
America’s Digital Army

Anthropology of Contemporary North America
series editors
James Bielo, Miami University
Carrie Lane, California State University, Fullerton
advisory board
Peter Benson, Washington University in St. Louis
John L. Caughey, University of Maryland
Alyshia Gálvez, Lehman College
Carol Greenhouse, Princeton University
John Hartigan, University of Texas
John Jackson Jr., University of Pennsylvania
Ellen Lewin, University of Iowa
Bonnie McElhinny, University of Toronto
Shalini Shankar, Northwestern University
Carol Stack, University of California, Berkeley

America’s 
Digital 
Army
Games at Work and War
Robertson Allen
University of Nebraska Press
Lincoln and London

© 2017 by the Board of Regents of the 
 University of Nebraska
Acknowledgments for the use of previously  
published material appear on page xii,  
which constitutes an extension of the copyright page.
All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America 
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017937445
Set in Charter by John Klopping.

Men are born for games. Nothing else. Every child knows that play is 
nobler than work. . . . But trial of chance or trial of worth all games 
aspire to the condition of war for here that which is wagered  
swallows up game, player, all.
cormac mccarthy, Blood Meridian


 
Contents
List of Illustrations 
viii
Acknowledgments 
xi
 
1. America’s Digital Army 
1
 
2. The Art of Persuasion and the Science of Manpower 
39
 
3. The Artiﬁce of the Virtual and the Real 
63
 
4. The Full- Spectrum Soft Sell of the Army Experience 
89
 
5. Complicating the Military Entertainment Complex 
115
 
6. The Labor of Virtual Soldiers 
147
 
 Notes 
167
Glossary 
177
References 
181
Index 
193

viii
 
Illustrations
 
 Following page 88
 
1.  In- game marketing image for the “Alley” level
 
2.  Outside entrance to the Office of Economic and  
Manpower Analysis
 
3.  Tommy Rieman and John Adams being interviewed by 
Susan Roesgen
 
4.  Reference photo used by America’s Army  
level designers and artists
 
5.  The reference photo’s in- game application in  
the “Ranch” scenario
 
6.  The front cover to issue 8 of the America’s Army  
Graphic Novel series
 
7.  sfc Gerald Wolford, in digital, plastic, 
and photographic representation
 
8.  Tommy Rieman’s Real Hero action ﬁgure
 
9.  Exterior view of the vae Alpha at the Indianapolis Air Show
 
10.  A mock- up life- size Humvee inside the vae
 
11.  Drill sergeants provide entertainment for visitors  
waiting in line
 
12.  Tommy Rieman and John Adams sign free copies of  
the America’s Army video game

illustrations 
ix
 
13. A typical gaming scenario at aec computers
 
14. Advertisement for the Army Experience Center
 
15. Ignited poster advertising the release of America’s Army 3
 
16. America’s Army arcade game
 
17. America’s Army video game developers at mini  
Basic Combat Training
 
18. Image from the development office the day of the layoffs


xi
Acknowledgments
There are many people who deserve thanks for their contributions not 
only to the content of this book, but also to the encouragement they 
have provided throughout its writing. Miriam Kahn, Danny Hoffman, 
Lorna Rhodes, David Price, and Crispin Thurlow provided outstanding 
early feedback. Many other individuals have also inﬂuenced aspects of 
this book, including Henry Lowood, Rebecca Carlson, Jussi Parikka, 
Sverker Finnström, and Neil Whitehead. I thank Mike Zyda, Mike Bode, 
Jonathan Breese, and Erich Iveans for their fact- checking reviews of 
speciﬁc chapter drafts.
I also thank those people within the Army Game Project who were 
willing to open their doors to my research. This project would not have 
been possible without the research access granted to me by Casey 
Wardynski. Phillip Bossant and Mike Bode were also very generous in 
allowing an outside researcher full access to their game development 
studio. Other speciﬁc employees of the Army Game Project are numer-
ous and unnameable. Many were very generous with their time, grant-
ing interviews, giving tours, and answering my questions. I wish to 
especially thank the America’s Army game developers for accepting me, 
in a small way, as a member of the “team” and opening a window into 
their lives.
This project would not have been able to take off without necessary 
research grants from the National Science Foundation and the Univer-
sity of Washington’s Anthropology Department. The Chester Fritz Endow-
ment further facilitated preliminary writing. I owe special gratitude to 
the Institute for Advanced Study on Media Cultures of Computer Sim-
ulation (mecs) at Leuphana University, Germany, whose generous 
research fellowship support and camaraderie made the composition 

xii acknowledgments
of this book possible. Special thanks to my fellow fellows there, Anne 
Dippel and Adam Page, for their conversations and advice pertaining 
to this book.
I thank Louis and William, whose meows have kept everything in 
perspective. And most importantly, Dorothy Cheng, my best critic and 
soundboard, who has been with me through all the gaming, research-
ing, ﬁeldworking, and writing.
Portions of this book have appeared previously in a variety of forms. 
Elements from chapters 1 and 6 appeared originally in “Virtual Soldiers, 
Cognitive Laborers,” in Virtual War and Magical Death: Technologies and 
Imaginaries for Terror and Killing, ed. Neil L. Whitehead and Sverker 
Finnström (Durham nc: Duke University Press, 2013). A shorter version 
of chapter 2 appeared as “America’s Army and the Military Recruitment 
and Management of ‘Talent’: An Interview with Colonel Casey 
Wardynski,” Journal of Gaming and Virtual Worlds 6, no. 2 (2014). Parts 
of chapter 3 appeared in both “The Unreal Enemy of America’s Army,” 
Games and Culture 6, no. 1 (2011), and “Games without Tears, Wars 
without Frontiers,” in War, Technology, Anthropology, ed. Koen Stroken 
(New York: Berghahn Books, 2012). Aspects of chapter 4 pertaining to 
the Virtual Army Experience were originally ﬂeshed out in “The Army 
Rolls through Indianapolis: Fieldwork at the Virtual Army Experience,” 
Transformative Works and Cultures 1, no. 2 (2009).

America’s Digital Army


1
1
America’s Digital Army
The action takes place in an oppressed yet stubborn country—  
Poland, Ireland, the republic of Venice, some South American 
or Balkan state . . . 
jorge luis borges, “Theme of the Traitor and the Hero”
PJ Goes to War
PJ’s world is limited and intense.1 It is conﬁned to one large street that 
is about four blocks long and ﬁlled with an array of abandoned shops, 
hotels, vehicles, and restaurants. This street is bordered by smaller par-
allel and interconnected alleys— two to the east and one to the west. A 
bright but cloudy sky casts brilliant shadows upon brownish gray build-
ings and shattered rubble in the streets of this city called Travnizeme. 
PJ, however, gives scant attention to these details, as he knows that he 
and his fellow squadmates have a critical mission to undertake. PJ’s 
squad leader, named TehLux[o]r, explained in the mission brieﬁng 
moments earlier that a group of Czervenian enemy soldiers is fast 
approaching, escorting one of their vips to safety. PJ does not know who 
this vip is or why he is so important, nor is he aware of the strategic and 
political implications of his mission. This information is not relevant. 
He knows only that his squad’s mission is to kill this vip at all costs before 
he can make it to the extraction point on the other side of the city.
Five of his squadmates, Fire Team A plus the squad leader, head west 
to cover the exits from a side alley. PJ’s unit, Fire Team B, is responsible 
for covering the eastern sector for possible enemy vip extraction attempts. 
As two soldiers in PJ’s ﬁre team run toward stairs that will take them to 
a rooftop overlooking the main street, his ﬁre team leader, LawBringer, 

2 america’s digital army
calls out the full name assigned to PJ when he ﬁrst joined the U.S. Army: 
“Perplexed Jaguar, follow me!” “Sure thing LawBringer,” PJ answers. 
They dart north down an eastern side alleyway, up a short ﬂight of stairs, 
and around several corners. LawBringer continues north down the alley 
at a dead run. PJ follows, but hesitates, knowing by experience that such 
incautious tactics are one way of getting quickly killed. Instead, PJ checks 
his ﬂanks and squares off, bringing up the iron sights of his m16a4 
machine gun. He covers LawBringer’s headlong sprint down the dark 
alley, but realizes there is little he can do to protect his ﬁre team leader.
PJ is still a rather inexperienced soldier himself, but he understands 
that LawBringer is demonstrating what his squadmates have disparag-
ingly referred to as “noob” soldier behavior. LawBringer can only learn 
through experience, PJ tells himself. Sure enough, as his ﬁre team leader 
runs down the alley past the open back door to a hotel, PJ hears the 
dreaded sounds of a Czervenian Obran being ﬁred at close quarters, 
and he knows that disregarding LawBringer’s orders was the right deci-
sion. He watches through his iron sights as a hidden enemy soldier 
unloads rounds of bullets into LawBringer from inside the hotel. PJ’s 
ﬁre team leader falls to the ground, severely injured and incapacitated 
but not dead. “I can see him. He’s right inside the hotel door,” LawBringer 
communicates through PJ’s headset. Moments later, though, the enemy 
soldier edges into the alleyway in hopes of securing LawBringer to immo-
bilize him from taking part in further combat. In the shadows, PJ waits 
until the enemy is centered in his sights, then ﬁres repeatedly. The enemy 
soldier falls to the ground next to LawBringer.
PJ patiently waits, thinking that perhaps there is another enemy 
nearby covering his fallen teammate’s ﬂanks. But PJ can hear the injured 
enemy soldier speaking in his own language over his communications 
headset, presumably calling for medical aid and informing his team-
mates of PJ’s location: “Priypa Hesti! Enepria Verdite! Enepria Verdite!” 
PJ knows he needs to silence quickly the incapacitated enemy soldier, 
but he hesitates to kill him since this would be a severe violation of the 
U.S. Army’s rules of engagement (roe). roe violations happen regu-
larly in this particular theatre of conﬂict, but PJ knows that the conse-
quences for such dishonorable actions include a prompt imprisonment 
in Fort Leavenworth. PJ has been there in the past and he does not 

america’s digital army 
3
want to go back. Choosing not to become a war criminal this time 
around, he cautiously secures the enemy soldier, an action that removes 
the ability to communicate with teammates or participate in further 
combat operations.
PJ has been listening to the tense chatter of Fire Team A’s squadmates, 
now apparently engaged in a ﬁreﬁght to the west. In the meantime Law-
Bringer has been bleeding severely, having been shot multiple times in 
the right arm, chest, and right leg. Although PJ now seriously doubts 
the beneﬁt of having LawBringer as a teammate, he knows that healing 
him would at least get an injured teammate back into the action, if only 
to cause a short distraction for the enemy soldiers. It would also earn 
LawBringer’s gratitude, increase PJ’s honor in the eyes of his squad-
mates, and maybe even get him a medal. PJ crouches over LawBringer, 
and after about ﬁfteen seconds of ﬁrst aid treatment— just as he was 
taught during training for basic combat lifesaving— LawBringer’s mul-
tiple bullet wounds are patched and he is again on his feet. The ﬁre team 
leader’s injuries prevent him from moving very fast, but he is an extra 
gun and an extra set of eyes for PJ to use to his advantage.
Two shadows of enemies almost immediately emerge from the foliage 
in a square to the north of the alley. “Two Czervos coming this way,” 
LawBringer calls out, as PJ hears the report of two Obrans and the sub-
sequent impact of bullets into both LawBringer’s ﬂesh and PJ’s body 
armor. PJ does not pause to check on the state of LawBringer. He very 
likely is dead now. Instead he turns around and sprints into the hotel, 
away from the fast approaching enemies. He sprints up some spiraling 
stairs, down a hall, and into an empty room. Crouching down, his back 
against the wall, PJ waits. He feels like a coward, camping in the hotel 
bedroom like this, but if he plays it right it might just be the best strat-
egy. He assesses his wounds: a light bullet scrape on his left shoulder, 
but without severe bleeding; and a direct hit to his chest, but the body 
armor prevented injury. His radio communication with other squad-
mates is still active, so he relays the vital information to the rest of the 
surviving U.S. Army soldiers in the area: “There are two who just came 
in through the back door of the hotel. One looked like he could be the 
vip. I’m in the second ﬂoor, side room.” “I’m on it,” the voice of his squad 
leader TehLux[o]r, responds, “I think we’re the only two left.”

4 america’s digital army
As he waits for the arrival of his teammate and the opportune moment 
to emerge from hiding, PJ reﬂects upon his experiences in recent weeks. 
It was a quick journey from boot camp to Travnizeme, but a journey that 
involved hundreds of deaths and failures in addition to emotional vic-
tories. PJ has learned and improved his skills with every mistake, and 
he has made friends— brothers in arms— for whom he would risk his 
life. He has already done so multiple times, and even died for them, in 
this theater of conﬂict. Several days ago he and two others were killed 
in this very room by a hand grenade tossed into the open window by 
some lucky noob Czervo.
PJ is brought out of his reveries as he hears gunﬁre downstairs in the 
hotel lobby. TehLux[o]r apparently has found one of the two enemies 
that had been chasing him. All becomes silent following the deafening 
boom of a grenade from downstairs. Maybe an enemy was killed by the 
blast, or maybe not. TehLux[o]r, though, is dead; his voice commo is 
down. PJ hears dull sounds of movement in the second ﬂoor’s back room 
overlooking the alley. He moves quietly down the hall, readying his 
weapon. He turns the corner and sees the vip facing away from the door 
and looking out a window. Hearing something suspicious, the vip moves 
as if to turn around, but it is too late. A barrage of bullets leaves PJ’s riﬂe 
and enters the head of the vip. It is an immaculate death, clean of any 
bone fragments or slippery bits that would otherwise splatter out the 
window. Only a slight puff of red appears as the vip ragdolls and ﬂops 
to the ﬂoor.
PJ has completed the mission. Celebratory music plays as time stops 
in PJ’s world, and the glorious, disembodied dead from PJ’s squad shout 
in jubilation. They had all been watching the action from their purga-
torial state. TehLux[o]r congratulates him: “That was awesome, man!” 
“Hey, thanks for helping me out,” says LawBringer. Two minutes later 
a different scenario plays itself out in this world of alleys, and with the 
same respawned soldiers. This time, however, PJ isn’t as cautious or 
lucky, and he takes a bullet to the neck. As he bleeds and audibly gasps 
for air, the screen turns red, then fades to black. The same alley scenario 
replays itself again and yet again. Perhaps the next time Perplexed Jag-
uar is protecting the vip instead of trying to kill him; maybe in some 
lives he actually is the vip. The possible permutations of this thread 

america’s digital army 
5
multiply as PJ’s career in the U.S. Army expands, but the constant vari-
ables of killing and death, victory and defeat, and honor and teamwork 
through armed combat are all that PJ ever knows or understands.
The Army Game Project
In PJ’s spectacular war story, a clear delineation of war from its repre-
sentations is lacking. There are elements that point to an uncanny, inhu-
man element in PJ’s interactions with both enemies and teammates. In 
fact PJ is an amalgamation of human and computer, a prosthetic exten-
sion of a human user within an online digital game. Perplexed Jaguar 
(i.e., PJ) was the name the video game America’s Army 3 automatically 
generated for me upon my ﬁrst time playing the game. (Players can cre-
ate their own name or go with one that is given to them.) PJ’s narrative 
may be an overdramatic war story, but for a gamer who has temporarily 
suspended disbelief long enough to become immersed in this environ-
ment, PJ’s experiences, and by extension the experiences of PJ’s human 
player, are very real, embodied, and physically stimulating. Video games 
are part of a “magical spectacle” of stimulation and perception that 
involves real adrenalin rushes, real increased heart rates, and other real 
sensory experiences and interpersonal communications (Virilio 1989, 
6). These real sensations and emotions, as well as PJ’s war story, might 
be a novelty for many who are unfamiliar with military- themed video 
games; but for the tens of millions of gamers worldwide who play ﬁrst- 
person shooting (fps) games and other competitive games, they are not 
very exceptional.
Despite its unexceptional position as merely one narrative among the 
vast array of other virtual war stories that have been enacted within 
video game worlds since at least the late 1970s, PJ’s story still stands out 
for one reason: it takes place within a public and freely accessible pc 
(personal computer) video game environment that has been entirely 
funded and produced by the U.S. Army. A hardcore player of the game 
America’s Army 3, published in the summer of 2009, would be able to 
identify PJ’s ﬁreﬁght as having taken place within a game scenario known 
as “Alley (Day Cloudy),” with the mission type being “vip” (see ﬁg. 1). 
He— most players of America’s Army have been men— would be capable 
of identifying many of the rooms and doors that PJ passed and imagin-

6 america’s digital army
ing the nuanced clinks of grenades and ricochets of bullets hitting cin-
derblocks or bricks. (Many of the game sounds were recorded from real 
weapons at army ﬁring ranges.) He would intuitively understand the 
unwritten rules and interfaces of pc gaming that might leave many unini-
tiated people lost.
This hypothetical gamer playing as PJ would most likely not be in the 
army, nor would he be interested in joining it, even though many people 
who play America’s Army are military veterans or prospective recruits. 
America’s Army, after all, is an elaborate interactive advertisement for 
the U.S. Army. As with most ads, only a small portion of people who 
experience it fully buy into the product.
The army does not need or expect every player of the game to be com-
pletely persuaded to enlist, though. An America’s Army player who, 
through his play experiences, comes to more readily accept the status 
quo of army norms, priorities, and ways of thinking about the world 
counts as a success as well. This is the essence of the rationale behind the 
U.S. military’s long- term investment in entertainment and interactive 
technologies that possess a persuasive power, investments considered by 
many to be outside the sphere of what the military does or should do.
After the army released the original version of the game on July 4, 
2002, for free download and online play, initial reactions saw the game 
more as a novelty than anything that would signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the 
future of gaming, army recruiting, or military training. Game journalists 
wondered whether the military could even produce a good game in the 
ﬁrst place, especially when one of the game’s self- proclaimed (and not 
very fun- sounding) goals was “to educate the American public about 
the U.S. Army and its career opportunities, high- tech involvement, val-
ues, and teamwork” (Army Game Project 2002, 1). The appeal of “free,” 
coupled with a compelling game design and the rising popularity of 
online networked competitive fps games like Counter- Strike, worked in 
the game’s favor. Numerous gamers worldwide quickly began playing 
it as a form of entertainment and socializing. The post- 9/11 but pre– Iraq 
War context of the game’s release further contributed to its initial suc-
cess, as news media outlets persisted in implying a connection between 
the 9/11 terrorist attacks and the Iraqi government under the presidency 
of Saddam Hussein, thus justifying the Bush administration’s calls to 

america’s digital army 
7
war in Iraq.2 Playing a parallel story of the U.S. Army engaged in com-
bat operations in a vaguely Middle Eastern setting, gamers interested 
in vicarious wish fulﬁllment found that the game’s thin narrative met 
their desires (Li 2003).
The game continued to grow through the ﬁrst decade of the twenty- 
ﬁrst century, transforming itself into a franchise of multiple games for 
multiple audiences and purposes. The pc game released periodic updates 
and consistently ranked among the most played online games. In 2009 
Guinness awarded the franchise ﬁve world records, reﬂecting its histor-
ically substantial inﬂuence on the evolution of interactive media and 
military gaming. These awards, which seem politically tailored so that 
only this one game could receive them, included the Largest Virtual 
Army (9.7 million registered users, about eight times the total size of 
the actual U.S. Army), Most Downloaded War Video Game (42 million 
downloads), Most Hours Spent Playing a Free Online Shooter (231 mil-
lion hours as of August 2008), Earliest Military Website to Support a 
Video Game, and Largest Travelling Game Simulator.3 Successive ver-
sions of the game, such as PJ’s world of America’s Army 3 (2009), sup-
ported additional modiﬁcations designed to train army soldiers, as well 
as applications aiding in the development of future weapon technolo-
gies. The once small America’s Army project whose developers were, in 
their own words, “ﬂying by the seat of our pants,” quickly expanded to 
encompass a large network of commercial and military institutions 
known as the Army Game Project.
The Army Game Project attempted to integrate a dynamic, and often 
difficult, nexus between a fast- moving knowledge economy and business 
contracting model, on the one hand, and the slower- moving procedures 
of a hierarchical military and bureaucratic government, on the other. 
The contrast between the lifestyles of game development work and mil-
itary work could not have been starker. The project was at the forefront 
of the trends in “serious games” and military entertainment for the bet-
ter part of a decade, and its ramiﬁcations have been widespread, span-
ning not only the “interactive entertainment” (i.e., games) industry, but 
also the growing military simulations industry and the U.S. government. 
In 2002, when the army recruitment rate was falling due partly to deploy-
ments in Afghanistan, the Army Game Project and America’s Army con-

8 america’s digital army
tributed to a new push by the army to market itself to potential recruits 
and the public at large. It also spearheaded the development of software 
packages for arms development, weapons and leadership training, and 
post- traumatic stress disorder (ptsd) rehabilitation.
A wide network of commercial, government, and military studios in 
Raleigh, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Seattle, Orlando, and elsewhere 
designed entertainment and government adaptations of the America’s 
Army game, and offices at the U.S. Military Academy and at the Red-
stone Arsenal military base near Huntsville, Alabama (where the plat-
form continues to be managed), oversaw the entire project. On the 
interactive entertainment side, America’s Army established contractual 
agreements with well- known game companies. Game industry giant 
Ubisoft published PlayStation 2, Xbox, and Xbox 360 versions of the 
game, and Epic Games licensed its commercially successful Unreal game 
engine, commonly used in many fps games, to the Army Game Project. 
The franchise at its height included several pc and console games, an 
active online community of game users, two product lines of America’s 
Army plastic G.I. Joe– like action ﬁgures, a coin- operated arcade game, 
a cell phone game, and a graphic novel series.
The America’s Army platform was also central to a high- tech venture 
in Philadelphia with the Pentagon, local army recruitment centers, 
area high schools, the marketing company Ignited, and the Franklin 
Mills shopping mall, all of which cooperated in the implementation 
of the Army Experience Center (aec), a two- year experimental pro-
gram (2008– 10) in military recruitment focusing on less- affluent, sub-
urban, and predominantly nonwhite regions of big cities, areas that 
historically have been difficult for recruitment. The Army Game Proj-
ect furthermore oversaw the development and implementation of a 
ten- thousand- square- foot “mobile mission simulator” dubbed the Vir-
tual Army Experience (vae), which toured throughout the United States 
between 2007 and 2009 to air shows, state fairs, and nascar events, 
hosting a twenty- minute immersive Disneyland- style simulated army 
gaming/recruiting experience.
The examples above only represent the entertainment, recruitment, 
and public outreach side of the Army Game Project. Other applications 
of the America’s Army platform offered the U.S. military and government 

america’s digital army 
9
organizations software for weapons development, as well as for soldier 
training and injury rehabilitation. One software application, for exam-
ple, teaches new army enlistees who have yet to go to basic training 
some essentials in land navigation, military map reading, and ﬁrst aid. 
Another early government application of the software trained U.S. Secret 
Service agents. Other prominent “government application” examples 
of the game technology include a close- quarters combat simulator using 
live- ﬁre ammunition and a military- convoy skills simulator, both of which 
are directed at training soldiers to make quick and effective combat 
decisions while under stress— for example, enemy gunﬁre.
The reasons for the existence of such a broad network devoted to the 
Army Game Project, as well as the beneﬁts for the army in placing a 
high- caliber game in the middle of popular fps gaming culture, were 
numerous. In addition to being an efficient and cost- effective marketing 
tool to target the enlistment of male teenagers, the game’s designers 
intended it to reduce recruitment attrition and cheaply train soldiers 
through simulations of expensive equipment. In 2003 the military 
invested over $13,000 for each new recruit, including $1,900 in adver-
tising. (The former ﬁgure includes the salaries of army recruiters.) The 
game’s designers hoped that by introducing a tailored training platform 
for new recruits to play, which provided “a realistic intro to the Army 
before getting to boot camp,” basic training dropout rates and the high 
associated costs that the army has to bear, even when a recruit drops 
out of basic training, would fall (U.S. General Accounting Office 2003, 
11; Zyda 2004). Salary bonuses, education incentives, and an overall 
push by the army to market itself as an attractive career— rather than a 
fallback option— also played into this retention strategy.
War Games at Work
The recruitment and training through digital technologies for the labor 
of war- making is the key theme of this book, and one that recurs in mul-
tiple formats throughout the following pages. Broadly speaking I focus 
my investigation on three kinds of “work” that interactive technologies 
like America’s Army seek to capture and control for military purposes. 
The ﬁrst, and most basic, form of work that I examine is the work of and 
on the public game itself when placed in the context of its intended 

10 america’s digital army
audience. This includes considering the kinds of persuasive messaging 
that the game deploys, the ways in which army management fashions 
and studies intended users of the game, and how the game articulates 
certain ideological positions (such as the imagination of national ene-
mies) to its users. Digging deeper, I investigate how those who designed 
and developed the game and its marketing messages understand both 
America’s Army and their own work on the project.
This kind of game work, however, is only useful to most military strat-
egists if it can be applied to the recruitment of actual soldiers, and the 
work of the recruited, or soon- to- be recruited, soldier in the context of 
digital games is the second form of work that I examine. Although Amer-
ica’s Army has done much more than support army recruitment and 
training, these have been the primary reasons for the persistent exis-
tence of the game platform over the course of ﬁfteen years. The training 
and rehabilitation of soldiers through virtual technologies is a rapidly 
growing industry, and one to which the America’s Army platform con-
tinues to contribute. While the recruitment mission of America’s Army 
has, since 2009, given way to this trend, I also query the underlying 
rationale for why a video game was thought to be a viable project for 
recruitment in the ﬁrst place. It may be the case that the current market 
of fps and other military- themed commercial games might inadvertently 
be doing the work of recruitment, even as the commercial version of 
America’s Army fades into irrelevancy amid much more visually com-
pelling games that have exponentially larger fan bases, such as those 
games in the Call of Duty and Battleﬁeld series that are released on a 
near- annual basis.
The third area of “work” on which I focus takes place on a much 
broader level, and it is here that the central claim of the book resides: 
I argue that military- funded and - themed gaming technologies like 
America’s Army take part in a militarization of American society that 
constructs everyone, even nonplayers of games, as virtual soldiers, 
whose labor is available for deployment. I understand the term “vir-
tual” to represent its commonly understood meaning of “the digital,” 
but also to refer to its older meaning of that which is not yet actualized, 
that is, “potential.” We are all virtual soldiers, in a sense, because 
actual military enlistment, or the aspiration and ability to enlist, are 

america’s digital army 
11
not the determining factors that construct a virtual soldier. Instead 
the conceptualization of virtual soldiers takes place at the level of 
institutions, such as the military. Once conﬁned mostly to the institu-
tion of the military itself, under current post- Fordist capitalist systems 
the process of cultural militarization and militarized subject formation 
now takes place across a smoother, less hierarchical space that encom-
passes technologies and entertainment, structures of labor and busi-
ness, and other institutions, such as prisons, schools, and religious 
organizations. In this way a person who does not have even the slight-
est desire to join the military might nevertheless be a virtual soldier. 
I use the labor of the America’s Army employees as speciﬁc examples 
of how the process of virtual soldiering works, and then delve further 
to look at how my own labor as a researcher, external to the entire 
project, nevertheless became appropriated in certain ways. I too was 
(and am still) a virtual soldier.
All digital games operate and are created within systems of power. 
Some also challenge them, but the work of game development is always 
dependent on economic and political factors. In the case of America’s 
Army, the project was well- funded during the lead- up to and aftermath 
of the invasion and occupation of Afghanistan in 2001 and Iraq in 2003. 
At that time the manpower and recruitment requirements of the mili-
tary rose drastically, and money was easy to come by for the project. By 
challenging many of the more entrenched and expensive “legacy” mod-
els of recruitment, however, the project made institutional enemies— 
and allies— within the greater organization of the army. Following the 
economic downturn in 2008, the rate of recruitment to the U.S. military 
rose as more appealing jobs became scarce. Recruitment came to be 
easy, and novel solutions such as the Army Game Project saw their once 
relatively reliable funding extensively cut in 2009. As of 2016 the pro-
gram is dramatically diminished, with an uncertain future, but the ques-
tions raised by the circulation of America’s Army and other Army Game 
Project products are very much apropos in a society shaped by the econ-
omy of war, immersed in the interactive spectacles of conﬂict, and dis-
tracted by a pervasive overload of information.
Ethnography— both the doing and the writing— happens through 
the ethnographer’s interactions with people, institutions, texts, and 

12 america’s digital army
memories. It is an ongoing interpretative process; in the following pages, 
I present a series of moments in this process. I have chosen to examine 
the practices of the Army Game Project because it has a fascinating his-
tory and depth, one that reaches to the core of the militarized and tech-
nophilic American psyche and illuminates a multitude of political, 
economic, and sociocultural issues. Most prominent among these issues 
is a global trend in militarization that needs to be understood more 
broadly. Other issues include the changing nature of work, and how 
media might reinforce or challenge regimes of power. Like America’s 
Army, this book is an idiosyncratic project; it is intended to be one way, 
and hopefully not the only way, to embark on a better understanding of 
the interconnected processes of militarization, entertainment, and labor 
in the early twenty- ﬁrst century.
Fieldwork Beginnings
In what follows I relate the interconnected stories of the Army Game 
Project. At my ﬁeld sites I have used a variety of ethnographic tools of 
investigation, according to what I have deemed most useful and rele-
vant. Participant observation, a tool for data collection that involves the 
self- reﬂexive documentation of the “thereness” of the ethnographer, 
has been my go- to method of research. I have recorded over sixty inter-
views with game developers, army officers and enlisted soldiers, activ-
ists, pr representatives, and industry professionals, and have had many 
more informal conversations with these same people over lunch, coffee, 
or beer. I had my own office at the America’s Army game development 
studio in Emeryville, California, for six months, where I was present 
throughout the workweek, sitting in on studio meetings and devoting 
several weeks of total game time to America’s Army, often playing with 
the developers of the game during play- testing sessions. I have been the 
guest for numerous official tours and arranged visits at military bases, 
marketing and games companies, and recruiting events. I traveled to 
Indiana, where I spent three weeks at the state fair and Indianapolis air 
show, and drove to Philadelphia to play games with middle and high 
school kids who would visit the Army Experience Center after school. I 
attended two of the largest video game industry events as a member of 
the press, led impromptu round table discussions at the America’s Army 

america’s digital army 
13
marketing agency, and witnessed the layoffs of over thirty people, many 
of them friends with whom I have stayed in contact over the years. I 
documented these and other modes of participant observation as data 
in one form or another through audio recordings, detailed written notes, 
document collection, photographs, or whatever other eclectic means 
were available and appropriate at the time.
This ﬁeldwork journey into the heart of America’s Army developed 
from a lifelong passion for video games. Although I consider myself a 
native player of military ﬁrst- person shooting games (as well as other 
kinds of games), my interactions with soldiers, game developers, mar-
keters, and government project managers were not from the point of 
view of an insider. I often play video games obsessively, but this did not 
make me a video game developer or marketer. I have family and friends 
in the armed forces, but I nevertheless was an outsider to all things mil-
itary when I ﬁrst embarked on this project. As an outsider I chose to look 
at the workings of the Army Game Project to trace the connections and 
meanings of this project across the wide spectrum of actors invested in 
the development, marketing, and presentation of the hybrid product 
known as America’s Army.
I originally became intrigued by America’s Army in the winter of 2005, 
during my ﬁrst year of graduate school. I had newly relocated to Seattle 
after living in Japan for three years teaching English, and I was just 
beginning to return to my old habits of gaming, which had always been 
a delightful— and often necessary— antithesis to study and work for me. 
The American war in Iraq was coming into full swing, taking the media 
limelight away from the other war in Afghanistan, and George W. Bush 
had just been re- elected. As an anthropology graduate student in Seat-
tle, I was surrounded by and caught up in antiwar sentiment. At the 
same time, I was captivated by the bourgeoning genre of commercial 
military- themed fps games that were coming onto market and were, in 
my eyes, proﬁting from unjust wars. My pleasure in these games made 
me feel uneasy— and it was not unease at my enjoyment of the simu-
lated violence in the games, as many may think. This apprehension was 
both personally and academically intriguing, and something I felt I 
needed to explore more deeply.
I have little patience for arguments that implicate video games as 

14 america’s digital army
primary causes of violence or long- term aggression, especially when 
the news media have repeatedly scapegoated games as underlying rea-
sons that mass shootings happen. Studies of video game “effects” (i.e., 
violence and long- term aggression) are usually too problematic to yield 
convincing results (Schreier 2013, 2015), and yet the popular myth of a 
veriﬁed link between video games and actual violence persists. My appre-
hension concerning military- themed fps games therefore came not from 
the violence represented in them or from the purported effects of violent 
games, but in the underlying ideological and political messages that 
were voiced by the games that I was playing. For example the games 
Conﬂict: Desert Storm and Conﬂict: Desert Storm II— Back to Baghdad 
celebrated the 1990s Gulf War in Iraq, but were strategically released 
as commercial products during the period leading up to, and immedi-
ately following, the 2003 Iraq invasion (Allen 2011; Stahl 2010). These 
and other games and media had played directly into the Bush adminis-
tration’s prevailing hawkish positions in support of war, positions that 
implicitly and incorrectly connected the 2001 al- Qaeda September 11 
terrorist attacks to Saddam Hussein’s regime in Iraq (Jarecki 2005; Stahl 
2007). Other seemingly innocuous games of mine, such as those in the 
beloved Civilization franchise, seemed to perpetuate colonialist settler 
narratives of conquest and to emphasize war over diplomacy in settling 
differences. These elements had always been there in the games I had 
played, but it was as if I had had an awakening in my moment of oppo-
sition to American war— a realization that my video games speak about 
war, and maybe not in ways that I entirely like.
My unease incited me to think more critically about my own gaming 
and inspired me to start what I envisioned as a small research project 
on military- themed fps games. I began playing America’s Army and read-
ing more research coming from scholars in the newly emergent academic 
ﬁeld of game studies, which was then still in relative infancy. By 2005 
so- called advergames, “games for change,” and the idea of using games 
for educational purposes had taken hold of the games industry and 
games research in a big way, and the overall “serious games” sector of 
the industry had become dominated by a military presence that included 
America’s Army and other kinds of military training simulations.
I discovered that, oddly enough, the U.S. Army’s original rationale 

america’s digital army 
15
for funding America’s Army stemmed from a different kind of unease at 
the way commercial military- themed fps games represented the U.S. 
Army and American war. While I was concerned with underlying mes-
sages in such games that seemed to support actual war through ideo-
logical themes that appeared overtly nationalistic (and often racist, 
colonialist, and jingoistic) in commercial military- themed fps games, 
the U.S. Army felt that they misrepresented the military service in other 
ways. Call of Duty, Battleﬁeld, and other commercial franchises, for exam-
ple, satisfy individualistic styles of play through their design, and work 
against the idea that military combat units operate as a highly coordi-
nated team. The army wanted to counteract such representations of 
soldiers by emphasizing teamwork, and also by working toward design 
choices that would deter Rambo- style “run and gun” approaches. For 
this reason America’s Army deliberately designed player characters who 
were more physically (but not mentally and emotionally) vulnerable, 
who more easily take injury. (Most commercial military games, by com-
parison, design player health systems that tend to enable player char-
acters to merely “breathe it off” behind a rock after taking thirteen or 
so bullet wounds and regain full health within seconds.) The regular 
depiction of soldiers who “go rogue,” or who deploy “unsanctioned vio-
lence” in these and other commercial entertainment media was also a 
concern to army officials. They wished for portrayals of soldiers who 
only “do the right thing” and operate within the sanctioned boundaries 
of national and international law. The army furthermore wanted to por-
tray through the video game the array of jobs and possible career paths 
that the army offers beyond mere combat roles, although the task of 
doing this through a ﬁrst- person shooting game has proven to be rather 
difficult over the years.
Once I understood that America’s Army had these kinds of goals, my 
project narrowed to just one game, but in the process it expanded past 
it. I quickly realized how this game was situated at an awkward and 
interesting spot in terms of the current milieu of war, interactive enter-
tainment, and politics. Various parties, it seemed to me, might interpret 
America’s Army in different ways according to their own predispositions. 
Despite the army’s intentions at limiting in- game violence, antiviolence 
crusaders on both the left and right might tend to think of the game as 

16 america’s digital army
reprehensible or morally suspect. When I bring up the topic of this 
research with many leftist acquaintances and academics with whom I 
otherwise typically align, people more often than not assume that I have 
an agenda to critique both the military and violent video games— and 
especially those developed by the military and targeted at youth as young 
as thirteen years old. For example one professor in my old department 
insisted to me that all such violent video games are “pornography.” There 
is certainly a wide array of problematic elements in most any game that 
I think are fruitful to explore and critique, as I do throughout this book 
with America’s Army. However, I did not think that it was wise to begin 
with this assumption for both culturally relativistic and practical rea-
sons, since I was working to gain long- term access to military and civil-
ian personnel working for the Army Game Project.
Instead I sought to approach this project from the starting position 
in the manner of classic anthropological research, withholding judg-
ment yet maintaining a self- reﬂexive acknowledgment of my own pre-
dispositions and biases. With a goal of discovering how individuals and 
organizations understand themselves as members of the Army Game 
Project, I decided to contact the top of the hierarchy, not really expect-
ing any reply or results. I emailed the project’s director at West Point, 
an economics professor and colonel, Dr. Casey Wardynski, in the late 
spring of 2006. I told him that I wanted to study as an anthropologist 
the behind- the- scenes process of military game development, empha-
sizing the long- term nature of most ethnographic studies and my desire 
to do research in an institutional setting. Having been discouraged about 
the possibilities of accessing the organizations composing the Army Game 
Project by estranged former America’s Army executive Mike Zyda, I 
doubted that the army would allow an unknown anthropology graduate 
student access to its game development institutions. Zyda told me in an 
email, “My guess is that you might have a near impossible time getting 
in. They tend to be very busy and wary of people studying them.” 4 I was 
resigned to the fact that this investigation might have to be done from 
the outside looking in.
To my surprise Wardynski replied to my messages, and after a few 
more emails he invited me to his office at West Point in July 2006. As I 
drove along the Palisades Parkway near the military academy for the 

america’s digital army 
17
ﬁrst time, the beautiful scenery of trees, mountains, canyons, and rivers 
seemed the last place on earth that a military base should be located. 
But there it was, a veritable fortress on a hill, positioned at a strategic 
curve in the Hudson River as it pushes its way south through the Hud-
son Highlands toward New York City. Leading to the main campus secu-
rity gate, the buildings of the small and cozy town of West Point oozed 
the airs of affluence, privilege, and education.
Wardynski’s workplace was at the Office of Economic and Manpower 
Analysis (oema), which he directed from 1995 until his retirement from 
the army in 2010. In an odd juxtaposition— or perhaps not, considering 
how the social sciences have historically served as arms of the military 
(Price 2004, 2008)— oema shared the same building as the Department 
of Social Sciences, Department of English, and the Combating Terrorism 
Center (see ﬁg. 2). I arrived there twenty minutes early, walked through 
the building’s corridors to get a feel for the layout, and sat down outside 
on a bench. “What the hell am I doing here?” I wrote to myself in my 
notes. Despite everything I had done to prepare, I still had woeful ﬁrst-
hand experience with the military. Although my father had enlisted in the 
navy and worked in communications with early computers for a few years 
in the 1960s before I was born, it was my ﬁrst time as an adult on a func-
tioning military base. If I had been ten years younger— seventeen years 
old— I would have been exactly in the demographic oema was the most 
interested in reaching, for one of the principal long- term goals of the 
Army Game Project was to normalize the army for the average American 
teenager as something within youth’s world of experience and possibility.
I learned quickly that Wardynski loves to talk. I was happy to let him 
do so as he described to me the scope of the Army Game Project, which 
was a good deal larger than I had imagined. The original America’s Army 
video game from 2002 was the sole product of the Army Game Project 
for many years, but in 2006 the project was dramatically expanding. 
After several years of success with the online game, he told me, other 
government entities began to approach oema with requests for training 
programs. One of the ﬁrst to do so was the U.S. Secret Service, which 
requested a tailored version of the game for simulating training exer-
cises for protective detail teams, tactical response units, and counter-
surveillance units.

18 america’s digital army
As more requests began coming in from government and military 
organizations, the Army Game Project decided that a separate office 
was necessary to handle them. The year 2006 was a period of transition 
as a large portion of the project management was being funneled toward 
Redstone Arsenal’s Software Engineering Directorate (sed) near Hunts-
ville, Alabama. Large public outreach programs such as the America’s 
Army Real Heroes and the Virtual Army Experience (see chapters 4 and 
5) were just getting under way as well. Ubisoft’s Xbox video game, Amer-
ica’s Army: Rise of a Soldier, was out in the commercial market. Most of 
these projects, Wardynski explained to me, were being developed by 
other entities that had little direct affiliation with the online video game 
and original version of America’s Army.
After Wardynski had described to me all of these institutional con-
nections that composed the Army Game Project, and asked me a few 
pointed questions about my own project, this ﬁrst visit to West Point 
ended abruptly with Wardynski giving me his approval from the top to 
undertake ethnographic ﬁeldwork at places central to the project. His 
reasons for allowing me to do so were unclear at the time; my project 
of “studying up” the networks of institutional power (Nader 1972), I 
thought, would be perceived as a nuisance at best and a threat at worst. 
I came to understand more about his reasons for allowing me access 
through subsequent conversations and encounters with him during my 
years of ﬁeldwork as my travels took me to locations in the San Francisco 
Bay Area, Los Angeles, Huntsville, Philadelphia, Seattle, Indianapolis, 
and eventually back to West Point.
Although Wardynski told me then that, in his words, I had “the green 
light” to do my research, I still faced the challenge of gaining access to 
the network and ﬁguring out which institutions were amenable and 
available in the ﬁrst place. I was only able to do so in a more structured 
way two years later, after I secured research funding from the U.S. 
National Science Foundation, a factor that signiﬁcantly helped legiti-
mize my project to U.S. government and military personnel at West 
Point’s oema, the sed in Huntsville, and elsewhere. Rather than having 
a single story of “arrival” at my ﬁeld site, I was arriving continuously at 
new locations— some of which would become more receptive and famil-
iar than others over the course of months and years. My access to these 

america’s digital army 
19
sites— development offices, marketing agencies, army bases, prerelease 
versions of America’s Army, email lists, recruiting and outreach events, 
press brieﬁngs, specialty beer tastings— and to the people within them 
was a continuously negotiated process of sending emails, dropping 
names, obtaining permissions and passwords, making calls, and listen-
ing with a sympathetic ear to the nontrivial work- related issues of video 
game developers and military veterans. Wardynski had granted me the 
go- ahead to contact America’s Army institutions on this ﬁrst visit to West 
Point, but it was by no means a golden ticket.
A World of Binaries
I came to this investigation for personal reasons, but I began with a 
broader starting supposition that media products like video games are 
cultural expressions that illuminate and shape social norms and con-
ventions. Games can signify and shape multiple ideas, worldviews, and 
ideologies, depending on the context in which they appear. The Army 
Game Project, which seeks to impose a very speciﬁc institutional mes-
sage upon its game, nevertheless cannot change the fact that media are 
always received by a range of individuals and open to a variety of inter-
pretations. To look at America’s Army as a cultural product and actor in 
this way necessitates a broad perspective on cultural and social trends 
that goes well beyond taking into account the qualities of the game itself.
One major cultural trend over the past two decades has been the ris-
ing popularity and use of video games, to the point at which their use 
is pervasive across many populations, devices, and geographical areas. 
When I grew up in the 1980s video games were typically relegated to 
the domain of preteen boys, and the medium was commonly considered 
an adolescent toy. Games were portrayed in popular news media as 
being a dangerous medium responsible for a list of complex social issues, 
such as youth aggression and a decay in critical thinking. This way of 
thinking persists still, and consistently recurs in news media after unfor-
tunate, publicly violent events.
Rates of violent crime consistently fell in the United States between 
1994 and 2014, even as digital games came into their own as an industry 
(Saad 2013; fbi 2015). Research has shown that, while people might be 
almost imperceptibly more aggressive after playing competitive games 

20 america’s digital army
(regardless of whether acts of violence are simulated in them), there 
are very inconclusive results in regards to any sort of correlation between 
video games and actual violence (Kowert and Quandt 2016; Schreier 
2013). Paradoxically, despite the power that misguided critics still often 
attribute to video games as root causes of social problems, it was not 
until recently that mainstream American culture came to consider the 
medium as anything but a toy.
Games, however, have grown up alongside their players as a medium 
of information, entertainment, communication, and marketing. In 2015 
the average age of a video game player was thirty- ﬁve years old, and 74 
percent of all video game players were over the age of eighteen. Now 
44 percent of gamers are women (esa 2015), although in military- themed 
fps games like America’s Army and certain other genres of games women 
represent a signiﬁcantly lower number of players. In addition to hostile 
gaming cultures of misogyny, another possible cause for the decreased 
participation by women in certain game genres is the persistent recy-
cling of hypermasculine heroic narratives, which is often achieved at 
the expense of the character development of women ﬁgures in games 
(Sarkeesian 2013). This certainly applies to America’s Army 3, as the only 
women depicted in the game are television news anchors, shown in a 
very brief nonanimated cut scene near the beginning of the game. With 
the transition to opening every job in the U.S. armed forces to women 
by 2016, including combat positions, it will be interesting to see if 
military- themed games come to represent this change through an inclu-
sion of women as soldiers beyond stereotypical medic/healer roles.
These issues are important to consider as games are quickly becom-
ing a dominant entertainment form across the American and global 
media landscape. Even immediately after the severe economic down-
turn beginning in 2008, game sales increased as the demand for them 
grew (Snider 2009). New mobile gaming technology supported through 
increasingly pervasive consumer use of phones and tablets spurred the 
industry through the recession and recovering economy, even as com-
puter and console game sales decreased. Average consumers likewise 
embraced these mobile game apps, as they were readily networked into 
cell phones, were relatively inexpensive, and involved games that could 
be played intermittently without large time commitments. Largely due 

america’s digital army 
21
to mobile app development, game industry sales peaked in 2010 at $17.1 
billion, $7 billion of which were mobile games. Reports peg recent annual 
industry sales at $15.4 billion, $9 billion of which were mobile game 
sales (esa 2014). Compared with $2.6 billion total sales across all plat-
forms in 1996 (esa 2008, 11), these most recent industry ﬁgures signpost 
just how drastically the interactive entertainment industry has grown.
The sheer variety of video games has grown as well, and although 
the plots and premises of many games are inane or infused with niche 
interests, there are an increasing number of games on the market that 
present narratives and situations compelling enough to give one pause. 
Like ﬁlm, it is a medium that is constantly reinventing itself through the 
creation of new genres, catering to an increasingly broader range of 
users. Everywhere a convergence is taking place between networked 
and traditional media, and games are at the center of this process. More 
and more, games and “gamiﬁed” systems— those that rely on game- like 
elements to motivate people to do certain things— inﬂuence shopping 
habits, communication channels between friends and coworkers, cor-
porate arrangements of work and play, and incentive structures for 
undertaking difficult tasks or deterring undesirable acts. Through these 
channels digital games are challenging and changing the ways in which 
people think about and interact with the world. Games are remixing 
and blending categories that were once in opposition; nevertheless, in 
several ways we still seem caught in a world of binaries.
the virtual and the real
The world seems often to be deﬁned in terms of binary opposites. 
Good/evil, male/female, rich/poor, white/black, and chosen/heathen: 
binaries categorize the world and pervade much of Western thought. 
This way of thinking tends to produce hierarchies of violence, espe-
cially in cases involving gender, race, class, and religion, in which binary 
thinking ends up limiting or obscuring possible solutions to complex 
phenomena by deﬁning the “other” as that which one is not. There is 
more to the world than binaries, but language has limited how we 
understand it.
Such is the case, too, with games. Digital games engender discussions 
on what is “real,” and what happens in gaming contexts tends to be 

22 america’s digital army
termed in common phrasings as being the opposite of “real life.” Talking 
about “real life” as being “not- game” is something that even die- hard 
gamers do in everyday speech, but this kind of phrasing is disingenuous. 
No matter how escapist one’s approach to games may be, game stimuli 
still bring about very real physiological and emotional responses within 
us. The original team of America’s Army developers understood these 
factors and published research on how properly integrated sound in par-
ticular brings about these kinds of responses in digital games (Shilling, 
Wardynski, and Zyda 2002). Massively multiplayer online games 
(mmogs) and worlds call out the false dichotomy of the virtual and the 
real to an even greater extent, as fully ﬂeshed emergent economies, cul-
tures, languages, and identities take shape through online virtual worlds.
There is a co- evolution taking place between these virtual contexts 
and the world of “meatspace,” a term originating in cyberpunk ﬁction, 
which refers to the physical world of ﬂesh and blood. Technologies that 
employ augmented reality— such as mobile devices and televisual sports-
casting aids— encompass both the virtual and the actual, and much of 
the world’s population is moving toward a reality that is increasingly 
mediated by both. In other ways beyond the virtual/real divide, binary 
conﬁgurations break down and become less distinct through militarized 
gaming and parallel trends. Three other distinctions that are applicable 
to the focus of this book are those commonly made between war and 
game, soldier and civilian, and work and play. The assumed stark divi-
sions in each pair are problematic.
war and game
On several occasions in 2009 angry protesters from Veterans for Peace, 
United for Peace and Justice, and other local allied groups jammed the 
interior of the far end of the Franklin Mills Shopping Mall in Philadel-
phia in front of the Army Experience Center, chanting the slogan “War 
is not a game!” Their rage was palpable and stemmed from (what they 
saw to be) the trivialization of war by the army through its use of (what 
they saw to be) an inherently trivial and toy- like game medium being 
used for military recruitment. And yet war is progressively becoming 
like a game, both in the ways in which it is consumed as an entertain-
ment product and the ways in which it is fought.

america’s digital army 
23
This connection between war and game is not new: as liminal spaces 
separated from mundane, routine existence, both war and game tradi-
tionally have rituals and rules that circumscribe the space and time of 
each. While both have purported “rules” that may seem objective to the 
casual observer, the ways in which those rules are followed and enforced 
are inherently culture- bound. Boot camp and deployments act as reso-
cializing mechanisms that prepare soldiers mentally to enter into a new 
kind of war space in which killing other humans is acceptable and sanc-
tioned. “Magic circles” of games likewise set apart the game setting as 
something in which norms of social interaction apply differently, where 
game rules shape and cordon off the game experience as being some-
thing that is more of a ritualistic, liminal space betwixt and between 
everyday existence (Huizinga 1950; Turner 1967). Though they may be 
difficult to deﬁne, the space and time of both war and game are rele-
gated to the atypical.
In addition to these anthropological connections between war and 
game are increasingly stronger socioeconomic ones. The rising variabil-
ity, variety, and interoperability in games over the course of the last 
twenty years has coincided with the rising and essentially pervasive 
scale of everyday consumer interactions with visual representations and 
simulations of war in the United States. War games are ﬂoating signiﬁ-
ers that can be endlessly interpreted, even by their developers. “The 
military,” writes media scholar Henry Jenkins (2003), “uses games to 
recruit and train soldiers; the antiwar movement uses games to express 
the futility of the current conﬂict; the pro- war movement uses games 
to express its anger against the terrorists; the news media use games to 
explain military strategy; and the commercial games industry wants to 
test the waters to see if we are going to play war games the same way 
other generations watched war movies.” This ambiguity of meaning, 
when coupled with the situational gravitas of conﬂict, gives war games 
a powerful but often nonspeciﬁc emotional tenor. This is precisely what 
makes them so gripping to a variety of people and why video games 
have become a central touchstone for the way in which people now 
conceptualize war.
War has always been a function of vision and vice versa; the technol-
ogies of seeing have always been directly related to the technologies of 

24 america’s digital army
ﬁghting (Virilio 1989), and this holds true for video games. Imagining 
war as a video game ﬁrst entered into widespread public consciousness 
during the 1991 First Gulf War, hailed at the time as being the “video 
game war” (and “Nintendo war”) due to the news media’s prominent 
and unprecedented reliance on video images of aerial bombing and 
digital representations of the conﬂict. These new gamelike properties 
of the war’s news coverage produced an unexpected and even alarming 
level of detachment between the actual killing and the clean way in 
which it was represented. The cycle of information ﬁrst experienced in 
the First Gulf War, in which military personnel relied on news media 
outside Iraq to provide them with up- to- date coverage of events inside 
Iraq, created a scenario that became far removed from the actual ﬁght-
ing. Contemporary real- time, twenty- four- hour news coverage has since 
perpetuated this culture of simulation in which news of an event often 
precedes the actual event, therefore shaping and affecting its outcome 
(Baudrillard 1995; Stahl 2007).
Games do have a strategic military purpose, but for most the purpose 
of war gaming is military entertainment— “militainment,” as commu-
nications scholar Roger Stahl terms it (2007, 2010). Games do not merely 
reﬂect the realities of war, but actively shape both war and our expec-
tations of it, even for those of us who do not play war- themed games. 
For those who do play, war games enable individuals to imagine them-
selves and role- play as soldiers in virtual contexts. This development 
has direct consequences in another categorical binary, that between the 
soldier and the civilian. The merging of war and game muddles the 
boundaries between the military and the nonmilitary and confounds 
the distinctions between soldier and civilian.
soldier and civilian
War is a problematic notion, and its limits are difficult to delineate. When 
is it? Where is it? Who are its participants? These questions, if approached 
thoroughly and thoughtfully, lead to unsettling answers that go beyond 
the battleﬁeld and into the living room and the bedroom. Even though 
90 percent of war casualties are noncombatant civilians, soldiers who 
are men dominate the popular imagery of war. The tacit boundaries 
between war and “not war” do not take into account the ways in which 

america’s digital army 
25
other forms of violence increase during times of war, especially among 
families of enlisted soldiers, which experience higher rates of domestic 
violence (Nordstrom 1998, 149– 50). In times of deployment the strain 
on families with loved ones as soldiers is apparent, but issues often per-
sist during post- deployment periods. For many veterans and their fam-
ilies war continues in frequently unacknowledged trauma and memories. 
The extent to which war affects civilians and soldiers alike in violent 
and traumatic ways cannot be understated and is a legacy of war that 
undermines the easy binary between soldier and civilian, as well as that 
between battlefront and home front.
War is not an “eruption” of violence due to some primal, animalistic 
impulses, but is a phenomenon shaped to a great degree by practices 
and understandings that are nonmilitary in origin (Hoffman 2011; Nord-
strom 2004, 2007). War and political violence are not the “breaking 
down” of society but rather express and produce social realities; to con-
sider military violence holistically and contextually means examining 
the systems that give it meaning and enable its production and 
perpetuation— systems such as government institutions, funding mech-
anisms, political economies, ideological frameworks, class and labor 
arrangements, education and recruitment initiatives, globalized net-
works, communication and entertainment media, structural racism and 
other forms of structured inequalities, and gendered behavior, which 
are among some of the main areas through which war operates. The 
processes of war shape, and are shaped by, all of these (Lutz 2006).
The upshot is that war is not limited to the domain of the soldier, nor 
has it ever been. War is not limited to a speciﬁc place or time; in the 
contemporary world it is pervasive and is something for which contem-
porary states are always preparing (Virilio and Lotringer 1983). Although 
a civil/military distinction exists, it is largely an artiﬁce maintained 
through institutional and media communications. This illusory separa-
tion between the world of the civilian and that of the soldier, however, 
has become increasingly vague through the variety of entertainment 
media depictions of war, as well as the increasing cooperation between 
the entertainment and military defense industries over the past twenty 
years (Halter 2006; Lenoir 2000, 2003; Turse 2008). As a video game 
that touts one of its goals as “compet[ing] in the electronic entertain-

26 america’s digital army
ment space for youth mind share” (Wardynski 2009, 15) in order to 
encourage the consideration of military enlistment at an early age, Amer-
ica’s Army actively and effectively perpetuates this ambiguity between 
soldier and civilian— more so than any other form of military recruit-
ment or media campaign.
Contextualizing war means understanding that soldiers and civilians 
alike perform the labor of war. Like civilian jobs soldiering can become 
a career, a temporary employment situation, or part- time work. In mak-
ing this parallel I want to be clear that I am not claiming that soldiers 
and civilians are essentially the same. The violence that underlies all 
soldiering work should not be diminished or trivialized as an aspect that 
sets soldiering apart from most other jobs, excepting police work and 
other forms of private or government security work. Nevertheless the 
aura of “selﬂess service” and patriotism that surrounds soldiering in the 
United States masks the ways in which it is primarily a job to which 
individuals regularly turn for largely ﬁnancial reasons.
Civilians, more often than soldiers, are the primary casualties in war, 
and the lines between home front and battlefront become unclear in 
myriad ways. Soldiers return home from overseas with unseen injuries. 
Remotely piloted drones, ﬂown over Afghanistan, Yemen, and Pakistan 
from bases in Nevada and North Dakota, become the new mechanism 
of air war. Entertainment media interpellate— or call on— individuals 
to imagine themselves as soldiers, and civilian labor regularly supports 
the industry of war. War clearly requires a lot of work and takes its toll 
on both civilians and soldiers, but it also involves a fair amount of play. 
In this sense the labor of making war in the twenty- ﬁrst century is in 
perfect alignment with other forms of work.
work and play
A friend of mine who was a guild leader for the popular mmog World of 
Warcraft once told me that the reason she stopped playing was that her 
play responsibilities for managing a group of over forty people were 
“becoming too much like work.” This fairly typical experience mirrors 
the corporate adoption of the “play- at- work” mantra (and its darker 
double, the imperative to “work- at- play”), which seems not to be abat-
ing, particularly in the tech industries. Evolving technologies and tech-

america’s digital army 
27
niques aimed at producing employee efficiency while mitigating 
burnout problematize the work-play binary, as employees continue to 
use networked technologies during work while extending working hours 
beyond discrete activities and bounded segments of time, thanks to 
essentially pervasive smart phones and tablets. High- tech companies 
like Google exemplify the corporate approach to incorporating more of 
an employee’s life into the work environment, with ﬂex- time “work from 
home” perks, legendary cafeterias, and “relaxed and casual, even whim-
sical” building designs (Goldberger 2013).
Work invades nonwork time through new media technologies, and 
the creative output of media and software industry laborers, including 
game developers, tends to become completely intertwined with their 
work. In contrast to previous eras, there is something very different 
going on here in regards to the way individuals working in the knowl-
edge economy conceptualize their labor. These kinds of high- tech work-
ers tend to consider their work as a personal endeavor of creativity, 
self- expression, and achievement, in direct contrast to the classic indus-
trial salaried laborer, working eight hours a day in a factory to perform 
repetitive tasks that produce uniform products (Berardi 2009b, 76– 77).
Although most obvious in the technology sector, the mentalities of 
“play as work” and “play at work” are not conﬁned to those working as 
employees in the high- tech software industry, but extend to other labor 
sectors as well as to users of entertainment and social media technolo-
gies. Facebook’s economy of likes, updates, and friends is a classic exam-
ple of what media theorist Tiziana Terranova calls “free labor” wherein 
“productive activities . . . are pleasurably embraced [by users] and at 
the same time shamelessly exploited [by companies]” (2000, 37). In the 
current era of “big data,” free downloadable apps and technology are 
rarely purely free, since end- user agreements typically involve the shar-
ing of personal use information that becomes aggregated and sold to 
the highest bidder, with the goal of better positioning products in online 
spaces that are most likely to reach target markets. Free user labor is 
likewise harnessed by game developers through game modiﬁcation tools 
that enable players and users to create and share their own additions 
to published game content beyond the original “vanilla” game. In this 
way game developers, publishers, and distributors maintain interest in 

28 america’s digital army
their product and encourage the growth of creative, emergent commu-
nities that add value to their software at little or no cost.
Those who voluntarily labor without pay regularly undertake aspects 
of digital game development work; quality assurance “beta testing” is 
a prime example. Game developers sometimes discursively position 
this established practice of testing software prior to its release for the 
purpose of detecting bugs and glitches as being a reward in itself, which 
gives volunteer testers an opportunity to have a sneak peek at a new 
game. Crowdfunded beta testing work, wherein the player actually 
pays the company for the privilege of contributing to the game’s devel-
opment process prior to its commercial release, is becoming a new 
normal in game development. For those quality assurance game testers 
who are actually paid employees of a company, a state of labor precar-
iousness due to characteristically short- term and low- wage contract 
work is common. For games especially, work and play quite often look 
the same.
The list of examples above points toward just how problematic the 
binary formulas of virtual and real, war and game, soldier and civilian, 
and work and play can be. They may have worked in the past as useful 
ways of describing and giving meaning to social phenomena, and they 
still attempt to describe aspects of the social. The result, however, is a 
misleading and mostly unintentional concealment of actual processes 
that belie the binaries.
The Militarization of Immaterial Labor
At the heart of the false dichotomies described above is an institutional 
force that has worked to solidify the apparent boundaries between them. 
By “institutions,” I refer to classical disciplinary institutions, such as 
schools, prisons, hospitals and mental institutions, universities, govern-
ments, factories and corporations— and the military. These institutions 
have been most prominently examined in the work of French theorist 
Michel Foucault, whose work details how the eighteenth century marked 
a dramatic rise in various scientiﬁc and pseudoscientiﬁc techniques for 
controlling individual bodies and actions at the level of large popula-
tions. During this period institutional and academic disciplines devel-
oped quickly, and once they could track and monitor populations their 

america’s digital army 
29
analysis brought about new social “problems,” such as birthrate, public 
health, military manpower, homelessness, and immigration.
The work of institutions historically has been to enforce conformity 
to institutionally deﬁned norms and expectations. Institutions, at their 
core, wield power and discipline, either through overt coercion or sub-
tle encouragement. This is most visible in those institutional conﬁgura-
tions that most regularly use physical violence as means of enforcing 
conformity, such as prison systems and militaries, but just as true for 
those institutions that structure behavior through typically less overt 
means. It is important to note that institutions produce behavior by struc-
turing actions (through physical infrastructure and architecture) and 
ways of thinking (through diverse messaging and instruction systems). 
Institutions deﬁne roles (student, mental patient, prisoner, soldier, juror, 
parishioner, homeless person, employee, spouse, social worker) and set 
boundaries; they work to delimit and solidify the differences between 
things, and this is the case with the binaries explored above.
Institutions regulate human populations by deploying analytical tools, 
including demographics, policies, laws, social systems, and (now) tools 
to leverage “big data.” Rather than approaching individuals as merely 
legal or political subjects, this institutional approach regards them as 
living beings whose physical health, mental condition, sexuality, genet-
ics, ability to reproduce, capability to ﬁght, potential to work, and all 
other biologically related functions (the list can go on) are central to 
governance and supervision. While institutions are the deﬁning struc-
tures through which power is wielded in the contemporary world, forms 
of power change over time and morph according to socioeconomic and 
political conditions. It is important to note that institutional power is 
not stagnant, but instead is constantly evolving, seeking out new forms 
of control by insinuating itself into the fabric of social life, individual 
behaviors, and subjectivities.5
One such important evolution involves the disaggregation and diffu-
sion of institutions over the past forty years, particularly in the United 
States. In some cases this process has been marked by perpetual crisis, 
and yet the control wielded by institutions is not fading away but is 
instead becoming dispersed beyond the institutions themselves, expand-
ing via globalized capital and systems of technology ever further into 

30 america’s digital army
human biology and subjectivity (Hardt and Negri 2000, 2004). Political 
theorist Giorgio Agamben formulates such crises as being “states of 
exception” that have become an unexceptional new norm of governance 
(2005), and activist scholar Naomi Klein’s The Shock Doctrine (2008) 
details the ways in which perpetually recurring human- made or human- 
exacerbated crises have intensiﬁed inequalities and been exploited for 
political and economic gain in the early twenty- ﬁrst century.
In their own ways both Agamben and Klein are describing the evo-
lution of institutional power into what Gilles Deleuze calls a society of 
control (1992), which is achieved when all- encompassing institutions 
are no longer required to produce docile subjects. Deleuze writes that 
“in the disciplinary societies” ﬁrst described by Foucault, “one was always 
starting again (from school to the barracks, from the barracks to the 
factory), while in the societies of control one is never ﬁnished with 
anything— the corporation, the educational system, the armed services 
being metastable states coexisting in one and the same modulation, like 
a universal system of deformation” (1992, 5). While the domain of the 
military in the United States, for example, was once mostly conﬁned to 
the world of the soldier, weapons, and barracks, military power in the 
society of control gradually becomes diffused across multiple formats, 
moving into schools and education systems, forms of entertainment, 
policing and immigration strategies, and international diplomatic efforts. 
For example, the California prison system, which persists as one of the 
most expansive and expensive in the world, is in a state of enormous 
ﬁnancial, social, and legal crisis (Gilmore 2007; LA Times Editorial Board 
2013). Public space becomes militarized through urban planning and 
policing (Davis 1990), and this has become increasingly obvious as issues 
surrounding police militarization and institutionalized racism have taken 
national center stage, beginning with events in Ferguson, Missouri, in 
August 2014 (Greenwald 2014).
Just as the speciﬁc power of institutions becomes more generalized, 
in the society of control the binary categories explored above, which 
were once integral to institutional power, now become blurred. The 
blurring of these binaries, which have to a great extent been established 
by institutions, is one symptom of the evolution from a disciplinary power 
based at the institutions to a disciplinary power diffused and distributed 

america’s digital army 
31
throughout the control society. (It is worth pointing out here that in 
describing this diffusionary process, I am not bemoaning the demise of 
the fabled “good ol’ days” when we knew the differences between work 
and play, feminine and masculine, soldier and civilian, gay and straight, 
sane and insane, war and game, black and white, and so forth.)
This discussion on the ways in which institutions wield power in the 
early twenty- ﬁrst century is highly relevant, given that America’s Army 
is a game funded and produced by one of the classical disciplinary 
institutions— the military— but distributed through digital media net-
works that have become essentially pervasive in the United States. Like 
other total institutions the U.S. military still directs much of its disci-
plinary power toward persuasive and more classically authoritarian 
messaging formats. The products of the Army Game Project deliberately 
use persuasive elements as a strategy; a favorite book of the project’s 
long- time director, Colonel Casey Wardynski, is Persuasive Technology: 
Using Computers to Change What We Think and Do (Fogg 2003). Although 
I hesitate to call America’s Army “propaganda,” since its approach to 
messaging is more sophisticated than the unidirectional mass media 
model of propaganda from the early and mid- twentieth century described 
by Herman and Chomsky (2002 [1988]), the game is still in that rhetor-
ical tradition of persuasion through media, directed at citizens by ele-
ments of the state. Wardynski himself unapologetically considers the 
game as part of a continuum stemming from the Uncle Sam “I Want 
You” ads of World War I and propaganda movies of World War II (Chap-
lin and Ruby 2005, 219). The situation of America’s Army within a mili-
tarized culture industry and economy, however, speaks to a larger, 
omnipresent form of military power, which is distributed more broadly 
across the society of control. This is the process of pervasive cultural 
militarization, enacted in part through the harnessing of high- tech labor 
and the intermeshing of the technologies and economies of entertain-
ment and war.
As the divide between work and play breaks down, “playbor” has 
become a new norm, especially in the high- tech industry. This develop-
ment is indicative of the stark differences between what is known as 
traditional Fordist and post- Fordist systems of labor, both of which draw 
their name from Henry Ford’s model of an industrial system of automo-

32 america’s digital army
tive production. At its height during the 1940s and ’50s, Fordism’s gen-
eral characteristics came to include factory assembly line work, 
unionized lifelong employment at a living wage, and the standardization 
of products. Although Fordist examples continue to exist, beginning in 
the 1970s this model gradually gave way to what has been termed “post- 
Fordism”— or, more broadly, post- industrialism.
As is the case with other institutions, the institution of the workplace 
is less discrete under the post- Fordist model. Several characteristics make 
it so, and these most prominently include 1) the economic privatization 
and deregulation of formerly state- run industries and social service pro-
grams; 2) shorter production cycles; 3) more networked and less hier-
archical structures of organization; 4) greater mobility of jobs, coupled 
with increased instability in long- term employment and the decreased 
power of labor unions; and 5) the centrality of new technologies in all 
of these processes (Hardt and Negri 2000; Virno 2004; Weeks 2011). 
Among the starkest characteristics of post- Fordism is the increase in the 
previously discussed ambiguity between work time and leisure time. 
This lack of distinction regularly happens through the connectivity 
brought about by new forms of communication, such as mobile phones 
and networked devices.
Once the separation between work and nonwork time becomes ambig-
uous, employers privilege other qualities of human labor. While the 
ability to carry out manual tasks has remained essential, other skill sets 
have grown in importance. Like the Industrial Revolution, which brought 
about new industrial changes in society beyond simply factory work, 
new post- Fordist changes exert inﬂuence in broader contexts and require 
social and working relationships to depend on the exchange of infor-
mation in more affective and communicative ways. Although speciﬁc 
types of labor have always compelled or required employees to project 
an intuitive and emotional tenor in their work (e.g., ﬂight attendants, 
service work), post- Fordist labor more extensively capitalizes on the 
affective, cognitive, communicative, and social qualities of employees. 
Technology is a pillar post- Fordist work, which typically takes place in 
front of computer screens and produces intangible products. The term 
for the kind of work that takes place under the conditions of post- Fordist 
employment is immaterial labor (Lazzarato 1996).

america’s digital army 
33
Autonomist Marxist scholar Bifo Berardi refers to the individuals work-
ing under this state of affairs as members of the “cognitariat” (2009a, 
2009b). This term draws on the Marxist concept of the proletariat as a 
class of revolutionary potential, but signals the autonomist Marxist idea 
that, with the disintegration of unions and labor from the 1970s onward, 
the primary possibilities for social change now lie in a new rising class 
of immaterial laborers. As a rising part of the contemporary global infor-
mation and entertainment culture industry, digital games are an exem-
plary industry of post- Fordist immaterial labor, which is undertaken by 
the cognitariat (Dyer- Witheford and de Peuter 2005).
Immaterial labor privileges “soft skills” for work in areas such as video 
game design, and this is also a central rationalization for the army in 
using “soft sell” marketing and recruiting tactics through initiatives such 
as America’s Army. With America’s Army, drawing on immaterial labor 
is both a means— through the development and use of game technology— 
and an end for the army, since the privileged qualities of immaterial 
workers are precisely those qualities in soldiers that the army seeks to 
recruit through novel initiatives like America’s Army (Wardynski et al. 
2009). It is not coincidental that, historically, post- Fordist conﬁgurations 
not only map closely onto the diffusion and smoothing of institutional 
power that is the main characteristic of the control society, but also cor-
respond to ongoing processes of militarization.
Militarization happens through industrial practices, infrastructural 
arrangements, policy planning, political decisions, consumer marketing, 
and entertainment media that have come to have vested interests in the 
continuation of economies that are centered on, or tied closely to, the 
military. Feminist sociologist Cynthia Enloe describes “militarization” 
as being a continual cultural and economic process whereby a person, 
institution, or idea comes to depend on the military or militaristic ideas 
for their well- being or existence. Because this development is often slow 
and inconspicuous, militaristic expressions and presumptions tend to 
take on an aura of the ordinary (2000, 3). Enloe, for example, explains 
how even a can of soup that contains pasta- shaped space defense sat-
ellites reﬂects militarized ideas that have been adopted as taken- for- 
granted assumptions by both the producers and consumers of soup 
(2000, 1– 35). These kinds of micro- level processes of militarization are 

34 america’s digital army
just as important to trace as the larger social ones, as they illuminate 
aspects of ordinary life that are often taken for granted.
The origins of the current militarized economy of the United States 
can be traced to the total war orientation of industries during World 
War II and the war’s aftermath, when rationalizations for the continu-
ation of high levels of military spending morphed at the beginning of 
the Cold War toward the contestation of a perceived Soviet threat. In 
1961, as he left the presidency Dwight Eisenhower signaled the dangers 
of what he termed the “military- industrial complex.” In his now iconic 
farewell address Eisenhower cautioned, “In the councils of government, 
we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted inﬂuence, whether 
sought or unsought, by the military- industrial complex. The potential 
for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist. . . . 
Akin to, and largely responsible for the sweeping changes in our 
industrial- military posture, has been the technological revolution during 
recent decades. . . . For every old blackboard there are now hundreds 
of new electronic computers” (1961).
Though it is not likely that Eisenhower could have predicted the rise 
of video games as an entertainment medium, he understood that the 
future of war would be intertwined with that of the computer. Indeed, 
it is so intertwined that one game developer of America’s Army under-
stood his work directly in relation to Eisenhower’s military- industrial 
complex, telling me that America’s Army “is really close to what he was 
talking about, the military becoming commercialized. It’s almost fash-
ionable, it’s really bizarre.” 6
Today organizations devoted to the continuation of the military’s close 
relationships with various industries exist at all levels, employ a large 
percentage of workers, and are central to the overall economic orienta-
tion of the United States. The stretch of this economy is vast, covering 
most economic sectors, including entertainment, communication, food, 
and academia, not to mention arms manufacturing (Turse 2008). The 
catchphrases that writers have used to describe what now exists build 
on Eisenhower’s phrasing and include expressions such as the “military 
entertainment complex,” “mime- net” (the military industrial media 
entertainment network), “empire” (with a capital “E” or a lowercase 
“e”), or, simply, “the complex.” 7 Other kinds of “complexes” have been 

america’s digital army 
35
invented to describe different militarized or hybrid institutionalized 
relationships, such as the “prison- industrial complex.” While these terms 
act as sometimes useful shorthand for describing the conduct of arrange-
ments, practices, organizations, policies, transactions, assumptions, and 
ideologies in a militarized economy, they also have the potential to 
obscure what they attempt to describe. I regularly use the term “military 
entertainment complex,” but also note the problems in doing so. Describ-
ing any kind of “complex” as a single monolithic entity belies the con-
stant negotiation of contracts, incorporation of new technologies, 
introduction of new policies, corporate buyouts and mergers, and the 
other dynamic interactions between multiple parties of individuals and 
organizations within a militarized set of relationships. Part of the proj-
ect of this book is in calling out the complexities and lived realities of 
militarized relationships, which are ironically exactly what is circum-
vented in notions of military “complexes.”
The military entertainment complex is one way in which the military 
comes to pervade everyday life in the United States, to the point where 
militarized entertainment, news about military operations, and the 
presence of the military in characteristically nonmilitary areas (such 
as sports events, state fairs, and shopping malls) becomes banal and 
even boring. Anthropologist Catherine Lutz describes this as the “mil-
itary normal” (2009), which starts to take shape the more often mili-
tary needs become prioritized, the more regularly the military’s presence 
is visible, the more habitually military metaphors come to be used in 
everyday language, and the more frequently military themes in news 
and entertainment media become an unquestioned part of the status 
quo. The logic of the military normal is almost involuntary on the social 
level in the United States, and it is difficult to escape— even for anthro-
pologists studying it.
For this reason I go further than Enloe in my conceptualization of 
what militarization is and how it is perpetuated, including aspects that 
are not exclusively top- down and originating from state, corporate, and 
institutional complexes. Militarization is not an exclusively one- way 
phenomenon, and in the contemporary post- Fordist world militariza-
tion acts in a more performative, bottom- up, and user- initiated manner. 
For example, while the old Uncle Sam “I want you for the U.S. Army” 

36 america’s digital army
ads might capture the essence of top- down early twentieth- century mil-
itary recruitment techniques that are unidirectional in their messaging 
from institution to individual, military recruitment today happens in a 
performative and cybernetic way that seeks to incorporate its subjects 
in its process. Digital games are a textbook example in that they give 
players the appearance of agency in determining their actions. Like the 
Internet, digital games and interactive media carry a liberatory promise 
to the user, one that is never fully fulﬁlled. Between the spaces of the 
promise and the deliverable, militarization creeps in.
I must add that ghosts of debates centering on the issue of video 
games vis- à- vis violence and aggression haunt this connection between 
militarization and video games. Although the issue of games and vio-
lence is connected in some ways to the militarization of games, I must 
be clear in stating that militarization through digital games is not syn-
onymous with violence in digital games. Despite all of my personal enjoy-
ment of simulated violence in games, I have never once felt in my 
gaming experiences any kind of so- called media effect that translates 
to me becoming a more violent individual. These real or imagined 
“effects” of games are important considerations, since the way in which 
the army talks about violence in digital games points toward a rhetorical 
maneuvering that carefully sidesteps claims that link games to physical 
aggression and violence. It is important to keep in mind that violence, 
guns, masculinity, and even seemingly divergent concepts like the ideas 
of peace, women’s rights, or environmentalism are all things that can 
be (and have been) militarized or demilitarized, depending on the con-
text (Enloe 2000).
War, media, and immaterial labor enact dynamic interconnected pro-
cesses, which are constantly morphing and changing. The ultimate prod-
uct of these intertwined processes is militarization, but the cultural 
expressions of a militarized society are continually changing. Military- 
themed and military- sponsored uses of media such as America’s Army 
both express and perpetuate a pervasive militarization of popular cul-
ture in the United States. As such, any notion that the military sphere 
in the United States is conﬁned merely to the armed services is false.
The primary argument of this book is that digital games and simula-
tions act as channels for enlisting and militarizing immaterial labor. 

america’s digital army 
37
This happens at all levels, and is a result of a military imagination that 
positions individuals as virtual soldiers— people whose labor is, or could 
be, militarized in some form. Virtual soldiering is not an individual choice 
that people are at liberty to make, but rather the result of an institution-
alizing force that spreads as a pervasive element through the society of 
control. In this sense everyone is essentially a virtual soldier. In this 
book I draw on descriptive ethnographic details in order to articulate 
how virtual soldiering operates, connecting the sinews between indi-
vidual and institutional actors of America’s Army to the larger cultural 
trends in militarization, interactive entertainment, and immaterial labor.


39
2
The Art of Persuasion and the Science of Manpower
oema’s charter is to build the army of the future. It’s about recruiting 
talent, assessing talent, deploying talent, and retaining talent.
maj. mike marty, America’s Army chief operations officer,  
personal interview
From Personnel Management to Talent Management
In my ﬁrst meeting with Wardynski, described in the previous chapter, 
I discovered that the roots of the Army Game Project were deeply embed-
ded in the logics of market analysis and neoliberal business principles. 
It was only later, in subsequent meetings, that I came to understand 
how profoundly the Army Game Project pushed against traditional, insti-
tutionalized understandings of how the U.S. Army recruits and concep-
tualizes soldiers. At the heart of this endeavor was Wardynski’s Office 
of Economic and Manpower Analysis (oema), an economic and policy- 
focused army interdisciplinary research institution within the Depart-
ment of Social Sciences at West Point. In its market- based rationalizations 
oema challenged the entrenched recruitment and technology procure-
ment practices of the army, and in so doing made a series of institutional 
rivals, if not enemies, within the greater U.S. military complex. More 
entrenched organizations were able to outmaneuver America’s Army in 
terms of funding and contract bids. In 2009, for example, the army’s 
peo- stri (Program Executive Office for Simulation, Training, and Instru-
mentation)1 mediated a bid by Czech software developer Bohemia Inter-
active Simulations for their product Virtual Battlespace 2 to become the 
official army training simulation for enlisted soldiers. This contract was 
essentially renewed in 2013, when Bohemia Interactive Simulations again 

40 the art of persuasion
won a competitive bid to develop the official next- gen training simula-
tion, Virtual Battlespace 3.
Through his zeal Wardynski created enemies and admirers— 
sometimes in the same person among several people with whom I com-
municated. He made clear his perspective that institutions like peo- stri 
were not only competitors with the Army Game Project, but also an 
endemic military problem. (“These nitwits at peo- stri hate me,” he 
once said.) From Wardynski’s standpoint the end goal of America’s Army 
had always been to increase the operational efficiency and quality of 
recruited soldiers and decrease unnecessary expenditures and proce-
dures. According to him larger institutionalized organizations are marked 
by bloated budgets, low- quality products, and wasteful practices, along 
with attitudes of complacency. These efficiency objectives were often 
overlooked in press reports and writings that sensationalized the fact 
that the U.S. Army game is “taxpayer- funded” (e.g., Hodes and Ruby- 
Sachs 2002).
oema’s traditional work was to provide analysis and recommenda-
tions to the army for a wide range of issues by building innovative proj-
ects to study and address systemic economic problems that the army 
faces in its organizational structure. Wardynski, for example, describes 
his PhD dissertation in policy analysis as an effort to better “understand 
how Army stationing practices undermine household income and 
increase the direct cost of manning the Army.” 2 Under his supervision 
oema proposed the Officer Career Incentive Program, which worked to 
ensure that officers could be placed in an army occupation of their choice 
and attend graduate school in exchange for additional years of service 
(Burgess 2008). Other initiatives on which oema worked include put-
ting together an effective program for tracking post– Cold War nuclear 
weapons stocks and various studies on the demographics and interests 
of West Point cadets, such as how many of them play America’s Army in 
relation to other college- aged adults (Chaplin and Ruby 2005, 214).
One study by oema, Towards a U.S. Army Officer Corps Strategy for 
Success: A Proposed Human Capital Model Focused upon Talent, argues 
that a “talent- focused strategy” for recruiting officers is imperative since, 
due to a dearth in supply of mid- career officers, “there are increasing 
and accelerating signs that [the] Officer Corps will be unequal to future 

the art of persuasion 
41
demands unless substantive changes are made in its management” 
(Wardynski et al. 2009, 3). This emphasis on “talent” accentuates a 
military need and desire to hire a workforce that exhibits “intelligence 
[and] aptitudes for rapid learning and adaptation. Talented officers . . . 
discern quickly patterns of activity within new situations, and . . . lever-
age these innate aptitudes to become expert in the competencies to 
which they are drawn. These may range from deep technical skills to 
broad conceptual or intuitive abilities, all of which the Army requires” 
(Wardynski et al. 2009, 15). In conjunction with this published assess-
ment Wardynski supervised the creation of a “talent management sys-
tem” for officers that would place “the right leader, in the right position, 
at the right time.” 3
An underlying issue, however, is in “accessing, developing, and 
employing talented people [whose] intellectual agility allows them to 
master diverse competencies demanded now and in the future. Such a 
strategy . . . will move the Army beyond personnel management to tal-
ent management” (Wardynski et al. 2009, vi). This published study is 
separate from the Army Game Project, but the fact that it originated 
from the same institution and director underscores how the need for 
“talented” army laborers could be addressed, in part, through novel 
recruitment solutions like America’s Army. At its core America’s Army is 
an initiative for moving toward the management of talented potential 
soldiers, as it actively engages a demographic of young men who have 
access to computers and basic competencies that are most valued by the 
working cognitariat.
These descriptions of what constitutes a “talented” workforce coin-
cide quite closely with the general characteristics of immaterial labor 
in post- Fordist knowledge economies. Like the need for officer “talent,” 
immaterial labor tends to emphasize ﬂexibility and adaptability, as well 
as affective, cognitive, and communicative forms of labor over the char-
acteristically Fordist privileging of structured time and manual labor, 
epitomized by assembly line work— or, in this case, the “cog in the wheel” 
characterization of the grunt soldier. Computers and new technologies 
are central in conﬁguring immaterial labor, and Wardynski himself had 
been writing about the need for the army to move toward an informa-
tional economic model of labor since at least the mid- 1990s. The army’s 

42 the art of persuasion
“expanding reliance on information technology,” he argued, “will give 
rise to an increasing requirement for highly educated individuals” who 
will be drawn to work in growing nonmilitary high- tech sectors (1995, 
61). America’s Army actively engages a demographic of young men who 
have access to computers and basic knowledge of the informational 
competencies most valued among high- tech, immaterial laborers, and 
is an initiative for recruiting talented virtual soldiers/immaterial work-
ers who might otherwise be attracted to nonmilitary high- tech work. 
One criticism that has been leveled at America’s Army is that it does not 
provide equal access to the game for underprivileged and minority youth 
who may not have access to computers in their domestic life to play the 
pc- exclusive game. If America’s Army is one way for oema to solve its 
projected supply problems in recruiting talented army laborers, this 
assessment misses the point that it is precisely the persons who have 
regular access to computers that America’s Army wishes to reach.
In their analysis of the history of video games, Greig De Peuter and 
Nick Dyer- Witheford demonstrate how game development work, once 
seen in the 1970s and early 1980s as a line of ﬂight from the institution-
alized and dehumanizing structure of Fordist work, was ultimately re- 
appropriated and co- opted by the capitalist economy as perhaps the 
most quintessential industry exemplifying post- Fordist immaterial labor 
(2009). This reappropriation continues in both military and nonmilitary 
spheres. Video games originated primarily from within military- funded 
initiatives but quickly came to be associated with a growing countercul-
ture of antiauthoritarian hackers. It is safe to say that capital has, for 
the most part, tamed the rebelliousness and recaptured the labor of the 
knowledge economy and the cognitariat. The military, however, is still 
in the process of remilitarizing this form of immaterial labor. The logics 
enumerated by oema, the Army Game Project, and Wardynski himself 
exemplify a military desire to do just this. America’s Army is a tool for 
militarizing, recruiting, managing, and ultimately recapturing the labor 
of the post- Fordist cognitariat.
To this end America’s Army and oema implemented a variety of persua-
sive and rhetorical strategies to address potential political ﬂashpoint 
issues, such as military recruitment and video game violence, to make the 
case that the game and its franchise was a legitimate use of government 

the art of persuasion 
43
funds. Wardynski understood that solid, consistent messaging by the 
America’s Army franchise was necessary in order to carefully navigate the 
murky political waters surrounding army recruitment funding, accusa-
tions of military propaganda, and video game violence. Wardynski’s 
explanations are not only informational in showing these persuasive tac-
tics of the Army Game Project, but are also demonstrative of his own per-
suasive power; his personality was so forceful that in my conversations 
with him I regularly felt compelled to believe his explanations indisput-
able, and this was a common feeling among employees working in the 
Army Game Project. Because Wardynski’s words capture a part of the 
sheer persuasive faculty that he commanded and sought to infuse into the 
game, I relate his explanations of the Army Game Project at length below.
In the Office of Wardynski
In the heart of West Point, Wardynski and I sat down to talk in his mod-
est office facing the Hudson River.4 His market approach went straight 
to the issue of increasing demand among tech- savvy “kids” (his termi-
nology) to join the army. In Wardynski’s words, “We [at oema] assume 
that markets are pretty efficient, and we know that government isn’t. 
So if you can make government behave more like markets, maybe you 
would be better off.” Central to oema’s strategy for doing so was a pro-
posed tailoring of the army’s Reserve Officers’ Training Corps (rotc) 
program. rotc courses and programs in universities across the United 
States are one of four paths to becoming an officer in the U.S. Army. In 
addition to regular courses, periodic weekend training activities, and 
morning physical exercise, they typically involve an eight- year commit-
ment to the army after graduation (four years’ active duty and four years’ 
inactive/reserve duty) in exchange for tuition reimbursement and a 
stipend while a university student. “So if we were looking to see where 
to put our rotc programs,” Wardynski asked, “what’s the hardest thing 
to do in terms of getting an rotc cadet? Is it training, or is it getting 
them interested in rotc? My thinking is [that] the hardest part is get-
ting talented people interested— building demand. So if building demand 
is the hard part, the question is really a function of two things: What 
schools do they want to go to and at those schools what could we do to 
make them interested in rotc?”

44 the art of persuasion
robertson allen: It’s pretty speciﬁc to the school and the place.
casey wardynski: Yeah, and so given that we want crackerjack 
people, what schools are they interested in? Because if we’re at 
the wrong school, we’re out of luck no matter what we do. So 
that’s a whole different question from what the army asks. 
Right now, the army is asking, how much do we get out of our 
rotc battalions at the other campuses? Well, if you’re at the 
wrong campuses, you’re never going [to solve your underlying 
problems] with that analysis. You have to ask a whole different 
kind of question: Of the people that want to go into the mili-
tary, where do they want to go to school? [ . . . ] So [oema] 
built the army a framework for how to deal with these ques-
tions globally. We asked, of the people who come into the army 
directly who have a college degree, where do they come from? 
And of people who are applying to West Point from all over the 
United States, where else did they apply? And you ﬁnd out that 
it’s really a whole different set of schools.
ra: Where are they?
cw: The Pennsylvania schools [Penn State and U Penn] are at the 
top of their league. And a lot of schools [that have rotc] aren’t 
even on the list. That’s a question about markets— where does 
the market say we should be, versus where are we? So with 
game technology, the question would be that we don’t really 
understand all the attributes of games all that well. We know 
there’s goodness there, but we don’t know what the ingredients 
are and in what ratios. But there are things that we do know. 
We know they move fast [in the market]. We know that they 
are extremely interesting to the same sort of people in the 
military— young males. For example, we created a Facebook 
page for the new launch of America’s Army 3 about two or three 
days ago. Ninety- four percent of the people who are fans of our 
Facebook page are male. That’s pretty good information right 
there— we’re in the right market.
ra: Two days and you already know that.
cw: Yep, I think we have about 2,600 fans now; 94 percent are 
male, 30 percent are thirteen to seventeen, 21 percent are 

the art of persuasion 
45
eighteen to twenty- four, and 23 percent are twenty- ﬁve to 
thirty- four. The vast majority are under age thirty- four. Okay, 
that’s good. So there’s native interest there and we’re in the 
right spot for this game technology thing. And the kind of game 
we’re making, it’s not Chutes and Ladders, it’s a ﬁrst- person 
[shooter] game. So that’s how you narrow in the genre. And 
the next thing to ask is what you can get from this game. They 
evolve very quickly and are pretty much at the cutting edge all 
the time. The industry is over there, moving at light speed— 
better, faster, quicker, more players, more immersion, more 
intuitive. All of these are the attributes of good games, and 
when you look at the army, where are we going? We run on 
[game] engines that nobody has ever even heard of. We run on 
engines that were economic failures.
Here Wardynski refers to the fact that America’s Army uses versions 
of the commercially successful Unreal Engine, which is a familiar game 
development tool among industry game developers. Other outsourced 
military games and simulations, such as the official army simulation 
trainer vbs2 (now vbs3), run on less common game engines with which 
commercial game developers typically are not as familiar. The politics 
of game- engine choice was an important aspect of how America’s Army 
positioned itself in terms of its competitors and audience. By drawing 
on established game- design conventions and technology in the com-
mercial fps market, oema sought to tap into the array of other hugely 
successful military- themed combat games in the commercial market. 
For example commercial sales for Call of Duty: Modern Warfare II (2009), 
released the same year as America’s Army 3, were over $310 million in 
its ﬁrst week of sales in the United States and United Kingdom, making 
it the most successful release for any form of entertainment media ever 
at that time. By mid- January 2010 the game had grossed over $1 billion 
in revenue (Cork 2009; bbc News 2010). But while commercial military 
games sought to gain a market share among the target demographic of 
teenage to thirty- something males, the purpose of America’s Army hinged 
on gaining headway within a separate market— that of the market for 
“talented” future military recruits.

46 the art of persuasion
Because the target demographic for both of these markets was essen-
tially the same, creating a video game developed and produced by the 
U.S. Army was a logical opportunity to leverage a preexisting market 
demand for military games by co- opting messages about the army that 
were already in circulation in the electronic entertainment industry. 
This is easier said than done, and the ability of America’s Army to tap 
into “native demand” was the major aspect that differentiated the game 
from other military uses of games for recruitment. Wardynski told me:
cw: There have been a lot of efforts to mimic [America’s Army] that 
haven’t succeeded, which points to the fact that this isn’t easy. 
Now, many of those efforts were doomed from design; they 
hadn’t thought through the key ingredients: is there native 
demand?5 We didn’t have to create demand; it was already 
there. So the navy gets it in their head to have a game [Strike 
and Retrieve (U.S. Navy 2005)] but where’s the native demand 
for things that look like the navy in a game? There’s very little 
demand [for] a submarine game or an airplane game that 
involves being a pilot or a commander. Do they hire for those 
jobs? No. So how do you make the jobs the navy is hiring for be 
interesting in games? Well, it doesn’t seem like anybody has 
been able to ﬁgure it out yet. Is it likely that the military is 
going to ﬁgure it out if the game industry can’t ﬁgure it out? 
No. So what do they [the U.S. Navy] come up with? A ﬁsh 
game. All the ten people who have played it have discovered 
[that], but the navy can check the logs that they have a game. 
Is there an air force game? Not really. Do they need one? 
Probably not. Is there evidence of existing demand? Pretty thin. 
Microsoft Flight Simulator . . . 
ra: It’s an older crowd of people who play ﬂight simulators.
cw: Exactly, so even if there is demand, is it the demand [that they 
want]? They’re in the wrong part of the curve. The next 
question would be, if you’re going to do it, do you have the 
wherewithal to do it right? Because if you do it wrong, there’s 
no point in doing it. There are enough alternatives for kids with 

the art of persuasion 
47
games that just because your game is free doesn’t mean that 
the kid is going to come play it. So if you don’t do a high- quality 
product, in my mind you might as well not do anything because 
you are probably going to end up hurting yourself more that 
helping yourself. The fact that we could do a top- quality 
product, being that we are in the government, to me is very 
surprising. Which is unfortunate, but it’s because of our 
procurement systems. They move at dead slow speed [and are] 
optimized for doing business with very large companies that 
have a high threshold for pain in terms of being paid late and 
having lots of rules and regulations.
ra: How difficult is it to operate as if there is a market within an 
organization that doesn’t see it that way?
cw: It’s hard, because we’re constrained by government procure-
ment and contract rules. We’re constrained by governmental 
thought processes, which see a year as fast or two years as fast; 
whereas in the game industry a year or two years is pretty slow. 
So the frame of reference is entirely different. That cultural 
shift is really tough. And the word “game” is involved. For the 
ﬁrst seven years [I was doing America’s Army], using the word 
“game” meant “toy,” which is kind of crazy because the army 
invented war games.
Wardynski frames the differences between U.S. military/government 
procurement practices and game development industry practices as 
being largely cultural. It is telling, though, that while the California- 
based game developers of America’s Army viewed oema as an arm of 
bureaucratic government— the symbolic antithesis of game development 
and at the top of the feudal hierarchy in which they described them-
selves working— Wardynski worked to position oema as a vocal chal-
lenger to institutionalized government procedures, such as established 
conventions of recruiting. He hoped to leverage the persuasive abilities 
of games to enable “kids” to start thinking about the army not as a fall-
back option but as a ﬁrst choice for a future career. Doing so required 
an entirely different approach to recruiting from typical army methods.

48 the art of persuasion
cw: The key idea of America’s Army was that there was a market 
failure that was hurting the army’s ability to recruit kids. Part 
of it is because of the recruiters, part of it is because of the 
army, and part of it is because of the way kids receive and 
process information about the army. And the things that the 
army has been doing demand no proof that they should 
continue being done. For example, there’s no question that we 
need recruiters. Nobody ever asks that question. Well, I 
question it; I’m not sure we need recruiters. I don’t understand 
why we need a military guy to go recruit a kid to be in the 
military. You don’t have an ibm guy go out and recruit a kid to 
work at ibm; you have headhunters and people to go to college 
fairs who know ibm. You might have a few recruiters, but 
really they are human- resource people who are more in the 
screening role than the recruiting role. Now, I can see the 
army having screeners to verify that these kids would be a 
good match, just like ibm would do, but we have reverse- 
screeners: instead of trying to keep out the bad ﬁts, we’re 
trying to force everyone in that could possibly ﬁt and then 
trying to see if we could get them to be a good ﬁt after the fact. 
Well, in World War II that might have made sense, but in the 
information age it doesn’t. We don’t need that many kids, 
really, and the kids that we do need we want them to be a 
good ﬁt because they are volunteers. If they’re not a good ﬁt, 
they are going to cost a fortune, they are going to be unhappy, 
and it doesn’t ﬁt well with the market model. So I question the 
fact that we need recruiters. Could we do it virtually by getting 
kids interested in the army, by test- driving, by virtually being a 
part of it? By having them visit bases, do Junior rotc? I think 
we can do a lot more of that, but the fact that we need recruit-
ers is not questioned.
ra: How is that received by army recruitment?
cw: Not well. It’s slow to adapt because it’s a risk- adverse business. 
And I can understand that because if they miss their objectives, 
they’re the ones who are going to be in the hot seat. It’s hard to 

the art of persuasion 
49
crack that nut. It grows its own feedstock, so recruiters who like it 
stay and become recruiter- recruiters. That process that they grew 
up in is a process that they believe in and are going to perpetuate.
ra: It becomes completely institutionalized.
cw: Completely institutionalized, whether it ﬁts the circumstances 
anymore or not. So the army does recruiting events [ . . . ] and 
the army will have a report about how many “events” they did 
this weekend and what they got. I’ll be like, well okay, [Ameri-
ca’s Army] had one hundred thousand events this weekend, 
because every mission in America’s Army is an “event.” They are 
just virtual, and they cost us a nickel. People forget that “return 
on investment” (roi) has a numerator and a denominator. They 
always think of the numerator as ﬁxed and the denominator as 
ﬁxed, but if you drive your cost out of the equation, now you’re 
in a world of disruptive technology that puts the other guys out 
of business because it doesn’t have to get you much. [We] 
challenge a lot of rules of thumb in the army about why we are 
doing business the way that we do. Is there another way to do it 
that is cheaper and gets the same effects? Or a way that is 
cheaper and gets lower effects, but when you do the math 
you’re still farther ahead? Or a way that is cheaper and gets you 
better effects?
ra: Has that been the rationale around the project since its inception?
cw: Right, that the costs are so fundamentally different. America’s 
Army costs $4 million a year to build, and hosting online is 
about another $2.5 million, and the rest is whatever you want 
to do with it for marketing and events.6 A normal game would 
have $10 to $40 million [devoted to marketing], depending on 
the game, and it would be a big deal. We don’t have that kind of 
money. We’re virtual, so we don’t need shelf space, but it would 
be nice to have a little money so we could be up front and 
center on places like Steam [store.steampowered 
.com] or Fileplanet [www.ﬁleplanet.com] so that kids who 
aren’t familiar with the product could at least see that it’s there 
and try it for free.7

50 the art of persuasion
But we face a lot of questions, like what is the roi for Ameri-
ca’s Army? Okay, we get X number of hundred million man- 
hours of play. So how does that equate to anything the army 
normally thinks about? The normal marketing model is that, 
ﬁrst, you want to make people aware that you have a product. 
Awareness is measured in terms of impressions, how many 
people saw it. So let’s say a million people saw an ad on tv: a 
million impressions. How long did they see it? Thirty seconds 
for a million people— what is that? That’s about eight thousand 
hours of viewer time. Did they pay attention? Maybe. Maybe 
they use Tevo, or went to get coffee or coke. Whose attention? 
Is it grandma, or is it Billy who is nineteen? We don’t know. 
What were the demographics of the tv show’s viewers you ran 
the ad on? Well, they generally are this, but who knows. So you 
try and compare a million game hours of America’s Army to 
that. A million hours of America’s Army are worth a hell of a lot 
more because: a) they didn’t Tevo it; b) it’s focused attention; 
and c) we’re way beyond the “did you know there’s an army?” 
part. In America’s Army you’re part of the army. So we can’t 
even have a reasonable, sane discussion about comparing 
America’s Army with the number of “impressions.”
“In America’s Army, you’re part of the army.” This direct claim on the 
place of the player in America’s Army is an unambiguous example of the 
military conceptualization of virtual soldiering through games. Older 
unidirectional models of mass media predicated on the dissemination 
of media from a central node to many viewers— television, ﬁlm, radio— 
interpellate viewers in a far different manner than video games, which 
require participatory behavior and, to varying degrees depending on 
the game in question, cocreation of the media experience. This element 
of participatory cocreation present in digital games involves users within 
a more interactive and engaging messaging environment, in which insti-
tutional power is better able to immerse individuals in its logics and 
world views. “Serious games” and “advergames” like America’s Army 
have speciﬁc purposes and messages to impart, and they seek to per-
suade users, much like propaganda (Nieborg 2005). Classic “propaganda” 

the art of persuasion 
51
in the traditional sense of the term, however, denotes a one- way mes-
saging conﬁguration from media producer to media consumer, and for 
this reason I hesitate to use the term in regards to America’s Army, even 
though Wardynski himself views the game as being in the same tradi-
tion as government recruitment propaganda from previous eras. Heather 
Chaplin and Aaron Ruby’s book Smartbomb, which Wardynski suggested 
that I read, describes him as claiming that “America’s Army is not that 
unique. He says that it’s just part of a continuum dating all the way back 
to Uncle Sam posters of World I or the propaganda movies of World War 
II. And he makes no apologies” (Chaplin and Ruby 2005, 219).
While America’s Army had the same recruitment goals as “legacy” 
models of recruitment that employ more unidirectional messaging meth-
ods, the entrenchment of recruitment programs like the military spon-
sorship of nascar and expensive television ads during sporting events 
was a constant obstacle for oema in convincing senior government and 
military officials about the efficacy and legitimacy of America’s Army. 
Wardynski explained:
Part of the problem with competing with the bureaucracy and insti-
tutions is that it’s hard to institutionalize. And part of the risk of 
becoming institutionalized is that you become part of the problem. 
So for senior leaders we brief, there are things called “programs of 
record.” [ . . . ] They are there come fair days and bad days; they’ve 
got a budget. In the business operating mind they get a little less 
hungry and less lean. To draw it out on a blackboard, innovation 
kind of goes algorithmic— increasingly you’re on the ﬂat part of the 
curve. So many senior leaders aren’t crazy about programs of record. 
America’s Army isn’t a program of record. It is funded out of the sec-
retary of the army’s recruiting initiative. It is one of his initiatives 
and has been since day one. It could be zeroed out at any point if it’s 
not performing, and it can grow if it is. It is growing usually because 
there has always been an advocate for it at the senior level of the 
army. [ . . . ]
All the literature on persuasive technology and behavioral eco-
nomics supports our approach,8 but the legacy [recruiting] system is 
very difficult to defeat. There are a lot of jobs, a lot of money tied up 

52 the art of persuasion
in it. I think their budget this year for the legacy recruiting stuff was 
$167 million; we’re in the range of $4 million. [But if] you look at 
where ﬁrms are putting their money into marketing, tv is not it. tv 
is dying, print is dying, radio is dying, and online is what’s growing. 
Why does the army value tv so much? I have no idea. It’s a one- way 
communication method that is extremely general in nature.
At the ﬁrst principles level, I would question if anything the army 
is doing is right. [The army gets] away with what we do because we 
have an unlimited budget apparently. Or at least when we get in trou-
ble and the country needs us, the budget pretty much becomes unlim-
ited, right? Just because we can do that doesn’t make it right. Now 
when the army throws those resources at it, it may succeed in the 
recruiting mission, but may not have done itself any long- term favors 
because the people that were brought in may not really have any idea 
of what they are doing.
Mitigating Moral Panic with a “Puff of Blood”
In the army’s view commercial game developers do not get it right in 
several ways: Hollywood- sounding explosions, for example, are dig-
itally faked in most other games, while three- quarters of the audio 
samples from America’s Army 3 were recorded on- site at locations such 
as ﬁring ranges. Minute details of uniforms and gear are, likewise, 
sometimes inaccurate in entertainment media that portray the army, 
and these small details remain important to soldiers and veterans. 
Army rules of engagement and doctrine are often not emphasized in 
games and ﬁlms, and entertainment media, in attempts to depict the 
grittiness, tragedy, or complexities of war, might try to portray sol-
diers as more complex ﬁgures than single- dimensional “good guys” 
(although there are also plenty of commercial ﬁlms and games that 
do not try to do this). All of these are ways in which entertainment 
studios misrepresent the army, according to Wardynski. To use his 
phrasing, these kinds of media portrayals negatively contribute to 
“human biases in decision making” about joining the army. oema sought 
to change this kind of messaging in popular entertainment media by 
being very explicit about the kinds of rules soldiers are required to 

the art of persuasion 
53
follow, how soldiers operate as a team, and how violence is, in theory, 
used as a means to an end by the military, and not as an end in itself. 
Wardynski told me:
cw: The real rub is that there is always the dichotomy between 
entertainment and the purpose of the game. We understand 
that entertainment serves a role here; it’s the motivating factor 
that draws the game into pop culture. If the game wasn’t fun to 
play and entertaining and all of those things, nobody would 
play it. But the United States Army is not in the entertainment 
business. There is a reason that we are using entertainment as a 
vehicle to educate. Well, if there’s no education there, there’s 
no point [ . . . ] because the fundamental reason we’re using 
entertainment is to get into pop culture and overcome these 
human biases in decision making to get at some of the good-
ness that B. J. Fogg at Stanford talks about in his work on 
persuasive technology.9
The neat thing about games is that you don’t have to wait 
ﬁve years [for the educating]. We can compress time and get to 
the inputs and outputs of decision making and see why the 
army cares about integrity. It’s not because mommy said it was 
a good idea but because that guy’s life actually depends on me 
knowing what the hell I’m doing. The deeper things you’re 
trying to bring across is that there are a lot of games with guns, 
but there’s only one army game because it isn’t just guys with 
guns; it’s guys with sanction, and that sanction has a set of 
expectations surrounding it which are the values. They are the 
army’s values, but we didn’t make them up. We know what 
America expects of us and they are a list of basic things that 
cordon behavior into an area of acceptability [which most 
Americans are] going to be pretty comfortable with. That is an 
army. That’s the key idea that we’re trying to put across.
ra: In other games like Call of Duty . . . 
cw: Yeah, you don’t have that. That’s not their purpose. They’re an 
entertainment tool.

54 the art of persuasion
ra: I heard somewhere, and I’ve always liked this phrase, that 
America’s Army is what the army wants itself to be (Lawson et 
al. 2007).
cw: Yes, we’re not perfect either as an army, but this is a model of 
how we hope we behave. It’s actually a model of how we hope 
our recruiters think about the problem, because we got to be 
very frank and open and honest about the army. It doesn’t do 
any good to hide the warts and the difficult parts from kids— 
the combat and all of that.
Informing Wardynski’s approach to recruitment articulated here is 
the reality of army recruiting methods, in which promises are often made 
to prospective recruits about placements, jobs, and other possible ben-
eﬁts, which may never materialize once they sign on the dotted line. 
Although such tactics are employed by some recruiters to meet their 
recruitment quotas, they rarely beneﬁt either the military or new recruits 
in the long run, and work against the very kinds of systemic issues that 
oema was attempting to redress through its initiatives. It was my impres-
sion that Wardynski felt misunderstood when public critics of America’s 
Army and skeptics from government offices began querying the game’s 
goals and methods. In his eyes they were asking the wrong kinds of ques-
tions about the game, questions shaped by: 1) criticisms of established 
military recruitment practices, criticisms that Wardynski shared himself; 
and 2) a culture of “moral panic” that conﬂates the playful performance 
of simulated game violence with actual violent crime. To illustrate, 
Wardynski recounted a conversation that he had with a congressional 
staffer three weeks prior to my interview about depictions of violence in 
America’s Army. It was still fresh on his mind since it had been
a pretty pointed discussion. And at one point she said, “Nobody dies 
in your game.” They were accusing us of glossing over that, and I told 
her, “Wait a minute. On one hand you’re saying that the violence 
bothers you. And on the other hand you’re saying that the glossing 
over of the consequences of the use of force and the fact that people 
get hurt [bothers you]. Well, we’re not operating in a vacuum. There’s 
a whole range of information that kids have about the army besides 

the art of persuasion 
55
the army game. They know they can get blown up. They know they’re 
going to combat and all of that. What they don’t know is what it is 
like to be a member of one of our teams and how we operate. They 
don’t know about the values and what they mean, really. They don’t 
know how we get them ready. And anyway, you can get hurt in the 
game. You can get killed in the game.” “Yeah, but there’s not a lot of 
blood,” she said. So I’m like, “Well, how much would be enough?” 
Kids get it. They get the drift. They know what it’s like when they get 
in here. We’re going a long way from where the army used to be with 
posters and tv and commercials where nobody had a gun.
It was a ﬁne line that America’s Army toed in regards to objective 
degrees and subjective interpretations of violence in video games, and 
this was often the most controversial element of America’s Army and its 
other public recruitment campaigns like the Virtual Army Experience 
(vae; see chapter 5). The army sought to mitigate these issues by pur-
posefully following the rubric for game ratings established by the inde-
pendent Entertainment Software Ratings Board (esrb), which was 
created in 1994 after Congress threatened the domestic video game 
industry with federal regulatory oversight if it did not institute an age- 
appropriate ratings classiﬁcation system for its products. To obtain a 
“Teen” rating, games such as America’s Army should have no post- mortem 
manipulation of bodies, no graphic amounts of blood, and no dismem-
berment. America’s Army was deliberately designed to fall within these 
levels appropriate to an audience of teenagers, ages thirteen and up, 
since it is at this age period when most individuals begin understanding 
and imagining their options for future careers.
By further implementing army rules of engagement (roe) that penal-
ized the extralegal executions of enemies who are incapacitated and 
secured as prisoners of war, the game pushed in- game behavior toward 
army- sanctioned violence. Wardynski was adamant, however, that the 
possibility for misusing military violence should still be available in 
the game as long as players were held accountable for the consequences 
of their actions. It is possible, for example, to shoot the obnoxious 
drill sergeant in basic training, but before the player can see the grue-
some results of this act they are immediately placed in a prison cell 

56 the art of persuasion
in Fort Leavenworth. Disarmed and secured enemies can be killed— or 
“double tapped,” in gamer slang— in America’s Army 3 (a popular tac-
tic among some of the game’s developers), but for this action the 
player loses “honor” points, which contribute to advancement and 
status in the game. Having several combat infractions also results in 
military imprisonment.
With these and other speciﬁc elements in the game design of Amer-
ica’s Army and its other products like the vae, the visual representational 
level of violence is signiﬁcantly lower than other military- themed ﬁrst- 
person shooters. A “puff of blood” 10 is the only visual indexing of cor-
poral injury in the game. But over the course of its existence as a game, 
the aura of moral panic surrounding video games and violence has played 
a large part in the reception of America’s Army by both antiwar protest-
ers and congressional lawmakers. Recurrent media coverage that makes 
both causal and casual connections between video games and violent 
crime, despite any consistent scientiﬁc evidence, has held the medium 
responsible for a whole list of social ills, including addiction, depression, 
antisocial behavior, violence, racism, sexism, and improper parenting 
(Kowert and Quandt 2016; Thierer 2009).
The political import of this press coverage was made apparent to me 
at the California development studio, when game developers received 
public relations training prior to the 2009 San Francisco Game Devel-
opers Conference on how to speak about in- game violence to members 
of the press: “If someone asks you about the army training kids to ﬁght 
and kill,” the America’s Army public relations manager directed, “just 
say, ‘We’re not here to talk about that’ or ‘That’s not my area of exper-
tise.’ ‘No comment’ is not a good response.” Earlier that year, a protest 
at the San Francisco headquarters of Ubisoft, the former publisher of 
console versions of America’s Army: Rise of a Soldier (2005) and Ameri-
ca’s Army: True Soldiers (2007), prompted current America’s Army game 
developers to change the signs outside the office building from “Amer-
ica’s Army” to “Digital Consulting Services,” a military subcontractor 
and their parent company.
Due to this history, Wardynski and the Army Game Project took pains 
to distance America’s Army and related venues like the Virtual Army 
Experience from moral- panic discourses ﬁxating on the purported effects 

the art of persuasion 
57
of violent video games. The vae, in particular, had been the target of 
protests at several of its tour locations at state fairs, air shows, and other 
large- scale public events. In their rationalizations of their objections to 
the vae, protest organizations such as Veterans for Peace regularly used 
moral- panic discourses that viliﬁed games as a medium and connected 
games to other “social ills.” At one America’s Army tournament/recruit-
ment event, for example, a Veterans for Peace member was quoted as 
describing America’s Army as being “like military pedophilia” and “giv-
ing candy to kids” (Meunier 2008).
ra: So what would you say to someone who says that the Virtual 
Army Experience (vae) gloriﬁes violence?
cw: “The army’s not a game. It gloriﬁes violence.”
ra: “War is not a game.”
cw: I think the way I’d approach that would be, ﬁrst, why the vae? 
Why not [other things like] Strength in Action Zone, or air 
shows, or just recruiters? I think the reason we’re talking about 
the vae is because it interests kids, the seventeen-  to twenty- 
year bunch. They ﬁnd it fascinating and the other stuff they 
couldn’t be more bored by. So it’s okay if the other stuff is a 
waste of money, but what we’re doing is actually effective [at 
recruiting and saving money]. Now, are we glorifying war? I 
don’t know, I’ll tell you what we’re doing and you ﬁgure it out. 
[The vae is] a half- hour story, and who is going to write a book 
with no climax? What’s the point of the story— the climax is 
usually the point. You lead up to it, you got it, and then you 
explain why it was important to the book. The climax of our 
story as a soldier is that we spend most of our lives preparing 
for stuff most of us hope is never going to happen, called 
combat. But if it does, that’s the point. If there was never a 
chance of combat, would the United States have an army? No. 
They’d have a ﬁre department or a police department, but we 
wouldn’t have an army. We do something different. So the 
point of the military is combat— either preventing it, deterring 
it, or if worse comes to worse, ﬁghting it. That’s the climax of 
being a soldier. Everything we do prepares you for that so that 

58 the art of persuasion
we can do what this book here [points to U.S. Code volumes on 
his bookshelf] says we are supposed to do. Title 10, U.S. Code 
gives us our mission: “The U.S. Army is designed to ﬁght and 
win the nation’s wars on land.” 11 That’s our only function, 
according to that book. We have other jobs, but that’s our 
function. So, you told us to do that in law, that’s what we 
organize ourselves to do, but we’re supposed to keep that a 
secret from the kids? That’s asinine, right?
We’re going to ﬁght and win the nation’s wars on land: that is 
the climax of the story of the U.S. Army, but we’re not going to 
mention it. That makes no sense to me. So if we do mention it, 
what’s the context? Is that all that you do? How do you get 
ready to do that, and after you come back, what do you learn 
from it? The reason we have a climax is that it paints the picture 
of why we have basic training, why it’s hard, why Mommy and 
Daddy can’t come, why we have discipline and values and teams 
and all that junk because when you’re in combat there’s no time 
to ﬁgure it out. Everybody’s life is dependent on you knowing 
your job and being disciplined enough for them to count on you, 
not to shoot at everything on God’s green earth, but just the bad 
guys, to watch your zone and trust that your buddy is watching 
his. So the climax, if you leave it out of the vae, what’s the point 
of everything? It’s hard to tell a story about these different 
occupations— here’s what they do and how they operate 
together, here’s how we get them ready. And here’s a guy who 
has really been to combat and here’s how what you just saw is 
related to add the human touch. That’s the vae. If I’m leaving 
out the climax of the story to me that is disingenuous. We’re not 
glorifying anything; we’re giving you the whole damn book. You 
make up your own mind if you think it’s glorious or not. Most of 
us don’t think it is. It’s worth doing because this country’s worth 
defending, and there are bad people out there— a lot of ’em— 
that don’t like our way of life. We didn’t choose to go to any 
particular war, you sent us. When you send us, we like to be 
ready and we like to win, because we assume you sent us to win.

the art of persuasion 
59
At this point, Wardynski had become so animated in his speech that 
it was unclear to me who the “you” was whom he was addressing. Was 
it me? The American people? Was it the U.S. Congress? In his next com-
ment, though, the target of his antipathy was made clear in his return 
to the congressional staffer, whom he had brought up earlier:
And this woman, this damn woman, she said something about one of 
our Real Heroes guys [see ﬁg. 3; see also chapter 3] as I was explaining 
this to her, and she said, “When your Real Hero survived that action he 
was in,” and I [stopped her and] said, “Whoa, he didn’t survive that. 
We don’t send soldiers to the battleﬁeld to survive. We send them to 
win. We send them to dominate. You don’t send the U.S. Army in 
harm’s way just to get by. If you send us for that, you’re sending the 
wrong crew. So you’re missing the point again. That book says that you 
told us to win. We’re not leaving that part out. We’re going organized 
to win.” She’s in the Defense Armed Services Committee and she didn’t 
understand the ﬁrst thing about why we have an army apparently.
Wardynski’s discernible vitriol over such interpretations that do not 
conform to official army messaging frameworks led me to probe further 
about his thoughts regarding the then- current situation of the Army 
Game Project, and speciﬁcally the Virtual Army Experience. In 2009 a 
congressman and two- time presidential candidate from Ohio, Dennis 
Kucinich, proposed defunding the vae to Congress, using the justiﬁca-
tion that “the vae shields participants from the realities of killing while 
glorifying the taking of human life in a thinly veiled attempt to recruit 
new soldiers. Making matters worse, if a child wants to take part in the 
simulation, the Army collects his or her contact information, as well as 
an assessment of the child’s performance in the simulator.” Kucinich 
further argued that the funds for the touring simulation, which ran 
nearly $10 million in 2007 (signiﬁcantly more than America’s Army), 
could be better spent during the economic downturn (2009). Kucinich’s 
proposal created a small media sensation, and Wardynski subsequently 
invited him for a tour of the vae. “He visited for about forty- ﬁve minutes 
with us and seemed eminently reasonable, paid close attention, talked 
to all of our guys, interacted with everything that we had there. I thought 

60 the art of persuasion
it was a pretty neat experience, frankly. I was pleasantly surprised [and] 
on the way out [ . . . ] he said, ‘I’d just like you to look at the age- 
appropriateness of it.’”
Wardynski, long experienced in handling such ﬂashpoint issues, had 
anticipated this kind of remark and redirected attention and responsi-
bility for the age- appropriateness of militarized violence in America’s 
Army and the vae back to Kucinich and the U.S. Congress. He recalled 
for Kucinich the 1994 agreement between Congress and the video game 
industry to establish the independently run esrb for game ratings, and 
he noted that America’s Army is rated “Teen.” In Wardynski’s words:
I said, “Well, we did [look at the age- appropriateness of the vae.]. In 
fact, we looked to Congress for guidance and we found it in the form 
of your agreement with the esrb on how to rate games. We rate the 
vae in the same way that the esrb established for games. And Amer-
ica’s Army serves as the underlying technology, so that’s how we 
arrived at our conclusion. So if Congress would like to give us different 
guidance, we’re in receive mode, but we did look at it, and we con-
tinue to look at it, and we’re very careful about what we put in here.”
We’re not using this [purely] for entertainment, but we do use 
entertainment as a vehicle to engage interest. The purpose is educa-
tion. It’s not gloriﬁcation or anything else, it’s education. And you’re 
going to know after you walk out of the vae as well as you could know 
it if this is something that I would want to do, or is this about as far 
away from anything that I would want to do as it could be? And if it 
is, it’s served its purpose, because you know you need to do something 
else. That’s the volunteer army. We think it’s a good system. [ . . . ] 
What we are trying to do is to speak to young folks in a way that they 
ﬁnd relevant and are comfortable with and present the army in ways 
that haven’t been presented before and give them a far more compre-
hensive picture of it than you could with just commercials and post-
ers. [ . . . ] We have thought this through pretty carefully— that doesn’t 
mean we can’t improve it, but we’ve been at it for a number of years 
trying to make sure what we’re doing makes sense given the army’s 
mission and our country.
As Wardynski’s comments and stories show, there was persuasive 

the art of persuasion 
61
work being done at multiple levels within the Army Game Project, and 
the future of the franchise depended on such work. (By this point in the 
interview, even I felt targeted and inﬂuenced by Wardynski’s rhetoric 
and salesperson’s facility for persuasion.) The game and franchise had 
as its primary goal the persuasion of players and users to enlist in the 
army or, failing that, to accept it more willingly as a legitimate, com-
monplace institution— part of the “military normal” of virtual soldiering 
(Lutz 2009).
Wardynski and oema, however, devoted signiﬁcant work toward other 
persuasive efforts in other directions to sustain America’s Army. Through 
his own persuasive aptitude and formidable self- styled “Godfather” dis-
position, Wardynski created allies when it was possible and exercised a 
penchant for ﬁring employees and contractors. Convincing the U.S. gov-
ernment that the game and its constituent products were effective, eco-
nomical, and ethical was a principally important task. As a project that 
received limited Department of Defense funding due to not being a “pro-
gram of record,” the Army Game Project did not have the institutional 
security afforded to more conservative army recruitment programs. 
Because it directly challenged the entrenched techniques of army recruit-
ment— tv ads, sports sponsorships, events like Strength in Action Zone, 
and even the effectiveness of army recruiters themselves— the Army 
Game Project created political rivalries within the Army Recruitment 
Command (usarec). In a lucrative market for military training simula-
tions, other organizations like the U.S. Army’s peo- stri office threatened 
the territorial claims that America’s Army had initially made on military 
serious games. These rivalries underscore the heterogeneous nature of 
the “military entertainment complex” and the U.S. military in general.
Other persuasive fronts that the Army Game Project consistently 
fought were in disassociating the project from negative scapegoating 
discourses that connected video games with increased individual aggres-
sion and violent behavior. At moments there were palpable pushbacks 
against the game from multiple organizations and groups. The Amer-
ican Civil Liberties Union (aclu), for example, wrote in a 2008 report 
on U.S. military recruitment practices that “by exposing children younger 
than seventeen to military recruitment, the United States military vio-
lates the terms of the Optional Protocol” to the Convention on the 

62 the art of persuasion
Rights of the Child, which was ratiﬁed by the U.S. Senate (2008, 3). 
America’s Army is mentioned in this report as one of many U.S. mili-
tary recruitment methods that, according to the aclu, target youth 
under seventeen for future military recruitment. Other interventions 
and protests periodically positioned America’s Army as a symbol of 
military recruitment for unpopular and unjust wars. Joseph DeLappe’s 
Dead in Iraq art project and memorial recorded in- game videos of 
DeLappe typing the names of deceased veterans in the America’s Army 
chat log— and the acrimonious reactions many players had to him doing 
so.12 His “America’s Diplomat” webpage, which modeled the design of 
the America’s Army webpage to advertise a ﬁctional game for the U.S. 
Foreign Service, were among some of the better organized and publi-
cized online interventions.13
Despite these instances, which challenged the official messages of 
America’s Army in creative and compelling ways, for the most part the 
game itself avoided controversy and was relegated in mainstream news 
media to coverage focusing on the novelty of the U.S. Army as a game 
developer. (As chapter 5 details, the Virtual Army Experience and the 
Army Experience Center were met with more organized opposition, 
perhaps due to the fact that they were both in physical, publicly acces-
sible locations.) This general avoidance of controversy was due, in part, 
to the multiple strategies of persuasion described in this chapter, which 
were directed at a variety of audiences and institutions. oema’s efforts 
were constantly geared toward the end goal of harnessing new “talent” 
to ensure the future viability of the army. To this end Wardynski focused 
his efforts on convincing government and military entities about the 
feasibility of the project. Marketing and public relations experts directed 
their energies toward convincing the public of the ethical foundation 
of the game in regards to its depictions of violence, its age- appropriateness, 
and its game- like portrayals of war. At the same time, the game itself 
worked to persuade its users to enlist, or at the very least move toward 
accepting the army as a positive institution shaping American society. 
In the next chapter I turn to an investigation of some of the speciﬁc 
techniques America’s Army uses to achieve this result.

63
3
The Artiﬁce of the Virtual and the Real
We are now subjected to a new super- structure of war fantasy in 
which the targets of warfare and the enemies of public safety are as 
malleable and as arbitrary as a dream image.
allen feldman, “Deterritorialized Wars of Public Safety”
This enemy is no longer concrete and localizable but has now become 
something ﬂeeting and ungraspable, like a snake in the imperial 
paradise. The enemy is unknown and unseen and yet ever present, 
something like a hostile aura. The face of the enemy appears in the 
haze of the future and serves to prop up legitimation where 
legitimation has declined. This enemy is in fact not merely elusive but 
completely abstract.
michael hardt and antonio negri, Multitude
While the scenarios of many military war games are ﬁctional, the under-
lying purpose of America’s Army is very real. As government adaptations 
of America’s Army software are being used to train soldiers for speciﬁc 
job- related combat skills, the public video game’s goal is, in the words 
of one army officer, “ﬁlling seats for basic training” by tapping into an 
already militarized gaming population. Though the Army Game Project 
consistently disavowed any recruitment goals in public relations mate-
rial surrounding the franchise’s products, representatives regularly 
acknowledged an explicit recruitment goal privately. The data collected 
by oema and the rationale articulated by Wardynski in the preceding 
chapter also reﬂect this emphasis. Regardless of whether the game is 
effective at achieving this recruitment goal, as a device of a military 
institutional power that aims to distribute and normalize the logic of 

64 the virtual and the real
the military among civil society, America’s Army seeks to inﬂuence how 
nonenlisted individuals think about the army. These nonenlisted virtual 
soldiers— the game’s civilian designers, its players, the friends and fam-
ily of these individuals, and even anthropologists who study the game— 
all have an increased potential to be persuaded through the game to 
accept the prioritization of U.S. military needs and American militarized 
narratives as a commonsensical, unquestioned fact. For these reasons, 
the Army Game Project presents a window into how the army views 
itself and how it is working to spread its cultural imaginary outward 
through public relations campaigns, technological spectacle, appeals 
to masculinity and patriotism, and many other rhetorical deployments.
One type of these deployments— the ﬁgure of the mythic, “unreal” 
enemy— works to enable game users to participate in a kind of ritualis-
tic, virtual subjugation of the constantly morphing and elusive enemies 
of the United States. These enemies stand in stark contrast to the so- 
called America’s Army Real Heroes, nine actual soldiers held up as “aspi-
rational” soldier- citizens by the Army Game Project, who were also made 
into plastic action ﬁgures and featured online. Though modeled on the 
lives and narratives of actual soldiers, the Real Heroes are public per-
sonalities and just as much artiﬁcial constructs as the unreal enemy. 
The noncurated story of one Real Hero, Tommy Rieman, is a contrasting 
and complex narrative that belies the carefully curated persona of the 
Real Hero. Taken together the unreal enemy and the Real Hero work in 
tandem, and are both artiﬁces that perpetuate war.
The Unreal Enemy
As kids my two cousins and I would often play the double game pack of 
Super Mario Brothers and Duck Hunt, which came included with the 
original Nintendo Entertainment System. Even though I, and most other 
people I knew, enjoyed playing Mario more, it was still fun to shoot 
computerized ducks with the electronic gun that came with the game. 
There was something about the way the ducks got this goofy, shocked 
expression in their eyes when shot that we found fun and satisfying. 
None of us paid much attention to the violence in our game playing, 
especially since I personally witnessed more actual violence in my cous-
ins’ ﬁghting over the right to use the Nintendo gun than I did in shooting 

the virtual and the real 
65
goofy ducks or squashing monsters beneath Mario’s lethal jump. When 
not playing video games, we sometimes gained similar pleasures of imag-
inative destruction when staging immense battles of green, grey, and 
tan army men, complete with Lincoln Log forts. The enemies in these 
battles, however, were not abstract, slightly anthropomorphic creatures, 
but usually ones upon which we all agreed: Nazi Germans and Soviets.
A large portion of video games have generally unobjectionable ene-
mies because they do not exist in the world outside of the imagination: 
diabolical wizards, goofy cartoon ducks, ﬁre- breathing dragons, invad-
ing aliens, oversized human- eating plants, and the list can go on. 
Although many contemporary games still premise their plots on ﬁghting 
these more abstract enemies, national enemies that are peculiar to par-
ticular historical and cultural circumstances are also evident in many 
games. These enemies have a history, since they are often preexistent 
in long- standing cultural narratives that originate outside the game 
world itself. When my cousins and I played with plastic army men and 
Lincoln Logs, for example, we were inspired by our watching of Ameri-
can nationalist ﬁlms, such as The Dirty Dozen, The Green Berets, and Pat-
ton. Like these ﬁlms, which were produced during the Vietnam era, 
war- themed video games are often valorizations of past or current con-
ﬂicts that parallel contemporary military endeavors. Just as often, 
military- themed fps games are set in the near future, and imagine spe-
ciﬁc national or ideological enemies against which the American military 
must ﬁght. A great number of military- themed game franchises follow 
one of these models. Prominent examples would include those games 
in the Battleﬁeld, Medal of Honor, Call of Duty, and Conﬂict franchises, 
as well as Contra and Rush N’ Attack (two examples from the 1980s), and 
the 2011 game Homefront, which envisioned an invasion of the United 
States by North Korea— thus paralleling the general backstory of the 
remade ﬁlm Red Dawn (2012), modeled on the original 1984 ﬁlm of the 
same name. (Whereas the original Red Dawn ﬁlm posed a pan- Communist 
enemy consisting mainly of Soviets and Cubans, the remake posits a 
North Korean enemy backed by Russia.) With increasingly better graph-
ics, modeling, texturing, and motion capture capabilities, these speciﬁc 
enemies become rendered in increasingly minute detail.
Concurrent with this trend toward marking an enemy with a locale, 

66 the virtual and the real
history, and culture, however, has been the continuous presence of other 
forms of enemy abstraction in military- themed games such as America’s 
Army, which presents an anonymous enemy not conﬁned to speciﬁc 
regions or nationalities. The history of war gaming is, generally speaking, 
a history of generic, abstract enemies, “red vs. blue” conﬁgurations in 
which opposing forces are capable, matched, and malleable according to 
particular situations. As such, the kinds of enemies within America’s Army 
are not entirely new. America’s Army, likewise, follows well- established 
conventions for ﬁrst- person shooter (fps) gameplay. One reason for this 
is the game’s use of the Unreal game engine, one of the most popular 
video game engines for ﬁrst- person shooters. Giving designers a tool to 
shape the physics within an environment, visually render data, deﬁne the 
behavior of artiﬁcial intelligence, and store system ﬁles (among many 
other things), game engines are the backbone around which everything 
else in a game is layered. America’s Army was the ﬁrst game to use the 
Unreal Engine 2, and its designers attributed part of its early success in 
2002 to its presentation of the engine’s then cutting- edge graphics, which 
were made available to gamers for free. America’s Army 3 (aa3), released 
in June 2009, uses the Unreal Engine 3.
In alluding to the Unreal Engine, I use the term unreal to describe the 
type of enemy appearing in the game and in the examples articulated 
below. This enemy resides within the uneasy liminal space established 
by the double entendre in the phrase “the unreal enemy of America’s 
Army.” (This phrase can be read a variety of ways, all of which are cor-
rect. “Unreal” can refer to the engine, or the adjective, or simultaneously 
both; “America’s Army” can refer to the game, or the military institution, 
or both.) By using the word unreal, I do not mean to connote the nega-
tion, opposite, or nonexistence of the “real.” The unreal enemy is not so 
much the mirror or opposite of a “real” enemy as the means through 
which the actual enemy is engendered and understood.1 The ﬁctional 
enemies in military games not only reﬂect cultural preoccupations and 
anxieties about future conﬂict, but also are one way in which actual 
enemies become manifest. In other words, preparation for ﬁghting poten-
tial enemies is one way of summoning them into existence.
This kind of enemy cannot exist without the presence of its opposite 
(Gallison 1994), which in this case is the American soldier. America’s 

the virtual and the real 
67
Army provides a salient illustration of this by disallowing gamers to play 
as the enemy of the U.S. Army. Although the general format of the game 
consists of two teams of human players that ﬁght against one another— 
one assaulting while the other defends, typically— the point of view of 
every human player is that of an American soldier. This unique design 
in the game, called the “swapping paradigm” by its developers, means 
that two players on different teams appear to themselves as U.S. soldiers 
but to one another as enemies. The stipulation that U.S. soldiers are not 
legitimate targets in the world of America’s Army is reinforced by the 
rules of engagement (roe), which punish players for friendly (and often 
very unfriendly) ﬁre in the game by removing “honor” points, a factor 
that can affect a player’s level of prestige, access to servers, and selec-
tion of more desirable weapons and leadership positions in the game.
Every human player sees his or her opponents as opposing enemy 
forces, who in the earlier versions of the game wore ski masks or other 
veiling apparatus for erasing phenotypic markers that might point toward 
particular ethnicities or groups. In America’s Army 3, this kind of enemy 
masking was done away with and both enemy and American soldiers 
featured the same randomized assortment of faces but drastically dif-
ferent silhouettes and gear. The erasure of a differentiated enemy race 
aided in the construction of an anonymous enemy potentially anywhere 
and applicable to any situation. One army recruiter and avid America’s 
Army player with whom I spoke made this connection explicitly: “The 
game teaches you not to shoot at the friendlies. It emphasizes ﬁghting 
terrorists, not communists or certain nationalities. You don’t see their 
features, so you can’t be biased or prejudiced towards any race or group 
of people. Nothing about the game creates a desire to kill or racist atti-
tudes. It is designed for teamwork and positive attitudes, not negative 
ones like killing and racism.”
Designers of the game certainly made this removal of an identiﬁable 
enemy race a deliberate part of the game’s design, but it also served 
other practical purposes regarding the game’s playability. An artist, Zeke, 
indicated that this practice was deﬁnitely on purpose.
For one, it’s for the reasons that we’re talking about [regarding race 
and nationality]. Two, it’s kind of a double plus in our favor because 

68 the virtual and the real
it also gives the enemy a distinguished look from friend. So when you 
are playing a game like this where it’s not always clear— black and 
white— who you should be shooting at from far away, if there’s not 
distinct things on the character, it’s going to be hard. I can only imag-
ine that it’s probably like that [in actual combat], if you’re not always 
in contact with where your teammates are in a real battle. [ . . . ] But 
that’s one of those things where gameplay- wise, we have to make it 
fun since if it’s too hard people are not going to want to play. So things 
like using ski masks or some crazy weird camo just to make them 
stand out helps a lot in just distinguishing the enemy, plus there are 
no implications there. At least that’s the goal. I think that all war 
games get ﬂack from time to time. This one just probably gets more 
because of the army.
Even though the faces of enemies are visible in the new America’s 
Army 3, players are automatically assigned a variety of random faces 
by the game, and do not typically see their own faces. The variety of 
geographical markers presented in the game over the years further-
more presupposes an enemy not from any speciﬁc region. The environ-
ments of the game, such as a snowy wilderness, swamps and farms 
reminiscent of the Deep South, abandoned eastern European cities, 
and central Asian terrains that have, in some cases, been modeled directly 
from landscapes in Afghanistan (Halter 2006, xiv), attest to the uni-
versal applicability of the type of enemy that can be of any ethnicity 
and located in any setting. This enemy is in stark contrast to similar 
games of the military ﬁrst- person shooter genre, mentioned above. 
Rather than externalizing the enemy as, for example, a Russian or an 
Iraqi “other,” the terrains and enemies of America’s Army imply that 
the enemy could very well be located internally, within the United 
States (see ﬁgs. 4 and 5).
Zeke further discussed how linguistic and cultural considerations also 
play a signiﬁcant factor in the game’s presentation, verifying that
making an enemy— that’s really hard to do without making a lot of 
people really upset and pissed off considering it’s the army game. 
[ . . . ] There’s never been a directive; nobody’s ever come to me in 
my office and said things like, “No, you can’t put Arabic lettering on 

the virtual and the real 
69
this door.” I have been told not to use English letters and I’ve heard 
references to not using things that make those kinds of implications, 
but that’s also a personal thing— I just don’t do that. But it’s deﬁnitely 
been said a lot of times in our reviews. And on the ﬂip side of that 
too, like on U.S. soil stuff, one of the objects I made had lettering in 
it. It had a made- up brand on it, but I remember in our art review the 
producers said, “You know, we don’t want to use U.S. lettering.” We 
actually have our own made up language. So, for example, a bus that 
I was working on had “City Transit” written on the side. After talking 
with the producers about not having U.S. or English lettering or any 
kind of recognizable language, I have to go to [Samuel], who made 
a whole pseudo- algorithm for changing things like the letter “L” to 
this, “Th” combinations to that. It’s really neat to actually see the dif-
ference, making up a phrase or word and then giving it to him to 
change it to some crazy other language that is made up.
The release of America’s Army 3 featured such imaginary languages 
and geographies even more prominently through the creation of a ﬁc-
tional nation, Czervenia.2 In this vaguely eastern European country, 
the unreal enemy of America’s Army became more fully articulated 
even as it borrowed from a myriad of preexisting geographical land-
scapes, histories, languages, weapons, and architectures worldwide. 
Samuel, a game designer, explained how he cobbled together Czerve-
nian, the new ﬁctional nation’s language, through online translation 
technologies:
[The army] wanted to get away from Iraq and all of that. They wanted 
to create a political situation that didn’t exist. [ . . . ] So basically we 
took Croatian and Slovenian and eastern European languages that 
have a Russian inﬂuence and combined it with the grammatical struc-
ture of Spanish. [ . . . ] I pull up babelﬁsh.com and dictionary.com 
and a few other translation websites, and I put a word in there and 
try to create interesting sounding words out of Spanish and Slovenian 
usually, or sometimes Czech. Basically I create something that sounds 
cool and ﬂows well, and if I create a sentence I say the sentence a few 
times in a ridiculous eastern European accent. If it sounds kinda cool, 
okay, we use that.

70 the virtual and the real
In this way, developers hoped to design a Czervenian scenario that 
reﬂected a reality in which the enemy of the U.S. Army was not com-
pletely unfamiliar, and drew predominantly on generic Slavic and Bal-
tic inﬂuences in creating the game’s cultural and geographical 
background. Although Samuel and most other America’s Army game 
developers generally understood that in 2009 the rising assertive power 
of Putin’s Russia was a growing threat in the eyes of many in the U.S. 
government, they could not have predicted the political events that seem-
ingly summoned a Russian enemy of America’s Army into existence.
Cultural Slippage between Home and Enemy
With the release of America’s Army 3 in 2009, a new evolution in the 
ﬁgure of the unreal enemy of America’s Army emerged. Players who 
downloaded the game were brought into a scenario in which a ﬁctional 
but vaguely eastern European island resort nation, the Democratic 
Republic of the Ostregals, was invaded without provocation by its north-
ern nationalist neighbor, Czervenia. In the scenario the army deployed 
troops to resolve the situation at the request of both the Ostregal gov-
ernment and the United Nations.
The details of this back story were collaboratively crafted and imag-
ined by the game developers in the California office, my primary ﬁeld-
work site. They considered Czervenian soldier and civilian points of 
view: landscapes, architecture, languages, and even Czervenian weap-
ons were all carefully invented to coincide with Czervenian customs and 
norms. Artists started talking about a “cultural palette” of colors com-
mon in Czervenia and the Ostregals. Using Google image searches, they 
found structures and cities in Spain, the Czech Republic, Slovenia, and 
other countries that ﬁt their image of Czervenian geography. A Czerve-
nian language (see above) was created based on various existing Euro-
pean languages, and war- torn settings in Iraq, Afghanistan, and elsewhere 
became references for battleﬁeld environments in the game. (Although 
an artist told me that he “[did]n’t want to get into Googling ‘war zones’ 
because you get a lot of messed- up imagery. But there’s deﬁnitely a look 
to war zones.”) Continuing the tradition of earlier versions of the unreal 
enemy of America’s Army, these extrapolations from the actual world 
were deliberately appropriated in ways that reﬂect their referents only 

the virtual and the real 
71
obliquely. The developers deliberately avoided direct references to Iraq 
and Afghanistan, and instead sought to create a political situation that 
could never exist by crafting this new, but vaguely familiar eastern Euro-
pean, theater of conﬂict.
As previously mentioned, earlier versions of America’s Army contained 
anonymous enemies who were commonly veiled in ski masks, had no 
obvious political agenda, were from no speciﬁc location in the world, 
and were of no apparent religion. The Czervenian enemy was more 
speciﬁc in its Slavic and Russian cultural allusions and borrowed abun-
dantly from Nazi Germany in political ideology. For public and interna-
tional relations purposes, however, “the Czervenians couldn’t be racial 
supremacists because we’re using the same [variety of character] heads 
on U.S. soldiers,” a game designer told me. “We couldn’t mention reli-
gious conﬂict either. That was a very speciﬁc thing [that the army 
directed us not to do].”
The design of the Czervenian enemy points toward a desire to ideal-
ize past American conﬂicts without acknowledging the grim realities of 
American counterinsurgency campaigns in the early twenty- ﬁrst cen-
tury. The army required that the Czervenian conﬂict, unlike actual coun-
terinsurgency conﬂicts in Iraq and Afghanistan, have as an enemy a 
conventional, hierarchically organized, and uniformed modern military 
fully capable of combating the U.S. military toe- to- toe. In other words 
the Czervenian enemy bears little resemblance to Iraqi insurgents or 
the Taliban in Afghanistan and Pakistan, who were the primary oppo-
nents of the U.S. military at the time of the game’s release. Instead, like 
other after- the- fact romanticizations of past conﬂicts between the U.S. 
Army and conventional militaries, the Czervenian conﬂict plays into a 
well- established media genre that represents a heroic conﬂict against a 
deﬁnable enemy with a set ideology, location, and political agenda. It 
represents the army ﬁghting a just and virtuous war. “I wanted the sce-
nario to be that the army was going to war,” Czervenia’s primary archi-
tect Samuel told me, “and, for once, they were going to war for the right 
reasons: to protect people and do justice and stop slaughter. [ . . . ] It’s 
an idealized version of what the army wants itself to be and what poli-
ticians want the army to be used for.”
Although the current U.S. military counterinsurgency strategy is not 

72 the virtual and the real
focused on conﬂicts between nation- states and standing armies (U.S. 
Army 2007), an American romantic desire for a just war against a deﬁn-
able enemy that is being fought “for the right reasons” is arguably strong. 
As a powerful and clearly aggressive enemy, Czervenia draws upon this 
nostalgic tendency, but it also evokes the potentialities of future conﬂicts 
by playing into premediated American anxieties over the rising inter-
national economic, diplomatic, and military power of long- standing 
rival and former enemy nations— especially Russia.
This general anxiety is perhaps the reason that, despite careful efforts 
to distance Czervenia from any real- world nation, the ﬁction of Czer-
venia appeared to materialize instantaneously when Russia invaded its 
southern neighbor, the post- Soviet nation of Georgia, in August 2008. 
When Wardynski came to visit the California studio one month later, he 
and the developers expressed concern since it was (in their eyes) uncanny 
how much Czervenia resembled Russia and how the Democratic Repub-
lic of the Ostregals resembled Georgia. “It’s almost the exact same sce-
nario,” one person told me. There was genuine concern that the unreal, 
abstract Czervenian enemy could morph into something tangible with 
real political implications once the game was released. By the time this 
international event took place, Czervenia had become completely artic-
ulated in both the game and the America’s Army Graphic Novel (see ﬁg. 
6), although both were months away from being released. A developer 
reassured some army visitors to the studio that “the Ostregals are not 
Georgia, although we are probably going to get folks who say things 
like, ‘Those mountains look like the Caucasus!’” In an effort to further 
distance the game from the Russian- Georgian conﬂict, speciﬁc imagery 
that could be interpreted as pointing toward this scenario, for example 
missiles perceived as “too Soviet- looking” were removed or altered at 
the request of Wardynski.
Curiously the game arma 2 (2009), a commercially produced and 
military- themed competitor game to America’s Army 3 that was released 
the same year, presented a different type of enemy that embraced these 
very same events. Marketing itself as containing a storyline “which blurs 
the boundaries between fact and ﬁction,” arma 2 presents a scenario in 
which a breakaway Communist faction seizes control of a region within 
the ﬁctional “post- Soviet” Caucasus nation of Chenarus (literally, “Black 

the virtual and the real 
73
Russia”). Without hiding any allusions to the Georgian region of South 
Ossetia, in the game world of arma 2 the conﬂict takes place in a region 
dubbed South Zagoria. The “pro- Western” government of Chenarus pre-
dictably calls on nato for aid, which provides enough shallow justiﬁca-
tion for U.S. military intervention.
By the time both games were released in June 2009, the Georgian 
conﬂict had become largely forgotten in the amnesiac twenty- four- hour 
news cycle. Czervenia, constructed with the intention of dissociating 
the U.S. Army from a speciﬁc enemy, was nevertheless shown to have 
an unwelcome potential to be conjured into a particular real- world foe 
despite the best efforts of its developers. Comparable situations occurred 
earlier in the history of America’s Army during the invasion of Iraq in 
2003, when some players of the game came to feel the simultaneous 
resemblance and disparity between the unreal and the actual enemies 
of the U.S. Army (Li 2003). Other America’s Army media campaigns have 
deliberately played on this juxtaposition between representational ﬁdel-
ity and narrative disjunction. This uncanny sense of interconnectedness 
led Walker, a game developer who had been using a made- up ethnic 
slur while playing against Czervenians,3 to pause and jokingly ask me 
during one of our countless play- test sessions in the development office, 
“Is it racist to use a slur against a ﬁctional enemy that you invented?”
Henry Jenkins writes that “we use games to work through the intense 
anxieties surrounding modern warfare, to bring it at least momentarily 
under our symbolic control” (2003). The construction of an anonymous 
but proximal enemy, complete with its own ambiguous language, is one 
institutionalized effort at achieving a symbolic supremacy over poten-
tial enemies, and the practice of enemy abstraction is entirely in keep-
ing with a long tradition of war simulation and tactical training exercises 
of the U.S. military (Der Derian 2001; Dunnigan 1992; Lenoir and Lowood 
2005). Such types of enemies enable training to take place against a 
generic enemy for the purposes of teaching military tactics and doc-
trine, and ideally produce a more versatile force of soldiers ready to 
ﬁght any particular foe. They also typically attempt to avoid the general 
stereotyping of a particular enemy of the United States and the political 
conundrums that would result from such depictions. In the aftermath 
of the 2013– 14 Euromaidan uprising in Kiev, Ukraine; the Russian annex-

74 the virtual and the real
ation of Crimea; and alleged Russian interference in the 2016 U.S. pres-
idential election, American anxieties over Russia have swelled beyond 
the levels reached during the 2008 Russian war in Georgia and the 
Caucasus. In popular media the old foe Russia, long depicted in Cold 
War– era ﬁlms that remain a part of American war lore, returns now 
with a new urgency. The unreal enemy harnesses these anxieties, and 
the ﬁction of Czervenia provides a politically expedient and militarized 
arena for their subduing.
My own limited experiences with these kinds of unreal enemies out-
side of video games have been humorous but revealing. When taking 
an introductory Reserve Officers’ Training Corps (rotc) course at the 
University of Washington as part of my preliminary ﬁeldwork for this 
project, I participated with my fellow classmates in several similar exer-
cises of imagination that enable cadets to hone their abilities to effec-
tively communicate the roles of combat units to all divisional levels in 
a standardized opord (operational order) format. My classmates, when 
given an open- ended option to create a scenario to practice the opord 
format of communication, envisioned an enemy of pecan- stealing squir-
rels with high morale, extra sharp teeth and claws, tails that stung like 
scorpions, and rabies. Virtual combat with the squirrels extended from 
campus into the fraternity houses, and the cadets, armed with Axe body 
spray,4 peanuts, and a new secret drug that would allow them to jump 
into the trees, eventually subdued the enemy animals.
In anthropologist Catherine Lutz’s book Homefront, larger and more 
serious soldier training exercises are examined as connecting points 
between the symbiotic histories of Fayetteville, North Carolina, and adja-
cent Fort Bragg and Pope Air Force Base (2001, 87– 130). Lutz examines 
the impact of large- scale simulation exercises that often take place off- 
base and with the collaboration of civilians. These live simulations, which 
envision in great socioeconomic and cultural detail a territory called 
“Pineland,” are further described by Anna Simons (1997), also a military 
anthropologist.5 Both Lutz and Simons describe how local civilian pop-
ulations aid in these war simulations by role- playing as guerrillas or 
citizens of Pineland. In the same way that the languages, landscapes, 
and enemies of America’s Army are modeled from generalized locations, 
Pineland is intentionally a vague but recognizable place, mirroring the 

the virtual and the real 
75
surroundings of Fayetteville and constructing what Lutz calls a “mythic” 
model of the enemy and the world that plays out “culturally tutored 
imagination, fears, and wishes . . . as if to tame them” (2001, 87).
Pineland, Czervenia, and rabid squirrels terrorizing frat boys each 
present enemies of mythic proportions and of varying degrees of seri-
ousness. Each type of simulation is imbued with a military imperative 
to act and subdue threats, and each is a ritual for establishing control 
over an unknown “other” as much as it is a scenario for military instruc-
tion and training. The unreal enemy is an enemy with minimal cultural, 
linguistic, or ethnic indicators and therefore, though anonymous, might 
be anyone. Everywhere and nowhere at once, the unreal enemy is a 
tabula rasa on which any enemy can be extrapolated. For Lutz this 
type of “unreality in which war games swim . . . has posed special chal-
lenges to the separation between foreign and domestic use of force 
and has potentially allowed cultural slippage between home and enemy” 
(2001, 103– 4).
I found this slippage to be very visible at particular moments during 
the course of my ﬁeldwork— when I played America’s Army as a U.S. 
soldier ﬁghting enemies in landscapes that appear uncannily similar to 
the surroundings of my birthplace of East Tennessee; when I sat among 
a class of rotc cadets who imagine the campus of the University of 
Washington and its surroundings as a backdrop for wars against blood-
thirsty squirrels; when I spoke with the game designers of America’s 
Army about the careful attention they must give to erase speciﬁc iden-
tiﬁable cultural backgrounds from their enemies; and when I studied 
the techniques for mapping the nation of Pineland onto the preexisting 
geographies of Fayetteville.
This slippage is the stuff of the unreal. Though Lutz asserts that these 
kinds of “ludic moments” of “war game spectatorship” have “redeﬁne[d] 
the role of the citizen from one who questions and acts to one who 
observes and is entertained by the state and by power itself” (2001, 107, 
109), her stance assumes a unidirectional model of mass media, broad-
cast from one central power to many individuals in the manner of tra-
ditional propaganda and passive viewing. This stance does not take into 
account the performative and interactive nature of digital media as a 
means for institutional power to engage the public. The unreal enemy 

76 the virtual and the real
is an enemy that is by deﬁnition enacted and performed and not one 
that is merely experienced by passive spectators. The medium of the 
video game demands this kind of cybernetic performativity, and the 
army encourages it in ways that reach beyond the game.
In bringing its message to the public, the Army Game Project accu-
mulated a history of live staged performances, the ﬁrst of which occurred 
in 2002 at the Electronic Entertainment Expo (e3), where America’s 
Army burst into the gaming world with much critical acclaim, as well 
as a front- page proﬁle of the game in the LA Times (Pham 2002). At the 
2003 e3 soldiers rappelled from Black Hawk helicopters down the side 
of the Los Angeles Convention Center to storm the building (Halter 
2006, vii– xi). Later e3 army appearances included a daily morning stag-
ing of Golden Knights specialist parachutists jumping 2,500 feet from a 
Chinook helicopter into a parking lot near the expo, followed by evening 
shows in which Special Forces soldiers used a converted auto dealership 
to stage a live- action performance of a mission taken from the game, 
using “real equipment, weapons, and uniforms” (Larkin 2005). Other 
early public exposures to America’s Army at expositions such as the Yerba 
Buena Center for the Arts further emphasized the ﬁdelity between in- 
game elements and actual army weapons and practices through exhib-
its that combined virtual and physical environments in intriguing ways 
(Chapman 2004; Davis and Bossant 2004).6 Similar types of domestic 
invasions were implemented through the Virtual Army Experience, which 
“deployed” (using Army Game Project wording in press releases) to large 
public events across the United States. The Army Experience Center in 
Philadelphia was a related two- year pilot project in recruitment via new 
media, community outreach, and the “soft sell.”
These performed domestic invasions bypass much of the virtual- real 
binary often encountered in popular and academic discussions about 
digital games and call into question the utility of such binaries (see 
chapter 1). The army itself blurred the line between the real and the 
virtual, supplying an in- game “Virtual Recruiting Station” that players 
could visit to learn more about so- called America’s Army Real Heroes, 
individuals chosen to represent an ideal of personal achievement and 
service who are upheld as model soldiers, typically noncommissioned 
officers at levels of rank that were realistically attainable by dedicated 

the virtual and the real 
77
recruits (see ﬁg. 7). Such visits potentially provided visitors with a wealth 
of information on speciﬁc Military Occupational Specialties (mos), uni-
form decorations, and individual biographies of enlisted soldiers. In 
contrast to the unreal enemy in America’s Army, players were encour-
aged to connect with these Real Heroes and were rewarded with bonus 
“honor points” for visiting the Virtual Recruiting Station. Three- inch 
plastic ﬁgurines depicting each Real Hero were distributed as promo-
tional merchandise, and several of the actual Real Heroes toured the 
country with the Virtual Army Experience, making public appearances 
at air shows, nascar races, state fairs, and other large public events.
The Real Heroes, as individuals, stand in opposition to the abstrac-
tion of the unreal enemy. Although America’s Army is not a role- playing 
game (rpg) as typically deﬁned in most taxonomies of video games, the 
game encouraged players to emulate the Real Heroes as “aspirational 
ﬁgures” (Wardynski 2007), and its developers consciously sought to 
incorporate more role- playing elements into America’s Army 3. Plans for 
another America’s Army game, subtitled Soldiers, which was to be more 
exclusively focused on role- playing a career path through the army, were 
discontinued in the early stages of the project, but the desire on the part 
of the developers to include role- playing elements within the game has 
inﬂuenced later versions and spin- offs such as the Virtual Army Expe-
rience and the Army Experience Center, both of which are venues that 
emphasize the speciﬁc job functions of military occupational specialties 
(mos). The America’s Army chief operations officer at oema, Maj. Mike 
Marty, also described the reasons for implementing the Real Heroes 
program in these terms, telling me during a visit to West Point that “[the 
army has] less elbow- to- elbow contact with the average citizens of Amer-
ica. Because of that, there are fewer opportunities for the army to sell 
itself. You can’t do that in a thirty- second commercial. You’ve got to 
provide them with a virtual world where they can rub elbows with sol-
diers and with the army instead of having other people tell them what 
the army is.”
In the context of the game, players can become “real heroes” them-
selves, and perhaps it is in this ambiguity between soldier and player, in 
the liminality of the virtual soldier, that the efficacy of the game as a 
public- relations tool is the most profound and obvious. Individual play-

78 the virtual and the real
ers, for example, were periodically upheld by the Army Game Project as 
model citizens, as was the case when an America’s Army player provided 
medical aid at a car accident. He credited the basic medical training that 
all players of versions of the game (prior to America’s Army 3) had to sit 
through to play the game— a ﬁfteen- minute lecture in a virtual class-
room— as being crucial to his ability to care for the victim of the car crash 
until emergency help arrived. In a press release Wardynski called this 
player a “true hero,” adding, “we are pleased to have played a role in 
providing the lifesaving training that he employed so successfully at the 
scene” (Army Game Project 2008). Another enlisted soldier added to 
this rhetorical blending between in- game action and its referents in an 
interview, explaining to me that “everything is realistic in the game 
because it was designed entirely by the army. Even the medic is real life.” 7
Enlisted soldiers, though, are the ones who are ultimately presented 
as being the “real heroes” and the “true soldiers.” (A console version of 
the game was titled America’s Army: True Soldiers.) The America’s Army 
website periodically published articles featuring biographical informa-
tion about the Real Heroes— including personal photos of their families, 
detailed information of badges and awards that each Real Hero has 
received, and video interview footage. Stories of the singular combat 
experience for which they were awarded medals are the predominant 
characteristic of these biographies.8 In one such description, an inter-
view article published originally at the America’s Army website revisits 
Real Hero Gerald Wolford’s experience of being ﬁred on by an Iraqi 
adversary:
“My gunner and I both saw an rpg [rocket- propelled grenade] ﬁred 
at our position, and I had time to turn and yell ‘rpg!’ so the two other 
men had time to get down.” The rpg hit the bridge right above the 
hmmwv [Humvee], wounding two of Wolford’s men. [ . . . ] Since his 
hmmwv had only suffered minor damage from the rpg blast, Wolford 
used it to shield his wounded Soldiers as he moved them to the casu-
alty collection point and into the care of the medics. Refusing medi-
cal care for his injuries, Wolford moved forward once again, so as to 
provide his men with cover. “At this time,” he says, “the vehicle got 
hit by the second rpg. [ . . . ] [W]e didn’t even see the guy that ﬁred 

the virtual and the real 
79
it.” [ . . . ] Just as the attacker readied another rpg, he was spotted 
by the Americans. Wolford observes the attacker, “He must have 
thought he was bulletproof. He knelt down in the middle of the road, 
and dropped another round in it. We engaged him, and we didn’t 
have to worry about that rpg anymore.” 9
Here the Real Hero’s language does the work of abstracting an Iraqi 
enemy into an inanimate object that acts as an unreal enemy: instead 
of worrying about the Iraqi soldier, the rpg is the enemy to be worried 
about. These accounts by the Real Heroes, which attempt to deﬁne and 
interpret the gaming experience, enable a valorization of the ﬁgure of 
the soldier that is not merely unidirectional, but enacted and cybernet-
ic— as is any game. The correspondence between the acronyms for 
“rocket- propelled grenade” and “role- playing game” is, of course, a coin-
cidence, but this correspondence aptly captures the slippage at work 
between technomilitary and gamer jargon, and that between a domes-
ticated genre of games and a tool of the enemy. Both are used and abbre-
viated as a technology of war. From the point of view of military 
institutional power, both kinds of rpgs are, in a sense, weapons.
Just as the Real Heroes are useful to the army in enabling players to 
emulate and envision themselves in their position, the unreal enemy 
is a useful way for the military to envision its targets. In contrast to 
other military- themed shooters, with enemies from a speciﬁc location 
in space and time, America’s Army provides little in the way of concep-
tualizing the enemy within temporal or spatial ﬁelds. The unreal enemy 
of America’s Army is a return to enemy abstraction; it is an abstraction, 
however, that is not based on computing limitations or aesthetic choices 
in design, but one that is more pervasive and encompassing of both in- 
game and out- of- game contexts. Nameless, elusive, and always just 
around the corner, the unreal enemy is not conﬁned to any single game 
or moment. The unreal enemy inﬂuences and precedes the production 
of actual enemies of the U.S. Army and operates within the framework 
of military institutional power, producing through virtual soldiering a 
“hybrid subjectivity” that is constituted “outside the institutions but 
even more intensely ruled by their disciplinary logics” (Hardt and Negri 
2000, 330– 32).

80 the virtual and the real
Tommy Rieman, Real Hero
Due to its abstraction, the constructed nature of the unreal enemy is 
immediately obvious. The Real Heroes, however, also participate in a 
narrative process that constructs the entirety of their lives around a 
particular moment— the moment of combat when their deeds elevated 
them to become a Real Hero. These deeds, the messaging implies, are 
deeds that anyone can perform if he or she has the military discipline, 
training, and courage, but it is this performance that distinguishes the 
Real Hero from the ordinary individual. The Real Heroes were ultimately 
a way of challenging and seeking to change the “cog in a wheel,” indus-
trial Fordist image of the army. Like the army’s short- lived, contradic-
tory, and Rambo- evoking failure of a slogan, “Army of One,” the Real 
Heroes sought to portray to civilians (and potential recruits) that the 
army was composed of a multitude of “talented” soldiers, not a mass of 
“grunts.” “Empower yourself, defend freedom” is a phrase that appears 
on many Army Game Project products, and the Real Heroes embodied 
this discourse of individual empowerment within the total institution 
of the army.
Websites, blogs, personal photos, bios, videos, press interviews, and 
appearances at the Virtual Army Experience all play a role in the mul-
timedia effort to personalize the army through the individual ﬁgures of 
Real Heroes. And yet beneath the public persona of the Real Hero, there 
naturally exists a more indeterminate human ﬁgure. As in the case of 
the unreal enemy, the construction of the identity of a Real Hero is in 
its own way an artiﬁce that curates and omits other aspects of their lives 
that may not be the most ﬂattering to the U.S. Army. The intrepid deeds 
performed and experienced by Real Heroes are indeed life- changing 
events that differentiate them from most other people, but not neces-
sarily in the ways portrayed in America’s Army messaging.
When I spoke with Real Hero Tommy Rieman, the Real Heroes pro-
gram coordinator, this disjunction became readily apparent in his account 
of his postdeployment adjustment and his ongoing experiences with 
post- traumatic stress disorder (ptsd) that began almost immediately 
after his return from Iraq to the United States. In contrast to his public 
persona, Rieman’s own account of his enlistment and return is an ambiv-
alent one that tells of simultaneous disillusionment and patriotic pride, 

the virtual and the real 
81
and contains within it elements that are consciously omitted from the 
highly sanitized and polished public Real Hero narrative.
Rieman’s story of deployment, trauma, reenlistment, and redeploy-
ment two years after my 2008 conversation with him is featured in the 
documentary Halfway Home (2013). The ﬁlm focuses on the institutional 
and sociocultural barriers that prevent injured veterans from overcom-
ing the traumatic experiences of war. It recreates an overarching dis-
cursive take on ptsd that problematizes government institutions more 
than the practices of American war and the ideological positions that 
justify it. ptsd, the ﬁlm implies, is a necessary but unfortunate price to 
pay for ensuring the freedom of Americans, and it can be overcome with 
better institutional support and civilian volunteer efforts. The ﬁlm 
humanizes each of the ﬁve individuals it proﬁles in meaningful ways, 
but its overall message is that empathy for injured veterans goes hand- 
in- hand with support for war. Opposition to war, the ﬁlm implies, is the 
same as opposing the injured veterans like Rieman who return having 
experienced life- changing trauma.
ptsd, however, plays no part in the stories of Real Hero media per-
sonalities. Notably, no Real Hero has any visual physical index of injury, 
as this would be counterproductive to the Army Game Project recruit-
ment goals (see ﬁg. 8). Communications scholar Paul Achter discusses 
Rieman in an analysis of media representations of the bodies of injured 
American war veterans, writing that “as far as the visual record is con-
cerned, Rieman [has] traveled to the brink of death and returned 
unscathed, making [him a] useful [representation] of America, of the 
army, and of the warrior spirit the military likes to cultivate in new 
recruits” (2010, 53).
Rieman, however, is more than simply that, as I quickly discovered 
during the Indianapolis Air Show in 2008, when I sat down with him at 
a desk behind the driver’s seat of one of the air- conditioned Virtual Army 
Experience semitrailers. As I was going through required protocol for 
explaining informed consent for use of interview material, he began 
staring me down deadpan, looking for all the world like he was ready 
to ﬁght me. Flustered, I raised my eyebrow questioningly, and he broke 
into a smile that made me laugh: “Just kidding!” he said.
Rieman joined the army when he was seventeen, in 1999, one month 

82 the virtual and the real
after his graduation from high school. He was assigned ﬁrst to the Eighty- 
Second Airborne Division and later to the Fifty- First Infantry, and was 
stationed at different times at Fort Bragg (the home of Pineland), in 
Kosovo, and in Germany. Before he was deployed to Iraq he joined a 
unit specializing in Long- Range Surveillance (lrs). Several days prior 
to the ground invasion of Iraq in March 2003, this unit was paradropped 
within Iraqi territory for reconnaissance and the calling- in of air strikes 
on Iraqi military positions. He and his squad of ﬁve others were, in his 
words, “sittin’ in a lrs hide- site for seven fuckin’ days. You can’t move, 
your buddy’s holding your mre (Meal Ready to Eat) bag so you can shit 
in it because you can’t move, ’cause you’re stuck in this fuckin’ hole. Cold 
as shit, feet wet, almost getting hypothermia.” Despite the harsh condi-
tions, Rieman recalls this particular experience of martial camaraderie 
as one of the best memories of his military career.
Almost four years later, near the end of the 2007 State of the Union 
address, President George W. Bush, instigator of the Iraq War, paid 
tribute to Tommy Rieman, who sat two seats away from First Lady 
Laura Bush throughout the speech. The president’s comments mirrored 
the sterile combat narratives of other America’s Army Real Heroes (see 
above). Bush described the particular events that happened nine months 
after Rieman’s lrs reconnaissance mission— events that have deﬁned 
his army career and much of his life ever since— in the following way:
Tommy Rieman was a teenager pumping gas in Independence, Ken-
tucky, when he enlisted in the U.S. Army. In December 2003 he was 
on a reconnaissance mission in Iraq when his team came under heavy 
enemy ﬁre. From his Humvee Sergeant Rieman returned ﬁre. He used 
his body as a shield to protect his gunner. He was shot in the chest 
and the arm, and received shrapnel wounds to his legs, yet he refused 
medical attention and stayed in the ﬁght. He helped to repel a second 
attack, ﬁring grenades at the enemy’s position. For his exceptional 
courage, Sergeant Rieman was awarded the Silver Star.10
Having killed an unspeciﬁed number of Iraqi insurgents, Rieman 
affirms, “I think about December 3, 2003, every day of my life. . . . [I]t 
continues to haunt me” (Freedman 2013). Given continuing unofficial 
attitudes in the military that stigmatize ptsd, Rieman’s candor and hon-

the virtual and the real 
83
esty in discussing his experiences and publicly bringing attention to the 
need for critical changes in institutional and social attitudes toward such 
life- altering war trauma as ptsd is courageous.
The day following the events described by President Bush, Rieman 
was medevac’d out of Iraq, “strapped down to a cot, and ﬂown all the 
way back to fuckin’ Walter Reed, and Walter Reed down to Fort Bragg, 
[North Carolina].” Rieman was reunited with his wife and had “a great 
weekend, I’m so excited, I’m like, ‘Hell yeah, this is how we roll.’ They 
give us a fuckin’ weekend off, I get recovery leave, they give me plenty 
of medication and shit for the weekend.” After this initial positive home-
coming, however, he underwent “some of the worst processes in my 
life.” He was ordered to report to a unit in Fort Bragg but did not have 
a physical copy of his orders or any contact numbers for obtaining them. 
He showed up on the following Monday,
and I swear to God it was like I had three dicks on my forehead, ’cause 
nobody would fuckin’ help me because I didn’t have a piece of paper. 
Basically they said, “Who the fuck are you? Where are you from? If 
you don’t have orders, we can’t help you.” [ . . . ] Unfortunately, the 
army can make the same mistakes. And it’s just like any Fortune 500 
company, you know, it’s a huge powerhouse, an organization. 1.5 mil-
lion employees, scattered all over the world. I mean, we’re really damn 
good at what we do, but unfortunately people slip through the cracks 
and things happen. Things aren’t set up, and we don’t learn from our 
mistakes. When I was wounded, there wasn’t any wounded warrior 
program set up.
Rieman had severe difficulties in obtaining medical treatment, espe-
cially psychological treatment, “which is insane.” He tried to stop the 
army’s ﬁnance offices from paying him extra tax- free payments for being 
in Iraq, “and they said, ‘We can’t help you, you don’t have orders.’ And 
I was like, ‘You know, I’m trying to stop you guys from paying me too 
much.’ ‘Sorry, I can’t help you.’ That’s what I got.” Rieman dealt with 
these issues and an increasingly difficult marriage
for months. I didn’t have a psychologist to talk to. It was the hardest 
time in my life, becoming sensitive again, because you’re totally ster-

84 the virtual and the real
ile over there. You lose feelings and emotions to a point. You become 
numb to certain things. The slightest things when I came back would 
scare me, and I didn’t know how to communicate with my wife. She 
went through a life- changing event by running the household and 
taking care of everything and living with the stress of not having me 
there. And then, I was there. And how do you explain it to one another 
to let them understand? You have to really, really communicate and 
you have to do it well. [We] did not communicate well at all. So. We’d 
say things, and they’d be the same thing, but we would say it in such 
different ways that . . . [Allen: It just misses?] Yeah. That was the 
hardest part, just reintegrating myself back into civilian life.
I didn’t have a unit to report to, so everyday I’d just sit at my 
house and be with my family and live with that [experience] every 
night. You have nightmares, you wake up sweating, you’re scream-
ing, you’re crying, you’re . . . And you ﬁnd yourself waking up in the 
bathtub, or outside. I’d be freaking out, locking the doors, paranoid 
as fuck. We’d be out at Wal- Mart and all of these people and you’d 
just want to fuckin’ explode on somebody. There’s a bag in the road, 
and you swerve, or . . . I remember one night distinctly: we were 
driving back into our neighborhood and there was a lake. Somebody 
had let off some serious ﬁreworks, and I was driving. You know, we 
got hit with ieds (Improvised Explosive Devices) in Iraq. I was driv-
ing and those ﬁreworks went off. I swerved off [the road], and the 
front tire got stuck in the lake. I got out and ran out of the fuckin’ 
vehicle and dove into the woods, and my wife just sat there and 
looked at me like I was the craziest motherfucker on the planet. It 
took me a minute to step back and say, “Holy shit!” So reintegrating 
just wasn’t easy.
After Rieman had been facing these experiences of ptsd for several 
months without any consistent medical support, his unit returned from 
Iraq and he was ﬁnally able to contact it to obtain his orders and paper-
work. He went to check in and introduced himself:
They treat me like shit: “Where the fuck have you been? Why are you 
so fat?” I gained sixty- ﬁve pounds after I got back, [and] I was fucked 
up. I couldn’t go out and exercise, I didn’t have any motivation. I 

the virtual and the real 
85
thought that the army had forgotten about me, that they didn’t give 
a shit about me, and that was really hard for me to take. And I hated 
that because I love the army, absolutely love it. [ . . . ] I’d tell them 
my story [but] they thought I was lying because I didn’t have paper-
work to prove it.
These difficulties went on for eight months, until August 2004, when 
Rieman unexpectedly received a package in the mail, containing the 
Silver Star and Purple Heart medals. “I didn’t think I did anything spe-
cial, and I was nominated by everybody on my team.” Once the medals 
arrived, the attitudes of his fellow soldiers at Fort Bragg changed:
People were lickin’ my nuts after that because they couldn’t believe 
that I was telling the truth the whole time, that it wasn’t a lie, and 
that the paperwork was there. [ . . . ] The army sticks to their rules, 
[and] if it’s common sense approachable, but a not- so- common issue, 
people lock up and don’t know what to do. They say, “Hell, I’m a sol-
dier, that’s the rules.” No, hold on. I understand rules are guidelines, 
but let’s take a look at this. We’re soldiers, we’re people, let’s take 
care of each other.
After these experiences Rieman was seriously considering not renew-
ing his enlistment and looking for employment outside the army. The 
medals, however, were in his eyes a message from the army that his 
sacriﬁce was recognized and appreciated. He recounted to me a con-
versation that he had, after receiving the medals, with an army general,
a division commander for the Eighty- Second. He said, “Son, there’s 
no fuckin’ way you should get out of the army. It would be crazy. 
You’ve done so many great things— what can I do for you?” And I 
said, “Not a fuckin’ thing, sir.” Just like that. And he goes, “Well, are 
you bitter?” And I said, “Well, a little bit.” I say, “Sir, it’s going to take 
an act of God for me to stay in the army,” and he goes, “What if I get 
you assigned to the Pentagon as security for the secretary of defense?” 
I said, “Okay— where do I sign?” Just like that. Two days later, he had 
paperwork, I signed and reenlisted. Two weeks before I get [to the 
Pentagon], I get this call [ . . . ], “We’re really excited about you com-
ing to the office and stuff.” I was like, “Yeah, I’m pretty excited to 

86 the virtual and the real
protect the secretary.” And she goes, “Protect the secretary? It’s not 
a hazardous job or anything. Our secretary is ﬁne.”
Instead of being assigned to the promised position, Rieman had been 
placed in a personnel job, dealing primarily in human resources, “which 
for an infantry grunt [ . . . ] is pretty rough to adjust to.” It was in this 
work at the Pentagon that he met Wardynski, who asked him to become 
part of the new Real Heroes program, becoming a spokesperson for both 
America’s Army and, by extension, the U.S. Army. In 2007 he withdrew 
from active duty to join the Virginia National Guard but continued to 
participate in the Real Heroes program by attending events such as the 
vae (see chapter 5), where I met him in Indianapolis. Although he under-
stood the need to seek psychological help, especially after his initial 
return to the United States, Rieman continued to have trouble with 
unaddressed issues stemming from his ptsd. He did not consider the 
available counselors capable of understanding his suffering and facili-
tating any recovery, since they had not experienced overseas deployment 
in war zones themselves. His marriage ended in divorce.
Two years after my 2008 interview with him Rieman was once again 
called up for deployment to Iraq. Halfway Home details how he thought 
that this experience of returning to war might help him come to terms 
with the persistent traumatic consequences of his last deployment. Rie-
man’s return to the crucible of war during this second tour in Iraq, 
though, further contributed to unaddressed feelings of isolation, depres-
sion, and powerlessness. At one haunting moment in the documentary 
he recounts how he removed the photos of his children and girlfriend 
from the walls of his barracks room, loaded his riﬂe, placed the barrel 
in his mouth, and sat on his bed, switching the safety from on to off 
repeatedly. While this moment of contemplating suicide was not his 
ﬁrst, it was a turning point for Rieman, who decided at that moment 
that he would not be overcome by his own sense of helplessness. While 
still deployed he ﬁnally sought out (and was able to receive) long- term 
counseling and medical help. Rieman has since become a public ﬁgure 
in speaking out about veteran’s needs, especially regarding medical treat-
ment and counseling.
In the eyes of many, Rieman’s soldiering narrative might provide pow-

the virtual and the real 
87
erful and tangible evidence to invoke as justiﬁcation against military 
enlistment. Having endured parallel conditions of war trauma, other 
soldiers have evolved in their interpretations of their enlistment expe-
riences to positions of resistance, to the point of refusing deployment 
orders (Gutmann and Lutz 2010). Rieman, however, changed in a con-
trasting way, and despite his negative experiences chose to become an 
archetypal representative of the army. Echoing Bush’s State of the Union 
speech, he framed his military work experiences as a classic heroic war 
narrative of masculine camaraderie and “selﬂess service.” Rieman told 
me that he looked positively on what “the army has structurally done 
for me as a man, and showed me the ways of life— and also showed me 
life. [ . . . ] If you can just put it past yourself— it’s not about you, it’s 
about you serving your fuckin’ country and looking to your brother left 
and right and serving with them.”
He then paused to address me directly: “If you have a son and he goes 
and joins the army, I guarantee that you would feel guilty that you never 
did. This is why I do it. I serve because of my kids. I want to be able to 
say that I served, so he doesn’t if he doesn’t want to. Or, I go ﬁght this 
battle so he doesn’t have to and he’s safe. [ . . . ] [I]t’s pride when you 
wear this uniform.11 So much shit has happened to me and I still love 
the army,” he told me, “so if all that can happen to me and I can love it, 
it’s fuckin’ great. And I want to change people’s lives. The army will.” 
The question, however, remains as to the manner in which one’s life 
potentially changes as a result of enlistment. If America’s Army is indeed 
providing the “whole damn book” (to use Wardynski’s own phrasing) 
about the U.S. Army and the labor of war, the disturbing aftermath of 
Rieman’s story following his deﬁning Real Hero combat events would 
be a part of it.
As things were, though, the Real Hero and the actual Tommy Rieman 
were two very different personas who, when contrasted, reveal what 
U.S. historian James Loewen describes as a process of “heroiﬁcation” 
that turns “ﬂesh- and- blood individuals into pious, perfect creatures 
without conﬂicts, pain, credibility, or human interest” (2007, 11). It is 
precisely the “ﬂesh- and- blood” human qualities of Rieman’s powerful 
personal narrative that were omitted from his Real Hero character, which 
became sanitized as a plastic G.I. Joe type of action ﬁgure, devoid of 

88 the virtual and the real
personality, injuries, and ﬂaws. This work of morphing a real human 
being into an “aspirational ﬁgure” parallels other tendencies in Ameri-
can historical memory to “reduce heroes from dramatic men and women 
to melodramatic stick ﬁgures. Their inner struggles disappear” (Loewen 
2007, 29). This, too, is the work of militarization, for the highly scripted, 
half- truthful war narratives of the Real Heroes obscure and deﬂect atten-
tion away from the trauma inﬂicted on both soldiers and their families, 
friends, and extended communities.
The ﬁgure of the unreal enemy provides for an omnipresent and for-
midable danger that the Real Hero unselﬁshly struggles against and 
ultimately vanquishes. This artiﬁcial framework repositions the threats 
posed to the legitimacy of the military by the unruliness of the bodies 
of injured soldiers, and reconstitutes the Real Hero and America’s Army 
as an ostensibly safe domain that can be inscribed and coded with insti-
tutional messages. The creation of these kinds of institutional “safe 
domains” was a critical aspect of the recruitment goals of America’s 
Army and its franchise products, and a central element of the “soft sell” 
atmosphere cultivated at venues such as the Virtual Army Experience 
(vae) and the Army Experience Center (aec)— both of which I explore 
in the next chapter.

1. In- game marketing image for the “Alley” level of America’s Army 3.
2. The outside entrance to the Office of 
Economic and Manpower Analysis. 
Photo by the author, September 2006.

3. America’s Army Real Heroes Tommy Rieman (left) and John Adams (center) 
being interviewed at the Virtual Army Experience by cnn correspondent  
Susan Roesgen for The Situation Room with Wolf Blitzer. Photo by the  
author, August 2008.

4. A reference photo, used by America’s Army level designers and 
artists, of a house in the rural United States.
5. The reference photo’s in- game application in the “Ranch” 
scenario of America’s Army 3.

6. The front cover to issue 8 of the America’s Army 
Graphic Novel series, featuring the Czervenian  
leader President- General Azdic. Sherman,  
Brooks, and Brown 2013.

7. One of the Real Heroes of America’s Army, sfc Gerald 
Wolford, in digital, plastic, and photographic representation.
8. Tommy Rieman’s Real Hero action 
ﬁgure. Photo by the author.

9. An exterior view of the vae Alpha at the Indianapolis Air Show. 
Photo by the author.
10. A mock- up life- size Humvee inside the 
vae. Photo by the author.

11. Drill sergeants provide entertainment for visitors waiting in 
line outside the vae by challenging them with push- ups for 
army gear. Photo by the author.

12. Real Heroes Tommy Rieman and John Adams sign free 
copies of the America’s Army video game given to visitors as 
they exit. Photo by the author.

13. A typical gaming scenario at aec computers. A variety of games were 
available to play, including the most current versions of America’s Army, World 
of Warcraft, and other sports, role- playing, and ﬁrst- person shooting games. 
Photo courtesy of the U.S. Department of Defense.

14. (Left) “Grab a bite.” An advertisement 
for the Army Experience Center in the 
Franklin Mills Mall, Philadelphia.  
Photo by the author.
15. (Below left) Ignited poster advertising 
the release of America’s Army 3 at the 
2009 Game Developers Conference. 
Photo by the author.
16. (Below right) America’s Army arcade 
game, published by Global vr.

17. (Above) Virtual soldiers: 
civilian America’s Army video 
game developers at mini Basic 
Combat Training. Photo by the 
Army Game Project.
18. (Left) Image from the 
development office the day of 
the layoffs. Photo by the author.


89
4
The Full- Spectrum Soft Sell of the Army Experience
There’s this [tv] commercial that shows a Marine climbing some 
crazy cliff with no gear, and then he ﬁghts a dragon and converts into 
a Marine officer with a sword and everything.1 Now, you tell me which 
is a more accurate depiction of the military— a Marine ﬁghting a 
dragon or a video game that really makes as much effort as possible to 
be accurate in its depictions of combat and military life? I don’t think 
that [commercial is] a very accurate depiction of what it’s like to be a 
Marine. I think playing a video game is also a far- fetched vision of 
what it’s like to be in the military; however, that being said, our game 
does genuinely try to portray certain parts of the military. So I do 
appreciate that, and I think that on some level it is more accurate. But 
I also feel like there are levels of lying, you know what I mean?
marcus, America’s Army game developer, personal interview
Among brown, arid mountains a scene repeats itself ceaselessly: video 
news reports tell us that “a well- armed genocidal faction in the city of 
Nradreg has surrounded a group of humanitarian aid workers and ref-
ugees who face starvation and imminent attack. This enemy faction has 
rejected all diplomatic efforts to negotiate safe passage of relief supplies. 
As part of international relief efforts, a combined U.S. Army air, sea, 
and ground task force has been ordered to use appropriate force to reach 
the remote compound.” Helicopters swoop, missiles ﬂy, and, after seven 
minutes of intense ﬁghting, a convoy of troops arrives with supplies. 
The unnamed enemy lies defeated. But, as if caught in a time warp, 
minutes later this Sisyphean scenario begins anew.
This generic conﬂict against an unreal enemy is the backstory to the 

90 the full-spectrum soft sell
cinematic action inside the Virtual Army Experience (vae). The vae was 
one development in the army’s push to market itself in a new, positive 
light, and it was unabashedly an aid to army recruitment. This “mobile 
mission simulator” was open to the public at locations across the United 
States from 2007 to 2010 and presented a kinetically engaging battle 
scenario to individuals who visit large public events (see ﬁg. 9). These 
events were often air shows featuring well- known military show teams 
such as the army’s Golden Knights, the navy’s Blue Angels, and the air 
force’s Thunderbirds. The vae also visited nascar races, as well as fairs, 
theme parks, and other festivals, but oema later determined that nascar 
venues were not optimal sites for the vae in terms of reaching a recrui-
table population due to the older and relatively more affluent demo-
graphic of fans who purchase race tickets.
The peak activity of the vae occurred during the 2007 and 2008 tours, 
when at least three simulators toured nationwide for up to eight months 
each year. Following the economic crisis that began in 2008, when 
recruitment became easier due to ﬁnancial hardships and military bud-
gets shrank slightly, the vae scaled down to a single- month tour in 2010 
and eventually closed permanently. This happened despite the endorse-
ment by Congress in 2010, which commended the army
for investing in new technological approaches to increase awareness 
and knowledge of the military among recruitment- age youth. The 
Army Experience Center in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and its trans-
portable counterpart, the Virtual Army Experience, are examples of 
technological projects that hold great potential to reshape recruiting 
techniques and conduct recruiting operations on a more cost effective 
basis. The committee believes this type of investment is essential if 
the Army intends to keep pace with societal changes regarding the 
subjects that capture the attention of young people and methods young 
people use to gather information and socially interact. . . . The com-
mittee understands that during periods when recruiting is relatively 
easy, investment in experimental programs draws increased scrutiny. 
The committee urges the Army to continue to use these tools and to 
invest in other related projects to maximize their immediate value, 
and learn more about how the Army may further adapt technology 

the full-spectrum soft sell 
91
to harness the power of the information age to support the recruiting 
mission. (U.S. Congress 2010, 318)
The vae and aec were two programs implemented by the Los Angeles– 
based marketing agency Ignited, and both were pioneering venues in 
the army’s experimentation with “soft sell” marketing for military recruit-
ment.2 (On an informational blurb at Ignited’s website in 2009, Ignited 
claimed, “We are in the business of making our clients part of the cul-
tural dialogue and the collective consciousness.”) Such tactics implicitly 
challenged classic “hard sell” techniques practiced by army recruiters, 
although in reality both recruitment techniques existed simultaneously, 
especially at the vae. Both venues, as explicit public recruitment endeav-
ors, generated considerable national attention and media coverage that 
often focused on protests that were regularly held at both. While the 
voices of these protesters are, I think, important to consider, in this 
chapter I also turn my attention to those individuals who worked at both 
the vae and the aec. I examine their own points of view in regards to 
their labor in the name of army recruitment.
This special focus on those people who work within the production 
environment of militarized gaming media attributes agency to those 
involved in both the production and the consumption of militarized 
media. In doing so I seek to avoid positioning the only possibilities of 
gamer subjectivity along dualistic lines wherein one must be either a 
“media activist” and vocal dissenter against militarized games or a “media 
dupe” who passively buys into all of the militarized messages within 
games. This approach stems from my personal understanding of the 
pleasures and problematics of militarized games and reﬂects my dis-
covery of a nuanced and thoughtful critical reﬂection that is already 
present among those who actually engage with and produce such media 
on a daily basis.
Many of the people whose views I detail below actively contributed 
through their work to the militarization of popular culture. But the com-
plexities of ethnographic experience have made it imperative for me to 
include the thoughtful yet ambiguous voices I have found over the course 
of my research. These points of view complicate the common knee- jerk 
“for or against” political mentality that often emerges among even 

92 the full-spectrum soft sell
thoughtful academics and other individuals when polarizing issues such 
as military recruitment are discussed. Divergent individual and institu-
tional interpretations regarding the meanings of Army Game Project 
products were apparent among even its employees, who continually 
reinscribed the game and franchise with new meanings that were diver-
gent from, but not necessarily contradictory to, the official army message.
From Air Shows and State Fairs . . . 
At the time when Russia was invading the post- Soviet nation of Georgia 
and the 2008 Beijing Olympics were being broadcast worldwide, the 
vae was making a prolonged two- week stay in Indiana during the Indi-
ana State Fair and the Indianapolis Air Show. On my way there, as I 
blearily stood in the Atlanta airport after a grueling cross- country red- 
eye ﬂight, a soldier in the Army National Guard limped to the front of 
the line, everyone’s sleepy eyes ﬁxed on the back of his head. He was in 
full uniform with a pack on his shoulder, wore a neck brace, and used 
a cane to walk. I wondered whether, like Rieman’s Real Hero backstory, 
this returning injured soldier was a darker face of a multimedia Janus.
The Virtual Army Experience sat at the Indiana State Fair among 
the General Motors and Saturn tents, a trailer promoting biofuels, and 
the fairground’s 4- h building. Its physical shell, part tractor- trailer and 
part inﬂatable structure, was visible across most of the fairground. 
Huge fans in the back of the structure had to constantly be kept blow-
ing lest the entire thing collapse. The vae came in four sizes, each 
named according to army unit designations: Alpha, Bravo, Charlie, and 
Delta. These conﬁgurations traveled across the country, predominantly 
to events in more populous areas that have traditionally served as a 
base for army recruitment, such as the South, the Midwest, and the 
Southwest. Alpha was the largest conﬁguration (holding up to forty 
people) and Delta the smallest (accommodating only about ﬁve people 
at a time), but Bravo and Charlie (which held between ﬁfteen and 
twenty people each) were the most typical versions, each collapsing 
to ﬁt within three full- size tractor- trailers. Alpha was essentially a com-
bination of Bravo and Charlie, and when these two conﬁgurations came 
together at events such as the Indianapolis Air Show a huge interior 
space was fashioned.

the full-spectrum soft sell 
93
An executive developer of the vae, Mark Long,3 described the interior 
of the multimedia experience to me in terms that emphasized the func-
tional integration between digital and physical elements. The featured 
highlights of the vae were mock- up Humvees and Black Hawk helicopters, 
the movement of which was simulated through 180- degree screens and
kinetic hammers that, when an explosion goes off, rock the Humvee 
[see ﬁg. 10]. And gas action weighted recoil mechanisms on the 
weapons. So you get this kinetic integration. You know, when you’re 
trying to physically control the muzzle climb on a weapon, shooting 
in a simulation allows you to suspend disbelief more. Suddenly that 
physical integration into the virtual environment takes you in and 
creates a greater sense of presence, which is really cool. And then 
there are air cannons and audio, the whole thing. So it’s a lot of fun. 
They have two of these systems and they bring them around to air 
shows and nascar, and men [who visit] there— young men and 
women— they can give their email address and then go through and 
try it, and a recruiter can follow up to see if there’s any interest. You 
don’t really decide to join the army because you went through the 
vae. But you get to try something cool with your friends for about 
ﬁve minutes and you give up your email address for it, so it seems 
like a fair deal.
In the following account, I describe a typical experience of the vae, 
which I composited over the course of my ﬁeldwork at the venue. I typ-
ically attended one or two full vae sequences each day, and hung around 
the venue at other times for several hours, talking with participants and 
interviewing and chatting with employees and soldiers, all of whom 
were aware of my presence there as a researcher.
Press releases and advertisements typically emphasized the interior 
simulation of the vae containing the Humvees, and brought attention 
to the virtuality of the experience, going so far as to claim that the vae 
is a “test drive” of army enlistment. For example, within the Alpha vae 
structure visitors were able to get “a virtual test drive of the United States 
Army. The core of the 9,750- square- foot vae is the America’s Army com-
puter game, rendered with state- of- the- art Army training simulation 
technology to create a life- size, networked virtual world. The vae high-

94 the full-spectrum soft sell
lights key Soldier occupations, Army technologies, operating environ-
ments and missions, within a fast- paced, action- packed, information- rich 
experience that immerses visitors in the world of Soldiering. Participants 
employ teamwork, rules of engagement, leadership and high- tech equip-
ment as they take part in a virtual U.S. Army mission” (Army Game 
Project 2007).
In fact, most visitors spent a signiﬁcant amount of the time outside 
the actual simulation. The wait outside was often as short as twenty 
minutes, but was reportedly as long as four hours, with the typical length 
of time spent inside the vae being thirty to forty minutes. To help par-
ticipants kill some time during the wait, army recruiters and drill ser-
geants stood around, ready to chat with people about the army or give 
away army T- shirts, hats, and copies of the America’s Army Xbox video 
game to people who did enough proper push- ups (see ﬁg. 11).
A representative from the army- sponsored Top Fuel dragster racing 
team was there as well, taking complimentary photos of anyone who 
wished to have their picture taken with the car. This was a popular option 
for kids who could not enter the vae, as the posted minimum age was 
thirteen years old.4 Near the building videos explained the fourfold pro-
cess of registering, obtaining the mission brieﬁng, playing the simula-
tion, and participating in the after- action review. Video teasers for the 
vae played repetitively on larger screens on top of the trailers.5
After the wait in the heat outside, visitors entered the air- conditioned 
registration lobby, where they were greeted by several locally hired young 
women standing behind a counter and computers. They asked everyone 
a series of required questions: “Are you interested in learning about the 
army?” “Have you or your family ever served in a branch of the mili-
tary?” They also collected more basic information from individuals, such 
as their addresses, telephone numbers, email addresses, and levels of 
education. They took each visitor’s photo and presented each with a 
Virtual Army Experience id card, which ﬁt inside a neck wallet equipped 
with an rfid sensor that tracked each person’s movement within the 
vae. All of this information was collated by a subcontractor, Fish Soft-
ware (now called simply fish), to produce a large database of demo-
graphic information that aided in producing knowledge about the 
effectiveness of particular displays within the vae and the efficiency of 

the full-spectrum soft sell 
95
national venues in garnering a population of potential recruits. Infor-
mation was also transferred to local recruiters, as I personally discovered 
when a Seattle- based army recruiter later followed up, cold calling me 
two days after I truthfully indicated at registration in Indianapolis that 
I was “interested in learning more about the army.”
As people waited for everyone in their group to ﬁnish with the regis-
tration process, visitors were able to kill some time by playing America’s 
Army at computer stations in the center of the room. For most this was 
their ﬁrst time playing the game, and most of the time visitors spent 
playing was devoted simply to learning the basic interface of the con-
trollers. Once everyone in the group was registered, a man introduced 
himself to the group as a subject matter expert (sme). He invited every-
one to stand in line as a group and explained the weapon systems sim-
ulated inside the vae, such as the Black Hawk helicopter and Humvees 
mounted with crows (Common Remotely Operated Weapons System), 
which use controller interfaces similar to video game joysticks (Pappa-
lardo 2010). The sme told the group that he served in the army in Iraq, 
and that anyone with questions about the vae or the army should ask 
him at any time. He then opened a door leading to the interior of the 
vae and a huge, dark space ﬁlled with life- size mock- ups of Humvees 
and a Black Hawk helicopter.
Before people could take their seats inside these vehicles, however, 
the sme directed everyone to watch a ﬁve- minute video in which the 
group— now referred to as a “squad”— was briefed on the upcoming 
mission. In this video a colonel and several officers described the sce-
nario of Nradreg’s humanitarian plight (see chapter beginning), using 
official- sounding, euphemistically unintelligible jargon while conveying 
the seriousness of the situation through tone and dramatic music. At 
the end of the video the sme showed the squad a map of the area that 
displayed critical points of the mission. He then instructed people how 
to identify civilians, told everyone not to shoot at them, and directed 
the squad to take a seat in one of the vehicles.
Unlike roller coasters or motion simulations, there was no overall 
consensus among visitors about which seat or vehicle was best for the 
experience. Shooting from the Black Hawk helicopter, as opposed to 
the Humvee, was objectively more difficult. Sometimes smes tried to 

96 the full-spectrum soft sell
preempt complaints about the Black Hawk being too hard by framing 
it as a “target practice challenge” in their brieﬁngs beforehand. This 
“are you good enough?” kind of framing typically encouraged younger 
men to sit in the Black Hawk mock- up. Guns, properly weighted and 
convincingly real, were mounted to the vehicles (see ﬁg. 10), and the 
m249 saw turret guns at the tops of the Humvees tended to be popular. 
After standing in line for over half an hour, though, many chose instead 
to sit in the Humvees. This, I contend, is one of the microlevel purposes 
of the vae: to introduce the army’s technologies and weapons systems 
to the general public so that civilians would, for instance, be able to 
make a more informed decision as to which vehicle or which seat in a 
U.S. Army Humvee is more appropriate for them to ride in. In the 
minutiae of such options and necessary decisions virtual soldiers are 
thus fashioned.
After the simulation began squad members were able to ﬁre the air 
riﬂes mounted on the vehicles. At this point there were no targets, and 
a montage of scenes accompanied by heavy- metal music appeared on 
the three large screens in front of each vehicle. This sequence showed 
missiles launching, army helicopters starting their run to the battleﬁeld, 
and halo (high altitude low opening) parachutists making their jump. 
Finally the montage changed to an aerial view that swooped down to 
the squad’s position, and the camera ﬂew into a virtual Humvee, bring-
ing everyone to a ﬁrst- person perspective as if they were viewing the 
action from inside their vehicle. Although there was no actual driver 
the vehicle started moving on- screen, accompanied by a physical rum-
bling from the vehicle that simulated movement. The screens showed 
civilians running away, and, although the sme told visitors not to shoot 
at them, some (sometimes including me) usually did anyway, often out 
of boredom. The virtual civilians, however, did not react in any way and 
kept on running. If visitors persisted in shooting at civilians, the sme 
threatened to remove them from the simulation.
Shortly, however, several men with guns ran out, crouched in the 
middle of the road, and started ﬁring their weapons in what appeared 
to be the direction of the vehicles. The squad swiftly took them out, but 
soon afterward an enemy jeep drove up. After taking just a few bullets 
the jeep exploded, creating a vibration felt from the seat of the Humvee. 

the full-spectrum soft sell 
97
After a few minutes of this, people began to realize that there was noth-
ing the enemy could do that could hurt their virtual selves— that they 
were a spectator to the action rather than an active agent in a game. 
This, at least, was my feeling once I realized I was not playing a game 
with the potential to lose, but was instead ﬁghting a pushover enemy 
that was going to let me win no matter what. Still, the seven minutes of 
cinematic target practice went by swiftly, ending with the convoy cross-
ing a bridge and arriving at the refugee camp, thus completing the objec-
tive of the mission. Some squad members, including me, tried to shoot 
the refugees and aid workers, but as nothing happened we sadly realized 
that our weapons were no longer effective. One visitor, blogging on the 
technology news website cnet, described a similar experience of the 
simulation:
I had fun during the intense but short experience. It felt surprisingly 
real, with the gun and Humvee shaking and rocking wildly as I shot 
at terrorists on a huge screen. Unfortunately, it didn’t really present 
the same level of risk most video games offer. As far as I could tell, 
nobody in the simulation died or got hurt. Sure, bullets ﬂew and 
bombs exploded, but nobody lost a life and had to respawn, or any 
other of the typical game conventions you’d expect from an fps [ﬁrst- 
person shooter] or a light- gun game. It was like I was playing through 
an Army mission in god mode.6 (Greenwald 2007)
Although some may ﬁnd the idea of shooting at virtual civilians appall-
ing, I suggest that most people did not do it out of spite or as a result of 
any “corrupting” inﬂuence of video games. Rather, visitors shot at civil-
ians to test the limits of believability in this virtual environment, to push 
back against and reappropriate in some small way the scripted heroic 
narrative so thoroughly entrenched and blatantly present at the vae. 
The act of shooting at civilians was the most powerful and common 
mode of speaking back to authority I witnessed inside the vae. The 
inability of civilians— or, for that matter, players— to die was disappoint-
ing; it punched through the logic of the claim I often heard during my 
time at the vae that “this is as close to realistic combat as you can get 
outside of going to war.” 7 John Grant, a member of the antiwar organi-
zation Veterans for Peace, equated this kind of experience with “the 

98 the full-spectrum soft sell
reality level of that good ol’ tv show The A- Team, where they’d go out 
on these special missions and it’s like, ‘Brrrrummmm! Brmbrmrbmrb-
mrm, brrrrrrrrmbrmbrmbrmbrm. Powpow.’ Booooombs! And guuuuuns! 
And bullets and people ﬂying. Nobody even gets a hangnail, and at the 
end they’re smoking cigars. Everybody’s happy and there’s not a mark 
on them. They’re all as handsome as they were before. That’s exactly 
the problem— there are no consequences.”
As the simulation ended, the sme directed everyone to exit the vae 
structure to a small tent, where he conducted an After Action Review 
in which he showed the squad images he claimed were taken during the 
game. These images never varied, nor did the essence of the sme’s review, 
which conveyed to the squad that they did a good job but needed to 
work more on teamwork and communicating with other members in 
their vehicles. At this point the sme had the group watch another video, 
this one about an America’s Army Real Hero.8 At the conclusion of the 
video the actual Real Hero entered the tent as the sme introduced him 
to the group. The Real Hero told the group more about his experiences 
in the army and handed out a Real Heroes action ﬁgure made in his 
likeness (see ﬁg. 8) to a member of the group, often to the youngest- 
looking visitor or to an individual who indicated at registration that he 
or she would be interested in joining the army. He then made himself 
available to sign autographs or chat about the army with anyone inter-
ested. The sme directed people to remove their neck wallets but to keep 
their vae id cards, and as visitors returned their wallets, they were given 
a copy of the America’s Army pc game attached to a vae lanyard. The 
visitors walked away to the rest of the state fair, perhaps going to the 
4- h building or the dog show nearby.
Although the vae takes its name from the technology of virtual real-
ity, when considering the population of visitors to the vae, another sense 
of the word virtual— that is, a connotation of potential— is also germane. 
The visitors to the vae were virtual soldiers, a force not yet mobilized, 
and the vae served as a conduit in actualizing the potential of this labor 
pool. Fish Software, the contracting company responsible for gathering 
data on visitors and disseminating them to relevant entities like recruit-
ment offices and oema, was forthright about this function of the vae, 
explaining that “though the vae will garner much attention for being a 

the full-spectrum soft sell 
99
realistic and compelling war simulator, the purpose of it is clear— to 
collect actionable information that allows the Army to recruit more effec-
tively. Every aspect of the experience is geared toward delivering posi-
tive messages about the Army and collecting information that can be 
leveraged post- event” (Fish Software 2007, 3).
The development, construction, presentation, and post- event aspects 
of the vae further involved a constellation of part- time, temporary, and 
full- time laborers. These too were a virtual army in the sense that they 
were not a part of the U.S. Army proper but nevertheless fulﬁlled many 
of the functions of the army, as contracting entities of the so- called “mil-
itary entertainment complex.” This virtual army was composed of smes, 
technicians, tour directors, public relations representatives (all employ-
ees of Ignited), young women staffing registration and checkout (hired 
on a temporary basis through local modeling agencies), drivers (employ-
ees of Performance Marketing Group), and employees of Fish Software, 
the army- sponsored Top Fuel dragster racing team, and McCann Erikson 
(the marketing agency responsible for the “Army Strong” campaign). 
In addition to this virtual army of contractors, enlisted army recruiters, 
the Real Heroes, and drill sergeants were all involved in the vae media 
campaign. The men (mostly nonmilitary or ex- military contractors) who 
toured with the vae as production staff, tended to speak of their work 
as if they were comrades- in- arms in a fashion similar to the America’s 
Army game developers (see chapter 6). “You know,” one employee told 
me, “anytime you’re on the road it’s just like the Band of Brothers in the 
sense that you go through the worst things on Earth. I mean, obviously 
we’re not in Iraq, but stuff will break and somehow we always make it 
work. I like that camaraderie.”
This virtual army existed to support the continual ﬂow of visitors and 
the occasional media or vip visit to the vae. Although this breakdown 
admittedly falls into the trap of categorizing individuals based on the 
type of work they do, it is nevertheless useful in beginning to think about 
the sheer variety of activities, motivations, interests, organizations, and 
logistics involved in putting on a production such as the vae. A step back 
from this local level of actors reveals even more layers of organizations 
connected to the vae. Zombie Studios, the America’s Army California 
studios, the sed at Redstone Arsenal, and oema are only the most cen-

100 the full-spectrum soft sell
tral organizations in a complex array of institutions that had a hand in 
the production and implementation of the vae.
Reducing the vae to a singular kind of experience or a pithy descrip-
tion of what it did or was is difficult; rather, it communicated a variety 
of messages through different channels and media, and it did so not 
simply through a unidirectional form of information dissemination, as 
in the traditional understanding of propaganda. The experiences of each 
visitor, of course, varied depending on the individuals present, the venue 
at which the vae was presented, the size and conﬁguration of the vae, 
and an inﬁnite number of other factors. The army predictably sought to 
limit variations in visitor interpretations by framing the experience in 
a highly scripted manner that communicated positive messages to par-
ticipants, especially teenagers, about the career opportunities available 
in the army. It did this not only through multiple videos, but also through 
use of America’s Army, the vae simulation, and (usually) charismatic 
recruiters, drill sergeants, Real Heroes like Tommy Rieman, and smes. 
Brian, one of the vae’s production staff, explained that this effort to 
humanize the army was very intentional because
traditional media marketing efforts for the army— they have always 
come off as being sort of half- assed and really goofy. You see televi-
sion commercials and the things that they really hype up are things 
like “honor” and “duty” and stuff, and it falls ﬂat, I think. It’s just 
images and audio. [The vae] really puts a human face on things 
whereas on a tv commercial nine times out of ten you are seeing 
actors and it’s really insincere, really uninteresting, and really unen-
gaging. Even in America’s Army you can go into a Virtual Recruiting 
Center to meet the Real Heroes [simulated in the game] and learn 
about their stories. They’re real people, but so much of army adver-
tising is not even virtual but artiﬁcial.
The scripted stories of the Real Heroes were at the center of the Amer-
ica’s Army campaign to place a human face on the army and directly 
challenged absurdly unrealistic advertising orientations such as the one 
described by Marcus in the epigraph to this chapter. Both Marcus and 
Brian, however, also understood that the interpretative framing sur-
rounding America’s Army and such related venues as the vae and the 

the full-spectrum soft sell 
101
aec was also thoroughly constructed since they had had a hand in pro-
ducing the interpretive material.
The vae framed the actual appearance of the Real Hero near the end 
of the public tour as the most signiﬁcant interpretative moment of the 
experience (see ﬁg. 12). Carefully chosen as representatives who present 
a realistic career goal for prospective recruits (with seven enlisted sol-
diers or noncommissioned officers and two commissioned officers), the 
Real Heroes were portrayed as ordinary soldiers who, through their 
training in the army, became enabled to do heroic deeds. As one Real 
Hero put it, “none of us were trying to be heroes, we were just there 
doing our job.” 9 Another states, “I don’t see myself as a hero. I just see 
myself as Tommy Rieman, doing my job. I think everybody has the same 
quality, but they just have to ﬁnd it.” 10
smes (subject matter experts) also played a signiﬁcant role in person-
alizing the army at the vae and were central to interpreting the vae to 
visitors in a way that attempted to maximize the number of people leav-
ing with a more favorable impression of the army. Some smes cracked 
jokes and kept their explanations upbeat, while others chose to focus 
on describing their own experiences and career trajectories that enlist-
ment in the army allowed. One sme, for example, informed visitors 
about his deployments and return, but chose to tell visitors mostly about 
his subsequent pursuit of a college degree with army support. smes said 
their job was to “educate, promote, and entertain the public,” and they 
conceptualized their work as both performer and educator. “I think I’m 
a little bit of each,” one sme told me,
because I like making people smile and have a good time because 
that’s what this is about. It’s not about trying to impress people or 
make them think they’re in the army. I like to entertain them, because 
the army isn’t that bad. A lot of people are like, “Oh, if I join the mil-
itary I’m going to get shot at,” and all this kind of stuff, but no, it 
depends on what job you do. I try to educate people and [tell them], 
“No, you could be a satellite technician, and do three or four years, 
get out, make over a hundred grand a year with your military educa-
tion and experience.” So, educate. And then, I might crack a few jokes 
[ . . . ] and just try to make good laughs and have a good time.

102 the full-spectrum soft sell
smes were all former enlistees in the army, and many worked as con-
tract employees at the vae between stints of active duty. As such the 
smes themselves blurred the lines between soldier and civilian, and 
stood in as the most visible mechanism of the “soft sell” at work at the 
vae. As contractors who sold their labor to the military as both enlisted 
and civilian employees, the smes embodied post- Fordist virtual soldier-
ing. Brian explained this to me in his own way, rhetorically asking,
What is the product that the vae wants to punch out? On one level 
you have the game that we give away, but at the end of the day, it’s 
all about recruiting. What’s the product, though? The Real Heroes 
are sort of the cream of the crop; they are the ultimate product. But 
I think on a larger scale you have to look at the subject matter experts. 
I think that those guys who were just regular folks in the army— some 
did combat, some didn’t— I think that those are the real products. 
Those guys are literally ‘products’ of the army.
Although the vae was a marketing effort to sell a real experience of 
joining and being in the U.S. Army, there were a plethora of other 
“products”— both literal and metaphorical— that shaped a visitor’s expe-
rience at the vae. The smes, army recruiters, and Real Heroes (all “prod-
ucts” of the army) helped create and sustain a militarized, highly 
masculine, and scripted experience that guests were able to take home 
with them after their visit (cf. Kline et al. 2003, 247– 68; Enloe 2000). 
Items given to visitors (id cards, key chains, action ﬁgures, T- shirts, hats, 
and video games) were some of these take- home products, as were the 
intangible memories of the experience. Additionally, people who ﬁt the 
right demographic and who indicated an interest in the army also took 
home with them the prospect of being contacted in the near future by 
a local army recruiter.
As the ﬁnely tuned military stories and experiences present at the vae 
demonstrate, there was a carefully executed deployment of persuasive 
technologies at work here. The Army Experience Center, the stationary 
cousin of the Virtual Army Experience, brought these technologies, nar-
ratives, and simulated experiences together in an unparalleled manner 
to intermesh militarized forms of entertainment, education, business, 
and public service— all in the name of U.S. Army recruitment.

the full-spectrum soft sell 
103
. . . to Shopping Malls and High Schools
Ignited took its concept of the Virtual Army Experience and expanded 
it, in association with entities at the Pentagon,11 to create the Army 
Experience Center, which sat at the far end of the winding Franklin Mills 
Mall in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, surrounded by an indoor skateboard 
park, a video game arcade, a Chinese restaurant, Banana Republic, and 
Victoria’s Secret. Although the aec was not a formal part of the Army 
Game Project and therefore not under the supervision of oema and 
Wardynski, it was closely connected due the fact that it was also man-
aged by Ignited, and maintained many formal and informal relationships 
with Army Game Project institutions. As a related Pentagon- supervised 
program that used both America’s Army software and the same vae Hum-
vee and Black Hawk simulators, the aec arguably generated more con-
tention and news coverage than either, with reports from cnn, nbc 
Nightly News, and the New York Times, as well as independent media 
organizations, activist organizations, and pbs.12 Public relations repre-
sentatives from Ignited with whom I spoke were generally happy with 
this wide exposure, claiming that “in the last two years we’ve maintained 
97 percent positive to neutral coverage.” 13
Like the vae and America’s Army, the aec was designed to appeal pri-
marily to teenage boys, yet the center had a vibe that was meant to be 
welcoming to anyone wishing know more about the army, or simply wish-
ing to relax from shopping, watch tv, or play video games. Civilian staff 
and army recruiters typically kept a courteous distance from visitors 
unless they were approached. Their dress was casual, with uniforms of 
khaki pants with white or black army polo shirts or jackets, color- coded to 
distinguish soldiers from civilians. As the aec’s director Al Flood explained 
to me, “We’re here to have the space for people to learn about the army in 
their own way.” The center contained big- screen televisions, anchored to 
the ceiling, playing espn and other programs in closed captioning, and 
plush sofas and chairs were arranged in clusters behind the front registra-
tion desk. Several interactive kiosks featured additional information on 
various army military occupational specialties (moses), global base loca-
tions, starting soldier salaries, and salary projections based on experi-
ence, education, and rank. A small area displayed army merchandise 
available for purchase. To one side was a regularly used classroom with 

104 the full-spectrum soft sell
approximately forty computers and seats, referred to as the “Tactical 
Operations Center” and visible through transparent glass walls.
Further back were four rows of seats with sixty desktop computers 
(see ﬁg. 13) and nineteen Xbox 360 consoles with plush seats along the 
wall. These were available for anyone over the age of thirteen to walk 
in and use, on the condition that they enter their personal contact infor-
mation in a database at the front registration desk and provide proof of 
age and identity. (Games rated “Mature” on the esrb scale were off 
limits to users under the age of seventeen. This excluded most ﬁrst- 
person shooting games besides America’s Army, which was deliberately 
rated “Teen.”) Once visitors registered they obtained an official aec card 
and number, which enabled information on individual users to be stored 
for statistical tracking and demographic analysis. In the very back of 
the center were Apache helicopter and Humvee simulators identical to 
those at the vae. The center’s recruiting and management offices, visible 
through large glass walls, were located behind doors.
The aura of transparency was important at the aec, both metaphor-
ically and literally. Taking pains to exude as casual an atmosphere as 
possible, and with an abundance of glass windows in its interior and on 
all sides facing the mall corridors to visually represent transparency in 
army recruiting, the aec epitomized the military recruitment soft sell 
in perhaps its purest form to date. This two- year, $13 million experimen-
tal pilot program, which lasted from August 2008 to July 2010, combined 
ﬁve Philadelphia- area recruiting stations into one. Twenty civilian staff 
and twenty- two enlisted army recruiters— handpicked from recruiting 
school by the Center’s Pentagon project manager, Major Larry Dillard— 
replaced forty regular army recruiters. “It’s an overall change in philos-
ophy” in recruiting, Dillard told me, and while people at the Pentagon 
were quick to recognize the potential of the center to revolutionize army 
recruiting strategies, recruiters entrenched in the system of the hard 
sell and the cold call were often less willing to change.
I was told that one of the primary reasons for locating the aec in the 
Philadelphia area was that army demographic research had indicated 
that approximately one third of all army recruits came from within a 
ﬁfty- nautical- mile radius of an existing army base. This, combined with 
the fact that the army has traditionally garnered low recruiting num-

the full-spectrum soft sell 
105
bers from urban areas, led to the consideration of sites in Baltimore, 
Albuquerque, Fresno, Chicago, and Philadelphia as possible locations 
for the aec. The Franklin Mills Mall was eventually chosen for its access 
to public transportation as well as the ethnic and class diversity of its 
shoppers. Locations like Philadelphia’s King of Prussia Mall, where 
“everyone is rich and preppy,” and other malls that “aren’t as nice,” 
were ruled out.14
Though recruiting was, by all measures, an end goal at the aec, as a 
pilot project the center integrated data collection goals for market 
research, in addition to an overarching goal of repositioning the army 
as a “community- building” organization. The data collection portion of 
the aec’s mission was often left unsaid or implied by its representatives, 
though it arguably constituted the most important part of the aec’s 
activities in terms of long- term proof- of- concept measuring and bud-
geting for future aec- like projects. Unless a person provided speciﬁc 
permission during registration, personal information was not used to 
contact individuals for the purposes of recruitment. Instead, informa-
tion was collected for demographic mapping of the sets of interests that 
various groups of visitors brought to the aec. Each visitor who logged 
on to a computer was required to complete a set of several simple ques-
tions, composed by Wardynski himself, for the purposes of collecting 
“actionable information.” This information was collected and analyzed 
for marketing and event planning at the aec and for “learn[ing] more 
about how the army may further adapt technology to harness the power 
of the information age to support the recruiting mission” (U.S. Congress 
2010, 318). In the event that the soft sell proved to be an effective and 
desirable strategy for military recruitment, this corpus of data was 
intended to be leveraged in the design of future, more permanent Army 
Experience Centers across the United States.
In addition to these long- term goals for setting up additional aecs 
nationwide— goals that have yet to be realized— the most commonly 
stated goals of the aec by its representatives involved “community build-
ing.” This was not mere rhetoric, either, but instead a central component 
of an emerging strategy of rebranding the U.S. Army to the American 
public as a constructive, rather than destructive, social force that pro-
vides positive “opportunities” for individuals and groups. Al Flood, the 

106 the full-spectrum soft sell
aec’s Ignited director, explained these twin recruitment and “commu-
nity building” goals of the aec by stating that “our mission here is to 
make people in the area, number one, aware of their army and in par-
ticular of the active duty army. And also to really increase their aware-
ness of the opportunities that exist in the army. Career opportunities, 
educational opportunities. [ . . . ] If people walk in here and they leave, 
if nothing else, with having a better appreciation of what the army does 
and for what the people in the army do and the sacriﬁces they make— 
mission accomplished.”
One of the most noteworthy aspects of the aec that I witnessed during 
my on- site ﬁeldwork there, and afterward through my continued engage-
ment with the center through its email updates and online presence, 
was its capability and willingness to regularly organize well- attended 
public events that appealed to young adults. While some of these events 
contained explicit military connections and themes, many of them did 
not. Some of the major events sponsored and produced by the aec 
included monthly movie nights for screening ﬁlms (e.g., Blackhawk 
Down, Twilight: New Moon, Terminator: Salvation, Avatar); visits from 
professional athletes (e.g., Philadelphia Phillies 2008 World Series cham-
pion pitcher Brad Lidge); regular video game tournaments for a variety 
of games (e.g., Call of Duty: World at War, halo 3 odst, Madden nfl 
’10); three- on- three basketball tournaments; a Christmas and a “Christ-
mas in July” charity clothing drive; a Halloween Thriller dance party 
that was an attempt to break a national record for the greatest number 
of simultaneous Thriller dancers; and the sponsorship of Philadelphia 
School District– wide events such as the Asian/Paciﬁc Islander Heritage 
Month Senior Leadership Forum, and similar events during Black His-
tory Month in February and Women’s History Month in March.
Something clearly was at work at the aec beyond (stereo)typical “hard 
sell” army recruitment efforts, which are usually concerned with meet-
ing quotas and ﬁlling seats for basic training. Beatrice Jauregui (2015) 
describes articulations made by “community- building” programs and 
venues such as the aec as manifestations of a shift in focus of the army’s 
conceptualizations of soldier “ﬁtness.” This pseudoholistic model of sol-
dier ﬁtness extends beyond soldiers themselves, situating soldier fam-
ilies and the broader “community” as subjects of army programs. Such 

the full-spectrum soft sell 
107
programs, speciﬁcally the aec and the Comprehensive Soldier Fitness 
program (launched in 2009), articulate a desire on the part of the army 
“to demonstrate that it creates good citizens as moral subjects, not only 
by putting them through the soldier- making machine, but also by entreat-
ing them to share their strength through direct and routinized interac-
tions with the community” (Jauregui 2015, 18– 19).
In operationalizing “the community” in this way, the aec successfully 
partnered with schools, and aec management actively worked to foster 
relationships with Philadelphia- area public schools and teachers. “We’ve 
been here long enough that high schools and high school teachers now 
contact us to come here for class trips,” Flood declared. Reserving the 
aec for school events was a simple matter, possible through the center’s 
website. Free transportation to and from the aec, along with event plan-
ning, was a simple process arranged by the on- site aec events coordi-
nator. Flood explained to me that these were part of
a long- term effort to get partnerships with educational outreach orga-
nizations, community outreach organizations. We’ve also tied in with 
a separate nonproﬁt to— believe it or not— conduct high school– level 
culinary arts competitions to simply showcase the high school stu-
dents who are participating in [alternative high school] programs. 
[This] allows us to showcase their achievements and a path to a poten-
tial future career that they’ve already started on. But it also allows us 
the opportunity to bring in a member of the United States Army culi-
nary arts team and say, “Hey, did you know that you could be a mas-
ter chef in the army?” “What? That’s crazy!” “No, it’s not!” We have 
actual master chefs in the army, so ultimately the message we send 
is, “Hey high school students, you’re doing great— keep it up. Con-
tinue to do what you’re doing. Make smart life decisions.”
This kind of contextual framing of events for high school students 
positions army enlistment as being the smartest life decision possible, 
especially for the mostly underprivileged youth who were already par-
ticipating in aec- sponsored educational programs. Further emphasizing 
such “life opportunities,” the aec partnered with phase 4 Learning Cen-
ter, an alternative high school program, to host daily high school courses 
taught within the aec’s networked and sleek Tactical Operations Center. 

108 the full-spectrum soft sell
During my on- site ﬁeldwork there, the majority of guests present at the 
aec during working hours on weekdays were phase 4 high school stu-
dents, taking classes and using technology made available to them by 
the army. phase 4 recognizes the precariousness of many of their stu-
dents, and its funders indicate that many come from low- income fami-
lies.15 Given this embeddedness of phase 4 within the aec, it is not 
surprising that a higher- than- average rate of 10 percent of graduating 
phase 4 students planned to undertake military service.16
After the aec ﬁnished its two years of operation, its director Al Flood 
also transitioned to become the phase 4 regional vice president for the 
Philadelphia area. Given these and other explicit military connections,17 it 
is difficult not to see the partnerships between the aec and educational 
institutions as being an unambiguous conduit for guiding at- risk youth 
toward the military. Just as the distinction between the civilian and sol-
dier is at least temporarily eroded and deemphasized at the aec, the tran-
sition between these educational and soldierly spheres of experience is 
made easy and almost commonsensical by the institutional relationships 
that are fostered between the aec, schools, and community organizations.
The educational partnerships at the aec are framed as “life opportu-
nities” that transition individuals along a path of career success toward 
an optimistic future, but at their core these relationships between the 
army and “the community” deliberately exploit a class and racial system 
of structural inequalities, which provides few attractive alternatives for 
employment or advancement besides military service to low- income 
youth of color. In this sense the aec is a clear manifestation of Deleuze’s 
control societies, in which “the family, the school, the army, the factory 
are no longer distinct analogical spaces” (1992, 6). The formation of 
military subjects— militarization— no longer happens only at the mili-
tary base or on the battleﬁeld (wherever that may be), but now happens 
across institutions and in less institutionalized settings such as state 
fairs, air shows, Thriller dance parties, and three- on- three basketball 
tournaments. Managing the aec, Al Flood told me, “is kind of like own-
ing the ﬁrst McDonald’s, or working at the ﬁrst McDonald’s. You know 
it’s going to be an amazing thing, but you know some days are going to 
be really, really hard and other days are not.” Later, after the aec hosted 
an “Asian/Paciﬁc Islander Heritage Month Senior Leadership Forum” 

the full-spectrum soft sell 
109
for local high school students, I overheard Flood ask an army recruiter, 
“How did the lunch line go today?” The recruiter replied, “We need more 
turkey, less ham, no wraps” (see ﬁg. 14).
Militarization is a process of subject formation that is no longer uni-
directional and originating solely from a monolithic military state power, 
but one that is cybernetic— performed and incorporative of the feedback 
of its militarized subjects. This means that the participation of “the com-
munity” is a critical component of processes of militarization in the 
twenty- ﬁrst century. This also means that even those who seek to oppose 
militarizing tendencies sometimes cannot escape its logics.
Critics and Protesters
The vae and aec were both lightning- rod venues that drew signiﬁcant 
crowds of protesters. Part of the reason for the vehemence of protest 
stemmed from a perceived trivialization of war through its representa-
tion in a digital, game- like context. “War is not a game,” was an often- 
repeated phrase during these protest events, which were well attended 
(and often organized) by members of the organization Veterans for Peace 
and allied antiwar groups. For example, a representative from Veterans 
for Peace declared in a public statement that “massacring people on a 
screen I don’t think is good for young people. It gives a distorted mes-
sage about what the Army is doing today.” Another representative added, 
“We don’t want to come across as criticizing the Army. Many of us have 
seen combat and have been decorated. But this thing uses violence to 
seduce young people into enjoying a very false depiction of war” (O’Mal-
ley 2008). Such strong reactions were bound up in an array of issues 
stretching beyond the strong antiwar stance of Veterans for Peace. They 
stemmed in part from a profound fear and misunderstanding of the 
emergent medium of video games, a fear that has historically accompa-
nied the emergence of other new media such as television and radio 
(Jenkins 2004, 2005).
At both the aec and vae protest organizations like Veterans for Peace 
took on a militarized logic of their own by privileging the experiences 
of former soldiers as being a more valid basis upon which antiwar pro-
test might be organized.18 Brian, a vae employee, saw a certain level of 
disingenuousness in the justiﬁcations of protesters, asserting to me that

110 the full-spectrum soft sell
so much of society— American society speciﬁcally— is incredibly mil-
itarized, but we don’t see it. You can hang out and watch the History 
Channel and that might not bother you, but it’s all basically war. You 
could write a whole thesis on sports and militarization in the United 
States, but for some reason [we don’t see it]. For example, the vae 
goes to a lot of air shows, and air shows to me have always been mil-
itary stuff, where you’re ﬂexing your military muscle, you’re showing 
off these machines that are designed to murder people, basically. 
And that’s ﬁne if you want to boil it down to that. But what’s inter-
esting is that at the Cleveland Air Show every year we have a group 
of protesters [who are mostly military veterans] that is very anti- vae. 
They’re really confused, though, in the sense that they’ll say that the 
air show is just “a celebration of American aviation,” but what we’re 
doing [at the vae] is so indicative of the militarization of American 
culture and how bad [the United States is] going down like Rome. 
They don’t see it, it’s like the forest from the trees thing. America is 
completely militarized in so many ways, but so is most of Western 
culture. It’s so easy to ﬁnd something like the vae and put your thumb 
on it, but it’s such a bigger societal issue than just the vae. [ . . . ] I 
think with protesters like that, to go after something really big like 
this is the easy way out— to say that this is big and evil and it’s going 
to hurt people.
While Brian saw the positions of some protesters as duplicitous, in 
the sense that the vae was being singled out at the expense of a broader 
possible critique of cultural militarization in the United States, other 
employees at the vae expressed different kinds of vocal and negative 
reactions against organized protesters. “I’ve heard about the horror sto-
ries of protesters showing up,” a vae subject matter expert and former 
soldier told me, “but I really hope I don’t have to deal with them. I 
wouldn’t get angry with them, I wouldn’t react. I’d let the media people 
deal with them, but I don’t believe that people should protest [the vae].” 
Antiwar protest, I was told, was unpatriotic. Notably, this extreme ideo-
logical position was articulated only by enlisted or former soldiers. Other 
smes were more even- handed, and asserted that the essence of the prob-
lem was in imparting the proper army- mediated interpretation to visi-
tors: “Protesters think this game is here to entice children and make it 

the full-spectrum soft sell 
111
seem like killing is glamorous, but smes are here to make sure that it’s 
not interpreted in that way.”
Brian, who had no military background, explained to me that this 
kind of interpretation was exactly how he imagined America’s Army 
when he ﬁrst heard about the game when he was in high school. In his 
mind’s eye he saw “guys in an office manically planning out how they 
are going to get guys in the army. And after working with [the vae] and 
doing it for so long I don’t think it’s that at all. It’s an honest, sincere 
effort to put people in the army. It’s not this sort of Orwellian, vindictive 
thing where they are just trying to trick people into joining the army, 
which I think is something that is very easy for people to think. [ . . . ] 
In my experience, it’s not like that.”
This realization, combined with Brian’s interest in Noam Chomsky’s 
writings on media, propaganda, and politics (e.g., Herman and Chomsky 
2002) created a lot of “cognitive dissonance” for him in his line of work. 
“You know,” he told me, “I had this super left- wing newspaper that I ran 
for a long time in college, and I never thought in a million years that I 
would be working for the army in any capacity, let alone promoting it 
in this way.” Brian spoke candidly about how he
was thinking about what Chomsky would think about something like 
[the vae]. I think it’s almost arguable that if he were sitting here, he 
would say that my reaction to it now is exactly why it works so well— 
because it doesn’t bother me anymore. And that’s where propaganda 
actually works. [The vae] is propaganda, but so is that Chevy display 
over there [across from the vae at the Indiana State Fair]. Propaganda 
used to not be a bad word until it got associated with Nazism. So pro-
paganda is propaganda and the army is just as much a corporation 
as any other entity out here— that’s why it is always at events like this 
[state fair].
Here Brian equates contemporary corporate marketing with military 
marketing, calling both forms of “propaganda.” This underscores how 
the corporate, military, and other institutional sectors appear to be 
increasingly overlapping. While “propaganda” might have negative con-
notations if associated with the military, Brian implied, it is not quite so 
bad if similar marketing methods are used simply to sell products to 

112 the full-spectrum soft sell
consumers in a commercial context. Brian was not particularly disturbed 
by what he saw as being the selling of the army brand— “just as much 
a corporation as any other entity out there”— at venues like the vae and 
the aec.
Although “propaganda” and “recruitment tool” were explicitly avoided 
phrasings by the marketing teams for America’s Army, the vae, and the 
aec, employees readily admitted that their products could be interpreted 
as being such, including Wardynski himself (Chaplin and Ruby 2005, 
219). One America’s Army producer acknowledged to me that “one per-
son’s ‘messaging,’ of course, is another person’s ‘propaganda.’” However 
I use the term “propaganda” with caution and highlight it here simply 
because it was part of a variety of indigenous, colloquial explanations 
articulated by employees of the Army Game Project regarding how they 
viewed America’s Army and its franchise products. Several, like Brian, 
were forthright in their opinion that what they were doing was, in some 
form, the production of propaganda.
Brian’s reﬂexivity concerning his position within the Army Game Proj-
ect was a complex one that can become lost in the polarizing news reports 
and academic criticisms that pit the military against protesters and the 
processes of militarization against critical reﬂection concerning those 
processes. A comment made by an Ignited employee during a brain-
storming session for the Army Experience Center media outreach plans 
that “we need to co- op and enlist the anti- recruiting movement to become 
a part of our movement” indicates that critical reﬂection sans outright 
opposition, such as that exhibited by Brian, might be precisely the goal 
of the soft sell.
For this reason I think that the interpretations of protesters at the vae 
and the aec were grounded in legitimate concerns, which became obfus-
cated through their consistent viliﬁcation of video games as a medium. 
When I met John Grant, a Vietnam veteran, journalist, and activist in 
Philadelphia against the aec, he expressed to me his concern that “these 
pawns, these kids, need some alternative information. A lot of people in 
the movement say, ‘Oh, we’re going to go to the Army Experience Center 
and we’re going to shut it down, shut it down!’ Well, I’m more realistic. 
It’s an asymmetrical battle. I don’t think we’re going to shut it down, at 

the full-spectrum soft sell 
113
least not today.” Grant believed the Army Experience Center was a more 
insidious venue worthy of protest not because of its use of digital games, 
but rather because it is “ratcheted up” and has “reached another level” 
in terms of corporate branding. Like Brian, he also equated the kind of 
marketing being done at the aec and vae as essentially the commercial 
selling of a product (i.e., army enlistment). Unlike Brian, however, he 
was particularly disturbed by it: “It’s brand selling; it’s Disney. It’s selling 
militarism, the myth of militarism, the whole drive of militarism in the 
form of the brand of the army. It’s larger than just recruiting for the army. 
It’s, you know, next to Victoria’s Secret in the mall. It’s a part of culture. 
You link it with entertainment, and it becomes something else.”
While the U.S. Army has consistently branded itself to potential 
recruits through previous tv advertising and recruiting campaigns, the 
explicit and unabashed coupling of the military to corporate “community- 
oriented” branding evident at the aec was, for Grant, something newly 
emergent and alarming. The army was overstepping its institutionally 
delimited boundaries, ever more ﬂuid and porous in the control societ-
ies. Grant understood a critical need for alternative messaging formats 
and recounted to me his idea to set up “next to the aec something called 
the ‘Peace Experience Center.’” His concept was uncannily analogous 
to the real experiences recounted to me earlier by Tommy Rieman, and 
it perhaps reﬂected some of his own post- Vietnam experiences as a 
returning soldier:
john grant: One game I [had an idea for] is a day in the life of a 
ptsd Iraq vet. He’s going to school, and a cop gives him a ticket 
for his vehicle inspection being overdue— the “ﬂeas of life,” as 
Samuel Beckett called it, that everybody goes through. [It 
focuses on] some poor kid who’s been sent to Iraq or Afghani-
stan and who is going through all these horrendous things. We 
know the whole history of post- traumatic stress and repeated 
tours. What’s it like to go through a day [for him after returning 
home]? And a video game would be perfect . . . The possibilities 
are endless about the game that you could do to educate a kid 
as to the realities of what it is like.

114 the full-spectrum soft sell
robertson allen: The military is actually making ptsd games 
[to help rehabilitate] ptsd victims [see Allen 2015; Halpern 
2008; McLay 2012].
jg: They are? Interesting. Well, obviously, why not? It’s like the 
psychiatrists they have in Iraq and in places— which is good, 
I’m not saying it is bad— but they’re like the industrial psychol-
ogists on the line of a Ford plant or something. The point is to 
get you back on the line, [ . . . ] not to address all of the prob-
lems that you really have, which is part of being on that 
goddamn line in the ﬁrst place.
Grant’s comments highlight with mordant irony how games and sim-
ulations now participate as an active agent in the recruitment, training, 
and rehabilitation of soldiers, and are present at every level in soldiers’ 
life- cycle experiences as critical elements in structuring the labor of 
post- Fordist war. My ﬁeldwork also reveals that the deployment of video 
game technology for military recruitment purposes is not without ironic 
moments, as when I witnessed army recruiters encouraging teenagers 
to play Guitar Hero to Rage Against the Machine’s song “Killing in the 
Name” on the Xbox 360 out of the back of a Hummer parked in front of 
the vae.19 The song’s concluding mantra (“Fuck you, I won’t do what 
you tell me!”), censored for the game, is Zack de la Rocha’s powerful 
and emotional retort to institutional state power and violence. Indeed, 
much of the video game industry thrives and proﬁts from the commod-
itization of irony, a new tactic of the soft sell. If anything, these moments 
indicate that the military’s appropriation of games will continue to be 
a nexus for continuing important conversations about the consumption 
of war, the recruitment for the labor of war, and the role of digital tech-
nologies in the perpetuation of virtual soldiering.

115
5
Complicating the Military Entertainment Complex
The theorists of the new U.S. empire have not focused on two 
important aspects of the institutions that produce its military power: 
their diversity and complexity and their incompetence and inade-
quacy to the tasks given them. . . . [D]espite the perception that the 
military is uniﬁed and coherent, its projects are and long have been 
often as plural, political, and contested as the projects of other arms  
of the state.
catherine lutz, “Empire Is in the Details”
I have this theory: You show me a functional family and I’ll show you a 
family that’s hiding something really well.
erich iveans, [Dev]Pye, former America’s Army producer, personal 
interview
Origin Stories
On the other side of the continent from the aec in my travels to the 
various organizations connected to the Army Game Project, I found 
myself leading an impromptu discussion at a long conference table in 
Los Angeles, surrounded by several men whom I had just met who per-
formed central roles in the design and implementation of both the aec 
and the vae. All were employees of Ignited, the marketing agency for 
America’s Army. “I’m sure you’ve heard the story of Colonel Wardynski,” 
one was telling me, “who saw his sons playing video games and thought 
that it was a much better venue to start speaking to the youth of Amer-
ica. So he went and banged on a lot of doors to get funding for the pro-
gram and was eventually able to get the funding to create the game 

116 the military entertainment complex
itself, which debuted at e3 [the Electronic Entertainment Expo] in 2002. 
It was a phenomenal success; everybody thought that because it was 
coming from the army it was going to be cheap.” Like Athena springing 
from Zeus’s head, America’s Army comes packaged and fully developed 
in this origin story, the product of an extraordinary individual who, 
through his innovation and unrelenting determination, singlehandedly 
conceived and produced his breakthrough product through sheer force 
of mental will.
This fable was often repeated in multiple versions, as the oral and 
written mythology of the project proliferated across multiple institu-
tional, personal, and literary channels. Roger Stahl, for example, writes 
that “America’s Army is the brainchild of Lt. Col. Casey Wardynski . . . 
who hatched the idea in 1999, the year when recruitment hit a low mark. 
Wardynski recognized both the signiﬁcance of video games in his own 
sons’ lives and the need to tap the market for technologically savvy 
recruits” (2010, 109). Zhan Li and Tim Lenoir also separately call it 
Wardynski’s “brainchild” (see Lenoir 2008; Li 2003, 12). Phillip Bossant, 
former art director and executive producer of the game, noted that “Col-
onel Wardynski recognized and had his own epiphany that appealing 
to the young means that you have to appeal to the young in ways [with 
which] they are familiar.” Heather Chaplin and Aaron Ruby likewise 
write, “In 1999 . . . Colonel Wardynski had an epiphany” (2004, 214). 
Mark Long, former ceo of Army Game Project subcontractor Zombie 
Studios, called Wardynski “a real maverick in the Pentagon. He’s a total 
outside- the- box thinker and an economist so he has a [ . . . ] great engi-
neering sensibility but at the same time is deeply practical. And when 
he ﬁrst proposed that the army take some tiny fraction of their huge 
recruiting budget and make a video game out of it I’m sure it was like, 
are you insane? But it turned out to be the best money they’ve ever spent. 
It made the army more relevant and more modern to recruits.”
Though these statements are certainly truthful, they underscore the 
inﬂuence and power of an individual at the expense of both historical 
perspective and the whole constellation of other entities that have con-
tributed to the Army Game Project. They imply that America’s Army 
began out of the blue, without precedent. While Wardynski was certainly 
the single most inﬂuential ﬁgure in bringing about the America’s Army 

the military entertainment complex 
117
franchise and deserves the credit such origin stories give him for envi-
sioning a product and leading it to its completion and evolution, 
Wardynski is just one person representing one institution within the 
Army Game Project. Though the project could not have unfolded the 
way it did without Wardynski’s involvement, the connection between 
the military and gaming was a logical one to make within the U.S. mil-
itary’s evolving cultural milieu of the late nineties and had, in many 
ways, already been made. America’s Army is part of a long history of 
war gaming that stretches back centuries.
The repetitive, similar statements highlighted above regarding 
Wardynski and America’s Army point to how this war gaming history 
has been thoroughly traced and standardized through a variety of aca-
demic and journalistic sources, to such an extent that it can be dubbed 
a canonical history of war games, full of obligatory genuﬂections that 
highlight through detailed descriptions a series of technologies, insti-
tutions, and products that have appeared over the course of the past 
thirty years and more.1 Like the origin story of America’s Army, this 
canonical history has had a tendency to reproduce a story of determin-
istic historical progression, to the point in which the history of war 
games reads nearly the same in all of these texts, regardless of the 
writer. (To put it in video gaming ﬁrst- person shooter jargon, this kind 
of history is “on rails.”) Such historical formulations are problematic 
because they remove a sense of contingency— which is present in all 
human relationships and organizations— and instead tend to present 
history as being largely determined through new technologies. In this 
kind of deterministic history, institutions are presented as being parts 
of a smooth “network” of interoperable components— individuals, orga-
nizations, technologies, and protocols— progressing harmoniously and 
logically. Individuals move seamlessly in their jobs between companies 
and organizations, shake hands and make deals, and new technologies 
just materialize.
Due largely to the work of military think- tank theorists John Arquilla 
and David Ronfeldt, this “network” metaphor for explaining social and 
institutional relationships has gained signiﬁcant clout over the past 
decade in military circles. Arquilla and Ronfeldt popularized the idea 
that the U.S. military needs to operate more like a network with substi-

118 the military entertainment complex
tutable, redundant parts, and less like the hierarchically structured orga-
nization that it is (2001). In order to ﬁght effectively a network of 
terrorist cells, the thinking goes, a conventional military must also oper-
ate as if it were a network, with independently acting components that 
can come to cooperate— or “swarm”— together as a uniﬁed whole when 
necessary, but quickly disseminate back into untraceable, unidentiﬁable 
units. The U.S. military has since taken up these tenets of “netwar” the-
ory and applied them to an array of strategic, organizational, and doc-
trinal procedures, as well as cyberwarfare initiatives (Steele 2001; U.S. 
Department of the Army 2007).
Critical scholars also drew on the network concept, theorizing the 
network as a new model for businesses, politics, structures of power, 
and emergent political movements taking shape in response to these 
structures of power. In their seminal volume Empire, Michael Hardt and 
Antonio Negri characterize this new model of the network as represent-
ing “the passage to the informational economy, [in which] the assembly 
line has been replaced by the network as the organizational model of 
production. . . . Production sites can thus be deterritorialized and tend 
toward a virtual existence, as coordinates in the communication net-
work. As opposed to the old vertical industrial and corporate model, 
production now tends to be organized in horizontal network enterprises” 
(2000, 295– 96). Such theoretical networks are seamless, virtual, and 
composed of autonomous nodes working toward a common goal. Such 
a pure network responds to crisis and incorporates whatever seeks to 
harm it into its system.
The network concept is important because it has structured how aca-
demic writings have couched their descriptions of the military enter-
tainment complex and the canonical history of war games. This includes 
academic and popular descriptions of America’s Army, the development 
of which was a watershed moment in this history of the relationship 
between entertainment and military sectors in the United States— and 
indeed globally. While Arquilla and Ronfeldt are themselves careful to 
take into account the contingent nature of the network, their metaphor 
has contributed to the prevalence of deterministic top- down explana-
tions of the connections between military and entertainment in the lit-
erature. There is utility in this idealized model of a network, but it risks 

the military entertainment complex 
119
masking how actual, existing networks like the Army Game Project are 
much more disorganized and potentially prone to failure.
What follows is an attempt to recapture some of the messiness and 
historical contingencies that are quite often lost in exclusively canonical 
histories of war gaming, which rely on the language of “the network” 
and “the military entertainment complex” as shorthand for complex 
relationships. I draw on some of the oral and written narratives of approx-
imately ten to ﬁfteen (mostly anonymous) game developers, primary 
and secondary textual sources, and my own ethnographic experience.2 
Like all business endeavors, America’s Army has always been a project 
that is very much subject to the individuals and institutions that com-
pose it. At multiple points in its history the project barely survived implo-
sion under the heavy weight of individual rivalries and institutional 
politics, and the feasibility of the project was very much in doubt. It was 
never inevitable that America’s Army would be an initial success, become 
a franchise enduring more than ten years, or even be published.
A Short History of War Games
War games and simulations are not a new phenomenon, and their mod-
ern origins can be traced as least as far as the early nineteenth century. 
The games chess and go are abstract representations of war that have 
traditionally been given anecdotal authority regarding their efficacy in 
the visualization of combat, but the modern practice of war gaming had 
its origins in the game Kriegsspiel, which was designed to train officers 
to envision battles as being constituted by complex but manageable 
units. Created by a Prussian officer in the aftermath of Napoleon’s mil-
itary ascendancy and eventual defeat, Kriegsspiel captured the German 
public imagination in the mid- nineteenth century, popular both as a 
leisure activity and military method for understanding war. This math-
ematical simulation of combat and casualties eliminated from the game 
many of the contingencies common to actual war, reducing battle to a 
Malthusian calculus of “cost- beneﬁt analysis” (Halter 2006, 40– 46). It 
proved to be an efficient mode of training, and similar war- gaming prac-
tices came to inform the strategies and theory of warfare in other West-
ern European nations and in the United States.
The application and improvement of the kind of war gaming intro-

120 the military entertainment complex
duced by Kriegsspiel continued through the twentieth century and inﬂu-
enced the way the U.S. military and other European states envisioned, 
planned, and taught war strategy to officers. Nonmilitary populations 
continued to play war games concurrently as a form of entertainment. 
H. G. Wells’s book Little Wars: A Game for Boys from Twelve Years of Age 
to Hundred and Fifty and for That More Intelligent Sort of Girls Who Like 
Boys’ Games and Books (1913) is essentially a set of rules for playing with 
toy soldiers, reﬂecting the deeply masculine and often sexist roots of 
war gaming that remain to this day.
In the 1950s and 1960s, board- game designers of war games, such as 
Charles Roberts and James Dunnigan, built on these previously sporadic 
iterations of war games to develop a full- ﬂedged genre of commercial 
war gaming that made a general transition from the board game to the 
computer around the early 1980s. War gaming for entertainment was 
largely conﬁned to a small group of hobbyists until the commercializa-
tion of the home computer, but by the time of Eisenhower’s address in 
1961 (see chapter 1), aspects of military war gaming had already migrated 
to the giant and expensive computers that had been built in military- 
funded research laboratories across the United States.
As a medium of the computer, video games originated from within 
this military domain. Most video game historians trace the beginnings 
of the medium back to defense research projects at Brookhaven National 
Laboratories, mit, and Stanford in the late 1950s and early 1960s. The 
commercial industry did not begin growing until the 1970s, with the 
fabled game Pong and Magnavox’s Odyssey game system. Atari’s domi-
nance during the 1970s and early 1980s— the “Golden Age” of video 
games— was followed by the North American industry’s dramatic crash 
in 1983, which provided Japanese companies the opportunity for ascen-
dancy in the industry through Nintendo and Sega through the 1980s and 
early 1990s. For the most part the commercial video game industry and 
the U.S. military interacted minimally with one another until the 1990s.
Through the ups and downs of the early commercial video game indus-
try, the U.S. military came to more regularly use simulations in the train-
ing of speciﬁc skills for specialized military roles, such as piloting unique 
aircraft. simnet, the U.S. military’s $140 million distributed simulator 
networking project developed during the mid- 1980s and functional by 

the military entertainment complex 
121
the late- 1980s, was a watershed project in its ability to network a huge 
number of combat units at theater- level operations within an expansive 
virtual environment that simulated troop movements and combat. Mark 
Long, who was involved in the production of America’s Army, recounted 
how his knowledge and experience with simnet contributed to his desire 
to develop video games and virtual reality technologies. “simnet,” he 
told me, “was actually how I got into video games” after leaving the 
army as a major in 1988:
Until about 1985– 87, simulators were multimillion dollar devices that 
were one- of- a- kind things built by a small number of companies. And 
they were really only useful for guys like pilots who had really per-
ishable skills. You can’t really practice crashing or ejecting from a 
plane— you need to have a simulator to do it. But as simulation tech-
nology began to get cheaper there was a colonel at darpa (Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency) who had the idea that you could 
network them and that these simulators could be valuable to guys 
who drove tanks, not just airplanes. [ . . . ] The real value in this sys-
tem was that it produced collaborative behavior— it wasn’t about the 
quality of the graphics or learning how to engage with the simulator, 
because they had better simulators for that. It was more intercom-
munication between the teams and tank crews and that kind of thing. 
[ . . . ] And just like America’s Army, they started adding other systems 
[ . . . ] and as early as 1990 you could be in a navy simulator and ﬂy 
your aircraft off a simulated aircraft deck and land it at an army refu-
eling location. They created this great interoperability. And then the 
Gulf War happened. This isn’t widely known, but a lot of armor offi-
cers attributed their unbelievable prowess on the battleﬁeld to the 
fact that they had run simulations over and over again. They brought 
simnet simulators, in fact, over to Kuwait and these guys built a real 
database of the desert and were training in that way. And at that point 
I think the army realized that they had a strategic technology that 
gave us this enormous advantage. In the early nineties there was a 
huge growth in simulation.
Long himself was a part of this initial growth in military simulation 
through the 1980s and 1990s, researching virtual reality technologies 

122 the military entertainment complex
at Princeton and the University of Washington, completing military con-
tracting work for America’s Army and other projects, and securing a $52 
million contract from Hasbro to develop a head- mounted device that 
never went to market.
The 1993 release of Doom, the popular ﬁrst- person shooter (fps) game 
that came to deﬁne the genre, was a key moment in the contingent rela-
tionship between the military and commercial gaming. U.S. Senate hear-
ings on video game violence launched by Joseph Lieberman and Herb 
Kohl focused on what were then seen as graphic depictions of violence 
in the game. The in- game violence, which most gamers nowadays would 
understand as being unrealistically cartoonish, did not bother the U.S. 
Marines, who by 1997 were using their own ad hoc modiﬁcations of 
Doom II to create Marine Doom, an unofficial combat simulator. Through 
the creation of more institutionalized arrangements, a symbiotic rela-
tionship between the commercial video game industry and military sim-
ulation became more fully realized throughout the 1990s and the 
following decade, with the private sector driving low- cost technological 
innovations. The most visible (and canonized) institution symbolizing 
this relationship is the Institute for Creative Technologies (ict), designer 
of the officer combat training simulator Full Spectrum Warrior, its com-
mercial Xbox spinoffs, and sequels. The ict, as a University of Southern 
California (usc) research institute, draws on expertise in academia, the 
military, Hollywood, and the gaming industry to produce a variety of 
experimental technologies for soldier training in “cultural awareness” 
and ptsd rehabilitation, among other research initiatives.3
The groundwork for America’s Army and multiple venues of cooper-
ation between the Department of Defense and the video game enter-
tainment industry lies in this broader context of the emerging military 
entertainment complex through the 1990s. A 1997 report generated by 
the National Research Council’s Computer Science and Telecommuni-
cations Board entitled Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertainment 
and Defense (nrc 1997) gave structure to this relationship, which had 
previously consisted of relatively short- term associations between spe-
ciﬁc military and commercial entities. This publication detailed future 
simulation requirements for the Department of Defense and identiﬁed 
ways in which the video game entertainment industry could contribute 

the military entertainment complex 
123
to the development of these requirements. Games and simulations were 
deemed important in the report due to their relatively low costs, their 
ability to handle many users simultaneously for joint training exercises, 
and their potential affordances for developing both new tactics and 
weapons systems (nrc 1997, 1).
What the Modeling and Simulation report anticipated in 1997 regard-
ing the increased connectivity between the entertainment and defense 
contracting industry has to a large degree taken place— perhaps partly 
as a self- fulﬁlling prophecy. The long- term agenda described in Model-
ing and Simulation articulated military requirements for the develop-
ment of new technologies that would
 a) increase immersion in simulated environments through 
storytelling and the selective use of sensory details (sight, 
sound, smell, etc.);
 b) provide capabilities for high- speed networks connecting 
thousands of computers;
 c) implement standards for interoperability, enabling different 
software and hardware programs to work with one another and 
bypassing proprietary constraints common in media industries;
 d) facilitate the quick production and reuse of computer- 
generated assets in simulations while also developing artiﬁcial 
intelligence that could learn by experience; and
 e) provide software and hardware tools to enable the easy produc-
tion of simulated environments themselves.
Some of these requirements have met with greater success than others. 
For example capabilities for high- speed networks are no longer a major 
problem due to the ever- increasing allocation of internet bandwidth, 
but the implementation of believable artiﬁcial intelligence into large- 
scale training simulations continues to be a difficult, but not insurmount-
able, issue.
Modeling and Simulation spends a good deal of time discussing the 
need to overcome the “cultural barriers” (i.e., differences in business 
practices) between the commercial entertainment industry and the mil-
itary; this preoccupation is also reﬂected in other texts from the same 

124 the military entertainment complex
era, such that co- written by journalist J. C. Herz and military simula-
tions expert Michael Macedonia (2002). Many of these differences 
involve issues of production scheduling (typically much longer in mili-
tary contracting), structures in business models and proﬁt making, long- 
term research goals, and intellectual property. A key perceived “cultural 
barrier” highlighted in the report is in the “markedly different objectives” 
between military and entertainment simulations. “In entertainment the 
driving actor is excitement and fun . . . . Unrealistically dangerous situ-
ations, exaggerated hazardous environments, and multiple lives and 
heroics are acceptable, even desirable, to increase excitement. Defense 
simulations, on the other hand, overwhelmingly stress realistic envi-
ronments and engagement situations. The interactions are serious in 
nature” (nrc 1997, 27, emphasis added). Published ﬁve years after this 
report, as the watershed game in the serious games movement America’s 
Army arguably changed this stark distinction between the fun and the 
serious, and demonstrated that a piece of military software can be both.
These signiﬁcant “cultural barriers” and differences between the 
defense simulation industry and the commercial video game industry 
have become less apparent in certain contexts as relationships become 
institutionalized through entities such as the ict, which was a direct 
result of the publication of the Modeling and Simulation report. The 
discourse of “cultural barriers” was present throughout the history of 
America’s Army as an indigenous explanation that both military person-
nel and developers provided about the causes of work conﬂicts between 
Army Game Project institutions. Such explanations point to larger issues 
outlined in previous chapters in regards to military efforts in drafting 
the cognitariat into its domain. While it is arguably an overly simplistic 
understanding, it highlights how separate elements of the theoretical 
“military entertainment complex” perceive themselves in relation to 
one another— not as a uniﬁed whole, but as a cosmos of separate cul-
tural spheres.
The Evolution of a Military Game
The Committee on Modeling and Simulation of the National Research 
Council, which published Modeling and Simulation (1997), was chaired 
by Mike Zyda, who is generally given credit for the composition of the 

the military entertainment complex 
125
report. Having made recommendations in the report for a framework 
sponsoring collaborations and connections between the entertainment 
and defense industries through an academic context, Zyda (then a pro-
fessor at the Naval Postgraduate School (nps) in Monterey, California) 
subsequently drafted a proposal for the creation of the Institute for Cre-
ative Technologies (ict) to address these recommendations. This pro-
posal was funded in 1999 by an initial $45 million grant and renewed 
in 2004 at $100 million, at the time the largest research grant ever 
received by the University of Southern California (usc). A well- funded 
and well- established institute, the ict went on to produce such games 
as Full Spectrum Warrior, which in its original noncommercial iteration 
was a military officer simulation trainer. Zyda, however, was not hired 
as the director of the ict once it became funded and, disgruntled by 
what he perceived as a betrayal, started his own research institution in 
2000 at the nps, called the moves (Modeling, Virtual Environments, 
and Simulation) Institute.4
These events occurred at about the same time as Wardynski’s fabled 
“epiphany” in army recruitment practices, and he was actively search-
ing for viable locations for the development of a video game project. 
Following discussions Wardynski and Zyda agreed that the Army Game 
Project would be suitable for moves and the nps, a research institution 
with primarily military officers pursuing master’s and doctoral degrees. 
“moves was just the sort of environment that Casey [Wardynski] 
needed,” a published America’s Army manuscript claims (Davis and 
Bossant 2004, 20). Officially beginning in May 2000, the project was 
coded “Operation Star Fighter” after The Last Starﬁghter (1984), a ﬁlm 
in which a boy, after scoring a perfect score on an arcade space game, 
is recruited by aliens to save the universe by piloting a real version of 
the game’s ship in a space war.5 The expertise of nps researchers such 
as professor Mike Capps (the original executive producer of America’s 
Army, who later became the president of game industry giant Epic 
Games) was “piped into the game,” and members of the development 
team visited nineteen army posts for the purposes of gathering refer-
ence material for implementation into the game (Davis and Bossant 
2004, 10– 11). Epic Games’ Unreal Engine 2 was licensed as crucial com-
mercial middleware for the game’s design (see chapter 3). This move 

126 the military entertainment complex
was critical to the game’s initial success, as versions of Unreal Engine 
form the basis for a great number of popular games and it is a develop-
ment tool with which both hard- core gamers and game developers are 
generally familiar.
When the project was progressing more slowly than anticipated, 
Zyda hired a cadre of game industry veterans who knew one another 
from their work at Electronic Arts (ea)— Alex Mayberry ([Dev]Abraxas, 
America’s Army creative director), Jesse McCree ([Dev]raygunn, Amer-
ica’s Army lead designer), and Phillip Bossant ([Dev]whatever, Amer-
ica’s Army art director)— to take on the role of team leaders for the 
project. (Mayberry and McCree later joined Blizzard Entertainment to 
become the lead game producer and lead level designer of the much- 
acclaimed World of Warcraft.) This cadre of leaders built a talented 
development team that consisted at its largest of twenty- eight mostly 
young and relatively inexperienced, but dedicated, civilian game devel-
opers. Their dual requirements were difficult but not insurmountable: 
They had to put together not merely a fun and compelling game, but 
one that advertised the U.S. Army in a way that would market potential 
army careers to players.
One individual was hired straight out of high school for his depth of 
knowledge in military weapons and game design. An America’s Army 
developer recalled this early development period at moves, explaining 
to me that when he ﬁrst came to the project “there was no real prece-
dent. Some of the people had [game] industry experience, but for most 
it was their ﬁrst gig. And they threw together an amazing piece of soft-
ware for 1.0, coming from where they were [and] trying to meet the 
requirements.” He echoed a sentiment that I heard repeated often to 
describe almost every period in the development history of America’s 
Army, saying that the work process was like “ﬂying by the seat of your 
pants.” Phillip Bossant also described this early period of the project as 
being “an intense time from December 2001 to July 2002. We basically 
rebuilt the game and started over. That’s not an ideal amount of time 
and there weren’t that many of us. It was a risky adventure; none of us 
knew if we could succeed or not.”
Despite these doubts, the game debuted in June 2002 at the Elec-
tronic Entertainment Expo (e3) to much pageantry and spectacle. It 

the military entertainment complex 
127
was released to the general public for pc gaming one month later, on 
July 4, as the very ﬁrst game to use the much- anticipated Unreal Engine 
2, which, among a whole slate of other improvements, featured improved 
graphical and rendering capabilities. America’s Army: Recon was the 
official title of version 1.0, and though it was met with initial skepticism 
by players, it proved many wrong. Michael “Ace” Abuchon ([Dev]Ace-
Killa), an early fan and volunteer beta tester of the game who later 
became its lead designer, did not expect anything, “because the army 
is good at making games— yeah, right! But it was the Unreal Engine 2, 
so it was interesting.” On the morning of its release, July 4, 2002, he 
went to buy the game Warcraft 3, which had been released the previ-
ous day, but before he installed that game he downloaded America’s 
Army: Recon 1.0. “And, funny enough, it was a week before I opened 
up Warcraft 3.”
The relatively small project that had begun under the auspices of a 
navy research institute and a West Point economic analysis center sud-
denly became headlines in the gaming industry. “With the success of 
America’s Army,” Ed Halter writes, “the real America’s Army had, for a 
moment, become video- game industry rock stars, at a time when that 
industry itself had taken a quantum leap into the mainstream conscious-
ness and entertainment business credibility” (2006, xvii). The sudden 
popularity took the development team by surprise. With the initial dif-
ﬁculties of putting together the America’s Army: Recon 1.0 release, they 
were happy to have survived. But what they were not prepared for were 
the kinds of “cultural barriers” in business practices that were described 
in Zyda’s Modelling and Simulation report and that they felt were becom-
ing more apparent. As Phillip Bossant put it, they still were unable to 
fully and “expertly live in two worlds at the same time— one foot in the 
entertainment industry, one foot in the government.”
For the next several years, America’s Army and the military came to 
deﬁne and dominate the emergent “serious games” industry, then the 
new buzzword in interactive entertainment, and the military contract-
ing sector effectively colonized much of the press and industry attention 
at expos such as e3, the Game Developers Conference, and the Serious 
Games Summit. This military takeover of the games industry was unam-
biguously portrayed at e3 2003, one year after the game’s release, as 

128 the military entertainment complex
actual army soldiers rappelled from helicopters hovering over the Los 
Angeles Convention Center and stormed through conference attendees 
into the building to “secure” it (Halter 2006, vii– viii). Indeed, a more 
generally militarized framework became more apparent throughout the 
United States at this time, particularly in the national broadcasting net-
works, as the invasion and occupation of Iraq unfolded through the 
news media in a spectacularly cinematic fashion (Stahl 2007). In 2003 
a study discovered that players of America’s Army used the game as a 
means to more closely draw an experiential connection to the invasion 
of Iraq, sometimes simultaneously playing the game while listening to 
news reports. Fan communities and clans of players, such as Christian 
groups, were appropriating the game in a variety of ways, adding through 
proselytization, protest, and a variety of special interest communities 
what game scholars call “emergent” behavior to the intended functions 
and original design of the game (Li 2003).
The development studio at moves continued releasing updates to the 
game on a semi- regular schedule. After Mike Capps left the team as 
executive producer following the release of version 1.0, Alex Mayberry 
was promoted to the position as executive producer/creative director 
of the team. Though they met quarterly with Wardynski and planned 
out each release at these meetings, no overarching long- term vision 
regarding the game’s development cycle was in place. Wardynski would 
provide feedback, give the stamp of approval, and provide general goals 
for the next release. “He would say things like, ‘We really want to get 
an anti- vehicular weapon, the at4 [in the game]. They’re about to launch 
the xm25, so we want to get that in.’ And we would say, ‘that’s going to 
cost this much,’ and we would end up with some list of features for the 
next release.”
The developers, however, came to realize that they needed a greater 
organizational structure with project scheduling. Army project manag-
ers from oema started giving the development team “feature creep” by 
insisting on extra features for upcoming releases without scheduling 
the features into the development workload or costs. Developers were 
subjected to army requirements that became moving targets, and it 
seemed to them that direction by Wardynski became increasingly 
“erratic.” This contributed to a generally antagonistic feeling in the office 

the military entertainment complex 
129
toward the army. Despite the organizational support provided by Zyda’s 
moves and the rock star status that the game had achieved following 
its initial release, the project was hopelessly underfunded and risked 
falling apart.
By October 2003, when they shipped America’s Army: Special Forces 
(version 2.0), the team was suffering from “army burnout” and “the 
army was deﬁnitely the bad guy at that time.” One anonymous game 
developer wrote in a forum that around this time the game had hit 
the third- ranking spot for total number of online players worldwide, 
and oema
started complaining about how we weren’t meeting their expecta-
tions. We began to read news stories interviewing Army personnel 
who talked about how they had built the game. The Navy started to 
get pissed at the Army because there was never any mention that the 
game was actually built within a Naval think- tank. A lot of political 
ﬁghts over the project broke out not only between the Army and the 
Navy, but within different divisions of the Army itself. When the proj-
ect was just a ﬂy- by- night rogue mission, no one paid much attention 
to it. Once the Army ﬁgured out that the game was the single most 
successful marketing campaign they’d ever launched (at one- third of 
1% of their annual advertising budget), we suddenly came under a 
very big microscope.6
The sentiment of disillusion was further enhanced by the game’s cadre 
of leaders, including executive producer Alex Mayberry, who by that 
time had “already moved on mentally.” Mayberry, art director Phillip 
Bossant, and lead designer Jesse McCree had approached the project 
as entrepreneurs and saw it as a transitional position for collecting a 
talented team to work on other non- army commercial game develop-
ment projects. Following the success of the initial release they began 
looking for ways to move the team into a new independent game devel-
opment company to be named Arsenal Interactive. In the fall of 2003 
the team had a “hell of a pipeline” and everybody knew their responsi-
bilities. “The vibe [of the studio] was moving toward wanting to move 
away from nps and become more commercialized. Alex and Jesse were 
planting the seeds in the team, and you could see it taking place.” The 

130 the military entertainment complex
studio began holding meetings about the entire team leaving to a new 
California location in either Bakersﬁeld or San Francisco. Mayberry and 
McCree began searching their game industry connections for startup 
funding “to set up a new company and basically walk out on the army.”
Rumors began circulating throughout the office that the army itself 
was looking for a new development team to replace the one at moves, 
and this additionally motivated the team to search actively for oppor-
tunities to partner with game publishers, especially Electronic Arts (ea) 
and Activision. Unbeknownst to either oema or moves, America’s Army 
artists were assigned projects to do work for both ea and Activision, “on 
Army computers and on Army time,” with one artist reportedly spend-
ing about three months of full- time work on a Wolfenstein game char-
acter prototype for publisher Activision. Another developer was 
reportedly doing level design for ea. “We had like three bids, and they 
all wanted us to do work for them to prove [our worth]. We had guys 
doing all kinds of work. [Someone else] was doing totally different work 
for a totally different game. We had a logo. We made a movie for Arse-
nal Interactive.”
The budding mutiny reached levels of absurdity that winter, when 
Wardynski was scheduled to visit the development studio for a quarterly 
America’s Army progress report. A developer had mistakenly scheduled 
a visit with Activision to discuss possibilities about startup funding for 
Arsenal Interactive at the exact time of Wardynski’s visit. While some 
developers were at the Hilton in Monterey, California, ﬁelding Activi-
sion, Wardynski was with others at the Hyatt next door. “The Army 
never knew, and the colonel left.”
Soon enough, however, the army did catch wind of the extracurric-
ular activities of the development team. On March 8, 2004, when the 
developers showed up to work, they discovered Wardynski there in the 
conference room, in full dress uniform— and “he never wears full dress 
uniform.” Accompanying Wardynski was his commanding officer, the 
Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Army, John McLaurin, along with 
several other army officers. Mayberry and McCree were ﬁred on the 
spot, and “of course the team just blows up, and gets all rowdy, and 
people started saying, ‘well I’m out too.’” Several developers voluntarily 
left, but most were convinced to stay on the project by Philip Bossant, 

the military entertainment complex 
131
who took over as the interim executive producer/art director. Bossant 
himself was planning on walking out as well, but Mayberry and McCree 
convinced him to stay in order to keep the team together, still with the 
dream of eventually setting up Arsenal Interactive by way of an intact 
team of America’s Army developers.
Although the legal ramiﬁcations of fraud were potentially severe, and 
“the colonel was really pissed off,” the army decided that it was in their 
best interest not to pursue additional punishment to the development 
team besides the top- level ﬁrings. A higher- level political battle center-
ing on America’s Army and involving the navy, army, and air force had 
been simmering since the previous summer. The fallout from this inter-
service rivalry resulted in the army announcing, at the same meeting, 
that they were moving development of the game away from the Naval 
Postgraduate School and moves, and setting up a new army- managed 
office at the nearby decommissioned base at Fort Ord.
Between January and April 2004, when America’s Army was being 
exhibited at the San Francisco Yerba Buena Center for the Arts’ exhibit, 
“Bang the Machine: Computer Gaming Art and Artifacts” (Chapman 
2004), a multilevel conﬂict between Wardynski’s oema and Zyda’s 
umbrella institution, the Naval Postgraduate School (nps), had come 
to a head. At the conﬂict’s center was the issue of publishing credit and 
publicity from the game, which the nps wished to share with the army. 
Wardynski and oema, however, did not want the navy to gain any press 
from its central role in developing an army game, as this would under-
mine marketing claims then being made about the product’s authentic-
ity as a game “designed, developed, and published by the U.S. Army.”
Earlier, in July 2003, the superintendent of the nps had told oema 
that if the navy school could not obtain any publicity from their involve-
ment in the Army Game Project, then Wardynski would have to ﬁnd 
another host. In the meantime, however, Wardynski encouraged Zyda 
to seek out other sources of income for the nps by building new military 
training tools that used material from America’s Army as spin- off tech-
nology to sell to other U.S. government entities. Wardynski pointed Zyda 
to the air force as a potential customer, and Zyda’s moves Institute at 
the nps created a convoy protection scenario, using America’s Army soft-
ware, for the air force to use as a soldier trainer. This move, however, 

132 the military entertainment complex
was deemed by auditors as an “augmentation of federal appropriations” 
from outside sources, without federal approval. Money allocated by the 
Department of Defense to the Army’s America’s Army project was ille-
gally used on the air force project by moves. Zyda reportedly did not 
realize the legal parameters of “augmentation” prior to taking on the 
air force project, and felt set up by Wardynski.
Wardynski later ﬁled a formal complaint regarding this partnership 
to the Department of Defense Office of Inspector General to investigate 
mismanagement of the Army Game Project by the moves. In a report 
published in 2005 the office found that the moves had “made 45 improper 
charges totaling nearly $500,000 to the Army Game Project and an Air 
Force Project,” “lacked the capability to perform a major portion of work 
on the project,” and had implemented management practices that had 
the “appearance of nepotism” (2005, i– ii). These factors, in addition to 
what appears to have been a developing personal conﬂict between 
Wardynski and Zyda, provided oema with a reason to remove its asso-
ciation with the moves and take complete control of (and credit for) 
the Army Game Project. When I interviewed him in the summer of 2006 
Mike Zyda was still discernibly bitter about the whole situation, inter-
spersing every sentence with a least a few obscenities when talking 
about that period. Zyda speculates that the air force project debacle was 
manufactured by Wardynski after the nps made it clear that the army 
would have to share credit for the development of America’s Army with 
the navy.
With the project now under its complete control, Wardynski’s oema 
began bringing in other entities and expanding the Army Game Project 
beyond its original parameters as an online pc game. The Fort Ord stu-
dio was renamed the America’s Army Public Applications (aapa), and 
began to share the game’s “assets”— units of game art, characters, weap-
ons, textures, particle effects, animations, and designs— with other new 
Army Game Project organizations. The air force project had shown that 
assets were cheaply reusable for other government and defense projects, 
compared to typical costs of ordering training software for operating 
weapons systems from large defense contractors. A private studio in 
Raleigh, North Carolina, began work on these types of military trainers, 
reusing America’s Army assets. A company called Virtual Heroes held 

the military entertainment complex 
133
the contract for what was known as America’s Army Government Appli-
cations (aaga). Yet another team at Picatinny Arsenal in New Jersey, 
called America’s Army Future Applications (aafa), began work on sim-
ulation trainers and weapons prototyping. “We had these three different 
organizations that were ostensibly to produce assets for each other,” 
one developer told me, “but they were producing at a different level of 
quality. The Picatinny guys were not artists.”
With the successful implementation of the Javelin Basic Skills Trainer, 
a cost- saving training system that simulated the expensive Javelin mis-
sile system (costing $86,000 per missile), a slate of other training sim-
ulators began development at these institutions, including one made 
for the U.S. Secret Service. One training simulation was developed in 
2005 in cooperation with the Sandia National Laboratories and the J.F.K. 
Special Warfare Center to train soldiers in cross- cultural communication 
with local civilians and “cultural awareness.” 7 Other products imple-
mented by the Army Game Project were intended to save money by 
reducing boot camp dropout rates (and added army costs) for soldiers 
by mentally preparing new recruits for rudimentary aspects of basic 
training and military life.8
The Army Game Project also executed a commercial partnership with 
video game publisher Ubisoft shortly after the move to Fort Ord. Under 
this agreement Ubisoft licensed the America’s Army title to build two 
totally separate games. The ﬁrst, for the Xbox and PlayStation 2, was 
America’s Army: Rise of a Soldier, developed by the private studio Secret 
Level and published for commercial release by Ubisoft in 2005. The 
game met with mixed reviews but was enough of a success to merit a 
sequel for the Xbox 360, America’s Army: True Soldiers, which was rushed 
through development and published by Ubisoft in 2007. True Soldiers 
received abysmal reviews, providing ample reason for Wardynski to can-
cel the partnership with Ubisoft following its release. Game developer 
Zombie Studios,9 data analytics and software distribution company Prag-
matic Solutions, marketing ﬁrm Ignited (see ﬁg. 15), and contracting 
organization Digital Consulting Services each joined the Army Game 
Project at varying points, and each company beneﬁted signiﬁcantly from 
the business opportunities made available by their membership.
However, the core aapa development team, newly relocated to Fort 

134 the military entertainment complex
Ord, was taking a long time to recover from its self- imposed crisis, and 
developers were leaving on a regular basis following the ﬁrings of May-
berry and McCree. The employment turnover during this time was so 
high that by 2007 only six of the twenty- eight team members from early 
2004 were still working at the studio; when America’s Army 3 was released 
in 2009 only two of this original group remained. Due to the uncertainty 
of maintaining a viable core development team, oema became worried 
that the entire aapa team would disintegrate, and began taking mea-
sures against this happening. One day in the summer of 2004 several 
individuals from the aaga offices in North Carolina arrived without 
warning at the aapa studio on Wardynski’s authority, “with hard drives, 
usb keys. They just charge into the office to ‘extract the data.’ They didn’t 
say, ‘hey, we’re your replacements if you guys fuck up, and we’re taking 
everything you have because we’re not sure you’re going to be around 
next week,’” but that was the underlying message that was sent to the 
aapa team.
Following the suppressed mutiny of Mayberry and McCree, this was 
the ﬁrst of many efforts on Wardynski’s part to control the game devel-
opment team, either by manufacturing competition, imposing an out-
sider authority ﬁgure onto the development process, simply ﬁring those 
who were deemed most problematic, or combining two or more of these 
approaches. A studio orientation of paranoia toward nonstudio “out-
siders” associated with the Army Game Project began with this incident, 
and continued throughout my own ﬁeldwork at the studio. I, too, was 
subject to suspicion when I ﬁrst arrived at the California office for two 
weeks in 2007 when a developer, as the mouthpiece of the whole team, 
questioned me for two hours about my research project in order to dis-
cern whether I was a “spy” sent by Wardynski or another Army Game 
Project team to monitor them.
The initial “data extraction” interaction with the new aaga team from 
North Carolina colored the relationship between the two teams. The 
California aapa team was envious of the aaga team’s status within an 
independent company (Virtual Heroes), which was something that May-
berry and McCree had hoped to achieve. They also suspected that exec-
utives at Virtual Heroes wanted more, in addition to the aaga contract 
for simulation trainers. When Wardynski announced that Philip DeLuca 

the military entertainment complex 
135
([Dev]Skippy) would become the new executive producer of the aapa 
team, it looked exactly as if the executives at Virtual Heroes were send-
ing their own choice of leadership to California. “Come to ﬁnd out, 
[DeLuca] was [their] buddy, and we already hated [them].”
“When I was ﬁrst approached by [the executives at Virtual Heroes, 
they were] saying that [they were] going to be given the directorship 
of the entire America’s Army program, which would be Pub Apps [aapa], 
Gov Apps [aaga], and Future Apps [aafa],” DeLuca explained to me.
The actual environment was incredibly toxic when I got there [ . . . ] 
so I ﬁred [the lead programmer] the day I got there. I also let some 
other people go because they were complicit in what amounts to fraud. 
I ﬁgured the team had defrauded the government by a minimum of 
$200,000 because they claimed to be working on something, never 
delivered that something, and instead used all of their time to [ . . . ] 
pitch to set up their own company. And I understand why they did 
it— they were dissatisﬁed with the government and how the army 
was managing them. [The army] didn’t understand that video game 
development is comprised of a series of negotiations. They are used 
to giving an order and essentially having the person carry it out. So 
they weren’t prepared for that back and forth.
DeLuca’s actions and management style further demoralized the now- 
small team that was “already running out of steam.” This factor, com-
bined with DeLuca’s posting of an antagonistic game forum message 
directed at America’s Army hackers, which acknowledged (against 
Wardynski’s wishes) that the army could indeed track individuals based 
on their ip address,10 led to DeLuca’s six- month contract not being 
renewed in April 2005. Philip Bossant once again stepped in, this time 
as the permanent executive producer.
DeLuca told me that, at that time, executives at Virtual Heroes were 
“competing for all intents and purposes for control of the project, [mak-
ing the case that] because of [their] central role in [aaga . . . they] 
should actually take [aapa] and run it.” It was becoming apparent that 
a more centralized restructuring of the entire project was necessary in 
order to bring all of the disparate elements to work together in a more 
organized, and less antagonistic, fashion. Virtual Heroes began court-

136 the military entertainment complex
ing the disaffected aapa employees remaining on the diminished Cali-
fornia team to move to North Carolina. These efforts were to also be 
Mike Zyda’s revenge for losing the project from moves, since Zyda sat 
on the corporate advisory board for Virtual Heroes, unbeknownst to 
Wardynski. The attempts by executives at Virtual Heroes to control the 
aapa ultimately proved ineffective, stymied in part by what appears to 
have been a personal rivalry with an army major working at oema under 
Wardynski
As had happened previously, the project in the midst of its growth 
was plagued by crisis, personal and institutional rivalries, and a lack of 
mutual understanding of the varying needs of game developers, gov-
ernment contractors, and military personnel. Reﬂecting on this, Phil 
DeLuca offered a retrospective analysis of the situation by the time of 
his departure in the spring of 2005:
The colonel’s idea was fundamentally brilliant. It demonstrated a level 
of insight as to what the army needed, and connected it to a social 
phenomenon that he was not familiar with, and he put it together, 
and it was absa- fucking- lutely brilliant. Now, the execution was poor, 
and that was deﬁnitely his fault. He selected these two majors, and 
one of them was really capable and driven and really intense, and 
another was . . . corrupt. And that’s his fault! The colonel fucked up, 
and he really doesn’t accept that he was ﬂawed. He views the ﬂaws 
as being in the civilians, who were ultimately responsible for imple-
menting the application. [ . . . ] He should have turned it over to a 
game development company. And he should have had a board that 
he could go to and ask, “Should we be spending $3 million [a year] 
on a game and $10 million [a year] on its marketing campaign?”
With his retirement looming Wardynski realized that there was a 
need to ensure the long- term viability of the Army Game Project, and 
he knew that oema was not the answer. As a research institution at West 
Point, oema’s mission was to make recommendations and prototypes, 
the implementation of which would be carried out by other entities; 
oema had never been meant to be the permanent home of the Army 
Game Project. With the goal of an eventual transition in mind, in 2005 
oema began sharing project responsibilities with the Software Engi-

the military entertainment complex 
137
neering Directorate (sed) at Redstone Arsenal, near Huntsville, Ala-
bama. Redstone Arsenal hosts a number of rocket science research and 
development centers, including nasa’s Marshal Space Flight Center and 
the U.S. Army’s Aviation and Missile Command. Well- known space pro-
grams (Gemini, Saturn, Mercury) and army weapons systems (e.g., 
Patriot and Javelin missiles; Apache, Chinook, and Black Hawk helicop-
ters) are some of the many programs originating from Redstone Arsenal. 
Compared with these extensive programs at Redstone Arsenal the sed 
was a small institution, and, like the other companies involved in the 
project, it made America’s Army its poster child.
The development of the many soldier trainers based on the America’s 
Army platform transitioned to the sed in 2005, while Virtual Heroes and 
other companies continued to contribute to various projects. At the high-
est level, the sed project managers of these gaming and simulation train-
ing programs were employees of the U.S. government, while other 
individuals working at the sed were employees of a hodgepodge of large 
military contracting companies such as Northrop Grumman, Lockheed 
Martin, and saic (Science Applications International Corporation, now 
known as Leidos).
Michael Bode ([Dev]Bode) worked as an employee of Northrop Grum-
man at the sed as a project manager for various America’s Army Basic 
Skills Trainers. He speciﬁed how in this labor context the hierarchy of 
contracting was “an important cultural thing.” Management of projects 
almost always falls into the hands of U.S. government civilian employ-
ees, underneath whom are additional hierarchies. “Prime” contractors 
are those individuals working for companies that hold the primary gov-
ernment contract for a project. At the lower levels of the hierarchy of 
government contracting are those employees known as “team members,” 
who work for companies that are subcontracted by the prime contrac-
tor. “If you are not government, the government people will treat you 
differently. It’s like being in a club. It’s partly because they are trained 
like that, and educated that they can communicate certain things to 
contractors, and can’t do certain things.” 11
As one of the largest U.S. Department of Defense contractors, saic 
(now Leidos) was the “prime” contractor for the Army Game Project, 
enabling money to pass from the government to “team member” com-

138 the military entertainment complex
panies, and then down the line to the employees of those companies. 
At each stage the overhead for managing the game’s development was 
multiplied by each contracting institution. One illustrative example that 
was recounted to me by an America’s Army executive concerned the 
salaries of game developers at the aapa, who were directly employed 
by a “team member” company called Digital Consulting Services (dcs). 
An aapa game developer being paid, for example, $50,000 by dcs would 
allow dcs to bill the “prime” contractor saic around $100,000. saic 
would, in turn, bill the U.S. government around $150,000 for fees directly 
related to the management of this one employee. Though saic, ranked 
at number 245 in the Fortune 500 list with $10.6 billion in annual reve-
nue in 2013,12 was the holder of the prime contract for America’s Army 
with the U.S. government, it had very little presence in the day- to- day 
activities of most parts of the Army Game Project and zero presence at 
the aapa game studio. Many America’s Army developers had never heard 
of saic.
This government contracting arrangement was a recurring problem 
from the point of view of the California development studio, which 
“always felt like we’re being held at a distance.” While aapa game devel-
opers and their employer, Digital Consulting Services, were “team mem-
bers” who were quite arguably producing the core product of the Army 
Game Project— the pc game America’s Army— they were very much on 
the outskirts of the contracting hierarchy. “They are not saic, so they 
are not prime, and so they are kind of looked down upon by saic employ-
ees. They’re not government, so [they are] on the low end of the totem 
pole in that regard.”
When the sed ﬁrst came on board the project, aapa developers hoped 
that some of the management problems that had plagued the team, 
such as the persistent issue of “feature creep” requests by oema infring-
ing on previously agreed- on workload timelines, would be mitigated. 
Erich Iveans ([Dev]Pye) recalled how during their ﬁrst interaction with 
sed the aapa team detailed lists of such issues to the sed director, Frank 
Blackwell, “just demand after demand that we couldn’t meet and still 
produce the game.” Blackwell, he recounted,
was sitting at the conference table and saying, “I ﬁnd this hard to 

the military entertainment complex 
139
believe, that’s just not possible.” The second half of the day, [an army 
officer from oema] shows up and he goes, “The ausa [Association of 
the U.S. Army] meetings are coming up, and I’ve promised everyone 
that you are going to make a video about Sergeant Smith,” this guy 
who was posthumously awarded a Congressional Medal of Honor for 
his combat actions. “Not only are you going to make this video of that 
action in the game, we’re going to do it at this resolution for project-
ing it on three wide screens. It’s due in two months— let’s go!” We 
could not have asked for a better example of how messed up things 
were. At the end of that day, Frank Blackwell said to us, “I need to go 
to Colonel Wardynski and talk to him, because I’ve ﬁgured out the 
problem, and the problem is him.”
The developers continued releasing new updates for the game on a 
regular basis and were “successful at pulling off those miracle moments 
to keep us going,” such as producing the aforementioned project about 
Sergeant Smith while also working on the game they were hired to make. 
Despite their petitioning sed with their woes, however, they were never 
successful at setting reasonable expectations for their managers. In a 
move that quite possibly saved the studio from complete implosion, the 
aapa changed locations once again in 2006 to Emeryville, a small city 
sandwiched between Berkeley, Oakland, and San Francisco Bay. Most 
of the small development team was happy to make the move north to a 
more urban and cosmopolitan center, and the move deliberately sought 
to take advantage of closer contacts with the electronic entertainment 
industry by bringing the office into the cultural fold of Silicon Valley 
and the Bay Area. A variety of digital entertainment companies such as 
Pixar and Electronic Arts’ Maxis studio (developers of The Sims, Spore, 
and SimCity) were in close proximity to the aapa. Developers liked to 
remark that they shared a Starbucks with video game industry celebrity 
Will Wright, who would regularly be seen during coffee breaks and who 
once came to visit the studio.
The Emeryville studio was where I found my ﬁeldwork home within 
the Army Game Project, ﬁrst arriving there in September 2006 and vis-
iting regularly— often for months at a time— until June 2009. In autumn 
2006 they had just put out a major release, America’s Army: Overwatch 

140 the military entertainment complex
(version 2.7), a high point in the franchise’s history that was neverthe-
less described as being “a goddamn miracle.” By that point the studio 
had reestablished a systematic workﬂow pipeline that made for efficient 
development. New graduates from the nearby Ex’pression College for 
Digital Arts made an easy transition to work at the studio, the location 
of which was deliberately chosen due to its close proximity to the school, 
and an intern program was set up between the two organizations.
The team was ﬁnally able to create a space that felt like a typically 
casual and relaxed game development studio, and this contributed to 
a greater sense of normalcy as they transitioned to the production of 
America’s Army 3 in 2007. Other Army Game Project initiatives materi-
alized in 2007 as well, including the Virtual Army Experience, a major 
project that the sed, Ignited, Zombie, and the aapa produced collabo-
ratively (see chapter 4). Additional commercial industry partnerships 
like an America’s Army arcade game and a cell phone game, both pub-
lished in 2007, resulted in products that made the franchise’s claims to 
authenticity and realism absurd (see ﬁg. 16).13 Ubisoft’s America’s Army: 
True Soldiers ﬂop was also released in 2007. When they worked out as 
anticipated, such commercial arrangements were win- win situations 
for both institutions, providing free advertising opportunities to the army 
while giving the licensing organization the ability to create an “official” 
army game to sell for proﬁt. Control over content, though, had always 
been an important issue that Wardynski had been loath to relinquish. 
The dubious quality of these games in terms of both playability and their 
desired representation of the army led to a more cautious approach in 
terms of future game industry relationships.
Noncommercial industry partnerships for use of the America’s Army 
platform involved a very successful project now used by the Walter Reed 
Army Medical Center involving a driving simulation for wounded sol-
diers using prosthetics or needing assistance in reacclimating to the 
civilian world.14 A soldier could now potentially go through recruitment, 
training, and post- trauma therapy using the America’s Army platform, 
thus meshing the life cycle of the game software with that of the soldier 
(Allen 2015). Collaboration with the nonproﬁt organization Project Lead 
the Way, also starting in 2008, gave the organization use of the platform 
for teaching middle and high school students physics through virtual 

the military entertainment complex 
141
simulation experiments.15 Later, nasa’s “ﬁrst- person explorer” serious 
game Moonbase Alpha (2010) was developed in partnership with Virtual 
Heroes, nasa Learning Technologies, and the sed using the America’s 
Army platform. The free game— winner of the 2010 Serious Games Show-
case and Challenge “Government” category— simulates moon life in a 
near- future scenario, and like America’s Army it encourages teamwork 
between its players in a digital institutional setting.
New updates to America’s Army: Special Forces, released in November 
2003 (version 2.0), were being developed and released until April 2009 
(version 2.8.5). This six- year release cycle for a single game is astonish-
ing, and highly unusual in an industry full of games that have a lifespan 
of several months to a few years at most. During these years military 
ﬁrst- person shooters (fps), a genre of games that the original America’s 
Army helped deﬁne and build, became demonstrably popular through 
successful game franchises like Call of Duty, Medal of Honor, Conﬂict, 
socom, and Battleﬁeld. America’s Army maintained a core group of ded-
icated players who communicated regularly with developers like pro-
ducer Erich Iveans ([Dev]Pye) in official online forums, but the pull of 
a free game became less pronounced over the years as the game’s graphic 
technology and slower style of gameplay was unable to keep pace with 
the industry. The rate of registered users of the game dropped consid-
erably as newer, ﬂashier products came to market.
While America’s Army was ostensibly a game targeting a younger pop-
ulation to encourage the consideration of the army as a viable career 
choice, a discernibly older group of gamers played the game. It was, in 
the words of the developers, a “thinking man’s tactical shooter” that did 
not require as much “twitch skill” as newer, more individualistically 
competitive fps games. The play style deliberately encouraged in Amer-
ica’s Army also inﬂuenced who continued playing since “one of the core 
goals [of America’s Army is] that a well- coordinated team should always 
be able to beat a more individually talented, random group of people.”
Part of the reason for the six- year longevity in the development of 
America’s Army: Special Forces, despite the gradual obsolescence of the 
game for younger players, was that the building of America’s Army 3 did 
not progress very smoothly. Developers recounted to me how there was 
a lack of leadership and vision at the California studio in terms of what 

142 the military entertainment complex
the ﬁnished product should be, and how the lead designer who had 
worked on the team for many years contributed to the standstill by refus-
ing to delegate responsibility. Wardynski and the sed waited impatiently 
through 2007 and early 2008 for progress toward a ﬁnished product 
that never materialized, and both oema and the sed began having dis-
cussions regarding the effectiveness of maintaining a team in California 
in the ﬁrst place. Eventually Mike Bode was sent from Alabama to Cal-
ifornia in the spring of 2008 to become the co- executive producer with 
Phillip Bossant. “In [Wardynski’s] eyes Phillip had failed,” a developer 
conﬁded, “and I can’t completely disagree with that.” Yet at the same 
time for the developers “it felt like there was shit going on up in the lofty 
perches of the army side that was buffeting us around in ways that we 
didn’t necessarily fully understand or even get exposed to.”
There gradually became implemented a more hierarchical chain of 
command, placing the sed as the mediator between oema and the devel-
opers, that prevented signiﬁcant communication between the game pro-
ducers in California and oema. This contrast with the earlier years of 
development was due to the centralizing force of the sed, which came 
to direct more of the requirements in the development of the game. 
Developers speculated that after Wardynski’s expected retirement in 
2010 the sed would become the permanent home for America’s Army, 
and this indeed was the ultimate goal of the Directorate’s leaders. With 
the idea of decapitating the leadership of the California team in order 
to implement a smoother transition of the game’s development to the 
sed post- release, Mike Bode “came with instructions to clean house on 
management. He didn’t do it because he realized how important some 
people were to the project.”
Wardynski, however, wanted a “price for failure” in the delay of Amer-
ica’s Army 3. Unbeknownst to most of the developers, the delay in pro-
duction by late 2008 had solidiﬁed Wardynski’s resolve to shut down 
the studio after the release of the game and move the game’s production 
entirely to the sed, despite Bode’s protests that the sed, as a government 
software development institution, lacked the video game industry tal-
ent pool capable of taking on the project effectively. But having previ-
ously experienced near- implosions of the project due to its leadership, 
Wardynski was hardened in implementing a preemptive- strike approach 

the military entertainment complex 
143
to dealing with the California development team. Recounting the plot 
of a movie that told the story of a Civil War unit whose mutiny was fore-
stalled by the execution of its leaders, Wardynski stepped in and directed 
Bode to ﬁre Bossant, a studio favorite, along with another long- time 
and critically knowledgeable producer in the summer of 2008. An addi-
tional experienced designer and team leader from the moves era quit 
following this, reportedly explaining his decision to leave to the entire 
team by saying simply, “Shit is unfun.”
When I began open- ended interviews with America’s Army game devel-
opers soon after this event, a large portion of what developers wanted 
to talk about involved what they termed as being “a huge clusterfuck of 
project management” that was only intensiﬁed by the ﬁrings. One level 
designer discussed how “It doesn’t even matter when we say no” to 
“unrealistic demands. It is crazy land.” Although this level designer 
enjoyed the challenge, it felt
like we are really being thrown into the deep end. [ . . . ] You have 
these crazy requirements that are difficult to meet coming at you from 
people who are intractable and on whom you have no leverage. You 
got moving targets, and that’s all just part of the job. Working in con-
straints fundamentally makes you do better work, so I’m into that. 
[But] the wriggle room you have is so small and the creativity you 
have got to bring to the problem is so considerable. And you have to 
solve all the problems at once: What is going to meet the requirements 
of the army; actually reﬂect legitimately useful information about 
the [Military Occupational Specialties of soldiers]; use real equip-
ment; be something that we can create the art for in the time we have; 
[and], on top of that, have a roadmap for all of this stuff to roll out 
over the next ﬁve years so that any given thing we are making doesn’t 
just fuck everything that came before it with some fundamental 
change. And to do that with only six dudes on staff who can program, 
[who already have] no time.
When I later visited the sed at Redstone Arsenal I realized that work-
ers there experienced parallel pressures but very different conditions, 
which were not conducive to managing a video game being developed 
over two thousand miles away by game developers of a very different 

144 the military entertainment complex
cultural mentality than their government managers in Alabama. No 
electronic devices from off- base were allowed in the buildings— no cell 
phones, usb devices, cameras, iPods, voice recorders, and deﬁnitely no 
laptops.16 Such security conditions were a strain for everyone involved, 
especially the project managers, one of whom described her work to me 
as being in a state that is “always in panic mode” due to the multiple 
pressures and demands. During a visit with another sed project man-
ager, he told me that he had received forty- eight emails over the course 
of my single hour visiting his office. These workplace factors could per-
haps partially explain a series of sed purchasing mishaps in 2008, in 
which software licenses for the use of critical middleware necessary for 
the California team were not obtained.17 These lapses— which the Cal-
ifornia team believed reﬂected either sed incompetence, deliberate sab-
otage, or both— caused game development to come to a near standstill 
at several points and created further tension when the blame for such 
delays was placed squarely on the California team by the sed.
The relationship between the game developers and their management 
at sed and oema was sometimes explained in indigenous terms by the 
developers, who would say that these conﬂicts, at the core, arose from 
cultural differences. “Every time we try to bring in common sense the 
government fucks it up with their weird justiﬁcations or rules that don’t 
make any sense to our culture,” one developer told me in frustration. 
Another former developer reﬂected on his experiences in a similar way, 
writing that “there was a magic couple of years there where two totally 
alien cultures came together to do something cool.” 18 Though it is most 
likely too simplistic an explanation, the language of cultural difference 
highlights how America’s Army is far more than the sum of what the 
army says it is— a video game “designed, developed, and deployed by 
the U.S. Army.” As an example par excellence of the “military entertain-
ment complex,” the history of America’s Army reveals a contingent his-
tory of relationships that is indeed very complex.
The relationships I have described here highlight anthropologist David 
Graeber’s observation that “totalities are always creatures of the imag-
ination. Nations, societies, ideologies, closed systems . . . none of these 
really exist. Reality is always inﬁnitely messier than that— even if the 

the military entertainment complex 
145
belief that they exist is an undeniable social force” (2004, 13). The power 
of the concept of the “complex” (e.g., “military industrial complex”) is 
in its ability to obfuscate multifaceted processes by making it appear as 
if the reality of convoluted negotiations, rivalries, and collaborations is 
actually smooth, logical, and homogeneous. The idea of “the network,” 
I would argue, achieves a similar result of affording more power to a 
phenomenon than it deserves.
I went to the Army Game Project in search of a network of interoper-
able and exchangeable entities, people, and organizations— but this 
proved largely elusive. What I found instead was a hierarchical assort-
ment of military, government, commercial, and contracting institutions, 
factional and personal rivalries, a long history of disgruntled workers, 
and a mode of explaining away misunderstandings and conﬂicts through 
a generalizing language of cultural differences. Although institutions 
in the Army Game Project did ultimately have to cooperate with one 
another to a certain extent, there was an intense amount of competition 
between organizations over product content, funding, and reputation. 
Underlying all of this competition was a fundamentally business- driven 
motive of organizational self- preservation, especially for those busi-
nesses and entities that relied heavily or exclusively on Army Game 
Project funding in order to operate. Although a horizontal, deterritori-
alized, and virtual network of production did exist to a certain extent, 
as an army- sponsored project the Army Game Project was essentially a 
hierarchically and bureaucratically organized endeavor, “a feudal soci-
ety existing within a democratic one,” as several developers liked to say.
On the ground and inside its institutions, the picture of the Army 
Game Project was much more nuanced and factional than the seamless 
and idealized networked production model described by network and 
netwar theorists. Echoing Catherine Lutz’s opening epigraph to this 
chapter, its history shows much more contingency than writers adher-
ing to the canonical history of war games ever show. Institutions that 
produce military power, Lutz writes, are diverse, complex, and often 
incompetent. “Despite the perception that the military is uniﬁed and 
coherent, its projects are and long have been often as plural, political, 
and contested as the projects of other arms of the state” (2006, 603). 

146 the military entertainment complex
While oema claimed that America’s Army was successful in helping the 
army recruit and hold on to the labor of talented soldiers, the accounts 
of America’s Army that I uncovered through speaking to the game’s devel-
opers point to a contrasting story of success and failure in the recruit-
ment and retention of game development labor and in the management 
of the project itself.

147
6
The Labor of Virtual Soldiers
This is my opportunity for me to use you as a conduit to paint a picture 
of how it really goes down. If I get ﬁred tomorrow, nobody’s going to 
know, unless you write about it. [ . . . ] I think that you could at least 
be a conduit to tell everybody else what kinds of challenges we really 
face here.
America’s Army developer, to the author, about his reasons for 
consenting to an interview
Recruiting the Developers
By the time the autumn of 2008 rolled around, I had situated myself 
full- time at the America’s Army game development studios in Emeryville, 
California. Over the course of twenty months (2007– 9), I had spent 
approximately seven months at this game studio, where America’s Army 
3 was under development in a nondescript office building overlooking 
San Francisco Bay, and I had come to know well many on the thirty- 
four- person development team. The workplace itself was a dark and 
comfortable maze of cubicles, meeting rooms, hallways, and offices. 
The characteristically quiet productivity of the work environment was 
punctuated by regular events such as morning meetings, conference 
calls, lunch and coffee breaks, play tests, guests visiting from other Army 
Game Project offices, and after- work ultimate Frisbee matches, gaming, 
and beers. I usually arrived in the morning and stayed until the late 
afternoon or evening, trying to stay as unobtrusive as possible in a 
demanding work environment, unless people were on break and in a 
talkative mood. Thanks to the generosity of the producers I had my own 
office situated among the quality assurance team, as well as a key to the 

148 the labor of virtual soldiers
studio that functioned during working hours and an America’s Army 
email address, which helped me keep track of office communications, 
priorities, and outings.
One day after work, over beers with some of the developers, I had a 
laugh over my initial arrival there, when I was met by Phillip Bossant, 
at that time the game’s executive producer. Bossant showed me around 
the office, and we gravitated toward the office kitchen, the intuitive 
choice for coffee and morning conversation. “Coffee is a big deal here. 
It fuels the team,” he told me. We were met in the kitchen by a group of 
four uniformed men— some in full U.S. Army fatigues, others wearing 
digitized camo pants with regular T- shirts. Naturally I assumed that 
they were soldiers; it was the U.S. Army’s video game studio, after all, 
and they were dressed in army gear. As conversation continued, I asked 
one of them how long he had been in the army, adding that I did not 
know that actual soldiers worked on the video game. He laughed and 
said, “Oh, we’re civilians. We like to play at being in the army.”
This statement stuck with me precisely because of its glibness and 
salience in achieving a blending between worlds that are typically talked 
about in contemporary American discourse as being oppositional and 
discrete from one another: the separate worlds of work and play, and 
those of the soldier and the civilian, both of which I discuss in detail in 
chapter 1. Of course the actual boundaries between these spheres (if 
they exist at all) are porous and eroding, and they have been becoming 
less visible for quite some time through multiple channels. In this book 
I have argued that the Army Game Project contributes to this blending, 
which enables the enlistment of civilian players as virtual soldiers— not 
only in the popular sense that they are soldiers playing in a virtual or 
simulated environment, but also in the sense that they are potential 
soldiers (in other words, virtually soldiers) who might ﬁght in Iraq, 
Afghanistan, or elsewhere in the future. The term “virtual soldiers” can 
be used interchangeably, sometimes to connote one or both of these 
meanings simultaneously since they are not mutually exclusive. But the 
latter meaning of virtual is salient given the fact that versions of Amer-
ica’s Army are also used in training enlisted soldiers for weapons famil-
iarization and cultural awareness role- playing exercises.
Like the mythic and unreal enemies of their creation (see chapter 3), 

the labor of virtual soldiers 
149
the developers of America’s Army underwent a parallel imperative to 
ﬂexibly adapt their labor to the mythic narratives of war. Through their 
work experiences the video game developers became a kind of hybrid 
soldier- civilian, possessors of expert military knowledge who worked 
within a liminal space between so- called military and nonmilitary 
spheres to translate this knowledge to video gamers and the larger pub-
lic. Toward this end, their labor not only produced a ﬁnished software 
product, but also projected an affective, militarized ethos for marketing 
and public relations. This type of immaterial labor was mobilized to 
soften the stark distinctions between the categories of the gaming civil-
ian and the working soldier. This amalgamation of categories, which is 
central to the creation and maintenance of virtual soldiering, engages 
in a playful but serious liminality, which is arguably an effective vehicle 
of militarization (see chapter 1); it is a post- Fordist magical construction 
that perpetuates war.
For the immaterial laborers working within the video game industry— 
with its precarious cycles of unemployment, eighty- hour weeks during 
“crunch time,” and indistinguishable intermeshing between work and 
leisure time— the seemingly oxymoronic concepts of “playbor” (Dyer- 
Witheford and de Peuter 2009, 23– 27) and “ﬂexploitation” (Gray 2004), 
though not part of their everyday vocabulary, would accurately describe 
their everyday life. These post- Fordist realities characterized the indus-
try in which the game developers of America’s Army worked. They were, 
by and large, a group of individuals in pursuit of careers in game devel-
opment or similar ﬁelds. As is often the case with soldiers who enlist 
in the U.S. military, it was principally economic and career advance-
ment opportunities that led most America’s Army game developers to 
choose work for a military contractor. Although a few of them had 
experiences with the military through past enlistment or employment, 
for most developers their work was the ﬁrst extended period of contact 
that they had ever had with a military organization. It was a young 
group, with the vast majority of employees having less than ﬁve years 
of game development experience. Many were fresh graduates from Bay 
Area universities with degree programs in graphic arts, design, anima-
tion, and other software-  and skills- related programs. Even by the stan-
dards of the demographically skewed video game industry employment 

150 the labor of virtual soldiers
norms, it was a beardy group of mostly twenty-  to forty- year- old white 
male game developers.1
Most of the developers were avid video gamers. Some typically stayed 
at the game development studio hours after the end of the work day in 
order to use the studio computers and facilities for their personal enjoy-
ment. One person told me, “All of these new games come out and you 
need to go check ’em out. For me, I feel like it’s a part of my research 
and development. But if I didn’t do this for a living, I would still [play 
games].” While sometimes they played as an individual activity, very 
often it was a collective, social enterprise of networked gaming that kept 
employees of America’s Army playing together, either at the studio’s 
computers or at their home computers.2 Because such activities directly 
fed back into their development of the game, keeping them up to date 
about new games, news, technologies, and memes, these practices were 
encouraged by the game’s producers, who sought to maintain the studio 
as a comfortable and stress- free space. During “crunch time,” an unspec-
iﬁed period prior to the game’s release when tasks were compressed 
into smaller windows of time, many would forgo their gaming and would 
stay late to work at the studio, sometimes sleeping there. In these expe-
riences the game developers of America’s Army differed little from the 
rest of the game development industry.
But the labor of America’s Army game developers went beyond the 
mere development of the game, and entered into a resocializing, insti-
tutionalizing, and militarized process that crafted them into virtual sol-
diers. This emerged in part as a result of the subject material of their 
game, as level designers, animators, sound technicians, and artists nec-
essarily had to be knowledgeable about the minute details of army uni-
forms, weapons, and doctrine. As I describe below, efforts undertaken 
to include the team under the institutional umbrella of the army further 
achieved this. Several developers also brought their past experiences 
and interests in the military to the development offices: two were vet-
erans of the U.S. armed forces, while several others were gun enthusi-
asts, volunteer participants in live simulation training exercises for Bay 
Area police forces, and, of course, enthusiastic players of games that 
were often military- themed. One developer even left the team to run a 
successful business designing military gear and reviewing new weapons 

the labor of virtual soldiers 
151
for sale on the civilian market.3 With these inﬂuences the design team 
embodied a remarkable mix of militarized libertarian ideology, coupled 
with a hefty dose of Berkeley liberalism, hipster irony, and a sardonic 
disdain for almost anything to do with the Republican Party, especially 
Sarah Palin.
In this work environment the developers adopted to varying degrees 
the subjectivities of soldiers. This was particularly true in their thinking 
about their employment. The hbo mini- series Generation Kill (2008), 
based upon Evan Wright’s book about his experiences as an embedded 
reporter with a marine unit during the 2003 invasion of Iraq (2004), 
was one of many shared narratives that shaped how several developers 
envisioned their work relations and relationships with outside institu-
tions in terms of the military. Off- site managers at the sed in Alabama 
were compared to incompetent leaders in the ﬁlm series, such as Cap-
tain America. Colonel Wardynski was the Godfather, another character 
in the series. And I, the anthropologist, was clearly in the position most 
analogous to the journalist Evan Wright: “I don’t think of you as a spy 
anymore,” a developer, Walker, told me after my ﬁrst week in the office, 
“you’re more like an embedded journalist, and that means we need to 
keep you alive.” When I joined developers during countless in- studio 
playtests of their game, I came to understand that this sense of cama-
raderie also was brought about and sustained through the shared, and 
patently fun, experiences of virtual military combat in video games.
Later, in an interview, Walker expanded his analogy between the 
development team and army units, explaining to me that “this is an elite 
team. We are an elite squad of individuals. We have been chosen by the 
army to make this game. That’s a big deal and I think a lot of team mem-
bers take that for granted. [ . . . ] There are thirty people on- site here 
and four people off- site. That’s a tight squad; that’s a platoon- sized unit. 
That’s exactly what that is, a platoon- sized element, and [the producer] 
runs around like the platoon sergeant. We got a design squad, an art 
squad, and [the executive producer] is like the lieutenant.” For many 
army game developers, their exposure to some of the specialized expe-
riences of soldiers became a meaningful way for them to include them-
selves within the greater institution of the army and identify with the 
situations of enlisted soldiers. Walker went as far as envisioning his work 

152 the labor of virtual soldiers
on the game, living in California away from many of his friends and 
family, in terms of an extended deployment overseas.
This metaphor of the team as a military unit continually resurfaced 
to explain other situations and employment experiences throughout my 
time at the America’s Army game development studios. But it was a met-
aphor that had some grounding in real experiences as well, for many 
on the development team had trained together as a military unit when 
the army sent them to boot camp.
As it turned out, so many people were dressed in army combat uni-
forms on my ﬁrst day of ﬁeldwork because about one third of the 
developers— one woman and twelve men— had freshly returned from 
a voluntary ﬁve- day job- related excursion to Fort Jackson’s Army Train-
ing Center (Hamacher 2007). Along with employees from other Army 
Game Project offices they underwent ﬁve days of “mini Basic Combat 
Training,” otherwise known as “mini- bct.” During this short period of 
time they endured many of the same ordeals of resocialization as new 
entries to boot camp— buzz cuts, obstacle courses, pushups, cafeteria 
lines, weapons training, and obnoxious drill sergeants. They were 
assigned to squads, slept in barracks, and were issued their own equip-
ment and uniforms, complete with an America’s Army arm patch. Describ-
ing it later, one participant claimed, “The ﬁrst day was one of the worst 
days of my life” (see ﬁg. 17).
This ordeal had many purposes. At its core it was intended to give the 
game developers an experiential taste of boot camp for the purposes of 
integrating their new familiarity with army life into the video game. 
Many developers approached the event as an opportunity to build their 
professional skills as artists, sound technicians, level designers, pro-
grammers, and producers. Developers indicated that their mini- bct 
experiences aided in the creation of an introductory framing segment 
of America’s Army 3 involving a virtual boot camp where users learn how 
to play by navigating an obstacle course, completing weapons familiar-
ization, and running through a live- ﬁre shoothouse. In this way the 
developers’ experiences at mini- bct came to be portrayed as a kind of 
halfway mark in a referential sequence pointing from the virtual boot 
camp of the game to the mini– boot camp of the game developers, to the 
“true” boot camp of the enlisted army soldier.

the labor of virtual soldiers 
153
The army intended the in- game representations of boot camp to serve 
as an artiﬁcial placeholder for the real army boot camp. I would con-
tend, however, that the representational process of America’s Army is 
much more complex than this. I prefer to think of the game as part of a 
hyperrealistic narrative of what the army desires itself to be, a narrative 
that produces, rather than reﬂects, realities (Baudrillard 1994, 6). This 
means that America’s Army, in a sense, precedes that which it represents, 
in much the same way that the contemporary boot camp experiences 
of many new army enlistees are preceded by an abundance of narratives 
(i.e., virtual boot camp experiences) populating the military entertain-
ment culture industry.
In emphasizing the “truth” of the game’s representational ﬁdelity, 
press releases claimed the game as a “virtual test drive” of the army and 
that it is “as close to being in the Army as you can get without enlisting.” 4 
Tag lines for the game also revealed this rhetorical vice quite succinctly, 
declaring that “America’s Army is a game like no other, because of its 
detailed level of authenticity” and that the game, although mostly cre-
ated by subcontracted civilian developers, was “Designed, Developed, 
and Deployed by the U.S. Army.” 5
The army was quick to advertise the fact that it had sent its game 
developers to boot camp, enlisting them as virtual soldiers. The mini- 
bct event was used for marketing to generate hype among video game 
players prior to the release of America’s Army 3 in June of 2009. The 
America’s Army marketing agency put together a video and photos of 
the event, taking on- site ﬁlm recordings and interspersing it with ret-
rospective interviews of developers and video game footage.6 Accom-
panying text to the video at the America’s Army Facebook page hailed 
the game’s authenticity, made all the more legitimate because of the 
mini- bct experience: “What makes aa3 the most authentic military game 
ever? Developers actually go through Army basic training. See how they 
became Army Strong at Fort Jackson, South Carolina, and how their 
experiences make aa3 a game like no other in the world.” 7 Two devel-
opers blogged about their experiences at mini- bct, which they exten-
sively described in online forums at americasarmy.com.8 Short video 
teasers with various developers enabled fans to take behind- the- scenes 
looks at the work and offices of the development team. And, adhering 

154 the labor of virtual soldiers
to a promotional language of realism, a press release for America’s Army 
3 advertised how its developers became transﬁgured into the role of a 
soldier, implying that players can also undergo a similar transformation 
through the game: “Nobody knows military simulations like the world’s 
premier land force, the United States Army. So, when the Army began 
making the America’s Army game to provide civilians with insights on 
Soldiering from the barracks to the battleﬁelds, it sent its talented devel-
opment team to experience Army training just as a new recruit would. 
The developers crawled through obstacle courses, ﬁred weapons, 
observed paratrooper instruction, and participated in a variety of train-
ing exercises with elite combat units, all so that you could virtually 
experience Soldiering in the most realistic way possible.” 9
Despite the unexpected physical intensity of the mini- bct experience, 
nearly all of the developers who attended the event remembered it as 
an occasion that contributed to their personal growth and understand-
ing of the army. One developer wrote on the America’s Army online 
forums that he and other coworkers “were yelled at, chided, [and] pushed 
beyond our physical and mental limitations, but came out all the stron-
ger for it in the end because we endured.” 10 After his return to the office 
another developer told some colleagues, “It has changed me. I don’t 
know if for good or bad, but it has changed me.” The only woman from 
the California office to attend described her experience as being “really 
moving, even though it wasn’t the full blown experience. [It was] as 
much of a taste as you really can get without actually being in the army. 
I would never have opted to do it, knowing what I know now [about 
how difficult it was], but I’m glad that I did. I wasn’t going to be the only 
person on the team that quit. Being a female, being a woman drives a 
lot of decisions that I make [in regards to my work].”
Often, these personal reasons for attending accompanied professional 
ones. This was the case with one producer (from another Army Game 
Project office) who stated that “the short answer as to why I want to go 
and do it is that I’m about to turn forty and I’d really like to know if I can 
handle it.” He went on to articulate why he thought the army sent the 
game developers, telling me that “they believe the more we know about 
what it takes to turn civilians into soldiers the better we will be able to 
depict that in the things that we build. I think also that the more we 

the labor of virtual soldiers 
155
know about tactics, techniques, trainings, and procedures, the more 
lifelike we can build scenarios, and the more effective we can be.”
As this producer implied, “turning civilians into soldiers” no longer 
happens solely in the institution of the military; it has become a process 
that happens during the everyday life of media consumers in the United 
States. Nearly every American has become a willing, unwilling, or unwit-
ting consumer of war and a participant in the national mediated narra-
tives of war that are part of the “military normal” (Lutz 2009). “Soft 
sells” such as America’s Army, the vae, and the aec further contribute 
to production of this militarized subjectivity by adding the dimension 
of interactivity and the veneer of user agency. By relying on user- 
generated interest in and discovery of the army through the game, Amer-
ica’s Army material online, and public venues like the vae and aec, the 
messages of America’s Army, which might be dismissed as heavy- handed 
statist propaganda in other contexts, instead morph into “impressions,” 
which can be readily accepted. Such processes of subjectiﬁcation, which 
originate from institutions but operate as if they derive from individual 
motives, exemplify how power capitalizes on the ostensibly liberatory 
nature of social media, interactive entertainment, and networks of infor-
mation sharing in the early twenty- ﬁrst century.
The marketing and media efforts of mini- bct capitalized on the affec-
tive performance of the game developers as soldiers. This ﬁgure worked 
to translate and reconﬁgure military power to gamers, suggesting to 
players that they also can possess the knowledge and expertise that was 
imparted to the game developers by the army— either by participating 
within the liminal space of the game, or better yet, enlisting and joining 
the army. Through these diverse methods, both developers and players 
of America’s Army became virtual soldiers.
Selﬂess Service during Crunch Time
Following the developers’ return to California, stories of mini- bct con-
tinued to periodically effervesce in conversations, and the experience 
became one of many in the folklore of America’s Army game develop-
ment. For some it was a high point in their employment at the studio, 
for in the year following mini- bct the team went through difficult times. 
There was a general lack of direction and vision, both internally and 

156 the labor of virtual soldiers
externally, as to what the new America’s Army 3 was supposed to be like. 
One root of these problems was a frustrating and convoluted system of 
military contracting and subcontracting that separated the development 
team from much army institutional support. In an arrangement that 
was confusing at best, the team’s offices near Berkeley communicated 
with a variety of other offices across the United States. In name the 
development team worked for a private company. This company was 
contracted to develop America’s Army by another large private military 
contractor, saic, which was, in turn, contracted by the U.S. government. 
But there was minimal contact between the game developers and these 
private employers; instead their customers, the U.S. Army and the U.S. 
government, oversaw the majority of project operations from offices in 
Alabama and at West Point.
This arrangement led to many difficulties. Nearly everyone in the 
office felt that the government management of the project from the Ala-
bama offices was incompetent. The demands placed on them to perform 
their work, they felt, did not match the amount of monetary and insti-
tutional support that trickled down to the office after the prime con-
tractor (saic) and the subcontractor (dcs) had taken a substantial 
portion of operational funding allocated to the development of the game. 
Often, they felt, the team became a scapegoat for problems that origi-
nated elsewhere. In one exchange during an interview with a developer 
named Benjamin, I asked what he felt about the project management 
outside of the team in regards to their understanding of the process of 
game development. I had overheard Wardynski exclaim during a visit 
to the studio that the game “industry is full of ﬂakes,” and I wanted to 
see if this was a prevailing opinion among Army Game Project members 
in the military and government: “I don’t think they have any idea. It 
doesn’t seem uncommon, this sort of understanding as to what actually 
goes into producing this stuff. These people just don’t understand how 
[games] are made. [Allen: Do you think they are like, ‘They just play all 
the time’?] Yeah, ‘They’re just messing around!’ They don’t really under-
stand what goes into it all and the nuts and bolts— how much work is 
actually required.” The development process, he told me, was seen as a 
kind of mystiﬁed, occult work from the perspective of these outsiders: 
“The end product is all this fun, all this cool stuff, so for them it’s just 

the labor of virtual soldiers 
157
this ‘magic’ that happens behind the scenes and for them it must seem 
rad doing it because playing the product is fun. I don’t think they have 
any idea as to how tenuous everything still is.”
Following a series of employment shakeups that eliminated most of 
the experienced members of the development team, those remaining 
became demoralized and doubtful of their own job security. This cre-
ated a considerable level of hostility toward project management, but 
also a closer level of camaraderie among team members. “No one is here 
out of loyalty to the product at this point,” Benjamin went on to tell me, 
“Everyone who is still here after all of those ﬁrings took place is here 
out of loyalty to each other and to the people who got let go. We’re not 
going to disgrace their efforts that they put in to trying to get this game 
out the door; we’re not going to screw over each other by abandoning 
this project so that people don’t have the credit to put on their resumes.” 
When this came to a head near the lowest point of the 2009 economic 
recession, Walker assessed the team’s situation in terms of troop morale:
All of us— the team as a whole— would feel much, much better if we 
could see a year into the future. But that is a well- guarded secret. 
That is a problem, a huge problem. It is a problem with our manage-
ment; it is a problem with the army. It is a problem that will have to 
be solved if they want to continue to do this, because it is horrible 
for morale. [ . . . ] If they don’t want people to continue to look for 
jobs all day long, then they need to make them feel like they are 
going to be taken care of in the future, and that is something that is 
severely lacking.
When it was useful to their purposes, members of the army sought 
to militarize this discontent by continuing to project to the subcontracted 
development team a sense of inclusion within the larger organization 
of the army. In a team meeting, a visiting senior officer sought to encour-
age the overworked and understaffed office as they entered “crunch 
time” a few months prior to the release of America’s Army 3. Speaking 
to them as if they were soldiers and framing their work in terms of “self-
less service,” one of the seven core army values, he told them, “Thank 
you for putting up with the drama [ . . . ] but you can’t quit, because you 
represent an organization that doesn’t quit. This country wouldn’t be 

158 the labor of virtual soldiers
here if the organization that you represent had a quitter’s attitude. I 
don’t care who pays you, you work for the army. You’re going to have to 
be like the Special Forces and do more with less. You have the Special 
Forces mentality. [ . . . ] Everybody wanted to have a piece of the bad 
guy after 9/11. You guys are serving the war effort in a huge way.”
While the senior officer’s ploy did not appear to work in terms of 
motivating the developers, his words were not visibly dismissed for their 
reliance on cheap platitudes and patriotic appeals. The developers took 
pride in their work, and most were pleased to be creating something 
both noncommercial and for the army. For this reason, and despite their 
disagreements with individuals at the project management level, the 
office’s orientation in regards to “big Army” at the institutional level was 
a positive one. But the pressing needs of job security, more competitive 
salaries, and better beneﬁts— in addition to receiving much- needed 
resources to ensure the timely release of America’s Army 3— were on the 
minds of nearly everyone at the time. When these issues were mentioned 
to the officer he dismissed them, telling the team, “That’s not a big prob-
lem, I think.” But some developers persisted, petitioning to him, “We’ve 
lost talent, and can’t attract talent because we can’t pay competitively. 
We want to continue to work for the project, but [management] has 
screwed us.” Choosing not to take into account these realities, the offi-
cer instead interpreted this as a threat and asked the team, “Is this a 
‘let’s have a walkout’ kind of problem?”
In eliding the fact that the game developers were laborers by imply-
ing that they were developing the game purely for patriotic reasons to 
help “get a piece of the bad guy,” the senior officer recreated the situa-
tion of many soldiers who join the military for primarily economic rea-
sons but nevertheless feel compelled to speak of their enlistment in 
terms of national service. The language of selﬂess service mystiﬁes the 
economic reasons underlying employment in the military and by mili-
tary contractors. Anthropologist Andrew Bickford writes that “if we think 
of the U.S. military as a labor market, and its soldiers as workers, these 
are people who ﬁnd themselves in coercive and exploitative situations 
[that] can compel soldiers to ﬁght and soldier on; it is a form of labor 
rationalization . . . that ultimately does little for the soldier” (2009, 151). 
His description of soldier labor applies to that of the game developers’ 

the labor of virtual soldiers 
159
work as well, for these virtual soldiers were essentially asked to continue 
projecting the affective qualities of a soldier by pushing on through 
crunch time in the service of their nation.
Crunch time abruptly ended on June 17, 2009, when the completed 
America’s Army 3 was released to the public for free download. At the 
end of the workday I accompanied the developers to their favorite 
Emeryville bar for a celebration. The next morning we arrived in the 
studio to ﬁnd the usually dark office space brightly lit and all computers 
locked. On that day all but a handful of employees were laid off without 
prior warning and the Emeryville development office was shut down. 
Wardynski himself did not make an appearance, and instead opted to 
send his deputy Maj. Mike Marty, who executed the layoffs as if disci-
plining unruly soldiers. Referring to the move as a “consolidation,” a 
representative from the sed told reporters that the layoffs “will allow 
us to gain efficiencies between our public and government applications” 
(Faylor 2009; McWhertor 2009). According to other unofficial sources, 
though, there simply was not any money for the program. Due to the 
economic downturn enlistment in the army was up, and existing funds 
reportedly had to be used simply for “keeping the patient alive.” 11 Even 
though America’s Army had generated a considerable number of recruit-
ing achievements and publicity over the years, such novel efforts had 
simply become less of an immediate ﬁscal priority. I was told that fund-
ing for the Army Game Project, typically cobbled together from previ-
ously reliable annual budget surpluses from a variety of army 
organizations, had materialized only at 15 percent of previous levels.
Largely due to preexisting external issues that were beyond the con-
trol of the California studio, the free game was critically broken and 
essentially unplayable for several weeks after its release. The executive 
producer Mike Bode, along with two others, stayed on the team to help 
patch these issues through the summer of 2009, but the efforts of only 
three individuals were not enough. The free game quickly lost popular-
ity and users. Frustrated players, many of them soldiers and veterans, 
had waited expectantly for months to download it, and they naturally 
equated news of the layoffs as retribution for the broken America’s Army 
3. In an angry retort to players’ mounting criticisms of the game and its 
developers, one of the former developers posted a comment (quickly 

160 the labor of virtual soldiers
deleted by forum moderators) at the americasarmy.com forums. He 
implored fans “to imagine trying to build a game with an impossible 
deadline, steadily declining workforce (via ﬁrings), a hiring freeze, con-
stantly being fed misinformation, having the ‘higher ups’ completely 
ignore your weekly plea for either a) more time, or b) more manpower, 
working a ton of unpaid overtime, pouring your heart and soul into a 
misadventure only to have the uniformed community scoff at you for 
uncontrollable variables . . . right when you’ve just lost your job.” 12
On the same day as the layoffs, a box of America’s Army 3 shirts, which 
they had ordered and paid for themselves, arrived. One developer told 
anybody around who was there to listen, “They should make us a shirt 
that says, ‘I made a video game and all I got was this shirt.’” Through 
multiple channels it had become painfully and abruptly clear to all of 
the developers that despite the similitude of their experiences to actual 
soldiers, they were, in the end, ex- employees of a subcontractor to a 
contractor to the U.S. military. “The army takes care of its own” was a 
phrase that was ironically repeated during the days following the layoffs. 
They had always understood that they were not a part of “its own,” and 
that, anyway, the army rarely adequately takes care of even “its own” 
veterans (see Rieman interview, chapter 3). But there was an expressive 
bitterness in their words that seemed unusually high, even for freshly 
laid- off workers. A great deal of this rancor derived from a growing real-
ization that the closest parallel between their experiences and the expe-
riences of many U.S. soldiers was, ultimately, that they ended up feeling 
forgotten, unappreciated, and discarded by the military (see ﬁg. 18).
Much ado could be made about the uniqueness of the developers’ 
situation. But my primary point in describing their experiences here has 
not been to elicit sympathy for them or to show how their situation was 
anomalous. The abrupt joblessness of the developers was unfortunately 
not an abnormality, especially in California during June of 2009, when 
the state unemployment rate was fast approaching 12 percent (U.S. 
Bureau of Labor Statistics 2010). Fluctuation in the video game labor 
market, punctuated by mass layoffs, has been an industry norm and 
post- Fordist principle for years.
My purpose, instead, has been to explain how the circumstances of 

the labor of virtual soldiers 
161
the developers might illuminate general trends in the militarization of 
popular culture in the United States. The enlistment of the developers’ 
labor to perform as virtual soldiers highlights a pervasive mobilization 
of the culture industry and the cognitive capacities of its laborers as 
vehicles of war. The corporatization of the military and the militariza-
tion of corporations are underlying engines of this trend, which is only 
accelerating. As more private mercenaries become employed in U.S. 
foreign occupations and counterterrorism attempts; as more businesses 
become contracted through Pentagon funding initiatives; as the capa-
bilities of digital technologies increase the immersive qualities of mili-
tary entertainment; and as social scientists weaponize culture and 
ethnography (Price 2011; Whitehead and Finnström 2013), new forms 
of virtual soldiering will emerge. It might, sooner or later, behoove every-
one to ask themselves, “How am I a virtual soldier?”
Epilogue: The Godfather
I was confronted with this question for the ﬁrst time one month prior to 
the layoffs when I joined the developers at the 2009 Game Developers 
Conference, where they were giving exclusive previews to America’s Army 
3 to video game journalists in a back room of the W Hotel. Wardynski 
was talking with me and some sed government employees when he 
turned to me to ask, “Have you ever seen the Godfather movies?”
“Yes,” I replied.
“You’re a good guy, right?” he asked. “Well, I hope you are because 
otherwise I’ll have to take care of you and kill you.”
“I didn’t think that sort of thing was supposed to be something the 
army does, sir,” I rejoined.
“I’m not talking about the army,” he clariﬁed, “I’m talking about me.” 
All I could do was smile falsely, unsure about how exactly to interpret 
that statement. I remembered another ﬂippant (but at the same time 
fully serious) comment that the Army Experience Center’s Pentagon 
program director, Maj. Larry Dillard, told me in Philadelphia: “Tell the 
truth— don’t say bad things.” As if the “truth” is that which only reﬂects 
the “good” aspects of the U.S. Army.
What does one do as an ethnographer when a full- bird colonel, your 

162 the labor of virtual soldiers
principal research subject, threatens you? Granted, the context was in 
joking hyperbole, during a casual hallway conversation with other Army 
Game Project executives, but I had been around Wardynski and those 
who knew him long enough to understand that his threats, however 
metaphorical and offhand, were not to be taken lightly. As I have 
described above, Wardynski liked to refer to himself as “the Godfather,” 
and some developers delighted in this practice as well, comparing him 
to both Francis Ford Coppola’s Godfather character and another colonel 
ﬁgure nicknamed “Godfather” in Evan Wright’s book (2004) and hbo 
miniseries Generation Kill (2008). Wardynski had at times channeled a 
maﬁa ruthlessness in his business and employment practices— mostly 
due to ﬁscal and institutional necessity, but perhaps sometimes, devel-
opers felt, simultaneously due to vendetta as a “price for failure.”
I have often returned to this conversation to wonder about what 
Wardynski was trying to achieve in making the comparison between 
the Army Game Project and the Maﬁa (and, by extension, my questioned 
loyalty to the Army Game Project “family”). I have also pondered why 
he allowed the research I was doing to even be carried out in the ﬁrst 
place if he felt that such a metaphorical threat was needed. The most 
direct answer I ever received from him was that, as an academic and a 
military academy officer, he felt that it was his obligation to support 
research in whatever manner was plausible. I do not have any reason 
to doubt the sincerity of this sentiment, as Wardynski has demonstrated 
a willingness not only to be open to new ideas but also to act on them. 
Now, however, I understand that through his Maﬁa- couched threat, 
Wardynski was anticipating my witnessing of the already- planned lay-
offs and my recording of the ugly fallout of that event. He had given me 
research access in 2006, when the Army Game Project was at its apex 
in funding and scope, but by the time of this encounter the project was 
underfunded and crashing, along with the global economy. In 2006 he 
had not foreseen that I would witness the unravelling of the project, 
and he was now hedging against what I might write about all of that.
I view my exceptional access to the Army Game Project— an institu-
tion competing for funding and legitimacy— as being somewhat politi-
cally motivated, due to the potential utility my research and presence 
afforded Wardynski and others in several areas. I do not think that it is 

the labor of virtual soldiers 
163
unreasonable to consider that I was, in fact, a “spy” of sorts in my abil-
ity to travel from institution to institution on a regular basis. I am not 
naïve enough to think that the heavy hindrances of work politics did 
not cloud my relationships with individuals. Some game developers 
became friends, and I inevitably came to see things from their point of 
view on a more regular basis. I do, however, think that the veneer of 
objectivity that was afforded me as an outside academic helped me ask 
difficult questions more easily and access information that was unavail-
able to those typically embedded in the Army Game Project work envi-
ronments. Although I never conveyed any information that would 
compromise my ﬁrst obligation to protect the individuals among whom 
I was conducting research, I was honest when others asked my opinion 
on the project and the general atmosphere of various offices. My inter-
views often felt like a much- needed chance for people to discuss their 
work frustrations and aspirations.
Many people compared me to embedded reporters, or regular jour-
nalists, and of all the institutions I came into contact with, the sed was 
by far the wariest of my presence— both within their building at Red-
stone Arsenal and anywhere else— and the most circumspect in their 
communication. Had it not been for Wardynski’s blessing, I do not think 
that I would have ever set foot on base in Alabama. Other companies, 
like Ignited, seemed appreciative that an academic was attempting to 
take their product on its own terms, rather than beginning with criti-
cisms, while others— including Wardynski himself— seemed to view me 
as a chance for good pr, another way to get their “message” out. The 
company of an external academic researcher perhaps added a small 
amount of legitimacy within military and government circles to the proj-
ect, but I do not fool myself in thinking that I was generally seen as add-
ing value to the Army Game Project by merely being present. In these 
different forms of inclusion within the institutional structure of the Army 
Game Project, I came to understand that my own labor as an anthropol-
ogist was being drawn on in some small way; like the developers I was 
researching, I also was enlisted as a virtual soldier.
In this book I have argued that virtual soldiering is central to how 
contemporary U.S. military institutions exert power over individuals. 
Virtual soldiering is a form of immaterial labor that does not require a 

164 the labor of virtual soldiers
person to be an actual soldier or even to have the desire to become one 
in the future. The developers of America’s Army and I were both enlisted 
as virtual soldiers in some regard, but the entire franchise of America’s 
Army did so in myriad other ways for different individuals: at the Virtual 
Army Experience and the Army Experience Center; through the Real 
Hero stories like that of Tommy Rieman, juxtaposed against the enemy 
other of America’s Army; through Wardynski’s careful positioning of the 
game in the midst of social and political controversy around violence in 
games; through staged invasions by actual soldiers of video game con-
ferences in Los Angeles; and in comic books or through the experiences 
of players like PJ, described in the opening section of this book. In all 
of these contexts, virtual soldiering happens.
Virtual soldiering happens in other contexts that go well beyond one 
game, too. The years since the “invasion of e3” that debuted America’s 
Army at the Los Angeles Convention Center in 2002 have witnessed a 
rapid evolution in military entertainment; entire sectors of the economy, 
forms of labor, methods of entertainment, and networks of information 
are now quantitatively and qualitatively more militarized. America’s 
Army marks a signiﬁcant chapter in the militarization of American cul-
ture, which has been happening since at least the 1950s. From a histor-
ical perspective, the networks of power and production of America’s Army 
examined here should not be viewed as an exception or a curious anom-
aly, but as a harbinger of more advanced recruitment and advertising 
methods— not only for the military, but also for corporations and prod-
ucts. Games and virtual interfaces are increasingly becoming used for 
recruitment, education, training, and weapons development. They are 
being used to mediate and carry out actual ﬁghting just as they are also 
commonly being used as vehicles for entertainment, socialization, and 
even news and information. As these technologies of the visual continue 
to blend what we think of as being virtual and actual experience, virtual 
mediation will become more pronounced, not only in everyday enter-
tainment and socialization but also in war and our consumption of it.
It is unclear how much of a role America’s Army will continue to have 
in this process, though. After the closing of the California studio the 
development of the game was fully absorbed by the sed and production 
moved entirely to Alabama. Past executive producer Phil DeLuca pre-

the labor of virtual soldiers 
165
dicted this happening two months before the layoffs, indicating to me 
that the project was “positioned well for the sed to take it over. It is a 
government entity and it’s got a lot of inertia. And it’s not fast- moving 
inertia. They like to control things, and anything that’s outside of their 
direct control they’ll eventually pull in. They’re slow, they’re the starﬁsh, 
so they’ll just keep on pulling until that clam gives it up.” Though still 
operational in 2016, the project has had to cut many of its ventures, 
including the Virtual Army Experience, which ironically won two Effie 
awards in the preeminent marketing awards ceremony held two weeks 
prior to the project- wide layoffs in 2009. The vae won a gold in the 
“government/institutional/recruitment” category and a silver for “brand 
experience,” and the army and Ignited also won a bronze Effie for the 
Army Experience Center in the “brand experience” category in 2010. 
Now renamed the Army Game Studio within the sed, America’s Army 3 
continues to be minimally supported, with software bug ﬁxes and 
updated versions released on a semiregular basis. In 2010 Wardynski 
retired from the army to become the superintendent of Huntsville, Ala-
bama, city schools, a relocation that indicates that his ongoing involve-
ment in the project is not out of the question, especially given the ties 
between educational and military institutions discussed in chapter ﬁve.
In 2013 the sed sought to reignite enthusiasm for America’s Army with 
the release of a new game, America’s Army: Proving Grounds, largely 
based on America’s Army 3, but with a more simpliﬁed and streamlined 
play style. Czervenia persisted as a menace in both the game and the 
America’s Army Graphic Novel series, which continues to be published 
as of 2016 as free digital downloads for tablets, smartphones, and pcs. 
Over the years since the publication of America’s Army 3 in 2009, the 
Czervenian enemy has come to more explicitly parallel a Russian enemy 
through its visual iconography, a scare- tactic development that is not 
without consequence, given the ongoing proxy wars between Putin’s 
Russia and the United States– led nato alliance in both Syria and Ukraine. 
This evolving unreal enemy of America’s Army is a far cry from the 
vaguely Middle Eastern ski- masked terrorist enemy of the original 2002 
game. Though such representations are a reﬂection of current geopo-
litical conditions, they also discipline the expectations of media users 
to match possible future realities of war.

166 the labor of virtual soldiers
The next American war— whenever or wherever it may be— will no 
doubt involve the enlistment of virtual soldiers drilled in other, similar 
ways that simultaneously shape expectations of war and attune bodies 
to future military institutional needs for the labor of war (see also Parikka 
2014). Just as the skills of drone pilots have been honed through games 
and simulations, perhaps new forms of virtual soldiering are already 
being shaped by the rapidly developing technologies of the smartphone, 
augmented reality, and virtual reality. These technologies of the digital 
certainly work toward other ends, which may come to mitigate and 
reduce militarized violence and ways of understanding an increasingly 
interconnected world. For the near future, however, game and simula-
tion technologies will continue to take center stage in the process of 
training a “reserve army” of virtual soldiers, the everyday consumers 
and users of media who are America’s digital army.

167
Notes
1. America’s Digital Army
 1. All given names that initially appear without a surname are pseudonyms. 
Names that are accompanied by a surname are the actual names of 
individuals. See note 6 for further naming details and conventions.
 2. See Stahl 2007 for an insightful investigation about the news media 
portrayal of Iraq and Saddam Hussein prior to and during the ﬁrst several 
years of the Iraq occupation.
 3. See http://pc.gamespy.com/pc/americas-army/951010p1.html, accessed 
May 3, 2014.
 4. Personal email from Mike Zyda to the author, dated May 12, 2006.
 5. When I write of “institutional power” I understand it to mean biopower 
and disciplinary power as formulated in the Foucauldian tradition.
 6. Note on interviews: All names of interviewees with surnames are their 
actual names. In most cases these are individuals who are already 
identiﬁable due to being in a more public position. More often, however, I 
have anonymized interviewee names to protect their identity as employ-
ees, sometimes creating composites that combine two or more individu-
als. Anonymized interviewee names are always ﬁrst names, if a name 
appears at all. All quoted interview material was either audio- recorded 
and transcribed or recorded directly in my ﬁeldnotes. Everything within 
quotes is verbatim dialogue, although I have taken the liberty to edit 
redundancies, small grammatical issues, and verbal tics that would affect 
the ease of reading. For quoted interviews I follow Chicago Manual of Style 
suggestions for use of ellipses. Ellipses inside brackets ([ . . . ]) indicate 
that a section of the interview has been deleted for the sake of readability. 
Regular ellipses within quoted interviews ( . . . ) indicate a pause in the 
conversation or an incomplete or interrupted thought.
 7. Der Derian 2001; Hardt and Negri 2000, 2004; Lenoir 2000; Lutz 2006; 
and Turse 2008 are among some prominent examples to use these various 
phrasings, all of which attempt to describe the same phenomenon.

168 notes to pages 39–53
2. The Art of Persuasion
 1. Formerly called stricom (Simulation Training and Instrumentation 
Command).
 2. http://www.linkedin.com/in/caseywardynski, accessed November 13, 2015.
 3. http://www.linkedin.com/in/caseywardynski, accessed November 13, 2015.
 4. The books that academics keep communicate their research orientation 
and interests, and this was true for Wardynski. His office shelves promi-
nently displayed volumes such as The Leadership Secrets of Colin Powell 
(Harari 2002); Freakonomics: A Rogue Economist Explores the Hidden Side 
of Everything (Levitt and Dubner 2005); Changing the Game: How Video 
Games Are Transforming the Future of Business (Edery and Mollick 2009); 
The 9/11 Commission Report (National Commission on Terrorist Attacks 
2004); Going to the Mines to Look for Diamonds: Experimenting with 
Military Recruiting Stations in Malls (Fricker and Fair 2003); and movies 
such as Gettysburg, Braveheart, Wall Street, Trading Places, Boiler Room, 
Stripes (a professed favorite of his), and We Were Soldiers.
 5. From his perspective, some of these efforts would likely include the 
Department of Defense– funded Institute for Creative Technologies’ games 
Full Spectrum Warrior (Pandemic Studios 2004) and Full Spectrum 
Warrior: Ten Hammers (Pandemic Studios 2006), as well as the navy game 
Strike and Retrieve (U.S. Navy 2005). Although it has proven in the 
intervening years since this interview to be more successful than America’s 
Army in terms of military institutionalization, Wardynski is likely also 
referring to army training simulation competitor peo- stri and their 
contracts for Bohemia Interactive’s Virtual Battlespace simulation franchise 
(vbs2 and vbs3), the official training simulations for the U.S. Army.
 6. Through ﬁndings discovered through Freedom of Information Act 
requests, Gamespot reports that the total cost for the Army Game Project 
between 2000 and 2009 was $32.8 million, averaging $3.28 million per 
year during the game’s ﬁrst ten years of development (Sinclair 2009).
 7. Steam is the leader in content distribution for digital download of pc 
games and is the most popular method of accessing America’s Army 3. 
Fileplanet predates Steam and is another method of downloading digital 
game content.
 8. Public relations documents written by Wardynski (2009) for selling the 
game’s legitimacy to military and government representatives draw 
explicitly on literature about persuasive technologies and behavioral 
economics, which was Wardynski’s PhD specialization.
 9. Fogg’s book (2003) directly inﬂuenced Wardynski’s approach to games as 
tools for persuasion.

notes to pages 56–74 
169
 10. See the America’s Army 3 faq statement, page 30: http://aa3.americas 
army.com/documents/AA3_Knowledge_Center_FAQ.pdf, accessed July 2, 
2014.
 11. This is a summary of a lengthy text. Title 10, Chapter 307, § 3062 (U.S. 
Congress 2011) provides for “an Army that is capable, in conjunction with 
other armed forces, of . . . overcoming any nations responsible for 
aggressive acts that imperil the peace and security of the United 
States. . . . [T]he Army . . . includes land combat and service forces and 
such aviation and water transport as may be organic therein.”
 12. See http://www.unr.edu/art/delappe/gaming/dead_in_iraq/dead_in 
_iraq%20jpegs.html, accessed July 4, 2014.
 13. See http://www.americasdiplomat.com/, accessed February 16, 2012. 
Page no longer available online. See http://nytimes-se.com/todays-paper 
/NYTimes-SE.pdf, accessed July 4, 2014, for a pdf copy of a spoof of the 
New York Times written by DeLappe that references the “America’s 
Diplomat” project.
3. The Virtual and the Real
 1. Here I draw on Jean Baudrillard’s thought regarding hyperreality and 
“the precession of simulacra,” in which the simulation of an event 
precedes the event itself and, paradoxically, acts as the means of bringing 
about the event (1994; see also Eco 1986).
 2. PJ’s combat experiences in chapter 1 take place within Czervenia.
 3. “The only good Czervo is a dead Czervo,” echoing pejorative statements 
made about American Indians (Meider 1993) and other dehumanizing 
racial slurs used against Japanese, Vietnamese, Korean, and other soldiers 
of various ethnicities who have been enemies of the American military at 
one point or another. “Czervo” later became a regularly used word in the 
America’s Army Graphic Novel series.
 4. Axe products have been advertised in military- themed video games such 
as Splinter Cell: Chaos Theory and Ghost Recon: Advanced Warﬁghter in 
addition to Axe’s very own series of browser- based marketing games, no 
longer available online, that were loaded with male heterosexual fantasy. 
Such symbiotic and networked relationships between various products 
and industries— deodorants, video games, the military— are usually not 
recognized by most individuals. The rotc cadet whose idea it was to use 
Axe body spray as a U.S. Army– issued weapon, however, made this 
connection.
 5. Simons paints a different picture of Fayetteville and Fort Bragg than Lutz, 
one that is exclusively from the point of view of the Special Forces soldiers 

170 notes to pages 76–91
with whom she conducted ﬁeldwork. She describes how a growing 
emphasis on missions involving “direct action” (i.e., combat) is changing 
the type of soldier interested in joining the Special Forces. This emphasis, 
Simons laments, is at the expense of the other three areas of Special 
Forces operations that do not involve direct combat but nevertheless 
make up the overwhelming bulk of Special Forces missions: unconven-
tional warfare, foreign internal defense, and special reconnaissance. The 
iterations of America’s Army: Special Forces (versions 2.0 to 2.8.4) empha-
size direct action and reinforce this trend.
 6. One curator of the Bang the Machine exhibition, Stanford video game 
historian and media collections curator Henry Lowood, further detailed 
this event to me in a personal interview, November 2008.
 7. See PJ’s introductory section at the beginning of the book for a descrip-
tion of how in- game combat life- saving mechanics work in America’s 
Army 3.
 8. One major requirement for becoming a Real Hero was distinction through 
medals. Every Real Hero had been awarded either a Bronze Star with “V” 
Device, a Silver Star, or the Distinguished Service Cross.
 9. Originally at http://www.americasarmy.com/realheroes/index.php?id 
¼4&view¼bio, accessed April 6, 2010 (content no longer available). 
Wolford’s proﬁle and Real Hero video biography are republished at the 
time of writing at http://www.liveleak.com/view?i=dea_1221257938, 
accessed November 16, 2015.
 10. For a transcript of the speech, see http://www.foxnews.com/story 
/2007/01/23/transcript-presidnt-bush-state-union-address/, accessed 
November 18, 2015. Rieman was also awarded the Purple Heart, which is 
given to soldiers who experience physical injury sustained by combat. Its 
omission here is telling.
 11. Lutz (2001) details the problematic recurrence and history of the idea of 
soldiers as “super citizens” whose labor is privileged above other forms of 
work.
4. The Full- Spectrum Soft Sell
 1. Marcus is conﬂating two separate marine corps commercials, one 
involving a man climbing a cliff (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X 
SBnJ7H-CAc, accessed December 6, 2015) and another involving ﬁghting 
a dragon (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=62tnJtLBQzQ, accessed 
December 6, 2015).
 2. The aec was not a formal part of the Army Game Project and was 

notes to pages 93–108 
171
managed out of the Pentagon. The vae was managed by both oema and 
the sed in Alabama. Ignited was responsible for the concept and implan-
tation of both, and America’s Army was the core game software underly-
ing both.
 3. At the time of this interview Long was co- ceo of Seattle- based Zombie 
Studios, one of the contracting software developers of the vae along the 
America’s Army California- based game development team.
 4. See Wardynski’s comments about esrb ratings and America’s Army 
products in my chapter 2 interview. The issue of whether the vae was 
age- appropriate continued to be a controversy throughout its existence 
and came to a head at several occasions (e.g., Rutledge 2008).
 5. For the teaser most typically played at the vae, see https://www.youtube 
.com/watch?v=JU19Bsw-rss#t=21, accessed November 18, 2015.
 6. In gamer jargon “respawn” refers to the gaming convention in which a 
player’s avatar returns to life after being defeated; “god mode” refers to a 
state in video games in which the player’s avatar is invulnerable to damage.
 7. Personal ﬁeldnotes. See also http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B51 
abXkmN_I&feature=related, accessed November 18, 2015, for similar 
phrasings. Similar claims were made by America’s Army game developers 
about their experiences at mini Basic Combat Training.
 8. For a representative example of a Real Hero video that was shown at the 
vae, see https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2ivHf5OwmGA#t=14, 
accessed July 21, 2014.
 9. http://www.americasarmy.com/realheroes/index.php?id=3&view=bio, 
accessed June 23, 2011 (no longer available online).
 10. For Rieman’s Real Hero video, see https://www.youtube.com/watch?v 
=30rVaa4VdRY, accessed July 22, 2014.
 11. The aec was run through the chief marketing officer for the army’s office, 
which was organized under the Office of the Assistant Secretary of the 
Army (Manpower and Reserve Affairs), Marketing and Recruiting 
division.
 12. See, for example, Carroll 2009 (cnn video report); Leland 2009 (New 
York Times article); Williams 2009 (nbc Nightly News report); and Denvir 
2008 (Free Speech Radio News).
 13. Amy Lindstrom, Ignited public relations representative, personal interview.
 14. Maj. Larry Dillard, personal interview; Al Flood, personal interview.
 15. phase 4 funding organization, the Heinz Foundation, confusingly writes, 
“Fifty- ﬁve percent of phase 4’s students are referred from school districts 
where over forty- one percent of the students are from low income 

172 notes to pages 108–125
families.” http://www.heinz.org/Interior.aspx?id=417&view=entry&eid 
=566, accessed July 28, 2014.
 16. http://www.heinz.org/Interior.aspx?id=417&view=entry&eid=566, 
accessed July 28, 2014.
 17. Flood was also a career army officer as a helicopter pilot, generals’ aide, 
and rotc instructor. At about the same time as the aec’s permanent— and 
planned— closure, Casey Wardynski likewise retired from the army and 
became the superintendent of the Huntsville, Alabama, city schools in 
June 2010.
 18. This parallels the militarization of other activist movements described by 
Enloe (2000, 14– 34).
 19. “Killing in the Name” has also been used by the military as a sonic 
instrument of torture on some of the detainees at Guantanamo Bay. 
Playing the music at high volumes for indeﬁnite periods of time is a 
practice antithetical to all messages within the music itself and demon-
strates how any material or immaterial thing can be militarized. Of this 
practice, Rage Against the Machine guitarist Tom Morello is quoted to 
have said, “The fact that music I helped create was used in crimes against 
humanity sickens me” (bbc 2009).
5. The Military Entertainment Complex
 1. The most prominent examples include Chaplin and Ruby 2005, 192– 221; 
Crogan 2011; Der Derian 2001, 2003; Gray 1997, 2003, 2005; Halter 2006, 
175– 238; Herz 1999, 197– 213; Kline et al. 2003, 179– 83; Lenoir 2000, 2003; 
Lenoir and Lowood 2005; Li 2003; Mead 2013; Nieborg 2005, 2009; 
Pasanen 2009; Stahl 2010, 91– 112.
 2. Anonymous quoted material in this chapter derives from many interviews 
that I conducted with America’s Army developers over the course of one 
and a half years, between November 2007 and April 2009.
 3. See http://ict.usc.edu/about/pdf-overviews/, accessed May 1, 2014, for 
an overview list of ict projects. Gonzalez (2012) further details similar 
“cultural awareness” exercises for military training.
 4. I base this history of America’s Army on accounts described in Chaplin and 
Ruby (2005), Halter (2006), and Zyda et al. (2005), as well as my own 
interviews and email communication with Zyda, Wardynski, and approxi-
mately ten other America’s Army employees.
 5. Orson Scott Card’s book Ender’s Game (1991) also was an inspirational 
text to other closely associated individuals in the military gaming ﬁeld 
(Chaplin and Ruby 2005, 195). In the book a young boy’s skills at directing 

notes to pages 129–137 
173
apparently simulated space battles prove to be the strategic edge in a war 
to save humanity against an alien bug- like species.
 6. See http://hardforum.com/showthread.php?t=1428555, accessed 
November 30, 2015. The former developer continues, writing that “that’s 
the short version of the story. The whole story could ﬁll a book.”
 7. See http://www.sandia.gov/adaptive-training-systems/Fact%20Sheets 
/ATS%20FactSheet%20CogSys%20Sheet%2010-04-06%20edit.pdf, 
accessed November 30, 2015.
 8. The Future Soldier Trainer (fst) and Future Soldier Training System 
(fsts) were two separate products designed with the goal of reaching 
new enlistees, with the underlying theory that virtual engagement with 
new recruits reduces attrition. The Future Soldiers program has addition-
ally implemented mobile Android and ios devices in its program. See 
http://www.futuresoldiers.com/training/index.jsp?contentId=fs_fsts, 
accessed June 4, 2014.
 9. Zombie relied on military contracts to supplement its revenue from the 
commercial sector. Future Force Company Commander (f2c2), a simula-
tion meant to depict a technologically savvy army- of- the- future, was one 
such contract that Zombie completed for the military contractor, saic. 
Zombie also played a signiﬁcant role in outsourced development work for 
the Virtual Army Experience and America’s Army 3.
 10. The message read, in part: “In the early 1940s, Japan learned an import-
ant lesson— ‘let the sleeping giant lie.’ We may not react swiftly, but when 
we do it’s with unstoppable force. . . . The Army has partners that deal 
with cybercrime as a matter of course. These include not just various 
Army it departments, but also the Department of Justice, the Secret 
Service, and the Federal Bureau of Investigations [sic]. . . . Allow me to 
speak directly to the bad guys for a moment: When you get banned, know 
that we know and have records showing you were doing something that’s 
a violation of terms of service, breaks your eula, and also happens to be 
against the law. We know who you are, and can track down where you 
play from. We have incontrovertible proof you did something illegal. The 
Army is angry, and we’re coming for you.” See http://www.unknown 
worlds.com/forums/loﬁversion/index.php/t86439.html, accessed July 
24, 2016.
 11. One example, Bode said, was in simple activities, like riding in another 
person’s car. A government employee “technically can’t ride in my car or 
any other contractor’s because that can be construed as giving him a 
favor. But I can ride in his car. So when we go to lunch, I can’t treat him. 

174 notes to pages 138–153
He can treat me. Weird stuff [that] can really impact your relationship 
with those people.”
 12. See http://archive.fortune.com/magazines/fortune/fortune500/2012 
/full_list/201_300.html, accessed June 6, 2014.
 13. See http://arcadeheroes.com/2007/07/20/americas-army-coming-to 
-arcades/, accessed June 8, 2014.
 14. See http://www3.ausa.org/webint/DeptAUSANews.nsf/byid/PGRH-7N2 
QQU, accessed June 8, 2014.
 15. See http://www.army.mil/article/12589/, accessed November 30, 2015.
 16. During my three visits to the sed, extremely tight security restrictions 
dictated that I be escorted at all times, including bathroom breaks, when 
inside any building. To enter Redstone Arsenal I had to undergo an 
extensive security check, and I often had to be picked up by project 
managers at the entrance to the base, about a ﬁfteen- minute drive away 
from the sed. My visits consequently placed considerably more strain on 
the employees there than they did on employees in Emeryville. To further 
complicate both game development and ﬁeldwork, a number of govern-
ment ﬁrewalls designed to prevent cyberattacks acted as continual 
barriers to the development process of America’s Army. Workers at the 
sed using government computers for the game, for example, could not 
download, access, or play their own game from the Internet at certain 
points in time.
 17. Perforce revision control software, Adobe Flash, and Beast lighting 
software for games were three speciﬁc examples cited to me by developers.
 18. This blog post has circulated throughout America’s Army user forums 
since its original posting in 2005. See http://archive.forum.americasarmy 
.com/viewtopic.php?t=155861, accessed July 4, 2014; and http://battle 
tracker.com/forum/america-s-army-3-0-forums/america-s-army-3-0-dis 
cussion/p2676712-new-message-from-the-dev-s/, accessed July 4, 2014.
6. The Labor of Virtual Soldiers
 1. For a survey of interactive industry employment norms at the time of the 
events described here, see http://www.gamecareerguide.com/features 
/416/the_game_industry_salary_survey_2007.php?page=1, accessed 
August 13, 2014.
 2. Valve’s Team Fortress II and Left 4 Dead were popular studio favorites.
 3. See www.milspecmonkey.com, which designs and sells military gear and 
patches.
 4. Such claims are also made for other Army Game Project products, like the 
Virtual Army Experience.

notes to pages 153–160 
175
 5. See, for example, http://forums.dmccaffer.co.uk/index.php?showtopic 
=2621, accessed August 15, 2014.
 6. For the video, see https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aY35d-lTVoY, 
accessed August 15, 2014; https://www.facebook.com/video/video.php 
?v=209342018104, accessed August 17, 2014.
 7. Text and video located at https://www.facebook.com/video/video.php 
?v=209342018104, accessed November 20, 2015.
 8. The blogs are no longer online but were originally available at http://
www.aa3.americasarmy.com/about/article.php?blogid=1, accessed 
March 1, 2010; and http://www.americasarmy.com/about/blogs.php 
?blogid=2, accessed March 1, 2010.
 9. http://www.goarmy.com/downloads/americas_army.jsp, accessed 
March 1, 2010.
 10. The blog was originally posted at http://forum.americasarmy.com/view 
topic.php?t=269828, accessed November 13, 2009 (no longer available 
online).
 11. As the sed project manager of America’s Army two years later told me over 
the phone regarding the defunding of many previous Army Game Project 
projects, including that of the Emeryville studio, “It’s political. It’s all 
political.” Another executive in the Army Game Project reported to me 
that “there was deﬁnitely mismanagement of funds” and that it was “a 
massive management failure” in not even having the money to work on 
the game after it was released.
 12. For republications of the now deleted forum post, see http://www.game 
politics.com/2009/06/20/america039s-army-launches-new-version 
-sacks-developers-moves-hq, accessed August 15, 2014; http://www.game 
spot.com/forums/pc-mac-discussion-1000004/americas-army-develop 
er-explains-what-happend-26925250/, accessed August 15, 2014.


177
Glossary
The military’s preferred defense against civilian scrutiny: a mix of 
abbreviations, acronyms, and new concepts, all imaginatively arrayed 
on PowerPoint slides, leaving even a semiotician . . . in a state of 
slightly bewildered awe.
james der derian, Virtuous War
aa3: America’s Army 3, released on June 17, 2009.
aafa: America’s Army Future Applications was located in Picatinny Arsenal, 
New Jersey.
aaga: America’s Army Government Applications, located at Virtual Heroes.
aapa: America’s Army Public Applications had offices in California located, in 
chronological order, at the Naval Postgraduate School’s moves Institute, 
Fort Ord, and Emeryville.
aec: The Army Experience Center, a combination of ﬁve army recruiting 
centers with a video game arcade and activity center, was located in the 
Franklin Mills Mall in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
crunch time: An unspeciﬁed period of time in game development work that 
most typically leads up to a release or update of software. Work hours are 
usually drastically increased to the point that many are forced to neglect 
social and family obligations to stay at work late or even overnight.
dcs: Digital Consulting Services was the employer of most of the game 
developers working on America’s Army in California.
fps: First- person shooter refers to a genre of video games in which the gamer 
primarily or exclusively plays from a ﬁrst- person perspective within a 3d 
environment. The most visible representation of the gamer is typically a 
gun, and the most common means of play is shooting at targets— human, 
alien, and so on— in armed combat. A subset of the fps genre is the 
military- themed fps game. It is becoming more common for fps games to 
offer a single- player narrative game, in which combat takes place against 

178 glossary
a computer opponent, alongside an online multiplayer option, which 
enables gamers to play against human opponents in arena matches. 
America’s Army is an anomaly in this trend, offering no single- player 
narrative outside of basic training, and the majority of gameplay happens 
in online or locally networked multiplayer combat.
“honor”: A unit of measurement and prestige that was given to player- 
characters within the online game of America’s Army, typically ranging 
from 0 to 99. “Honor” is an aggregate of many numbers and is a generic 
indicator that measures the skill of players, the length of time a player 
has played as a speciﬁc character, and the ability or willingness of a 
player to conform to the rules of engagement (roe) in the game. Players 
who commit more roe violations on a regular basis generally have less 
“honor,” as do newer and less skilled players.
Ignited: The Los Angeles– based marketing agency for the America’s Army 
franchise, which was responsible for the promotional advertisement for 
the online game, as well as the design, implementation, and production 
of both the Virtual Army Experience and the Army Experience Center.
mos: Military Occupational Specialty.
moves Institute: The Modeling, Virtual Environments, and Simulation Institute 
at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, California, was started by 
Mike Zyda and was the ﬁrst development studio of America’s Army.
nps: Naval Postgraduate School, in Monterey, California.
oema: The Office of Economic and Manpower Analysis, located in the U.S. 
Military Academy (West Point) Department of Social Sciences; the direct 
military supervising office for all projects related to America’s Army, 
including those located at the sed.
roe: rules of engagement.
saic: Science Applications International Corporation, a large military 
contractor that was the “prime” contractor for America’s Army. In 2013 
saic split into two companies, Leidos and a new company that retains the 
name saic.
sed: Software Engineering Directorate, a U.S. government entity located at 
Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, which oversaw the project management of 
the Army Game Project, including projects such as government trainers, 
the Virtual Army Experience, and the America’s Army video game.
sme: subject matter expert, typically a soldier (noncommissioned officer or 
one of higher rank) who advises civilians about speciﬁc aspects of the 
military. In the case of the vae, smes are essentially tour guides and hired 
employees of Ignited who have been enlisted in the army. In the case of 
America’s Army and other Army Game Project training tools, senior 

glossary 
179
enlisted smes advised game developers regarding the content and presen-
tation of the game.
vae: The Virtual Army Experience, a mobile mission simulator that travels 
throughout the United States.
Virtual Heroes: Located in Raleigh, North Carolina, and now owned by 
Applied Research Associates, Virtual Heroes was previously an indepen-
dent company and the development studio for the America’s Army 
Government Applications contract. Virtual Heroes contributed to the 
development of Moonbase Alpha, a nasa- funded free- to- play public 
simulation. The company, which has emerged as a leading serious games 
developer, works on additional projects for U.S. government organiza-
tions, such as the fbi, by using the Unreal game engine (the same engine 
used by America’s Army) to develop government training simulations.
Zombie Studios: Zombie Studios, now closed, was a Seattle- based studio that 
regularly worked as a subcontracted developer on Army Game Project 
material (the vae and America’s Army 3) and other Department of 
Defense projects (e.g., Future Force Company Commander), in addition to 
developing independent commercial games.


181
References
Achter, Paul. 2010. “Unruly Bodies: The Rhetorical Domestication of Twenty- 
First- Century Veterans of War.” Quarterly Journal of Speech 96 (1): 46– 68.
Agamben, Giorgio. 2005. State of Exception. Translated by Kevin Attell. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Allen, Robertson. 2009. “The Army Rolls through Indianapolis: Fieldwork at 
the Virtual Army Experience.” Transformative Works and Cultures 1 (2). 
http://journal.transformativeworks.org/index.php/twc/article/view 
/80/97, accessed August 15, 2014.
—. 2011. “The Unreal Enemy of America’s Army.” Games and Culture 6 
(1): 38– 60.
—. 2012. “Games without Tears, Wars without Frontiers.” In War, 
Technology, Anthropology, edited by Koen Stroken, 83– 93. New York: 
Berghahn Books.
—. 2013. “Virtual Soldiers, Cognitive Laborers.” In Virtual War and 
Magical Death: Technologies and Imaginaries for Terror and Killing, edited 
by Sverker Finnström and Neil Whitehead, 152– 70. Durham: Duke 
University Press.
—. 2014. “America’s Army and the Military Recruitment and Manage-
ment of ‘Talent’: An Interview with Colonel Casey Wardynski.” Journal of 
Gaming and Virtual Worlds 6 (2): 179– 91.
—. 2015. “Software and Soldier Life- Cycles of Recruitment, Training, and 
Rehabilitation.” In “The War of My Generation”: American Youth Culture 
and the War on Terror, edited by David Kieran, 144– 67. New Brunswick nj: 
Rutgers University Press.
American Civil Liberties Union. 2008. Soldiers of Misfortune: Abusive U.S. 
Military Recruitment and Failure to Protect Child Soldiers. http://www 
.aclu.org/pdfs/humanrights/crc_report_20080513.pdf, accessed August 
15, 2014.
Army Game Project. 2005. America’s Army Training Manual. U.S. Army. 
http://americasarmy.ﬁlefront.com/ﬁle/Instruction_Manual_

182 references
PDF;8203#Download, accessed July 10, 2014 (no longer available 
online).
—. 2007. “The Virtual Army Experience Launched!” February 12. http://
www.americasarmy.com/intel/article.php?t=248663, accessed April 13, 
2008 (no longer available online).
—. 2008. “America’s Army Medic Training Helps Save a Life.” January 8. 
http://www.americasarmy.com/intel/article.php?t=271086, accessed 
April 2, 2008 (no longer available online).
Arquilla, John, and David Ronfeldt, eds. 2001. Networks and Netwars: The 
Future of Terror, Crime, and Militancy. Santa Monica: rand.
Baudrillard, Jean. 1994. Simulacra and Simulation. Translated by Sheila Faria 
Glaser. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
—. 1995. The Gulf War Did Not Take Place. Sydney: Power Publications.
bbc News. 2009. “What is anti- X Factor song Killing in the Name all about?” 
bbc. December 18. http://news.bbc.co.uk.nyud.net/2/hi/uk_news 
/magazine/8419446.stm, accessed July 4, 2014.
—. 2010. “Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2 takes $1bn in sales.” bbc. 
January 13. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/8457335.stm, 
accessed June 26, 2014.
Berardi, Franco “Bifo.” 2009a. Precarious Rhapsody: Semiocapitalism and the 
Pathologies of the Post- Alpha Generation. Edited by Erik Empson and 
Stevphen Shukaitis. Translated by Ariana Bove, Erik Empson, Michael 
Goddard, Giuseppina Mecchia, and Antonella Schintu. London: Minor 
Compositions.
—. 2009b. The Soul at Work: From Alienation to Autonomy. Translated by 
Francesca Cadel and Giuseppina Mecchia. Los Angeles: Semiotext(e).
Bickford, Andrew. 2009. “Anthropology and humint.” In The Counter- 
Counterinsurgency Manual: Or, Notes on Demilitarizing American Society, 
135– 51. Chicago: Prickly Paradigm.
Bingham, Amy. 2011. “Pentagon’s nascar Sponsorship Gets a Green Light: 
Congress Rejects Measure to Cut Funding for Ads on Race Cars.” abc 
News. February 18. http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/politics/2011/0 
2/pentagons-nascar-sponsorship-gets-a-green-light-congress-rejects 
-measure-to-cut-funding-for-ads-on-r/, accessed June 26, 2014.
Borges, Jorge Luis. 1998. Collected Fictions. New York: Penguin.
Burgess, Lisa. 2008. “Army Reviews Incentive Program to Improve Retention 
or [sic] Captains.” Stars and Stripes. April 18. http://www.stripes.com 
/news/army-renews-incentive-program-to-improve-retention-or-cap-
tains-1.77789, accessed June 26, 2014.
Card, Orson Scott. 1991. Ender’s Game. New York: Tor.

references 
183
Carroll, Jason. 2009. “U.S. Army Video Game Recruiting.” cnn. January 14. 
Online video report. http://www.cnn.com/video/#/video/tech/2009 
/01/14/carroll.mall.recruiting.cnn, accessed July 24, 2014.
Chaplin, Heather, and Aaron Ruby. 2005. Smartbomb: The Quest for Art, 
Entertainment, and Big Bucks in the Videogame Revolution. Chapel Hill: 
Algonquin Books.
Chapman, Adam. 2004. “Bang the Machine: Computer Gaming Art and 
Artifacts @ Yerba Buena Center for the Arts.” Intelligent Agent 4 (2) 
(Spring). http://www.intelligentagent.com/archive/IA4_2reviewbang 
themachinechapman.pdf, accessed July 10, 2014.
Cork, Jeff. 2009. “Modern Warfare Sells Close to 5 Million in First Day.” 
Gameinformer. November 12. http://www.gameinformer.com/b/news 
/archive/2009/11/12/modern-warfare-2-sells-close-to-5-million-in-ﬁrst 
-day.aspx, accessed June 26, 2014.
Crogan, Patrick. 2011. Gameplay Mode: War, Simulation, and Technoculture. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Davis, Margaret, and Phillip Bossant, eds. 2004. America’s Army pc Game 
Vision and Realization: A Look at the Artistry, Technique, and Impact of the 
U.S. Army’s Groundbreaking Tool for Strategic Communication. Monterey 
ca: U.S. Army and moves Institute.
Davis, Mike. 1990. City of Quartz: Excavating the Future in Los Angeles. 
London: Verso.
Deleuze, Gilles. 1992. “Postscript on the Societies of Control.” October 59 
(Winter): 3– 7.
Denvir, Daniel. 2008. “Philly’s Military Amusement Park.” Free Speech Radio 
News. November 13. http://archive.fsrn.org/audio/newscast-thursday 
-november-13-2008/5309, accessed July 24, 2014; see also http://www 
.phillyimc.org/en/phillys-military-amusement-park, accessed July 24, 
2014.
Department of Defense, Office of Inspector General. 2005. “Development and 
Management of the Army Game Project.” Report No. d- 2005- 103. http://
www.dodig.mil/Audit/reports/FY05/05-103.pdf, accessed August 15, 
2014.
Der Derian, James. 2001. Virtuous War: Mapping the Military- Industrial- 
Media- Entertainment Network. Boulder: Westview Press.
—. 2003. “War as a Game.” The Brown Journal of World Affairs 10 (1): 
37– 48.
Dunnigan, James. 1992. The Complete Wargames Handbook: How to Play, 
Design, and Find Them. Revised edition. New York: Quill.
Dyer- Witheford, Nick, and Grieg De Peuter. 2005. “A Playful Multitude? 

184 references
Mobilising and Counter- Mobilising Immaterial Game Labour.” Fibrecul-
ture 5. http://www.journal.ﬁbreculture.org/issue5/depeuter_dyerwith 
eford.html, accessed August 15, 2014.
—. 2009. Games of Empire: Global Capitalism and Video Games. Minneap-
olis: University of Minnesota Press.
Eco, Umberto. 1986. “Travels in Hyperreality.” In Faith in Fakes, translated by 
William Weaver. London: Secker and Warburg.
Edery, David, and Ethan Mollick. 2009. Changing the Game: How Video Games 
Are Transforming the Future of Business. Upper Saddle River nj: Pearson 
Education.
Eisenhower, Dwight D. 1961. “Text of the Address by President Eisenhower.” 
White House press release. January 17. Published online by the Dwight D. 
Eisenhower Presidential Library. http://www.eisenhower.archives.gov 
/research/online_documents/farewell_address/1961_01_17_Press 
_Release.pdf, accessed May 13, 2014.
Enloe, Cynthia. 2000. Maneuvers: The International Politics of Militarizing 
Women’s Lives. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Entertainment Software Association (esa). 2008. Essential Facts about the 
Computer and Video Game Industry: 2008 Sales, Demographic, and Usage 
Data. http://www.theesa.com/facts/pdfs/esa_ef_2008.pdf, accessed 
May 1, 2014.
—. 2014. Essential Facts about the Computer and Video Game Industry: 
2014 Sales, Demographic, and Usage Data. http://www.theesa.com/wp 
-content/uploads/2014/10/ESA_EF_2014.pdf, accessed October 9, 2015.
—. 2015. Essential Facts about the Computer and Video Game Industry: 
2015 Sales, Demographic, and Usage Data. http://www.theesa.com/wp 
-content/uploads/2015/04/esa-Essential-Facts-2015.pdf, accessed 
October 9, 2015.
Faylor, Chris. 2009. “America’s Army Devs Laid Off Following Launch 
(Updated).” Shacknews. June 18. http://www.shacknews.com/article 
/59202/americas-army-devs-laid-off, accessed August 15, 2014.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2015. “2014 Crime in the United States.” 
https://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-u.s/2014/crime-in 
-the-u.s.-2014/tables/table-1, accessed January 31, 2016.
Feldman, Allen. 2004. “Deterritorialized Wars of Public Safety.” In State, 
Sovereignty, War: Civil Violence in Emerging Global Realities, edited by 
Bruce Kapferer, 16– 28. New York: Berghahn Books.
Fish Software. 2007. “Case Study: Fish Supports the U.S. Army Virtual Army 
Experience.” http://www.ﬁshsoftware.com/clients/vae.htm, accessed 
August 13, 2008 (no longer available online).

references 
185
Fogg, B. J. 2003. Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We 
Think and Do. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.
Foucault, Michel. 1992. The History of Sexuality: An Introduction. Vol. 1. 
Translated by Robert Hurley. New York: Vintage Books.
Freedman, Paul. 2013. Halfway Home. Documentary ﬁlm. Los Angeles: 
GoDigital.
Fricker, Ronald, and Christine Fair. 2003. Going to Malls to Look for Diamonds: 
Experimenting with Military Recruiting Stations in Malls. Santa Monica: 
rand.
Gilmore, Ruth Wilson. 2007. Golden Gulag: Prisons, Surplus, Crisis, and 
Opposition in Globalizing California. Berkeley: University of California 
Press.
Goldberger, Paul. 2013. “Exclusive Preview: Google’s New Built- From- Scratch 
Googleplex.” Vanity Fair. February 22. http://www.vanityfair.com/online 
/daily/2013/02/exclusive-preview-googleplex?mbid=social_twitter, 
accessed May 8, 2014.
González, Roberto. 2012. “World in a Bottle: Prognosticating Insurgency in 
Iraq and Afghanistan.” In War, Technology, Anthropology, edited by Koen 
Stroken. New York: Berghahn Books.
Graeber, David. 2004. Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology. Chicago: 
Prickly Paradigm.
Gray, Anne. 2004. Unsocial Europe: Social Protection or Flexploitation? 
London: Pluto.
Gray, Chris Hables. 1997. Postmodern War. New York: Guilford.
—. 2003. “Perpetual Revolution in Military Affairs, International 
Security, and Information.” In Bombs and Bandwidth: The Emerging 
Relationship Between Information Technology and Security, edited by 
Robert Latham, 199– 212. New York: New Press.
—. 2005. Peace, War, and Computers. New York: Routledge.
Greenwald, Glenn. 2014. “The Militarization of U.S. Police: Finally Dragged 
into the Light by the Horrors of Ferguson.” The Intercept. August 14. 
https://theintercept.com/2014/08/14/militarization-u-s-police-dragged 
-light-horrors-ferguson/, accessed September 12, 2015.
Greenwald, Will. 2007. “The Virtual Army Experience: The U.S. Army Brings 
Virtual to Potential Recruits with Its Touring Virtual Army Experience 
Exhibit.” cnet. October 2. http://www.cnet.com/news/the-virtual-army 
-experience, accessed August 10, 2016.
Gutmann, Matthew, and Catherine Lutz. 2010. Breaking Ranks: Iraq Veterans 
Speak Out against the War. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Halpern, Sue. 2008. “Virtual Iraq: Using Simulation to Treat a New Genera-

186 references
tion of Traumatized Veterans.” New Yorker. May 19. http://www.newyork 
er.com/reporting/2008/05/19/080519fa_fact_halpern, accessed August 
13, 2014.
Halter, Ed. 2006. From Sun Tsu to Xbox: War and Video Games. New York: 
Thunder’s Mouth Press.
Hamacher, Heather. 2007. “‘America’s Army’ Contractors Take Basic Train-
ing.” Army News Service. November 15. http://www.army.mil/article 
/6131/americas-army-contractors-take-basic-combat-training, accessed 
August 15, 2014.
Harari, Oren. 2002. The Leadership Secrets of Colin Powell. New York: McGraw Hill.
Hardt, Michael, and Antonio Negri. 2000. Empire. Cambridge ma: Harvard 
University Press.
—. 2004. Multitude: War and Democracy in the Age of Empire. New York: 
Penguin.
Herman, Edward, and Noam Chomsky. 2002 [1988]. Manufacturing Consent: 
The Political Economy of the Mass Media. New York: Random House.
Herz, J. C. 1999. Joystick Nation: How Videogames Ate Our Quarters, Won Our 
Hearts, and Rewired Our Minds. Boston: Little, Brown.
Herz, J. C., and Michael R. Macedonia. 2002. “Computer Games and the 
Military: Two Views.” Defense Horizons 11 (April): 1– 8.
Hodes, J., and E. Ruby- Sachs. 2002. “America’s Army Targets Youth.” The 
Nation. September 2. http://www.thenation.com/article/americas-army 
-targets-youth, accessed August 15, 2014.
Hoffman, Danny. 2011. The War Machines: Young Men and Violence in Sierra 
Leone and Liberia. Durham: Duke University Press.
Huizinga, Johan. 1950. Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play Element in Culture. 
Boston: Beacon Press.
Jarecki, Eugene. 2005. Why We Fight. Documentary ﬁlm. Los Angeles: Sony 
Pictures Classics.
Jauregui, Beatrice. 2015. “World Fitness: U.S. Army Family Humanism and 
the Positive Science of Persistent War.” Public Culture 27 (3): 449– 85.
Jenkins, Henry. 2003. “War Games.” Technology Review. November 7. http://
www.technologyreview.com/printer_friendly_article.aspx?id=13383, 
accessed May 6, 2014.
—. 2004. “The War Between Effects and Meaning: Rethinking Video 
Game Violence.” Independent Schools. Spring.
—. 2005. “Games, the New Lively Art.” In Handbook for Video Game 
Studies, edited by Jeffrey Goldstein, 175– 89. Cambridge ma: mit Press.
Klein, Naomi. 2008. The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism. New 
York: Picador.

references 
187
Kline, Stephen, Nick Dyer- Witherford, and Greig De Peuter. 2003. Digital 
Play: The Interaction of Technology, Culture, and Marketing. Montreal: 
McGill– Queen’s University Press.
Kowert, Rachel, and Thorsten Quandt. 2016. The Video Game Debate: Unravel-
ling the Physical, Social, and Psychological Effects of Digital Games. New 
York: Routledge.
Kucinich, Dennis. 2009. “Eliminate Deceptive Army Recruitment.” Press 
release from the office of U.S. congressman Dennis Kucinich. March 12. 
http://www.commondreams.org/newswire/2009/03/12-6, accessed 
July 4, 2014.
Larkin, Erik. 2005. “U.S. Army Invades e3.” pc World. May 23. http://www 
.pcworld.com/article/120929/article.html, accessed July 10, 2014.
Lawson, Sean, Hector Postigo, and Marouf Hasian. 2007. “A Hopeful 
Mirror: Military Games as Visions of the Future Army.” Presented at the 
Society for Social Studies of Science annual conference, Montreal, 
October 11– 13.
Lazzarato, Maurizio. 1996. “Immaterial Labour.” Translated by Paul Coilli and 
Ed Emory. In Radical Thought in Italy Today, edited by Michael Hardt and 
Paolo Virno, 133– 47. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Leland, John. 2009. “Urban Tool in Recruiting by the Army: An Arcade.” New 
York Times. January 4. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/05/us/05 
army.html, accessed July 24, 2014.
Lenoir, Timothy. 2000. “All but War Is Simulation: The Military- 
Entertainment Complex.” Conﬁgurations 8 (3): 289– 335.
—. 2003. “Programming Theaters of War: Gamemakers as Soldiers.” In 
Bombs and Bandwidth: The Emerging Relationship Between Information 
Technology and Security, edited by Robert Latham, 175– 98. New York: New 
Press.
—. 2008. “Recycling the Military- Entertainment Complex.” Unpublished 
whitepaper. http://virtualpeace.org/whitepaper.php, accessed May 22, 2014.
Lenoir, Timothy, and Henry Lowood. 2005. “Theaters of War: The Military– 
Entertainment Complex.” In Collection- Laboratory- Theater: Scenes of 
Knowledge in the 17th Century, edited by Jan Lazardzig, Helmar Schramm, 
and Ludger Schwarte, 427– 56. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Levitt, Steven, and Stephen Dubner. 2005. Freakanomics: A Rogue Economist 
Explores the Hidden Side of Everything. New York: HarperCollins.
Li, Zhan. 2003. “The Potential of America’s Army the Video Game as Civilian- 
Military Public Sphere.” ma thesis, Department of Comparative Media 
Studies, mit. http://www.gamecareerguide.com/features/230/masters 
_thesis_the_potential_of_.php, accessed August 15, 2014; http://dspace 

188 references
.mit.edu/bitstream/handle/1721.1/39162/55872555.pdf, accessed 
August 15, 2014.
Loewen, James. 2007. Lies My Teacher Told Me: Everything Your American 
History Textbook Got Wrong. 2nd ed. New York: Touchstone.
Long, Dustin. 2012. “U.S. Army to Discontinue nascar Sponsorship in 2013.” 
USA Today. November 7. http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/sports/motor 
/nascar/story/2012-07-10/Army-wont-return-to-NA-
SCAR-in-2013/56126666/1, accessed July 2, 2014.
Los Angeles Times Editorial Board. 2013. “California’s Prison Mess.” Los Angeles 
Times. August 9. http://www.latimes.com/opinion/editorials/la-ed 
-prison-release-california-jerry-brown-20130809-story.html, accessed 
May 12, 2014.
Lutz, Catherine. 2001. Homefront: A Military City and the American 20th 
Century. Boston: Beacon Press.
—. 2006. “Empire Is in the Details.” American Ethnologist 33 (4): 593– 611.
—. 2009. “The Military Normal: Feeling at Home with Counterinsur-
gency in the United States.” In The Counter- Counterinsurgency Manual: 
Or, Notes on Demilitarizing American Society, 23– 37. Chicago: Prickly 
Paradigm.
McCarthy, Cormac. 2010 [1985]. Blood Meridian, or The Evening Redness in the 
West. 25th anniversary edition. New York: Vintage Books.
McLay, Robert. 2012. At War with ptsd: Battling Post- Traumatic Stress Disorder 
with Virtual Reality. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
McWhertor, Michael. 2009. “America’s Army 3 Devs Let Go Day After 
Launch.” Kotaku. June 18. http://kotaku.com/5296131/americas-army-3 
-devs-let-go-day-after-launch, accessed August 15, 2014.
Meider, Wolfgang. 1993. “‘The Only Good Indian Is a Dead Indian’: History 
and Meaning of a Proverbial Stereotype.” The Journal of American Folklore 
106 (419): 38– 60.
Meunier, Nathan. 2008. “Vets Protest America’s Army Tournament.” The 
Escapist. December 8. http://www.escapistmagazine.com/news/view 
/87943-Vets-Protest-Americas-Army-tournament, accessed July 3, 2014.
Nader, Laura. 1972. “Up the Anthropologist— Perspectives Gained from 
Studying Up.” In Reinventing Anthropology, edited by Dell Hymes, 
284– 311. New York: Pantheon.
National Commission on Terrorist Attacks. 2004. The 9/11 Commission Report. 
New York: W. W. Norton.
National Research Council. 1997. Modeling and Simulation: Linking Entertain-
ment and Defense. Washington dc: National Academy Press.
Nieborg, David. 2005. Changing the Rules of Engagement: Tapping into the 

references 
189
Popular Culture of America’s Army, The Official U.S. Army Computer Game. 
ma thesis, Faculty of Arts, Utrecht University. http://www.scribd.com 
/doc/50778558/63/Tapping-into-the-Popular-Culture-of-Ameri-
ca%E2%80%99s-Army, accessed August 15, 2014.
—. 2009. “Empower Yourself, Defend Freedom!— Playing Games During 
Times of War.” In Digital Material: Anchoring New Media in Daily Life and 
Technology, edited by Van den Boomen et al., 35– 48. Amsterdam: Amster-
dam University Press.
Nordstrom, Carolyn. 1998. “Deadly Myths of Aggression.” Aggressive Behavior 
24: 147– 59.
—. 2004. Shadows of War: Violence, Power, and International Proﬁteering 
in the Twenty- First Century. Berkeley: University of California Press.
—. 2007. Global Outlaws: Crime, Money, and Power in the Contemporary 
World. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Pappalardo, Joe. 2010. “The Rise of the Joystick Army.” Popular Mechanics. 
May 20. http://www.popularmechanics.com/technology/military 
/weapons/crows-and-the-joystick-army, accessed July 21, 2014.
Parikka, Jussi. 2014. “Cultural Techniques of Cognitive Capitalism: Metapro-
gramming and the Labour of Code.” Cultural Studies Review 20 (1): 30– 52.
Pasanen, Tero. 2009. “The Army Game Project— Creating an Artefact for 
War.” ma thesis, Department of Art and Culture Studies, University of 
Jyväskylä. https://jyx.jyu.ﬁ/dspace/bitstream/handle/123456789/20128 
/URN_NBN_ﬁ_jyu-200905151595.pdf?sequence=1, accessed August 15, 
2014.
Pham, Alex. 2002. “Army’s New Message to Young Recruits: Uncle ‘Sim’ 
Wants You.” Los Angeles Times. May 22. pdf image available online at 
http://www.movesinstitute.org/~zyda/Press/LATimes22May2002.pdf, 
accessed July 10, 2014.
Price, David. 2004. Threatening Anthropology: McCarthyism and the fbi’s 
Surveillance of Activist Anthropologists. Durham: Duke University Press.
—. 2008. Anthropological Intelligence: The Deployment and Neglect of 
American Anthropology in the Second World War. Durham: Duke Univer-
sity Press.
—. 2011. Weaponizing Anthropology. Petrolia ca: Counterpunch.
Rutledge, Raquel. 2008. “Army Shuts Down War Game.” Milwaukee Journal 
Sentinel. July 2. http://www.jsonline.com/news/29400594.html, 
accessed July 20, 2014.
Saad, Lydia. 2013. “U.S. Crime Is Up, but Americans Don’t Seem to Have 
Noticed.” Gallup.com. October 31. http://www.gallup.com/poll/165653 
/crime-americans-seem-noticed.aspx, accessed May 3, 2014.

190 references
Sarkeesian, Anita. 2013. Damsel in Distress— Tropes vs. Women. Documentary 
ﬁlm. Feminist Frequency. http://www.feministfrequency.com/2013/03 
/damsel-in-distress-part-1/, accessed May 3, 2014.
Schreier, Jason. 2013. “From Halo to Hot Sauce: What 25 Years of Violent 
Video Game Research Looks Like.” Kotaku. January 17. http://kotaku.com 
/5976733/do-video-games-make-you-violent-an-in-depth-look-at-every 
thing-we-know-today, accessed December 5, 2015.
—. 2015. “Why Most Video Game ‘Aggression’ Studies are Nonsense.” 
Kotaku. August 14. http://kotaku.com/why-most-video-game-aggression 
-studies-are-nonsense-1724116744, accessed December 5, 2015.
Sherman, Zachary, Scott Brooks, and J. Brown. 2013. “Proving Grounds.” 
America’s Army Graphic Novel series. Issue 8. San Diego: Idea and Design 
Works.
Shilling, Russell, Casey Wardynski, and Mike Zyda. 2002. “Introducing 
Emotion into Military Simulation and Videogame Design: America’s 
Army: Operations and virte.” Proceedings of the GameOn Conference. 
London.
Simons, Anna. 1997. The Company They Keep: Life Inside the U.S. Army Special 
Forces. New York: Avon.
Sinclair, B. 2009. “America’s Army Bill: $32.8 million: Government Tallies 
Total Budget for Free- to- Play First- Person Shooter and Military Recruit-
ment Tool’s First Decade of Development.” GameSpot. December 8. 
http://www.gamespot.com/articles/americas-army-bill-328-million 
/1100-6242635, accessed June 26, 2014.
Snider, Mike. 2009. “Video Game Sales Hit Record Despite Downturn.” USA 
Today. January 18. http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/tech/gaming/2009 
-01-15-video-game-sales_N.htm, accessed May 3, 2014.
Stahl, Roger. 2007. Militainment, Inc.: Militarism and Pop Culture. Documen-
tary ﬁlm. Northampton ma: Media Education Foundation.
—. 2010. Militainment, Inc.: War Media, and Popular Culture. New York: 
Routledge.
Steele, Dennis. 2001. The army Magazine Hooah Guide to Army Counterinsur-
gency: A 30- Minute Course on the Army’s 30- Year Overhaul. The Association 
of the U.S. Army. http://www.ausa.org/publications/armymagazine 
/archive/2007/7/Documents/Steele_COIN_0707.pdf, accessed May 25, 
2014.
Terranova, Tiziana. 2000. “Free Labor: Producing Culture for the Digital 
Economy.” Social Text 18 (2): 33– 58.
Thierer, Adam. 2009. “Video Games and ‘Moral Panic.’” The Technology 

references 
191
Liberation Front. January 23. http://techliberation.com/2009/01/23 
/video-games-and-moral-panic/, accessed July 3, 2014.
Turner, Victor. 1967. “Betwixt and Between: The Liminal Period in Rites de 
Passage.” In Forest of Symbols: Aspects of Ndembu Ritual. Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press.
Turse, Nick. 2008. The Complex: How the Military Invades Our Everyday Lives. 
New York: Metropolitan Books.
U.S. Army. 2007. The U.S. Army and Marine Corps Counterinsurgency Field 
Manual. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2010. “Local Area Unemployment Statistics.” 
http://data.bls.gov/timeseries/LASST060000000000003, accessed 
August 15, 2014.
U.S. Congress. 2010. National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010.
—. 2011. Armed Forces, U.S. Code 10. http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg 
/CPRT-112HPRT67344/pdf/CPRT-112HPRT67344.pdf, accessed July 3, 
2014.
U.S. General Accounting Office. 2003. “Military Recruiting: dod Needs to 
Establish Objectives and Measures to Better Evaluate Advertising’s 
Effectiveness.” gao- 03- 1005. http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d03100 
5.pdf, accessed April 15, 2014.
Virilio, Paul. 1989. War and Cinema: The Logistics of Perception. London: 
Verso.
Virilio, Paul, and Sylvère Lotringer. 1983. Pure War. Translated by Mark 
Polizzotti. New York: Semiotext(e).
Virno, Paolo. 2004. A Grammar of the Multitude. Los Angeles: Semiotext(e).
Wardynski, Casey. 1995. “The Labor Economics of Information Warfare.” 
Military Review. (May– June): 56– 65.
—. 2007. “v3.0 Game Requirements.” Unpublished document. Power-
Point provided by an America’s Army producer to Robertson Allen in 
October 2009.
—. 2009. “Army Game Project Results Overview.” Unpublished docu-
ment. Manuscript provided by Wardynski to Robertson Allen on May 26, 
2009.
Wardynski, Casey, David Lyle, and Michael Colarusso. 2009. Towards a U.S. 
Army Officer Corps Strategy for Success: A Proposed Human Capital Model 
Focused upon Talent. Carlisle pa: Strategic Studies Institute.
Weeks, Kathi. 2011. The Problem with Work: Feminism, Marxism, Antiwork 
Politics, and Postwork Imaginaries. Durham: Duke University Press.
Wells, H. G. 1913. Little Wars: A Game for Boys from Twelve Years of Age to 

192 references
Hundred and Fifty and for That More Intelligent Sort of Girls Who Like Boys’ 
Games and Books. London: Palmer.
Whitehead, Neil, and Sverker Finnström, eds. 2013. Virtual War and Magical 
Death: Technologies and Imaginaries for Terror and Killing. Durham: Duke 
University Press.
Williams, Brian. 2009. “Gamers, the Army Wants you.” nbc Nightly News. 
January 7. http://archives.nbclearn.com/portal/site/k-12/ﬂatview?cue 
card=39820, accessed July 24, 2014.
Wright, Evan. 2004. Generation Kill: Devil Dogs, Iceman, Captain America, and 
the New Face of American War. New York: Putnam.
Zyda, Michael. 2002. “Weapons of Mass Distraction: America’s Army Recruits 
for the Real War.” Presentation at the Naval War College Strategic Studies 
Group, Newport ri, December 9. http://www.movesinstitute.org/~zyda 
/Presentations.html, accessed August 15, 2014.
—. 2004. “Crossing the Chasm Panel.” Presented at the Serious Game 
Workshop, Game Developers Conference, San Jose, March 23. http://
www.movesinstitute.org/~zyda/Presentations.html, accessed August 15, 
2014.
Zyda, Michael, Alex Mayberry, Jesse McCree, and Margaret Davis. 2005. 
“From Viz- Sim to vr to Games: How We Built a Hit Game- Based Simula-
tion.” In Organizational Simulation: From Modeling & Simulation to Games 
& Entertainment, edited by W. B. Rouse and K. R. Boff, 553– 90. New York: 
Wiley.

193
Index
Abuchon, Michael “Ace,” 127
Achter, Paul, 81
Activision, 130
advergames, 14, 50
aec. See Army Experience Center (aec)
affective labor, 32, 41, 149, 155, 159. See 
also cognitive labor; immaterial 
labor; post- Fordism
Agamben, Giorgio, 30
agency, 36, 91, 155
American Civil Liberties Union 
(aclu), 61– 62
America’s Army (franchise): action 
ﬁgures, 8, 64, 87, 98, 102; America’s 
Army 3, 5, 7, 20, 44– 45, 52, 56, 
66– 73, 77– 78, 134, 140– 42, 147, 
152– 54, 156– 61, 165; America’s Army 
Graphic Novel, 8, 72, 165; America’s 
Army: Proving Grounds, 165; 
America’s Army: Recon, 127; 
America’s Army: Rise of a Soldier, 18, 
56, 133; America’s Army: Soldiers, 
77; America’s Army: Special Forces, 
129, 141; America’s Army: True 
Soldiers, 56, 78, 133; arcade game, 
8, 140; history of, 115– 46; “honor” 
points in, 56, 67, 77; mobile phone 
game, 8, 140; Real Heroes, 18, 59, 
64, 76– 88, 92, 98– 102, 164
America’s Army Future Applications 
(aafa), 133
America’s Army Government Applica-
tions (aaga), 133– 35. See also 
Virtual Heroes
America’s Army Public Applications 
(aapa), 132– 36, 138– 40
arma (franchise), 72– 73
Army Experience Center (aec), 8, 12, 
22, 62, 76– 77, 88, 90– 91, 101– 9, 
112– 13, 161, 164– 65. See also 
Ignited
Army Game Project. See America’s 
Army (franchise); Office of 
Economic and Manpower Analysis 
(oema)
Arquilla, John, 117– 18. See also netwar
artiﬁcial intelligence, 66, 123
autonomism. See Berardi, “Bifo”; 
cognitive labor; immaterial labor; 
Marxism
basic combat training, 3, 9, 58, 63, 
106, 133, 152– 55
Battleﬁeld (franchise), 10, 15, 65, 141
Berardi, “Bifo,” 33
beta testing, 28
Bickford, Andrew, 158
big data, 27, 29

194 index
biopower. See disciplinary power; 
Foucault, Michel; institutional 
power
Blackwell, Frank, 138– 39. See also 
Software Engineering Directorate 
(sed)
Bode, Mike, 137, 142– 43, 159
Bohemia Interactive Simulations, 39
boot camp. See basic combat training
Bossant, Phillip, 116, 126– 31, 135, 
142– 43, 148
Bush, George W., 6, 13, 14, 82– 83, 87
Bush, Laura, 82
Call of Duty (franchise), 10, 15, 45, 53, 
106, 141
capitalism, 11, 29– 30, 42. See also 
post- Fordism
Capps, Mike, 125, 128
Chaplin, Heather, 51, 116
Chomsky, Noam, 31, 111
Civilization (franchise), 14
cognitive labor, 32, 41, 161. See also 
affective labor; immaterial labor; 
post- Fordism
Cold War, 34, 40, 74
Conﬂict (franchise), 14, 65, 141
Contra, 65
Convention on the Rights of the Child, 
61– 62
counterinsurgency, 71
Counter- Strike, 6
Crimea, annexation of, 74
crunch time, 149– 50, 157, 159
cyberpunk, 22
Czervenia, 1– 4, 68– 75, 165. See also 
America’s Army (franchise); enemies
Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (darpa), 121
DeLappe, Joseph, 62
de la Rocha, Zack, 114
Deleuze, Giles, 30, 108
DeLuca, Philip, 135– 36, 164
De Peuter, Greig, 42, 149
Digital Consulting Services, 56, 133, 138
digital games. See video games
disciplinary power, 30– 31. See also 
institutional power
Doom (franchise), 122
drones, 26, 166
Duck Hunt, 64
Dunnigan, James, 120
Dyer- Witheford, Nick, 42
Effie awards, 165
Electronic Arts (ea), 126, 130, 139
Electronic Entertainment Expo (e3), 
76, 116, 126– 27, 164
emergence, 128
empire, 34, 115, 118. See also Hardt, 
Michael; Negri, Antonio
enemies: Afghan, 68, 71; Communist, 
34, 65, 67, 72– 73; domestic, 68, 75– 
76; Iraqi, 68, 71, 78– 79, 82; mythic, 
64, 75, 148– 49; Nazi, 65, 71; 
Russian, 65, 68– 74, 92, 165; 
terrorist, 67, 97, 118; unreal, 66, 
69– 70, 72– 80, 88, 89, 148, 165. See 
also America’s Army (franchise); 
Czervenia; the other
Enloe, Cynthia, 33, 35
Entertainment Software Ratings 
Board (esrb), 55, 60, 104
Epic Games, 8, 125
ethnicity, 67– 68, 73, 75, 105
ethnography, 11– 13, 161
Euromaidan, 73
Facebook, 27, 44, 153

index 
195
ﬁrst- person shooter (fps), 5– 6, 8– 10, 
13– 15, 20, 45, 65– 66, 97, 122, 141. 
See also video games
ﬂexpolitation. See work- play binary
Fogg, B. J., 31, 51, 53
Fordism, 31– 32, 41, 42, 80, 114
Foucault, Michel, 28– 30
fps. See ﬁrst- person shooter (fps)
free labor, 27. See also beta testing; 
immaterial labor
Full Spectrum Warrior, 122, 125. See 
also Institute for Creative 
Technologies (ict)
Game Developers Conference, 56, 127, 
161
games. See interactive media; video 
games
gamiﬁcation, 21
Generation Kill, 151, 162
globalization, 25, 29, 33
Graeber, David, 144– 45
Grant, John, 97, 112– 14
Guinness world records, 7
Gulf War (1991). See Persian Gulf War 
(1991)
Halfway Home, 81, 86
Halter, Ed, 127
Hardt, Michael, 118. See also empire
heroiﬁcation, 87, 97
Herz, J. C., 124
Homefront, 65
Hussein, Saddam, 6, 14
ict. See Institute for Creative 
Technologies (ict)
Ignited, 8, 91, 99, 103, 106, 112, 115, 
133, 140, 163, 165
immaterial labor, 32, 33, 36, 37, 41– 42, 
149– 50. See also affective labor; 
cognitive labor; post- Fordism
immersion, 5, 8, 11, 45, 50, 94, 123, 161
Institute for Creative Technologies 
(ict), 122, 124– 25
institutional power, 30, 33, 50, 63, 75, 
79, 114, 163. See also disciplinary 
power
institutions, 7, 11, 18– 19, 31– 32, 35, 41, 
47, 49, 51, 62, 79, 88, 100, 117, 119, 
122, 155– 56; conformity and, 
28– 29; control and, 73; crisis of, 
29– 30; labor and, 42, 151, 166; 
militarization and, 33, 37, 108, 115, 
155; normalization of, 61– 62; 
racism and, 30; research within, 
11, 16, 163; rivalries within, 39– 40, 
119, 131– 46; total, 31, 80; violence 
and, 25; war and, 25, 81, 83. See 
also Foucault, Michel; institu-
tional power
interactive media, 6– 9, 11, 15, 21, 
36– 37, 75, 103, 127, 155. See also 
media; video games
interpellation, 26, 50
Iraq War (2003– 11), 6, 13– 14, 69– 71, 
73, 78– 79, 80, 82– 84, 86, 95, 99, 
113– 14, 128, 148, 151
Iveans, Erich, 115, 138, 141
Jauregui, Beatrice, 106
Jenkins, Henry, 23, 73
Klein, Naomi, 30
knowledge economy, 7, 27, 42. See also 
cognitive labor; immaterial labor; 
post- Fordism
Kohl, Herb, 122
Kriegsspiel, 119– 20
Kucinich, Dennis, 59– 60

196 index
labor. See affective labor; Fordism; 
immaterial labor; post- Fordism
The Last Starﬁghter, 125
Leidos. See Science Applications 
International Corporation (saic)
Lenoir, Timothy, 116
Li, Zhan, 116
Lieberman, Joseph, 122
liminality, 23, 66, 77, 149, 155
Lockheed Martin, 137
Loewen, James, 87
Long, Mark, 93, 116, 121– 22
Lutz, Catherine, 35, 74– 75, 145
Macedonia, Michael, 124
Marine Doom, 122
Marxism, 33
masculinity, 20, 31, 36, 64, 87, 102, 120
massively multiplayer online game 
(mmog), 22, 26
Mayberry, Alex, 126, 128– 31, 134
McCree, Jessee, 126, 129– 31, 134
McLaurin, John, 130
meatspace, 22
Medal of Honor (franchise), 65, 141
media: activism, 91– 92; convergence of, 
21; effects, 14, 36, 56– 57; mass, 31, 
50, 75; as scapegoat, 14, 61. See also 
interactive media; video games
mediation, 22, 24, 72, 110, 155, 164
Microsoft Flight Simulator, 46
militainment, 24. See also military 
entertainment complex
militarization, 10– 12, 24, 28, 31, 33– 37, 
42, 88, 91, 108– 13, 128, 149– 51, 155, 
157, 161, 164, 166; community and, 
109; deﬁnition of, 33, 35– 36; and 
demilitarization, 36; of police, 30; 
of public space, 30. See also Enloe, 
Cynthia
military entertainment complex, 
34– 36, 61, 99– 100, 115– 24, 144, 
145, 153
military industrial complex, 34, 120, 145
military normal, 35, 61, 155. See also 
Lutz, Catherine
Military Occupational Specialty 
(mos), 40, 58, 77, 94, 103, 143
military recruitment: attrition of, 9; 
costs of, 9, 133; “hard sell” of, 91, 
104, 106; inequality and, 108; insti-
tutionalization of, 48– 49; legacy 
model of, 11, 51– 52; schools and, 
43– 44, 106– 9; “soft sell” of, 33, 76, 
88, 91, 102, 104– 5, 112, 114, 155; 
“talent” and, 40– 43, 45, 62, 80, 
146; virtual, 76– 77, 100
mime- net, 34. See also military 
entertainment complex
mmog. See massively multiplayer 
online game (mmog)
Moonbase Alpha, 141
mos. See Military Occupational 
Specialty (mos)
moves Institute, 125– 26, 128– 32, 136
nascar, 8, 51, 77, 90, 93
nato (North Atlantic Treaty Organi-
zation), 73, 165
Naval Postgraduate School (nps), 125, 
129, 131– 32
Negri, Antonio, 118. See also empire
netwar, 118, 145. See also Arquilla, 
John; Ronfeldt, David
the network, 7– 9, 18, 20– 21, 25, 27, 
31– 32, 34, 117– 19, 145, 155, 164. See 
also Hardt, Michael; Negri, 
Antonio; netwar
new media. See interactive media; 
media; video games

index 
197
9/11. See September 11, 2001
Nintendo, 24, 64, 120
Northrop Grumman, 137
Odyssey, 120
Office of Economic and Manpower 
Analysis (oema), 16– 18, 39– 40, 
42– 45, 47, 51– 52, 54, 61– 63, 77, 90, 
98– 99, 103, 128– 39, 142, 144, 146
Olympics, 2008 Beijing, 92
the other, 21, 68, 75. See also enemies
Palin, Sarah, 151
Pentagon, 8, 85– 86, 103– 4, 116, 161
peo- stri. See Program Executive 
Office for Simulation, Training, 
and Instrumentation (peo- stri)
performativity, 35, 75– 76, 155– 56, 161
Persian Gulf War (1991), 14, 24, 121
playbor. See work- play binary
PlayStation 2, 8, 133
Pong, 120
post- Fordism, 11, 31– 33, 35, 102, 149; 
characteristics of, 32; military 
recruitment and, 41; soldiering 
and, 114; video game development 
and, 42, 160. See also cognitive 
labor; immaterial labor; virtual 
soldier
post- traumatic stress disorder (ptsd), 
8, 80– 86, 113– 14, 122
precarity, 28, 108, 149
Program Executive Office for Simula-
tion, Training, and Instrumenta-
tion (peo- stri), 39– 40, 61
propaganda, 31, 43, 50– 51, 75, 100, 
111– 12, 155. See also Chomsky, 
Noam
protest, 22, 56– 57, 62, 91, 109– 13, 128
ptsd. See post- traumatic stress 
disorder (ptsd)
race and racism, 15, 21, 25, 30, 56, 67, 
71, 73, 108
Real Heroes. See America’s Army 
(franchise)
recession, 2008– 9 U.S., 20, 157, 162
recruitment. See military recruitment
Red Dawn, 65
Redstone Arsenal, 8, 18, 99, 137, 143, 
163. See also Software Engineering 
Directorate (sed)
Reserve Officers’ Training Corps 
(rotc), 43– 44, 48, 74– 75
Rieman, Tommy, 64, 80– 87, 92, 
100– 101, 113
Roberts, Charles, 120
roe. See rules of engagement (roe)
role playing, 24, 74, 77, 79, 148
Ronfeldt, David, 117– 18. See also 
netwar
rotc. See Reserve Officers’ Training 
Corps (rotc)
Ruby, Aaron, 51, 116
rules of engagement (roe), 2, 52– 53, 
55, 67, 94
Rush N’ Attack, 65
Science Applications International 
Corporation (saic), 137– 38, 156
sed. See Software Engineering 
Directorate (sed)
Sega, 120
“selﬂess service,” 26, 87, 157– 58
September 11, 2001, 6, 14, 158
serious games, 7, 14, 50, 61, 124, 127. 
See also video games
Serious Games Summit, 127
simnet, 120– 21

198 index
Simons, Anna, 74
simulation: as cost reduction, 9, 133; 
entertainment and, 8, 13, 23, 36, 
54; interoperability of, 120– 21, 123; 
military industry of, 7, 61, 121– 24; 
military recruitment and, 8, 59, 
90, 93– 104, 114; military strategy 
and, 73, 117– 24; precession of, 24, 
79, 153; Soldier rehabilitation and, 
114, 140; training and, 9, 14, 17, 
39– 40, 45, 74– 75, 114, 120– 22, 125, 
133– 36, 150, 166. See also interac-
tive media; role playing; simnet; 
video games
sme. See subject matter expert (sme)
society of control, 30– 31, 33, 37, 108, 
113. See also Deleuze, Giles
socom, 141
soft sell, 33, 76, 88, 91, 102, 104– 5, 112, 
114, 155
Software Engineering Directorate 
(sed), 18, 136– 44, 159, 161, 163– 65. 
See also Redstone Arsenal
soldier- civilian binary, 22, 24– 26, 28, 
31, 64, 74, 102– 3, 108, 148– 61
Strength in Action Zone, 57, 61
Strike and Retrieve, 46
studying up, 18. See also ethnography
subjectiﬁcation, 11, 29– 30, 36, 79, 91, 
107– 9, 151, 155
subject matter expert (sme), 95, 
101– 2, 110
Super Mario Brothers, 64
Taliban, 71
television, 50, 52, 55, 61, 89, 98, 100, 
103, 113
Terranova, Tiziana, 27
terrorism, 6, 14, 17, 23, 75, 118, 161; as 
depicted in games, 67, 97, 165
Ubisoft, 8, 18, 56, 133, 140
the uncanny, 5, 72– 73
United for Peace and Justice, 22
unreal enemy. See enemies
Unreal Engine, 45, 66, 125– 27
U.S. Code, 58
U.S. Congress, 55, 59– 60, 90
U.S. Department of Defense, 61, 122, 
132, 137. See also Pentagon
U.S. Secret Service, 9, 17, 133
U.S. Senate, 62, 122
vae. See Virtual Army Experience (vae)
Veterans for Peace, 22, 57, 97, 109
video games: aggression and, 14, 19, 
36, 61; development of, 7, 11, 16, 
20, 28, 33, 42, 45, 47, 55, 67–73, 
123–60, 164; magic circle and, 23; 
misogyny and, 20; moral panic 
and, 16, 54, 56–57; persuasion and, 
6, 10, 31, 47, 51, 53, 61–62, 102; 
players of, 5–6, 13, 20, 27–28, 
44–45, 50, 62, 67, 73, 77–78, 
127–29, 141, 150, 159; as prosthesis, 
5; race and, 67; ratings system for, 
55, 60, 94, 104; realism and, 131, 
140, 153–55; “real life” and, 22, 78; 
rules of, 6, 23, 120; sexism and, 
120; as toys, 19–20, 22, 47; 
violence and, 13–16, 20, 36, 42–43, 
54–57, 62, 64, 97, 122, 164. See also 
serious games; simulation; 
violence; war-game binary
violence: in crime, 19, 54; culture and, 
25; gloriﬁcation of, 57, 109; 
institutional, 29, 114; military, 26, 
53, 55, 60, 166; sanctioned, 55; struc-
tural, 21; unsanctioned, 15, 55; video 
games and, 13– 16, 20, 36, 42– 43, 
54– 57, 62, 64, 122, 164; war and, 24

index 
199
Virtual Army Experience (vae), 8, 18, 
55– 60, 62, 76– 77, 80– 81, 86, 
88– 104, 109– 15, 140, 155, 164– 65. 
See also Army Experience Center 
(aec); Ignited; Software Engi-
neering Directorate (sed)
Virtual Battlespace, 39– 40
Virtual Heroes,133– 37, 141
virtual- real binary, 21– 22, 76
virtual reality, 98, 121, 166
virtual soldier, 10– 11, 37, 42, 50, 61, 64, 
77, 79, 96, 98, 102, 114, 148– 50, 
153, 155, 159, 161
war: in Afghanistan, 7, 11, 13, 26, 
70– 71, 113, 148; ambiguity of, 
24– 26; and culture, 23– 24; cyber, 
118; drones and, 26, 166; in 
Georgia, 72– 74, 92; gloriﬁcation 
of, 57– 60; in Iraq, 6– 7, 11, 13– 14, 
68– 71, 73, 78– 80, 82– 84, 86, 95, 
99, 113– 14, 128, 148, 151; just, 13, 
62, 71– 72; labor of, 9, 26, 87, 114, 
166; in Pakistan, 26, 71; in Syria, 
165; total, 34; in Ukraine, 73– 74, 
165; in Yemen, 26
Warcraft 3, 127
Wardynski, Casey, 16– 19, 31, 39– 62, 
63, 72, 78, 86, 87, 103, 105, 112, 
115– 17, 125, 128, 130– 36, 139– 43, 
151, 156, 159, 161– 65
war- game binary, 22– 24, 28, 31, 57, 
62– 63, 79, 109– 10
Wells, H. G., 120
Wolfenstein (franchise), 130
Wolford, Gerald, 78– 79
work- play binary, 9– 11, 13, 22, 26– 28, 
31– 32, 42, 148– 50
World of Warcraft, 26, 126
World War I, 31
World War II, 31, 34, 48, 51
Wright, Evan, 151, 162
Wright, Will, 139
Xbox, 8, 18, 94, 104, 114, 122, 133
Zombie Studios, 99, 116, 133, 140
Zyda, Mike, 16, 124– 32, 136, 178

In the Anthropology of Contemporary North America series:
America’s Digital Army: Games at Work and War
Robertson Allen
Governing Affect: Neoliberalism and Disaster Reconstruction
Roberto E. Barrios
Holding On: African American Women Surviving hiv/aids
Alyson O’Daniel
Rebuilding Shattered Worlds: Creating Community by Voicing the Past
Andrea L. Smith and Anna Eisenstein
To order or obtain more information on these or other University of  
Nebraska Press titles, visit nebraskapress.unl.edu.

