All advocates are faced with
two main challenges.
The ﬁ rst, and arguably more 
important of the two,
is how to open people’s 
hearts and minds, so that 
they might deliberately and 
conscientiously consider new ideas.
A Meaningful Life
Animal Advocacy, Human Nature, 
and a Better World
by Matt Ball

Effective advocates—those who are truly 
successful in fostering change—are 
thoughtful psychologists. They understand 
that each of us is born with a certain 
intrinsic nature. We are then raised to 
follow certain beliefs, and taught to hold 
speciﬁ c prejudices. Over time, we discover 
new “truths” and abandon others; we 
mix and match, supplement and reﬁ ne, 
continually altering our collection of 
attitudes, principles, and values.
Even though we can recognize that our belief system changes over time, at any given 
point, most of us are likely to believe that our current set of positions and opinions are 
“right”—that our convictions are well founded, our actions justiﬁ ed, and that we are each, 
at heart, a good person. Even when, years later, we ﬁ nd ourselves reﬂ ecting on previously 
held beliefs with a sense of bemusement, it does not occur to us that we may someday feel 
the same way toward the attitudes we now hold.
Similarly, effective advocates understand that they don’t change anyone else’s mind. No 
matter how elegant an argument is, ultimately, real and lasting change comes only from 
opening a person’s heart and mind, allowing them the freedom to explore new ideas and 
new ways of viewing the world. Of course, there is no magic way of doing this. 
The simplest way to encourage other people to open their hearts and minds 
is for our own hearts and minds to be open—and not just for the sake of 
advocacy or argument. Rather, we must be truly open, able to sincerely 
consider anything and everything that is said during interactions with 
others. I believe an open heart and mind is imperative for a sincere 
advocate, because no one person has all the answers.
So, in the interest of moving forward, let me suggest we set aside 
everything we believe we “know,” and try to ﬁ nd the core of our concern, 
what is fundamentally important.
After many years of struggling to distill my advocacy to its purest form, 
I have come to believe that virtually all of our actions can be traced 
to a desire for fulﬁ llment and happiness and a need to avoid or 
alleviate suffering. That is to say, something is “good” if it leads 
to more happiness, and something is “bad” if it leads to more 
suffering. This is a simplistic view, of course, but does cut through 
confusion, leaving us with a simple measure by which to judge the 
consequences of our actions and evaluate our advocacy.
Given that pain—be it physical, emotional, or psychological—
is generally the single greatest barrier to contentment, 
I believe suffering must be our ﬁ rst priority, especially 
since there is so very much of it in the world. In essence, 
then, my advocacy philosophy can be best described as
a desire to decrease the amount of suffering in the world.
Preface
2
Matt Ball, the author of A Meaningful Life, with his wife and 
daughter, Anne and Ellen Green.

If you are reading this, I would guess that 
you are concerned about more than just the 
pursuit of your own happiness. The question 
then is: How can we make a difference in a 
world where suffering is so widespread?
In addition to starting with open hearts 
and minds, a basic understanding of human 
nature shows that people have an afﬁ nity for 
the known and the immediate. This is true 
not only of the population as a whole, but for 
advocates as well. In general, most people 
working for a better world concentrate on 
those closest to them, geographically and/or 
biologically. Even those who look beyond 
species focus on either the familiar or the 
fantastic, with a disproportionate amount of 
resources and effort spent on cats and dogs, 
endangered species, or individual animals 
in high-proﬁ le situations.
This is not surprising, given our basic human 
desire to have a visible impact on the 
world. We all want to feel 
like we are accomplishing 
something, that we’ve 
been victorious. It often doesn’t 
matter how signiﬁ cant the 
accomplishment or victory is—
or even if the world is truly better 
off—but rather that something 
tangible has been achieved. This 
need for visible results is what leads some 
people to say they are unable or unwilling 
to support Vegan Outreach, because what 
we do is too slow or too abstract, and there 
is no way to see the animals saved.
Understanding human nature and 
recognizing the primacy of suffering has 
led Vegan Outreach to formulate two 
guiding principles for advocacy:
1.  We should, as much as possible, strive 
to identify and set aside our personal 
biases and needs. Vegan Outreach’s 
approach to advocacy tries to orient 
itself through a straightforward analysis 
of the world as it is, motivated solely by 
the suffering of others.
2.  When we choose to do one thing, we 
are choosing not to do others. The 
people who want to create a better 
world, including those who make up 
Vegan Outreach, have extremely limited 
resources and time. So instead of 
choosing to “do something, do anything,” 
we pursue actions that we believe will 
lead to the greatest reduction in 
suffering. Once again, this may 
sound simplistic, but given the 
endless demands on advocates, 
we believe it is an important 
principle to follow.
Principles of Advocacy
3

Based on these two principles, we choose to focus on exposing 
the cruelties of factory farms and industrial slaughterhouses, 
while providing honest information about how to pursue a 
cruelty-free lifestyle. Let me repeat—our emphasis on ethical 
eating is derived from our principles of advocacy, not vice 
versa. No speciﬁ c diet—conscientious carnivorism, veganism, 
etc.—has any value in and of itself. Rather, the importance of 
promoting cruelty-free eating is that it allows us to have the 
maximum impact on the amount of suffering in the world. 
There are three basic reasons for this:
1.  The Numbers The number of animals raised and killed for food each year in the 
United States alone vastly exceeds any other form of exploitation, involving numbers far 
greater than the total human population of the entire world. Ninety-nine out of every 100 
animals killed in the United States each year are slaughtered for human consumption.
2.  The Suffering Of course, if these billions of animals lived happy, healthy lives and 
had quick, painless deaths, then our concern for suffering would lead us elsewhere.
But animals raised for food must endure unfathomable suffering.
 
 Most advocacy tends to revolve around detailed stories of individuals, and the story of 
any individual chicken, pig, or veal calf clearly rivals any other case of cruelty. Indeed, 
perhaps the most difﬁ cult aspect of advocating on behalf of these animals is trying 
to describe the indescribable: the overcrowding and conﬁ nement, the stench, the 
racket, the extremes of heat and cold, the attacks and even cannibalism, the hunger 
and starvation, the illness…the near-constant horror of every day of their lives. Indeed, 
every year, hundreds of millions of these animals—many times more than the total 
number killed for fur, in shelters, and in laboratories—don’t even make it to slaughter. 
They actually suffer to death.
3.  The Opportunity If there were nothing we could do about 
these animals’ suffering—if it all happened in a distant 
land beyond our inﬂ uence—then, again, our focus 
would be different. But exposing factory farms 
and advocating ethical eating is the most readily 
accessible option for making a better world! We 
don’t have to overthrow a foreign government. 
We don’t have to forsake modern life. We don’t 
have to win an election or convince Congress 
of the validity of our argument.
 
 Rather, every day, every single person makes 
decisions that affect the lives of these 
farmed animals. Inspiring someone to 
change leads to fewer animals suffering 
on factory farms. Many major national 
campaigns spend huge amounts of time 
and money for far less payoff. By choosing 
to promote cruelty-free living, every person we 
meet is a potential major victory.
4
Why Vegan Outreach?

The rationale outlined above seems logical, 
but we didn’t arrive at these conclusions 
overnight. Before founding Vegan Outreach, 
Jack Norris and I sought to end many 
different forms of animal exploitation and 
pursued various methods of advocacy—
from letter writing campaigns to scores 
of protests and everything in between, 
including civil disobedience.
Even within the realm of promoting 
vegetarianism, there are many different 
opinions and options. For example, the 
Christian Vegetarian Association works 
within the context of the most commonly 
practiced religion in the United States.
The CVA’s booklet Honoring God’s Creation 
reaches out to people through their existing 
ethical framework. This approach allows 
the CVA to advocate—quite successfully—
to a vast audience for whom other 
approaches would be less effective.
Other advocacy organizations focus on 
harnessing the power of video footage, 
such as Meet Your Meat. Some groups 
take out free spots on public access stations, 
and sometimes can afford to purchase 
commercial airtime. A different approach 
is to go right to the public via “FaunaVision” 
vans (equipped with large TV monitors, 
speakers, and portable power units) and 
“Faunettes” (small mobile units that can be 
wheeled on sidewalks and inside buildings), 
which act like magnets, attracting people 
who may otherwise ignore someone 
leaﬂ eting. Many regional groups provide 
important resources and support, from 
publishing local shopping and dining 
guides to organizing social gatherings.
How to Promote Compassion
5
Why Vegan? is distributed at the Houston International 
Festival by Eugene Khutoryansky (above) and at the African 
Festival of the Arts in Chicago by Joe Espinosa (below), who 
is wearing a “body screen” playing Meet Your Meat.

At Vegan Outreach, we work for maximum change, seeking 
to achieve the greatest reduction in suffering per dollar 
donated and hour worked. We believe the way to accomplish 
this is to present the optimal message to our target audience. 
This leads to two basic questions: Who is our audience, and 
what is the message that will elicit the greatest change?
Of course, with inﬁ nite resources, we could reach out to 
everyone. Given our very limited resources, though, the goal of maximum change leads 
Vegan Outreach to focus on students (especially college-age), for three main reasons:
1.  The Relative Willingness and Ability to Change Of course, not every 
student is willing to stop eating meat. But relative to the population as a whole, college 
students tend to be more open-minded—even rebellious against the status quo—and 
in a position where they aren’t as restricted by parents, tradition, habits, etc.
2.  The Full Impact of Change Even if students and senior citizens were equally 
open to change, over the course of their lives, students can save more animals. Young 
people not only have more meals ahead of them, but also have more opportunities to 
inﬂ uence others.
3.  The Ability to Reach Large Numbers College students are typically easier to 
reach in large numbers. For a relatively small investment of time, an activist can hand 
a copy of Even If You Like Meat or Why Vegan? to hundreds of students who otherwise 
might never have viewed a full and compelling case for compassion.
6
Maximum Change
Jon Camp hands out copies of Even If You Like Meat at Yale University in Connecticut.

Our message for this audience is the suffering on factory farms and in industrial 
slaughterhouses. We have found that this simple and straightforward message has many 
beneﬁ ts, including the following:
1.  Honesty In general, people can sense insincerity. They don’t respect the tactic of 
bait and switch, and few people believe that vegetarian advocates are truly concerned 
about everyone else’s health.
 
 Nearly every new vegetarian, though, goes through the phase of, “Even though I care 
about animals, other people won’t. People are selﬁ sh—I’ll appeal to their self-interest!” 
But look around—is the health argument working? For years we’ve known that being 
obese is the single greatest threat to good health; yet every year, more and more people 
in the United States become more and more overweight! Is this really the message with 
the best chance to create the real change that will save animals?
2.  Impact Many animal advocates buy the “trickle up” theory of change: “If they 
oppose wearing fur coats, they might eventually stop eating meat!” Does anyone really 
believe that an hour spent holding a sign outside a furrier does more to help animals 
than spending that hour handing out Even If You Like Meat brochures? Even if a person 
doesn’t become vegetarian right after reading Even If You Like Meat, they are far more 
likely to be sympathetic to other cases of animal abuse than they would be after seeing 
an antifur poster—the “trickle down” approach to animal liberation!
3.  Motivation We don’t want to get people to just consider changing their diet. We 
want them to change and maintain that change. If someone gives up meat to improve 
their health, the next time they hear someone praise the Atkins diet, that same person 
might switch and end up eating even more animals than before! So we should try to
get them to consider boycotting factory farms for reasons that are sustainable.
7
Kaya Hansen leaflets the College Park campus of the University of Maryland.

I’m not fooling myself—I know that 
exposing what goes on in factory farms 
and slaughterhouses isn’t going to appeal 
to everyone. But feel-good arguments that 
avoid the horrors of meat production are 
simply not compelling enough. We don’t 
want people to nod in agreement and 
continue on as before. It is far better
if 95% of people turn away revolted 
and 5% open their minds to change, 
than if everyone smiles politely and 
continues on to McDonald’s.
Let me repeat: Trying to appeal 
to everyone hasn’t worked, and it 
won’t work. It is well past time to 
give up the fantasy that there is some 
perfect self-centered argument that will 
magically compel everyone to change.
Conversely, showing people what goes 
on behind the walls of factory farms 
and slaughterhouses does work! We have 
found cruelty to animals to be the most 
compelling reason to change one’s diet—
and maintain that change—in the face of 
peer pressure, tradition, the latest fad, etc. 
During the two years that Jack devoted to 
leaﬂ eting colleges around the country, he 
found a tremendous willingness among students to take and consider information about 
the realities of modern animal agriculture and the compassionate alternative. Other 
activists have found the same. We constantly receive feedback like, “I had no idea what 
went on! Thank you so much for opening my eyes!”
And yet, there are many, many more willing people to reach. 
Obviously friends and family, but we can’t spend all our time and 
emotional resources on the immediate. The simplest way to get 
information to interested people is to stock displays in your area: 
libraries, music and bookstores, co-ops and natural food stores, 
coffeehouses, and sympathetic restaurants.
Youth, though, is where the animals get the biggest bang for the buck. 
Vegan Outreach’s  Adopt a College program, where 
activists leaﬂ et at local campuses, serves to reach out 
methodically to our prime audience. This is the ﬁ rst 
systematic plan for bringing about animal liberation 
by targeting our most receptive audience.
The animals can’t afford our continued, reactionary, 
try-everything-and-anything campaigns. We know 
what works. We just need the dedication to do it!
You can join up at our web site: VeganOutreach.org
8
Ayako Mogen hands out Even If You Like Meat pamphlets 
on the campus of the University of Pittsburgh.

Anyone who has been vegetarian for more 
than a few minutes knows the many road-
blocks—habit, tradition, convenience, taste, 
familiarity, peer pressure, etc.—that keep 
people from opening their hearts and 
minds to consider the animals’ plight.
Our message must overcome all of these!
When it comes to advocating for the 
animals, people are looking for a reason 
to ignore us—no one sits around thinking, 
“Wow, I really want to give up all my 
favorite foods and isolate myself from my 
friends and family!” Knowing this, we 
can’t give anyone any reasons to ignore 
the terrible and unnecessary suffering on 
factory farms and in slaughterhouses.
If we want to be as effective as we possibly 
can be for the animals, it is absolutely 
essential that we recognize and avoid 
common traps. Remember: Our message 
is simple. We shouldn’t distract people 
from it by trying to present every piece 
of information that sounds vaguely pro-
vegetarian. Nor should we try to answer 
every tangential argument—advocacy isn’t 
about how much we know. We can’t, for 
instance, let the discussion degrade into 
an argument over sterility and impotence, 
third-world starvation, Jesus’ loaves and 
ﬁ shes, impending dust bowls, abortion, 
chickens being smarter than human 
toddlers, the President, bone char, or 
Grandpa’s cholesterol level. Whatever is 
said cannot counter the fact that eating 
animals causes unnecessary suffering.
9
Pitfalls
Students of McGill University in Montreal (above) and 
Pennsylvania State University (below) are introduced to 
Even If You Like Meat by Ryan Enright and Jessica Parry.

Similarly, we can’t afford to build our case from questionable sources. Factory farms 
and slaughterhouses are hidden from view, and the industry’s PR machine (“Animals are 
treated well, slaughterhouses are well regulated”) denies standard animal agriculture 
practices. The public won’t believe otherwise just because we say so. However, there is no 
need to cite “biased” sources; the cruelties of factory farms and industrial slaughterhouses 
are well documented by nonpartisan third-party sources and the industry itself. Just as 
our case is perfectly strong without the most extreme claims, it is also complete when 
based on sources most people will regard as indisputable.
We should always stay focused on the animals, not ourselves or our particular diet. Ethical 
eating is not an end in itself. It is not a dogma or religion, nor a list of forbidden ingredients 
or immutable laws—it is only a tool for opposing cruelty and reducing suffering.
Remember:
◆  We don’t want to attack anything or anyone.
◆  We don’t want to express our rage at how animals are raised and killed.
◆  We don’t want to show how smart and enlightened we are.
◆  We don’t want to “win an argument with a meat eater.”
◆  We don’t want to gross out someone so they don’t eat meat at their next meal.
We want people to open their hearts and minds to change. It all simpliﬁ es to this:
◆  Buying meat, eggs, and dairy causes unnecessary suffering.
◆  We can each choose not to cause this suffering.
10
Jenna Calabrese hands out copies of Even If You Like Meat on the campus of the University of Massachusetts – Lowell.

For many, maintaining a change in diet
is a far more signiﬁ cant undertaking than 
most advocates admit—or even realize. 
While leaﬂ eting colleges across the country, 
Jack was often told, “I was vegetarian for a 
while, but I didn’t feel healthy.…” He heard 
this so frequently that he sometimes felt 
he met more failed vegetarians than 
current vegetarians!
Contrast this with the messages many 
activists like to present, such as “Meat is
a deadly poison!” Just consider a meat eater 
hearing a friend’s story of feeling unhealthy 
on a vegetarian diet, and then being faced 
with the nearly desperate-sounding activist 
chant of “Meat causes heart disease! Colon 
cancer! Breast cancer! Diabetes!”
As we know, even a moderate health 
argument doesn’t hold much sway over 
most people—especially young people. 
But the health argument is not only an 
inefﬁ cient use of our limited resources: 
when we regurgitate extremist-sounding, 
black and white propaganda, we hurt 
animals. Everyone who tries a vegetarian 
diet because of its “magical properties” 
will quit if they don’t immediately lose 
weight and increase their energy. They will 
then tell everyone how awful they felt as 
a vegetarian, and how much better they 
feel now as a meat eater. Just one failed 
vegetarian can counter the efforts of many 
well-spoken advocates.
It is well past time that we accompany 
the case for ethical eating with an honest 
and thorough plan for staying healthy. The 
nutritional case historically presented by 
advocates is so bad—and has led to so many 
failed vegetarians—that Jack went back to 
school to become a registered dietitian, so 
he could evaluate nutrition research and 
provide sound recommendations.
If we want to do our best to prevent 
suffering, we must learn and present
a complete, unbiased summary of the 
nutritional aspects of a cruelty-free diet, 
including uncertainties and potential 
concerns. Doing so not only leads people 
to trust that we are not just partisan 
propagandists, but also creates healthy 
spokespeople for the animals!
11
Staying Healthy
Compassionate Action for Animals’ biannual vegan
food showcase at the University of Minnesota.
“Staying Healthy on Plant-Based Diets” is a detailed article 
on nutrition written by Jack Norris, RD (above). You’ll find 
an abridged version in our Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating 
and the full article with references at VeganHealth.org/sh

Perhaps the biggest problem for advocates 
is society’s stereotype of vegans. No 
longer does “vegan” need to be explained 
when referenced on TV or in movies, but 
unfortunately, the word is often used as 
shorthand for someone young, angry, 
deprived, fanatical, and isolated. In short, 
“vegan” = “unhappy.” Just like one failed 
vegetarian counters the efforts of many 
honest advocates, this caricature guarantees 
that veganism won’t be considered—let 
alone adopted—on a wide scale.
Regrettably, the “angry vegan” image is 
based in reality, and ﬁ ghting this stereotype 
just reinforces it. Not only have I known 
many fanatical vegans, I was one. Like every 
error I have tried to point out in this essay—
inefﬁ cient tactics, obsessing over ingredients, 
arguing minutiae, etc.—this is another I’ve 
been guilty of. My self-righteous indignation 
gave many people a lifetime excuse to 
ignore the hidden realities of factory farms 
and the compassionate alternative.
It is not enough to be a vegan, or even a 
dedicated vegan advocate. If we want to 
maximize the amount of suffering we can 
prevent, we must actively be the opposite of 
the vegan stereotype. The animals can’t wait 
until we get over our despair. We must learn 
“how to win friends and inﬂ uence people.” 
We must—regardless of the sorrow and 
outrage we rightly feel—leave everyone we 
meet with the impression of a joyful person 
leading a fulﬁ lling and meaningful life.
Countering the Stereotype
12
Even If You Like Meat brochures are distributed by Suzanne Haws at San Jose State University (below) and Stewart Solomon 
at Cal Poly Pomona (opposite page).

This isn’t a particularly exciting or inspiring prescription:
◆  Focus on preventing animals from being bred for factory farms.
◆  Accept that, at this time, only a minority will listen, and many others will react with disdain.
◆  Avoid extreme claims, absolutism, and self-righteousness.
◆  Accept and admit to uncertainty.
◆  Be a friendly, upbeat, and respectful “people person.”
It is understandable to want something more immediate, more rewarding. Nearly every 
time I give a talk, at least one person says something like, “We have to do it all, now!
We have to save them all!”
Of course, I can’t dismiss the possibility that there is a better way, but history is not 
encouraging. Millions of people before us have been outraged and furious with the state 
of the world; yet today, there is more suffering than ever before. Obviously, anger and 
dedication aren’t enough.
Look at this country’s animal advocacy movement. In just the past few decades, hundreds 
of thousands of people have donated hundreds of millions of dollars and worked hundreds 
of millions of hours on behalf of the animals. What is there to show for it?
◆  Most who became active during this time have burned out and quit.
◆  Average per-person animal consumption has gone up, not down.
◆  The amount of animal suffering in the United States has exploded!
Still, many activists insist, “Animal liberation by any means necessary!
I’m willing to do anything!”
If this is the case, we need to ask ourselves these questions:
◆  Are we willing to give up—i.e., refocus—our anger?
◆  Are we willing to direct our passion, rather than have it rule us?
◆  Are we willing to put the needs of unseen animals before our own desires?
◆  Are we willing to accept slow change over no change?
13
Summary & Questions

I’d be lying if I said this was easy. Often, the logical 
response seems to be, Why bother? I’m doing enough 
by being vegan. Changing the world is hopeless.
This brings us to the second of the two challenges 
mentioned at the beginning: Why care?
It is relatively easy to look at horrible pictures or 
watch footage of brutality to animals and be angry 
and motivated in the short term. But what about a 
week down the road? A month? A year—after being 
rejected by relatives, ignored by coworkers, mocked 
while leaﬂ eting?
In many ways, remaining dedicated and motivated 
is a harder challenge than opening other people’s 
hearts and minds.
Is the situation hopeless? If you look at the big picture, I do believe that there is reason for 
optimism. Indeed, anyone interested in creating a fundamental change for the future is 
advised to take the long view—at least longer than the next year, or even the next decade. 
Although it is frustrating how slow the pace of progress can seem to us, the rate of change 
has been unprecedented in the past few centuries. As Bruce Friedrich points out:
 
 Socrates, considered the father of philosophical thought, was teaching more than 
twenty-ﬁ ve hundred years ago. It was thousands of years later that we saw 
the beginnings of our democratic system. Not until the 19th century 
was slavery abolished in the developed world. Only in the last century 
was child labor ended, child abuse criminalized, women allowed 
to vote, and minorities granted wider rights.
14
The Final Challenge

When viewed in this context, it seems clear that today we have the great and singular 
opportunity to make The Economist’s prediction come true:
 
 Historically, man has expanded the reach of his ethical calculations, as ignorance 
and want have receded, ﬁ rst beyond family and tribe, later beyond religion, race, and 
nation. To bring other species more fully into the range of these decisions may seem 
unthinkable to moderate opinion now. One day, decades or centuries hence, it may 
seem no more than “civilized” behavior requires.
Is this enough to keep an activist going, day in and day out, when trying to do the hard 
work of promoting ethical eating—especially while not surrounded by other activists to 
provide support? We aren’t robots. We each want to be happy.
Yet our desire for happiness, I believe, is the 
answer to the ﬁ nal challenge.
Ultimately, happiness isn’t to be found in 
“stuff.” While the United States is the richest 
country on earth, Americans aren’t the 
happiest people on earth. The phrase isn’t 
“the pursuit of happiness” for nothing! Over 
the millennia, those creatures who were 
satisﬁ ed found themselves erased from 
the gene pool by our unfulﬁ lled ancestors. 
Those that passed on their genes always 
desired more, leaving us with a basic 
nature that pursues happiness but isn’t able 
to acquire it.
Where does this leave us? The best answer 
I’ve found is that happiness is the result of 
a meaningful life, and meaning comes not 
from things, but from accomplishment.
15

POB 38492, Pittsburgh, PA 15238-8492 U 412.968.0268 U VeganOutreach.org U info@VeganOutreach.org
Working to end cruelty to animals
I believe that meaningful accomplishment
comes from living life beyond ourselves,
viewing our existence beyond the immediate.
Doing my thoughtful best to make the world
a better place is as meaningful a life as I can imagine.
To paraphrase Martin Luther King, Jr.:
 
The arc of history is long
 
 
And ragged
 
 
And often unclear
 
But ultimately
 
It progresses towards justice.
I want to be a part of that progress.
Some of the photos that appear in this booklet were provided courtesy of Casey Constable, Compassionate Action for Animals, 
Farm Sanctuary, Mauricio, Nick Lesiecki, Kari Nienstedt, Protecting Animals USA, Dawn Ratcliffe, USDA, and Joshua Warchol
Printed on recycled paper with soy inks    © Vegan Outreach, 2006    A Meaningful Life by Matt Ball Rev. 11/06

