
An Introduction to
Microelectromechanical
Systems Engineering
Second Edition

For a listing of recent titles in the Artech House Microelectromechanical
Systems (MEMS) Series, turn to the back of this book.

An Introduction to
Microelectromechanical
Systems Engineering
Second Edition
Nadim Maluf
Kirt Williams
Artech House, Inc.
Boston • London
www.artechhouse.com

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.S. Library of Congress.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Maluf, Nadim.
An Introduction to microelectromechanical systems engineering–2nd ed. –(Artech House
microelectromechanical library)
1. Microelectromechanical systems
I. Title
II. Williams, Kirt
621.3’81
ISBN 1-58053-590-9
Cover design by Igor Valdman
© 2004 ARTECH HOUSE, INC.
685 Canton Street
Norwood, MA 02062
All rights reserved. Printed and bound in the United States of America. No part of this book
may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, includ-
ing photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher.
All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or service marks have
been appropriately capitalized. Artech House cannot attest to the accuracy of this informa-
tion. Use of a term in this book should not be regarded as affecting the validity of any trade-
mark or service mark.
International Standard Book Number: 1-58053-590-9
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To our families
Tanya, Ella, and Jad
Erika, Gordon, Brynn, and Reed

.

Contents
Foreword
xiii
Preface
xv
Preface to First Edition
xix
CHAPTER 1
MEMS: A Technology from Lilliput
1
The Promise of Technology
1
What Are MEMS—or MST?
2
What Is Micromachining?
3
Applications and Markets
4
To MEMS or Not To MEMS?
7
Standards
8
The Psychological Barrier
8
Journals, Conferences, and Web Sites
9
List of Journals and Magazines
9
List of Conferences and Meetings
10
Summary
11
References
11
Selected Bibliography
12
CHAPTER 2
Materials for MEMS
13
Silicon-Compatible Material System
13
Silicon
13
Silicon Oxide and Nitride
19
Thin Metal Films
20
Polymers
21
Other Materials and Substrates
21
Glass and Fused Quartz Substrates
21
Silicon Carbide and Diamond
22
Gallium Arsenide and Other Group III-V Compound Semiconductors
22
Polymers
23
Shape-Memory Alloys
23
Important Material Properties and Physical Effects
24
vii

Piezoresistivity
24
Piezoelectricity
26
Thermoelectricity
29
Summary
31
References
31
Selected Bibliography
32
CHAPTER 3
Processes for Micromachining
33
Basic Process Tools
34
Epitaxy
34
Oxidation
35
Sputter Deposition
35
Evaporation
36
Chemical-Vapor Deposition
37
Spin-On Methods
40
Lithography
40
Etching
44
Advanced Process Tools
55
Anodic Bonding
55
Silicon Direct Bonding
56
Grinding, Polishing, and Chemical-Mechanical Polishing
57
Sol-Gel Deposition Methods
58
Electroplating and Molding
58
Supercritical Drying
60
Self-Assembled Monolayers
61
SU-8 Photosensitive Epoxy
61
Photosensitive Glass
62
EFAB
62
Nonlithographic Microfabrication Technologies
63
Ultraprecision Mechanical Machining
64
Laser Machining
64
Electrodischarge Machining
65
Screen Printing
65
Microcontact Printing/Soft Lithography
66
Nanoimprint Lithography
67
Hot Embossing
67
Ultrasonic Machining
68
Combining the Tools—Examples of Commercial Processes
68
Polysilicon Surface Micromachining
69
Combining Silicon Fusion Bonding with Reactive Ion Etching
71
DRIE of SOI Wafers
71
Single Crystal Reactive Etching and Metallization
72
Summary
74
References
75
Selected Bibliography
77
viii
Contents

CHAPTER 4
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications
79
General Design Methodology
79
Techniques for Sensing and Actuation
81
Common Sensing Methods
81
Common Actuation Methods
82
Passive Micromachined Mechanical Structures
85
Fluid Nozzles
85
Hinge Mechanisms
88
Sensors and Analysis Systems
89
Pressure Sensors
89
High-Temperature Pressure Sensors
93
Mass Flow Sensors
94
Acceleration Sensors
96
Angular Rate Sensors and Gyroscopes
104
Carbon Monoxide Gas Sensor
114
Actuators and Actuated Microsystems
116
Thermal Inkjet Heads
116
Micromachined Valves
119
Micropumps
126
Summary
128
References
129
Selected Bibliography
131
CHAPTER 5
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic Applications
133
Imaging and Displays
133
Infrared Radiation Imager
133
Projection Display with the Digital Micromirror Device
TM
135
Grating Light Valve™Display
139
Fiber-Optic Communication Devices
141
Tunable Lasers
142
Wavelength Locker
151
Digital M × N Optical Switch
154
Beam-Steering Micromirror for Photonic Switches and Cross Connects
156
Achromatic Variable Optical Attenuation
161
Summary
165
References
165
Selected Bibliography
167
CHAPTER 6
MEMS Applications in Life Sciences
169
Microfluidics for Biological Applications
169
Pumping in Microfluidic Systems
170
Mixing in Microfluidics
171
DNA Analysis
172
Contents
ix

The Structure of DNA
172
PCR
174
PCR on a Chip
174
Electrophoresis on a Chip
176
DNA Hybridization Arrays
180
Microelectrode Arrays
182
DNA Addressing with Microelectrodes
183
Cell Cultures over Microelectrodes
185
Summary
185
References
186
Selected Bibliography
187
CHAPTER 7
MEM Structures and Systems in RF Applications
189
Signal Integrity in RF MEMS
189
Passive Electrical Components: Capacitors and Inductors
190
Quality Factor and Parasitics in Passive Components
190
Surface-Micromachined Variable Capacitors
192
Bulk-Micromachined Variable Capacitors
195
Micromachined Inductors
197
Microelectromechanical Resonators
200
Comb-Drive Resonators
201
Beam Resonators
203
Coupled-Resonator Bandpass Filters
206
Film Bulk Acoustic Resonators
208
Microelectromechanical Switches
211
Membrane Shunt Switch
213
Cantilever Series Switch
213
Summary
214
References
214
Selected Bibliography
216
CHAPTER 8
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS
217
Key Design and Packaging Considerations
218
Wafer or Wafer-Stack Thickness
219
Wafer Dicing Concerns
219
Thermal Management
220
Stress Isolation
221
Protective Coatings and Media Isolation
222
Hermetic Packaging
223
Calibration and Compensation
224
Die-Attach Processes
225
Wiring and Interconnects
227
Electrical Interconnects
227
Microfluidic Interconnects
231
Optical Interconnects
232
x
Contents

Types of Packaging Solutions
233
Ceramic Packaging
233
Metal Packaging
237
Molded Plastic Packaging
240
Quality Control, Reliability, and Failure Analysis
243
Quality Control and Reliability Standards
244
Statistical Methods in Reliability
246
Accelerated Life Modeling
248
Major Failure Modes
249
A Reliability Case Study: The DMD
254
Summary
256
References
257
Selected Bibliography
259
Glossary
261
About the Authors
271
Index
273
Contents
xi

.

Foreword
According to my best recollection, the acronym for microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS) was officially adopted by a group of about 80 zealots at a crowded meet-
ing in Salt Lake City in 1989 called the Micro Tele-Operated Robotics Workshop. I
was there to present an invited paper that claimed MEMS should be used to fabri-
cate resonant structures for the purposes of timekeeping, and I was privileged to be
part of this group of visionaries for one and a half exciting days. The proceedings
may not be in print any longer. However, I recall that they were given an Institute of
Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) catalog number of 89TH0249-3. Discus-
sion at the workshop about the name of this new field of research raged for over an
hour, and several acronyms were offered, debated, and rejected. When the dust set-
tled, I recall that Professor Roger Howe of the University of California at Berkeley
stood up and announced, “Well, then, the name is MEMS.” In this way, the group
came to consensus. The research they conducted, unique to any currently being con-
ducted in the United States (or the world for that matter) would hereafter be known
as “MEMS.”
In those early, heady, exciting, and terribly uncertain days, many issues faced
those in the nascent field that researchers today would find hard to remember. For
example, our hearty band constantly worried if any scholarly journal would publish
the papers we wrote. Sources of research funding were hard to find and difficult to
maintain. MEMS fabrication was itself a major issue. Topics of conversation were
frequently about the nature, properties, and standardization of the polysilicon that
the pioneering band of researchers was using to demonstrate the early, elementary
structures of the day. Even the most daring and idealistic of students occasionally
turned down the offer to work with the faculty of that era: the work sometimes
appeared too farfetched for the taste of even the green-eyed zealots among the
graduate student population.
In the 10 years since the momentous events of that watershed workshop, the
National Science Foundation (NSF) funded a set of MEMS projects under its
“Emerging Technologies Initiative,” headed at the time by George Hazelrigg. NSF
funding continues to this day. The Defense Advanced Projects Research Agency
(DARPA) put nearly $200 million into MEMS research. Numerous MEMS journals
have sprung up, and the rate of filing of MEMS patents has reached over 160 per
calendar year in 1997. The skeptics that predicted the collapse of the field in 1990
are now confronted with the fact that, in 1997, 80 U.S. were companies in the
MEMS field. The combined total world market of MEMS reached approximately
$2 billion as well. In addition, the most conservative market studies predict a world
MEMS market in excess of $8 billion in 2003. In a phrase, MEMS has arrived.
xiii

Despite all the rosy news, there remain significant challenges facing the MEMS
field. One of these I call the challenge of the “500 MEMS Companies” and the other,
the “10,000 MEMS Designers.” For the field to fully take root and become ubiqui-
tous, there must be an unprecedented training of tens of thousands of MEMS engi-
neers. Already, the demand for MEMS experts has far outstripped the ability of
academia to train them. The only hope is for existing engineers to learn the basics of
MEMS and then go up the MEMS learning curve in the traditional way (i.e., learn-
ing by doing).
Here is where this book plays an important, essential role on the national stage.
Dr. Nadim Maluf has put together one of the finest MEMS primers that you may
find on the bookshelf today. Written in a no-nonsense, clear style, the book brings
the practicing engineer and student alike to an understanding of how MEMS are
designed and fabricated. Dr. Maluf’s book concentrates mostly on how to design
and manufacture MEMS. This is to be expected of Dr. Maluf, who has impeccable
MEMS credentials. Trained in MEMS for his Ph.D. at Stanford University, Dr.
Maluf has spent his postdoctoral career as a practicing MEMS engineer and man-
ager at Lucas NovaSensor, one of the early MEMS companies in the field. His indus-
trial career has been focused both on bringing MEMS products successfully to
market and on defending his company’s market share against encroachment by
other technologies. Because this book is written from Dr. Maluf’s practical perspec-
tive, this volume is sure to have lasting value to the myriad of engineers and execu-
tives who are struggling to find a way into the field of MEMS. This book also will
serve as a useful resource for those already in the field who wish to broaden their
expertise in MEMS fabrication. When I reviewed the manuscript, I was ready to
offer Dr. Maluf a great deal of suggestions and corrections. I was quite humbled to
realize that, instead, I was eager to have a copy of the new book on my own shelf. It
will serve as a reference for not only myself, but also the students and engineers who
frequently ask me, “What book should I buy to learn how to make MEMS?”
Albert (“Al”) P. Pisano, Ph.D.
MEMS Program Manager
DARPA
xiv
Foreword

Preface
The past few years have witnessed an increasing maturity of the MEMS industry
and a rapid introduction of new products addressing applications ranging from bio-
chemical analysis to fiber-optic telecommunications. The market size for MEMS
products has doubled in the past 5 years and is projected to grow at this fast rate for
the foreseeable future. The corresponding technology has enjoyed a fast pace of
development and has rapidly spread to institutions and companies on all inhabited
continents. A search of the keyword MEMS in all granted patents in the United
States since 1998 returns nearly 4,000 patents and references. Many devices have
left universities to go into commercial development, and several have reached the
stage of becoming products. It is therefore appropriate to extensively revise the text
to incorporate advances in the field, new products, as well as suggestions from the
readers.
As we revised the original text and added substantial new material, we strived to
retain the style characteristic of an introductory book intended for a broad audience
of scientists, engineers, students, and business executives. This revised edition con-
tinues to assume that the reader has no prior experience in MEMS technology but
does possess an understanding of basic scientific concepts equivalent to first-year
college physics and chemistry. The objective remained to introduce a select number
of representative demonstrators that are now or are soon to be commercially avail-
able. We added many more illustrations and pictures to aid the reader in developing
a familiarity with the technology. We also included throughout the text more practi-
cal tidbits that are useful to those who wish to apply this technology to their needs.
In this revision, we have expanded on the fabrication processes, adding new
methods and materials. The advantages and limitations of many micromachined
structures are covered in more detail. We divided the chapter on commercial struc-
tures into four chapters, each focusing on a specific application, and then expanded
each chapter with appropriate material covering new technical developments and
products. Chapter 4 is now specific to automotive and industrial applications, cov-
ering traditional products, such as pressure sensors, accelerometers, and yaw-rate
sensors, and new emerging products in valving and pumping. Chapter 5 now covers
the applications of MEMS in photonics, including displays, optical sensors, and
new products that are now common in fiber-optic telecommunications. The focus
of Chapter 6 is on applications in life sciences, with emphasis on new products and
developments specific to biochemical analysis and microfluidics. With the emer-
gence of wireless and radio frequency (RF) as a new market for MEMS technology,
we dedicated Chapter 7 to describe recent developments and introductions in this
promising area. In Chapters 4 through 7, we expanded where appropriate on the
xv

application and on the system that includes the MEMS product. We also expanded
the material in Chapter 8 on packaging to include packaging of optical MEMS prod-
ucts and added an entirely new section on reliability and quality assurance. We
added several references to each chapter to direct the advanced reader to the source
of the material. We also expanded the glossary to assist the novice in understanding
and relating to a new terminology.
Many people provided us technical information and materials specifically for
the second edition of this book. We thank Bardia Pezeshki of Santur Corporation;
John (Hal) Jerman of Iolon; Asif Godil of Lightconnect; Greg Ortiz of Surface Tech-
nology Systems; Bonnie Gray; Greg Jepson of Bullen Ultrasonics; Chris Bang and
Den Feinberg of Microfabrica; Malcom Gower of Exitech; Amy Wang; Brian Paegel
of The Scripps Research Institute; Carol Schembri and John Larson of Agilent Tech-
nologies; Didier Lacroix and Ken Cioffi of Discera; Michael Cohn of MicroAssem-
bly; Nelson Fuller of Alumina Micro; and Stephen Durant and Christopher Eide of
Morrison and Foerster. Evan Green and Carter Hand of New Focus were kind
enough to review portions of the manuscript. Thanks go to our editor, Mark Walsh,
for his unwavering support. Kirt Williams further thanks his former graduate advi-
sor, Professor Richard S. Muller, for having such a profound effect on his life for
introducing him to MEMS.
xvi
Preface

“It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was
the age of foolishness…” from A Tale of Two Cities by Charles Dickens, engraved
on a thin silicon nitride membrane. The entire page measures a mere 5.9 µm on a
side, sufficiently small that 60,000 pages—equivalent to the Encyclopedia Britan-
nica—can fit on a pinhead. The work, by T. Newman and R. F. W. Pease of Stan-
ford University, won the Feynman challenge in 1985.
(Courtesy of: Engineering & Science, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California.)

.

Preface to First Edition
I stood a few years ago before an audience at a customer’s facility explaining the
merits of micromachining technology. The small conference room was packed, and
all ears were attentive. Everyone was eager to learn about this mysterious buzz-
word, “MEMS.” Many in the audience were nodding in a sign of comprehension,
but the gazed looks on many faces betrayed them. This experience is not unique;
rather, it repeats itself frequently in auditoriums around the world. The technology
is simply too broad to be explained in a short lecture. Many technical managers,
engineers, scientists, and even engineering students with little or no prior experience
in microelectromechanical systems are showing a keen interest in learning about
this emerging technology. This book is written for these individuals.
I sought in this book to introduce the technology by describing basic fabrica-
tion processes and select examples of devices and microsystems that are either com-
mercially available or show great promise in becoming products in the near
future—practical examples from the “real world.” The objective is to provide a set
of representative cases that can give the reader a global understanding of the tech-
nology’s foundations and a sense of its diversity. The text describes the basic opera-
tion and fabrication of many devices, along with packaging requirements. Inspired
by the adage “a picture is worth a thousand words,” I have included numerous
descriptive schematic illustrations. It is my hope that scanning these illustrations
will aid the reader in quickly developing a basic familiarity with the technology.
Suggestions at the end of each chapter for further reading and an extensive glossary
should supplement the main text.
The following paragraphs present an overview of each chapter in the book.
Chapter 1—MEMS: A Technology from Lilliput. This introductory chapter
defines the scope of the technology and the applications it addresses. A short analy-
sis of existing markets and future opportunities is also included.
Chapter 2—The Sandbox: Materials for MEMS. This chapter reviews the
properties of materials common in micromachining. The emphasis is on silicon
and materials that can be readily deposited as thin films on silicon substrates.
Three physical effects—piezoresistivity, piezoelectricity, and thermoelectricity—are
described in some detail.
Chapter 3—The Toolbox: Processes for Micromachining. Various fabrication
techniques used in semiconductor manufacturing and micromachining are intro-
duced. These include a number of deposition and etch methods, as well as lithogra-
phy. The discussion on etch methods covers the topics of anisotropic etching,
dependence on crystallographic planes, and deep reactive ion etching. Three com-
plete manufacturing process flows are described at the end.
xix

Chapter 4—The Gearbox: Commercial MEM Structures and Systems. This
chapter
includes
descriptions
of
a
select
list
of
commercially
available
micromachined sensors and actuators. The discussion includes the basic principle of
operation and a corresponding fabrication process for each device. Among the
devices are pressure and inertial sensors, a microphone, a gas sensor, valves, an
infrared imager, and a projection display system.
Chapter 5—The New Gearbox: A Peek into the Future. The discussion in this
chapter centers on devices and systems still under development but with significant
potential for the future. These include biochemical and genetic analysis systems,
high-frequency components, display elements, pumps, and optical switches.
Chapter 6—The Box: Packaging for MEMS. The diverse packaging require-
ments for MEMS are reviewed in this chapter. The basic techniques of packaging
sensors and actuators are also introduced. A few nonproprietary packaging solu-
tions are described.
The writing of a book usually relies on the support and encouragement of col-
leagues, friends, and family members. This book is no exception. I am grateful to Al
Pisano for his general support and for recognizing the value of an introductory book
on MEMS. I would like to thank Greg Kovacs, Kirt Williams, and Denise Salles for
reading the manuscript and providing valuable feedback. They left an indelible mark
of friendship on the pages of the book. I am thankful to many others for their com-
ments, words of encouragement, and contributions. To Bert van Drieënhuizen,
Dominik Jaeggi, Bonnie Gray, Jitendra Mohan, John Pendergrass, Dale Gee, Tony
Flannery, Dave Borkholder, Sandy Plewa, Andy McQuarrie, Luis Mejia, Stefani
Yee, Viki Williams, and the staff at NovaSensor, I say, “Thank you!” Jerry Gist’s
artistic talents proved important in designing the book cover. For those I inadver-
tently forgot to mention, please forgive me. I am also grateful to DARPA for provid-
ing partial funding under contract N66001-96-C-8631. Last, but not least, words
cannot duly express my gratitude and love to my wife, Tanya. She taught me over
the course of writing this book the true meaning of love, patience, dedication, under-
standing, and support. I set out in this book to teach technology, but I finished learn-
ing from her about life.
Nadim Maluf
August 1999
xx
Preface to First Edition

C H A P T E R
1
MEMS: A Technology from Lilliput
“...And I think to myself, what a wonderful world...oh yeah!”
—Louis Armstrong
The Promise of Technology
The ambulance sped down the Denver highway carrying Mr. Rosnes Avon to the
hospital. The flashing lights illuminated the darkness of the night, and the siren
alerted those drivers who braved the icy cold weather. Mrs. Avon’s voice was clearly
shaken as she placed the emergency telephone call a few minutes earlier. Her hus-
band was complaining of severe palpitations in his heart and shortness of breath.
She sat next to him in the rear of the ambulance and held his hand in silence, but her
eyes could not hide her concern and fear. The attending paramedic clipped onto the
patient’s left arm a small device from which a flexible cable wire led to a digital dis-
play that was showing the irregular cardiac waveform. A warning sign in the upper
right-hand corner of the display was flashing next to the low blood-pressure read-
ing. In a completely mechanical manner reflecting years of experience, the para-
medic removed an adhesive patch from a plastic bag and attached it to Mr. Avon’s
right arm. The label on the discarded plastic package read “sterile microneedles.”
Then, with her right hand, the paramedic inserted into the patch a narrow plastic
tube, while the fingers of her left hand proceeded to magically play the soft keys on
the horizontal face of an electronic instrument. She dialed in an appropriate dosage
of a new drug called Nocilis™. Within minutes, the display was showing a recover-
ing cardiac waveform, and the blood pressure warning faded in the dark green color
of the screen. The paramedic looked with a smile at Mrs. Avon, who acknowledged
with a deep sigh of relief.
Lying in his hospital bed the next morning, Mr. Avon was slowly recovering
from the disturbing events of the prior night. He knew that his youthful days were
behind him, but the news from his physician that he needed a pacemaker could only
cause him anguish. With an electronic stylus in his hand, he continued to record his
thoughts and feelings on what appeared to be a synthetic white pad. The pen recog-
nized the pattern of his handwriting and translated it to text for the laptop computer
resting on the desk by the window. He drew a sketch of the pacemaker that Dr.
Harte showed him in the morning; the computer stored an image of his lifesaving
instrument. A little device barely the size of a silver dollar would forever remain in
his chest and take control of his heart’s rhythm. But a faint smile crossed Mr. Avon’s
lips when he remembered the doctor mentioning that the pacemaker would monitor
his level of physical activity and correspondingly adjust his heart rate. After all, he
1

might be able to play tennis again. With his remote control, he turned on the projec-
tion screen television and slowly drifted back into light sleep.
This short fictional story illustrates how technology can touch our daily lives in
so many different ways. The role of miniature devices and systems is not immediately
apparent here because they are embedded deep within the application they enable.
The circumstances of this story call for such devices on many separate occasions. The
miniature yaw-rate sensor in the vehicle stability system ensured that the ambulance
did not skid on the icy highway. In the event of an accident, the crash acceleration
sensor guaranteed the airbags would deploy just in time to protect the passengers.
The silicon manifold absolute pressure (MAP) sensor in the engine compartment
helped the engine electronic control unit maintain at the location’s high altitude the
proper proportions in the mixture of air and fuel. As the vehicle was safely traveling,
equally advanced technology in the rear of the ambulance saved Mr. Avon’s life. The
modern blood pressure sensor clipped onto his arm allowed the paramedic to moni-
tor blood pressure and cardiac output. The microneedles in the adhesive patch
ensured the immediate delivery of medication to the minute blood vessels under the
skin, while a miniature electronic valve guaranteed the exact dosage. The next day, as
the patient lay in his bed writing his thoughts in his diary, the microaccelerometer in
the electronic quill recognized the motion of his hand and translated his handwriting
into text. Another small accelerometer embedded in his pacemaker would enable him
to play tennis again. He also could write and draw at will because the storage capac-
ity of his disk drive was enormous, thanks to miniature read and write heads. And
finally, as the patient went to sleep, an array of micromirrors projected a pleasant
high-definition television image onto a suspended screen.
Many of the miniature devices listed in this story, in particular the pressure,
acceleration, and yaw-rate microsensors and the micromirror display, already exist
as commercial products. Ongoing efforts at many companies and laboratories
throughout the world promise to deliver, in the not-too-distant future, new and
sophisticated miniature components and microsystems. It is not surprising, then,
that there is widespread belief in the technology’s potential to penetrate in the future
far-reaching applications and markets.
What Are MEMS—or MST?
In the United States, the technology is known as microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS); in Europe, it is called microsystems technology (MST). A question asking
for a more specific definition is certain to generate a broad collection of replies with
few common characteristics other than “miniature.” But such apparent divergence
in the responses merely reflects the diversity of applications this technology enables,
rather than a lack of commonality. MEMS is simultaneously a toolbox, a physical
product, and a methodology, all in one:
• It is a portfolio of techniques and processes to design and create miniature
systems.
• It is a physical product often specialized and unique to a final application—
one can seldom buy a generic MEMS product at the neighborhood electronics
store.
2
MEMS: A Technology from Lilliput

• “MEMS is a way of making things,” reports the Microsystems Technology
Office of the United States DARPA [1]. These “things” merge the functions
of sensing and actuation with computation and communication to locally
control physical parameters at the microscale, yet cause effects at much
grander scales.
Although a universal definition is lacking, MEMS products possess a number of
distinctive features. They are miniature embedded systems involving one or many
micromachined components or structures. They enable higher level functions,
though in and of themselves, their utility may be limited—a micromachined pres-
sure sensor in one’s hand is useless, but, under the hood, it controls the fuel-air mix-
ture of the car engine. They often integrate smaller functions together into one
package for greater utility (e.g., merging an acceleration sensor with electronic cir-
cuits for self diagnostics). They can also bring cost benefits directly through low unit
pricing or indirectly by cutting service and maintenance costs.
Although the vast majority of today’s MEMS products are better categorized as
components or subsystems, the emphasis in MEMS technology should be on the
“systems” aspect. True microsystems may still be a few years away, but their devel-
opment and evolution relies on the success of today’s components, especially as
these components are integrated together to perform functions ever increasing in
complexity. Building microsystems is an evolutionary process; we spent the last 30
years learning how to build micromachined components, and only recently we
began learning about their seamless integration into subsystems and ultimately into
complete microsystems.
One notable example is the evolution of crash sensors for airbag safety
systems. Early sensors were merely mechanical switches. They later evolved into
micromechanical sensors that directly measured acceleration. The current genera-
tion of devices integrates electronic circuitry alongside a micromechanical sensor
to provide self diagnostics and a digital output. It is anticipated that the next
generation of devices will also incorporate the entire airbag deployment circuitry
that decides whether to inflate the airbag. As the technology matures, the airbag
crash sensor may be integrated one day with micromachined yaw-rate and other
inertial sensors to form a complete microsystem responsible for passenger safety
and vehicle stability.
Examples of future microsystems are not limited to automotive applications
(see Table 1.1). Efforts to develop micromachined components for the control of
fluids are just beginning to bear fruit. These could one day lead to the integration
of micropumps with microvalves and reservoirs to build new miniature drug
delivery systems.
What Is Micromachining?
Micromachining is the set of design and fabrication tools that precisely machine and
form structures and elements at a scale well below the limits of our human percep-
tive faculties—the microscale. Micromachining is the underlying foundation of
MEMS fabrication; it is the toolbox of MEMS.
What Is Micromachining?
3

Arguably, the birth of the first micromachined components dates back many
decades, but it was the well-established integrated circuit industry that indirectly
played an indispensable role in fostering an environment suitable for the develop-
ment and growth of micromachining technologies. As the following chapters will
show, many tools used in the design and manufacturing of MEMS products are
“borrowed” from the integrated circuit industry. It should not then be surprising
that micromachining relies on silicon as a primary material, even though the tech-
nology has certainly been demonstrated using other materials.
Applications and Markets
Present markets are primarily in pressure and inertial sensors, inkjet print heads
dominated by the Hewlett-Packard Co. of Palo Alto, California, and high-resolution
digital displays with Texas Instruments of Dallas, Texas, being a leader in this mar-
ket. Future and emerging applications include tire pressure sensing, RF and wireless
electronics, fiber optical components, and fluid management and processing devices
for chemical microanalysis, medical diagnostics, and drug delivery (see Table 1.1).
While estimates for MEMS markets vary considerably, they all show significant
present and future growth, reaching aggregate volumes in the many billions of
4
MEMS: A Technology from Lilliput
Table 1.1
Examples of Present and Future Application Areas for MEMS
Commercial Applications
Invasive and noninvasive biomedical sensors
Miniature biochemical analytical instruments
Cardiac management systems (e.g., pacemakers, catheters)
Drug delivery systems (e.g., insulin, analgesics)
Neurological disorders (e.g., neurostimulation)
Engine and propulsion control
Automotive safety, braking, and suspension systems
Telecommunication optical fiber components and switches
Mass data storage systems
RF and wireless electronics
Distributed sensors for condition-based maintenance and monitoring
structural health
Distributed control of aerodynamic and hydrodynamic systems
Military Applications
Inertial systems for munitions guidance and personal navigation
Distributed unattended sensors for asset tracking, and environmental
and security surveillance
Weapons safing, arming, and fusing
Integrated microoptomechanical components for identify-friend-or-foe
systems
Head- and night-display systems
Low-power, high-density mass data storage devices
Embedded sensors and actuators for condition-based maintenance
Integrated fluidic systems for miniature propellant and combustion control
Miniature fluidic systems for early detection of threats from biological and
chemical agents
Electromechanical signal processing for small and low-power wireless
communication
Active, conformable surfaces for distributed aerodynamic control of aircraft

dollars by 2010 [2–7]. The expected growth stems from technical innovations and
acceptance of the technology by an increasing number of end users and customers.
A rapid adoption rate of microfluidics, RF, and optical MEMS will cause these
applications to grow at a faster pace than the more traditional pressure and accel-
eration sensing products (see Table 1.2). As a result, the percentage of revenues
from automotive applications, which consume large volumes of pressure and accel-
eration sensors, are projected to decrease even though the automotive market will
grow to $1.5 billion in 2007. In 1997, automotive applications accounted for 35%
of the total $1.2-billion MEMS market [4], dropping to 26% in 2002 and to 18% in
2007 [6]. It is clear, however, from the data that, because of the lack of a single
dominant application—the killer app—and the diverse technical requirements of
end users, there is not a single MEMS market; rather, there are a collection of mar-
kets, many of which are considered niche markets, especially when compared to
their semiconductor businesses kin. This fragmentation of the overall market
reflects itself onto the large number of small and diverse companies engaged in
MEMS. Geographically, the United States and Europe lead the world in the manu-
facture of MEMS-based products, with Japan trailing (see Table 1.3).
An important action when sizing the market for MEMS is to distinguish between
components and systems. For instance, the world market for disposable blood pres-
sure sensors in 2000 was approximately 25 million units totaling $30 million at the
Applications and Markets
5
Table 1.3
Geographical Distribution of
the World MEMS Production Facilities
Number of Fabs
North America
139
Germany
34
France
20
United Kingdom
14
Benelux
17
Scandinavia
20
Switzerland
14
Rest of Europe
10
Japan
41
Rest of Asia
31
(Source: [8].)
Table 1.2
Analysis and Forecast of Worldwide MEMS
Markets (in Millions of U.S. Dollars)
2002
2007
($ 000,000)
($ 000,000)
Microfluidics
1,404
2,241
Optical MEMS
702
1,826
RF MEMS
39
249
Other actuators
117
415
Inertial sensors
819
1,826
Pressure sensors
546
913
Other sensors
273
830
Total
3,900
8,300
The forecasted compounded annual growth rate (CAGR) between 2002
and 2007 is 16%.
(Source: [6]).

component level but about $200 million at the system level. The price differential
between the component and the system can readily reach a factor of ten and occa-
sionally higher. Another example is an emerging automotive application for MEMS
initiated by the U.S. Congress when it passed the Transportation Recall Enhance-
ment, Accountability and Documentation (TREAD) Act in 2000 requiring warning
systems in new vehicles to alert operators when their tires are underinflated (the law
was in response to the significant number of fatalities from the Ford/Firestone safety
issue). A U.S. federal court directed the National Highway Traffic Safety Administra-
tion (NHTSA) in August 2003 to require auto manufacturers to install a direct tire
measurement system with a pressure sensor in each wheel [9]. With 16 million new
vehicles sold in North America each year, there is suddenly a new market for nearly
70 million pressure sensors totaling approximately $100 million per year. The cost of
the total system, which includes electronic circuitry and a wireless link to the dash-
board, ranges between $65 to $200 [10], making the market size at the system level
well over $1 billion per year.
Forecasting of the MEMS markets has not been without its feckless moments.
Poor forecasting of emerging applications has left visible scars on many companies
engaged in the development and manufacture of MEMS products. For instance, the
worldwide market for airbag crash sensors is estimated today at $150 million, even
as these components become standard on all 50 million vehicles manufactured every
year around the globe. Market studies conducted in the early 1990s incorrectly esti-
mated the unit asking price of these sensors, neglecting the effect of competition on
pricing and artificially inflating the size of the market to $500 million. As a result,
many companies rushed to enter the market in the early 1990s only to shutter their
programs a few years later.
Marketers also did not fare well in predicting the rapid deflation of the telecom-
munications economic bubble in 2001 and its Draconian effects on the industry. In
the midst of that bubble, studies showed that the markets for optical switches and
tunable lasers, two areas that relied heavily on MEMS technology, would soon
exceed 10 billions dollars. Venture capitalists poured hundreds of millions of dollars
into companies that developed products for fiber-optical telecommunications, many
based on various aspects of MEMS technology. Large companies rushed to spend
billions in acquiring startup companies with innovative product ideas. With its stock
at a historical peak in the year 2000, Nortel Networks of Ontario, Canada, pur-
chased Xros, a startup company in Sunnyvale, California, developing a MEMS-
based optical switch fabric, for $3.25 billion in stock. The market for optical
switches did not materialize and Nortel ultimately shut down the division. During
the same period, JDS Uniphase of San Jose, California, acquired Cronos Integrated
Microsystems of Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, a MEMS foundry, for
$700 million in stock. JDS Uniphase later divested the division to MEMSCAP of
Grenoble, France, for approximately $5 million. Dozens of startup companies met
the fate of death as funding dried out and revenues did not grow. But if this dooms-
day scenario inflicted pain on numerous companies, investors and speculators, it
also sowed the seeds of great innovation into the MEMS industry and left a breed of
highly competitive and reliable products. The intellectual capital left behind will
undoubtedly spur in the near future ideas and products for applications beyond
fiber-optical telecommunications.
6
MEMS: A Technology from Lilliput

To MEMS or Not To MEMS?
Like many other emerging technologies with significant future potential, MEMS is
subject to a rising level of excitement and publicity. As it evolves and end markets
develop, this excessive optimism is gradually moderated with a degree of realism
reflecting the technology’s strengths and capabilities.
Any end user considering developing a MEMS solution or incorporating one in
a design invariably reaches the difficult question of “why MEMS?” The question
strikes at the heart of the technology, particularly in view of competing methods
(e.g., conventional machining or plastic molding techniques, which do not have
recourse to micromachining). For applications that can benefit from existing com-
mercial MEMS products (e.g., pressure or acceleration sensors), the answer to this
question relies on the ability to meet required specifications and pricing. But the vast
majority of applications require unique solutions that often necessitate the funding
and completion of an evaluation or development program. In such situations, a
clear-cut answer is seldom easy to establish.
In practice, a MEMS solution becomes attractive if it enables a new function or
provides significant cost reduction or both. For instance, medical applications gener-
ally seem to focus on added or enabled functionality and improved performance,
whereas automotive applications often seek cost reduction. Size reduction can play
an important selling role but is seldom sufficient as the sole reason unless it
becomes enabling in itself. Naturally, reliability is always a dictated requirement.
The decision-making process is further complicated by the fact that MEMS is not
a single technology but rather a set of technologies (e.g., surface versus bulk
micromachining). At this point, it is beneficial for the end user to become familiar
with the capabilities and the limitations of any particular MEMS technology selected
for the application in mind. The active participation of the end user allows for the
application to drive the technology development rather than the frequent opposite.
Companies seeking MEMS solutions often contract a specialized facility for the
design and manufacture of the product. Others choose first to evaluate basic con-
ceptual designs through existing foundry services. A few decide to internally
develop a complete design. In the latter case, there is considerable risk that manufac-
turing considerations are not properly taken into account, resulting in significant
challenges in production.
Regardless of how exciting and promising a technology may be, its ultimate
realization is invariably dependent on economical success. The end user will justify
the technology on the basis of added value, increased productivity, or cost competi-
tiveness, and the manufacturer must show revenues and profits. On both tracks,
MEMS technology is able to deliver within a set of realistic expectations that may
vary with the end application. A key element to cost competitiveness is batch fabri-
cation (that is, the practice of simultaneously manufacturing hundreds or thousands
of identical parts, thus diluting the overall impact of fixed costs—including the cost
of maintaining expensive cleanroom and assembly facilities) (see Figure 1.1). This is
precisely the same approach that has resulted over the last few decades in a dramatic
decrease in the price of computer memory chips. Unfortunately, the argument
works in reverse too: Small manufacturing volumes will bear the full burden of
overhead expenses, regardless of how “enabling” the technology may be.
To MEMS or Not To MEMS?
7

Standards
Few disagree that the burgeoning MEMS industry traces many of its roots to the inte-
grated circuit industry. However, the two market dynamics differ greatly with severe
implications, one of which is the lack of standards in MEMS. Complementary
metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology has proven itself over the years to be
a universally accepted manufacturing process for integrated circuits, driven primarily
by the insatiable consumer demand for computers and digital electronics. By con-
trast, the lack of a dominant MEMS high-volume product (or family of products) and
the unique technical requirements of each application have resulted in the emergence
of multiple fabrication and assembly processes (the next chapters will introduce
them). Standards are generally driven by the needs of high-volume applications,
which are few in MEMS. In turn, the lack of standards feeds into the diverging
demands of the emerging applications.
The Psychological Barrier
It is human nature to cautiously approach what is new, for it is foreign and untested.
Even for the technologically savvy or the fortunate individual living in high-tech
regions, there is a need to overcome the comfort zone of the present before engaging
the technologies of the future. This cautious behavior translates to slow acceptance
of new technologies and derivative products as they get introduced into soci-
ety. MEMS acceptance is no exception. For example, demonstration of the first
micromachined accelerometer took place in 1979 at Stanford University [11]. Yet it
took nearly 15 years before it became accepted as a device of choice for automotive
airbag safety systems. Naturally, in the process, it was designed and redesigned,
tested, and qualified in the laboratory and in the field before it began gaining the
confidence of automotive suppliers. The process can be lengthy, especially for
embedded systems (see Figure 1.2).
8
MEMS: A Technology from Lilliput
Mmm!
Maluf
No Si? I’ll eat
your profits
instead!
$
Si
Cleanroom
Cleanroom
Figure 1.1
Volume manufacturing is essential for maintaining profitability.

Today, MEMS and associated product concepts generate plenty of excitement
but not without skepticism. Companies exploring for the first time the incorpora-
tion of MEMS solutions in their systems do so with trepidation until an internal
“MEMS technology champion” emerges to educate the corporation and raise the
confidence level. With many micromachined silicon sensors embedded in every car
and in numerous critical medical instruments, and with additional MEMS products
finding their way into our daily life, the height of this hidden psychological barrier
appears to be declining.
Journals, Conferences, and Web Sites
The list of journals and conferences with a focus on micromachining and MEMS
continues to grow every year. There is also a growing list of online Web sites, most
notably MEMSnet
®, an information clearinghouse hosted by the Corporation for
National Research Initiatives of Reston, Virginia, and Nexus Association of Greno-
ble, France, a nonprofit organization with funding from the European Commission.
The sites provide convenient links and maintain relevant information directories
(see Table 1.4).
List of Journals and Magazines
Several journals and trade magazines published in the United States and Europe
cover research and advances in the field. Some examples are:
• Sensors and Actuators (A, B & C): a peer-reviewed scientific journal pub-
lished by Elsevier Science of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
• Journal of Micromechanical Systems (JMEMS): a peer-reviewed scientific
journal published by the IEEE of Piscataway, New Jersey, in collaboration
with the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) of New York,
New York.
Journals, Conferences, and Web Sites
9
−20
−40
−60
−80
−100
Percent
Cable TVs
VCRs
PCs
Cell phones
1960
1970
1980
1990
‘96
Figure 1.2
The percentage of household penetration of new electronic products. It takes 5 to 15
years before new technologies reach wide acceptance [12].

• Journal
of
Micromechanics
and
Microengineering
(JMM):
a
peer-
reviewed scientific journal published by the Institute of Physics of Bristol,
United Kingdom.
• Sensors Magazine: a trade journal with emphasis on practical and commercial
applications. It is published by Helmers Publishing, Inc., of Peterborough,
New Hampshire.
• MST News: a newsletter on microsystems and MEMS. It is published by
VDI/VDE Technologiezentrum Informationstechnik GmbH of Teltow, Ger-
many, and is available on-line.
• Micro/Nano Newsletter: a publication companion to “R&D Magazine”
with news and updates on micromachined devices and nanoscale-level
technologies. It is published by Reed Business Information of Morris Plains,
New Jersey.
• Small Times Magazine: a trade journal reporting on MEMS, MST, and nano-
technology. It is published by Small Times Media, LLC, a subsidiary company
of Ardesta, LLC, of Ann Arbor, Michigan.
List of Conferences and Meetings
Several conferences cover advances in MEMS or incorporate program sessions on
micromachined sensors and actuators. The following list gives a few examples:
• International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers):
held in odd years and rotates sequentially between North America, Asia, and
Europe.
• Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Workshop (Hilton-Head): held in even years
in Hilton Head Island, South Carolina, and sponsored by the Transducers
Research Foundation of Cleveland, Ohio.
10
MEMS: A Technology from Lilliput
Table 1.4
List of a Few Government and Nongovernment Organizations with Useful On-line Resources
Organization
Address
Description
Web Site
MEMSnet
Reston, VA
U.S. information
clearinghouse
www.memsnet.org
MEMS Exchange
Reston, VA
Intermediary broker for
foundry services
www.mems-exchange.org
MEMS Industry Group
Pittsburgh, PA
Industrial consortium
www.memsindustrygroup.org
NIST
Gaithersburg, MD
Sponsored U.S.
government projects
www.atp.nist.gov
DARPA
Arlington, VA
Sponsored U.S.
government projects
www.darpa.mil
IDA
Alexandria, VA
Insertion in military
applications
mems.ida.org
NEXUS
Grenoble, France
European MST network
www.nexus-mems.com
VDI/VDE – IT
Teltow, Germany
Association of German
Engineers
www.mstonline.de
AIST – MITI
Tokyo, Japan
The “Micromachine Project”
in Japan
www.aist.go.jp
ATIP
Albuquerque, NM
Asian Technology
Information Project
www.atip.org

• Micro Electro Mechanical Systems Workshop (MEMS): an international
meeting held annually and sponsored by the IEEE.
• International Society for Optical Engineering (SPIE): regular conferences
held in the United States and sponsored by SPIE of Bellingham, Washington.
• Micro Total Analysis Systems (µTAS): a conference focusing on microanalyti-
cal and chemical systems. It is an annual meeting and alternates between
North America and Europe.
Summary
Microelectromechanical structures and systems are miniature devices that enable the
operation of complex systems. They exist today in many environments, espe-
cially automotive, medical, consumer, industrial, and aerospace. Their potential for
future penetration into a broad range of applications is real, supported by strong
development activities at many companies and institutions. The technology consists
of a large portfolio of design and fabrication processes (a toolbox), many borrowed
from the integrated circuit industry. The development of MEMS is inherently inter-
disciplinary, necessitating an understanding of the toolbox as well as of the end
application.
References
[1]
Dr. Albert Pisano, in presentation material distributed by the U.S. DARPA, available at
http://www.darpa.mil.
[2]
System Planning Corporation, “Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS): An SPC Market
Study,” January 1999, 1429 North Quincy Street, Arlington, VA 22207.
[3]
Frost and Sullivan, “World Sensors Market: Strategic Analysis,” Report 5509-32, February
1999, 2525 Charleston Road, Mountain View, CA 94043, http://www.frost.com.
[4]
Frost and Sullivan, “U.S. Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS),” Report 5549-16,
June 1997, 2525 Charleston Road, Mountain View, CA 94043, http://www.frost.com.
[5]
Intechno Consulting, “Sensors Market 2008,” Steinenbachgaesslein 49, CH-4051, Basel,
Switzerland, http://www.intechnoconsulting.com.
[6]
In-Stat/MDR, “Got MEMS? Industry Overview and Forecast,” Report IN030601EA,
August 2003, 6909 East Greenway Parkway, Suite 250, Scottsdale, AZ 85254,
http://www.instat.com.
[7]
WTC Wicht Technologie Consulting, “The RF MEMS Market 2002–2007,” Frauenplatz
5, D-80331 München, Germany, http://www.wtc-consult.de.
[8]
Yole Développement, “World MEMS Fab,” 45 Rue Sainte Geneviève, 69006 Lyon, France,
http://www.yole.fr.
[9]
Public Citizen, Inc., et al. v. Norman Mineta, Secretary of Transportation, Docket No.
02-4237, August 6, 2003, United States Court of Appeals, Second Circuit, New York,
http://www.ca2.uscourts.gov.
[10]
“IC Makers Gear Up for New Tire Pressure Monitor Rule,” Electronic Engineering Times,
December 1, 2003, p. 1.
[11]
Roylance, L. M., and J. B. Angell, “A Batch Fabricated Silicon Accelerometer,” IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. 26, No. 12, 1979, pp. 1911–1917.
[12]
Mercer Management Consulting, Inc., “New Technologies Take Time,” Business Week,
April 19, 1999, p. 8.
Summary
11

Selected Bibliography
Angell, J. B., S. C. Terry, and P. W. Barth, “Silicon Micromechanical Devices,” Scientific
American, Vol. 248, No. 4, April 1983, pp. 44–55.
Gabriel, K. J., “Engineering Microscopic Machines,” Scientific American, Vol. 273, No. 3,
September 1995, pp. 150–153.
Micromechanics and MEMS: Classic and Seminal Papers to 1990, W. S. Trimmer (ed.),
New York: Wiley-IEEE Press, 1997.
“Nothing but Light,” Scientific American, Vol. 279, No. 6, December 1998, pp. 17–20.
Petersen, K. E., “Silicon As a Mechanical Material,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 70,
No. 5, May 1982, pp. 420–457.
12
MEMS: A Technology from Lilliput

C H A P T E R
2
Materials for MEMS
“You can’t see it, but it’s everywhere you go.”
—Bridget Booher, journalist, on silicon
If we view micromachining technology as a set of generic tools, then there is no rea-
son to limit its use to one material. Indeed, micromachining has been demonstrated
using silicon, glass, ceramics, polymers, and compound semiconductors made of
group III and V elements, as well as a variety of metals including titanium and tung-
sten. Silicon, however, remains the material of choice for microelectromechanical
systems. Unquestionably, this popularity arises from the large momentum of the
electronic integrated circuit industry and the derived economic benefits, not least of
which is the extensive industrial infrastructure. The object of this chapter is to pres-
ent the properties of silicon and several other materials, while emphasizing that the
final choice of materials is determined by the type of application and economics.
Silicon-Compatible Material System
The silicon-compatible material system encompasses, in addition to silicon itself, a
host of materials commonly used in the semiconductor integrated circuit industry.
Normally deposited as thin films, they include silicon oxides, silicon nitrides, and
silicon carbides, metals such as aluminum, titanium, tungsten, and copper, and
polymers such as photoresist and polyimide.
Silicon
Silicon is one of very few materials that is economically manufactured in single-
crystal substrates. This crystalline nature provides significant electrical and
mechanical advantages. The precise modulation of silicon’s electrical conductivity
using impurity doping lies at the very core of the operation of electronic semi-
conductor devices. Mechanically, silicon is an elastic and robust material whose
characteristics have been very well studied and documented (see Table 2.1). The
tremendous wealth of information accumulated on silicon and its compounds over
the last few decades has made it possible to innovate and explore new areas of appli-
cation extending beyond the manufacturing of electronic integrated circuits. It
becomes evident that silicon is a suitable material platform on which electronic,
mechanical, thermal, optical, and even fluid-flow functions can be integrated.
Ultrapure, electronic-grade silicon wafers available for the integrated circuit indus-
try are common today in MEMS. The relatively low cost of these substrates
13

(approximately $10 for a 100-mm-diameter wafer and $15 for a 150-mm wafer)
makes them attractive for the fabrication of micromechanical components and
systems.
Silicon as an element exists with three different microstructures: crystalline,
polycrystalline, or amorphous. Polycrystalline, or simply “polysilicon,” and amor-
phous silicon are usually deposited as thin films with typical thicknesses below 5
µm. Crystalline silicon substrates are commercially available as circular wafers with
100-mm (4-in) and 150-mm (6-in) diameters. Larger-diameter (200-mm and
300-mm) wafers, used by the integrated circuit industry, are currently economically
unjustified for MEMS. Standard 100-mm wafers are nominally 525 µm thick, and
150-mm wafers are typically 650 µm thick. Double-side-polished wafers commonly
used for micromachining on both sides of the wafer are approximately 100 µm thin-
ner than standard thickness substrates.
Visualization of crystallographic planes is key to understanding the dependence
of material properties on crystal orientation and the effects of plane-selective etch
solutions (see Figure 2.1). Silicon has a diamond-cubic crystal structure that can be
14
Materials for MEMS
Table 2.1
Properties of Selected Materials
Property
a
Si
SiO2
Si3N4
Quartz SiC
Diamond
GaAs AlN
92%
Al2O3
PolyimidePMMA
Relative
permittivity (εr)
11.7
3.9
4–8
3.75
9.7
5.7
13.1
8.5
9
—
—
Dielectric
strength
(V/cm ×10
6)
0.3
5–10
5–10
25–40 4
10
0.35
13
11.6
1.5–3
0.17
Electron
mobility
(cm
2/V·s)
1,500 —
—
—
1,000
2,200
8,800 —
—
—
—
Hole mobility
(cm
2/V·s)
400
—
—
—
40
1,600
400
—
—
—
—
Bandgap (eV)
1.12
8-9
—
—
2.3–3.2 5.5
1.42
—
—
—
—
Young’s
modulus (GPa)
160
73
323
107
450
1,035
75
340
275
2.5
3
Yield/fracture
strength (GPa)
7
8.4
14
9
21
>1.2
3
16
15.4
0.23
0.06
Poisson’s ratio
0.22
0.17
0.25
0.16
0.14
0.10
0.31
0.31
0.34
—
Density (g/cm
3)
2.4
2.2
3.1
2.65
3.2
3.5
5.3
3.26
3.62
1.42
1.3
Coefficient of
thermal
expansion
(10
−6/ºC)
2.6
0.55
2.8
0.55
4.2
1.0
5.9
4.0
6.57
20
70
Thermal
conductivity
at 300K
(W/m·K)
157
1.4
19
1.4
500
990–2,000 0.46
160
36
0.12
0.2
Specific heat
(J/g·K)
0.7
1.0
0.7
0.787
0.8
0.6
0.35
0.71
0.8
1.09
1.5
Melting
temperature (ºC)
1,415 1,700 1,800 1,610
1,800
b
3,652
b
1,237 2,470 1,800 380
c
90
c
aProperties can vary with crystal direction, crystal structure, and grain size.
bSublimates before melting.
cGlass transition temperature given for polymers.

discussed as if it were simple cubic. In other words, the primitive unit—the smallest
repeating block—of the crystal lattice resembles a cube. The three major coordinate
axes of the cube are called the principal axes. Specific directions and planes within
the crystal are designated in reference to the principal axes using Miller indices [1], a
special notation from materials science that, in cubic crystals, includes three integers
with different surrounding “punctuation.” Directions are specified by brackets; for
example [100], which is a vector in the +x direction, referred to the three principal
axes (x,y,z) of the cube. No commas are used between the numbers, and negative
numbers have a bar over the number rather than a minus sign. Groups of directions
with equivalent properties are specified with carets (e.g., <100>, which covers the
[
]
,[
]
,[
]
,[
]
,[
]
,
100
100
010
010
001
= +
=−
= +
=−
= +
x
x
y
y
z and [
]
001 =−z
direc-
tions). Parentheses specify a plane that is perpendicular to a direction with the same
numbers; for example, (111) is a plane perpendicular to the [111] vector (a diagonal
vector through the farthest corner of the unit cube). Braces specify all equivalent
planes; for example, {111} represents the four equivalent crystallographic planes
(111), (
)
111 , (
)
111 , and (
)
111 .
Silicon-Compatible Material System
15
(b)
(a)
(010)
(110)
(111)
z, [001]
y, [010]
x, [100]
z, [001]
y, [010]
x, [100]
z, [001]
y, [010]
x, [100]
(110)
(110)
(111) = (111)
(111) = (111)
(111) = (111)
(111) = (111)
Figure 2.1
(a) Three crystallographic planes and their Miller indices for a simple cubic crystal.
Two planes in the {110} set of planes are identified. (b) The four planes in the {111} family. Note
that (
)
111 is the same plane as (111).

The determinants of plane and direction equivalence are the symmetry opera-
tions that carry a crystal lattice (including the primitive unit) back into itself (i.e., the
transformed lattice after the symmetry operation is complete is identical to the start-
ing lattice). With some thought, it becomes evident that 90º rotations and mirror
operations about the three principal axes are symmetry operations for a simple cubic
crystal. Therefore, the +x direction is equivalent to the +y direction under a 90º rota-
tion; the +y direction is equivalent to the –y direction under a mirror operation, and
so forth. Hence, the +x, –x, +y, –y, +z, and –z directions are all equivalent. Vector
algebra (using a dot product) shows that the angles between {100} and {110} planes
are 45º or 90º, and the angles between {100} and {111} planes are 54.7º or 125.3º.
Similarly, {111} and {110} planes can intersect each other at 35.3º, 90º, or 144.7º.
The angle between {100} and {111} planes is of particular importance in
micromachining because many alkaline aqueous solutions, such as potassium
hydroxide (KOH), selectively etch the {100} planes of silicon but not the {111}
planes (discussed in detail in Chapter 3). The etch results in cavities that are bounded
by {111} planes (see Figure 2.2).
Material manufacturers cut thin circular wafers from large silicon boules along
specific crystal planes. The cut plane—the top surface of the wafer—is known as the
orientation cut. The (100) wafers dominate in both MEMS and CMOS technology,
but wafers are also readily available with (111) orientation and, to a lesser degree,
(110) orientation. It should be noted that saying that the surface of a wafer has a
particular orientation such as (100) is arbitrary; any orientation within the equiva-
lent {100} group of planes, such as (001), can alternatively be selected. It should be
further noted that when referring to the wafer surface (e.g., (100)), the group of
planes (e.g., {100}) or direction normal to the surface (e.g., [100]) is often used
instead; all are intended to mean the same thing. The (100) and (111) wafers, with n-
and p-type doing, are produced with a minor flat at a specific location relative to a
wider, major flat, as shown in Figure 2.2.
Crystalline silicon is a hard and brittle material deforming elastically until it
reaches its yield strength, at which point it breaks. Its tensile yield strength is 7 GPa,
which is equivalent to a 700-kg (1,500-lb) weight suspended from a 1-mm2 area. Its
Young’s modulus is dependent on crystal orientation, being 169 GPa in <110>
directions and 130 GPa in <100> directions—near that of steel. The dependence of
the mechanical properties on crystal orientation is reflected in the way a silicon wafer
preferentially cleaves along crystal planes1. While large silicon wafers tend to be
fragile, individual dice with dimensions on the order of 1 cm × 1 cm or less are rugged
and can sustain relatively harsh handling conditions. As a direct consequence of
being a single crystal, mechanical properties are uniform across wafer lots, and
wafers are free of intrinsic stresses. This helps to minimize the number of design
iterations for silicon transducers that rely on stable mechanical properties for their
operation. Bulk mechanical properties of crystalline silicon are largely independent
16
Materials for MEMS
1.
A (100) silicon wafer can be cleaved by scratching the surface with a sharp diamond scribe along a <110>
direction (parallel or perpendicular to the flat), clamping the wafer on one side of the scratch, and applying a
bending force to the free side of the wafer. Fracture occurs preferentially along <110> directions on the
surface. The newly exposed fracture surfaces tend to be {111} planes, which are sloped at 54.7° with respect
to the surface.

of impurity doping, but stresses tend to rise when dopant concentrations reach high
levels (~ 1020 cm−3).
Polysilicon is an important material in the integrated circuit industry and has
been extensively studied. A detailed description of its electrical properties is found
in [2]. Polysilicon is an equally important and attractive material for MEMS. It
has been successfully used to make micromechanical structures and to integrate
electrical interconnects, thermocouples, p-n junction diodes, and many other elec-
trical devices with micromechanical structures. The most notable example is the
acceleration sensor available from Analog Devices, Inc., of Norwood, Massachu-
setts, for automotive airbag safety systems. Surface micromachining based on poly-
silicon is today a well-established technology for forming thin (a few micrometers)
and planar devices.
The mechanical properties of polycrystalline and amorphous silicon vary with
deposition conditions, but, by and large, they are similar to that of single crystal sili-
con [3]. Both normally have relatively high levels of intrinsic stress (hundreds of
MPa) after deposition, which requires annealing at elevated temperatures (>900ºC).
Silicon-Compatible Material System
17
(111)
(c)
[100]
[010]
[001]
(111)
Surface
is (001)
Flat is along [110] direction
(111)
(111)
(110) plane
º
(b)
45
(001) plane
[110] direction
x, [100]
y, [010]
z, [001]
(110)
(100) plane
(010) plane
(a)
Primary flat
(111) n-type
45°
90°
Primary flat
(111) p-type
Secondary flat
Secondary flat
(100) n-type
Primary flat
(100) p-type
Primary flat
No secondary flat
Secondary flat
Figure 2.2
(a) Illustration showing the primary and secondary flats of {100} and {111} wafers for
both n-type and p-type doping (SEMI standard); (b) illustration identifying various planes in a
wafer of {100} orientation (the wafer thickness is exaggerated); and (c) perspective view of a {100}
wafer and a KOH-etched pit bounded by {111} planes.

Beam structures made of polycrystalline or amorphous silicon that have not been
subjected to a careful stress annealing step can curl under the effect of intrinsic
stress.
Silicon is a very good thermal conductor with a thermal conductivity greater than
that of many metals and approximately 100 times larger than that of glass. In com-
plex integrated systems, the silicon substrate can be used as an efficient heat sink.
This feature will be revisited when we review thermal-based sensors and actuators.
Unfortunately, silicon is not an active optical material—silicon-based lasers do
not exist. Because of the particular interactions between the crystal atoms and the
conduction electrons, silicon is effective only in detecting light; emission of light
is very difficult to achieve. At infrared wavelengths above 1.1 µm, silicon is
transparent, but at wavelengths shorter than 0.4 µm (in the blue and ultraviolet por-
tions of the spectrum), it reflects over 60% of the incident light (see Figure 2.3). The
attenuation depth of light in silicon (the distance light travels before the intensity
drops to 36% of its initial value) is 2.7 µm at 633 nm (red) and 0.2 µm at 436 nm
(blue-violet). The slight attenuation of red light relative to other colors is what gives
thin silicon membranes their translucent reddish tint.
Silicon is also well known to retain its mechanical integrity at temperatures up to
about 700°C [4]. At higher temperatures, silicon starts to soften and plastic defor-
mation can occur under load. While the mechanical and thermal properties of poly-
silicon are similar to those of single crystal silicon, polysilicon experiences slow
stress annealing effects at temperatures above 250°C, making its operation at ele-
vated temperatures subject to long-term instabilities, drift, and hysteresis effects.
Some properties of silicon at and above room temperature are given in Table 2.2.
The surface of silicon oxidizes immediately upon exposure to the oxygen in air
(referred to as native oxide). The oxide thickness self-limits at a few nanometers at
room temperature. As silicon dioxide is very inert, it acts as a protective layer that
prevents chemical reactions with the underlying silicon.
The interactions of silicon with gases, chemicals, biological fluids, and enzymes
remain the subject of many research studies, but, for the most part, silicon is
considered stable and resistant to many elements and chemicals typical of daily
18
Materials for MEMS
Wavelength ( m)
µ
UV
Violet
Green
Red
IR
Si
Ag
Ni
Pt
Au
Al
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Reflectivity (%)
Figure 2.3
Optical reflectivity for silicon and selected metals.

applications. For example, experiments have shown that silicon remains intact in
the presence of Freon™gases as well as automotive fluids such as brake fluids.
Silicon has also proven to be a suitable material for applications such as valves
involving the delivery of ultra-high-purity gases. In medicine and biology, studies
are ongoing to evaluate silicon for medical implants. Preliminary medical evidence
indicates that silicon is benign in the body and does not release toxic sub-
stances when in contact with biological fluids; however, it appears from recent
experiments that bare silicon surfaces may not be suitable for high-performance
polymerase chain reactions (PCR) intended for the amplification of genetic DNA
material.
Silicon Oxide and Nitride
It is often argued that silicon is such a successful material because it has a stable
oxide that is electrically insulating—unlike germanium, whose oxide is soluble in
water, or gallium arsenide, whose oxide cannot be grown appreciably. Various
forms of silicon oxides (SiO2, SiOx, silicate glass) are widely used in micromachin-
ing due to their excellent electrical and thermal insulating properties. They are also
used as sacrificial layers in surface micromachining processes because they can be
preferentially etched in hydrofluoric acid (HF) with high selectivity to silicon. Sili-
con dioxide (SiO2) is thermally grown by oxidizing silicon at temperatures above
800°C, whereas the other forms of oxides and glass are deposited by chemical
vapor deposition, sputtering, or even spin-on (the various deposition methods will
be described in the next chapter). Silicon oxides and glass layers are known to sof-
ten and flow when subjected to temperatures above 700°C. A drawback of silicon
oxides is their relatively large intrinsic stresses, which are difficult to control. This
has limited their use as materials for large suspended beams or membranes.
Silicon nitride (SixNy) is also a widely used insulating thin film and is effective as
a barrier against mobile ion diffusion—in particular, sodium and potassium ions
found in biological environments. Its Young’s modulus is higher than that of silicon
and its intrinsic stress can be controlled by the specifics of the deposition process.
Silicon nitride is an effective masking material in many alkaline etch solutions.
Silicon-Compatible Material System
19
Table 2.2
Temperature Dependence of Some Material Properties of Crystalline Silicon
300K
400K
500K
600K
700K
Coefficient of linear
expansion (10
−6 K
−1)
–0,002.616
–0,003.253
–0,003.614
–93.842
–94.016
Specific heat (J/g·K)
–0,000.713
–0,000.785
–0,000.832
–90.849
–90.866
Thermal conductivity
(W/cm·K)
–0,001.56
–0,001.05
–0,000.8
–90.64
–90.52
Temperature coefficient
of Young’s modulus (10
−6 K
−1)
–0,–90
–0,–90
–0,–90
–90
–90
Temperature coefficient
of piezoresistance (10
−6 K
−1)
(doping <10
18 cm
−3)
–2,500
–2,500
–2,500
—
—
Temperature coefficient
of permittivity (10
−6 K
−1)
–1,000
–2,5—
–2,5—
—
—
(Source: [5].)

Thin Metal Films
The choice of a thin metal film depends greatly on the nature of the final application.
Thin metal films are normally deposited either by sputtering, evaporation, or chemi-
cal vapor deposition; gold, nickel, and Permalloy™(NixFey), and a few other metals
can also be electroplated. Table 2.3 lists some metals and conducting compounds
used as thin films, along with their resistivities (resistivity varies with deposition
conditions and is usually higher for thin films than for bulk material).
For basic electrical interconnections, aluminum (usually with a few percent
silicon and perhaps copper) is most common and is relatively easy to deposit by sput-
tering, but its operation is limited to noncorrosive environments and to temperatures
below 300ºC. For higher temperatures and harsher environments, gold, titanium,
and tungsten are substitutes. Aluminum tends to anneal over time and with tempera-
ture, causing changes in its intrinsic stresses. As a result, it is typically located away
from stress- or strain-sensing elements. Aluminum is a good light reflector in the visi-
ble, and gold excels in the infrared. Platinum and palladium are two very stable mate-
rials for electrochemistry, though their fabrication entails some added complexity.
Gold, platinum, and iridium are good choices for microelectrodes, used in electro-
chemistry and in sensing biopotentials. Silver is also useful in electrochemistry. Chro-
mium, titanium, and titanium-tungsten are frequently used as very thin (5–20 nm)
adhesion layers for metals that have poor adhesion to silicon, silicon dioxide, and sili-
con nitride. Metal bilayers consisting of an adhesion layer (e.g., chromium) and an
20
Materials for MEMS
Table 2.3
List of Selected Metals That Can Be Deposited As Thin Films (Up to a Few µm in Thickness) with
Corresponding Electrical Resistivities and Typical Areas of Application
Metal
ρ (µΩ·cm)
Typical Areas of Application
Ag
1.58
Electrochemistry
Al
2.7
Electrical interconnects; optical reflection in the visible
and the infrared
Au
2.4
High-temperature electrical interconnects; optical
reflection in the infrared; electrochemistry;
corrosion-resistant contact; wetting layer for soldering
Cr
12.9
Intermediate adhesion layer
Cu
1.7
Low-resistivity electrical interconnects
Indium-tin oxide (ITO)
300–3,000
Transparent conductive layer for liquid crystal displays
Ir
5.1
Electrochemistry; microelectrodes for sensing biopotentials
Ni
6.8
Magnetic transducing; solderable layer
NiCr
200–500
Thin-film laser trimmed resistor; heating element
Pd
10.8
Electrochemistry; solder-wetting layer
Permalloy™(NixFey)
—
Magnetic transducing
Pt
10.6
Electrochemistry; microelectrodes for sensing biopotentials;
solderable layer
SiCr
2,000
Thin-film laser trimmed resistor
SnO2
5,000
Chemoresistance in gas sensors
TaN
300–500
Negative temperature coefficient of resistance (TCR)
thin-film laser trimmed resistor
Ti
42
Intermediate adhesion layer
TiNi
80
Shape-memory alloy actuation
TiW
75–200
Intermediate adhesion layer; near zero TCR
W
5.5
High-temperature electrical interconnects;
thermionic emitter

intermediate nickel or platinum layer are normally used to solder with silver-tin or
tin-lead alloys. For applications requiring transparent electrodes, such as liquid-
crystal displays, indium-tin-oxide (ITO) meets the requirements. Finally, Permal-
loy™has been explored as a material for thin magnetic cores.
Polymers
Polymers, in the form of polyimides or photoresist, can be deposited with varying
thicknesses from a few nanometers to hundreds of microns. Standard photoresist is
spin-coated to a thickness of 1 µm to10 µm, but special photoresists such as the
epoxy-based SU-8 [6] can form layers up to 100 µm thick. Hardening of the resist
under ultraviolet light produces rigid structures. Spin-on organic polymers are
generally limited in their application as a permanent part of MEMS devices because
they shrink substantially as the solvent evaporates, and because they cannot sustain
temperatures above 200°C. Because of their unique absorption and adsorption
properties, polymers have gained acceptance in the sensing of chemical gases and
humidity [7].
Other Materials and Substrates
Over the years, micromachining methods have been applied to a variety of sub-
strates to fabricate passive microstructures as well as transducers. Fabrication
processes for glass and quartz are mature and well established, but for other materi-
als, such as silicon carbide, new techniques are being explored and developed. In the
process, these activities add breadth to micromachining technology and enrich the
inventory of available tools. The following sections briefly review the use of a few
materials other than silicon.
Glass and Fused Quartz Substrates
Glass is without a doubt a companion material to silicon; the two are bonded
together figuratively and literally in many ways. Silicon originates from processed
and purified silicates (a form of glass), and silicon can be made to bond electrostati-
cally to Pyrex
® glass substrates—a process called anodic bonding and common in
the making of pressure sensors. But like all relatives, differences remain. Glasses
generally have different coefficients of thermal expansion than silicon (fused quartz
is lower, while window glass is higher), resulting in interfacial stresses between
bonded silicon and glass substrates.
Micromachining of glass and fused quartz (amorphous silicon dioxide) sub-
strates is practical in special applications, such as when an optically transparent or
an electrically insulating substrate is required. Crystalline quartz (as opposed to
fused quartz) also has the distinct property of being piezoelectric and is used for
some MEMS devices. However, micromachining of glass or quartz is limited in
scope relative to silicon. Etching in HF or ultrasonic drilling typically yields coarsely
defined features with poor edge control. Thin metal films can be readily deposited
on glass or quartz substrates and defined using standard lithographic techniques.
Channels microfabricated in glass substrates with thin metal microelectrodes have
been useful in making capillaries for miniaturized biochemical analysis systems.
Other Materials and Substrates
21

Silicon Carbide and Diamond
Silicon carbide and diamond continue to captivate the imagination of many in the
micromachining community. Both materials offer significant advantages, in particu-
lar hardness, high stiffness (high Young’s modulus), resistance to harsh chemical
environments, mechanical stability at high temperature, wide bandgap, and very
high thermal conductivity (see Table 2.1). Some micromachining in silicon carbide
[8] and diamond has been demonstrated; however, much remains to be studied
about both materials and their potential use in MEMS. An important feature of both
silicon carbide and diamond is that they exhibit piezoresistive properties. High-
temperature pressure sensors in silicon carbide substrates have been developed with
stable operation up to about 500°C.
Silicon carbide (SiC) has a number of possible crystal structures, including cubic
and hexagonal. Hexagonal crystalline SiC substrates are commercially available,
but they are very expensive and are available only in diameters up to 76 mm [9].
Cubic crystalline silicon carbide can be obtained by epitaxial growth directly on
silicon (which has the same cubic structure), but the material has a high density of
voids and dislocations due to mismatch in lattice spacing. Thin polycrystalline SiC
films deposited by chemical vapor deposition can be used as the structural layer for
surface micromachining (discussed in Chapter 3), with a sacrificial layer of silicon or
silicon dioxide [8]. Because etching SiC is so difficult, alternative methods of
forming a pattern, such as selective deposition and using a mold, have been
studied. Silicon carbide films have also been used as a coating material for harsh
environments.
Diamond is an even lesser-explored material than silicon carbide. Thin syn-
thetic polycrystalline diamond or “diamond-like carbon” films made with thick-
nesses up to a few microns can be formed using chemical vapor deposition.
Diamond has an extremely high ratio of Young’s modulus to density, giving vibrat-
ing structures made of diamond higher resonant frequencies than similar structures
made of other materials. In addition to the properties listed earlier, diamond films
are also good field emitters and have received extensive study as a source of elec-
trons for such applications as displays. Etching diamond films is even more difficult
than for silicon carbide, so alternative patterning methods such as selective deposi-
tion are used [9].
Gallium Arsenide and Other Group III-V Compound Semiconductors
Rather than ponder the utility of gallium arsenide (GaAs) and other group III-V
compounds (e.g., InP, AlGaAs, GaN) as alternate substrate materials to silicon, it is
perhaps more appropriate to think of micromachining as a set of tools that can pro-
vide solutions to issues specific to devices that currently can only be built in these
materials, in particular lasers and optical devices. In that regard, micromachining
becomes an application-specific toolbox whose main characteristic is to address
ways to enable new functions or enhance existing ones.
Micromechanical structures such as springs and bridges have been formed in
GaAs by both reactive ion etching [10] and orientation-dependent etching [11] (dis-
cussed in Chapter 3). Micromachining has also been used to incorporate structures
such as mirrors on the surface of III-V semiconductors to create new devices, includ-
ing tunable lasers [12]. Moreover, micromachining using GaAs and other group
22
Materials for MEMS

III-V compound semiconductors is a practical way to integrate RF switches, anten-
nas, and other custom high-frequency components with ultra-high-speed electronic
devices for wireless telecommunications.
Polymers
Polymers are long chains of carbon (or sometimes silicon) atoms with various
chemical side groups attached to the carbon [13]. If the chains are not crosslinked
by covalent bonds, they are able to move relative to each other at elevated tempera-
ture under applied stress. Such materials reharden upon cooling and are called
thermoplastics. The temperature above which flow readily occurs is the glass
transition temperature, which varies with the length of the molecules and the type of
side groups.
PMMA [poly(methylmethacrylate)], polypropylene, polyvinyl chloride, acrylic,
and other thermoplastics are used in sheet form as a substrate for micromachining.
Heating above the glass transition temperature enables molding or embossing under
pressure from a master for some of these materials (described in Chapter 3). Layers
of polycarbonate and acrylic, with channels already formed in their surfaces by hot
embossing or conventional machining, have been thermally bonded together for
microfluidic systems. In MEMS, thick layers of PMMA have also been spin-coated
and used as a photoresist.
Polymer substrates have not been used as much as silicon in micromachining,
but have some advantages, perhaps the most important being lower cost. The proc-
essing temperatures allowed are much lower than for silicon and many glasses, but
suitable fabrication processes have been designed, particularly for biological appli-
cations. Polymers are in general less stiff than inorganic materials (see Table 2.1).
Polyimide is a material that is most often used in the form of sheets 7 to 125 µm
thick, but can also be spin-coated in films a few micrometers thick. It is sold by
DuPont High Performance Films of Circleville, Ohio, under the trade name Kap-
ton®. Polyimide is relatively inert, is a good electrical insulator, and can be exposed
to a wide range of temperatures, roughly –250º to +400ºC, for at least a short time
[14]. In the electronics industry, polyimide has been used as a flexible substrate for
printed circuit boards and for hard disk drives. In micromachining, sheets have been
laser cut to form microfluidic devices, while spin-on films have been used as resists,
sacrificial layers, and a wafer-bonding adhesive.
Other polymers finding application in MEMS include parylenes and silicones.
Parylenes are deposited by chemical-vapor deposition to form a conformal coating.
There are several forms of parylene due to variations in the chemical structure [15].
Like polyimide, parylenes are fairly inert chemically and form a barrier to the flow
of water and other vapors. Silicones are different from most other polymers in that
the backbone chain of atoms is silicon rather than carbon. Silicones are very compli-
ant and have been used as the deformable membrane in valves [15], as well as being
a common die-attach material in packaging (see Chapter 8).
Shape-Memory Alloys
The shape-memory effect is a unique property of a special class of alloys that return
to a predetermined shape when heated above a critical transition temperature. The
Other Materials and Substrates
23

material “remembers” its original shape after being strained and deformed. The dis-
covery was first made in a gold-cadmium alloy in 1951 but was quickly extended to
a broad range of other alloys, including titanium-nickel, copper-aluminum-nickel,
iron-nickel and iron-platinum alloys. A basic understanding of the underlying physi-
cal principles was established in the 1970s, but extensive research remains ongoing
in an effort to develop a thorough theoretical foundation. Nonetheless, the potential
applications for shape-memory alloys abound. It has been estimated that upwards of
15,000 patents have been applied for on this topic. Titanium-nickel alloys have been
the most widely used of shape-memory alloys because of their relative simple com-
position and robustness.
An important factor that determines the practical utility of the alloy is its transi-
tion temperature. Below this temperature, it has a low yield strength; in other words,
it is readily deformed into new permanent shapes. The deformation can be 20 times
larger than the elastic deformation. When heated above its transition temperature,
the material completely recovers its original (high-temperature) shape through com-
plex changes in its crystal structure. The process generates very large forces, making
shape-memory alloys ideal for actuation purposes. By contrast, piezoelectric and
electrostatic actuators exert only a fraction of the force available from a shape-
memory alloy, but they act much more quickly.
Bulk titanium-nickel alloys in the form of wires and rods are commercially avail-
able under the name Nitinol™[16]. Its transition temperature can be tailored
between –100° and 100°C, typically by controlling stoichiometry and impurity con-
centration. Recently, thin titanium-nickel films with thicknesses up to 50 µm were
successfully demonstrated with properties similar to those of Nitinol. Titanium-
nickel is a good electrical conductor, with a resistivity of 80 µΩ•cm, but a relatively
poor thermal conductor, with a conductivity about one tenth that of silicon. Its yield
strength is only 100 MPa below its transition temperature but rapidly increases to
560 MPa once heated above it. The Young’s modulus shows a similar dependence
on temperature; at low temperatures, it is 28 GPa, increasing to 75 GPa above the
transition temperature.
Important Material Properties and Physical Effects
The interaction of physical parameters with each other—most notably electricity
with mechanical stress, temperature and thermal gradients, magnetic fields, and
incident light—yields a multitude of phenomena of great interest to MEMS. We will
briefly review in this section three commonly used effects: piezoresistivity, piezoelec-
tricity, and thermoelectricity.
Piezoresistivity
Piezoresistivity is a widely used physical effect and has its name derived from the
Greek word piezein meaning to apply pressure. Discovered first by Lord Kelvin in
1856, it is the phenomenon by which an electrical resistance changes in response to
mechanical stress. The first application of the piezoresistive effect was metal strain
gauges to measure strain, from which other parameters such as force, weight, and
pressure were inferred (see Figure 2.4). Most the resistance change in metals is due to
24
Materials for MEMS

dimensional changes: under stress, the resistor gets longer, narrower, and thinner
[17]. C. S. Smith’s discovery in 1954 [18] that the piezoresistive effect in silicon
and germanium was much greater (by roughly two orders of magnitude) than in
metals spurred significant interest. The first pressure sensors based on diffused
(impurity-doped) resistors in thin silicon diaphragms were demonstrated in 1969
[19]. The majority of today’s commercially available pressure sensors use silicon
piezoresistors.
For the physicist at heart, piezoresistivity arises from the deformation of the
energy bands as a result of an applied stress. In turn, the deformed bands affect the
effective mass and the mobility of electrons and holes, hence modifying resistivity.
For the engineer at heart, the fractional change in resistivity, ∆ρ/ρ, is to a first order
linearly dependent on σ// and σ⊥, the two stress components parallel and orthogonal
to the direction of the resistor, respectively. The direction of the resistor is here
defined as that of the current flow. The relationship can be expressed as
∆ρ ρ
π σ
π σ
/ /
/ /
=
+
⊥
⊥
where the proportionality constants, π// and π⊥, are called the parallel and
perpendicular piezoresistive coefficients, respectively, and are related to the gauge
factor
2 by the Young’s modulus of the material. The piezoresistive coefficients
depend on crystal orientation and change significantly from one direction to the
other (see Table 2.4). They also depend on dopant type (n-type versus p-type) and
concentration. For {100} wafers, the piezoresistive coefficients for p-type elements
are maximal in the <110> directions and nearly vanish along the <100> direc-
tions. In other words, p-type piezoresistors must be oriented along the <110> direc-
tions to measure stress and thus should be either aligned or perpendicular to the
wafer primary flat. Those at 45º with respect to the primary flat (i.e., in the <100>
direction), are insensitive to applied tensile stress, which provides an inexpensive
Important Material Properties and Physical Effects
25
Parallel direction
Alignment
marks
Solder
tab
Backing film
Orthogonal
direction
Sense element
Figure 2.4
A typical thin metal foil strain gauge mounted on a backing film. Stretching of the
sense element causes a change in its resistance.
2.
The gauge factor, K, is the constant of proportionality relating the fractional change in resistance, ∆R/R, to
the applied strain, ε, by the relationship ∆R/R = K⋅ε.

way to incorporate stress-independent diffused temperature sensors. The crystal-
orientation-dependence of the piezoresistive coefficients takes a more complex func-
tion for piezoresistors diffused in {110} wafers, but this dependence fortuitously dis-
appears in {111} wafers. More descriptive details of the underlying physics of
piezoresistivity and dependence on crystal orientation can be found in [20, 21].
If we consider p-type piezoresistors diffused in {100} wafers and oriented in the
<110> direction (parallel or perpendicular to the flat), it is apparent from the posi-
tive sign of π// in Table 2.4 that the resistance increases with tensile stress applied in
the parallel direction, σ//, as if the piezoresistor itself is being elongated. Further-
more, the negative sign of π⊥implies a decrease in resistance with tensile stress
orthogonal to the resistor, as if its width is being stretched. In actuality, the stretch-
ing or contraction of the resistor are not the cause of the piezoresistive effect, but
they make a fortuitous analogy to readily visualize the effect of stress on resistance.
This analogy breaks down for n-type piezoresistors.
Like many other physical effects, piezoresistivity is a strong function of tempera-
ture. For lightly doped silicon (n- or p-type, 1018 cm-3), the temperature coefficient of
π// and π⊥is approximately –0.3% per degree Celsius. It decreases with dopant con-
centration to about –0.1% per degree Celsius at 8 × 1019 cm-3.
Polysilicon and amorphous silicon also exhibit a strong piezoresistive effect. A
wide variety of sensors using polysilicon piezoresistive sense elements have been
demonstrated. Clearly, piezoresistive coefficients lose their sensitivity to crystalline
direction and become an average over all orientations. Instead, the gauge factor, K,
relating the fractional change in resistance to strain is often used. Gauge factors in
polysilicon and amorphous silicon range typically between –30 and +40, about a
third that of single-crystal silicon. The gauge factor decreases quickly as doping con-
centration exceeds 1019 cm−3. However, one advantage of polysilicon over crystal-
line silicon is its reduced TCR. At doping levels approaching 1020 cm−3, the TCR for
polycrystalline silicon is approximately 0.04% per degree Celsius compared to
0.14% per degree Celsius for crystalline silicon. The deposition process and the
dopant species have been found to even alter the sign of the TCR. For example,
emitter-type polysilicon (a special process for depositing heavily doped polysilicon
to be used as emitter for bipolar transistors) has a TCR of –0.045% per degree Cel-
sius. Resistors with positive TCR are particularly useful in compensating the nega-
tive temperature dependence of piezoresistive sensors.
Piezoelectricity
Certain classes of crystals exhibit the peculiar property of producing an electric field
when subjected to an external force. Conversely, they expand or contract in response
26
Materials for MEMS
Table 2.4
Piezoresistive Coefficients for n- and p-Type {100}
Wafers and Doping Levels Below 10
18 cm
-3
π//
(10
-11 m
2/N)
π⊥
(10
-11 m
2/N)
p-type
–107
––1
In <100> direction
–172
–66
In <110> direction
n-type
–102
–53
In <100> direction
––31
–18
In <110> direction
Note: The values decrease precipitously at higher doping concentrations.

to an externally applied voltage. The effect was discovered in quartz by the brothers
Pierre and Jacques Curie in 1880 [22]. Its first practical application was in the
1920s when Langevin developed a quartz transmitter and receiver for underwater
sound—the first Sonar! Piezoelectric crystals are common in many modern applica-
tions (e.g., as clock oscillators in computers and as ringers in cellular telephones).
They are attractive for MEMS because they can be used as sensors as well as actua-
tors, and they can be deposited as thin films over standard silicon substrates.
The physical origin of piezoelectricity is explained by charge asymmetry within
the primitive unit cell, resulting in the formation of a net electric dipole (see
Figure 2.5). Adding up these individual dipoles over the entire crystal gives a net
polarization and an effective electric field within the material. Crystal symmetry
again plays an important role: Only a crystal that lacks a center of symmetry
exhibits piezoelectric properties. A crystal with a center of symmetry, such as a
cubic crystal, is not piezoelectric because the net electric dipole within the primitive
unit is always vanishing, even in the presence of an externally applied stress (see
Figure 2.6). Silicon is not piezoelectric because it is cubic, and, further, the atoms are
held together by covalent (not ionic) bonding.
If we consider an ionic or partly ionic crystal lacking a center of symmetry, for
example zinc oxide (ZnO), the net electric dipole internal to the primitive unit is
zero only in the absence of an externally applied stress. Straining the crystal shifts
the relative positions of the positive and negative charges, giving rise to an electric
dipole within the primitive unit and a net polarization across the crystal. Con-
versely, the internal electric dipoles realign themselves in response to an externally
applied electric field, causing the atoms to displace and resulting in a measurable
crystal deformation. When the temperature exceeds a critical value called the Curie
temperature, the material loses its piezoelectric characteristics.
The piezoelectric effect is described in terms of piezoelectric charge coefficients,
dij, which relate the static voltage, electric field, or surface charge in the i direction to
displacement, applied force, or stress in the j direction. The convention for describ-
ing piezoelectrics is that the direction of polarization is the “3” or z direction of the
crystal axis, while a direction perpendicular to it is the “1” or x or y direction of the
crystal. Hence, piezoelectric charge coefficients are given as d33 for both voltage and
Important Material Properties and Physical Effects
27
pi
pi
Σp = 0
i
Σ
≠
p
0
i
Figure 2.5
Illustration of the piezoelectric effect in a hypothetical two-dimensional crystal. The
net electric dipole within the primitive unit of an ionic crystal lacking a center of symmetry does
not vanish when external stress is applied. This is the physical origin of piezoelectricity. (After:
[21].)

force along the z axis, and d31 for voltage along the z axis but force along the x or y
axis. The units of the charge coefficients are C/N, which are the same as m/V. The
choice depends on whether the electrical parameter of interest is voltage or charge.
If a voltage, Va, is applied across the thickness of a piezoelectric crystal (see
Figure 2.7), the unconstrained displacements ∆L, ∆W, and ∆t along the length,
width, and thickness directions, respectively, are given by
∆
∆
∆
L
d
V
L t
W
d
V
W t
t
d
V
a
a
a
=
⋅
⋅
=
⋅
⋅
=
⋅
31
31
33
where L and W are the length and width of the plate, respectively, and t is the thick-
ness or separation between the electrodes. In this case, d units of m/V are appropri-
ate. Conversely, if a force, F, is applied along any of the length, width, or thickness
directions, a measured voltage, Vm, across the electrodes (in the thickness direction)
is given in each of the three cases, respectively, by
(
)
(
)
(
)
V
d
F
W
V
d
F
L
V
d
F t
L W
m
m
m
=
⋅
⋅
=
⋅
⋅
=
⋅⋅
⋅⋅
31
31
33
ε
ε
ε
28
Materials for MEMS
Electrodes
Width (W)
Length (L)
Thickness (t)
2
1
3 (Direction of polarization)
V
Figure 2.7
An illustration of the piezoelectric effect on a crystalline plate. An applied voltage
across the electrodes results in dimensional changes in all three axes (if d31 and d33 are nonzero).
Conversely, an applied force in any of three directions gives rise to a measurable voltage across the
electrodes.
pi
pi
Σp = 0
i
Σp
0
i =
Figure 2.6
Illustration of the vanishing dipole in a two-dimensional lattice. A crystal possessing a
center of symmetry is not piezoelectric because the dipoles, pi, within the primitive unit always
cancel each other out. Hence, there is no net polarization within the crystal. An externally applied
stress does not alter the center of symmetry. (After: [21].)

where ε is the dielectric permittivity of the material. In this case, d units of C/N are
used. The reversibility between strain and voltage makes piezoelectric materials
ideal for both sensing and actuation. Further detailed reading on piezoelectricity
may be found in [23, 24].
Quartz is a widely used stand-alone piezoelectric material, but there are no
available methods to deposit crystalline quartz as a thin film over silicon substrates
(see Table 2.5). Piezoelectric ceramics are also common. Lithium niobate (LiNbO3)
and barium titanate (BaTiO3) are two well-known examples, but they are also diffi-
cult to deposit as thin films. Piezoelectric materials that can be deposited as thin film
with relative ease are lead zirconate titanate (PZT)—a ceramic based on solid solu-
tions of lead zirconate (PbZrO3) and lead titanate (PbTiO3)—ZnO, and PVDF. Zinc
oxide is typically sputtered and PZT can be either sputtered or deposited in a sol-gel
process (Chapter 3 describes the deposition processes in more detail). PVDF is a
polymer that can be spun on. All of these deposited films must be poled (i.e., polar-
ized by heating above the Curie temperature, then cooling with a large electric field
across them) in order to exhibit piezoelectric behavior.
Thermoelectricity
Interactions between electricity and temperature are common and were the subject
of extensive studies in the nineteenth century, though the underlying theory was not
put in place until early in the twentieth century by Boltzmann. In the absence of a
magnetic field, there are three distinct thermoelectric effects: the Seebeck, the Pel-
tier, and the Thomson effects [25]. The Seebeck effect is the most frequently used
(e.g., in thermocouples for the measurement of temperature differences). The Peltier
effect is used to make thermoelectric coolers (TECs) and refrigerators. The Thom-
son effect is less known and uncommon in daily applications.
In the Peltier effect, current flow across a junction of two dissimilar materials
causes a heat flux, thus cooling one side and heating the other. Mobile wet bars with
Peltier refrigerators were touted in 1950s as the newest innovation in home appli-
ances, but their economic viability was quickly jeopardized by the poor energy con-
version efficiency. Today, Peltier devices are made of n-type and p-type bismuth
telluride elements and are used to cool high-performance microprocessors, laser
diodes, and infrared sensors. Peltier devices have proven to be difficult to implement
as micromachined thin-film structures.
Important Material Properties and Physical Effects
29
Table 2.5
Piezoelectric Coefficients and Other Relevant Properties for a Selected List of Piezoelectric
Materials
Material
Piezoelectric
Constant (dijj)
(10
−12 C/N)
Relative
Permittivity
(εrr)
Density
(g/cm
3)
Young’s
Modulus
(GPa)
Acoustic
Impedance
(10
6 kg/m
2⋅s)
Quartz
d33 = 2.31
4.5
2.65
107
15
Polyvinylidene-fluoride
(PVDF)
d31 = 23
d33 = −33
12
1.78
3
2.7
LiNbO3
d31 =−4, d33 = 23
28
4.6
245
34
BaTiO3
d31 = 78, d33 = 190
1,700
5.7
30
PZT
d31 = −171 d33 = 370 1,700
7.7
53
30
zinc oxide (ZnO)
d31 = 5.2, d33 = 246
1,400
5.7
123
33

In the Seebeck effect, named after the scientist who made the discovery in 1822,
a temperature gradient across an element gives rise to a measurable electric field that
tends to oppose the charge flow (or electric current) resulting from the temperature
imbalance. The measured voltage is, to first order, proportional to the temperature
difference with the proportionality constant known as the Seebeck coefficient.
While, in theory, a single material is sufficient to measure temperature, in practice,
thermocouples employ a junction of two dissimilar materials. The measurable volt-
age at the leads, ∆V, is the sum of voltages across both legs of the thermocouple.
Therefore,
(
)
(
)
(
) (
)
∆V
T
T
T
T
T
T
cold
hot
hot
cold
hot
cold
=
⋅
−
+
⋅
−
=
−
⋅
−
α
α
α
α
1
2
2
1
where α1 and α2 are the Seebeck coefficients of materials 1 and 2, and, Thot and Tcold
are the temperatures of the hot and cold sides of the thermocouple, respectively (see
Figure 2.8). Alternately, one may use this effect to generate electrical power by main-
taining a temperature difference across a junction. Table 2.6 lists Seebeck coeffi-
cients for a number of materials.
30
Materials for MEMS
Material 1
Material 2
Hot
Cold
∆V
Figure 2.8
The basic structure of a thermocouple using the Seebeck effect. The measured volt-
age is proportional to the difference in temperature. Thermocouples can be readily implemented
on silicon substrates using combinations of thin metal films or polysilicon.
Table 2.6
The Seebeck Coefficients Relative to Platinum
for Selected Metals and for n- and p-Type Polysilicon
µV/K
µV/K
Bi
–73.4
Ag
0007.4
Ni
–14.8
Cu
0007.6
Pa
0–5.7
Zn
0007.6
Pt
000
Au
0007.8
Ta
003.3
W
0011.2
Al
004.2
Mo
0014.5
Sn
004.2
n-poly (30 Ω/)
–100
Mg
004.4
n-poly (2600 Ω/)
–450
Ir
006.5
p-poly (400 Ω/)
0270
Note: The sheet resistance is given for the 0.38-µm-thick polysilicon films.
Polysilicon is an attractive material for the fabrication of thermocouples and
thermopiles because of its large Seebeck coefficient.

Summary
The selection of substrate materials for MEMS is very broad, but crystalline silicon
is by far the most common choice. Complementing silicon is a host of materials that
can be deposited as thin films. These include polysilicon, amorphous silicon, silicon
oxides and nitrides, glasses, organic polymers, and a host of metals. Crystallo-
graphic planes play an important role in the design and fabrication of silicon-based
MEMS and affect some material properties of silicon. Three physical effects com-
monly used in the operation of micromachined sensors and actuators were intro-
duced: piezoresistivity, piezoelectricity, and thermoelectricity.
References
[1]
Ashcroft, N. W., and N. D. Mermin, Solid State Physics, Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Col-
lege, 1976, pp. 91–93.
[2]
Kamins, T., Polycrystalline Silicon for Integrated Circuits, Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1988.
[3]
Bustillo, J. M., R. T. Howe, and R. S. Muller, “Surface Micromachining for Micro-
electromechanical Systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 86, No. 8, August 1998,
pp. 1559–1561.
[4]
Siethoff, H., “Macroscopic Mechanical Behaviour of Si at High Temperature,” in Proper-
ties of Crystalline Silicon, R. Hull (ed.), London: INSPEC, The Institution of Electrical
Engineers, Section 3.6, 1999.
[5]
Properties of Silicon, EMIS Datareviews Series, No. 4, London: INSPEC, The Institution of
Electrical Engineers, 1988.
[6]
Lorenz, H., et al., “SU-8: A Low-Cost Negative Resist for MEMS,” Journal of Microme-
chanics and Microengineering, Vol. 7, No. 3, September 1997, pp. 121–124.
[7]
Gutierrez Monreal, J., and C. M. Mari, “The Use of Polymer Materials As Sensitive
Elements in Physical and Chemical Sensors,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. 12, 1987,
pp. 129–144.
[8]
Mehregany, M., et al., “Silicon Carbide MEMS for Harsh Environments,” Proceedings of
the IEEE, Vol. 86, No. 8, August 1998, pp. 1594–1610.
[9]
Zorman, C. A., and M. Mehregany, “Materials for Microelectromechanical Systems,” in
The MEMS Handbook, Chapter 15, M. Gad-el-Hak (ed.), Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press,
2002.
[10]
Zhang, Z. L., and N. C. MacDonald, “Fabrication of Submicron High-Aspect-Ratio GaAs
Actuators,” Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 2, No. 2, June 1993,
pp. 66–73.
[11]
Chong, N., T. A. S. Srinivas, and H. Ahmed, “Performance of GaAs Microbridge Thermo-
couple Infrared Detectors,” Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 6, No. 2, June
1997, pp. 136–141.
[12]
Li, M. Y., et al., “Top-Emitting Micromechanical VCSEL with a 31.6-nm Tuning Range,”
IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, Vol. 10, No. 1, January 1998, pp. 18–20.
[13]
Van Vlack, L. H., Elements of Materials Science and Engineering, 6th Edition, Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1989, pp. 32–36.
[14]
DuPont High Performance Films, “Kapton Data Sheet H-38492-2,” Circleville, OH,
August 1997.
[15]
Yang, X., C. Grosjean, and Y.-C. Tai, “Design, Fabrication, and Testing of Micromachined
Silicone Rubber Membrane Valves,” Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 8,
No. 4, December 1999, pp. 393–402.
Summary
31

[16]
Rogers, C., “Intelligent Materials,” Scientific American, Vol. 273, No. 3, September 1995,
pp. 154–157.
[17]
Kovacs, G. T. A., Micromachined Transducers Sourcebook, Boston, MA: WCB/McGraw-
Hill, 1998, pp. 211–215.
[18]
Smith, C. S., “Piezoresistive Effect in Germanium and Silicon,” Physical Review, Vol. 94,
1954, pp. 42–49.
[19]
Gieles, C. M., “Subminiature Silicon Pressure Sensor Transducer,” Digest IEEE
International Solid-State Circuits Conference, Philadelphia, PA, February 19–21, 1969,
pp. 108–109.
[20]
Kanda, Y., “A Graphical Representation of the Piezoresistive Coefficients in Silicon,” IEEE
Transactions on Electron Devices, Vol. ED-29, No. 1, 1982, pp. 64–70.
[21]
Middelhoek, S., and S. A. Audet, Silicon Sensors, San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 1989.
[22]
Curie, P., and J. Curie, “Development by Pressure of Polar Electricity in Hemihedral Crys-
tals with Inclined Faces,” Bull. Soc. Min. de France, Vol. 3, 1880, p. 90.
[23]
Cady, W. G., Piezoelectricity, New York: Dover, 1964.
[24]
Zelenka, J., Piezoelectric Resonators and their Applications, Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
Elsevier, 1986.
[25]
MacDonald, D. K. C., Thermoelectricity: An Introduction to the Principles, New York:
Wiley, 1962.
Selected Bibliography
Dyos, G. T., and T. Farrell (eds.), Electrical Resistivity Handbook, London: Peter
Pererginus, 1992.
Hull, R. (ed.), Properties of Crystalline Silicon, London: INSPEC, Institution of Electrical
Engineers, 1999.
Kittel, C., Introduction to Solid State Physics, 6th edition, New York: Wiley, 1986.
Sze, S. M. (ed.), Semiconductor Sensors, New York: Wiley, 1994.
Sze, S. M., Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 2nd edition, New York: Wiley, 1981.
32
Materials for MEMS

C H A P T E R
3
Processes for Micromachining
“You will have to brace yourselves for this—not because it is difficult to under-
stand, but because it is absolutely ridiculous: All we do is draw arrows on a piece of
paper—that’s all!”
—Richard Feynman, explaining the Theory of Quantum Electrodynamics
at the Alix G. Mautner Memorial Lectures, UCLA, 1983.
This chapter presents methods used in the fabrication of MEMS. Many are
borrowed from the integrated-circuit industry, in addition to others developed spe-
cifically for silicon micromachining. There is no doubt that the use of process equip-
ment and the corresponding portfolio of fabrication processes initially developed
for the semiconductor industry has given the burgeoning MEMS industry the impe-
tus it needs to overcome the massive infrastructure requirements. For example,
lithographic tools used in micromachining are oftentimes from previous generations
of equipment designed for the fabrication of electronic integrated circuits. The
equipment’s performance is sufficient to meet the requirements of micromachining,
but its price is substantially discounted. A few specialized processes, such as ani-
sotropic chemical wet etching, wafer bonding, deep reactive ion etching, sacrificial
etching, and critical-point drying, emerged over the years within the MEMS com-
munity and remain limited to micromachining in their application.
From a simplistic perspective, micromachining bears a similarity to conven-
tional machining in the sense that the objective is to precisely define arbitrary
features in or on a block of material. There are, however, distinct differences.
Micromachining is a parallel (batch) process in which dozens to tens of thousands
of identical elements are fabricated simultaneously on the same wafer. Furthermore,
in some processes, dozens of wafers are processed at the same time. Another key dif-
ference is the minimum feature dimension—on the order of one micrometer—which
is an order of magnitude smaller than what can be achieved using conventional
machining.
Silicon micromachining combines adding layers of material over a silicon wafer
with etching (selectively removing material) precise patterns in these layers or in the
underlying substrate. The implementation is based on a broad portfolio of fabrica-
tion processes, including material deposition, patterning, and etching techniques.
Lithography plays a significant role in the delineation of accurate and precise pat-
terns. These are the tools of MEMS (see Figure 3.1).
We divide the toolbox into three major categories: basic, advanced, and non-
lithographic processes. The basic process tools are well-established methods and are
usually available at major foundry facilities. The advanced process tools are unique
in their nature and are normally limited to a few specialized facilities. For example,
33

very few sites offer LIGA1, a micromachining process using electroplating and mold-
ing. The nonlithographic processes are more conventional means of producing
microstructures, which may be combined with other processes to produce a final
MEMS product.
Basic Process Tools
Epitaxy, sputtering, evaporation, chemical-vapor deposition, and spin-on methods
are common techniques used to deposit uniform layers of semiconductors, metals,
insulators, and polymers. Lithography is a photographic process for printing images
onto a layer of photosensitive polymer (photoresist) that is subsequently used as a
protective mask against etching. Wet and dry etching, including deep reactive ion
etching, form the essential process base to selectively remove material. The follow-
ing sections describe the fundamentals of the basic process tools.
Epitaxy
Epitaxy is a deposition method to grow a crystalline silicon layer over a silicon
wafer, but with a differing dopant type and concentration. The epitaxial layer is
typically 1 to 20 µm thick. It exhibits the same crystal orientation as the underlying
crystalline substrate, except when grown over an amorphous material (e.g., a layer
34
Processes for Micromachining
Thin film
Patterning
• Optical lithography
• Double-sided lithography
Etching
• Wet isotropic
• Wet anisotropic
• Plasma
• RIE
• DRIE
Photoresist
Substrate
Deposition
• Epitaxy
• Oxidation
• Sputtering
• Evaporation
• CVD/LPCVD/PECVD
• Spin-on method
• Sol-gel
• Anodic bonding
• Silicon fusion bonding
Figure 3.1
Illustration of the basic process flow in micromachining: Layers are deposited; photo-
resist is lithographically patterned and then used as a mask to etch the underlying materials. The
process is repeated until completion of the microstructure.
1.
LIGA is a German acronym for lithographie, galvanoformung, und abformung, meaning lithography, elec-
troplating, and molding.

of silicon dioxide), it is polycrystalline. Epitaxy is a widely used step in the fabrica-
tion of CMOS circuits and has proven efficient in forming wafer-scale p-n junctions
for controlled electrochemical etching (described later).
The growth occurs in a vapor-phase chemical-deposition reactor from the
dissociation or hydrogen reduction at high temperature (>800ºC) of a silicon-
containing source gas. Common source gases are silane (SiH4), dichlorosilane
(SiH2Cl2), or silicon tetrachloride (SiCl4). Nominal growth rates are between 0.2
and 4 µm/min, depending on the source gas and the growth temperature. Impurity
dopants are simultaneously incorporated during growth by the dissociation of a
dopant source gas in the same reactor. Arsine (AsH3) and phosphine (PH3), two
extremely toxic gases, are used for arsenic and phosphorous (n-type) doping,
respectively; diborane (B2H6) is used for boron (p-type) doping.
Epitaxy can be used to grow crystalline silicon on other types of crystalline
substrates such as sapphire (Al2O3). The process is called heteroepitaxy to indicate
the difference in materials. Silicon-on-sapphire (SOS) wafers are available from a
number of vendors and are effective in applications where an insulating or a
transparent substrate is required. The lattice mismatch between the sapphire
and silicon crystals limits the thickness of the silicon to about one micrometer.
Thicker silicon films suffer from high defect densities and degraded electronic
performance.
Oxidation
High-quality amorphous silicon dioxide is obtained by oxidizing silicon in either
dry oxygen or in steam at elevated temperatures (850º–1,150ºC). Oxidation mecha-
nisms have been extensively studied and are well understood. Charts showing final
oxide thickness as function of temperature, oxidizing environment, and time are
widely available [1].
Thermal oxidation of silicon generates compressive stress in the silicon dioxide
film. There are two reasons for the stress: Silicon dioxide molecules take more vol-
ume than silicon atoms, and there is a mismatch between the coefficients of thermal
expansion of silicon and silicon dioxide. The compressive stress depends on the
total thickness of the silicon dioxide layer and can reach hundreds of MPa. As a
result, thermally grown oxide films cause bowing of the underlying substrate.
Moreover, freestanding membranes and suspended cantilevers made of thermally
grown silicon oxide tend to warp or curl due to stress variation through the thick-
ness of the film.
Sputter Deposition
In sputter deposition, a target made of a material to be deposited is physically
bombarded by a flux of inert-gas ions (usually argon) in a vacuum chamber at a pres-
sure of 0.1–10 Pa. Atoms or molecules from the target are ejected and deposited onto
the wafer. There are several general classes of sputter tools differing by the ion exci-
tation mechanism. In direct-current (dc) glow discharge, suitable only for electrically
conducting materials, the inert-gas ions are accelerated in a dc electric field between
the target and the wafer. In planar RF, the target and the wafer form two parallel
plates with RF excitation applied to the target. In ion-beam deposition (also known
as ion milling), ions are generated in a remote plasma, then accelerated at the target.
Basic Process Tools
35

RF planar sputtering and ion-beam methods work for the deposition of both con-
ducting and insulating materials, such as silicon dioxide. In planar and cylindrical
magnetron sputtering, an externally applied magnetic field increases the ion density
near the target, thus raising the deposition rates. Typical deposition rates are 0.1–0.3
µm/min, and can be as high as 1 µm/min for aluminum in certain sputtering tools.
Nearly any inorganic material can be sputtered. Sputtering is a favored method
in the MEMS community for the deposition at low temperatures (<150ºC) of thin
metal films such as aluminum, titanium, chromium, platinum, palladium, tungsten,
Al/Si and Ti/W alloys, amorphous silicon, insulators including glass, and piezoelec-
tric ceramics (e.g., PZT and ZnO). In a variation known as reactive sputtering, a
reactive gas such as nitrogen or oxygen is added during the sputtering of a metal to
form compounds such as titanium nitride or titanium dioxide.
The directional randomness of the sputtering process, provided that the target
size is larger than the wafer, results in good step coverage—the uniformity of the thin
film over a geometrical step—though some thinning occurs near corners. The depos-
ited film has a very fine granular structure and is usually under stress [2]. The stress
levels vary with the sputter power and chamber pressure during deposition, with
tensile stress occurring at lower power and higher pressure, and compressive stress
occurring at higher power and lower pressure. The transition between the compres-
sive and tensile regimes is often sharp (over a few tenths of a Pa), making the
crossover—an ideal point for zero-stress deposition—difficult to control. Heating the
substrate during deposition is sometimes used to reduce film stress.
Many metals, particularly inert ones such as gold, silver, and platinum, do not
adhere well to silicon, silicon dioxide, or silicon nitride, peeling off immediately
after deposition or during later handling. A thin (5- to 20-nm) adhesion layer, which
bonds to both the underlying material and the metal over it, enables the inert metal
to stick. The most common adhesion layers are Cr, Ti, and Ti/W alloy. The inert
metal must be deposited on the adhesion layer without breaking the vacuum, as oxy-
gen in the air would immediately oxidize the adhesion layer, rendering it useless.
Evaporation
Evaporation involves the heating of a source material to a high temperature, gener-
ating a vapor that condenses on a substrate to form a film. Nearly any element (e.g.,
Al, Si, Ti, Au), including many high-melting-point (refractory) metals and com-
pounds (e.g., Cr, Mo, Ta, Pd, Pt, Ni/Cr, Al2O3), can be evaporated. Deposited films
comprised of more than one element may not have the same composition as the
source material because the evaporation rates may not correspond to the stoichio-
metry of the source.
Evaporation is performed in a vacuum chamber with the background pressure
typically below 10−4 Pa to avoid contaminating the film. Target heating can be done
resistively by passing an electrical current through a tungsten filament, strip, or boat
holding the desired material. Heating can alternatively be done by scanning a high-
voltage (e.g., 10-kV) electron beam (e-beam) over the source material. In this case,
the carrier is usually made of tungsten, graphite, alumina, or copper (copper is an
excellent thermal conductor, but it can only be used if it is not wetted by the molten
source). Resistive evaporation is simple but can result in spreading impurities or
other contaminants present in the filament. E-beam evaporation, by contrast, can
36
Processes for Micromachining

provide better-quality films and slightly higher deposition rates (5–100 nm/min),
but the deposition system is more complex, requiring water cooling of the target and
shielding from x-rays generated when the energetic electrons strike the target. Fur-
thermore, radiation that penetrates the surface of the silicon substrate during the
deposition process can damage the crystal and degrade the characteristics of
electronic circuits.
Evaporation is a directional deposition process from a relatively small source.
This results in the majority of material particles being deposited at a specific angle
to the substrate, causing poor step coverage and leaving corners and sidewalls
exposed. This is generally an undesirable effect if thin film continuity is desired (e.g.,
when the metal is an electrical interconnect). Rotating the substrate to face the
source at different angles during deposition reduces the effect. In some cases, how-
ever, shadowing can be used deliberately to selectively deposit material on one side
of a step or a trench but not the other.
Thin films deposited by evaporation tend to exhibit tensile stress, increasing
with higher material melting point. Evaporated niobium and platinum films, for
example, can have tensile stress in excess of 1 GPa, sufficient to cause curling of the
wafer or even peeling. As with sputtering, an adhesion layer must be used with
many metals.
Chemical-Vapor Deposition
Chemical-vapor deposition (CVD) works on the principle of initiating a surface
chemical reaction in a controlled atmosphere, resulting in the deposition of a
reacted species on a heated substrate. In contrast to sputtering, CVD is a high-
temperature process, usually performed above 300ºC. The field of CVD has grown
substantially, driven by the demand within the semiconductor industry for high-
quality, thin dielectric and metal films for multilayer electrical interconnects. Com-
mon thin films deposited by CVD include polysilicon, silicon oxides and nitrides,
tungsten, titanium and tantalum as well as their nitrides, and, most recently, copper
and low-permittivity dielectric insulators (εr < 3). The latter two are becoming
workhorse materials for very-high-speed electrical interconnects in integrated cir-
cuits. The deposition of polysilicon, silicon oxides, and nitrides is routine within the
MEMS industry.
Chemical vapor deposition processes are categorized as atmospheric-pressure
(referred to as APCVD), or low-pressure (LPCVD), or plasma-enhanced (PECVD),2
which also encompasses high-density plasma (HDP-CVD). APCVD and LPCVD
methods operate at rather elevated temperatures (400º–800ºC). In PECVD and
HDP-CVD, the substrate temperature is typically near 300ºC, though the plasma
deposition of silicon nitrides at room temperature is feasible. The effect of deposi-
tion parameters on the characteristics of the thin film is significant, especially for
silicon oxides and nitrides. Substrate temperature, gas flows, presence of dopants,
Basic Process Tools
37
2.
Energetic electrons excited in a high-frequency electromagnetic field collide with gas molecules to form ions
and reactive neutral species. The mixture of electrons, ions, and neutrals is called plasma and constitutes a
phase of matter distinct from solids, liquids, or gases. Plasma-phase operation increases the density of ions
and neutral species that can participate in a chemical reaction, be it deposition or etching, and thus can
accelerate the reaction rate.

and pressure are important process variables for all types of CVD. Power and
plasma excitation RF frequency are also important for PECVD.
Deposition of Polysilicon
Chemical-vapor deposition processes allow the deposition of polysilicon as a thin
film on a silicon substrate. The film thickness can range between a few tens of
nanometers to several micrometers. Structures with several layers of polysilicon
are feasible. The ease of depositing polysilicon, a material sharing many of the
properties of bulk silicon, makes it an extremely attractive material in surface
micromachining (described later).
Polysilicon is deposited by the pyrolysis of silane (SiH4) to silicon and hydrogen
in a LPCVD reactor. Deposition from silane in a low-temperature PECVD reactor is
also possible but results in amorphous silicon. The deposition temperature in
LPCVD, typically between 550º and 700ºC, affects the granular structure of the
film. Below about 600ºC, the thin film is completely amorphous; above about
630ºC, it exhibits a crystalline grain structure. The deposition rate varies from
approximately 6 nm/min at 620ºC up to 70 nm/min at 700ºC. Partial pressure and
flow rate of the silane gas also affect the deposition rate.
Generally speaking, LPCVD polysilicon films conform well to the underlying
topography on the wafer, showing good step coverage. In deep trenches with aspect
ratios (ratio of depth to width) in excess of 10, some thinning of the film occurs on
the sidewalls, but that has not limited using polysilicon to fill trenches as deep as
500 µm.
Polysilicon can be doped during deposition—known as in situ doping—by
introducing dopant source gases, in particular arsine or phosphine for n-type doping
and diborane for p-type doping. Arsine and phosphine greatly decrease the deposi-
tion rate (to about one third that of undoped polysilicon), whereas diborane
increases it. The dopant concentration in in-situ doped films is normally very high
(~1020 cm−3), but the film resistivity remains in the range of 1 to 10 mΩ•cm because
of the low mobility of electrons or holes.
Intrinsic stresses in as-deposited doped polysilicon films can be large (>500
MPa) and either tensile or compressive, depending on the deposition temperature.
Furthermore, there is normally a stress gradient through the thickness of the film,
which results in curling of released micromechanical structures. Annealing at 900ºC
or above causes stress relaxation through structural changes in grain boundaries and
a reduction in stress to levels (<50 MPa) and stress gradient generally deemed
acceptable for micromachined structures.
Deposition of Silicon Dioxide
Silicon dioxide is deposited below 500ºC by reacting silane and oxygen in an
APCVD, LPCVD, or PECVD reactor. Due to the low temperature compared to
thermally grown oxide, this is known as low-temperature oxide (LTO). The
optional addition of phosphine or diborane dopes the silicon oxide with phosphorus
or boron, respectively. Films doped with phosphorus are often referred to as phos-
phosilicate glass (PSG); those doped with phosphorus and boron are known as
borophosphosilicate glass (BPSG). When annealed at temperatures near 1,000ºC,
38
Processes for Micromachining

both PSG and BPSG soften and flow to conform with the underlying surface topog-
raphy and to improve step coverage. LTO films are used for passivation coatings
over aluminum, but the deposition temperature must remain below about 400ºC to
prevent degradation of the metal.
Silicon dioxide can also be deposited at temperatures between 650º and 750ºC
in a LPCVD reactor by the pyrolysis of tetraethoxysilane [Si(OC2H4)4], also known
as TEOS. Silicon dioxide layers deposited from a TEOS source exhibit excellent uni-
formity and step coverage, but the high temperature process precludes their use over
aluminum.
A third, but less common, method to deposit silicon dioxide involves reacting
dichlorosilane (SiCl2H2) with nitrous oxide (N2O) in a LPCVD reactor at tempera-
tures near 900ºC. Film properties and uniformity are excellent, but its use is limited
to depositing insulating layers over polysilicon.
As is the case for the LPCVD of polysilicon, deposition rates for silicon dioxide
increase with temperature. A typical LTO deposition rate at low pressure is 25
nm/min at 400ºC, rising to 150 nm/min at atmospheric pressure and 450ºC; the
deposition rate using TEOS varies from 5 nm/min at 650ºC up to 50 nm/min
at 750ºC.
Deposited silicon dioxide films are amorphous with a structure similar to fused
silica. Heat treatment (annealing) at elevated temperatures (600º–1,000ºC) results
in the outgassing of hydrogen incorporated in the film and a slight increase in den-
sity, but no change in the amorphous structure. This process is called densification.
Silicon dioxide deposited using CVD methods is very useful as a dielectric
insulator between layers of metal or as a sacrificial layer (etched using hydrofluoric
acid) in surface micromachining. However, its electric properties are inferior to
those of thermally grown silicon dioxide. For example, dielectric strength of CVD
silicon oxides can be half that of thermally grown silicon dioxide. It is no coinci-
dence that gate insulators for CMOS transistors are made of the latter type. In
general, CVD silicon oxides are under compressive stress (100–300 MPa). The
stress cannot be controlled except when PECVD is used.
Deposition of Silicon Nitrides
Silicon nitride is common in the semiconductor industry for the passivation of
electronic devices because it forms an excellent protective barrier against the diffu-
sion of water and sodium ions. In micromachining, LPCVD silicon nitride films
are effective as masks for the selective etching of silicon in alkaline solutions,
such as potassium hydroxide. Silicon nitride has also been used as a structural
material.
Stoichiometric silicon nitride (Si3N4) is deposited at atmospheric pressure by
reacting silane (SiH4) and ammonia (NH3), or at low pressure by reacting dichlo-
rosilane (SiCl2H2) and ammonia. The deposition temperature for either method is
between 700º and 900ºC. Both reactions generate hydrogen as a byproduct, some of
which is incorporated in the deposited film. CVD and LPCVD silicon nitride films
generally exhibit large tensile stresses approaching 1,000 MPa. However, if LPCVD
silicon nitride is deposited at 800º–850ºC and is silicon-rich (an excess of silicon in
the film) due to a greatly increased dichlorosilane flow rate, the stress can be below
100 MPa—a level acceptable for most micromachining applications.
Basic Process Tools
39

For deposition below 400ºC, nonstoichiometric silicon nitride (SixNy) is
obtained by reacting silane with ammonia or nitrogen in a PECVD chamber.
Hydrogen is also a byproduct of this reaction and is incorporated in elevated
concentrations (20%–25%) in the film. The refractive index is an indirect measure
of the stoichiometry of the silicon nitride film. The refractive index for stoichiomet-
ric LPCVD silicon nitride is 2.01 and ranges between 1.8 and 2.5 for PECVD films.
A high value in the range is indicative of excess silicon, and a low value generally
represents an excess of nitrogen.
One of the key advantages of PECVD nitride is the ability to control stress
during deposition. Silicon nitride deposited at a plasma excitation frequency of
13.56 MHz exhibits tensile stress of about 400 MPa, whereas a film deposited at a
frequency of 50 kHz has a compressive stress of 200 MPa. By alternating frequencies
during deposition, one may obtain lower-stress films.
Spin-On Methods
Spin-on is a process to put down layers of dielectric insulators and organic materi-
als. Unlike the methods described earlier, the equipment is simple, requiring a
variable-speed spinning table with appropriate safety screens. A nozzle dispenses
the material as a liquid solution in the center of the wafer. Spinning the substrate at
speeds of 500 to 5,000 rpm for 30 to 60 seconds spreads the material to a uniform
thickness.
Photoresists and polyimides are common organic materials that can be spun on
a wafer with thicknesses typically between 0.5 and 20 µm, though some special-
purpose resists such as epoxy-based SU-8 can exceed 200 µm. The organic polymer
is normally in suspension in a solvent solution; subsequent baking causes the solvent
to evaporate, forming a firm film.
Thick (5–100 µm) spin-on glass (SOG) has the ability to uniformly coat surfaces
and smooth out underlying topographical variations, effectively planarizing surface
features. Thin (0.1–0.5 µm) SOG was heavily investigated in the integrated circuit
industry as an interlayer dielectric between metals for high-speed electrical intercon-
nects; however, its electrical properties are considered poor compared to thermal or
CVD silicon oxides. Spin-on glass is commercially available in different forms, com-
monly siloxane- or silicate-based. The latter type allows water absorption into the
film, resulting in a higher relative dielectric constant and a tendency to crack. After
deposition, the layer is typically densified at a temperature between 300º and 500ºC.
Measured film stress is approximately 200 MPa in tension but decreases substan-
tially with increasing anneal temperatures.
Lithography
Lithography involves three sequential steps:
• Application of photoresist (or simply “resist”), which is a photosensitive
emulsion layer;
• Optical exposure to print an image of the mask onto the resist;
• Immersion in an aqueous developer solution to dissolve the exposed resist and
render visible the latent image.
40
Processes for Micromachining

The mask itself consists of a patterned opaque chromium (the most common),
emulsion, or iron oxide layer on a transparent fused-quartz or soda-lime glass sub-
strate. The pattern layout is generated using a computer-aided design (CAD) tool
and transferred into the opaque layer at a specialized mask-making facility, often by
electron-beam or laser-beam writing. A complete microfabrication process nor-
mally involves several lithographic operations with different masks.
Positive photoresist is an organic resin material containing a sensitizer. It is
spin-coated on the wafer with a typical thickness between 0.5 µm and 10 µm. As
mentioned earlier, special types of resists can be spun to thicknesses of over 200
µm, but the large thickness poses significant challenges to exposing and defining
features below 25 µm in size. The sensitizer prevents the dissolution of unexposed
resist during immersion in the developer solution. Exposure to light in the 200- to
450-nm range (ultraviolet to blue) breaks down the sensitizer, causing exposed
regions to immediately dissolve in developer solution. The exact opposite process
happens in negative resists—exposed areas remain and unexposed areas dissolve in
the developer.
Optical exposure can be accomplished in one of three different modes: contact,
proximity, or projection. In contact lithography, the mask touches the wafer. This
normally shortens the life of the mask and leaves undesired photoresist residue on
the wafer and the mask. In proximity mode, the mask is brought to within 25 to 50
µm of the resist surface. By contrast, projection lithography projects an image of the
mask onto the wafer through complex optics (see Figure 3.2).
Resolution, defined as the minimum feature the optical system can resolve, is
seldom a limitation for micromachining applications. For proximity systems, it is
limited by Fresnel diffraction to a minimum of about 5 µm, and in contact
systems, it is approximately 1 to 2 µm. For projection systems, it is given by 0.5×
λ⁄NA where λ is the wavelength (~ 400 nm) and NA is the numerical aperture of the
optics (~ 0.25 for steppers used in MEMS). Resolution in projection lithography is
Basic Process Tools
41
Resist
Proximity
Projection
Mask
Mask
Resist
Optics
Resist
development
Exposure
Substrate
Substrate
Resist
Resist
Figure 3.2
An illustration of proximity and projection lithography. In proximity mode, the mask is within
25 to 50 µm of the resist. Fresnel diffraction limits the resolution and minimum feature size to ~ 5 µm. In
projection mode, complex optics image the mask onto the resist. The resolution is routinely better than
one micrometer. Subsequent development delineates the features in the resist.

routinely better than one micrometer. Depth of focus, however, is a more severe con-
straint on lithography, especially in light of the need to expose thick resist or accom-
modate geometrical height variations across the wafer. Depth of focus for contact
and proximity systems is poor, also limited by Fresnel diffraction. In projection sys-
tems, the image plane can be moved by adjusting the focus settings, but once it is
fixed, the depth of focus about that plane is limited to ±0.5 × λ/NA2. Depth of focus
is typically limited to few microns.
Projection lithography is clearly a superior approach, but an optical projection
system can cost significantly more than a proximity or contact system. Long-term
cost of ownership plays a critical role in the decision to acquire a particular litho-
graphic tool.
While resolution of most lithographic systems is not a limitation for MEMS,
lithography can be challenging depending on the nature of the application; examples
include exposure of thick resist, topographical height variations, front to back side
pattern alignment, and large fields of view.
Thick Resist
Patterned thick resist is normally used as a protective masking layer for the etching
of deep structures and can also be used as a template for the electroplating of metal
microstructures. Coating substrates with thick resist is achieved either by multiple
spin-coating applications (up to a total of 20 µm) or by spinning special viscous
resist solutions at slower speeds (up to 100 µm). Maintaining thickness control and
uniformity across the wafer becomes difficult with increasing resist thickness.
Exposing resist thicker than 5 µm often degrades the minimum resolvable fea-
ture size due to the limited depth of focus of the exposure tool—different depths
within the resist will be imaged differently. The net result is a sloping of the resist
profile in the exposed region. As a general guideline, the maximum aspect ratio
(ratio of resist thickness to minimum feature dimension) is approximately three—in
other words, the minimum achievable feature size (e.g., line width or spacing
between lines) is larger than one third of the resist thickness. This limitation may be
overcome using special exposure methods, but their value in a manufacturing envi-
ronment remains questionable.
Topographical Height Variations
Changes in topography on the surface of the wafer, such as deep cavities and
trenches, are common in MEMS and pose challenges to both resist spinning and
imaging. For cavities deeper than about 10 µm, thinning of the resist at convex
corners and accumulation inside the cavity create problems with exposure and with
leaving insufficient resist thickness during etches (see Figure 3.3). Two recent devel-
opments targeting resist coating of severe topography are spray-on resist and
electroplated resist.
Exposing a pattern on a surface with height variations in excess of 10 µm is also
a difficult task because of the limited depth of focus. Contact and proximity tools
are not suitable for this task unless a significant loss of resolution is tolerable. Under
certain circumstances where the number of height levels is limited (say, less than
three), one may use a projection lithography tool to perform an exposure with a
42
Processes for Micromachining

corresponding focus adjustment at each of these height levels. Naturally, this is
costly because the number of masks and exposures increases linearly with the
number of height levels.
Double-Sided Lithography
Often, lithographic patterns on both sides of a wafer need to be aligned with respect
to each other with high accuracy. For example, the fabrication of a commercial
pressure sensor entails forming on the front side of the wafer piezoresistive sense
elements that are aligned to the edges of a cavity on the back side of the wafer.
Different methods of front-to-back side alignment, also known as double-sided
alignment, have been incorporated in commercially available tools. Wafers polished
on both sides should be used to minimize light scattering during lithography.
Several companies, including SÜSS MicroTec (formerly Karl Süss) of Munich,
Germany, EV Group (formerly Electronic Visions) of Schärding, Austria, OAI (for-
merly Optical Associates) of San Jose, California, and Ultratech, Inc., of San Jose,
California, provide equipment capable of double-sided alignment and exposure.
The operation of the SÜSS MA-6 system uses a patented scheme to align crosshair
marks on the mask to crosshair marks on the back side of the wafer (see Figure 3.4).
First, the alignment marks on the mechanically clamped mask are viewed from
below by a set of dual objectives, and an image is electronically stored. The wafer is
then loaded with the back side alignment marks facing the microscope objectives
and positioned such that these marks are aligned to the electronically stored image.
After alignment, exposure of the mask onto the front side of the wafer is completed
in proximity or contact mode. A typical registration error (or misalignment) is less
than 2 µm.
Large Field of View
The field of view is the extent of the area that is exposed at any one time on the
wafer. In proximity and contact lithography, it covers the entire wafer. In projec-
tion systems, the field of view is often less than 1 × 1 cm
2. The entire wafer is
exposed by stepping the small field of view across in a two-dimensional array,
hence the stepper appellation. In some applications, the device structure may span
dimensions exceeding the field of view. A remedy to this is called field stitching, in
which two or more different fields are exposed sequentially, with the edges of the
fields overlapping.
Basic Process Tools
43
Accumulation
Thinning
Resist
Figure 3.3
Undesirable effects of spin-coating resist on a surface with severe topographical
height variations. The resist is thin on corners and accumulates in the cavity.

Etching
In etching, the objective is to selectively remove material using imaged photoresist as
a masking template. The pattern can be etched directly into the silicon substrate or
into a thin film, which may in turn be used as a mask for subsequent etches. For a
successful etch, there must be sufficient selectivity (etch-rate ratio) between the
material being etched and the masking material. Etch processes for MEMS fabrica-
tion deviate from traditional etch processes for the integrated circuit industry and
remain to a large extent an art.
Etching thin films is relatively easier than etching bulk silicon. Table 3.1 pro-
vides a list of wet and dry (usually plasma) etchants commonly used for metal and
dielectric films.
Deep etching of silicon lies at the core of what is often termed bulk
micromachining. No ideal silicon etch method exists, leaving process engineers with
techniques suitable for some applications but not others. Distinctions are made on
the basis of isotropy, etch medium, and selectivity of the etch to other materials.
44
Processes for Micromachining
Mask
X
Y
(c)
(b)
Wafer
Microscope
objectives
(a)
Mask alignment keys
Wafer alignment keys
Microscope view
Chuck
Front side
Figure 3.4
Double-sided alignment scheme for the SÜSS MA-6 alignment system: (a) the image
of mask alignment marks is electronically stored; (b) the alignment marks on the back side of the
wafer are brought in focus; and (c) the position of the wafer is adjusted by translation and rotation
to align the marks to the stored image. The right-hand side illustrates the view on the computer
screen as the targets are brought into alignment. (After: product technical sheet of SÜSS MicroTec
of Munich, Germany.)

Isotropic etchants etch uniformly in all directions, resulting in rounded cross-
sectional features. By contrast, anisotropic etchants etch in some directions prefer-
entially over others, resulting in trenches or cavities delineated by flat and well-
defined surfaces, which need not be perpendicular to the surface of the wafer (see
Figure 3.5). The etch medium (wet versus dry) plays a role in selecting a suitable etch
method. Wet etchants in aqueous solution offer the advantage of low-cost batch
fabrication—25 to 50 100-mm-diameter wafers can be etched simultaneously—and
can be either of the isotropic or anisotropic type. Dry etching involves the use of
reactant gases, usually in a low-pressure plasma, but nonplasma gas-phase etching
is also used to a small degree. It can be isotropic or vertical. The equipment for dry
etching is specialized and requires the plumbing of ultra-clean pipes to bring high-
purity reactant gases into the vacuum chamber.
Isotropic Wet Etching
The most common group of silicon isotropic wet etchants is HNA, also known as
iso etch and poly etch because of its use in the early days of the integrated circuit
industry as an etchant for polysilicon. It is a mixture of hydrofluoric (HF), nitric
(HNO3), and acetic (CH3COOH) acids, although water may replace the acetic acid.
In the chemical reaction, the nitric acid oxidizes silicon, which is then etched by the
hydrofluoric acid. The etch rate of silicon can vary from 0.1 to over 100 µm/min
depending on the proportion of the acids in the mixture. Etch uniformity is nor-
mally difficult to control but is improved by stirring.
Basic Process Tools
45
Table 3.1
Wet and Dry Etchants of Thin Metal Films and Dielectric Insulators
Wet Etchants
(Aqueous Solutions)
Etch Rate
(nm/min)
Dry Etching Gases
(Plasma or Vapor Phase)
Etch Rate
(nm/min)
Thermal silicon
dioxide
HF
2,300
CHF3+ O2
50–150
5 NH4F:1 HF
(buffered HF)
100
CHF3+ CF4
+ He
250–600
HF vapor (no plasma)
66
LPCVD silicon
nitride
Hot H3PO4
5
SF6
150–250
CHF3 + CF4
+ He
200–600
Aluminum
Warm H3PO4:HNO3:
CH3COOH
530
Cl2 + SiCl4
100–150
HF
4
Cl2+ BCl3
+CHCl3
200–600
Gold
KI:I2
660
Titanium
HF:H2O2
110–880
SF6
100–150
Tungsten
Warm H2O2
150
SF6
300–400
K3Fe(CN)6:KOH:
KH2PO4
34
Chromium
Ce(NH4)2(NO3)6:
CH3COOH
93
Cl2
5
Photoresist
Hot H2SO4:H2O2
>100,000
O2
350
CH3COOH3 (acetone)
>100,000
(After: [3, 4].)

Anisotropic Wet Etching
Anisotropic wet etchants are also known as orientation-dependent etchants
(ODEs) because their etch rates depend on the crystallographic direction. The list of
anisotropic wet etchants includes the hydroxides of alkali metals (e.g., NaOH,
KOH, CsOH), simple and quaternary ammonium hydroxides (e.g., NH4OH,
N(CH3)4OH), and ethylenediamine mixed with pyrochatechol (EDP) in water [5].
The solutions are typically heated to 70º–100ºC. A comparison of various silicon
etchants is given in Table 3.2.
KOH is by far the most common ODE. Etch rates are typically given in the
[100] direction, corresponding to the etch front being the (100) plane. The {110}
planes are etched in KOH about twice as rapidly as {100} planes, while {111}
planes are etched at a rate about 100 times slower than for {100} planes [7]
46
Processes for Micromachining
{111}
Wet etch
Plasma (dry) etch
Isotropic
Anisotropic
Figure 3.5
Schematic illustration of cross-sectional trench profiles resulting from four different
types of etch methods.
Table 3.2
Liquid, Plasma, and Gas Phase Etchants of Silicon
HF:HNO3:
CH3COOH
KOH
EDP
N(CH3)4OH
(TMAH)
SF6
SF6/C4F8
(DRIE)
XeF2
Etch type
Wet
Wet
Wet
Wet
Plasma
Plasma
Vapor
Typical
formulation
250 ml HF,
500 ml
HNO3,
800 ml
CH3COOH
40 to 50
wt%
750 ml
Ethylenediamine,
120g
Pyrochatechol,
100 ml water
20 to 25 wt%
Room-
temp.
vapor
pressure
Anisotropic
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Varies
Yes
No
Temperature 25°C
70º–90°C 115°C
90°C
0º–100°C
20º–80°C 20°C
Etch rate
(µm/min)
1 to 20
0.5 to 3
0.75
0.5 to 1.5
0.1 to 0.5
1 to 15
0.1 to 10
{111}/{100}
Selectivity
None
100:1
35:1
50:1
None
None
None
Nitride etch
(nm/min)
Low
1
0.1
0.1
200
200
12
SiO2 Etch
(nm/min)
10–30
10
0.2
0.1
10
10
0
p
++ Etch stop No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
(After: [3, 6]. )

(see Figure 3.6). The latter feature is routinely used to make V-shaped grooves and
trenches in (100) silicon wafers, which are precisely delineated by {111} crystallo-
graphic planes. The overall reaction consists of the oxidation of silicon followed by
a reduction step:
(
)
Si
OH
Si OH
+
→
+
−
++
−
2
4
2
(
)
e
oxidation
(
)
(
)
(
)
Si OH
H O
Si OH
H
2
2
6
2
4
4
2
++
−
−−
+
+
→
+
e
reduction
A charge transfer of four electrons occurs during the reaction.
There is little consensus on the origin of the selectivity to {111} crystallographic
planes. Proposals made throughout the literature attribute the anisotropy to the
lower bond density—and hence lower electron concentration—along {111} planes.
Others believe that {111} planes oxidize quickly and are protected during the etch
with a thin layer of oxide.
The etch rate of KOH and other alkaline etchants also slows greatly for heavily
doped p-type (p++) silicon due to the lower concentration of electrons needed for this
etch reaction to proceed [7]. P++ silicon is thus commonly used as an etch stop. The
etch rate of undoped or n-type silicon in KOH solutions is approximately 0.5 to 4
µm/min depending on the temperature and the concentration of KOH, but it
drops by a factor of over 500 in p++ silicon with a dopant concentration above
1 × 1020cm−3.
Basic Process Tools
47
(a)
(b)
Back side mask
{100}
{111}
Front side mask
a
0.707a
54.74°
{100}
{111}
{100}
{111}
Self-limiting
etches
Membrane
<100>
{110}
Figure 3.6
Illustration of the anisotropic etching of cavities in {100}-oriented silicon: (a) cavities,
self-limiting pyramidal and V-shaped pits, and thin membranes; and (b) etching from both sides of
the wafer can yield a multitude of different shapes including hourglass-shaped and oblique holes.
When the vertically moving etch fronts from both sides meet, a sharp corner is formed. Lateral
etching then occurs, with fast-etching planes such as {110} and {411} being revealed.

LPCVD silicon nitride is an excellent masking material against etching in KOH.
Silicon dioxide etches at about 10 nm/min and can be used as a masking layer for
very short etches. Photoresist is rapidly etched in hot alkaline solutions and is there-
fore not suitable for masking these etchants.
Alkali hydroxides are extremely corrosive; aluminum bond pads inadvertently
exposed to KOH are quickly damaged. It should be noted that CMOS fabrication
facilities are very reluctant to use such etchants or even accept wafers that had previ-
ously been exposed to alkali hydroxides for fear of contamination of potassium or
sodium, two ions detrimental to the operation of MOS transistors.
In the category of ammonium hydroxides, tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide
(TMAH, N(CH3)4OH) exhibits similar properties to KOH [7]. It etches {111} crys-
tallographic planes 30 to 50 times slower than {100} planes. The etch rate drops by a
factor of 40 in heavily p-doped silicon (~1 ×1020cm−3). A disadvantage of TMAH is
the occasional formation of undesirable pyramidal hillocks at the bottom of the
etched cavity. Both silicon dioxide and silicon nitride remain virtually unetched in
TMAH and hence can be used as masking layers. It is advisable to remove native sili-
con dioxide in hydrofluoric acid prior to etching in TMAH because a layer just a few
nanometers thick is sufficient to protect the silicon surface from etching. TMAH
normally attacks aluminum, but a special formulation containing silicon powder or
a pH-controlling additive dissolved in the solution significantly reduces the etch rate
of aluminum [8]. This property is useful for the etching of silicon after the complete
fabrication of CMOS circuits without resorting to the masking of the aluminum
bond pads.
EDP is another wet etchant with selectivity to {111} planes and to heavily
p-doped silicon. It is hazardous and its vapors are carcinogenic, necessitating the use
of completely enclosed reflux condensers. Silicon oxides and nitrides are suitable
masking materials for EDP etching. Many metals, including gold, chromium, cop-
per, and tantalum, are also not attacked in EDP; however, the etch rate for alumi-
num is at about 0.3 µm/min for the formulation given in Table 3.2.
Etching using anisotropic aqueous solutions results in three-dimensional faceted
structures formed by intersecting {111} planes with other crystallographic planes.
The design of the masking pattern demands a visualization in three dimensions of
the etch procession. To that end, etch computer simulation software, such as the
program ACES™available from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
are useful design tools.
The easiest structures to visualize are V-shaped cavities etched in (100)-oriented
wafers. The etch front begins at the opening in the mask and proceeds in the <100>
direction, which is the vertical direction in (100)-oriented substrates, creating a cav-
ity with a flat bottom and slanted sides. The sides are {111} planes making a 54.7º
angle with respect to the horizontal (100) surface. If left in the etchant long enough,
the etch ultimately self-limits on four equivalent but intersecting {111} planes, form-
ing an inverted pyramid or V-shaped trench. Of course, this occurs only if the wafer
is thicker than the projected etch depth. Timed etching from one side of the wafer is
frequently used to form cavities or thin membranes. Hourglass and oblique-shaped
ports are also possible in {100} wafers by etching aligned patterns from both sides of
the wafer and allowing the two vertical etch fronts to coalesce and begin etching
sideways, then stopping the etch after a predetermined time.
48
Processes for Micromachining

The shape of an etched trench in (110) wafers is radically different (see
Figure 3.7). In silicon (110) wafers, four of the eight equivalent {111} planes are per-
pendicular to the (110) wafer surface. The remaining four {111} planes are slanted
at 35.3º with respect to the surface. The four vertical {111} planes intersect to form a
parallelogram with an inside angle of 70.5º. A groove etched in (110) wafers has the
appearance of a complex polygon delineated by six {111} planes, four vertical and
two slanted. Etching in (110) wafers is useful to form trenches with vertical side-
walls, albeit not orthogonal to each other [9].
While concave corners bounded by {111} planes remain intact during the etch,
convex corners are immediately attacked (Figure 3.8). This is because any slight ero-
sion of the convex corner exposes fast-etching planes (especially {411} planes) other
Basic Process Tools
49
{110}
Vertical {111}
Vertical {111}
Top view
{111}
109.5°
70.5°
Slanted {111}
Slanted {111}
Figure 3.7
Illustration of the anisotropic etching in {110}-oriented silicon. Etched structures are
delineated by four vertical {111} planes and two slanted {111} planes. The vertical {111} planes
intersect at an angle of 70.5º.
Suspended
beam
Convex corner
{411}
Concave corner
Nonetching
layer
Figure 3.8
Illustration of the etching at convex corners and the formation of suspended beams of
a material that is not etched (e.g., silicon nitride, p++ silicon). The {411} planes are frequently the
fastest etching and appear at convex corners.

than {111} planes, thus accelerating the etch. Consequently, a convex corner in the
mask layout will be undercut during the etch; in other words, the etch front will pro-
ceed underneath the masking layer. In some instances, such as when a square island
is desired, this effect becomes detrimental and is compensated for by clever layout
schemes called corner compensation [10]. Often, however, the effect is intentionally
used to form beams suspended over cavities (see Figure 3.9).
Electrochemical Etching
The relatively large etch rates of anisotropic wet etchants (>0.5 µm/min) make it dif-
ficult to achieve uniform and controlled etch depths. Some applications, such as
bulk-micromachined pressure sensors, demand a thin (5- to 20-µm) silicon mem-
brane with dimensional thickness control and uniformity of better than 0.2 µm,
which is very difficult to achieve using timed etching. Instead, the thickness control
is obtained by using a precisely grown epitaxial layer and controlling the etch reac-
tion with an externally applied electrical potential. This method is commonly
referred as electrochemical etching (ECE) [11, 12]. An n-type epitaxial layer grown
on a p-type wafer forms a p-n junction diode that allows electrical conduction only if
the p-type side is at a voltage above the n-type; otherwise, no electrical current
passes and the diode is said to be in reverse bias. During ECE, the applied potential is
such that the p-n diode is in reverse bias, and the n-type epitaxial layer is above its
passivation potential—the potential at which a thin passivating silicon dioxide layer
forms—hence, it is not etched (see Figure 3.10). The p-type substrate is allowed to
50
Processes for Micromachining
Figure 3.9
Scanning-electron micrograph of a thermally isolated RMS converter consisting of
thermopiles on a silicon dioxide membrane. The anisotropic etch undercuts the silicon dioxide
mask to form a suspended membrane. (Courtesy of: D. Jaeggi, Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology of Zurich, Switzerland.)
V
n-Si
p-Si
OH−
OH−
OH−
Electrode
Figure 3.10
Illustration of electrochemical etching using n-type epitaxial silicon. The n-type
silicon is biased above its passivation potential so it is not etched. The p-type layer is etched in the
solution. The etch stops immediately after the p-type layer is completely removed.

electrically float, so it is etched. As soon as the p-type substrate is completely
removed, the etch reaction comes to a halt at the junction, leaving a layer of n-type
silicon with precise thickness.
In an original implementation of electrochemical etching on preprocessed
CMOS wafers, Reay et al. [13] fabricated a single-crystal n-type silicon well with
electronic circuits fully suspended from an oxide support beam. Instead of using
KOH, they used TMAH with silicon dissolved in the solution in order to prevent the
etch of exposed aluminum bond pads (see Figure 3.11).
Plasma Etching
Plasma (or dry) etching is a key process in the semiconductor industry. Companies
such as Applied Materials, Inc., of Santa Clara, California, and Lam Research Corp.
of Fremont, California, are leading developers and suppliers of plasma-etching sys-
tems of silicon as well as silicon dioxide, silicon nitride, and a wide variety of metals.
Conventional plasma-phase etch processes are commonly used for etching polysili-
con in surface micromachining and for the formation of shallow cavities in bulk
micromachining. The introduction in the mid 1990s of deep reactive ion etching
(DRIE) systems by Surface Technology Systems (STS), Ltd., of Newport, United
Kingdom, Unaxis Semiconductors (formerly PlasmaTherm) of St. Petersburg, Flor-
ida, and Alcatel, S.A., of Paris, France, provided a new powerful tool for the etching
of very deep trenches (over 500 µm) with nearly vertical sidewalls.
Plasma2 etching involves the generation of chemically reactive neutrals (e.g., F,
Cl), and ions (e.g., SFx
+) that are accelerated under the effect of an electric field
toward a target substrate. The reactive species (neutrals and ions) are formed by the
collision of molecules in a reactant gas (e.g., SF6, CF4, Cl2, CClF3, NF3) with a cloud
of energetic electrons excited by an RF electric field. When the etch process is purely
chemical, powered by the spontaneous reaction of neutrals with silicon, it is collo-
quially referred to as plasma etching. But if ion bombardment of the silicon surface
plays a synergistic role in the chemical etch reaction, the process is then referred to
as reactive ion etching (RIE). In RIE, ion (e.g., SFx
+) motion toward the substrate is
Basic Process Tools
51
100
m
µ
Suspended
n-well
{111}
Figure 3.11
A fully suspended n-type crystalline silicon island electrochemically etched in TMAH
after the completion of the CMOS processing. (Courtesy of: R. Reay, Linear Technology, Inc., of
Milpitas, California, and E. Klaassen, Intel Corp. of Santa Clara, California.)

nearly vertical, which gives RIE vertical anisotropy. Asymmetric electrodes and low
chamber pressures (5 Pa) are characteristic of RIE operation. Inductively coupled
plasma reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE) provides greater excitation to the electron
cloud by means of an externally applied RF electromagnetic field. Inductively cou-
pled plasma (ICP) increases the density of ions and neutrals resulting in higher etch
rates. The ion bombardment energy is controlled by a separate power supply driving
the platen on which the wafer sits.
A different, purely physical method of etching is ion milling, in which noble-gas
ions (usually argon) are remotely generated, then accelerated at the substrate though
a potential on the order of 1 kV. The directionality of the ions results in a very verti-
cal etch profile. Because a chemical reaction is not required, any material can be
etched by ion milling. The ion-milling rate is typically much slower than with RIE
and varies widely with the material [4].
The remainder of this section focuses on DRIE and its application in
micromachining. Further reading on the basics of plasma etching is suggested at the
end of this chapter.
DRIE
DRIE evolved in the mid 1990s from the need within the micromachining commu-
nity for an etch process capable of vertically etching high-aspect-ratio trenches at
rates substantially larger than the 0.1 to 0.5 µm/min typical of traditional plasma
and RIE etchers. In one approach, developed by Alcatel, the wafer is cooled to cryo-
genic temperatures. Condensation of the reactant gases (SF6 and O2) protects the
sidewalls from etching by the reactive fluorine atoms. However, cryogenic cooling
may be difficult to maintain locally and could result in undesirable thermal stresses.
Another approach currently used by Alcatel, PlasmaTherm, and Surface Tech-
nology Systems (STS) [14] follows a method patented by Robert Bosch GmbH, of
Stuttgart, Germany, in which etch and deposition steps alternate in an ICP-RIE sys-
tem [15] (see Table 3.3). The etch part of the cycle, typically lasting 5 to 15s, uses SF6,
which supplies highly reactive fluorine radicals, to etch silicon. The etch step has both
vertical and isotropic character, resulting in a slight mask undercut (see Figure 3.12).
In the deposition step, a fluorocarbon polymer (made of a chain of CF2 groups similar
in composition to Teflon™), about 10 nm thick, is plasma-deposited using C4F8 as
the source gas. In the following etch step, the vertically oriented ions (SFx
+) enhance
52
Processes for Micromachining
Table 3.3
Process Characteristics of DRIE in the STS System
Etch step
5–15s
SF6 flow
80–150 sccm
Etch power to coil
600–2,500W
Etch power to platen
5–30W
Deposition step
5–12s
C4F8 flow
70–100 sccm
Deposition power to coil
600–1,500W
Pressure
0.5–4 Pa
Platen temperature
0º–20°C
Etch rate
1–15 µm/min
Sidewall angle
90° ± 2°
Selectivity to photoresist
≥40 to 1
Selectivity to SiO2
≥100 to 1

the effect of fluorine radicals in removing the protective polymer at the bottom of the
trench, while the film remains relatively intact along the sidewalls. The repetitive
alternation of the etch and passivation steps results in a very directional etch at rates
from 1 to over 15 µm/min, depending on the recipe and machine (newer etchers are
available with more powerful RF sources). The degree of scalloping—the sidewall
texture due to the isotropic component of the etch—varies with the recipe. Recipes
optimized for smoother sidewalls can exhibit surface planarity with roughness less
than 50 nm, allowing their use as optically reflective surfaces.
A limitation of DRIE is the dependence of the etch rates on the aspect ratio
(ratio of height to width) of the trench (see Figures 3.13 and 3.14). The effect is
known as lag or aspect-ratio-dependent etching (ARDE). The etch rate is limited by
the flux of reactants (namely, F radicals) and drops significantly for narrow
trenches. A quick remedy is implemented at the mask layout stage by eliminating
large disparities in trench widths. The effect of lag can also be greatly alleviated by
Basic Process Tools
53
Silicon
Polymer (nCF )
2
Mask
SFx
F
Etch
Deposit polymer
Etch
nCFx
+
+
SFx
+
F
Figure 3.12
Profile of a DRIE trench using the Bosch process. The process cycles between an etch
step using SF6 gas and a polymer deposition step using C4F8. The polymer protects the sidewalls
from etching by the reactive fluorine radicals. The scalloping effect of the etch is exaggerated.
20
m
µ
Figure 3.13
ARDE in DRIE. The etch rate decreases with increasing trench aspect ratio. (Courtesy
of: GE NovaSensor of Fremont, California.)

adjusting the process parameters such that a balance is reached between the
transport-limited rates of the etch and passivation steps [16]. These parameters are
found with experimentation and may vary depending on the mask layout. The pen-
alty for minimizing lag is a reduction in the etch rate to about 1 µm/min.
The high selectivity to silicon dioxide makes it possible to etch deep trenches and
stop on a buried layer of silicon dioxide (e.g., silicon-on-insulator wafers). How-
ever, when the etch reaches the buried oxide layer, the positive ions charge the
oxide, deflecting subsequent ions to the side. The ion bombardment degrades the
passivation layer at the bases of the sidewalls, resulting in an undesirable lateral
undercut (referred to as footing or notching) along the silicon-oxide interface (see
Figure 3.15). The problem is eliminated in STS DRIE tools by reducing the platen
frequency from 13.56 MHz to 380 kHz, which alters the ion energy.
54
Processes for Micromachining
Trench width ( m)
µ
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0.5
0.75
1
1.25
1.5
1.75
2
15
7.5
5.0
3.8
3.0
2.5
2.1
1.9
Aspect ratio
Etch rate (mm/min)
Figure 3.14
Etch-rate dependence on feature size and aspect ratio for a typical DRIE recipe at
600W.
Silicon
Silicon
5
m
µ
5
m
µ
30 kV
30 kV
Oxide
Oxide
(b)
(a)
Notch
Figure 3.15
(a) Lateral etch observed at the interface between silicon and buried oxide layers,
and (b) undercut eliminated with different recipe. (Courtesy of: Surface Technology Systems, Ltd.,
of Newport, United Kingdom.)

DRIE is a powerful tool for the formation of deep trenches with near-vertical
sidewalls; however, process development is required for each mask pattern and
depth to optimize for low ARDE, good uniformity, high speed, high verticality,
small scalloping, and small footing. In general, all cannot be optimized simultane-
ously. Sequentially running different processes or slowly changing the process as the
etch proceeds may be done for the best result.
Advanced Process Tools
Anodic Bonding
Anodic bonding, also known as field-assisted bonding or Mallory
bonding, is a
simple process to join together a silicon wafer and a sodium-containing glass
substrate (e.g., Corning Pyrex
® 7740 and 7070, Schott 8330 and 8329). It is used in
the manufacturing of a variety of sensors, including pressure sensors, because it
provides a rigid support to the silicon that mechanically isolates it from packaging
stress.
The bonding is performed at a temperature between 200° and 500°C in
vacuum, air, or in an inert gas environment. The application of 500 to 1,500V
across the two substrates, with the glass held at the negative potential, causes
mobile positive ions (mostly Na+) in the glass to migrate away from the silicon-
glass interface toward the cathode, leaving behind fixed negative charges in the
glass (see Figure 3.16). The bonding is complete when the ion current (measured
externally as an electron current) vanishes, indicating that all mobile ions have
reached the cathode. The electrostatic attraction between the fixed negative charge
in the glass and positive mirror charge induced in the silicon holds the two
substrates together and facilitates the chemical bonding of glass to silicon. Silicon
dioxide on the silicon surface should be removed before bonding, as a thin
(~100 nm) layer is sufficient to disturb the current flow and the bond. A buried
oxide layer, such as on a silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafer, however, does not pres-
ent a problem, as it conducts sufficiently well at high temperatures to allow the cur-
rent flow needed for bonding.
Advanced Process Tools
55
V
−
+
Cathode
Chuck
Silicon
Glass
Na+
Current
Figure 3.16
Illustration of anodic bonding between glass and silicon. Mobile sodium ions in the
glass migrate to the cathode, leaving behind fixed negative charges. A large electric field at the
silicon-glass interface holds the two substrates together and facilitates the chemical bonding of
glass to silicon.

The coefficient of thermal expansion of the glass substrate is preferably matched
to that of silicon in order to minimize thermal stresses. For example, Corning Pyrex®
7740 has a coefficient of thermal expansion of 3.2 × 10−6/°C; silicon’s coefficient is
2.6 × 10−6/°C at room temperature, rising to 3.8 × 10−6/°C at 300°C. Sputtered,
evaporated, or spin-on glass films containing sodium can also be used to anodically
bond two silicon substrates. In this case, the required voltage to initiate the bond
process decreases to less than 100V due to the thinness of the glass layer.
Silicon Direct Bonding
Silicon direct bonding, also known as silicon fusion bonding, is a process capable of
securely joining two silicon substrates. It emerged as an important step in the devel-
opment of SOI technology during the 1980s for high-frequency and radiation-hard
CMOS applications [17]. SOI wafers made by silicon direct bonding are commer-
cially available today from many vendors. The concept was quickly extended to the
manufacture of pressure sensors [18] and accelerometers in the late 1980s and is
now an important technique in the MEMS toolbox.
Silicon direct bonding can be performed between two bare single-crystal silicon
surfaces or polished polysilicon. One or both surfaces may have thermal or other
smooth silicon dioxide or silicon nitride on them. For uniform and void-free bond-
ing, the surfaces must be free of particles and chemical contamination, flat to within
about 5 µm across a 100-mm wafer, and smoother than about 0.5- to 1-nm RMS
roughness [19] (silicon wafers out of the box are typically on the order of 0.1–0.2
nm RMS roughness).
The direct bonding process starts with cleaning and hydration of the surfaces.
The following is a typical sequence, although one or more steps may be swapped or
even skipped, as long as the resulting wafers are clean and hydrated. First, the wafers
are precleaned in a hot Piranha (sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide) solution.
Next, they are dipped in a dilute HF solution to etch away the native oxide (or ther-
mal oxide surface) and remove contaminants trapped in the oxide. This is followed
by an RCA-1 clean (hot ammonium hydroxide and hydrogen peroxide solution)
clean, intended to remove organics. Finally, an RCA-2 clean (hot hydrochloric acid
and hydrogen peroxide solution) is done to remove metal contamination. All of the
hot hydrogen-peroxide solutions form the hydroxyl (–OH) groups on the surface
needed for bonding. This is known as hydration. The bond surfaces are then care-
fully brought into contact and held together by van der Waals forces [20]. An anneal
at 800° to 1,100°C for a few hours promotes and strengthens the bond according to
the reaction
Si
O
H
H
O
Si
Si
O
Si
H O
−
−
•••
−
−
→
−
−
+
2
In some cases, features on the two bond surfaces must be aligned to each other
prior to bonding. For instance, a cavity in one wafer may be joined to an access port
provided through the second wafer. Special equipment is necessary to perform the
alignment and bonding. SÜSS MicroTec and EV Group, two major equipment
manufacturers, use similar schemes to align and bond. The wafers are sequentially
mounted in a special fixture and aligned with the two bond surfaces facing each
other in a manner similar to double-sided alignment in lithography. A mechanical
56
Processes for Micromachining

clamping fixture holds the aligned wafers in position, separated by thin spacers at
the wafer edges. If desired, the fixture and wafers can be placed in a chamber with
vacuum, inert gas, oxygen, or other controlled atmosphere. The centers of the
wafers are then brought into contact and the spacers removed, allowing the bonded
area to proceed from the wafer center to the edge. The relative misalignment is rou-
tinely less than 5 µm and can be as good as 1 µm. Direct bonding can be repeated to
form thick multiple-wafer stacks, although experience shows that the thicker the
stack becomes, the more difficult it is to achieve good bonding [21].
Grinding, Polishing, and Chemical-Mechanical Polishing
Some applications use a thin layer of silicon (5 to 200 µm) that is fusion-bonded to a
standard-thickness wafer (525 µm for single-side polished or 400 µm for double-
side-polished, 100-mm-diameter wafers), possibly with a layer of oxide between
them. Instead of attempting to silicon-fusion bond such a thin, fragile layer to a
standard-thickness wafer, two standard-thickness wafers are fusion bonded
together, then one side is thinned down to the desired thickness. The thickness
reduction is achieved using grinding and polishing. The wafer stack is mounted on a
rotating table and ground by a diamond-bonded wheel spinning in the opposite
direction. The grinding mechanically abrades silicon and reduces the thickness of
the wafer to near the desired thickness. Hundreds of micrometers can be removed.
The resulting surface roughness is removed in the subsequent polishing step in
which wafers are mounted inside precise templates on a rotating table. A wheel with
a felt-like texture polishes the wafer surface using a slurry containing fine silica or
other hard particles in a very dilute alkaline solution (see Figure 3.17). The final sur-
face is smooth, with a thickness control as good as ±0.5 µm. There is frequently
invisible damage to the crystal structure incurred during the grinding step that
becomes apparent when etched in orientation-dependent etchants. This damage can
be removed by growing a thick thermal oxide, then etching it off.
Chemical mechanical polishing, also known as chemical mechanical planariza-
tion (CMP), is commonly used in the IC industry for the planarization of dielectric
insulating layers. The polishing combines mechanical action with chemical etching
using an abrasive slurry dispersed in an alkaline solution (pH > 10). The rate of
material removal is controlled by the slurry flow and pH, applied pressure on the
polishing head, rotational speed, and operating temperature. CMP is an excellent
Advanced Process Tools
57
Slurry
Table
Polish pad
Wafer
Wafer
Figure 3.17
Illustration of CMP.

planarization method yielding a surface roughness less than 1 nm over large dimen-
sions, but it is slow with removal rates less than 100 nm/min compared to 1 µm/min
for standard polishing.
Sol-Gel Deposition Methods
A sol-gel process is a chemical reaction between solid particles in colloidal suspen-
sion within a fluid (a sol) to form a gelatinous network (a gel) that can be
transformed to solid phase upon removal of the solvent. Sol-gel is not a unique
process, but rather represents a broad type of processes capable of forming glasses
and ceramics in a multitude of shapes starting from basic chemical precursors. A
widespread application of sol-gel processing is in the coating of surfaces with optical
absorption or index-graded antireflective materials. It has been used in research
laboratories to deposit thick piezoelectric films on silicon substrates.
A sol-gel process starts by dissolving appropriate chemical precursors in a liquid
to form a sol (see Figure 3.18). After a time the sol goes through its gel point, the
point at which the sol undergoes polymerization, to change it from a viscous liquid
state to a gelatinous network. Both sol formation and gelation are low-temperature
steps. The gel is then formed into a solid shape (e.g., fiber or lens) or applied as a film
coating on a substrate by spinning, dipping, or spraying. For example, TEOS in
water can be converted into a silica gel by hydrolysis and condensation using
hydrochloric acid as a catalyst. Drying and sintering at an elevated temperature
(200°–600°C) results in the transition of the gel to glass and then densification to
silicon dioxide [22]. Silicon nitride, alumina, and piezoelectric PZT can also be
deposited by sol-gel methods.
Electroplating and Molding
Electroplating is a well-established industrial method that has been adapted in
micromachining technology to the patterned deposition of metal films. A variety of
metals including gold, copper, nickel, and nickel-iron (Permalloy™) have been
electroplated on silicon substrates coated with a suitable thin metal plating base.
Table 3.4 lists some plating solutions.
58
Processes for Micromachining
Precursors
Gelation
Forming
and sintering
Sol
Wet gel
Coatings
Solids
Drying
Dry gel
Figure 3.18
Basic flow of a sol-gel process.

Electroplated MEMS structures can take the shape of the underlying substrate
and a photoresist mold. First, a conducting seed layer (e.g., of gold or nickel) is
deposited on the substrate. In the simplest approach, thick (5- to 100-µm) resist is
then deposited and patterned using optical lithography (see Figure 3.19). The larg-
est aspect ratio achievable with optical lithography is approximately three, limited
by resolution and depth of focus. In LIGA, optical lithography is replaced with
x-ray lithography to define very high aspect ratio features (>100) in very thick (up
to 1,000 µm) poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA), the material on which Plexiglas®
is based. The desired metal is then plated. Finally, the resist and possibly the seed
layer outside the plated areas are stripped off.
Advanced Process Tools
59
1. Resist exposure
2. Resist development
3. Electroplating
4. Removal of resist
Mask
UV or x-rays
Resist
Metal
Plating
base
Figure 3.19
Illustration of mold formation using either optical or x-ray lithography and electro-
plating (LIGA).
Table 3.4
Example Solutions for Electroplating Selected Metals
Metal
Solution
Gold
KAu(CN)2:K3C6H5O7:HK2PO4:H2O
NaAuSO3:H2O
Copper
CuSO4:H2SO4:H2O
Nickel
NiSO4:NiCl2:H3BO3:H2O
Permalloy
NiSO4:NiCl2:FeSO4:H3BO3:C7H4NNaSO3:H2SO4:H2O
Platinum
H2PtCl6:Pb(CH2COOH)2:H2O
Aluminum
LiAlH4:AlCl3 in diethyl ether

The process may be stopped at this point with a metal microstructure suitable
for some purposes. Alternatively, the metal can be used as a mold for plastic parts
(the “A” in LIGA).
Precision gears and other microstructures have been fabricated using LIGA, but
the method is considered expensive because of the requirement to use collimated
x-ray irradiation available only from synchrotrons. Mold formation using opti-
cal lithography is often called “poor man’s LIGA.” Guckel [23] provides addi-
tional details on the molding of high aspect ratio structures fabricated with x-ray
lithography.
In a variation known as electroforming, the plated metal is peeled off of the sub-
strate and is the useful structure. Examples of electroformed products are electric
shaver screens and some ink-jet heads.
Supercritical Drying
The final step of many micromachining processes is the removal of a sacrificial layer
(e.g., using hydrofluoric acid to etch 1 µm of silicon dioxide from under a polysilicon
beam). After rinsing, the water must be dried from the wafer. If a freestanding struc-
ture overhangs the substrate, surface tension forms a meniscus of water between the
two (see Figure 3.20). As the water dries, its volume (and hence thickness) decreases.
If the structure is compliant, as is usually the case in surface micromachining, it is
pulled down, contacting the substrate. If a sufficiently large, smooth area of the
structure makes contact, it can stick, which is known as stiction in the micromachin-
ing community. Such stuck structures can often be freed by pushing with a probe tip,
but this is hardly suitable for production.
A solution to avoid stiction after release is supercritical drying, also known as
critical-point drying [24]. In this process, the wafer is moved without drying into
methanol, which is miscible with the small amount of water left on the wafer during
transfer. The wafer is then placed in a pressure chamber, covered by methanol. Liq-
uid carbon dioxide, which is miscible with methanol, is flowed into the chamber at a
pressure of about 7.5–9 MPa as the methanol/carbon dioxide mixture is drained out
of the bottom. After a few minutes, only carbon dioxide is left in the chamber. The
chamber is then heated from room temperature (near 20°C) to about 35°C, which
also increases the pressure (see Figure 3.21). The carbon dioxide has now surpassed
the critical point [31.1°C, 7.39 MPa (1071 psia)] and is in the supercritical region, in
which liquid and gas are indistinguishable. Finally, the carbon dioxide is vented off.
As the pressure drops, the carbon dioxide in the chamber transitions from a super-
critical fluid to a gas with only one phase ever being present, thus preventing the
60
Processes for Micromachining
Water meniscus
Freestanding cantilever
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.20
Pull-down of a compliant freestanding structure (a cantilever) due to surface tension
during drying: (a) water completely fills the volume under the structure; (b) part of the water
volume has dried; and (c) most of the water volume has dried, with surface tension pulling the
structure down until it touches the substrate.

formation of a meniscus and the corresponding stiction. Finally, the dried wafer is
removed from the chamber.
Self-Assembled Monolayers
The stiction problem during drying that was presented earlier can also be avoided if
a hydrophobic layer is coated onto the structure. One method of doing this is the
application of a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) [25]. The SAM precursors used
for this application are straight-chain hydrocarbons, such as octadecyltrichlo-
rosilane (OTS, CH3(CH2)17SiCl3), with a chemical group at one end that adheres to
silicon, silicon-dioxide, and silicon-nitride surfaces. These head groups naturally
pack tightly onto the surface and crosslink, leaving the tails sticking straight up
away from the surface. The coating self-limits at one molecule of thickness and is
hydrophobic.
In a SAM-coating process, the structures are released and rinsed in water as
usual, then soaked in a solvent miscible with water. The wafer may be moved to an
intermediate solvent compatible with the first solvent and the subsequent SAM sol-
vent. The wafer is then placed in a solution containing the SAM precursor and held
for a few minutes, during which the coating occurs. Finally, it is rinsed and dried,
which may be done on a hot plate or under a heat lamp. Due to the hydrophobicity
of the SAM-coated surface, the contact angle changes, and the water does not pull
compliant structures down to the substrate. An added benefit is that if the structure
ever does touch down during operation, it will not stick, as it might otherwise do
without the coating. SAM coatings have also been studied as a dry lubricant and
found to prolong the life of micromachined parts sliding in contact, eventually
wearing out [25]. SAMs decompose at high temperatures (~350°C).
SU-8 Photosensitive Epoxy
Epoxies have been in use for decades for joining sections of material together and as
a structural component of composites. Some epoxies are formulated to be sensitive
to ultraviolet light, allowing photolithographic patterning. SU-8 is a negative-acting
photosensitive epoxy intended for use in fabricating microstructures. Originally
developed by International Business Machines Corp., it is commercially produced
under license by two companies, MicroChem Corp. of Newton, Massachusetts, and
SOTEC Microsystems of Renens, Switzerland.
Advanced Process Tools
61
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
2
4
6
8
10
Temperature (ºC)
Critical point
(31°C, 7.4 MPa)
Supercritical
region
Gas
Liquid
Absolute pressure (MPa)
Fill
Vent
Heat
Figure 3.21
The path taken on the carbon dioxide pressure-temperature phase diagram during
supercritical drying.

SU-8 is spun onto a substrate in the same manner as photoresist. Different vis-
cosities and a range of spin speeds yield thicknesses from 0.5 to over 250 µm with a
single coating [26]. Multiple spins have been used to coat up to 1 mm. The epoxy is
then exposed, typically with a standard contact lithography system in the near UV
(350–400 nm), but x-rays or an electron beam may also be used. At wavelengths
longer than 350 nm, SU-8 has little absorption, allowing exposure through the
thickness of much thicker layers than are typically used for traditional photoresist.
During exposure, a strong acid is generated where exposed. During the post-
exposure bake, the acid initiates thermally driven crosslinking. Immersion in a
developer then removes the SU-8 that is not crosslinked. At this point, the remaining
material is suitable for many applications, but a hard bake may be performed to pro-
mote further crosslinking.
SU-8 structures are the same thickness as the original spin. Aspect ratios (ratio of
epoxy height to width) of 20:1 are regularly produced. The cured material is resis-
tant to most chemicals and is thermally stable. SU-8 has been used to form microflu-
idic channels and optical waveguides. It has also been used as the mask for thick
electroplating, although stripping the SU-8 is much more difficult than stripping
photoresist.
Photosensitive Glass
Positive-acting photosensitive glass wafers are made commercially under the trade
name FORTURAN
® by Schott Glas of Mainz, Germany, and processed by Mikro-
glas Technik AG of Mainz, Germany. FORTURAN is a lithium aluminum silicate
glass with small amounts of cerium and silver ions. The full thickness of the glass is
exposed with ultraviolet light through a mask, causing the silver ions to form atoms.
Annealing causes these atoms to aggregate into microscopic particles, which then
serve as nucleation sites for lithium metasilicate crystals. The crystallized volumes
are etched relatively rapidly in hydrofluoric acid, leaving holes through the wafer.
Up to 14 patterned or unpatterned glass wafers can be thermally bonded together,
creating complex systems of channels suitable for microfluidic applications.
Substrates 150 to 1,500 µm thick can be processed. The smallest hole that can be
formed in a 400-µm wafer is 60 µm, for an aspect ratio of seven, with a 1.5-µm toler-
ance. Sidewalls are within 2º of vertical [27].
EFAB
EFAB
TM is the trade name for an electrochemical fabrication surface micro-
machining process by Microfabrica, Inc., of Burbank, California, under license from
the University of Southern California. In the EFAB process, three-dimensional struc-
tures are created by multilayer depositions of patterned metals. Photolithographic
techniques are used to deposit a patterned layer of metal (see Figure 3.22). While the
details of the process are proprietary, one could accomplish such a structure by elec-
troplating through patterned photoresist. Next, a blanket deposition of a second
metal is performed, which fills in the spaces left from the patterned deposition, as
well as coating the first metal. The structure is then planarized, leaving the entire
substrate covered by patterns of the two metals, all the same thickness. These three
steps are then repeated with different masks as many times as necessary to build the
desired structure. The definition of each layer is arbitrary with respect to the
62
Processes for Micromachining

previous layer. Finally, one of the metals is selectively etched as a sacrificial layer,
leaving behind the other as a structural layer (see Figure 3.23).
Layer thicknesses are in the range of 2 to 20 µm, with a thickness tolerance bet-
ter than 0.35 µm. Dozens of layers can be formed on 4-in substrates, for an overall
stack height of up to several hundred micrometers. The minimum feature size in the
plane of the substrate is about 5 µm. One production EFABprocess utilizes nickel as
the structural material and copper as the sacrificial material. Other material systems
to produce copper or nickel-alloy structural layers have been demonstrated.
Nonlithographic Microfabrication Technologies
Several conventional, non-IC-related technologies that do not use photolithography
are also capable of forming features of relatively small dimensions. These include
mechanical machining, ultrasonic machining, electrodischarge machining, and laser
machining. Only some of these can be considered to be batch fabrication. As these
fabrication methods have been in use for decades, they have had time to evolve,
Nonlithographic Microfabrication Technologies
63
500
m
µ
Figure 3.23
EFAB example demonstrating the complex three-dimensional structures that can be
produced. The layers of metal are clearly visible. (Courtesy of: Microfabrica Inc., of Burbank,
California.)
(c)
(b)
(a)
Second
plated
metal
Substrate
First
plated
metal
Photoresist
mask
Figure 3.22
The EFAB process: (a) pattern photoresist and selectively electroplate first metal; (b)
blanket electroplate second metal; and (c) planarize to same thickness.

yielding ever lower cost and finer dimensional control. In some applications, such as
ink-jet printer nozzles and automobile fuel-injection nozzles, photolithographic
fabrication methods have been used, but proved less economical than the more
established methods. In addition to competing with lithographic technologies, non-
IC-related fabrication technologies are often used in conjunction with them in the
production of a final product; examples include bulk-micromachined pressure sen-
sors with ultrasonically drilled glass bonded to the back side and ink-jet heads with
surface-micromachined heaters and laser-drilled ports. Two newer techniques for
creating submicrometer patterns are also discussed in this section.
Ultraprecision Mechanical Machining
Cutting tools such as mills, lathes, and drills using a specially hardened cutting edge
have been in use for the production of macroscopic parts for over a century.
Using modern computer-numerical-controlled (CNC) machines with sharply tipped
diamond-cutting tools, many metals and even silicon have been milled to a desired
shape, with some features smaller than 10 µm. Many of these shapes, such as retro-
grade undercuts with flat sidewalls, cannot be formed using lithographic methods.
Resolution of about 0.5 µm can be achieved, with surface roughnesses on the order
of 10 nm [28]. Example applications include optical mirrors and computer hard-
drive disks.
Laser Machining
Focused pulses of radiation, typically 0.1–100 ns in duration, from a high-power
laser can ablate material (explosively remove it as fine particles and vapor) from a
substrate. Incorporating such a laser in a CNC system enables precision laser
machining. Metals, ceramics, silicon, and plastics can be laser machined. Holes as
small as tens of microns in diameter, with aspect ratios greater than 10:1, can be pro-
duced. Arbitrary shapes of varying depths are laser machined by scanning the beam
to remove a shallow layer of material, then scanning again until the desired depth
has be reached (see Figure 3.24). Laser machining can be used to create perforations
in silicon wafers for subsequent cleaving to form individual chips, as well as simply
cutting though the full wafer thickness.
Laser machining is most often a serial process, but with mask-projection tech-
niques, it becomes a parallel process. It has successfully competed with KOH etching
64
Processes for Micromachining
(a)
(b)
fig3.24_LaserExamples(a).TIF
Insert here
fig3.24_LaserExamples(b).TIF
100
m
µ
Figure 3.24
Laser machining examples: (a) microlenses in polycarbonate; and (b) fluid-flow
device in plastic. Multiple depths of material can be removed. (Courtesy of: Exitech Ltd., of Oxford,
United Kingdom.)

and with electroplating in the production of ink-jet nozzles. Due to its speed, low
cost, and rapid turn-around time, laser machining is one of the preferred methods of
creating trenches and cuts in plastics.
Electrodischarge Machining
Electrodischarge machining, also called electrical-discharge machining or sparkero-
sion machining (EDM) uses a series of electrical discharges (sparks) to erode
material from a conductive workpiece. High-voltage pulses, repeated at 50 kHz to
500 kHz, are applied to a conductive electrode, typically made of graphite, brass,
copper, or tungsten. Electrodes as small as 40 µm in diameter have been used, limit-
ing features to about the same size. Features with aspect ratios of over 10 can be fab-
ricated, with a surface roughness on the order of 100 nm. Each discharge removes a
small volume of material, typically in the range of 10
3 to 10
5 µm
3, from the work-
piece [29]. EDM is performed in a dielectric liquid such as mineral oil. Due to heat-
ing, a gas bubble is formed during each voltage pulse. After the pulse, the bubble
collapses, flushing away debris from the blank and electrode.
EDM has been used to create the tooling for molds and stamping tools, as well
as final products such as nozzles and holes in microneedles.
Screen Printing
Screen printing, also known as silk screening, has been used for the printing of
images for millennia. In electronics, it has long been used in the production of
ceramic packages and more recently for large flat-panel displays. In a parallel
process, many ceramic packages are processed together on a single plate, then sepa-
rated near the end of the process. A wide variety of materials, including metals and
ceramics, can be applied using screen printing. It does not have same resolution as
photolithography, but is cost effective and is readily applied to large substrates.
Screen printing begins with the production of a stencil, which is a flat, flexible
plate with solid and open areas (see Figure 3.25). The stencil often has a fine-mesh
screen as a bottom layer to provide mechanical rigidity. Separately, a paste is
made of fine particles of the material of interest, along with an organic binder and
a solvent. A mass of paste is applied to the stencil, then smeared along with a
squeegee. A thin layer of paste is forced though the openings in the stencil, leaving a
Nonlithographic Microfabrication Technologies
65
Substrate
Stencil
Squeegee motion
Transferred pattern
Squeegee
Paste
Screen
Figure 3.25
Illustration of screen printing.

pattern on the underlying substrate. Drying evaporates the solvent. Firing burns off
the organic binder and sinters the remaining metal or ceramic into a solid, resulting
in a known amount of shrinkage. Metal lines with 125-µm lines and spaces are made
in the production of ceramic packaging (discussed further in Chapter 8) [30], with
30-µm features demonstrated [31]. Film thicknesses after firing range from roughly
10 to 200 µm. Multiple layers of different materials can be stacked.
Microcontact Printing/Soft Lithography
Microcontact printing, a microscale form of ink printing also called soft lithogra-
phy, has been studied by several research groups [32, 33]. It enables low-cost
production of submicrometer patterns and has been studied as an alternative
to conventional photolithography, but is not presently a product fabrication
method.
The process begins with the production of the original, hard, three-dimensional
master pattern (see Figure 3.26), which can involve conventional photolithography
and etching, electron-beam lithography, laser scribing, diamond scribing, or any
other suitable method. A mold of an elastomer, usually poly(dimethylsiloxane)
(PDMS), is made against the master, then peeled off to create a stamp with raised
patterns. An “ink,” a liquid solution typically of an alkanethiol (a hydrocarbon
chain ending in a thiol, an –SH group) such as hexadecanethiol, is poured onto the
PDMS stamp and dried. The inked stamp is then held against a substrate coated with
gold, silver, or copper, then removed. The thiol end of each “ink” molecule bonds to
the metal, forming a densely packed, single-molecule-thick coating of hexade-
canethiol where the raised areas of the stamp were. Such SAM coatings can be envi-
sioned as similar to turf with dense blades of grass. Once the SAM coating is in
place, it can be used as an etch mask for the metal. The metal can then be used as an
etch mask for the underlying substrate, such as silicon.
Several variations on this scheme may be performed. In one, a metal catalyst
“ink” is stamped on the substrate, which is then used for the selective plating of cop-
per. In another, proteins or other biological molecules are coated onto a flat stamp.
A patterned PDMS layer contacts the flat stamp and is removed, taking the protein
66
Processes for Micromachining
(a)
Hard master mold
PDMS stamp
“Ink” coating
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Ink monolayer
Metal
(f)
Etched metal . . . . . .or. . . . . . .Plated metal
Figure 3.26
Microcontact printing: (a) create master; (b) form PDMS stamp and peel off; (c) coat
with “ink”; (d) press inked stamp against metal and remove, leaving ink monolayer; (e) use self-
assembled monolayer as an etch mask; or (f) as a plating mask.

with it where contact occurred. The flat stamp is then held against a substrate,
transferring the protein pattern [33].
Features smaller than 0.1 µm have been made using microcontact printing. The
best alignment accuracy of a second pattern, however, is at present about 20 µm
[33], so most soft lithography applications have used a single step.
Nanoimprint Lithography
As with microcontact printing, nanoimprint lithography has the goal of generating
submicrometer features at low cost and high throughput and is not a production
process [34]. It starts with a mold of etched silicon, silicon dioxide, or other hard
material created using optical or electron-beam lithography (see Figure 3.27). Sepa-
rately, a substrate is coated with a 50- to 250-nm resist layer such as PMMA or a
more conventional novolak-resin-based resist, which does not need to be photosen-
sitive. The resist is heated above its glass transition temperature so that it flows eas-
ily under pressure. The mold is then pressed into the resist, which flows to the sides
of the high points in the mold. The mold is removed, leaving an unintentional resi-
due of resist where the mold high points were. This residue is stripped using vertical
RIE. At this point, the resist pattern can be used like conventional photoresist in an
etch, liftoff, or plating process.
Features 25 nm wide with smooth sidewalls have been demonstrated. Align-
ment accuracy of a second nanoimprint step is likely to be many micrometers, but
the technique has been combined with optical lithography to fabricate devices with
several layers.
Hot Embossing
In the hot embossing process, a pattern in a master is transferred to a thermoplastic
material. If the dimensions are relatively large (>100 µm), the master can be made
with conventional machining. Smaller dimensions can be produced using nickel
electroplated through patterned photoresist. The master is pressed into the thermo-
plastic (e.g., PMMA, polycarbonate, polypropylene) just above the material’s glass
transition temperature. The master and plastic are cooled while in contact, then
separated, leaving a pattern in the plastic.
Hot embossing is used in microfluidics for creating trenches in substrates of
thermoplastic. Several substrates can then be bonded together to form channels for
a microfluidic system. Aspect ratios over 10 can be achieved, with the minimum fea-
ture size limited by the master.
Nonlithographic Microfabrication Technologies
67
(a)
Hard mold
(b)
(c)
Resist
Figure 3.27
Nanoimprint lithography: (a) press hard mold into resist coating; (b) remove mold;
and (c) RIE to remove residue (After: [34].)

Ultrasonic Machining
In ultrasonic machining, also known as ultrasonic impact grinding, a transducer
vibrates a tool at high frequency (20–100 kHz). The tip of the tool is pushed against
the workpiece as a slurry of water or oil and abrasive particles, such as boron car-
bide, aluminum oxide, or silicon carbide, is flushed across the surface. There are
several mechanisms for removal of material: The tool vibration directly hammers
particles into the surface, as well as imparting a high velocity to other particles,
both of which chip away at the workpiece. Cavitation erosion and chemical action
can also contribute. The microscopic chips are carried away by the slurry. As the
tool moves slowly into the workpiece, a hole with vertical sidewalls is created. An
array of tips can drill many holes at the same time; Figure 3.28 shows examples in
several materials. The hole shape matches that of the tool and can be round, square,
or other.
Ultrasonic machining can be performed on hard, brittle materials (with a Knoop
hardness above about 400) such as glasses, ceramics, diamond, and silicon. The
minimum hole diameter is about 150 µm. At the other extreme, holes over 100 mm
have been machined. For small holes, the maximum aspect ratio is about five,
increasing to over 15 for holes several millimeters in diameter. With tolerancing, the
size accuracy of 1-mm holes is typically ±50 µm, improving to ±25 µm for larger
holes. Hole depth can be over 10 mm.
Combining the Tools—Examples of Commercial Processes
The sequence in which various processes from the toolbox are combined determines
a unique microfabrication process. The process may be specific to a particular
design or may be sufficiently general that it can be used to fabricate a range of
designs. This section describes four example fabrication processes that are generic in
their nature and used today in manufacturing at a number of companies and
commercial foundries.
68
Processes for Micromachining
Figure 3.28
Photograph of ultrasonically drilled holes and cavities in glass (clear), alumina
ceramic (white), and silicon (shiny). All of the holes in a single substrate are drilled simultaneously.
(Courtesy of: Bullen Ultrasonics, Inc., of Eaton, Ohio.)

All of these processes are compatible with CMOS fabrication and hence allow
the integration of electronic circuits alongside microelectromechanical devices.
Successful integration requires that circuit and structural processing steps do not
adversely affect each other; for example, once aluminum is on the wafer in contact
with silicon, it cannot be heated above 400–450°C. As will be observed, a key dis-
tinguishing feature among the processes is the release step that frees the microstruc-
tures in selected locations from the underlying substrate.
Polysilicon Surface Micromachining
In surface micromachining, thin layers of a material—most commonly polysili-
con—form the structural elements. Originating at the University of California at
Berkeley, polysilicon surface micromachining is an established manufacturing
process at Analog Devices, Inc., of Norwood, Massachusetts, MEMSCAP (formerly
Cronos Integrated Microsystems, Inc.) of Research Triangle Park, North Carolina,
and Robert Bosch GmbH of Stuttgart, Germany. Bustillo et al. present a compre-
hensive review of surface micromachining in a special issue of the Proceedings of the
IEEE on MEMS [35].
Polysilicon surface micromachining combines a stack of patterned polysilicon
thin films with alternating patterned layers of sacrificial silicon dioxide. A single
layer of structural polysilicon is sufficient to make many useful devices, and up to
five polysilicon and five oxide layers are a standard process at Sandia National
Laboratories of Albuquerque, New Mexico. The polysilicon is deposited using
LPCVD, followed by a high-temperature anneal (>900ºC) to relieve mechanical
stress. The silicon dioxide is deposited using LPCVD or PECVD and is often doped
with phosphorus [phosphosilicate glass (PSG)] to increase the etch rate in hydro-
fluoric acid. In the Sandia process, the polysilicon and silicon dioxide layers are each
2 µm thick. By contrast, Robert Bosch uses a process with 10-µm-thick polysilicon
grown by epitaxy over silicon dioxide.
Each of the layers in the stack is lithographically patterned and etched before
the next layer is deposited in order to form the appropriate shapes and to make pro-
visions for anchor points to the substrate (see Figure 3.29). The final release step
consists of etching the silicon dioxide (hence the sacrificial term) in a hydrofluoric
acid solution to free the polysilicon plates and beams, thus allowing motion in the
plane of and perpendicular to the substrate. Small holes are usually added to large
plates to allow the sacrificial etchant access for faster release. To avoid sticking of
compliant structures when drying the wafer, supercritical drying or a self-assembled
monolayer is often used.
Gears, micromotors, beams, simple as well as hinged plates, and a number of
other structures have been demonstrated, though primarily accelerometers and
yaw-rate sensors are currently in high-volume production. Surface micromachining
offers significant flexibility to fabricate planar structures one layer at a time, but
their thinness limits the applications to those benefiting from essentially two-
dimensional forms.
Polysilicon is a useful structural material because integrated circuit processes
already exist for depositing and etching it and because its thermal coefficient of
expansion is well matched to that of the silicon substrate. However, surface
micromachining is not limited to the materials just described. Many systems of
Combining the Tools—Examples of Commercial Processes
69

structural layer, sacrificial layer, and etchant have been used, as shown in Table 3.5.
The etchant must etch the sacrificial layer at a useful rate, while having little or no
impact on the structural layer. Reasons for selecting materials other than polysilicon
include the need for higher electrical conductivity, higher optical reflectivity, and
lower deposition temperature for compatibility with CMOS circuitry that is already
on the wafer. For example, Texas Instruments’ Digital Mirror Device™(DMD™)
display technology uses a surface-micromachined device with aluminum as its
70
Processes for Micromachining
Table 3.5
Some Systems of Materials for Surface Micromachining
Structural Material
Sacrificial Material
Etchant
Polysilicon
Silicon dioxide/PSG
Hydrofluoric acid
Silicon nitride
Silicon dioxide/PSG
Hydrofluoric acid
Silicon nitride
Polysilicon
Potassium hydroxide; xenon difluoride
Gold, tungsten, molybdenum, other metals
Silicon dioxide/PSG
Hydrofluoric acid
Aluminum
Photoresist/organic
Oxygen plasma
Nickel
Copper
Ammonium persulfate
Silicon-germanium
Germanium
Hydrogen peroxide
Silicon carbide
Silicon dioxide
Hydrofluoric acid
2. Resist development
and oxide etch
1. Resist exposure
5. Resist development
and polysilicon etch
6. Sacrificial etching
of oxide
3. Deposition of
polysilicon
4. Resist exposure
Resist
Oxide
Mask
Polysilicon
Oxide
Oxide
Mask
Substrate
Resist
Suspended
beam
Anchor
Figure 3.29
Schematic illustration of the basic process steps in surface micromachining.

structural element and an organic polymer as a sacrificial layer. Chapter 5 describes
this particular device in greater detail.
Combining Silicon Fusion Bonding with Reactive Ion Etching
The silicon fusion bonding with reactive ion etching (SFB-DRIE) process involves
the formation of tall structures in crystalline silicon to overcome the thinness
limitation of surface micromachining [36]. Instead of depositing thin polysilicon
layers, crystalline silicon substrates are fusion bonded to each other in a stack. Each
substrate is polished down to a desired thickness, then patterned and etched before
the next one is bonded. An optional intermediate silicon dioxide between the silicon
substrates is not a sacrificial layer but is rather for electrical and thermal insulation.
The process allows the building of complex three-dimensional structures one thick
layer at a time.
The basic process flow begins by etching a cavity in a first wafer, referred to as
the handle wafer (see Figure 3.30). A second wafer is silicon fusion bonded on. An
optional grind and polish step reduces the thickness of the bonded wafer to any
desired value. CMOS electronic circuits can then be integrated on the top surface of
the bonded stack without affecting any of its mechanical properties. Finally, a DRIE
step determines the shape of the microstructures and mechanically releases them as
soon as the etch reaches the embedded cavity. This cavity takes the role of the sacri-
ficial layer in surface micromachining and ensures that the micromechanical struc-
tures are free to move except at well-defined anchor points.
The high aspect ratio and depth available using the SFB-DRIE process add new
dimensions to the design and fabrication of complex three-dimensional structures
(see Figure 3.31). A range of new applications, including those integrating fluid flow
functions such as valving and pumping, can be addressed with this process. Robust
thermal actuators made of crystalline silicon are also feasible with an available out-
put force approaching one newton. This process is now a manufacturing platform
at GE NovaSensor of Fremont, California.
DRIE of SOI Wafers
The availability of double-sided aligners, DRIE tools, and SOI wafers led to a rela-
tively simple process for fabricating three-dimensional microstructures that became
popular in the late 1990s. The process begins with DRIE of the thinner top layer of
an SOI wafer to form the desired structure (see Figure 3.32). The etch stops with
high selectivity on the buried oxide layer. If undercut of the silicon at the oxide inter-
face control is not desired, the specialized stop-on-oxide recipe discussed earlier can
be used. A large area of the back side, corresponding to the structure on the front
side, is etched to the buried oxide layer. Finally, the now-freestanding buried oxide
is etched away, typically with hydrogen fluoride [hydrofluoric acid (HF)] vapor or a
liquid HF solution, both of which selectively etch the oxide. If liquid HF is used and
the structure is fragile, it must be handled carefully to avoid breakage during etch-
ing, rinsing, and drying. A variation on the process is to etch the device structure
from the top, then release it by etching the underlying oxide, which may be as thick
as 2 µm, in liquid HF. If the structure is sufficiently stiff, it can be dried without spe-
cial handling. If it is too compliant, critical-point drying can be used. Similar
processes are in development or commercial use by companies including the
Combining the Tools—Examples of Commercial Processes
71

Micromachined Products Division of Analog Devices, Inc., of Belfast, United King-
dom, TRONIC’S Microsystems SA of Grenoble, France, and DiCon Fiberoptics,
Inc., of Richmond, California (see Figure 3.33).
Single Crystal Reactive Etching and Metallization
The single-crystal reactive etching and metallization (SCREAM) process [37] uses
yet another approach to release crystalline microstructures. Standard lithography
and etching methods define trenches between 10 and 50 µm in depth, which are then
coated on the top, sidewalls, and bottom with a conformal layer of PECVD silicon
dioxide (see Figure 3.34). An anisotropic etch step selectively removes the protective
72
Processes for Micromachining
1. Resist exposure
5. Resist exposure
3. Silicon fusion bonding
2. Etch cavity
6. Etch (DRIE)
4. Fabricate CMOS
Embedded
cavity
Silicon
Silicon
Resist
Oxide
Mask
Oxide
Suspended
beam
Anchor
Resist
Mask
CMOS
circuits
Silicon
Figure 3.30
Fabrication process combining silicon fusion bonding and DRIE.

Combining the Tools—Examples of Commercial Processes
73
1. DRIE top side of SOI wafer
stopping on oxide.
2. Double-sided alignment.
DRIE back side of SOI wafer
stopping on oxide.
Oxide
Silicon
Silicon
Buried oxide
3. Etch buried oxide in HF
Oxide
Silicon
Silicon
Freestanding structure
Structure overlaps
bottom silicon
Stucture is over
free space
Oxide
Silicon
Silicon
Figure 3.32
Example process for DRIE of SOI wafers. The final structure may be over free space
or can overlap the bottom wafer (or both, as in this example).
Package
bottom wafer
Actuator overlaps
Bottom wafer
Top
wafer
Freestanding
actuator
Figure 3.33
Scanning electron microscope image of a variable optical attenuator made by DRIE
of an SOI wafer. (Courtesy of: DiCon Fiberoptics, Inc., of Richmond, California.)
Figure 3.31
Scanning electron microscope image of a 200-µm-deep thermal actuator fabricated
using silicon fusion bonding and DRIE. (Courtesy of: GE NovaSensor of Fremont, California.)

oxide only at the bottom of the trench. A subsequent plasma silicon etch extends the
depth of the trench. A dry isotropic etch step using sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) laterally
etches the exposed sidewalls near the bottom of the trench, thus undercutting adja-
cent structures and mechanically releasing them. Sputter deposition of aluminum
provides the metal for electrical contacts and interconnects.
This process, known by its SCREAM acronym, was initially developed at
Cornell University. Kionix, Inc., of Ithaca, New York, uses a variation of SCREAM
for the manufacture of accelerometers, micromirrors, and other devices.
Summary
The toolbox of micromachining processes is very large and diverse. The vast
majority of the methods can be condensed into three major categories:
74
Processes for Micromachining
Sharp tip
Suspended beam
6. Plasma etch in SF to release structures
6
5. Remove oxide at bottom and etch silicon
4. Coat sidewalls with PECVD oxide
3. Silicon etch
2. Lithography and oxide etch
1. Deposit oxide and photoresist
Oxide
Silicon substrate
Photoresist
Figure 3.34
Basic steps of the SCREAM process. (After: [37].)

• Material deposition, including thin film deposition and bonding processes;
• Pattern definition using lithography;
• Etching and mechanical material removal.
A complete micromachining process flow consists of a series of steps using a
number of methods from the toolbox to build complex microstructures one layer at
a time.
References
[1]
Katz, L. E., “Oxidation,” in VLSI Technology, S. M. Sze (ed.), New York: McGraw-Hill,
1983, pp. 131–167.
[2]
Thornton, J. A., and D. W. Hoffman, “Stress Related Effects in Thin Films,” Thin Solid
Films, Vol. 171, 1989, pp. 5–31.
[3]
Williams, K. R., and R. S. Muller, “Etch Rates for Micromachining Processing,” Journal of
Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 5, No. 4, December 1996, pp. 256–269.
[4]
Williams, K. R., K. Gupta, and M. Wasilik, “Etch Rates for Micromachining Processing–
Part II,” Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 12, No. 6, December 2003,
pp. 761–778.
[5]
Williams, K., “Etching,” in Properties of Crystalline Silicon, R. Hull (ed.), London:
INSPEC, The Institution of Electrical Engineers, 1999, Chapter 16.
[6]
Kovacs, G. T. A., N. I. Maluf, and K. E. Petersen, “Bulk Micromachining of Silicon,” Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 86, No. 8, August 1998, pp. 1536–1551.
[7]
Seidel, H., et al., “Anisotropic Etching of Crystalline Silicon in Alkaline Solutions,” Journal
of Electrochemical Society, Vol. 137, No. 11, November 1990, pp. 3612–3632.
[8]
Schnakenberg,
U.,
W.
Benecke,
and
P.
Lange,
“TMAHW
Etchants
for
Silicon
Micromachining,” Proc. 1991 Int. Conf. on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, San Fran-
cisco, CA, June 24–27, 1991, pp. 815–818.
[9]
Ammar, E. S., and T. J. Rodgers, “UMOS Transistors on (110) Silicon,” IEEE Transactions
on Electron Devices, Vol. ED-27, No. 5, May 1980, pp. 907–914.
[10]
Sandmaier, H., et al., “Compensation Techniques in Anisotropic Etching of (100)-Silicon
Using Aqueous KOH,” Proc. 1991 Int. Conf. on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, San
Francisco, CA, June 24–27, 1991, pp. 456–459.
[11]
Waggener, H. A., “Electrochemically Controlled Thinning of Silicon,” Bell System Tech-
nology Journal, Vol. 50, 1970, pp. 473–475.
[12]
Kloeck, B., et al., “Study of Electrochemical Etch-Stop for High Precision Thickness Con-
trol of Silicon Membranes,” IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, Vol. 36, No. 4, April
1989, pp. 663–669.
[13]
Reay, R. J., E. H. Klaassen, and G. T. A. Kovacs, “Thermally and Electrically Isolated
Single-Crystal Silicon Structures in CMOS Technology,” IEEE Electron Device Letters,
Vol. 15, October 1994, pp. 309–401.
[14]
Bhardwaj, J., and H. Ashraf, “Advanced Silicon Etching Using High Density Plasmas,”
Proc. SPIE, Micromachining and Microfabrication Process Technology Symp., Austin, TX,
October 23–24, 1995, Vol. 2639, pp. 224–233.
[15]
Lärmer, F., and P. Schilp, “Method of Anisotropically Etching Silicon,” German Patent DE
4 241 045, 1994.
[16]
Ayón, A. A., et al., “Etching Characteristics and Profile Control in a Time Multiplexed
Inductively Coupled Plasma Etcher,” Tech. Digest Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Work-
shop, Hilton Head Island, SC, June 8–11, 1998, pp. 41–44.
Summary
75

[17]
Lasky, J. B., “Wafer Bonding for Silicon-On-Insulator Technologies,” Applied Physics Let-
ters, Vol. 48, No. 1, January 6, 1986, pp. 78–80.
[18]
Petersen, K. E., et al., “Silicon Fusion Bonding for Pressure Sensors,” Tech. Digest
Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, Hilton Head Island, SC, June 6–9, 1988,
pp. 144–147.
[19]
Schmidt, M.A, “Wafer-to-Wafer Bonding for Microstructure Formation,” Proceedings of
the IEEE, Vol. 86, No. 8, August 1998, pp. 1575–1585.
[20]
Tong, Q.–Y., and U. Gösele, Semiconductor Wafer Bonding, New York: Wiley, 1999,
pp. 49–72.
[21]
Miki, N., et al., “Multi-Stack Silicon-Direct Wafer Bonding for 3D MEMS Manufactur-
ing,” Sensors and Actuators A, Vol. 103, 2003, pp. 191–194.
[22]
Strawbridge, I., and P. F. James, “Glass Formation from Gels,” in High Performance
Glasses, M. Cable and J. M. Parker (eds.), London: Blackie Publishing, 1992, pp. 20–49.
[23]
Guckel, H., “High-Aspect Ratio Micromachining Via Deep X-Ray Lithography,” Proceed-
ings of the IEEE, Vol. 86, No. 8, August 1998, pp. 1586–1593.
[24]
Mulhern, G. T., D. S. Soane, and R. T. Howe, “Supercritical Carbon Dioxide Drying of
Microstructures,” Proc. 7th Int. Conf. on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Transducers
‘93), Yokohama, Japan, June 7–10, 1993, pp. 296–299.
[25]
Srinivasan, U., et al., “Lubrication of Polysilicon Micromechanisms with Self-Assembled
Monolayers,” Technical Digest of Solid State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, Hilton Head,
SC, June 1998, pp. 156–161.
[26]
MicroChem Corp., Data Sheet for NANO SU-8 2000, Newton, MA, February 2002.
[27]
Mikroglas Teknik AG, “FOTURAN—A Photostructurable Glass,” Mainz, Germany,
2003.
[28]
Ehrfeld, W., and U. Ehrfeld, “Progress and Profit Through Micro Technologies: Commer-
cial Applications of MEMS / MOEMS,” Proc. SPIE, Vol. 4,557, October 2001, pp. 1–10.
[29]
Kalpakjian, S., and S. R. Schmid, Manufacturing Processes for Engineering Materials, 4th
Edition, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education/Prentice Hall, 2003.
[30]
DuPont Microcircuit Materials, “DuPont Green Tape™Design and Layout Guideline,”
Research Triangle Park, NC, 2003.
[31]
Kulke, R., et al., “LTCC—Multilayer Ceramic for Wireless and Sensor Applications,” Eng-
lish translation of “LTCC-Mehrlagenkeramik für Funk- und Sensor-Anwendungen,” Pro-
duktion von Leiterplatten und Systemen (PLUS), Eugen G. Leuze Verlag, December 2001,
pp. 2131–2136.
[32]
Xia, Y., et al., “Non-Lithographic Methods for Fabrication of Elastomeric Stamps for Use
in Microcontact Printing,” Langmuir, Vol. 12, No. 16, 1996, pp. 4033–4038.
[33]
B. Michel, et al., “Printing Meets Lithography: Soft Approaches to High-Resolution Pat-
terning,” IBM Journal of Research and Development, Vol. 45, No. 5, September 2001,
pp. 697–714.
[34]
Chou, S. Y., P. R. Krauss, and P. J. Renstrom, “Nanoimprint Lithography,” J. Vac. Sci.
Technol. B, Vol. 14, No. 6, November/December 1996, pp. 4129–4133.
[35]
Bustillo, J. M., R. T. Howe, and R. S. Muller, “Surface Micromachining for Micro-
electromechanical Systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 86, No. 8, August 1998,
pp. 1559–1561.
[36]
Klaassen, E. H., et al., “Silicon Fusion Bonding and Deep Reactive Ion Etching; A New
Technology for Microstructures,” Proc. 8th Int. Conf. on Solid-State Sensors and Actua-
tors, Stockholm, Sweden, June 25–29, 1995, pp. 556–559.
[37]
Shaw, K. A., Z. L. Zhang, and N. C. MacDonald, “SCREAM-I: A Single Mask, Single-
Crystal Silicon, Reactive Ion Etching Process for Microelectromechanical Structures,” Sen-
sors and Actuators, Vol. A40, No. 1, 1994, pp. 63–70.
76
Processes for Micromachining

Selected Bibliography
Chang, C. Y., and S. M. Sze (eds.), ULSI Technology, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1996.
Flamm, D. L., and G. K. Herb, “Plasma Etching Technology,” in Plasma Etching: An
Introduction, D. M. Manos and D. L. Flamm (eds.), San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 1989,
pp. 1–89.
Jaeger, R. C., Introduction to Microelectronic Fabrication, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley,
1988.
Kamins, T., Polycrystalline Silicon for Integrated Circuits, Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1988.
Kovacs, G. T. A., Micromachined Transducers Sourcebook, New York: McGraw-Hill,
1998.
Madou, M., Fundamentals of Microfabrication, Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1997.
Moreau, M., Semiconductor Lithography Principles, Practices and Materials, New York:
Plenum Press, 1988.
Tong, Q.–Y., and U. Gösele, Semiconductor Wafer Bonding, New York: Wiley, 1999.
Wise, K. D. (ed.), “Special Issue on Integrated Sensors, Microactuators, and Microsystems
(MEMS),” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 86, No. 8, August 1998.
Summary
77

.

C H A P T E R
4
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial
and Automotive Applications
“…for I believe that his device had tremendous advantages and unless there be other
systems of equal merits which are unknown to me, I am of the opinion that he has
the most remarkable system in existence.”
—David Sarnoff on E. Howard Armstrong’s radio receiver, 1914.
Quoted in the Empire of the Air, by Tom Lewis.
Armed with an understanding of the fabrication methods, it is time to examine vari-
ous types of microelectromechanical (MEM) structures and systems. It is apparent
that with a vast and diverse set of fabrication tools, creativity abounds. Indeed, the
list of MEM structures and devices continues to grow daily as more applications
prove to benefit from miniaturization. But just as necessity is mother of all
inventions, it is economics that ultimately determine the commercial success of a
particular design or technology. Demonstrations of micromachined devices are
innumerable, but the successful products are few. MEMS technology is only a
means to achieve a solution for a particular application. A quest for its perfection
should not entail an oversight of the end objective: the application itself.
The next four chapters review a select set of MEMS-based commercial products
with applications in multiple diverse markets. This chapter is specific to those prod-
ucts with utility in industrial and automotive applications. It also includes a short
introduction on the general methodology of the design process and a listing of com-
monly used sensing and actuation techniques. The following three chapters address
products for optical, life sciences, and RF electronic applications.
Three general categories form the total extent of MEMS: sensors, actuators, and
passive structures. Sensors are transducers that convert mechanical, thermal, or
other forms of energy into electrical energy; actuators do the exact opposite. Passive
structures include devices where no transducing occurs, including both mechanical
and optical components. A complete listing of all MEMS demonstrations is not
sought in this book; rather, the theme is to illustrate the state of the technology by
providing sufficient examples of structures and systems that have proven their com-
mercial viability or show promise to do so in the near future.
General Design Methodology
Starting with a list of specifications for the MEM device or system, the design
process begins with the identification of the general operating principles and overall
79

structural elements, then proceeds onto analysis and simulation, and finally onto
outlining of the individual steps in the fabrication process. This is often an iterative
process involving continuous adjustments to the shape, structure, and fabrication
steps. The layout of the lithographic masks is the final step before fabrication and is
completed using specialized CAD tools to define the two-dimensional patterns.
Early design considerations include the identification of the general sensing or
actuation mechanisms based on performance requirements. For instance, the output
force requirement of a mechanical microactuator may favor thermal or piezoelectric
methods and preclude electrostatic actuation. Similarly, the choice of piezoresistive
sensing is significantly different from capacitive or piezoelectric sensing. The inter-
disciplinary nature of the field brings together considerations from a broad range of
specialties, including mechanics, optics, fluid dynamics, materials science, electron-
ics, chemistry, and even biological sciences. On occasion, determining a particular
approach may rely on economic considerations or ease of manufacture rather than
performance. For example, the vast majority of pressure sensors use cost-effective
piezoresistive sense elements instead of the better performing, but more expensive,
resonant-type sense structures.
The design process is not an exact analytical science but rather involves develop-
ing engineering models, many for the purpose of obtaining basic physical insights.
Computer-based simulation tools using finite-element modeling are convenient for
analyzing complex systems. A number of available programs, such as ANSYS®
(ANSYS, Inc., of Canonsburg, Pennsylvania) and CoventorWare™(Coventor, Inc.,
of Cary, North Carolina), can simulate mechanical, thermal, and electrostatic
structures (see Figure 4.1). Substantial efforts are currently under way to develop
sophisticated programs that can handle coupled multimode problems, (e.g., simulta-
neously combining fluid dynamics with thermal and mechanical analysis). As
powerful as these tools are perceived to be, their universal predictive utility is ques-
tionable. However, they can provide valuable insight into and visualization of the
device’s operation.
In planning a fabrication process, the choice is to use a standard foundry service
with a completely predefined process flow, to use a service that allows the selection
80
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications
Back side
Membrane
Frame
Front side
Figure 4.1
A finite element simulation using ANSYS modeling program of a quarter of a bulk
micromachined silicon pressure sensor showing contours of mechanical stress in response to an
applied pressure load.

of previously developed individual process steps, or to design a custom process spe-
cific to the device or system. If the production unit volume is not sufficiently large, it
may be challenging to identify reputable manufacturing facilities willing to develop
and implement custom processes.
Techniques for Sensing and Actuation
Common Sensing Methods
Sensing is by no means a modern invention. There are numerous historical accounts
describing the measurement of physical parameters—most notably, distance,
weight, time, and temperature. Early Chinese attempts at making compasses date
back to the twelfth century with the use of lodestone, a naturally occurring magnetic
ore. Modern sensing methods derive their utility from the wealth of scientific
knowledge accumulated over the past two centuries. We owe our intimate familiar-
ity with electrostatics and capacitance to the work of Charles Augustin de Coulomb
of France and John Priestly of England in the late eighteenth century and observe
that Lord Kelvin’s discovery of piezoresistivity in 1856 is recent in historical terms.
What distinguishes these modern techniques is the ability to sense with greater
accuracy and stability; what makes them suitable for MEMS is their scalable
functionality.
The objective of modern sensing is the transducing of a specific physical
parameter, to the exclusion of other interfering parameters, into electrical energy.
Occasionally, an intermediate conversion step takes place. For example, pressure or
acceleration are converted into mechanical stress, which is then converted to elec-
tricity. Infrared radiation in image sensors is often converted into heat and then
sensed as an electrical voltage or a change in electrical resistance. Perhaps the most
common of all modern sensing techniques is temperature measurement using the
dependence of various material properties on temperature. This effect is pro-
nounced in the electrical resistance of metals. The rate at which the resistance rises
with temperature—TCR—of most metals ranges between 10 and 100 parts per mil-
lion per degree centigrade.
Piezoresistivity and piezoelectricity are two sensing techniques described in
greater detail in Chapter 2 (see Table 4.1). Impurity-doped silicon exhibits a pie-
zoresistive behavior that lies at the core of many pressure and acceleration sensor
Techniques for Sensing and Actuation
81
Table 4.1
The Relative Merits of Piezoresistive, Capacitive, and Electromagnetic Sensing Methods
Piezoresistive
Capacitive
Electromagnetic
Simple fabrication
Simple mechanical structure
Structural complexity varies
Low cost
Low cost
Complex packaging
Voltage or current drive
Voltage drive
Current drive
Simple measurement circuits
Requires electronic circuits
Simple control circuits
Low-output impedance
Susceptible to EMI
Susceptible to EMI
High-temperature dependence
Low-temperature dependence
Low temperature dependence
Small sensitivity
Large dynamic range
Sensitivity ∝magnetic field
Insensitive to parasitic resistance
Sensitive to parasitic capacitance
Insensitive to parasitic inductance
Open loop
Open or closed loop
Open or closed loop
Medium power consumption
Low power consumption
Medium power consumption

designs. Measuring the change in resistance and amplifying the corresponding out-
put signal tend to be rather simple, requiring a basic knowledge of analog circuit
design. A drawback of silicon piezoresistivity is its strong dependence on tempera-
ture which must be compensated for with external electronics.
By contrast, capacitive sensing relies on an external physical parameter changing
either the spacing or the relative dielectric constant between the two plates of a
capacitor. For instance, an applied acceleration pushes one plate closer to the other.
Or in the example of relative humidity sensors, the dielectric is an organic material
whose permittivity is function of moisture content [1]. The advantages of capacitive
sensing are very low power consumption and relative stability with temperature.
Additionally, the approach offers the possibility of electrostatic actuation to perform
closed-loop feedback. The following section on actuation methods explains this
point further. Naturally, capacitive sensing requires external electronics to convert
minute changes in capacitance into an output voltage. Unlike measuring resistance,
these circuits can be substantially intricate if the change in capacitance is too small.
This is frequently the case in MEMS where capacitance values are on the order of 1
pF (10−12 F) and changes in capacitance can be as small as a few fF (10−15 F).
Yet another sensing approach utilizes electromagnetic signals to detect and
measure a physical parameter. Magnetoresistive sensors on the read heads of high-
density computer disk drives measure the change in conductivity of a material slab in
response to the magnetic field of the storage bit. In Hall-effect devices, a magnetic
field induces a voltage in a direction orthogonal to current flow [2]. Hall-effect sen-
sors are extremely inexpensive to manufacture. They are used in high-reliability
computer keyboards and make excellent candidates to measure wheel velocity in
vehicles. Another form of electromagnetic transducing uses Faraday’s law to detect
the motion of a current-carrying conductor through a magnetic field. Two yaw-rate
sensors described later in this chapter make use of this phenomenon. The control
electronics for magnetic sensors can be readily implemented using modern CMOS
technology, but generating magnetic fields often necessitates the presence of a per-
manent magnet or a solenoid.
Common Actuation Methods
A complete shift in paradigm becomes necessary to think of actuation on a miniature
scale—a four-stroke engine is not scalable. The next five schemes illustrate the diver-
sity and the myriad of actuation options available in MEMS. They are electrostatic,
piezoelectric, thermal, magnetic, and phase recovery using shape-memory alloys.
The choice of actuation depends on the nature of the application, ease of integration
with the fabrication process, the specifics of the system around it, and economic jus-
tification (see Table 4.2). Examples of each actuation method will arise throughout
this chapter and the next.
Electrostatic actuation
Electrostatic actuation relies on the attractive force between two conductive plates
or elements carrying opposite charges. A moment of thought quickly reveals that the
charges on two objects with an externally applied potential between them can only
be of opposite polarities. Therefore, an applied voltage, regardless of its polarity,
82
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications

always results in an attractive electrostatic force. If C is the capacitance between two
parallel plates [see Figure 4.2(a)], x is the spacing between them, and V is an
externally applied voltage, the electrostatic force is then ½CV
2/x (the square term
ensures that the force is always positive and attractive). For two parallel plates with
a spacing of one micrometer, an applied voltage of 5V, and a reasonable area of
1,000 µm
2, the electrostatic force is merely 0.11 µN. Electrostatic comb actuators
[3] are a variant that includes two comb sets of interdigitated “teeth” that are offset
relative to each other [see Figure 4.2(b)]. An applied voltage brings the two combs
together such that the teeth become alternating. Designers have favored comb
actuators over parallel-plate actuators for two primary reasons: they allow a larger
displacement (tens of micrometers are feasible) and the force is relatively independ-
ent of displacement. Forces are, however, of the same order as forces for a parallel
plate with the same quadratic dependence on voltage.
A natural extension of electrostatic actuation is closed-loop feedback in systems
employing capacitive sensing. When sense circuits detect the two surfaces of a
capacitor separating under the effect of an external force (e.g., acceleration), an
electrostatic feedback voltage is immediately applied by the control electronics to
counteract the disturbance and maintain a fixed capacitance. The magnitude of the
Techniques for Sensing and Actuation
83
(a)
(b)
Applied
voltage
V
Area A
x
Applied
voltage
V
Attractive
force
Attractive
force
Comb tooth
Figure 4.2
(a) An illustration of a parallel-plate electrostatic actuator with an applied voltage V
and a spacing x. The attractive force is normal to the plate surfaces. (b) An illustration of an
electrostatic comb actuator. The attractive force is in the direction of the interdigitated teeth.
Table 4.2
Comparison of Various Actuation Methods on the Basis of Maximum Energy Density. Actual
Energy Output May Be Substantially Lower Depending on the Overall Efficiency of the System
Actuation
Max. Energy
Density
Physical and
Material Parameters
Estimated
Conditions
Approximate
Order (J/cm
3)
Electrostatic
½ ε0 E
2
E = electric field
5 V/µm
~ 0.1
ε0 = dielectric permittivity
Thermal
½ Y (α ∆T)
2
α = coefficient of expansion
3 × 10
-6 /ºC
~ 5
∆T = temperature rise
100ºC
Y = Young’s modulus
100 GPa
Magnetic
½ B
2/µ0
B = magnetic field
0.1 T
~ 4
µ0 = magnetic permeability
Piezoelectric
½ Y (d33 E)
2
E = electric field
30 V/µm
~ 0.2
Y = Young’s modulus
100 GPa
d33 = piezoelectric constant
2 × 10
-12 C/N
Shape-memory alloy
—
Critical temperature
~ 10 (from reports
in literature)

feedback voltage then becomes a measure of the disturbing force. This feature is
integral to the closed-loop operation of many accelerometers and yaw-rate sensors.
Piezoelectric Actuation
Piezoelectric actuation can provide significantly large forces, especially if thick pie-
zoelectric films are used. Commercially available piezoceramic cylinders can provide
up to a few newtons of force with applied potentials on the order of a few hundred
volts. However, thin-film (<5 µm) piezoelectric actuators can only provide a few
millinewtons. Both piezoelectric and electrostatic methods offer the advantage of
low power consumption as the electric current is very small.
Thermal Actuation
Thermal actuation consumes more power than electrostatic or piezoelectric actua-
tion but can provide, despite its gross inefficiencies, actuation forces on the order of
hundreds of millinewtons or higher. At least three distinct approaches have emerged
within the MEMS community. The first capitalizes on the difference in the coeffi-
cients of thermal expansion between two joined layers of dissimilar materials to
cause bending with temperature—the classic case of a bimetallic thermostat studied
by S. Timoshenko in 1925 [4]. One layer expands more than the other as tempera-
ture increases. This results in stresses at the interface and consequently bending of
the stack. The amount of bending depends on the difference in coefficients of ther-
mal expansion and absolute temperature. Unfortunately, the latter dependence
severely limits the operating temperature range—otherwise, the device may actuate
prematurely on a hot day.
In another approach known as thermopneumatic actuation, a liquid is heated
inside a sealed cavity. Pressure from expansion or evaporation exerts a force on the
cavity walls, which can bend if made sufficiently compliant. This method also
depends on the absolute temperature of the actuator. Valves employing this method
will be described later in this chapter.
Yet a third distinct method utilizes a suspended beam of a same homogeneous
material with one end anchored to a supporting frame of the same material [5].
Heating the beam to a temperature above that of the frame causes a differential
elongation of the beam’s free end with respect to the frame. Holding this free end
stationary gives rise to a force proportional to the beam length and temperature dif-
ferential. Such an actuator delivers a maximal force with zero displacement, and
conversely, no force when the displacement is maximal. Designs operating between
these two extremes can provide both force and displacement. A system of mechani-
cal linkages can optimize the output of the actuator by trading off force for displace-
ment, or vice versa. Actuation in this case is independent of fluctuations in ambient
temperature because it relies on the difference in temperature between the beam and
the supporting frame. A plate microvalve utilizing this actuation scheme is described
later.
Magnetic Actuation
Lorentz forces form the dominant mechanism in magnetic actuation on a miniatur-
ized scale [6]. This is largely due to the difficulty in depositing permanently
84
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications

magnetized thin films. Electrical current in a conductive element that is located
within a magnetic field gives rise to an electromagnetic force—the Lorentz force—in
a direction perpendicular to the current and magnetic field. This force is propor-
tional to the current, magnetic flux density, and length of the element. A conductor
1 mm in length carrying 10 mA in a 1-T magnetic field is subject to a force of 10 µN.
Lorentz forces are useful for closed-loop feedback in systems employing electro-
magnetic sensing. Two yaw-rate sensors and a beam steering micromirror described
later make use of this method.
Actuation Using Shape-Memory Alloys
Finally, of all five schemes, shape-memory alloys undoubtedly offer the highest
energy density available for actuation. The effect, introduced in Chapter 2, can
provide very large forces when the temperature of the material rises above the
critical temperature, typically around 100ºC. The challenge with shape-memory
alloys lies in the difficulty of integrating their fabrication with conventional silicon
manufacturing processes.
Passive Micromachined Mechanical Structures
Fluid Nozzles
Nozzles are among the simplest microstructures to fabricate using anisotropic etch-
ing of silicon, electroforming, or laser drilling of a metal sheet. A series of U.S. pat-
ents issued in the 1970s to IBM Corp. [7] describes the fabrication of silicon nozzles
and their application for inkjet printing. The Ford Motor Company experimented
in the 1980s with micromachined nozzles for engine fuel injection. With the expira-
tion of most key patents on nozzle formation, micromachined nozzles are becoming
common features in the design of atomizers, medical inhalers, and fluid spray sys-
tems. Nozzles need not necessarily be of silicon. MicroParts GmbH of Dortmund,
Germany, manufactures a drug-inhaling device for asthma patients that incorpo-
rates a precise plastic nozzle fabricated using the LIGA electroplating and molding
process described in the previous chapter.
A simple square silicon nozzle can be readily fabricated by depositing silicon
nitride on both sides of a (100) wafer and patterning a square in the silicon nitride
layer on the back side. Anisotropic etching in potassium hydroxide (KOH) or
tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide (TMAH) forms a port through the wafer with
walls defined by the {111} planes of silicon. The dimensions of the backside opening
in the silicon nitride must be larger than 71% of the wafer thickness in order to etch
through the wafer (see Figure 4.3).
Forming nozzles of circular or arbitrary shape in silicon involves additional fab-
rication steps. The most common approach is to grow on a (100) wafer a p-type epi-
taxial layer of silicon with a high boron concentration ( >1 × 1019 cm−3). The shape
of the nozzle is patterned and etched into the p-type silicon layer using standard
lithography and plasma etching (or RIE). A protective layer of silicon nitride is
deposited on both sides of the wafer and patterned in the shape of a square on the
back side. Double-sided lithography provides accurate alignment between the noz-
zle opening and the square on the back side. The fabrication is complete with the
Passive Micromachined Mechanical Structures
85

anisotropic etching of the silicon from the back side using KOH or TMAH. The
p-type layer acts as an etch stop, thus preserving the shape of the nozzle.
These nozzles are oriented perpendicular to the surface of the wafer and are
referred to as top shooters or roof shooters in the inkjet field. Nozzles oriented par-
allel to the wafer surface are termed side shooters. One such implementation devel-
oped by Xerox Corp. of Webster, New York, uses orientation-dependent etching to
form grooves in a silicon wafer [8]. Another wafer is coated with a polyimide spacer
layer and bonded to the grooved wafer. Finally, the wafer is diced to reveal triangle-
shaped ports [Figure 4.4(a)].
Choosing a fluid flow path in the plane of the silicon wafer and using RIE pro-
vides further flexibility in shaping the nozzle and the orifices. In an implementation
of a CO2 cleaning apparatus [9], a silicon micromachined nozzle was specially
designed to allow subsonic fluid flow at the inlet and supersonic flow at the outlet
[Figure 4.4(b)]. DRIE is a suitable process for defining in the silicon a deep channel
(50 to 500 µm) following the desired contour of the nozzle. The dimensional control
is limited in the plane of the wafer by the lithography to better than one micrometer,
whereas in the vertical depth direction, it is limited by the etch process to approxi-
mately 10% of the total depth. A top cover is later bonded using anodic bonding of
glass or silicon fusion bonding.
Nozzles can alternatively be fabricated using electroforming. The process starts
with the production of a mold or mandrel, which may be flat or have topography
86
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications
1. Pattern mask
2. Anisotropic etch
1. Pattern mask
2. Etch circle in p++
3. Mask front side
4. Anisotropic etch
Silicon nitride
Silicon
p++ silicon
Silicon
Resist
Silicon
nitride
Silicon frame
p++
silicon
Silicon frame
{111}
{111}
Figure 4.3
Schematic illustrations of square and circular nozzles on the wafer surface with their
corresponding fabrication steps.

such as bumps and trenches (see Figure 4.5). The mandrel material must be electri-
cally conducting to enable electroplating and have sufficient adhesion to the metal
being plated but allow the metal to be peeled off after plating [10]. For example, the
materials system used by Hewlett-Packard for early-generation inkjet orifice plates
is electroplated nickel on a stainless steel mandrel: stainless steel has a thin epitaxial
oxide layer on it that allows electrical conduction but does not form a strong bond
to the plated nickel. Photoresist or some other insulator is patterned on the mandrel
Passive Micromachined Mechanical Structures
87
Silicon
Inlet
Outlet
(b)
(a)
Outlet
Silicon
Silicon
Adhesive
Figure 4.4
Illustration of side-shooter nozzles: (a) nozzles formed by orientation-dependent
etching of grooves, wafer bonding, and dicing [8], and (b) nozzle formed by DRIE and wafer
bonding. (After: [9].)
Mandrel
Photoresist
1. Make mandrel, pattern photoresist
Metal
2. Electroplate metal
3. Peel metal off
Orifice
Figure 4.5
Illustration of an electroformed nozzle process.

surface where through-holes are desired. Metal is then electroplated everywhere in
the mandrel that is not protected by the photoresist. Finally, the plated metal-foil
structure is peeled off of the mandrel and the resist is stripped. A later section in this
chapter describes the inkjet head in greater detail.
Hinge Mechanisms
Hinges are very useful passive elements in our daily lives. At the microscopic scale,
they extend the utility of the inherently two-dimensional surface micromachining
technology into the third dimension. The hinge fabrication occurs simultaneously
with the rest of the planar structures on the wafer (see Figure 4.6). Folding the
hinge out of the plane gives structures access to the space above the silicon die.
One potential future commercial application that may benefit from these fold-up
mechanisms is the assembly of microlenses, mirrors, and other components on opti-
cal microbenches [11, 12] (see Figure 4.7).
88
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications
Fresnel lens
Hinge
Figure 4.7
Photograph of a Fresnel microlens on an adjustable platform made of five hinged
polysilicon plates. (Courtesy of: M. Wu, University of California, Los Angeles.)
Silicon substrate
Polysilicon level 1
Polysilicon level 2
Polysilicon
level 1
Polysilicon level 2
Staple
Silicon substrate
Hinge staple
Plate
Support arm
Figure 4.6
Illustration of the fold-up surface micromachined hinge. The structure is fabricated
using polysilicon surface micromachining. (After: [13].)

The hinge structure is simple, consisting of a plate and a support arm made of a
first polysilicon layer. A staple made of a second polysilicon layer captures the plate
support arm. The staple is anchored directly to the substrate. The fabrication util-
izes the polysilicon surface micromachined process introduced in Chapter 3. The
polysilicon layers are typically 2 µm thick. The sacrificial phosphosilicate glass
(PSG) layer is 0.5 to 2.5 µm thick. Etching in hydrofluoric acid removes the PSG
layer and releases the mechanical plate from the substrate. Recent designs incorpo-
rate mechanical levers that snap into grooves defined in the plate and permanently
lock the hinge in a vertical position.
In early demonstrations, the assembly process involved manually lifting each
plate into position using sharp probes. The process has recently evolved to rely on
self assembly by designing the hinges so that they lock in place when the movable
parts are at a particular angle relative to the substrate. Random agitation while rins-
ing in water swings the structures away from the substrate; when they reach a preset
design location, they latch and lock in position. Both manual and self-assembly
tasks remain tedious and must be automated in the future before hinge assembly
gains acceptance in a mainstream manufacturing environment.
Sensors and Analysis Systems
Pressure Sensors
The first high-volume production of a pressure sensor began in 1974 at National
Semiconductor Corp. of Santa Clara, California. Pressure sensing has since grown
to a large market with an estimated 60 million silicon micromachined pressure sen-
sors manufactured in 2001. Nearly all units use bulk micromachining technology.
Manifold-absolute-pressure (MAP) [14] and disposable blood pressure [15] sensing
are the two single largest applications. The vast majority use piezoresistive sense ele-
ments to detect stress in a thin silicon diaphragm in response to a pressure load. A
few designs use capacitive methods to sense the displacement of a thin diaphragm.
The basic structure of a piezoresistive pressure sensor consists of four sense ele-
ments in a Wheatstone bridge configuration that measure stress within a thin crys-
talline silicon membrane (see Figure 4.8). The stress is a direct consequence of the
membrane deflecting in response to an applied pressure differential across the front
and back sides of the sensor. The stress is, to a first order approximation, linearly
proportional to the applied pressure differential. The membrane deflection is typi-
cally less than one micrometer. The output at full-scale applied pressure is a few mil-
livolts per volt of bridge excitation (the supply voltage to the bridge). The output
normalized to input applied pressure is known as sensitivity [(mV/V)/Pa] and is
directly related to the piezoresistive coefficients, π// and π⊥(see Chapter 2). The
thickness and geometrical dimensions of the membrane affect the sensitivity and,
consequently, the pressure range of the sensor. Devices rated for very low pressures
(less than 10 kPa) usually incorporate complex membrane structures, such as cen-
tral bosses, to concentrate the stresses near the piezoresistive sensors and improve
both sensitivity and linearity.
A common design layout on {100} substrates positions the four diffused p-type
piezoresistors at the points of highest stress, which occur at the center edges of the
Sensors and Analysis Systems
89

diaphragm. Two resistors have their primary axes parallel to the membrane edge,
resulting in a decrease in resistance with membrane bending. The other two resistors
have their axes perpendicular to the edge, which causes the resistance to increase
with the pressure load. Other layouts are also possible including designs to measure
shear stress, but the main objective remains to position the resistors in the areas of
highest stress concentration in order to maximize the response to applied pressure. It
is necessary that the four piezoresistors have identical resistances in the absence of
applied pressure. Any mismatch in resistance, even one caused by temperature,
causes an imbalance in the Wheatstone bridge. The resulting output reading is
known as zero offset and is undesirable.
Deep diffusions degrade the sensitivity of the piezoresistors by averaging the
stress over the depth of the sense element. Shallow diffusions are prone to surface
charge effects that can cause long-term drift in the output signal. Remedies to these
conflicting requirements are frequently proprietary to the manufacturers. U.S. pat-
ent 4,125,820 (November 14, 1978) assigned to Honeywell, Inc., of Minneapolis,
Minnesota, illustrates one solution in which the piezoresistive diffusions are buried
below the surface of the membrane.
90
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications
Bondpad
Metal conductors
P-type diffused
piezoresistor
Etched cavity
N-type
epitaxial
layer
P-type
substrate
and frame
Anodically
bonded
Pyrex substrate
Backside port
{100} Si
diaphragm
(a)
(b)
R1
R2
R3
R4
Vout
Vbridge
R3
R2
R1
{111}
Figure 4.8
(a) Schematic illustration of a pressure sensor with diffused piezoresistive sense
elements; and (b) the four sense elements form a Wheatstone bridge configuration.

The fabrication process of a typical pressure sensor relies mostly on steps
standard to the integrated circuit industry, with the exception of the precise forming
of the thin membrane using electrochemical etching (ECE). An n-type epitaxial layer
of silicon is grown on a p-type, {100} wafer. A thin, preferably stress-free, insulating
layer is deposited or grown on the front side of the wafer, and a protective silicon
nitride film is deposited on the back side. The piezoresistive sense elements are
formed by locally doping the silicon p-type using the masked implantation of boron,
followed by a high-temperature diffusion cycle. Etching of the insulator on the front
side provides contact openings to the underlying piezoresistors. A metal layer, typi-
cally aluminum, is then sputter deposited and patterned in the shape of electrical
conductors and bond pads. A square opening is patterned and etched in the silicon
nitride layer on the back side. Double-sided lithography ensures that the backside
square is precisely aligned to the sense elements on the front side. At this point, elec-
trical contacts are made to the p-type substrate and n-type epitaxial layer, and the
silicon is electrochemically etched from the back side in a solution of potassium
hydroxide. Naturally, the front side must be protected during the etch. One practi-
cal protection method includes coating with wax such as paraffin and clamping in a
fixture. The etch stops as soon as the p-type silicon is completely removed, and the
n-type layer is exposed. The process forms a membrane with precise thickness
defined by the epitaxial layer. Anodic bonding in vacuum of a Pyrex glass wafer on
the back side produces an absolute pressure sensor that measures the pressure on the
front side in reference to the cavity pressure (often, vacuum). For differential- or
gauge-type pressure sensors, previously drilled holes in the glass wafer provide vent
ports (see Figure 4.9).
The advent of silicon-fusion bonding in the 1980s proved very useful to the
design of bulk micromachined pressure sensors. The outward sloping of {111}
planes delineating the sensor’s frame results in an unnecessary increase in die size.
Silicon-fusion bonding allows the forming of the membrane after the etching of a
reference cavity with inward sloping {111} walls. Consequently, extremely small
pressure sensors are feasible. For example, GE NovaSensor of Fremont, California,
manufactures a sensor that is 400 µm wide, 800 µm long, and 150 µm thick, and it
fits inside the tip of a catheter (see Figure 4.10).
The fabrication of a silicon-fusion-bonded sensor begins with the etching of a
cavity in a bottom handle wafer. Silicon-fusion bonding of a p-type top wafer with
an n-type epixatial layer encapsulates and seals the cavity. Electrochemical etching
or standard polishing thins down the top bonded wafer to form a membrane of
appropriate thickness. The remaining process steps define the piezoresistive sense
elements, as well as the metal interconnects, and are similar to those used in the fab-
rication of the standard bulk micromachined pressure sensors described earlier.
Calibration and correction of error sources are necessary for the manufacture of
precision pressure sensors. A specification on accuracy of better than 1% over a
temperature range of –40° to +125°C is typical of many automotive, medical, and
industrial applications. First-order errors include zero offset (the output at no
applied pressure), uncalibrated sensitivity or span (conversion factor between input
pressure and output signal), and temperature dependence of the output signal.
Second-order effects include nonlinearities in the output response, as well as tem-
perature coefficients of some first-order error terms. Compensation and correction
Sensors and Analysis Systems
91

techniques place certain restrictions on the device and process design. For example,
one scheme uses laser trimming of resistors with near-zero TCR to correct first-
order errors, but this scheme requires that the average doping concentration of the
92
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications
Fusion
bond line
N-type layer
P-type substrate
Metallization
Diffused piezoresistor
Inward sloping
{111} planes
Figure 4.10
A miniature silicon-fusion-bonded absolute pressure sensor. (Courtesy of: GE
NovaSensor of Fremont, California.)
Deposit insulator
Diffuse piezoresistors
Deposit and
pattern metal
Electrochemical
etch of backside
cavity
Anodic bond
of glass
Insulator
N-type epitaxial layer
P-type substrate
Silicon nitride
P-type diffusions
Metal
Glass
Figure 4.9
Fabrication steps for a piezoresistive, gauge, or differential bulk micromachined
pressure sensor.

piezoresistors is above 5 × 1019 cm−3, or below 3 × 1017 cm−3. Compensation over
intermediate ranges of dopant concentration requires sophisticated electronic cir-
cuits that continuously monitor the temperature of the Wheatstone bridge.
There has been recently a shift within the industry to provide the calibration
and compensation functions with specially designed application-specific integrated
circuits (ASICs). The active circuits amplify the voltage output of the piezoresistive
bridge to standard CMOS voltage levels (0–5V). They also correct for tempera-
ture errors and nonlinearities. Error coefficients particular to individual sensors
are permanently stored in on-board electrically programmable memory (e.g.,
EEPROM). Most sensor manufacturers have developed their own proprietary
circuit designs, and some have even integrated the circuitry onto the pressure-
sensor chip. A few general-purpose signal conditioning integrated circuits are
commercially available; one example is the MAX1457 from Maxim Integrated
Products of Sunnyvale, California.
High-Temperature Pressure Sensors
The temperature rating of most commercially available silicon micromachined pres-
sure sensors is –40° to +125ºC, covering the automotive and military specifications.
The increased leakage current above 125ºC across the p-n junction between the dif-
fused piezoresistive element and the substrate significantly degrades performance.
Silicon-on-insulator (SOI) technology becomes very useful at elevated temperatures
because the thin silicon sense elements exist over a layer of silicon dioxide, thus
eliminating all p-n diode junctions. Adjacent silicon sense elements are isolated from
each other by shallow moat-like trenches. The dielectric isolation below the sense
elements completely eliminates the leakage current through the substrate, as long as
the applied voltages are below the breakdown voltage of the insulating oxide layer.
A high-temperature pressure sensor from GE NovaSensor utilizes SOI technol-
ogy to form thin p-type crystalline silicon piezoresistors over a thin layer of silicon
dioxide. Gold metallization and bond pads provide electrical contacts to the sense
elements (see Figure 4.11).
Sensors and Analysis Systems
93
Figure 4.11
Photograph of an SOI-based pressure sensor rated for extended temperature
operation up to 300°C. (Courtesy of: GE NovaSensor of Fremont, California.)

Silicon-fusion bonding plays an important role in the making of the SOI sub-
strates (see Figure 4.12). A heavily doped, thin p-type layer is formed on the surface
of one wafer, and an oxide layer is thermally grown on an another wafer. Silicon-
fusion bonding brings the two substrates together such that the p-type layer is in
direct contact with the oxide layer. Etching in ethylenediamine pyrocathechol (EDP)
thins down the stack and stops on the heavily doped p-type silicon. A front-side
lithography step followed by a silicon etch patterns the piezoresistive sense elements.
Gold metallization is sputtered or evaporated and then lithographically patterned to
form electrical interconnects and bond pads. The final step forms a thin membrane
by etching a cavity from the back side using potassium hydroxide or a similar etch
solution. Double-sided lithography is critical to align the cavity outline on the back
side with the piezoresistors on the front side. The front side need not be protected
during the etch of the cavity if EDP is used instead of potassium hydroxide; EDP is
highly selective to heavily doped p-type silicon, silicon dioxide, and gold, but it is
toxic and must be handled with extreme caution.
Mass Flow Sensors
The flow of gas over the surface of a heated element produces convective heat loss at
a rate proportional to mass flow. Flow sensors operating on this principle belong to
a general category of devices known as hot-wire anemometers, which measure the
temperature of the hot element and infer the flow rate. A number of demonstrations
exist in the open literature; most share a basic structure consisting of a thin-film
heating element and a temperature-measuring device on a thin (<1 µm) insulating
dielectric membrane suspended over an etched cavity, at least 50 µm in depth. This
architecture provides excellent thermal isolation between the heater and the sup-
porting mechanical frame, which ensures that heat loss is nearly all due to mass flow
over the heating element. A thermal isolation exceeding 15ºC per milliwatt of heater
power is typical. Moreover, the small heat capacity due to the tiny heated volume
94
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications
1. Silicon fusion bonding
2. Etch stop on p silicon
+
3. Patterning and metallization
4. Back-side etch to form cavity
Silicon
dioxide
P silicon
+
P silicon
+
Metallization (Au)
P piezoresistor
+
Silicon
dioxide
Metallization
Figure 4.12
Fabrication process of an SOI high-temperature pressure sensor. (Courtesy of: GE
NovaSensor of Fremont, California.)

provides a fast thermal time constant and consequently a rapid response time. One
approach to inferring the temperature of the heating element is to drive it with a
constant current and measure its resistance, then calculate the temperature using the
TCR. Alternatively, direct temperature measurement using a p-n diode or a thermo-
couple is equally adequate.
Honeywell, Inc., of Minneapolis, Minnesota, manufactures the AWM series of
bidirectional mass airflow sensors using two adjacent thin membranes, presumably
made of silicon nitride, each containing a heating element and a temperature-
sensitive resistor [16]. The two membranes are small in size, each measuring less
than 500 × 500 µm2. Gas flow across the membranes cools the upstream heater and
heats the downstream element. The two heaters are part of a first Wheatstone
bridge, and the temperature-sensing resistors form two legs in a second Wheatstone
bridge, whose differential output is directly proportional to the rate of flow (see
Figure 4.13). The direction of flow is reflected in the polarity of the differential
bridge output—a characteristic of the dual sense element configuration. In essence,
this polarity determines which of the two heaters is upstream or downstream.
Laser-trimmed thick- or thin-film resistors provide calibration as well as nulling of
any offsets due to resistance mismatch in the Wheatstone bridges. The Honeywell
AWM series of devices is capable of measuring gas flow rates in the range of 0
to 1,000 sccm. The upper limit is due to pronounced nonlinear effects in the
heat-transfer mechanism. The full-scale output is approximately 75 mV, and the
response time is less than 3 ms. The device consumes less than 30 mW.
While the processing details of the Honeywell series of airflow sensors
are not publicly disclosed, one can readily design a process for fabricating a
demonstration-type device. An example process would begin with the deposition of
a thin layer of silicon nitride, approximately 0.5 µm in thickness, over a {100} sili-
con wafer. Silicon nitride is usually an excellent choice for making thin membranes
Sensors and Analysis Systems
95
Heaters
Upstream
resistor
Downstream
resistor
Silicon nitride
Silicon substrate
Upstream resistor
<110>
<100>
Downstream resistor
Heating
resistors
Silicon nitride
membrane
Etched pit
{111} plane
Flow
Figure 4.13
Illustration of a micromachined mass flow sensor. Gas flow cools the upstream
heater and heats the downstream heater. Temperature-sensitive resistors are used to measure the
temperature of each heater and consequently infer the flow rate. The etched pit underneath the
heater provides exceptional thermal isolation to the silicon support frame. (After: technical sheets
on the AWM series of mass airflow sensors, Honeywell, Inc., of Minneapolis, Minnesota, and [16].)

because it can be deposited under low tensile stress, and it retains its structural integ-
rity in most anisotropic etch solutions. The thin-film heaters and sense elements are
deposited next by sputtering a thin metal layer (e.g., platinum or nickel) or by the
chemical vapor deposition of a heavily doped layer of polysilicon. The thin metal
film or polysilicon are then patterned using standard lithography followed by an
appropriate etch step. An insulating passivation layer, preferably made of silicon
nitride, encapsulates and protects the heating and sense elements. Both silicon
nitride layers must then be lithographically patterned in the shape of the two sus-
pended membranes and consequently etched to expose the silicon regions outside of
the membrane outline. The final step involves the etching of the silicon in potassium
hydroxide or a similar anisotropic etch solution to form the deep cavity. The etch
first proceeds in the open silicon regions, and then it progresses underneath the sili-
con nitride thin film, removing all the silicon and resulting in the suspended silicon
nitride membranes. The reason the etch proceeds underneath the silicon nitride layer
is because its orientation is in the <100> direction. The etch stops on the {111} crys-
tallographic planes along the periphery of the open silicon areas.
Acceleration Sensors
The first demonstration of a micromachined accelerometer took place in 1979 at
Stanford University [17], but it took nearly 15 years before such devices became
accepted mainstream products for large-volume applications (see Table 4.3). The
overall market for silicon microaccelerometers has been steadily increasing, reach-
ing an estimated $319 million in 2000 [18] and driven primarily by the need for
crash sensing in airbag deployment systems. The increase in unit volume has been
accompanied by a steady decrease in pricing for automotive applications from an
estimated $10 per unit in the early 1990s to less than $2 per unit in 2002. Clearly,
low-volume pricing for custom designs remains well above quoted figures for the
high-volume automotive markets.
96
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications
Table 4.3
Some Applications for Micromachined Accelerometers
Measurement
Application
Acceleration
Front and side airbag crash sensing
Electrically controlled car suspension
Safety belt pretensioning
Vehicle and traction control systems
Inertial measurement, object positioning, and navigation
Human activity for pacemaker control
Vibration
Engine management
Condition-based maintenance of engines and machinery
Security devices
Shock and impact monitoring
Monitoring of seismic activity
Angles of inclination
Inclinometers and tilt sensing
Vehicle stability and roll
Headlight leveling
Computer peripherals (e.g., joystick, head mounted displays)
Handwriting recognition (e.g., SmartQuill from British Telecom plc)
Bridges, ramps, and construction

All accelerometers share a basic structure consisting of an inertial mass sus-
pended from a spring (see Figure 4.14). They differ in the sensing of the relative
position of the inertial mass as it displaces under the effect of an externally applied
acceleration. A common sensing method is capacitive, in which the mass forms one
side of a two-plate capacitor. This approach requires the use of special electronic
circuits to detect minute changes in capacitance (<10−15 F) and to translate them
into an amplified output voltage. Another common method uses piezoresistors to
sense the internal stress induced in the spring. In yet a different method, the spring is
piezoelectric or contains a piezoelectric thin film, providing a voltage in direct pro-
portion to the displacement. In some rare instances, such as in operation at elevated
temperatures, position sensing with an optical fiber becomes necessary. The focus of
this section is on capacitive and piezoresistive accelerometers.
The primary specifications of an accelerometer are full-scale range, often given
in G, the Earth’s gravitational acceleration (1 G = 9.81 m/s2), sensitivity (V/G), reso-
lution (G), bandwidth (Hz), cross-axis sensitivity, and immunity to shock. The
range and bandwidth required vary significantly depending on the application.
Accelerometers for airbag crash sensing are rated for a full range of ±50G and a
bandwidth of about one kilohertz. By contrast, devices for measuring engine knock
or vibration have a range of about 1G, but must resolve small accelerations (<100
µG) over a large bandwidth (>10 kHz). Modern cardiac pacemakers incorporate
multiaxis accelerometers to monitor the level of human activity, and correspond-
ingly adjust the stimulation frequency. The ratings on such sensors are ±2G and a
bandwidth of less than 50 Hz, but they require extremely low power consumption
for battery longevity. Accelerometers for military applications such as fuzing can
exceed a rating of 1,000G.
Cross-axis sensitivity assesses the immunity of the sensor to accelerations along
directions perpendicular to the main sensing axis. Cross-axis rejection ratios in
excess of 40 dB are always desirable. Shock immunity is an important but somewhat
subjective specification for the protection of the devices during handling or opera-
tion. While one would expect the specification quantified in units of acceleration, it
is instead defined in terms of a peculiar but more practical test involving dropping
the device from a height of one meter over concrete—the shock impact can easily
Sensors and Analysis Systems
97
M
F
M a
=
⋅
δ = F/k
Spring ( )
k
Inertial
mass (
)
M
fr =
k
M
1
2π
anoise =
8πK Tf B
B
r
Q M
Resonant frequency:
Noise equivalent acceleration:
T = Temperature
B = Bandwidth
Q = Quality factor
KB = Boltzmann constant
;
<
B
fr
Figure 4.14
The basic structure of an accelerometer, consisting of an inertial mass suspended
from a spring. The resonant frequency and the noise-equivalent acceleration (due to Brownian
noise) are given.

reach a dynamic peak of 10,000G! In addition to achieving a large impact, the drop
test excites the various modes of resonance that are liable to cause catastrophic
failure.
While many companies offer micromachined acceleration sensor products, a
representative set of only four accelerometers follows next, each unique in its design
and fabrication.
Piezoresistive Bulk Micromachined Accelerometer
Until only recently, piezoresistive-type acceleration sensors were widely available.
Many companies, including GE NovaSensor of Fremont, California, and IC Sensors
of San Jose, California (a division of Measurement Specialties, Inc., of Fairfield,
New Jersey), offered products using anisotropically etched silicon inertial mass and
diffused piezoresistive sense elements. But these products were retired because they
could not meet the aggressive pricing requirements of the automotive industry. The
product introduction in 1996 by Endevco Corp., of San Juan Capistrano, Califor-
nia, indicates that piezoresistive accelerometers remain in this highly competitive
market (see Figure 4.15).
The Endevco sensor consists of three substrates: a lower base; a middle core con-
taining a hinge-like spring, the inertial mass, and the sense elements; and finally a top
protective lid [19]. The inertial mass sits inside a frame suspended by the spring. Two
thin boron-doped piezoresistive elements in a Wheatstone bridge configuration span
the narrow 3.5-µm gap between the outer frame of the middle core and the inertial
mass. The piezoresistors are only 0.6 µm thick and 4.2 µm long and are thus very sen-
sitive to minute displacements of the inertial mass. The output in response to an
acceleration equal to 1G in magnitude is 25 mV for a Wheatstone bridge excitation of
10V. The thick and narrow hinge structure allows displacement within the plane of
98
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications
Acceleration
Boron doped
piezoresistor
Lid
{110} plane
Bondpads
Hinge
Mass
Outer frame
Base
Figure 4.15
Illustration of a piezoresistive accelerometer from Endevco Corp., fabricated using
anisotropic etching in a {110} wafer. The middle core contains the inertial mass suspended from a
hinge. Two piezoresistive sense elements measure the deflection of the mass. The axis of sensitivity
is in the plane of the middle core. The outer frame acts as a stop mechanism to prevent excessive
accelerations from damaging the part. (After: [19].)

the device, but it is very stiff in directions normal to the wafer, resulting in high
immunity to off-axis accelerations. Moreover, the outer frame acts as a stop mecha-
nism that protects the device in the event of excessive acceleration shocks. It takes
6,000G for the inertial mass to touch the frame, and the device can survive shocks in
excess of 10,000G. Open apertures reduce the weight of the inertial mass and com-
bine with the stiff hinge to provide a rather high resonant frequency of 28 kHz.
The fabrication process is somewhat unique with its utilization of {110} wafers
for the middle core. In this case, the {111} crystallographic planes are orthogonal to
the {110} surface of the wafer, which allows the formation of vertical trenches using
anisotropic wet etchants. The fabrication begins with boron implantation and diffu-
sion at 1,100ºC to form highly doped p-type piezoresistors. In order to obtain maxi-
mum sensitivity, the piezoresistors are aligned along a <111> direction. A silicon
oxide or silicon nitride layer masks the silicon in the form of the inertial mass and
hinge during the subsequent anisotropic etch in EDP. The inertial mass is bounded
by vertical {111} planes, giving it the shape of a parallelogram whose inside angle is
70.5º (see Chapter 3). Subsequent fabrication steps provide for the deposition and
patterning of aluminum electrical contacts and bond pads. Shallow recesses are
incorporated in the base and lid substrates before the three-wafer stack is bonded
together using low-melting-point glass as the adhesive.
Capacitive Bulk Micromachined Accelerometer
Many companies offer capacitive bulk-micromachined accelerometers. The next
example describes the SCA series from VTI Technologies of Vantaa, Finland. The
sensor consists of a stack of three bonded silicon wafers, with the hinge spring and
inertial mass incorporated in the middle wafer. The inertial mass forms a moveable
inner electrode of a variable differential capacitor circuit. The two outer wafers are
identical and are simply the fixed electrodes of the two capacitors (see Figure 4.16).
Holes through the inertial mass reduce the damping effect from air trapped in
the enclosed cavity, increasing the operating bandwidth of the sensor. Unlike other
designs, the contacts to the electrodes are on the side of the die and thus must be
defined after the wafer is diced into individual sensor parts. The SCA series of sen-
sors is available in a measuring range from ±0.5G to ±12G. Electronic circuits sense
changes in capacitance, then convert them into an output voltage between 0 and 5V.
The rated bandwidth is up to 400 Hz for the ±12G accelerometer, the cross-axis
sensitivity is less than 5% of output, and the shock immunity is 20,000G.
The particulars of the VTI Technologies process are not publicly available;
however, Sasayama et al. [20] describe a process for building a similar part (see
Figure 4.17). The three wafers are fabricated separately, then joined at the end by a
bonding process, such as anodic bonding, silicon fusion bonding, or even a glass
thermocompression bond. The upper and lower wafers are identical and contain a
metal electrode patterned with standard lithography over a thin layer of silicon
dioxide. The inertial mass and hinge are delineated in the middle wafer using four
sequential steps of anisotropic etching in potassium hydroxide or a similar etchant.
First, shallow recess cavities are etched on both sides of the wafer. Three distinct
masking layers are each deposited and patterned separately. Silicon dioxide and sili-
con nitride are good material choices. Each of these masking layers is sequentially
removed after an etch step in an anisotropic wet etching solution. In essence, the
Sensors and Analysis Systems
99

pattern information is encoded in each of the three masking layers. Timed etching
simply translates the encoded information into a variable topography in the silicon
substrate. The end result is a thin support hinge member with a much thicker inertial
mass. The recesses on either side of the mass form the thin gaps for the two-plate
sense capacitors.
100
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications
1. Etch recess cavities in silicon
2. Deposit and pattern three masking
anisotropic etch silicon
layers;
3. Remove first masking layer;
anisotropic etch silicon
Silicon
Mass
Hinge
4. Remove second masking layer;
anisotropic etch silicon
Figure 4.17
Process steps to fabricate the middle wafer containing the hinge and the inertial
mass of a bulk micromachined capacitive accelerometer similar to the device from VTI
Technologies. (After: [20].)
Silicon
Glass
Metal contact to
top wafer
Silicon
Inertial mass
Metal contact to
middle wafer
Metal electrode
Metal contact to
lower wafer
Contact to
substrate
Air damping vias
Figure 4.16
Illustration of a bulk micromachined capacitive accelerometer. The inertial mass in
the middle wafer forms the moveable electrode of a variable differential capacitive circuit. (After:
accelerometer product catalog of VTI Technologies of Vantaa, Finland.)

Capacitive Surface Micromachined Accelerometer
Surface micromachining emerged in the late 1980s as a perceived low-cost alterna-
tive for accelerometers aimed primarily at automotive applications. Both Robert
Bosch GmbH of Stuttgart, Germany, and Analog Devices, Inc., of Norwood, Mas-
sachusetts, offer surface micromachined accelerometers, but it is the latter company
that benefited from wide publicity to their ADXL product family [21]. The Bosch
sensor [22] is incorporated in the Mercedes Benz family of luxury automobiles. The
ADXL parts are used on board Ford, General Motors, and other vehicles, as well as
inside joysticks for computer games. The surface micromachining fabrication
sequence, illustrated in Chapter 3, is fundamentally similar to both sensors, though
the Bosch device uses a thicker (10-µm) polysilicon structural element.
Unlike most bulk-micromachined parts, surface-micromachined accelerometers
incorporate a suspended comb-like structure whose primary axis of sensitivity lies
in the plane of the die. This is often referred to as an x-axis (or y-axis) type of device,
as opposed to z-axis sensors where the sense axis is orthogonal to the plane of the
die. However, due to the relative thinness of their structural elements, surface
micromachined accelerometers suffer from sensitivity to accelerations out of the
plane of the die (z-axis). Shocks along this direction can cause catastrophic failures.
The ADXL device [21] consists of three sets of 2-µm-thick polysilicon finger-like
electrodes (see Figure 4.18). Two sets are anchored to the substrate and are
stationary. They form the upper and lower electrode plates of a differential capaci-
tance system, respectively. The third set has the appearance of a two-sided comb
whose fingers are interlaced with the fingers of the first two sets. It is suspended
approximately 1 µm over the surface by means of two long, folded polysilicon beams
acting as suspension springs. It also forms the common middle and displaceable
Sensors and Analysis Systems
101
Stationary polysilicon fingers
Anchor to
substrate
Inertial mass
Spring
Displacement
C2
C1
Figure 4.18
Illustration of the basic structure of the ADXL family of surface micromachined accel-
erometers. A comb-like structure suspended from springs forms the inertial mass. Displacements of
the mass are measured capacitively with respect to two sets of stationary finger-like electrodes.
(After: ADXL data sheets and application notes of Analog Devices, Inc., of Norwood,
Massachusetts.)

electrode for the two capacitors. The inertial mass consists of the comb fingers and
the central backbone element to which these suspended fingers are attached. Under
no externally applied acceleration, the two capacitances are identical. The output sig-
nal, proportional to the difference in capacitance, is null. An applied acceleration dis-
places the suspended structure, resulting in an imbalance in the capacitive half bridge.
The differential structure is such that one capacitance increases, and the other
decreases. The overall capacitance is small, typically on the order of 100 fF (1 fF =
10−15 F). For the ADXL105 (programmable at either ±1G or ±5G), the change in
capacitance in response to 1G is minute, about 100 aF (1 aF = 10−18 F). This is equiva-
lent to only 625 electrons at an applied bias of one volt and thus must be measured
using on-chip integrated electronics to greatly reduce the impact of parasitic capaci-
tance and noise sources, which would be present with off-chip wiring. The basic
read-out circuitry consists of a small-amplitude, two-phase oscillator driving both
ends of the capacitive half bridge in opposite phases at a frequency of 1 MHz. A
capacitance imbalance gives rise to a voltage in the middle node. The signal is then
demodulated and amplified. The 1-MHz excitation frequency is sufficiently higher
than the mechanical resonant frequency that it produces no actuation force on the
plates of the capacitors, provided its dc (average) value is null. The maximum accel-
eration rating for the ADXL family varies from ±1G (ADXL 105) up to ±100G
(ADXL 190). The dynamic range is limited to about 60 dB over the operational
bandwidth (typically, 1 to 6 kHz). The small change in capacitance and the relatively
small mass combine to give a noise floor that is relatively large when compared to
similarly rated bulk micromachined or piezoelectric accelerometers. For the
ADXL105, the mass is approximately 0.3 µg, and the corresponding noise floor,
dominated by Brownian mechanical noise, is 225 µG
Hz. By contrast, the mass for
a bulk-micromachined sensor can easily exceed 100 µg.
Applying a large-amplitude voltage at low frequency—below the natural fre-
quency of the sensor—between the two plates of a capacitor gives rise to an electro-
static force that tends to pull the two plates together. This effect enables the
application of feedback to the inertial mass: Every time the acceleration pulls the set
of suspended fingers away from one of the anchored sets, a voltage significantly
larger in amplitude than the sense voltage, but lower in frequency, is applied to the
same set of plates, pulling them together and effectively counterbalancing the
action of the external acceleration. This feedback voltage is appropriately propor-
tioned to the measured capacitive imbalance in order to maintain the suspended
fingers in their initial position, in a pseudostationary state. This electrostatic actua-
tion, also called force balancing, is a form of closed-loop feedback. It minimizes
displacement and greatly improves output linearity (because the center element
never quite moves by more than a few nanometers). The sense and actuation plates
may be the same, provided the two frequency signals (sense and actuation) do not
interfere with each other.
A significant advantage to surface micromachining is the ease of integrating two
single-axis accelerometers on the same die to form a dual-axis accelerometer, so-
called two-axes. In a very simple configuration, the two accelerometers are orthogo-
nal to each other. However, the ADXL200 series of dual-axis sensors employs a
more sophisticated suspension spring mechanism, where a single inertial mass is
shared by both accelerometers.
102
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications

Capacitive Deep-Etched Micromachined Accelerometer
The DRIE accelerometer developed at GE NovaSensor of Fremont, California,
shares its basic comb structure design with the ADXL and Bosch accelerometers. It
consists of a set of fingers attached to a central backbone plate, itself suspended by
two folded springs (see Figure 4.19). Two sets of stationary fingers attached directly
to the substrate complete the capacitive half bridge. The design, however, adds a
few improvements. By taking advantage of the third dimension and using structures
50 to 100 µm deep, the sensor gains a larger inertial mass, up to 100 µg, as well as a
larger capacitance, up to 5 pF. The relatively large mass reduces mechanical
Brownian noise and increases resolution. The high aspect ratio of the spring practi-
cally eliminates the sensitivity to z-axis accelerations (out of the plane of the die).
Fabrication follows the SFB-DRIE process introduced in Chapter 3.
The sensor, described by van Drieënhuizen et al. [23], uses a 60-µm-thick comb
structure for a total capacitance of 3 pF, an inertial mass of 43 µg, a resonant
frequency of 3.1 kHz, and an open-loop mechanical sensitivity of 1.6 fF/G. The
corresponding mechanical noise is about 10 µG
Hz, significantly less than for a
surface-micromachined sensor. The read-out circuitry first converts changes in
capacitance into frequency. This is accomplished by inserting the two variable
capacitors into separate oscillating circuits whose output frequencies are directly
proportional to the capacitance. A phase detector compares the two output frequen-
cies and converts the difference into a voltage. The circuit then amplifies the signal
before feeding it back to a set of actuation electrodes for force balancing. These
electrodes may be distinct from the sense electrodes. Filters set the closed-loop
bandwidth to 1 kHz. The overall sensitivity is 700 mV/G for a ±5G device. Early
prototypes had a dynamic range of 44 dB limited by electronic 1/f noise in the
CMOS circuitry. Recent prototypes with newer implementations of the electronic
read-out circuits demonstrated a dynamic range approaching 70 dB over the
1-kHz bandwidth. The SFB-DRIE process is fully compatible with the integration
Sensors and Analysis Systems
103
Bondpad
Trench
isolation
Capacitive
sense plates
Folded
spring
1 mm
Figure 4.19
Scanning-electron micrograph of a DRIE accelerometer using 60-µm-thick comb
structures. (Courtesy of: GE NovaSensor of Fremont, California.)

of CMOS circuits next to the mechanical sensing element. The large available
capacitance makes the decision to integrate based purely on economics rather than
performance.
Angular Rate Sensors and Gyroscopes
Long before the advent of Loran and the satellite-based global positioning system,
the gyroscope was a critical navigational instrument used for maintaining a fixed
orientation with great accuracy, regardless of Earth rotation. Invented in the
nineteenth century, it consisted of a flywheel mounted in gimbal rings. The large
angular momentum of the flywheel counteracts externally applied torques and
keeps the orientation of the spin axis unaltered. The demonstration of the ring laser
gyroscope in 1963 displaced the mechanical gyroscope in many high-precision
applications, including aviation. Inertial navigation systems based on ring laser
gyroscopes are on board virtually all commercial aircraft. Gyroscopes capable of
precise measurement of rotation are very expensive instruments, costing many thou-
sands of dollars. An article published in 1984 by the IEEE reviews many of the basic
technologies for gyroscopes [24].
The gyroscope derives its precision from the large angular momentum that is
proportional to the heavy mass of the flywheel, its substantial size, and its high rate
of spin (see Figure 4.20). This, in itself, precludes the use of miniature devices for
useful gyroscopic action; the angular momentum of a miniature flywheel is minis-
cule. Instead, micromachined sensors that detect angular rotation utilize the Coriolis
effect. Fundamentally, such devices are strictly angular-rate or yaw-rate sensors,
measuring angular velocity. However, they are colloquially but incorrectly referred
to as gyroscopes.
The Coriolis effect, named after the French physicist Gaspard Coriolis,
manifests itself in numerous weather phenomena, including hurricanes and torna-
does, and is a direct consequence of a body’s motion in a rotating frame of reference
104
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications
Pivot
Bearing
Flywheel
Outer gimbal ring
Inner gimbal ring
Axle
Roll
Yaw
Pitch
Figure 4.20
Illustration of a conventional mechanical gyroscope and the three rotational degrees
of freedom it can measure.

(see Figure 4.21). To understand it, let us imagine an automobile driving from Seat-
tle, Washington (lat. 48º N), to Los Angeles, California (lat. 34º N). At the begin-
ning of its journey, the car in Seattle is actually moving eastward with the rotation of
Earth (the rotating frame of reference) at about 1120 km/h1. At the end of its jour-
ney in Los Angeles, its eastward velocity is 1,385 km/h. As the car moves south
across latitudes, its eastward velocity must increase from 1,120 to 1,385 km/h; oth-
erwise, it will continuously slip and never reach its destination. The road—effec-
tively the rotating surface—imparts an eastward acceleration to maintain the
vehicle on its course. This is the Coriolis acceleration. In general, the Coriolis accel-
eration is the acceleration that must be applied in order to maintain the heading of a
body moving on a rotating surface [25].
All micromachined angular rate sensors have a vibrating element at their core—
this is the moving body. In a fixed frame of reference, a point on this element oscil-
lates with a velocity vector v. If the frame of reference begins to rotate at a rate Ω,
this point is then subject to a Coriolis force and a corresponding acceleration equal
to 2Ω× v [26]. The vector cross operation implies that the Coriolis acceleration
and the resulting displacement at that point are perpendicular to the oscillation.
This, in effect, sets up an energy transfer process from a primary mode of oscillation
into a secondary mode that can be measured. It is this excitation of a secondary
resonance mode that forms the basis of detection using the Coriolis effect. In beam
structures, these two frequencies are distinct with orthogonal displacements. But for
highly symmetrical elements, such as rings, cylinders, or disks, the resonant fre-
quency is degenerate, meaning there are two distinct modes of resonance sharing the
same oscillation frequency. This degeneracy causes the temporal excitation signal
(primary mode) to be in phase quadrature with the sense signal (secondary mode),
thus minimizing coupling between these two modes and improving sensitivity and
Sensors and Analysis Systems
105
Ω
v
ac
Coriolis acceleration:
Ω
x
y
z
a = 2
c
Ω×v
Figure 4.21
Illustration of the Coriolis acceleration on an object moving with a velocity vector v
on the surface of Earth from either pole towards the equator. The Coriolis acceleration deflects the
object in a counterclockwise manner in the northern hemisphere and a clockwise direction in the
southern hemisphere. The vector Ωrepresents the rotation of the planet.
1.
The velocity at the equator is 1,670 km/h. The velocity at latitude 48º N is 1,670 km/h multiplied by cos 48º.

accuracy [27]. Additionally, the degeneracy tends to minimize the device’s sensitiv-
ity to thermal errors, aging, and long-term frequency drifts.
A simple and common implementation is the tuning-fork structure (see
Figure 4.22). The two tines of the fork normally vibrate in opposite directions in the
plane of the fork (flexural mode). The Coriolis acceleration subjects the tips to a
displacement perpendicular to the primary mode of oscillation, forcing each tip to
describe an elliptical path. Rotation, hence, excites a secondary vibration torsional
mode around the stem with energy transferred from the primary flexural vibration
of the tines. Quartz tuning forks such as those from BEI Technologies, Systron Don-
ner Inertial Division of Concord, California, use the piezoelectric properties of the
material to excite and sense both vibration modes. The tuning-fork structure is also
at the core of a micromachined silicon sensor from Daimler Benz AG that will be
described later. Other implementations of angular rate sensors include simple reso-
nant beams, vibrating ring shells, and tethered accelerometers, but all of them
exploit the principle of transferring energy from a primary to a secondary mode of
resonance. Of all the vibrating angular-rate structures, the ring shell or cylinder is
the most promising for inertial and navigational-grade performance because of the
frequency degeneracy of its two resonant modes.
The main specifications of an angular-rate sensor are full-scale range (expressed
in º/s or º/hr; scale factor or sensitivity [V/(º/s)]; noise, also known as angle random
walk [ (
)]
°
⋅
s
Hz ; bandwidth (Hz); resolution (º/s); and dynamic range (dB), the lat-
ter two being functions of noise and bandwidth. Short- and long-term drift of the
output, known as bias drift, is another important specification (expressed in º/s or
º/hr). As is the case for most sensors, angular-rate sensors must withstand shocks of
at least 1,000G.
Micromachined angular-rate sensors have largely been unable to deliver a
performance better than rate grade. These are devices with a dynamic range of only
40 dB, a noise figure larger than
(
)
01. °
⋅
s
Hz , and a bias drift worse than 10 º/hr.
By comparison, inertial grade sensors and true gyroscopes deliver a dynamic range
of over 100 dB, a noise less than
(
)
0 001
.
°
⋅
hr
Hz , and a bias drift better than
0.01 º/hr [28]. The advantage of micromachined angular-rate sensors lies in their
106
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications
Tine oscillation
Coriolis acceleration
Figure 4.22
Illustration of the tuning-fork structure for angular-rate sensing. The Coriolis effect
transfers energy from a primary flexural mode to a secondary torsional mode.

small size and low cost, currently less than $10. They are slowly gaining acceptance
in automotive applications, in particular, for vehicle stability systems. The sensor
detects any undesired yaw of a vehicle due to poor road conditions and feeds the
information to a control system, which may activate the antilock braking system
(ABS) or the traction control system (TCS) to correct the situation. The Mercedes
Benz ML series of sport utility vehicles incorporates a silicon angular-rate sensor
from Robert Bosch GmbH for vehicle stability.
The selection of commercially available micromachined yaw-rate sensors
remains limited, but many manufacturers have publicly acknowledged the existence
of development programs. The sensors from Delphi Delco Electronics Systems,
Robert Bosch GmbH, Daimler Benz AG, and Silicon Sensing Systems illustrate four
vibratory-type angular-rate sensors distinct in their structure as well as excitation
and sense methods.
Micromachined Angular-Rate Sensor from Delphi Delco Electronics Systems
The sensor from Delphi Delco Electronics Systems of Kokomo, Indiana [29], a divi-
sion of Delphi Corporation of Troy, Michigan, includes at its core a vibrating ring
shell based on the principle of the ringing wine glass discovered in 1890 by G. H.
Bryan. He observed that the standing-wave pattern of the wine glass did not remain
stationary in inertial space but participated in the motion as the glass rotated about
its stem.
The complete theory of vibrating-ring angular-rate sensors is well developed
[30]. The ring shell, anchored at its center to the substrate, deforms as it
vibrates through a full cycle from a circle to an ellipse, back to a circle, then to
an ellipse rotated at right angles to the first ellipse, then back to the original
circle (see Figure 4.23). The points on the shell that remain stationary are
called nodes, whereas the points that undergo maximal deflection are called anti-
nodes. The nodes and antinodes form a vibration pattern—or standing-wave pat-
tern—around the ring. The pattern is characteristic of the resonance mode. Because
of symmetry, a ring shell possesses two frequency-degenerate resonant modes with
their vibration patterns offset by 45º with respect to each other. Hence, the nodes
of the first mode coincide with the antinodes of the second mode. The external con-
trol electronics excite only one of the two modes—the primary mode. But under
rotation, the Coriolis effect excites the second resonance mode, and energy transfer
occurs between the two modes. Consequently, the deflection amplitude builds up
at the antinodes of the second mode—also, the nodes of the first mode. The overall
vibration becomes a linear combination of the two modes with a new set of
nodes and antinodes forming a vibration pattern rotated with respect to the
pattern of the primary mode. It is this lag that Bryan heard in his spinning
wine glass. In an open-loop configuration, the deflection amplitude at the nodes
and antinodes is a measure of the angular rate of rotation. Alternatively, the
angular shift of the vibration pattern is another measure. In a closed-loop
configuration, electrostatic actuation by a feedback voltage applied to the
excitation electrodes nulls the secondary mode and maintains a stationary vibra-
tion pattern. The angular rate becomes directly proportional to this feedback
voltage.
Sensors and Analysis Systems
107

A total of 32 electrodes positioned around the suspended ring shell provide the
electrostatic excitation drive and sense functions. Of this set, eight electrodes strate-
gically positioned at 45º intervals—at the nodes and antinodes—capacitively sense
the deformation of the ring shell. Appropriate electronic circuits complete the sys-
tem control functions, including feedback. A phased-locked loop (PLL) drives the
ring into resonance through the electrostatic drive electrodes and maintains a lock
on the frequency. Feedback is useful to electronically compensate for the mechanical
poles and increase the closed-loop bandwidth of the sensor. Additionally, a high
mechanical quality factor increases the closed-loop system gain and sensitivity.
The fabrication process is similar to the electroplating and molding process
described in Chapter 3, except that the substrate includes preprocessed CMOS con-
trol circuitry. The mold is made of photoresist, and the electroplated nickel ring shell
is 15 to 50 µm thick. Finally, packaging is completed in vacuum in order to minimize
air damping of the resonant ring and provide a large quality factor. Researchers at
the University of Michigan demonstrated a polysilicon version of the sensor with
improved overall performance.
108
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications
1. Primary standing
wave pattern
Node
Antinode
2. Secondary standing
wave pattern at 45°
Antinode
Node
3. Coriolis effect transfers
energy to secondary mode
effectively rotating the
vibration pattern
Antinode
Node
Electrostatic drive
and sense electrodes
Vibrating ring
Support flexures
Anchor
45°
Figure 4.23
Illustration of the Delphi Delco angular-rate sensor and the corresponding
standing-wave pattern. The basic structure consists of a ring shell suspended from an anchor by
support flexures. A total of 32 electrodes (only a few are shown) distributed around the entire
perimeter of the ring excite a primary mode of resonance using electrostatic actuation. A second
set of distributed electrodes capacitively sense the vibration modes. The angular shift of the
standing-wave pattern is a measure of the angular velocity. (After: [29].)

The demonstrated specifications of the Delphi Delco sensor over the tempera-
ture range of –40° to +125ºC include a resolution of 0.5º/s over a bandwidth of
25 Hz, limited by noise in the electronic circuitry. The nonlinearity in a rate range of
±100 º/s is less than 0.2º/s. The sensor survives the standard automotive shock test: a
drop from a height of one meter. The specifications are adequate for most automo-
tive and consumer applications.
Angular-Rate Sensor from Silicon Sensing Systems
The CRS family of yaw-rate sensors from Silicon Sensing Systems, a joint venture
between BAE Systems of Plymouth, Devon, England, and Sumitomo Precision
Products Company of Japan, is aimed at commercial and automotive applications.
It also uses a vibratory ring shell similar to the sensor from Delphi Delco but differs
on the excitation and sense methods. Electric current loops in a magnetic field,
instead of electrostatic electrodes, excite the primary mode of resonance. These
same loops provide the sense signal to detect the angular position of the vibration
pattern (see Figure 4.24).
The ring, 6 mm in diameter, is suspended by eight flexural beams anchored to a
10-mm-square frame. Eight equivalent current loops span every two adjacent sup-
port beams. A current loop starts at a bond pad on the frame, traces a support beam
to the ring, continues on the ring for one eighth of the circumference, then moves
onto the next adjacent support beam, before ending on a second bond pad. Under
this scheme, each support beam carries two conductors. A Samarium-Cobalt perma-
nent magnet mounted inside the package provides a magnetic field perpendicular to
the beams. Electromagnetic interaction between current in a loop and the magnetic
Sensors and Analysis Systems
109
B
Current loop
Support flexural beams
Bondpad
Suspended ring
Glass
1. Deposit and pattern oxide
2. Deposit
pattern metal
and
3. Resist spin
pattern
and
4. DRIE
5. Anodic bond of glass
Silicon
Figure 4.24
Illustration of the CRS angular-rate sensor from Silicon Sensing Systems and
corresponding fabrication process. The device uses a vibratory ring shell design, similar to the
Delphi Delco sensor. Eight current loops in a magnetic field, B, provide the excitation and sense
functions. For simplicity, only one of the current loops is shown. (After: product data sheet of
Silicon Sensing Systems.)

field induces a Lorentz force. Its radial component is responsible for the oscillation of
the ring in the plane of the die at approximately 14.5 kHz—the mechanical resonant
frequency of the ring. The sensing mechanism measures the voltage induced around
one or more loops in accordance with Faraday’s law: As the ring oscillates, the
area of the current loop in the magnetic flux changes, generating a voltage. Two
diametrically opposite loops perform a differential voltage measurement. One can
simplistically view an actuating and a sensing loop as the primary and secondary
windings of a transformer; the electromagnetic coupling between them depends on
the ring vibration pattern and thus on the angular rate of rotation.
Closed-loop feedback improves the overall performance by increasing the band-
width and reducing the system’s sensitivity to physical errors. Two separate feed-
back loops with automatic gain control circuits maintain a constant oscillation
amplitude for the primary mode of resonance and a zero amplitude for the secon-
dary resonance mode. The feedback voltage required to null the secondary mode is a
direct measure of the rate of rotation.
The fabrication of the sensor is relatively simple. A silicon dioxide layer is depos-
ited on a silicon wafer, then lithographically patterned and etched. The silicon diox-
ide layer serves to electrically isolate the current loops. A metal layer is sputter
deposited, patterned, and etched to define the current loops as well as the bond pads.
A layer of photoresist is spun on and patterned in the shape of the ring and support
flexural beams. The photoresist then serves as a mask for a subsequent DRIE step to
etch trenches through the wafer. After removal of the photoresist mask, the silicon
wafer is anodically bonded to a glass wafer with a previously defined shallow cavity
on its surface. Little is available in the open literature on the packaging, but it is clear
from the need to include a permanent magnet that the packaging is custom and spe-
cific to this application.
The specification sheet of the CRS03-02 gives an output scale factor of
20 mV/(º/s) with a variation of ±3% over a temperature range from –40° to +85ºC.
The noise is less than 1 mV rms from 3 to 10 Hz. The nonlinearity in a rate range of
±100 º/s is less than 0.5 º/s. The operating current is a relatively large 50 mA at a
nominal 5-V supply.
Angular-Rate Sensor from Daimler Benz
The sensor from Daimler Benz AG of Stuttgart, Germany [31], is a strict implemen-
tation of a tuning fork using micromachining technology (see Figure 4.25). The tines
of the silicon tuning fork vibrate out of the plane of the die, driven by a thin-film pie-
zoelectric aluminum nitride actuator on top of one of the tines. The Coriolis forces
on the tines produce a torquing moment around the stem of the tuning fork, giving
rise to shear stresses that can be sensed with diffused piezoresistive elements. The
shear stress is maximal on the center line of the stem and corresponds with the opti-
mal location for the piezoresistive sense elements.
The high precision of micromachining is not sufficient to ensure the balancing of
the two tines and the tuning of the two resonant frequencies—recall from the earlier
discussion that the vibration modes of a tuning fork are not degenerate. An imbal-
ance in the tines produces undesirable coupling between the excitation and sense
resonant modes, which degrades the resolution of the device. A laser ablation step
precisely removes tine material and provides calibration of the tuning fork. For this
110
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications

particular design, all resonant modes of the fork are at frequencies above 10 kHz.
To minimize coupling to higher orders, the primary and secondary modes are sepa-
rated by at least 10 kHz from all other remaining modes. The choice of crystalline
silicon for tine material allows achieving a high quality factor (~ 7,000) at pressures
below 10−5 bar.
The fabrication process is distinct from that of other yaw-rate sensors in its usage
of SOI substrates (see Figure 4.26). The crystalline silicon over the silicon dioxide
layer defines the tines. The thickness control of the tines is accomplished at the begin-
ning of the process by the precise epitaxial growth of silicon over the SOI substrate.
The thickness of the silicon layer, and consequently of the tine, varies between
20 and 200 µm, depending on the desired performance of the sensor. Litho-
graphy followed by a shallow silicon etch in tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide
(TMAH) define 2-µm-deep cavities in two mirror-image SOI substrates. Silicon
Sensors and Analysis Systems
111
1. Etch cavity in SOI wafers
2. Silicon fusion bonding
3. Etch front side;
stop on buried oxide
4. Etch oxide
5. Define and pattern
piezoelectric films and
piezoresistors
6. Back-side etch;
stop on buried oxide;
plasma etch release
Silicon
AlN
Al
Diffused piezoresistor
SiO2
Figure 4.26
The main fabrication steps for the Daimler Benz micromachined angular-rate sensor.
Excitation AlN
piezoelectric
film
Piezoresistive
torsional shear
sensor
Tuning fork
Axis of
rotation
Direction of
oscillation
Silicon fusion
bonding interface
{100} silicon substrate
Coriolis
force
Coriolis
force
Figure 4.25
Illustration of the angular-rate sensor from Daimler Benz. The structure is a strict
implementation of a tuning fork in silicon. A piezoelectric actuator excites the fork into resonance.
The Coriolis force results in torsional shear stress in the stem, which is measured by a piezoresistive
sense element. (After: [31].)

fusion bonding brings these substrates together such that the cavities are facing each
other. The cavity depth determines the separation between the two tines. An etch step
in TMAH removes the silicon on the front side and stops on the buried silicon diox-
ide layer which is subsequently removed in hydrofluoric acid. The following steps
define the piezoelectric and piezoresistive elements on the silicon surface. Diffused
piezoresistors are formed using ion implantation and diffusion. Piezoelectric alumi-
num nitride is then deposited by sputtering aluminum in a controlled nitrogen and
argon atmosphere. This layer is lithographically patterned and etched in the shape of
the excitation plate over the tine. Aluminum is then sputtered and patterned to form
electrical interconnects and bond pads. Finally, a TMAH etch step from the back side
removes the silicon from underneath the tines. The buried silicon dioxide layer acts as
an etch stop. An anisotropic plasma etch from the front side releases the tines.
The
measured
frequency
of
the
primary,
flexural
mode
(excitation
mode) was 32.2 kHz, whereas the torsional secondary mode (sense mode) was
245 Hz lower. Typical of tuning forks, the frequencies exhibited a temperature
dependence. For this particular technology, the temperature coefficient of fre-
quency is –0.85 Hz/ºC.
Angular-Rate Sensor from Robert Bosch
This sensor from Robert Bosch GmbH of Stuttgart, Germany, is unique in its imple-
mentation of a mechanical resonant structure equivalent to a tuning fork [32]. An
oscillator system consists of two identical masses coupled to each other by a spring
and suspended from an outer frame by two other springs (see Figure 4.27). Such a
112
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications
M
M
k1
k1
k2
k2
Direction of oscillation
Accelerometer
Accelerometer
Bondpads to
accelerometer
Bondpads
to current
loops
Spring
Mass
Current loop
Direction of oscillation
Direction of Coriolis force
fi =
=
k1
M
1
2π
(In phase)
(Out of phase)
fo
k
k
1
2
+
M
1
2π
Figure 4.27
Illustration of the yaw-rate sensor from Robert Bosch GmbH. A simple mechanical
model shows the two masses and coupling springs. (After: [32].)

coupled system has two resonant frequencies: in phase, and out of phase. In the in-
phase oscillation mode, the instantaneous displacements of the two masses are in
the same direction. In the out-of-phase mode, the masses are moving, at any
instant, in opposite directions. A careful selection of the coupling spring provides
sufficient separation between the in-phase and out-of-phase resonant frequencies.
Lorentz forces generated by an electric current loop within a permanent mag-
netic field excite only the out-of-phase mode. The oscillation electromagnetically
induces a voltage in a second current loop that provides a feedback signal propor-
tional to the velocity of the masses. The resulting Coriolis forces on the two masses
are in opposite directions but orthogonal to the direction of oscillation. Two poly-
silicon surface-micromachined accelerometers with capacitive comb structures
(similar in their basic operation to the ADXL family of sensors) measure the Corio-
lis accelerations for each of the masses. The difference between the two accelera-
tions is a direct measure of the angular yaw rate, whereas their sum is proportional
to the linear acceleration along the accelerometer’s sensitive axis. Electronic cir-
cuits perform the addition and subtraction functions to filter out the linear accel-
eration signal.
For the Bosch sensor, the out-of-phase resonant frequency is 2 kHz, and the
maximum oscillation amplitude at this frequency is 50 µm. The measured quality
factor of the oscillator at atmospheric pressure is 1,200, sufficiently large to excite
resonance with small Lorentz forces. The stimulated oscillation subjects the masses
to large accelerations reaching approximately 800G. Though they are theoretically
perpendicular to the sensitive axis of the accelerometers, in practice, some coupling
remains, which threatens the signal integrity. However, because the two temporal
signals are in phase quadrature, adopting synchronous demodulation methods
allows the circuits to filter the spurious coupled signal with a rejection ratio exceed-
ing 78 dB. This is indeed a large rejection ratio but insufficient to meet the require-
ments of inertial navigation.
The peak Coriolis acceleration for a yaw rate of 100º/s is only 200 mG. This
requires extremely sensitive accelerometers with compliant springs. The small
Coriolis acceleration further emphasizes the need for perfect orthogonality between
the sense and excitation axes. Closed-loop position feedback of the acceleration
sense element compensates for the mechanical poles and increases the bandwidth of
the accelerometers to over 10 kHz.
The fabrication process simultaneously encompasses bulk and surface
micromachining: the former to define the masses and the latter to form the
comb-like accelerometers (see Figure 4.28). The process sequence begins by depos-
iting a 2.5-µm layer of silicon dioxide on a silicon substrate. Epitaxy over the oxide
layer grows a 12-µm-thick layer of heavily doped n-type polysilicon. This layer
forms the basis for the surface-micromachined sensors and is polycrystalline
because of the lack of a seed crystal during epitaxial growth. In the next step, alu-
minum is deposited by sputtering and patterned to form electrical interconnects
and bond pads. Timed etching from the back side using potassium hydroxide thins
the central portion of the wafer to 50 µm. Two sequential DRIE steps define the
structural elements of the accelerometers and the oscillating masses. The following
step involves etching the sacrificial silicon dioxide layer using a gas phase process
(e.g., hydrofluoric acid vapor) to release the polysilicon comb structures. Finally, a
Sensors and Analysis Systems
113

protective silicon cap wafer that contains a recess cavity is bonded on the front side
using a low temperature seal glass process. A glass wafer anodically bonded to the
back side seals the device. The final assembly brings together the silicon sensor and
the electronic circuits inside a metal can whose cover holds a permanent magnet.
The sensitivity of the device is 18 mV/(º/s) in the range of ±100 º/s over –40° to
+85ºC. The temperature dependence of the uncompensated sensor causes an offset
amplitude of 0.5 º/s over the specified temperature range, but signal conditioning
circuits reduce this dependence by implementing appropriate electronic temperature
compensation schemes.
Carbon Monoxide Gas Sensor
Many gas sensors operate on the principle of modulating the resistance of a metal-
oxide element by adsorption of gas molecules to its surface. The adsorbed gas mole-
cules interact with the surface of such a wide-bandgap semiconductor to trap one or
more conduction electrons, effectively reducing the surface conductivity. The resis-
tance is inversely proportional to a fractional power of the gas concentration. The
class of sensor materials include the oxides of tin (SnO2), titanium (TiO2), indium
(In2O3), zinc (ZnO), tungsten (WO3), and iron (Fe2O3). Each metal oxide is sensitive
to different gases. For example, tin oxide is effective at detecting alcohol, hydrogen,
oxygen, hydrogen sulfide, and carbon monoxide. Indium oxide, by contrast, is sensi-
tive to ozone (O3); zinc oxide is useful for detecting halogenated hydrocarbons.
Unfortunately, most are adversely affected by humidity, which must be controlled at
all times. In addition, variations in material properties require that each sensor is
individually calibrated.
The MiCS series of carbon monoxide sensors from MicroChemical Systems SA
of Switzerland [33] is based on an earlier implementation by Motorola that incorpo-
rated a tin-oxide, thin-film sense resistor over a polysilicon resistive heater [34]. The
role of the heater is to maintain the sensor at an operating temperature between 100°
114
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications
Aluminum
Polysilicon
Silicon
dioxide
Silicon substrate
1. Deposit oxide and polysilicon;
deposit and pattern aluminum
2. Anisotropic etch from backside;
pattern and etch polysilicon
3. Sacrificial etch of oxide;
DRIE of silicon
4. Bond cap wafer;
anodic bond glass
Glass
Cap
Bondpad
Figure 4.28
Illustration of the fabrication process for the yaw-rate sensor from Robert Bosch
GmbH. (After: [32].)

and 450ºC, thus reducing the deleterious effects of humidity. The sense resistor and
the heater reside over a 2-µm-thick silicon membrane to minimize heat loss through
the substrate. Consequently, a mere 47 mW is sufficient to maintain the membrane
at 400ºC. There are a total of four electrical contacts: two connect to the tin-oxide
resistor, and the other two connect to the polysilicon heater. The simplest method to
measure resistance is to flow a constant current through the sense element and
record the output voltage (see Figure 4.29).
The particulars of the fabrication process for the MiCS carbon monoxide sensor
and its predecessor by Motorola are not publicly disclosed, but demonstrations of
similar devices exist in the literature. A simple process would begin with the forming
of a heavily doped, p-type, 2-µm-thick layer of silicon either by epitaxial growth or,
alternatively, by ion implantation and annealing. The deposition of a silicon nitride
layer follows. A chemical vapor deposition (CVD) step provides a polysilicon film
that is later patterned and etched in the shape of the heater. The polysilicon film is
doped either in situ during the CVD process or by ion implantation and subsequent
annealing. An oxide layer is then deposited and contact holes etched in it. The pur-
pose of this layer is to electrically isolate the polysilicon heater from the tin-oxide
sense element. The tin-oxide layer is deposited by sputtering tin and oxidizing it at
approximately 400ºC. An alternative deposition process is sol-gel, starting with a
tin-based organic precursor and curing by firing at an elevated temperature. The
tin-oxide layer is patterned using standard lithography and etched in the shape of
the sense element. Sputtered and patterned aluminum provides contact metalliza-
tion. Finally, an etch from the back side in potassium hydroxide or EDP forms a thin
membrane by stopping on the heavily doped p-type surface silicon layer. Naturally,
a masking layer (e.g., silicon nitride) on the back side of the substrate and protection
of the front side are necessary. It is also possible to etch all of the silicon and stop at
Sensors and Analysis Systems
115
Package opening
Mesh
Charcoal filter
Mesh
Silicon
Anisotropically
etched silicon
membrane
Silicon dioxide
Polysilicon heater
Insulating
layer
Tin oxide
Metal
contact
Surface tin oxide
Bulk tin oxide
P-type silicon
Figure 4.29
Illustration of a carbon monoxide sensor, its equivalent circuit model, and the final
packaged part. The surface resistance of tin-oxide changes in response to carbon monoxide. A
polysilicon heater maintains the sensor at a temperature between 100° and 450ºC in order to
reduce the adverse effects of humidity. (After: [34].)

the silicon nitride layer to further increase thermal isolation and improve the sen-
sor’s performance.
The operation of the earlier sensor by Motorola consists of applying to the
heater a 5-V pulse for 5s, followed by a 1-V pulse lasting 10s. The corresponding
temperature is 400ºC during the first interval, decreasing to 80ºC during the second
pulse. To maintain consistency, the resistance measurement always occurs at the
same time during the interval—in this case, at 9.5s into the second 10-s long pulse.
The MiCS sensor demonstrates a response from 10 to 1,000 parts per million (ppm)
of carbon monoxide (CO) over a humidity range of 5 to 95%. The output signal
shows a square-root dependence on CO concentration, with little dependence on
humidity for CO concentrations above 60 ppm.
Actuators and Actuated Microsystems
The physical world is not still but is rather very dynamic and full of motion. If sen-
sors extend our faculties of sight, hearing, smell, and touch, then actuators must be
the extension to our hands and fingers. They give us the agility and dexterity to
manipulate physical parameters well beyond our reach. It is not surprising that the
promise to control at a miniature scale is fascinating. Wouldn’t the surgeon dream of
electronically controlled precision surgical tools? And what to do when our sensors
tell us of a need to locally act and control on a microscopic scale? It is actuation that
affords us the ability to apply this type of feedback.
In this section, we address the use of micromachined actuators primarily in
industrial and automotive applications—though it is well understood that with
minor modifications, these actuators can be applied to other markets. Inkjet heads
and microvalves are perhaps the most notable examples to discuss. Micromachined
pumps are also emerging as new products of the future. The complexity of actuated
microsystems continues to increase as the technology matures, accompanied with a
rapidly rising level of integration. For instance, novel microfluidic systems now inte-
grate valves and pumps, as well as various types of sensors and interconnecting
channels, and they have become a separate field of study and development [35].
Thermal Inkjet Heads
The thermal inkjet print head, ubiquitous in today’s printers for personal comput-
ers, receives frequent mention as a premier success story of MEMS technology.
While thermal inkjet technology is a commercial success for Hewlett-Packard, Inc.,
of Palo Alto, California, and a few other companies, there is little in it that origi-
nates from silicon MEMS per se. Early generations of inkjet heads used electro-
formed nickel nozzles [10, 36, 37]. More recent models use nozzle plates drilled by
laser ablation [38]. Silicon micromachining is not likely to compete with these tra-
ditional technologies on a cost basis. However, applications that require high-
resolution printing will probably benefit from micromachined nozzles. At a resolu-
tion of 1,200 dots per inch (dpi), the spacing between adjacent nozzles in a linear
array is a mere 21 µm. A greater number of laser-drilled nozzles on a head raises the
cost, while the cost remains constant as holes are added using batch-fabrication
methods. Nonetheless, the nozzles continue to be made in nickel plates, but
micromachining technology is now necessary to integrate a large number of
116
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications

microheaters on a silicon chip. High-performance inkjet technology represents an
excellent illustration of how micromachining has become a critical and enabling
element in a more complex system.
The device from Hewlett-Packard illustrates the basic principle of thermal ink-
jet printing (see Figure 4.30) [38, 39]. A well under an orifice contains a small vol-
ume of ink held in place by surface tension. To fire a droplet, a thin-film resistor
made of tantalum-aluminum alloy locally superheats the water-based ink beneath
an exit nozzle to over 250ºC. Within 5 µs, a bubble forms with peak pressures
reaching 1.4 MPa (200 psi) and begins to expel ink out of the orifice. After 15 µs,
the ink droplet, with a volume on the order of 10−10 liter, is ejected from the nozzle
[37]. Within 24 µs of the firing pulse, the tail of the ink droplet separates, and the
bubble collapses inside the nozzle, resulting in high cavitation pressure. Within less
than 50 µs, the chamber refills, and the ink meniscus at the orifice settles.
The fabrication process of Hewlett-Packard inkjet heads has evolved as the
printing resolution has increased. While the exact process flow is proprietary, a rep-
resentative process follows. Fabrication starts with a silicon wafer, which is oxi-
dized for thermal and electrical isolation (see Figure 4.31) [40]. Approximately 0.1
µm of tantalum-aluminum alloy is sputtered on, followed by aluminum containing
a small amount of copper. The TaAl is resistive and has a near-zero thermal coeffi-
cient of expansion [38], while Al is a good conductor. The aluminum and TaAl are
patterned, leaving an Al/TaAl sandwich to form conductive traces. Aluminum is
then removed only from the resistor location to leave TaAl resistors. The resistors
and conductive traces are protected by layers of PECVD silicon nitride, which is an
electrical insulator, and PECVD silicon carbide, which is electrically conductive at
elevated temperatures but is more chemically inert than the silicon nitride. The
Actuators and Actuated Microsystems
117
Silicon substrate
Silicon dioxide
insulator
TaAl resistor
Al conductor
SiC/SiN
passivation
Ta protection/
adhesion layer
Au pad
Polyimide adhesive/
ink barrier
Ni orifice plate
Ink
At 0
s:
start of cycle
µ
After 5
s:
bubble forms
µ
After 15
s:
drop ejected
µ
After 24
s:
bubble collapses,
meniscus retracts
µ
Ink meniscus
Bubble
Figure 4.30
Concept of a Hewlett-Packard thermal inkjet head and the ink firing sequence.
(After: [38, 39].)

PECVD is performed at a sufficiently low temperature so as not to affect the metal
already on the wafer. The use of this bilayer passivation, in addition to providing the
appropriate thermal properties and needed chemical protection, reduces the inci-
dence of pinholes. The SiC/SiN layers are patterned to make openings over the bond
pads. Later generations of heads use an additional layer of tantalum, which is very
hard, over the SiC/SiN in the resistor area to protect the underlying areas from the
high cavitation pressure (up to 13 MPa) felt during bubble collapse, greatly length-
ening the lifetime [40]. The tantalum sputtering is followed by gold sputtering with-
out breaking vacuum. The Ta also acts as an adhesion layer for the Au. The Au and
Ta are patterned, so they only remain on the contact pads and resistor. The gold is
then etched off of the resistor, leaving it only on the bond pads. Next, polyimide is
spun on, partially cured, and patterned to leave a channel through which ink flows
to the resistor. The nickel orifice plate, which was separately fabricated using elec-
troforming or laser ablation, is aligned and bonded to the silicon structure by the
polyimide. Finally, the wafer is cut up to the final product size.
As the print resolution of HP thermal inkjet heads increased from 96 dpi in 1984
to 180 dpi to 300 dpi to 300 × 600 dpi in the mid 1990s, the number of heater resis-
tors increased from 12 to 30 to 50 to 104, respectively [36, 37, 40]. For the earlier
generations, there was one external contact pad to drive each resistor, plus several
common grounds. For any electronic device, one of the greatest areas of reliability
concern is where electrical contacts are made, and disposable inkjet heads are a par-
ticular concern because they are installed by the consumer. To improve reliability, as
118
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications
Silicon substrate
Silicon dioxide
insulator
TaAl resistor
Al conductor
1. Grow oxide for insulator, sputter TaAl and Al, pattern Al and TaAl,
pattern Al again to form resistor and conductive trace.
2. PECVD silicon nitride and silicon carbide passivation,
pattern to contact openings.
SiC/SiN
passivation
3. Sputter tantalum and gold, pattern Ta and Au for pads,
pattern Au again, leaving Ta over resistors.
Ta for
protection layer
Au pad
Ta for
adhesion layer
4. Deposit and pattern polyimide, bond premade nickel orifice plate.
Polyimide adhesive/
ink barrier
Ni orifice plate
Figure 4.31
Fabrication process for Hewlett-Packard thermal inkjet head.

well as reduce the area of silicon required for the output pads (which are
large), on-chip n-channel metal-oxide-semiconductor (NMOS) driver circuitry was
implemented on the 104-resistor chip, reducing the number of pads to 36. While
the NMOS transistors require additional chip area and additional processing steps,
the space savings is great enough that the overall chip cost is reduced [40].
Micromachined Valves
A new generation of miniature valves with electronic control would be desirable
among both manufacturers and users of valves. For example, recent trends in home
appliances indicate a shift towards total electronic control [41]. Electronically pro-
grammable gas stoves, currently under development, require low-cost, electroni-
cally controlled gas valves. Moreover, miniature valves are useful for the control of
fluid flow functions in portable biochemical analysis systems [42] and automotive
braking systems [43]. Some potential applications for silicon micromachined valves
include:
• Electronic flow regulation of refrigerant for increased energy savings;
• Electronically programmable gas cooking stoves;
• Electronically programmable pressure regulators for gas cylinders;
• Accurate mass flow controllers for high-purity gas delivery systems;
• Accurate drug delivery systems;
• Control of fluid flow in portable biochemical analysis systems;
• Portable gas chromatography systems;
• Proportional control for electrohydraulic braking (EHB) systems.
The field of micromachined valves remains nascent. In order for silicon
micromachined valves to gain a substantial foothold in the market, they must effec-
tively compete with the relatively mature traditional valve technologies. These cover
a broad range of actuation methods, media handling, pressures, flow rates, and
price. It is unlikely that micromachined valves will displace traditional valves;
rather, they will complement them in special applications where size and electronic
control are beneficial.
The following sections describe three micromachined valves. The devices are
from Redwood Microsystems, Inc., of Menlo Park, California; TiNi Alloy
Company of San Leandro, California; and Alumina Micro, LLC of Bellingham,
Washington. They illustrate the efforts of three small companies in commercializ-
ing microvalves. The first two valves operate on the principle of blocking a vertical
fluid port with a silicon plug suspended from a spring that is sufficiently compliant
to allow vertical displacement during actuation. Accordingly, the inlet pressure
limit is relatively low, typically, less than 150 psig2 (~ 1 MPa). The third valve uses
an elegant pressure balancing scheme to reduce the pressure forces against an
actuated silicon element thus increasing the inlet pressure to nearly 1,000 psig
(~ 7 MPa).
Actuators and Actuated Microsystems
119
2.
The psig is a unit of differential (gauge) pressure equal to one psi (or 6.9 kPa).

Micromachined Valve from Redwood Microsystems
Early development of this valve took place in the mid 1980s at Stanford University
[44]. Redwood Microsystems was founded shortly thereafter with the objective of
commercializing the valve. The actuation mechanism of either normally open or
normally closed valves
3 depends on the electrical heating of a control liquid sealed
inside a cavity. When the temperature of the liquid rises, its pressure increases, thus
exerting a force on a thin diaphragm wall and flexing it outward.
In a normally open valve, the diaphragm itself occludes a fluid port by its flexing
action, hence blocking flow (see Figure 4.32). Upon removal of electrical power, the
control liquid entrapped in the sealed cavity cools down, and the diaphragm returns
to its flat position, consequently allowing flow through the port. The flexing
membrane is in intimate contact with the fluid flow, which increases heat loss by
conduction and severely restricts the operation of the valve. A more recent demon-
stration from Redwood Microsystems shows a thermal isolation scheme using a
glass plate between the heated control liquid and the flexible membrane. Small
perforations in the isolation glass permit the transmission of pressure to actuate the
diaphragm.
The normally closed valve uses mechanical levering activated by a liquid-filled
thermo pneumatic actuator to open an outlet orifice. The outward flexing action of
the diaphragm under the effect of internal pressure develops a torque about a
silicon fulcrum. Consequently, the upper portion of the valve containing the actua-
tion element lifts the valve plug above the valve seat, permitting flow through the
orifice.
The pressure that develops inside the sealed cavity results from the heating of the
control liquid, which must meet several criteria in order to yield efficient actuation.
In particular, the control liquid must be inert and noncorrosive. It must be electri-
cally insulating but thermally conductive and must boil or expand considerably
when heated. Redwood Microsystems uses one of the Fluorinert™perfluorocarbon
120
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications
Silicon
Outlet port
Resistive heater
Flexible diaphragm
Control liquid
Pyrex
Pyrex
Figure 4.32
Illustration of a normally open valve from Redwood Microsystems. Heating of a
control liquid sealed inside a cavity causes a thin silicon diaphragm to flex and block the flow
through the outlet orifice. The inlet port is not shown.
3.
The trademark name of the valve is the Fluistor™, short for fluid transistor because the valve is electrically
gated in a fashion similar to the electronic transistor.

liquids from 3M Chemicals of St. Paul, Minnesota. Their boiling point ranges
from 56° to 250ºC, and they exhibit large temperature coefficients of expansion
(~ 0.13% per degree Celsius). They are also electrically insulating and have a high
dielectric constant. Clearly, the choice of control liquid determines the actuation
temperature and, correspondingly, the power consumption and switching times of
the valve.
The NO-1500 Fluistor normally open gas valve provides proportional control
of the flow rate for noncorrosive gases. The flow rate ranges from 0.1 sccm up to
1,500 sccm. The maximum inlet supply pressure is 690 kPa (100 psig)4, the switch-
ing time is typically 0.5s, and the corresponding average power consumption is 500
mW. The NC-1500 Fluistor is a normally closed gas valve (see Figure 4.33) with
similar pressure and flow ratings, but its switching response is 1s and it consumes
1.5W. Because the Fluistor relies on the absolute temperature—rather than a differ-
ential temperature—of the control liquid for actuation, the valve cannot operate at
elevated ambient temperatures. Consequently, the Fluistor is rated for operation
from 0° to 55ºC. The normally closed valve measures approximately 6 mm × 6 mm
× 2 mm and is packaged inside a TO-8 can with two attached tubes (see Chapter 8).
The packaging is further discussed in Chapter 8.
U.S. Patent 4,966,646 (October 30, 1990) describes the basic fabrication steps
for a normally open valve; however, the fabrication details of a normally closed
valve are not publicly available. The following process delineates the general steps
to fabricate a normally closed valve. The features in the intermediate silicon layer
are fabricated by etching both sides of the wafer in potassium hydroxide. The
front-side etch forms the cavity that will later be filled with the actuation liquid. The
etch on the bottom side forms the fulcrum as well as the valve plug. Accurate timing
and a well-controlled etch rate of both etches ensure the formation of the thin
Actuators and Actuated Microsystems
121
(b)
(a)
Silicon
Outlet port
Resistive
heater
Pivot point
{111} plane
Diaphragm
Fluorinert
filled cavity
Pyrex
Pyrex
Figure 4.33
Illustration of the basic operating mechanism of a normally closed micromachined valve from
Redwood Microsystems. (a) The upper stage of the valve normally blocks fluid flow through the outlet ori-
fice. The inlet orifice is not shown. (b) Heating of the Fluorinert liquid sealed inside a cavity flexes a thin sili-
con diaphragm which in turn causes a mechanical lever to lift the valve plug. (After: Fluistor valve
specification sheet of Redwood Microsytems of Menlo Park, California.)
4.
Fluid flow through an ideal orifice depends on the differential pressure across it. The volume flow rate is
equal to C A
P
D
0
2∆
ρ where ∆P is the difference in pressure, ρ is the density of the fluid, A0 is the orifice
area, and CD is the discharge coefficient, a parameter that is about 0.65 for a wide range of orifice
geometries.

diaphragm in the middle of the silicon wafer. The top glass wafer is processed
separately to form a sputtered thin-film metal heater. Ultrasonic drilling opens a fill
hole through the top Pyrex glass substrate, as well as the inlet and outlet ports in the
lower Pyrex glass substrate. Both glass substrates are sequentially bonded to the sili-
con wafer using anodic bonding. In the final step, the Fluorinert liquid fills the cav-
ity. Special silicone compounds dispensed over the fill hole permanently seal the
Fluorinert inside the cavity.
Micromachined Valve from TiNi Alloy Company
TiNi Alloy Company of San Leandro, California, is another small company with the
objective of commercializing micromachined valves. Its design approach, however, is
very different than that of Redwood Microsystems. The actuation mechanism relies
on titanium-nickel (TiNi) [45], a shape-memory alloy—hence the name of the com-
pany. The rationale is that shape-memory alloys are very efficient actuators and can
produce a large volumetric energy density, approximately five to 10 times higher
than competing actuation methods. It is, however, the integration of TiNi processing
with mainstream silicon manufacturing that remains an important hurdle.
The complete valve assembly consists of three silicon wafers and one beryllium-
copper spring to maintain a closing force on the valve poppet (plug) (see
Figure 4.34). One silicon wafer incorporates an orifice. A second wafer is simply a
spacer defining the stroke of the poppet as it actuates. A third silicon wafer contains
the valve poppet suspended from a spring structure made of a thin-film titanium-
nickel alloy. A sapphire ball between a beryllium-copper spring and the third silicon
wafer pushes the poppet out of the plane of the third wafer through the spacer of the
second wafer to close the orifice in the first wafer. Current flow through the
titanium-nickel alloy heats the spring above its transition temperature (~ 100ºC),
122
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications
Orifice die
Spacer
Actuator die
TiNi spring and actuator
Sapphire ball
Bias spring
Silicon
Beryllium-copper
Poppet
Flow orifice
Figure 4.34
Assembly of the micromachined, normally closed valve from TiNi Alloy Company.
The beryllium-copper spring pushes a sapphire ball against the silicon poppet to close the flow ori-
fice. Resistive heating of the TiNi spring above its transition temperature causes it to recover its
original flat (undeflected) shape. The actuation pulls the poppet away from the orifice, hence per-
mitting fluid flow. (After: A. D. Johnson, TiNi Alloy Company of San Leandro, California.)

causing it to contract and recover its original undeflected position in the plane of the
third wafer. This action pulls the poppet back from the orifice, hence permitting
fluid flow.
The fabrication process relies on thin-film deposition and anisotropic etching
to form the silicon elements of the valve (see Figure 4.35). The fabrication of the
orifice and the spacer wafers is simple, involving one etch step for each. The third
wafer containing the poppet and the titanium-nickel spring involves a few addi-
tional steps. Silicon dioxide is first deposited or grown on both sides of the wafer.
The layer on the back side of the wafer is patterned. A timed anisotropic silicon
etch using the silicon dioxide as a mask defines a silicon membrane. TMAH is a
suitable etch solution because of its extreme selectivity to silicon dioxide. A
titanium-nickel film, a few micrometers in thickness, is sputter deposited on the
front side and subsequently patterned. Control of the composition of the film is
critical, as this determines the transition temperature. Double-sided lithography
is critical to ensure that the titanium-nickel pattern aligns properly with the cavities
etched on the back side. Gold evaporation and patterning follows; gold defines the
bond pads and the metal contacts to the titanium-alloy actuator. A wet or plasma
etch step from the back side removes the thin silicon membrane and frees the pop-
pet. At this point, the three silicon wafers are bonded together using a glass
thermo-compression bond. Silicon fusion bonding is not practical because the
titanium-nickel alloy rapidly oxidizes at temperatures above 300ºC. Assembly of
the valve elements remains manual, resulting in high production costs. The list
price for one valve is about $200. Achieving wafer-level assembly is crucial to bene-
fit from the cost advantages of volume manufacturing.
The performance advantage of shape-memory alloys manifests itself in low
power consumption and fast switching speeds. The valve consumes less than 200
mW and switches on in about 10 ms and off in about 15 ms. The maximum gas flow
rate and inlet pressure are 1,000 sccm and 690 kPa (100 psig), respectively. The
valve measures 8 mm × 5 mm × 2 mm and is assembled inside a plastic package.
Actuators and Actuated Microsystems
123
TiNi
Au
Si
Poppet
• Deposit silicon oxide
• Etch backside cavities
• Sputter deposit TiNi
• Pattern TiNi
• Deposit and pattern
gold contacts
• Wet or dry etch silicon
from backside to free poppet
• Assemble with orifice die
SiO2
Orifice die
Spacer
TiNi
Si
Figure 4.35
Fabrication sequence of the micromachined valve from TiNi Alloy Company.
(After: [45].)

Sliding Plate Microvalve
Alumina Micro, LLC, of Bellingham, Washington, is developing micromachined
valves under license based on technology developed at GE NovaSensor of Fremont,
California. These valves are intended for use in such automotive applications as
braking and air conditioning, which require the ability to control either liquids or
gases at high pressures—as high as 2,000 psi (14 MPa)—over a wide temperature
range (typically from –40°C to +125°C).
In micromachined valves that use a vertically movable diaphragm or plug over an
orifice, such as the two examples discussed previously, the diaphragm or plug sus-
tains a pressure difference across it. This pressure difference, when multiplied by the
area, results in a force that must be overcome for the diaphragm to move. For high
pressures and flow rates, the force becomes relatively large for a micromachined
device. By contrast, the valve under development by Alumina Micro belongs to a
family of valves known as sliding plate valves, in which a plate, or slider, moves
horizontally across the vertical flow from an orifice. With appropriate design, the
forces due to pressure can be balanced to minimize the force that must be supplied to
the slider.
As shown in Figure 4.36, the valve is comprised of three layers of silicon
[46, 47]. The inlet and outlets ports are formed in the top and bottom layers of
silicon, respectively. For the normally open valve shown, fluid flows past the top
controlling orifice formed between the slider and the top wafer, through the thick-
ness of the second layer of silicon, and down out of the outlet port formed in the bot-
tom wafer. Fluid flow also passes through the slot in the slider, under the slider,
through the lower controlling orifice, and out of the outlet port. To reduce or turn
off the flow, an actuator moves the slider to the right in the figure, reducing the area
of the two controlling orifices. The pressure inside the slot is equal to the inlet pres-
sure pin. Therefore, the horizontal pressure forces acting on the internal surfaces of
the slot are equal and opposite and balance each other. Similarly, the horizontal
pressure forces acting on the external surfaces of the slot balance each other because
the pressure outside the slot is equal to the outlet pressure pout. The pressure forces
are also balanced vertically, as the pressures on the top and bottom surfaces of the
slider are equal to the inlet pressure [47]. In practice, small pressure imbalances due
to flow are present, so some force is still required to move the slider, limiting opera-
tion to a few MPa (hundreds of psi).
The actuator is formed entirely in the middle silicon layer. There is a small
(approximately 0.5 to 1 µm) gap above and below all moving parts to allow motion.
The thermal actuator consists of a number of mechanically flexible “ribs” sus-
pended in the middle and anchored at their edges to the surrounding silicon frame.
Current flow through these electrically resistive ribs heats them, resulting in their
expansion. The centers of the ribs push the movable pushrod to the left in the draw-
ing [5], applying a torque about the fixed hinge and moving the slider tip in the
opposite direction. When the current flow ceases, the ribs passively cool down by
conduction of heat, both out the ends of the ribs and through the fluid. The mechani-
cal restoring force of the hinges and ribs returns the slider to its initial position.
Depending on the geometry of the actuator ribs, the actuation response time can
vary from a few to hundreds of milliseconds. The depth of the recesses above and
124
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications

below the ribs can be increased to lower the heat-flow rate. This reduces power con-
sumption but slows the response when cooling.
Actuators and Actuated Microsystems
125
(a)
Electrical contact
Top wafer
Middle wafer
Bottom wafer
Slider
Actuator ribs
Thin recess
Inlet port at pin
Outlet port at pout
flow path
Upper controlling orifice
(b)
Outlet port
Electrical contacts
Slider
Movable hinge
and pushrod
Inlet port
Actuator ribs
Thin recess
Top wafer
Middle wafer
Bottom wafer
Slot
Fixed hinge
Outline of outlet port in
bottom wafer
Deep recess
Frame
pout
pout
pin
pin
Figure 4.36
(a) A schematic cross section of the sliding plate microvalve depicting the inlet and
outlet ports, as well as the slider and the ribs of the thermal actuator. The slider’s motion to the
right of the picture reduces the size of the upper and lower controlling orifices, therefore
decreasing the flow through the valve. (b) A rendering of the three silicon wafers that comprise a
micromachined pressure-balanced valve. The top and bottom wafers include the inlet and outlet
ports, respectively. An intermediate wafer incorporates a thermal actuator that drives a slider
suspended from two hinges.

This actuator design avoids rubbing parts, greatly improving the reliability of
the valve. The force provided by the ribs can be raised by increasing both the silicon
thickness and the number of ribs and can be on the order of one Newton, which is
considered to be a very large force in micromachined structures. As the slider moves
to the right, it reduces the areas of the upper and lower controlling orifices and thus
the flow. Eventually, the slider closes off the orifices, and the flow drops to a
negligible amount. A small amount of leakage occurs through the thin recess that is
required to allow motion. In many applications, the leakage is considered small and
is acceptable.
Because the ribs and the frame that constrains their ends are made of the same
material (single-crystal silicon), the actuation force depends on the temperature gra-
dient between them. Any changes in temperature that are uniform to the entire
valve, such as fluctuations in the ambient temperature, cause both the ribs and the
frame to expand and contract at the same rate, resulting in no actuation. This
enables this valve design to operate over a very wide temperature range. The penalty
for the use of an all-silicon valve is a much lower power efficiency, as silicon is a
good thermal conductor (see Table 2.1) and heat is rapidly conducted out the ends
of the ribs. A design advantage of using silicon is that the resistivity of the middle
wafer can be specified by the designer over a range of several orders of magnitude,
allowing the actuator resistance to be designed independently of the actuator
dimensions.
To fabricate the valves, shallow recess cavities are etched in the top and bottom
wafers for the clearances required for actuator motion. Etching in KOH creates the
ports, deep recess, and through hole for electrical contacts (see Figure 4.36). These
might also be formed using DRIE, but KOH etching is an inexpensive option and
works well for this application. The actuator in the middle wafer is etched using
DRIE. Aligned silicon fusion bonding combines the wafer stack. Metal is applied to
the electrical contact areas of the middle wafer. Finally, the ports are protected with
dicing tape to keep them clean, and the wafer is diced (described in Chapter 8). In
use, the chips are held to the surface of a ceramic or metal package with an adhesive
or solder and wire bonded.
A typical design may include ten or more rib pairs, where each pair is formed by
two ribs connected in the middle to the pushrod. Each rib is approximately 100 µm
wide, 2,000 µm long, and 400 µm thick, and is inclined at an angle of a few degrees.
For an average temperature rise of 100°C, each rib pair contributes a force at the
pushrod (and center of rib pair) of about 0.15N. The force falls nearly linearly to
zero at the end of the stroke (about 5 to 10 µm). The lever structure formed by the
fixed hinge and slider transform this large force and small displacement at the actua-
tor to a moderate force and large displacement (>100 µm) at the tip of the slider
near the fluid ports. The prototype valve initially demonstrated at GE NovaSensor
[47] controlled water at pressures reaching 1.3 MPa (190 psig) and flows of 300
ml/min. Further design and fabrication improvements can increase these values to
match the requirements of the automotive and industrial applications.
Micropumps
Micropumps are conspicuously missing from the limelight in the United States. By
contrast, they receive much attention in Europe and Japan, where the bulk of the
126
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications

development activities appears to be. An application for micropumps is likely to
be in the automated handling of fluids for chemical analysis and drug delivery
systems.
Stand-alone micropump units face significant competition from traditional
solenoid or stepper-motor-actuated pumps. For instance, The Lee Company of
Westbrook, Connecticut, manufactures a family of pumps measuring approxi-
mately 51 mm × 12.7 mm × 19 mm (2 in × 0.5 in × 0.75 in) and weighing, fully
packaged, a mere 50g (1.8 oz). They can dispense up to 6 ml/min with a power
consumption of 2W from a 12-V dc supply. But micromachined pumps can have a
significant advantage if they can be readily integrated along with other fluid-
handling components, such as valves, into one completely automated miniature
system. The following demonstration from the Fraunhofer Institute for Solid State
Technology of Munich, Germany [48], illustrates one successful effort at making a
bidirectional micropump with reasonable flow rates.
The basic structure of the micropump is rather simple, consisting of a stack of
four wafers (see Figure 4.37). The bottom two wafers define two check valves at the
inlet and outlet. The top two wafers form the electrostatic actuation unit. The appli-
cation of a voltage between the top two wafers actuates the pump diaphragm, thus
expanding the volume of the pump inner chamber. This draws liquid through the
inlet check valve to fill the additional chamber volume. When the applied ac voltage
goes through its null point, the diaphragm relaxes and pushes the drawn liquid out
through the outlet check valve. Each of the check valves comprises a flap that can
move only in a single direction: The flap of the inlet check valve moves only as
liquid enters to fill the pump inner chamber; the opposite is true for the outlet check
valve.
The novelty of the design is in its ability to pump fluid either in a forward or
reverse direction—hence its bidirectionality. At first glance, it appears that such a
Actuators and Actuated Microsystems
127
Pump diaphragm
V
Check-valve flap
Silicon
Insulator
Inlet
Outlet
Chamber
Fixed electrode
Check value
unit
Electrostatic
actuation unit
Figure 4.37
Illustration of a cutout of a silicon micropump from the Fraunhofer Institute for Solid
State Technology of Munich, Germany [48]. The overall device measures 7 × 7 × 2 mm3. The
electrostatic actuation of a thin diaphragm modulates the volume inside a chamber. An increase in
volume draws liquid through the inlet check valve. Relaxation of the diaphragm expels the liquid
through the outlet check valve.

scenario is impossible because of the geometry of the two check valves. This is true
as long as the pump diaphragm displaces liquid at a frequency lower than the natu-
ral frequencies of the two check valve flaps. But at higher actuation frequencies—
above the natural frequencies of the flap—the response of the two flaps lags the
actuation drive. In other words, when the pump diaphragm actuates to draw liquid
into the chamber, the inlet valve flap cannot respond instantaneously to this action
and remains closed for a moment longer. The outlet check valve is still open from
the previous cycle and does not respond quickly to closing. In this instance, the
outlet check valve is open and the inlet check valve is closed, which draws liquid
into the chamber through the outlet rather than the inlet. Hence, the pump reverses
its direction. Clearly, for this to happen, the response of the check valves must lag
the actuation by at least half a cycle—the phase difference between the check valves
and the actuation must exceed 180º. This occurs at frequencies above the natu-
ral frequency of the flap. If the drive frequency is further increased, then the
displacement of theflaps becomes sufficiently small that the check valves do not
respond to actuation.
The pump rate initially rises with frequency and reaches a peak flow rate of 800
µl/min at 1 kHz. As the frequency continues to increase, the time lag between the
actuation and the check valve becomes noticeable. At exactly the natural frequency
of the flaps (1.6 kHz), the pump rate precipitously drops to zero. At this frequency,
the phase difference is precisely 180º, meaning that both check valves are simultane-
ously open—hence no flow. The pump then reverses direction with further increase
in frequency, reaching a peak backwards flow rate of –200 µl/min at 2.5 kHz. At
about 10 kHz, the actuation is much faster than the response of the check valves,
and the flow rate is zero. For this particular device, the separation between the
diaphragm and the fixed electrode is 5 µm, the peak actuation voltage is 200V, and
the power dissipation is less than 1 mW. The peak hydrostatic back pressure devel-
oped by the pump at zero flow is 31 kPa (4.5 psi) in the forward direction and 7 kPa
(1 psi) in the reverse direction.
The fabrication is rather complex, involving etching many cavities separately in
each wafer and then bonding the individual substrates together to form the stack
(see Figure 4.38). Etching using any of the alkali hydroxides is sufficient to define the
cavities. The final bonding can be done by either gluing the different parts or using
silicon fusion bonding.
Summary
This chapter presented a set of representative MEM structures and systems
used
in
industrial
and
automotive
applications,
including
a
number
of
micromachined sensors, actuators, and a few passive devices. The basic sensing and
actuation methods vary considerably from one design to the other, with significant
consequences to the control electronics. Design considerations are many; they
include the specifications of the end application, functionality, process feasibility,
and economic justification.
128
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications

References
[1]
Yamazoe, N., and Y. Shimizu, “Humidity Sensors: Principles and Applications,” Sensors
and Actuators, Vol. 10, No. 3–4, November–December 1986, pp. 379–398.
[2]
Kovacs, G. T. A., Micromachined Transducers Sourcebook, New York: McGraw-Hill,
1998, pp. 614–623.
[3]
Johnson, W. A., and L. K. Warne, “Electrophysics of Micromechanical Comb Actuators,”
Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 4, No. 1, March 1995, pp. 49–59.
[4]
Timoshenko, S., “Analysis of Bi-Metal Thermostats,” Journal of the Optical Society of
America, Vol. 11, 1925, p. 233.
[5]
Klaassen, E. H., et al., “Silicon Fusion Bonding and Deep Reactive Ion Etching; A New
Technology for Microstructures,” Proc. 8th Int. Conf. on Solid-State Sensors and Actua-
tors, Stockholm, Sweden, June 25–29, 1995, pp. 556–559.
[6]
Halliday, D., and R. Resnick, Physics, Part Two, 3rd ed., Extended version, New York:
Wiley, 1986, pp. 718–724.
[7]
U.S. Patents 3,921,916, November 25, 1975, and 3,949,410, April 6, 1976.
[8]
Peeters, E., and S. Verdonckt-Vandebroek, “Thermal Ink Jet Technology,” Circuits and
Devices, Vol. 13, No. 4, July 1997, pp. 19–23.
[9]
Kneisel, L. L., J. D. Baker, and L. N. Goenka, “Silicon Micromachined CO2 Cleaning Noz-
zle and Method,” U.S. Patent 5,545,073, August 13, 1996.
[10]
Siewell, G. L., W. R. Boucher, and P. H. McClelland, “The ThinkJet Orifice Plate: A Part
with Many Functions,” Hewlett-Packard Journal, Vol. 36, No. 5, May 1985, pp. 33–37.
[11]
Wu, M. C., “Micromachining for Optical and Optoelectronic Systems,” Proceedings of the
IEEE, Vol. 85, No. 11, November 1997, pp. 1833–1856.
Summary
129
Pattern oxide
and nitride
Silicon nitride
Silicon dioxide
Etch grooves;
strip nitride
Silicon nitride
p+ Si
Pattern front side
nitride
Etch grooves;
pattern back side
nitride
Etch from back side;
stop on p+;
strip nitride
p+ Si
Silicon nitride
Pattern nitride;
etch shallow
grooves
Protect front side;
pattern back side;
etch cavities;
stop on p+.
RIE p+ Si;
strip nitride
Silicon nitride
Figure 4.38
Fabrication process for an electrostatically actuated micropump.

[12]
Muller, R. S., and K. Y. Lau, “Surface-Micromachined Microoptical Elements and Sys-
tems,” in Integrated Sensors, Microactuators, & Microsystems (MEMS), K. D. Wise (ed.),
Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 86, No. 8, August 1998, pp. 1705–1720.
[13]
Pister, K. S. J., et al., “Microfabricated Hinges,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A33, No. 3,
June 1992, pp. 246–256.
[14]
Czarnocki, W. S., and J. P. Schuster, “The Evolution of Automotive Pressure Sensors,” Sen-
sors, Vol. 16, No. 5, May 1999, pp. 52–65.
[15]
NPC-107 data sheet, GE NovaSensor, 1055 Mission Court, Fremont, CA 94539,
http://www.novasensor.com.
[16]
Johnson, R. G., and R. E. Higashi, “A Highly Sensitive Silicon Chip Microtransducer for Air
Flow and Differential Pressure Sensing Applications,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. 11,
1987, pp. 63–72.
[17]
Roylance, L. M., and J. B. Angell, “A Batch Fabricated Silicon Accelerometer,” IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, Vol. 26, No. 12, 1979, pp. 1911–1917.
[18]
“Automotive Sensor Market,” Market Report by Strategy Analytics, Inc., 199 Wells Ave-
nue, Newton Centre, MA, 02459, February 2003.
[19]
Suminto, J. T., “A Wide Frequency Range, Rugged Silicon Micro Accelerometer with Over-
range Stops,” Proc. 9th Annual Int. Workshop on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, San
Diego, CA, February 11–15, 1996, pp. 180–185.
[20]
Sasayama, T., et al., “Highly Reliable Silicon Micro-Machined Physical Sensors in Mass
Production,” Proc. 8th Int. Conf. on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, Stockholm, Swe-
den, June 25–29, 1995, pp. 687–690.
[21]
Chau, K. H. –L., et al., “An Integrated Force-Balanced Capacitive Accelerometer for Low-G
Applications,” Proc. 8th Int. Conf. on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, Stockholm, Swe-
den, June 25–29, 1995, pp. 593–596.
[22]
Offenberg, M., et al., “Novel Process for a Monolithic Integrated Accelerometer,” Proc. 8th
Int. Conf. on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, Stockholm, Sweden, June 25–29, 1995,
pp. 589–592.
[23]
Van Drieënhuizen, B. P., et al., “Force-Balanced Accelerometer with mG Resolution,
Fabricated Using Silicon Fusion Bonding and Deep Reactive Ion Etching,” Proc. 1997 Int.
Conf. on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, Chicago, IL, June 16–19, 1997, Vol. 2,
pp. 1229–1230.
[24]
“Inertial Technology for the Future,” R. R. Ragan (ed.), IEEE Transactions on Aerospace
and Electronic Systems, Vol. AES-20, No. 4, July 1984, pp. 414–444.
[25]
Emiliani, C., The Scientific Companion, 2nd ed., New York: Wiley, 1995, pp. 204–205.
[26]
Beer, F. P., and E. R. Johnston, Jr., Vector Mechanics for Engineers: Dynamics, 3rd ed.,
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1977, pp. 716–719.
[27]
Söderkvist, J., “Micromachined Gyroscopes,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. A43, 1994,
pp. 65–71.
[28]
Yazdi, N., F. Ayazi, and K. Najafi, “Micromachined Inertial Sensors,” in Integrated Sen-
sors, Microactuators, & Microsystems (MEMS), K. D. Wise (ed.), Proceedings of the IEEE,
Vol. 86, No. 8, August 1998, pp. 1640–1659.
[29]
Chang, S., et al., “An Electroformed CMOS Integrated Angular Rate Sensor,” Sensors and
Actuators, Vol. A66, 1998, pp. 138–143.
[30]
Langdon, R. M., “The Vibrating Cylinder Gyroscope,” The Marconi Review, Fourth Quar-
ter, 1982, pp. 231–249.
[31]
Voss, R., et al., “Silicon Angular Rate Sensor for Automotive Applications with Piezoelec-
tric Drive and Piezoresistive Read-Out,” Proc. 1997 Int. Conf. on Solid-State Sensors and
Actuators, Chicago, IL, June 16–19, 1997, Vol. 2, pp. 879–882.
[32]
Lutz, M., et al., “A Precision Yaw Rate Sensor in Silicon Micromachining,” Proc. 1997 Int.
Conf. on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, Chicago, IL, June 16–19, 1997, Vol. 2,
pp. 847–850.
130
MEM Structures and Systems in Industrial and Automotive Applications

[33]
Trautweiler, S., N. Mosier, and E. Zdankiewicz, “New Silicon-Based Metal-Oxide Chemi-
cal Sensors,” Sensors Magazine, Vol. 16, No. 9, September 1999.
[34]
Lyle, R. P., and D. Walters, “Commercialization of Silicon-Based Gas Sensors,” Proc. 1997
Int. Conf. on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, Chicago, IL, June 16–19, 1997, Vol. 2,
pp. 975–978.
[35]
Nguyen, N. -T., and S. T. Wereley, Fundamentals and Applications of Microfluidics, Nor-
wood, MA: Artech House, 2002.
[36]
Bhaskar, E. V., and J. S. Aden, “Development of the Thin-Film Structure for the ThinkJet
Prinhead,” Hewlett-Packard Journal, Vol. 36, No. 5, May 1985, pp. 27–33.
[37]
Askeland, R. A., W. D. Childers, and W. R. Sperry, “The Second-Generation Thermal Ink-
Jet Structure,” Hewlett-Packard Journal, Vol. 39, No. 4, August 1988, pp. 28–31.
[38]
Beatty, C. C., “A Chronology of Thermal Ink-Jet Structures,” Tech. Digest Solid-State Sen-
sor and Actuator Workshop, Hilton Head Island, SC, June 3–6, 1996, pp. 200–204.
[39]
Allen, R. R., J. D. Meyer, and W. R. Knight, “Thermodynamics and Hydrodynamics of
Thermal Ink Jets,” Hewlett-Packard Journal, Vol. 36, No. 5, May 1985, pp. 21–26.
[40]
Aden, J. S., et al., “The Third Generation HP Thermal InkJet Printhead,” Hewlett-Packard
Journal, Vol. 45, No. 1, February 1994, pp. 41–45.
[41]
“Under-Glass Controls: Creative Cooktop Delivers High Power and Fast Boiling,” Appli-
ance Manufacturer, July 1996, pp. 61–63.
[42]
Anderson, R. C., et al., “Genetic Analysis Systems: Improvements and Methods,” Tech.
Digest Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, Hilton Head Island, SC, June 8–11,
1998, pp. 7–10.
[43]
U.S. Patent 6,533,366, March 18, 2003.
[44]
U.S. Patents 4,824,073, April 25, 1989 and 4,966,646, October 30, 1990.
[45]
Johnson, A. D., and E. J. Shahoian, “Recent Progress in Thin Film Shape Memory Microac-
tuators,” Proc. IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, Amsterdam, the Netherlands,
January 29–February 2, 1995, pp. 216–219.
[46]
U.S. Patent 6,523,560 B1, February 25, 2003, and U.S. Patent application publication
US2002/0174891 A1, November 28, 2002.
[47]
Williams, K. R., et al., “A Silicon Microvalve for the Proportional Control of Fluids,”
Digest of the 10th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators (Trans-
ducers ‘99), Sendai, Japan, June 1999, pp. 1804–1807.
[48]
Zengerle, R., et al., “A Bidirectional Silicon Micropump,” Proc. IEEE Micro Electro
Mechanical Systems, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, January 29–February 2, 1995,
pp. 19–24.
Selected Bibliography
Frank, R., Understanding Smart Sensors, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1996.
Gad-El-Hak, M., The MEMS Handbook, Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2001.
Kovacs, G. T. A., Micromachined Transducers Sourcebook, New York, NY: McGraw-Hill,
1998.
Micromechanics and MEMS: Classic and Seminal Papers to 1990, W. Trimmer (ed.), New
York: IEEE, 1997.
Senturia, S. D., Microsystem Design, Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000.
Soloman, S., Sensors Handbook, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998.
Wise, K. D. (ed.) “Special Issue on Integrated Sensors, Microactuators, and Microsystems
(MEMS),” Proceeding of the IEEE, Vol. 86, No. 8, August 1998.
Summary
131

.

C H A P T E R
5
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic
Applications
“Our Technology and Engineering Emmy Awards have always honored the innova-
tors that move our industry forward.”
—Peter O. Price, President of the National Television Academy
on the Emmy
® Award to Texas Instrument’s Digital Light
Processing™(DLP) Technology, October 2003.
The penetration of MEMS technology in photonic applications is one that evokes in
many minds stories of success. What made MEMS successful is that in many
instances, it enabled new functionality by miniaturizing and arraying optical ele-
ments. Two notable markets and applications have benefited greatly from MEMS:
displays and optical fiber communications. In displays, the Digital Light Processing
(DLP™) technology from Texas Instruments of Dallas, Texas, has become a stan-
dard in small- and large-screen projection of digital images, with the Digital Mirror
Device™(DMD) at its core. In fiber-optical communications, there are a myriad of
MEMS-based components in tunable lasers, optical switches, and optical attenua-
tors, all key elements in transmitting data through optical fibers. But in hearing
these success stories, one should not forget that the systems that are enabled by these
MEMS-based components are very complex and encompass in their operation a
multitude of technologies, with MEMS being just one of them. It is the convergence
of all of these technologies that makes them collectively a success.
This chapter first describes in detail three commercially available products in
imaging applications: an infrared image sensor and two image-projection devices. It
then provides detailed insight into the operation of four types of products used
in fiber-optical telecommunications: tunable lasers, wavelength lockers, optical
switches, and variable optical attenuators. These components source and manipu-
late light as it travels within an optical fiber carrying information.
Imaging and Displays
Infrared Radiation Imager
Demonstrations of micromachined infrared bolometers and sensors have existed for
many years, but the uncooled two-dimensional infrared imaging array from Honey-
well, Inc., of Minneapolis, Minnesota [1], stands out in the crowd and competes
effectively with traditional designs involving cooled cameras based on group II-VI
compound semiconductors.
133

The basic approach of the Honeywell design, described in U.S. Patent 6,621,083
B2 (September 16, 2003), achieves high sensitivity to radiation by providing extreme
thermal isolation for a temperature-sensitive resistive element. Incident infrared
radiation heats a suspended sense resistor, producing a change in its resistance that is
directly proportional to the radiation intensity (see Figure 5.1). The two-level struc-
ture, consisting of an upper silicon nitride plate suspended over a substrate, provides
a high degree of thermal isolation corresponding to a thermal conductance of merely
10-8 W/K. This value approaches the theoretical lowest limit of 10-9 W/K due to
radiative heat loss. The square silicon nitride plate is 50 µm on a side and 0.5 µm
thick. The thin (50- to 100-nm) resistive element rests on the silicon nitride and has a
large temperature coefficient of resistance in the range of –0.2 to –0.3% per degree
Celsius. In order to capture most or all of the incident radiation, the fill factor—the
area covered by the sensitive element as a fraction of the overall pixel area—must
approach unity. The gap between the suspended plate and the substrate is approxi-
mately 1.8 µm. The silicon nitride plate and a thin reflecting metal directly under-
neath it form a quarter-wave resonant cavity to increase infrared absorption at
wavelengths near 10 µm—corresponding to the peak radiation from a black body
near 20ºC. A two-dimensional array of these pixels images activity at or near room
temperature and is useful for night vision.
The basic fabrication process relies on a surface micromachining approach, but
unlike the polysilicon surface micromachining process, it incorporates an organic
layer, such as polyimide, as the sacrificial material. The fabrication of the pixels
occurs after the fabrication of standard CMOS electronic circuits on the silicon sub-
strate. In a typical array size of 240 × 336 pixels, it is nearly impossible to obtain
individual leads to each element. The integrated electronics provide multiplexing as
well as scan and readout operations.
The CMOS electronic circuits are fabricated first. The last step in the CMOS
process ensures that the surface is planar. One approach is by chemical-mechanical
polishing (CMP) of a silicon dioxide passivation layer. The fabrication of the sense
pixels begins with the deposition and patterning of the bottom metal films of the
two-level structure. The composition of the metal does not appear to be critical. In
the next step, the 1.8-µm thick sacrificial layer is deposited. The public literature
134
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic Applications
Metal interconnect
Resistive element (TCR ~
0.2% per ºC)
−
Suspended silicon
nitride plate
R
Address
column
Address
row
Substrate
Thin reflecting
metal layer
Figure 5.1
Illustration of a single sense element in the infrared imaging array from Honeywell. Incoming
infrared radiation heats a sensitive resistive element suspended on a thin silicon nitride plate. Electronic
circuits measure the change in resistance and infer the radiation intensity. (After: [1].)

does not specify the type of material, but one could use an organic polyimide film or
photoresist that can sustain the subsequent thermal cycles of the fabrication
process. Standard lithography and etching methods are applied to define contacts
through the sacrificial layer to the underlying metal. These contacts also serve to
form anchor points for the suspended plate. A 0.5-µm thick silicon nitride layer is
deposited at low temperature and patterned using standard lithography in the shape
of the suspended plate. The next deposition step is critical because it defines the thin
temperature-sensitive resistor. Two families of materials exhibit suitable sensing
properties:
• Vanadium oxides (VO2, V2O3, and V2O5);
• Lanthanum manganese oxides (La1-xA xMnO3; A = Ca, Sr, Ba, or Pb).
Sputtered vanadium oxides have a convenient sheet resistance (~25 kΩper
square at 25ºC), acceptable 1/f noise, high absorption of infrared radiation, and a
large TCR of about –0.2% per degree Celsius. Lanthanum manganese oxides yield
even larger TCRs in the range of –0.3% per degree Celsius with low 1/f noise. The
combination of low noise and high TCR is critical to increasing sensitivity. After the
deposition and patterning of the resistive element, another silicon nitride layer is
applied for encapsulation of the sensitive components. Removal of the sacrificial
layer by plasma etching releases the silicon nitride plate. An oxygen plasma is effec-
tive at isotropically removing organic materials, including polyimide and photore-
sist. Finally, the parts are diced, then packaged under vacuum (<10 Pa residual
pressure) to reduce heat loss by conduction.
The readout electronics (see Figure 5.1) activate a column of pixels by applying
a voltage to their corresponding address column; they then measure the current
from each transistor as a constant pulse voltage sequentially scans the address rows
for the pixels in the column. The estimated change in temperature for an incident
radiation power of 10−8 W is only 0.1ºC. The corresponding resistance change is a
measurable –10Ωfor a 50-kΩresistor. The thermal capacity of a pixel is 10−9 J/K,
determined by the very small thermal mass of the suspended plate. Consequently,
the thermal response time, defined by the ratio of thermal capacity to thermal con-
ductance, is less than 10 ms, sufficiently fast for most imaging applications. The
signal-to-noise ratio is limited by thermal noise and 1/f noise to about 49 dB. Special
circuits perform a calibration step that subtracts from the active image the signal of
a blank scene. The latter signal incorporates the effects of nonuniform pixel resis-
tance across the array. An intermittent shutter provides the blank scene signal,
therefore allowing continuous calibration.
Projection Display with the Digital Micromirror Device
TM
The Digital Micromirror Device™(DMD) is a trademark of Texas Instruments of
Dallas, Texas, which developed and commercialized this new concept in projection
display technology referred to as Digital Light Processing™(DLP). U.S. Pat-
ent 4,615,595 (October 7, 1986) describes the early structure of the DMD.
The technology has since undergone continuous evolution and improvements.
Texas Instruments first introduced its new product family of DLP-based projection
systems in 1996.
Imaging and Displays
135

The DMD consists of a two-dimensional array of optical switching elements
(pixels) on a silicon substrate (see Figure 5.2) [2]. Each pixel consists of a reflective
micromirror supported from a central post. This post is mounted on a lower metal
platform—the yoke—itself suspended by thin and compliant torsional hinges from
two stationary posts anchored directly to the substrate. Two electrodes positioned
underneath the yoke provide electrostatic actuation. A 24-V bias voltage between
one of the electrodes and the yoke tilts the mirror towards that electrode. The non-
linear electrostatic and restoring mechanical forces make it impossible to accurately
control the tilt angle. Instead, the yoke snaps into a fully deflected position, touching
a landing site biased at the same potential to prevent electrical shorting. The angle of
tilt is limited by geometry to ±10º (the direction of the sign is defined by the optics).
The restoring torque of the hinges returns the micromirror to its initial state once the
applied voltage is removed. CMOS static random-access memory (SRAM) cells fab-
ricated underneath the micromirror array control the individual actuation states of
each pixel and their duration. The OFF state of the memory cell tilts the mirror by
–10º, whereas the ON state tilts it by +10º. In the ON state, off-axis illumination
reflects from the micromirror into the pupil of the projection lens, causing this par-
ticular pixel to appear bright (see Figure 5.3). In the other two tilt states (0º and
–10º), an aperture blocks the reflected light giving the pixel a dark appearance. This
beam-steering approach provides high contrast between the bright and dark states.
Each micromirror is 16 µm square and is made of aluminum for high reflectivity in
the visible range. The pixels are normally arrayed in two dimensions on a pitch of 17
µm to form displays with standard resolutions from 800 × 600 pixels (SVGA) up to
1,280 × 1,024 pixels (SXGA). The fill factor, defined as the ratio of reflective area to
total area, is approximately 90%, allowing a seamless (continuous) projected image
136
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic Applications
Mirror
Mirror post
Address electrode
Torsion hinge
Yoke
Landing tip
Landing site
Bias electrode
Unactuated state
Actuated state
Anchor post
Figure 5.2
Illustration of a single DMD pixel in its resting and actuated states. The basic structure
consists of a bottom aluminum layer containing electrodes, a middle aluminum layer containing a
yoke suspended by two torsional hinges, and a top reflective aluminum mirror. An applied
electrostatic voltage on a bias electrode deflects the yoke and the mirror towards that electrode.
(After: [2].)

free of pixelation. Texas Instruments reduced the pitch in 2000 from 17 µm to 14
µm in order to increase the number of available die per wafer and reduce cost.
While the operation of each mirror is only digital—in other words, the pixel is
either bright or dark—the system is capable of achieving gray shades by adjusting
the dwell time of each pixel—the duration it is bright or dark. The mechanical
switching time including settling time is approximately 16 µs, much faster than the
response of the human eye (on the order of 150 ms). At these speeds, the eye can
only interpret the average amount—not the duration—of light it receives in a pulse.
This, in effect, is equivalent to the impulse response of the eye. Modulating the dura-
tion of the pulse, or the dwell time, gives the eye the sensation of gray by varying the
integrated intensity. Because the pixel switching speed is approximately 1,000 times
faster than the eye’s response time, it is theoretically possible to fit up to about 1,000
gray levels (equivalent to 10 bits of color depth). In actuality, full-color projection
uses three DMD chips, one for each primary color (red, green, and blue), with each
chip accommodating 8-bit color depth for a total of 16 million discrete colors.
Alternatively, by using filters on a color wheel, the three primary colors can be
switched and projected using a single DMD chip.
Texas Instruments uses surface micromachining to fabricate the DMD on
wafers incorporating CMOS electronic address and control circuitry (see
Figure 5.4). The basics of the fabrication process are in some respects similar to
other surface micromachining processes; the etching of one or more sacrificial layers
releases the mechanical structures. It differs in that it must address the reliable inte-
gration of close to one million micromechanical structures with CMOS electronics.
All micromachining steps occur at temperatures below 400ºC, sufficiently low
to ensure the integrity of the underlying electronic circuits. Standard 0.8-µm,
double-metal level, CMOS technology is used to fabricate control circuits and
SRAM memory cells. A thick silicon dioxide layer is deposited over the second
CMOS metal layer. A CMP of this silicon dioxide layer provides a flat starting sur-
face for the subsequent building of the DMD structures. A third aluminum metal
layer is sputter deposited and patterned to provide bias and address electrodes,
landing pads, and electrical interconnects to the underlying electronics. Photoresist
is spin deposited, exposed, developed, and hardened with ultraviolet (UV) light to
Imaging and Displays
137
Flat state
OFF
Actuated (
10º)
OFF
−
Actuated (+10º)
ON
Projection lens
Incident
illumination
Reflected
light
Micromirror
20º
30º
10º
Figure 5.3
Illustration of optical beam steering using the switching of micromirrors. Off-axis
illumination reflects into the pupil of the projection lens only when the micromirror is tilted in
its +10º state, giving the pixel a bright appearance. In the other two states, the pixel appears
dark [2].

form the first sacrificial layer (sacrificial spacer 1). A sputter deposition of an alumi-
num alloy (98.8% Al, 1% Si, 0.2% Ti) defines the hinge metal layer. The mechanical
integrity of the DMD relies on low stresses in the hinge. A thin silicon dioxide mask
is then deposited with PECVD and patterned to protect the torsion hinge regions.
The aluminum is not etched after this step. Retaining this silicon dioxide mask,
another sputtering step deposits a thicker yoke metal layer, also made of a proprie-
tary aluminum alloy. A thin layer of silicon dioxide is subsequently deposited and
patterned in the shape of the yoke and anchor posts. An etch step removes the
exposed aluminum areas down to the organic sacrificial layer. But in the regions
where the oxide hinge mask remains, only the thick yoke metal is removed, stopping
on the silicon dioxide mask and leaving intact the thin torsional hinges. Both silicon
dioxide masking layers are stripped before a second sacrificial layer, also made of
UV-hardened photoresist, is deposited and patterned. Yet another aluminum alloy
sputter deposition defines the mirror material and the mirror post. A silicon dioxide
mask protects the mirror regions during etch of the aluminum alloy.
The remaining fabrication steps address the preparation for sawing and packag-
ing, made difficult by the delicate micromechanical structures. A wafer saw cuts the
138
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic Applications
Silicon substrate with CMOS circuits
1. Pattern spacer 1 layer
Metal-3 level
Sacrificial
spacer 1
CMP
oxide
4. Etch yoke and strip oxide
Hinge
Yoke
Hinge post
2. Deposit hinge metal; deposit
and pattern oxide hinge mask
Oxide hinge mask
Hinge metal
5. Deposit spacer 2 and mirror
Mirror
Mirror mask
Spacer 2
Yoke metal
Oxide mask
Mirror
Mirror post
Yoke
Hinge
3. Deposit yoke and pattern
yoke oxide mask
6. Pattern mirror and
etch sacrificial spacers
Figure 5.4
Fabrication steps of the Texas Instruments’ DMD [2].

silicon along edge scribe lines to a depth that allows breaking the individual dice
apart at a later stage. An oxygen-plasma etch step removes both sacrificial layers
and releases the micromirrors. A special passivation step deposits a thin, antistiction
layer to prevent any adhesion between the yoke and the landing pads. Finally, a sin-
gulation process breaks apart and separates the individual dice. The packaging of
the DMD is discussed in Chapter 8.
Reliability is the sine qua non of the commercial success of DMD technology.
The designs described here are the result of extensive efforts at Texas Instruments
aimed at understanding the long-term operation of the pixels as well as their fail-
ure modes. The DMD micromirrors are sufficiently robust to withstand normal
environmental and handling conditions, including 1,500G mechanical shocks,
because the weight of the micromirrors is insignificant. The major failure and
malfunction mechanisms are surface contamination and hinge memory. The latter
is the result of metal creep in the hinge material and causes the mirror to exhibit a
residual tilt in the absence of actuation voltages. The reliability of the DMD is
further discussed in Chapter 8.
Grating Light Valve™Display
The Grating Light Valve™(GLV) is a novel display concept invented initially at
Stanford University. Silicon Light Machines of Sunnyvale, California, a division of
Cypress Semiconductor Corp. of San Jose, California, is developing a commercial
product based on the licensed technology [3]. The fundamental light-switching con-
cept relies on closely spaced parallel rows of reflective ribbons suspended over a sub-
strate (see Figure 5.5). The separation gap between the ribbons and the substrate is
Imaging and Displays
139
Unactuated - reflective state
Actuated - diffractive state
Diffracted light
Incident light
Oxide (500 nm)
Tungsten (100 nm)
Aluminum (50 nm)
Air gap (130 nm)
Silicon
Silicon
Si N (100 nm)
3
4
Ribbons
Incident light
Reflected light
Figure 5.5
Illustration of the operating principle of a single pixel in the GLV. Electrostatic
pull down of alternate ribbons changes the optical properties of the surface from reflective
to diffractive. (After: [3].)

approximately one quarter the wavelength of light in the visible spectrum. In their
resting state, the ribbons appear as a continuous surface to incident light, and normal
reflection occurs. But when an electrostatic voltage pulls down alternate rows of rib-
bons, the light reflecting from the deflected ribbons travels an additional one half of a
wavelength (twice the gap) and thus becomes 180º out of phase with respect to the
light from the stationary ribbons. This effectively turns the ribbons into a phase grat-
ing, diffracting the incident light into higher orders. The angle of diffraction depends
on the wavelength and the pitch—or periodicity—of the ribbons.
The entire display element consists of a two-dimensional array of square pixels,
each approximately 20 µm on a side containing two fixed and two flexible ribbons.
The mechanical structure of the ribbon relies on a thin silicon nitride film under ten-
sion to provide the restoring force in the absence of actuation. The reflecting surface
is a 50-nm-thick aluminum layer. The underlying electrode is made of tungsten iso-
lated from the substrate by silicon dioxide.
The optical projection system includes an aperture mounted over the display ele-
ment (see Figure 5.6). Light-absorbing material surrounding the aperture blocks the
reflected light but allows the first diffraction orders to be imaged by the projection
lens. The incident illumination may be normal to the chip, sending the diffracted
orders off axis. Alternatively, the use of off-axis illumination simplifies the imaging
optics in a scheme similar to projection with the DMD described in the previous
chapter.
For full color display, each pixel consists of three sets of ribbons, one for each of
the three primary colors (red, green, and blue). The design of the pitch is such that
the projection lens images the diffraction order of only one single color from each
subpixel. The pitch of the red subpixel must be larger than that of green, and in turn
larger than that of blue.
The GLV display supports at least 256 gray shades or 8-bit color depth by rap-
idly modulating the duration ratio of bright to dark states. This in turn varies the
light intensity available for viewing—similar to the scheme used in the DLP by Texas
Instruments. Early display prototypes demonstrated a contrast ratio between the
140
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic Applications
Pitch
Blue subpixel
Green subpixel
Red subpixel
R
G
G
B
Incident
light
Reflected
light
B
R
R
B
G
Aperture
Lens
Figure 5.6
Implementation of color in a GLV pixel. The pitch of each color subpixel is tailored to
steer the corresponding light to the projection lens. The aperture blocks the reflected light but
allows the first diffraction order to enter the imaging optics. The size of the pixel is exaggerated for
illustration purposes.

bright and dark states in excess of 200. The fill ratio—the percentage area available
to reflect light—is approximately 70%, with a potential for further improvement by
reducing the unused space between ribbons—the pitch, and not the spacing, deter-
mines the diffraction angle.
A key advantage of the GLV over other display technologies is its fast speed.
The small size and weight of the ribbon, combined with the short stroke, provide a
switching speed of about 20 ns, about one thousand times faster than the DMD. At
these speeds, the address and support electronics become simple. There is no longer
a need for fast memory buffers, such as those required for conventional active
matrix liquid crystal displays, to compensate for the mismatch in speeds between
the electronics and the display elements. Moreover, there is little power required to
actuate the very small ribbons.
The very fast switching has also allowed Silicon Light Machines to explore a
simpler scheme, whereby the projected image of a single row of pixels is rapidly
scanned through the optics to build a two-dimensional picture. Projection at video
rate for a high-resolution display requiring 1,000 horizontal lines implies a data
scan rate of 60,000 lines per second. Incorporating 256 shades of gray increases the
bit refresh rate to 15.4 MHz, which corresponds to a pixel switching every 65
ns—well within the capability of the GLV. This new scheme allows simplifying the
GLV to a single row of pixels instead of a two-dimensional array and hence reduces
associated manufacturing costs.
The fabrication involves the surface micromachining of the ribbons and their
release by etching a sacrificial layer. The process begins with the deposition of an
insulating 500-nm thick silicon dioxide layer over a silicon wafer, followed by the
sputter deposition or CVD of tungsten. The tungsten is patterned using standard
lithography and etched in SF6-based plasma to define the electrodes for electrostatic
actuation. The sacrificial layer is then deposited. The details of this layer are not
publicly available, but many possibilities exist, including organic polymers. This
layer is very thin, measuring approximately 130 nm, one quarter the wavelength of
green light. Silicon nitride and aluminum are deposited next, followed by patterning
in the shape of narrow ribbons. The release step is last. Oxygen plasma is useful for
the removal of organic sacrificial layers, such as photoresist. It is also possible to
consider using sputtered amorphous silicon as a sacrificial layer. Its selective
removal, however, may require an exotic etch step involving xenon difluoride
(XeF2). This etchant sublimes at room temperature from its solid form and reacts
spontaneously with silicon to form volatile SiF4. Its advantage over SF6 or CF4 is that
it does not require a plasma, and it does not etch silicon nitride, silicon oxide, or alu-
minum. But xenon difluoride is a hazardous chemical, reacting with water moisture
to form hydrofluoric acid. It is not used in the integrated circuit industry.
Fiber-Optic Communication Devices
The rise and fall of scores of start-up companies during the bubble years
(1997–2001) of the fiber-optic telecommunication industry left a legacy of technical
innovations and novel designs, especially as relating to MEMS. In the economic
downturn, many companies closed their doors, and it could be years before their
intellectual property is applied to other fields. A few companies have survived and
Fiber-Optic Communication Devices
141

continue to seek customers for their products. The difficult economic environ-
ment has necessitated that the surviving companies develop products that are cost
competitive, especially against similar products made using alternative traditional
technologies, while passing the stringent Telcordia™standards of reliability (see
Chapter 8). MEMS has become widely accepted as the fabrication technology of
choice for a number of functions, in particular for dynamic attenuation of the light
intensity inside the fiber, known as variable optical attenuators (VOAs); beam steer-
ing of light among an array of fibers, also known as optical switching or cross con-
nects; and, to a lesser extent, as components within tunable lasers. It is important to
note that while the primary market that drove the development of such devices was
fiber-optic telecommunication, there remain other applications, albeit in smaller
markets, that can benefit from these innovations (e.g., imaging, microscopy, and
spectroscopy).
We examine in this section four different types of MEMS-based photonic
devices whose sole function is to manipulate or generate light. We begin first
with two distinct embodiments of a tunable laser product, one from Iolon, Inc.,
of San Jose, California, and the other from Santur Corporation of Fremont,
California. Next, we describe a wavelength locker from Digital Optics Corporation
of Charlotte, North Carolina. We then follow with an optical switch from Ser-
calo Microtechnology, Ltd., of Liechtenstein; then a beam steering mirror, or
three-dimensional (3-D) optical switch, from Integrated Micromachines, Inc., of
Irwindale, California; and finally a VOA from Lightconnect, Inc., of Newark,
California.
Tunable Lasers
Lasers are at the core of fiber-optical communication where information is impressed
upon streams of light inside a fiber. The advent of wavelength-division multiplexing
(WDM) in the last decade offered a tremendous increase in information bandwidth
by multiplexing multiple wavelengths into a single fiber. But as the number of wave-
length channels increased to 100 and beyond, wavelength agility and the ability to
switch between channels without human intervention has become of great impor-
tance. This is where tunable lasers promise to play a significant role [4].
Tunable lasers as bench-top test instruments have achieved a great degree of
technical maturity in the recent past. Companies such as New Focus, Inc., of San
Jose, California, and Agilent Technologies of Palo Alto, California, have offered
such products for many years. But the innovation brought forth by MEMS technol-
ogy aims to miniaturize these instruments from bench-top dimensions to fit in the
palm of a hand. This miniaturization is necessary because equipment space inside
central offices is very limited—a central office houses racks of electronic and optical
equipment for processing and routing of data and voice. The use of tunable lasers in
telecommunications has been primarily in the wavelength range of 1,528 nm to
1,565 nm (known as the C-Band) and 1,570 nm to 1,610 nm (known as the L-Band).
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) of Geneva, Switzerland, has
specified the use to be on a grid of discrete channels throughout the C- and L-Bands
at optical frequencies spaced 50 GHz (~ 0.4 nm) apart [5]. This grid specification
brings forth the need for a wavelength “locker” to prevent a laser from drifting from
its assigned wavelength on the ITU grid.
142
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic Applications

A basic laser consists of an optical amplification medium (a gain medium) posi-
tioned inside a resonant cavity [6, 7]. The amplification medium can be a gas (e.g.,
helium-neon or argon), a crystal (e.g., a ruby or neodymium), or, most commonly, a
semiconductor material (e.g., GaAs, AlGaAs, or InP, depending on the wavelength
of interest). The resonant cavity, in its simplest form, consists of two partially
reflecting surfaces with an optical separation equal to an integral number of half
wavelengths. Its role is to provide positive optical feedback by circulating light
within its geometrical boundaries (see Figure 5.7).
In an optical amplifier, an electrical current or a high-intensity light excites
(pumps) electrons from a low-energy (ground) state to a high-energy (excited) state.
When the population of electrons in the excited state exceeds that in the ground
state, the material reaches population inversion and becomes capable of a physical
process known as stimulated amplification [8]. In this process, an incoming photon
whose energy is equal to the energy difference between the excited and ground states
stimulates the relaxation of an electron to its ground state, thus releasing a photon
that is coherent (i.e., preserving the phase) and chromatic (i.e., preserving the wave-
length) with the incident photon. When an optical amplifier is placed within an opti-
cally resonant cavity, light reflects back and forth inside the resonator with coherent
amplification at every pass within the gain medium—it is this positive feedback that
gives rise to the high intensity of the laser beam. However, resonance occurs only at
certain specific wavelengths or frequencies—these are called the cavity longitudinal
modes and are separated by a frequency equal to c/2L, where c is the speed of light
within the medium and L is the optical cavity length [9]. At these frequencies, the
optical length of the cavity is an integral number of half wavelengths. Light at other
wavelengths rapidly decays. For relatively long cavities (>0.5 mm), multiple dis-
crete modes coexist within the available spectrum of the gain medium, and the light
Fiber-Optic Communication Devices
143
2L
c
Frequency
Lasing mode
Filter function
Cavity modes
Transmission
Resonant cavity
Output light
Filter
Gain
medium
Partially reflecting mirrors
2
λ
L
m
=
Figure 5.7
Illustration of the building blocks of a laser. A gain medium amplifies light as it
oscillates inside a resonant cavity. Only select wavelengths called longitudinal cavity modes that
are separated by a frequency equal to c/2L may exist within the cavity. A wavelength filter with a
narrow transmission function selects one lasing mode and ensures that the output light is
monochromatic.

beam is not necessarily monochromatic, as multiple modes may participate in lasing.
A wavelength filter, typically a grating, selects only one desired wavelength to gener-
ate a monochromatic laser beam (see Figure 5.7).
The tuning of a laser requires two simultaneous operations: the tuning of the fil-
ter to the new desired wavelength and the tuning of the optical length of the cavity
such that one of the resonant longitudinal modes defined by c/2L overlaps the
desired wavelength (see Figure 5.7). Often referred to as the phase tuning, this is a
condition for resonance. Additionally, at any output wavelength of a tunable
laser, the amplification medium must possess a reasonable gain before lasing can
occur—this is strictly a material property that dictates the choice of the material.
The two lasers described here achieve the same objective using two radically differ-
ent approaches. The Iolon approach achieves both tuning steps by using a MEMS-
type microactuator [10]. The Santur approach [11] does it by heating and cooling
the gain medium to change the index of refraction.
The main specifications of a tunable laser are wavelength in nanometers (or the
corresponding optical frequency in Hz), tuning range in nanometers, spectral
linewidth at the lasing frequency in Hz (the narrower the linewidth, the higher the
coherence of the output beam), output optical power expressed in milliwatts or in
dBm (the reference 0 dBm level is at 1 mW), relative intensity noise over a given fre-
quency bandwidth (RIN) expressed in db/Hz, and side-mode suppression ratio
(SMSR) in dB, which measures the power ratio at the lasing fundamental mode or
wavelength to its nearest allowed mode. For applications in telecommunications,
the specifications vary between short-distance (a few kilometers) and long-distance
(>800 km) transmission. The latter requires more stringent specifications; for
instance, the power is typically 13 ± 0.25 dBm (20 ± 1 mW) over the entire C-Band,
the RIN needs to be lower than –120 dB/Hz, and the SMSR is higher than 45 dB.
The External Cavity Tunable Laser from Iolon
The laser design used by Iolon [10] belongs to a family of external-cavity lasers
known after their inventors as Littman-Metcalf (see Figure 5.8) [12]. The three key
building blocks are physically separate and hence can be optimized individually.
External cavity lasers can also deliver superior properties in the form of stable power
as well as high monochromaticity (measured as narrow line width) [13].
In this laser, the amplification medium consists typically of an InGaAsP/InP
semiconductor diode with multiple quantum wells (a laser diode) because its gain
spectrum covers the entire C-Band [14]. A thermoelectric cooler (TEC) maintains
the temperature of the laser diode at approximately 25°C to increase diode lifetime
and minimize chromatic thermal drift—the gain spectrum is a strong function of
temperature. The wavelength filter is a glancing-angle ruled blazed or holographic
grating [15] with a typical periodicity of 1,200 lines per millimeter. A partially
reflective coating on one facet of the laser diode and a reflective mirror bound the
external cavity [see Figure 5.8(a)]. With an effective cavity length of 8 mm, the spac-
ing between the cavity modes is approximately 18 GHz (~ 0.2 nm) (i.e., nearly 190
distinct modes fit within the C-Band). The other facet of the laser diode must be
highly transmissive (coated with an antireflective multilayer coating) in order to
avoid forming a spurious resonant cavity within the diode itself—the reflectance is
often significantly less than 10−3. Light emanates from the laser diode through a
144
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic Applications

collimating lens, then diffracts on the grating. The mirror reflects back into the cav-
ity and the gain medium only one wavelength whose diffracted beam is exactly per-
pendicular to the mirror. This wavelength (and corresponding diffraction angle θ)
depends strictly on the grating pitch as well as the relative angle of the mirror with
the diffraction grating. In actuality, because the diffraction grating has finite disper-
sion [16], the linewidth of the reflected wavelength is broadened to a few picome-
ters. The output of the laser is typically the main (undiffracted) order reflecting from
the grating, but an auxiliary output can be taken from the partially reflective facet of
the laser diode.
The Littman-Metcalf configuration utilizes a fixed grating but rotates the reflec-
tive mirror to tune the laser to a different wavelength [Figure 5.8(b)]. It is the rota-
tion of the mirror that achieves both tuning operations simultaneously: it selects a
different diffracted wavelength from the grating, and it modulates the physical
length of the cavity. By appropriately selecting a virtual pivot point [17], the dimen-
sional change of the cavity length can be such that an integral number of new half
wavelengths can fit within the cavity—note that a rotation about a virtual pivot
point is geometrically equivalent to a rotation about a real pivot point and a linear
translation. A poor choice of pivot point or misalignment can cause serious
Fiber-Optic Communication Devices
145
Incident beam
Pivot point
cooler
Thermoelectric
Laser diode
(gain medium)
Collimating lens
Nonreflective
facet
Partially
reflective
facet
Auxiliary output
(front facet)
(b)
(a)
Grating
Output (back facet)
First diffractive order
Reflective mirror
θ2
θ1
θ
Figure 5.8
(a) Illustration of the Littman-Metcalf external cavity laser configuration. Light from
the laser diode is collimated and diffracted by a grating acting as a wavelength filter. Lasing occurs
only at one wavelength, whose diffraction order is reflected by the mirror back into the cavity. (b)
Rotating the mirror around a virtual pivot point changes the wavelength and tunes the laser.

degradation in the performance and tunability of the laser. One such degradation is
mode hopping, when the cavity no longer supports an integral number of half wave-
lengths, causing the laser to “hop” to a different cavity mode (or wavelength) that
satisfies the resonance condition.
Past designs of Littman-Metcalf-type lasers incorporated large traditional
actuators, such as piezoelectric rods or voice-coil actuators, to rotate the mirror
around the virtual pivot point. The Iolon approach uniquely incorporates an
electrostatic rotary microactuator to miniaturize the overall size of the laser (see
Figure 5.9). A gold-coated silicon substrate mounted vertically on top of special
146
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic Applications
Collimating
lens
Diffraction grating
Mirror
actuator
Balancing
Laser
diode
Light path
Coupling
beam
Lever pivot
Bond pad (electrical contact)
Suspended
spring
Electrostatic
comb actuator
Outline of silicon die
Anchor
Anchor
Unetched silicon
(a)
Virtual pivot point
Lever
pivot
Lever
Suspension spring
Mechanical anchor
(b)
Suspended beam
Figure 5.9
(a) Illustration of the mechanically balanced electrostatic comb actuator design with
the reflecting mirror. The laser diode, collimating lens, and diffraction are also shown in reference
to the actuator. (b) A simplified schematic of the mechanical structure of the comb actuator. A
lever in a push-pull configuration connects two comb actuators. The virtual pivot point lies at the
intersection of the two flexural suspension beams supporting the loaded actuator with the mirror.

mounting pads forms the reflective mirror end of the cavity. The mirror is 1.7 mm
wide and extends approximately 600 µm above the surface of the actuator. The
maximum range of rotation of the actuator necessary to tune the laser over the
entire C-Band depends on the dispersion of the grating. At 1,200 lines per millime-
ter, one degree of angular rotation at the mirror causes a 7.5-nm shift in wavelength.
Hence, the total required rotation of the actuator is less than five degrees. At this
angle, the distal end of the mirror travels 300 µm.
Fabricated using the SFB-DRIE process introduced in Chapter 3, the rotary
actuator [18] utilizes a mechanically balanced comb structure with a flexural sus-
pension design [see Figure 5.9(a)]. Its single-crystal silicon design makes it inher-
ently free of intrinsic stresses and hysteretic mechanical effects. With a typical spring
width of 4 µm and a thickness of 85 µm, the out-of-plane stiffness is sufficiently high
to confine all displacements to the plane of the silicon die. The comb elements are
also 4 µm wide with a gap of 10 µm. The fundamental in-plane mechanical resonant
frequency is 212 Hz. All flexures and springs include fin-like structures to simulate a
periodic structure during the DRIE step, thus minimizing the loading effect (see
Chapter 3) and improving the sidewall profile. As these fins are attached only to the
suspended flexures and springs, they have no impact on the spring constants, but
they add mass and cause a slight reduction in the mechanical resonant frequency.
The rather large thickness and size of the silicon comb actuator result in a
relatively high mass that makes the device sensitive to in-plane vibrations and
accelerations—an unbalanced actuator behaves similar to the DRIE accelerometer
described in the previous chapter. This undesired vibration sensitivity is greatly
reduced by a mechanically balanced design that incorporates two electrostatic
comb actuators coupled together by a lever in a push-pull configuration [see
Figure 5.9(b)]—when one actuator rotates in a clockwise direction, the other turns
in the opposite orientation. The combs are nearly identical, differing only in their
masses: the mass of the unloaded actuator on the right-hand side is equal to the
mass of the loaded actuator (left-hand side) and the mirror. Externally applied
in-plane accelerations cause equal but opposite torques on the lever, thus minimiz-
ing any undesired motion of the mirror. Nonetheless, minute imbalances between
the masses of the two actuators remain and adversely impact the optical length of
the cavity. An electronic feedback servo loop monitoring the output wavelength
(see the following section on wavelength lockers) applies a force-balancing voltage
to the comb structure and counteracts small parasitic displacements, thus eliminat-
ing any residual rotation of the mirror. With the servo loop active, the measured
optical wavelength shift at an applied sinusoidal vibration of 5G at 50 Hz is less
than 10 pm (equivalent to an optical frequency shift of 1.25 GHz off the main opti-
cal carrier on the ITU grid at approximately 194 THz).
The orientation of the flexural springs that support the loaded actuator on the
left-hand side determines the location of the virtual pivot point. For nonintersecting
flexures and small deflections, the pivot point lies at the intersection of the lines
extending from these flexures [19]. This design was preferred by the engineers over
centrally symmetrical rotary actuators that are inherently balanced because of space
considerations in the miniature laser package.
The theory of conventional electrostatic comb actuators teaches that the attrac-
tive force is quadratic with the applied voltage [20]. This nonlinear dependence
Fiber-Optic Communication Devices
147

makes the design of closed-loop electronic circuits rather complex. Instead, it is
desirable to design a mechanical system whose force (and hence angular displace-
ment) is linear with applied voltage. A close examination of the actuator reveals that
the length of the individual comb teeth varies, becoming shorter towards the outer
periphery of the rotary actuator. As the two comb actuators in the push-pull con-
figuration are driven differentially and rotate in opposite directions, additional teeth
engage in one actuator and disengage in the other [18]. The rate at which the total
number of engaged teeth changes with angle of rotation (and applied voltage) is
determined by the geometry and layout of the comb teeth. If the total number of
engaged teeth is inversely proportional to the square of the voltage, then the nonlin-
ear dependence is eliminated. In practice, this dynamic tailoring of the number of
engaged comb teeth with angle greatly reduces the overall nonlinear dependence but
does not eliminate it. Experimental analysis shows that the behavior is generally lin-
ear with high-order ripples [20]. For the particular design used by Iolon, a differen-
tial voltage drive of 150V results in an angular rotation of ±2.5º.
Once packaged in a standard 18-pin butterfly package (see Chapter 8) with all
of the components optically aligned, the product meets all of the requirements of a
tunable laser for long-distance transmission. The power is 13 ± 0.1 dBm from 1,529
to 1,561 nm; the RIN measures –145 dB/Hz from 10 MHz to 22 GHz; the SMSR is
55 dB; and the spectral linewidth, typical of external cavity lasers with long cavities,
is very narrow, measuring 2 MHz [21]. The tuning speed of the laser is only limited
by the actuator’s mechanical response time and the bandwidth of the closed-loop
servo. A maximum tuning speed of approximately 10 ms has been reported.
The DFB Tunable Laser from Santur Corporation
The laser design used by Santur [11] bears no resemblance to the previous design,
other than achieving a similar performance. It is based on a family of integrated
semiconductor lasers called distributed-feedback (DFB) lasers [22]. These lasers are
ubiquitous as transmission sources in fiber-optic telecommunications owing to their
excellent spectral performance and proven reliability. They have been manufactured
in volume for many years and thus are cost effective. They provide a stable output
power, typically between 10 and 50 mW, and are frequency stabilized by a
Bragg grating guaranteeing no wavelength drift. It is common to obtain in a
communication-grade DFB a RIN of better than –145 dB/Hz from 50 kHz to 2.5
GHz, a SMSR higher than 45 dB, and a spectral linewidth narrower than 2 MHz
(e.g., [23]).
The details of the DFB laser are beyond the scope of this book and can be found
in [24]. In summary, the basic structure consists of a gain medium made of multiple
quantum wells in an InGaAsP/InP semiconductor crystal (see Figure 5.10). Light is
confined within the crystal to a waveguide that is made by the difference in index of
refraction between InP and InGaAsP. A periodic Bragg grating delineated immedi-
ately above the waveguide provides a wavelength filter as well as a resonant cavity.
The Bragg grating reflects light continuously over its entire length, thus behaving as
a distributed reflector and resulting in a distributed resonant cavity—hence the
name distributed feedback. This coupled role of the Bragg grating makes a full
analysis numerically complex and intensive. The grating shape, periodicity, and
index of refraction determine the center wavelength of the filter, as well as its
148
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic Applications

reflectivity into the cavity. If Λ is the periodicity of a simple grating and n’ is the dif-
ference in indices of refraction of the materials bounding the grating, then the center
wavelength of the grating in free space is Λ/2n' [25]. For a grating centered at 1,550
nm in InP and InGaAsP (n’0.2), the required periodicity is approximately 0.6 µm,
necessitating fabrication using high-resolution lithographic tools such as an electron
beam. The dependence of optical gain and index of refraction on temperature
results in the lasing wavelength increasing with temperature at the rate of 0.12
nm/ºC over the range 20º to 80ºC. This is why semiconductor lasers include a TEC
device to control temperature and wavelength.
The Santur laser utilizes temperature as the variable parameter to tune the out-
put wavelength of the DFB laser. However, a 25ºC change in temperature results in a
3-nm wavelength shift that is only a fraction of the entire C-Band. This limited ther-
mal tuning range gives rise to using a linear array of 12 DFB lasers. All are similar in
every respect, differing only in the periodicity of their Bragg gratings, each covering a
small portion of the C-Band (about 3 nm) (see Figure 5.10) [26]. Applying a current
to a particular laser in the array selects this laser for operation; a temperature adjust-
ment then fine tunes the output wavelength. A tilting micromachined mirror then
steers the output light beam through a focusing lens into an optical fiber. The micro-
mirror only needs to tilt in one direction for laser selection, but a tilt capability in the
orthogonal direction aids in relaxing the alignment tolerances during final packag-
ing. The maximum angular tilt is quite small, only about ±1.5º, because the DFB
lasers in the array are on a 10-µm pitch.
Unlike the external cavity laser described earlier, this laser resonant cavity is
fully contained within the semiconductor diode, and, hence, external vibrations
have no effect on the output wavelength. However, these external vibrations
may cause minute misalignments of the micromirror relative to the two lenses,
thereby modulating the output power coupled into the optical fiber. Experimental
Fiber-Optic Communication Devices
149
p-InP
n-InP
Waveguide
Bragg
grating
Fiber
Collimating
lens
Focusing
lens
Tilting
micromirror
± 0.5º
± 2º
+
Single DFB laser
DFB array
(10- m pitch)
µ
AR coating
Figure 5.10
Schematic illustration of the tunable array of DFB lasers from Santur Corporation of
Fremont, California. Once a DFB laser in the array is electrically selected, a micromirror steers its
output light through a focusing lens into an optical fiber. Changing the temperature of the DFB
laser array using a TEC device tunes the wavelength over a narrow range. The illustration on the
far left depicts the simplified internal structure of a single DFB laser. Both facets of the
semiconductor diode are coated with an antireflection (AR) coating.

measurements showed that a 10-G shock without compensation by the electronic
control loop caused a small but noticeable 0.2 dB change in output power.
A fully packaged laser contains three electronic control closed-loop circuitries
that use input from a commercial wavelength locker to measure output wavelength
from a 1% optical tap to measure output power in the fiber [11]. The first circuit
controls the drive current to operate one single DFB laser in the array and compen-
sate for any change in the output intensity resulting from long term aging effects. A
second circuit controls the temperature of the DFB laser array, thus tuning the out-
put wavelength. The third circuit applies the appropriate voltages to the micromir-
ror to maximize optical coupling and offset any mechanical misalignment. An
intentional misalignment of the micromirror angle can attenuate the coupled power
into the fiber and turn the mirror into an integrated variable optical attenuator. The
present design offers a 10-dB attenuation range, thus providing an output power
that can be varied from 3 dBm (2 mW) up to 13 dBm (20 mW). It is evident that
when the micromirror is in an extreme angular position, no light couples into the
fiber, thus blanking the laser. This is necessary during the transient duration when
the control electronics are switching between different DFB lasers within the array
or altering the temperature of a single array element.
The final measured specifications of this tunable laser are as follows: the maxi-
mum output power is 13 ± 0.1 dBm tunable from 1,531 to 1,564 nm; the RIN is
lower than –145 dB/Hz up to 10 GHz; the SMSR is 43 dB; and the spectral linewidth
is 8 MHz. The tuning speed of the laser is limited by the response of the TEC to
about 1s. We will discuss the packaging details of this tunable laser in Chapter 8.
The micromirror is a double-gimbaled structure (see Figure 5.11) fabricated
using bulk-micromachining methods in single-crystal silicon. The mirror is a highly
doped, conductive silicon layer that is a few micrometers thick and is suspended
using torsional flexures from a frame. The inner and outer torsion flexures are 3.5
µm and 5 µm wide, respectively; both are 150 µm long and 15 µm thick. The
150
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic Applications
Glass substrate
Gold electrodes (at +V)
SiO2
Silicon
Gold reflector
Torsional hinge
Silicon
{111}
15
m
µ
Bond pad
Figure 5.11
Schematic cross section of the micromirror used within the tunable laser from Santur
Corporation. The device consists of a double-gimbaled mirror structure supported by torsional
hinges. A gold layer defines the high-reflectivity mirror surface that remains at ground potential.
Four gold electrodes on an anodically bonded glass substrate actuate the mirror and cause
rotation around the hinges.

reflective element is a layer of gold measuring 1.4 × 1.5 mm2. The large but finite
reflectivity (~ 98%) of gold results in some coupling losses measuring about 0.2 dB.
Four gold electrodes on a glass substrate directly underneath the mirror actuate the
mirror and cause rotation. The dimensions of the torsional flexures and electrode-
mirror gap are such that full angular rotation is obtained at about 120V. The overall
die measures 3 × 3 mm2.
Santur Corporation has disclosed sufficient details to recreate a fabrication
process. One starts with a SOI wafer that is approximately 155 µm thick composed
of a crystalline top silicon layer (15 µm thick) on top of a 0.25-µm thick silicon
oxide layer over a silicon handle substrate. A gold layer (20 to 50 nm thick) is depos-
ited either using evaporation or sputtering. Because gold deposited in either method
tends to be under stress, it is desirable for the SOI silicon layer to be as thick as possi-
ble. The torsion flexures and mirrors are then lithographically delineated and etched
into the SOI silicon layer using standard dry etch methods. The front side is pro-
tected, and the bulk of the wafer is etched from the back side using KOH or TMAH.
The etch stops at the intermediate silicon oxide layer. An etch of the oxide layer then
releases the suspended mirror structure. A flash sputter deposition or evaporation of
gold on the back side of the mirror can greatly alleviate any bowing of the mirror
due to stresses from the gold film on the front side by adding a balanced stress on the
back side. Finally, the silicon wafer is anodically bonded to a glass substrate upon
which gold electrodes were previously deposited and lithographically delineated.
Wavelength Locker
The function of a wavelength locker is to measure the difference between the actual
and desired wavelengths of a laser and provide an error signal that can be used by
the laser’s electronic control loop to correct for the deviation. This function is key to
all lasers used in fiber-optic telecommunication in order to “lock” the laser output
to an assigned wavelength on the ITU grid and to offset drift due to aging and envi-
ronmental conditions. Wavelength lockers are available as stand-alone products
external to the laser or can be integrated within the laser resonant cavity. This sec-
tion selects for description a micromachined wavelength locker from Digital Optics
Corporation of Charlotte, North Carolina, which operates in the wavelength range
from 1,525 to 1,625 nm.
A wavelength locker is a special implementation of a one-dimensional planar
resonant cavity known as a Fabry-Perot etalon [27]. For an etalon of physical length
d and index of refraction n bounded by two partially reflective surfaces of reflectiv-
ity r, the frequency spacing between adjacent longitudinal modes is known as the
free spectral range (FSR) and equals c/2d under normal incidence. The transmis-
sion transfer function of the etalon, therefore, consists of periodic peaks whose
sharpness is a function of the finesse, a measure of the loss in the resonator’s mir-
rors. A low mirror reflectivity results in a low finesse and broad transmission peaks
[see Figure 5.12(a)]. The utility of the etalon is that once its transmission peaks are
calibrated, it forms a wavelength “ruler” against which an incident beam of
unknown wavelength can be measured. The calibration process entails fixing the
frequency position of the transmission peak relative to the ITU grid and ensuring
that the FSR matches the periodicity of the ITU grid, typically 50 GHz. An etalon is
a simple structure, but to obtain a precise and accurate measurement of the
Fiber-Optic Communication Devices
151

frequency (or wavelength), its transmission peaks (equivalent to the marks on a
ruler) must be calibrated and insensitive to temperature and process variations. It is
the fabrication of an etalon that is complex and requires great diligence.
A basic wavelength locker consists of a beam splitter, a Fabry-Perot etalon, and
two detectors. An incident light beam is divided into two optical beams. The first
one travels through a calibrated etalon, and its intensity is measured by a first detec-
tor. The second beam is directly detected by a second detector and serves as an inten-
sity reference. The differential analysis serves to eliminate the effect of any power
fluctuations in the laser diode itself on the wavelength measurement. The transmis-
sion function of the etalon maps any wavelength changes in the incident beam to an
intensity change that is measured by the detectors. An electronic control loop takes
the differential error signal between the two detectors as input and closes the loop to
the laser control circuitry to lock its output wavelength to a predetermined value.
Depending on the design of the electronic circuitry, the locking can be peak synchro-
nous (locking to the transmission peaks) or edge level (locking to a predetermined
intensity level) [see Figure 5.12(b)]. The latter locking method is common because
the high slope at the locking point results in a large change in intensity for a small
change in wavelength (or frequency), typically 2% to 7% per GHz [28].
152
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic Applications
Frequency (THz)
194.6
194.62
194.64
194.66
194.68
194.7
ITU grid
T( ) =
λ
1
1 + (2 / ) sin (
F π 2
2
)
2π
λ
F = πr1/2
1 −r is the finesse
d
n
Transmission peak
(a)
FSR
Locking
point
(b)
Peak-synchronous detection
Edge-locking detection
1,540.545
Etalon transmission T( )
λ
1,540.386
1,540.228 1,540.070
1,539.912 1,539.753
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Wavelength (nm)
Figure 5.12
(a) The transmission function of an example etalon in the infrared spectrum showing
the transmission peaks relative to the ITU grid. When calibrated, the FSR matches the periodicity of
the ITU grid. The transmission peaks become narrower and sharper with increasing finesse (higher
mirror reflectivity). (b) The laser can be locked to the etalon’s transmission function using
peak-synchronous detection (locking to the peak) or edge-locking detection (locking to a
predetermined intensity level).

The wavelength locker from Digital Optics Corporation miniaturizes the ele-
ments of a standard locker to result in a device that measures 5.5 × 5.5 × 4.0 mm3
(see Figure 5.13). The miniature beam splitter is a diffractive optical element con-
sisting of a multiple-phase grating [29, 30]. Relief structures etched in an optically
transparent substrate, such as fused silica or silicon in the infrared portion of the
spectrum, form regions of varying phases and thus diffract the incident light in a
specific pattern or orientation. The efficiency of the grating (the intensity that is
available in the higher order diffraction orders) is tailored by adjusting the planar
topography and phase of the relief structures. A thorough analysis typically involves
using a fast Fourier transform of the output light intensity to calculate the phase
pattern of the diffractive element. In this particular case, a high-efficiency phase
grating divides the incident light beam into two higher order beams noted as +1 and
–1 orders. A second set of similar diffractive optics corrects the path of the two
diffractive beams (and possibly collimates them) for normal incidence on the
detecting photodiodes.
The etalon is a cube of fused silica (n = 1.444) whose polished facets have been
coated with a partially reflective dielectric mirror. For the wavelength range of 1,550
to 1,650 nm, the dielectric mirror typically consists of alternating layer pairs, each
one quarter of a wavelength in thickness, of Al2O3 and SiO2, or TiO2 and SiO2. The
optical thickness of the glass cube determines the free spectral range. For the locker
to work properly on the ITU grid, the FSR must equal the ITU channel separation of
50 GHz ± 0.01 GHz. This means that the smallest thickness of the etalon must equal
to approximately 2.076 mm. The fine calibration of the FSR to the 50-GHz ITU
spacing relies on the dependence of the index of refraction, n, on temperature to
adjust the optical length of the etalon. For fused silica, the temperature coefficient of
Fiber-Optic Communication Devices
153
Figure 5.13
A schematic illustration of the wavelength locker from Digital Optics Corporation. A
first diffractive element divides the light from the laser into two beams. The first one travels
through a calibrated etalon and is detected by a photodetector. The second is detected directly by
another photodetector and serves as an intensity reference.

its index of refraction, dn/dT, is approximately 7 × 10−6K−1 at 1,545 nm. This tem-
perature dependence results in a spectral sensitivity of 1.35 GHz/°C, thus necessitat-
ing the use of a TEC to stabilize the etalon’s temperature.
The full product is a subassembly that comprises a first glass substrate with the
diffractive optical elements, an etalon on a ceramic carrier, and two photodetectors
also mounted with the appropriate electrical contacts on a ceramic carrier. The sub-
assembly elements are epoxied together and cured. The optical path is usually void
of any epoxy to ensure long-term reliability.
Digital M × N Optical Switch
An optical switch is to fiber-optical telecommunications and light transmission what
a multithrow, multipole electrical switch is to electronic or microwave signaling. An
optical switch redirects an incoming light signal into one of many output fibers.
Arrays of optical switches allow the rapid reconfiguration of optical networks
in data communications by altering the light path in a system of intersecting
fibers—much like railroad points move train tracks to reconfigure a rail network.
They are also useful components in the addition and deletion of extra channels in
optical add/drop multiplexers (OADM) [31] for WDM—equivalent to highway
entrance and exit ramps that add or remove some of the traffic. During the boom
years of the late 1990s, venture capital funded a large number of innovative startup
companies in a race against the giants of the telecommunications industry to develop
the next generation of optical switches. But the collapse of the telecommunications
market in the following years resulted in the closure of many of these companies and
forced the remaining ones to demonstrate products that were cost effective and
highly reliable.
A key characteristic of optical switch arrays is their order (i.e., how many input
and output fibers can be independently coupled to each other). If a switch can route
the light from a single input fiber to any of N output fibers, then it is labeled 1 × N.
Generally, M × N switches are two-dimensional arrays with M input and N output
fibers. Their electronic equivalent is an analog multiplexer that selects any one of M
electrical inputs and routes its signal to any one of N output lines. The now-defunct
company Optical Micromachines, Inc., formerly of San Diego, California, was one
of the early pioneers to demonstrate arrays using surface-micromachined polysilicon
mirrors in switches reaching up to 32 × 32. Optical switches are commercially avail-
able today from such companies as JDS Uniphase of San Jose, California; DiCon
Fiberoptics, Inc., of Berkeley, California; and Sercalo Microtechnology, Ltd., of
Liechtenstein but are typically 1 × 2 up to 1 × 8, or they are 2 × 2 switches.
The basic architecture and technology used by Sercalo for their M × N switches
stems from prior research activities performed at the University of Neuchâtel in
Switzerland using the SOI and DRIE process introduced in Chapter 3 [32]. While
not all of the details of the Sercalo switch are publicly available, the device is nearly
identical to the work completed at the University of Neuchâtel, and we will thus
limit this discussion to the latter device.
The basic cell for a 2 × 2 switch element consists of an electrostatic comb actua-
tor controlling the position of a vertical mirror plate at the intersection of two per-
pendicular slots. Within each slot lie two optical fibers, one on each slot end (see
Figure 5.14). In the actuator’s normal unbiased position, the mirror plate sits in the
154
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic Applications

middle of the intersection and reflects the light by 90º, thereby altering the path of
data communication—this is the cross state. Applying approximately 70V to the
actuator combs causes the mirror to retract, letting the light pass through unob-
structed—this is the bar state. Arraying the 2 × 2 switch element in both directions
creates a generalized M × N switch matrix.
The slots must normally accommodate optical fibers, typically 150 to 250 µm
in diameter. The depth of the slot must be such that the center of the fiber aligns
with the center of the micromirror. Because light diverges upon leaving the fiber,
the mirror must be significantly larger than the fiber core itself (the core is a central
area that carries light, typically about 10 µm in diameter for single-mode fibers
[33]). In the demonstration from the University of Neuchâtel, the mirror height is
identical to the depth of the groove, approximately 75 µm. Insertion loss, a meas-
ure of the light-coupling efficiency between input and output fibers—it is the ratio
of intensities at the output to the input—greatly depends on the alignment accuracy
Fiber-Optic Communication Devices
155
Unactuated
(cross state)
Actuated
(bar state)
Slots for optic fibers
Electrostatic
comb actuator
Optic fiber
Micromirror
Silicon
Trench isolation
Silicon
oxide
Input 1
Output 2
Output 1
Input 2
Input 1
Input 2
Output 2
Output 1
Figure 5.14
Illustration of a 2 × 2 binary reflective optical switch fabricated using SOI wafers and
DRIE. An electrostatic comb actuator controls the position of a micromirror. In the cross state, light
from an input fiber is deflected by 90º. In the bar state, the light from that fiber travels
unobstructed through the switch. Side schematics illustrate the signal path for each state.

of the fibers with respect to each other and to the mirror. Insertion loss also relies on
the mirror reflecting all of the light impinging on its surface. This essentially
requires the use of highly reflective coatings, in particular aluminum for wave-
lengths in the visible and gold in the infrared. Furthermore, the surface of the mirror
must be optically flat in order to eliminate any deleterious light-scattering effects. A
surface roughness less than 10% of a wavelength is considered to be optically flat
for most applications.
The device is fabricated on SOI wafers with a 75-µm-thick top silicon layer. The
overall die size is approximately 3.3 × 3.7 mm2. Lithography in standard resist was
followed by DRIE down to the buried oxide. An etch step in hydrofluoric acid
removes the 2-µm buried silicon dioxide layer to release the comb actuator as well as
the mirror plate. In the research performed at the University of Neuchâtel, 50-nm-
thick aluminum is deposited on the silicon surfaces to increase reflectivity. Owing to
its small size, small mass, and stiff springs, the switch has a fast response time,
typically 500 µs.
The optical switch from the University of Neuchâtel demonstrated an overall
insertion loss of less than 1.6 dB in the bar state and less than 3.4 dB in the cross
state, losses considered excessive for optical-fiber telecommunications. The meas-
ured reflectivity of the aluminum mirror was 76%, lower than the theoretical value
of 95%, thus contributing about 1.2 dB to the loss ratio [34]. The loss was further
exacerbated by scattering from the surface roughness of the mirror plate, which was
measured at 36 nm rms.
In producing a commercial version of the switch, Sercalo had to address these
problems to offer adequate performance in the operating wavelength range from
1,300 to 1,600 nm. First, substituting gold for aluminum greatly improves reflectiv-
ity in the infrared. Second, developing a gold deposition process that yields a
smoother, fine-grain structure is necessary to reduce scattering effects. Sputtering,
evaporation, and slow (low-current) electroplating of gold are known to yield
smooth surfaces. Finally, the fibers must be aligned relative to each other with an
accuracy of less than 0.5 µm to minimize coupling losses. Because all of the slots and
mirror are precisely defined in a single lithographic and etch step, any misalignment
will typically result from variations in the fiber diameter, which can be greatly mini-
mized by using fiber from the same spool. As a result of these improvements, Sercalo
was successful in reducing the insertion loss to an average of 0.5 dB.
The measured polarization-dependent loss (PDL), which is the ratio of reflected
intensities corresponding to the two polarizations, is less than 0.1 dB. PDL is primar-
ily affected by the dependence of the reflectivity of metallic surfaces on polarization,
especially at oblique incidence. For a 45º incident angle on a gold surface, the
difference in reflectivity is about 0.5%, which corresponds to a contribution of
0.025 dB to PDL.
Beam-Steering Micromirror for Photonic Switches and Cross Connects
In M × N switch arrays, the number of individual mirrors is M·N. Arrays bigger
than 32 × 32 require a substantially large number of mirrors and become sub-
ject to sufficiently low manufacturing yields, which make them uneconomical.
Furthermore, the insertion loss increases with the array size as the optical path
length gets longer, and sensitivity to misalignment becomes more critical. A new
156
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic Applications

three-dimensional (3-D) system architecture using continuously tilting mirrors in
two directions can serve the same functionality but with far fewer mirrors: an opti-
cal cross connect with N input and output fiber ports requires only 2N mirrors. The
mirrors in the 3-D architecture are no longer digital (ON-OFF), but rather point the
light beam from one fiber to another with high spatial precision (see Figure 5.15). In
this beam-steering approach, a first tilting mirror on a first plate points the light
from a collimated input fiber to one of many similar mirrors on a second plate,
which in turn points the light to a collimated output fiber. Both an input and an out-
put mirror are required, so that each can be pointed directly at the centerline of its
corresponding fiber, rather than at an angle. To minimize the maximum angular
displacement of the mirrors, the two plates can be positioned at 45º relative to the
incident light. The angular tilt precision needs be very high. For a system using
single-mode fibers with a typical core diameter of 10 µm and an optical path length
of, say, 10 cm, the mirror must have an accuracy and repeatability of better than
100 µrad (0.006°). The system specifications require a mirror design that is capable
Fiber-Optic Communication Devices
157
Plate with
tilting mirrors
N
N input fibers
N output fibers
Figure 5.15
Schematic illustration of the 3-D architecture for an N × N switch or photonic cross
connect. A beam-steering micromirror on a first plate points the light from a collimated input fiber
to another similar micromirror on a second plate, which in turn points it to a collimated output
fiber. This system architecture requires a total of 2N continuously tilting mirrors in two directions.
To minimize the maximum angular displacement of the mirrors, the two plates are positioned at
45º relative to the incident light.

of delivering such high angular pointing precision, as well complex alignment and
closed-loop feedback systems that are beyond the scope of this book [35].
Many
companies
achieved
significant
progress
in
the
development
of
very-large-scale photonic switches (reaching up to 4,000 × 4,000). However the col-
lapse of the telecommunications capital equipment market by 2002 forced many of
these companies to use their micromirror technologies in pursuit of other, possibly
less lucrative, markets. It is the broad utility of these beam-steering micromirrors
that leads us to present them here, even though the primary application for which
they were developed (fiber-optical telecommunication) will not witness significant
growth until a future time.
A search on issued patents in this field reveals a plurality of micromirror
inventions, the vast majority of which utilize electrostatic actuation (e.g., [36]).
One implementation from Integrated Micromachines, Inc. (IMMI), of Irwindale,
California, utilizes electromagnetic actuation instead. While the company is no
longer pursuing applications in fiber-optical communications, the design stands out
as an elegant implementation using a low-voltage, low-power electromagnetic
scheme [37].
The basic design for virtually all beam-steering micromirrors, including the
device from IMMI, consists of a bulk-micromachined mirror supported from a sili-
con frame using a gimbal suspension (see Figure 5.16). The mirror is often circular in
shape, though elliptical, rectangular, and square shapes are also possible. A thin
layer (10 ~ 100 nm) of metal on the surface ensures a high reflectivity; gold is the
metal of choice for infrared radiation. The IMMI design utilizes four independent
drive coils on the back side of mirror for actuation.
The design places the reflective surface of the mirror on what conventionally is
the back side of a double-polished silicon surface. The thickness of the mirror is
approximately 100 to 200 µm. A thick and thus stiff mirror is essential to reduce the
risk of distortions (e.g., warping due to heating from absorbed laser radiation or
stress from the deposited gold layer). The mirror diameter is often 5 to 10 times the
nominal diameter (typically measured as full width at half maximum) of the light
beam to ensure that the mirror intercepts all incident rays. This in itself assumes that
158
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic Applications
Torsional hinge
Silicon frame
(Back side of wafer)
(Front side of wafer)
Planar coil
Solder ball
Bond pad
Spring
Gold mirror
Figure 5.16
Schematic illustration of the beam-steering micromirror from IMMI. The mirror is
formed on what conventionally is the back side of a double-polished SOI wafer, while the drive
coils and thin torsional flexures are made on the front side. Sn-Pb solder balls allow the packaging
of arrays of mirrors on ceramic substrates using flip-chip technology.

the propagating radiation is in a single Gaussian mode—multimode radiation will
require much larger diameter multiples [38]. The IMMI design micromirror has a
diameter of approximately 3 mm, giving it a mass of 1.7 mg.
The gimbal suspension consists of four serpentine torsional hinges arranged in a
symmetrical topography and formed in the top silicon layer of what conventionally
is the front side of a SOI wafer. This allows the manufacture of thin, compliant
hinges, which results in lower actuation forces [39]. However, if the hinges are too
compliant, the suspension-mirror mechanical system will be sensitive to vibration
and will not survive mechanical shocks. The final dimensions are thus a compro-
mise depending on many factors, including the magnitude of available actuation
forces, required size of the mirror, available real estate, and allowed resonant
modes. The suspension-mirror geometry and dimensions are such that the first reso-
nance of the IMMI mirror is at 140 Hz. The present gimbal suspension favors three
modes of displacement (two out-of-plane angular rotations and one out-of-plane
displacement), but it also permits additional undesirable modes such as in-plane
motion or rotation of the mirror. Fortunately, these undesirable modes have reso-
nant peaks above 3 kHz and thus do not participate in the mirror motion, provided
the control electronics limit the bandwidth to a value lower than these resonant fre-
quencies. Numerical analysis of the suspensions and experimental results has shown
that the rotational spring constants remain unchanged through the full angular dis-
placement of the micromirror. Consequently, the mirror actuation is linear with
current in the drive coils, a feature that simplifies the implementation of the control
electronics.
Magnetic actuation is a key differentiator of the IMMI micromirror, as it deliv-
ers a higher actuation energy per unit volume compared to equivalent electrostatic
actuation methods (see Table 4.2). A larger actuation force enables the use of a rela-
tively stiffer suspension and thicker mirror, thus improving the overall mechanical
response. The actuation force is given by the Lorentz force and depends on the fol-
lowing key parameters: the length and orientation of the drive coil and the intensity
and orientation of the magnetic field vector. The drive coils are formed by electro-
plating on the front side of the wafer with electrical connections leading to tin-lead
(Sn-Pb) solder balls made using standard screen printing and reflow processes. The
solder balls allow the packaging of multiple mirrors in arrays on ceramic substrates
using flip-chip technology (see Chapter 8).
There are a total of four coils, one in each quadrant of the circular mirror. The
coils reside within a short distance (200~500 µm) from the surface of a permanent
rare-Earth cylindrical magnet. The magnetic flux density at the surface of the mag-
net is approximately 1T but rapidly decays with distance. The magnetic flux density
outside of the magnet has two components: normal (Bn) and radial (Br) [see
Figure 5.17(a)]. The total actuation force consists of the contributions of both com-
ponents to the Lorentz force. A counterclockwise current interacting with the nor-
mal component Bn results in a Lorentz force that acts in the plane of the coil [see
Figure 5.17(b)]. Bn is not constant across a coil, resulting in a net force that is radi-
ally outward for a single coil. By pairing the coils in a symmetrical manner, the in-
plane forces from all four coils counteract each other, thus greatly reducing motions
in the plane of the mirror. A suspension with high in-plane stiffness further ensures
that in-plane motion is negligible.
Fiber-Optic Communication Devices
159

Only the fringing radial component of magnetic field (Br) contributes to the
angular and piston (vertical) displacement of the micromirror. A counterclockwise
current in a drive coil interacting with the radial field results in a Lorentz force that is
normal to the plane of the coil and acting to pull the coil towards the magnet [see
Figure 5.17(b)]—the peripheral portion of the coil contributes to the force, whereas
the radial portions have little effect. Switching the polarity of the current results in
an opposite force that pushes the coil away from the magnet. It thus becomes evident
that two adjacent coils carrying currents in opposite directions induce a torque
around an axis of symmetry that divides them. Torques of arbitrary magnitude can
be generated around the two axes of symmetry by the proper selection of the current
direction and magnitude in each of the coils. Furthermore, an additional vertical
(piston) motion can be induced by driving all four coils simultaneously with a cur-
rent in the same direction. For example, a clockwise current in all coils moves the
mirror away from the surface of the magnet.
The differential drive of the coils provides an added benefit: the developed
torque stays relatively constant throughout the full range of motion of ±5º. As the
mirror tilts, the side that is closer to the magnet develops a larger downward force,
whereas the side that is farther from the magnet develops a smaller upward force.
The two effects are offsetting, resulting in a minimal increase in the torque (<0.2%)
over the full mirror travel. This linear behavior greatly minimizes cross coupling
between the two axes of rotation (<0.1% in displacement cross coupling).
The drive coils play an additional role as sense coils to detect the angular posi-
tion of the mirror. A multiturn planar coil deposited on the ceramic substrate that
holds the silicon micromirror acts as the primary winding of a transformer, with the
four drive coils as the secondary. An ac signal at a frequency of approximately 5
MHz in the primary produces a corresponding sense voltage in each of the four coils
160
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic Applications
B
I
B
I
F
IL
=
×B
F
F
F = 0
F = 0
n
r
The Lorentz force is
planar to the mirror
for the normal field,
.
Bn
The Lorentz force is
normal to the plane of the
mirror for the radial
fringing field,
.
Br
Permanent
magnet
Mirror structure
F
IL
=
×B
Bn
Br
Flux lines
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.17
(a) An illustration of the rare-Earth magnet and the four independent drive coils. The
magnetic flux density outside of the magnet has a normal component, Bn, and a fringing radial
component, Br. (b) The normal magnetic component interacts with a counterclockwise current to
induce a Lorentz force that is in the plane of the coils. The radial component of the magnetic field
results in a force that is normal to the plane of the coil.

through mutual inductance coupling (the mirror does not respond to this high fre-
quency). This coupling is a strong function of the position and orientation of the
coils relative to the primary coil. These sense voltages then become a direct measure
of the angular position of the mirror and are used in a closed-loop electronic circuit
to spatially lock the mirror.
The details of the fabrication process are not available, but, once again, one can
design a fabrication sequence that can produce a similar device. The starting material
is a SOI substrate polished on both sides. The first fabrication steps cover the forma-
tion of the drive coils and corresponding interconnects on the front side of the SOI
wafer. A gold seed layer, typically 50 to 100 nm thick, is sputtered on both sides of
the wafer, then followed by standard lithography on the front side to delineate the
coil layout. The thin gold layer on the back side will ultimately serve as the reflecting
surface of the mirror. Electroplating 5–20 microns of gold on the front side forms the
coils and bond pads. The next step is the delineation of the torsional hinges, also on
the front side of the wafer. This is completed using standard lithography, followed
by standard RIE. It may be necessary to delineate the suspension hinges just prior to
the electroplating if the thickness of the gold is more than 5 µm in order to avoid the
deposition of resist over the thick topographical features of the gold coils. The fabri-
cation is completed by etching from the back side of the wafer the contour of the mir-
ror and using the embedded silicon oxide layer as an etch stop. Either DRIE or wet
anisotropic etching (e.g., KOH or TMAH) can be used. The very last step is the
removal of the exposed silicon oxide layer using hydrofluoric acid.
It is evident from this process that the thickness of the suspension is determined
by the thickness of the top SOI layer, typically a few micrometers thick. As a result,
the mechanical properties of the suspension are very predictable and well con-
trolled. Similarly, the thickness of the mirror is determined by the thickness of the
handle layer (thick bottom layer) of the SOI wafer and is uniform—the measured
surface flatness over the 3-mm diameter mirror is less than 15 nm RMS with local
roughness of approximately 2 nm. The gold layer on the back side of the wafer pro-
vides a very high reflectivity in the near infrared spectrum.
Achromatic Variable Optical Attenuation
A variable optical attenuator (VOA) is a dynamic optical component used in fiber-
optical telecommunications to adjust the intensity of light inside the fiber. A VOA
typically maintains the power below 20 mW, which corresponds to the onset of
nonlinear effects such as four-wave mixing, Brillouin scattering, and Raman scatter-
ing [40, 41]. Key characteristics of a VOA are spectral range (typically between
1,528 to 1,620 nm), insertion loss (a measure of light lost within the component
exclusive of the required attenuation, typically less than 1 dB), polarization-
dependent loss (a measure of the difference in loss between the two orthogonal
polarizations, typically less than 0.5 dB), wavelength dependence of attenuation
(typically less than 0.3 dB over the spectral range), and finally size (a volume less
than 1 cm
3 is highly desirable). All loss parameters are measured in dB.
Numerous implementations using MEMS technology have emerged in the past
few years. The following example is a product by Lightconnect, Inc., of Newark,
California, that utilizes a principle of operation and a structure that are identical to
the GLV discussed earlier in this chapter [42]. The basic concept is to use diffraction
Fiber-Optic Communication Devices
161

to shift energy away (and thus attenuate) from the main undiffracted beam into
higher order beams (see Figure 5.18), attenuating the incident beam (attenuation is
equivalent to creating a continuum of gray shades). The closely spaced suspended
reflective ribbons used for the GLV form the elements of an adjustable-phase grat-
ing. When the ribbons are coplanar, incident light is reflected back into the aperture
without attenuation. When alternating ribbons are pulled down using electrostatic
actuation by one quarter of a wavelength (λ/4) relative to their adjacent ribbons, the
incident energy diffracts into higher orders that are directed outside the aperture,
and the incident beam is completely attenuated. When the separation is less than λ/4,
the incident beam is partially attenuated, as some energy is shifted into the higher
diffracted orders.
While the VOA derives its basic principle of operation from the GLV, it must
also address a number of specifications that are particular to fiber-optical telecom-
munications. The first one relates to the chromatic dependence of the diffraction
grating. Displays have to manipulate only three basic colors: red, green, and blue.
But VOAs must manipulate a nearly continuous spectrum of wavelengths from
1,528 nm to 1,610 nm without a chromatic dependence. The second specification is
polarization-dependent loss. A difference in attenuation between the two polariza-
tions that is larger than 0.5 dB greatly increases the risk of data errors during trans-
mission. The design from Lightconnect adapts the GLV diffractive technology with
two key modifications to applications in fiber-optical telecommunications.
In order to understand the basic operation of the achromatic design, one needs
to refer to the use of phasors for time-varying electric fields [43]. In the case of the
GLV, two phasors—one for each of the fixed and moveable ribbons—affect the
162
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic Applications
Undeflected
Partial deflection
Full deflection
λ/4
< /4
λ
Zeroth order
Higher
orders
Intensity
Diffraction
angle
No attenuation
Partial attenuation
Full attenuation
Zeroth order
First order
Aperture
Figure 5.18
An illustration of the basic principle of operation of the variable optical attenuator
from Lightconnect, Inc. A set of suspended ribbons act as an adjustable grating. When alternating
ribbons are pulled down by λ/4, the structure becomes a phase grating and diverts the incident
energy into higher diffraction orders, thus providing full attenuation of the incident beam. When
all of the ribbons are coplanar or separated by a half wavelength, the surface acts as a reflector.
When the separation between adjacent ribbons is less than λ/4, there is light in all orders and the
incident beam is only partially attenuated.

reflected wave [see Figure 5.19(a)]. The difference in angle between the two phasors
is equal to 4πd/λ, where d is the physical separation between the ribbons and λ is the
wavelength. When the two phasors are π radians apart (i.e., the total vector sum of
the phasors is zero), there is complete diffraction of light into the higher orders.
However, this condition is satisfied only at one wavelength, which depends on the
separation d. For all other wavelengths, the angle difference between the phasors is
less than π (the vector sum is nonzero), thus allowing light to be reflected in both
the zeroth (undiffracted) and higher-order diffraction modes. To correct for this
dependence, the design introduces another phasor such that the sum of all three vec-
tors is null over a broad range of wavelengths [see Figure 5.19(a)].
The basic repetitive cell consists of three reflective ribbons [see Figure 5.19(b)]:
one moveable ribbon, a reference “ribbon,” and a compensating “ribbon,” with the
latter two being spatially fixed and separated by an integer multiple of half the
center wavelength (Nλ0/2) where λ0 is typically around 1,550 nm (i.e., their phasors
will be in phase only at the center wavelength). In the nominal undeflected state, all
three phasors have the same orientations at the center wavelength λ0 and add con-
structively to reflect the light without diffraction (no attenuation by the VOA). Pull-
ing the moveable ribbon down by λ0/4 adds a round trip phase of π at the center
Fiber-Optic Communication Devices
163
N 2
λ0
4
λ0
εc
εr
εm
Moveable ribbon
Compensating ribbon
Reference ribbon
(b)
εc
Re
εm
εr
ε
ε
ε
m
r
c
+
+
= 0 for all
is satisfied when:
λ
Re
Im
εm
εr
at
=
λ
λ0
(a)
A
A
A
r
c
m
+ 2
=
and
Ac
Am
2N
1
πλo
λ
πλ0
λ
2N
at λ ≠λ0
Im
2 cε
The three phasors add to the null vector
2 cε
Figure 5.19
(a) Phasor description of the diffractive operation of the variable optical attenuator.
At the center wavelength, the phasors add to the null vector. At other wavelengths, the compen-
sating ribbon introduces an error vector that cancels the error vector introduced by the moveable
ribbon, thus providing broadband achromatic operation [42]. (b) A schematic illustration of the
achromatic implementation of the variable optical attenuator. The structure consists of groups of
three ribbons, one of which is moveable and two of which are spatially fixed. The latter two are
vertically separated by Nλ0/2 where λ0 is the center wavelength and N is an integer.

wavelength to the light reflected by this ribbon. Schematically, the corresponding
phasor, εm, rotates in the complex plane by 180º. At the center wavelength, εc, the
phasor corresponding to the compensating ribbon remains in the same orientation
as εr, the phasor for the reference ribbon. The three phasors now add destructively to
a null vector [see Figure 5.19(a)] at the center wavelength, and thus light diffracts
into higher orders, causing maximum attenuation of the main undiffracted order. At
a wavelength λ different than λ0, the phasor εm rotates by an amount πλ0/λ radians
(less or more than π), causing an error vector relative to the phasor at λ0. Simultane-
ously, the phasor εc rotates by 2Nπλ0/λ, causing an error vector in the opposite
direction—εc rotates past εm by an additional πλ0/λ (if N = 1), placing it in an oppo-
site quadrant to εm. As the magnitudes of the phasors are proportional to the areas of
the ribbons, the two error vectors can be made to cancel each other out under certain
geometrical conditions. Analytical calculations show that if Am, Ar, and Ac are the
respective areas of the moveable, reference and compensating ribbons, then there are
two conditions that must be satisfied: Ar+2Ac = Am and Ac/Am = 1/2N. The first con-
dition ensures equality of the magnitudes of the phasors that are out of phase. The
second condition follows from matching the phases of the error vectors. As a result,
the total phasor is null (εm + εmr+εc = 0) over a wide range of wavelengths.
Extending the achromatic design to also eliminate polarization dependence
entails mapping the linear geometry (linear ribbons) into one with cylindrical sym-
metry (circular discs), making the device effectively a two-dimensional phase grating
(see Figure 5.20). The reference ribbon becomes a reference circular post; the move-
able ribbon becomes a membrane with circular cut outs suspended by anchor points
on the edges; and the achromatic compensating ribbons become annular rings
around the reference posts. The membrane incorporates minute release holes that
assist in the fast and uniform removal of the sacrificial layer during fabrication. The
dimensions of the gaps remain unchanged.
In a typical design, N equals 3, the center wavelength is 1,550 nm, correspond-
ing to a height difference between the moveable membrane and compensating annuli
of 2.32 µm. The periodicity of the repeating diffractive element is typically between
20 and 200 µm [42]. The widths of the reference post, as well as the gap between the
post and membrane, are typically a few micrometers. The resulting variable optical
164
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic Applications
Silicon substrate
Anchor to substrate
Array of fixed posts
Release holes
Reflecting membrane
Reflecting surface
Achromatic compensator
d
N
=
2
λ0
Figure 5.20
A cross-sectional schematic of the variable optical attenuator. The architecture
incorporates achromatic compensation and cylindrical symmetry to ensure low dependence on
polarization [42].

attenuator from Lightconnect has a dynamic range (attenuation range) of 30 dB, a
wavelength dependence of attenuation of 0.25 dB, and a polarization-dependent
loss of 0.2 dB. The total insertion loss, which includes losses from fiber coupling, is
0.7 dB. The response time of the device is, as expected from the GLV, quite fast,
measuring 40 µs. The actuation voltage between the membrane and substrate is less
than 8V. The company also provides a specification for reliability: in excess of 100
billion cycles for wear out. While wear out is very subjective and not quantified, it
reflects the projected reliability of this device where displacements are very small
(λ0/4 400 nm) and friction is nonexistent.
The fabrication is very similar to that of the GLV with a few exceptions. First,
lithography followed by an etch defines the reference posts with a height of 2.32
µm. A thin (20–60 nm) layer of silicon dioxide is thermally grown. A layer of sacrifi-
cial polysilicon or amorphous silicon is deposited. This layer must be optically
smooth, as any defects will subsequently imprint the moveable membrane. Holes
are etched through the sacrificial layer to allow for the anchor points to the sub-
strate. Silicon nitride is then deposited as the membrane material. It may be stochio-
metric or silicon rich. A lithographic step followed by an etch step pattern the
nitride layer into the desired membrane layout. Finally, xenon difluoride (XeF2)
removes the sacrificial layer of silicon to release the membrane. A subsequent
evaporation step deposits a thin gold layer across the entire surface, ensuring high
reflectivity in the infrared.
Summary
This chapter reviewed a number of commercially available products with applica-
tions in imaging, displays, and fiber-optical telecommunications. The applications
are very diverse but share the common use of MEMS technology to manipulate
light. While MEMS have proven to be vital for the operation of the aforementioned
products, it remains an enabling technology and a means to an end. It is impera-
tive to understand the final application in order to assess the importance and
applicability of MEMS for that particular application.
References
[1]
Cole, B. E., R. E. Higashi, and R. A. Wood, “Monolithic Two-Dimensional Arrays of
Micromachined Microstructures for Infrared Applications,” in Integrated Sensors, Micro-
actuators, & Microsystems (MEMS), K. D. Wise (ed.), Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 86,
No. 8, August 1998, pp. 1679–1686.
[2]
Van Kessel, P. F., et al., “A MEMS-Based Projection Display,” in Integrated Sensors,
Microactuators, & Microsystems (MEMS), K. D. Wise (ed.), Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol.
86, No. 8, August 1998, pp. 1687–1704.
[3]
Bloom, D. M., “The Grating Light Valve: Revolutionizing Display Technology,” Proc.
SPIE, Projection Displays III, Vol. 3013, San Jose, CA, February 10–12, 1997,
pp. 165–171.
[4]
Chen, Y., et al., “Metro Optical Networking,” Bell Labs Technical Journal, January–
March 1999, pp. 163–186.
[5]
Tomsu, P., and C. Schmutzer, Next Generation Optical Networks, Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 2002, pp. 68–70.
Summary
165

[6]
Saleh, B. E. A., and M. C. Teich, Fundamentals of Photonics, New York: Wiley, 1991,
pp. 461–466, 494–503.
[7]
Siegman, A. E., Lasers, Mill Valley, CA: University Science Books, 1986, pp. 1–80.
[8]
Coldren, L. A., and S. W. Corzine, Diode Lasers and Photonic Integrated Circuits, New
York: Wiley, 1995, pp. 1–9, 111–116.
[9]
Saleh, B. E. A., and M. C. Teich, Fundamentals of Photonics, New York: Wiley, 1991,
pp. 310–317.
[10]
Jerman, H., and J. D. Grade, “A Mechanically-Balanced, DRIE Rotary Actuator for a
High-Power Tunable Laser,” Tech. Digest Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, Hil-
ton Head Island, SC, June 2–6, 2002.
[11]
Pezeshki, B., et al., “20 mW Widely Tunable Laser Module Using DFB Array and MEMs
Selection,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, Vol. 14, October 2002, pp. 1457–1459.
[12]
Littman, M. G., and H. J. Metcalf, “Spectrally Narrow Pulsed Dye Laser Without Beam
Expander,” Applied Optics, Vol. 17, No. 14, 1978, pp. 2224–2227.
[13]
Agrawal, G. P., and N. K. Dutta, Semiconductor Lasers, Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1993, pp. 269–275.
[14]
Coldren, L. A., and S. W. Corzine, Diode Lasers and Photonic Integrated Circuits, New
York: Wiley, 1995, pp. 17–24, 393–398.
[15]
Klein, M. V., Optics, New York: Wiley, 1970, pp. 342–346.
[16]
Klein, M. V., Optics, New York: Wiley, 1970, pp. 338–341.
[17]
Liu, K., and M. G. Littman, “Novel Geometry for Single-Mode Scanning of Tunable
Lasers,” Optics Letters, Vol. 6, No. 3, 1981, pp. 117–118.
[18]
U.S. Patent 6,469,415, October 22, 2002.
[19]
Smith, S. T., and D. G. Chetwynd, Foundations of Ultraprecision Mechanism Design
(Developments in Nanotechnology), London, UK: Taylor and Francis, 1992, p. 119.
[20]
Tang, W. C., et al., “Electrostatic-Comb Drive of Lateral Polysilicon Resonators,” Sensors
and Actuators, Vol. A21, Nos. 1–3, February 1990, pp. 328–331.
[21]
Berger, J. D., and D. Anthon, “Tunable MEMS Devices for Optical Networks,” Optics &
Photonics News, March 2003, pp. 43–49.
[22]
Kogelnik, H., and C. V. Shank, “Coupled-Wave Theory of Distributed Feedback Lasers,”
Journal of Applied Physics, Vol. 43, 1972, pp. 2327–2335.
[23]
Data sheet for CQF935/508 series, JDS Uniphase Corporation, 1768 Automation Parkway,
San Jose, CA 95131, http://www.jdsu.com.
[24]
Ghafouri-Shiraz, H., Distributed Feedback Laser Diodes and Optical Tunable Filters, New
York: Wiley, 2003.
[25]
Amann, M. -C., and J. Buus, Tunable Laser Diodes, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1998,
pp. 40–51.
[26]
Pezeshki, B., et al., “Twelve Element Multi-Wavelength DFB Arrays for Widely Tunable
Laser Modules,” Tech. Digest of the Optical Fiber Communication Conference, Anaheim,
CA, March 17–22, 2002, pp. 711–712.
[27]
Saleh, B. E. A., and M. C. Teich, Fundamentals of Photonics, New York: Wiley, 1991,
pp. 316–317.
[28]
Plomteux, O., “DFL-5720 Digital Frequency-Locking System: Simplifying Wavelength-
Locker Testing,” Application Note 083, EXFO Electro-Optical Engineering, Inc., Vanier,
Quebec, Canada, http://documents.exfo.com/appnotes/anote083-ang.pdf.
[29]
Dames, M. P., et al., “Efficient Optical Elements to Generate Intensity Weighted Spot
Arrays: Design and Fabrication,” Applied Optics, Vol. 30, No. 19, July 1, 1991,
pp. 2685–2691.
[30]
Farn, M. W., “Agile Beam Steering Using Phase-Array Like Binary Optics,” Applied Optics,
Vol. 33, No. 22, August 1, 1994, pp. 5151–5158.
166
MEM Structures and Systems in Photonic Applications

[31]
Hecht, J., Understanding Fiber Optics, 3rd ed., Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall,
1999, pp. 133–134, 320–325, 373–374, 455.
[32]
Marxer, C., et al., “Vertical Mirrors Fabricated by Deep Reactive Ion Etching for Fiber-
Optic Switching Applications,” Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 6, No. 3,
September 1997, pp. 185–277.
[33]
Hecht, J., Understanding Fiber Optics, 3rd ed., Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall,
1999, pp. 62–72.
[34]
Zou, J., et al., “Optical Properties of Surface-Micromachined Mirrors with Etch Holes,”
Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 8, No. 4, December 1999, pp. 506–513.
[35]
Iannone, E., and R. Sabella, “Optical Path Technologies: A Comparison Among Different
Cross-Connect Architectures,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, Vol. 14, No. 10, Octo-
ber 1996, pp. 2184–2196.
[36]
U.S. Patents 5,629,790, May 13, 1997; 6,480,320 B2, November 12, 2002; and 6,628,041
B2, September 30, 2003.
[37]
Burns, B., et al., “Electromagnetically Driven Integrated 3D MEMS Mirrors for Large Scale
PXCs,” in Proceedings of National Fiber Optics Engineers Conference, NFOEC 2002, Dal-
las, TX, September 15–19, 2002.
[38]
Saleh, B. E. A., and M. C. Teich, Fundamentals of Photonics, New York: Wiley, 1991,
pp. 81–105.
[39]
Temesvary, V., et al., “Design, Fabrication, and Testing of Silicon Microgimbals for Super-
Compact Rigid Disk Drives,” Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 4, No. 1,
March 1995, pp. 18–27.
[40]
Hecht, J., Understanding Fiber Optics, 3rd ed., Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall,
1999, pp. 99–100.
[41]
Agrawal, G., Nonlinear Fiber Optics, 2nd ed., San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 1995,
pp. 239–243, 316–399.
[42]
U.S. Patents 6,169,624, January 2, 2001, and 6,501,600, December 31, 2002.
[43]
Halliday, D., and R. Resnick, Physics, 3rd ed. extended, New York: Wiley, 1988,
pp. 907–910.
Selected Bibliography
Buser, P., and M. Imbert (translated by R. H. Kay), Vision, Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press, 1992.
Hecht, J., Understanding Fiber Optics, 3rd ed., Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall,
1999.
MacDonald, L. W., and A. C. Lowe (eds.), Display Systems: Design and Applications, West
Sussex, England: Wiley, 1997.
Micromechanics and MEMS: Classic and Seminal Papers to 1990, W. Trimmer (ed.), New
York: IEEE, 1997.
Wise, K. D. (ed.), “Special Issue on Integrated Sensors, Microactuators, and Microsystems
(MEMS),” Proceeding of the IEEE, Vol. 86, No.8, August 1998.
Summary
167

.

C H A P T E R
6
MEMS Applications in Life Sciences
“Jim, you’ve got to let me go in there! Don’t leave him in the hands of Twentieth-
Century medicine.”
—Dr. Leonard McCoy speaking to Captain James Kirk,
in the movie Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home, 1986.
The “medical tricorder” in the famed Star Trek television series is a purely fictional
device for the remote scanning of biological functions in living organisms. The
device remains futuristic, but significant advances in biochemistry have made it pos-
sible to decipher the genetic code of living organisms. Today, dozens of companies
are involved in biochemical analysis at the microscale, with a concentration of them
involved in genomics, proteomics, and pharmacogenics. Their successes have
already had a positive impact on the health of the population; examples include
faster analysis of pathogens responsible for illness and of agricultural products as
well as more rapid sequencing of the human genome. Systems expected in the near
future will detect airborne pathogens responsible for illness (such as Legionnaire’s
disease or anthrax in a terrorist attack) with a portable unit, give on-demand genetic
diagnostics for the selection of drug therapies, be able to test for food pathogens
such as E. coli on site, and more rapidly test for bloodborne pathogens.
Conventional commercial instruments for biochemical and genetic analysis,
such as those available from Applied Biosystems of Foster City, California, perform
a broad range of analytical functions but are generally bulky. The concept of micro
total analysis system (µTAS), which aims to miniaturize all aspects of biochemical
analysis, with its commensurate benefits, was introduced in 1989 by Manz [1]. This
chapter begins with an introduction to microfluidics, followed by descriptions of
the state of the art of some of the microscale methods used in DNA analysis. Finally,
electrical probe techniques and some applications are presented. A common theme
will be the use of glass and plastic substrates, in contrast to most of the devices in
other chapters of this book.
Microfluidics for Biological Applications
The biological applications of MEMS (bio-MEMS) and microfluidics are inextrica-
bly linked because the majority of devices in systems for biological and medical
analysis work with samples in liquid form. Outside of biological analysis, microflu-
idics have applications in chemical analysis, drug synthesis, drug delivery, and
point-of-use synthesis of hazardous chemicals. In this section, we discuss common
pumping methods in bio-MEMS and the issue of mixing.
169

Pumping in Microfluidic Systems
Examples of flow channels used in microfluidics are rectangular trenches in a
substrate with cap covers on top, capillaries, and slabs of gel, having cross-sectional
dimensions on the order of 10 to 100 µm and lengths of tens of micrometers to
several centimeters. For microfluidic biological analysis, fluid drive or pumping
methods include applied pressure drop, capillary pressure, electrophoresis, electro-
osmosis, electrohydrodynamic force, and magnetohydrodynamic force; the first
four are common. Pressure drive, the most familiar from the macroscopic world, is
simply the application of a positive pressure to one end of a flow channel. Alterna-
tively, a negative pressure (vacuum) can be applied to the other end. Due to drag at
the walls, the flow is slowest at the edges, increasing in a parabolic profile to a maxi-
mum at the center [see Figure 6.1(a)].
Another familiar pumping force is the wicking action of small-diameter capillar-
ies. This force is due to surface tension (i.e., the surface energy of the system can be
lowered if the solid-gas interface is replaced by a solid-liquid interface). Capillary
action is commonly used to load liquid into a channel. After insertion of the end of a
170
MEMS Applications in Life Sciences
(a) Pressure-driven flow
Inlet
pressure
Oulet
pressure
Velocity is near
zero at walls
Velocity is maximum
at center of channel
Flow
(b) Electrophoretic flow
V
Electric field
Ions move in opposite directions in the liquid
(c) Electroosmotic flow
V
Flow
Mobile surface ions
drag bulk fluid along
Velocity is constant
across channel
Electric field
Charge
on wall
surface
Mobile ionic
surface charge
Figure 6.1
Three types of pumping used in microfluidics: (a) pressure drive, in which a pressure
forces the volume fluid to flow; (b) electrophoretic flow, in which ions of opposite polarity in solu-
tion flow in opposite directions under the effect of externally applied electric field; and (c) electro-
osmotic flow, in which an electric field moves the mobile ion sheath of the surface double layer,
dragging the volume in the channel along with it.

capillary into a larger container of sample, or addition of liquid to a well at the
mouth of a channel on a chip, liquid is drawn into the channel without the applica-
tion of additional pressure.
Electrophoretic flow can be induced only in liquids or gels with ionized parti-
cles. The application of a voltage across the ends of the channel produces an electric
field along the channel that drives positive ions through the liquid toward the nega-
tive terminal and the negative ions to the positive terminal [see Figure 6.1(b)]. Neu-
tral particles in the channel are not directly affected by the field. The velocity of the
ions is proportional to the electric field and charge and inversely related to their size
[2]. In liquids, velocity is also inversely related to the viscosity, while in gels the
velocity depends on porosity.
Electroosmotic flow occurs because channels in glasses and plastics tend to have
a fixed charge on their surfaces. In glasses, silanol (SiOH) groups at the walls are
deprotonated in solution (they lose the hydrogen as a positive ion), leaving the sur-
face with a negative charge [3]. These negative ions then attract a diffuse layer of
positive ions, forming a double layer in the liquid [see Figure 6.1(c)]. The layer of
positive ions is not tightly bound and can move under an applied electric field.
When this sheath of ions moves, it drags the rest of the channel volume along with
it, creating electroosmotic flow. In contrast to pressure-driven flow, the velocity at
the center of the channel is about the same or slightly less, giving the fluid a flat
velocity profile. This plug flow is advantageous in many situations in biological
analysis where the spreading of a short-length sample into neighboring regions of a
channel is not desired. Electroosmotic pumping works best with small-dimension
channels. Flow velocities can range from a few micrometers per second to many mil-
limeters per second.
Electrophoretic flow and electroosmotic flow can be grouped together under
the heading of electrokinetic flow; indeed, both occur simultaneously in ionic solu-
tions with an applied electric field. The one that dominates depends on the details of
the solution and walls. Manufacturers of analysis equipment employing electroki-
netic flow generally design the system so that only one dominates. For example in
gel electrophoresis, the solution is a porous gelatinous medium, which cannot move
as a liquid would in electroosmosis. Instead, the charges percolate electrophoreti-
cally under the effect of the electric field through the porous gel. Alternatively, a liq-
uid buffer solution can be used in microchannels. Electroosmosis can dominate,
pushing the bulk of the flow in one direction. Positive ions within this bulk flow
move even faster relative to the bulk solution, while negative ions move in the oppo-
site direction with respect to the bulk solution, giving them a slower net velocity [3].
Mixing in Microfluidics
Volumetric flow rates in microscale channels are of course much lower than in mac-
roscopic channels, such as the water pipes in a building. The Reynolds number is
useful for comparing flows of different fluids in channels of dimensions that vary
over orders of magnitude. The Reynolds number is a dimensionless number related
to the ratio of kinetic energy in the fluid to the rate of loss of energy to friction. It is
given by ρ•ν•D/µ, where ρ is the fluid density, ν is the average velocity, D is the
diameter or equivalent “hydraulic diameter” of the channel, and ρ is the absolute
viscosity. For Reynolds numbers below about 2,300 for a tube with circular cross
Microfluidics for Biological Applications
171

section, flow is laminar: the fluid can be envisioned as flowing in laminar sheets,
moving slowest at the edges due to the drag of the walls and moving fastest at the
center. For higher Reynolds numbers, the flow is turbulent rather than laminar. In
microfluidics, water-based solutions are usually used, having ρ1 g/cm
3and µ0.01
g/(cm•s). For a representative hydraulic diameter of 30 µm and a representative
velocity of 1 mm/s, the Reynolds number is merely 0.03. In microfluidics, Reynolds
numbers are usually below one [4].
This has great implications for mixing in microfluidics. In the macroscopic
world, simply joining two channels together would enable the two streams to inter-
mix. At these low Reynolds numbers, however, streams joined from two channels
simply flow side by side, with intermixing only by diffusion. This is used to advan-
tage in the Agilent Cell LabChip, which detects cells stained with fluorescent dyes.
When placed in the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer system, a vacuum pulls separate flows
of cells and buffer together in a Y-shaped junction (see Figure 6.2). The flow of cells
is pushed to one side of the microchannel by the flow of buffer. Individual stained
cells are detected as they pass under an excitation beam and fluoresce. This concen-
tration scheme is used because individual cells would clog a flow channel of the same
width. Often the opposite situation, mixing, is desired. In this case, special flow
structures, which add some turbulence or increase the area of diffusive mixing, have
been demonstrated to overcome this problem [5].
DNA Analysis
The Structure of DNA
The genetic code is stored in cell chromosomes, each containing long strands of
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) [6, 7]. The building blocks of DNA are molecules
called nucleotides that consist of a “base” joined to a sugar-phosphate backbone
[see Figure 6.3(a)]. The nomenclature often interchanges between base and nucleo-
tide to represent the same building block. In DNA there are four types of nucleotides
differentiated by their bases: adenine, thymine, cytosine, and guanine. The nucleo-
tides are labeled according to the first letter of their corresponding bases: A, T, C,
172
MEMS Applications in Life Sciences
Buffer
Stained cells
Vacuum
Focused
excitation beam
F
F
F
F
F
Fluorescence
Cell stained with
fluorescent dye
F
F
Figure 6.2
Example of the use of laminar flow in microfluidics: In the Cell LabChip from Agilent
Technologies of Palo Alto, California, the flow of cells tagged with a fluorescent dye is pushed to
one side of the channel. Individual cells are detected when they fluoresce.

and G, respectively. This is the four-letter alphabet of DNA. The human genome has
23 separate pairs of chromosomes, averaging 130 million base pairs in length, for a
total of about three billion base pairs. Genes that form the template for proteins are
typically 27,000 base pairs long, but only about 1,000 are used; the rest are extra
“filler” bases.
Each nucleotide molecule has two ends, labeled 3’ and 5’, corresponding to the
hydroxyl and phosphate groups attached to the 3’ and 5’ positions of carbon atoms
in the backbone sugar molecule [see Figure 6.3(b)]. In the long DNA chain, the 3’
DNA Analysis
173
Denature at 95ºC
Add primers to select starting sections
Add DNA polymerase enzyme and dNTPs;
Incubate at 60ºC
One cycle complete
Repeat
5’GTCATGCAGGTCGACT CTG 3’
3’CAGTACGTCCAGCTGAGAC5’
5’GTCATGCAGGTCGACTCTG3’
3’CAGTACGTCCAGCTGAGAC5’
H
O
H
H
H
H
H C5’
2
O
P
O
O3’
H
O
H
H
H
H
H C5’
2
O
P
O
HO
O3’
H
O
H
H
H
H
H C5’
2
O
P
O
HO
O3’
Cytosine
Thymine
Guanine
3’ GAGA5’
3’CAGTACGTCCAGCTGAGAC 5’
5’CATG 3’
Section to amplify
(a)
(b)
5’GTCATGCAGGTCGACTCTG 3’
3’CAGTACGTCCAGCTGAGAC 5’
CCAGCTGAGA5’
5’CATGGCAGGT
5’GTCATGCAGGTCGACTCTG 3’
3’CAGTACGTCCAGCTGAGAC 5’
GAGTACGTCCAGCTGAGA 5’
5’CATGCAGGTCGACTCTG
Phosphate
Sugar
Base
HO
Hydrogen dissociates
in solution
Weak hydrogen bond
Base pair
Sugar-phosphate backbone
5’GTCATGCAGGTCGACTCTG 3’
Figure 6.3
Illustration of (a) the twisted double-helix structure of DNA; and (b) the polymerase
chain reaction (PCR). Denaturing of the starting DNA template at 95ºC yields two strands, each
containing all of the necessary information to form a complementary replica. The addition of
primers defines the starting point for replication. At 60ºC, the DNA polymerase enzyme catalyzes
the reconstruction of the complementary DNA strand from an ample supply of nucleotides
(dNTPs). The reconstruction always proceeds in the 5’→3’ direction. The cycle ends with copies of
two portions of the helices, in addition to the starting template. The cycle is then repeated. The
exploded view of three nucleotides (CTG) in the denatured template shows their chemical
composition, including the 3’-hydroxyl and 5’-phosphate groups. (After: [6, 7].)

end of one nucleotide connects to the 5’ end of the next nucleotide. This essentially
gives directionality to the DNA chain.
Two strands of DNA are joined by weak hydrogen bonds to form the well-
known twisted double-helix structure [6]. The attachment occurs between specific
pairs of nucleotides: guanine bonds to cytosine (G–C), and adenine bonds to
thymine (A–T). This important pairing property is known as complementarity.
Color photography makes a simple analogy to understand complementarity: The
three additive primary colors—red, green, and blue—are in their respective order
complementary to the three subtractive colors—cyan, magenta, and yellow. A posi-
tive photographic print and its negative contain the same image information, even
though the colors of the positive (the additive colors) are different from the colors of
the negative (the subtractive colors). The positive and negative in photography are
analogous to the two complementary strands of DNA in a double helix.
PCR
A primary objective of genetic diagnostics is to decipher the sequence of nucleotides
in a DNA fragment after its extraction and purification from a cell nucleus. This task
is difficult due to the miniscule concentration of DNA available from a single cell. As
a solution, scientists resort to a special biochemical process called amplification to
create a large number of identical copies of a single DNA fragment. The most com-
mon amplification method is the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Invented in the
1980s by Kary Mullis, for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in
1993, it allows the replication of a single DNA fragment using complementarity.
The basic idea is to physically separate—denature—the two strands of a double
helix and then use each strand as a template to create a complementary replica.
The polymerase chain reaction begins by raising the temperature of the DNA
fragment to 95ºC in order to denature the two strands. Incubation occurs next at
60ºC in a solution mix containing a special enzyme (called DNA polymerase, an
example of which is Taq polymerase), an ample supply of nucleotides (dNTPs), and
two complementary primers. The primers are short chains of nucleotides previously
synthesized to hybridize—or to specifically match up using complementarity—with
a very small segment of the longer DNA fragment and consequently define the start-
ing point for the replication process. The DNA polymerase enzyme catalyzes the
construction of the complementary DNA strand beginning from the position of the
primer and always proceeding in the 5’ →3’ direction. Replication of a portion of
the single strand is rapid, proceeding at a rate of about 50 bases per second [8]. The
cycle ends with two identical copies of only the sections between (and including) the
primers, in addition to the starting DNA template. Repetition of the cycle increases
the number of identical copies with a factor of 2n, where n is the number of cycles;
thus, after 20 cycles, about one million copies have been created. The efficiency
drops after about 20 cycles [9], but 30 to 40 cycles are typically needed to generate
sufficient product for later analysis.
PCR on a Chip
There are several advantages to miniaturizing the PCR process. Smaller chambers
have a greater ratio of surface area to volume. Surface area affects the rate of heat
174
MEMS Applications in Life Sciences

conduction, and volume determines the amount of heat necessary for a thermal
cycle. A greater ratio of surface area to volume, therefore, enables faster thermal
cycling in PCR. Because the chamber volume is smaller, less sample and volume of
expensive reagents is needed. If integrated with a detection scheme such as electro-
phoretic separation or TaqMan
tagging (described later) on the same chip, the
entire process is simplified, making it faster, less expensive, and more repeatable.
PCR on a silicon chip was first demonstrated around 1994 by several groups
[10, 11], and by the end of the 1990s there had been several demonstrations of PCR
on a chip. This section describes silicon miniature PCR thermal cycling chambers
developed at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) of Livermore, Cali-
fornia (see Figure 6.4) [12]. Different versions of this chamber are at the core of
portable analytical instruments under development at Cepheid of Sunnyvale, Cali-
fornia, and Microfluidic Systems, Inc., of Pleasanton, California.
Several generations of micromachined chambers have been fabricated at LLNL
[13]. They thermally cycle a solution between the denaturing and incubation tem-
peratures, approximately 95ºC and 60ºC, respectively. One chamber, with a vol-
ume of 25 to 100 µl, is made of two silicon chips with etched grooves, which are
bonded together. A silicon nitride window provides optical access. Experimental
results have shown that bare silicon inhibits PCR amplification, so a disposable
polypropylene liner was added to the chamber. This slows the rate at which the
chamber can be heated and cooled slightly from an all-silicon version to about
8°C/s. An advantage of a disposable liner is that the chamber no longer has to be
cleaned. Eliminating this time-consuming operation enables more samples to be run
per day.
Earlier designs had a polysilicon heater on a silicon nitride membrane for heat-
ing the fluid inside the chamber and used a separate, external temperature sensor.
By changing the heater material to platinum, which is commonly used as a tempera-
ture sensor, both heating and sensing operations can be performed with the same
platinum element. Testing of early devices showed that there were temperature
variations as high as 10°C across the chamber. By relocating the heater away from
DNA Analysis
175
Polysilicon heater
Silicon nitride
membrane
Bondpad
Silicone
sealant
Glass
(b)
(a)
Polyethylene
tubing
Glass
~ 10 mm
Figure 6.4
Illustrations of (a) the front side, and (b) the back side of an early micromachined sili-
con PCR chamber. A polysilicon heater on a silicon nitride membrane cycles the solution between
the denaturing and incubation temperatures of PCR. (After: [12].)

the membrane so that heat flows through the highly thermally conductive silicon
walls of the chamber, the temperature uniformity of the fluid was greatly improved.
A fan was added for more rapid cooling. These modifications have yielded much
tighter closed-loop temperature control and enabled faster cycling, from around 35s
per cycle to as little as 17s per cycle. These cycle times are far faster than the approxi-
mately 4 min per cycle needed in the industry-workhorse Applied Biosystems
GeneAmp® PCR System 9600 [13].
The LLNL system has detection capability in addition to amplification. In a
variation of traditional PCR, the addition of TaqMan dyes (probes), which link to
certain sections of a DNA strand (just like the primers), results in fluorescence of
green light from each replicated DNA strand when excited by a blue or ultraviolet
source [13, 14]. Thus, the intensity of the fluorescence is proportional to the number
of replicated DNA strands matching the TaqMan probe in the solution. This proce-
dure has the advantage of simultaneous DNA amplification and detection but only
works when suitable primers and probe have been added to the solution for the type
of DNA under test. Thus, the number of different DNA sections potentially being
identified is equal to the number of PCR chambers that can be run simultaneously.
In demonstrations at LLNL with different cells, there was no detectable fluorescence
signal for the first 20–25 cycles, depending on the initial concentration. After cycling
on the order of 5–15 minutes, the signal appeared and rapidly grew if there was a
match.
In the LLNL system, the light source is a filtered blue LED through the silicon
nitride window. A handheld prototype, which represents the holy grail of DNA
analysis, is about the size of a one-quart milk carton, including computer, display,
and keypad, and is powered by a separate 0.5-kg battery with a run time of two
hours. Larger but still portable systems using this technology, available from Micro-
fluidic Systems, can presently identify over 10 airborne pathogens.
Electrophoresis on a Chip
Determining the sequence of nucleotides in a DNA strand involves amplification
and chemical labeling of the amplified DNA fragments with specific fluorescent
or radioactive tags and a subsequent distinct detection step that analyzes the
labeled DNA products. The entire process is called DNA sequencing. Its underlying
principles are beyond the scope of this book, but the eager reader is referred to
Stryer’s book on biochemistry [6]. One detection technique is electrophoresis, which
employs the separation of charged molecules, including DNA, in suspension under
the effect of an electric field [see Figure 6.5(a)]. In solution, a hydrogen ion dissoci-
ates from each phosphate in the DNA backbone, leaving the DNA strand with a net
negative charge [see Figure 6.3(b)]. The charge-to-mass ratio is approximately the
same for strands of different lengths, but, when driven with an electric field through
a molecular sieve, larger molecules move more slowly [9]. Thus, after a given time,
groups of small molecules move farther than larger ones. A limitation of electropho-
resis is that as the sample sits in solution, it is also diffuses both up and down the
channel. Because the diffusion distance grows with time, short electrophoretic sepa-
ration and detection times are advantageous, which implies the use of a high electric
field over a short distance. Electrophoresis can separate DNA fragments up to about
3,000 bases in length.
176
MEMS Applications in Life Sciences

In gel electrophoresis, DNA products are introduced at the edge of a porous
gelatinous sheet that is 20 to 100 cm long. The electric field is limited to only 5–40
V/cm due to Joule heating [9]. In capillary electrophoresis [15], the products are fed
into a thin capillary tube, 10 to 300 µm in diameter and approximately 50 cm long,
with an applied electric field of up to 1,200 V/cm [9]. Higher fields can be used with
smaller cross sections due to the ability to remove heat more rapidly. Before electro-
phoresis is performed, the DNA strands are processed to add a tag for later
DNA Analysis
177
V
Negative ion (DNA) motion
Electric field
Starting point
Reference
Unknown
Reference
Unknown
(a)
(b)
Unknown matches reference
Unknown does not match reference
Smaller DNA fragment
travel farther, spread more
s
Stop at T
Stop at A
Stop at G
Stop at C
400
bases
long
300
bases
long
200
bases
long
100
bases
long
Solution with stop-at-C
Original copy = ....ATCGCTAGTCAGAT....
....ATCGCTAGTCAGAT....
TAGC
stop
....ATCGCTAGTCAGAT....
TAGCGATC
stop
....ATCGCTAGTCAGAT....
TAGCGATCAGTC
stop
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.5
(a) Illustration of electrophoresis to sort DNA fragments by size. Here, a sieving
medium is assumed so that negative charges move to the right. Charged molecules move under
the effect of the applied electric field. (b) Comparison of known and unknown samples based on
fragment length. (c) Illustration of the Sanger method: copies are made of the original DNA, ran-
domly stopping at the same nucleotide (C in this example) to produce variable-length fragments
with the same ending. (d) Fragments with each ending undergo electrophoresis.

detection. One type of tag is radioactive (32P), which is imaged with photographic
film to determine the position of the strand in the gel or capillary. A more common
tag added to the 5’ end fluoresces under ultraviolet excitation, emitting light at a
visible wavelength. Used alone, electrophoretic separation can compare two samples
of fragments of DNA to determine whether they match but cannot tell the exact
sequence.
If electrophoresis is to be employed to determine the sequence of bases on a sec-
tion of DNA, the Sanger method may be used for fragments up to about 1,000 bases
long [see Figure 6.5(c, d)] [9]. This begins with many identical copies of single, dena-
tured sections of DNA. Replication in a solution with dNTPs is started from the 5’
end, just as in PCR. In this case, however, a small concentration of bases in the solu-
tion of one type, such as C (cytosine), is altered so that the replication of that DNA
strand stops when the replication-halting base is used. This results in copies of the
original strands of varying length that always end in C. The same is done in separate
solutions with small concentrations of replication-halting bases of the other types
(G, A, and T). The four groups of variable-length copies then undergo electrophore-
sis in four parallel channels. Sequences of each length, from one base to the maxi-
mum in the original sample, are separated for reading, and the results from the four
channels are compared to infer the entire sequence of the strand.
Miniaturization brings many benefits to capillary electrophoresis. The length of
the sample emitted into the channel can be kept relatively short (on the order of
100 µm), reducing the distance that must be traveled for the fragments of different
lengths to separate. Reducing the length of the channel decreases the applied voltage
required to maintain a high electric field from a few kilovolts down to hundreds of
volts. Faster separation times also become possible because the molecules have to
travel shorter distances. Additionally, the overall volume of DNA and reagents
decreases significantly to one microliter or less.
Early demonstrations of capillary electrophoresis on a chip took place in 1992 at
Ciba-Geigy, Ltd., of Basle, Switzerland [16]. Woolley and Mathies [17, 18] from the
University of California, Berkeley, were the first in 1994 to demonstrate DNA
sequencing by capillary electrophoresis on a glass chip. The structure of their device
consists of two orthogonal channels etched with buffered hydrofluoric acid into a
first glass substrate: a short channel for injecting fluid and a long channel for separat-
ing the DNA fragments (see Figure 6.6). A second glass substrate covers the channels
and is secured to the first substrate with an intermediate adhesive or by thermal
bonding. Holes etched or drilled with a diamond-core drill in the top glass substrate
provide fluid access ports to the embedded channels. Both channels are typically 50
µm wide and 8 µm deep but can be as wide as 100 µm and as deep as 16 µm; the sepa-
ration channel is 3.5 cm long. Thermal bonding is achieved by ramping the tempera-
ture of the glass plates in an oven to 600°C at the rate of 5°C/min, holding the
temperature for 2 to 3 hours, then ramping down to room temperature [18]. The sur-
faces of the channels have a coating to eliminate charging due to deprotonation, pre-
venting electroosmosis from occurring. The injection and separation channels are
filled with sieving matrix of hydroxyethylcellulose by applying a vacuum to one end.
The fluid containing the DNA fragments is admitted into the injection channel,
and the fragments are electrophoretically pumped by means of an electric field of
170 V/cm applied across the two ends of the channel for a duration of 30–60s. The
178
MEMS Applications in Life Sciences

injection-channel loading time is critical: If it is too short, more short DNA frag-
ments are injected in the next step; if it is too long, the sample is biased toward
longer fragments. Once the injection channel is filled, the applied voltage is
switched to be across the two ends of the separation channel. The applied electric
field directs the small “plug” of ionized fragments from the intersection of the two
channels into the separation channel. After a short injection time, the ends of the
injection channel are made positive to pull ionized fragments still in the injection
channel back from the junction with the separation channel; otherwise, injection
would occur continuously. At an applied electric field of 180 V/cm, it takes approxi-
mately 2 min to complete the separation of the DNA fragments in the injected plug.
This compares with 8 to 10 hours to complete an equivalent separation using con-
ventional gel electrophoresis or 1 to 2 hours with conventional capillary electropho-
resis. Optical imaging of a fluorescent tag on each DNA fragment is used to detect
the separated products inside the channel. The results from Woolley and Mathies
indicate a resolution of a single nucleotide in DNA strands that are up to 1,000
nucleotides long.
Though this demonstration is an important accomplishment, much remains to
be done before portable DNA sequencing instruments are available on the market.
A complete sequencing system must integrate PCR with electrophoresis—or some
DNA Analysis
179
Injection
+ −
Separation
+
−
Glass plate
Embedded channel
~ 700V
Separation channel
Injection channel
2
Injected sample
1
2
3
4
Fluid plug
Electrophoretic
separation
1
3
4
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
Port
Shorter
fragments
Figure 6.6
Illustration of the fluid injection and separation steps in a miniature DNA electropho-
resis system. An applied electric field electrophoretically pumps the fluid molecules from port 3 to
port 1 during the injection step. Another applied voltage between ports 2 and 4 initiates the
electrophoretic separation of the DNA molecules. The smearing of the fluid plug in the separation
channel is schematically illustrated. The capillary channels have a typical cross section of 8 × 50
µm2. The separation capillary is 3.5 cm long. (After: [17, 18].)

other DNA detection method—as well as include all fluid preparation and handling
functions, such as pumping, valving, filtering, mixing of reagents, and rinsing. This
demands the development of a complete system with many enabling technologies,
MEMS being only one of them.
The electrophoresis part of the DNA sequencing process has been commercial-
ized by companies such as Caliper Life Sciences, Inc., of Hopkinton, Massachu-
setts, with the product now being sold as the LabChip by Agilent Technologies. Up
to 12 samples containing variable-length sections of DNA are placed in the dispos-
able LabChip, which is inserted into the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer system for analy-
sis. This system is about the size of a small suitcase, has a separate computer for
control and data acquisition, and is powered by a wall outlet, making the system
semiportable.
The entire LabChip structure is made of sheets of glass. Patterning of glasses is
limited to usually photolithography and etching or laser ablation (see Chapter 3).
The layers are bonded together under heat and pressure, then cut apart. The use of
glass in a simple process leads to low cost, making a single use before disposal
economical. Single-use devices have the advantages of no concern about cross con-
tamination from previous samples, greatly reduced chances of clogging, and no
long-term risk of material degradation with use. Many glasses (and plastics) are
transparent to visible and UV light, which is useful in optical detection schemes.
Some specifications for the Agilent DNA 1000 LabChip include a DNA concentra-
tion range of 0.5–50 ng/µl, a sizing range of 25–1,000 base pairs, a sizing accuracy
of ±15%, and a resolution better than 10% over most of the range [19]. The sample
volume is 1 µl and takes 30 min to analyze.
DNA Hybridization Arrays
Once fragments of an unknown DNA sample have been amplified into many copies,
they can be read with DNA hybridization arrays. These are different sequences of
preassembled nucleotides attached to a substrate (see Figure 6.7). The DNA sections
to be identified, with lengths in the range of a hundred to thousands of bases, are
tagged with a fluorescent dye at one end. When placed in a buffer solution on the
substrate, sections of some of the unknowns hybridize to the complementary
sequences on the substrate. As discussed earlier, hybridization is the process by
which DNA strands match up and bind with complementary DNA capture probes.
The substrate is then rinsed and illuminated. The locations of fluorescence indicate
where hybridization occurred and thus which sequences are present in the unknown.
This approach is particularly beneficial in the detection of specific gene mutations
and in the search for known pathogens.
Several companies commercially produce microscale DNA arrays. One of
the market-leading products is the GeneChipfrom Affymetrix of Santa Clara,
California [20]. The GeneChip is produced on 5-inch square fused quartz substrates,
which are coated with a bonding layer comprised of molecules to which the DNA
nucleotides can adhere, followed by a protection group [21, 22]. Using a standard
photolithographic mask (see Chapter 3), ultraviolet light is shone through 20-µm
square openings to remove the protection groups, activating selected sites on the
substrate (see Figure 6.8). A solution containing one type of nucleotide (A, T, G,
or C) with a removable protection group is flushed across the surface. These
180
MEMS Applications in Life Sciences

nucleotides bond to activated sites in each square that was exposed but not in the
other areas. The process is repeated to start chains of the other three-nucleotide
types. Repeated exposure with different masks to remove the protection groups and
flushing with the four nucleotide solutions grow DNA strands, or probes, that are
DNA Analysis
181
T - A
A - T
G - C
C - G
A
A
G
C
T
A
G
A
G
G
C
T
C
G
-
G
C
-
C
G
-
T - A
C
G
C
A
F
F
A
T
C
G
F
A
T
C
G
F A T CG
F
A
T
C
G
F
F
G
C
G
A
F
G
C
G
A
F
G
C
G
A
F
G
C
G
A
Fluorescent
tag
Unknown strands
in solution
Array bound
to substrate
Match
Match
No match No match No match
No match
Figure 6.7
The use of a DNA hybridization array. Only complementary DNA fragments in the
solution match can hybridize to the fragments bound to the substrate. The free fragments, which
are usually much longer than the bound fragments, have fluorescent tags on the end for reading.
Only sites that receive their complements will fluoresce when read.
1. Coat substrate with bonding molecules and protection group
Protection group
Bonding molecule
Fused quartz substrate
2. Expose UV light through mask to deprotect exposed area
Mask
3. Flush with solution containing one nucleotide (e.g., A)
A
A
A
UV light
4. Repeat for other nucleotides
A
T
C
G
A
T
C
G
A
T
C
G
5. Build array until it is 25 nucleotides long
A
T
C
G
A
T
C
G
A
T
C
G
A
T
C
G
C
C
G
C
C
C
A
A
A
T
C
G
C
G
A
A
A
T
C
G
C
C
T
C
C
G
G
A
A
T
A
T
25 nucleotides
Figure 6.8
Illustration of the GeneChip fabrication process. (After: [20].)

typically 25 nucleotides long. Finally, all probes are deprotected, the substrates are
diced, and they are packaged in plastic flow-cell cartridges for use.
With 25 nucleotides in a sequence, there are 425 (equal to 1015) different combi-
nations that can be made with this process. However, with a final chip size of 1.28
cm2, there is only enough space for about 320,000 squares with different sequences.
Thus Affymetrix produces chips with only preselected sequences, targeting specific
applications (e.g., detecting strains of E. coli or hereditary neurological disorders in
humans). If different sequences or longer lengths are desired, custom arrays can be
made either with a new mask set or with a special maskless project system, such as
one based on Texas Instruments’ DLP (see Chapter 5), available from BioAutoma-
tion of Plano, Texas [21].
Another microarray market leader is Agilent Technologies. One product, the
Human 1A Oligo Microarray, has over 18,000 probes per 1- by 3-in glass slide with
lengths of 60 nucleotides [23]. Agilent uses inkjet technology (see Chapter 4) to
write the probes, base by base, with processing similar to that for the Affymetrix
probes. Picoliter volumes of nucleotide “ink” write round spots approximately 130
µm across. In addition to standard products, custom arrays can be produced with a
shorter turnaround time than with the masking production method. Agilent also
manufactures the Microarray Scanner for reading the arrays and producing com-
puter output. The large quantity of data produced by DNA analyses has spawned a
new field of study termed bioinformatics, which seeks to develop algorithms to han-
dle large genetic databases.
Microelectrode Arrays
Electrodes are extremely useful in the sensing of biological and electrochemical
potentials. In medicine, electrodes are commonly used to measure bioelectric signals
generated by muscle or nerve cells. In electrochemistry, electric current from one or
many electrodes can significantly alter the properties of a chemical reaction. It is
natural that miniaturization of electrodes is sought in these fields, especially for
applications where size is important or arrays of electrodes can enable new scientific
knowledge. Academic research on microelectrodes abounds. The reader will find a
comprehensive review of microelectrodes and their properties in a book chapter by
Kovacs [24].
In simple terms, the metal microelectrode is merely an intermediate element
that facilitates the transfer of electrons between an electrical circuit and an ionic
solution. Two competing chemical processes, oxidation and reduction, determine
the equilibrium conditions at the interface between the metal and the ionic solution.
Under oxidation, the electrode loses electrons to the solution; reduction is the exact
opposite process. In steady state, an equilibrium between these two reactions gives
rise to an interfacial space charge region—an area depleted of any mobile charges
(electrons or ions)—separating a surface sheet of electrons in the metal electrode
from a layer of positive ions in the solution. This is similar to the depletion layer at
the junction of a semiconductor p-n diode. The interfacial space charge region is
extremely thin, on the order of 0.5 nm, resulting in a large capacitance on the order
of 10-5 F per cm2 of electrode area. Incidentally, this is precisely the principle of
182
MEMS Applications in Life Sciences

operation in electrolytic capacitors. A simple electrical model for the microelec-
trode consists of a capacitor in series with a small resistor that reflects the resis-
tance of the electrolyte in the vicinity.
The fabrication of microelectrode arrays first involves the deposition of an insu-
lating layer, typically silicon dioxide, on a silicon substrate (see Figure 6.9). Alterna-
tively, an insulating glass substrate is equally suitable. A thin metal film is sputtered
or evaporated and then patterned to define the electrical interconnects and elec-
trodes. Gold, iridium, and platinum, being very chemically inert, are excellent
choices for measuring biopotentials as well as for electrochemistry. Silver is also
important in electrochemistry because many published electrochemical potentials
are referred to silver/silver-chloride electrode. It should be noted that wire bonding
to platinum or iridium is very difficult. If the microelectrode must be made of such
metals, it is necessary to deposit an additional layer of gold over the bond pads for
wire bonding. The deposition of a silicon nitride layer seals and protects the metal
structures. Openings in this layer define the microelectrodes and the bond pads. The
following sections describe two instances where microelectrodes show promise as a
diagnostics tool in biochemistry and biology.
DNA Addressing with Microelectrodes
A unique and novel application patented by Nanogen of San Diego, California [25],
makes use of microelectrode arrays in the analysis of DNA fragments of unknown
sequences. The approach exploits the polar property of DNA molecules to attract
them to positively charged microelectrodes in an array. The analysis consists of two
sequential operations, beginning first with building an array of known DNA cap-
ture probes over the electrode array, followed by hybridization of the unknown
DNA fragments. DNA capture probes are synthetic short chains of nucleotides of
known specific sequence.
Applying a positive voltage to a selection of microelectrodes in the array attracts
previously synthesized DNA capture probes to these biased electrodes, where they
chemically bind in permeable hydrogel layer that had been impregnated with a cou-
pling agent (see Figure 6.10) [26]. Microelectrodes in the array that are negatively
biased remain clear. Subsequent washing removes only unbound probes. Immersion
Microelectrode Arrays
183
Metal bondpad (e.g., Au)
Silicon
Silicon oxide
Silicon nitride
Microelectrode (e.g., Au, Pt, Ir, Ag)
C
R
Figure 6.9
Cross section of a microelectrode array showing two different metals for the elec-
trodes and for the bond pads. The schematic also illustrates a basic electrical equivalent circuit that
emphasizes the capacitive behavior of a microelectrode. The silicon substrate and the silicon diox-
ide dielectric layer may be substituted by an insulating glass substrate.

in a second solution binds a second type of DNA capture probes to another set of
biased electrodes. Repetition of the cycle with appropriate electrode biasing sequen-
tially builds a large array containing tens and potentially hundreds of individually
distinct sites of DNA capture probes differing by their sequence of nucleotides. The
removal of a capture probe from a particular site, if necessary, is simple, accom-
plished by applying a negative potential to the desired microelectrode and releasing
the probe back into the solution. It is this electrical addressing scheme to selectively
attract or repel DNA molecules that makes this method versatile and powerful.
Once the array of DNA capture probes is ready, a sample solution containing
DNA fragments of unknown sequence (target DNA) is introduced. These fragments
hybridize with the DNA capture probes—in other words, the target DNA binds only
to DNA capture probes containing a complementary sequence. Optical imaging of
fluorescent tags reveals the hybridized probe sites in the array and, consequently,
information on the sequence of nucleotides in the target DNA. This approach is par-
ticularly beneficial in the detection of specific gene mutations or in the search for
known pathogens.
Positive biasing of select electrodes during the hybridization phase accelerates
the process by actively steering and concentrating with the applied electric field tar-
get DNA molecules onto desired electrodes. Accelerated hybridization occurs in
minutes rather than the hours typical of passive hybridization techniques. The
184
MEMS Applications in Life Sciences
−−−
−−−−
DNA capture probe
Microelectrode
(a) Electronic
addressing
(b) Detection by
hybridization
DNA capture probe
Target DNA
Fluorescent tag
A
C
T
G
C
G
A
Selected electrode
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
T
C
C
G
A
G
T
?
?
Inferred sequence
Probe A
Probe B
Figure 6.10
Illustration of the Nanogen electronic addressing and detection schemes. (a) A posi-
tive voltage attracts DNA capture probes to biased microelectrodes. Negatively biased electrodes
remain clear of DNA. Repetition of the cycle in different solutions with appropriate electrode bias-
ing sequentially builds an array of individually distinct sites of DNA capture probes that differ by
their sequence of nucleotides. (b) A DNA fragment with unknown sequence hybridizes with a DNA
capture probe with a complementary sequence. Fluorescence microscopy reveals the hybridized
site and, consequently, the unknown sequence.

method is sufficiently sensitive to detect single base differences and single-point
mutations in the DNA sequence.
Cell Cultures over Microelectrodes
Many types of cells, in particular nerve and heart cells, can grow in an artificial cul-
ture over a microelectrode array. The growth normally requires a constant tempera-
ture, often at 37ºC (the core temperature of the human body), a suitable flow of
oxygen, and a continuous supply of nutrients [27]. Bioelectric activity, or action
potential, capacitively couples across the cell membrane and surrounding fluid to
the nearest microelectrode, which then measures a small ac potential, typically
between 10 and 1,000 µV in peak amplitude. The array of microelectrodes essen-
tially images the dynamic electrical activity across a large sheet of living cells. The
measured action potentials and their corresponding temporal waveforms are char-
acteristic of the cell type and the overall health of the cell culture. For example, tox-
ins that block the flow of sodium or potassium ions across the cell membrane
suppress the action potentials or alter their frequency content (see Figure 6.11) [27].
This approach may be useful in the future for studying the effects of experimental
drugs in vitro or for the early detection of airborne toxic particles.
Summary
In recent years, a number of microscale biological analysis techniques have become
commercialized, notably electrophoresis and arrays for DNA analysis on disposable
glass or plastic chips. Prototypes and products to run analyses are becoming smaller
and more portable. Most of these biological applications employ microfluidics, in
which pumping methods are different than in the macroscopic world and Reynolds
numbers are very low.
Summary
185
100
m
µ
Cells
Electrode
Figure 6.11
Photograph of a cultured syncytium spontaneously beating over a microelectrode
array. The platinum electrodes are 10 µm in diameter with a spacing of 100 µm. The electrodes
measure the extracellular currents generated by a traveling wave of action potential across the
sheet of living cells. (Courtesy of: B. D. DeBusschere of Stanford University, Stanford, California.)

References
[1]
Manz, A., N. Graber, and H. M. Widmer, “Miniaturized Total Chemical Analysis Systems:
A Novel Concept for Chemical Sensing,” Sensors and Actuators B, Vol. B1, 1990,
pp. 244–248.
[2]
Kovacs, G. T. A., Micromachined Transducer Sourcebook, Boston, MA: WCB McGraw-
Hill, 1998, Section 6.6.
[3]
Sharp, K. V., et al., “Liquid Flow in Microchannels,” in The MEMS Handbook, M. Gad-el-
Hak (ed.), Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2002, Chapter 6.
[4]
Kopf-Sill, A. R., et al., “Creating a Lab-on-a-Chip with Microfluidic Technologies,” in Inte-
grated Microfabricated Biodevices, M. J. Heller and A. Guttman (eds.), New York: Marcel
Dekker, 2002, Chapter 2.
[5]
Gray, B. L., et al., “Novel Interconnection Technologies for Integrated Microfluidic Sys-
tems,” Sensors and Actuators A, Vol. 77, 1999, pp. 57–65.
[6]
Stryer, L., Biochemistry, New York: W. H. Freeman and Co., 1988, pp. 71–90, 120–123.
[7]
Darnell, J., L. Harvey, and D. Baltimore, Molecular Cell Biology, 2nd ed., New York: Scien-
tific American Books, 1990, p. 219.
[8]
Nguyen, N. -T., and S. T. Wereley, Fundamentals and Applications of Microfluidics, Nor-
wood, MA: Artech House, 2002.
[9]
Mastrangelo, C. H., M. A. Burns, and D. T. Burke, “Microfabricated Devices for Genetic
Diagnostics,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 86, No. 8, August 1998, pp. 1769–1787.
[10]
Wilding, P., M. A. Shoffner, and L. J. Kricka, Clinical Chemistry, Vol. 40, No. 9, September
1994, pp.1815–1818.
[11]
U. S. Patent 5,674,742, October 7, 1997.
[12]
Northrup, M. A., et al., “DNA Amplification with a Microfabricated Reaction Chamber,”
Proc. 7th Int. Conf. on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, Yokohama, Japan, June 7–10,
1993, pp. 924–926.
[13]
Belgrader, P., et al., “Development of Battery-Powered, Portable Instrumentation for Rapid
PCR Analysis,” in Integrated Microfabricated Biodevices, M. J. Heller and A. Guttman
(eds.), New York: Marcel Dekker, 2002, Chapter 8.
[14]
TaqMan
® EZ-RT PCR Kit, Protocol, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, 2002.
[15]
Kuhr, W. G., and C. A. Monnig, “Capillary Electrophoresis,” Analytical Chemistry, Vol.
64, 1992, pp. 389R–407R.
[16]
Manz, A., et al., “Planar Chips Technology for Miniaturization and Integration of Separa-
tion Techniques into Monitoring Systems. Capillary Electrophoresis on a Chip,” Journal of
Chromatography, Vol. 593, 1992, pp. 253–258.
[17]
Woolley, A. T., and R. A. Mathies, “Ultra-High Speed DNA Sequencing Using Capillary
Electrophoresis Chips,” Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 67, 1995, pp. 3676–3680.
[18]
Woolley, A. T., and R. A. Mathies, “Ultra-High Speed DNA Fragment Separations Using
Capillary Array Electrophoresis Chips,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
USA, Vol. 91, November 1994, pp. 11348–11352.
[19]
Agilent Technologies, Product Literature for DNA1000 LabChip Kit, Palo Alto, CA, 2001.
[20]
Affymetrix, GeneChip Product Literature, Santa Clara, CA, 2003.
[21]
Garner, H. R., R. P. Balog, and K. J. Luebke, “Engineering in Genomics,” IEEE Engineer-
ing in Medicine and Biology, July/August 2002, pp. 123–125.
[22]
Fodor, S. P., et al., “Multiplexed Biochemical Assays with Biological Chips,” Nature, Vol.
364, No. 6437, 1993, pp. 555–556.
[23]
Agilent Technologies, Inc., Product Brochure for Agilent SurePrint Technology, Palo Alto,
CA, 2001.
186
MEMS Applications in Life Sciences

[24]
Kovacs, G. T. A., “Introduction to the Theory, Design, and Modeling of Thin-Film Microe-
lectrodes for Neural Interfaces,” in Enabling Technologies for Cultured Neural Net-
works, D. A. Stenger and T. M. McKenna (eds.), San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 1994,
pp. 121–166.
[25]
U.S. Patents 5,605,662, February 25, 1997, and 5,632,957, May 27, 1997.
[26]
Heller, M. J., et al., “Active Microelectronic Array Systems for DNA Hybridization, Geno-
typing, Pharmacogenomic, and Nanofabrication Applications,” in Integrated Microfabri-
cated Biodevices, M. J. Heller and A. Guttman (eds.), New York: Marcel Dekker, 2002,
Chapter 10.
[27]
Borkholder, D. A., B. D. DeBusschere, and G. T. A. Kovacs, “An Approach to the Classifi-
cation of Unknown Biological Agents with Cell Based Sensors,” Tech. Digest Solid-State
Sensor and Actuator Workshop, Hilton Head Island, SC, June 8–11, 1998, pp. 178–182.
Selected Bibliography
Heller, M. J., and A. Guttman (eds.), Integrated Microfabricated Biodevices, New York:
Marcel Dekker, 2002.
Horton, R. M., and R. C. Tait, Genetic Engineering with PCR, Norfolk, UK: Horizon
Press, 1998.
The reader will find extensive coverage of the research activities in this field in past proceed-
ings of the conference on Micro Total Analysis Systems (µTAS).
Summary
187

.

C H A P T E R
7
MEM Structures and Systems in RF
Applications
“The discovery of electrical waves has not merely scientific interest though that
alone inspired it... it has had a profound influence on civilization; it has been instru-
mental in providing the methods which may bring all inhabitants of the world
within hearing distance of each other and has potentialities social, educational and
political which we are only beginning to realize.”
—Sir Joseph. J. Thomson, on James Maxwell’s discovery of
electromagnetic waves in James Clerk Maxwell: A Commemorative
Volume 1831–1931, The University Press: Cambridge, UK, 1931.
Radio-frequency (RF) MEM devices have been in research and development for
years, with scores of papers published annually. There are unpublicized devices in
use in small volume in commercial and military applications, but only recently have
such devices gone into high-volume production. Current and future RF MEMS
devices will be competitive with more conventional components on the basis of vol-
ume, mass, cost, and performance. The largest potential market is in cellular tele-
phone handsets, with hundreds of millions of units sold each year. Other portable
electronics markets, where the aforementioned qualities are major considerations,
include cordless phones for home use, wireless computer networking, radios, and
global positioning system (GPS) receivers. Satellites, missile guidance, military
radar, and test equipment are separate markets of importance, with lower potential
sales volumes but higher unit prices.
Opening the cover of a modern cellular telephone reveals a myriad of discrete
passive and active components occupying substantial volume and weight. The mar-
ket’s continued push for small portable telephones argues a convincing economic
case for the miniaturization of components. MEMS technology promises to deliver
miniature integrated solutions including variable capacitors, inductors, oscillators,
filters, and switches to potentially replace conventional discrete components.
Signal Integrity in RF MEMS
A requirement for any RF device is maintaining signal integrity: transmitting desired
signals with low loss, minimizing reflections, not permitting external signals or
noise to join the transmitted signal, and filtering out or not generating undesired
signals, such as higher-frequency harmonics. At high frequencies, these seemingly
simple requirements are not readily attained.
189

Basic electromagnetic theory teaches that when the signal wavelength is on the
order of the size of the system through which it flows, it is necessary to use a special-
ized type of electrical connections called transmission lines to carry the electrical sig-
nal from one point to another [1]. Transmission lines have a conductor for the signal
and one or multiple nearby ground conducting lines running parallel to the signal
line. The familiar coaxial lines used for cable television are one example where the
signal conductor is in the center of a hollow cylindrical ground conductor. On cir-
cuit boards, strip lines, which have a signal line sandwiched between two ground
planes and separated by a dielectric, are common. Another form that is more easily
implemented on circuit boards, and especially on chips, is the coplanar waveguide.
This has a central strip of metal for the signal, with ground strips on both sides. The
whole structure resides on a dielectric, with air or vacuum above. Devices that trans-
mit the RF signal, such as switches, must match the characteristic impedance of the
transmission line to avoid signal reflections. Similarly, devices at the output termi-
nals of a transmission line must be impedance-matched to collect the full signal
strength and avoid undesirable reflection.
Losses fall into two categories: conductor loss and dielectric loss. Conductor
loss is due to the nonzero resistance of the materials used, resulting in heating, and is
modeled as an equivalent resistance in series with the signal path. Low-resistivity
metals such as gold, copper, and aluminum are therefore commonly used for the
conductors in RF MEMS. Contacts in a switch and even between layers of different
materials also add resistance, which must be considered. Dielectric loss is due to
atomic-scale dipoles excited in the dielectric material, also resulting in heating, and
can be modeled as an equivalent parallel conductance. Eddy currents induced in an
underlying conducting substrate are also modeled as a parallel conductance. Insulat-
ing or semiinsulating substrates are often necessary for RF-MEMS devices to
minimize the loss due to eddy currents. High-resistivity (>5,000 Ω•cm) silicon sub-
strates are acceptable but semi-insulating gallium arsenide (GaAs) is preferred when
possible. Gallium arsenide is already in common usage for microwave integrated cir-
cuits for its high electron mobility. Insulators such as glass and alumina are preferred
from a low-loss standpoint, although other considerations such as process compati-
bility, cost, and thermal coefficient of expansion mismatch factor into substrate
selection.
Passive Electrical Components: Capacitors and Inductors
Quality Factor and Parasitics in Passive Components
All capacitors and inductors have parasitics associated with them that limit their
performance. Two parameters that describe their performance and enable compari-
sons between devices are the quality factor Q and the self-resonance frequency fSR.
The quality factor Q is a measure of loss in a linear-circuit element and is defined
as the maximum energy stored during a cycle divided by the energy lost per cycle.
For reactive components such as capacitors and inductors, it is equal to the absolute
value of the ratio of the imaginary part of the impedance to the real part of the
impedance: for a capacitor C with series resistance Rs, Q = 1/(2πfCRS); for an induc-
tor L with series resistance Rs, Q = 2πfL/RS [see Figure 7.1 (a, b)]. In both cases, a
190
MEM Structures and Systems in RF Applications

greater resistance gives a smaller Q. As the frequency goes up, current flows along
an increasingly thin layer at the surface of conductors (the skin depth) [1], increas-
ing the resistance and lowering the Q. For capacitors, dielectric loss, which is a func-
tion of frequency [2], also contributes to a lower Q. For micromachined capacitors,
however, the dielectric is usually a gas or vacuum, leaving series resistance as the
dominant loss mechanism in many designs; however, loss can also occur in the sub-
strate [see Figure 7.1(a)]. Because of the long, thin shape of their conductors, induc-
tors tend to have a higher series resistance than do capacitors, resulting in far lower
quality factors. On-chip inductors can have substrate loss as well [see Figure 7.1(b)].
It is clear from the equations that quality factor for a given component varies with
frequency and the value of capacitance or inductance, so both frequency and com-
ponent value must be specified when citing a value for Q and especially when mak-
ing comparisons in order to be fair.
The lines connecting a capacitor to a circuit and even the plates themselves have
a small parasitic inductance [1]. A circuit model has a capacitance C in series with
an inductance Lpara [see Figure 7.1(c)]. At low frequencies, the impedance of the
inductor, which is imaginary and positive, is small, and the capacitor functions as
normal. As the frequency rises, however, the capacitor impedance, which is imagi-
nary and negative, falls while the impedance of the inductor rises, limiting the useful
Passive Electrical Components: Capacitors and Inductors
191
(a)
C
Rs
L
Rs
C
L
Lpara
Cpara
(b)
(c)
(d)
Q =
1
2πfCRs
Q =
Rs
2πfL
fSR =
1
2π
CLpara
fSR =
1
2π
LCpara
Interconnect resistance
Main capacitor
Dielectric loss
Substrate parasitic
lossy capacitor
Turns of inductor
Capacitances between turns
Substrate parasitic
lossy capacitor
Inductor
Figure 7.1
Parasitics in reactive devices: (a) micromachined capacitor modeled as a capacitor
with parasitic series resistance; (b) inductor with parasitic series resistance; (c) capacitor with para-
sitic series inductance; and (d) inductor with parasitic parallel capacitance between coils.

frequency range. Above the self-resonance frequency
(
)
f
CL
SR
para
=1
2
/
π
, the
inductance dominates and the capacitor looks to a circuit like an inductor (i.e., the
pair has an imaginary positive impedance).
Inductors are usually implemented as coils of a conductor, which have parasitic
capacitance between them. A circuit model can be made with each turn of the induc-
tor represented by an incremental inductor and its parasitic capacitance [see
Figure 7.1(d)]. A simplified model has an inductor L in parallel with a parasitic
capacitor Cpara. At low frequencies, the capacitor has a large imaginary negative
impedance, and most current flows through the inductor. As the frequency rises,
however, the magnitude of the capacitor impedance falls, while the imaginary posi-
tive
impedance
of
the
inductor
rises.
Above
the
self-resonant
frequency
(
)
f
LC
SR
para
=1
2
/
π
, the capacitance dominates (i.e., the pair has an imaginary
negative impedance), and the inductor ceases to function as one. In general, this
occurs at a lower frequency for inductors than for capacitors. As seen in the equa-
tion for Q, the quality factor for an inductor rises with frequency; however, because
the parallel capacitance reduces the effective inductance at higher frequencies, Q
eventually reaches a maximum before falling.
Surface-Micromachined Variable Capacitors
Capacitors with a constant capacitance are readily fabricated side by side with tran-
sistors in standard semiconductor integrated-circuit processes by sandwiching a
dielectric between two conductive layers. The primary reason for using on-chip
capacitors is the reduction in parts that must be used on a circuit board and the com-
mensurate reduction in cost. Other reasons include noise reduction and lowering
both parasitic capacitance and resistance. Because the capacitance per unit area in a
standard process is relatively small, large capacitances (more than a few picofarads)
occupy too great a chip area to be cost effective, and high-dielectric materials must
be integrated or off-chip components must be used.
Some analog circuits, such as voltage-controlled oscillators (VCOs) and tuning
circuits, require voltage-controlled variable capacitors (varactors). These are pres-
ently implemented on a separate semiconductor chip with a reverse-biased p-n diode
junction. Varying the dc voltage applied varies the depletion-region width and thus
the small-signal capacitance; capacitance tuning ranges from 2:1 to over 10:1 with
an applied voltage of 0–5V are available commercially. The greatest limitation of
semiconductor varactors is their Q, which is, at most, on the order of 50 in the giga-
hertz frequency range. High Q is required for oscillators with low phase noise [3]; an
example requirement is Q > 50 for a 2-pF capacitor in the range of 1 GHz [4].
Micromachining technology is expected to make an impact in the near future with
the commercial fabrication of variable capacitors with higher Q, the ability to be
fabricated on the same chip as semiconductor circuitry for a reduction in part count,
the ability to handle large ac input voltages that would forward bias diode varactors,
and potentially wider tuning range.
Micromachined variable capacitors can be divided into two broad categories,
surface-micromachined and bulk-micromachined. Surface-micromachined vari-
able capacitors tend to be simpler to fabricate, more readily integrated on the
same chip as existing circuitry, and use less expensive process steps than their
192
MEM Structures and Systems in RF Applications

bulk-micromachined counterparts, but they have a nonlinear response to the tun-
ing voltage and smaller tuning ranges. The quality factor and self-resonance fre-
quency vary with the design.
Many versions of surface-micromachined variable capacitors have been demon-
strated in research papers and patents [5–7]. Most implementations have in com-
mon a bottom plate residing on an insulated substrate, an air gap, and a flat top
plate parallel to the substrate suspended by a spring structure [see Figure 7.2(a)].
Applying a dc control voltage V creates an electrostatic force Fe = ε0AV2/(2g2), where
ε0 is the permittivity of free space, A is the area of plate overlap, and g is the gap.
This force pulls the top plate downward, increasing the capacitance. The restoring
spring force is given by Fs = k∆g, where k is the spring constant and ∆g is the plate
motion or displacement. The spring force increases linearly with plate motion, but
the electrostatic force rises faster than linearly with the plate gap change. This
results in both the plate motion and the capacitance changing slowly at first, then
rising rapidly. When the displacement reaches one third of the initial gap, the elec-
trostatic force rises more rapidly than the spring force, and the top plate snaps down
toward the bottom plate. This limits the controllable increase in capacitance for this
type of variable capacitor to 50%, which is sufficient for many VCO applications.
Parasitic capacitance, which does not change with voltage, lowers the possible tun-
ing range.
In portable applications such as cellular-phone handsets, the dc control voltage
is limited to 3.6V or less (on-chip charge-pump circuitry can, however, increase the
available voltage). A system-determined capacitance and process-determined gap set
the required mechanical spring constant. Another design consideration is that electri-
cal current must flow through the springs to the top plate, making the springs the
dominant source of series resistance. The geometrical dimensions of the springs can
be optimized to provide the least electrical resistance for a particular spring constant.
Passive Electrical Components: Capacitors and Inductors
193
Bottom plate
Stationary plate
on insulating substrate
Anchor to
substrate
Spring
Suspended
top plate
(a)
(b)
Anchor to
substrate
Beam spring
Top plate
Anchor to
substrate
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 7.2
Different implementations of a surface-micromachined parallel-plate variable
capacitor: (a) perspective view of the basic concept showing a stationary plate and a moveable
plate suspended by springs; (b) top view of a capacitor using straight beams as springs; (c) top
view using T-shaped springs [8]; (d) top view using L-shaped springs [5]; and (e) top view with
center anchor [7].

An optimal solution is to make the spring beams short, thick, and wide, but within
the constraint of the spring constant. The resistance can also be kept to a minimum
by the use of a highly conductive metal.
Design and fabrication so that the top plate moves as desired present a particular
challenge due to the effects of stress. Similar challenges are faced by other freestand-
ing micromachined structures, making this a subject worth exploring. The use of
straight beam springs, such as those shown in Figure 7.2(b), does not allow stress
relief. Compressive residual stress can cause the plate to flex upward or downward,
while tensile residual stress increases the voltage that must be applied to cause a
given amount of plate motion. Even if the plate material is deposited with a low
residual stress, differential thermal expansion between the freestanding structure
and the substrate results in stress that varies with temperature (e.g., many consumer
products are specified to operate over wide range from –20º to +40ºC). Differential
thermal expansion problems for this type of design can be avoided by choosing sub-
strate and structural materials with the same coefficient of thermal expansion, such
as single-crystal silicon and polycrystalline silicon. Because silicon is neither a good
insulator nor a good conductor, this approach is not adequate if the design requires
an insulating substrate and a highly conducting capacitor to minimize losses, as dis-
cussed earlier.
Several different designs have been made in attempts to reduce the effects of
stress and simultaneously achieve a high Q. The design shown in Figure 7.2(c) uses
LPCVD polysilicon springs and top plate, with the beam springs laid out in a T
shape in an attempt to relieve stress, but fabricated structures were still warped at
room temperature [8]. A thin layer of gold on top of the polysilicon lowers the resis-
tance, giving a Q of 20 at 1 GHz and a self-resonant frequency above 6 GHz for a
2-pF capacitor. The measured tuning range is 1.5:1 at 4V. In general, a single mate-
rial should be used if it is desired that a freestanding structure remain flat; the metal
on silicon used in this capacitor imparts an undesired curvature to the plate as the
temperature varies.
The design in Figure 7.2(d) uses sputtered aluminum for the top plate and
springs, with a sacrificial photoresist layer that is removed in an oxygen plasma [5].
The circularly oriented L shape of these springs allows the plate to rotate to give some
relief of both residual and temperature-induced stresses. Even with this design, how-
ever, plate warpage was sufficiently large that only capacitors smaller than 200 µm
on a side could be used, so several small capacitors are wired in parallel. Capacitors
with a nominal 2.1-pF value have a Q of 62 at 1 GHz and a tuning range of 1.16:1 at
5.5V. An aluminum ground plane under the bottom plate, traces, and bond pads
shields the silicon substrate, reducing eddy-current loss. As there is also capacitance
that does not vary with voltage between the traces and the ground, the maximum
possible tuning range with a higher voltage is less than 1.5:1. Unlike the polysilicon-
based capacitor described earlier, the use of low-temperature process steps allows
integration of such capacitors on wafers with previously fabricated circuitry.
The design in Figure 7.2(e) [7] uses electroplated gold for the plate and springs,
with a sacrificial PECVD oxide layer etched in hydrofluoric acid followed by super-
critical drying (see Chapter 3). In contrast to the other designs, the anchor is in the
center of the structure, which allows the outer edge of the plate to freely expand or
contract in order to relieve both residual and thermal stresses. A bond wire to the
194
MEM Structures and Systems in RF Applications

center makes an electrical contact with low resistance and low inductance. The
greatest challenge in this design is fabricating the plate metal with a low residual
stress gradient to avoid curling. For a nominal capacitance of 2 pF, this design has a
Q of 181 at 1 GHz and a self-resonance frequency of 7.5 GHz. The tuning range is
1.45:1 at 5.5V. To demonstrate the deleterious effect of substrate conductivity,
capacitors were fabricated with the same process on fused quartz and on high-
resistivity (>10 kΩ•cm) silicon substrates with 4 µm of silicon dioxide for an insu-
lator. The small parasitic conductance through the silicon reduced Q by a factor of
40 compared to that on quartz. The use of an insulating substrate also reduced the
parasitic capacitance in the traces and bond pads, which was a concern with the
other designs, to about 1% of the nominal capacitance.
All of the surface-micromachined designs described have small etch holes in the
top plate to allow the etchant to remove the sacrificial layer rapidly. The last design
also has a layer of silicon nitride coating the bottom plate to prevent shorting when
the top plate snaps down. It further has standoff bumps protruding under the top
plate to limit motion and reduce the contact area at snap down, reducing the likeli-
hood of sticking.
Bulk-Micromachined Variable Capacitors
The most successful bulk-micromachined variable capacitors have been of the
interdigitated-finger (comb-drive) type [see Figure 7.3(a)]. In these devices, a spring
supports a set of movable fingers that mesh with a set of stationary fingers. When a
dc voltage is applied, the electrostatic force attracts the movable fingers to increase
Passive Electrical Components: Capacitors and Inductors
195
(a)
Anchor and
electrical contact
Anchor and
electrical contact
Stationary fingers
Movable fingers
Folded-beam spring
Capacitor gap
Motion
(b)
SOI
wafer
20- m epoxy
µ
Glass
Thick Si
Buried oxide
20- m Si
µ
2. Bond wafers with epoxy
1. SOI and glass wafers
3. Remove thick Si and
oxide; deposit Al
2- m Al
µ
4. RIE through Al;
DRIE through Si
5. Etch epoxy
undercutting Si
,
6. Deposit thin Al
to coat sidewalls
~0.25- m Al
µ
Figure 7.3
Interdigitated-finger capacitor: (a) conceptual top view showing a group of fingers
and springs; and (b) process flow for reduced substrate parasitics. (After: [11].)

the length of overlap and thus the capacitance between the fingers. The capacitance
scales linearly with the number of fingers and the finger thickness and is inversely
proportional to the gap. Thus, the use of DRIE for high-aspect-ratio trenches results
in a large capacitance per unit area. Fabricating a massive number of fingers in par-
allel, typically in several separate blocks, gives the desired capacitance. As with the
surface-micromachined capacitors, resistance in the springs dominates the Q if
other sources of loss are minimized.
Several generations of interdigitated-finger variable capacitors have been
designed and fabricated at the Rockwell Science Center of Thousand Oaks, Califor-
nia [9–11]. The earliest was fabricated using a single mask to DRIE though the top
layer of silicon on a SOI wafer, stopping on a 2-µm-thick buried layer of silicon
dioxide. Hydrofluoric acid removes the buried oxide in the regions with moving
parts, followed by supercritical drying. Even heavy doping (>1020 cm−3) of the sili-
con springs and fingers does not yield as low a sufficiently low resistance, so their
resistance is lowered by sputtering on a thin, unpatterned layer of aluminum. This
coats the tops and sidewalls of the silicon. The top of the underlying silicon substrate
is also coated, but gaps are formed due to the undercut of the oxide, avoiding short-
ing. Even with the thick buried oxide, the underlying low-resistivity silicon handle
substrate acts as the lossy plate of a capacitor, giving both low Q and a large para-
sitic capacitance [see Figure 7.1(a)]. Changing the underlying silicon substrate to
high-resistivity material improves the Q and lowers the parasitic capacitance by a
factor of ten.
Further improvement in Q is achieved by using a glass substrate, which requires
major changes in the process flow [see Figure 7.3(b)]. These capacitors are fabricated
by bonding the thin-silicon side of a SOI wafer to the glass wafer with 20 µm of
epoxy. The Young’s moduli of epoxies are normally orders of magnitude lower than
those of silicon and glass, providing some stress isolation between the two substrates.
The thick side of the SOI wafer is removed by grinding and polishing off most of the
silicon, completing the silicon removal by etching in TMAH, and finally etching off
the buried oxide to reveal the 20 µm-thick layer of silicon. Next, a 2-µm layer of alu-
minum is deposited for a low series resistance and patterned using standard lithogra-
phy and plasma etching. The photoresist and aluminum act as a mask in a DRIE step
to etch straight down through the silicon to the buried layer of epoxy. The epoxy is
etched in an oxygen plasma, which undercuts the silicon to free the moving parts. An
additional 0.25 µm of aluminum is sputtered to coat the sidewalls for an even lower
series resistance. Fabricated capacitors have fingers that are 2 µm wide, 20 µm thick,
a gap of 2 µm, and an initial overlap of a few micrometers. A nominal capacitance of
2 pF requires 1,200 sets of interdigitated fingers. The measured value for Q is 61 at 1
GHz, the self-resonance frequency is 5 GHz, and the tuning range is 4.55:1 at 5.2V
from a finger motion of 23 µm.
A characteristic common to all mechanical devices with masses and springs,
whether surface or bulk micromachined, or even macro- or microscale, is that the
mass will move unintentionally when the device is subject to an external accelera-
tion, such as vibration (this sensitivity results in noise that is casually referred to as
microphonics). The displacement and corresponding capacitance change in vari-
able capacitors depends on the acceleration, the mass, and the spring constant in
the direction of motion. The allowed capacitance change is application-dependent.
196
MEM Structures and Systems in RF Applications

A further concern for interdigitated-finger capacitors is motion of the movable fin-
gers sideways, perpendicular to the intended direction of travel [along the verti-
cal direction in Figure 7.3(a)]. In this event, the gap on one side is reduced,
and the electrostatic force increases rapidly. This eventually pulls the fingers
together, resulting in an electrical short. The spring constant perpendicular to the
direction of travel must be sufficiently large to prevent any such displacement
under the expected operating conditions. Microphonics is a key concern that
must be resolved before micromachined variable capacitors are fully deployed in
commercial systems.
Micromachined Inductors
Billions of low-cost discrete inductors are sold annually for applications including
RF filters, VCOs, and chokes. Most of these have inductances in the range of a few
to tens of nanohenries. When used in conjunction with an integrated circuit, discrete
circuit components suffer from parasitic capacitance in traces and bond pads on the
chip, in the bond wires connecting the chip to the circuit board, and in the inductor
packaging. This limits the self-resonance frequency and therefore the maximum
operating frequency. The inductors also consume precious board space in portable
electronics; for example, in a Nokia 6161 cellular telephone, there are 24 discrete
inductors (in addition to even more capacitors and resistors) along with only 15
integrated circuits [12]. To alleviate the self-resonance shortcoming and to reduce
the part count and space used on a printed circuit board, low-cost, high-
performance on-chip inductors are desirable.
Example inductor parameters needed for use in an on-chip high-Q resonant
tank circuit for VCOs in cellular phones in the 1–2 GHz range are L = 5 nH and
Q >30 [4]. Inductors are readily fabricated on integrated-circuit chips using stan-
dard CMOS or bipolar processes by simply forming a spiral in one layer of metal
and a connection to the center of the spiral in another layer of metal (see Figure 7.4).
Losses from the resistance of the metal and eddy currents in the substrate limit the
Q to less than 10 at 2 GHz [11].
One approach to improving both quality factor and self-resonance frequency is
to reduce the parasitic capacitance and substrate conductive loss by changing to an
insulating substrate, which is not possible if circuitry must be integrated on the
same chip. Alternatively, raising the inductor above the substrate using an air gap
or forming a cavity underneath it reduces the parasitic capacitance to the substrate.
As an example, 24-nH inductors were made using a 12.5-turn spiral with an outer
diameter of 137 µm. Those fabricated on the substrate have a self-resonance fre-
quency of 1.8 GHz; those raised 250 µm above the substrate have an fSR of 6.6 GHz
[11]. The quality factor undoubtedly increased as well, but values were not
reported. In a similar comparison, 1.2-nH inductors fabricated on the substrate
with a fSR of 22 GHz showed an increase to 70 GHz after substrate removal [3]. The
quality factor for the latter was expected to be in the range of 60–80 at 40 GHz.
Another obvious solution for improvement in Q is minimizing the resistance by
using a thick layer (limited by the skin depth) of low-resistivity metal. While inte-
grated circuit–process inductors have been limited to the metal available in the
process (usually aluminum), when given the choice of metals, researchers have cho-
sen primarily copper and gold. A further improvement that may not be immediately
Passive Electrical Components: Capacitors and Inductors
197

apparent is the addition of a highly conductive ground plane under the coil. Eddy
currents are still induced, but the losses are much lower than with a resistive material.
An alternative to planar spiral inductors is positioning small solenoids on top of
the substrate. The Palo Alto Research Center (PARC) of Palo Alto, California, is
commercializing this concept [13]. In the PARC implementation, the coils are
closely spaced ribbons of copper-plated metal that concentrate most of the magnetic
flux inside the coils [see Figure 7.5(a)]. The bottoms of the coils are attached to the
substrate. A thick copper shield placed under the coils prevents eddy currents in an
underlying semiconductor, giving low loss even when fabricated on a moderately
doped silicon substrate. For example, an inductor with three turns, each 200 µm
wide and 535 µm in diameter, has an inductance of 4 nH, a high Q of 65 at 1 GHz,
and a self-resonance frequency of 4.2 GHz. Using a thin aluminum shield made with
standard integrated circuit processing instead of thick copper lowers the Q by about
25% due to a small amount of substrate coupling. By fabricating the inductor on a
glass substrate without a shield, the self-resonance frequency and the effective induc-
tance both rise because there is less parasitic capacitance, while Q is about the same.
Taking the resistance due to the skin effect into account, this Q is close to the theo-
retical maximum possible to due to series resistance alone. While raising the coils off
of the substrate improves performance, their height may be a limitation in applica-
tions where space is a constraint. The coils have been demonstrated to be stronger
than 25-µm-diameter bond wires, which is sufficiently robust for use in plastic
injection-molded packages.
The PARC solenoid process uses all low-temperature steps, enabling its use on
wafers already containing circuitry. Fabrication begins with deposition of up to
7 µm of copper onto the wafer for the ground plane [14]. Approximately 12 to
15 µm of benzocyclobutene (BCB), a low-loss dielectric, are spun on to raise the coil
up off of the substrate. Vias are opened in the BCB for the coil anchors and electrical
contact to ground. A proprietary conductive sacrificial layer is sputtered on,
followed by gold, a thicker layer of molybdenum-chromium (MoCr) alloy, and a
gold passivation layer, for a 1.5-µm-thick metal stack (Figure 7.6). By increasing the
pressure part way through the deposition, the stress of the MoCr film is more
compressive on the bottom than on the top—an example of stress engineering. The
metal stack is patterned and etched to form the shapes of flattened coil half-turns,
with arrays of small etch holes in them. The photoresist is left on the metal stack as a
selective etchant removes the sacrificial layer. Due to the stress gradient in the
198
MEM Structures and Systems in RF Applications
Insulated
substrate
Lower met
coil inductor
al
Upper metal connector
(on dielectric)
Parasitic conductance in substrate
Parasitic capacitance
to substrate
Parasitic capacitance
between turns
Figure 7.4
Illustration of a planar on-chip inductor, with parasitics noted. The inductor consists
of a planar spiral made in one layer of metal and a connection to the center of the spiral in another
layer of metal.

MoCr, the free ends curl upward, but do not reach their final destination due to the
stiffness of the thick photoresist. When heated, the photoresist softens and
gradually allows the free ends to bend further. By precisely controlling the stress
gradient and the thickness of the MoCr film, the radius of curvature is such that the
Passive Electrical Components: Capacitors and Inductors
199
(a)
(b)
300
m
µ
100
m
µ
Figure 7.5
The PARC inductor: (a) scanning-electron micrograph (SEM) of a five-turn solenoid
inductor (the locations of the sides of the turns before release are visible); and (b) SEM close up of
the tops of the turns where the metal from each side meets, showing the interlocked ends. The
etch holes have been filled with copper. (© 2003 IEEE [13].)
1. Deposit Cu ground plane. Deposit and pattern dielectric.
Sputter sacrificial metal and Au/MoCr/Au stack with stress gradient in MoCr.
Pattern metal with photoresist and etch.
2. Etch sacrificial layer to release MoCr film, which curls slightly.
Heat to relax photoresist. Au/MoCr/Au stack curls completely.
3. Strip photoresist.
Electroplate Au/MoCr/Au with copper.
MoCr film curls up
Photoresist
Au/MoCr/Au
Sacrificial layer
BCB dielectric
Cu ground plane
Substrate
Figure 7.6
Illustration of the PARC inductor fabrication process.

two free ends meet. An interlocking tongue-in-groove structure aids in alignment
and gives a small amount of process tolerance [Figure 7.5(b)]. The stack coils are
electroplated with 5 to 8 µm of copper for a low resistance, using the gold on both
sides as a seed layer. The copper also fills the etch holes and seals the seam where the
two halves came together. Finally, the photoresist and any remaining release
material are removed.
Microelectromechanical Resonators
A simple mechanical system of a spring with spring constant k and a mass m has a
resonant frequency
( )
f
k
m
r =
1
2π
/
at which it naturally oscillates if the mass is
moved and released (see Figure 7.7). If an external force drives the mass at this reso-
nant frequency, the amplitude of the displacement rapidly grows until limited by
losses in the system at steady state (the loss is known as damping). When driven at a
frequency above or below the resonant frequency, the amplitude is smaller. In elec-
tronics, this is analogous to a series or parallel combination of capacitor and induc-
tor, with a small series resistance.
As discussed earlier, the quality factor, Q, of a resonant electrical circuit or
mechanical device is defined as the ratio of the maximum energy stored during a
cycle to the energy lost per cycle. Thus, circuits or devices with higher Q values will
have larger response (e.g., displacement) when driven at the resonant frequency (see
Figure 7.8). Such circuits or devices also have a higher response peak and a narrower
200
MEM Structures and Systems in RF Applications
Mass m
Massless spring
with spring constant k
fr =
k
m
1
2π
Resonant frequency:
Damping
Displacement
Figure 7.7
Illustration of a mechanical oscillator consisting of a spring, a mass, and a damping
element that represents mechanical losses. When driven at its natural (resonant) frequency, the
amplitude of the oscillation is greatest; at lower and higher frequencies, the amplitude is smaller.
Q =
energy lost per cycle
maximum energy stored during cycle =
resonant frequency
Frequency
fr
Frequency
Amplitude
Amplitude
Amplitude
fr
Low Q
Moderate Q
High Q
Bandwidth (BW)
BW
bandwidth at 1/ 2 of maximum
Frequency
fr
BW
3 dB
Figure 7.8
Illustration of the effect of the quality factor, Q, on the relationship between
amplitude of oscillation and frequency.

bandwidth, which is the distance in frequency between the points of response that
are
(
)
1
2
3
−dB below the response maximum. Bandwidth is also given a percentage
of the center frequency.
Quartz crystals are presently at the core of every electrical resonant circuit
because, historically, integrated electronic oscillators have not been able to achieve
the large quality factors necessary for the stable operation of frequency-selective
communications systems. A typical quartz crystal has a Q that reaches 10,000 or
even higher. By comparison, the quality factor of an electrical filter consisting of a
network of inductors, capacitors, and resistors (RLC network) is typically far less
than 1,000, limited by parasitic resistive losses in the circuit. The quality factor has
also an effect on insertion loss. For example, a simple bandpass filter consisting of a
series inductor and capacitor, with parasitic resistance, in series with an output
resistor, which has a center frequency at 16 MHz, a Q of 100, and a bandwidth of
2.9 MHz (18% of the center frequency) has an insertion loss of 0.8 dB—in other
words, the signal suffers an undesirable attenuation of about 9%. The insertion loss
increases further as the Q decreases. Quality factors above 1,000 are generally con-
sidered high for many electronic and RF applications. If micromechanical resona-
tors can demonstrate high Q over a wide range of tunable frequencies, then
integrating them with electronics will consequently lead to system miniaturization.
The frequencies of interest cover the range between 800 MHz and 2.5 GHz for
front-end wireless reception, as well as the intermediate frequencies1 at 455 kHz
and above.
Based on the equation for resonant frequency, it follows immediately that a
reduction in size, which brings about a decrease in mass and stiffening of the spring,
increases the resonant frequency. This is the basic argument for the micromachining
of resonators. The various designs differ in their implementation of excitation and
sense mechanisms.
Comb-Drive Resonators
One of the earliest surface-micromachined resonator designs [15], which is now
commonly used in various MEM devices, is the interdigitated-finger comb-drive
structure developed at the University of California, Berkeley, California (see Figure
7.9). This structure is comprised of folded springs supporting a shuttle plate that
oscillates back and forth in the plane of the wafer surface. The folded springs relieve
residual stress and give a more compact layout. An applied voltage, either positive
or negative, generates an electrostatic force between the left anchor comb and
shuttle comb that pulls the shuttle plate to the left in Figure 7.9. This electrical force
Fe is given by ½(dC/dx) V
2, where V is the applied voltage, and dC/dx is the rate of
increase in capacitance as the finger overlap increases and is constant for a given
design. Because the voltage is squared, the force is always attractive. When a
sinusoidal ac voltage νacos(ωt) is applied, where νa is the amplitude and ω is the
Microelectromechanical Resonators
201
1.
A receiver converts the frequency of a selected incoming RF signal to a fixed intermediate frequency by het-
erodyning the signal with the local oscillator. This allows the remaining circuits in the receiver to remain
precisely tuned to the intermediate frequency regardless of the frequency of the incoming signal. The follow-
ing frequencies are generally considered intermediate frequency: 50 kHz, 100 kHz, 262 kHz, 455 kHz, 500
kHz, 9 MHz, 10.7 MHz, 45 MHz, and 75 MHz.

frequency in rad/s (ω = 2πf), the force is proportional to νa
2 × cos
2(ωt) = νa
2 × ½[1 +
cos (2ωt)]. Thus, the force driving the resonator appears at a frequency of twice the
input frequency, in addition to a dc component.
A frequency response different than the input frequency is not particularly use-
ful for filters. To make a useful linear filter, a dc bias is superimposed so that the
input across the comb is VD + νacos(ωt). The force is then proportional to [VD+
νacos(ωt)]2 = VD
2 + 2VDνacos(ωt)+ νa
2cos2(ωt). In a linear filter, VD is intentionally
made much greater than νa, so that the last term is negligible and the dominant
time-varying drive force is at the input frequency ω. The final part of the filter is an
output resistor attached to the sense comb on the right side of the structure in Figure
7.9. An output current io = d(CV)/dt = VD•dC/dt = VD(dC/dx)•(dx/dt) = VD(dC/dx)
•ω•xmaxsin(ωt) flows through the output resistor, where xmax is the maximum dis-
placement. Because xmax has a peak at the resonant frequency ωr (= 2πfr), the output
current also peaks at ωr.
Because this device only responds to a narrow range of frequencies, it can be
used to set the frequency in a frequency-reference circuit [16]. It can also be used as a
mixer in a heterodyne unit. Driving an anchor with a drive signal at frequency ωd
and the shuttle plate at a carrier frequency ωc with a dc offset generates an electro-
static time-varying force that has a spectral signature at the fundamental frequencies
ωd and ωc, at the sum and difference frequencies (ωd + ωc) and (ωd – ωc), and at the
second harmonics, 2ωd and 2ωc, as discussed earlier. Only the frequency near the
mechanical resonance is passed to the output.
The spring constant k of a single clamped-clamped beam bending to the side is
given by kbeam = E•t•(w/L)3, where E is the Young’s modulus, t is the beam thick-
ness, w is the width, and L is the length. For the structure shown in Figure 7.9, the
202
MEM Structures and Systems in RF Applications
Anchors
vo
Spring beam
Shuttle plate
Electrostatic sense
comb structure
Electrostatic
comb actuator
ac input signal
va( )
ω
Spectrum
analyzer
io
Resonant frequency:
Drive dc bias
VD
fr =
ktotal
m
m
m
p
c
b
+ 0.25
+ 0.34
1
2π
fr
Output
resistor
ktotal = System spring constant
mp = Mass of shuttle
mc = Mass of connector
mb = Mass of spring beams
Motion
Figure 7.9
Illustration of a micromachined folded-beam comb-drive resonator. The left comb
drive actuates the device at a variable frequency ω. The right capacitive-sense-comb structure
measures the corresponding displacement by turning the varying capacitance into a current,
which generates a voltage across the output resistor. There is a peak in displacement, current, and
output voltage at the resonant frequency.

total spring constant for the system of spring beams is ktotal = 2 kbeam . Because the
springs do not move as much as the main shuttle mass, only a fraction of their mass
is added to that of the shuttle mass in determining the resonant frequency.
A representative comb-drive resonator made of polycrystalline silicon using
standard surface-micromachining techniques has beams with a thickness 2 µm,
widths of 2 µm, and lengths of 185 µm, resulting in a system spring constant of 0.65
N/m. With an effective motional mass equal to 5.7 × 10−11 kg, the structure reso-
nates at 17 kHz [17]. Keeping the same beam thickness and width but reducing the
length to 33 µm gives a structure that resonates at 300 kHz [18]. The Q can be over
50,000 in vacuum but rapidly decreases to below 50 at atmospheric pressure due to
viscous damping in air [19]. Thus, vacuum packaging is necessary to commercialize
these high-Q devices.
To attain a higher resonant frequency, the total spring constant must be
increased or the motional mass must be decreased. The former is done by increasing
the beam width and decreasing its length; the latter is difficult to do while retaining
a rigid shuttle with the same number of comb fingers. Using electron-beam lithogra-
phy to write submicron linewidths, single-crystal silicon beams with lengths of 10
µm and widths of 0.2 µm reached a resonant frequency of 14 MHz [20]. Alterna-
tively, while using the same resonator dimensions, the resonant frequency can be
increased by using a material with a larger ratio of Young’s modulus, E, to density,
ρ, than silicon. Metals known in engineering for their high stiffness-to-mass ratio,
such as aluminum and titanium, have a ratio E/ρ that is actually lower than for sili-
con. Two materials with higher E/ρ ratios are silicon carbide and polycrystalline
diamond; the latter is a research topic for high-frequency resonators.
Beam Resonators
To build a micromachined structure with higher resonant frequency than that read-
ily achievable with a comb drive, the mass must be further reduced. Beam resona-
tors have been studied extensively at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
[21–23], for this purpose, and Discera, Inc., of Ann Arbor, Michigan, is commer-
cializing them for reference frequency oscillators to replace quartz crystals in cellu-
lar phones. The advantages include a much smaller size, the ability to build several
different frequency references on a single chip, higher resonant frequencies, more
linear frequency variation with temperature over a wide range, and the ability to
integrate circuitry, either on the same chip or on a circuit chip bonded to the MEM
chip, all at a lower cost than the traditional technology.
The simplest beam resonator is rigidly clamped on both ends and driven by an
underlying electrode (see Figure 7.10). A dc voltage applied between the beam and
the drive electrode causes the center of the beam to deflect downward; removal
allows it to travel back upward. An ac drive signal νa causes the beam to flex up and
down. As with the comb-drive actuator, when a large dc bias VD is superimposed to
the ac drive signal, the beam oscillates at the same frequency as the drive signal. At
resonance, the deflection amplitude is at its greatest. An example polysilicon beam
is 41 µm long, 8 µm wide, 1.9 µm thick, with a gap of 130 nm [21]. Applying volt-
ages VD = 10V and νa = 3 mV, the measured resonant frequency is 8.5 MHz, the
quality factor Q is 8,000 at a pressure of 9 Pa, and the deflection amplitude is a mere
4.9 nm at the center of the beam. At atmospheric pressure, Q drops to less than
Microelectromechanical Resonators
203

1,000 due to viscous damping, and the deflection at resonance falls by a correspond-
ing ratio. To maintain a high Q in its product, Discera uses an on-chip, vacuum-
sealed cap over the resonators.
The dc bias also adds a downward electrostatic force. This force varies with dis-
tance and opposes the mechanical restoring force of the beam, making the effective
mechanical spring constant of the system smaller. The resonant frequency falls by a
factor proportional to
(
)
1
2
2
2
−CV
k g
D
, where C is the initial capacitance, k is
the mechanical spring constant, and g is the gap without a dc bias. Thus, the reso-
nant frequency can be electrically tuned.
In contrast to the two-port resonators described later, this single-beam resona-
tor is a one-port device with only one pair of external leads. The resonator appears
as a time-varying capacitor, C(ω), because the capacitance between the beam and
the drive electrode changes with the deflection. A simple electrical circuit using
external passive components is necessary to measure an electrical signal from the
resonator [22]. The circuit includes a shunt blocking inductor, L, and a series block-
ing capacitor, C (see Figure 7.10). With a large dc bias VD, the dominant output
current at the input frequency ω is io=VDdC/dt. At high frequency, the inductor L is
an open circuit, and the output capacitor C is a short, so that io flows through the
load resistor RL. In practice, the load resistance may be the input impedance of the
measurement equipment. Alternatively, a transimpedance amplifier, which ampli-
fies an input current and outputs a voltage, can substitute the load resistance.
One of the key requirements of a frequency reference is stability over the operat-
ing temperature range. As the temperature rises, the Young’s modulus for most
materials falls, resulting in a lower spring constant and therefore a lower resonant
frequency. For polysilicon clamped-clamped beams, the rate at which the resonant
frequency falls is –17 × 10–6/K (ppm/K), compared to the –1 × 10–6/K range for AT-
cut quartz crystals (the exact value varies due to production variation) [23]. A solu-
tion to this problem, being implemented in Discera products, is variable electrical
stiffness compensation.
When an electrode with a dc bias VC is placed over a beam, an effective second
electrical spring is added to the system, which also reduces the overall system spring
constant [see Figure 7.11(a)]. By mounting the ends of this top electrode on top of
metal supports with a faster thermal expansion rate than that of the polysilicon elec-
trode, the gap increases with temperature. This reduces the electrical spring constant
204
MEM Structures and Systems in RF Applications
First-order
resonant frequency:
E = Young’s modulus
ρ = Density
t = Beam thickness
L = Beam length
fr = 1.03
E
ρ
t
L2
ac input signal
va( )
ω
Gap
Anchor
Beam
Drive
electrode
Motion
L
VD
dc bias
RL
vo
io
Coo
Figure 7.10
Illustration of a beam resonator and a typical circuit to measure the signal. The beam
is clamped on both ends by anchors to the substrate. The capacitance between the resonant beam
and the drive electrode varies with the deflection.

opposing the mechanical spring, while the mechanical spring constant itself is fal-
ling, resulting in their combination varying much less with temperature (down to
+0.6 × 10–6/K in prototypes [23]).
For process compatibility the entire top electrode is made of metal, which also
expands faster laterally than the underlying silicon substrate. Because it is clamped
at the ends, it undesirably bows upward unless measures are taken to prevent this.
By suspending the ends of this beam off of the substrate and putting slits near its
ends [see Figure 7.11(b)], bowing is greatly reduced, from 6 nm down to 1 nm when
heated to 100ºC. When appropriately biased, this reduces the frequency shift with
temperature to only –0.24 × 10–6/K, comparable to the best quartz crystals [23].
Design specifications for this prototype beam are a length of 40 µm, width of 8 µm,
thickness of 2 µm, gap below the resonant beam during operation of 50 nm, and gap
above the beam of about 250 nm. With a beam-lower electrode dc bias VD of 8V
and a beam-upper electrode voltage VC also of 8V, the resonant frequency is 9.9
MHz with a Q of 4,100. For the Discera products to be used as cellular phone
Microelectromechanical Resonators
205
Polysilicon
resonant
beam
Polysilicon
bottom
drive
electrode
(a)
ac input signal
va( )
ω
VD
dc bias
Metal top
compensation
electrode
VC
dc bias
(b)
Slit
Polysilicon resonant
beam (under metal)
Polysilicon bottom
drive electrode
Compensation
electrode
Raised support
Anchor
Figure 7.11
Illustration of the compensation scheme to reduce sensitivity in a resonant structure
to temperature. A voltage applied to a top metal electrode modifies through electrostatic
attraction the effective spring constant of the resonant beam. Temperature changes cause the
metal electrode to move relative to the polysilicon resonant beam, thus changing the gap
between the two layers. This reduces the electrically induced spring constant opposing the
mechanical spring while the mechanical spring constant itself is falling, resulting in their
combination varying much less with temperature. (a) Perspective view of the structure [23], and
(b) scanning electron micrograph of the device. (Courtesy of: Discera, Inc., of Ann Arbor,
Michigan.)

reference oscillators, beams are designed for resonant frequencies including 19.2
MHz and 76.8 MHz for code-division multiple access (CDMA) wireless networks
and 26 MHz for Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) networks.
The bottom electrode and the resonant beam are fabricated from polysilicon
using standard surface micromachining steps, with a sacrificial silicon dioxide layer
in between [23]. A sacrificial oxide layer is also formed on top of the resonant beam,
followed by a sacrificial nickel spacer on the sides of the beam. Gold electroplated
through a photoresist mask forms the top metal electrode. Finally, the nickel and
silicon dioxide are etched away to leave the freestanding beams.
Coupled-Resonator Bandpass Filters
The resonators just described have a very narrow bandpass characteristic, making
them suitable for setting the frequency in an oscillator circuit but not for a more gen-
eral bandpass filter. Bandpass filters pass a range of frequencies, with steep roll-off
on both sides. Two or more microresonators, of either the comb-drive or clamped-
clamped beam type, can be linked together by weak springs or flexures to create use-
ful bandpass filters (see Figure 7.12).
206
MEM Structures and Systems in RF Applications
−50
−45
−40
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
Frequency [MHz]
7.88
7.84
7.80
7.76
Transmission [dB]
Performance
= 7.81 MHz
= 15 kHz
Rej. = 35 dB
I.L. < 2 dB
f
BW
0
µresonators
Anchor
Lr
L12
20
m
µ
Electrodes
wr
Coupling Spring
Electrode
Figure 7.12
Scanning electron micrograph of a polysilicon surface micromachined bandpass fil-
ter consisting of two clamped resonant beams coupled by a weak intermediate flexure spring. The
excitation and sensing occur between the beams and electrodes beneath them on the surface of
the substrate. Each resonant beam is 41 µm long, 8 µm wide, and 2 µm thick. The coupling flex-
ure is 20 µm long and 0.75 µm wide. (© 1998 IEEE [24].)

To visualize this complex effect, let us imagine two physically separate but iden-
tical simple resonators consisting of a mass and a spring. These resonators can freely
oscillate at the natural frequency determined by the mass and the spring constant.
Adding a weak and compliant flexure or spring between the two masses (see
Figure 7.13) restricts the allowed oscillations of this two-body system. The two
masses can move either in phase or out of phase with respect to each other; these are
the two oscillation modes of the system. When the motions are in phase, there is no
relative displacement between the two masses and, consequently, no restoring force
from the weak flexure. The oscillation frequency of this first mode is then equal to
the natural frequency of a single resonator. When the two masses move out of phase
with respect to each other, however, their displacements are in opposite directions
at any instant of time. This motion produces the largest relative displacement across
the coupling flexure, thereby resulting in a restoring force, which, according to
Newton’s second law, provides a higher oscillation frequency. The physical cou-
pling of the two masses effectively split the two overlapping resonant frequencies (of
the two identical resonators) into two distinct frequencies, with a frequency separa-
tion dependent on the stiffness of the coupling flexure. In physics, it is said that the
coupling lifts the degeneracy of the oscillation modes. For a very compliant coupling
spring, the two split frequencies are sufficiently close to each other that they effec-
tively form a narrow passband. Increasing the number of coupled oscillators in a
Microelectromechanical Resonators
207
Mass m
Frequency
Amplitude
fr1
Mass m
Stiff spring with
spring constant k1
Weak flexure with
spring constant k2
Stiff spring with
spring constant k1
In phase
Out of phase
fr2
fr1 =
k1
m
1
2π
fr2 =
k
k
1
2
+ 2
m
1
2π
Figure 7.13
Illustration of two identical resonators, each with a mass and spring, coupled by a
weak and compliant intermediate flexure. The system has two resonant oscillation modes, for in-
phase and out-of-phase motion, resulting in a bandpass characteristic.

linear chain widens the extent of this passband but also increases the number of rip-
ples. In general, the total number of oscillation modes is equal to the number of cou-
pled oscillators in the chain.
Coupled-resonator filters are two-port devices, with a two-lead input and two-
lead output. An ac voltage input drives the filter, while the output is taken in the
same method as that for a single resonator: a dc bias is applied. The current due to
the capacitance change, VD dC/dt, is the output, which is typically fed to a transim-
pedance amplifier to generate an output voltage. From the perspective of an electri-
cal engineer, a dual electrical network models the behavior of a filter made of
coupled micromechanical resonators. The dual of a spring-mass system is a network
of inductors and capacitors (LC network): The inductor is the dual of the mass (on
the basis of kinetic energy), and the capacitor is the dual of the spring (on the basis of
potential energy). A linear chain of coupled undamped micromechanical resonators
becomes equivalent to an LC ladder network. This duality allows the implementa-
tion of filters of various types using polynomial synthesis techniques, including
Butterworth and Chebyshev common in electrical filter design. Widely available
“cookbooks” of electrical filters provide appropriate polynomial coefficients and
corresponding values of circuit elements [18].
Film Bulk Acoustic Resonators
Another method of creating microelectromechanical bandpass filter is to use a pie-
zoelectric material. By sandwiching a sheet of piezoelectric material with a reasona-
bly high d33 (see Chapter 3) and low mechanical energy loss between two electrodes,
a resonator is created [see Figure 7.14(a)]. When an ac signal is applied across the
piezoelectric, an acoustic wave, traveling at the speed of sound in the material, is
generated. If the top and bottom surfaces of the device are in air or vacuum, there is
an acoustic impedance mismatch, and the wave is reflected back and forth through
the thickness. When the acoustic wavelength is equal to twice the thickness, a stand-
ing wave is formed (mechanical resonance) and the electrical impedance is low [see
Figure 7.14(b)]. The frequency response of such devices is commonly modeled by
the simplified L-C-R electrical network shown in Figure 7.14(c). The series induc-
tance and capacitance in the model represent the kinetic energy of the moving mass
and the stored energy due to compression and expansion of the material, respec-
tively, while the series resistor represents energy loss. This resistance is relatively
small with a good design and process, enabling quality factors of over 1,000 in pro-
duction devices. There is also a significant electrical capacitance between the plates,
represented by the parallel capacitor. The series capacitor and inductor in this sys-
tem have a series resonance—the low impedance in Figure 7.14(b). Due to the paral-
lel capacitor, the system also predicts a separate, parallel resonance—the high
impedance in Figure 7.14(b).
The goal of a bandpass filter, such as those linking the input or output circuitry
to the antenna of a cellular phone, is to transmit a narrow range of frequencies with
low loss and filter out both higher and lower frequencies. To make a bandpass filter,
FBARs are placed in a ladder network such as that shown in Figure 7.14(d) [25]. The
series FBARs are designed to have the same series-resonant frequency and corre-
sponding low impedance, which transmits the desired frequency with low loss [see
Figure 7.14(e)]. These devices do not transmit higher frequencies due to the high
208
MEM Structures and Systems in RF Applications

impedance resulting from the parallel resonance just above the series-resonant fre-
quency. The parallel FBARs are designed to have a lower series-resonant frequency,
shorting undesired signals to ground but not affecting the desired frequency. The
result is a transmission curve such as that shown in Figure 7.14(e) for a commercial
device [26]. Adding more stages provides more filtering of undesired frequen-
cies—but at the cost of more attenuation of the desired frequencies.
Agilent Technologies, Inc., of Palo Alto, California, started marketing FBAR-
based RF bandpass filters for cellular phone handsets in 2001. There is a great
consumer demand for smaller cellular phones, and FBAR filters are one of the
microelectromechanical devices that have helped to meet this demand by being
much smaller than the ceramic surface-acoustic wave devices they replaced. They
also enable new filter applications by meeting very sharp frequency filter roll-off
specifications and being able to handle power of over 1W [25]. In most applications
Microelectromechanical Resonators
209
Metal
Metal
Piezoelectric
Air above
Air below
Symbol
(a)
(c)
Series inductor, capacitor, and resistor
Parallel capacitor
Ladder filter
attentuation
Individual FBAR absolute
value of impedance
Absolute value
of impedance
Parallel resonance:
high impedance
Series resonance:
low impedance
Frequency
(b)
+
Input
–
+
Output
–
(d)
Series FBARs have low impedance near center of
bandpass range, passing the desired signal; they
have high impedance above top edge of bandpass
range, blocking undesired frequencies.
Parallel FBARs have low impedance below bottom
edge of bandpass range, acting as a short to ground
for undesired frequencies; they have high impedance
in bandpass range, preventing desired frequencies
from being grounded.
Little attenuation in
bandpass frequency range
0 dB
High attenuation
outside bandpass
frequency range
(e)
Frequency
Series FBARs pass desired
frequencies to output
They heavily
filter higher
frequencies
Parallel FBARs pass frequencies
below bandpass range to ground
They heavily filter
frequencies in
bandpass range
Bandpass
range
Frequency
Figure 7.14
Film bulk acoustic resonator (FBAR): (a) cross section of an FBAR and symbol; (b)
impedance versus frequency of an individual FBAR; (c) equivalent electrical circuit; (d) FBARs in
ladder filter; and (e) impedance versus frequency for two FBARs and relation to attenuation versus
frequency of ladder filter.

to date, pairs of FBAR filters have been placed at the antenna of a cellular phone to
form a duplexer. One bandpass filter allows signal transmission from the output
power amplifier to the antenna (e.g., 1.85–1.91 GHz for PCS); the other has a differ-
ent bandpass that transmits received signals from the antenna to the input low-noise
amplifier (e.g., 1.93–1.99 GHz for PCS).
The fabrication of an Agilent FBAR filter, the exact details of which are proprie-
tary, begins with a high-resistivity silicon wafer (see Figure 7.15) [27, 28]. The high
resistivity is needed to reduce losses due to eddy currents; alternatively, an insulating
substrate such as glass could be used. A cavity a few micrometers deep is etched into
the silicon. The silicon is thermally oxidized for electrical isolation. Phosphosilicate
glass (PSG) is deposited using LPCVD sufficiently thick to fill the cavity. Chemical-
mechanical polishing then removes all of the PSG outside of the cavity and planar-
izes the wafer surface. At this point, the PSG in the cavity has a very smooth surface,
which is critical for the later deposition of aluminum nitride (AlN). About 0.1 µm of
molybdenum (Mo) is sputtered and patterned to form the lower electrode. Molybde-
num is chosen for its suitably low electrical resistivity, low mechanical loss, and
process compatibility. This is followed by sputtering and patterning of the alumi-
num nitride piezoelectric layer. The AlN thickness is chosen so that the thickness of
the stack is one half of a wavelength of the speed of sound in these materials for the
desired resonant frequency. For example, if the speed of sound through the thickness
of the AlN is 11.4 km/s and the desired tuning frequency is 1.88 GHz, then the wave-
length is 6.1 µm and the thickness is chosen to be approximately 3 µm (the elec-
trodes add acoustic additional path length, so the piezoelectric layer is slightly
thinner than this). Thickness control is critical, as it sets the resonant frequency.
Next, another layer of molybdenum is sputtered, followed by gold, which adheres to
the Mo. The gold is patterned for the bond pads, followed by patterning of the Mo
for the top electrode. A small area of extra metal is added on top of some resonators
to mass-load them and reduce their acoustic resonant frequency for the ladder filter
[28]. Alternatively, a small amount of metal could be removed from the surface to
210
MEM Structures and Systems in RF Applications
PSG
Oxide
Silicon
Smooth
surface
AlN piezoelectric
Au pad
Mo upper electrode
Air gap
(1) Etch cavity in silicon,
grow thermal oxide, deposit PSG
(2) CMP PSG for smooth, planar surface
(3) Sputter and pattern Mo,
sputter and pattern AlN
(4) Sputter Mo and Au,
pattern Au, pattern Mo
(5) Etch away sacrifical PSG,
leaving suspended FBAR
Mo lower
electrode
Figure 7.15
Illustration of an example FBAR fabrication process.

raise the acoustic resonant frequency. Finally, the PSG under the resonator is etched
away in a hydrofluoric acid solution, leaving the freestanding structure. Access for
the etching acid is provided through holes at the edges of the resonator structure.
Releasing the structure has alternatively been performed by orientation-dependent
etching of the silicon from the back side of the wafer, but this requires double-sided
alignment and starting the back side etch with a window much larger than the area
of the resonator, greatly increasing the chip area and cost [28].
When FBARs in a filter block applied signals, some of the power is absorbed
(the rest is passed through or reflected). Each FBAR’s area must be large enough to
dissipate heat without causing a problem, such as a significant shift in the frequency
characteristic. One issue with such filters with a mechanical resonance back and
forth through the thickness of the piezoelectric material is that some acoustic energy
is unintentionally coupled into the plane of the material. To prevent standing waves
from forming in plane, the walls of the Agilent FBAR are not parallel but rather at
an angle to each other; implementations include forming a nonparallelogram quad-
rilateral or an irregular pentagon [29].
Microelectromechanical Switches
Microelectromechanical switches have many potential applications in electronics.
In cellular phones, they can rapidly isolate and connect the send and receive chan-
nels to a common antenna, as well as performing less frequent reconfigurations for
different communications standards (e.g., global system for mobile communica-
tions, code-division multiple access, or time-division multiple access). At extremely
high frequencies (above 30 GHz), the wavelength becomes sufficiently short that
small phased arrays of antennas can be fabricated for radar applications: banks of
switches can rapidly reconfigure phase shifters to drive the phased arrays to orient
the transmitted signal in different directions. Automated test and measurement
equipment also use arrays of switches for the application of power and signals to
devices under test.
The key desirable parameters in RF switches are low insertion loss and return
loss (reflection) in the closed state, high isolation in the open state, high linearity
(typically quoted as level of third-order harmonic), high power-handling capability
during switching, low operating voltage (for portables), high reliability (particularly
a large number of cycles before failure), small size, and low cost. As will be seen,
there are tradeoffs among various combinations of these parameters. For microelec-
tromechanical switches to be designed into new products, they must surpass the per-
formance of, or offer some other advantage such as small size or cost over, existing
switch technologies such as gallium arsenide FETs, silicon p-i-n diodes, and tradi-
tional electromagnetic relays.
Many different micromechanical RF switch prototypes have been fabri-
cated, drawing on the various actuation techniques discussed in Chapter 4. The
most common are electrostatically driven, which is appealing for handheld and
satellite applications for its negligible power consumption when holding. Most
electrostatically driven switches have a membrane or a cantilever containing one
contact, which is suspended over the substrate supporting another contact (see
Figures 7.16 and 7.17).
Microelectromechanical Switches
211

212
MEM Structures and Systems in RF Applications
Substrate
Isolation
Bottom electrode
Thin dielectric
Top electrode
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.16
Illustration of a membrane switch: (a) In the open state, the metal lines act as a
waveguide, with the sides being ground and the signal propagating down the center line. (b) In
the closed state, application of a dc voltage pulls the top ground membrane down to short the
signal line. If there is a thin dielectric as shown, the impedance is low only at high frequency.
(After: [30].)
(a)
(b)
Cap wafer
Base wafer
Thin gold alloy
Thick gold
Thin gold alloy
Polysilicon
cantilever
Polysilicon cantilever
Motion
Gold/glass
stack forms
hermetic seal
Three gold lines form coplanar waveguide
Silicon nitride
Glass
Cantilever
drive electrode
Ground
Signal
Ground
Motion
Silicon nitride insulator
Gold alloy contact
Signal out
Signal in
(c)
(d)
Thin gold
for seal ring
Polysilicon
cantilever 1
Gold alloy
contact 1
Thick gold/glass
for seal ring
Input 1
Input 2
Contact
area
Output
Cantilever 2
drive electrode
Cantilever 1
drive electrode
Polysilicon
cantilever 2
Gold alloy
contact 2
Gold alloy
signal line
Figure 7.17
Illustration of the MicroAssembly cantilever switch: (a) Cross section along the
length of the cantilever, showing the coplanar waveguide. (b) Cross section across the width of
the cantilever, showing the signal contact region. (c) Micrograph of the top wafer of a single-pole,
double-throw switch, containing the cantilever, before assembly. (d) Scanning electron micro-
graph of the bottom wafer, containing the coplanar waveguide and seal ring, before assembly.
(Courtesy of: MicroAssembly Technologies of Richmond, California.)

Membrane Shunt Switch
In a membrane-switch implementation from the University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, a 2-µm-thick layer of gold is suspended 2 µm above a
0.8-µm-thick gold signal line, which is coated with about 0.15 µm of insulating sili-
con nitride [30]. The membranes have a span of 300 µm and lengths of 20 to 140
µm. Application of a 15-V dc voltage to the signal line (in addition to the ac signal)
pulls the gold membrane down to the nitride, shunting the signal line to ground
[31]. The use of an insulator prevents this switch from working at dc and low fre-
quency but is expected to be more reliable than metal-to-metal contacts. The sides
of the gold membrane are supported by wide strips of the same gold film,
which, with the signal line, form the coplanar waveguide needed for microwave
signals.
In the closed state, the connection is made by capacitive coupling, which is only
useful at high frequency. Insertion loss in the closed state is less than 0.6 dB over the
range of 10–40 GHz, with a return loss of less than –20 dB. The silicon nitride could
be made even thinner for a lower closed-state capacitance and lower insertion loss,
but it is already at the minimum thickness required to prevent breakdown with the
required dc operation voltage. In the open state, there is clearly a capacitor that
causes undesired coupling. The gap could be increased for greater isolation (at least
20 dB is desired), but this would require an even greater actuation voltage. The
measured ratio of closed to open capacitance in this design is about 17. The loss in
the up state is the same as for the coplanar waveguide alone.
Cantilever Series Switch
Several cantilever-type switches with metal-to-metal contacts (also known as relays)
are under commercial development by companies such as Teravicta Technologies of
Austin, Texas; Radant MEMS, Inc., of Stowe, Massachusetts; and MicroAssembly
Technologies, Inc., of Richmond, California (see Figure 7.17). In the switch from
MicroAssembly Technologies, a voltage applied to a cantilever creates a potential
between the free end and underlying ground lines. The cantilever is pulled down,
with the structure stopping when a separate gold-alloy contact on the cantilever
mates with contacts below, bridging the gap between the contacts. Coplanar
waveguides maintain microwave-signal integrity. A single pole, double throw
switch (two inputs and one output) is shown in the micrographs in Figure 7.17;
switches have been designed with one up to four inputs.
The area of greatest concern in switches of any size is reliability of the contact
itself. In the MicroAssembly switch, a proprietary gold alloy is employed. Special
attention is paid to the mechanics of the switch closure. For example, a relatively
high closing force aids in keeping the electrical resistance low over the life of the
switch. Melting and sputtering of the metal to create a self-renewing contact is being
studied. Cleanliness is also critical: the contacts can be contaminated by volatile
organic compounds far below the part-per-billion level. A well-controlled switch
environment is established by the use of integrated hermetic packaging (see Chapter
8). As seen in Figure 7.17, a multilayer gold/glass ring surrounds the switch, while
allowing signals to flow in and out. Another substrate forms the cap, which is
bonded at the wafer level for low handling cost. The use of integrated packaging
gives this device a level of completeness not found in many prototypes and produces
Microelectromechanical Switches
213

a smaller size and lower bill-of-materials cost than if a separate hermetic package
were used.
The gap between the cantilever and the underlying electrodes must be suffi-
ciently large that the isolation is high when open. Furthermore, the cantilever must
be stiff enough that it is not damaged and closure does not accidentally occur when
the device is shocked (switches have demonstrated a shock tolerance of 30,000G).
These criteria lead to a higher actuation voltage than is available in many systems.
To resolve this problem, charge-pump circuitry supplies the needed drive voltage
from a 1.5-V input. When closed, which takes 10 µs, the measured insertion loss of
the switch is less than 0.2 dB from dc to 2 GHz. For the package alone, the insertion
loss is nearly “invisible” to the circuit at 0.06 dB, which has enabled this packaging
scheme to be used for other RF devices as well as switches. The isolation when open
is 40 dB. Goals are an insertion loss of 0.2 dB over 24–40 GHz, a lifetime of 1011
cycles, and 1-W cold-switched power handling.
Summary
The most notable members of the RF MEMS family, micromachined variable
capacitors, inductors, resonators, filters, and switches were described, with research
or commercial examples of each. There are different advantages of these devices,
compared to their conventional counterparts, including smaller size, lower cost,
higher Q, lower loss, and the ability to be integrated on the same chip as circuitry. A
common theme in RF MEMS is the reduction of parasites. We are presently at the
dawn of an era of commercial use of RF MEMS.
References
[1]
Ramo, S., J. R. Whinnery, and T. van Duzer, Fields and Waves in Communications Elec-
tronics, 3rd ed., New York: John Wiley, 1994.
[2]
Solymar, L., and D. Walsh, Lectures on the Electrical Properties of Materials, 3rd ed.,
Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford Univeristy Press, 1985.
[3]
Nguyen, C. T. -C., L. P. B. Katehi, and G. M. Rebeiz, “Micromachined Devices for Wireless
Communications,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 86, No. 8, August 1998, pp. 1756–1786.
[4]
Young, D. J., et al., “A Low-Noise RF Voltage-Controlled Oscillator Using On-Chip
High-Q Three-Dimensional Inductor and Micromachined Variable Capacitor,” Technical
Digest of Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, Hilton Head, NC, June 1998, pp.
128–131.
[5]
Young, D. J., and B. E. Boser, “A Micromachined Variable Capacitor for Monolithic Low-
Noise VCOs,” Technical Digest of Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, Hilton
Head, SC, June 1996, pp. 86–89.
[6]
Dec, A., and K. Suyama, “Microwave MEMS-Based Voltage-Controlled Oscillators,” IEEE
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 48, No. 11, November 2000,
pp. 1943–1949.
[7]
U.S. Patent 6,549,394, April 15, 2003.
[8]
Dec, A., and K. Suyama, “Micromachined Electro-Mechanically Tunable Capacitors and
Their Application to IC’s,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol.
46, No. 12, December 1998, pp. 2587–2596.
214
MEM Structures and Systems in RF Applications

[9]
Yao, J. J., S. Park, and J. DeNatale, “High Tuning-Ratio MEMS-Based Tunable Capacitors
for RF Communications Applications,” Technical Digest of Solid-State Sensor and Actua-
tor Workshop, Hilton Head, NC, June 1998, pp. 124–127.
[10]
Yao, J. J., et al., “A Low Power/Low Voltage Electrostatic Actuator for RF MEMS Applica-
tions,” Technical Digest of Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, Hilton Head, NC,
June 2000, pp. 246–249.
[11]
Yao, J. J., “RF MEMS from a Device Perspective,” Journal of Micromechanics and Micro-
engineering, Vol. 10, 2000, pp. R9–R38.
[12]
Ulrich, R., and L. Schaper, “Putting Passives in Their Place,” IEEE Spectrum, Vol. 40,
No. 7, July 2003, pp. 26–30.
[13]
Van Schuylenbergh, K., et al., “Low-Noise Monolithic Oscillator with an Integrated
Three-Dimensional Inductor,” Technical Digest of International Solid-State Circuits Con-
ference, San Francisco, CA, February 2003, pp. 392–393.
[14]
Chua, C. L., et al., “Out-Of-Plane High-Q Inductors On Low-Resistance Silicon,” Journal
of Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 12, No. 6, December 2003, pp. 989–995.
[15]
Tang, W. C., T. -C. H. Nguyen, and R. T. Howe, “Laterally Driven Polysilicon Resonant
Microdevices,” Sensors and Actuators, Vol. 20, 1989, pp. 25–32.
[16]
Nguyen, C. T. -C., and R. T. Howe, “CMOS Micromechanical Resonator Oscillator,”
Technical Digest of International Electron Devices Meeting, Washington, D.C., December
1993, pp. 199–202.
[17]
Nguyen, C. T. -C., “Frequency-Selective MEMS for Miniaturized Communications
Devices,” Proceedings of 1998 IEEE Aerospace Conference, Vol. 1, Snowmass, CO,
March 1998, pp. 445–460.
[18]
Wang, K., and C. T. -C. Nguyen, “High-Order Micromechanical Electronic Filters,” Tech-
nical Digest of IEEE 1997 International Micro Electro Mechanical System Workshop,
Nagoya, Japan, January 26–30, 1997, pp. 25–30.
[19]
Nguyen, C. T. -C., and R. T. Howe, “Quality Factor Control for Micromechanical Reso-
nantors,” Technical Digest of International Electron Devices Meeting, San Francisco, CA,
December 1992, pp. 505–508.
[20]
McMillan, J. A., et al., “High Frequency Single Crystal Silicon Resonant Devices,” Pro-
ceedings of the 38th Annual Symposium and Topical Conference of the American Vacuum
Society, 1991.
[21]
Bannon, F. D., J. R. Clark, and C. T. -C. Nguyen, “High-Q HF Microelectromechanical Fil-
ters,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 35, No. 4, April 2000, pp. 512–526.
[22]
Wang, K., A. -C. Wong, and C. T. -C. Nguyen, “VHF Free-Free Beam High-Q Microme-
chanical Resonators,” Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 9, No. 3, Septem-
ber 2000, pp. 347–360.
[23]
Hsu, W. -T., and C. T. -C. Nguyen, “Stiffness-Compensated Temperature-Insensitive
Micromechanical Resonators,” Technical Digest of 15th IEEE Conference on Micro Elec-
tro Mechanical Systems, Las Vegas, NV, January 2002, pp. 731–734.
[24]
Nguyen, C. T. -C., “Frequency-Selective MEMS for Miniaturized Communications
Devices,” Proc. 1998 IEEE Aerospace Conference, Vol. 1, Snowmass, CO, March 21–28,
1998, pp. 445–460.
[25]
Larson III, J. D., et al., “A BAW Antenna for the 1900 MHz PCS Band,” Proc. 1999 Ultra-
sonics Symposium, pp. 887–890.
[26]
“Agilent ACPF-7001 High Rejection Tx Filter for US PCS Band Data Sheet,” Agilent Tech-
nologies, Inc., Palo Alto, CA, March 30, 2003.
[27]
U. S. Patent 6,060,818, May 9, 2000.
[28]
Ruby, R. C., et al., “Thin Film Bulk Wave Acoustic Resonators (FBAR) for Wireless Appli-
cations,” Proc. 2001 IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium, pp. 813–821.
[29]
U. S. Patent 6,215,375, April 10, 2001.
Summary
215

[30]
Muldavin, J. B., and G. M. Rebeiz, “High-Isolation CPW MEMS Shunt Switches—Part 1:
Modeling,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques. Vol. 48, No. 6, June
2000, pp. 1045–1052.
[31]
Muldavin, J. B., and G. M. Rebeiz, “High-Isolation CPW MEMS Shunt Switches—Part 2:
Design,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques. Vol. 48, No. 6, June
2000, pp. 1053–1056.
Selected Bibliography
De Los Santos, H. J., RF MEMS Circuit Design for Wireless Communications, Norwood,
MA: Artech House, 2002.
Nguyen, C. T. -C., L. P. B. Katehi, and G. M. Rebeiz, “Micromachined Devices for Wireless
Communications,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 86, No. 8, August 1998, pp. 1756–1786.
Rebeiz, G. M., RF MEMS: Theory, Design and Technology, New York: Wiley, 2003.
Yao, J. J., “RF MEMS from a Device Perspective,” Journal of Micromechanics and Micro-
engineering, Vol. 10, 2000, pp. R9–R38.
216
MEM Structures and Systems in RF Applications

C H A P T E R
8
Packaging and Reliability Considerations
for MEMS
“Reality has surpassed fantasy. We’re like kids in a candy store.”
—Art Thompson, tactical activity lead of the NASA Mars Exploration
Rovers mission after landing on Mars, January 2004.
Packaging is the process, industry, and methods of “packing” microelectromechani-
cal components and systems inside a protective housing. Combining engineering
and manufacturing technologies, it converts a micromachined structure or system
into a useful assembly that can safely and reliably interact with its surroundings.
The definition is broad because each application is unique in its packaging require-
ments. In the integrated circuit industry, electronic packaging must provide reliable
dense interconnections to the multitude of high-frequency electrical signals, as well
as extract excessive heat from the chips. By contrast, MEMS packaging must
account for a far more complex and diverse set of parameters. It must first protect
the micromachined parts in broad-ranging environments; it must also provide inter-
connects to electrical signals and, in most cases, access to and interaction with the
external environment. For example, the packaging of a pressure sensor must ensure
that the sensing device is in intimate contact with the pressurized medium yet pro-
tected from exposure to any harmful substances in this medium. Moreover, packag-
ing of valves must provide both electrical and fluid interconnects, and packaging of
lasers must allow for optical fibers. As a consequence of these diverse requirements,
standards for MEMS packaging lack, and designs often remain proprietary to com-
panies. Invariably, the difficulty and failure in adopting standards implies that pack-
aging will remain engineering-resource intensive and thus will continue to carry
rather high fixed costs.
Packaging is a necessary “evil.” Its relatively large dimensions tend to dilute the
small-size advantage of MEMS. It is also expensive: the cost of packaging tends to
be significantly larger than the cost of the actual micromachined components. It is
not unusual that the packaging content is responsible for 75% to 95% of the overall
cost of a microelectromechanical component or system. These factors, prevalent in
the early days of electronic integrated circuits, contributed towards large-scale inte-
gration in that industry in order to minimize the impact of packaging on overall
cost, size, and performance. High-density packaging methods, such as surface
mount technologies (SMT), are today at the core of advancements in electronic
packaging. By contrast, the evolution of MEMS packaging is slow and centers
largely on borrowing from the integrated circuit and other industries in an effort to
benefit from the existing vast body of knowledge. Whether sophisticated packaging
217

technologies will penetrate MEMS remains to be seen, but if they do they will cer-
tainly have to rely on serious market incentives, in particular high-volume applica-
tions, and on a minimum level of technology standardization.
The field of packaging is so broad in scope that one can only hope to present
here a brief introduction of the fundamentals (see Figure 8.1), especially as they
relate to the various structures and systems introduced in the previous chapters.
Such an accomplishment is made more difficult by the proprietary nature of most
package designs.
Key Design and Packaging Considerations
Designing packages for micromachined sensors and actuators involves taking into
account a number of important factors. Some are shared with the packaging of elec-
tronic integrated circuits, but many are specific to the application. These factors also
bear significance on the design of the micromachined components themselves. As a
result, the design of the package and of the micromachined structures must com-
mence and evolve together; it would be naïve to believe they can be separated. The
following are critical factors and considerations frequently encountered in MEMS
packaging.
218
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS
1. Inspect and test wafer
2. Saw and dice wafer
3. Separate dice
4. Postprocess
(optional)
5. Die attach and
interconnects
6. Package seal
7. Calibration and
final test
Wire bond
Flip chip
Figure 8.1
Illustration of a simplified process flow for MEMS packaging. Upon completion of
wafer-level fabrication, inspection and first tests take place. The wafer is then mounted on a special
sticky tape and sawed. The individual dice are separated. Some post processing, such as removal
of a sacrificial layer, may occur at this point. One die or many dice are attached to a ceramic, a
metal header, or a premolded plastic lead frame. Electrical interconnects are made by wire
bonding, flip chip, or another method. A ceramic, metal, glass, or plastic cap seals the assembly.
Alternatively, the die or dice are attached to a metal lead frame. After the electrical interconnects
are made, plastic is molded over the assembly. A final test and calibration conclude the process.
This simple process does not allow for fluidic or optical connections.

Wafer or Wafer-Stack Thickness
Standards in the electronic integrated-circuit industry dictate specific thicknesses for
silicon wafers depending on their diameters. For example, a standard 100-mm
(4-in) diameter silicon wafer polished on one side has a nominal thickness of
525 µm. The standard thickness increases to 650 µm for 150-mm (6-in) diameter
wafers. Wafers polished on both sides are normally thinner. Glass substrates are at
least 250 µm (10 mils) thick. Often, a stack of bonded silicon or glass wafers can
have a total thickness exceeding 1 mm, posing significant challenges for packaging
facilities. In some cases, it becomes outright impossible to accommodate such large
thicknesses. Proper communication of the thickness to the parties responsible for
packaging is imperative in order to minimize disruptions to the assembly line and
avoid unnecessary delays.
Wafer Dicing Concerns
A key highlight of MEMS technology is the batch fabrication aspect—hundreds and
thousands of identical structures or microsystems are fabricated simultaneously on
the same wafer. Dicing separates these structures into individual components (dice)
that can be later packaged. A diamond or carbide saw blade, approximately 50 to
250 µm wide, spins at high speed and cuts through the substrate that is normally
mounted and held in position on a colored “sticky tape” known as dicing tape.
Water flows continuously during sawing to cool the blade. Dicing is a harsh process
conducted in an unclean environment and subjects the microstructures to strong
vibrations and flying debris. Retaining the integrity and cleanliness of the micro-
structures requires protecting the sensitive components from particulates and liq-
uids as well as ensuring that they can survive all of the shaking.
Each MEMS design merits its own distinctive approach on how to minimize the
adverse effects of dicing. In surface-micromachined MEMS, such as the accelerome-
ter from Analog Devices, protection can mean, for example, forming shallow dim-
ples in the dicing tape and mounting the wafer upside down such that the sensitive
micromechanical structures face toward and are aligned with the dimples. Alterna-
tively, it is possible to perform the final sacrificial etch (see Chapter 3) after the dic-
ing is complete. While this postprocess approach ensures that there are no free
mechanical structures during the dicing, it implies that the microstructures must be
freed on each individual die, thus sacrificing batch fabrication for mechanical integ-
rity. This naturally increases the final fabrication cost. The fabrication process of
the Texas Instruments, Digital Mirror Device (DMD) follows this approach. The
DMD arrays are diced first, then the organic sacrificial layer on each individual die
is subsequently etched in oxygen plasma. Because the rumored selling price for each
DMD is in the hundreds of dollars, this method may be economically justified, but
accelerometers intended for the automotive market command prices of a few dollars
at most with little margin to allocate to the dicing process.
The reader will observe in Chapters 4 through 7 a number of designs incorpo-
rating bonded caps or covers made of silicon and occasionally glass, whose sole pur-
pose is to protect the sensitive micromechanical structures. These become, after the
completion of the cap, fully embedded inside an all-micromachined housing—a
first-level package. For example, the yaw-rate sensor from Robert Bosch GmbH
includes a silicon cover that protects the embedded microstructures during dicing,
Key Design and Packaging Considerations
219

provided the vibrations are not sufficiently large to cause damage. In addition to
mechanical protection, an electrically grounded cover also shields against electro-
magnetic interference (EMI). Naturally, the cap approach is not suitable for sensors,
such as pressure or flow sensors, or actuators that require direct and immediate con-
tact with their surrounding environments.
Thermal Management
The demands on thermal management can be very diverse and occasionally conflict-
ing depending on the nature of the application. The main role of thermal manage-
ment for electronic packaging is to cool the integrated circuit during operation [1]. A
modern microprocessor containing millions of transistors and operating at a few
gigahertz can consume tens of watts. By contrast, the role of thermal management in
MEMS includes the cooling of heat-dissipating devices and, especially, thermal
actuators, but it also involves understanding and accounting for the sources of tem-
perature fluctuations that may adversely affect the performance of a sensor or actua-
tor. As such, thermal management is performed at two levels: the die level and the
package level.
Thermal analysis is analogous to understanding electrical networks. This is not
surprising because of the dual nature of heat and electricity—voltage, current, and
electrical resistance are dual to temperature, heat flux, and thermal resistance,
respectively. A network of resistors is an adequate first-order model to understand
heat flow and nodal temperatures. The thermal resistance, θ, of an element is equal
to the ratio of the temperature difference across the element to the heat flux—this is
equivalent to Ohm’s law for heat flow. For a simple slab of area A and length l, θ
equals l/(κA) where κ is the thermal conductivity of the material (see Figure 8.2).
The nature of the application severely influences the thermal management at the
die level. For example, in typical pressure sensors that dissipate a few milliwatts over
220
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS
Silicon
Package housing
Adhesive
Glass
TL
TH
θhousing
θadhesive
θglass
θframe
θmembrane
θconvection
TE
Figure 8.2
Components of thermal resistance for a hypothetical microstructure, including a
heat-producing element at temperature TH, embedded in a suspended membrane. The device is
assembled within a housing maintained at a low temperature, TL. The temperature of the
surrounding environment is TE.

an area of several square millimeters, the role of thermal management is to ensure
long-term thermal stability of the piezoresistive sense elements by verifying that no
thermal gradients arise within the membrane. The situation becomes more compli-
cated if any heat-dissipating elements are positioned on very thin membranes,
increasing the effective thermal resistance to the substrate and the corresponding
likelihood of temperature fluctuations. Under some circumstances, maintaining an
element at a constant temperature above ambient brings performance benefits. One
example is the mass-flow sensor from Honeywell (see Chapter 4).
Thermal management at the package level must take into account all of the ther-
mal considerations of the die level. In the case of the mass-flow sensor, it is impera-
tive that the packaging does not interfere with the die-level thermal isolation
scheme. In the example of the infrared imager also from Honeywell (see Chapter 5),
the package housing needs to hold a permanent vacuum to eliminate convective
heat loss from the suspended sensing pixels.
Thermal actuators can dissipate significant power. It can take a few watts for a
thermal actuator to deliver a force of 100 mN with a displacement of 100 µm. With
efficiencies typically below 0.1%, most of the power is dissipated as heat that must
be removed through the substrate and package housing. In this case, thermal
management shares many similarities with the thermal management of electronic
integrated circuits. This is a topic that is thoroughly studied and discussed in the
literature [1].
Metals and some ceramics make excellent candidate materials for the package
housing because of their high thermal conductivity. To ensure unimpeded heat
flow from the die to the housing, it is necessary to select a die-attach material
that does not exhibit a low thermal conductivity. This may exclude silicones
and epoxies and instead favor solder-attach methods or silver-filled epoxies,
polyimides, or glasses. A subsequent section in this chapter explores various
die-attach techniques. Naturally, a comprehensive thermal analysis should take
into account all mechanisms of heat loss, including loss to fluid in direct contact
with the actuator.
Stress Isolation
The previous chapters described the usefulness of piezoresistivity and piezo-
electricity to micromachined sensors. By definition, such devices rely on converting
mechanical stress to electrical energy. It is then imperative that the piezoresistive or
piezoelectric elements are not subject to mechanical stress of undesirable origin and
extrinsic to the parameter that needs to be sensed. For example, a piezoresistive
pressure sensor gives an incorrect pressure measurement if the package housing sub-
jects the silicon die to stresses. These stresses need only be minute to have a cata-
strophic effect because the piezoresistive elements are extremely sensitive to stress.
Consequently, sensor manufacturers take extreme precautions in the design and
implementation of packaging. The manufacture of silicon pressure sensors, espe-
cially those designed to sense low pressures (<100 kPa), includes the anodic bond-
ing of a thick (>1 mm) Pyrex glass substrate with a coefficient of thermal expansion
matched to that of silicon. The glass improves the sensor’s mechanical rigidity and
ensures that any stresses between the sensor and the package housing are isolated
from the silicon piezoresistors.
Key Design and Packaging Considerations
221

Another serious effect of packaging on stress-sensitive sensors is long-term drift
resulting from slow creep in the adhesive or epoxy that attaches the silicon die to
the package housing. Modeling of such effects is extremely difficult, leaving
engineers with the task of constant experimentation to find appropriate solu-
tions. This illustrates the type of “black art” that exists in the packaging of
sensors and actuators, and it’s a reason companies do not disclose their packaging
secrets.
Protective Coatings and Media Isolation
Sensors and actuators coming into intimate contact with external media must be
protected against adverse environmental effects, especially if the devices are subject
to long-term reliability concerns. This is often the case in pressure or flow sensing,
where the medium in contact is other than dry air. For example, sensors for automo-
tive applications must be able to withstand salt water and acid rain pollutants (e.g.,
SOx, NOx). In home appliances (white goods), sensors may be exposed to alkali envi-
ronments due to added detergents in water. Even humidity can cause severe corro-
sion of sensor metallization, especially aluminum.
In many instances of mildly aggressive environments, a thin conformal coating
layer is sufficient protection. A common material for coating pressure sensors is
parylene (poly(p-xylylene) polymers) [2, 3] (see Table 8.1). It is normally deposited
using a near-room-temperature chemical vapor deposition process. The deposited
film is conformal covering the sensor element and exposed electrical wires. It is resis-
tant to automotive exhaust gases, fuel, salt spray, water, alcohol, and many organic
solvents. However, extended exposure to highly acidic or alkali solutions ultimately
results in the failure of the coating.
Recent studies suggest that silicon carbide may prove to be an adequate coating
material to protect MEMS in very harsh environments [4]. Silicon carbide deposited
in a plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) system by the pyrolysis
of silane (SiH4) and methane (CH4) at 300ºC proved to be an effective barrier for
protecting a silicon pressure sensor in a hot potassium hydroxide solution, which is
a highly corrosive chemical and a known etchant of silicon. However, much
222
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS
Table 8.1
Material Properties for Three Types of Parylene Coatings*
Property
Parylene-N
Parylene-C
Parylene-D
Density (g/cm
−3)
1.110
1.289
1.418
Tensile modulus (GPa)
2.4
3.2
2.8
Permittivity
2.65
3.15
2.84
Volume resistivity (Ω•cm) at 23ºC, 50% RH
1.2 × 10
17
8.8 × 10
16
1.2 × 10
17
Refractive index
1.661
1.639
1.669
Melting point (ºC)
410
290
380
Coefficient of expansion (10
−6 /K)
69
35
<80
Thermal conductivity (W/m•K)
0.12
0.082
—
Maximum water absorption (%)
0.01
0.06
<0.1
Gas permeability (amol/Pa•s•m)
N2
15.4
2.1
9.0
CO2
429.0
15.4
26.0
SO2
3,790.0
22.0
9.53
*They are stable at cryogenic temperatures to over 125ºC [2].

development remains to be done to fully characterize the properties of silicon car-
bide as a coating material.
For extreme environments such as in applications involving heavy industries,
aerospace, or oil drilling, special packaging is necessary to provide adequate
protection to the silicon microstructures. If the silicon parts need not be in direct
contact with the surrounding environment, then a metal or ceramic hermetic
package may be sufficient. This is adequate for accelerometers, for example, but
inappropriate for pressure or flow sensors. Such devices must be isolated from
direct exposure to their surrounding media and yet continue to measure pressure or
flow rate. Clever media-isolation schemes for pressure sensors involve immers-
ing the silicon microstructure in special silicone oil with the entire assembly
contained within a heavy-duty stainless-steel package. A flexible stainless-steel
membrane allows the transmission of pressure through the oil to the sensor’s
membrane. Media-isolated pressure sensors are discussed in further detail later in
this chapter.
Media-isolation can be more difficult to achieve in certain applications. For
instance, there are numerous demonstrations of optical microspectrometers capable
of detecting SOx and NOx, two components of smog pollution. But incorporating
these sensors into the tail pipe of an automobile has proven to be of great difficulty
because the sensor must be isolated from the harsh surrounding environment, yet
light must reach the sensor. A transparent glass window is not adequate because of
the long-term accumulation of soot and other carbon deposits.
Hermetic Packaging
A hermetic package is theoretically defined as one that prevents the diffusion of
helium. For small-volume packages (<0.40 cm
−3), the leak rate of helium must be
lower than 5 × 10
−8 atm•cm
3/s. In practice, it is always understood that a hermetic
package prevents the diffusion of moisture and water vapor through its walls. A
hermetic package must be made of metal, ceramic, or millimeter-thick glass. Silicon
also qualifies as a hermetic material. Plastic and organic-compound packages, on
the other hand, may pass the strict helium leak rate test, but they allow mois-
ture into the package interior over time; hence, they are not considered her-
metic. Electrical interconnections through the package must also conform to
hermetic sealing. In ceramic packages, metal pins are embedded and brazed
within the ceramic laminates. For metal packages, glass firing yields a hermetic
glass-metal seal.
A hermetic package significantly increases the long-term reliability of electrical
and electronic components. By shielding against moisture and other contaminants,
many common failure mechanisms including corrosion are simply eliminated. For
example, even deionized water can leach out phosphorous from low-temperature
oxide (LTO) passivation layers to form phosphoric acid that, in turn, etches and
corrodes aluminum wiring and bond pads. The interior of a hermetic package is
typically evacuated or filled with an inert gas such as nitrogen, argon, or helium.
The DMD from Texas Instruments and the infrared imager from Honeywell, both
discussed in a previous chapter, utilize vacuum hermetic packages with transparent
optical windows. The package for the DMD even includes a getter to absorb any
residual moisture.
Key Design and Packaging Considerations
223

Calibration and Compensation
The performance characteristics of precision sensors, especially pressure, flow,
acceleration, and yaw-rate sensors, often must be calibrated in order to meet the
required specifications. Errors frequently arise due to small deviations in the manu-
facturing process. For example, the sensitivity of a pressure sensor varies with the
square of the membrane thickness. A typical error of ±0.25 µm on a 10-µm thick
membrane produces a ±5% error in sensitivity that must be often trimmed to less
than ±1%. Additionally, any temperature dependence of the output signal must be
compensated.
One compensation and calibration scheme utilizes a network of laser-trimmed
resistors with near-zero TCR to offset errors in the sensor [5]. The approach
employs all-passive components and is an attractive low-cost solution. The resistors
can be either thin film (<1 µm thick) or thick film (~ 25 µm thick) [6] and are
trimmed by laser ablation. Thin-film resistors, frequently used in analog integrated
circuits such as precision operational amplifiers, are sputtered or evaporated directly
on the silicon die and are usually made of nickel-chromium or tantalum-nitride.
These materials have a sheet resistance of about 100 to 200Ωper square, and a very
low TCR of ±0.005% per degree Celsius. Nickel-chromium can corrode if not passi-
vated with quartz or silicon monoxide (SiO), but tantalum nitride self passivates by
baking in air for a few minutes. Thick-film resistors, by contrast, are typically fired
on thick ceramic substrates and consist of chains of metal-oxide particles embedded
in a glass matrix. Ruthenium dioxide (RuO2) and bismuth ruthenate (BiRu2O7) are
examples of active metal oxides. Blending the metal oxides with the glass in different
proportions produces sheet resistances with a range of values from 10 to 106 Ωper
square. Their TCR is typically in the range of ±0.01% per degree Celsius. Trimming
using a neodymium-doped yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) laser at a wave-
length of 1.06 µm produces precise geometrical cuts in the thin- or thick-film resis-
tor, hence adjusting its resistance value. The laser is part of a closed-loop system that
continuously monitors the value of the resistance and compares it to a desired target
value.
Laser ablation is also useful to calibrate critical mechanical dimensions by direct
removal of material. For instance, a laser selectively ablates minute amounts of sili-
con to calibrate the two resonant modes of the Daimler Benz tuning fork yaw-rate
sensor (see Chapter 4). Laser ablation can also be a useful process to precisely cali-
brate the flow of a liquid through a micromachined channel. For some drug delivery
applications, such as insulin injection, the flow must be calibrated to within ±0.5%.
Given the inverse cubic dependence of flow resistance on channel depth, this trans-
lates to an etch depth precision of better than ±0.17%, equivalent to 166 nm in a
100-µm deep channel. This is impossible to achieve using most, if not all, silicon-
etching methods. A laser ablation step can control the size of a critical orifice under
closed-loop measurement of the flow to yield the required precision.
As the integration of circuits and sensors becomes more prevalent, the trend has
been to perform, when possible, calibration and compensation electronically. Many
modern commercial sensors, including pressure, flow, acceleration, and yaw-rate
sensors, now incorporate application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) to calibrate
the sensor’s output and compensate for any errors. Correction coefficients are stored
in on-chip permanent memory such as EEPROM.
224
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS

The need to calibrate and compensate extends beyond conventional sensors.
For example, the infrared imaging array from Honeywell must calibrate each
individual pixel in the array and compensate for any manufacturing variations
across the die. The circuits perform this function using a shutter: The blank scene,
that is the collected image while the shutter is closed, incorporates the variation in
sensitivity across the array; while the shutter is open, the electronic circuits subtract
the blank-scene image from the active image to yield a calibrated and compensated
picture.
Die-Attach Processes
Subsequent to dicing of the substrate, each individual die is mounted inside a pack-
age and attached (bonded) onto a platform made of metal or ceramic, though plastic
is also possible under limited circumstances. Careful consideration must be given to
die attaching because it strongly influences thermal management and stress isola-
tion. Naturally, the bond must not crack over time nor suffer from creep—its reli-
ability must be established over very long periods of time. The following section
describes die-attach processes common in the packaging of silicon micromachined
sensors and actuators. These processes were largely borrowed from the electronics
industry.
Generally, die-attach processes employ either metal alloys or organic or inor-
ganic adhesives as intermediate bonding layers [7, 8]. Metal alloys comprise of all
forms of solders, including eutectic and noneutectic (see Table 8.2). Organic
adhesives consist of epoxies, silicones, and polyimides. Solders, silicones, and epox-
ies are vastly common in MEMS packaging. Inorganic adhesives are glass matrices
Die-Attach Processes
225
Table 8.2
Properties of Some Eutectic and Noneutectic Solders
Alloy
Liquidus
(ºC)
Solidus
(ºC)
Ultimate
Tensile
Strength (MPa)
Uniform
Elongation
(%)
Creep
Resistance
Noneutectic
60%In 40%Pb
185
174
29.58
10.7
Moderate
60%In 40%Sn
122
113
7.59
5.5
Low—soft
alloy
80%In 15%Pb 5%Ag
154
149
17.57
—
Low
80%Sn 20%Pb
199
183
43.24
0.82
Moderate
25%Sn 75%Pb
266
183
23.10
8.4
Poor
5%Sn 95%Pb
312
308
23.24
26
Moderate to
high
95%Sn 5%Sb
240
235
56.20
1.06
High
Eutectic
97%In 3%Ag
143
143
5.50
—
Low—soft
alloy
96.5%Sn 3.5%Ag
221
221
57.65
0.69
High
42%Sn 58%Bi
138
138
66.96
1.3
Moderate
—brittle alloy
63%Sn 37%Pb
183
183
35.38
1.38
Moderate
1%Sn 97.5%Pb 1.5%Ag 309
309
38.48
1.15
Moderate
88%Au 12%Ge
356
356
—
—
Moderate
96.4%Au 3.6%Si
370
370
—
—
Moderate
(Source: [7].)

embedded with silver and resin and are mostly used in the brazing of pressed ceramic
packages (e.g., CERDIP type and CERQUAD type) in the integrated circuits
industry. Their utility for die-attach may be limited because of the high-temperature
(400ºC) glass seal and cure operation.
The choice of a solder alloy depends on it having a suitable melting temperature
as well as appropriate mechanical properties. A solder firmly attaches the die to the
package and normally provides little or no stress isolation when compared to
organic adhesives. The large mismatch in the coefficients of thermal expansion with
silicon or glass results in undesirable stresses that can cause cracks in the bond.
However, the bond is very robust and can sustain large normal pull forces on the
order of 5,000 N/cm2.
Most common solders are binary or ternary alloys of lead (Pb), tin (Sn), indium
(In), antimony (Sb), bismuth (Bi), or silver (Ag) (see Figure 8.3). Solders can be either
hard or soft. Hard solders (or brazes) melt at temperatures near or above 500ºC and
are used for lead and pin attachment in ceramic packages. By contrast, soft solders
melt at lower temperatures, and, depending on their composition, they are classified
as eutectic or noneutectic. Eutectic alloys go directly from liquid to solid phase with-
out an intermediate paste-like state mixing liquid and solid—effectively, eutectic
alloys have identical solidus and liquidus temperatures. They have the lowest melt-
ing points of alloys sharing the same constituents and tend to be more rigid with
excellent shear strength.
Silicon and glass cannot be directly soldered to and thus must be coated with a
thin metal film to wet the surface. Platinum, palladium, and gold are good choices,
though gold is not as desirable with tin-based solders because of leaching. Leaching
is the phenomenon by which metal is absorbed into the solder to an excessive
degree causing intermetallic compounds detrimental to long-term reliability—gold
or silver will dissolve into a tin-lead solder within a few seconds. Typically, a thin
(<50 nm) layer of titanium is first deposited on the silicon to improve adhesion, fol-
lowed by the deposition of a palladium, platinum, or nickel layer, a few hundred
nanometers thick—this layer also serves as a diffusion barrier. A subsequent flash
226
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS
Wt. % Lead (Pb)
Wt. % Tin (Sn)
327
183
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100
Solid
Solid
Liquid
Liquidus
Temperature (°C)
Solidus
Pasty
region
Eutectic
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Figure 8.3
Phase diagram of lead-tin solder alloys. The eutectic point corresponds to a lead com-
position of 37% by weight [7].

deposition of very thin gold improves surface wetting. Immersing the part in flux
(an organic acid) removes metal oxides and furnishes clean surfaces. In a manufac-
turing environment, the solder paste is either dispensed through a nozzle or screen
printed on the package substrate, and the die is positioned over the solder. Heating
in an oven or by direct infrared radiation melts the solder, dissolving in the process
a small portion of the exposed thin metal surfaces. When the solder cools, it forms
a joint bonding the die to the package. Melting in nitrogen or in forming gas pre-
vents oxidation of the solder.
Organic adhesives are attractive alternatives to solder because they are inexpen-
sive, easy to automate, and they cure at lower temperatures. The most widely used
are epoxies and silicones, including room-temperature vulcanizing (RTV) rubbers.
Epoxies are thermosetting (i.e., cross linking when heated) plastics with cure tem-
peratures varying between room temperature and 175ºC. Filled with silver or gold,
they become thermally and electrically conductive, but not as conductive as solder.
Electrically nonconductive epoxies may incorporate particles of aluminum oxides,
beryllium oxides, or magnesium oxides for improved thermal conductivity. RTV
silicones come in a variety of specifications for a wide range of applications from
construction to electronics. For example, the Dow Corning® 732 is a multipurpose
silicone that adheres well to glass, silicon, and metal, with a temperature rating of
–65ºC to 232ºC [9]. Most RTV silicones are one part condensation-curing com-
pounds, curing at room temperature in air while outgassing a volatile reaction prod-
uct, such as acetic acid. Another class of RTVs, however, is addition-cure RTVs,
which do not outgas, making them suitable for many optical applications. Unlike
epoxies, they are soft and are excellent choices for stress relief between the package
and the die. The operating temperature for most organic adhesives is limited to less
than 200ºC; otherwise, they suffer from structural breakdown and outgassing.
Epoxies and RTV silicones are suitable for automated manufacturing. As vis-
cous pastes, they are dispensed by means of nozzles at high rates or screen printed.
The placement of the die over the adhesive may also be automated by using pick-
and-place robotic stations employing pattern recognition algorithms for accurate
positioning of the die.
Wiring and Interconnects
With the advent of microfluidic components and systems, the concept of inter-
connects is now more global, simultaneously incorporating electrical and fluid
connectivity. Electrical connectivity addresses the task of providing electrical wiring
between the die and electrical components external to it. The objective of fluid
connectivity is to ensure the reliable transport of liquids and gases between the die
and external fluid control units.
Electrical Interconnects
Wire Bonding
Wire bonding is unquestionably the most popular technique to electrically connect
the die to the package. The free ends of a gold or aluminum wire form low-resistance
Wiring and Interconnects
227

(ohmic) contacts to aluminum bond pads on the die and to the package leads (termi-
nals). Bonding gold wires tends to be easier than bonding aluminum wires.
Thermosonic gold bonding is a well-established technique in the integrated cir-
cuit industry, simultaneously combining the application of heat, pressure, and ultra-
sonic energy to the bond area. Ultrasound causes the wire to vibrate, producing
localized frictional heating to aid in the bonding process. Typically, the gold wire
forms a ball bond to the aluminum bond pad on the die and a stitch bond to the
package lead. The “ball bond” designation follows after the spherical shape of the
wire end as it bonds to the aluminum. The stitch bond, in contrast, is a wedge-like
connection as the wire is pressed into contact with the package lead (typically gold
or silver plated). The temperature of the substrate is usually near 150ºC, below the
threshold of the production of gold-aluminum intermetallic compounds that cause
bonds to be brittle. One of these compounds (Au5Al12) is known as purple plague
and is responsible for the formation of voids—the Kirkendall voids—by the diffu-
sion of aluminum into gold. Thermosonic gold bonding can be automated using
equipment commercially available from companies such as Kulicke and Soffa Indus-
tries, Inc., of Willow Grove, Pennsylvania.
Bonding aluminum wires to aluminum bond pads is also achieved with ultra-
sonic energy but without heating the substrate. In this case, a stitch bond works bet-
ter than a ball bond, but the process tends to be slow. This makes bonding aluminum
wires economically not as attractive as bonding gold wires. However, gold wires are
difficult to obtain with diameters above 50 µm (2 mils), which makes aluminum
wires, available in diameters up to 560 µm (22 mils), the only solution for high-
current applications (see Table 8.3).
The thermosonic ball bond process begins with an electric discharge or spark to
melt the gold and produce a ball at the exposed wire end (see Figure 8.4). The
tip—or capillary—of the wire-bonding tool descends onto the aluminum bond pad,
pressing the gold ball into bonding with the bond pad. Ultrasonic energy is simulta-
neously applied. The capillary then rises and the wire is fed out of it to form a loop as
the tip is positioned over the package lead—the next bonding target. The capillary is
lowered again, deforming the wire against the package lead into the shape of a
wedge—the stitch bond. As the capillary rises, special clamps close onto the wire,
causing it to break immediately above the stitch bond. The size of the ball dictates a
minimum in-line spacing of approximately 100 µm between adjacent bond pads on
the die. This spacing decreases to 75 µm for stitch bonding.
228
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS
Table 8.3
Recommended Maximum Current in Gold and Aluminum Bond Wires
Maximum current (A)
Material
Diameter (µm)
Length <1 mm
Length < 1 mm
Gold
025
00.95
00.65
050
02.7
01.8
Aluminum
025
00.7
00.5
050
02
01.4
125
07.8
05.4
200
15.7
10.9
300
28.9
20
380
40.4
27.9
560
71.9
49.6

The use of wire bonding occasionally runs into serious limitations in MEMS
packaging. For instance, the applied ultrasonic energy, normally at a frequency
between 50 and 100 kHz, may stimulate the oscillation of suspended mechanical
microstructures. Unfortunately, many micromachined structures coincidentally
have resonant frequencies in the same range, increasing the risk of structural failure
during wire bonding.
Flip Chip
Flip-chip bonding [11], as its name implies, involves bonding the die, top face down,
on a package substrate (see Figure 8.5). Electrical contacts are made by means of
plated solder bumps between bond pads on the die and metal pads on the package
substrate. The attachment is intimate with a relatively small spacing (50 to 200 µm)
between the die and the package substrate. Unlike wire bonding which requires the
bond pads to be positioned on the periphery of the die to avoid crossing wires, flip
chip allows the placement of bond pads over the entire die (area arrays), resulting in
a significant increase in density of input/output (I/O) connections—up to 700 simul-
taneous I/Os. Additionally, the effective inductance of each interconnect is minis-
cule because of the short height of the solder bump. The inductance of a single
solder bump is less than 0.05 nH, compared to 1 nH for a 125-µm-long and
25-µm-diameter wire. It becomes clear why the integrated circuit industry has
adopted flip chip for high-density, fast electronic circuits.
What makes flip-chip bonding attractive to the MEMS industry is its ability to
closely package a number of distinct dice on one single package substrate with mul-
tiple levels of embedded electrical traces. For instance, one can use flip-chip bonding
Wiring and Interconnects
229
Wire clamp
Bondpad
Gold wire
1. Arcing forms
gold ball
Arc generator
2. Ball bond while applying
heat and/or ultrasonic
4. Stitch bond on lead
5. Break wire
Die
Die
Package lead
3. Position tip over package lead
Gold wire
Die
Package lead
Bonding tip
Force
Force
Wire loop
Figure 8.4
Illustration of the sequential steps in thermosonic ball and stitch bonding. The tem-
perature of the die is typically near 150ºC. Only the tip of the wire-bonding tool is shown [10].

to electrically connect and package three accelerometer dice, a yaw-rate sensing die,
and an electronic ASIC onto one ceramic substrate to build a fully self-contained
navigation system. This type of hybrid packaging produces complex systems,
though each individual component in itself may not be as complex. Clearly, a similar
system can be built with wire bonding, but its area usage will not be as efficient and
its reliability may be questionable, given the large number of gold wires within the
package (note that each suspended gold wire is in essence an accelerometer, subject
to deflections and potential shorting).
Additional fabrication steps are required to form the solder bumps over the die.
A typical process involves the sputtering of a titanium layer over the bond pad metal
(e.g., aluminum) to promote adhesion, followed by the sputtering of copper. Pat-
terning and etching of the titanium and copper defines a pedestal for the solder
bump. A thicker layer of copper is then electroplated. Finally, the solder bump, typi-
cally a tin-lead alloy, is electroplated over the copper. Meanwhile, in a separate
preparation process, solder paste is screen printed on the package substrate in pat-
terns corresponding to the landing sites of the solder bumps. Automated pick-and-
place machines position the die, top face down, and align the bond pads to the
solder-paste pattern on the package substrate. Subsequent heating in an oven or
under infrared radiation melts the solder into a columnar, smooth, and shiny bump.
Surface tension of the molten solder is sufficient to correct for any slight misalign-
ment during the die-positioning process. If desired, a final underfill step fills the void
space between the die and the package substrate with epoxy. An optional silicone or
parylene conformal coat protects the entire assembly.
Flip chip may not be compatible with the packaging of MEMS with microstruc-
tures exposed to the open environment. For instance, there is a risk of damaging the
thin diaphragm of a pressure sensor during a flip-chip process. By contrast, a capped
device such as the Bosch yaw-rate sensor (see Chapter 4) can take full advantage of
flip-chip technology.
230
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS
IC or MEMS die
Silicon substrate
Silicon oxide
Bondpad metal
SiN
Titanium
Sputtered Cu
Plated Cu
Plated solder
Solder
bump
Metal interconnect layers
Dielectric layers
Package substrate
Bondpad
Solder paste
Conductor
Figure 8.5
Flip-chip bonding with solder bumps.

Microfluidic Interconnects
All advances in electrical interconnect technology derive from the packaging
requirements of the integrated circuit industry, but that is not the case for fluidic
interconnects. These are required to package microfluidic devices such as micro-
pumps and microvalves. No standards exist simply because the field remains in its
infancy and few microfluidic devices are commercially available. Sadly, most micro-
fluidic interconnect schemes remain at the level of manually inserting a capillary
into a silicon cavity or via-hole and sealing the assembly with silicone or epoxy (see,
for example, the PCR thermal cycler in Chapter 6). These are suitable methods for
laboratory experimentation but will not meet the requirements of automated manu-
facturing (see Figure 8.6).
Future fluid packaging schemes amenable to high-volume manufacturing
would have to rely on simplified fluid interconnects. For example, fluid ports in a
silicon die could be aligned directly to ports in a ceramic or metal manifold. The sili-
con die can be attached by any of the die-attach methods described earlier. Under
such a scheme, it becomes possible to envisage systems with fluid connectivity on
one side of the die and electrical connectivity on the opposite side. This would
enhance long-term reliability by separating fluid flow from electrical wiring.
Researchers at Abbott Laboratories of Abbott Park, Illinois, demonstrated a
hybrid packaging approach incorporating a complex manifold in acrylic (e.g., Plexi-
glas™) [13]. These are large boards, many centimeters in size, with multiple levels of
channels and access vias, all made in plastic. The channels are formed by laminating
and bonding layers of thermoplastics into which trenches had been preformed. The
plastic board becomes equivalent to a fluid printed-circuit board onto which surface
fluid components are attached and wired. These components need not necessarily be
micromachined. For example, the board could hold a silicon pressure or flow sensor
in proximity of a miniature solenoid valve. Much of the technology for fluid inter-
connects remains under development. New markets and applications will undoubt-
edly drive engineers to contrive innovative but economically justifiable solutions.
Wiring and Interconnects
231
200
m
µ
(b)
(a)
Figure 8.6
(a) A photograph of a fluid interconnect etched in silicon using DRIE. Fluid flows
through a central orifice leading into a channel embedded within the silicon substrate. The
precise outer trench provides mechanical support to tightly hold a capillary in position. (b) A
photograph of a capillary inserted into an intact fluid port. (Courtesy of: GE NovaSensor of
Fremont, California [12].)

Optical Interconnects
Optical interconnecting is generally understood as the active field of research that
aims to develop very fast chip-to-chip transmission rates for high-speed computa-
tion. For the packaging of MEMS components in photonic applications, optical
interconnects are simpler in nature, generally entailing coupling light in and out of
an optical fiber without a noticeable loss (typically <0.1 dB). The laser and optoe-
lectronic industry makes extensive use of fiber interconnects for the packaging and
manufacture of their products. Companies packaging optical MEMS components
have largely borrowed these established packaging designs and methods for their
applications. One such design is the ubiquitous gold-plated butterfly package [14],
which includes electrical pins in a winged construction with an allowance for a fiber
connection [see Figure 8.7(a)].
Establishing an optical connection through the walls of the butterfly package
involves positioning an optical fiber inside a feed-through tube and aligning it relative
to optical elements inside the package. This alignment step is critical and is often
completed actively in situ, with light propagating through the fiber during the
assembly to guarantee maximum optical coupling between the fiber and the compo-
nents inside the package [15]. A hermetic seal of the feed through is also necessary
because the entire butterfly package is hermetically sealed with a top cover at the
end of the assembly process. Hermetic sealing of optical components is a pil-
lar of high-reliability packaging required under the Telcordia® standards of the
232
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS
Fiber feed through
Electrical pin
Metal package
(a)
(b)
Fiber in plastic jacket
Feed through
Fiber core
Solder
Metallized fiber core
Plastic jacket
Solder dispensing hole
Figure 8.7
(a) A schematic of the gold-plated butterfly package, commonly used in the packag-
ing of fiber-based optical components; and (b) an illustration showing a fiber soldered inside the
package feed through. The plastic jacket surrounding the fiber core is stripped and metallized prior
to soldering.

telecommunications industry. Solder is a common material to hermetically seal the
feed-through tube. The fiber plastic jacket is first stripped over a short distance,
exposing the glass core of the fiber, which is then metallized with layers of nickel and
gold. The fiber is subsequently inserted into the feed through, and solder is dispensed
through a tiny opening in the tube [see Figure 8.7(b)]. Occasionally, an intermediate
metal ferrule is used between the fiber and the feed through [16]. Indium-based
solders, such as In 97%/Ag 3% or In 80%/Pb 15%/Ag 5%, are common, as they
offer good wetting and low melting temperatures (≤150ºC) to minimize the risk of
damage to the fiber. Because they are soft alloys, they exhibit little stresses at the fiber
surface.
Types of Packaging Solutions
In its basic form, a package is a protective housing with an enclosure to hold one or
multiple dice forming a complete microelectromechanical device or system. The
package provides where necessary electrical, optical, and fluid connectivity between
the dice and the external world.
In some cases, it is advantageous to provide a first level of packaging (chip- or
die-level encapsulation) to the micromechanical structures and components [17].
This is particularly of interest in applications where the surfaces of the microstruc-
tures need not be in direct exposure to liquids or gases. A top silicon cap attached, for
example, by silicon fusion bonding can maintain a hermetic seal and hold a vacuum
while protecting the sensitive microstructures from damage during saw and assem-
bly. A top cap also allows the use of plastic molding, ubiquitous in low-cost packag-
ing solutions. In this method, molten plastic flows under high pressure, filling the
inner cavity of a mold and encapsulating a metal lead frame. The die or capped
microstructure rests upon this frame. For example, a crystalline silicon cap protects
the sensing elements of the accelerometer from VTI Technologies (see Chapter 4)
during molding of the plastic package over the die. Fixed to ground potential, the cap
also becomes an effective shield against electromagnetic interference [18].
There are three general categories of widely adopted packaging approaches in
MEMS. They are ceramic, metal, and plastic, each with their own merits and limita-
tions (see Table 8.4). For instance, plastic is a low-cost, oftentimes a small-size (sur-
face mount) solution, but it is inadequate for harsh environments. The asking price
for a plastic packaged pressure or acceleration sensor is frequently below $5. By
contrast, a similar sensor packaged in a hermetic metal housing may cost well over
$30. It is not surprising that packaging is what frequently determines economic
competitiveness.
Ceramic Packaging
Ceramics are hard and brittle materials made by shaping a nonmetallic mineral,
then firing at a high temperature for densification. The vast majority of ceramics are
electrical insulators and often are good thermal conductors (see Table 8.5). Ease of
shaping along with reliability and attractive material properties (e.g., electrical
insulator, hermetic sealing) have made ceramics a mainstay in electronic packaging.
They are widely used in multichip modules (MCM) [19] and advanced electronic
Types of Packaging Solutions
233

234
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS
Table 8.4
The Diversity of MEMS Packaging Requirements
Electrical
Contacts
Fluid
Ports
Media
Contact
Transparent
Window
Hermetic
Sealing
Stress
Isolation
Heat
Sinking
Thermal
Isolation
Calibration and
Compensation
Types of
Packaging
†
Sensors
Pressure
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Possibly
Yes
No
No
Yes
P, M, C
Flow
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
P, M, C
Acceleration
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Possibly
No
No
Yes
P, M, C
Yaw rate
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Possibly
No
No
Yes
P, M, C
Microphone
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
P, M, C
Hydrophone
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Possibly
No
No
No
M, C
Actuators
Optical switch
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
M, C
Display
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Possibly
Possibly
No
M, C
Valve
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Possibly
Possibly
Possibly
M, C
Pump
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Possibly
No
Possibly
M, C
PCR thermal cycler
Yes
Yes
Yes
Possibly
No
No
Possibly
Yes
No
M, C
Electrophoresis
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
M, C
Passive
Nozzles
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
P, M, C
Fluid mixer
No
Yes
Yes
Possibly
No
No
No
No
No
P, M, C
Fluid amplifier
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Possibly
M, C
* Fluid includes liquid or gas.
† P: plastic, M: metal, C: ceramic

packages such as ball grid arrays (BGA) [20]. These same characteristics have
extended the utility of ceramics to the packaging of MEMS—many commercially
available micromachined sensors use some form of ceramic packaging. Ceramics
are completely customizable and allow the formation of through ports and mani-
folds for the packaging of fluid-based MEMS. Ceramics usually suffer from shrink-
age (~13% in the horizontal direction and ~15% in the vertical direction) during
firing, which manufacturers take into account in their designs. Compared to plastic
packaging, they are significantly more expensive.
Alumina (Al2O3) is by far the most common of all ceramics, having been used
over the centuries in porcelain and fine dinnerware. Aluminum nitride (AlN) and
beryllia (BeO) have superior material properties (e.g., better thermal conductivity),
but the latter is very toxic. Aluminum nitride substrates tend to be costly in particu-
lar because of required complex processing due to the difficulty of sintering the
material.
A ceramic package is made of laminates, each formed and patterned separately,
then brought together and cofired (sintered) at an elevated temperature—typically
between 1,500ºC and 1,600ºC (see Figure 8.8). Recent advances have led to low-
temperature cofired ceramics (LTCC), such as the Dupont 951 Green Tape™, with
sintering temperatures near 800ºC. Powders are first mixed together with special
additives and extruded under a knife edge to form a thin laminate sheet. This
“green” unfired soft tape, approximately 0.1 to 0.3 mm thick, is peeled from the
supporting table, then cut and punched using precise machining tools. Patterns of
electrical interconnects are screen printed on each sheet using a slurry of tungsten
powder or tungsten-molybdenum. This process also fills via holes with metal. Vias
left unfilled with tungsten can be later used as fluid- or pressure-access ports
through the ceramic. Several “green” sheets are aligned and press laminated
together, then cofired at an elevated temperature in a reducing atmosphere to sinter
the laminate stack into a monolithic body. A typical integrated circuit package con-
sists of three laminates, but as many as sixteen may be simultaneously cofired, natu-
rally at a higher material cost. An appropriate metal finish is then applied to the
tungsten, followed by plating of nickel. If necessary, pins or leads are brazed to the
package. The leads are typically made of ASTM F-15 alloy (also known as Kovar,
it is an alloy that consists of 52% iron, 29% nickel, and 18% cobalt) that has a ther-
mal expansion coefficient matched to that of alumina. The brazing material is often
a silver-copper eutectic alloy. A final nickel and electroless gold-plating step ensures
that wires can be bonded to the leads. A BGA ceramic package has no pins brazed;
rather, it has arrays of solder balls connected to electrical feed throughs. One
Types of Packaging Solutions
235
Table 8.5
Material Properties of Some Notable Ceramics As Compared to Silicon
Ceramic
Relative
Permittivity
Thermal Conductivity
(W/m•K)
Thermal Expansion
(10
−6/ºC)
Density
(g/cm
−3)
Alumina (Al2O3)
09.7
040
7.2
4
Aluminum Nitride (AlN)
10
150
2.7
3.2
Beryllia (BeO)
06.8
300
7
2.9
Borosilicate glass
03.7
002
3.2
2.1
Silicon
11.8
157
2.6
2.4

attractive feature of ceramic is the ability to screen print on its surface a network of
thick-film resistors that can be later trimmed with a laser for sensor calibration.
Whether custom or standard, a ceramic package often consists of a base or a
header onto which one die or many dice are attached by adhesives or solder. Wire
bonding is suitable for electrical interconnects. Flip-chip bonding to a pattern of
metal contacts on the ceramic works equally well. The final step after mounting the
die on the base and providing suitable electrical interconnects involves capping and
sealing the assembly with a lid whose shape and properties are determined by the
final application. For instance, the lid must be transparent for optical MEMS or must
hermetically seal a vacuum, as is the case for the infrared bolometer from Honeywell
or the DMD from Texas Instruments (see Chapter 5). By contrast, a plastic cover pro-
vides a cost-effective solution for low-cost devices. For example, disposable blood
pressure sensors used for arterial-line measurement in intensive care units are pro-
tected by a plastic cover that includes an access opening for pressure [21]. A special
gel dispensed inside this opening provides limited protection (particularly against
biological solutions and electrical charge) to the device while permitting the transmis-
sion of pressure to the sensitive silicon membrane (see Figure 8.9).
Ceramic packaging of optical MEMS can be complex and costly. This is certainly
true for DMD packages that have undergone a continuous evolution from their early
application in airline ticket boarding (ATB) printers to today’s high-resolution
display arrays [22]. The DMD type-A package for SVGA displays consists of a 114-
pin alumina (Al2O3) ceramic header (base) with metallization for electrical intercon-
nects and a Cu-Ag brazed Kovar seal ring (see Figure 8.10). Wire bonds establish
electrical connectivity between the die and metal traces on the ceramic header. A
transparent window consisting of a polished Corning 7056 glass fused to a stamped
gold-nickel-plated Kovar frame covers the assembly. Resistance seam welding of the
seal ring on the ceramic base to the Kovar glass frame provides a permanent hermetic
seal. Two zeolite getter strips attached to the inside of the glass window ensure long-
term desiccation. The particular choice of metal and glass window materials mini-
mizes the mismatch in coefficients of thermal expansion (4 × 10−6 and 5 × 10−6 per
236
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS
9. Gold or nickel plate
8. Braze pins
7. Nickel plate
6. Sinter
5. Cut, stack, and laminate
4. Metallize
3. Fill
2. Punch holes
1. Cast ceramic
tape
Figure 8.8
Process flow for the fabrication of a cofired laminated ceramic package with electrical pins and
access ports. (Courtesy of: the Coors Electronic Package Company of Golden, Colorado.)

degree Celsius for Kovar and Corning 7056, respectively) and reduces stresses during
the high temperature (~1,000ºC) metal-to-glass fusing process. Antireflective coat-
ings applied to both sides of the glass window reduce reflections to less than 0.5%. A
heat sink attached to the backside of the ceramic package by means of adhesives
keeps the temperature of the DMD within tolerable limits.
Metal Packaging
In the early days of the integrated circuit industry, the number of transistors on a
single chip and the corresponding pin count (number of I/O connections) were few.
Metal packages were practical because they were robust and easy to assemble. The
standard family of transistor outline (TO)-type packages grew to cover a wide range
of shapes, but all accommodated fewer than 10 electrical pins. But the semiconduc-
tor industry abandoned the TO packages in favor of plastic and ceramic packaging
as the density of transistors grew exponentially and the required pin count increased
Types of Packaging Solutions
237
Ceramic
Thick-film
resistor
Gel
Plastic cap
Figure 8.9
Photograph of a disposable blood pressure sensor for arterial-line measurement in
intensive care units. The die (not visible) sits on a ceramic substrate and is covered with a plastic
cap that includes an access opening for pressure. A special black gel dispensed inside the opening
protects the silicon device while permitting the transmission of pressure. (Courtesy of: GE
NovaSensor, Fremont, California [21].)
Heat sink
Ceramic header
Seam weld
Hermetic optical window (Corning 7056)
DMD
Gold wire bonds
Kovar frame
Kovar seal ring
Zeolite getters
Glass-to-metal fused seal
Figure 8.10
Illustration of the DMD type-A ceramic package. The assembly includes a hermeti-
cally sealed optical window for high-resolution projection display [22].

correspondingly. Today, TO-type packages remain in use for few applications, in
particular high-power discrete devices and high-voltage linear circuits (e.g., opera-
tional amplifiers).
Metal packages are attractive to MEMS for the same reasons the integrated cir-
cuit industry adopted the technology over 30 years ago. They satisfy the pin count
requirements of most MEMS applications; they can be prototyped in small volumes
with rather short turnaround periods; and they are hermetic when sealed. But a
major drawback is the relatively large expense of metal headers and caps; they cost a
few dollars per assembled unit, at least ten times higher than an equivalent plastic
package. Early prototypes of the ADXL family of accelerometers from Analog
Devices (see Chapter 4) were available in TO-type hermetic metal packages. How-
ever, pressure to reduce manufacturing costs has led the company to adopt a stan-
dard plastic dual-in-line (DIP) solution and establish first-level packaging (at the die
level) using proprietary chip-encapsulation methods.
A metal hermetic package, including the familiar TO-8-type and the tub-like but-
terfly package, is frequently made of ASTM F-15 alloy (Kovar), though steel is also
possible. Because Kovar has a low coefficient of thermal expansion that is matched to
fused silica (a common optical material), it is a metal of choice for butterfly packages
used in optical and photonic applications. A sheet of metal is first formed into a
header or a tub-like housing. Holes are then punched, either through the bottom for
plug-in packages or the sides for flat or tub-like packages. An oxide is then grown
over the package housing. Metal leads are placed through the holes and beads of
borosilicate glass, such as Corning 7052 glass, are placed over the leads. Fusing of the
glass to metal at a temperature above the melting temperature of glass (~ 500ºC) pro-
duces a hermetic metal-to-glass seal. Etching the metal oxides reveals a fresh alloy
surface that is then plated with either nickel or gold—both of which allow wire bond-
ing and soldering. Standard headers, butterfly packages, and lids are commercially
available and can be readily modified in conventional machine shops. For instance,
metal tubes can be brazed to drilled ports in the header and a companion coverlid
to provide access to fluids in pressure and flow sensors and microvalves (see
Figure 8.11). Similarly, a feed-through tube may be brazed to the sidewalls of a
butterfly package for eventual optical interconnecting using a fiber [see Figure
8.7(a)]. In the final packaging assembly, the micromachined structures as well as
other components (e.g., optical elements) are mounted directly on the header or
within the tub of the package. Wire bonds to the plated package leads establish elec-
trical connectivity. If necessary, optical or fluidic connections are also made, as dis-
cussed earlier. Finally, the soldering or seam welding of the header or butterfly
package to a coverlid (or cap), most often made of the same alloy, hermetically seals
the assembly.
One example of metal packaging applies to the tunable laser from Santur Corp.
discussed in Chapter 5. The packaging includes positioning the array of distributed
feedback lasers (DFBs), the tilting micromirror, and a host of optical elements
within the butterfly package, as well as making the appropriate electrical and fiber
interconnections [see Figure 8.12(a)]. The die that holds the micromirror is first
attached and wire bonded to a ceramic chip with electrical pads. This micromirror
subassembly is mounted on its side over an underlying ceramic plate that also holds
the DFB array, two beam splitters, and a InGaAs quadrant detector. The ceramic
238
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS

plate sits on a first thermoelectric cooler (TEC) that controls the temperature of the
DFBs and performs the fine tuning of the output wavelength. The two beam splitters
sample a fraction of the laser light (typically less than 1%) onto the quadrant detec-
tor to feed the spatial position of the beam back to the electronics that control the
angles of the micromirror.
An etalon and a standard detector epoxied on a second TEC play the role of a
built-in wavelength locker [see Figure 8.12(b)]. A fraction of the light sampled by
the beam splitters passes through the etalon onto the detector for locking to the ITU
grid (see Chapter 5). A second TEC maintains the temperature of the etalon to a pre-
determined value.
Types of Packaging Solutions
239
Tilting
micromirror
Detector
TEC 2
Etalon
TEC 1
Beam
splitter
Beam
splitter
(a)
(b)
DFB array
Quadrant detector
Tilting micromirror
subassembly
Beam splitter
TEC
Fiber
Etalon
DFB array
Quadrant
detector
Figure 8.12
(a) A rendering of the packaging for the tunable laser from Santur Corp.; and (b) a
block diagram of the components within the packaging of the tunable laser. A first thermoelectric
cooler controls the temperature of the DFB array. A second cooler controls the temperature of an
etalon and a detector that act as a wavelength locker.
Figure 8.11
Modified by brazing two tubes to the header and the cap, the TO-8 metal can
become suitable for packaging fluidic microdevices, such as this microvalve from Redwood
Microsystems. (Courtesy of: A. Henning, Redwood Microsystems of Menlo Park, California.)

Packaging solutions for harsh environments, namely those found in heavy
industries and aerospace, can be complex and costly. The custom requirements of
the application, coupled with the lack of high-volume market demand, have turned
packaging for harsh environments into a niche art. One particularly interesting
design is the metal packaging of media-isolated pressure sensors for operation in
heavy-industrial environments. The design immerses the silicon pressure sensor
within an oil-filled stainless steel cavity that is sealed with a thin stainless steel
diaphragm. The silicon pressure sensor measures pressure transmitted via the steel
diaphragm and through the oil. The robust steel package offers hermetic protection
of the sensing die and the wire bonds against adverse environmental conditions
(see Figure 8.13).
Each stainless steel package is individually machined to produce a cavity. The
die is attached to a standard header with glass-fired pins and wire bonded. This
header is resistance welded to the stainless-steel package. Arc welding of a stainless-
steel diaphragm seals the top side of the assembly. Oil filling of the cavity occurs
through a small port at the bottom that is later plugged and sealed by welding a ball.
Molded Plastic Packaging
Unlike metal or ceramic packages, molded plastic packages are not hermetic. Yet
they dominate in the packaging of integrated circuits because they are cost-effective
solutions (costing on average a few pennies or less per electrical pin). Advances in
plastic packaging have further improved reliability to high levels. Today’s failure
rates in plastic-packaged logic and linear integrated circuits are less than one failure
in every ten billion hours of operation [23].
There are two general approaches to plastic packaging: post molding and pre-
molding (see Figure 8.14). In the first approach, the plastic housing is molded after
the die is attached to a lead frame (a supporting metal sheet). The process subjects
the die and the wire bonds to the harsh molding environment. In premolding, the die
is attached to a lead frame over which plastic was previously molded. It is attractive
240
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS
Steel diaphragm
(b)
(a)
Silicone oil
Silicon die
Steel housing
Weld joint
Sealed fill port
Glass fired pins
Wire bond
Figure 8.13
(a) Photograph, and (b) cross-sectional schematic of a pressure sensor mounted
inside an oil-filled, stainless-steel package. Pressure is transmitted via the stainless-steel diaphragm
and through the oil to the silicon sensor. (Courtesy of: GE NovaSensor of Fremont, California.)

in situations where the risk of damaging the die is high or if openings through the
plastic are necessary (e.g., for pressure or flow sensors). However, it tends to be
more expensive than post molding.
The metal lead frame in either approach is an etched or stamped metal sheet
consisting of a central platform (paddle) and metal leads supported by an outer
frame. The leads provide electrical connectivity and emanate from the paddle in the
shape of a fan. The metal is typically a copper alloy or Alloy-42 (Ni42Fe58); the latter
has a coefficient of thermal expansion 4.3 × 10−6 per degree Celsius that matches
that of silicon.
In postmolded plastic packaging, the lead frame is spot-plated with gold or sil-
ver on the paddle and the lead tips to improve wire bonding. The die is then attached
with adhesive or eutectic solder. Wires are bonded between the die and the lead tips.
Plastic molding encapsulates the die and lead frame assembly but leaves the outer
edges of the leads exposed. These leads are later plated with tin or tin-lead to
improve wetting during soldering to printed circuit boards. Finally, the outer frame
is broken off and the leads are formed into a final S-shape (see Figure 8.14).
The sequence of process steps differs for premolded plastic packages. First, a
plastic body is molded onto a metal lead frame. The molded thermosetting plastic
polymer encapsulates the entire lead frame with the exception of the paddle and the
outer edges of the leads. Deflashing of the package removes any undesirable or
residual plastic on the die bonding areas. The molded body may contain ports or
openings that may be later used to admit a fluid (e.g., for pressure or flow sensing).
The lead frame is spot-plated with gold or silver to improve wire bonding and
soldering. At this point, the die is attached and wire bonded to the lead frame. A
protective encapsulant, such as RTV or silicone gel, is then dispensed over the die
and wire bonds. Finally, a premolded plastic cap is attached using an adhesive or
ultrasonic welding. If necessary, the cap itself may also contain a fluid access port
(Figures 8.15 and 8.16).
The molding process is a harsh process involving mixing the component for the
thermosetting plastic at approximately 175ºC, then flowing it under relatively high
Types of Packaging Solutions
241
Metal lead frame
Plastic molding compound
Die with first level silicon packaging
Bond wire
Paddle
Lead
Figure 8.14
Schematic showing a sectional view of a post-molded plastic package. The die is first
mounted on a center platform (the paddle) and wires bonded to adjacent electrical leads. The
paddle and the leads form a metal lead frame, over which the plastic is molded. A MEMS die
should include a first level of packaging (e.g., a bonded silicon cap) as protection against the harsh
effects of the molding process. This particular illustration is of a plastic quad-flat pack (QFP) with
electrical leads along its entire outer periphery.

pressure (~ 6 MPa) into the mold cavity before it is allowed to cool. The plastic
material is frequently an epoxy. Novolac epoxies are preferred because of their
improved resistance to heat. The temperature cycle gives rise to severe thermal
stresses due to the mismatch in coefficients of thermal expansion between the plas-
tic, the lead frame, and the die. These stresses may damage the die or cause localized
delamination of the plastic. The material properties of the plastic, and especially its
coefficient of thermal expansion, are carefully adjusted by the introduction of addi-
tives to the epoxy. Fillers such as glass, silica, or alumina powder make up 65% to
70% of the weight of the final product and help tailor its coefficient of thermal
expansion as well as its thermal conductivity. In addition, mold release agents (e.g.,
synthetic or natural wax) are introduced to promote releasing the plastic part from
the mold. Flame-retardant materials, typically brominated epoxy or antimony triox-
ide, are also added to meet industry flammability standards. Carbon and other
organic dyes give the plastic its all-too-common black appearance, which is neces-
sary for laser marking.
242
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS
Metal lead frame
Premolded plastic body
Pressure sensing die
Bond wire
Premolded plastic cap
Encapsulation gel
Adhesive die attach
Adhesive/epoxy
Figure 8.15
Illustration of a premolded plastic package [24]. Adapting it to pressure sensors
involves incorporating fluid ports in the premolded plastic housing and the cap.
5 mm
Figure 8.16
Photograph of the NovaSensor NPP-301, a premolded plastic, surface mount
(SOIC-type) and absolute pressure sensor. (Courtesy of: GE NovaSensor of Fremont, California.)

Plastic packaging for integrated circuits are governed by standards set forth by
the Electronics Industries Association (EIA), the Joint Electron Device Engineering
Council (JEDEC), and the Electronics Industry Association of Japan (EIAJ) (see
Table 8.6). While plastic packaging for MEMS is not governed by any standards
yet, it often uses standard or slightly modified integrated-circuit plastic packages.
The development of new plastic packaging technologies for MEMS will likely
remain in the far future because of the prohibitive associated costs.
Quality Control, Reliability, and Failure Analysis
When questioned about the reliability of a MEMS or micromachined component,
the spontaneous reaction of an average consumer is often negative, vaguely pointing
that these devices just cannot be “reliable.” Myth more than scientific reality
influences the minds of people in developing such an opinion. For example, there
is a perception that small size cannot instill a sense of reliability. Yet, it is
the small dimensions that generally increase immunity to shocks, make friction
miniscule, and reduce electrical power consumption and heat dissipation. Only
when reminded that most automobiles in the world depend on micromachined sen-
sors for engine operation and passenger safety does the negative image in the indi-
vidual’s mind begin to change. As the MEMS industry continues to mature, it will
further improve its existing quality and reliability procedures; as products permeate
through society, the consumer will become more at ease with the reliability of
these tiny components, making them one day synonymous with that of a sister
industry—electronic integrated circuits.
Quality Control, Reliability, and Failure Analysis
243
Table 8.6
Selected Standard Molded Plastic Packages for Integrated Circuits*
Type
Pin Count
Description
Surface Mount
Small outline transistor (SOT)
Min. 3, max. 8
Small package with leads
on two sides
Small outline IC (SOIC)
Min. 8, max. 28
Small package with leads
on two sides
Thin small outline package (TSOP)
Min. 26, max. 70
Thin version of the SOIC
Small outline J-lead (SOJ)
Min. 24, max. 32
Same as SOIC but with
leads bent in J shape
Plastic leaded chip carrier (PLCC)
Min. 18, max. 84
J-shaped leads on four
sides
Thin QFP (TQFP)
Min. 32, max. 256
Wide but thin package
with leads on four sides
Through-Hole
Mount
Transistor outline 220 (TO220)
Min. 3, max. 7
One in-line row of leads,
with heat sink
Dual in-line (DIP)
Min. 8, max. 64
Two in-line rows of leads
Single in line (SIP)
Min. 11, max. 40
One in-line row of leads
Zigzag in line (ZIP)
Min. 16, max. 40
Two rows with staggered
leads
Quad in line package (QUIP)
Min. 16, max. 64
Four in-line rows of leads;
leads are staggered
(Source: [25].)
*Surface mount devices are generally thinner than through-hole mount packages and accommodate a smaller spacing between adjacent leads
(pins).

Quality Control and Reliability Standards
There are no standards that specifically govern the reliability of micromachined
components or MEMS in general. Instead, the MEMS industry derives its quality
and reliability guidelines from the quality standards of the systems into which
MEMS and microsystems are ultimately inserted. For example, the fabrication of
micromachined sensors used in automotive applications is frequently subject to the
quality management principles of QS 9000 standards initially set forth in 1994 by
Daimler-Chrysler, Ford, and General Motors for the entire auto industry in the
United States. The QS 9000 standard is itself an evolution of another quality man-
agement standard, ISO 9001, which was established by the International Organiza-
tion for Standardization of Geneva, Switzerland. Similarly, Telcordia
® Technologies
manages a set of quality and reliability standards specific to products and equipment
for the telecommunications industry. Table 8.7 lists a number of standards widely
used in industries and applications that have adopted MEMS and microsystems
technology.
These standards differ vastly in their impact on the manufacturers of
micromachined components. The ISO 9000 series and QS 9000 standards address
quality management principles such as methods for process control, documenta-
tion, and uniform procedures, but they do not specify particular tests or reliability
requirements. These standards leave the details of the qualification tests and
reliability specifications to the manufacturer, as long as they are well documented
and follow predescribed quality management principles. The typical result of the
ISO and QS standards is a manufacturing operation with clear controls over
its design and manufacturing processes. Mature companies often seek certifica-
tion by third parties specialized in auditing and reviewing quality management
systems.
Unlike the ISO 9000 and QS 9000 standards, the Telcordia, IEEE, and MIL
standards detail specific environmental and operational tests for qualification and
reliability. These tests have two purposes. The first one is to evaluate the product’s
performance under rigorous environmental conditions, in particular, shock and
vibration, temperature, humidity, and occasionally salt spray and altitude. Shock
and vibration tests simulate situations observed during handling and shipping, or in
high-vibration environments such as portable applications. Temperature testing
validates the overall thermal design of the product. Humidity tests checks for con-
densation effects on performance and reliability, particularly as they affect corro-
sion. Salt spray (as specified in MIL-STD-810) is largely unique to marine or
military applications and is not common for most commercial applications. Alti-
tude testing is useful for evaluating high-voltage insulation because low pressure
induces chemical changes in the insulating material.
The second purpose is to precipitate a failure of the product by stressing it under
the effect of carefully applied operational and environmental conditions over
extended durations. These tests include humidity and temperature cycling, thermal
shock, operation in damp heat, mechanical stressing, and burn-in—collectively, they
form the basis of accelerated life testing and they are casually referred to as “shake
and bake.” Burn-in, specified under MIL-STD-883, is common in the reliability test-
ing of electronic components and seeks to detect latent defects that will result
in infant mortality (failures that occur at a very early stage). During burn-in,
244
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS

temperature stresses and electrical voltages are applied for an extended duration of
time with operation at maximum load under different ambient temperatures.
One example of extensive reliability standards is the GR-CORE series from
Telcordia Technologies for telecommunication components and equipment. These
standards clearly outline test conditions for shock, vibration, temperature, and
humidity cycling, accelerated aging as well as other test parameters to evaluate the
rate of infant mortality and gauge the long-term reliability of the product. Many of
the tests defined under the Telcordia standards originate from the MIL standards
defined by the U.S. Department of Defense for the operation of components for
military applications. For example, the GR-63, 463, 1209, and 1221 CORE stan-
dards that define the reliability tests specifically for optoelectronic and passive
fiber-optical components (see Table 8.8) explicitly reference the MIL-STD-202 and
883 standards. Procedures and methods also accompany the MIL standards to
guide the user in performing the tests and interpreting the data. For example, the
MIL-HDBK-H-108 provides sampling procedures and tables for reliability and life
testing, and the MIL-HDBK-217 discusses reliability prediction (e.g., calculation of
failure rates and mean time to failures) of electronic equipment [26].
An industry of professional consultants and advisors specializing in quality and
reliability standards has come to exist. The manufacturer of MEMS products is well
Quality Control, Reliability, and Failure Analysis
245
Table 8.7
A Select List of Key Reliability and Quality Standards for Systems and Applications that Are Likely to
Incorporate MEMS or Microsystems
Standards
Description
Organization/Regulatory Body
Web Site
ISO 9000 series
Principles for general
quality management
International Organization for
Standardization
www.iso.ch
QS 9000
Automotive quality
management
Automotive Industry Action Group
www.aiag.org
IEEE 1332
Program for reliability
of electronic systems
IEEE
www.ieee.org
IEEE 1413
Methodology for
reliability prediction
IEEE
MIL-HDB-217
Reliability prediction
for electronics
U.S. Department of Defense
dodssp.daps.mil
MIL-STD-202
Test methods for
electronic components
U.S. Department of Defense
MIL-STD-883
Test methods for
microelectronics
U.S. Department of Defense
GR-63-CORE
Standard for
environmental criteria
for telecom equipment
Telcordia Technologies
www.telcordia.com
GR-463-CORE
Standard for the
reliability of
optoelectronic devices
Telcordia Technologies
GR-1209-CORE
Standard for the
reliability of branched
optical devices
Telcordia Technologies
GR-1221-CORE
Standard for the
reliability of passive
optical devices
Telcordia Technologies
21 CFR Parts
800-1299
Clearance pursuant to
Title 21 Code of
Federal Regulations
U.S. Food and Drug Administration,
Center for Devices and
Radiological Health
www.fda.gov/cdrh

advised to seek such professional recourse. The user of MEMS products will often
demand that those products are certified under one or many quality standards that
are most applicable to the user’s industry. However bureaucratic these standards
may on occasion be perceived by the general scientific community, they are of para-
mount importance to the MEMS industry as it transitions from prototyping experi-
mentation to mature manufacturing.
Statistical Methods in Reliability
If one defines reliability as the probability that a device will perform its specified
functions without failing over an expected operating time within defined operating
and environmental conditions, then it becomes clear that statistics play an important
role in assessing and predicting the reliability of a product. This section introduces a
few key concepts and terms commonly used in the theory of reliability. The reader is
referred to the books by Bajenescu
(
et al. [28] and Kececioglu [29, 30] for further
insight on the methodologies of reliability.
Failure is defined as the termination of the ability of a product to meet required
specifications or perform a required function. Failures are random events that are
statistically independent and can thus be described by standard probability distribu-
tion functions that follow the Poisson process. Depending on the underlying physics,
246
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS
Table 8.8
A Summary of the Key Reliability Tests Specified Under the Telcordia Standards GR-63/463 and
GR-1209/1221 for the Qualification of Devices for Optical Telecommunications
Test
GR-63/463-CORE Reliability
Assurance for Optoelectronic Devices
GR-1209/1221-CORE Reliability Assurance
for Branched and Passive Fiber-Optic Devices
Mechanical
shock
500G for 1 ms, 5 times/axis
500G for 1 ms, 2 times/axis; 200G for
1.33 ms, 2 times/axis
Nonoperational
vibration
20G, 20–2,000 Hz,
4 min/cycle, 4 cycles
20G, 20–2,000 Hz, 4 min/cycle, 4 cycles
Operational
vibration
5.0G, 10–100 Hz; 2.4G,
100–200 Hz
10–55 Hz, 1.52 mm amplitude, 20 min
per 3 axes
Thermal shock
(air-to-air)
15 cycles, 0° to 100°C
—
Solderability
+260°C for 10s
—
Accelerated aging
(operational)
70°C or 85°C, > 2,000 hours
—
High-temperature
storage
+85°C, 2,000 hours
+85°C, RH<40% RH, 2,000 hours
Low-temperature
storage
–40°C, 2,000 hours
–40°C, 2,000 hours
Temperature
cycling
–40°C to +70°C, >100 cycles
–40°C to +70°C, >100 cycles; –40°C to
+70°C, 10% to 80% RH, 42 cycles
Damp heat
+85°C/85% RH, 1,000 hours
+85°C/85% RH, 500 hours
Internal moisture
<5,000 ppm water vapor
—
ESD threshold
±500-V discharge, each pin set
—
Fiber pull
1.0 kg, 3 times, 5-s duration
—
Fiber twist and
flex tests
—
0.5-kg load, 100 cycles
Side pull
—
0.25 to 0.5 kg-load at 90° angle
Cable retention
—
0.5 to 1 kg-load for 1 minute
Water immersion
—
43°C, pH 5.5, for 336 hours
(Source: [27].)

the random failure events can have different probability distribution laws (e.g.,
exponential, normal, lognormal, Weibull, gamma, and Rayleigh [29, 31]). The
operating time is a duration for which the product performs its required function.
For a nonrepairable product, the mean operating time is also referred to as the mean
time to failure (MTTF). For a product that can be completely repaired, the mean
time of operation becomes the mean time between failures (MTBF). As most elec-
tronic and micromachined components are often difficult to repair after failure, we
will limit the discussion of lifetime to MTTF.
Knowledge of the probability distribution function, f(t), is necessary to compute
the probability of a unit failing as well as the failure rate and MTTF [28, 29]. The
probability of a failure at time t, defined as F(t), is the area under the distribution
function, mathematically given by the integral over a time period t. It is mostly a
mathematical concept that is not widely used in specifying product reliability.
Instead, failure rate and MTTF are the two key and practical specifications in the
assessment and prediction of reliability. The failure rate, also known as hazard rate,
Z(t), is a measure of the instantaneous speed of failure, effectively the number of
failures over a given period of time. Consequently, it has units of failures per unit
time, most commonly one failure in one billion hours (10−9/hr) also known as fail-
ure in time (FIT). Mathematically, it can be shown that Z(t) = f(t)/[1−F(t)]. Experi-
mentally, the failure rate is calculated as the ratio of the observed number of failures
occurring in a time interval to the number of functional devices at the beginning of
this time interval, normalized to the length of the time interval [28]. The larger the
number of devices and the longer the observation time are, the higher the statistical
confidence becomes in the measured failure rate. This confidence is mathematically
reflected by multiplying the measured failure rate by the statistical chi squared
(χ2) parameter [31]. When the observation time is impractically long to achieve
reasonable confidence, temperature-based accelerated life testing (described later)
becomes an invaluable tool to extrapolate values for the failure rate and MTTF.
The experimentally observed failure rate of many high-technology products,
including electronic, fiber-optical, and micromachined components, exhibits a
characteristic time-dependent behavior that is best described by the “bath tub”
curve (see Figure 8.17). This curve shows an early stage in the life of the product
with a rapidly decreasing failure rate resulting from better screening, improving reli-
ability, and lower infant mortality. A second stage characterized by a rather con-
stant failure rate defines the mean useful life of the component in the field. A rising
failure rate brought by an increase in wear signals the onset of the last stage and the
end of the useful life.
Reliability scientists model the bath-tub curve as a superposition of three
different probability distribution functions, one for each stage in the curve. The
Weibull distribution function best models the early stage, whereas the lognormal dis-
tribution is used to model the third stage. The exponential distribution is best to
describe the middle span because it models a constant failure rate that we denote as
λ. The overall failure rate curve is the sum of all three contributions (see Figure 8.17).
The middle span is one that attracts most attention, as it describes the reliability of
the product during its most useful life. A key characteristic of the exponential
distribution function is its time-independent failure rate, which allows for varying
the combination of the number of devices under test and the hours of testing. For
Quality Control, Reliability, and Failure Analysis
247

example, if 10,000 unit hours of testing is required, then one can test 10 units for
1,000 hours, or 100 units for 100 hours or some other combination. The constant
failure rate (λ) can then be expressed in failures per unit of time. For an exponential
distribution, one can mathematically show that the MTTF is equal to 1/λ [28].
Clearly, the exponential approximation is valid only for the middle span of the curve
and should not be used elsewhere.
Accelerated Life Modeling
An accelerated life model is one that predicts failure as a function of applied operat-
ing and environmental stresses. Shock and vibration, temperature and humidity
cycling, mechanical stress, and burn-in belong to a category of qualitative acceler-
ated life testing intended to bring out failure modes that would normally manifest
themselves in later stages of the product’s life. Once a failure is observed, appropri-
ate corrective actions are taken to eliminate the origin of the failure. By contrast,
another category of accelerated life testing is quantitative in nature and aims to
predict a failure rate and an MTTF. Stress tests such as operation in high heat, high
humidity, and high voltages are good examples. These tests rely on the theory of rate
processes [30], which is generally described by an exponential dependence on the
stress parameter to determine the degradation in a particular life characteristic due
to the applied stress—this dependence is known as the acceleration factor. The
Eyring equation is a generalized model that can take into account multiple stress
248
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS
t
Stage 1
Infant mortality
Burn in
Failure rate
( )
Z t
Stage 3
Wearout
Stage 2
Constant failure rate
Random failures
Useful operating life
Exponential contribution
Lognormal contribution
Weibull contribution
Sum
Z = λ
λ
χ
= Failure rate in FIT
= Number of observed failures
= Number of functional devices at the beginning of period
= Duration of observation period
(2 +2) = Statistical chi squared parameter
n
N
T
n
2
λ =
2· ·
N T
χ2
9
(2 +2)·10
n
Figure 8.17
The reliability bath-tub relationship between failure rate Z(t) and time t. It consists of
three temporal stages, each with its listed characteristics. The failure rate in the middle span of the
curve is time independent and equal to λ. The overall failure rate can be modeled as the sum of
the contributions of three probability distribution functions. Using the exponential distribution
function suited only for the middle span, one can calculate the MTTF to equal 1/λ.

parameters, including temperature, humidity, and voltage [32]. The Arrhenius
equation, a special case of the Eyring equation, is a well-known example of a rate
process where the stress parameter is only temperature. If the failure rate is constant
in time and the exponential distribution function is applicable, then the degrading
life characteristic is time to failure (lifetime) and the corresponding acceleration fac-
tor is proportional to exp(−Ea/kT) where Ea is the activation energy, k is the Boltz-
mann constant, and T is temperature [33]. Should there be an indication that the
failure rate is not constant in time, then a more appropriate probability distribution
function must be used, resulting in a different degrading life characteristic and a dif-
ferent expression for the Arrhenius acceleration factor [33, 34]. The Arrhenius
equation is very useful to model failures that depend on chemical reactions, diffu-
sion processes, and migration processes. This includes failure modes in die attach,
epoxies, solder, metal interconnects, thin films, and semiconductor junctions. The
Arrhenius model has a limitation specific to micromachined components and
MEMS: it is not suitable to analyze accelerated failures resulting from mechanical
fatigue, a phenomenon that has been observed in polycrystalline and amorphous
materials used in the fabrication of MEMS. This limitation is of most significance to
surface-micromachined actuators made of polysilicon or metal alloys.
To find the activation energy, the time to failure is measured at a few elevated
temperatures. It is advantageous to make the measurements at the highest possible
temperatures in order to shorten the observation time, provided that the applied
temperatures do not alter the nature of the failure or damage the device under test.
For example, it is not possible to apply a temperature that exceeds the flow tempera-
ture of epoxies or solder because the physics of the failure modes will certainly
change and the accelerated life model will fail. An exponential curve fit is then
applied to the measured data. The slope of the logarithm of the time to failure plot-
ted against the inverse of absolute temperature (in Kelvins) is equal to the activation
energy. The MTTF or lifetime at the normal operating temperature (often room
temperature) is extrapolated using the Arrhenius equation (see Figure 8.18).
Major Failure Modes
It is evident from the diversity of materials, fabrication processes, and products
introduced in the earlier chapters that the possible failure modes would be numer-
ous and equally diverse. The purpose of this section is not to replace standard failure
mode and effect analysis (FMEA) methodology to unravel the details of a failure,
but rather to point to a few common failure modes that the industry has learned to
address.
Decades of development and millions of deployed units have provided plenty of
insight and knowledge into the reliability of micromachined electromechanical
sensors, in particular pressure sensors and accelerometers. These products have
evolved through multiple generations and can now operate and survive under
extreme environmental conditions. Over the years, engineers incorporated many
design and manufacturing improvements, each addressing one or more possible fail-
ure modes. In some instances, these details have become public knowledge. For
example, rounding of the corners is now a common practice to reduce stress concen-
tration in micromechanical structures. But in many other instances, manufacturers
consider these details as trade secrets, especially when utility patents cannot be
Quality Control, Reliability, and Failure Analysis
249

obtained or are difficult to enforce. This level of secrecy becomes even more
entrenched in packaging and assembly.
Much work remains to be completed before the reliability of relatively new
product entries, especially those with integrated optical, fluidic, RF, or acoustic
functions, reaches a level similar to that of widely deployed micromachined sensors.
Clearly, these new products have benefited from the existing body of knowledge on
reliability, but there remain failures specific to them. For instance, the reliability of
the junction between silicon (or glass) and a fluidic interconnect is constantly subject
to improvement. In another example, it is not clear whether outgassing from epoxies
or other adhesives used in the packaging of optical elements affects the reflectivity of
micromachined mirrors or interferes with the high voltages typically used in the elec-
trostatic actuators that drive those mirrors.
Failure modes stem either from weaknesses in the design itself (of both the
micromachined device and packaging) or from process variations that result in criti-
cal departures from the nominal design. Addressing the former usually follows a sys-
tematic course of tests and simulations to pinpoint the exact origin of the design
weakness. For example, computer-aided simulations are very useful in identifying
nodes of high stress that can result in fracture. Addressing the weaknesses stemming
from process control is a more tedious and time-consuming task, which necessitates
patience, experience, technical flair, and good organization. For example, the source
of an occasional electrical short or open in an electrostatic actuator may be quite dif-
ficult to diagnose. It may be the result of a variation in the thickness of a metal trace
over a topographical step, or it may be caused by defects in an insulating layer, or
there could be yet another plausible explanation. Countless companies proud of
250
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS
104
106
108
102
1010
Slope = Ea
Measurements at
elevated temperatures
Extrapolated lifetime
Time to failure (hours)
Normal operating temperature
1/T (K
)
−1
Figure 8.18
The Arrhenius model is a useful tool in accelerated life testing to extrapolate the
lifetime of a device at normal operating temperatures. Measurements of time to failure are made
at a few elevated temperatures, and an exponential curve fit is applied to the data to calculate the
activation energy. This extrapolation method assumes a constant failure rate and thus is specific to
the exponential distribution function that is graphically represented by the scatter in the measured
data at any particular temperature.

their new and innovative MEMS product ideas had to face these types of reliability
questions as they transitioned from a prototyping phase to a manufacturing phase.
Analog Devices, Inc., invested tremendous time and resources to resolve the stiction
problem that plagued their early accelerometer designs. The following are major
observed failure modes that span both design and process control.
Cracks and Fractures
Cracks can occur in a number of locations in a microstructure and are the result of
a large stress that exceeds the fracture stress of the material or fatigue [35]. Observ-
ing and diagnosing a large fracture is readily achieved under an optical or scanning
electron microscope. Acoustic imaging is occasionally used, but its utility is limited
to detecting large embedded defects. However, hairline fractures can seldom be
seen. Instead, their existence is indirectly detected by measuring their effect on a
number of other parameters (e.g., by looking for anomalies in the frequency
response of a mechanical element). Often, a mechanical shock is the causing event
of fracture [36]. Naturally, the mass of the micromechanical structure must be rela-
tively large for the shock to pose any real risk. For instance, a 10-µm thick, 1 mm
2
membrane in a pressure sensor has very little mass (24 µg) and can sustain shocks
up to 100,000G [37]!
A mechanical shock can originate from several sources. It can be intentional, as
is the case for accelerometers or during the reliability testing of the product, or acci-
dental (e.g., from the saw during wafer dicing or rough handling during packaging).
A mechanical shock has a typical duration of tens to hundreds of microseconds,
which greatly exceeds the acoustic transit time defined as the time it takes an acoustic
wave to travel through the longest dimension of the micromechanical structure (typi-
cally on the order of a few microseconds). Therefore, the micromechanical structure
behaves as if the shock is static and wave analysis is not necessary [38]. This is not the
case with ultrasonic pulses. Such short pulses (of duration ≤1 µs) are common in
ultrasonic cleaning, wire bonding during packaging, or in micromachined resonators
that specifically utilize ultrasound in their operation. Waves will reflect back at geo-
metrical discontinuities and material boundaries due to mismatches in acoustic
impedances, causing standing waves and local amplification of stresses possibly
beyond the fracture stress. In such situations, a complete wave analysis using
computer-aided modeling is useful to identify the fragile boundaries.
Under shock, the displacement of a freestanding micromechanical structure
may exceed its maximum allowed design limit, thus causing excessive stress at
one or more particular locations (often corners) and consequently failure. Good
mechanical designs take such shocks into account. For example, some well-designed
accelerometers have travel limiters for the inertial mass (see Chapter 4) in order to
minimize the stress on the supporting spring in the presence of a large shock. Sharp
corners are also responsible for fracture under even small shocks because they con-
centrate mechanical stress. Designers have learned to round the profile of corners to
reduce this risk of failure. For example, the corner formed by the intersection of the
{111} planes of the thick frame and the thin membrane of a pressure sensor (see
Chapter 4) is characteristically sharp, and virtually all manufacturers of modern
commercial pressure sensors perform some type of corner rounding. While knowl-
edge about such failure modes is now common, details of the corresponding
Quality Control, Reliability, and Failure Analysis
251

solutions remain proprietary to the manufacturers. For instance, a dilute silicon
etchant will round the corner mentioned earlier, but the duration of the etch, the
type of etchant used, and concentration are all considered trade secrets.
Shocks can also cause fracture by exciting undamped mechanical resonant
modes. By virtue of the instantaneous energy they impart on an object, shocks have a
very broad spectral signature (up to hundreds of kilohertz) that overlaps with the
resonant frequencies of many micromachined elements. Proper mechanical design
should address the appropriate damping of any resonant mode that may be excited
by shock. This is of particular significance to suspended structures made of single-
crystal silicon packaged in vacuum because they make excellent low-frequency reso-
nators with high quality factors. While single-crystal silicon is generally less suscep-
tible to fracture than polysilicon or amorphous silicon, its crystalline nature offers
little internal damping. External damping (e.g., air viscous damping) is the only
means to reduce the quality factor of single-crystal-silicon beams and the risk of
fracture under shock.
Corner rounding, travel limiters, and damping are examples of design modifica-
tions intended to improve immunity to shock. The cause-and-effect relationship
tends to be well understood either through modeling or extensive testing. Yet, there
are other factors related to fabrication and process control that can have an equally
dramatic effect on immunity to shock but whose details can be quite arduous to
unravel. For instance, a poorly controlled electrochemical etch in the fabrication of a
pressure sensor can yield a membrane lacking thickness uniformity that can jeopard-
ize its mechanical properties, including sensitivity to mechanical shock. Similarly,
increased scalloping and undercut in a poorly controlled deep reactive ion etch
(DRIE) can seriously degrade the mechanical properties of a micromachined struc-
ture. Investigating a failure that may be connected to poor process control is a costly
and time-consuming proposition. Instead, it is more important and economical to
implement preventive process controls over the critical fabrication and packaging
steps.
Packaging plays a very important role in shielding a micromechanical structure
from the effects of externally applied shocks. For example, the elastic nature of most
room-temperature vulcanizing (RTV) rubbers used in die attach is useful to mini-
mize the transmission of stress from the package to the sensitive micromechanical
elements in a shock [37]. Intermediate substrates and supporting material between
the die and the outer casing of the package can also be useful in protection and
lessening the impact of a shock.
Delamination
Though not a frequent failure mechanism, delamination is a concern in all multilay-
ered stacks. The fabrication methods of such stacks are detailed in Chapter 3 and
include silicon fusion bonding, LIGA, as well as surface micromachining.
Delamination is often the result of poor process control. In silicon fusion bonding,
an unreliable bond can usually be traced to minute surface defects, chemical con-
tamination, excessive bowing of the substrates under stress, or poor hydration of the
surfaces prior to bringing the two wafers into contact. A submicron defect is suffi-
cient to create an imperceptible void between the two surfaces that can later propa-
gate under the effect of aging and other environmental factors, such as shock. Silicon
252
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS

wafers that were ground and polished may exhibit large intrinsic stresses and exces-
sive bowing, which weaken the bond. Experience has shown that the bond will ulti-
mately fail unless the stress is not annealed at an elevated temperature (>500ºC).
Stresses play an equally important role in the failure of thin-film stacks, especially
those incorporating platinum, palladium, and gold. In such cases, it is standard
practice to include an intermediate layer (often chromium or a titanium alloy) to
promote better adhesion. A primitive yet effective test for gauging sensitivity to
delamination is the tape peel test: an adhesive tape is attached to the layers or sub-
strates in question and manually peeled back.
In some circumstances, the area of adhesion between two layers or wafers may
be too small to sustain large forces in the event of a shock. This is the case with poly-
silicon hinges that are anchored to the substrate using small polysilicon staples (see
Figure 4.6). A reliability analysis at the design stage should uncover such a weakness
and increase the bonding or adhesion area.
Stiction
Stiction is the failure mode that describes the situation when surface adhesion forces
are larger than the mechanical restoring force of a suspended micromechanical
element. Surface adhesion forces include capillary forces, electrostatic attraction,
and van der Waals forces.
Stiction
is
a
serious
problem
in
surface-micromachined
devices
that
occurs immediately after removing the die from the aqueous solution used to etch
the sacrificial layer. A liquid meniscus formed on hydrophilic surfaces inside the
suspension gap pulls the microstructure towards the substrate, causing the two
surfaces to come into contact and stick (see Figure 3.20). Stiction can also occur
after deployment in the field if water condenses inside the gap. The humidity tests
outlined in the Telcordia and MIL specifications are useful in accelerating failures
due to stiction. There are currently two leading methods that can alleviate the
impact of stiction induced by liquid capillary forces, both described in great detail in
Chapter 3: the use of antistiction coatings and supercritical drying when pulling
the structures out of liquid solutions. Coatings remain the topic of much-needed
research.
A different type of sticking happens in electrical relays and RF capacitive
switches. In relays operating at dc currents with ohmic contact between the poles
[39], repeated impacting between the two metal surfaces of the poles degrades the
contacts, ultimately leading to stiction. This process is akin to microwelding, due to
localized heating in the contact area. In RF capacitive switches, electrical charging
within the dielectric layers permanently pulls the switch membrane to the substrate.
The electrical charges are normally trapped within the dielectric with no available
conduction path. The origin of the charging is not well known, though tunneling
into the dielectric is a leading hypothesis [40].
Electrical and Thermal Failure Modes
MEMS share with integrated circuits many electrical and thermal failure modes,
such as burnout of electrical interconnects and diode junctions. Metal traces on the
silicon die are subject to the same rules of electrical reliability found in the
integrated circuit industry, including electrical crowding, electromigration, current
Quality Control, Reliability, and Failure Analysis
253

density limitation (typically <100 kA/cm
2), and localized resistive heating in the wir-
ing. Metal patterns over rising topographical features are particularly susceptible to
failure because of the potentially thin metal at the corners. Failure of electrical wir-
ing is not limited to on-chip metal traces. Wire bonds are also subject to failure if
they are not matched to the current requirements of the device. Additionally, wire
bonds can fail under mechanical shock and vibration because they are often made of
gold (a dense material) and have long lengths exceeding many millimeters.
Thermal failures occur when there is an excessive temperature rise due to local-
ized heating (e.g., from a high electrical resistance or an accidental current surge) or
when there is poor conduction of heat generated within the device (e.g., in thermal
actuators that can dissipate several watts). In all cases, proper thermal management
at the die and package level is important to mitigate the risk of thermal failures.
A Reliability Case Study: The DMD
The DMD, described in detail in Chapter 5, is an excellent example of a complex
microsystem that merges electronic, mechanical, optical, and chemical attributes,
thus making its reliability a highly interactive relationship between many diverse
operational factors and environmental parameters. The historical evolution of the
DMD and its reliability over nearly two decades highlights the depth and breadth of
the development effort that has yielded this commercial success.
Early in the 1990s, the lifetime of the DMD was only 100 hours at 65ºC,
whereas the target application (primarily printing) required a minimum of 5,000
hours. Some parts worked well, but others did not. The design was marginal, and
the fabrication processes were not under control. The origins of the failures were
largely unknown, which made improving the reliability a daunting task. Texas
Instruments undertook a program of extensive testing, characterization, and analy-
sis of the failure modes that gradually increased the understanding of the underlying
physics and resulted in new designs that were more robust and reliable.
With the novelty of the DMD design and the emerging nature of the MEMS
industry, Texas Instruments had to develop many specialized tests and build the
corresponding equipment in house. These tests varied many operational parameters,
including temperature, voltage and timing waveform, the number of mirror land-
ings, mirror duty cycle, and light intensity. It then sought to identify statistical
relationships that would lead to the location of design parameters that yielded a
more reliable performance. They also performed a number of environmental tests,
many similar to those defined under the Telcordia and MIL standards, to verify the
product’s environmental robustness (see Table 8.9).
One important characterization test is the bias/adhesion mirror mapping
(BAMM) [41]. It involved the statistical analysis of the number of mirrors that
land with increasing applied bias while holding the other operational parameters
constant. The result is a distribution curve for mirror landing whose tightness (i.e.,
spread in voltage) is a measure of process variability that led the engineers to further
optimization of the hinge design and voltage drive waveform. The BAMM test also
uncovered another weakness: the bias voltage at landing decreased from 16V to
about 14V after 2,000 hours of operation. The finding and the data became use-
ful in implementing additional improvements and developing models for lifetime
prediction [42].
254
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS

Another valuable test and characterization method is the solution space tech-
nique [41]. In this case, many parameters were controllably varied and plotted in
two or more dimensions with the intent of visualizing interrelationships between the
variables. An acceptable solution space is one where overall mirror performance is
satisfactory under all combinations of operating conditions. The test is performed
before and after accelerated aging to gauge the robustness of the solution space and
to identify the parameters that were most sensitive to aging. This method also
yielded improved hinge designs and electrical drive waveform.
More than two thirds of all failures that affect the DMD micromirror are traced
to a particle defect [42], either on the surface of the mirror or underneath it. A parti-
cle on the surface affects the rotation dynamics and optical properties of the mirror.
A particle below it may prevent mirror movement or cause an electrical short. Parti-
cle defects during lithography and etching can damage the hinge. Particle reduction
is an important aspect of process control, and, much as in the integrated circuit
industry, it greatly impacts yield. The remaining failures are attributed to hinge and
mirror mechanics, including hinge fatigue and memory and stiction to the landing
electrode.
The hinge is a thin layer (~ 75 nm) of an aluminum alloy (98.8% Al, 1% Si,
0.2% Ti) [43]. To assess its sensitivity to fatigue, Texas Instruments performed
accelerated testing by switching the mirrors more rapidly than normal (once every
20 µs). Tests over nearly five million mirrors on nine different DMD dice have accu-
mulated more than 3 × 1012 cycles per mirror without any evidence of fatigue.
Naturally, Texas Instruments has been successful in maintaining tight process con-
trol over the deposition step and alloy material to result in such consistency in the
reliability. Tests, however, demonstrated that hinge memory is a more serious reli-
ability hazard. When a mirror is operated in the same direction for a long period of
time, it exhibits a residual tilt in that direction when all bias voltages are removed,
due to a permanent deformation in the hinge. This effect is known as hinge memory.
When the residual tilt exceeds 3.5º (the full tilt angle of the mirror under operation
is 10º), it creates an imbalance in the separation gaps under the mirror, and the elec-
trostatic force on the side with the large gap becomes insufficient to overcome the
Quality Control, Reliability, and Failure Analysis
255
Table 8.9
A Summary of the Environmental Tests Performed in Assessing the Reliability of the DMD
Environmental Test
Details
Duration
Storage life (cold/hot)
−55°C to +100°C, no applied power
1,000 hours
Temperature cycling
–55°C to +125°C, air to air, fine/gross leaks
1,000 cycles
Thermal shock
–55°C to +125°C, liquid to liquid
200 cycles
Unbiased humidity
+85°C/85% RH, no applied power
1,000 cycles
Electrostatic discharge
Human body model, 1 positive, 1 negative at 2,000V
Latch up
25°C, ±300 mA
Ultraviolet light sensitivity
25°C, ultraviolet exposure
1,000 hours
Sequence 1
1,500G mechanical shock, Y direction only
Vibration, 20G from 20 to 2,000 Hz
Constant acceleration, 10,000G, Y only
Sequence 2
Thermal shock, –55°C to +125°C
15 cycles
Temperature cycling, –55°C to +125°C
100 cycles
Moisture resistance
10 days
(Source: [41].)

permanent twist in the hinge. The pixel appears damaged to the user. Evidence
points to metal creep of the hinge material as the source of this effect, with strong
dependence on operating temperature and duty cycle. The latter is the percentage of
time the mirror lands on one side relative to the other. For example, a 95/5-duty
cycle means that the mirror lands on one side 95% of the time, and one the other side
the remaining 5%. Tests have shown that duty cycles near or at 50/50 exhibit no
hinge memory, but the effect is pronounced at larger duty cycles and is further exac-
erbated by temperature under worst-case operating conditions (65ºC). Duty cycles
characteristic of real-life display images tend to be imbalanced (varying between
75/25 and 85/15), thus making hinge memory a limiting factor of lifetime. Early
results showed a lifetime of 1,000 hours under worst-case conditions of 65ºC and
95/5 duty cycle. A discovery that baking the hinge alloy during fabrication at 150ºC
for 12 to 16 hours alleviated the tendency to creep by annealing intrinsic stresses and
passivating the metal surface [44]. This contributed to a five-fold increase in life-
time. The bake cycle and other additional improvements increased the worst-case
lifetime to 10,000 hours, which extrapolates to better than 200,000 hours under
normal operating temperatures (<45ºC) and duty cycle (75/25 to 85/15) [42].
A last failure mode is the stiction of the yoke to the landing electrode. Stiction
remains difficult to predict, but it is believed that contamination of the surface of the
landing electrode is the major cause. An innovative solution implemented four
spring tips (see Figure 8.19) at the landing corners of the yoke. As the mirror struc-
ture tilts and the spring tips come into contact with the landing electrodes, the
springs deform and potential energy is stored in them. As soon as the applied bias is
removed, the springs push the yoke and the mirror structure off the surface.
Summary
Packaging of MEMS is an art rather than a science. The diversity of MEMS applica-
tions places a significant burden on packaging. Standards do not exist in MEMS
packaging; rather, the industry has adopted standards and methods from the
integrated circuit industry and modified them as necessary. This chapter reviewed
the basic considerations of MEMS packaging and introduced three widely accepted
packaging approaches: ceramic, metal, and plastic. Basic concepts for reliability are
also introduced.
256
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS
Torsion hinge
Spring tip
Yoke
Figure 8.19
An illustration of the middle structure in a DMD showing the spring tips. Their role is
to push the mirror off the surface of the landing electrode upon removal of the bias voltage, thus
reducing the risk of stiction.

References
[1]
Lau, J. H., et al., Electronic Packaging: Design, Materials, Process, and Reliability, New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1998, pp. 111–193.
[2]
Beach, W. F., T. M. Austin, and R. Olson, “Parylene Coatings,” in Electronic Materials
Handbook: Volume 1, Packaging, M. L. Minges, C. A. Dostal, and M. S. Woods (eds.),
Materials Park, OH: ASM International, 1989, pp. 789–801.
[3]
Monk, D. J., et al., “Media Compatible Packaging and Environmental Testing of Barrier
Coating Encapsulated Silicon Pressure Sensors,” Tech. Digest Solid-State Sensor and
Actuator Workshop, Hilton Head Island, SC, June 3–6, 1996, pp. 36–41.
[4]
Flannery, A. F., et al., “PECVD Silicon Carbide for Micromachined Transducers,” Proc.
1997 Int. Conf. on Solid-State Sensors and Actuators, Vol. 1, Chicago, IL, June 16–19,
1997, pp. 217–220.
[5]
Burri, M., “Calibration-Free Pressure Sensor System,” Application Note AN1097,
Motorola Sensor Device Data book, 1995.
[6]
Sergent, J. E., “The Hybrid Microelectronics Technology,” in Electronic Packaging &
Interconnection Handbook, 2nd ed., C. A. Harper (ed.), New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997,
pp. 7.10–7.26.
[7]
Hwang, J. S., “Solder Technologies for Electronic Packaging,” in Electronic Packaging &
Interconnection Handbook, 2nd ed., C. A. Harper (ed.), New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997,
pp. 5.4–5.20.
[8]
Striny, K. M., “Assembly Techniques and Packaging of VLSI Devices,” in VLSI Technol-
ogy, 2nd ed., S. M. Sze (ed.), New York: McGraw-Hill, 1988, pp. 566-611.
[9]
Dow Corning Corporation, Midland, MI 48686-0994, http://www.dowcorning.com/
html/industries/electronics/index.html.
[10]
Bonding Handbook and General Catalog, Kulicke and Soffa Industries, Inc., Willow
Grove, PA, 1990.
[11]
Flip Chip Technologies, J. H. Lau (ed.), New York: McGraw-Hill, 1996.
[12]
Jaeggi, D., et al., “Novel Interconnection Technologies for Integrated Microfluidic Sys-
tems,” Tech. Digest Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, Hilton Head Island, SC,
June 8–11, 1998, pp. 112–115.
[13]
VerLee, D., et al., “Fluid Circuit Technology: Integrated Interconnect Technology for
Miniature Fluidic Devices,” Tech. Digest Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, Hil-
ton Head Island, SC, June 3–6, 1996, pp. 9–14.
[14]
Borgeson, P., and P. A. Kondos, “Packaging of Single Mode Laser Diodes,” Proc. of the
2002 ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition, November
17–22, 2002, New Orleans, LA, EPP-Vol. 2, pp. 471–475.
[15]
Harvilchuck, L.A., et al., “Passive Optoelectronics Component Manufacturing,” Proc. of
the 2002 ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition, Novem-
ber 17–22, 2002, New Orleans, LA, EPP-Vol. 2, pp. 465–469.
[16]
Ogura, G., “Hermetic Packaging: A Neglected ‘Holy Grail’?,” Lightwave Magazine,
October 2001.
[17]
Eddy, D. S., and D. R. Sparks, “Application of MEMS Technology in Automotive Sensors
and Actuators,” in Integrated Sensors, Microactuators, & Microsystems (MEMS), K. D.
Wise (ed.), Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 86, No. 8, August 1998, pp. 1750–1751.
[18]
U.S. Patent 5,545,912, August 13, 1996.
[19]
Ginsberg, G. L., and D. P. Schnorr, Multichip Modules and Related Technologies, New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1994.
[20]
Ball Grid Array Technology, J. H. Lau (ed.), New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995.
[21]
NPC-107 data sheet, GE NovaSensor, 1055 Mission Court, Fremont, CA 94539,
http://www.novasensor.com.
[22]
Faris, J., and T. Kocian, “DMD™Packages—Evolution and Strategy,” TI Technical Jour-
nal, July–September 1998, pp. 87–94.
Summary
257

[23]
Bonner, J. K., “Surface Mount Technology,” in Electronic Packaging & Interconnection
Handbook, 2nd ed., C. A. Harper (ed.), New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997, pp. 9.50–9.51.
[24]
Cohn, C., and M. T. Shih, “Packaging and Interconnection of Integrated Circuits,” in Elec-
tronic Packaging & Interconnection Handbook, 2nd ed., C. A. Harper (ed.), New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1997, pp. 6.14–6.17.
[25]
Cohn, C., and M. T. Shih, “Packaging and Interconnection of Integrated Circuits,” in Elec-
tronic Packaging & Interconnection Handbook, 2nd ed., C. A. Harper (ed.), New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1997, pp. 6.46–6.56.
[26]
Available from The U.S. Department of Defense, Single Stock Point for Military Specifica-
tions, Standards and Related Publications, Bldg. 4/D, 700 Robbins Avenue, Philadelphia,
PA, 19111–5094, http://www.dodssp.daps.mil.
[27]
Telcordia
® Technologies, One Telcordia Drive, Piscataway, NJ 08854, http://www.
telcordia.com.
[28]
Bajenescu
(
, T. I., and M. I. Bâzu, Reliability of Electronic Components, New York: Springer,
1999, pp. 9–20.
[29]
Kececioglu, D., Reliability Engineering Handbook, Vol. 1, Engelwood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 1991, pp. 107–323.
[30]
Glasstone, S., K. J. Laidler, and H. Eyring, The Theory of Rate Processes, New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1941.
[31]
DeGroot, M. H., and M. J. Schervish, Probability and Statistics, 3rd ed., Boston, MA: Pear-
son Addison Wesley, 2002.
[32]
NIST/SEMATECH
e-Handbook
of
Statistical
Methods,
Section
8.1.5.2,
2003,
http://www.itl.nist.gov/div898/handbook.
[33]
Nelson, W., Accelerated Testing: Statistical Models, Test Plans, and Data Analyses, New
York: Wiley, 1990, pp. 51–106, 521–543.
[34]
Accelerated Life Testing Reference, ReliaSoft Corporation, 115 South Sherwood Village
Dr., Tucson, AZ 85710, 2001, http://www.weibull.com.
[35]
Allameh, S. M., et al., “Surface Topography Evolution and Fatigue Fracture in Polysilicon
MEMS Structures,” Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 12, No. 3, June 2003,
pp. 313–324.
[36]
Tanner, D. M., et al., “MEMS Reliability in Shock Environments,” in Proceedings IEEE
International Reliability Physics Symposium, San Jose, CA, April 2000, pp. 129–138.
[37]
Reynolds, J. K., et al., “Packaging a Piezoresistive Pressure Sensor to Measure Low Absolute
Pressures over a Wide Sub-Zero Temperature Range,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical,
Vol. 83, 2000, pp. 142–149.
[38]
Srikar, V. T., and S. D. Senturia, “The Reliability of Microelectromechanical Systems
(MEMS) in Shock Environments,” Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 11,
No. 3, June 2002, pp. 206–214.
[39]
Hyman, D., and M. Mehregany, “Contact Physics of Gold Microcontacts for MEMS
Switches,” IEEE Transactions on Components and Packaging Technology, Vol. 22, Sep-
tember, 1999, pp. 357–364.
[40]
Goldsmith, C., et al., “RF MEMS: Benefits and Challenges of an Evolving Switch Technol-
ogy,” in the 23rd Annual Technical Digest, Gallium Arsenide Integrated Circuit (GaAs IC)
Symposium, October 21–24 , 2001, pp. 147–148.
[41]
Douglass, M. R., “DMD Reliability: A MEMS Success Story,” in Reliability, Testing and
Characterization of MEMS/MOEMS II, R. Ramesham and D. M. Tanner (eds.), Proceeding
of the SPIE, Vol. 4980, January 2003, pp. 1–11.
[42]
Douglass, M. R., “Lifetime Estimates and Unique Failure Mechanisms of the Digital Micro-
mirror Device (DMD),” Proceedings of IEEE International Reliability Physics Symposium,
1998, pp. 9–16.
[43]
U.S. Patents 4,662,746, May 5, 1987, and 5,083,857, January 28, 1992.
[44]
U.S. Patent 6,204,085, March 20, 2001.
258
Packaging and Reliability Considerations for MEMS

Selected Bibliography
Electronic Packaging & Interconnection Handbook, 2nd ed., C. A. Harper (ed.), New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1997.
Harper, C. A., and M. B. Miller, Electronic Packaging, Microelectronics and Interconnec-
tion Dictionary, New York: McGraw Hill, 1993.
Kececioglu, D., Reliability Engineering Handbook, Vols. 1 and 2, Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1991.
Lau, J. H., et al., Electronic Packaging: Design, Materials, Process, and Reliability, New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1998.
Manzione, L. T., Plastic Packaging of Microelectronic Devices, New York: Van Nostrand
Reinhold, 1990.
Striny, K. M., “Assembly Techniques and Packaging of VLSI Devices,” in VLSI Technol-
ogy, 2nd ed., S. M. Sze (ed.), New York: McGraw-Hill, 1988, pp. 566–611.
Summary
259

.

Glossary
Accelerated life testing
Also known as accelerated ageing, it is a methodology in
reliability that subjects a product to a high degree of operational and environmental
stresses, such as high temperature or voltage, in order to precipitate failure modes
that would normally manifest themselves in later stages of the product’s life.
Action potential
A temporary change in the electrical voltage across the cellular
membrane of a nerve or muscle cell. Action potentials occur when the cell is stimu-
lated, especially by a nerve impulse. They form the mechanism by which sensory
and motor functions are transmitted across the neural system.
Amorphous silicon
Silicon lacking a preferred crystalline orientation, typically
consisting of extremely fine grains each measuring a few nanometers in size.
Amplification
In biochemistry, it is the process of making a large number of iden-
tical copies of a DNA fragment. In electronics, it is the process of increasing the
magnitude of an electrical voltage.
Anodic bonding
A process to bond silicon to glass, specifically Pyrex™7740 or
equivalent.
Application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC)
An electronic integrated circuit
with a functionality designed specifically for one particular application (e.g., the
detection of minute changes in capacitance and conversion into an output voltage).
Bandpass see filter.
Bandwidth
The extent of the frequency response of a linear system. It is numeri-
cally defined as the difference between two corner frequencies where the system
gain is 3 dB below the maximal gain. An input signal with a frequency content
below or above the corner frequencies is severely attenuated by the system.
Bimetallic actuation
The resulting motion when a stack of two materials having
dissimilar coefficients of thermal expansion is heated. One material expands more
than the other, giving rise to bending stresses. The amount of bending is propor-
tional to the temperature of the stack and the difference in coefficients of thermal
expansion.
BGA
An acronym for ball grid array. A type of advanced ceramic package for
integrated circuits consisting of arrays of solder balls instead of electrical pins.
Bond pad
A metal area on a die or wafer to which a gold or aluminum wire is
bonded. The wire and bond pad provide electrical connectivity between electrical
components on the die and electronic circuitry external to the die.
261

Bragg grating
A periodic variation in the index of refraction within the core of an
optical fiber or a waveguide. It reflects light at its resonant wavelength that is pro-
portional to the periodic spacing of the grating.
Brownian noise see noise.
Bulk micromachining
A class of micromachining processes that remove material
from a substrate, yielding micromechanical structures with thicknesses in the tens or
hundreds of micrometers. It usually refers to the orientation-dependent etching or
deep reactive ion etching of silicon.
Burn-in
A methodology in reliability testing that involves operating a device
under extreme operating and environmental conditions in order to accelerate the life
of the product and precipitate an early failure.
Butterfly package
A metal package that consists of a tub-like housing with elec-
trical leads on two sides. A butterfly package may also include a feed-through tube
to allow for a fiber optical connection.
CERDIP
An acronym for ceramic dual-in-line package for integrated circuits. It
consists of a rectangular pressed ceramic body with pins on two opposites. A
ceramic cap is glass sealed to the body.
CERQUAD
An acronym for ceramic quad-flat pack. Similar to the CERDIP but
has pins on all sides.
Characteristic impedance
The input impedance of a transmission line. Intuitively,
it is the impedance of the load that, when attached to the terminal ends of a trans-
mission line, makes the line appear infinitely long. Characteristic impedance is of
great importance for good low-loss transmission. If the characteristic impedance of
a transmission line is mismatched to the load at the output terminals, then some of
the signal is reflected back at the junction causing loss and other undesirable effects.
It is a complex number with resistive and reactive components. It is independent of
the length of the transmission line but depends on frequency.
Check valve
A valve that permits fluid flow only in one direction.
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
A process based on the principle of initiating
a chemical reaction in a vacuum chamber, resulting in the deposition of a reacted
species on a heated substrate. Materials that can be deposited by CVD include poly-
silicon, silicon oxide, and silicon nitride.
Chromaticity
A property of light that relates to the number of wavelengths (col-
ors) available within an optical beam. A laser is a highly chromatic source because it
contains essentially one main wavelength.
CMOS
An acronym for complementary metal oxide semiconductor. A class of
electronic devices made of silicon and associated fabrication processes common in
integrated circuits.
Coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE)
The rate of change in length of an object
as a function of temperature. In general, CTE = (∆L/L)/∆Twhere (∆L/L) is the frac-
tional change in length corresponding to a ∆T change in temperature. It is measured
in inverse units of temperature (/ºC or ppm/K).
262
Glossary

Coherence
A property of light that describes the statistical correlation between
the phases of optical wavefronts (i.e., the degree to which the waves of the radiation
are vibrating in phase). Temporal coherence relates to the phase correlation between
different instants in time and is a necessary characteristic to obtain interference. Spa-
tial coherence relates to the phase correlation between different points in space.
Complementarity
In biochemistry, it is the specific affinity for binding between
the purines (adenine and guanine) with pyrimidines (thymine and cytosine). See
nucleotide.
Condenser microphone see capacitor microphone.
Coriolis effect
Physical effect responsible for the deflection of objects moving on
the surface of a rotating body such as Earth.
Corner frequency see filter.
Decibel (dB)
A unit to measure the relative difference in intensity of a physical,
electrical, optical, or acoustical signal (e.g., voltage, electric field, or pressure). It is
defined as 20 times the 10-base logarithm of the intensity ratio, or, because power is
proportional to the square of the intensity, 10 times the 10-base logarithm of the
power ratio. For example, 40 dB is equivalent to a ratio of 100 between the highest
and lowest intensities in the range. The same ratio in power would, however, be
equivalent to 20 dB.
Degeneracy see frequency degeneracy.
Detector
Also photodetector, it is a semiconductor sensor that converts the opti-
cal intensity in a light beam into an electrical current. A quadrant detector is made
of four adjoining detectors and detects the spatial position of a light beam.
Die
Also chip, a common term in microfabrication technology indicating a small
piece of semiconductor or glass cut or diced from a much larger wafer.
Diffusion
In semiconductor fabrication, it is the process to controllably spread or
diffuse impurity dopant atoms in silicon or a semiconductor. Diffused resistors are
resistors made of one type of doping (e.g., p-type) and embedded in silicon having a
background doping of the opposite type (e.g., n-type).
Diffraction
In optics, it is the effect of an incident light beam separating into mul-
tiple beams, each called a higher diffraction order upon striking an optical element
with features that approach in size the wavelength of the incident beam.
DIP
An acronym for dual-in-line type of package. Made of ceramic or plastic, it is
rectangular in shape with pins (leads) on its two long sides.
Dipole
Also electric dipole, it is the electric field created by two charges of equal
magnitude but opposite polarity and separated by a small distance.
Distributed-feedback laser (DFB)
A category of integrated semiconductor lasers
that utilize a Bragg grating to stabilize their output optical frequency. They are
widely used in optical fiber telecommunications.
Doping
Also known as impurity doping. A process of introducing into a semi-
conductor material impurities or foreign atoms—dopants—in relatively dilute con-
centrations (10
13 ~ 10
20 cm
-3). The impurities alter the electrical properties of the
Glossary
263

semiconductor by adding electrons or holes (carriers). At or near room temperature,
the carrier concentration is largely equal to the dopant concentration. If the doping
is n-type, then there is an excess of electrons. Conversely, a p-type material has an
excess of holes. The material is electrically more conductive at higher doping levels.
A p-type region in direct contact with an n-type forms a p-n diode, which passes
current only in one direction: from the p-type to the n-type. Arsenic and phospho-
rous are common n-type dopants in silicon; boron is a p-type dopant in silicon.
Duality
A general abstract concept that pairs equivalent parameters from dis-
tinct physical systems on the basis of energy arguments. Duality is frequently
invoked between mechanical, thermal, and electrical systems. For example, a spring
in a mechanical system is dual to a capacitor because they both store poten-
tial energy. In general, duality pairs mass to inductance, spring constant to the
inverse of capacitance, coefficient of viscous damping to resistance, mechani-
cal displacement to charge, velocity to electrical current, and applied force to
applied voltage.
EEPROM
An acronym for electrically erasable and programmable read only
memory, a type of read-only electronic memory that can be erased and repro-
grammed using high-voltage electrical pulses.
Electromagnetic interference (EMI)
Undesirable interference with electronic sig-
nals of an electromagnetic nature. Sources of EMI include solar eruptions, radio sig-
nals, and nuclear explosions.
Electrophoresis
In chemistry, it is the migration of charged or polar molecules in
suspension in a solution under the effect of an externally applied electric field. It is
useful for the separation of dissimilar molecules and analysis of their molecular
structure based on their rate of movement.
Epitaxy
Chemical process to grow a thin crystalline layer on top of a crystalline
substrate. The grown layer generally has the same crystalline orientation as the
substrate.
Etalon
Also known as a Fabry-Perot cavity or etalon, it is an optical resonator
bounded by two partially reflective surfaces. At resonance, the length of the cavity
equals an integer number of half wavelengths. The etalon is a useful optical filtering
element.
Eutectic point
At their eutectic point, alloys have identical solidus and liquidus
temperatures. The melting temperature of a eutectic alloy is lower than that of any
other alloy composed of the same constituents in different proportions. See liquidus
temperature.
Exponential probability density function
A commonly used probability distribu-
tion in reliability applicable to components with a constant failure rate.
Filter
An electrical or optical circuit that selectively blocks the transmission of
certain frequencies (or wavelengths). The transition frequencies defining the bands
of transmission are known as corner frequencies. A lowpass filter blocks high fre-
quencies but permits the transmission of low frequencies. A highpass filter performs
the opposite function of a lowpass filter. A bandpass filter allows the transmission of
264
Glossary

frequencies in a mid-band range but blocks the transmission of frequencies above or
below this band—outside of the corner frequencies.
Finesse
A measure of optical loss in an optical resonator, such as an etalon.
Imperfections in the reflective surfaces that bound the resonator and in the material
between them degrade the finesse. It is the ratio of the free spectral range (FSR), the
spectral separation between two adjacent transmission peaks of the resonator, to
the full width at half maximum (FWHM), the spectral width of the transmission
peak at its 50% point.
FIT
An acronym for failure in time, it is a measure of reliability equal to
10
-9 failure/hr.
Foundry
A service facility capable of prototyping and fabricating semiconductor
circuits or MEMS. Foundry services typically offer a set of standard fabrication
processes. A few provide custom design services.
Frequency degeneracy
The situation when two or more resonant modes oscillate
at exactly the same frequency. When a number of identical oscillators are coupled
with each other, their frequencies become degenerate. The coupling generally lifts
this degeneracy by splitting the frequencies apart. The amount of separation
depends on the strength of the coupling.
Genomics
The study of genes and their functions.
Grating
Also known as diffraction grating, it consists of a repeating array of lines
spaced apart by a distance close to that of the wavelength of light. Incoming light is
diffracted by the grating into a multitude of higher orders that form an angle with
the incident light beam. A grating can be either transmissive or reflective. See Bragg
grating.
Helmholtz cavity
Also known as a Helmholtz resonator, in acoustics it is a hol-
low air-filled cavity having an inlet opening for sound and an outlet. The cavity is an
acoustic oscillator with a characteristic resonant frequency determined by both the
air volume and the geometry of the inlet and outlet ports. It is commonly used in
acoustics for frequency tuning.
Hole
In physics, it is a vacant position in a semiconductor left by the absence of
an electron. The concept is analogous to a bubble in water left by the absence of liq-
uid. A hole is a carrier of positive electric charge and participates in electric
conduction.
Hybridization
In biochemistry, it is the process when two DNA strands having
complementary sequences of nucleotides match up and bind with each other.
Impedance
A measure of the total resistance to electrical current flow. In acous-
tics, it is a measure of the total resistance to the propagation of acoustic pressure
waves through a medium. Impedance is generally a complex number.
Insertion loss
In a linear system, such as a filter, it is the attenuation, measured in
decibels, of an input signal with frequency content within the system bandwidth.
Ideally, it is zero.
Ion implantation
A high-energy process capable of embedding impurity dopant
atoms within the surface of a semiconductor substrate. It is usually followed by a
Glossary
265

high-temperature diffusion or anneal step. Implantation is useful in the doping of
piezoresistors, embedded electrical interconnects in a silicon substrate, and thin
polysilicon films.
International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
The
ITU,
headquartered
in
Geneva, Switzerland, is an international organization within the United Nations,
where governments and companies coordinate global telecommunication networks,
services, and standards.
Liquidus temperature
In metallurgy, the phase state of an alloy changes with tem-
perature, pressure, and mole percentage of its constituents. At a constant pressure,
there are three distinct regions in the phase diagram. At low temperatures, the alloy
is a solid. At high temperatures, it is a liquid. A third intermediate region defines a
plastic-like, mixed liquid and solid state. The dividing line between the liquid state
and the plastic-like state is the liquidus line. The dividing line between the solid state
and the plastic-like state is the solidus line. For each molar composition, there is a
liquidus and a solidus temperature. At the eutectic composition, the two tempera-
tures are identical; in other words, the two lines coalesce and the plastic-like phase
vanishes.
Lithography
A process common in microfabrication for delineating a pattern
image in a photosensitive polymer. The polymer, or photoresist, can then be used as
a masking layer to transfer the pattern into the underlying substrate.
Lorentz force
In physics, it is the force on a current-conducting element inside a
magnetic field. Its magnitude is equal to the current multiplied by the magnetic flux
density and the length of the conductor. Its direction is orthogonal to both the mag-
netic field and electric current. For a free charge, the force is equal to the product of
the charge, the velocity, and the magentic flux density.
LPCVD
An acronym for low-pressure chemical-vapor deposition.
MESFET
An acronym for metal-semiconductor field effect transistor. A type of
electronic transistor useful for operation at very high frequencies. It is very common
in electronic circuits made of gallium arsenide (GaAs).
Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)
A generic descriptive term, common
in the United States, for a broad technology with the objective of miniaturizing
complex systems by integrating a diverse set of functions into a small package or a
single die.
Micromachining
A term describing the set of design and fabrication tools for the
machining of microstructures and very small mechanical features in a substrate fre-
quently made of silicon.
Microwave
The electromagnetic frequency range variously defined as starting at
about 1 GHz and extending to 30 GHz or even 3 THz (the far infrared). The range of
30 GHz to 300 GHz, with wavelengths in vacuum of 1 cm to 1 mm, is referred to as
the millimeter-wave range.
MTTF
An acronym for mean time to failures for nonrepairable systems. A typi-
cal figure for robust electronic equipment is in excess of 500,000 hours. It means
266
Glossary

that of all equipment tested, one failure occurred after 500,000 hours of testing.
MTTF is usually predicted using statistical methods.
MTBF
An acronym for mean time between failures. It is used to measure the
mean time between successive failures, assuming the system can be repaired to the
same state prior to the failure.
Multi-chip modules (MCM)
A type of high-density packaging approach com-
mon in the integrated circuit industry that involves electrically connecting a number
of dice on the same substrate.
n-type doping see doping.
Noise
A random disturbance in an electrical, optical, acoustic, or mechanical sig-
nal. It frequently determines the resolution of a sensor. It is characterized by its spec-
tral density, which represents the magnitude in an infinitesimally small frequency
band. The power in the noise signal is proportional to frequency bandwidth; hence,
the voltage magnitude is proportional to the square root of bandwidth. Noise origi-
nates from a multitude of sources. The most common is electrical interference noise
and may be filtered. Thermal—or Brownian—and 1/f noise are fundamental physi-
cal entities. Thermal noise originates from physical mechanisms where energy is
converted to heat (e.g., electrical resistance or mechanical friction). It is white in
nature, meaning its spectral energy density is constant over frequency. Thermal
noise increases with temperature. In contrast, 1/f noise, as the name implies, has a
spectral density that decreases at higher frequencies. It is common in electronic cir-
cuits, and originates from crystal imperfections that momentarily trap electrons
(hence the frequency dependence). The corner frequency in a noise spectrum is the
frequency where 1/f and thermal noise are equal. A common measure of electrical
noise is the magnitude of the spectral density at a particular frequency, given in
V
Hz.
Nucleotide
The building block of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). It can be any of
adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), or thymine (T). The sequence of nucleotides
in DNA defines the genetic code. An oligonucleotide is a molecule composed of 25
or fewer nucleotides.
Numerical aperture (NA)
In optics, it is the sine of the angle of the largest cone of
meridional rays (rays that cross the optic axis) that can enter or leave an optical sys-
tem or element multiplied by the index of refraction. For NA<0.25, it is approxi-
mately equal to one-half the inverse of the f-number and a measure of the aperture
size. The numerical aperture is always less than one in air.
Oxidation
Chemical process by which the atoms of an element lose electrons. In
an aqueous solution, neutral atoms become positive ions.
Optoelectronic
Family of devices and components that merge both optical and
electronic functions. They include lasers, optical detectors, modulators, optical
amplifiers, and integrated assemblies merging all such building blocks.
PECVD
An acronym of plasma-enhanced chemical-vapor deposition.
Phase quadrature see quadrature.
Glossary
267

Piezoelectricity
The property exhibited by a class of materials to develop a volt-
age in response to applied mechanical stress or pressure. Conversely, an externally
applied electrical voltage strains and deforms the material.
Piezoresistivity
The property of a certain class of materials, including impurity
doped silicon, to change their electrical resistivity in response to mechanical stress.
Plasma etching
A class of etch processes capable of selectively removing material,
including silicon, by chemical reaction with one or more gases. The reactive gases
are ionized in a plasma inside a vacuum chamber by means of electrical or electro-
magnetic energy. A plasma is an electrically neutral, highly ionized gas composed of
ions, electrons, and neutral particles.
Polysilicon
Abbreviation for polycrystalline silicon. An aggregate of small crys-
talline grains of silicon, each with a different preferred orientation. The grains may
vary in dimensions from a few nanometers to a few micrometers.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
In biochemistry, it is an amplification process
invented in the 1980s for creating billions of identical replicas of a DNA fragment.
Primitive unit
The smallest repeating block of a crystal lattice.
Proteomics
The study of the full set of proteins encoded by a genome.
p-type doping see doping.
p-n diode see doping.
Quadrature
The situation when two periodic signals of same frequency, fL, are
out of phase by a quarter of a cycle, or 90º. For example, sine and cosine waveforms
are in quadrature (or phase quadrature). One important application is in communi-
cations and RF circuits. Separation is possible by heterodyning (multiplication) with
another signal of frequency fR. The amplitudes at the two new frequencies, (fR + fL)
and (fR – fL), are proportional to the amplitude sum and difference, respectively, of
the signals in quadrature.
Quality factor
Physically, it is 2π multiplied by the ratio of the energy stored to
the energy lost during one oscillation cycle of a resonator. It arises from energy loss
mechanisms, such as resistive heating in electrical networks, or viscous damping or
friction at grain boundaries in mechanical systems. Practically, it is the ratio of the
resonant frequency to the spectral bandwidth measured at 3 dB below the resonant
peak of an electrical or mechanical system. The sharper the resonance is, the higher
the quality factor gets. It is a measure of the frequency stability of oscillators. In an
RLC electrical circuit, it is equal to
LC R.
Radio Frequency (RF)
Also known as radio spectrum, it is a general term that
refers to the portion of the electromagnetic spectrum between 3 kHz and 300 GHz.
In the United States, the Department of Commerce and the Federal Communications
Commission are responsible for regulating the frequency allocations in this spectrum.
Reduction
Chemical process by which the atoms of an element gain electrons and
increases their negative valence. Reduction neutralizes positive ions in an aqueous
solution.
Resistivity
The material property, usually measured in Ω•cm, that, along with
the physical dimensions, determines the resistance of a resistor in Ω.
268
Glossary

Sacrificial etching
A micromachining processing method in which an inter-
mediate layer sandwiched between two layers of a different material is preferentially
(sacrificially) etched and selectively removed. Usually, the etch selectivity is high
between the intermediate layer and the two sandwich layers. The purpose of the sac-
rificial layer is to mechanically release one or both of the sandwich layers. Silicon
oxide is a commonly used sacrificial layer.
Silicon fusion bonding
Also known as silicon direct bonding, it is a process to
fuse or bond together two silicon substrates. The bond is strong, generally occurring
at the molecular level.
Silicon on insulator (SOI)
Substrates consisting of a thin layer of silicon dioxide,
typically 0.5 to 2 µm thick, sandwiched between two crystalline silicon layers. The
silicon dioxide is known as buried oxide. One method to fabricate SOI substrates is
by silicon fusion bonding a silicon wafer with a thin layer of silicon dioxide on its
surface to a bare silicon wafer, then thinning one of the silicon substrates. SOI is a
well-proven technology for the fabrication of CMOS electronic circuits suitable for
high-temperature operation (up to 300ºC), as well as for high-voltage (>100V) and
high-frequency (>10 GHz) applications.
Sheet resistance
The resistance of one square of material in units of Ωper square
(Ω/). It is equal to resistivity divided by the thickness of the material. For thick-
film resistors, it is generally implicit that the unit thickness is one mil (25.4 µm).
Solidus temperature see liquidus temperature.
Sound Power Level (SPL)
Sound pressure, in decibels, measured in reference to a
base sound pressure of 20 µPa in air. The reference is usually 1 Pa in water.
Sputtering
A process to deposit a thin film on the surface of a substrate. It
involves the removal of material from a target by ion bombardment and subsequent
redeposition on the substrate.
SRAM
An acronym for static random access memory, a type of electronic mem-
ory that can be arbitrarily addressed. Unlike EEPROM, it cannot hold the data once
electrical power is turned off.
Stiction
A well-known problem resulting from the geometrical scaling law when
surface adhesion forces are larger than the mechanical restoring forces of a sus-
pended micromachined structure.
Strain
In mechanics, a deformation produced by stress. In a beam, it is equal to
the change in length divided by the original beam length.
Surface micromachining
A class of fabrication processes yielding micromechani-
cal structures which are only a few micrometers thick, usually involving the removal
of a sacrificial layer.
Surface mount technology (SMT)
An advanced electronic packaging technol-
ogy in which the type of packages are particularly small so that they can be soldered
in high density on the surface of a printed-circuit board.
SVGA see VGA.
SXGA see VGA.
Glossary
269

TEC see Thermoelectric cooler.
Temperature coefficient of expansion (TCE) see coefficient of thermal expansion.
Temperature coefficient of resistance (TCR)
The rate of increase in resistance as
a function of temperature. In general, TCR = (∆R/R)/∆T, where (∆R/R) is the frac-
tional change in resistance corresponding to a ∆T change in temperature. It is meas-
ured in inverse units of temperature (/ºC).
Thermocompression bond
A bonding process involving the melting of an inter-
mediate layer between two substrates pressed against each other. Frequently, the
intermediate layer is made of glass or gold.
Thermoelectric cooler (TEC)
Also known as a Peltier cooler, it is a device that is
capable of transferring heat from one side to another. It is common in controlling
the temperature of small dice or objects. The device consists of many semiconductor
junctions in parallel that use the Peltier effect.
VGA
An acronym for video graphics adapter, it identifies displays with a resolu-
tion of 640 × 480 pixels. SVGA, XGA, and SXGA denote displays with resolutions
of 800 × 600, 1,024 × 768, and 1,280 × 1,024 pixels, respectively.
Wavelength
A characteristic of a wave, it represents the distance between identi-
cal points in two adjacent cycles of an oscillating waveform. In electromagnetic
waves, wavelength and frequency are inversely related by the velocity of the wave. In
vacuum, the velocity is the speed of light equal to 3 × 10
8 m/s. In a transmission line,
the velocity depends on the dielectric constant, frequency, and geometry and is in the
range of 2 × 10
8 m/s. Thus, a 2-GHz signal has a wavelength of around 100 mm.
Wavelength division multiplexing (WDM)
A protocol in fiber-optic communica-
tion in which digital data is multiplexed on different wavelengths in a single fiber.
This effectively increases the bandwidth available in one fiber by increasing the
number of channels.
Wavelength locker
A device used in fiber optical telecommunications that locks
the wavelength of a laser to a specific value that is often preset by the ITU.
Wet anisotropic etching
Process of etching or removal of material from a silicon
substrate with the etch front delineated by crystallographic planes. Potassium
hydroxide and tetramethyl ammonium hydroxides are two examples.
Wheatstone bridge
An electrical circuit consisting of four resistors forming two
branches electrically connected in parallel, with each branch consisting of two resis-
tors electrically in series. It is useful to measure an imbalance in the values of the four
resistors.
Wireless
RF communication without the use of wires or other transmission lines.
Young’s modulus
Also known as modulus of elasticity, it is a material constant
(in units of pressure) relating mechanical stress to elastic strain. It is indicative of the
stiffness of the material. For example, diamond has a very high Young’s modulus,
whereas soft polymers have low values. It often depends on orientation in crystalline
materials.
270
Glossary

About the Authors
Nadim Maluf received a B.E. from the American University of Beirut, Lebanon, an
M.S. from the California Institute of Technology, and a Ph.D. from Stanford
University, all in electrical engineering.
He is currently vice president of marketing at New Focus, a division of
Bookham Technology, in San Jose, California. Prior to his current position, he held
senior management positions at New Focus and was the head of the R&D depart-
ment at NovaSensor in Fremont, California. He is also a consulting professor of
electrical engineering at Stanford University. He has more than 20 years of industry
experience in integrated circuit technology, microelectromechanical systems, sen-
sors and actuators, and their use in medical, automotive, industrial, and telecommu-
nications applications.
Kirt Williams is a senior scientist at Science Applications International Corpora-
tions. He has conducted research and development on a variety of micromachined
devices, including all-silicon plate valves for high pressure and a wide temperature
range, high-Q variable capacitors, optical switches, and thermionic-emission-based
ionization pressure sensors and magnetic-field sensors. He is also a short course lec-
turer on MEMS for the University of California Extension. He received a B.S. with a
double major of electrical engineering and materials science and an M.S. and a
Ph.D. in electrical engineering, all from the University of California at Berkeley. He
is a state-licensed professional engineer in electrical engineering. Dr. Williams has
authored or coauthored a number of papers, patents, and a book chapter on microe-
lectromechanical devices and fabrication processes.
271

.

Index
A
Accelerated life modeling, 248–49
Acceleration sensors. See Accelerometers
Accelerometers, 96–114
applications, 96
capacitive, 99–114
cross-axis sensitivity, 97
piezoresistive, 98–99
primary specifications, 97
structure, 97
Actuation, 82–85
electrostatic, 82–84
magnetic, 84–85
method comparison, 83
methods, 82–85
piezoelectric, 84
protective coatings, 222–23
with shape-memory alloys, 85
thermal, 84
Actuators, 116–19
comb, 146, 147
complexity, 116
thermal, 221
thermal inkjet heads, 116–19
Advanced process tools, 55–63
anodic bonding, 55–56
EFAB, 62–63
electroplating, 58–59
grinding, 57–58
molding, 59–60
photosensitive glass, 62
polishing, 57–58
self-assembled monolayers, 61
silicon direct bonding, 56–57
sol-gel deposition methods, 58
SU-8 photosensitive epoxy, 61–62
supercritical drying, 60–61
Amorphous silicon, 14, 17–18
defined, 14
piezoresistive effect, 26
See also Silicon
Angular-rate sensors, 104–7
Daimler Benz, 110–12
from Delphi Delco Electronics Systems,
107–9
performance, 10
from Robert Bosch, 112–14
from Silicon Sensing Systems, 109–10
specifications, 106
uses, 107
vibrating element, 105
Anisotropic wet etching, 46–50
in convex corners, 49
etched trench shape, 49
illustrated, 49
See also Etching
Anodic bonding, 55–56
defined, 55
illustrated, 55
process, 55–56
ANSYS modeling program, 80
Application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs),
93
Arrhenius equation, 249, 250
Aspect-ratio-dependent etching (ARDE), 53
Atmospheric-pressure CVD (APCVD), 37, 38
B
Ball grid arrays (BGAs), 235
Basic process tools, 34–55
chemical-vapor deposition (CVD), 37–40
epitaxy, 34–35
etching, 44–55
evaporation, 36–37
lithography, 40–44
oxidation, 35
spin-on methods, 40
sputter deposition, 35–36
Batch fabrication, 7
Beam resonators, 203–6
compensation scheme, 205
defined, 203
273

frequency reference requirement, 204
illustrated, 204
as one-port device, 204
See also Resonators
Beam-steering micromirror, 156–61
coils, 159, 160
defined, 157–58
design, 158
drive coils, 160
fabrication process, 161
gimbal suspension, 159
IMMI implementation, 158–59
magnetic actuation, 159
schematic illustration, 158
Bias/adhesion mirror mapping (BAMM), 254
Bioinformatics, 182
Bio-MEMS, 169
Bosch sensor, 112–14
defined, 112–13
fabrication illustration, 114
fabrication process, 113–14
illustrated, 112
out-of-phase resonant frequency, 113
sensitivity, 114
See also Sensors
Bulk-micromachined variable capacitors,
195–97
interdigitated-finger, 195–97
mass movement, 196
microphonics and, 196–97
See also Capacitors
Bulk micromachining, 44
C
Calibration and compensation, 224–25
Cantilever switch, 212, 213–14
contact reliability, 213
cross section, 212
defined, 213
gap, 214
micrograph, 212
See also Switches
Capacitive accelerometers, 99–114
ADXL, 101–2
deep-etched micromachined, 103–7
illustrated, 100
middle wafer fabrication process, 100
surface micromachined, 10–12
See also Accelerometers
Capacitors, 192–97
bulk-micromachined, 195–97
with constant capacitance, 192
parasitics, 191
quality factor, 190–92
surface-micromachined variable, 192–95
See also Passive components
Capillary electrophoresis, 177
Carbon monoxide gas sensor, 114–16
CVD step, 115
defined, 114–15
fabrication process, 115
illustrated, 115
Ceramic packaging, 233–37
defined, 235
DMD type-A, 237
fabrication process flow, 236
LTCC, 235
material properties, 235
of optical MEMS, 236
shrinkage, 235
See also Packaging
Chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP), 57,
134
Chemical-vapor deposition (CVD), 37–40
atmospheric-pressure (APCVD), 37, 38
in carbon monoxide sensor, 115
defined, 37
low-pressure (LPCVD), 37, 38, 39, 40
plasma-enhanced (PECVD), 37, 38, 40
of polysilicon, 38
of silicon dioxide, 38–39
of silicon nitrides, 39–40
Code-division multiple access (CDMA), 206
Comb-drive resonators, 201–3
defined, 201
frequency response, 202
illustrated, 202
total spring constant, 203
See also Resonators
Complementarity, 174
Computer-numerical-controlled (CNC)
machines, 64
Conferences, 10–11
Coriolis acceleration, 104–5
Corner compensation, 50
Coupled-resonator bandpass filter, 206–8
oscillation modes, 207
scanning electron micrograph, 206
as two-port devices, 208
Cracks, 251
Crash sensors, 3
CRS angular-rate sensor, 109–10
Crystalline silicon, 14–16
crystallographic planes, 14–15
274
Index

material properties temperature
dependence, 19
yield strength, 16
Curie temperature, 27
D
Daimler Benz angular-rate sensor, 110–12
defined, 110
fabrication steps, 111
illustrated, 111
See also Angular-rate sensors
Damping, 200
Deep reactive ion etching (DRIE), 51, 52–55,
252
ARDE in, 53
defined, 52
etch-rate dependence, 54
process characteristics, 52
silicon fusion bonding with (SFB-DRIE), 71,
72
of SOI wafers, 71–72, 73
STS tools, 54
trench profile, 53
use of, 55
See also Etching
Delamination, 252–53
Delphi Delco angular-rate sensor, 107–9
Deoxyribonucleic acid. See DNA
DFB tunable laser, 148–51
defined, 148
fabrication process, 151
micromirror, 150
resonant cavity, 149
schematic, 149
schematic cross section, 150
See also Tunable lasers
Diamond, 22
Die-attach processes, 225–27
Digital Light Processing (DLP), 133, 135
Digital Mirror Device (DMD), 70, 133,
135–39
defined, 136
environmental tests, 255
fabrication, 137, 138, 219
illustrated, 136
micromirror, 255
optical beam steering, 137
package, 223
reliability, 139
reliability case study, 254–56
structures, 137
Digital M × N optical switch, 154–56
Distributed-feedback lasers.
See DFB tunable laser
DNA
addressing with microelectrodes, 183–85
amplification, 174
analysis, 172–81
building blocks, 172
capture probes, 183, 184
complementarity, 174
electrophoresis on a chip, 176–80
hybridization arrays, 180–81
nucleotides, 172
PCR on a chip, 174–76
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 173, 174
sequencing, 176, 179–80
structure, 173
Double-sided lithography, 43
DRIE accelerometers, 103–7
angular-rate sensors, 103–7
defined, 103
gyroscopes, 104–7
scanning-electron micrograph, 103
E
EDP etching, 48
EFAB, 62–63
defined, 62
example, 63
process, 62–63
process illustration, 63
Electrical failures, 253–54
Electrical interconnects, 227–30
flip-chip bonding, 229–30
wire bonding, 227–29
See also Interconnects
Electrodischarge machining (EDM), 65
Electromagnetic interference (EMI), 220
Electromechanical etching, 50–51
defined, 50
illustrated, 50
See also Etching
Electroosmotic flow, 171
Electrophoresis
on a chip, 176–80
capillary, 177
defined, 176
employing, 178
fluid injection, 179
gel, 177
illustrated, 177
See also DNA
Electrophoretic flow, 171
Index
275

Electroplating, 58–59
defined, 58
example solutions, 59
Electrostatic actuation, 82–84
defined, 82–83
extension, 83–84
illustrated, 83
See also Actuation
Epitaxy, 34–35
defined, 34
use of, 35
Etchants
anisotropic, 46
isotropic, 45
orientation-dependent (ODEs), 46
Etching, 44–55
anisotropic wet, 46–50
aspect-ratio-dependent (ARDE), 53
deep, 44
deep reactive ion (DRIE), 51, 52–55
EDP, 48
electromechanical, 50–51
isotropic wet, 45
objective, 44
thin films, 44
timed, 100
Evaporation, 36–37
defined, 36
as directional deposition process, 37
performing, 36
External cavity tunable laser, 144–48
comb actuator, 146, 147
defined, 144–45
designs, 146
fabrication, 147
fixed grating, 145
flexural springs, 147
illustrated, 145
packaging, 148
See also Tunable lasers
F
Failure in time (FIT), 247
Failure mode and effect analysis (FMEA), 249
Failure(s)
cracks and fractures, 251–52
defined, 246
delamination, 252–53
electrical, 253–54
mean time between (MTBF), 247
mean time to (MTTF), 247
modes, 249–54
stiction, 253
thermal, 254
See also Reliability
Fiber-optic communication devices, 141–65
beam-steering micromirror, 156–61
digital M × N optical switch, 154–56
tunable lasers, 142–51
variable optical attenuator (VOA), 161–65
wavelength locker, 151–54
Film bulk acoustic resonators (FBARs),
208–11
cross section, 109
fabrication process, 210
filters, 209, 210
impedance vs. frequency, 209
parallel, 209
series-resonant frequency, 208
See also Resonators
Flip-chip bonding, 229–30
advantages, 229–30
defined, 229
illustrated, 230
See also Electrical interconnects
Fluid nozzles, 85–88
Footing, 54
FORTURAN, 62
Fractures, 251–52
Free spectral range (FSR), 151
Fused quartz, 21
G
Gallium arsenide (GaAs), 22
Gel electrophoresis, 177
GeneChip, 180–82
Glass, 21
micromachining, 21
transition temperature, 23
Grating Light Valve (GLV), 139–41
advantages, 141
defined, 139
fabrication, 141
implementation, 140
operating principle illustration, 139
support, 140
GR-CORE series, 245
Grinding, 57–58
Group III-V compound semiconductors, 22–23
Gyroscopes, 104–7
illustrated, 104
precision, 104
276
Index

H
Hermetic packaging, 223
High-temperature pressure sensors, 93–94
defined, 93
fabrication process, 94
silicon-fusion bonding, 94
See also Pressure sensors; Sensors
Hinges, 88–89
assembly process, 89
fabrication, 88
fold-up surface, 88
structures, 89
Hot embossing, 67
Hot-wire anemometers, 94
Human 1A Oligo Microarray, 182
I
Imaging/displays, 133–41
DMD, 135–39
infrared radiation imager, 133–35
Indium-tin-oxide (ITO), 21
Inductors, 197–200
example parameters, 197
implementation, 192
parasitics, 191
PARC, 198, 199
planar on-chip, 198
quality factor, 190–92
self-resonance shortcoming, 197
spiral, 198
See also Passive components
Infrared radiation imager, 133–35
defined, 134
fabrication, 134
illustrated, 134
Interconnects, 227–33
electrical, 227–30
flip-chip bonding, 229–30
microfluidic, 231
optical, 232
Interdigitated-finger capacitor, 195–97
defined, 195
illustrated, 195
Ion-beam deposition, 35–36
Isotropic wet etching, 45
J
Journal of Micromechanical Systems
(JMEMS), 9
Journal of Micromechanics and
Microengineering (JMM), 10
Journals, 9–10
L
LabChip structure, 180
Laser ablation, 224
Laser machining, 64–65
defined, 64
examples, 64
process, 64–65
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
(LLNL), 175, 176
Lead zirconate titanate (PZT), 29
LIGA
defined, 34
“poor man’s,” 60
Lithography, 33, 40–44
double-sided, 43
large field of view, 43
nanoimprint, 67
projection, 41, 42
proximity, 41
soft, 66–67
steps, 40
thick resist, 42
topographical height variations, 42–43
Littman-Metcalf external cavity laser, 144–48
Low-pressure CVD (LPCVD), 37, 38, 39, 40
Low-temperature cofired ceramics, 235
Low-temperature oxide (LTO) passivation
layers, 223
M
Magazines, 9–10
Magnetic actuation, 84–85
Manifold absolute pressure (MAP) sensor, 2
Mass flow sensors, 94–96
defined, 94–95
illustrated, 95
manufacturing, 95
See also Sensors
Materials, 13–31
diamond, 22
gallium arsenide, 22–23
glass, 21
piezoelectricity, 26–29
piezoresistivity, 24–26
polymers, 21, 23
properties, 14
shape-memory alloys, 23–24
silicon, 13–19
silicon carbide, 22
silicon nitride, 19
Index
277

Materials (continued)
silicon oxide, 19
thermoelectricity, 29–30
thin metal films, 20–21
Mean time between failures (MTBF), 247
Mean time to failure (MTTF), 247
Media isolation, 223
Membrane switch, 212, 213
MEMS
acceptance, 8–9
analysis and forecast, 5
application areas, 4
background, xiii
decision, 7
defined, 2–3
fabrication, xiii
fabrication methods, 33–75
in industrial and automotive applications,
79–129
life sciences applications, 169–85
markets, 4–6
market size, xv
materials, 13–31
packaging, 217–43
photonic applications, 133–65
production facilities, 5
products, 3
reliability, 243–56
resources, 9–11
RF applications, 189–214
solutions, 7
standards, 8
Metal packaging, 237–40
benefits, 238
example, 238–39
for harsh environments, 240
hermetic, 238
TO-type, 237–38
tunable laser, 238–39
See also Packaging
MicroAssembly cantilever switch, 212
Microcontact printing, 66–67
defined, 66
illustrated, 66
process, 66
variations, 66–67
Microelectrode arrays, 182–85
cell cultures over, 185
cross section, 183
DNA addressing with, 183–85
fabrication, 183
positive biasing, 184
Microelectromechanical resonators, 200–211
Microelectromechanical switches, 211–14
Microelectromechanical systems. See MEMS
Microfluidic interconnects, 231
Microfluidics, 169–72
electroosmotic flow, 171
electrophoretic flow, 171
mixing in, 171–72
pumping in, 170–71
Micromachined valves, 119–28
applications, 119
overview, 119
from Redwood Microsystems, 120–22
sliding plate, 124–26
from TiNi Allow Company, 122–23
Micromachining, 3–4
advanced process tools, 55–63
basic process flow, 34
basic process tools, 34–55
birth of, 4
bulk, 44
commercial process examples, 68–74
defined, 3, 33
nonlithographic technologies, 63–68
processes for, 33–75
silicon, 33
Micro/Nano Newsletter, 10
Microphonics, 196
Micropumps, 126–28
fabrication, 128
fabrication illustration, 129
illustrated, 127
pump rate, 128
stand-alone units, 127
structure, 127
Microsystems technology (MST), 2
Micro total analysis system (µTAS), 169
Miller indices, 15
Molded plastic packaging, 240–43
approaches, 240–41
characteristics, 240
molding process, 241–42
postmolded, 241
premolded, 242
sectional view, 241
standards, 243
See also Packaging
Molding, 59–60
MST News, 10
Multichip modules (MCMs), 233
N
Nanoimprint lithography, 67
278
Index

Nitinol, 24
Nonlithographic technologies, 63–68
electrodischarge machining (EDM), 65
hot embossing, 67
laser machining, 64–65
microcontact printing, 66–67
nanoimprint lithography, 67
screen printing, 65–66
soft lithography, 66–67
ultraprecision mechanical machining, 64
ultrasonic machining, 68
Nozzles, 85–88
defined, 85
electroforming fabrication, 86–87
fluid flow paths, 86
forming, 85
parallel orientation, 86
schematic illustrations, 86
side-shooter, 87
O
Optical add/drop multiplexers (OADM), 154
Optical beam steering, 137
Optical interconnects, 232–33
gold-plated butterfly package, 232
hermetic sealing, 232
illustrated, 232
See also Interconnects
Organization, this book, xvii–xviii
Orientation-dependent etchants (ODEs), 46
Oxidation, 35
P
Packaging, 217–43
calibration and compensation, 224–25
ceramic, 233–37
defined, 217
design, 218–25
die-attach processes, 225–27
DMD, 237
for harsh environments, 240
hermetic, 223
media isolation, 223
metal, 237–40
molded plastic, 240–43
process flow, 218
protective coatings, 222–23
requirements, 234
solution types, 233–43
stress isolation, 221–22
thermal management, 220–21
wafer dicing concerns, 219–20
wafer/wafer-stack thickness, 219
PARC inductor, 198, 199
defined, 198
fabrication process, 199
illustrated, 199
solenoid process, 198
Parylenes, 23
Passive components, 190–200
parasitics, 191
quality factors, 190–92
Passive micromachined mechanical structures,
85–89
fluid nozzles, 85–88
hinge mechanisms, 88–89
Peltier effect, 29
Photoresists, 21
positive, 41
spin-on, 40
Photosensitive glass, 62
Piezoelectric actuation, 84
Piezoelectric coefficients, 29
Piezoelectricity, 26–29
defined, 27
effect illustrations, 27, 28
physical origin, 27
quartz, 29
Piezoresistive accelerometers, 98–99
availability, 98
fabrication process, 99
illustrated, 98
See also Accelerometers
Piezoresistivity, 24–26
application, 24
defined, 24
deformation of energy bands, 25
p-type, 26
Plasma-enhanced CVD (PECVD), 37, 38, 40
Plasma etching, 51–52
defined, 51
DRIE, 51, 52–55
process, 51
RIE, 51–52
PMMA, 23
Polarized-dependent loss (PDL), 156
Polishing, 57, 57–58
chemical-mechanical (CMP), 134
step definition, 57
Polyimides, 21
defined, 23
spin-on, 40
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 173, 174
Index
279

Polymerase chain reaction (continued)
on a chip, 174–76
defined, 174
Polymers, 21, 23
defined, 23
forms, 21
parylenes, 23
photoresist, 21
polyimide, 21, 23
Polysilicon, 14, 17–18
beam structures, 18
deposition of, 38
importance, 17
mechanical properties, 17
piezoresistive effect, 26
surface micromachining, 69–71
Population inversion, 143
Potassium hydroxide (KOH), 16
etch rate, 47
as KOH, 46
Pressure sensors, 89–93
fabrication process, 91
high-temperature, 93–94
schematic illustration, 90
silicon-fusion-bonded, 91
See also Sensors
Principle axes, 15
Protective coatings, 222–23
Psychological barrier, 8–9
Q
Quality control, 244–46
Quartz
crystals, 201
micromachining, 21
as piezoelectric material, 29
R
Reactive ion etching (RIE), 51–52
Redwood Microsystems valve, 120–22
defined, 120
fabrication steps, 121
illustrated, 120
operating mechanism, 121
See also Micromachined valves
Reliability, 243–56
accelerated life modeling, 248–49
bath-tub relationship, 248
case study, 254–56
defined, 246
GR-CORE series, 245
ISO 9000/QS 9000, 244
standards, 244–46
statistical methods in, 246–48
tests, 246
See also Failure(s); Quality control
Resonators, 200–211
beam, 203–6
comb-drive, 201–3
coupled-resonator bandpass filter, 206–8
film bulk acoustic, 208–11
microelectromechanical, 200–211
See also RF MEMS
RF MEMS, 189–214
devices, 189
losses, 190
low-resistivity metals, 190
microelectromechanical resonators,
200–211
microelectromechanical switches, 211–14
passive electrical components, 190–200
signal integrity, 189–90
Room-temperature vulcanizing (RTV) rubbers,
227, 252
S
Santur DFB tunable laser, 148–51
Screen printing, 65–66
defined, 65
illustrated, 65
process, 65–66
Seebeck effect, 29, 30
coefficients, 30
defined, 29
thermocouple structure using, 30
Self-assembled monolayers (SAM), 61
coating process, 61
electromagnetic, 82
precursors, 61
Sensing
capacitive, 82
methods, 81–82
objective, 81
piezoresistive, 81–82
Sensors, 89–116
acceleration, 96–114
angular rate, 104–7
carbon monoxide gas, 114–16
high-temperature pressure, 93–94
mass flow, 94–96
pressure, 89–93
protective coatings, 222–23
stress-sensitive, 222
Sensors and Actuators (A, B, C), 9
280
Index

Sensors Magazine, 10
Shape-memory alloys, 23–24
actuation with, 85
critical temperature and, 23–24
Shocks, 251–52
Side-shooter nozzles, 87
Silicon, 13–19
amorphous, 14, 17–18
crystalline, 14–17
defined, 13
interactions, 18
mechanical integrity and, 18
micromachining, 33
microstructures, 14
optical reflectivity, 18
polysilicon, 14, 17–18
properties, 14
surface oxidation, 18
as thermal conductor, 18
Silicon carbide, 22
Silicon dioxide, 38–39
Silicon direct bonding, 56–57
defined, 56
performance, 56
process, 56–57
Silicon-fusion bonding, 94
Silicon fusion bonding with reactive ion
etching (SFB-DRIE), 71
defined, 71
high aspect ratio, 71
illustrated, 72
Silicon nitride, 19
deposition of, 39–40
LPCVD, 48
Silicon-on-sapphire (SOS) wafers, 35
Silicon oxide, 19
Silk screening. See Screen printing
Single-crystal reactive etching and
metallization (SCREAM) process,
72–74
defined, 72
development, 74
illustrated, 74
Sliding plate microvalve, 124–26
defined, 124
designs, 126
fabrication, 126
schematic cross section, 125
See also Micromachined valves
Small Times Magazine, 10
Soft lithography, 66–67
Sol-gel process, 58
Spin-on methods, 40
Sputter deposition, 35–36
defined, 35
directional randomness, 36
planar/cylindrical magnetron, 36
Stiction, 253
Stress isolation, 221–22
SU-8 photosensitive epoxy, 61–62
defined, 61
structures, 62
use of, 62
Supercritical drying, 60–61
Surface-micromachined variable capacitors,
192–97
design, 194
etch holes, 195
fabrication, 192–93, 194
implementations, 193
in portable applications, 193
versions, 193
See also Capacitors
Surface micromachining
polysilicon, 69–71
schematic illustration, 70
systems of materials for, 70
Surface mount technologies (SMT), 217
Switches, 211–14
cantilever, 212, 213–14
desirable parameters, 211
membrane, 212, 213
prototypes, 211
See also RF MEMS
T
Tape peel test, 253
TaqMan tagging, 175, 176
Tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide (TMAH),
48, 112
Thermal actuation, 84
Thermal failures, 254
Thermal inkjet heads, 116–19
concept, 117
fabrication, 117–18
fabrication illustration, 118
nozzles, 116
Thermal management, 220–21
Thermoelectric coolers (TECs), 29
Thermoelectricity, 29–30
Thermosonic gold bonding, 228
Thin metal films, 20–21
choice of, 20
etching, 44
Index
281

TiNi Alloy Company valve, 122–23
metals, 20
defined, 122
fabrication sequence, 123
illustrated, 122
performance, 123
See also Micromachined valves
Titanium-nickel alloys, 24
Transition temperature, 23, 24
Transportation Recall Enhancement,
Accountability, and Documentation
(TREAD), 6
Tunable lasers, 142–51
as bench-top test instruments, 142
building blocks illustration, 143
DFB, 148–51
elements, 143
external cavity, 144–48
metal packaging, 238–39
specifications, 144
tuning operations, 144
U
Ultraprecision mechanical machining, 64
Ultrasonic machining, 68
V
Valves. See Micromachined valves
Vanishing dipole, 28
Variable optical attenuators (VOAs), 142,
161–65
cross-sectional schematic, 164
defined, 161
diffraction operation, 163
fabrication, 165
key characteristics, 161
principle of operation, 162
Voltage-controlled oscillators (VCOs), 192
Volume manufacturing, 8
W
Wafers
dicing concerns, 219–20
thickness, 219
Wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM),
142
Wavelength locker, 151–54
defined, 151
elements, 152
etalon, 153
schematic illustration, 153
Wire bonding, 227–29
aluminum, 228
gold, thermosonic, 228
limitations, 229
See also Electrical interconnects
Y
Yaw-rate sensor, 112
282
Index

Recent Titles in the Artech House
Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) Series
Fundamentals and Applications of Microfluidics, Nam-Trung Nguyen
and Steven T. Wereley
Introduction to Microelectromechanical (MEM) Microwave Systems,
Héctor J. De Los Santos
An Introduction to Microelectromechanical Systems Engineering, Second Edition,
Nadim Maluf and Kirt Williams
MEMS Mechanical Sensors, Stephen Beeby et al.
RF MEMS Circuit Design for Wireless Communications, Héctor J. De Los Santos
For further information on these and other Artech House titles,
including previously considered out-of-print books now available through our
In-Print-Forever® (IPF®) program, contact:
Artech House
Artech House
685 Canton Street
46 Gillingham Street
Norwood, MA 02062
London SW1V 1AH UK
Phone: 781-769-9750
Phone: +44 (0)20 7596-8750
Fax: 781-769-6334
Fax: +44 (0)20 7630-0166
e-mail: artech@artechhouse.com
e-mail: artech-uk@artechhouse.com
Find us on the World Wide Web at:
www.artechhouse.com

