PHYSICS REPORTS (Review Section of Physics Letters) 144, No. 6 (1987) 32L-375. North-Holland, Amsterdam
AN ONTOLOGICAL BASIS FOR THE QUANTUM THEORY
D. BOHM, B.J. HILEY and P.N. KALOYEROU
Department of Physics, Birkheck College. (London University), Ma/ct Street, London WC1 E 7HX, Great Britain
Received July 1986
Contents:
I. Non-relativistic particle systems, D. Bohm, B.J. Hi/er
II. A causal interpretation of quantum fields, D. Bohm, B.J.
I. Introduction
323
Hiley, P.N. Ka/oyerou
2. New ontological implications of the causal interpreta-
I. Introduction
349
tion. The single-particle system
324
2. The causal interpretation of the scalar field
349
3. Extension to the many-body system
330
3. Analysis into normal modes and the ground state of the
4. A brief resumé of the theory of measurements in the
field
352
causal interpretation
332
4. The excited state of the field
356
5. Quantum transitions discussed independently of mea-
5. The concept of a photon
363
surement
337
5.1. The absorption of a quantum of energy
363
6. The quantum processes of “fusion” and “fission”
339
5.2. The absence of photon trajectories
366
7. Quantum wholeness and the approach to the classical
6. Interference experiments
368
limit
340
6.1. The treatment of interference
368
8. Summary and conclusions
345
6.2. The two-slit interference pattern
368
References
347
6.3. The Pfleegor—Mandel experiment
369
7. The EPR experiment
370
8. Generalization of the interpretation and extension to
fermions
373
References
375
Single ordersfor this issue
PHYSICS REPORTS (Review Section of Physics Letters) 144. No. 6 (1987) 321—375.
Copies of this issue may be obtained at the price given below. All orders should be sent directly to the Publisher. Orders must be
accompanied by check.
Single issue price Dfi. 40.00. postage included.
0 370-1573/$ 19.25 © Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. (North-Holland Physics Publishing Division)

AN ONTOLOGICAL BASIS FOR
THE QUANTUM THEORY
D. BOHM, B.J. HILEY and P.N. KALOYEROU
Department of Physics, Birkbeck College, (London University), Malet Street,
London WC1 E 7HX, Great Britain
I
NORTH-HOLLAND
- AMSTERDAM

PHYSICS REPORTS (Review Section of Physics Letters) 144, No. 6 (1987) 323—348. North-Holland, Amsterdam
I. Non-relativistic Particle Systems
D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley
Abstract:
In this paper we systematically develop an ontology that is consistent with the quantum theory. We start with the causal interpretation of the
quantum theory, which assumes that the electron is a particle always accompanied by a wave satisfying Schrodinger’s equation. This wave
determines a quantum potential, which has several qualitatively new features, that account for the difference between classical theory and quantum
theory.
Firstly, it depends only on the form of the wave function and not on its amplitude, so that its effect does not necessarily fall off with the distance.
From this, it follows that a system may not be separable from distant features of its environment, and may be non-locally connected to other systems
that are quite far away from it,
Secondly, in a many-body system, the quantum potential depends on the overall quantum state in a way that cannot be expressed as a
preassigned interaction among the particles, These two features of the quantum potential together imply a certain new quality of quantum wholeness
which is brought out in some detail in this article.
Thirdly, the quantum potential can develop unstable bifurcation points, which separate classes of particle trajectories according to the “channels”
into which they eventually enter and within which they stay, This explains how measurement is possible without “collapse” of the wave function,
and how all Sorts of quantum processes, such as transitions between states, fusion of two systems into one and fission of one system into two, are
able to take place without the need for a human observer. Finally, we show how the classical limit is approached in a simple way, whenever the
quantum potential is small compared with the contributions to the energy that would be present classically. This completes our demonstration that
an objective quantum ontology is possible, in which the existence of the universe can be discussed, without the need for observers or for collapse of
the wave function.
1. Introduction
Quantum theory has been presented almost universally as a theory giving nothing but statistical
predictions of the results of measurements. The fact that the predictions are statistical is, of course, not
in itself very novel, but the basically new feature on which most interpretations agree is that the theory
can be formulated only in terms of the results of a measurement process, and that there is no way even
to conceive
of the individual actual
system, except insofar
as it manifests
itself through the
phenomenona that are to be observed in such a process of measurement.*
In contrast, previous theories (e.g., Newtonian mechanics or classical statistical mechanics) started
with assumptions about what each individual system is and discussed both measurement and statistics as
having a secondary kind of significance that is ultimately based on assumptions as to what is, with
regard to individual systems. That is to say, previous theories dealt basically with the ontology of
individual actual systems while the quantum theory appears to have a fundamental and irreducible
epistomological and statistical component. Indeed, without discussing the statistical results of measure-
ments there would be nothing to talk about in the theory at all except for pure mathematics with no
physical interpretation.
In 1952 one of us (DB) [3] proposed a causal interpretation of the quantum theory based on the
assumption that an individual electron, for example, is constituted of a particle satisfying certain
* Ballantine [1] has proposed what he regards as a statistical interpretation which is Consistent with the assumption that the concept of an
individual electron in its actual movement is meaningful. However, he discusses only ensembles, and never makes any statement as to what the
individual electron actually is, The same is true of Lande’s 12] theory.

324
tIn onto/ogical basis for the quantum theory
equations of motion and a wave satisfying Schrödinger’s equation. Both particle and wave are taken to
he objectively real whether they are observed or not. This has raised the possibility that quantum
mechanics can be understood essentially in terms of ontological assumptions concerning the nature of
individual systems so that the epistemological and statistical content would then take on a secondary
role as in Newtonian mechanics.
In support of this view, we have analysed the measurement process in great detail in a further paper
using the causal interpretation [4], and we have shown that the objective reality of the individual
measurement process can be maintained consistently, without the need either for “collapse of the wave
function” or for consciousness to play a fundamental role at this level. However, Shimony [5] has
pointed out that in the very act of discussing in this way in terms of a measurement process, we are still,
in effect, giving epistomology a basic role, at least tacitly. Perhaps one could say that Shimony is asking
us explicitly to formulate a theory solely in terms of what Bell [6. 7] has called “beables”, without
bringing in “observables” except as a special case of what is happening among the beables.
To meet this challenge we shall in this paper further discuss the ontological significance of the causal
interpretation of the quantum theory, in terms of a few illustrative examples, that serve to bring out
what is implied in this approach. These will include the processes of quantum transition, of “fusion” of
two particles into a single combined system, and of “fission” of such a combined system into two
particles. (The latter cases have already been discussed to some extent in an earlier paper [81.)
We feel that these examples are sufficiently broad in their implications to indicate how the ontology
works out more generally, and to enable us to understand individual quantum processes without having
to bring in measurement. Indeed, we shall see that what is now called a measurement is itself only a
special case of the above-mentioned processes of “fusion” and “fission”, in which the thing measured
and the measuring apparatus may now be seen to constitute an indivisible whole. And as Bell [71has
suggested, the term measurement is therefore somewhat inappropriate, since what is “measured” is, to
a considerable extent, formed within the activity of the process itself.
Although we do thus interpret the quantum theory in terms of a particular kind of ontology, this
requires us to introduce several fundamentally new notions as to the nature of being (or of “beables”)
that may be admitted into physical theories. However, as these notions are of a quite different kind to
those that have generally been accepted in physics thus far, it will not be useful to summarize them at
this point. Rather, it will be best to let them come out in full detail at appropriate stages of the
discussion. All that we wish to emphasize here is that the quantum theory can be understood intuitively
on an ontological basis only if we are ready to consider the assumption of fundamentally new kinds of
qualities and properties for matter rather than merely to continue the development of past lines of
thought.
Finally, we show that the causal interpretation leads to a simple approach to the classical limit in
which, on the basis of a single notion of reality that is valid at all levels, one can see that classical
behaviour results when a certain typically quantum mechanical contribution to this reality (the quantum
potential) can be neglected.
2. New ontological implications of the causal interpretation. The single-particle system
We shall now develop in some detail the main new implications of the causal interpretation of
quantum theory. Firstly, as has indeed been suggested in the Introduction, we suppose that the
electron, for example. actually is a certain kind of particle following a continuous and causally

D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley, Non-relativistic particle systems
325
determined trajectory. As we have also suggested, however, this particle is never separated from a new
type of quantum wave field that belongs to it and that fundamentally affects it. This quantum field,
i/i(x, t), satisfies Schrödinger’s equation, just as the electromagnetic field satisfies Maxwell’s equations.
It too is therefore causally determined.
In classical physics, a particle moves according to Newton’s laws of motion, and, as is well known,
the forces that enter into these laws can be derived from the classical potential, V. The basic proposal in
the causal interpretation is that the quantum theory can be understood in a relatively simple way by
assuming that the particle is also acted on by an additional quantum potential, Q, given by
Q=-~~h~~ where R=I~2
and h is Planck’s constant, while m is the mass of the particle. Evidently, the quantum potential is
determined by the quantum wave field, I/I.
To justify this proposal, we begin by considering Schrödinger’s equation for a single particle
(2)
We write
= R e’5~
and obtain
(3)
where Q is given in eq. (1) and
with P=R2.
(4)
m
Clearly eq. (3) resembles the Hamilton—Jacobi equation except for an additional term, Q. Thissuggests
that we may regard the electron as a particle with momentum p
VS subject not only to the classical
potential V but also to the quantum potential Q. Indeed the action of the quantum potential will then
be the major source of the difference between classical and quantum theories. This quantum potential
depends on the Schrödinger field t/i and is determined by the actual solution of the Schrodinger equation
in any particular case.
Given that the electron is always accompanied by its Schrodinger field, we may then say that the
whole system is causally determined; hence the name “causal interpretation”.
Equation (4) can evidently be regarded as a continuity equation with P = R2 being a probability
density, as Born suggested. The function P has, however, two interpretations, one through the quantum
potential and the other through the probability density. It is our proposal that the fundamental meaning
of R (and therefore indirectly of P) is that it determines the quantum potential. A secondary meaning is
that it gives the probability density for the particle to be at a certain position. Here we differ from Born
who supposed that it was the probability of finding the particle there in a suitable measurement.

326
An ontological basis for the quantum theory
Indeed, as has been pointed out in the Introduction, in the causal interpretation, the measurement
process itself has to be interpreted as a particular application of the theory, which is formulated
basically in terms of “beables” rather than of “observables” [7](while the observables are treated as
statistical functions of the heables).
Equation (4) implies that it is consistent to interpret P as a probability density in a statistical
ensemble of well-defined trajectories, each following the causal laws described above. For if the density
holds initially, then this equation guarantees that it will hold for all time. We shall discuss the question
of why there is such a statistical ensemble further on, as well as why its probability density will approach
no matter what the initial form of this density may have been.
As the theory develops, we shall find that the electron is by no means a structureless particle.
Rather, what is suggested by its behaviour is that it is a highly complex entity that is deeply affected by
its quantum field in an extremely subtle and dynamic way. Moreover, this entity is not to be regarded
(as is done in the usual interpretations) as somehow directly possessing both particle-like and wave-like
properties. Rather, the observed wave-like properties will follow, as we shall see, from the general
effect of the quantum wave field on the complex structure of the particle.
At first sight, it may seem that to consider the electrons as some kind of particle that is affected by
the quantum field, tb. is a return to older classical ideas. Such a notion is generally felt to have long
since been proved to be inadequate for the understanding of quantum processes. However, closer
inspection shows that this is not actually a return to ideas of this sort. For the quantum potential has a
number of strikingly novel features, which do not cohere with what is generally accepted as the essential
structure of classical physics. As we shall see, these are just such as to imply the qualitatively new
properties of matter that are revealed by the quantum theory.
The first of these new properties can be seen by noting that the quantum potential is not changed
when we multiply the field intensity
~]i by an arbitrary constant. (This is because çb’ appears both in the
numerator and the denominator of Q.) This means that the effect of the quantum potential is
independent of the strength (i.e.. the intensity) of the quantum field but depends only on its form. By
contrast, classical waves, which act mechanically (i.e., to transfer energy and momentum, for example,
to push a floating object) always produce effects that are more or less proportional to the strength of
the wave.
To give an analogy, we may consider a ship on automatic pilot being guided by radio waves. Here
too, the effect of the radio waves is independent of their intensity and depends only on their form. The
essential point is that the ship is moving with its own energy, and that the information in the radio
waves is taken up to direct the much greater energy of the ship. We may therefore propose that an
electron too moves under its own energy, and that the information in the form of the quantum wave
directs the energy of the electron.
This introduces several new features into the movement. First of all, it means that particles moving
in empty space under the action of no classical forces still need not travel uniformly in straight lines.
This is a radical departure from classical Newtonian theory. Moreover, since the effect of the wave does
not necessarily fall off with the intensity, even distant features of the environment can profoundly affect
the movement. As an example, let us consider the interference experiment [9]. This involves a system
of two slits. A particle is incident on this system, along with its quantum wave. While the particle can
only go through one slit or the other, the wave goes through both. On the outgoing side of the slit
system, the waves interfere to produce a complex quantum potential which does not in general fall off
with the distance from the slits. This potential is shown in fig. 1. Note the deep “valleys” and broad
“plateaux”. In the regions where the quantum potential changes rapidly there is a strong force on the

D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley, Non-relativistic particle systems
327
Fig. 1. The quantum potential for the two-slit experiment.
particle. The particle is thus deflected, even though no ordinary type of force is acting. The movement
of the particle is therefore modified as shown in fig. 2 (which contains an ensemble of possible
trajectories).
In this explanation of the quantum properties of the electron, the notion of information plays a key
role. Indeed it is helpful to extend this notation of information and introduce what could be called
active information. The basic idea of active information is that a form having very little energy enters
into and directs a much greater energy. The activity of the latter is in this way given a form similar to
that of the smaller energy. It is therefore clear that the original energy-form will “inform” (i.e. put form
into) the activity of the larger energy.
As an example, consider a radio wave whose form carries a signal. The energy of the sound that we
hear from our radio comes, however, not from this wave but from its power plug or batteries. This is
essentially an “unformed” energy, that takes up the form or information carried by the radio wave. The
information in the radio wave is, in fact, potentially active everywhere, but it is actually active, only
where and when its form enters into the electrical energy within the radio. A more developed example
of active information is obtained by considering the computer. The information content in a silicon chip
can similarly determine a whole range of potential activities which may be actualized through having the
form of this information enter the electrical energy coming from a power source. Which of these
possibilities will in any given case be actualized depends on a wider context that includes the software
programmes and the responses of the computer operator at any given moment.
Although the computer does thus indicate a kind of objective significance for information, neverthe-
less like the radio set it depends on a structure set up through the thought of human beings and so it still
retains a trace of subjectivity. An example that does not involve structures set up by human beings is
the function of the DNA molecule. The DNA is said by biologists to constitute a code, that is to say, a
language. The DNA molecule is considered as information content for this code, while the “meaning”
is expressed in terms of various processes; e.g., those involving DNA molecules, which “read” the

328
An ontological basis for the quantum i/u ‘r%
I
‘
1111(1
I
I
it. 2. Ti ,i~eciotic~ho the tsw-dii experiment.
DNA code, and carry out the activities that are implied by particular sections of the DNA molecule.
The comparison to our notion of objective and active information is very close. Thus, in the process of
cell growth it is only theform of the DNA molecule that counts, while the energy is supplied by the rest
of the cell (and indeed ultimately by the environment as a whole). Moreover, at any moment, only a
part of the DNA molecule is being “read” and giving rise to activity. The rest is potentially active and
may become actually active according to the total situation in which the cell finds itself.
The notion of active information is not only relevant in objective contexts as those described above,
but it evidently also applies to subjective human experience. For example, in reading a map we
apprehend the information context through our own mental energy. And by a whole set of virtual or
potential activities in the imagination, we can see the possible significance of this map. Thus the
information is immediately active in arousing the imagination but this activity is still evidently inward
within the brain and nervous system. If we are actually travelling in the territory itself then, at any
moment, some particular aspect may be further actualized through our physical energies, acting in that
territory (according to a broader context including what the human being knows and what he is
perceiving at that moment).
It is clear that the notion of active information already has a widespread application in many areas of
human experience and activity, as well as beyond these (in the case of DNA). Our proposal is then to
extend the notion of the possibility of the objective applicability of the notion of active information to
the quantum level. That is to say the information in the quantum potential is potentially active
everywhere, but actually active only where this information enters into the activity of the particle.
This implies, however, that as we have already suggested, an electron, or any other elementary
particle, has a complex and subtle inner structure (e.g., at least comparable to that of a radio). This

D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley, Non-relativistic particle systems
329
notion goes against the whole tradition of modern physics which assumes that as we analyse matter into
smaller and smaller parts its behaviour grows more and more elementary. But our interpretation of the
quantum theory indicates that nature is far more subtle and strange than previously thought. However,
this inner complexity is perhaps not as implausible as may appear at first sight. For example, a large
crowd of people can be treated by simple statistical laws, whereas individually their behaviour is
immensely more subtle and complex. Similarly, large masses of matter reduce approximately to a
simple Newtonian behaviour, whereas the molecules and atoms out of which matter is built have a more
complex inner structure.
To make this suggestion yet more plausible, we note that between the shortest distances now
measurable in physics (of the order of 1016 cm) and the shortest distances in which current notion of
space time probably has meaning, of the order of i033 cm, there is a vast range of scale in which an
immense amount of yet undiscovered structure could be contained. Indeed, this range of scale is
comparable to that which exists between our own size and that of the elementary particle.
So far, the double slit experiment has been discussed in terms of a single particle. But a typical
experiment, in fact, involves a statistical ensemble of particles all having the same quantum field,
~i.
The experiment can be so arranged that each particle, along with its quantum field, goes through the slit
system separately and independently. Each of these electrons start from a different initial position, and
so go through the slit system in a different way, following one of the ensemble of trajectories shown in
fig. 2. As a result, it will arrive at a different point on the screen. After many such particles have gone
through, one then obtains a statistical ensemble of spots on the detection screen, which add up to the
well-known interference pattern.
Once the quantum field, ~i, is specified, the results of each experiment are in principle determinate
and depend only on the initial conditions of the particle. The latter will however fluctuate from one case
to the next, because the particles emerge from a source (e.g., a hot filament), in which they are subject
to irregular thermal perturbations. Within this source, the actual trajectory of a particle is extremely
sensitive to the complex details of the quantum potential, which is in turn sensitive to the small thermal
disturbances from the other particles in the thermodynamic system. The motion is therefore unstable
and chaotic in a sense, that has been defined, for example, by Kadonoff et al. [101,and that we shall
discuss later in section 4. This means that complete predictability and controllability of the initial
conditions is, in practice, essentially impossible. And so, it will also not be possible to predict just
where each electron will arrive on the detection screen. In this fashion, statistical notions of the
predictions of the quantum theory can be explained while causality is still basic to the theory itself.
As to why the probability density in a thermal source should approach I~d2,
there are several possible
explanations. First of all, one can give reasons why it is plausible that this will be the equilibrium
distribution resulting from the effects of chaotic thermal disturbances on the quantum potential of any
particle that emerges [111.And secondly, it is possible to assume a further stochastic process of random
fluctuations of the momentum around on average, j~= VS, representing, for example, the action of a
subquantum level that would lead to P = R2 in the long run [12, 131.
The fact that each particle responds to information from the entire environment gives a simple and
tangible account of Bohr’s notion of the undivided wholeness of the experimental conditions and the
experimental results [14, 151. Thus, each particle goes through only one of the slits, and yet its motion is
fundamentally affected by information coming from both slits. One has therefore to consider the whole
of the relevant experimental solution, to understand what happens in each case. However, this sort of
wholeness implied by the causal interpretation differs in an important way from that of Bohr. For in the
causal interpretation, while the entire experiment has to be treated as an undivided whole, this whole is

330
An ontological basis br the quantion theory
analysable in thought (e.g., through the movement of the particle acted on by the quantum potential).
However, in Bohr’s approach, the entire experimental situation is an unanalysable whole, about which
nothing more can be said at all.
3. Extension to the many-body system
We shall now go on to consider the many-body system in which we shall see, in several striking ways,
a further development of this difference between classical and quantum ontologies.
We shall begin by considering the two-body system. The wave function t~i(r1,r2, t) satisfies the
Schrödinger equation
ih~=[_
_(V~+V~)+V]~
(5)
where V1 and V. refer to particles 1 and 2 respectively. Writing cli
ReiS I and defining P
R
2 = çIJ~IIJ,
we obtain
~S
(VS)2
(VS)2
+
+V+Q=0
(6)
~t
2m
2rn
where
h
(V2-l-V2)R
-
2m
R
and
aP/at + div
1(PV1S!m) + div2(PV1S/m) = 0.
(8)
As in the case of the one-body system, eq. (6) can be interpreted as the Hamilton—Jacobi equation
with the momenta of the two particles being respectively
p1=V~S
and
p2=V2S.
But this time it is the Hamilton—Jacobi equation for a system of two particles responding not only to the
classical potential, V, but also the quantum potential, Q. This latter now depends on the position of
both particles in a way that does not necessarily fall off with the distance. We thus obtain the possibility
of a non-local interaction between the two particles.
Going on to consider the N-body system we will have
Q = Q(r~,r,
r5, t)
so that the behaviour of each particle may depend non-locally on all the others, no matter how far away
they may be.
If we take P = R
2 as the probability density in the configuration space of the two particles, then

D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley, Non-relativistic particle systems
331
clearly eq. (8) is the equation for the conservation of this probability. With this definition of
probability, it follows, as has been shown, by means of a detailed and extensive treatment [3, 41, that all
the statistical results of measurements are (as in the one-body case) the same in the causal interpretation
as they are in the usual formulation of the theory.
For several centuries, there has been a strong feeling that non-local theories are not acceptable in
physics. It is well known, for example, that Newton felt uneasy about action-at-a-distance t16] and that
Einstein regarded this action as “spooky” [171.One can understand this feeling, but if one reflects
deeply and seriously on this subject one can see nothing basically irrational about such an idea. Rather
it seems to be most reasonable to keep an open mind on the subject and therefore to allow oneself to
explore this possibility. If the price of avoiding non-locality is to make an intuitive explanation
impossible, one has to ask whether the cost is not too great.
The only serious objection we can see to non-locality is that at first sight it does not seem to be
compatible with relativity because non-local connections in general would allow a transmission of
signals faster than the speed of light. However, we have extended the causal interpretation to a
relativistic quantum field theory. Although this interpretation now implies that events outside each
other’s light cones can be connected but the additional new features of the quantum potential do not
permit a signal to be transmitted faster than light [4]. It follows then that the causal interpretation is
compatible with the essential implications of the theory of relativity.
While non-locality as described above as an important new feature of the quantum theory, there is
yet another new feature that implies an even more radical departure from the classical ontology, to
which little attention has been paid thus far. This is that the quantum potential, Q, depends on the
“quantum state” of the whole system in a way that cannot be defined simply as a pre-assigned
interaction between all the particles.
To illustrate what this means in more detail, we may consider the example of the hydrogen atom,
whose wave function is a product of function f(x), where x is the centre-of-mass coordinate, and g(r)
where r is the relative coordinate,
~P=f(x) g(r).
The quantum potential will contain a term representing the interaction of electron and proton
2
2
Ii
Vg(r)
~
2~i g(r)
In the s state, Q1 is a function only of r itself, while in the p state, it depends on the relative angles, U
and
~,
as well. Evidently, it is impossible to find a single pre-assigned function of r, which would
simultaneously represent the interaction of electron and proton in both s and p states. And, of course,
the problem would be still more sharply expressed if we brought in all the other states (d, f, etc.).
It is clear from the above that the wholeness of the entire system has a meaning going beyond
anything that can be specified solely in terms of the actual spatial relationships between particles. This is
indeed the feature which makes quantum theory go beyond mechanism of any kind. For the essence of
a mechanical behaviour is that the parts interact in some pre-assigned way to make up the whole. Even
if the interaction is non-local, the system is still mechanical as long as the interaction potential is a fixed
and pre-assigned function of the particle variables. But in the causal interpretation of the quantum
theory, this “interaction” depends upon the wave function of the entire system, which is not only

332
An ontological basis for the quantum theor~
contingent on the state of the whole but also evolves with time according to Schrddinger’s equation.
Something with this sort of independent dynamical significance that refers to the whole system and that
is not reducible to a property of the parts and their inter-relationships is thus playing a key role in the
theory. As we have stated above this is the most fundamentally new ontological feature implied by the
quantum theory.
The above-described feature should, in principle, apply to the entire universe. However, as has been
shown elsewhere [18],when the wave function of a system factorises into two parts, the corresponding
subsystems will behave independently. In this case, each subsystem can be treated on its own. It is this
feature which provides the ground for the possibility of understanding how, in spite of quantum
wholeness, the world still behaves in the classical limit as a set of relatively independent parts that
interact mechanically.
Such considerations are crucially important to understand the application of quantum mechanics to
the many-body system. For example, a chemical bond in a molecule in a certain quantum state can be
seen to be a consequence of the quantum potential for the whole molecule, which is such that in this
state it tends to hold the electrons in places where they contribute to the bonding. On the other hand.
in a different quantum state, the quantum potential will be different, so that the molecule may not be
stable.
Similarly, in the superconducting state of a many-electron system, there is a stable overall organized
behaviour, in which the movements are coordinated by the quantum potential so that the individual
electrons are not scattered by obstacles. One can say indeed that in such a state, the quantum potential
brings about a coordinated movement which can be thought of as resembling a “ballet dance”.
As the temperature goes up, the property of superconductivity disappears. In terms of our approach,
this is because the wave function breaks up into a set of independent factors which can be thought of as
representing independent pools of information, so that the electrons will cease to be guided by a
common pool of information and will instead respond to independent pools of this kind. Therefore, the
electrons begin to behave like an unorganized crowd of people who are all acting more or less
independently and thus begin to jostle each other, so that the property of superconductivity disappears.
This suggests that the quantum potential arising under certain conditions has the novel quality of
being able to organize the activity of an entire set of particles in a way that depends directly on the state
of the whole. Evidently, such an organization can be carried to higher and higher levels and eventually
may become relevant to living beings [191.
The possibility that information can be in one common pool or divide into independent pools in the
way described above arises basically from the multi-dimensional nature of the wave function, which
constitutes one pool when it is not factorizable and many when it is.
This is what enables us to answer one of the principle objections that has been made to causal
interpretation, i.e., that the wave function, being in a configuration space, cannot be understood in a
field in a 3 + 1-dimensional space time. For we are now regarding the wave function as belonging to an
information structure that can quite naturally be considered to be multi-dimensional (organized into as
many sets of dimensions as may be needed), rather than as a simple source of a mechanical force.
4. A brief resumé of the theory of measurements in the causal interpretation
We shall now give a brief resumé of our treatment of the quantum measurement process [41,as this
treatment introduces a number of key new concepts that will be carried over into our discussion of the
quantum potential approach.

D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley, Non-relativistic particle systems
333
Our first step is, for the sake of convenience, to divide the overall process of measurement into two
stages. In the first stage, the “observed system” interacts with the “measuring apparatus” in such a way
that the wave function of the combined system breaks into a sum of non-overlapping packets, each
corresponding to a possible distinct result of the measurement. Let the initial wave function of the
observed system be
where the cli~(x)are the possible eigenfunctions of the operators that are being “measured”. The initial
wave function of the combined system is then
= q50(y) E C~~~(x)
where ~( y) is the initial wave function of the measuring apparatus. After the two systems have
interacted ~ goes over into
= ~
nt/i~(x)cb~(y)
where the
4~(y)
are the different wave packets of the relevant parameters of the apparatus that
correspond to the possible results of the measurement. For a proper measurement to be made, the
packets 4..~(y), must, of course, be distinct and non-overlapping.
As we show in Bohm and Hiley [4], during the period of interaction, the wave functions, and
therefore the quantum potential, become very complex and rapidly fluctuating functions of the time.
When the packets have separated, the “apparatus particles” must have entered one of them (say m) and
will have zero probability of leaving (because there is no probability of entering the spaces in between
packets). From then on, the quantum potential acting on the particles will be determined only by the
packet cl’~m(x) çb~( y), because all the other packets (which do not overlap this one) will not contribute to
it. So, at least as far as the particles are concerned, we may ignore all the other packets, and regard
them as, in the sense discussed in section 2, constituting inactive or physically ineffective information.
Here, it must be emphasized that this will still happen even when there is some spatial overlap between
~frtn(X)
and the remaining packets, cli~(x).This is because of the multi-dimensional nature of the
many-body wave function, which implies that the packet, çli~(x)4~(y),and any other packet, say
~/i~(x)/.~(y),will fail to overlap as long as one of its factors fails to overlap, even though the other factor
would still have some overlap.
One may describe what happens in another way by saying that each packet, çb~(y)forms a kind of
“channel”. During the period of interaction, the quantum potential develops a structure of bifurcation
points, such that trajectories of the apparatus particles on one side of one of these points enter a
particular channel (say 4m(y)),
while the others do not. Eventually, each particle enters one of the
channels to the exclusion of all the others and thereafter stays in this channel. When this has happened,
the “observed” particle will behave from then on, as if its wave function were just lfJ~(x),even if clim(x)
and the rest of the clsr~(x)should still overlap. The fact that the “apparatus particles” must enter one of
their possible channels and stay there is thus what is behind the possibility of a set of clearly distinct
results of a quantum measurement.
At this point, however, one may ask what is the role of the “inactive” packets, not containing the
particles. Can we be sure that they must necessarily remain permanently inactive? The answer is that in

334
.4n ontological basis fir the quantum
theory
principle, it is in fact still possible to bring about activity of such packets. For example, one may apply
an interaction Hamiltonian to one of these inactive packets, say cl~’r(X), such that it comes to coincide
once again with cli,~(x),while leaving
~~~(y)
unchanged. The two packets together will then give us
+ çli~(x)).If cli~1(x)and clhr(X) overlap, there will be interference between them, and this will
give rise to a new quantum state, in which the previously inactive packet.
tI’r(X), will now affect the
quantum potential, so that it will once again be active.
But here, it is necessary to note that thus far, the “measuring apparatus” and the “observed system”
have been treated on an essentially symmetrical footing. We have not, as yet, brought into the
theoretical description anything that would assign a special role to the state of the measuring apparatus
as something that was actually capable of being known by a human being. It was here that we
introduced our second stage of the measurement process, which contained a detection or registration
device capable of amplifying the distinctions in the states of the “apparatus particles” to a large scale
level that is easily observable by ordinary means. Such a registration device will contain a very large
(macroscopic) number, N, of particles. When this device interacts with the “apparatus particles”, y, its
wave function A(Z
Z,~)will have to be brought into the discussion. To each distinct state, n, of the
“apparatus particles”, there will he a corresponding state, A,,(Z1,... ZN) of the registration devices.
The wave function of the relevant system will then he
~C’~,,(y)~(x)A,(Z1,...
Z5).
Each of the A, will also not overlap with the others, so that even if the q~(y)
should later come to
overlap, this would still not affect the quantum potential. as the particles of the registration device will
now be in distinct channels.
Could the channels of the registration device in turn be made to overlap again? In Bohm and Hiley
[4]it was emphasized that this would have essentially zero probability, because in registration, there has
occurred a thermodynamically irreversible process. (So that, for example, to have overlap here would
be as improbable as for a kettle of water placed on ice to boil.)
It follows then that once registration has occurred, the packets (or channels) not containing all the
relevant particles (including those constituting the registration device) will indeed be permanently
inactive or physically ineffective. From this, we can see that there is no need to introduce a “collapse”
of the wave function in a measurement. For, because of the very behaviour of all the relevant particles
and of the wave functions, the “observed system” will from now on act entirely as if it were in the
quantum state, cl’~(x).This state will correspond to the channels determined by the wave function of all
the constituents of the registration device, that are actually occupied by the particles constituting this
device. So it follows that everything will from this point on take place as if the wave function had
“collapsed” to the actual result, without the need for any such collapse ever to occur. And this comes
about without the need to bring in the consciousness of an observer, in arguments such as have been
proposed by Wigner [20]. As in the case of superconductivity discussed in section 3, we can consider
this process in terms of the “dance” of the particles, as guided by “pools” of information, represented
by the wave function. The two systems begin by executing independent “dances”, because the wave
function then factorises, and corresponds to separate “pools” of information. During the period of
interaction, both systems move according to a single and more complex pool of information, so that
they are carrying out a common “dance”. It then follows that what happens in the over-all process
described above can better he regarded as a mutual transformation of observed system and observing
apparatus, rather than as a measurement in which the two systems are governed by separate and

D. Bohm and 8.1. Hiley, Non-relativistic particle systems
335
independent pools of information. Thus during the period of interaction this single more complex pool of
information determines (among other things), a set of bifurcation points. Finally, as the particles enter
one of the channels, as determined by the bifurcation points, the two systems are moving once again
according to independent pools of information, and therefore executing separate “dances”. But their
movements are correlated, in the sense thateach state of movement of the observed system goes together
with a corresponding state of the apparatus. In this process of mutual transformation, one can indeed
hardly say that anything has been measured for what are called the results of a measurement are not
present to begin with, but come about in the process of interaction itself.
While it is clear that what is automatically called the measurement process has thus been given an
overall causal and objective description, one may nevertheless ask what is the meaning of all the
“empty” wave packets (i.e., those not containing particles). Those still satisfy Schrödinger’s equation,
but are nevertheless permanently inactive, in the sense that they never manifest themselves in the
movements of the particles at all. Such packets seem to be floating, almost like wraiths in a strange
multi-dimensional world. One can see, for example, in the “many worlds” interpretation of Everett
[211, the problem is dealt with in a certain way, as each packet would correspond to a different
universe, with its different measuring instrument (along with its different human observer as well).
What do all these “empty” packets signify in the causal interpretation?
To help make clear what the permanent loss of potential for activity of such packets means, we may
consider as an analogy a device that was used to illustrate what has been called the implicate order [22].
In this device, a droplet of insoluble ink was inserted into a viscous fluid such as glycerine, which was
then subject to a shearing rotation in a controlled way. The ink droplet gradually became invisible as it
was drawn out into a fine thread. When the rotation was reversed, this time the thread was gradually
drawn together, until the ink droplet suddenly emerged again into visibility. While it was drawn out and
invisible, the distribution of ink particles appeared to be “at random” with no order. Yet it had a
hidden order, which was revealed when the droplet came together again. This order was described as
implicate or enfolded, while the ink droplet itself was explicate or unfolded.
Let us now imagine printing a message in ink droplets suspended in glycerine. As these are enfolded,
the information in the message becomes inactive, within the field of anything that is sensitive only to a
concentration of ink beyond a certain minimum threshold. But it is still potentially active there, as can
be seen by the fact that it can be unfolded again into its original form. If, however, the fluid had not
been viscous, there would have been an irreversible diffusion. After such a process, the information in
the message would be permanently inactive in the field in question, as the original form could never be
reconstituted again. Nevertheless, in a certain sense, some highly enfolded transformation of the
original structure of the printed message is still in principle present, regardless of how much diffusion
has taken place.
The analogy to the quantum theory is clear. As long as the measuring apparatus interacts reversibly
with the classical system, channels that are inactive with regard to the particles are still potentially
active. But as soon as the irreversible interaction with the registration device takes place, the channels
not containing particles are permanently inactive. In the usual language, we would say that the
information has been “lost”, but as with the diffusion of ink particles, it has merely ceased to be
capable of acting in the manifest domain.
From the above, we see that the information content in the wave function is quite generally in a
non-manifest (implicate) order (generally multi-dimensional), while the particles are in the ordinary
(explicate) order of space time. Indeed, it can be shown [22]that the Green’s function, which describes
the movement of this wave function, corresponds to just a process of enfoldment and unfoldment. The

336
An ontological hasi.s for the quantum theory
movements of the particles then express the meaning of the information content in a manifest
(explicate) order.
In the above example, the information was ultimately “carried” or “held” by ink droplets. In other
applications of information theory, there has always been some material system or field that carries the
information. This implies that such information has a certain usually small energy, but that the energy
in the activity which is its “meaning” is much larger and has an independent source. Can we look back
at the information in the quantum field in this way?
As yet, we have no theory as to what is the origin of the quantum potential. However, we may
suppose that the information it represents is carried in some much more subtle level of matter and
energy, which has not yet manifested in physical research. In this connection, we may recall that in
section 2, we proposed that the behaviour of matter does not always become simpler as we go to
smaller low dimensions, and that a particle may have a structure (somewhere between iO~’cm and
i0~cm) which is complex and subtle enough to respond to information in ways that might even
resemble, for example, the activity of a ship guided by radar waves. It is in this structure (which could
include generalized fields of a very subtle nature as well as particles) that we may look for the basis of
this information in physical structure.
Another analogy to the process in which information becomes inactive can be obtained by thinking
of what happens when we make a decision from a number of distinct possibilities. Before the decision is
made, each of these possibilities constitutes a kind of information. This may be displayed virtually in
imagination as the sort of activities that would follow if we decided on one of these possibilities.
Immediately after we make such a decision, there is still the possibility of altering it. However, as we
engage in more and more activities that are consequent on this decision, we will find it harder and
harder to change it. For we are increasingly caught up in its irreversible consequences and sooner or
later we would have to say that the decision can no longer be altered. Until that moment, the
information in the other possibilities was still potentially active, but from that point on such information
is permanently inactive. The analogy to the quantum situation is clear for the information in the
unoccupied wave packet becomes more and more inactive as more and more irreversible processes are
set in train by the channel that is actually active.
In the case of our own experience of choice, the inactive possibilities may still have a kind of
“ghostly existence” in the activity of the imagination, but eventually this too will die away. Similarly,
according to our proposal, the inactive information in the quantum potential exists at a very subtle level
of the implicate order. We may propose, however, that perhaps this too will eventually die away
because of as yet unknown features of the laws of physics going beyond those of quantum theory.
The above discussion should help to make it clear how it is possible to understand quantum processes
without bringing the collapse of the wave function and without bringing in the consciousness of an
observer. D’Espagnat [23] has however suggested in a critical vein that our ability to do without the
collapse of the wave function does in fact depend ultimately on consciousness. For in his view, we have
“assumed that we perceive only the supplementary (particle) variables”, and for him this implies that all
the unoccupied packets are dropped from our account, simply because they are not perceived and
therefore do not enter our consciousness. In our approach, however, our basic assumption has actually
nothing to do with consciousness. Rather, it is that the particles are the direct manifest reality, while the
wave function can be “seen” only through its manifestations in the motions of the particles. This is
similar to what happens in ordinary field theories (e.g., the electromagnetic), on which the fields
likewise can manifest themselves only through the forces that they exert on the particles.* Moreover the
* The main difference is that the particles can be sourcesof fields, whereas, in the quantum theory, particles do not serve as sources of the wave
function. But evidently this does not affect the question of how the fields are manifest themselves.

D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley, Non-relativistic particle systems
337
conclusion that after an irreversible detection process has taken place, the unoccupied packets will
never manifest themselves in the behaviour of the particles follows, as we have seen, from the theory
itself and has nothing to do with our not being conscious of these packets.
We can further justify our assumption that the immediately manifest level is that of the particles by
noting that (as will be shown in more detail in section 7) in the classical limit, from which the content of
our sensory data comes, the quantum potential can be neglected. This means that all that we learn
about the world through the senses has to pass through a level in which the wave function plays no
essential role. That is to say, as we have indeed already indicated, empirical knowledge referring to the
wave function has ultimately to come from inferences drawn from observations of the behaviour of
structures of particles, as manifested at the classical level. This conclusion is however a consequence of
our basic assumptions concerning the nature of reality as a whole and does not depend on any further
hypothesis concerning the particular content of our consciousness.
5. Quantum transitions discussed independently of measurement
We are now ready to extend the notions developed here to show how specific but typical processes
can be discussed apart from the context of measurement, and indeed apart from the need to bring in the
activity of any human beings at all (e.g., no one is needed to prepare a quantum state).
We begin this section with a discussion of a transition process. If an atom, for example, is to jump
from one stationary state to another, it is necessary that there be an additional system available which
can take up the energy. This is usually the electromagnetic field within which, for example, a photon
can be created. However, to avoid the complexities arising in the causal interpretation to the
electromagnetic field [3, 41, we shall suppose that the energy is taken up in an Auger-like effect by an
additional particle in the neighbourhood, that was originally in a bound state near the atom in question.
Clearly the principles involved will be the same no matter what are the details of the system that carries
away the energy.
Let us consider an atom containing an electron with coordinates x and with an initial wave function
cl’0(x) exp(—iE0t) corresponding to a stationary state with energy E0. (We shall write /1 = 1 in the rest of
the paper.) The additional particles will have coordinates y and an initial wave function q~0(y,t). In
general 40(y, t) will represent a state in which the y particle is bound near a centre. The combined
system will then have an initial wave function,
1IA~J = cli0(x) exp(—iE0t) ~0(y, t).
Through interaction between the atomic electron and the additional particle the wave function will
begin to include other stationary states of the electron. To simplify the discussion, we will suppose that
only one of these, çli~(x)exp(—iE1t), contributes significantly. The corresponding wave function of the
additional particle will be 4~(y,t), which represents a particle that is no longer bound. (We suppose, of
course, that the energy, E0 — E~,given off by the electron is considerably greater than the binding
energy of the y particle.) As a function of time the wave function of the combined system will then be
= cli0(x) exp(—iE11t) ~0(y, t) + J a(t’, t) cli1(x) exp(—iEft) ~(y’ t — t’) dt’
(9)
where a(t’, t) can be calculated using ordinary time-dependent perturbation theory [26].

338
An ontological basis for the quantum theors’
What the above formula means is that during a small interval of time dt’ a contribution to the wave
function will be produced which is described by the integrand. That is to say, there will be a term
l/J~(x)exp(—iE~t)corresponding to the final state of the electron which is multiplied by ~
t
— t’) dt’.
This latter function corresponds to a y particle that during the time interval (t
— i”) moves away from
the atom very rapidly because it has absorbed the energy difference Ef — E11. As a result there will be a
negligible overlap with 411(y, t). As time goes on the total contribution to cl1(x) exp(—iE1t) will
accumulate in a way that is proportional to the integral in the above equation. This integral represents a
sum of a set of contributions ~(y,t — i”) dt’, each of which has moved a different distance from the
atom, but practically all of which will have a negligible overlap with 4~1(y,t).
As brought out in section 4, this feature of negligible overlap implies the establishment of a separate
“channel” along with bifurcation points that divide all trajectories into two classes, i.e., those that enter
the channel and those that do not. For small values of t, the number of trajectories entering the channel
is proportional to t, and as a simple calculation shows, the proportionality factor yields the correct
probability. This means that while interaction is taking place, the y particle and the electron will (as in
the case of superconductivity) be executing a common “dance” but that afterwards their “dances” will
be independent. However, they will be correlated, in the sense that for all initial conditions in which the
electron has undergone a transition to a new “dance”, they particle will be moving freely and far away
from the atom, while all other initial conditions will remain bound.
In the way discussed in section 4, the information in whichever is the unoccupied channel has
become inactive. Of course, at this stage, it is still potentially active. But, as happened in the case of the
measuring apparatus there is a second stage. In this stage, the y particle interacts irreversibly with its
macroscopic environment. The same arguments used in section 4 will show that the unoccupied
channels will then have lost the potential for activity, and so may from this point on, be dropped from the
physical account.
Clearly, the entire process has, in this way, taken place with an individual system, and there is
moreover no need to discuss a collapse of the wave function to that of the bound state. There is also no
need to talk about the preparation of the initial state by a human being, for the x and y particles could
fall into stationary states on their own account by giving up energy (e.g., to the electromagnetic field).
A similar analysis would show how any suitable initial state (e.g., of free particles) could give rise, in a
transition to the state from which we initially started. This means that we can regard the whole system
as existing in its own right whether there are human beings to prepare states and observe them or not.
A very important feature of our interpretation is that it makes possible a simple and precise
definition of what is to be meant by the time at which a transition takes place. In terms of the wave
function, all that we can talk about is the mean life time. For example, the mean life time of a uranium
atom is of the order of 2 x l0~years. Nevertheless, in any specimen, some uranium atoms are observed
to decay in a very short time, which can indeed in principle be measured very precisely (e.g., within
10 -~ s). There is no clear way to discuss this in terms of the wave function alone [24].However, in the
causal interpretation, the wave function does not exhaust the whole of reality. There is also the particle,
which may be bound in a stationary state for a long time until by chance it comes near a bifurcation
point [251in which case it very rapidly moves out into an unbound state, thus implying a relatively
well-defined time of transition. This is a definite advantage of the causal interpretation, not only over
the usual interpretation, but also over the many-world’s theory, which (as we shall discuss in more
detail in section 8) also has no clearly defined concept of the time of transition.
Finally, we can now clear up a question that has long been puzzling in terms of the usual
interpretation, i.e., that of the “watched dog effect [24]” (or Zeno’s paradox). If one supposes that an

D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley. Non-relativistic particle systems
339
electron is continually “watched” by a piece of apparatus, the probability of transition has been shown
to go to zero. It seems that the electron can undergo transition only if it is not “watched”. This appears
to be paradoxical in the usual interpretation which can only discuss the results of “watching” and has no
room for any notion of the electron existing while it is not being “watched”. But in the causal
interpretation with its objective ontology, this puzzle does not arise because the system is evolving
whether it is watched or not. Indeed, as our theory of measurement shows, the “watched” system is
profoundly affected by its interaction with the measuring apparatus [4] and, so we can understand why,
if it is “watched” too closely, it will be unable to evolve at all.
6. The quantum processes of “fusion” and “fission”
We now go on to extend the results of the previous section to the examples of “fusion” and “fission”.
We begin with a discussion of “fusion”. We will consider the case of an atom containing an electron
with coordinate x. This atom is able to capture an incident particle with coordinate Z to form a new
combined system, which is a negative ion. As happened in the case of a transition, the excess energy
will be carried away by an additional particle with coordinate y bound to a centre in the neighbourhood.
This will represent the fusion of two independent systems to form a new whole.
The initial state of the electron in the atom will be denoted by cl’0(x) exp(—iE0t) and the initial state
of the incident particle by ~0(Z,t). The initial state of the additional particle will be ~0(y,t), as in the
previous section. The combined initial wave function for the entire system will then be
~I~(x,y, Z, t) = ~0(Z,t) ç10(y, t) ~/i0(x)exp(—iE0t) .
(10)
Because of the interaction between the three particles with coordinates x, y and Z, this combined
wave function will change. We shall assume that the main possibility for change is the introduction of a
bound state for particle Z which will correspond to a wave function A(x, Z) exp(—iE~t)while the
additional particle that takes up the energy released has a wave function ~
t), representing a state
that is no longer bound. Using time-dependent perturbation theory in the way discussed in the previous
section, it can be shown that the final wave function becomes
~(x, y, Z, t) = ~‘~(x,y, Z, t) +J a(t’, t) ~
t — t’) A(x, Z) exp(—iEft) dt’.
(11)
The final wave function contains a “channel” corresponding to a free y particle and a state in which
the x and Z particles have “fused” into a single whole. While the particles are all interacting, they are
executing a common “dance”, in which there are critical (bifurcation) points, such that those on one
side enter the channel corresponding to fusion while those on the other do not. Finally, the y particle
executes a “dance” independent of the other two, but correlated to their state. We emphasize once
again that all this happens without the presence of any apparatus either to prepare or measure the
system, and without any collapse of the wave function.
We now come to the fission process which is essentially the inverse of the fusion process. It is only
necessary for us to give a brief sketch of how this takes place as the treatment is similar in both cases.

340
An ontological basis for the quantum theory
The main difference is that the y particle must now supply the energy needed for fission, whereas
with fusion, it had to absorb the energy released. We therefore suppose that the y particle is incident
with a high energy, in a state represented by q~0(y,t), and that after this particle interacts with the
atom, it is scattered into one of a set of states of lower energy, represented by 4~(y,t). The initial state
of the combined system can be represented by the wave function
~P0(x,y, Z t) = ~y,
t) A(x, Z) exp(—iE1t)
Through interaction this becomes
~(x, y, Z, t) = ~(x, y, Z, t) +1 a(t’, t) cli~(x)exp(—iE~t)~ ~(Z, t — t’) ~
t — t’) dt’.
(12)
The sum over states appears above because the outgoing particle can move in many directions and
the additional particle will move in a correlatethway. However, in time, the various directions become
separated in space and the functions ~(y,
t — t’)~villcease to overlap. The y particle will enter one of
the channels corresponding to a particular 4~(y,t — t’) and will remain in it. All the other channels will
be empty and can be left out of the discussion from this point on.
The probabilities for transition, whether for fusion or fission, can be obtained by integrating all the
particle coordinates over the relevant packets and as has been shown elsewhere [3]this will come out
the same as for the usual interpretation.
It can be seen from this discussion that the measurement process treated in section 4 is actually a
combination of fusion and fission. At first, the measuring apparatus undergoes fusion with the observed
system, and this is followed by fission. This means that what has commonly been called “measurement”
is actually a transformation of the entire system. In this transformation the apparatus and the
“observed” system enter into a common “dance” for a short time and then separate to give rise to
independent movements in which the “observed” system is executing a new “dance” corresponding to
the wave function cli~(x).
We therefore emphasise, once again, Bell’s suggestion that the process described above should not
even be called measurement, except perhaps in the classical limit where the effect of these transforma-
tions is negligible. In every such transformation, that which is “measuring” and that which is
“measured” are both altered in a certain irreducible way. Of course, in a rough treatment that is
adequate for the large scale level the alterations may generally be neglected, but any suitable refined
treatment must take such alterations into consideration.
7. Quantum wholeness and the approach to the classical limit
We have seen thus far that the quantum behaviour of matter shows a certain kind of wholeness,
brought about by the quantum potential. This latter functions as active information that may reflect
distant features of the environment and may give rise to a non-local connection between particles that
depends on the “quantum state” of the whole, in a way that is not expressible in terms of the

D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley, Non-relativistic particle systems
341
relationships of the particles alone. How then do we account for the classical limit in which matter
generally does not show such wholeness, but behaves as if it were constituted of independent parts,
which do not depend significantly on distant features of the environment?
We shall begin by discussing how quantum mechanics approaches the classical limit. There already
exists a well-known way of treating this question mathematically; i.e., the W.K.B. approximation. This
is indeed obtained just by neglecting the quantum potential, which leaves us with the Hamilton—Jacobi
equation. Such neglect will be justified when the quantum potential term is actually small compared
with the other terms in the Hamilton—Jacobi equation. Roughly speaking, then, classical behaviour is
approached, when the classical potential dominates over the quantum potential; and when this is not so,
we obtain typical quantum behaviour. The approach to the classical limit has therefore nothing to do
with setting Ii = 0, as Planck’s constant is always actually the same, while the relative importance of the
terms in the equations is what may change with conditions.
The W.K.B. approximation is obtained simply by solving for S, with Q set equal to zero. In the
one-dimensional case, we obtain, for a stationary state of energy, E,
~
dx
(13
J ~/2m(E - V(x))’
From the conservation equation, we obtain P -~ (E — V(x))112 so that R -~ (E — V(x))1~4.The approxi-
mate wave function is then
= A(E
— V(x))”4 exp[2J dx (2m(E — V(X)))h/2].
The test for the validity of this approximation is simply to evaluate the quantum potential with the
appropriate wave function, and to show that it is small compared with (E — V(x)). This leads to the
criterion
— 2m (E
— V(x)~114~
(E — V(x))t14 ~ 1.
(14)
In simple physical terms, this criterion will be satisfied when the classical potential, V(x), does not
change much in relation to E — V(x), within a quantum wave length [26].
This criterion tends to be
satisfied in most large-scale situations where the quantum number is large, and the wave length is
therefore short enough so that V(x) does not change appreciably within it. Nevertheless, wherever there
are turning points, at which E — V(x) = 0, it will necessarily break down. Because the approximation
breaks down in this way, a special treatment is needed there, which shows that in general a wave will be
reflected from such points, with a phase change, the details of which depend somewhat on the precise
shape of the potential [26].
Thus, for a stationary state, we must take a linear combination of waves
running in opposite directions,
(E — V(x)yh/4{exp[i J dx (2m(E — V(X)))h/2] + exp[_i J dx (2m(E — V(x)))~112+ a]}

342
Arm ontological basi.s for the quantum theory
where a is a suitable phase factor, determined in the way indicated above. The wave function is now a
combination of sines and cosines, so that the amplitude R(x) oscillates in each wave length. Since, in
the limit of high quantum numbers, the wave length is very short, the quantum potential will still be
large. Indeed,
this
is just an example of the possibility of the strong dependence of the quantum
potential on distant features of the environment. (In this case, the region with E — V(x) = 0 where the
wave
is reflected.) This means that the criterion (14) for the validity of the WKB approximation does
not always guarantee that the quantum potential is small, even in states with high quantum numbers,
and that therefore a system does not always approach the classical limit for high quantum states.
The situation described above, in which the wave function is effectively real, implies that VS = 0. In
the causal interpretation, this means that the particles are at rest. Such a conclusion violated Einstein’s
physical intuition, which was such that he felt that, at least in states with high quantum numbers, the
particles ought to be moving back and forth with equal probabilities for each direction [27].However, it
must be admitted that whether we use the usual interpretation or the causal interpretation or indeed
any other interpretation, the quantum theory clearly predicts for this case that there will be a
trigonometrically varying probability density for the particles, with zeros at the nodes of the wave
function. If the particles are moving back and forth, how can they possibly cross these modes, at which
they can never be present? (Unless their speeds are infinite, which would violate classical intuition even
more than would the notion that their speed is zero.)
One of us [28]answered Einstein, but we would like here to present such an answer in more detail.
Firstly, we emphasize again that p = 0 is, for this case, a reasonable result, consistent with the existence
of nodes in the wave function, whereas the intuitive notion of equiprobability of opposite velocities is
not. What was behind Einstein’s objection was the commonly accepted notion we have referred to
before, namely, that high quantum numbers must always imply classical behaviour. But if we reflect on
this point further, we can see that Einstein’s objection implied that the quantum mechanics must be
wrong for this example, in the sense that prediction of nodes in states of high quantum numbers for the
probability density cannot be right. Therefore, Einstein’s criticism against the causal interpretations is
misdirected — it should have been directed against the quantum theory itself, because it implies that this
theory must fail for high quantum numbers.
We wish however to argue here that the quantum theory is in fact valid for high quantum numbers.
To show this, consider replacing the impenetrable walls (i.e. the nodes of the wave function) with high
but penetrable barriers, so that this experiment would become essentially an interference experiment.
Indeed, it would just be the equivalent of the Fabry—Perot interferometer for neutrons or electrons.
Considering the many kinds of macroscopic scale quantum interference experiments with electrons and
neutrons, one can therefore see no reason to doubt that nodes would be discovered in this Fabry—Perot
case, even for high quantum number, if the experiments were ever done.
In this connection there is a common and indeed very natural tendency to form the notion of some
kind of averaging process that would wipe out such nodes. For most large-scale systems this would, in
fact, be correct. For example, there might be averaging over random thermal disturbances due to the
environment or, in a simpler case of the isolated system, one may take a linear combination of solutions
with a small range of energies to form a local wave packet. In such situations the amplitude of the wave
function would change slowly so that the quantum potential would be negligible and the classical limit
would therefore be approached for high quantum numbers. However, if the system is isolated and its
energy is well-defined so that only one energy eigenfunction will be present in the wave function, then
the nodes predicted by the quantum mechanics will necessarily have to be present. However, such a
state of well-defined energy requires a very special kind of experimental situation to bring it about and

D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley, Non-relativistic particle systems
343
maintain it, because it is highly unstable to small perturbations (as will indeed be brought out in more
detail later on in this section).
We therefore emphasise again that although high quantum numbers generally lead to classical
behaviour, there are special conditions in which they do not do so.
It is an advantage of the causal interpretation that it gives a simple and correct criterion for the
classical limit, i.e., that the quantum potential be negligible. We are thus able to treat reality on all
levels in the same way. It would seem that in any investigation into macroscopic quantum phenomenon,
or into the relationship between classical and quantum domains, clarity will be enhanced, if we can thus
treat the process without a break or “cut” between these levels, such as seems to be required in other
interpretations.
The above discussion of the approach to a classical limit has been in terms of a one-particle system.
To extend this to the many-particle system, we have also to take into account the non-local and
state-dependent connection between particles, which is brought about by the many-body quantum
potential. In particular, this sort of connection will arise when the wave function is not factorisable
(recall that when the wave function is factorisable the particles behave independently). Such a
non-factorised wave function will generally be present in a bound state which is stabilised by attractive
classical potentials. Of course, for such bound states, quantum wholeness plays an essential part.
However, bound states can be broken up (i.e., they can undergo fission) if they are bombarded with
particles, including photons and phonons, having sufficient energy. Our question is then: what happens
to quantum wholeness when this break-up occurs?
We have already discussed fission as brought about by interaction with an external particle that
supplies the necessary energy. In this case, as shown in eq. (12), the external particle with coordinate y
eventually goes into one of its possible sets of wave packets. Thereafter the other packets have no effect
on the quantum potential so that the effective wave function is then represented by a set of factors
corresponding to independent behaviour of the various particles (whose coordinates are x, y and Z).
This means that distant systems originating in fission of a single larger system will in general be in states
corresponding to independent behaviour and so quantum non-local connection will not be present.
However, it is possible to have fission under special conditions in which such non-local connection
remains. This indeed is what happens in the experiment of Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen. A typical
way of bringing this about is through the spontaneous disintegration of a system into two parts. Thus let
an unstable molecule be represented by the wave function
111(x,Z)=~C~cli~(x)x~(Z).
(15)
After disintegration the wave function will be
‘W~(x,Z)=~C~
~
(16)
where a~and b~represent the respective distances that the two particles have moved. This corresponds
to a function in which there are still correlations even though the particles have separated by
macroscopic distances and in which the quantum potential corresponds to a non-local interaction.
As we have shown in our measurement paper [4], any measurement of the properties of these
particles will bring about factorisation without the need for a collapse of the wave function. However,
since the purpose of this paper is to discuss the ontology independently of the question of measurement

344
An ontological basis for the quantum theory
we shall now show how factorised wave functions are brought about by almost any kind of small
interaction or perturbation that may be present naturally or fortuitously. For example, suppose that a
particle with coordinate y interacts with the particle x. Let the initial wave function of the y particle be
40(y). The effect of the interactton is to change terms such as 4~(y)qi~(x— a~)into linear combinations
~ a1, çb.(y) A1(x) where A. form a complete set. The total wave function will become
~
(17)
The y particle eventually goes into one of the separate packets into which 1P~finally develops. Let this
be denoted by s. The other packets will then not contribute to the quantum potential and the effective
wave function will become
~(x,y,Z)=~,(y)
As(x)~CnasnXn(Z~b,m).
(18)
Clearly this reduces to a set of factors for all of the particles and so the quantum non-local connections
will be destroyed.
What the above shows is that quantum non-local connection is fragile and easily broken by almost
any disturbance or perturbation. (Zeh [29] has come to a similar conclusion, but on a different basis.)
This kind of connection is stable only when a system is held together by classical potentials and even
then only when the system is not disturbed by interactions with enough energy to disintegrate it. It is
clear then that such non-local connections may be expected to arise mainly at very low temperatures for
which the random thermal notions do not have enough energy to break up the system. It will also arise
under special conditions established in the laboratory in which a system breaks up without any external
disturbances (as in the experiment of EPR). But as a rule we may expect that non-local connection will
not normally be encountered under ordinary conditions, in which every system is bathed in electromag-
netic radiation and is subjected to external perturbations of all kinds as well as random thermal energies
(usually in the form of phonons).
Moreover, because typical systems are constituted of particles with classical potentials V(r) that fall
off with the distance, they tend at appreciable temperatures to form relatively independent blocks with
correspondingly weak interaction between the blocks, along the lines suggested by Kadanoffet al. [10].
The various disturbances mentioned above, will then ensure that the blocks will have product wave
functions, so that the various parts of a system will be executing independent “dances”. This completes
the demonstration that the relative independence characteristic of classical mechanics will generally be
maintained at the large-scale level while on a sufficiently small scale, the size of which is dependent on
temperature and other conditions, there will generally be non-local connections and other forms of
quantum wholeness.
The above-described fragility of quantum behaviour at a large-scale level holds also for the
one-particle
system.
We
have
indeed already
indicated,
for example,
that
special experimental
conditions are needed to establish well-defined quantum states with very high quantum numbers.
Consider, for example, a particle with coordinates x, in such a stationary state that interacted with a
free particle with coordinate y, through a classical interaction potential V(x
— y) of rather short range.
A treatment similar to that used for transition, fission and fusion would then show that a set of separate
channels would ultimately be created, in which the x particle will be in localized packets, with a spread
corresponding roughly to the range of the potential. Since these packets are too narrow to be
significantly restricted by the containing potential barriers, the parts corresponding to movements in

D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley, Non-relativistic particle systems
345
opposite directions will form two separating packets. The particle will enter one of these, and from then
on, the interference between different directions of motion of the wave function that is responsible for
the nodes in the wave function will vanish. The behaviour will then be classical. The essential point is
that almost any random disturbance would produce a similar result. And this explains why we would
not expect to find stationary states of high quantum number under conditions that arise naturally
(except possibly at very low temperatures), and why we need special experimental conditions to bring
them about.
Finally, such considerations may also be applied to discuss the possibility, already mentioned in
section 3, of using the non-local connection supplied by the quantum potential as a means of
transmitting signals faster than light. The state dependence and fragility of this connection is just what
makes the transmission of such a signal impossible. Thus, one way of trying to convey a signal would be
to have a particle A initially in a definitely known state, and to have this state changed instantaneously
by a measurement made on a distant particle B. But if the state of particle A were measured before that
of B, the wave function of the whole system would be altered into a product of factors, in which all
long-range connection would have vanished. A subsequent measurement of B would then not affect A,
so that no signal would be possible.
Another way of carrying a signal would be to try to “modulate” the quantum potential as one would
a radio wave into a signal having a definite form and order, with a corresponding meaning. But once
again, any interaction aimed at doing this would result in factorised states, so that long-range
connections needed to carry such a signal would vanish. More generally, one can show that although
the total system is, in principle, deterministic, nevertheless, the actual behaviour of long-range quantum
connections is too fragile to be controllable in ways required for transmitting a signal, as well as too full
of unstable bifurcation points to make the behaviour of the system predictable enough for this purpose.
8. Summary and conclusions
Throughout this article we have developed an ontology that enables us consistently to understand
what may be the individual nature of the reality that underlies the quantum behaviour of matter. The
main advantages of this ontology are the following:
(1) It permits an objective description of quantum processes, in which neither measurement nor
preparation of a state plays a fundamental part. This enables us to understand intuitively what the
quantum theory means.
(2) It avoids the need for introducing a “collapse” of the wave function that would violate the basic
laws of physics, such as Schrödinger’s equation.
(3) It gives a clear discussion of the time of transition, and of the “watched dog” effect.
(4) It gives a clear notion of the meaning of the classical limit, as arising in a very simple way
whenever the quantum potential is negligible compared with the other terms in the Hamilton—Jacobi
equation. It also makes it clear that the classical limit is not always valid on a macroscopic scale,
because, under certain special conditions, the quantum potential can still be large in such systems.
(5) A more detailed analysis [3]shows that it covers the whole range of the quantum theory. In this
connection, it is important to note that one can extend the causal interpretation to quantum fields [3],
and thus deal with all bosonic systems. We shall in fact give a more detailed treatment of this question
in the next paper [30],where we shall also discuss how fermions are to be incorporated into the causal
interpretation.

346
An ontological basis for the quantum theory
(6) It has important advantages for cosmology, especially because it can discuss the universe apart
from the questions of the “collapse of the wave function” and of the absolute need for the presence of
observers, which are characteristic of other interpretations. Thus, in the commonly accepted interpreta-
tion, one has necessarily to invoke a measuring apparatus, which ultimately cannot be treated within
the framework of the theory. In effect, this apparatus is regarded as being outside the universe, and
thus, a consistent cosmology cannot be obtained.
Current theories involve what is called the wave function of the universe, which is especially important
to consider, at or near the moment of its supposed origin. But how could this wave function have been
observed or measured, unless there was an apparatus present at that time, as current interpretations
indeed demand? Evidently, under conditions that prevailed during this period (in which not even atoms
and molecules could exist), this would have been impossible. We recall that Wigner [20]has attempted
to avoid the whole dilemma of the unexplained whole “collapse” of the wave function by an appeal to
the mind of an observer, whose consciousness is supposed to cause this collapse. At or near the point of
origin of the universe, this observer would have to be a pure disembodied spirit, who could constantly
be observing the wave function of the universe, and thus bringing about a sequence of collapses that
corresponded to the actual evolution of the universe. Everett, however, proposes a non-countable
infinity of universes, along with their non-countable infinity of observers, that are constantly proliferat-
ing by dividing and subdividing. But here, the question is once again: How could these observers have
been present, in conditions near the original “big bang”?
It seems to be much simpler, as is done in the causal interpretation, to assume an objective uni-
verse, with its particles and with its wave function, which is not dependent on observers, though it may
contain them.
At this point, it seems to be worthwhile to compare our approach in more detail to that of the
many-worlds interpretations, which is the only other one that treats the universe as objective, and yet
avoids bringing in the collapse of the wave function. Evidently, the two interpretations are similar, in
that, in a certain sense, the “many worlds” appear in both. The difference is that in the Everett view,
all these worlds actually exist in manifest form, while in our approach, they are present only in the
implicate order as non-manifest and inactive information. However, in the causal interpretation, only
one of these worlds is fully actualized and manifest. (Rather, as in the case of a dancer, many
possibilities are present, but only one is actualised.)
We would like to draw attention to the fact that there are several important difficulties in the
many-worlds view that do not arise in our approach. Thus, one of the main problems of the
many-worlds interpretation is that like the usual interpretation, it has no concepts in terms of which it
could discuss the time at which a transition actually takes place. (Indeed, we have been able to do this
only by enriching the conceptual structure to include a set of particles, as well as the wave function or
the quantum state.) In the many-worlds view, it is thus not clear how one would even confront the
question of discussing just when a new universe is suddenly created, in which there is a new quantum
state, along with a new state of the observing apparatus. Recall here that the many-worlds’ interpreta-
tion takes the overall wave function as a complete description of reality and expressly avoids bringing in
probability in a fundamental way, so that
it cannot just assume a statistical distribution of times at
which new universes are supposed to be created.
To try to avoid this difficulty, would one say perhaps that a new universe is formed at the moment
when the apparatus wave packets cease to overlap? But then, as we have seen in section 4, interference
is still possible between these packets, so that we would have to say that later, these universes could be
withdrawn or destroyed. Would the proponents of this view be ready to contemplate both constant

D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley, Non-relativistic particle systems
347
creation and constant destruction of universes? Or would they want to say that a new universe is
created only when the registration device has functioned irreversibly in the way described in section 4?
If so, at just what point in the functioning would a new universe come into being? Or would the
creation (and destruction) of universes be a gradual process? (Rather as happened with the gradual
disappearance of the Cheshire cat.) And even if all these ambiguities are somehow dealt with, there is
still the fact that a complete transition may actually take place in a time much shorter than that in which
the wave function changes appreciably. There do not seem to be any concepts within the many-worlds’
point of view which allow for this to be described consistently.
This sort of difficulty also comes out in another way, which shows itself when the results of different
measurements do not have equal coefficients in the wave function of the whole system (so that in the
usual interpretation, one would say that they do not have equal probabilities). One seems to need here
a further concept corresponding to a variable “intensity” with which each universe could exist. Perhaps
one could modify the basic idea by proposing that, corresponding to each possible result of a
measurement, there are many universes, all of which are in the same quantum state. The number of
such universes would then be proportional to the square of the corresponding coefficient that appears in
the wave function. But then, what can it mean to have a vast set of universes that are all different, and
yet in identical quantum states? In what way are they actually different?
It should be clear that none of the difficulties described above arises in our approach. And as we
have seen, our approach also avoids the basic difficulties of other interpretations. We feel therefore that
in spite of the novel and somewhat strange features that we have ascribed to the quantum potential, it
is, on balance, the best interpretation that is available.
References
[1] L.E. Ballantine, Rev. Mod. Phys. 42 (1970) 358.
[2] A. Lande, Quantum Mechanics in a New Key (Exposition Press, New York, 1973).
[3] D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85(1952)166, 180.
[4] D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley, Found. Phys. 14 (1984) 255.
[5]A. Shimony, Private communication.
[61J.S. Bell, CERN preprint (1984).
[7] J.S. Bell, Epistemological Lett. 9 (1976) 11.
[8] A. Baracca, D. Bohm, B.J. Hiley and A.E.G. Stuart, Nuovo Cimento 28B (1975) 453.
[9] C. Philippidis, C. Dewdney and B.J. Hiley, Nuovo Cimento B52 (1979) 15.
[10] L.P. Kadanoff, W. Gdtze, D. Hamblen, R. Hecht, E.A.S. Lewis, V.V. Palciauskas, M. Rayl, J. Swist, 0. Aspnes and J. Kane, Rev. Mod. Phys.
30 (1967) 395.
[11] D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 89 (1953) 458.
[12] D. Bohm and i-P. Vigier, Phys. Rev. 96 (1954) 208.
[13] E. Nelson, Phys. Rev. 150 (1966) 1079.
[14] N. Bohr, Essays on Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge (wiley, N.Y., 1963).
[15] Neils Bohr, A Centenary Volume, eds. A.P. French and P.T. Kennedy (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1985) p. 153.
[16] H.J. Thayer, Newton’s Philosophy of Nature (Hafner, New York, 1953) p. 54.
[17] A. Einstein, The Born—Einstein Letters (MacMillan, London, 1971) p. 158.
[18] D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley, Found. Phys. 5(1975) 93.
[19] H. Frdhlich, Rev. Nuovo Cimento 1 (1977) 399.
[20] E. wigner, The Scientist Speculates, ed. I.J. Good (Heinemann, London, 1961) p. 284.
[21] H. Everett, Rev. Mod. Phys. 29 (1957) 454.
[22] D. Bohm, Wholeness and the Implicate Order (Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1980).
[23] B. D’Espagnat, In Search of Reality (Springer Verlag, New York, 1979).
[24] B. Misra and E.C.G. Suddarshan, J. Math. Phys. 18 (1977) 756.

348
An ontological basis for the quantum theory
[25] C. Dewdney and B.J. Hiley, Found. Phys. 12 (1982) 27.
[26] D. Bohm, Quantum Mechanics (Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1951).
[27] A. Einstein, in: Scientific Papers presented to M. Born on his retirement (Oliver and Boyd, London, 1953).
[28] D. Bohm, Private communication.
[29] H.D. Zeh, Found. Phys. 1 (1970) 69.
[30] 0. Bohm, B.J. Hiley and P.N. Kaloyerou. An Ontological Basis for the Quantum Theory, II. A Causal Interpretation of Quantum Fields
(following paper).

PHYSICS REPORTS (Review Section of Physics Letters) 144, No. 6 (1987) 349—375. North-Holland, Amsterdam
II. A Causal Interpretation of Quantum Fields
D. Bohm, B.J. Hiley and P.N. Kaloyerou
Abstract:
We extend the approach to the causal interpretation given in the previous paper [1] to quantum mechanical field theories. We begin by
presenting a systematic causal interpretation of the real scalar field. We analyse the field into normal modes and discuss their meaning for excited
states of the field, including both Fock states and coherent states. We then go on to discuss the absorption of a quantum of energy by an atom. In
this process the field is initially continuously distributed. However, because of the non-linearity and non-locality of the super-quantum potential of
the total field, energy is “swept in” from the entire wavepacket, so that it concentrates on the atom as a single quantum of energy hi’. We then see
that while the field is continuously distributed, it manifests itself in a discrete, particle-like way, and this explains the wave—particle duality. We
extend this approach to explain interference phenomena, and the Pfleegor—Mandel experiment involving interference of two separated lasers.
Finally, we discuss briefly the extension of the causal interpretation to a relativistic assemblage of fermions.
1. Introduction
In the previous paper [1] we have given a systematic account of how the quantum theory can be
reformulated so that it refers to individual quantum systems without the need for an observer. Statistics
then plays only a secondary role. However, this treatment was restricted to systems of particles only.
Mandel [2]has questioned whether it is possible to discuss individual events in quantum field theory. In
an earlier paper an extension of the causal interpretation has been made to the case of quantum fields
although in a somewhat condensed way [3]. In the present paper, we shall develop this treatment in
considerably more detail with special emphasis on making clear how individual physical processes
actually take place. Moreover, we shall show that such processes are independent of acts of preparation
and observation.
2. The causal interpretation of the scalar field
In the earlier paper, to which we have referred above [3], the causal interpretation was applied to the
eledtromagnetic field. But this field introduces formal complications that tend to hide the physical
meaning of the theory. We shall therefore simplify the problem by discussing a scalar massless bosonic
field for which the principles are essentially the same as those of quantum electrodynamics.
We begin with the real scalar field 4(x) and its canonical momentum ‘rr(x). In units for which c = 1
and h = 1, the Lagrangian is
.~1=~(ôc/.Idt)2— ~(V~)2
(1)
so that
1r(x) = *~Iot.
(2)

350
An ontological basis for the quantum theory
Classically this field satisfies the wave equation
(3)
To quantize this field we may introduce a super-wave function ~1i(.
.
. 4.(x, t),.
. .) which depends on
the values of ~ at every point in the universe.
2 then gives the probability of any given total field
configuration. ir(x) is now replaced by an operator which can be symbolised as
= —i ~iI~(x)
(4)
where a!~4~i(x)is the usual functional derivative of quantum field theory. This operator acts on the
super-Wave function çli(. . . j(x, t),. .
It is clear that quantum field theory has consequences similar to those of quantum particle theory.
The main difference is that the basic degrees of freedom are the field variables rather than the particle
variables. This can be made even clearer by considering the Fourier analysis of the field in a box with
periodic boundary conditions. The non-denumerable infinity of field variables is replaced by a
denumerable infinity 4ik with kc, ky, k~restricted to integral multiples of 2irIL where L is the size of the
box. The functional derivative becomes an ordinary derivative and the similarity to ordinary quantum
mechanics becomes very obvious.
It should be added, of course, that if we start from quantum field theory, the particles come out as
quantized excitations of the entire field. Therefore the particle is no longer a fundamental concept in
quantum field theory but rather it is derived as a structural feature of the field. It will be important to
keep this in mind throughout our discussion, as we shall emphasise that in the causal interpretation the
particle is just a dynamical structure within the field.
To obtain the causal interpretation of the field theory, we do just what was done in the particle
theory, that is, we assume the basic dynamical variables, 4i(x, t), have well-defined values that change
continuously. To see how they change we must begin with the super-SchrOdinger equation, which is,
i9~/iI~lt=Ht/i
(5)
where H is the Hamiltonian given by
H=
2 f [~
(~(x t))2 + (V~(x,t))2] dV.
(6)
All
space
We then write
= R(. .
. ~(x, t),.
.
. ,t) exp[iS(.
. . ~(x, t),.
. .
, t)]
and obtain
aS/at + ~f [(SSI~)2 + (V~)2]dV + Q =0
(7)

D. Bohm et al., A causal interpretation ofquantum fields
351
and
a~
I
a
[
as]
(8)
where P =
~‘i~2 and Q is the super-quantum potential which we shall define presently.
Equation (7) is evidently the extended Hamilton—Jacobi equation for the field which contains the
super-quantum potential, Q, in addition to the other terms that would be present classically.
We can write
~(x, t) = ~S(..
. q~(x,t),.
.
. ,t)Iaq~(x,t)
(9)
which is comparable in the particle case to
p=VS.
(10)
The super-quantum potential will be
-
- if (a2/(a~(x,t))2)R(. . . ~(x, t),. . .
, t) dV
11
-
2 J
R(. . . ~(x, t),. . .
, t)
and this is comparable in the many-particle system to
2
—
—
1
V,R(..
. x,,.. . , t)
12
~MP
—
2m
R(. . . x~,
. . .
, t)
From the extended Hamilton—Jacobi equation (7) we obtain the “field velocity”
a4Iat=as/a~.
(13)
Then eq. (8) clearly represents the conservation of probability. The remaining equation of motion is
obtained from (7) as
a~Iat= —aH/a~=V~— aQIa4.~.
(14)
Putting (7) into the above we obtain
a2~Iat2=V2~— ~Qia4.
(15)
As shown in the previous paper [1], the classical limit is approached whenever Q becomes negligible. In
this case, eq. (15) reduces to the ordinary wave equation. However, in the quantum domain there is an
extra term —~QI~4.In general, this is a non-linear and non-local function of 4. As we shall see, it
profoundly alters the meaning of the equation and leads to radically new implications. We emphasize
again, however, that in the classical limit none of these will be significant.

352
An ontological basis for the quantum theory
3. Analysis into normal modes and the ground state of the field
In order to discuss the ground state and excited states of the field, it will be convenient to go to a
representation in terms of normal modes. To simplify the problem we may, as we have already
suggested, consider a cubic box of side L and assume periodic boundary conditions. We take L to be
finite but much larger than any dimension of physical interest, i.e., in principle, as large as we please.
The normal modes will then be trigonometric waves and an arbitrary field can be expressed as
q5(x, t) =
~
[ak(t)Cos(k
. x) + bk(t) Sin(k . x)]
(16)
where
k=k~,k~,k~with k~—2rrn~/L;ky=2rrn\,/L ; k~2~rnjL
and where n~,n~,n~are integers and V is the volume of the box. Because —k and k cover the same
functions we should sum only over half the possible values of k, e.g., n~and n~cover all the integers
positive, negative and zero, while n~is restricted to values greater than or equal to zero. Whenever the
sum is taken with the above restrictions, we shall write it as above ~.
We also introduce 7r(x, t), the momentum canonically conjugate to 4.(x, t), which satisfies the
Poisson bracket relations
{4(x, t), 7r(x’, t)} = ~(x — x’) .
(17)
We Fourier analyse rr(x, t) writing
~(x, t) =
~
[ak(t) Cos(kx) + ~k(t) Sin(k x)].
(18)
With the aid of (17) we then obtain the Poisson bracket relations
with all other Poisson brackets equal to zero. This means that ak, ak and bk, 13k form a set of canonical
variables.
From (6) we obtain the Hamiltonian
H= ~J [2()
+ (V~(x))2]dV
(19)
which in terms of Fourier analysis becomes
H
~ ~
[(ak)2
+ k2(ak)2 + (Pk)2 + k2(bk)2].
(20)
It is convenient to go to the complex representation of the normal modes. Writing

D. Bohm et al., A causal interpretation of quantum fields
353
~
nk=~j~(ak—iI3k)~
(21)
we obtain
4(x, t) =
q,~exp(ik . x)
(22)
~-(x,
t) =
~k exp(ik x).
(23)
From the above we see that the reality of ç~implies that q~= q_~and rr~= IT_k.
We then obtain the Poisson bracket relations
*
*
{ qk’ ~k}
= {q,~,ITk}
=
~kk’
with all other Poisson brackets being zero. And the Hamiltonian becomes
H—~[7~irk+k
2q~q~].
(24)
We verify the classical equations of motion:
qk = aHIa~=
~‘k’
~k
= —aH/aq~= —k2q~
2
which are the correct equations of motion.
We now go to the quantum theory. We represent the super-wave function in terms of the q,~and
q*~= ~
We are restricting ourselves to half the values of k as before. We then write
~
q~...;q~... ;t).
Because the system reduces to a set of independent harmonic oscillators, the wave function can be
expressed as a linear combination of the product functions,
= ct’(q,
11, q~1)c~’(q~2,
q2)
~
q,.)...
.
(25)
Each ~/J(q~,
q~) satisfies an independent Schrödinger equation representing a harmonic oscillator,
i~(qk,q~)=[~~* ~
(26)
Writing q’(qk, q~)= Rk exp(iSk) we obtain the equivalent Hamiltonian—Jacobi equation
as
ias \/aS ~
1
~
2R
~
aqd*
=0.
(27)

354
An ontological basis for the quantum theory
The above result is similar to that obtained in the causal interpretation of a particle undergoing
harmonic oscillation. The ground state of eq. (26) then represents the zero point energy. Its wave
function is
(q~,q~)= exp[—kq~q~].
(28)
The ground state of the whole set of oscillators is then
= exp[_ ~
kq~qk].
(29)
The quantum potential for this state is
(30)
Writing
as/at = —E
we get
E =
~‘ [~~)+
k].
(31)
Since the wave function is real as/aq~= as/aq~= 0 and we obtain
E=>~k.
(32)
This is, evidently, the usual expression for the zero point energy (note that each k corresponds to two
real oscillators ak and bk so that the usual factor 1/2 is cancelled).
We shall now discuss the meaning of the wave function for the ground state, eq. (28). Firstly, let us
note that although the quantum potential will, in general, be non-local, in the special case of the ground
state it reduces to a local function. In fact, it cancels the term ~ k2q~q~,which, in the space
representation, corresponds to V~*V4.This is evidently a local function (as we shall see later it is only
in the excited states that non-locality appears, although in the classical limit it disappears again).
Let us now consider the significance of the probability distribution. (Wheeler [4] has considered this
problem for the electromagnetic field and has obtained results similar to those that will be given here.
His analysis is, however, developed in less detail and, of course, does not consider the role of the
quantum potential.) We begin by expressing the q~in terms of 4i(x) i.e.,
qk= ~
fexp[_ik.x] q~(x)dV.
(33)
[We have suppressed the coordinate t which will not be relevant in this context.] This yields

D. Bohm et al., A causal interpretation ofquantum fields
355
~oexp[JJ)’)f(x’~)d~7’]
(34)
where
f(x’ —x)=
~
kexp[ik(x’—x)].
To turn this sum into an integral, we introduce the density of k-vectors which is V/(2IT)3 and we obtain
f(x’ —x)=
1
Jkexp[ik.(x’
—x)]dk..
(35)
(2 ‘it-)
This is not a properly defined function but we can evaluate it by taking a limit in which there is a
cut-off in k-space. We can represent such a cut-off by multiplying the integrand by a factor e~ and
allowing A to become as small as we please. These integrations are then straightforward and the result is
f(r) =
-~
r22_ 3A2
(36)
it-
(A +r)
where r = x’ — x~.
The probability function is then
p =
~2
= exp[_ Jf ~(x) ~(x’)
r2— 3A2 dV dV’].
(37)
IT
(A+r)
This probability is largest when ~~(x)and çb(x’) have different signs. Therefore it is quite clear that
for a given value of t~(x)it is highly improbable that a neighbouring field 4(x’) will have the same sign
within a distance of the order of A. (Recall that A is as small as we please.) This point can be brought
out more clearly by going to spherical polar coordinates where r = x’ — x~.The contribution to the
probability coming from a field ~(x) which is on a shell of radius r will be
exp[_
cb(x) c~(x+ r)
(r2 + ~2;2 r~dr dQ].
Clearly this probability can become very small for small A and small r, when ~x) and ~(x+ r) have the
same sign. It is therefore most probable that the field ~(x)is highly discontinuous, the sharpness of the
discontinuity being dependent on the cut-off radius A. Such a discontinuity implies that the most
probably spatial form of the field will be chaotic, i.e., in the sense of modern chaos theory [5].
However, this chaotic variation will be limited, because the variation of the q,, will be the order of iiV7~
as can be seen from eq. (29).
Because aS/aq~=
=
= 0 it follows that the field is static. This result is surprising as one
generally thinks that the zero point fluctuations of the vacuum correspond to some kind of chaotic
dynamical behaviour. We can, indeed, obtain such a dynamical behaviour by introducing the further
assumption that the field is taking part in a random-type of fluctuation in which the mean value of
= 0. This would be along the lines suggested by Bohm and Vigier [6] and later developed in a more

356
An ontological basis for the quantum theory
systematic way by Nelson [7]and de la Pena [8]. However, for the purposes of the present article, we
shall confine ourselves to the initial deterministic model, which we emphasise is completely self-
consistent.
The ground state energy which we ordinarily ascribe to the dynamic behaviour will now be attributed
to the super-quantum potential. In the analogy with the particle case in a stationary state, we have p = 0
and E = V + Q, or alternatively Q = E — V. In the classical case we have T = E — V. So Q is in some
sense playing a role analogous to T. For example, in an excited state, the energy of the quantum
potential enters into the quantum transitions in the same way that the kinetic energy would in the
classical limit. And if, as we have suggested above, the energy of the quantum potential is accounted for
by further random motions, then the analogy to our ordinary way of thinking will be very close.
Whether we take the static or dynamic model, the ground state is not covariant because it defines a
favoured frame in which either ~ = 0 or its mean value is zero. Will this be consistent with relativity?
First of all, as shown in our previous paper [1], the quantum potential is too unstable and fragile to
carry a signal. Therefore, at least in this respect relativity will not be violated.
Secondly, as shown originally by one of us [3], the statistical results of this theory are the same as
those obtained in the usual interpretation. But this latter is known to be covariant and therefore no
experimental results can be obtained that violate relativity.
Finally, in the classical limit, the quantum potential becomes negligible and, as we have seen, we
obtain the usual covariant field equation in this limit.
It follows that the non-covariant ground state in our interpretation will not be accessible to
observation as long as the quantum theory in its current form is valid. And so no violations of relativity
will be obtained. However, it is possible, as pointed out in the earlier paper [3], that quantum theory
will fail to hold in some, as yet, unexplored domain. For example, if we extend our theory to include
stochastic processes in the manner suggested earlier, there will be some relaxation time, r, for the
probability function to approach the usual one,
~~2• Measurement in times shorter than r might show
this discrepancy and these results would in general not be covariant. If this should happen then
relativity would evidently hold only as a statistical approximation valid for distributions close to
equilibrium in the stochastic process underlying the quantum mechanics.
4. The excited state of the field
There is a considerable range of possible forms for the excited state of the field. One of these is the
well-known set of Fock states in which the number of quanta and the energy are well defined. Another
is the set of coherent states [9] which are especially suited to the discussion of the time dependence of
the field and its approach to the classical limit. For the case where the mean quantum number is low,
both kinds of states lead to the same results for most purposes. However, as we shall see for states with
high quantum numbers there may be significant differences between the two types of state.
Let us begin with a treatment of the Fock state. A typical wave function for the excitation of a
normal mode q,~with a definite k-vector is
~t_qkexp[
~ kq~qk]=qk~
(38)
The probability function is

D. Bohm et al., A causal interpretation of quantum fields
357
~=
~
~2
(39)
What this means is that the actual field in the excited state will in general not look very different from
that of the ground state. As a function of x we will have
P ff ~(x) ~(x’) exp[ik . (x’ - x)] dV dV’
~2
(40)
The factor ~2
will still represent a generally chaotic variation. However, the integral in front implies a
tendency for waves with vector k to be emphasised relative to the original chaotic distribution. From the
actual value of the field one could therefore not say for certain whether the state is excited or not
because the same field configuration could exist in either state. Indeed, the degree of excitation is
determined only with the aid of the super-quantum potential which involves the state of the whole as
discussed in our previous article in the treatment of the many-body system.
The state having only a single normal mode excited is an extreme abstraction. A more realistic
representation of the state would involve something like a wave packet. To represent such a packet we
write
(41)
In the above equation, the sum is over all k and we do not make the restriction that f.k = f~because
the super-wave function is, in general, complex even though ~(x) is real. Indeed considering that
q_~= q~,we can also write
~
[f~ +f~qfl~P0
(42)
where the ~ indicates summing a suitable half of the total set of values of k as discussed before. For the
applications made in this paper we may assume that f0 = 0 i.e. the space average of the field is zero.
To obtain the time dependence of II’, we note that the state q,~~ and q~iIi,0both have the same energy
k, so that they oscillate as e~1. We obtain
= ~ [f~ e
+f~q~~
The i~terms correspond to running waves in the direction + z, while the q ~ terms correspond to
running waves in the —z direction.
To simplify the discussion let us form a wave packet running only in the + z direction. This will be
sufficient to illustrate the general meaning of the super-quantum potential for these wave packets.
Writing
qk= ~Jexp[_ik.x]~(x)dV
we obtain

358
An ontological basis for the quantum theory
~(t)
= f F(x, t) ~(x) dV ~
(43)
where
F(x, t) =
fk exp[—ik. x — ikt].
(44)
To interpret this, it is convenient to write in accordance with (16)
~(x, t) = ~
E’[akt)
Cos(k x) + bk(t) Sin(k . x)]
and define
= ~
~a~(t)
Cos(k . x)
çb
\/~~
b~(t)Sin(k~x)
with
=
~c +
We note that 4~and 4,, are orthogonal. Similarly, we split F(x) into two parts F~and F,, with
~
~‘fkexp[ikt]Cos(k~x)
and
F,, =
—
~
fk exp[—iktj Sin(k . x).
We further note that F,, is orthogonal to ~ and F~to ~,,. Using these orthogonality relations we then
obtain
~(t) =J [F~(x, t) ~~(x)+F,,(x, t) ~,(x)]dV
~.
(45)
This wave function will be large in absolute magnitude for fields in which ç&., = a~F~
and 4’,, = a,,F,,
where ac and a,, are real proportionality factors. This follows because the total integrand is then a
non-negative function of both integrands. Fields that are not proportional in this way will tend to
produce a smaller integrand because of cancellation. Indeed fields that are orthogonal to those
described above will give no contribution at all to the integrals.
Introducing 1(x) to represent the part of the field that is orthogonal to F~(x,t) and F~(x,t) we can
write
4’(x, t) = ac F~(x,t) + a,, F,,(x, t) + F(x, t)
.
(46)

D. Bohm et al., A causal interpretation of quantum fields
359
The most probable state will then be one in which a~and a,, are as large as possible within the
limitation of the Gaussian function ~ which tends to bound the variation of the overall field.
It is therefore most likely that the field 4’(x, t) will have the form of a wave packet corresponding to
ac F~(x,t) + a~F,,(x, t). The functions F(x, t) which are orthogonal to F~(x,t) and F,,(x, t) will then not
affect the factor in front of 1P~:This means that their variation will be the same as it is in the ground
state. Therefore the generally chaotic variation of the field as a whole will be modified by a statistical
tendency to vary around an average which has the form of a wave packet as described above.
We shall now show that inside this wave packet the super-quantum potential introduces non-local
connections between fields at different points separated by a finite distance (unlike what happens in the
ground state). To obtain the quantum potential we must first write down the absolute value of the wave
function in the qk representation.
Recalling that we are choosing Jik
= 0 in eq. (42) we write
= ~ ~
exp[—ikt]~.
Then writing
g = ~
fk~kexp[—ikt]
we have
R=\/~~=1f~?1P~.
(47)
The quantum potential is
Q>~
~2R/R.
k
aq~aq~
Let us now evaluate the change of quantum potential, ~Q, from the ground state. This is
~
+c.c.
(48)
4k
gg
2k
g
In a wave packet which has only a small range of k, the second term on the right-hand side reduces to k
which is just the extra energy of the whole field above the ground state (recalling that only one quantum
has been excited). More generally, this term varies with the time in a rather complex way but it will be
sufficient for our purposes to consider only those wave packets in which the variation of k makes a
negligible contribution to this term.
What will be of interest to us is the remaining term. When the q,~is expressed in terms of 4’(x)
through eq. (33) the quantum potential then reduces to
fkf~
.
(49)
F(x, t) 4’(x) dV
F*(x~,t) 4’(x’) dV’

360
An ontological basis for the quantum theory
Clearly this term implies a non-local interaction between 4’(x) at one point and the 4’(x’) at other
points for which the integrand is appreciable. Writing
Q = ~Q+
where Q0 is the quantum potential of the ground state given in eq. (30) we can write the field equation
(15) as
a
24’/at2 =V24’ — ~LiQ/~4’
—aQ~/a4’.
(50)
Using eq. (30) and expressing Q in terms of 4’(x) by Fourier analysis we obtain
9 = ~(~‘‘~)
F(x, t)
.
~ cc.
(51)
F(x, t) 4’(x) dV) (J F~(x’,t) 4’(x’) dV’)
Recall that in the ground state the field was static because the effect of the quantum potential cancels
out V24’ in the field equation. But now in the excited state there is a further term which causes the
average wave packet to move. As happens with the quantum potential itself, the field equation is
non-local as well as non-linear. This non-locality represents instantaneous connection of field at
different points in space. However, it is significant only over the extent of the wave packet. In the usual
interpretation the spread of the wave packet corresponds to a region within which, according to the
uncertainty principle, nothing at all can be said as to what is happening. Therefore the causal
interpretation attributes non-locality only to those situations in which, in the usual interpretation, no
well defined properties at all can be attributed.
It is important to note that a state of the form
= q~exp[—ikt]~
1
does not correspond to the usual picture of an oscillation. This can be seen from eq. (51) because the
term V
24’ is absent. This result follows essentially because, as explained in our previous paper [1],
stationary wave functions generally correspond to a static state in contradiction to our intuitive
expectations of a dynamic state of movement. In order to obtain wave functions that give results that
are closer to our intuitive notions we have to use coherent states [9].
To illustrate what these are, let us consider a particle of coordinate x undergoing harmonic
oscillation. Its Schrödinger equation is
li2a2~ k
i/l
=
—
—
y +
—
at
2max
2
We introduce the variable ~ = V(mw/h)x where w = v’k7~.We obtain
a~/~hw[
a2
21
ih
~-
=
-~- [—
—i + ~ ]4i.

D. Bohm et al., A causal interpretation of quantum fields
361
The ground state wave function is
x exp[—~2/2].
One can show by direct differentiation that a solution for Schrödinger’s equation is obtained by writing
I
—6~o
4’ocexp[—~(~—ye
)_1
(52)
where y is a complex number which we can write as
y = y~e~.
We can rewrite the above as
~ exp[— ~( ~
—
y~cos(wt + O))2] exp[i~y~sin(wt + O)~]
Xexp[—i~y~2sin(wt+O)cos(wt+O)+~jy~2sin2(wt+O)].
(53)
The latter exponential is a factor that can be absorbed into the normalising coefficient. This solution,
therefore, represents a Gaussian wave packet whose centre oscillates harmonically with amplitude y~
and initial phase 0. The mean momentum (in these units) at any time, t, is y~sin(wt + 0).
Evidently the packet oscillates as a unit. States of this kind which are, of course, not stationary are
called coherent states. They represent the nearest approximation to the classical behaviour of an
oscillator.
If a~represents the creation operator for a quantum (so that a~a= N is the number operator) then
one can show [9] that
1
2
\‘i
a~’~y’t/i
11
4’=exp{—~y~] ~
.
(54)
n0
The probability for the nth state of excitation is
P~= ~
This is a Poisson distribution and the most probable value of ri is
=
The root-mean-deviation is
—
or

362
Ar: ontological basis for the quantum theory
For large values of
y the number of quanta becomes indefinite but the fractional deviation of this
number from the mean approaches zero. This behaviour further shows the classical significance of
coherent states of high y~because their energy becomes nearly determinate in the sense that the
fractional deviation is small, while the absolute magnitude of the indeterminacy in energy becomes
large enough so that one quantum more or less makes no significant difference. Therefore in
interactions with other systems the oscillator in a coherent state of high mean energy behaves nearly
like a classically well-defined object.
To further show up the classical significance of the coherent state, we evaluate the quantum potential
and compare it with the classical potential. The quantum potential (in these units) will be
~
(55)
but because of the Gaussian probability function, the range of fluctuation of particle position and
therefore of the quantum potential (which is essentially proportional to the argument of the Gaussian)
will be of the order of 1 (in these units). Evidently, as the absolute value of y~becomes large, the total
energy (which is kinetic + potential + quantum potential) will be correspondingly large and therefore
much greater than the quantum potential. Since the quantum potential can be neglected, the dynamics
will then be essentially that of classical mechanics.
Of course, the coherent state represents classical motion under conditions in which, in the usual
interpretation, we would say that x and p are defined as accurately as possible within the limits of the
uncertainty principle. More general wave functions are clearly possible which approach the classical
limit in the sense that the quantum potential can be neglected but which correspond to much greater
uncertainty in x and p.
It is evident that we can discuss coherent states of the radiation oscillators in a straightforward way.
For low degrees of excitation the coherent state of an oscillator (54) can be approached as
(56)
This represents a time-dependent linear combination of the ground state and the first excited state.
For most purposes, such as calculating probability of transitions, the results obtained from such a state
are essentially the same as those obtained from the corresponding Fock state which is not time-
dependent and in which the number of quanta is well defined. The only difference is that the mean field
will oscillate harmonically in the coherent state.
The most interesting case to consider is that of a wave packet in which the mean value of 4’ actually
moves with the form of this packet even as we approach the classical limit. To obtain this we go back to
eq. (52) writing for the wave function of an oscillator
~xexp[—~2/2+ ~y e’~].
It will be convenient here to return to expressing the field 4’ in terms of ak and bk, the real and
imaginary parts of q,~.This field is
4’(x, t) =
~
[ak(t)Cos(k~x) + bk(t) Sin(k . x)].

D. Bohm et al., A causal interpretation of quantum fields
363
We want a packet in this field whose average behaviour is given by
=
rk~cos[wkt+
~k]
bk =
~
cos[wkt + ~k]
The appropriate overall wave packet will have to be made up of a product of states
~exp[_
~ k (a~+ b~)]exp[rk exp(i(~k+ wkt)) ak] exp[sk exp(i(Ek + wkt)) bk].
(57)
For large Tk and Sk this will represent a very nearly well-defined state of movement as a wave packet
(corresponding, for example, to the oscillations of an electromagnetic field in a resonant cavity). In this
state, the average field will have a packet form, and there will be random Gaussian deviations from this
packet which become negligible when the mean amplitude is great enough.
5. The concept of a photon
5.1. The absorption of a quantum of energy
Thus far in discussing wave packets we have not encountered any of the discrete quantised properties
of the electromagnetic field. We shall now show how these come in by discussing the process of
absorption of energy from the field by an atom which goes from the ground state to an ionized state. If
the field is in an excited state with a single quantum of energy then it will interact with the atom. During
this interaction, a very complex super-wave function of the field together with the atom will result. The
resulting super-quantum potential can change dramatically to bring in bifurcation points. When the
process is complete the whole system of field plus particle will then either remain in the initial state or
will enter into a new state in which a quantum of energy has gone into the atom while the field is left in
the ground state. The super-quantum potential, being non-local, in this way sweeps up energy from the
whole wave packet and brings it to the atom. The discrete quantized properties of the field are thus
explained.
The treatment is very similar to that of the Auger-like effect which we discussed in our previous
paper [1]. We begin with the initial state of the field, as given by eq. (41) which represents a packet of
Fock states with one quantum of excitation,
= ~ fk~kexp[
~
k’ qk’qk.].
The initial state of the electron in an atom is 4’~(~ — ~
where s~represents the centre of the atom. The
combined initial state is
= ~ fk~k4’~- ~) exp[- ~
k’qqk].
We assume an interaction Hamiltonian

364
An ontological basis for the quantum theory
H1 = Af 4’(x) 6(x— fld
3x= A4’(~)=A~q~exp[ik~].
.
(58)
What this means is that the particle interacts locally, i.e., only at the central point of the atom.
As happened in the Auger-like effect, the interaction Hamiltonian will introduce further terms into
the overall wave function. The coefficient q,~is the sum of a creation operator and an annihilation
operator. In this case, only the annihilation operator will be significant and it will produce the ground
state of the field. The quantum of energy will then go into the particle ~. We assume that this energy is
considerably more than enough to ionize the atom. The final wave function of the electron can be
written as
t/i
1=~C,,tIi~(~,t)
where the 4i~(~, t) represents packets going in various directions. Perturbation theory then enables us
to compute C~as function of the time. The final wave function for the whole system is
=
— ~) + ~ f a~(t’,t) ~
t — t’) dt’ ~.
(59)
where a~(t’,t) can be calculated using ordinary time-dependent perturbation theory.
The coefficient a~(t’,t) is proportional to V~()which is the matrix element between the initial state t/s0
and one of the final states t/i~of the electron. In more detail this is
~
(60)
with
~‘
=
— ~. (The term ~k fk exp[ik (~‘+ ~)J has arisen by taking the matrix element of the field
between its initial excited state and final ground state.)
What (59) means is that during a small time interval dt’, a contribution to the wave function will be
produced which will be described by the integrand. This contribution is multiplied by the ground state
of the field.
The packet functions ~
t
— t’) correspond to particles that move in a direction represented by n
and are set in motion at t = t’. These packets will all separate so that they cease to overlap. And in
addition they will eventually not overlap the initial wave function
~.
Returning to the causal interpretation as applied to the electron, we see that the corresponding
particle will eventually either enter one of the outgoing packets or it will end up in the initial state still
bound to the atom. After it enters one of these channels, it will remain there indefinitely. Moreover,
because the packets do not overlap with each other or with the initial state, the quantum potential in
each channel will be the same as if the other channels did not exist. In other words, as explained in our
previous paper [1], all the effects of the collapse of a wave function will be present without any actual
collapse having occurred. Furthermore, as also explained in our previous paper, when the electron goes
on to interact with the thermal environment, the probability that these packets could ever come to
interfere will become negligible.
The effective wave function of the combined system then reduces to

D. Bohm et a!., A causal interpretation of quantum fields
365
lPeff = ~IJn(~, t — t’) ~
(61)
where n~signifies the packet actually occupied by the particle. This represents a situation in which the
particle now carries away a discrete quantum of energy, while the field is left in its ground state.
As we have indeed already indicated, during the period of transition the quantum potential will be
very complex and will contain many bifurcation points, implying a highly unstable movement of the
whole system. According to the initial conditions of the particle and of the total field, the whole system
will in some cases enter channels corresponding to a complete transition in which a whole quantum of
energy has been absorbed by the particle. In other cases, however, the whole system will remain
unaltered. When the probability of transition is worked out using the assumptions that the initial
conditions have a distribution of field and particle variables corresponding to p =
~2
then the usual
probability of transition will be obtained.
This probability is proportional to V~2where 1’~is the matrix element given in (60). It will be
useful to transform (60) by first introducing the function
K(~’+ ~)=~
fk exp[ik.(~’+
This is essentially the spatial form of the mean wave packet as determined by the Fourier coefficients
fk which appeared in the original wave function of the field (41). Therefore the wave function of the
field determines a function K( ~) which is the nearest one can come to what the classical field would be
in the corresponding classical situation. We may then expand,
exp[ik~’]= 1 +ik
~‘
because ~ is generally appreciable only in regions considerably smaller than the typical wave length in
the packet. Then noting that ~‘~(~‘)and ~
0) are orthogonal, we obtain
~
~~(~‘,o)dv’
~‘
~~(~‘,0)dV’.VK(~
0).
(62)
This means that the matrix element depends on the mean field K through its gradient. The fact that it
depends on the gradient has come about because we are working with a scalar theory. With a vector
theory, e.g., the electromagnetic field, the matrix element is indeed proportional to the mean field
itself. For our purposes, e.g., in discussing the interference pattern, this difference is not of fundamen-
tal significance because it means only that the probability of transition depends on the gradient of the
mean field function (so that, for example, the maxima will occur at points of steepest gradient rather
than at points of greatest intensity of the wave).
When the ground state is spherically symmetrical, the probability of transition, P, will also be
spherically symmetrical so that
Pcc~VK~
2.
(63)
We thus complete the demonstration that, although the field is essentially continuous, the possibility

366
An ontological basis for the quantum theory
of transfer of energies is discrete and is quantized according to the usual rules. Evidently, similar results
will be obtained for emission, excitation, etc. As we have already explained, the energy is swept up
through the non-local and non-linear effects of the quantum potential. The fact that such a process is
“quantized” is explained, in effect, by the existence of discrete stable limit cycles for the whole system
of particles and fields. A transition takes place whenever the whole system passes a bifurcation point.
And, as in our previous paper [1], such a transition is very rapid compared with the mean life time of
the state.
It is interesting now to consider the process of inelastic scattering of quanta. Roughly speaking, this
is accomplished by the absorption of the quantum which is swept up into the atom and the re-emission
of the quantum slightly lower energy moving in a somewhat different direction. If the initial energy of
the quantum is large compared with that absorbed by the atom, then a series of such inelastic
scatterings will define something resembling a jagged track. This is as close as one can get to the track
of the radiation field.
5.2.
The absence of photon trajectories
Actually, it is not possible to make a causal interpretation of the field in which there would be a
well-defIned particle trajectory. This can be done only by systems whose basic structure is that of a
particle, e.g., electrons, and which approach an exact particle behaviour in the classical limit (where the
quantum potential can be neglected). On the other hand, the quantized field approaches a classical field
in its classical limit where its quantum potential can be neglected and so there is no room to talk of it as
a particle except in the crude sense used in our description of scattering processes.
From the mathematical point of view one can exclude the possibility of classical trajectories by
noting that for relativistic boson fields, there is no conserved four-vector whose time component is
positive-definite. Where there is such a four-vector, the time component represents the probability
density for particles. And the space component represents the probability current. Because the density
current is a four-vector it is covariant in the sense that if the probability is normalised in one Lorentz
frame, then it will he normalised in every frame. Thus it is consistent to equate the time component of
this four-vector to a probability density.
In the complex Klein—Gordon field there is indeed a conserved four-vector but this is not positive
definite. This has therefore been interpreted as a mean charge current vector rather than as a
probability for a particle. In the electromagnetic field as well as in other boson theories, there is an
energy momentum tensor T11 which is conserved at least in the absence of interaction. Some authors
[10. ii] have proposed that T°°can be taken as the probability density for a particle, while the velocity
of the particle would be
V
= T’/T°°
.
This means that if the same definition of velocity is used in different frames it will lead, in general, to
particle velocities that are not Lorentz transformations of each other and to normalisations of
probabilities that are not the same in different frames.
Let us, for example, consider the case of the electromagnetic field. If we begin with a plane wave
moving at the speed of light, the energy density is ~(E2 + H2) and the Poynting vector is E X H. E and
H are perpendicular to each other and perpendicular to energy flux E X H with
El
HI. Since

D. Bohm et al., A causal interpretation of quantum fields
367
x H~=
~(E
2
+ H2) the energy flux would define a velocity V~= 1 which corresponds to the speed of
light. And since all these conditions are Lorentz invariant, it follows that such a field, when transformed
into new coordinates with new values E’, H’, will correspond to a flux also at the speed of light. At least
in this case it might seem at first sight that such a definition of trajectories could be made consistently.
Nevertheless, as indicated above, the normalisation will not be invariant under a Lorentz transforma-
tion. Consider, for example, the component of the energy-momentum tensor T°°=
~(E2
+ H2) which
would have to correspond to the probability density of particles. Let us suppose the energy flux is in the
z-direction and that we make a Lorentz transformation in the x-direction. In the new frame the
corresponding component of the energy-momentum tensor is
T’°°
= T°°I(1
— V2)
where V is the boost velocity in the Lorentz transformation. Let us now normalize T’°°by computing
the integral
N~=fT00dxldy1dzI.
Using the Jacobian of the transformation, we obtain
dx’dy’dz’=\/l—V2dxdydz
N’=f Vi—V2 dxdydz.
This evidently does not agree with the original normalisation
N=J T°°dxdydz.
What this means is that if we interpret the flow lines in any one frame as particle trajectories, we will
not get the right corresponding probabilities for particles in the other frame. (But if we had replaced
T°°by the time component of a four-vector,
V°, we would have had N = N’, and the trajectory
interpretation would have been consistent.)
If we go on to situations in which the field does not correspond to a plane wave, we will not even get
the same trajectories in different frames. For example, consider an electrostatic field
E
in the
x-direction. The Poynting vector is zero, and this would therefore correspond to particles at rest. Let us
consider a Lorentz transformation in the x-direction. Under this transformation E remains in this
direction and there is no field H. Therefore the Poynting vector is still zero in the new frame. This
would mean that the particle would have to be at rest in both frames which is clearly impossible.
The reason for this result is, of course, that the energy momentum is a tensor and so cannot be
regarded as describing a flux of particles.

368
An ontological basis for the quantum theory
6. Interference experiments
6.1. The treatment of interference
We are now ready to discuss how interference is to be treated in the causal interpretation of the
quantum theory. We shall do this by assuming that quanta of the field are detected by atoms that absorb
discrete units of energy in the way described in the previous section. We shall see that in an interference
experiment with two slits, for example, the probability of absorption will be proportional to what would
be thought of classically as the field intensity at the point where the atom is located. Of course, this
probability will vary in just such a way as to explain the observed interference patterns.
We shall then go on to discuss the Pfleegor—Mandel experiment [12] in which two independent laser
sources are excited in such a way that there is only one quantum of energy in the whole system. If the
two lasers can interfere in a certain region of space, this gives rise to a paradox when we try to think of
where the photon that is absorbed “comes from”. In our treatment this situation presents no serious
problem. The energy is distributed continuously between the sources in a statistically varying way, while
in the process of absorption it is swept into the single atom by the action of the non-local, non-linear
quantum potential.
6.2. The two-slit interference pattern
Let us now return to a consideration of the interference in the two-slit experiment. To simplify the
discussion we shall assume a resonant cavity with one of its normal modes excited to its first quantum
state. Let us suppose that two small holes are made in the cavity close to each other, as shown in fig. 1.
We assume that this will make a negligible change to the normal modes inside the cavity. In the classical
description, waves will radiate out from the holes 1 and 2, and will interfere in the region A. We will
treat this by representing the field inside the cavity by
cP1 and the field outside by 4’s. It will be
convenient to treat 4’~as the sum 4~and 4’2 of the contributions from slits 1 and 2 respectively. The
effective normal mode is then 4’ =
+ 4’~+ 4’,. Of course, this is an approximation that will be valid if
Fig. 1. Two-slit interference produced by resonant cavity.

D. Bohm et a!., A causal interpretation ofquantum fields
369
the holes are small enough so the overall wave function will not change appreciably during the course of
an experiment.
The probability of transition is not determined by 4’ alone but depends on
K in the way given by
(63). As we have said earlier, K is the spatial form of the mean wave packet as determined by the
Fourier coefficients fk’
K(fl=>~fkexp[ik.fl.
As with 4’, K can be written as a sum with three terms
K = K1 + K1 + K2
where K1 represents the values of K inside the cavity and K1 and K2 represent the contributions from
slits 1 and 2, as propagated from the cavity.
If we place an atom at point A where the contributions of the two slits overlap, the probability of
transition will then be
~x
V(K1 + K2)1
2.
(64)
This shows the characteristic interference structure. Thus in a statistical ensemble of experiments done
with the same super-quantum wave function, the usual fringes will be obtained. As we have indicated in
the previous section, the fact that they depend on the gradient of the field is due to use of a scalar field
(which would follow also in the usual interpretation). With a vector field it is readily shown that
probability is indeed proportional to the field intensity [13].
6.3. The PJleegor—Mandel experiment
Let us now go on to the Pfleegor—Mandel experiment [12]. We shall treat this in terms of two
resonant cavities C
1 and C2, each with a small hole in it. The beams coming out of the holes will cross at
A as shown in fig. 2. Each cavity will have normal modes denoted respectively by the functions K1 and
K2. As in the interference experiment, we divide each of these into a part that is inside and a part that
is outside the cavity,
K1 = K1
+ K0
and
K2 = K1
+ K0.
Suppose that one of these lasers is excited to the first coherent state while the other is left in the
ground state. According to (41) the overall wave function is then
where ~ is the vacuum state and where flk is the Fourier coefficient of K1. But if the second laser is
excited then the overall wave function is
~f2kqk~.

370
An ontological basis for the quantum theory
/IIIIIII7~~~~Y
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of interface of two independent lasers used in the Pfleegor—Mandel experiment.
However linear combinations of such states are possible corresponding to their being in phase or out of
phase,
= ~
(flk ~f2k)
qk ~)
(65)
while the “out of phase” state is
~=~(flkf2k)qk~’O.
(66)
In these states it is not possible to attribute the quantum of energy to either laser.
To have two lasers with definite phase relations of this kind is, however, essentially the same as
considering two wave packets with a definite phase relation as discussed in section 3. It follows from
what we said there that the energy will be distributed between the two lasers in a way that varies
statistically. Therefore the usual mode of talking about this, namely, that the entire quantum of energy
is either in one laser or the other, with equal probability, is not valid.
If we now suppose that an atom is placed at A to absorb a quantum, the super-quantum potential
would “sweep up” the energy from both lasers to constitute a full quantum. However, in a statistical
ensemble of experiments of this kind one would obtain the usual interference pattern. In this way the
causal interpretation provides a simple means of understanding what otherwise seems a very paradoxi-
cal situation in this experiment.
7. The EPR experiment
We now go on to apply the causal interpretation to the EPR situation. Because we are working in
terms of a scalar field, we cannot discuss the usual example in terms of polarisation or spin. Rather, we
shall return to something more like the original EPR experiment. This example was applied only to

D. Bohm et al., A causal interpretation of quantum fields
371
particles. Here there was a wave function 6(x2 —
— a) representing a situation in which whenever
particle 1 is found at xl, particle 2 will be found at x2 = x1 + a. And, of course, whenever the
momentum of particle 1 was measured, that of particle 2 would be the opposite. This meant that it was
possible to measure both momentum and the position of 2 by making measurements on particle I only.
EPR assumed there was no connection between the particles and therefore concluded that either the
position or the momentum of particle 2 could be measured without it being disturbed.
But they further assumed that anything that could be measured with unlimited accuracy without
being disturbed is an “element of reality”. That is to say it exists objectively independently of our
knowledge about it. This implied that both x2 and p2 are such elements of reality. But quantum
mechanics has no way of defining two non-commuting observables simultaneously and therefore in its
usual interpretation it cannot attribute independent reality simultaneously to both of them. From this
EPR concluded that “quantum mechanics was incomplete” in the sense that it lacked the concepts
needed to describe and understand the underlying reality. They did not wish to imply the quantum
mechanics was empirically wrong. Rather they regarded the formalism as a sort of probability calculus
which gave correct statistical predictions but which contained no adequate reflection of the underlying
reality of the individual system.
In order to transpose this experiment into a field-theoretical context, we first replace 6(x2
— x1
— a)
by a function 5(12 — x1
— a) which is sharply peaked but regular and can be Fourier analysed as
S=~g~exp[ik.(x2—x1—a)].
If the width of the function 5 is considerably less than a, then clearly the conditions of the experiment
are not significantly altered but we can avoid the mathematical difficulties that arise from the
8-function.
The EPR experiment will now correspond to exciting two normal modes of opposite momentum in a
correlated way. The wave function of the combined system of field and particle will then be,
~J—~g~exp[ik.a]qkq-k~’O4’O(~~0)
(67a)
= ff 5(x2 - x~- a) 4’(x2) 4’(x~)~
- ~) dV1 dV,
(67b)
where ~i~( ~ — ~)
is the initial wave function of the electron that absorbs (and therefore detects) one of
the quanta near the position ~. This clearly describes a situation in which there is a statistical tendency
that whenever 4’ is excited at x1, a corresponding excitation of 4’ will take place at x2 = x~+ a. On the
other hand, whenever there is an excitation k there will be a corresponding excitation —k. This is
essentially what corresponds in field theory, to the EPR situation with regard to particles.
Let us now suppose we place an atom at ~, which can absorb a quantum of energy and liberate an
electron in a photoelectric effect. To treat this process we introduce the interaction Hamiltonian
H1 = AE
q~exp[ik~].
This Hamiltonian will absorb a quantum of energy, say qk’ leaving the field with only a single
quantum, q,~= q~,and it will introduce a factor exp(—ik. ~).

372
An ontological basis for the quantum theorr
However, as shown by eq. (59) this term will also bring about a transition of the particle wave
function from ~( ~ — ~)
to a final wave function which includes terms such as
~/i~(~, t). Each t/j~
determines a separate channel, and eventually the electron enters one of them iJJ,il after which the other
channel may be dropped from consideration. The final wave function of field plus particle will then be
=
g~exp[-ik. (~+ a)] q~~
~(
~,
t).
(68)
Recall q~ q~when 4’ is real. We are left with
= J S(x -
-
a) 4’(x)
~
~(
~,
t) dV.
(69)
This result is the same as the one we would get using the usual quantum theory, which effectively
contains the assumption of the collapse of the wave function to the final state. However, in the causal
interpretation there has been no collapse, but an equivalent result has been brought about by the action
of the super-quantum potential. The field now fluctuates in a region near x
~ + a. The absorption of
the quantum of energy by the atom at ~ has therefore given shape and form to the remaining field at
x = ~ + a. This is a kind of non-linear and non-local effect of the super-quantum potential.
Let us now go on to discuss an experiment in which momentum would be determined rather than
position. To bring this about we could consider the Compton effect. The quantum of frequency
i.’ is to
be scattered from a very weakly bound electron. This quantum is absorbed and a new quantum emitted
with frequency v’ at an angle 0 relative to that of the original wave vector. The electron absorbs the
energy difference ii — x.’ and comes off at an angle 4’ with momentum p.
The relevant formulae are obtained from the detailed conservation of energy and momentum for
each individual scattering process. The conservation of energy gives
/2
2
~
=vm
+p
—m.
(70)
It will be adequate for our purposes to assume the electron comes off in the non-relativistic range so
that
i— r”=p2/2rn
(with p/m~1).
(71)
Taking into account the conservation of momentum in the original and perpendicular directions, we
obtain
= p(l —p2/4m2)
(72)
2cos 4’ —p/rn
and
cot0= ~
pcos4’
,
(73)
p sin 4’
With the aid of equations (71), (72) and (73) we can calculate both the initial and final momentum of
the field quantum from a knowledge of the momentum vector of the recoil electron. Therefore to each

D. Bohm et al., A causal interpretation of quantum fields
373
value of this recoil momentum, p, there is a corresponding quantum of energy i and a momentum
vector k’ of the scattered quantum.
Let us represent the initial state of the electron by 4i0( ~ — ~). This will be very poorly localised so
that the range of momenta will be small. The limiting accuracy of the measurement will be determined
by this range of momenta. To treat this problem in detail would involve time-dependent perturbation
theory for the scattering process which includes the absorption of the original quantum and emission of
the new quantum in another direction. However, for our purposes here we do not have to go into all
the details. It is sufficient to take into account the fact that the initial wave function of the electron
— ~
goes into a linear combination of packet functions t/i~(~,t). Each of these packets will
constitute a channel and the electron will enter one of them so that thereafter the other channels can be
neglected. We know from the more detailed mathematical treatment that these packets are very nearly
plane waves with a range of wave numbers k corresponding roughly to the range in 4’~(~
—
There will also be a matrix element which has to be worked out from second-order perturbation
theory. Once again, the details are unimportant for us here. The only point that is of interest for this
problem is that the second-order matrix element for the whole system implies the absorption of the
original quantum qk and its replacement by a narrow packet in momentum space. In this discussion we
will ignore the width of the packet and say that the scattered quantum is represented by a definite state
of momentum of k’.
The original wave function (67a) will effectively reduce to
V~ccg~exp[—ik’.a] ~k~_k
~P~)
I/J~(~,t0).
(74)
The above result shows that after the Compton effect has taken place, not only does the scattered
quantum go into a definite state q~but also the additional quantum goes into the corresponding state
q_~• In this case the quantum potential arising during the Compton scattering interaction has produced
a wave-like form of the distant quantum which corresponds to that produced in the directly scattered
quantum. This shows how we explain the well-known result of the usual interpretation that any
measurement profoundly affects the form of that which is measured. However, it should be emphasised
here that the fact that the Compton effect is being used specifically to make a measurement is a side
issue. The same thing would happen in any Compton scattering occurring of its own accord. In other
words, what we are discussing here is, as in the previous paper, an ontology of the quantum process
which does not require any further epistemological basis.
Finally, it is clear that the ontology proposed here differs significantly from that assumed by Einstein.
For the latter does not admit non-local interactions and this is why Einstein found it natural to assume
that the two particles were not connected in any way at all. However, in the causal interpretation they
are connected by the quantum potential; and therefore they are not separate “elements of reality” in
the sense defined by Einstein. Rather, as we have brought out in our previous paper, all these are
participating in an undivided whole.
8. Generalization of the interpretation and extension to fermions
Thus far this paper has been discussing the causal interpretation in terms of the scalar field. But as
we have already indicated earlier, this can be easily generalized to the vector field and this has indeed
been done [3, 13]. Bosons in general thus seem to present no serious difficulty.

374
,4n ontological basis for the quanium theory
However, an extension of this interpretation to fermions cannot be carried out along the lines given
in this paper. For if we regard the fermions as fields, they obey anticommutation relations which have
no classical limit and which do not permit a picture of continuous field variables that we have used for
bosonic systems.
We propose instead to treat fermions as particles which, in a many-body system, will be restricted to
antisymmetric wave functions. Certainly in the non-relativistic limit this interpretation will work out in a
straightforward way. To go to a relativistic theory we need an interpretation of the Dirac equation.
Such an interpretation has in fact been proposed [14]. Basically, the idea is to assume the probability
density for a single particle is given by t/i ~
and the current density is
=
Since the Dirac equation is covariant, this procedure will have the same meaning in every frame so that
the interpretation is also covariant. In the above reference, it is shown that this will work consistently.
In the many-body system, the wave function will have a set of spinor indices for each particle. The
probability density for the whole set of particles in their configuration space is obtained by summing the
spinor indices over all the particles. A similar approach could be used to obtain the probability current
density of the nth particle by taking the average of velocity operator c~,summed over the spinor indices
of all the particles. The velocity of the nth particle will then be the ratio of this current-density to the
probability density.
In this approach, it is necessary to use Dirac’s original suggestion that the negative energy states in
the vacuum are filled. Pair creation is treated as a transition of a negative energy particle into a positive
energy state. Of course, in principle, every problem will involve all the particles in the vacuum, though
in most cases the wave function will factorise, so that it will be sufficient to consider a limited number of
particles and ignore the rest. This is similar, in many ways, to what happens with the boson fields for
which likewise the whole universe must be considered in principle, while in practice a limited number of
Fock states may be adequate.
Although this theory provides a consistent interpretation, it is somewhat ad hoc and consequently is
not likely to provide a great deal of further insight. However, it is our view that, at this stage, it is
premature to put too much emphasis on the interpretation of relativistic quantum mechanics. This is
because we feel that the theory in its current stages of development is probably not consistent enough to
be given an overall coherent interpretation. First of all, there are the infinities which make it difficult
even to see what the theory means. For example, the dressed particles are said to be in a different
Hilbert space from that with which the theory starts. In general relativity these difficulties are even
greater. Thus the quantization of the gravitation field implies that space and time would lose their
customary meaning, not only at the Planck length of i0~cm, but also in black holes and near the “big
bang” with which the universe is said to have originated. Moreover, near singularities of this type, there
could be no atoms or other particles or any other structure of the kinds that we know. Therefore, there
could be no measuring instruments and this means that the usual interpretation will have nothing to talk
about in these domains. Even the causal interpretation could find no foothold if there is no clear
significance for space-time. For these reasons we feel that a serious interpretation of the relativistic
domain would best be deferred until we obtain a more consistent theory. For the present, we should
regard the relativistic quantum theory mainly as a set of algorithms from which we can derive a large
number of useful and interesting results.

D. Bohm et al., A causal interpretation ofquantum fields
References
[11D. Bohm and B.J. Hiley, An Ontological Basis for the Quantum Theory, I. Non-relativistic Particle Systems (previous paper).
12] L. Mandel, Progress in Optics XIII, ed. E. Wolf (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1976) p. 29.
[31D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85(1952)180.
[41J.A. Wheeler, in: Batelle Rencontres, eds. CM. De Wilt and iA. Wheeler (Benjamin, New York, 1968) p. 255.
[5]Hao Ban-Lin, Chaos (World Publications, Singapore, 1984).
[61D. Bohm and i-P. Vigier, Phys. Rev. 96 (1954) 208.
[7] E. Nelson, Phys. Rev. 150 (1966) 1097.
[8] L. de La Pena-Auerbach and AM. Cetto, J. Math. Phys. 18 (1977) 1612.
[9] Ri. Glauber, Phys. Rev. 130 (1963) 2529; 131 (1963) 2766.
[101RD. Prosser, tnt. J. Theoret. Phys. 15 (1976) 169.
[11] J.P. Wesley, Found. Phys. 14 (1984) 155.
[12] R.L. Pfleegor and L. Mandel, Phys. Rev. 159 (1967) 1084; J. Opt. Soc. Am. 58 (1968) 946.
1131 P.N. Kaloyerou, Investigation of the Quantum Potential in Relativistic Domain, Ph.D. Thesis London (1985).
[14J D. Bohm, Prog. Theor. Phys. 9 (1953) 273.

