www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

©2011 O’Reilly Media, Inc. O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
Learn how to turn 
data into decisions.
From startups to the Fortune 500, 
smart companies are betting on  
data-driven insight, seizing the 
opportunities that are emerging  
from the convergence of four 
powerful trends:
n New methods of collecting, managing, 
 and analyzing data
n Cloud computing that ofers inexpensive 
 storage and lexible, on-demand computing  
 power for massive data sets
n Visualization techniques that turn complex 
 data into images that tell a compelling story
n Tools that make the power of data available 
 to anyone
Get control over big data and turn it into insight  
with O’Reilly’s Strata offerings. Find the inspiration 
and information to create new products or revive  
existing ones, understand customer behavior, and  
get the data edge.
Visit oreilly.com/data to learn more.
www.allitebooks.com

Harlan D. Harris, Sean Patrick
Murphy, and Marck Vaisman
Analyzing the Analyzers
An Introspective Survey of Data
Scientists and Their Work
www.allitebooks.com

Analyzing the Analyzers
by Harlan D. Harris, Sean Patrick Murphy, and Marck Vaisman
Copyright © 2013 Harlan D. Harris, Sean Patrick Murphy, and Marck Vaisman. All
rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://my.safaribooksonline.com). For
more information, contact our corporate/institutional sales department: 800-998-9938
or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Mike Loukides
June 2013:
First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition:
2013-06-06: First release
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781449371760 for release details.
Nutshell Handbook, the Nutshell Handbook logo, and the O’Reilly logo are registered
trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Analyzing the Analyzers and related trade dress are
trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their prod‐
ucts are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and
O’Reilly Media, Inc., was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been
printed in caps or initial caps.
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher
and authors assume no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting
from the use of the information contained herein.
ISBN: 978-1-449-37176-0
[LSI]
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
1. Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
2. Case Studies in Miscommunication. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
Rock Stars and Gods                                                                            5
Apples and Oranges                                                                             6
3. A Survey of, and About, Professionals. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
Clustering Data Scientists                                                                 10
Self-Identification                                                                           10
Skills                                                                                                 11
Combining Skills and Self-ID                                                       12
The Variety of Data Scientists                                                          14
Data Businesspeople                                                                      14
Data Creatives                                                                                 15
Data Developer                                                                               15
Data Researchers                                                                            16
Big Data                                                                                               16
Related Surveys                                                                                  17
4. T-Shaped Data Scientists. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
Evidence for T-Shaped Data Scientists                                           20
5. Data Scientists and Organizations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
Where Data People Come From: Science vs. Tools Education   23
From Theory to Practice: Internships and Mentoring                 24
Teams and Org Charts                                                                      25
iii
www.allitebooks.com

Career Paths                                                                                        26
6. Final Thoughts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
A. Survey Details. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
iv 
| 
Table of Contents
www.allitebooks.com

CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Binita, Chao, Dmitri, and Rebecca are data scientists. What does that
statement tell you about them? Probably not as much as you’d like.
You know they probably know something about statistics, program‐
ming, and data visualization. You’d hope that they had some experi‐
ence finding insights from data, maybe even “big data.” But if you’re
trying to find the best person for a job, you need to be more specific
than just “doctor,” or “athlete,” or “data scientist.” And that’s a problem.
Finding the right people for a task is all about efficient communication
and, without the appropriate shared vocabulary, data science talent
and data science problems are too often kept apart.
The three of us, organizers of data science events in Washington,
DC, decided that we wanted to do something about this problem after
too many personal experiences of failures caused by miscommunica‐
tion. So in mid-2012 we surveyed data scientists, asking about their
experiences and how they viewed their own skills and careers. The
results may help us, as a professional community, settle on finer-
grained descriptions and more effective means of communicating
about what we do for a living.
We start by describing four fictitious data scientists, each typical of
one of four categories that emerged from the survey. Their variety is
striking.
Binita works for Acme Industries — a Fortune 100 manufacturing
company — as Director of Analytics. She manages a small team of
technical analysts and spends rather more time in meetings than she
wishes. She really likes getting her hands dirty, diving into data sets
when she has time, and helping her team design compelling visuali‐
1
www.allitebooks.com

zations and predictive models that will go into production. But the
payoff is the presentation to senior management, translating statistical
jargon to business lingo, p-values into profits. Binita has a bachelors
in Industrial Engineering and an MBA, and she spent several years in
consulting before moving to her role at Acme. She reads all about the
new “big data” and “data science” buzzwords in the business press, and
sees value in her skills, but isn’t sure which labels apply to her. Maybe
she’ll start an analytics consulting firm of her own soon?
Chao has a finger in every pie. By day he builds interactive web graph‐
ics for a major newspaper, but by night he goes to technical Meetups
and works on an open-source Python package for mapping spatial
data. A few times a year he goes to hackathons, teaming up with others
to prototype new businesses or dive into public data sets. Chao has an
undergraduate degree in economics, minoring in computer science.
He started a Master’s in statistics before dropping out and trying un‐
successfully to start a statistical consulting firm. He’s been following
the blogs and tweets about data science since 2009, and his business
cards (the ones he made on Moo with colorful data visualizations, not
the boring ones he gets from work) say “Chao, Data Scientist Extra‐
ordinaire!”
Dmitri writes really fast, elegant, maintainable Machine Learning
code. He works for a medium-sized consulting firm that provides
predictive models for companies without the resources to build sys‐
tems themselves. The skills section of his resume has five dense lines
of technologies like Hadoop, SVM, and Scala. Dmitri keeps up with
the Machine Learning literature, which he started reading when he
was writing his Master’s thesis in computer science. He’s contributed
a few patches to an open source big data package that he uses in his
work. Dmitri is pretty happy with his job, but imagines he’ll find a
different development job in a few years. Maybe something using
Dremel or other massive columnar databases — that stuff looks pretty
cool.
Rebecca works for an internet retailer and has the title Data Scientist.
Ten years ago if you had asked her what she’d be doing now, she’d have
said, “I guess I’ll be a professor by then.” After spending 10 years
studying molecular biology, building statistical models, programming
simulations, managing complex data sets, publishing papers, and pre‐
senting at conferences, she decided she was bored. Rebecca left her
post-doc and started farming out her resume, tweaking the language
based on articles she’d read about the need for data science in industry.
2 
| 
Chapter 1: Introduction
www.allitebooks.com

Now she helps the company figure out which marketing practices are
actually useful, builds predictive models of future sales, and looks for
relevant patterns in Twitter data. Fun stuff! She still gets to read aca‐
demic papers, learn new tools, and play with a vast array of data. But
now her insights get noticed, and her work turns into real changes in
the business.
Why do people use the term “data scientist” to describe all of these
professionals? Does it clarify expectations, distinguish people with
different strengths, and let practitioners and organizations commu‐
nicate effectively and make good decisions? Does it define an attain‐
able career path and suggest professional growth options? Or does it
instead lead to confusion, misunderstandings, and missed opportu‐
nities?
We think that terms like “data scientist,” “analytics,” and “big data” are
the result of what one might call a “buzzword meat grinder.” The peo‐
ple doing this work used to come from more traditional and estab‐
lished fields: statistics, machine learning, databases, operations re‐
search, business intelligence, social or physical sciences, and more. All
of those professions have clear expectations about what a practitioner
is able to do (and not do), substantial communities, and well-defined
educational and career paths, including specializations based on the
intersection of available skill sets and market needs. This is not yet true
of the new buzzwords. Instead, ambiguity reigns, leading to impaired
communication (Grice, 1975) and failures to efficiently match talent
to projects.
In the rest of this article, we’ll see how miscommunication about data
science skills and roles led to wasted time and effort for Dmitri and
Binita. We’ll use the survey results to identify a new, more precise
vocabulary for talking about their work, based on how data scientists
describe themselves and their skills. We’ll discuss how data scientists
are both broad and deep and what this means for career growth and
effectiveness. And finally, we’ll turn from the practitioner’s to the or‐
ganization’s point of view and consider how to apply the survey results
when trying to identify, train, integrate, team up, and promote data
scientists.
Introduction 
| 
3
www.allitebooks.com


CHAPTER 2
Case Studies in Miscommunication
There are two related issues that we have seen when it comes to mis‐
understandings about the roles of data scientists. In one case, excessive
hype leads people to expect miracles, and miracle-workers. In the oth‐
er case, a lack of awareness about the variety of data scientists leads
organizations to waste effort when trying to find talent. These case
studies are based on collective experiences from many of our friends,
colleagues, and Meetup members.
Rock Stars and Gods
Dmitri, our machine learning developer, gets head-hunted by a suc‐
cessful e-commerce company that has now realized the need for a data
scientist. The recruiter supplies the following job description:
We’re looking for a Data Scientist Superstar to revolutionize the on‐
line experience. Are you excited about leveraging state-of-the-art
methods to turn big data into business value? Can you manage people
and projects and see an idea through from conception to delivery?
The rest of the job description shows a laundry list of desired skills,
including terms like “Big Data,” a dozen algorithm names, and other
jargon. Dmitri thinks that this looks pretty reasonable and is com‐
fortable that he meets the vast majority of the requirements. He has
several phone interviews and is invited onsite.
During the first few minutes of Dimitri’s meeting with the CEO, it
becomes clear that they are looking for much more than what was
previously discussed. Dmitri asks politely for more details about what
5

the CEO is really seeking, and the CEO calmly responds “I want GOD!
I want a rockstar programmer who has developed highly sophisticated
machine learning algorithms, has built a distributed back-end big data
platform, and has started a company!”
Dmitri respectfully responds back: “I wish you the best of luck finding
that person.” These expectations are highly unreasonable — at least
for a single person — so Dmitri decides to pass on the opportunity.
The expectation of miracles does not place the company, nor Dmitri,
in a good position.
In his next interview with a small but exciting startup, Dmitri’s inter‐
view with the CEO is much less eventful and more productive. How‐
ever, after wrapping up his interview with the CTO, he is informed
that the next step in the process is a fun project that should only con‐
sume a few hours: find a publicly available data set at least several
hundred gigabytes in size, pose and answer an interesting question
about the data, and detail all steps, assumptions, and conclusions, in‐
cluding code. If this request is coming from the technically savvy CTO,
Dmitri wonders what other unrealistic expectations this position may
entail.
Apples and Oranges
Binita’s job search illustrates a different problem. As a data-savvy
manager with an updated resume, she is recruited constantly for data
scientist roles. However, the last three interviews ended the same way;
organizations label the position as “Data Science” but want a new
member to join an existing software engineering team to write
production-level code.
In one case, Binita begins a conversation with a well-known technol‐
ogy company. She is initially concerned that the position is too tech‐
nical but is assured by the manager that they want a senior person who
can develop business strategies and performance metrics, as well as
talk algorithms. Binita can build prototypes, but she does not code
production-level software. Concerned, she flies out to the West coast
anyway.
Upon arrival, her trepidation only increases as she is not scheduled to
meet a single business person. A technical interviewer walks in, in‐
troduces himself, and then dives into the first question: “Tell me, what
are B-trees, how do they work, and how does the SQL query optimizer
6 
| 
Chapter 2: Case Studies in Miscommunication

use them?” While Binita has heard of this data structure, her job has
never required this knowledge, and the rest of the allotted interview
time is spent awkwardly. Needless to say, Binita does not get the job.
Unlike Dmitri’s experiences, the problem here is not that the company
was looking for a major deity but that it failed to communicate clearly
the role’s required skills, costing both the potential candidate and the
company significant time and expenses.
Apples and Oranges 
| 
7


CHAPTER 3
A Survey of, and About,
Professionals
How can we, as a professional community, fix this problem? Perhaps
by using the tools we know best — data collection, data analysis, and
data communication. In mid-2012, the three of us set out to do some
old-school data science and constructed a survey of practitioners. But
not just any survey. We wanted to ask questions that would help us
understand and define sub-groups — not based on years of experience,
or academic degrees, or titles — but based instead on how data scien‐
tists think about themselves and their work. We didn’t ask about ver‐
ticals, or pay scales, or org charts. We avoided tool and technique
questions about database platforms or favorite statistical or machine
learning techniques. Others have asked those questions, and the an‐
swers are interesting, but not relevant to our problem.
We created a five-page web survey, taking less than 10 minutes to
complete and focusing on five areas: skills, experiences, education,
self-identification, and web presence. (Regarding web presence, we
asked for those willing to share their LinkedIn, Meetup, and GitHub
profiles, so that we could perform additional text analysis. However,
due to relatively low response rates and some technical issues, the re‐
sults were not usable, and will not be reported.) After testing the survey
on a small group of friends and colleagues, we shared it broadly, evan‐
gelized it to professional Meetups, and posted links on every relevant
social network we could think of. By the end of the project, we received
over 250 completed surveys from around the globe. (See Appendix:
“Design and Invitation” on page 29 for more details.) Our first task was
to look for underlying clusters in our respondents — clusters that may
9

be the basis for new ways to communicate about data scientists, their
careers, and their roles.
Clustering Data Scientists
Two sets of survey questions lent themselves to a clustering analysis.
We asked respondents to rank a diverse set of data science-related
skills, and we also asked the extent to which they self-identified with
a variety of professional categories.
Self-Identification
How do you think about yourself and your career? How might you
talk about yourself to friends, colleagues, or potential employers? To
gain insight, we asked people to state the extent to which they agreed
with 11 “I think of myself as a/an X” statements (Figure 3-1) using a
standard five-level Completely Agree to Completely Disagree scale.
Figure 3-1. Respondents tended to agree or disagree consistently to
questions such as “I think of myself as a/an X” in each Self-ID Group.
Our suggested Self-ID Group names are shown, along with the self-ID
categories most strongly associated with each Group.
As discussed in more detail in Appendix: “Non-negative Matrix Fac‐
torization”, we identified four clusters (latent factors) in our responses.
Each cluster is a set of self-ID categories that people tended to respond
to consistently. For example, it was unlikely that an individual data
scientist would both agree strongly that they are a Statistician but dis‐
agree strongly that they are a Scientist. We named the four clusters to
be evocative of the range of self-ID categories most associated with
that cluster. These named clusters we define as Self-ID Groups. Note
that each self-ID category was most strongly associated with a single
Self-ID Group, with the exception of Jack of All Trades, which is only
narrowly most associated with the Data Creative group. We will de‐
10 
| 
Chapter 3: A Survey of, and About, Professionals

scribe each of these Self-ID Groups in more detail below, but first we
want to introduce Skills Groups.
Skills
What skills do you bring to your work? What are your primary areas
of expertise? It can be tricky to get good answers to these questions.
On a scale of 1 to 10, how good are you at Math? Rather than try to
get comprehensible answers to this nearly incomprehensible question,
we elected to ask respondents to rank their skills. This is a lot easier.
As applied to your work, are you more skilled at Visualization or at
Bayesian/Monte Carlo Statistics?
We developed a set of 22 generic skills that we thought spanned the
range of useful things that data scientists might do in their work
(Figure 3-2). A few concrete examples were provided with each skill
to clarify and to aid ordering (see Appendix: “Skills List”). Respond‐
ents dragged-and-dropped those skills into an ordered list, with their
introspectively determined top skill on top.
Figure 3-2. Respondents tended to rank similarly skills in each Skills
Group. Our suggested Skills Goup names are shown, along with the
skills most strongly associated with each Group. ML = “Machine
Learning” and OR = “Operations Research.”
Clustering Data Scientists 
| 
11

As with the Self-ID Groups, we clustered the Skills, providing names
for each cluster to summarize those skills concisely. For example, re‐
spondents tended to rank Spatial Statistics and Surveys and Marketing
together, either ranking both relatively high or both relatively low. As
before, most Skills categories were most strongly associated with a
single Skills Group, with two exceptions. Structured Data, which
ended up in the ML/Big Data Skills group, was also strongly associated
with the Programming skills group. And Machine Learning, which
also ended up with the ML/Big Data group, was also commonly ranked
highly by respondents who ranked Math/OR or Statistics skills highly.
It’s worth noting that because we used rankings instead of an absolute
scale, we are not suggesting that two data scientists who rank ML/Big
Data skills highly are equivalently skilled or effective. One may be a
recent university graduate, having only completed coursework in Ma‐
chine Learning, while another may have decades of experience apply‐
ing these techniques to a wide range of problems.
Combining Skills and Self-ID
Figure 3-3 shows how our respondents fell into our four Self-ID
Groups and five Skills Groups. Each respondent’s responses can be
“compressed” by replacing their eleven Self-ID ratings with their four
Self-ID Group loadings, and similarly for Skills. The respondent can
then be labeled by their most strongly loaded Self-ID and Skills groups.
For example, someone who rated the Data Businessperson Self-ID
questions highest, and ranked the Statistics Skills highest, would fall
into the lower-left rectangle.
12 
| 
Chapter 3: A Survey of, and About, Professionals

1. Although we think our respondents cover the broad range of professionals who might
be considered data scientists, we do not assert that we have an unbiased sample. Data
Researchers may well not be the largest group in the population as a whole.
Figure 3-3. There were interesting partial correlations among each re‐
spondent’s primary Skills Group (rows) and primary Self-ID Group
(columns). The mosaic plot illustrates the proportions of respondents
who fell into each combination of groups. For example, there were few
Data Researchers whose top Skill Group was Programming.
Several reasonable observations fall out of this initial categorization.
First of all, Data Businesspeople are most likely to have primarily
Business-related skills. This is certainly a reassuring result. Also of
note is that half of Data Businesspeople have strongest skill rankings
in other areas, such as Statistics and ML/Big Data. Second, our largest
group of respondents, Data Researchers, were also those most likely
to have expertise in Statistics or, perhaps, Math.1 Third, both Data
Businesspeople and Data Researchers were quite unlikely to rate Pro‐
gramming skills as their highest skills. And fourth, Data Creatives and
Clustering Data Scientists 
| 
13
www.allitebooks.com

Data Developers demonstrated greater variability in how they ranked
their skills than others (see also Figure 4-2). Data Creatives and Data
Developers are also the two Self-ID groups most likely to excel in ML/
Big Data and Programming skills, but as we’ll see next, there are sub‐
stantial differences between the experiences of these types of data sci‐
entists.
When trying to describe subtypes of data scientist, we found that the
Self-ID Groups were more evocative and a better primary label for
practitioners, with the Skill Groups a correlated but secondary label.
We may find it valuable to describe someone as a “Data Researcher
with depth in Machine Learning/Big Data,” or as a “Data Business‐
person with depth in Statistics.” (We urge readers to find their own
data scientist type by doing the skills ranking and self-ID rating tasks
at survey.datacommunitydc.org.)
The Variety of Data Scientists
So let’s return to Binita, Chao, Dmitri, and Rebecca. Could our new
terms be of value when trying to efficiently and coherently speak about
these four professionals, their roles, and their careers? As we’ve already
described, Data Businesspeople, Creatives, Developers, and Research‐
ers tend to have distinctive skills. What else can we say about them,
based on their survey responses? In this section, we summarize the
most interesting results.
Data Businesspeople
Data Businesspeople like Binita are those that are most focused on the
organization and how data projects yield profit. They were most likely
to rate themselves highly as leaders and entrepreneurs, and the most
likely to have reported managing an employee (about 80% have). They
were also quite likely to have done contract or consulting work, and a
substantial proportion have started a business. Although they were the
least likely to have an advanced degree among our respondents, with
about 60% having a Master’s or beyond, they were the most likely to
have an MBA, at nearly 25%. But Data Businesspeople definitely have
technical skills and were particularly likely, like Binita, to have under‐
graduate Engineering degrees. And they work with real data — about
90% report at least occasionally working on gigabyte-scale problems,
which far exceeds quarterly financials in a spreadsheet. Also of note,
Data Businesspeople skewed a little older in our demographics, and
14 
| 
Chapter 3: A Survey of, and About, Professionals

nearly a quarter were female, higher than our other varieties of data
scientist. But only about a quarter said they had described themselves
as a “data scientist,” much lower than the half of the rest of our re‐
spondents who had done so!
Data Creatives
As we’ll discuss later, data scientists can often tackle the entire soup-
to-nuts analytics process on their own: from extracting data, to inte‐
grating and layering it, to performing statistical or other advanced
analyses, to creating compelling visualizations and interpretations, to
building tools to make the analysis scalable and broadly applicable.
We think of Data Creatives like Chao as the broadest of data scientists,
those who excel at applying a wide range of tools and technologies to
a problem, or creating innovative prototypes at hackathons — the
quintessential Jack of All Trades. Our Data Creative respondents latch‐
ed onto the term Artist like no other group. Similar to Data Research‐
ers, they have substantial academic experience, with about three-
quarters having taught classes and presented papers. Common un‐
dergraduate degrees were in areas like Economics and Statistics. But
unlike Data Researchers, relatively few Data Creatives have a PhD.
Respondents like Chao do have substantial business expertise — Data
Creatives were actually slightly more likely than Data Businesspeople
to have done contract work (80%) or have started a business (40%).
As the group most likely to identify as a Hacker, they also had the
deepest Open Source experience, with about half contributing to OSS
projects and about half working on Open Data projects. We also saw
that Data Creatives were somewhat younger and more likely to be male
than other respondents. Curiously, they responded most positively to
our final question: “Did you feel that this survey applied to you?”
Data Developer
We think of Data Developers like Dmitri as people focused on the
technical problem of managing data — how to get it, store it, and learn
from it. Our Data Developers tended to rate themselves fairly highly
as Scientists, although not as highly as Data Researchers did. This
makes sense, particularly for those closely integrated with the Machine
Learning and related academic communities. But, like Dmitri, Data
Developers are clearly writing code, probably production code, in
their day-to-day work. About half have Computer Science or Com‐
puter Engineering degrees, and about half have contributed to Open
The Variety of Data Scientists 
| 
15

Source projects. More Data Developers land in the Machine Learning/
Big Data skills group than other types of data scientist. They were also
least likely to have done consulting work, managed an employee, or
contributed to an Open Data project.
Data Researchers
One of the interesting career paths that leads to a title like “data sci‐
entist” starts with academic research in the physical or social sciences,
or in statistics. Many organizations have realized the value of deep
academic training in the use of data to understand complex processes,
even if their business domains may be quite different from classic sci‐
entific fields. People like Rebecca who end up in the Data Researchers
Self-ID Group tend to be from these backgrounds. The majority of
respondents whose top Skills Group was Statistics ended up in this
category, for instance. Nearly 75% of Data Researchers have published
in peer-reviewed journals, and over half have a PhD. (Our skewed-by-
personal-connections respondents reported a surprising number of
psychology and political science degrees.) On the other hand, Data
Researchers were least likely to have started a business, and only half
have managed an employee.
Big Data
It’s worth a digression into a set of questions we asked about “big data.”
In our view, one of the reasons why “data science” and other buzzwords
have come about recently is the advent of new technologies and tech‐
niques for inexpensively working with very large data sets. However,
we also view big data as somewhat tangential to the value of data sci‐
entists to organizations. Our survey data supports this; most data sci‐
entists rarely work with terabyte or larger data. Figure 3-4 shows how
often respondents worked with data of kilobyte, megabyte, gigabyte,
terabyte, and petabyte scale, broken down by Skills Group (which is
clearer, here, than Self-ID Group):
16 
| 
Chapter 3: A Survey of, and About, Professionals

Figure 3-4. Number of respondents working with different scales of
data, by primary Skills Group.
Respondents whose top Skills Group was ML/Big Data were most
likely to work with larger data sets, with over half at least occasionally
working on TB-scale problems, compared with about a quarter for
other respondents. Even in the ML/Big Data Skills group, however, the
vast majority rarely or never worked with PB-scale data. True big data
work seems limited to a relatively small subset of data scientists.
Related Surveys
Among many other surveys related to data science and business ana‐
lytics (e.g., Libertore and Luo, 2012; EMC, 2011), several in particular
are worth noting here. Kandel et al. (2012) interviewed 35 “enterprise
analysts” and, as part of their quantification of these interviews, iden‐
tified three “archetypes”: hacker, scripter, and application user. Hack‐
ers were skilled at programming and large-scale data management,
and also often built sophisticated data visualizations. Scripters used
statistical/mathematical programming languages like R and Matlab to
do more detailed and sophisticated analyses of data sets typically pro‐
Related Surveys 
| 
17

vided by others. The group they called application users tended to use
spreadsheets and other packaged analysis systems; we would probably
not call most of these application users data scientists. Importantly,
they highlighted the value of diverse skills, quoting one person as say‐
ing “analysts that can’t program are disenfranchised here,” and another
as saying “A generalist is more valuable than a specialist… We look for
pretty broad skills and data passion” (ibid, p. 2,924).
Researchers at Talent Analytics, Corp. and the International Institute
for Analytics recently surveyed about 300 analytics professionals, ask‐
ing about skills and activities, as well as their proprietary set of psy‐
chometric questions (www.talentanalytics.com and personal commu‐
nication). Like us, they clustered their responses into categories. When
they clustered based on daily activities, analytics professionals were
focused on Data Preparation, Programming, Management, or Gen‐
eralist/Other. While these categories partially line up with ours, there
are substantial differences. For example, our Data Businesspeople cat‐
egory reported the lowest proportion of PhDs, but their Management
category reported the highest proportion of PhDs. They also found
psychometric patterns, such as analytics professionals overall rating
highly on their curiosity dimension, but the details and the way these
questions varied among their respondents remain confidential. Of
note, a relatively small proportion of their respondents frequently
worked with terabyte-scale data, supporting our result discussed
above.
18 
| 
Chapter 3: A Survey of, and About, Professionals

CHAPTER 4
T-Shaped Data Scientists
We feel that a defining feature of data scientists is the breadth of their
skills — their ability to single-handedly do at least prototype-level
versions of all the steps needed to derive new insights or build data
products (Mason & Wiggins, 2010). We also feel that the most suc‐
cessful data scientists are those with substantial, deep expertise in at
least one aspect of data science, be it statistics, big data, or business
communication.
In many ways, this pattern matches the “T-shaped skills” idea that has
been promoted since at least the early 1990s (see citations here). The
“T” represents breadth of skills, across the top, with depth in one area
represented by the vertical bar. T-shaped professionals can more easily
work in interdisciplinary teams than those with less breadth and can
be more effective than those without depth. Data science is an inher‐
ently collaborative and creative field, where the successful professional
can work with database administrators, business people, and others
with overlapping skill sets to get data projects completed in innovative
ways.
For data scientists, we feel this notion can help address the commu‐
nications issues we’ve described. By clarifying your areas of depth,
perhaps using our Skills terminology, others can more quickly under‐
stand where your expertise lies. We also suggest that our Skills termi‐
nology can suggest areas of career development. For instance, a data
scientist with an Operations Research background and deep skills in
Simulation, Optimization, Algorithms, and Math might find value in
learning some of the new Bayesian/Monte Carlo Statistics methods
that also fall under our Math/OR Skills Group. That same data scientist
19

might also want to make sure they have enough broad programming,
big data, and business skills to be able to intelligently collaborate with
(or lead) others on a data science team.
Others have made this point as well. Stanton et al. (2012), in a writeup
of a recent workshop, reviewed the state of data science in a primarily
academic/"eScience” context. Interestingly, they emphasized a role
performing data archival and preservation, which is not currently a
focus of data scientists, although perhaps it should be. Their workshop
participants recommended that the breadth of T-shaped data scientists
should fall into three categories: data curation, analytics and visuali‐
zation, and networks and infrastructure. They also mention the intri‐
guing idea that data scientists should have (serif) “I"-shaped skills, with
domain knowledge along the bottom (see also The Data Science Venn
Diagram, Conway, 2010).
Evidence for T-Shaped Data Scientists
Our survey data can be used to indicate how T-shaped data scientists
already are, at least directionally. As we used rankings rather than an
absolute measure of skills, our data only lets us approximate skill
depth.
What would our results have to look like to support the idea that data
scientists are T-shaped? In general, most respondents would have a
Skill Group (e.g., Math/OR or Statistics) that they are strong in, and
relatively uniform rankings in the other Skill Groups. In contrast, if
the rankings (and thus groupings) were idiosyncratic, with different
people having different patterns of skills, we wouldn’t see that pattern.
Figure 4-1 shows that our respondents did trend toward T-shapes in
their skills. Each respondent has a numerical “loading” representing
the strength of their responses to the five Skill Groups. Instead of
plotting the same Skill Group in the same place, we instead plot the
strongest Skill Group for an individual in the center, the next strongest
to the right, then to the left, and so forth. The grey bars show a sub‐
jectively created “ideal” T-shaped pattern. The grey circles illustrate a
simulated null hypothesis: that our respondents were not T-shaped in
their skills. (The process of sorting random ranks will naturally cause
some skill groups to be stronger than others.) The green circles show
the results from our respondents. They were substantially more T-
shaped than you would expect from random rankings and tended to
have one strongest Skill Group, perhaps a secondary Skill Group, and
20 
| 
Chapter 4: T-Shaped Data Scientists

Figure 4-1. Skill Group strength for “ideal” professionals (grey bar), si‐
mulated controls (grey dots), and mean of surveyed respondents
(green). Loadings are sorted from center out on a per-respondent ba‐
sis.
weaker skills elsewhere. (See Appendix: “Non-negative Matrix Facto‐
rization” for technical details.)
We can look at the T-shaped nature of the four Self-ID Groups as well.
Figure 4-2 shows how strongly, on average, people in each Self-ID
Group were associated with our five Skills Groups. Data Businesspeo‐
ple were quite T-shaped, with top skills in Business, and moderate
skills elsewhere. Data Researchers tended to be very deep in Statistics
(and related skills), but somewhat less broad. On average, they ranked
all of the ML/Big Data, Business, and Programming skills fairly low.
Data Developers had a pattern that might be called “Pi-shaped,” with
strong Programming skills and relatively strong ML/Big Data skills,
along with moderate skills in the other three skill groups. And finally,
Data Creatives tended to be the least T-shaped of our respondents.
Interestingly, Data Creatives were, on average, neither ranked the
strongest nor the weakest in any skill group.
Evidence for T-Shaped Data Scientists 
| 
21

Figure 4-2. Mean Skill Group loadings for survey participants catego‐
rized into four Self-ID Groups.
22 
| 
Chapter 4: T-Shaped Data Scientists

CHAPTER 5
Data Scientists and Organizations
Let’s turn the focus around now, and consider how our survey results
might inform communication and career path problems from the
point of view of organizations that need data scientists.
Where Data People Come From: Science vs.
Tools Education
Tools are critical to data scientists’ effectiveness. The maturity of cur‐
rent tools allows an individual to at least roughly perform all of the
steps needed to develop insights and build data products. However,
we feel that evidence points in favor of a scientific versus a tools-based
education for data scientists. Along with technical expertise, the sci‐
entific mentoring process builds and rewards curiosity, storytelling,
and cleverness (DJ Patil, 2011). Our survey results support this notion,
with 70% of our respondents having at least a Master’s degree, and
scientific fields (social or physical sciences, but not math, computer
science, statistics, or engineering) making up about 40% of reported
undergraduate degrees.
Furthermore, post-graduate education in the sciences provides hands-
on experience working with real data, not just to describe a phenom‐
enon, but to evaluate a theory or argue a position. Disciplines such as
physics and astronomy teach rigorous statistical thinking, while sys‐
tems such as particle accelerators and space telescopes provide massive
streams of data requiring careful data curation. (Data from the under-
construction Square Kilometer Array telescope is expected to be col‐
lected at the rate of 10 PB/hour. Data from Facebook is estimated to
23
www.allitebooks.com

accumulate at the rate of less than 1 PB/day.) We feel that hard science
backgrounds provide excellent training for any sort of data scientist,
especially Data Developers. On the other hand, some have argued that
social scientists make great data scientists too (e.g., Miller, 2012; Riv‐
era, 2013). Psychologists, economists, political scientists, and others
work in the sort of tangled, noisy real-world data that many organi‐
zations are (unfortunately) buried in. These disciplines yield data sci‐
entists who can quickly clean and aggregate data, use advanced stat‐
istical techniques to understand causality, and think deeply about data
visualization, presentation, and communication. We saw many such
degrees in our Data Researcher and Data Creative respondents.
Classic Computer Science (Machine Learning) and Applied Statistics
degrees can also be very effective starting points for data scientists.
Machine Learning’s focus on large-scale data and algorithms, com‐
bined with software development skills, apply naturally to real-world
organizational data. Many Applied Statistics programs incorporate
consulting, giving graduates substantial domain expertise, a critical
aspect of effective data science (e.g., Conway, 2010, Driscoll, 2012).
It will be interesting to see the effectiveness of the new analytics, data
science, and business intelligence Master’s-level degrees that many
colleges and universities are now starting to offer. The history of many
current data scientists are those who pivoted through a variety of fields,
giving them the breadth and depth needed for the field almost acci‐
dentally. It remains to be seen whether new degrees will offer the scope
and practicality to provide the software engineering, statistical think‐
ing, and domain skills needed to be immediately effective, or if addi‐
tional experience will be necessary.
From Theory to Practice: Internships and
Mentoring
As with many other fields, moving from academia to practice in data
science can be tricky. Patil (2011) suggests “[taking] incredibly bright
and creative people right out of college and [putting] them through a
very robust internship program.” For large organizations with the
budget and senior talent to lead that sort of program, this could work
very well, but it seems unlikely to us to be scalable down.
An interesting alternative model, highlighted at DataGotham 2012, is
the hiring consultant who helps to recruit, train, and then integrate
24 
| 
Chapter 5: Data Scientists and Organizations

and mentor a fresh-out-of-school data scientist in a smaller organi‐
zation. DonorsChoose.org, realizing they needed a data scientist to get
the best value from data collected as part of their charitable mission,
worked with an expert data scientist over a roughly five-month period.
Before the hire, the expert helped the nonprofit understand the role
of a data scientist, and afterward helped train and mentor the new
employee, and set a path forward for successful initial projects. We feel
that the broad talents of data scientists will be useful for small organ‐
izations, but that innovative approaches such as this will be necessary
to assure effectiveness.
Teams and Org Charts
We have heard a number of anecdotes about data scientists whose
effectiveness was hampered due to inadequate integration with the rest
of the organization. There are several aspects to this. First, as suggested
by our data showing the diversity of data scientists, and the typical T-
shaped distribution of skills, data scientists should work in teams with
overlapping skills to be most effective (Davenport et al., 2010; Patil,
2011). As we described in the introduction, there is an occasional ten‐
dency for organizations that don’t understand this to want to hire a
“god” who can do it all.
Another aspect of integration is the need for organizations to set up
their data science teams so that they can work effectively. Patil
(2011) again: “A new hire won’t do something amazing, now or in the
future, if the organization he or she works for doesn’t hold up its end
of the bargain. The organization must provide a platform and oppor‐
tunities for the individual to be successful.” Data science teams need
direct access to both raw data and decision-makers, and based on our
analysis, they need a diversity of skills to make best use of that access.
They also need to be supported by a management with a process for
adopting and using their results. Projects whose potential outcomes
cannot be turned into organizational change will probably never pay
for themselves. When the output of a data science team is expected to
be software with a full life-cycle, it is critical that the team include from
the beginning adequate resources to test, deploy, and maintain the
system. Although some of our respondents had the Programming
Skills to attempt some of those tasks, it is unrealistic to expect that
most Data Businesspeople or Data Researchers could do so effectively
on their own. In larger organizations, the funding and managerial re‐
lationship between analytics teams and the rest of the business, in‐
Teams and Org Charts 
| 
25

cluding data infrastructure and IT staff, can be critically important to
realizing the benefits of data science (Davenport et al., 2010).
Career Paths
There are several concerns that organizations may have when con‐
structing not just static roles for data scientists, but career paths with
opportunities for advancement. As with many classes of employees,
data scientists with years of experience and domain expertise can be
both extremely valuable and extremely hard to replace. The engineer‐
ing professions have long considered the pros and cons of promotion
into management roles, and identified viable alternatives for senior
people who do not want to manage. Of our respondents, 62% have
managed others; it would be interesting to know how many data sci‐
entists aspire to manage teams, versus find management an annoy‐
ance.
A potentially interesting approach to keeping data scientists engaged
in large organizations is to set up a job rotation program (Davenport
et al., 2010). After an initial orientation period, data scientists could
be systematically rotated among internal teams. A product group may
need a personalization model; a marketing group may need help with
controlled experiments; a finance group may need help with forecast‐
ing; an operations group may need help with process optimization. By
being embedded directly in the group, a data scientist can learn critical
business values and skills, focus on problems that a group most needs
help with, and provide solutions with minimal distraction. But, by
being rotated periodically, a data scientist can gain a valuable breadth
of skills and points of view, while continuing to develop their deepest
Skills Group.
26 
| 
Chapter 5: Data Scientists and Organizations

CHAPTER 6
Final Thoughts
After considering themselves and their careers in the framework we
have suggested here, Binita, Chao, Dmitri, and Rebecca all made some
changes. Binita learned some clearer ways of talking about the diver‐
sity of people on her team and will help HR to more clearly define
roles, at least until she leaves to strike out on her own. Chao sees the
value in specializing more and will be signing up for some massive
open online courses (MOOCs) to deepen his Statistics skills. He hopes
to complement his existing visualization skillset with some work in
time-series modeling. Dmitri, conversely, sees some benefit in diver‐
sifying a bit and will start to read more about data visualization tech‐
nology and about how to sell data projects to managers. Rebecca has
identified some process and organizational changes in her company
that would help her be more effective and will start chatting with
managers about how those might happen.
Others benefited from this framework too. That CEO who was looking
for a “god” got his expectations in line with reality and is now looking
to build a small, diverse data science team. And the firm that confused
Binita’s Data Businessperson skills with those of a Data Developer has
a newfound appreciation for the variety of people in this field and the
variety of talents that they bring to the table.
We hope that our work can be valuable to the community broadly, but
we realize that this article is just one step forward. Our suggested
names for the variety of data scientist are just suggestions. Additional
survey research could help clarify the natural categories more clearly,
and we look forward to data illustrating how the field is changing over
time, as new educational and career paths emerge.
27


APPENDIX A
Survey Details
Design and Invitation
The survey was created on KwikSurveys.com (note: hacked, closed,
and reopened under new management since we used it). The first page
described the survey, stated our privacy policy, and thanked partici‐
pants. The second page posed the skills-sorting task. The third page
asked about education and experiences. The fourth page asked about
professional web presence. The fifth page asked about self-
identification and had some basic demographic questions. The final
page thanked the participant and provided a link to send to others.
After testing, we posted links on social and professional networking
sites, emailed friends and colleagues, and so forth. A sample personal
invitation was:
As someone in the broad Analytics / Data Science / Big Data / Applied
Stats / Machine Learning space, would you be willing to take a brief
survey? Three of us in the DC Data Science community wondered
about the ways that skills and experiences of practitioners in these
fields vary, and are collecting some data to help us learn more. By
participating, you would help us define these new fields better, and
we hope the results will help people such as yourself talk about how
your skills and your work fit in with everyone else’s. Should take 10
minutes or less!
29

Skills List
Here are the list of skills we provided (in random order) and asked
respondents to sort:
• Algorithms (ex: computational complexity, CS theory)
• Back-End Programming (ex: JAVA/Rails/Objective C)
• Bayesian/Monte-Carlo Statistics (ex: MCMC, BUGS)
• Big and Distributed Data (ex: Hadoop, Map/Reduce)
• Business (ex: management, business development, budgeting)
• Classical Statistics (ex: general linear model, ANOVA)
• Data Manipulation (ex: regexes, R, SAS, web scraping)
• Front-End Programming (ex: JavaScript, HTML, CSS)
• Graphical Models (ex: social networks, Bayes networks)
• Machine Learning (ex: decision trees, neural nets, SVM, cluster‐
ing)
• Math (ex: linear algebra, real analysis, calculus)
• Optimization (ex: linear, integer, convex, global)
• Product Development (ex: design, project management)
• Science (ex: experimental design, technical writing/publishing)
• Simulation (ex: discrete, agent-based, continuous)
• Spatial Statistics (ex: geographic covariates, GIS)
• Structured Data (ex: SQL, JSON, XML)
• Surveys and Marketing (ex: multinomial modeling)
• Systems Administration (ex: *nix, DBA, cloud tech.)
• Temporal Statistics (ex: forecasting, time-series analysis)
• Unstructured Data (ex: noSQL, text mining)
• Visualization (ex: statistical graphics, mapping, web-based data‐
viz)
30 
| 
Appendix A: Survey Details

Non-negative Matrix Factorization
We used Non-negative Matrix Factorization to perform our Skills and
Self-ID clusterings. NMF attempts to find a matrix factorization where
all elements of the basis vectors are constrained to be non-negative.
This is natural in data sets such as our skills rankings, which range
from 0 (lowest or missing) to 21 (highest).
The R NMF package that we used is not currently available via CRAN,
but can be downloaded from the archives.
We used the standard Brunet et al. (2004) method, which attempts to
minimize KL-divergence. Note that NMF attempts to globally opti‐
mize a non-smooth function from a random initial state, and so we
used 200 random runs to find a relatively reliable factorization. (See
main text for several skills/self-ID terms that sometimes fell into other
groups when different random seeds were chosen. These small dif‐
ferences did not appreciably affect our overall results.) The ranks of 5
and 4 (for Skills and Self-ID, respectively) were chosen to maximize
the informativeness and interpretability (evaluated subjectively) of the
resulting basis vectors. Lower ranks yielded vague factors, while higher
ranks yielded less informative results compared to the raw ranks/
ratings.
The results of NMF are two matrices: a coefficients matrix that de‐
scribes how the observed dimensions can be approximately recon‐
structed with a smaller number of latent factors, and a basis matrix
that describes how individual respondents’ rankings/ratings can be
approximately summarized using the latent factors. We categorize in‐
dividual respondents by normalizing the basis matrix and selecting
the largest latent factor loading. The normalized coefficients matrix is
used to assign skills/self-ID terms to Skill Groups/Self-ID Groups.
For T-shaped skills analysis, we use the normalized basis vectors for
each respondent. Figure 4-1 was constructed by multiplying 1,000 si‐
mulated random rankings of skills by the computed coefficients matrix
to get skill group loadings for each simulated respondent. For both
that matrix and the observed basis matrix we then sorted the normal‐
ized loadings from high to low, then plotted the means in the following
order (left-to-right): 5, 3, 1, 2, 4.
Non-negative Matrix Factorization 
| 
31

Acknowledgements
Thank you to those who gave us valuable feedback on drafts of this
article and the survey, to those who gave us opportunities to share the
results, as well as to our hundreds of survey participants around the
world. Particular thanks to: MB, DC, AD, AF, NK, JDL, HM, NN, DJP,
NT, KV, JW, JMW, and EZ.
—Harlan Harris, Sean Murphy, and Marck Vaisman
32 
| 
Appendix A: Survey Details

About the Authors
Harlan D. Harris is a data scientist with experience in predictive
modeling, software design, statistics, social science, operations, mar‐
keting, and simulation. He is the co-founder and co-organizer of the
Data Science DC Meetup, and the co-founder and President of Data
Community DC, Inc. He has a PhD in Computer Science from the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and worked as a research‐
er in several Psychology departments before turning to industry.
Sean Patrick Murphy, with degrees in mathematics, electrical engi‐
neering, and biomedical engineering and an MBA from Oxford Uni‐
versity, has served as a senior scientist at the Johns Hopkins Applied
Physics Laboratory for the past 10 years. Previously, he served as the
Chief Data Scientist at WiserTogether, a series A funded health care
analytics firm, and the Director of Research at Manhattan Prep, a
boutique graduate educational company. He was also the co-founder
and CEO of a big data-focused startup: CloudSpree.
Marck Vaisman is a data scientist, consultant, entrepreneur, master
munger, and hacker. Marck is the Principal Data Scientist at Data‐
Xtract, LLC helping clients from start-ups to Fortune 500 firms with
all kinds of data science projects. His professional experience spans
the management consulting, telecommunications, Internet, and tech‐
nology industries. He is the co-founder of Data Community DC, Inc.
and co-organizer of the Data Science DC and R Users DC Meetup
groups. He has an MBA from Vanderbilt University and a B.S. in Me‐
chanical Engineering from Boston University. Marck is also a contri‐
buting author of The Bad Data Handbook.
www.allitebooks.com

