Analysis and Critique:
How to Engage
and Write about Anything
Dorsey Armstrong, Ph.D.

PUBLISHED BY:
THE GREAT COURSES
Corporate Headquarters
4840 Westﬁ elds Boulevard, Suite 500
Chantilly, Virginia 20151-2299
Phone: 1-800-832-2412
Fax: 703-378-3819
www.thegreatcourses.com
Copyright © The Teaching Company, 2011
Printed in the United States of America
This book is in copyright. All rights reserved. 
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above,
no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form, or by any means 
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), 
without the prior written permission of
The Teaching Company.
The Credits page is a continuation of the copyright page.

Dorsey Armstrong, Ph.D.
Associate Professor of English
and Medieval Literature
Purdue University
P
rofessor Dorsey Armstrong is Associate 
Professor of English and Medieval Literature 
at Purdue University. She received her A.B. 
in English and Creative Writing from Stanford 
University in 1993 and her Ph.D. in Medieval 
Literature from Duke University in 1999. She 
specializes in Middle English language and literature, Arthurian literature, 
Anglo-Saxon language and literature, and gender and feminist studies.
Professor Armstrong is the author of Gender and the Chivalric Community 
in Malory’s “Morte d’Arthur” (University Press of Florida, 2003) and Sir 
Thomas Malory’s “Morte Darthur”: A New Modern English Translation 
Based on the Winchester Manuscript (Parlor Press, 2009). Professor 
Armstrong is currently editor in chief of the academic journal Arthuriana
and is at work on a critical study of geography in the late medieval 
Arthurian legend. Ŷ
i

Table of Contents
iiii
LECTURE GUIDES
INTRODUCTION
Professor Biography ............................................................................i
Course Scope .....................................................................................1
LECTURE 1
How to Write about Anything  .............................................................2
LECTURE 2
How to Be an Effective Reader  .........................................................7
LECTURE 3
How Literature Can Help  .................................................................12
LECTURE 4
Shaping Your Voice  .........................................................................18
LECTURE 5
Knowing Your Reader  ......................................................................22
LECTURE 6
The Art of the Essay—How to Start ..................................................27
LECTURE 7
How to Organize an Argument .........................................................32
LECTURE 8
Supporting Your Argument ...............................................................36
LECTURE 9
Finishing Strong................................................................................40
LECTURE 10
The Uses of Poetry  ..........................................................................45

iii
Table of Contents
LECTURE 11
Poetic Diction and Syntax.................................................................49
LECTURE 12
Drama—Writing Out Loud ................................................................53
LECTURE 13
What You Can Learn from Autobiography ........................................58
LECTURE 14
Writing and Leadership  ....................................................................62
LECTURE 15
The Rules of Rhetoric .......................................................................67
LECTURE 16
Invention and Arrangement ..............................................................71
LECTURE 17
Ethos and Pathos .............................................................................74
LECTURE 18
Finding What You Need ....................................................................78
LECTURE 19
Using What You Find ........................................................................82
LECTURE 20
Getting Started—Writing First Drafts ................................................87
LECTURE 21
Editing—Finding What’s Wrong ........................................................90
LECTURE 22
Rewriting—Fixing What’s Wrong ......................................................95
LECTURE 23
Avoiding Common Errors in Grammar and Usage .........................102

Table of Contents
iv
LECTURE 24
The Power of Words .......................................................................108
Bibliography ....................................................................................112
Credits ............................................................................................116
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL

1
Analysis and Critique:
How to Engage and Write about Anything
Scope:
F
or thousands of years, writing has been a powerful way for us to 
share our thoughts and ideas. Even in the technologically saturated 
21st century, we still express ourselves in writing almost every 
day. But all writing—whether it’s an essay, a personal letter, or a detailed 
business report—is at its most effective and memorable when it’s built on 
the fundamental critical and analytical skills that transform your words from 
good to great. 
Regardless of your subject, your goal, or your occasion, this course will lead 
you on a path to more engaging and effective writing. One of the keys to 
effective writing is understanding literary genres and the ways their unique 
styles and characteristics can shape and inform your own voice. The ¿ rst 
lectures of the course guide you through the ¿ ve major literary genres: 
¿ ction, essay, poetry, drama, and autobiography.
From there, the focus shifts to the art of rhetoric and the ways it can help 
you adapt your writing to a variety of different situations. Some of the most 
applicable rhetorical concepts explored in this part of the course include 
deductive reasoning, commonplaces, and pathos. Your increased awareness 
of classical rhetoric will go a long way to helping you become a stronger 
writer by calling your attention to the basics of compelling analytical writing. 
What about the act of writing itself, which can be daunting even to the 
most seasoned writer? The ¿ nal section of the course is a step-by-step 
guide through the writing process that provides answers to frequently asked 
questions about each of writing’s four major stages: researching, writing a 
¿ rst draft, editing, and rewriting. By the end of the course, you will know the 
feeling of having a masterful instructor standing right by your side as you 
learn to write about practically anything. Ŷ

2
Lecture 1: How to Write about Anything
How to Write about Anything 
Lecture 1
Pretty soon, you’ll begin to grasp that what makes it possible to really 
engage with a piece of writing, to really understand and get inside it, 
is not simply coming up with answers to questions about the piece, but 
it’s actually understanding what kinds of questions need to be asked in 
the ¿ rst place.
I
f you are taking this course, then you are someone who cares about good 
writing—both how to appreciate it and how to produce it. Over the next 
24 lectures, we’ll explore several different strategies that will help you 
learn to read and think critically by examining important works from several 
major genres of writing. You’ll also learn to use the reading methods and 
critical-thinking skills developed through the study of these genres to write 
more effectively for any occasion, situation, or goal. 
Great writers are always great readers, so in this course we’re going to spend 
a lot of time learning how to be active, engaged readers. And you’re going to 
¿ nd out that this will help you to become an effective and persuasive writer. 
Let’s jump right in and take an example of a piece of writing and consider 
how or why it doesn’t really work: 
They had but one last remaining night together, so they embraced 
each other as tightly as that two-À avor entwined string cheese that 
is orange and yellowish-white, the orange probably being a bland 
Cheddar and the white ... Mozzarella, although it could possibly be 
Provolone or just plain American, as it really doesn’t taste distinctly 
dissimilar from the orange, yet they would have you believe it does 
by coloring it differently. 
On reading this, what are your ¿ rst impressions? I hope that your ¿ rst 
reaction is that it is terrible writing, even ridiculous. This is deliberately bad 
writing—the 2003 winning entry from the annual Bulwer-Lytton bad writing 
contest. Most of us can recognize bad writing, but apart from deliberately 

3
bad pieces like the contest winner, we’d usually be slightly hard pressed to 
explain why the writing is bad, and what might be done to make it better. 
This course aims to help you both understand and recognize what makes 
writing good or bad, and then use that knowledge to produce strong and 
effective writing of your own.
The ¿ rst unit of this course explores what the elements of successful 
writing are and how they depend on insightful reading, careful research, 
and rigorous analytical thinking. Successful writing requires us to develop 
active-analytical reading strategies (as opposed to passive-receptive reading 
habits). By examining excerpts from several novels and short stories, 
including the work of Jane Austen, Herman Melville, Edgar Allen Poe, 
and more contemporary writers, we’ll learn how passive reading turns us 
into simple receivers of whatever a text has to offer (empirical information, 
emotional pleasure) while active, insightful reading empowers us to more 
effectively evaluate and interpret the meaning of what we read—making us 
better writers in the process.
Perfect, grammatically correct writing is not necessarily interesting or engaging.
Photos.com/JupiterImages/© Getty Images/Thinkstock.

4
Lecture 1: How to Write about Anything
Successful writing requires us to develop an effective and distinctive voice: 
a persona on paper that is both strong and À exible. We’ll analyze the work 
of several well-known writers to learn how they create and develop their 
voices. We’ll also study how these writers shift and modify their voices in 
response to changing circumstances or contexts, and how one writer often 
produces compelling writing in response to 
the work of another. We’ll look at several 
examples of how authors anticipate, meet, and 
even shape readers’ expectations. 
In addition, we’ll examine the characteristics 
of powerful, persuasive prose to show you 
how to adapt and incorporate these strategies 
into your own writing. The essay is perhaps 
the richest and most varied genre for studying 
the characteristics of a good argument, and 
we’ll study three classic essays from the English and American traditions 
to demonstrate effective strategies for starting, organizing, supporting, and 
concluding an argument. One of these essays is Jonathan Swift’s “A Modest 
Proposal,” which is subtitled: “For Preventing The Children of Poor People 
in Ireland From Being A Burden to Their Parents or Country, and For Making 
Them Bene¿ cial to The Public,” and which also includes the following lines: 
I have been assured by a very knowing American of my 
acquaintance in London, that a young healthy child well nursed is 
at a year old a most delicious, nourishing, and wholesome food, 
whether stewed, roasted, baked, or boiled; and I make no doubt that 
it will equally serve in a fricassee or a ragout.
What is the ¿ rst thing that comes to mind, besides the horri¿ c image of 
parents cannibalizing their children? Well, the sheer ludicrousness of the 
idea, presented in such a formal, rational tone, is meant to provoke an 
extreme reaction. Writing, when it’s done well, is never just words on a 
page—good writing invites interaction. The reader engages with the words, 
interacts with the language and ideas of the author. 
Active, insightful 
reading empowers us 
to more effectively 
evaluate and interpret 
the meaning 
of what we read.

5
While the writing of autobiography requires only that one mine one’s own 
past for information, very often persuasive writing will demand that you do 
a little outside research—and cite that research appropriately—in order to 
make your point more effectively and persuasively. We’ll address research 
issues in two lectures later in the course. The lectures on research will 
include segments on the effective and ethical use of online research tools, 
and special attention will be devoted to the evaluation and application of 
material discovered through Internet-based searches.
The ¿ nal portion of the course deals with the writing and revision process. 
By the time you ¿ nish this course, you’ll possess a set of rewriting tools that 
will allow you to assess both minor and major editing comments and decide 
if and how you want to implement suggestions for revision. The course also 
includes a lecture that examines 10 common errors in grammar and usage. It 
explains the rationale for certain grammatical constructions and conventions 
so you’ll know when something is incorrect, and why. 
So even though this lecture is introductory in nature, you’re already on your 
way to becoming a better reader and writer. As we continue on in this course, 
you will gain increased ability to recognize good writing and to produce 
powerful writing yourself. Ŷ
Barnet and Cain, A Short Guide to Writing about Literature.
Gardner, Writing about Literature.
Grif¿ th, Writing Essays about Literature.
Guerin et al., A Handbook of Critical Approaches to Literature.
Harmon and Holman, A Handbook to Literature.
Kennedy and Gioia, Literature.
Lunsford and Ruszkiewicz, Everything’s an Argument.
Roberts, Writing about Literature.
    Suggested Reading

6
Lecture 1: How to Write about Anything
1. Consider the passages below, and try to determine what makes them 
good writing. Is it the style, a certain vocabulary, a particularly vivid 
image? Jot down a list of things that you ¿ nd striking or engaging, and 
try to determine why.
The former tenant of our house, a priest, had died in the back 
drawing room. Air, musty from having been long enclosed, hung 
in all the rooms, and the waste room behind the kitchen was littered 
with old useless papers. Among these I found a few paper-covered 
books, the pages of which were curled and damp. ... The wild 
garden behind the house contained a central apple-tree and a few 
straggling bushes under one of which I found the late tenant’s rusty 
bicycle-pump. He had been a very charitable priest; in his will he 
had left all his money to institutions and the furniture of his house 
to his sister. —James Joyce, Araby
The great pullman was whirling onward with such dignity of 
motion that a glance from the window seemed simply to prove 
that the plains of Texas were pouring eastward. Vast À ats of green 
grass, dull-hued spaces of mesquit and cactus, little groups of frame 
houses, woods of light and tender trees, all were sweeping into the 
east, sweeping over the horizon, a precipice. —Stephen Crane, 
“The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky” 
Although it was so brilliantly ¿ ne—the blue sky powdered with 
gold and great spots of light like white wine splashed over the 
Jardins Publiques—Miss Brill was glad that she had decided on her 
fur. The air was motionless, but when you opened your mouth there 
was a faint chill, like a chill from a glass of iced water before you 
sip, and now and again a leaf came drifting—from nowhere, from 
the sky. —Katherine Mans¿ eld, “Miss Brill” 
    Exercise

7
How to Be an Effective Reader 
Lecture 2
Almost anything can be read or interpreted insightfully—from long-
acclaimed works of literature to the most mundane set of directions 
from one place to another. 
I
n analyzing a piece of writing, you may start with reactions such as “I 
like it” or “I don’t like it,” but you don’t want to stop there. These initial 
reactions are what I call precritical responses. The difference between a 
reader who is simply interested and one who is deeply engaged can be found 
in if and how those readers move beyond those precritical responses to think 
about how and why a particular piece of writing affects them in certain ways. 
Moving beyond the precritical can allow you to appreciate even writing 
that you might not really like. It can help you recognize the writer’s skill, 
appreciate the effort the writer made, and admire the emotions he or she is 
able to make you feel. 
Let’s talk about a precritical response and how you can move beyond 
it so that you can become a more engaged reader. Remember, the key to 
becoming a competent writer lies ¿ rst in being an attentive reader. So, let’s 
take a famous passage and see what we can make out of it. Here are the 
opening lines of Herman Melville’s classic Moby Dick:
Call me Ishmael. Some years ago—never mind how long 
precisely—having little or no money in my purse, and nothing 
particular to interest me on shore, I thought I would sail about a 
little and see the watery part of the world. It is a way I have of 
driving off the spleen, and regulating the circulation. 
Whenever I ¿ nd myself growing grim about the mouth; whenever 
it is a damp, drizzly November in my soul; whenever I ¿ nd myself 
involuntarily pausing before cof¿ n warehouses, and bringing 
up the rear of every funeral I meet; and especially whenever my 
hypos get such an upper hand of me, that it requires a strong moral 
principle to prevent me from deliberately stepping into the street, 

8
Lecture 2: How to Be an Effective Reader
and methodically knocking people’s hats off—then, I account it 
high time to get to sea as soon as I can. 
When I teach Moby Dick, I always ask students to give me an initial, 
precritical response to this passage. I want them to think about what feelings 
it gave them. Some students tell me, “I liked it” or “I didn’t get what he was 
saying half the time.” I’m always happy to get a student who says, “I’m 
excited to read the rest.” Those are all precritical responses, so let’s move 
past them and ¿ nd out, using critical skills of engagement, why you might 
have any one of those reactions and how we can use those reactions as a 
starting point to achieve a deeper understanding of the text.
Let’s start with those of you who responded with some version of “I liked it.” 
Why did you like it? Well, for one thing, there’s something powerful about 
the use of the ¿ rst person and direct address, and the ¿ rst three words of 
this text convey that this will be a work that does 
both. “Call me Ishmael”—the writer, or speaker, 
however we might imagine him, is talking directly 
to you, his audience, and telling you what to do. 
He goes on from there to tell you something about 
himself in the ¿ rst person. This can be one of 
the easiest and most effective ways to grab your 
reader’s attention—we all like to hear stories, and 
generally speaking, a ¿ rst-person narrative gives 
us a deeply personal account that can be especially 
enthralling in that it allows us to see into the mind 
of another person.
But what about a more negative precritical 
response, such as “I didn’t get what he was saying 
half the time”? Those of us living in 21st-century 
America probably don’t have any idea what 
hypos are—nor do we commonly come across 
cof¿ n warehouses, or funeral processions into which you could easily join. 
And very few people wear hats these days, so the idea of expressing your 
discontent by stepping into the street and knocking them off of people’s 
heads just seems bizarre. 
A useful thing to 
remember when 
you’re composing 
your own writing 
is that ... your 
audience can’t 
immediately 
interact with you 
in the present 
moment, so above 
all you should 
strive for clarity.

9
But we can learn something important from this seeming disorientation. It 
tells us that we are in a world that is not 21st-century America, and the very 
strangeness of the narrator’s attitude and behavior in relation to our modern 
sensibilities helps contribute to a sense of having escaped to a different time 
and place. Finally, the tone, style, and this wry comment on hypos (which 
likely refers to melancholy) and knocking people’s hats off their heads also 
has a little bit of humor about it—at the very least, we know we’re in for a 
story that’s not going to be totally devoid of light moments. Through careful 
reading, what at ¿ rst seems like a rather impenetrable passage can, in fact, 
allow us to get into the work and understand something about the setting of 
the story and the characters who inhabit it.
You’ve already learned a little something about insightful reading and how it 
can enhance our understanding and our enjoyment of the written word. If you 
recognize powerful, clever, nuanced moments in a variety of written texts as 
a reader, you’ll soon start to be able to work these into your own writing. A 
useful thing to remember when you’re composing your own writing is that 
The Bene¿ ts of Rereading
A 
piece of writing has several lives—at least two and potentially 
many more—and this is something you should be thinking of as 
you are working on your own writing. 
The ¿ rst life of a piece of writing is when you read it the ¿ rst time, when 
you experience it as a brand-new text that you’ve never encountered 
before. The second life of a piece of writing occurs when you consider 
and then reÀ ect on what it is you’ve just read—you may think of words 
that struck you in particular; certain details; and whether the piece is 
written in the ¿ rst or the third person, set in the past or the present, or any 
one of several other aspects.
The third—and to my mind, arguably the most interesting—life of 
the text is the last one. After you’ve read it once, reÀ ected on the text, 
and then read it again, you read through it yet again, armed with your 
precritical response and perhaps a few insights that you’ve gleaned from 
your initial read-through. This third life of the text is when you can really 
start to apply the principles of insightful reading. 

10
Lecture 2: How to Be an Effective Reader
with the written word, your audience can’t immediately interact with you in 
the present moment, so above all you should strive for clarity. You should 
anticipate questions or moments of confusion, and you should consider 
the self-image you’re conveying to your audience. How are they going to 
interpret you and your personality based on what you’ve written? Ŷ
Barnet and Cain, A Short Guide to Writing about Literature.
Carpenter, Reading Lessons.
Gardner, Writing about Literature.
Grif¿ th, Writing Essays about Literature.
Guerin et al., A Handbook of Critical Approaches to Literature.
Harmon and Holman, A Handbook to Literature.
Kennedy and Gioia, Literature.
Lunsford and Ruszkiewicz, Everything’s an Argument.
Lynn, Literature.
McLaughlin and Coleman, Everyday Theory.
Roberts, Writing about Literature.
1. Consider the three excerpts below and practice some of the techniques 
of insightful reading we’ve explored in this lecture. For each, try 
to determine the setting (time and place) and mood of the story (is it 
humorous? gloomy?) and make a list of words and phrases that stand out 
and that careful attention to which can help you ¿ nd a way of engaging 
with the text.
With this excellent resolve for the future, Goodman Brown felt 
himself justi¿ ed in making more haste on his present evil purpose. 
He had taken a dreary road, darkened by all the gloomiest trees of 
    Suggested Reading
    Exercises

11
the forest, which barely stood aside to let the narrow path creep 
through, and closed immediately behind. It was all as lonely as 
could be; and there is this peculiarity in such a solitude, that the 
traveller knows not who may be concealed by the innumerable 
trunks and the thick boughs overhead; so that, with lonely footsteps 
he may yet be passing through an unseen multitude. —Nathaniel 
Hawthorne, “Young Goodman Brown”
Maman-Nainaine said that when the ¿ gs were ripe Babette might 
go to visit her cousins down on the Bayou-Lafourche where the 
sugar cane grows. Not that the ripening of ¿ gs had the least thing to 
do with it, but that is the way Maman-Nainaine was. It seemed to 
Babette a very long time to wait; for the leaves upon the trees were 
tender yet, and the ¿ gs were like little hard, green marbles. —Kate 
Chopin “Ripe Figs”
At the foot of these fairy mountains the voyager may have descried 
the light smoke curling up from a village whose shingle roofs gleam 
among the trees, just where the blue tints of the upland melt away 
into the fresh green of the nearer landscape. It is a little village of 
great antiquity, having been founded by some of the Dutch colonists, 
in the early times of the province, just about the beginning of the 
government of the good Peter Stuyvesant (may he rest in peace!), 
and there were some of the houses of the original settlers standing 
within a few years, with lattice windows, gable fronts surmounted 
with weathercocks, and built of small yellow bricks brought from 
Holland. —Washington Irving, “Rip Van Winkle”
2. Consider the list of words and phrases you made in exercise 1. Now, try 
your hand at rewriting each passage by substituting different words for 
those you’ve identi¿ ed as key for engaging with the text. (What happens 
if you replace “Maman-Nainaine” with “Grandma” in the passage from 
“Ripe Figs”? How about if “fairy mountains” in “Rip Van Winkle” is 
replaced with “solid hills”?) What changes can be effected with just a 
few word substitutions?

12
Lecture 3:  How Literature Can Help
How Literature Can Help 
Lecture 3
It’s always possible that your audience has only the time or inclination 
to read your piece of writing once, so you have to make that one time 
really count.
O
ne of the basics of engaging with writing—as either an author or 
a reader—is to understand the genre, or type, of writing it is. An 
awareness of conventions of style, subject matter, and how other 
elements ¿ t with a piece’s perceived genre can help you become more keenly 
attuned to your own writing and help you to pay attention to considerations 
like the expectations of your audience. In this lecture, we focus on ¿ ve 
major types of writing: poetry, drama, prose, essay, and autobiography. We’ll 
explore the dominant features of each and then learn how understanding 
these features and their differences can make us better readers and thus 
better writers.
So if we have to brieÀ y de¿ ne each of these genres, what would we say? We 
might say that poetry is a form of writing that uses language in unexpected 
ways—by rhyming, by use of rhythm, or simply by patterning the language 
in unconventional forms. 
The simplest way to de¿ ne drama is to call it something that is performed in 
front of an audience. In a drama, we have to rely wholly on what we see and 
hear as an audience to make sense of the story: What the characters say and 
how they say it are what we use to determine state of mind, the relationships 
between them, and the plot of the drama that’s unfolding. We have to also 
suspend our disbelief and imagine that somehow we are looking through 
what’s often called the fourth wall—that which divides the audience from 
the actors on stage. 
Prose ¿ ction is perhaps the genre of writing most familiar to us. Types of 
writing that tell some kind of story—novels, short stories—are found 
everywhere. Within the genre of ¿ ction we have all sorts of subgenres: 

13
mystery, thriller, romance, historical 
¿ ction, science ¿ ction, fantasy—the 
list goes on and on. 
The essay is also quite easy to de¿ ne 
in its broadest strokes—it is a piece 
of writing that seeks to persuade 
and inform, to support a particular 
position. Autobiography is quite 
simply the story of a life, told by the 
person who has lived it. As we’ve 
already seen, all of these genres 
might overlap with one another in 
interesting and provocative ways.
As a writer, you needn’t limit yourself 
to the conventions of a single genre. 
You can use various conventions 
of writing in conjunction with one 
another to try and make a more 
powerful argument, or simply craft 
a more engaging piece of writing. 
But at the same time, just because you know how to 
employ the conventions of all of these genres doesn’t 
mean that you should do that all at once.
Sometimes restraint can be the most effective 
strategy of all. You want to engage your audience, 
not completely overwhelm them, and while it may be 
impressive that you can work in a variety of genres, 
a display of this ability might not get you to your 
ultimate goal. The more you write, the more you will 
learn to walk this ¿ ne line between effective display and use of your writerly 
knowledge and simply showing off—something that is likely to turn off your 
audience and not help you in achieving your ultimate goal. Ŷ
As a writer, you 
needn’t limit 
yourself to the 
conventions of a 
single genre.
By reading from various genres, you 
can learn conventions that can help 
you produce more engaging writing.
Creatas/JupiterImages/© Getty Images/Thinkstock.

14
Lecture 3:  How Literature Can Help
An Exercise in Using Multiple Genres
L
et’s consider how knowledge of the conventions of these various 
genres might be used to enhance something as mundane as a protest 
letter written to the local city council about something as commonplace 
as a leash law for dogs. Consider the following letter:
Dear City Council: 
I am writing to ask that you consider establishing an off-leash 
area of the park for local dogs. Many other communities have 
designated off-leash areas for the pets of citizens, and these 
are usually carefully monitored and have strict rules about 
interaction between animals and cleaning up after them. This 
would be a positive thing for both the dogs and their owners. 
Thank you for considering this request.
Let’s consider how we might punch this up a bit to make it more 
persuasive. First, let’s think about how we might use conventions of 
poetry to grab the reader’s attention. Perhaps we could ¿ nd a more 
interesting choice of words to refer to the dogs, since they are the main 
focus of the letter. We could begin the letter with something like, “It is 
not for nothing that dogs are often referred to as ‘man’s best friend.’ 
These furry, four-legged friends provide companionship and love 
to their owners.” Here we have another poetic À ourish in our use of 
alliteration in the second sentence. 
From what other genres might we borrow? Autobiography seems to be 
obvious, as the writer of this letter would most likely not be in favor 
of doing something nice for dogs if she did not have some positive 
experience with dogs herself. Perhaps a line like, “As a dog owner for 
many years, and having lived in many different communities, I have 
seen ¿ rst-hand how off-leash areas in parks are bene¿ cial to dogs and 
provide members of the community—even those who are not dog 
owners themselves—a chance to enjoy watching these friendliest of 
animals romp, play, and interact with one another.” 

15
What about drama and ¿ ction; could we bring those in? Well, we 
certainly could, but one thing we always need to consider as we work 
toward becoming engaging and effective writers is that you can have 
too much of a good thing. For example, you could add an imagined 
dialogue between the owner and his dog: 
Dog: “Oh please please please please could I run and play in 
this beautiful park?”
Owner: “I would love to let you, but the law says I have to 
keep you on the leash.”
Dog: “But it makes me so happy to run free. And you have 
trained me not to jump on other people or dogs, and I know 
that you always pick up after me.”
Owner: “I know, buddy. I’m sorry that the city council 
members are such jerks.”
This dramatic exchange is de¿ nitely attention grabbing. The argument 
is clear, succinct, and meant to play on our emotions. The emotional 
appeal can be a powerful one, but what’s the drawback here? Some of 
the audience might ¿ nd this approach a little odd and off-putting, and 
certainly no one likes to be told—even if it is in an imagined dramatic 
dialogue between a person and a dog—that your policy makes you a jerk.
Would employing conventions of ¿ ction work better? Maybe. The 
above dramatic exchange could be rewritten to read more like a story, in 
which the owner of the dog looks at his pet and imagines him thinking 
the things he has him say in the dramatic monologue. Maybe he 
describes his “sad, wistful eyes” as he looks over the grassy ¿ eld in the 
park; perhaps the author describes how he whines softly, how his ears 
twitch eagerly, how he looks hopefully up at his owner, wishing that he 
might be let off the leash just this once.
One thing that you will of necessity become quite skilled at as you work 
on your writing skills is knowing when to discriminate. Sometimes less 
is more, and the last thing you want to have happen is to have your main 
message become obscured by rhetorical À ourishes that can overwhelm 
what it is you are trying to say. 

16
Lecture 3:  How Literature Can Help
Barnet and Cain, A Short Guide to Writing about Literature.
Carpenter, Reading Lessons.
DiYanni, Literature.
Gardner, Writing about Literature.
Grif¿ th, Writing Essays about Literature.
Guerin et al., A Handbook of Critical Approaches to Literature.
Harmon and Holman, A Handbook to Literature.
Kennedy and Gioia, Literature.
Lunsford and Ruszkiewicz, Everything’s an Argument.
McLaughlin and Coleman, Everyday Theory.
Roberts, Writing about Literature.
1. Consider the following three passages and try to determine to what 
genre—poetry, prose, drama, autobiography, or essay—they belong. 
What are the elements of each that provide you with clues and help you 
make that determination?
I had made it to the shelter none too soon—the air was starting to 
feel damp, and I knew the rain was coming. I climbed the ladder 
and heaved myself onto the platform, and then almost lost my grip 
and fell backward; there was someone already there. “Careful!” he 
said and reached for my hand. It was Finn, my brother’s friend. I 
let him help me up. “Sorry,” he said. “I didn’t mean to startle you.”
“This is my place,” I said. It came out meaner, more accusatory 
than I had intended. “I mean, I usually wait for the storm up here.”
“Sorry,” he said again. “I didn’t realize.”
    Suggested Reading
    Exercises

17
We looked at each other awkwardly for a moment. “That’s all 
right,” I said, “you can stay if you want.”
The À ames came
Over the brim of the world
A terrible, hungry sunrise
That ate and ate the earth
Well into the sleeve of night
And out the other side
Laura: “It won’t be long now. Here, give me that.”
Edie: “What do you want that for?”
Laura: “It helps with the pain. Maybe. Can’t make it any worse.”
Edie: “Does it hurt now?”
Laura: “Just every ¿ ve to seven minutes.”
Edie: “What should I do?”
Laura: “Go and get your grandmother.” Cries out.
Edie: “Are you sure I should go?”
Laura: “Better now than ¿ ve minutes from now. I think this baby’s 
coming sooner rather than later.”
2. As you may have determined, the ¿ rst example is prose, the second 
is poetry, and the third is drama. Now, try and revise each of those 
examples, moving them from one genre to another (for example, try to 
make a poem out of the prose selection; take the drama selection and 
rewrite it so that it reads like prose). What did you discover in trying to 
make these changes? Did you have to invent details? Add description? 
Change words to be more or less “poetic”?

18
Lecture 4: Shaping Your Voice
Shaping Your Voice 
Lecture 4
The trick, as a writer, is to know for whom you’re writing and what it 
is you’re trying to convey.
I
n this lecture, we narrow our focus to prose ¿ ction. In particular, 
we examine the issue of voice—this is sometimes called tone, style, 
or even diction. Voice is a critical component of any kind of writing, 
from the formal essay, to the letter to the editor, to the note you leave on 
your neighbor’s windshield asking him please not to park in front of 
your driveway. 
Let’s consider the distinctive voice of a writer whose style is one of the most 
famous and most easily identi¿ able: Ernest Hemingway. His short story 
“Hills Like White Elephants” begins as follows: 
The hills across the valley of the Ebro were long and white. On this 
side there was no shade and no trees and the station was between 
two lines of rails in the sun. Close against the side of the station 
there was the warm shadow of the building and a curtain, made of 
strings of bamboo beads, hung across the open door into the bar, to 
keep out À ies. The American and the girl with him sat at a table in 
the shade, outside the building.
What is the adjective that comes to mind if you try 
to describe Hemingway’s style in a single word? 
One descriptor that comes up often when critics 
talk about Hemingway is “spare”; “simple” and 
“clean” are other words often used to describe 
Hemingway’s style. Hemingway’s voice engages the audience by what we 
might call writing by indirection. His style is deliberately simplistic—some 
might say maddeningly so—but is a distinctive choice that marks his writing 
out from so many others’. 
Voice is a critical 
component of any 
kind of writing.

19
In this story, he describes the scene, what the characters say to one another, 
and some other details—like the strings of bamboo beads. But the reader 
is forced to ¿ ll in gaps, to try and ¿ gure out what the real story is about, 
since Hemingway does not tell us what any of the characters are thinking or 
feeling or give much description of their nonverbal behavior. For example, 
this opening doesn’t say anything about how the man and woman look—
are they excited to be going somewhere? Are they slouched in their chairs? 
We’ve got to work it out for ourselves as we read.
One of the most famous literary voices from the last hundred years must 
be that of J. D. Salinger’s Holden Caul¿ eld. Consider the following two 
versions of an opening statement from the main character of The Catcher in 
the Rye: 
Most likely, you will want to know my history—the details of my 
birth and adolescence, what it was like to grow up with distant 
parents, and other similar matters—but I would actually rather not 
discuss that part of my life.
Now consider this version: 
If you really want to hear about it, the ¿ rst thing you’ll probably 
want to know is where I was born, and what my lousy childhood 
was like, and how my parents were occupied and all before they 
had me, and all that David Copper¿ eld kind of crap, but I don’t feel 
like going into it, if you want to know the truth.
Both of these passages have a particular voice, but one is arguably stronger, 
more arresting, more engaging than the other. Why is this the case? They 
both speak directly to the reader, as if Holden were having a conversation 
with him or her, and thus, they are arguably both very engaging from the 
start. And if you were to consider, on the basis of these sentences alone, 
which of these speakers you’d like to invite over to your house for dinner, 
most of us would pick the speaker of the ¿ rst passage. Although he declines 
to tell the reader about himself, he does so rather politely. 

20
Lecture 4: Shaping Your Voice
The second speaker, on the other hand, comes across as somewhat emotional 
and angry. He uses coarse language, modifying the mention of his childhood 
with words like “lousy” and “crap,” and the sarcastic mention of David 
Copper¿ eld suggests a distaste for stories of the rags-to-riches variety. In 
other words, he seems unhappy, cynical, and maladjusted. Although you 
probably wouldn’t want to have him as a houseguest, you probably are more 
interested in reading the story told by the second speaker than the ¿ rst. 
The second speaker has a realness and grittiness in his voice that makes his 
story compelling. There’s a reason that polite, diligent, hard-working people 
rarely have unauthorized biographies written about them—it’s just not as 
interesting to most readers as a life that is somewhat unconventional, in 
which the subject breaks rules or engages in bad behavior.
Choosing a certain kind of diction or sentence style contributes to the voice 
of a piece of writing, and by examining some famous writers and analyzing 
the voices they’ve constructed, you’ve gotten some idea of how important 
voice can be, and how just a few words or a certain arrangement can create 
certain expectations in your reader. Ŷ
Barnet and Cain, A Short Guide to Writing about Literature.
Carpenter, Reading Lessons.
DiYanni, Literature.
Gardner, Writing about Literature.
Grif¿ th, Writing Essays about Literature.
Guerin et al., A Handbook of Critical Approaches to Literature.
Kennedy and Gioia, Literature.
McLaughlin and Coleman, Everyday Theory.
Roberts, Writing about Literature.
    Suggested Reading

21
Consider the following information: “On December 12, Aloyisia H. Society 
and Gerard Dashing were married at the Ourtown Country Club. The bride 
wore a pink wedding gown with green accents. The groom wore a white 
tuxedo and high-top sneakers. There were 400 people in attendance. The 
bride had 12 bridesmaids, and the groom had ¿ ve groomsmen. Because 
of a catering accident, there was no food at the reception. The DJ did not 
show up, so the bride’s younger brother provided music for dancing with 
his harmonica. After learning of the catering accident, the best man ordered 
50 pizzas from A1 Pizza Delivery. When the pizzas arrived, the best man 
and the groom’s father had a brief argument as to who would pay for them. 
The best man tried to punch the groom’s father but accidentally hit the 
bride instead. The bride and groom left the reception early to retire to the 
honeymoon suite at their hotel.”
1. Rewrite the passage so that it sounds as if the words are being spoken by 
a 14-year-old girl talking to her friends. 
2. Rewrite the same information so that it reads as if it is being conveyed 
by that girl’s mother to her father. 
3. Now imagine that a member of Congress is stating these facts in 
front of a panel of high-ranking government of¿ cials, and rewrite the 
passage again. 
4. Revise so that this same information reads as it would if a father was 
explaining this to his six-year-old son. 
5. Now imagine how the six-year-old would tell his best friend.
    Exercises

22
Lecture 5: Knowing Your Reader
Knowing Your Reader 
Lecture 5
Melville actually changed the ending in the American edition of Moby 
Dick so that Ishmael survived. Although perhaps he didn’t properly 
anticipate audience reaction with the ¿ rst version, his decision to 
actually change the outcome of his story demonstrates the power of an 
audience and the need to be attentive to them and their demands.
I
n our last lecture, we started to talk about the genre of ¿ ction, and how 
important voice is. A cleverly constructed voice can tell you something 
about the characters of a story or the author of a magazine article. In this 
lecture, we discuss the other side of that coin: the importance of knowing 
your reader, and how to identify and, indeed, construct an audience. One of 
the most important factors in good writing is the writer’s understanding of the 
nature of his or her audience. Perhaps even more important is understanding 
what particular information you need or want to convey to your audience. In 
other words, you have to know what 
you want to say, how you want to 
say it, and why you want to say it. 
We’re going to start by analyzing 
some pieces of writing to deduce 
the intended audience. We’ll try to 
determine how writers construct 
an audience and convey respect for 
the audience—or fail to do so—
and what the consequences of that 
may be. 
Let’s consider a piece of writing that 
both establishes a strong narrator’s 
voice and constructs an audience, 
the opening of the classic short 
story “The Yellow Wallpaper” by 
Charlotte Perkins Gilman. This is a 
Charlotte Perkins Gilman constructs 
her audience and creates a strong 
voice through her character’s diary in 
“The Yellow Wallpaper.”
Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division,
LC-USZ62-106490.

23
story of a woman going mad. She and her family have rented a home in the 
country to try and ¿ nd some sort of “rest cure” for what is ailing her, and the 
premise is that we, the reader, are looking over her shoulder at her diary. 
She chronicles the time spent in this house, and over time, we are able to 
watch her descent into insanity as we read her words. Here’s the opening: 
It is very seldom that mere ordinary people like John and myself 
secure ancestral halls for the summer. A colonial mansion, a 
hereditary estate, I would say a haunted house and reach the height 
of romantic felicity—but that would be asking too much of fate! … 
There comes John, and I must put this away—he hates to have me 
write a word.
So what do we make of this? We have a ¿ rst person speaker who engages the 
audience by creating the sense of a conversation, and we are drawn in to the 
story by the fact that there’s something fascinating about reading something 
meant to be private (her diary). The audience is even further drawn in by the 
fact of how we are witnessing a woman descending into madness while she 
herself seems unaware. The story gets weirder and weirder as it continues, 
with the main character describing how she sees a woman hiding in the 
pattern of the wallpaper of her room. In the narrator’s words, this woman she 
sees “creeps” around the room at night. 
At the climax of the story, she locks herself in the room with the dreadful 
wallpaper, and then we read the following words: 
Why there’s John at the door! It is no use young man, you can’t 
open it! How he does call and pound! Now he’s crying to Jennie for 
an axe. It would be a shame to break down that beautiful door!
What are our reactions to those lines? Well the ¿ nal line, about how it would 
be a shame to break down such a beautiful door, helps secure audience 
reaction in that it suggests how detached she is from reality if her husband is 
trying to break down the door and she doesn’t consider why this might be. It 
really drives home how altered her mental state is.

24
Lecture 5: Knowing Your Reader
But as good as this story is, it doesn’t quite respect the audience as much as 
it should. Can you guess why? Is there anything that strikes you as wrong, or 
kind of a false note? Well, ¿ rst of all, Gilman has hit upon a clever strategy 
to engage the audience—by creating the idea that we are reading the diary 
of a woman as she goes insane. But once we’ve got that premise established, 
it is a problem when we reach the climax of the story. Do we really think 
that the main character is pausing to write these sentences? What’s happened 
here, clearly, is that we’ve gone from reading the main character’s diary to 
reading her mind. We get the sense that the author was either hoping we just 
wouldn’t notice or else that given the story’s other strengths, we’d forgive 
her this one mistake. Either way, we as an audience might feel a little like the 
author wasn’t offering us her full respect. 
So we’ve talked about respecting your audience, but we should also be 
aware of how our writing constructs an audience—how our tone, our word 
choice, our style all signal whom the piece of writing is intended for. For 
example, let’s consider two pieces of writing that convey the same pieces of 
information but are intended for vastly different audiences. These two quotes 
both describe the victory of William the Conqueror at the Battle of Hastings 
in 1066. Here’s the ¿ rst quote: 
The factors that led to William’s victory are multiple and range 
from the mundane to the fantastic. Events quotidian and epic, 
natural and arti¿ cial, converged with extraordinary moments of 
luck, coincidence, poor planning and misfortune to produce a ¿ nal 
conÀ ict that seems as if it could have been lifted directly from the 
pages of Homer or Virgil.
Let’s try to describe the intended audience for this passage. This piece of 
writing is a little bit long, with subclauses and more elevated diction. The 
syntax of the sentences—with their repetitive pairing of opposing ideas 
like “quotidian and epic, natural and arti¿ cial”—shows that the writer is 
consciously demonstrating his or her facility with language. The choice of 
words like “quotidian” indicates that this may be writing by and for those 
who are highly educated. Another clue about the intended audience is 
the ¿ nal line, which references the works of the classical poets Homer 
and Virgil. 

25
So who is the intended audience for this ¿ rst passage? We can probably agree 
that the writer expects the readers to be highly educated, with knowledge of 
classical works. The seriousness of the tone also suggests that the readers 
are expected to be people who are at least dedicated amateur historians and 
possibly scholars conducting research on the topic of William the Conqueror 
and the Battle of Hastings. Here’s a description of that same event in 
different form: 
William’s conquest seemed unlikely at ¿ rst, but a series of events—
ranging from bad weather to bad luck—resulted in his surprising 
victory. The details of what happened make for a great story; it’s 
one you’ll never forget.
Obviously, this second passage is written a little more simply, and seems 
to be intended for a more general audience, one that maybe is only slightly 
interested in the topic or is new to this kind of historical reading. The 
author’s approach here seems to be intended to draw people in, to intrigue 
them—the use of words like “luck,” “surprising,” 
and the ¿ nal phrase “it’s a story you’ll never forget” 
all work to try and get the reader interested and to 
keep reading. The author seems to be saying here 
that historical information can be entertaining if 
it’s presented in the right way. By contrast, the ¿ rst 
passage seems to take as a given that the audience is 
already interested in the topic. 
The second example is more simply written with 
more accessible language, but at the same time, it is 
not writing down to the potential audience. It writes to that audience, which 
seems to be imagined as a broad range of the population, anywhere from 
elementary school to adulthood. The second passage says, to almost anyone 
who starts reading it, “this could be written for me.”
A chief lesson here is the idea that when you write, you construct not only 
an authorial persona, but you also construct an audience. No matter if you’re 
writing the great American novel or a letter to the editor, on some level 
you have an idea of to whom you’re writing. As the example of Charlotte 
When you write, 
you construct not 
only an authorial 
persona, but you 
also construct 
an audience.

26
Lecture 5: Knowing Your Reader
Perkins Gilman’s “The Yellow Wallpaper” shows, you can create a ¿ ctional 
idea of audience within whatever piece you’re creating, which can add to 
the interest and engagement of the actual audience. But perhaps the most 
important lesson here is to always respect your audience. Ŷ
Barnet and Cain, A Short Guide to Writing about Literature.
DiYanni, Literature.
Gardner, Writing about Literature.
Grif¿ th, Writing Essays about Literature.
Guerin et al., A Handbook of Critical Approaches to Literature.
Kennedy and Gioia, Literature.
McLaughlin and Coleman, Everyday Theory.
Roberts, Writing about Literature.
Your beloved Uncle Wilfred has died at the ripe age of 98. During his 
lifetime, he attended Youngblood Academy, served in the navy, married Aunt 
Sylvie, had three children—Ella, Peter, and David—and taught high school 
science. How and how much of this information would you convey to the 
following audiences.
1. An obituary in the local paper? 
2. A letter to a good friend of yours who had met him on several occasions?
3. The Scholarship Committee, a body that you would like to see create a 
scholarship in his memory?
4. A former navy buddy of his who has not yet been informed of his death? 
Try writing practice paragraphs to each of these audiences.
    Suggested Reading
    Exercises

27
The Art of the Essay—How to Start
Lecture 6
You want to make your opening as effective and engaging as possible so 
that people will keep reading. 
I
n this lecture—and the three that follow it—we’ll look more closely at 
methods for securing the kind of responses you want for your writing. 
We’ll do this by shifting our focus to the ways successful arguments are 
constructed: how to open an argument as well as how to organize, support, 
and conclude it. 
We’ll start by evaluating and critiquing the opening of one of the most famous 
argumentative essays in the English literary tradition: Jonathan Swift’s “A 
Modest Proposal,” in which Swift sets up a satirical argument that the Irish 
should adopt a policy of eating their own 
children as a solution to the problems of 
widespread poverty and hunger. Here’s his 
¿ rst sentence:
It is a melancholy object to those 
who walk through this great town or 
travel in the country, when they see 
the streets, the roads, and cabin doors, 
crowded with beggars of the female 
sex, followed by three, four, or six 
children, all in rags and importuning 
every passenger for alms.
We haven’t gotten to the satirical suggestion 
yet, but we do see in these opening lines a 
very successful blend of description and 
explanation that will subsequently serve as 
the foundation for his argument. You know from this single sentence what 
the problem is and why it’s a topic worth making an argument about. So 
Jonathan Swift, whose 
satirical essay is a model of 
effective argumentation.
Photos.com/JupiterImages/© Getty Images/Thinkstock.

28
Lecture 6: The Art of the Essay—How to Start
right away, Swift has our attention and probably our sympathy. He proceeds 
to add both speci¿ city and substance to his opening:
Whoever could ¿ nd out a fair, cheap, and easy method of making 
these children sound, useful members of the commonwealth, would 
deserve so well of the public as to have his statue set up for a 
preserver of the nation.
Here we have a speci¿ c articulation of what’s at stake—nothing less than 
the future of the commonwealth! So now we understand the problem, and 
we’ve been given some idea of how grateful the whole British Empire would 
be to the person who found a solution—you can imagine that in the minds 
of the reader, ideas for possibilities for becoming this savior are starting to 
churn. As we’ll see, Swift’s tongue is planted more-or-less ¿ rmly in cheek at 
this point, but he’s clearly demonstrated an 
effective strategy for opening an argument: 
description of the topic at hand and 
explanation of its importance. 
I also want you to notice that Swift doesn’t 
lard his opening with melodramatic, 
universal claims or unnecessary generalities. In other words, he doesn’t 
waste time trying to make his subject seem important by giving us vague, 
empty statements such as “Hunger is a serious problem that needs to be 
solved.” While these kinds of general claims may have some element of truth 
to them, they don’t do anything to establish the importance of this particular 
argument about this particular instance of poverty and hunger. By ¿ rmly 
¿ xing his argument in a speci¿ c time and place and making a substantial 
claim about what’s at stake, Swift gives his audience a compelling reason to 
keep reading.
I’d also like to point out the degree and type of details Swift includes in his 
opening. We get some indication of how bad the situation is (the children 
are dressed in rags), but he holds off on giving us a full-scale account of 
the horrors. He recognizes that an effective opening requires only a few, 
carefully chosen, details; they must add substance to the introduction but not 
Right away, Swift has 
our attention and 
probably our sympathy.

29
become the main focus of the reader’s attention. Here’s what he says a few 
lines later:
I have been assured by a very knowing American of my 
acquaintance in London, that a young healthy child well nursed is 
at a year old a most delicious, nourishing, and wholesome food, 
whether stewed, roasted, baked, or boiled; and I make no doubt that 
it will equally serve in a fricassee or a ragout.
So what, then, is the “modest proposal” of Swift’s title? Why, to have the 
Irish eat their own children of course! Obviously, this is a satirical essay, and 
he’s actually commenting on the other offensive proposals that have been 
put forth to deal with the desperate situation of the Irish at the time. But for 
all its satire, Swift’s essay is a model of effective argumentation, and we can 
learn a lot from examining it more closely.
So let’s see if we can use Swift’s strategy to make our own openings more 
effective; in other words, let’s see if we can craft an introduction to an 
argument that balances a speci¿ c description of a topic with a substantial 
explanation of its signi¿ cance. And let’s see if we can do it without falling 
back on generalizations or distracting details.
Imagine you’ve submitted a request to your health insurance provider for 
coverage of a particular medical procedure—only to have that claim denied 
as medically unnecessary. You need to craft an appeal letter to your insurer 
that offers a compelling argument. Let’s focus on just the ¿ rst four or ¿ ve 
sentences. Your goal should be to balance a description of your situation 
with an explanation of its importance. Here’s an example of what not to do 
when faced with this kind of writing task:
I am suffering from a skin condition which started during an 
especially stressful project at work (I am currently on medical 
leave because of this condition). My primary-care physician, 
prescribed a corticosteroid, but it didn’t work. I recently got in 
to see a dermatologist, and she prescribed a UV-light treatment. I 
submitted a claim for this treatment, but it was rejected as medically 
unnecessary. I am requesting an expedited review of the decision.

30
Lecture 6: The Art of the Essay—How to Start
What are the drawbacks here? First, while the writer does provide speci¿ c 
details, they end up describing a personal medical history rather than the 
main problem at hand. A few personal medical details are useful in this 
situation, but too many distract from the writer’s main goal. Also, while the 
writer does try to explain that the skin condition is a signi¿ cant problem and 
that its cause may have something to do with stress, we come away with no 
clear idea of what’s at stake in this particular instance. Let’s try rewriting 
these ¿ rst few lines:
I’m writing to appeal your denial of coverage of a UV-light treatment 
for a diagnosed skin condition; this treatment was prescribed by my 
dermatologist. Your denial states that the procedure is medically 
unnecessary. I am requesting an expedited review of this case as 
I am currently on medical leave from my job due to the above-
mentioned skin condition and will be unable to return until I 
receive treatment.
This version provides fewer personal medical details, but the ones that are 
included are speci¿ cally relevant to the problem of denial of coverage. They 
do not distract from the primary purpose of the letter. We also receive a 
clearer sense of what’s at stake and thus have more persuasive evidence for 
an expedited review of the case. In a case like this, the opening can make or 
break you. Don’t start out bland and vague and save the ¿ repower for several 
paragraphs later—you’ve got to persuade your reader early on that at the 
very least, it is worth it to keep reading. Ŷ
Grif¿ th, Writing Essays about Literature.
Lunsford and Ruszkiewicz, Everything’s an Argument.
Ramage, Bean, and Johnson, Writing Arguments.
1. Imagine you’ve submitted a claim to your health insurance provider 
for a particular clinical procedure only to have that claim denied as 
    Suggested Reading
    Exercises

31
“medically unnecessary.” Draft the opening two paragraphs of an 
appeal letter meant to convince your insurer that the procedure must be 
covered. Try to balance a speci¿ c description of the situation with an 
explanation of its importance. Avoid general or universal claims. Gauge 
the effectiveness of your opening by using the “what?/so what?” litmus 
test discussed in the lecture. 
2. Look at the introduction to an old e-mail you’ve written—one that 
attempts to make an argument about something—and measure its 
effectiveness using the “what?/so what?” litmus test. Then use the 
strategies and examples we’ve studied to help draft a more speci¿ c and 
substantial version of that introduction. Use the “what?/so what?” test 
to determine if your new version is more powerful and persuasive than 
the original. 

32
Lecture 7: How to Organize an Argument
How to Organize an Argument
Lecture 7
[A sequence or series], like all devices, has to be used with restraint. If 
you do too many sequences, you might as well be writing a grocery list.
O
ur last lecture dealt with introductions, but even the strongest 
introduction can’t save a written argument that lacks coherence. By 
examining how arguments are structured and presented, you’ll learn 
how to more effectively guide your readers from one point to the next and 
how to avoid structural À aws that may obscure your argument. In order to do 
this, we spend some more time with Jonathan Swift’s “A Modest Proposal.”
How do you organize a piece of writing? You might have lots of things you 
want to say and no clue how to get those things onto the page in coherent 
form. With some kinds of writing, a chronological structure works well—you 
start at the beginning and go on to the end. But sometimes, the most important 
parts of a text might be in the middle, and you don’t want your readers to 
have to hunt for them. Another perfectly acceptable way to organize an 
argument is the basic ¿ ve-paragraph model, expanded as necessary. In this 
model, your ¿ rst paragraph states your main claim; paragraphs two, three, 
and four (or however many you need) each offer supporting points for that 
idea; and the ¿ nal paragraph reiterates your main claim. 
These approaches can work well as a basic argumentative structure, but I’ve 
found that the best way to guide your readers is to establish the key terms of 
your argument as early as possible and then return to and expand on those 
ideas throughout the piece. This kind of approach can easily work in concert 
with the basic ¿ ve-paragraph or chronological approaches, but it adds a layer 
of sophistication to your argument that might otherwise be lacking.
Once the key terms and ideas of your argument are in place, the process 
of organization becomes a matter of consistently referring back to, linking, 
and developing those terms and ideas. What do I mean by key terms? Let’s 
look at a classic example to get an idea. We recall from earlier lectures that 
Swift’s “A Modest Proposal” makes a satirical argument that the Irish should 

33
adopt a policy of eating their children as a way to end poverty and hunger. 
Let’s take a look at how Swift establishes the terms of his argument:
I have been assured by a very knowing American of my 
acquaintance in London, that a young healthy child well nursed is 
at a year old a most delicious, nourishing, and wholesome food, 
whether stewed, roasted, baked, or boiled; and I make no doubt that 
it will equally serve in a fricassee or a ragout.
Obviously one of Swift’s greatest challenges is to convince his audience to 
put aside the notion of children as children and replace it with the notion of 
children as food. And not just any old grub, but rather quite tasty food that 
can be served, Swift assures us, at least four different ways, maybe six if 
you’re venturesome enough to try a fricassee or a ragout. To press this new 
association even further, Swift would have his audience know the following:
A child will make two dishes at an entertainment for friends; and 
when the family dines alone, the fore or hind quarter will make a 
reasonable dish, and seasoned with a little pepper or salt will be 
very good boiled on the fourth day, especially in winter.
The lesson we can take from Swift is that there are innumerable ways to 
de¿ ne a word and the concepts associated with it—even a word as seemingly 
straightforward as “child.” In fact, the very absurdity of Swift’s attempts 
to rede¿ ne a child as a food source is evidence of how good writers can—
and must—convince audiences to see the topic on their terms. Of course, 
once you’ve committed yourself to rede¿ ning a word or concept, you must 
follow through by reiterating and developing the new connections you want 
your audience to make. That is to say, once you’ve introduced them to your 
language, you have to keep speaking it and expanding the vocabulary. Swift 
is an expert at using this strategy to organize his argument. He goes on to say:
I have already computed the charge of nursing a beggar’s child ... 
to be about two shillings per annum, rags included; and I believe 
no gentleman would repine to give ten shillings for the carcass of 
a good fat child, which, as I have said, will make four dishes of 
excellent nutritive meat. 

34
Lecture 7: How to Organize an Argument
Swift continues to af¿ rm the child-as-food connection, but now he adds an 
extra twist. He takes an entirely logical next step by addressing the issue of 
economics and commodi¿ cation—and he does this by running his own cost-
bene¿ t analysis of child as livestock. By this point, we’re so far onto Swift’s 
turf and so deeply immersed in his language, terms, and meanings that we 
cannot help but follow along. We’ve already accepted his notion of child 
as food and made it our normative de¿ nition 
(or at least suspended our disbelief). In order 
to keep going and follow his logic, we have 
to recognize that this is a deliberate exercise 
in absurdity—but we keep going because 
through this satire, an important point is 
being made.
So, organizing an argument requires you 
to establish some sense of continuity as 
you move from one point to the next—
that’s a basic premise of any writing guide. 
But establishing that continuity involves 
more than making sure you have effective 
transitions between paragraphs and points. Rather, you should approach 
the organizing process as though you are trying to teach your readers a new 
language with its own particular vocabulary and grammar—one for which 
you’ve set and developed the terms. 
In addition to establishing the key terms and ideas of an argument, the 
process of organization should involve careful attention to transitions. If the 
links from one point to the next aren’t there—or aren’t strong enough—the 
argument won’t be as effective as it could be. The easiest, and most successful, 
strategy for crafting transitions is the repetition-variation approach. By that 
I mean taking a word or phrase from the end of one paragraph or section 
of an argument and using it, preferably with some slight variation, as the 
beginning of the next paragraph or section. Another form of transition—
somewhat less elegant but certainly effective when used judiciously—is the 
sequence or series. A sequence or series can be a dynamic form of transition, 
but you need to be careful about boring your readers with too many lists. 
You should approach 
the organizing 
process as though 
you are trying to teach 
your readers a new 
language with its own 
particular vocabulary 
and grammar.

35
By this point, you’ve learned how to begin an argument, and you’ve acquired 
some strategies for organizing your writing. But even the most engaging 
opening and the cleverest structure will be useless if you don’t adequately 
support your argument—if you don’t tell your reader, as clearly as possible, 
“so what?” In our next lecture, we’ll look at strategies for supporting your 
claims and making your argument as persuasive as possible. Ŷ
Grif¿ th, Writing Essays about Literature.
Lunsford and Ruszkiewicz, Everything’s an Argument.
Ramage, Bean, and Johnson, Writing Arguments.
1. Look back at the last written argument you crafted—whether a grant 
proposal, a business presentation, or a letter to your boss requesting 
a raise. Did you include a paragraph or section early in the piece that 
helped establish and de¿ ne the terms and ideas of the argument in a 
way that was favorable to you or that supported your main claim? Did 
you refer back to and develop those terms and ideas as your argument 
unfolded? If not, draft such a paragraph and include it in the piece. If so, 
try revising the paragraph or section and making it even stronger. 
2. Go back to the paragraphs I asked you to draft during the lecture about 
your idea of “government”—how you think it should be de¿ ned and 
what ideas you believe should be associated with it. Study the transitions 
you made from one paragraph or section to the next. How did you link 
your points and ideas? Try revising one of those transitions using either 
or both of the two strategies we’ve studied (repetition-variation and 
sequence/series). 
    Suggested Reading
    Exercises

36
Lecture 8: Supporting Your Argument
Supporting Your Argument 
Lecture 8
It’s true that association, speculation, and the appearance of correlation 
can actually have a really persuasive effect on an audience. ... Nearly 
all forms of advertising and marketing rely in some way on the 
willingness of people to be persuaded by claims and arguments based 
on speculation and association.
I
n this lecture, we’ll build on our discussion of how arguments can 
be organized by examining a closely related quality of persuasive 
writing: the selection and presentation of evidence. More speci¿ cally, 
we will study key strategies you can use to more effectively support a 
written argument. 
Our ¿ rst key strategy: Evidence does not explain itself. It’s never suf¿ cient 
simply to refer to a piece of evidence in your writing and expect readers 
to make a link between it and the claim you’re trying to support. To write 
persuasively, you have to show your readers how and why your proof is 
relevant to your argument. 
If it works for you, try thinking of yourself as the prosecuting attorney on 
“Law and Order.” It’s not suf¿ cient for you to walk over to the evidence 
table, point out the murder weapon, and proclaim, “Ladies and gentlemen, 
this is the actual weapon used in the homicide. Thank you very much for 
your time. I know you will ¿ nd the accused party guilty of murder.” A good 
prosecutor would need to offer a detailed and comprehensive explanation 
that connects the gun and the alleged killer. She or he would want to cite 
forensic reports, crime-scene photos, testimony from eye witnesses, and any 
other sources that would help convince the judge and jury that the murder 
weapon is a valid piece of evidence and supports a guilty verdict. 
Our second key strategy is to provide a direct link between your evidence 
and your conclusion. Very likely you’ve encountered arguments in which 
proof was offered up without any concrete reason why the evidence should 
be interpreted a certain way. Arguments that rely on statistics or the ¿ ndings 

37
of scienti¿ c studies are especially prone to this particular failing. My favorite 
example is the raft of arguments out there for and against the health bene¿ ts 
of drinking coffee. I like coffee—a lot—and I’m always hoping to read a 
solid argument in favor of drinking more of it. 
While it’s easy to ¿ nd articles that tout the bene¿ ts of coffee drinking, it’s 
not so easy to ¿ nd articles that use evidence convincingly and responsibly 
to make that argument. It’s not a lack of evidence that causes this problem. 
In fact, there is quite a substantial cottage industry among researchers 
who devote their time and energy to examining the effects of caffeine 
consumption on rats. I have no doubt that these studies are, on the whole, 
well conceived, carefully conducted, and scienti¿ cally valid. The problem 
comes in where articles and blog entries draw 
on such research to support arguments about 
whether coffee is good or bad for humans, 
and in what quantities we should or should 
not consume it. 
To be speci¿ c, the subjects of the scienti¿ c 
studies are rats, not humans, and caffeine is 
not the same thing as coffee. Of course it’s 
easy to conÀ ate caffeine and coffee, but any 
argument that relies on evidence taken from 
a caffeine-rat study must include some explanation of how those effects, 
positive or negative, can support a conclusion about the effects of coffee 
drinking on human beings. Without careful explanation of how this evidence 
needs to be considered and attention to the context and differences between 
rats and humans, the argument is nothing more than speculation based on 
possible association. The claims you make based on evidence must be direct 
and de¿ nitive and show a clear cause-effect relationship. 
Our third key strategy for supporting an argument is the use of concessions. 
Admitting that alternative viewpoints exist can have the seemingly 
paradoxical effect of strengthening one’s own argument. This may seem 
counterintuitive to some writers: Why acknowledge the validity of some idea 
that may compete with your own? Wouldn’t that undermine the argument 
you want to make? 
Admitting that 
alternative viewpoints 
exist can have the 
seemingly paradoxical 
effect of strengthening 
one’s own argument.

38
Lecture 8: Supporting Your Argument
As we’ll see from the following examples, just the opposite is true. Rather 
than undermining an argument, concessions can actually strengthen it. By 
acknowledging and dealing with counterevidence, you establish yourself as 
a trustworthy commentator on a particular subject.
Here’s an example of a concession from Thomas Paine’s “Common Sense”: 
Some writers have explained the English constitution thus; the king, 
say they, is one, the people another; the peers are an house in behalf 
of the king; the commons in behalf of the people; but this hath all 
the distinctions of an house divided against itself; and though the 
expressions be pleasantly arranged, yet when examined they appear 
idle and ambiguous. 
What exactly is Paine conceding here? Well, he’s acknowledging that other 
writers have offered an explanation of Great Britain’s government that 
sounds well-balanced and rational—yet, as Paine argues, this appearance of 
balance and rationality belies a hierarchy of power that favors elites while 
granting little authority to commoners. 
Paine uses this concession to highlight, by contrast, the possibilities for 
government in America that he will sketch out later in the essay. It’s 
important to recognize here that Paine uses a concession to highlight and 
support his own position. In other words, he’s not necessarily giving ground 
to his opponents; rather, he’s sketching out their argument as a way of 
bringing his own views into sharper relief—underscoring the best parts of 
his case even as he shines some light on the weakest parts of theirs.
It’s also important to recognize that Paine is using this concession to bolster 
his own credibility—mainly by demonstrating his thorough understanding 
of other points of view. His concession shows that he’s done his homework 
and can offer a detailed assessment of the pros and cons of other possible 
positions on this topic. 
When it comes to supporting an argument, we’ve identi¿ ed three crucial 
points: ¿ rst, the need to explain how a particular piece of evidence helps 
you make your case to an audience; second, the need to provide a connection 

39
between evidence and conclusion that is direct, de¿ nitive, and based on 
cause-effect; and third, how acknowledging the arguments of others can 
serve to strengthen your own argument. Ŷ
Grif¿ th, Writing Essays about Literature.
Lunsford and Ruszkiewicz, Everything’s an Argument.
Ramage, Bean, and Johnson, Writing Arguments.
1. Choose an editorial column from your favorite newspaper and examine 
the way the author uses evidence to support her or his argument—what 
kinds of explanations (if any) does she or he include to connect that 
evidence to the editorial’s main claim? Try rewriting the column—see 
if you can offer more convincing connections between the evidence and 
the claim. 
2. Find a letter to the editor that you disagree with and draft a response that 
challenges the letter-writer’s position; include at least one concession 
that helps highlight, by contrast, your own position on the issue. 
    Suggested Reading
    Exercises

40
Lecture 9: Finishing Strong
Finishing Strong
Lecture 9
We can glean from Swift’s closing lines an important reminder and 
a striking example of how conclusions can be used to anticipate and 
refute, in advance, charges that an argument for some broader goal 
or cause is actually self-serving. You don’t have to follow Swift’s over-
the-top style, but we shouldn’t hesitate to emulate the spirit of his 
conclusion when we perceive that some similar possibility of a personal 
attack will follow in the wake of us making our own arguments.  
I
n the previous three lectures, we’ve studied strategies for starting, 
organizing, and supporting arguments. Now we focus on methods for 
crafting more effective conclusions—how to wrap up and ¿ nish off 
your presentation of an argument in ways that solidify your claims, make 
your case, and perhaps even leave your readers wanting to hear more about 
the issue. 
You’ve probably been told at some point by an English teacher that 
conclusions must include a summary of the highlights of an argument. This is 
certainly true: An effective conclusion should include some sort of recapping 
of the main ideas that structure your 
argument. But you should not simply repeat 
verbatim what you say in your introduction. 
A little variation shows that you’ve really 
thought about wrapping this argument up in 
a compelling and engaging way. 
What else should you do with a conclusion? 
How can you effectively ¿ nish an argument 
by doing something other than—or more 
than—summarizing for your readers the key 
points you’ve made? Here again, our famous 
essayists, Thomas Paine and Jonathan Swift, 
can provide some answers. Let’s look ¿ rst 
at Paine’s ¿ nal two paragraphs in “Common 
Thomas Paine’s strong 
conclusions inÀ uenced the 
American Revolution.
Photos.com/JupiterImages/© Getty Images/Thinkstock.

41
Sense,” keeping in mind that just prior to these paragraphs, Paine does 
provide his readers with the kind of summary we are discussing. 
Under our present denomination of British subjects we can neither 
be received nor heard abroad: The custom of all courts is against 
us, and will be so, until, by an independence, we take rank with 
other nations. 
These proceedings may at ¿ rst appear strange and dif¿ cult; but, like 
all other steps which we have already passed over, will in a little 
time become familiar and agreeable; and, until an independence is 
declared, the Continent will feel itself like a man who continues 
putting off some unpleasant business from day to day, yet knows it 
must be done, hates to set about it, wishes it over, and is continually 
haunted by the thoughts of its necessity.
The strategy Paine uses is one you certainly can and should follow in crafting 
your own conclusions. This is a negative consequences conclusion—
meaning he uses these last few lines to underscore the negative things that 
could happen if readers are not persuaded by his argument and fail to support 
his vision of governmental reform. 
I want to emphasize here that Paine is not using the negative consequences 
approach as a scare tactic—he knows that few readers, especially those who 
are still uncertain as to the validity of his 
argument, are likely to be persuaded by 
apocalyptic claims. But he also knows that 
his readers are likely to respond if presented 
with a clear statement of what the ultimate 
consequences may be if they choose not to 
accept his argument.
In other words, what we learn from Paine 
is that effective conclusions can underscore 
ultimate consequences without resorting 
to ultimatums. Stating ultimate consequences is like saying, “if we do not 
do x, then y will happen,” whereas stating an ultimatum is like saying, 
What we learn from 
Paine is that effective 
conclusions can 
underscore ultimate 
consequences without 
resorting to ultimatums.

42
Lecture 9: Finishing Strong
“you’d better do x, or else y is your fault.” Ultimatums put a tremendous 
(and needless) strain on the writer-reader relationship and are likely to 
alienate undecided readers. Stating something as an explanation of ultimate 
consequences doesn’t put your reader in as defensive a position.
Let’s take a look at another example of an effective conclusion—this one 
from Jonathan Swift’s “A Modest Proposal.” Swift offers a version of Paine’s 
negative consequences approach, but he provides an extra twist—a variation 
that I call the no viable alternatives strategy. Recall that Swift’s satire—
following the structure of classical Latin satires by Horace and Juvenal—
proposes an outlandish solution to a seemingly intractable problem. In this 
case, the problem is the pervasive poverty in Ireland, and the solution is to 
allow poor parents to sell their children to the rich so the rich can devour 
them as tasty and satisfying meals.
Swift is mocking both the British imperialist treatment of Ireland and a 
prevailing impulse among politicians and reformers of his day to suggest 
simple, cure-all solutions to complex social and economic problems. In his 
conclusion, Swift offers a direct challenge to those who would support such 
naive attempts at social engineering: 
I desire those politicians who dislike my overture, and may perhaps 
be so bold as to attempt an answer, that they will ¿ rst ask the parents 
of these mortals, whether they would not at this day think it a great 
happiness to have been sold for food, at a year old in the manner 
I prescribe, and thereby have avoided such a perpetual scene of 
misfortune as they have since gone through by the oppression of 
landlords, the impossibility of paying rent without money or trade, 
the want of common sustenance, with neither house nor clothes 
to cover them from inclemencies of the weather, and the most 
inevitable prospect of entailing the like or greater miseries upon 
their breed forever.
Swift’s conclusion suggests that alternatives to his proposal for changing 
the status quo aren’t likely to be viable. Notice that he doesn’t launch a 
direct attack on any particular plans that other writers have offered; rather, 
he points out that such plans are not likely to work unless and until their 

43
authors consider the causes and implications of the problem as fully and 
as carefully as Swift has. He also offers a kind of litmus test to determine 
whether alternative proposals would be as viable as his: asking the parents of 
impoverished children if a particular proposed solution would be something 
they would choose. Including your own version of Swift’s litmus test—a 
criterion against which alternatives to your claim must be measured—is a 
powerful strategy for persuading readers that you offer the best solution to 
the problem at hand. 
A third tone you can take in your conclusion is the positive consequences 
strategy. Here your goal is not to point out the negative things that may occur 
if readers do not accept your claims but rather to underscore the fact that 
some potentially positive things will not be manifested. An argument that 
stresses the negative potential outcomes in its conclusion can be powerful, 
but one that manages to end on a hopeful note could be more persuasive. 
So what lessons should we take away from this ¿ nal lecture in our four-
part series on crafting successful arguments? I cannot stress enough the 
importance of using the conclusion to recap the main thesis and key points 
of your arguments. I would also strongly encourage you to go beyond a 
basic summary and explore the three strategies we’ve covered here: negative 
consequences, no viable alternatives, and positive consequences. I’d also urge 
you to think about ways of using conclusions to pique your readers’ curiosity 
as Paine did. Finally, I hope you’ll be mindful that you may need to use a 
conclusion to preemptively defend yourself against challenges that would 
seek to undermine your claims. If you can anticipate how someone might 
argue against you, you’d better address it head-on rather than ignore it. Ŷ
Grif¿ th, Writing Essays about Literature.
Lunsford and Ruszkiewicz, Everything’s an Argument.
Ramage, Bean, and Johnson, Writing Arguments.
    Suggested Reading

44
Lecture 9: Finishing Strong
1. Rewrite the ¿ nal two paragraphs of Thomas Paine’s “Common Sense” 
(see above) by following a positive consequences strategy (perhaps 
not as dif¿ cult a task as it sounds, given that we have the bene¿ t of 
200-plus years of hindsight and examples of the good things that could 
happen if the colonies achieved independence from Britain and formed 
themselves into a new nation). 
2. Draft a negative consequences conclusion to Henry David Thoreau’s 
“Civil Disobedience” (discussed in the lecture)—not a gloom-and-
doom scenario but a thoughtful and persuasive discussion of what the 
consequences would be if democracy devolved rather than evolved in 
the ways Thoreau imagines. 
    Exercises

45
The Uses of Poetry 
Lecture 10
You would not be alone if you were thinking that the de¿ nition of 
poetry is probably something like the U.S. Supreme Court’s infamous 
de¿ nition of pornography, which is “I can’t de¿ ne it, but I know it 
when I see it.”
I
n this lecture, we explore how understanding poetry can help us become 
better readers and writers. First, what do you think poetry is? You may 
think of de¿ nitions like “a poem rhymes,” “it has a particular rhythm or 
pattern,” or “it uses words in unusual ways.” Consider the following piece 
of text: 
I have eaten
the plums
that were in
the icebox
and which
you were probably
saving
for breakfast
Forgive me
they were delicious
so sweet
and so cold
If you hear this read aloud, you might think it’s not a poem but instead a note 
of apology. In fact, it is a very famous poem by William Carlos Williams. 
Part of what makes it a poem is not the words themselves but how the 
words are laid out on the page. You’ll also notice that phrases and sentences 
are cut in unusual places—places you would not expect to ¿ nd a pause in 
everyday writing. 

46
Lecture 10: The Uses of Poetry
This poem has no punctuation—the only guide to how to read the piece 
is where the line breaks occur. By popping up in unexpected places, they 
call our attention to certain words or combinations of words that we might 
not otherwise notice. For example, the word “saving” has its own line; this 
makes us ponder, maybe, if it is not just the saving of the plums that is being 
referenced, but some larger, deeper idea of saving. Similarly, “forgive me” 
stands alone, also raising in the minds of the readers possible larger ideas 
about forgiveness in general. 
The ¿ nal two lines of the poem also seem to mark it as something not typical 
of a note left on the kitchen table. Apologizing for eating the plums doesn’t 
require the writer to tell the reader how the plums tasted—that’s a little extra 
poetic À ourish. And that ¿ nal word, “cold,” is interesting in that it really 
doesn’t describe what the plums tasted like but instead the fact that they had 
been in the icebox, and it thus calls us back to that word, “icebox,” early in 
the poem. That’s another word that may have caught our attention, in that it’s 
archaic. So the choice of that word tells us something perhaps about the age 
of the poet or gives us an idea that the speaker of the poem lives sometime 
in the past. 
Let’s take a look at John Donne’s elegy “On His Mistress Going to Bed.” 
Donne was one of the most revered poets of the English Renaissance, and 
his work today remains some of the most studied and enjoyed in English 
literature. Read these lines from the middle of the poem:
Licence my roving hands, and let them go
Before, behind, between, above, below.
O, my America, my Newfoundland,
My kingdom, safest when with one man mann’d,
My mine of precious stones, my empery;
How am I blest in thus discovering thee!
To enter in these bonds, is to be free;
Then, where my hand is set, my soul shall be.
We could spend days unpacking this poem—it is a delightfully clever play 
on the idea of exploration, referencing the discovery of what Europeans 
thought of as the New World. There is also a double entendre or two. How 

47
would you describe the tone of the poem; what are some words that spring to 
mind? “Joy” might be one, “delight,” or even “ecstasy.” If the words weren’t 
enough to convey the speaker’s happiness, then the exclamation point in 
“How am I blest in thus discovering thee!” certainly does.
What else makes Donne’s poem so compelling? One of the most important 
elements of this poem is metaphor, which is similar to another poetic 
device, simile. A simile makes a comparison between two things by using 
the words “like” or “as.” An example of a simile would be “her eyes were 
like the ocean” or “her eyes were as blue as the 
ocean”; a metaphor would be if you simply said 
“her eyes were oceans.” In the case of Donne’s 
poem, the metaphor is that his lover’s body is an 
undiscovered country ripe for exploration.
Metaphor and simile can be effective devices for 
engaging a reader’s attention, as can devices like 
synecdoche: when you use a word describing a 
part to mean the whole. For example, in the classic 
line “all hands on deck,” the word “hands” stands in for “people.” A close 
relative of this device is metonymy: when a word that describes something 
associated with an idea is used in place of the logical word. The classic 
example is “The White House said today.” Obviously, the words “White 
House” are standing in for the president and his or her representatives.
But how can reading and understanding poetry help us with our own 
writing? We can learn to recognize skillful treatments of language that help 
the words on the page add up to more than the sum of their parts. We can 
also be conscious of making more dramatic choices in our style and diction. 
What I think is most important is that poetry can intrigue us, can get us to 
think intensely about a certain subject in new or unexpected ways, and can 
also simply delight us with its use of wordplay. Ŷ
Metaphor and 
simile can be 
effective devices 
for engaging a 
reader’s attention.

48
Lecture 10: The Uses of Poetry
Barnet and Cain, A Short Guide to Writing about Literature.
DiYanni, Literature.
Gardner, Writing about Literature.
Grif¿ th, Writing Essays about Literature.
Guerin et al., A Handbook of Critical Approaches to Literature.
Kennedy and Gioia, Literature.
Roberts, Writing about Literature.
Each of the sentences below is written in fairly straightforward, plain prose. 
Rewrite each so that you make use of ¿ gurative or poetic language to punch 
up the sentence. Example: “She had blonde hair.” Rewrite: “She had hair the 
color of ripe wheat.”
1. It was a cold and rainy day.
2. She was a tall, thin woman with brown eyes and short, dark hair.
3. The countryside had lots of green hills and trees.
4. He was excited to learn that his sister was coming home soon.
    Exercises
    Suggested Reading

49
Poetic Diction and Syntax
Lecture 11
English has an unusually large vocabulary drawn from a number of 
different languages that come from different branches on the family 
tree of languages. A lot of other languages have no need of books like 
a thesaurus. This huge smorgasbord of words in English is one of the 
great things about our language—but we have so many options that it 
can also be problematic.
I
n this lecture, we deepen our discussion of poetry by focusing on 
issues of diction and syntax. As we do this, we’ll address the need to 
pay attention to matters of connotation, association, and the particular 
dif¿ culties caused by the nature of the English language—which is one of 
the few languages that has so many synonyms that it’s necessary for every 
schoolchild to learn to use a thesaurus. 
Consider the following sentence: “We have to come up with some kind 
of scheme to deal with this.” Upon hearing this, what are your immediate 
reactions? Is the person who said this honest and trustworthy? Why? What 
you’re probably focusing on is the word “scheme.” What if the sentence had 
read “We have to come up with some kind of 
plan to deal with this”? How do you feel about 
the speaker now? Honest? Trustworthy? Or 
maybe you can’t tell one way or another. 
If you look up “scheme” and “plan” in a 
dictionary or thesaurus, you’ll ¿ nd that they 
are usually given as simple equivalents of one 
another. But in addition to a word’s de¿ nition, 
there is also a word’s connotation to consider. In American English, as well 
as some other versions, the word “scheme” has negative associations—it 
connotes something illegal, underhanded, deceptive. 
So we’ve established that word choice is an important consideration when 
you’re writing and that learning about this from poetry can help make 
It’s not just word 
choice that can have 
an impact—word order 
also is important.

50
Lecture 11: Poetic Diction and Syntax
your writing more engaging. But it’s not just word choice that can have an 
impact—word order also is important. What I’m talking about here is syntax, 
or the grammatical ordering of a sentence so that it makes sense. 
For example, the sentence “The king married the queen” makes perfect 
sense; if we were to mess with the syntax so that the words read “Queen king 
the the married,” this makes no sense at all. The sentence “The king married 
the queen” is a perfect example of the most common sentence structure in 
English: subject-verb-object. But listen to just three sentences in a row using 
that structure: “The king married the queen. They lived in a castle. They 
were good rulers.” Do you want to keep reading if the whole paper or article 
follows this structure? Probably not. Why? Because it’s boring! Now what 
if we changed the syntax a bit? What if we said “The king and queen—they 
got married. In a castle they lived, and ruled well.” That might seem a little 
stilted, but hands down it’s more interesting than the ¿ rst version.
Poetry can be a good teacher when it comes to understanding syntax as well 
as word choice, and perhaps the poet to most famously play with matters 
of syntax is E. E. Cummings. Here is the opening of Cummings’s “anyone 
lived in a pretty how town”:
anyone lived in a pretty how town
(with up so À oating many bells down)
spring summer autumn winter
he sang his didn’t he danced his did.
What do you think of these lines? Even though we can’t do a really accurate 
“translation” by simply correcting the syntax or changing the word choice, 
we get some images and some idea of what the poet is trying to convey. Let’s 
start with the basics—there’s someone who lives in a town, and it seems as 
if there are church bells that ring in this town, throughout the year, and this 
person maybe sings and dances or maybe doesn’t. 
Now, you could make all sorts of interpretations that are very different from 
what I’ve just suggested, but you get the point that even though the syntax is 
confusing, some images can be discerned if we think hard about it. And it’s 
that mystery—it is what is hard (or initially confusing) about this poem—that 

51
makes it so good and so interesting. I wouldn’t suggest you just throw the 
words of your story up on the page in random order and leave it to your reader 
to sort out, but you could try to vary your word order as a means of engaging 
your reader. 
The more you read—of all kinds of writing—the better you will be as a 
writer. Of course, the other piece of advice is simply to write, and to have 
as many eyes as possible look at what you are writing. This is a case where 
you certainly can learn by doing, and the more you do, the better you 
get. Practice what you’ve learned from these lectures over and over and 
over again. Ŷ
Barnet and Cain, A Short Guide to Writing about Literature.
DiYanni, Literature.
Gardner, Writing about Literature.
Grif¿ th, Writing Essays about Literature.
Guerin et al., A Handbook of Critical Approaches to Literature.
Kennedy and Gioia, Literature.
Roberts, Writing about Literature.
Consider the following sentences. Rewrite each so that the syntax is different, 
and consider what effect this has. In some cases, you may need to combine 
two sentences into one. Example: “She was tired after a long day at work.” 
Rewrite: “After working a long day, she was tired.”
1. I was driving along the road. I saw my favorite coffee shop and decided 
to stop.
2. There is nothing better than hot coffee with cream and sugar on a 
cold morning.
    Suggested Reading
    Exercises

52
Lecture 11: Poetic Diction and Syntax
3. I balanced my coffee, scone, and wallet as I went back to my car.
4. I drove around for a while before I was able to ¿ nd the on-ramp.

53
Drama—Writing Out Loud
Lecture 12
The award-winning writer Sherman Alexie ... when asked what 
advice he has for young writers ... often tells them to take a drama 
class or some acting lessons. And this is because good writers 
are very often asked to read their work aloud, and sometimes 
they have to take questions. If they aren’t at least halfway decent 
performers, then the audience is going to be somewhat bored, no 
matter how much they might actually love the written works of 
the author.
D
rama is performance. All the information we get about characters, 
situations, and plot points in a dramatic production has to come out 
of the mouths of the actors on a stage. Understanding the generic 
conventions of drama can help make us better readers and better writers—
especially if we are writing something that is meant to be read aloud. Writing 
intended only or primarily to be read on the page can get away with things 
that writing meant to be performed out loud cannot. This lecture will focus 
on understanding how drama can help you become a better “out loud” writer.
Let’s start by considering the following wedding toast: 
John and Jane: You guys are the best! I hope you have many long 
happy years together. Congratulations! 
Nothing wrong with that, you might be saying—it’s clear and to the point. 
But now consider this second toast: 
John and Jane: May the best day of your past be the worst day of 
your future, may your home always be too small to hold all of your 
friends, and may you live as long as you love and love as long as 
you live.
Which toast would you prefer to receive at your wedding? The second toast 
does a beautiful job of wordplay, parallel sentence structure and symmetry, 

54
Lecture 12: Drama—Writing Out Loud
creative use of images, and words appropriate to the occasion. But even the 
most beautiful words are going to suffer if they are delivered awkwardly, and 
that ¿ rst, simple toast can seem superior when read clearly and sincerely. It’s 
all about the delivery.
You may be thinking, I really don’t need to express myself with the spoken 
word all that often, so this is not something I need to think about. But at 
some point in your life, you are going to have to do something dramatic in 
this sense—whether it’s giving a presentation at work, defending yourself in 
traf¿ c court, or proposing to your signi¿ cant 
other. Each of those situations will go far 
more smoothly if you keep some basic rules 
of dramatic performance in mind. 
Let’s take an example of a famous speech. 
The St. Crispin’s Day speech from 
Shakespeare’s Henry V is one of the best-
known speeches in Shakespeare and serves 
as a good example for our purposes today because it is making an argument. 
First, some quick background information: In 1415, King Henry V of 
England crossed the English Channel to press his claim to the French throne. 
For reasons that are too complex to go into here, he had with him only a small 
band of warriors—some estimates place the size of the English contingent at 
around 6,000, while the French army numbered around 36,000. Just before 
the battle, King Henry V gave his men a speech of encouragement to try and 
compensate for the overwhelming odds against them. 
Whatever it was that Henry really said, Shakespeare undoubtedly vastly 
improved it in his version. Just before the speech begins, the king’s cousin 
Westmoreland laments that there are so few of them on the battle¿ eld and 
expresses a desire for some of the men who chose to stay in England to join 
them in battle. Here’s the king’s response:
What’s he that wishes so?
My cousin Westmoreland? No, my fair cousin;
If we are mark’d to die, we are enow
To do our country loss; and if to live,
Even the most beautiful 
words are going to 
suffer if they are 
delivered awkwardly.

55
The fewer men, the greater share of honour.
God’s will! I pray thee, wish not one man more.
So how does he begin? The king acknowledges the situation but chides 
his cousin for expressing concern about their numbers. He acknowledges 
that there are relatively few of them, but he characterizes this as a bonus: 
There will be more honor to go around. He then turns his attention to those 
members of the host who may still be having doubts about the battle they are 
about to ¿ ght, announcing:
Rather proclaim it, Westmoreland, through my host,
That he which hath no stomach to this ¿ ght,
Let him depart; his passport shall be made,
And crowns for convoy put into his purse;
We would not die in that man’s company
That fears his fellowship to die with us. 
In other words, if you don’t want 
to ¿ ght, we’d rather have you 
leave, for it means more honor for 
us. In one move, Henry has made 
sure that everyone who ¿ ghts with 
him is there willingly. Henry then 
uses a series of emotionally laden 
images to further persuade his 
listeners. He paints a picture of life 
after the battle, when the men are 
safely home and greeted as heroes; 
he characterizes the upcoming 
battle as a glorious struggle that 
will confer honor upon those who 
participate; and he says that even 
in their old age, when they’ve 
forgotten everything else, the men 
will remember the feats they did on 
St. Crispin’s Day. 
King Henry V of England, whose St. 
Crispin’s Day speech inspired his army 
to ¿ ght against extreme odds.
Corel Stock Photo Library.

56
Lecture 12: Drama—Writing Out Loud
According to Henry, not only will those who ¿ ght beside him earn honor 
and nobility, but their names will be on everyone’s lips. This speech is a 
brilliant example of knowing your audience, turning a bad situation to your 
advantage, and persuading people of the rightness of your cause so that they 
back you eagerly. And then Henry concludes with some of the most famous 
lines in all of literature, words that are majestic and powerful and poetic, that 
in one fell swoop ennoble all those who ¿ ght beside him, as he goes so far as 
to emphatically include himself as their equal:
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers;
For he to-day that sheds his blood with me
Shall be my brother; be he ne’er so vile,
This day shall gentle his condition;
And gentlemen in England now-a-bed
Shall think themselves accurs’d they were not here,
And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks
That fought with us upon Saint Crispin’s day.
So what do we take away from this dramatic example? When it comes to 
words meant to be read aloud, presentation style is key—words read aloud 
need inÀ ection, emphasis, and a certain degree of enthusiasm for them to be 
effective. And perhaps more than with any other kind of writing, you need 
to really prepare. In other words, practice what you are going to say before 
you get in front of a microphone and try to say it. Whether it’s an of¿ ce 
presentation or a political speech, walking through it at least once out loud 
will help you do a better job.
What else? Well, as always, know your audience! King Henry V certainly 
knew his and was able to appeal to all their ideals and values. Make sure 
you’re not talking down to or over your audience, and try to be appropriate. 
But perhaps most important is the need to really be sincere. Ŷ

57
Barnet and Cain, A Short Guide to Writing about Literature.
DiYanni, Literature.
Gardner, Writing about Literature.
Grif¿ th, Writing Essays about Literature.
Guerin et al., A Handbook of Critical Approaches to Literature.
Kennedy and Gioia, Literature.
Roberts, Writing about Literature.
1. The following exchange between two characters can be understood in 
a variety of different ways depending upon how the director and actors 
decide to play the lines. Rewrite the scene as a piece of prose ¿ ction, 
rendering the mood of the scene as (1) angry, (2) excited, (3) sad, and 
(4) indifferent. What cues or clues do you have to give your reader that a 
playwright may choose to leave ambiguous?
Mother: “You’re late again.”
Son: “I’m not late. Your clock is wrong.”
Mother: “No, your watch is wrong.”
Son: “In any event, I’m home now.”
Mother: “Where were you tonight?”
Son: “Out with friends”
Mother: “Which friends?”
Son: “You don’t know them.”
    Suggested Reading
    Exercise

58
Lecture 13: What You Can Learn from Autobiography
What You Can Learn from Autobiography
Lecture 13
TMI—too much information—is one of the most common and 
devastating mistakes you can make in a situation that calls for written 
self-presentation.
T
his lecture begins our examination of the value of autobiographical 
writing, and we’ll be studying several extremely powerful tools that 
autobiographers use to achieve their writing goals. Our ultimate aim 
is to learn how those tools work and how we can incorporate them into our 
own work.
Whether you’re crafting an online personal pro¿ le, a professional bio blurb, 
or a job application letter, the challenges of creating a written self-portrait 
can be daunting. What experiences and qualities should you highlight, and 
what approaches are most effective? When should you give lots of detail, and 
when should you hold back? Through careful analysis of excerpts from the 
autobiography of one of America’s most famous 
and successful individuals—Benjamin Franklin—
this lecture reveals several strategies you can 
use when faced with a writing task that calls for 
self-presentation. 
Successful autobiographical writing is kind of 
like being the favorite guest at a dinner party—
you have great stories to tell, but they don’t 
go on too long, and your stories make the other 
people at the dinner table feel included. Personal anecdotes from successful 
autobiographers can be wonderfully instructive because they show us how to 
describe our best qualities without coming across as arrogant. As we’ll see, 
when it comes to autobiographical writing, the best way to be effective is to 
be selective.
When it comes to 
autobiographical 
writing, the best 
way to be effective 
is to be selective.

59
Let’s start with an anecdote from Benjamin Franklin’s autobiography:
I disliked the trade, and had a strong inclination for the sea, but 
my father declared against it; however, living near the water, 
I was much in and about it, learnt early to swim well, and to 
manage boats; and when in a boat or canoe with other boys, I was 
commonly allowed to govern, especially in any case of dif¿ culty; 
and upon other occasions I was generally a leader among the boys, 
and sometimes led them into scrapes, of which I will mention one 
instance, as it shows an early projecting public spirit, tho’ not then 
justly conducted.
The strategy Franklin follows in this 
anecdote from his early childhood is one 
I call IAA—which stands for interests, 
abilities, 
and 
achievements. 
Most 
occasions that call for autobiographical 
writing require us to describe at least 
one—and sometimes all three—of 
these areas. Franklin begins by telling 
us something about his general af¿ nity 
for water- and boat-related activities—
and also, by way of contrast, that 
he’s not terribly interested in being 
bound into a formal apprenticeship 
for a conventional trade. Franklin is 
also presenting himself as someone 
whose interests blend fairly well with 
his abilities. Although he has a facility for things aquatic and nautical, the 
straightforward way in which he presents this information doesn’t come 
across as bragging or boasting.
What really stands out, even in this very short piece of autobiographical 
writing, is a sense of overall unity of interests and activities at a very young 
age. And the skills he seems to be gently pointing to have to do with being 
a leader—so he’s setting the stage for future events that will undoubtedly be 
Benjamin Franklin as a boy. 
Franklin skillfully wrote about 
the early abilities that would 
eventually serve him as a leader.
The Teaching Company Collection.

60
Lecture 13: What You Can Learn from Autobiography
an important part of his autobiography. From the beginning, he has a focus 
that is guiding him as he selects stories and events to relate to his readership. 
When faced with the often daunting prospect of writing about your life in 
order to achieve a speci¿ c goal, it’s all too easy to respond by pushing as 
much information as you can at your readers. Give your readers only the 
most important, pertinent details up front. If they want to know more, they 
know how to ¿ nd you! I recently had the opportunity to attend a lecture by 
an amazing scholar, and while the talk itself turned out to be spectacular, the 
experience was marred by the fact that the person who gave the introduction 
took 25 minutes to recount the speaker’s activities and accomplishments—
while the speaker herself only ended up lecturing for about 35 minutes. 
For most of us, in most writing situations, how we present our achievements 
and accomplishments is the thing that will matter most. For an example 
of how to approach this dimension of autobiography, let’s look at another 
excerpt from Franklin:
There was a salt-marsh that bounded part of the mill-pond, on the 
edge of which, at high water, we used to stand to ¿ sh for minnows. 
By much trampling, we had made it a mere quagmire. My proposal 
was to build a wharff there ¿ t for us to stand upon, and I showed 
my comrades a large heap of stones, which were intended for a new 
house near the marsh, and which would very well suit our purpose. 
Accordingly, in the evening, when the workmen were gone, I 
assembled a number of my play-fellows, and working with them 
diligently like so many emmets, sometimes two or three to a stone, 
we brought them all away and built our little wharff.
This anecdote is instructive: Note the way Franklin presents his achievements. 
In particular, note the balance he strikes between individual accomplishment 
and collaborative effort. It may seem to be a minor point, but it matters a 
great deal when your writing goal is to convey your accomplishments 
without seeming arrogant or overblown. One of the most powerful—and 
relatively easy—tactics a writer can employ in autobiographical situations 
is to alternate the use of personal pronouns so as to provide a mix of “I” and 
“we” statements and descriptions. 

61
So what have we gained from studying Benjamin Franklin’s approach to 
autobiographical writing? First, we learned the value of con¿ ning personal 
information to the three key areas of interests, abilities, and achievements. 
Remember also that your autobiographical writing will be that much more 
powerful and persuasive if you can ¿ nd a way to connect your individual 
accomplishments to a broader collaborative effort. Finally, try presenting 
your faults or failures as part of a larger process of self-development—
indications of talents that were not fully realized. Put another way, make sure 
your vices appear more like virtues in the making. Ŷ
Freedman and Frey, Autobiographical Writing across the Disciplines.
Smith and Watson, Getting a Life.
1. Choose an event from your personal or professional life that you 
believe exempli¿ es some of your best qualities or skills. Use Franklin’s 
strategy of presenting at least some of these qualities or skills as not-yet-
fully-realized. 
2. Choose an event from your personal or professional life that allows you 
to de¿ ne yourself through your relations with other people. Describe 
this event in such a way that your individual talents and skills are made 
apparent through your interactions with others.
    Suggested Reading
    Exercises

62
Lecture 14: Writing and Leadership
Writing and Leadership 
Lecture 14
Autobiography is perhaps the richest and most underused source of 
practical knowledge for anyone seeking to present herself or himself as 
quali¿ ed to take on a leadership role and make effective use of it.  
I
n this lecture, we’re going to expand on the important link between 
autobiographical writing and leadership. The subject of leadership—
its different qualities, its various styles, its capacity for success or 
failure—has garnered massive amounts of attention in the ¿ elds of business, 
education, government, and athletics. Actually, there is hardly a ¿ eld where 
leadership is not the center of attention. Many of the books, seminars, and 
workshops offered on leadership are based on sound research in the ¿ elds of 
management and organizational studies. Some are based on less substantial 
evidence or offer little more than pep talks, without any clear way to actually 
apply this stuff to your own life. But none of them that I’ve encountered 
focuses on the crucial and generative link between writing and leadership—
or, to be more speci¿ c, how the study and practice of autobiographical 
writing can help you better understand how leadership skills are developed. 
The study of autobiography can also help you see how different approaches 
to leadership are de¿ ned. It can also give you concrete examples of how 
you can put these strategies into practice to achieve your professional and 
personal goals. 
To help us better apprehend the link between autobiography and leadership, 
we continue our study of Benjamin Franklin’s life story, and we add some 
examples from the autobiographical work of another ¿ gure: Frederick 
Douglass. In this excerpt from an account of Douglass’s boyhood in the 
1820s, he describes how he learned to read—something slaves were 
expressly forbidden to do:
The plan which I adopted, and the one by which I was most 
successful, was that of making friends of all the little white boys 
whom I met in the street. As many of these as I could, I converted 

63
into teachers. With their kindly aid, obtained at different times and 
in different places, I ¿ nally succeeded in learning to read. When I 
was sent of errands, I always took my book with me, and by going 
one part of my errand quickly, I found time to get a lesson before 
my return. I used also to carry bread with me, enough of which was 
always in the house, and to which I was always welcome; for I was 
much better off in this regard than many of the poor white children 
in our neighborhood. This bread I used to bestow upon the hungry 
little urchins, who, in return, would give me that more valuable 
bread of knowledge.
Every time I read this passage, I’m 
astonished by how insightful Douglass 
is when it comes to forging an emotional 
connection with his readers—soliciting 
their sympathy while never putting 
himself in a position to be pitied. 
What similarities do you see between 
Douglass’s and Franklin’s childhood 
anecdotes? 
Certainly 
both 
excerpts 
evince a general sense of resourcefulness 
and ingenuity—speci¿ cally an ability 
to get others to help them achieve their 
goals. And both show how determined 
and dedicated their authors are to their 
respective tasks. But it’s important for 
us to see how both writers also use their 
autobiographical anecdotes to implicitly 
suggest that good leaders need to exist in 
a kind of reciprocal relationship with those around them. Reciprocal, in this 
case, does not mean a relationship of equals; by any measure, both Franklin 
and Douglass bene¿ t far more from these interactions than their peers do. 
Still, the autobiographical descriptions underscore what you can gain by 
writing about yourself not simply as a representative of or for a group—but 
as someone for whom reciprocity is a crucial function of leadership. 
The abolitionist Frederick 
Douglass wrote three 
effective autobiographies.
Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division, LC-USZ62-15887.

64
Lecture 14: Writing and Leadership
The take-away point here is that whatever events or achievements you 
choose as the centerpiece for the autobiographical writing you’ve been 
called upon to do, take the time to imagine and then describe them through 
some connection with other people: people 
with whom you’ve worked, people you’ve 
supervised, people who are part of whatever 
network you’ve served as a leader. 
Another thread that runs through nearly 
every great autobiographical text is a 
judicious and effective use of emotional 
expression. By judicious, I mean an 
expression of feeling that is not made for 
an overt dramatic effect. In fact, in most 
cases, the more intense and emphatic an autobiographical representation 
of emotion is, the less effective it is. By contrast, an understated approach 
carries with it a much greater chance of establishing an intimate connection 
with readers. To illustrate the effectiveness of emotion expressed in a minor 
rather than a major key, let’s take a look at an especially poignant event from 
Franklin’s Autobiography—the death of his son from smallpox and his guilt 
for not having the child inoculated:
In 1736 I lost one of my sons, a ¿ ne boy of four years old, by the 
small-pox, taken in the common way. I long regretted bitterly, 
and still regret that I had not given it to him by inoculation. This 
I mention for the sake of parents who omit that operation, on the 
supposition that they should never forgive themselves if a child 
died under it; my example showing that the regret may be the same 
either way, and that, therefore, the safer should be chosen.
I want to emphasize that there is no requirement for Franklin to include 
these brief remarks on his loss or the feelings he experiences as a result. He 
could have left them out with no consequences, personal or professional. 
Yet he makes a deliberate decision to include this event—and to take care to 
describe it in a way that directly connects his individual loss to something 
much larger than himself. It’s easy enough to recognize the selÀ essness 
Franklin evinces—his willingness to share this information for the sake 
Another thread that runs 
through nearly every 
great autobiographical 
text is a judicious 
and effective use of 
emotional expression.

65
of his readers—and there’s no reason to suspect that he has some ulterior 
motive or agenda. 
At the same time, however, we would be remiss as students of Franklin’s 
work if we didn’t note that his decision does, when taken within the broader 
context of the Autobiography as a whole, add considerable credibility to his 
role as a leader and garner him signi¿ cant sympathetic support. It’s not a 
self-serving move in a direct sense, but it does have the ultimate effect of 
enhancing his status as a representative ¿ gure who speaks for and to a larger 
group. Franklin’s strategy for establishing leadership is what we might call 
the use of soft power—the ability to achieve one’s goals by establishing 
intimacy and cultivating personal connections with a larger public body.
So what have we learned from Franklin and Douglass—and how can we apply 
it to our own autobiographical writing? Keep in mind that autobiography is 
a rich source of knowledge for understanding how leadership skills can be 
developed and how different styles of leadership can be employed to help 
you achieve your goals. You would be well served to follow the models 
of Franklin and Douglass and present yourself as a leader who establishes 
productive reciprocal relations with those around you and never allows an 
individual accomplishment to be represented without some connection to 
those with whom you serve. 
Keep in mind also the potential bene¿ ts of judicious emotional expression 
when the occasion requires you to write about your interests, abilities, and 
achievements. When the circumstances of a writing situation are such that 
an expression of emotion could work in your favor, remember that less really 
is more, and a low-key pitch and understated tone will draw your readers 
closer, inviting them—as an effective leader does—to listen longer and hear 
more of what you have to say. Ŷ
Freedman and Frey, Autobiographical Writing across the Disciplines.
Smith and Watson, Getting a Life.
    Suggested Reading

66
Lecture 14: Writing and Leadership
1. Choose an event from your personal life and write a short 
autobiographical description, patterned after Franklin’s brief treatment 
of his son’s death, that puts your private experience in service to a 
broader public problem or issue.
2. Imagine you’ve just received a promotion that puts you in charge of 
a group of people who previously were fellow employees at the same 
level. Now draft an e-mail—using some of the autobiographical 
strategies we’ve studied in the excerpts from Franklin and Douglass—to 
help establish your position as a leader while maintaining a productive 
relationship with your former peers.
    Exercises

67
The Rules of Rhetoric
Lecture 15
The art and practice of posing rhetorical questions in order to 
communicate more effectively was one of the concepts that ancient and 
classical thinkers like Quintilian, Aristotle, and Cicero ¿ rst studied and 
articulated. In other words, it’s not as if classical rhetoric somehow 
evaporated or disappeared once we moved into the Modern Period, 
although a lot of people actually seem to think that this is the case. 
I
n this lecture, we take a broader look at some of the concepts that serve as 
the foundation for successful arguments and autobiography. These ideas 
really serve as the foundation for almost all forms of effective writing. 
Four of the most readily applicable rhetorical concepts that you can use to 
strengthen your writing are commonplaces, stasis, deductive reasoning, and 
inductive reasoning. A commonplace is a piece of truth that is wrapped up 
in easily recognizable language. The notion of truth I mean here is not some 
empirical fact—rather, it’s some thought that’s familiar enough to a certain 
group of people that they’re going to respond positively to it, even if they 
can’t always precisely identify why. An example of a commonplace for most 
Americans is the notion that we have a right to the pursuit of happiness. It’s 
one of the most widely recognized and accepted ideas from the Declaration 
of Independence, and I think it’s safe to say that the majority of U.S. citizens, 
no matter what their politics, would respond positively if a writer were to 
invoke this idea. The use of commonplaces can give the reader a feeling of 
solidarity, and then the writer can move on to address other points that might 
generate disagreement. In other words, it’s a way of getting everyone into a 
similar, comfortable intellectual space before you start to present a case that 
may not be so familiar to them.
The next concept is stasis. In classical rhetoric, stasis refers to the general 
agreement between opposing parties about what the terms of the argument 
are. Parties that are in conÀ ict often won’t agree on a common de¿ nition 
of the argument’s terms and therefore can’t move beyond that initial 

68
Lecture 15: The Rules of Rhetoric
disagreement. You can see how the concept of stasis is related to the notion 
of the commonplace—both hinge on the need for agreement. 
So why should stasis matter when it comes to writing? Just as effective 
writers must make an effort to identify commonplaces that are relevant to 
their readers, they also have to make an effort to identify the terms of an 
argument and recognize when those terms have been agreed upon and when 
they have not. I’m not suggesting that writers must always strive for stasis 
or that they must change their terms or viewpoints in order to do this. But 
it’s possible to craft a powerful piece of writing simply by showing readers 
how and why stasis has not been achieved with regard to a particular issue: 
to identify the terms that are problematic and 
to clarify the overall scope and the content 
of the debate, even if it seems that the debate 
itself can’t be resolved. 
In addition to a lack of stasis, one of the 
reasons that certain debates are not easily 
resolved is because the writers who address 
the issue don’t make effective use of 
different forms of reasoning to appeal to 
their audience. This brings us to our next two rhetorical concepts: deductive 
and inductive reasoning. Deductive reasoning is the kind that many people 
are familiar with from detective stories and murder mysteries. Deductive 
reasoning begins with a generally accepted declaration or premise—
something that most people take to be true most of the time. The writer 
then uses that premise to make sense of a speci¿ c event, occurrence, 
or phenomenon. 
The opening lines of Jane Austen’s famous novel Pride and Prejudice set 
up just such an occasion for deductive reasoning by establishing a general 
premise about the circumstances of wealthy, unmarried men, and as you may 
recall that opening line is:  
It is a truth universally acknowledged that a single man in possession of 
a good fortune must be in want of a wife.
Deductive reasoning 
is the kind that many 
people are familiar with 
from detective stories 
and murder mysteries.

69
Indeed, a lot of the characters in that novel are young men with fortunes 
and young women with the potential to be wives. So we might, then, read 
the whole rest of the book in light of that opening claim, and so long as the 
characters act or speak in ways that seem to af¿ rm Austen’s foundational 
premise, everything that happens within the ¿ ctional world of the novel 
makes sense.
As you might guess, not all instances of reasoning follow the deductive 
pattern. Sometimes a process is inductive—meaning a writer will examine 
particular events or subsets of phenomena and use them as the basis for then 
constructing a premise that would apply to any events or incidents that are 
similar to that one. In other words, to reason inductively is to move from 
particulars to generalizations. If we were to rewrite Pride and Prejudice 
following an inductive pattern, we would begin not with those famous ¿ rst 
lines, but we’d begin by describing the words and actions of each single 
male character, assessing any differences and oddities of behavior, weighing 
them against similarities—and, ultimately, identifying the most common 
traits linking them to each other. Our descriptions would probably take 
into account how each single male interacted with female characters who 
could be potential wives, and we’d want to make it apparent to our readers 
that the men with more money generally seemed to be operating under the 
assumption that getting yourself a spouse would be a necessary thing to do. 
Inductive reasoning opens up lots of potential theories, but it’s up to the 
writer to decide which ones are most important to identify for the reader. 
Inductive reasoning can be put to effective use in your writing, and you 
should always keep it in mind as an alternative to the deductive process—
especially when you’re faced with a writing task that compels you to 
describe a wide range of evidence and try and make sense of it for your 
audience. As the ancient and classical rhetorical scholars would remind 
you, as the writer, you are in charge of determining what commonalities in 
your evidence are most worthy of being presented as truths that should be 
universally acknowledged. Ŷ

70
Lecture 15: The Rules of Rhetoric
Crowley and Hawhee, Ancient Rhetoric for Contemporary Students.
1. Use the process of induction (in relation to whatever content/subject you 
like), and craft a thesis or main claim for an argument.
2. Use the process of deduction (in relation to whatever content/subject 
you like), and craft a thesis or main claim for an argument.
    Suggested Reading
    Exercises

71
Invention and Arrangement
Lecture 16
Kairos was so intriguing and signi¿ cant for ancient rhetorical ¿ gures 
that the idea was manifested in the form of an actual mythical creature. 
The surviving depictions of Kairos show a human form in what we’d 
call, I think, a precarious balancing act—it’s trying to grasp new 
opportunities without losing hold of what he already possesses.
T
he goal of this lecture is to enlarge the critical frame we’ve created 
through our study of commonplaces, stasis, and inductive and 
deductive reasoning in order to better illustrate and explain two 
broader areas of ancient classical rhetoric—invention and arrangement. We’ll 
look at how elements of invention and arrangement can help us build stronger 
arguments, especially in the areas of business and professional writing.
“Invention” is a rhetorical term that refers to the process by which we generate 
arguments—meaning how we come up with the topics we write about. 
When business management gurus urge people to “think outside the box,” 
they’re really asking for versions of what we call invention. “Arrangement” 
is a rhetorical term that refers to the 
way arguments are organized—it’s the 
formulas and the expectations that dictate 
the way a piece of writing is structured. 
The classic ¿ ve-paragraph essay is an 
example of formula-based arrangement. 
I’d like you to do what the ancient 
Greeks did when they were involved 
in the invention process and needed to 
generate ideas and arguments. First, 
consider the kairos of your situation. Kairos refers to the opportunities that a 
particular set of circumstances might present to you—and it also refers to the 
need to time your response so as to make the most of whatever opportunities 
have presented themselves. In other words, kairos is really about saying—or 
writing—the right thing in the right way at the right time. 
I’d like you to do what the 
ancient Greeks did when 
they were involved in the 
invention process and 
needed to generate ideas 
and arguments.

72
Lecture 16: Invention and Arrangement
Kairos needs to be part of our writing tool kit insofar as it serves to remind 
us that each writing situation is unique in some way, and that when we’re in 
the middle of the process of invention, we’ll do ourselves a huge favor if we 
attend closely to each situation’s contingencies, demands, and opportunities. 
Put another way, never assume that one writing moment is the same as 
another, and always enter into each writing task without a preconceived 
notion of what argument you’ll make or exactly how you’ll make it.
Please don’t mistake my meaning here—I’m not suggesting that the concept 
of kairos requires you to change your core beliefs or take a position that 
undermines your own ethical standards. In fact, one of the bene¿ ts of 
maintaining a À exible stance and an awareness of changing circumstances 
is that it puts you in a better position to articulate and circulate your beliefs 
should the opportunity present itself. 
The ancient Greeks also offered a tool to help make those “kairotic” 
moments—analogy. Analogy is simply drawing connections between two 
things that may not necessarily be associated with each other by a particular 
audience. If the issue you’re writing about doesn’t seem to have a kairotic 
quality to it, you can create that kairos for yourself by constructing an analogy 
that links your idea with something that’s part of the current zeitgeist. The 
take-away point is two-fold: First, kairos is incredibly powerful; second, 
good writers can create their own kairos by using analogies to connect their 
subject to something that stands at the center of everyone’s attention. In 
the process, they can invent new arguments that lead to deeper and more 
meaningful discussion of the issue at hand, and they can get more people to 
focus on it.
Kairos is crucial not only for the invention process but also for arrangement—
meaning it can inspire you to modify or even radically restructure those 
received formulas for how things like a business letter or a memo should 
look, or it can cause you to rethink and revise the terms and the language 
you might use when you’re writing one of these. Moving beyond received 
models and conventional instructions—when the opportunity, circumstances, 
and timing seem right—can be a powerful way of setting your writing apart 
from everyone else’s.

73
So what can you do to not only invent new ideas and arguments but also 
create new arrangements for them? An important addition to your writing 
tool kit should be a virtual permission form that states that you are no longer 
required to begin a piece of writing by crafting the introduction. Don’t 
start at the start—start somewhere else! The reason is if you’re crafting an 
introduction to something that you haven’t yet written, you’re undercutting 
the possibility that in the very act of writing, you might discover something 
new and important to say about your topic.  
Instead of following a pattern, pick an aspect of your topic that seems most 
interesting or challenging and develop that in as much depth as you can. If, 
in the process of developing that point, you conceive of some new aspect 
of your topic, go ahead and develop that next—and don’t worry about 
transitions; you can build those back in later. Your goal should be to use the 
writing process as a means of discovering what elements of a subject deserve 
the most attention. It’s only by letting go of conventional formulas and 
expectations that writers can imagine new ways of arranging the arguments 
and the knowledge they’ve both invented and discovered. Ŷ
Clouse, The Student Writer.
Crowley and Hawhee, Ancient Rhetoric for Contemporary Students.
1. Most of the time, we don’t recognize kairotic possibilities until after the 
fact (i.e., if only I had seen that connection between idea A and idea B, 
or if only I had worded the sentence this way instead of that). Using 
the bene¿ t of hindsight, go back to a piece of professional writing and 
revise it to capitalize on that missed opportunity.
2. Rearrange the traditional business memo formula. How would 
you organize or word it if you didn’t have to worry about meeting 
conventional expectations for how a memo is supposed to look 
and sound?
    Exercises
    Suggested Reading

74
Lecture 17: Ethos and Pathos
Ethos and Pathos
Lecture 17
Some of the most compelling writers we’ve studied in this course—
particularly Benjamin Franklin and Frederick Douglass—were 
actually students of classical rhetoric.
I
n our last lecture, we talked about two of four major concepts in classical 
rhetoric—invention and arrangement. In this lecture, we analyze another 
two rhetorical concepts—ethos and pathos. These ideas are particularly 
useful in writing situations where you are attempting to persuade somebody 
to give you something—like job application letters or grant proposals. Ethos 
means the perception that readers have of your reliability or character; pathos 
means inspiring emotion in your readers, especially feelings of sympathy. 
There’s nothing intrinsically ethically problematic with simple pathos-
based appeals, but as a general rule, attempts to persuade are much more 
successful when they combine pathos and ethos. So how do you establish 
ethos? Generally speaking, ethos is established through patterns of behavior. 
Figures in the public eye have established an ethos based on what’s widely 
known about their actions. “That’s all ¿ ne and good,” you might be saying, 
“but how do I construct an ethos in a piece of writing if the audience doesn’t 
actually know me personally?” In this case, you have to demonstrate 
expertise, and/or you’ve got to speak 
from a position of authority in the writing 
itself. In order to make your writing have 
the greatest pathetic appeal, you need to 
establish your ethos fairly early on. 
Let’s look at an example that models a mix 
of ethos and pathos. In this case, we’re 
going to return to Frederick Douglass’s 
Narrative—a text that’s intended, in its broadest terms, to persuade its 
audience to support the abolition of slavery. In the ¿ rst part of the quote 
below, Douglass establishes his ethos—his authority to speak on this subject. 
Attempts to persuade are 
much more successful 
when they combine 
pathos and ethos.

75
I have no accurate knowledge of my age, never having seen any 
authentic record containing it. By far the larger part of the slaves 
know as little of their ages as horses know of theirs, and it is the 
wish of most masters within my knowledge to keep their slaves thus 
ignorant. I do not remember to have ever met a slave who could tell 
of his birthday. They seldom come nearer to it than planting-time, 
harvest-time, cherry-time, spring-time, or fall-time. 
So how does Douglass establish his ethos and his right to speak on the 
matter of slavery? First and foremost, there’s the fact that he was a slave. 
But here, when it comes to the particular matter of slaves knowing personal 
information like their birth dates, he establishes himself as someone who has 
paid close attention to this issue speci¿ cally—and thus someone who has 
a right to comment on it. Douglass establishes ethos by providing speci¿ c 
information. He tells us how slaves reckon or remember their birthdays, and 
his language here indicates that he has asked numerous slaves if they know 
their birthdays—he’s done research into the matter. 
Notice how carefully he quali¿ es his statements. He acknowledges that 
there’s some outer limit to his knowledge, and this further enhances his 
ethos—he’s cautious, he’s reliable, and he does not claim to know things that 
he can’t know. This balance of humility with authority is part of what makes 
his writing so powerful and also so persuasive. So that’s the establishment of 
ethos—and I think we can agree that Douglass does a pretty good job of this. 
He then continues on to work some pathos into this passage by saying:
A want of information concerning my own [birth date] was a source 
of unhappiness to me even during childhood. The white children 
could tell their ages. I could not tell why I ought to be deprived of 
the same privilege. I was not allowed to make any inquiries of my 
master concerning it. He deemed all such inquiries on the part of a 
slave improper and impertinent, and evidence of a restless spirit. 
The nearest estimate I can give makes me now between twenty-
seven and twenty-eight years of age. I come to this, from hearing 
my master say, some time during 1835, I was about seventeen 
years old.

76
Lecture 17: Ethos and Pathos
What makes this so pathetically powerful is that Douglass takes a relatively 
understated tone. He offers a matter-of-fact discussion of slave-holding 
culture’s practice of keeping slaves ignorant of such basic personal 
information as birth dates. When he does this, he doesn’t pile on negative 
adjectives—he doesn’t even really characterize the practice as speci¿ cally 
as he could have. He keeps the tone calm—the lack of this knowledge, 
he says, is “a source of unhappiness”; it’s very understated, “a source of 
unhappiness.” He’s confused as to why he can’t know this information, 
and we get a very circumspect description of his master’s attitude. So the 
understatement Douglass uses here allows us to imagine the reality as 
somewhat more unpleasant, and he does not come across as trying to prey 
on our sympathies. He presents the facts straightforwardly, and most readers 
will feel sympathy for his situation—why can’t a slave even know his or her 
own birthday? Of course, he doesn’t understand why one group of children 
could know their birth dates and another group would be ignorant of this 
information for no other reason than the color of their skin.
In order to really appreciate and recognize this understatedness, we have 
to remember that Douglass is speaking to an audience of mostly white 
Northerners. Douglass was strongly aware of the need to introduce them to 
the nature of slave-holding culture, but he needed to do that as judiciously 
as possible. The concern here is that his audience might become so 
emotionally overwhelmed by the description of the horrors of slavery that 
they would just stop listening. Perhaps even worse than the possibility of 
overwhelming his audience would be if they listened and thought his story 
was so incredible that it couldn’t possibly be true. Douglass has to take care 
so that his audience does not disbelieve him, but at the same time, he also 
recognizes that pathos is a powerful tool for persuading his audience to join 
the antislavery movement.
While Douglass’s example really drives home how the ideas of ethos and 
pathos work, you don’t need to have lived through a horrible situation in 
order to establish a compelling ethos—nor do you need to recount horri¿ c 
events in order to get a pathetic response from your audience. So, what 
you can take away from today’s lecture is an understanding of how ethos 
and pathos can work together—and how it’s usually more effective to have 
more ethos than pathos to create a really compelling piece of writing. An 

77
awareness of the elements of classical rhetoric that we’ve covered in this 
lecture and the two before it can help you become a better writer, simply by 
calling your attention back to what we might call the basics of good writing. 
You may never use the words kairos, ethos, or any of the others, but knowing 
and understanding them will de¿ nitely be a bene¿ t. Ŷ
Crowley and Hawhee, Ancient Rhetoric for Contemporary Students.
1. Draft the ¿ rst two paragraphs of a fundraising letter for your favorite 
charitable cause. How will you establish your ethos such that people 
will feel comfortable enough to donate money at your request?
2. Imagine you are organizing a community blood drive and need to 
compose a À yer asking people to participate. How would you generate 
suf¿ cient pathos to convince donors to show up?
    Suggested Reading
    Exercises

78
Lecture 18: Finding What You Need
Finding What You Need
Lecture 18
The writer Umberto Eco, whose medieval murder mystery The Name 
of the Rose has become really a classic, tells a story about how he had 
decided that in The Name of the Rose, the poison in the book would be 
applied to the corners of the pages of a book that was read by medieval 
monks, and the monks in the story would be poisoned through the act of 
licking their ¿ ngers before they touched the corner of each page to turn 
it. Without thinking this through too much, he wrote to an acquaintance 
who specialized in plants, and he asked that friend if he knew of some 
substance that could poison someone if it was administered in this 
way—but Eco neglected to say that he wanted to know this as part of 
research for a novel he was writing! Understandably, this acquaintance 
replied with something like: “Um, yeah, I don’t think I’m going to be 
able to help you with this.”
I
n this lecture, we move our attention to a more practical concern of 
writing—the process of conducting research. There are several writing 
situations in which you might ¿ nd yourself needing to do research, from 
a college paper to a magazine article to a letter to the editor. In other words, 
almost any type of writing can be improved with a little research. 
Before you begin, it is most helpful to try and identify what your objective 
is. Is it to prove a particular position or support a belief that you hold? Is it to 
educate your audience on a certain topic? Is it to entertain? After identifying 
your objective—however nebulous it might be at this point—your next 
action will be to ¿ nd your hook, or the way into your research. For example, 
let’s say you want to write a murder mystery. If that’s all you know—and 
that’s totally ¿ ne at the earliest stages—then starting research can seem like 
a really daunting task, as you could just start looking things up and reading 
about them and never stop. But maybe you could ¿ nd a way to give yourself 
a clearly de¿ ned way in—for example, you might start small and decide to 
look up the articles about every murder that’s occurred in your town in the 
last 20 years. Or you could decide to model yourself after certain mystery 

79
writers, in which case you might start by reading the works of those writers 
to get some inspiration.  
In addition to ¿ nding a hook, it is imperative that you have some sort of 
schedule. This can be really general, something as simple as “This week 
I’m just reading and taking notes; next week I’ll start writing”—or it could 
get really speci¿ c, something like “Monday: two hours reading, a half-hour 
drafting ideas.” I promise you will be more productive and focused if you 
give yourself a schedule and some deadlines. 
How do you actually begin to do research? You might start with an Internet 
search: It’s quick and easy. The problem here is also one of the most exciting 
things about the Internet—that millions of 
pages of information will be at your ¿ ngertips 
almost immediately. How do you sort 
through this information? Better yet, how do 
you decide which information is useful and 
which is not? That’s the tough part, and I’m 
going to try and give you some tips to make 
this a little easier. 
There’s absolutely a time and a place for 
Internet research; however, relying on the 
Internet as your sole source of information 
can be dangerous. I have found that the information on Wikipedia is more or 
less reliable, but this is also a source that can be altered by anyone. It’s not 
rigorously fact-checked, and Wikipedia entries can be slanted depending on 
the interests of the person writing the entry. 
Academic websites are a reliable source both for basic information and to 
guide you to other reliable sources of more speci¿ c information. If a site 
has an “edu” ending, this would tend to mean that it is af¿ liated with a 
university. If you want to research microbes in space, you can bet that you’ll 
¿ nd the most reliable information in a scienti¿ c journal like Nature. Other 
reliable sources of information are long-established scholarly entities, like 
the Encyclopedia Britannica or the Oxford English Dictionary. You also 
There’s absolutely a 
time and a place for 
Internet  research; 
however, relying on the 
Internet as your sole 
source of information 
can be dangerous.

80
Lecture 18: Finding What You Need
absolutely want to stay away from sites that sell research papers on a variety 
of topics. These are simply tools for helping people plagiarize. 
For scholarly writing, I can’t stress enough how important it is to actually go 
to the library. Many electronic resources that would be helpful with a project 
like this can only be accessed from libraries. There are a lot of databases 
that can help you with this kind of writing, including many geared toward 
particular ¿ elds. If you’re not sure what the most useful databases are for 
your ¿ eld of interest, ask a librarian. 
Here’s something to remember as you’re wandering the stacks of your 
library looking for a particular call number—once you ¿ nd the book you’re 
looking for, don’t just take it off the shelf and walk away; take a moment to 
stop and look at what books are around the one that you just grabbed. On 
a related note, when you’re conducting research you may ¿ nd an article or 
book that you thought was going to be helpful, but it’s clear from the ¿ rst 
page that it doesn’t actually 
relate directly to your topic. 
Do not just put it down and 
forget about it—spend a 
few minutes perusing the 
notes and the Works Cited 
section. Very often when 
you do this, you might 
¿ nd a reference to another 
article or book—or a point 
being made that does relate 
to what you’re working on. 
I talked earlier about the importance of having a research schedule. The 
activities of researching and writing are necessarily going to overlap, but it’s 
important to have an idea of how long the one and the other will generally 
last. At a certain point when you’re still researching, you may get a really 
clear idea of how you want to open your piece. Should you not start writing 
just because you’re not into your writing week yet? Of course not. If you 
feel inspired to write, you should start—while keeping in mind that you may 
change what you’ve written, or you may throw it out altogether once you’ve 
Even in the Internet age, libraries are crucial 
sources of information.
Pixland/Thinkstock.

81
done a little more research. By the same token, at a certain point you may 
have to make yourself stop reading and start writing. In our next lecture, 
we’ll talk about putting all your research efforts to work as you start the 
process of writing. Ŷ
Bullock, The Norton Field Guide to Writing.
Lynn, Literature.
MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers.
Oliver, The Student’s Guide to Research Ethics.
1. Pick a text we have discussed previously in this class, and try entering 
it in a variety of different online search engines—Google, Yahoo, Bing, 
and so on. Is there a difference in terms of which or what kind of pages 
come up? Which of these webpages seem reliable as documentary 
sources for a research project involving this topic? How can you tell?
2. Repeat this exercise, but this time use your local library’s database or 
the MLA catalog. What is different about the sources you discover?
3. Now, go in person and ¿ nd a scholarly book on one of these topics 
or pieces we’ve discussed. Look around to see what other books are 
nearby. What did you observe?
    Exercises
    Suggested Reading

82
Lecture 19: Using What You Find
Using What You Find
Lecture 19
In order to cite properly, you need to be able to ¿ nd the quote you 
have in mind. It does you absolutely no good—trust me on this one, no 
good—if you think: “I remember that being in the middle of some book 
that had a brown cover,” and then you spend precious time searching 
for it.
N
ow that you’ve mastered some of the basics of ¿ nding information, 
you need to start ¿ guring out how to keep track of it. Everybody 
works and thinks differently, so it may be a matter of doing this 
a few times before you ¿ gure out which style of information storing and 
sorting works for you.
The most important and useful advice I can give you is simply to start early. 
In exchange for your audience’s time and interest, you have an obligation to 
know what you’re talking about. This means you need to read up on your 
topic and absorb the information. Then you’ll need to review a lot of your 
research materials so that you have an understanding of other points of view 
on your topic. Next, you need to be able to articulate your own position in 
respect to those other points of view. Finally, you have to make a convincing 
case as to why your particular focus or argumentative position is important. 
If you’re in the early stages of your project and not quite sure what approach 
you want to take to a particular topic, you might start with reading through 
the material you’ve collected and using tabs to identify pages that contain 
material you ¿ nd interesting and relevant to your topic. After you’ve gone 
through an initial reading of your material, it’s time to take more detailed 
notes. The way I tend to work is by taking notes on a particular text, either 
in longhand or on the computer. When I do this, I try to sum up a scholar’s 
general argument and then note particularly interesting points individually—
making sure to identify on which page they appear. 
When I’ve worked my way through taking notes on a text, I either print 
the typed notes or staple my handwritten notes together. This way, when 

83
it comes time to start the drafting process, I can read through my notes to 
remind myself what’s important about a book rather than having to reread it. 
I am always careful to write down my own questions or counterarguments as 
they come to me, so that I don’t forget a À ash of insight. 
Another variation on this note-taking approach is the note card version—
many of us probably learned some form of this in high school. It’s just what 
it sounds like: You write a quote or an important argumentative point on 
each note card. In the top corner of the card, you should also designate who 
the author is, which text the idea or quote comes from, and which page 
number you found it on. The bene¿ t of 
this approach is that it’s a little more 
À exible, because you can shufÀ e the 
cards to further organize your research 
by subpoints.
When you’re organizing your research 
into an article, one of the trickiest things 
is to make your voice heard while using 
the work of other experts as a means of 
support. You want to make your research support your idea, but you need to 
give proper accreditation where it’s due. The best way to generate an original 
argument for a research project is after doing your research, decide what 
your particular stance is on a topic, and then try and articulate your position. 
Generate a rough outline indicating where supporting points could be helped 
by the use of secondary sources. When you’re doing this, you absolutely 
need to identify critics who have expressed opinions that disagree with your 
own. Sometimes an opposing view or counterargument can help you prove 
your own point; you can even use a counterargument as a way of structuring 
your own argument.
One of the major dangers when writing a research paper is the issue of 
plagiarism, which you need to avoid at all costs. In a nutshell, plagiarism is 
using the words or ideas of others without giving proper credit where credit 
is due. There is obvious, outright plagiarism, and then there is accidental 
plagiarism, which is what you have to guard against most vigilantly. Let’s 
say you’ve read lots and lots of books and articles on your subject; you’ve 
One of the trickiest things 
is to make your voice 
heard while using the 
work of other experts as 
a means of support.

84
Lecture 19: Using What You Find
taken lots and lots of notes; and you’ve become an authority on the topic. 
This is great because it means that you’ve internalized much of what you’ve 
been reading. The danger is that your original thoughts on a particular topic 
may somehow get mixed up with what other scholars have to say. As you’re 
reading over your notes or note cards, you might forget whether they contain 
what a scholar said about your topic or your own reaction to what you 
were reading. 
This is why I tend to note direct quotes by putting quotation marks around 
sentences or phrases I ¿ nd important—or if I’m paraphrasing, I might write 
something like: “Professor Eminence spends two pages discussing the 
history of Malory scholarship, focusing particularly on where early 20th-
century scholars went wrong.” Now when it comes to my research, I might 
be in full agreement with Professor Eminence’s thinking about how early 
20th-century scholars were wrong in a particular area, and I can say that—but 
I also need to cite Professor Eminence as having made this argument ¿ rst.
Even if I arrive at a conclusion or position on my own, independent of 
another scholar, once I start doing research and discover that other scholars 
have already observed this point, I need to make sure that I give them credit. 
Actually, when you discover that what you thought was an original insight 
on your part is, in fact, a point that someone else has already made, you 
should be encouraged that you seem to be thinking like the experts. Ŷ
Bullock, The Norton Field Guide to Writing.
Lynn, Literature.
MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers.
Oliver, The Student’s Guide to Research Ethics.
Suggested Reading

85
1. For each passage below, even though you don’t know the research 
sources, can you identify where the citation fails and what the red 
À ags are? 
Many Malory scholars now disagree with Eugène Vinaver’s 
argument that Malory composed eight separate tales; several, in 
fact, argue that Malory’s text is the “most comprehensive before the 
modern period” and others have gone so far as to suggest that it is 
“the ¿ rst novel.” In any event, we can agree with Dorsey Armstrong 
that Malory’s Morte d’Arthur is something “new and original” (33).
People have always told stories. Back in the Middle Ages, people 
wrote some of the most popular stories ever to be told. Medieval 
people liked stories about knights, combat, and ladies in distress. 
Today, people tend to like the same kinds of stories, but with a 
modern twist.
Studies have shown that when light-rail moves into a neighborhood, 
property values go down. Neighborhoods with light-rail stations are 
noisier, more prone to crime, and more likely to incur instances of 
vandalism. It is estimated that if a light-rail station were to be built 
in this neighborhood, all property values would drop by at least 
ten percent.
2. Correct the citation format in the examples below so that it conforms to 
MLA style. Now correct it so that it conforms to APA style. Repeat for 
Chicago style. Notice the similarities and differences.
Jane Austen’s Pride and Prejudice; quote from page 1 (published 
by Penguin Books in London, 2002): “It is a truth universally 
acknowledged that a single man in possession of a good fortune, 
must be in want of a wife.”
Dorsey Armstrong’s Gender and the Chivalric Community in 
Malory’s Morte d’Arthur (published in 2003 by University Press 
    Exercises

86
Lecture 19: Using What You Find
of Florida, in Gainesville) quote from page 1: “The particular 
construction of gender in Malory’s text is critical to any attempt to 
engage with its narrative project.”
Ryan Schneider’s The Public Intellectualism of Ralph Waldo 
Emerson and W. E. B. Du Bois: Emotional Dimensions of Race and 
Reform (published by Palgrave Macmillan, New York, 2010), quote 
from page 137: “Despite the epic-heroic, sacri¿ cial connotations 
of their rhetoric, Du Bois and Stewart refuse the argument that 
violence is a morally just and ethically viable means of bringing 
about the kinds of radical changes in the social order necessary to 
ensure reciprocal relations across the color line.”

87
Getting Started—Writing First Drafts
Lecture 20
I cannot tell you how often I see students who hand in a paper that 
begins a little wobbly, but by the end, they’ve expressed some 
wonderfully original insight that they didn’t have when they started. 
This phenomenon is called “writing your way to an argument,” and 
while this is wonderful, what would be ideal is if this happened in the 
¿ rst draft of a paper or an article or a letter, and that the writer then 
had time to go back and revise—keeping that insight they achieved at 
the end as the guiding force that now drives the paper forward.
S
ometimes the hardest part of producing a polished piece of writing is 
simply the act of getting started. The blank screen on the computer or 
the blank sheet of paper in front of you can seem particularly daunting 
if you have several ideas and you’re unsure where to start—or even worse, if 
you know you need to compose something but feel as if you have no ideas. 
Let’s look at some techniques that can make starting a piece of writing seem 
a little less formidable than might at ¿ rst seem to be the case. 
Let’s say you are writing a letter to apply for a job. First, you might do some 
free-writing or brainstorming—for example, you might make a list of the 
speci¿ c quali¿ cations that the job requires, and then you might make another 
list of your own quali¿ cations. Lists like these can help you ¿ gure out how to 
organize your letter. Maybe you’re currently a gardener, but you want to apply 
for a job as an editorial assistant. Should you mention your current job as a 
gardener ¿ rst, or should you maybe mention before that the fact that you were 
an English major in college and that you wrote for your college’s newspaper? 
Obviously, while you certainly should discuss your current job, you don’t 
want that to be the ¿ rst thing you mention in a letter like this. You might 
want to do a little research—research about the company to which you’re 
applying. Maybe you’ll discover that you and the CEO are from the same 
small town in the Midwest or that you went to the same college. As long as 
you can manage it without seeming forced, it might be helpful to include 
these details in your letter—so instead of writing, “When I was in college I 

88
Lecture 20: Getting Started—Writing First Drafts
wrote for my school’s newspaper,” you might write, “During my junior year 
at St. Excellence College, I was a reporter for the St. Excellence Daily, the 
campus paper.”
What if you are feeling blocked even about beginning the brainstorming 
stage? I’ll give you a few strategies that have worked for me and for friends 
and colleagues of mine. One thing that works against us as we attempt to 
get started with a process of writing is the desire to produce a really good 
piece of prose. Sometimes in order to get to the good writing, you have to 
slog through some garbage. In other words, one way to get to a point where 
you produce something decent is to give yourself permission to write poorly. 
Giving yourself this permission can really be liberating: It allows you to type 
ideas or points in no particular order, with poor grammar, bad spelling, and 
incomplete sentences. The key here is to 
simply get whatever ideas you have out of 
your head and onto the screen. 
After a break—it’s extremely important 
to take a break and come back to your 
writing with fresh eyes—you can come 
back and take a look at what you’ve 
written, and then you can start to think 
about how the pieces that you’ve put on the page could be rearranged into 
something that resembles a coherent argument. Another thing to realize is 
that very often the process of writing itself can help you ¿ gure out what it is 
you’re trying to say. 
Finding a writing partner or a writing support group is a great way to get 
yourself motivated. If you know that you have a deadline when you actually 
have to hand something to someone else, who will in turn be passing 
something he or she has written to you for your comments, you can usually 
manage to get some words down on the page. 
Serving as a reader for someone else’s work can also make you a better 
writer. As you edit a friend’s writing—as you’re looking for the thesis, as 
you’re circling supporting points that aren’t satisfactorily À eshed out—
you’re also learning more about writing in a way that you can apply to your 
Finding a writing partner 
or a writing support 
group is a great way to 
get yourself motivated.

89
own work, and you can apply it almost immediately. As I’ve suggested 
several times before, if you want to improve your writing, read as much as 
you can—the more you read and write, the better you’ll become at both. Ŷ
Bullock, The Norton Field Guide to Writing.
The Chicago Manual of Style.
Clouse, The Student Writer.
Grif¿ th, Writing Essays about Literature.
Lanham, Revising Prose.
———, Style.
MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers.
O’Connor, Words Fail Me.
Strunk and White, The Elements of Style.
Trimble, Writing with Style.
Tufte, Artful Sentences.
1. Imagine that you have just been asked to write a paper—the main 
argument is up to you—on an often-anthologized story (such as William 
Faulkner’s “A Rose for Emily” or James Baldwin’s “Sonny’s Blues” 
or some other short story that you have read relatively recently). Set 
yourself a strict limit of 15 minutes and allow yourself the ability to 
“brainstorm” or “free-write” anything that comes to mind and that 
interests you about this text.
2. Set your free-writing aside for at least an hour—preferably a day. After 
that time, come back to it and see if you can ¿ nd at least two thesis 
statements that look like they could be promising as you set out to write 
a ¿ ve- to seven-page paper on the story you’ve selected.
    Suggested Reading
    Exercises

90
Lecture 21: Editing—Finding What’s Wrong
Editing—Finding What’s Wrong
Lecture 21
Because [the editing] stage is so crucial and can make the difference 
between a piece of writing that’s okay and one that’s actually great, 
I have reminded you over, and over, and over again to give yourself 
the opportunity to put a piece of writing aside—even if it’s just for an 
hour—and then come back and look at it with fresh eyes.
M
any people ¿ nd writing an essay, letter, or other piece of text such 
a draining process that when they reach the end, they just want to 
get the thing out of their sight—so they hand it in immediately. If 
they’ve waited until the last minute to work on this assignment, then often 
there is really no choice. This is a major error. While getting the darn thing 
written certainly feels like the biggest part of the writing process, editing is 
arguably just as important—and in some cases, it’s more important than the 
actual writing itself. 
When it comes to editing, there are two basic models at opposite ends of 
the spectrum: There’s the line-by-line approach, and then there’s the holistic 
approach. A line-by-line approach is just what it sounds like: You start with 
the ¿ rst line of the piece—you read through it and each successive line as 
carefully as possible, revising the phrasing, the word choice, and so on.
The holistic approach is about stepping back from the work and taking a 
macroscopic view. This approach allows you to ask questions about the 
piece: What is it trying to say? How does it say it? You can then change or 
rearrange chunks of the paper—and then you gradually work down to the 
level of word choice and punctuation. Most people tend to use a combination 
of these approaches. In this lecture, we explore how to best use elements 
from each editing style on a piece of text with serious macro-level problems.
Let’s consider the classic example of the ¿ ve-paragraph essay. The idea 
with a ¿ ve-paragraph essay is that you have an introductory paragraph, 
then you have three paragraphs of supporting evidence, and then you’ve 
got a concluding paragraph that sums up your argument. Quotes can often 

91
work in the interest of supporting your points—they function as concrete 
evidence that work to prove what you’re trying to say. But all too often, I see 
students including quotes as if they’re just trying to ¿ ll up space, with very 
little commentary or discussion of the quote. You cannot simply ¿ nd a quote 
that works to support your main claim, plug it into the paper, and leave it to 
your reader to ¿ gure out how it ¿ ts. A good rule of thumb is that if you are 
including a quote of three lines, you should spend at least an equal number 
of lines explaining why that quote is important.
When you’re taking the holistic approach, the ¿ rst thing you should do after 
reading through the essay is to try and state in a sentence what the main 
argument of the essay is. A good way to check for this in your own writing is 
to try and underline your main claim—and ideally, your main claim should 
be stated somewhere near the end of the ¿ rst 
paragraph (unless it’s a very long paper). Your 
reader should be able to tell almost immediately 
what the main point is. 
The key for a paper to be strong and organized 
is for the writer to make every supporting point 
connect back explicitly to this main claim. So 
our next step in trying to determine how well or 
poorly an essay connects back to that claim would be to write an outline of 
the paper as it stands. This doesn’t have to be in formal outline style; for me, 
the easiest thing to do is just write a sentence or a couple of phrases for each 
paragraph. In this way, we quickly identify the basic structure of the paper—
and if you look at it closely, you can see where it might fall apart. 
After you’ve identi¿ ed some À aws in the broad outline of the paper, you 
can try and revise the outline to make the paper stronger. Once you’ve dealt 
with the larger sweep of the paper, you can start to focus in on some of the 
details. As you rewrite, you want to make sure that it’s absolutely clear how 
each point works to support the main claim. You want to make sure that the 
quotes you’ve selected actually do the work that you want them to do. Are 
there other quotes that might help you make your point a little bit better or 
a little more clearly? You might want to replace them now. As you rewrite, 
you’ll also want to check for awkward phrasing and out-and-out errors. In 
Your reader should 
be able to tell almost 
immediately what 
the main point is.

92
Lecture 21: Editing—Finding What’s Wrong
our next lecture, we’ll get down to the business of rewriting an essay from 
start to ¿ nish. Ŷ
Bullock, The Norton Field Guide to Writing.
The Chicago Manual of Style.
Clouse, The Student Writer.
Grif¿ th, Writing Essays about Literature.
Harmon and Holman, A Handbook to Literature.
Lanham, Revising Prose.
———, Style.
Lynn, Literature.
MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers.
O’Connor, Woe Is I.
———, Words Fail Me.
Strunk and White, The Elements of Style.
Trimble, Writing with Style.
Tufte, Artful Sentences.
1. Below is a short essay. Using the techniques described in the lecture, 
work through the essay, identifying (1) what its main claim is, (2) how 
it is structured, (3) whether the supporting points work or not, and (4) 
which issues of phrasing, punctuation, and so on, if left unattended, will 
detract from the major claim of the piece.
Beowulf is one of the greatest works of English literature. It was 
written in a language called Old English that looks very little like 
Modern English. Because of this, you need to take a special course 
    Suggested Reading
    Exercise

93
on Old English just to be able to read it in the original language. It 
is worth the effort, however, because it is a great poem that is not so 
great if you only read it in translation. In Beowulf, the hero, named 
“Beowulf” ¿ ghts three different monsters—Grendel, Grendel’s 
mother, and a dragon. All of these ¿ ghts are important, only one 
of them is really important in terms of de¿ ning Beowulf’s identity.
The ¿ rst ¿ ght Beowulf undertakes is against a monster named 
Grendel who has been attacking the mead hall of King Hrothgar 
of the Danes for twelve winters. Beowulf hears of this trouble and 
journeys across the sea to offer Hrothgar his assistance. He seems 
to do this because he likes a challenge, and he wants to establish 
his reputation as a great warrior. After he defeats Grendel, he has 
to ¿ ght her mother, who lives at the bottom of a lake. This ¿ ght 
is a little more dif¿ cult for Beowulf because he has to ¿ ght her 
underwater, but he still wins. Finally, after he has been king of his 
people for 50 years, he has to ¿ ght a dragon. There is a big debate 
as to whether or not Beowulf does the right thing because in the 
end he dies and leaves his people without a king, they are sure to be 
attacked by the Swedes once he has died.
Some quotes from the poem show how important Beowulf’s 
identity is, and they also show that reputation is really important 
in this society. When he arrives at Hrothgar’s court, he says that 
“I had a ¿ xed purpose when I put to sea/As I sat in the boat with 
my band of men,/I meant to perform to the uttermost/what your 
people wanted or perish in the attempt,/in the ¿ end’s clutches. /And 
I shall ful¿ ll that purpose,/prove myself with a proud deed/or meet 
my death here in the mead-hall.” (632-638) When he’s ¿ ghting 
Grendel the narrator tells us that “Hygelac’s kinsman kept thinking 
about his name and fame: he never lost heart” (1529-1530). At the 
end, when Beowulf ¿ ghts the dragon, he makes a formal boast “I 
risked my life/ often when I was young. Now I am old,/but as king 
of the people I shall pursue this ¿ ght/for the glory of winning, if 
the evil one will only/ abandon his earth-fort/ and face me in the 
open.” (2510-2515) Indeed, the ¿ nal lines of the poem, eulogizing 
Beowulf, note that “it was said that of all the kings upon the earth / 

94
Lecture 21: Editing—Finding What’s Wrong
he was the most gracious and fair-minded / kindest to his people 
and keenest to win fame.” (3182–3184).
If we consider all this evidence together, it seems clear that his ¿ rst 
¿ ght, with Grendel, is the most important. It establishes Beowulf’s 
reputation and sets the scene so that he can win other battles, 
including the one with the dragon. The fact that his people seem 
to think that it is positive that he sets out to “win fame” shows 
that according to the values of this society he is doing what he is 
supposed to. And he couldn’t do that if hadn’t fought Grendel.

95
Rewriting—Fixing What’s Wrong
Lecture 22
Very often, the problems that occur in the later sections of a paper or 
in portions of a letter arise from the fact that the writer has not really 
articulated a clear main position. 
I
n the ¿ rst step of the editing process, we’ve identi¿ ed what some of the 
issues are, and we’ve thought about some ways to improve the problem 
areas of an essay. Now it’s time to put our thoughts into action and start 
rewriting. As I’ve said before, step one is always make sure that you are 
working with a clearly articulated main claim. If your main claim is clear 
and you keep it foremost in your mind, then often the supporting points 
simply fall into place, and the structure is logical from the outset. If you’re 
not sure of what exactly it is you’re trying to argue, then the paper or letter 
or article can wander. 
You may be thinking—and you may be rightly thinking—that the editing 
and rewriting process is really easy to describe and demonstrate when we’re 
dealing with an academic essay. The essay is a form that’s trying to make an 
argument, so it’s relatively easy to spot weaknesses. But what about other 
types of writing? 
Let’s consider something that’s not an essay. How about a letter to your 
mayor, asking her to get behind renaming something in honor of John and 
Jane Smith—a couple that has been very active in charitable activities in 
your community? Let’s consider a ¿ rst draft of this letter and then see how 
we could maybe make it better. 
Dear Peggy, 
I absolutely idolize John and Jane Smith, I cut out every newspaper 
article I read about them. They are always giving money to good 
causes and helping people live better lives. I’ve never heard of them 
asking for recognition for all the good things they do. I just think 
they deserve to have some recognition after everything they’ve 

96
Lecture 22: Rewriting—Fixing What’s Wrong
done for people in our community, and in other communities, and 
for the arts, and for cancer research and special education needs. I 
think we should name something after them, even if it’s just a rock 
in the Community Park. Please help me honor John and Jane Smith. 
Sincerely, 
Rita Neighbor
What does this letter have going for it? It’s de¿ nitely sincere and heartfelt, 
but the writer is so eager to get this recognition for John and Jane Smith 
that she doesn’t seem to have taken much time in the writing of the letter—
the words come out kind of breathlessly; they’re sort of tumbling over one 
another, as if she was just writing every thought the moment it came into 
her head.
How would we start to edit this and make it stronger? Let’s start from a 
holistic perspective. The ¿ rst thing that strikes me is that the letter writer 
starts out by talking about herself. That’s all very nice, Rita Neighbor, but 
the goal of this letter is not to let people know what Rita Neighbor thinks 
about John and Jane Smith but rather to get recognition for them. Rita 
Neighbor’s longtime interest in their philanthropy can certainly be used to 
support her desired objective, but she needs to make John and Jane Smith the 
main focus from the beginning of the letter, and she needs to move herself to 
a secondary position. 
We can also zoom in on John and Jane Smith’s accomplishments—as 
of now, they’re listed kind of haphazardly. These accomplishments are 
all very important, but they should each get their own moment within the 
letter. Finally, we might need some indication that other people besides Rita 
Neighbor think this is a good idea.
On a ¿ ner level of detail, a few things leap out. First, when you’re writing a 
letter to the mayor, even if she has been your best friend since kindergarten, 
you probably want to address her as “Mayor Friendly” rather than “Peggy.” 
There are also some grammatical and mechanical errors: The ¿ rst sentence is 
a run-on due to a comma splice, and there are some moments where the tone 

97
is far too casual. Examples include “I’ve” instead of “I have” and “they’ve” 
instead of “they have.”
After identifying and editing in terms of some of the major issues, we can 
rewrite the letter so that it’s more powerful and more effective. Here’s the 
revised version:
Dear Mayor Friendly: 
As I’m sure you are well aware, local residents John and Jane 
Smith have changed our community and many others through 
their generous acts of philanthropy. I have followed their charity 
work for many years and been consistently impressed with how 
they have given large sums of money to causes as diverse as the 
arts, cancer research, and special education. I and many others in 
our neighborhood would like to honor the Smiths by renaming 
Neighborhood Park, John and Jane Smith Park. 
Although it is a small, token act of recognition, we hope that it 
would be meaningful to the Smiths since it is their neighbors who 
wish to honor them. Those of us interested in making this happen 
would be grateful if you could tell us how to go about setting the 
wheels for this in motion. 
Sincerely, 
Rita Neighbor
What’s different? This letter is no longer about Rita Neighbor’s long, 
individual idolization of the Smiths, but it’s about the Smiths themselves. 
Her longtime interest in their activities, however, is still useful—as she can 
cite the different areas in which the Smiths have made signi¿ cant charitable 
contributions. Her writing tone is a little more formal, and she also takes 
care to indicate that she is not alone in this request. Finally, she asks the 
mayor for information on the steps necessary to make the renaming of 
a park possible—she indicates that she is willing to take an active role to 
accomplish whatever needs to be done.

98
Lecture 22: Rewriting—Fixing What’s Wrong
So what is the most important thing to take away from this lecture? State a 
main idea that is as clear and speci¿ c as possible. If you keep this main idea 
¿ rmly in your mind as you write, and then you explicitly connect supporting 
points back to it, chances are you’ll ¿ nd that your 
writing À ows much more naturally. The structure of 
your writing will be easier to ¿ gure out, and your 
audience will be better able to follow you. 
A related point is make sure that you never assume 
your audience understands the point you’re trying to 
make. For example, if you ¿ nd a quote from a text 
that you think helps make your point, you cannot 
simply insert it into your essay. Always spell things 
out—signpost, in other words, so that your audience doesn’t have to work 
too hard to follow whatever it is you’re trying to say. You now have the basic 
tools to assess what needs to be edited in a piece of writing, and you have 
some guidelines for how to go about making those changes. Ŷ
Bullock, The Norton Field Guide to Writing.
The Chicago Manual of Style.
Clouse, The Student Writer.
Grif¿ th, Writing Essays about Literature.
Harmon and Holman, A Handbook to Literature.
Lanham, Revising Prose.
———, Style.
Lynn, Literature.
MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers.
O’Connor, Woe Is I.
———, Words Fail Me.
Never assume 
your audience 
understands 
the point you’re 
trying to make.
    Suggested Reading

99
Strunk and White, The Elements of Style.
Trimble, Writing with Style.
Tufte, Artful Sentences.
1. Take the edited version of the sample essay from Lecture 21 (below) 
and, using the skills we’ve practiced in that lecture and this one, rewrite
the entire essay so that it is clear, coherent, well supported, and free 
from errors of punctuation and mechanics.
While on the surface “The Yellow Wallpaper” seems to be about 
one woman’s descent into insanity, closer analysis reveals that the 
story is really a comment on the gender inequality of Gilman’s day, 
as the depictions of male characters, the description of the narrator’s 
bedroom, and the symbolism of the yellow wallpaper make plain.
From these and other similar comments the narrator makes 
throughout the story, it’s clear that she feels helpless in the face of 
the male authority of her husband and brother. She seems not to 
have a say in her own recovery—for example, she’s unsure exactly 
what kind of medicines and tonics she’s taking—and she uses 
negative words like “forbidden,” which suggest that she is being 
ordered to do things—or not to do them—against her will. 
In addition to the description of how the men in the narrator’s life 
seem to have taken away the narrator’s free will, the description of 
the bedroom functions to cast an ominous and forbidding aura over 
the narrator’s situation. Her description of the bedroom starts off 
very positively—it’s a “big airy room, with windows that look all 
ways and air and sunshine galore”—but then the description gets 
more ominous. She comments that it must have been a nursery at 
one time because of the bars on the windows, and then perhaps a 
gymnasium because there are rings mounted on the wall. Other 
details in her description—the bed is nailed to the À oor, and the 
bedposts look as if they have been “gnawed on”—all combine to 
    Exercise

100
Lecture 22: Rewriting—Fixing What’s Wrong
produce the image of imprisonment. The images conjured up by 
this description of the room point clearly toward a comment on 
gender inequality, especially because the narrator says her husband 
insisted that she take this room for her own.
By far, however, the most compelling piece of evidence that this 
is a story about gender issues and not simply insanity is made 
clear through the yellow wallpaper of the story’s title. It is ripped 
in places—clearly deliberately torn—and the narrator tells us that 
“the color is repellent, almost revolting: a smoldering unclean 
yellow, strangely faded by the slow-turning sunlight. It is a dull 
yet lurid orange in some places, a sickly sulphur tint in others. No 
wonder the children hated it! I should hate it myself if I had to live 
in this room long.” As the story progresses, the hideous wallpaper 
preys upon the mind of the narrator, who has been forced by her 
husband to spend long hours in a room that she detests. Eventually, 
the narrator hallucinates what is arguably a metaphor for her own 
situation. She tells us that she sees a woman behind the pattern of 
the wallpaper and says: “Sometimes I think there are a great many 
women behind, and sometimes only one, and she crawls around 
fast, and her crawling shakes it all over….. And she is all the time 
trying to climb through. But nobody could climb through that 
pattern—it strangles so….” The word “strangles” in this passage, 
along with the description of the woman as being behind the pattern 
and trying to get out, all suggest that there is something about the 
quality of being a woman, rather than being insane, that is at stake 
in Gilman’s story. The story concludes with the narrator imagining 
that she and the woman in the wallpaper are the same person, and 
just like the woman behind the pattern, the narrator chillingly 
“creeps” around her room in an act so obviously insane that her 
husband faints at the sight of it. 
Taken individually, the depiction of men, the description of the 
bedroom that sounds more like a 19th-century lunatic asylum than 
a nursery, and the narrator’s obsessive hallucinations involving the 
yellow wallpaper could all be considered important elements in a 
story about one woman’s descent into insanity. When we consider 

101
them altogether, however, it becomes clear that the narrator’s 
madness is a direct result of issues of gender inequality: Her 
husband dictates her rest cure and then assigns her a room that’s 
more prison than anything else. Once in that room, the narrator’s 
feelings of imprisonment, the feeling that her situation is literally 
killing her, manifest themselves in her hallucination of the woman 
in the wallpaper, who stands as a symbol for the narrator herself. 
“The Yellow Wallpaper” uses the idea of madness or insanity to 
demonstrate the dangers of sexual inequality in American society 
of the time.

102
Lecture 23: Avoiding Common Errors in Grammar and Usage
Avoiding Common Errors in Grammar and Usage
Lecture 23
A famous story tells how Winston Churchill was reading through 
proofs of a piece he had written, and he noticed that his editor had 
rewritten his sentences so that there was no preposition at the end. In 
the margins, Churchill wrote back, “This is a situation up with which 
[I] shall not put.” 
I
n the last lectures, we discussed the revision process, one of the 
most important—but also most overlooked—stages of producing an 
effectively written piece. Many of the strategies we discussed are also 
useful tools for avoiding the common errors in grammar and punctuation that 
are the topic of this lecture. For example, we talked about how important it is 
to set aside a piece of writing and then return to it with fresh eyes, allowing 
you to better spot places that need revision. Even better is to ask for someone 
else to look it over for you. One of the easiest and quickest ways to spot 
errors and awkward moments is simply to read 
your piece out loud. Reading aloud forces you to 
slow down, and your eyes are less likely to skip 
over a typo.
Let’s look at 10 of the most common errors that 
I have seen in my experience teaching college-
level writing. The common error that I ¿ nd the 
most distressing is the incorrect use of “I” when 
it should be “me” and vice versa. Which of the 
following two sentences is correct: “It was such 
a wonderful time for Michelle and I” or “It was such a wonderful time for 
Michelle and me”? The answer is the second sentence. The reason is that the 
compound object “Michelle and me” is the object of the preposition “for”—
and because of this, the ¿ rst-person pronoun has to be in the objective case. 
An easy way to check for the correctness of our ¿ rst example would be to 
take “Michelle and me” and make it singular. Now we have “It was such a 
wonderful time for I” or “It was such a wonderful time for me.” For most 
One of the easiest 
and quickest ways 
to spot errors and 
awkward moments 
is simply to read 
your piece out loud.

103
of us, we don’t even need to know the rule—our ear tells us that the second 
sentence is correct. 
The second common error is that of subject-pronoun agreement. Which of 
these sentences is correct: “If a person has a complaint, he or she should 
contact the Human Resources Department” or “If a person has a complaint, 
they should contact the Human Resources Department”? Sentence two is 
simpler and more economical—but, in fact, it is incorrect. The reason is that 
“person” is singular, but “they” is plural; in other words, they don’t agree. 
That sentence could easily be corrected by simply turning “person” into 
“people”—“If people have complaints, they should contact ... .” 
By using a sentence like “If a person has a complaint, he or she should 
contact ... ,” not only do you manage to have your pronouns agree—person, 
he, and she are all singular—but you also avoid the pitfall of using gender-
exclusive language, our third common error. When I was in high school, I 
was taught that when you were trying to get your pronouns to agree, it was 
all right to use “he” to stand in for the universal subject—thus, “If a person 
has a complaint, he should contact ... .” This didn’t seem quite fair to me, 
and by the time I got to college, the grammar police seemed to agree. At 
this point, it was suggested that subject-pronoun agreement be achieved by 
composing sentences like “If a person has a complaint, he or she should 
contact ... .” This solution also seemed somewhat unsatisfactory, as did the 
more streamlined: “If a person has a complaint (s)he should contact ... .” 
Today, I think the smartest thing to do is try and follow the rules about 
subject-pronoun agreement and gender-inclusive language as closely as 
possible. The easiest way to do this is to use a plural construction throughout: 
“If people have complaints, they should contact ... .” Or if you’re really 
committed to using the singular form, the word “one” works nicely: “If one 
has a complaint, one should contact ... .” 
Another common error that I see all too frequently is the misuse of 
apostrophes. Students tend to add apostrophes where they are not needed or 
omit them altogether. The construction that trips most people up is the tiny 
word “its” in its various forms. The problem here is that apostrophes can be 
used to show possession and are also used in contractions. When you turn “it 

104
Lecture 23: Avoiding Common Errors in Grammar and Usage
is” into “it’s,” that is when you use an apostrophe; if you are merely stating 
that something belongs to “it,” there is no apostrophe. There is one easy rule 
to remember: Possessive nouns always use an apostrophe, but possessive 
pronouns never do.
Number ¿ ve on our list of errors is the misused comma. This is a major issue 
when it comes to writing properly structured sentences. In many of the papers 
I’ve graded, commas seem to have been sprinkled randomly throughout. 
Commas should be used to separate ideas in a sentence, to separate multiple 
adjectives describing the same thing, and to prevent confusion when the 
meaning of a sentence would otherwise be unclear. 
The sixth of our top 10 common grammar and punctuation errors is 
misplaced or dangling modi¿ ers. A dangling modi¿ er can be a word or a 
phrase that is referring to a word or idea that is not clearly present in the 
sentence. See if you can ¿ gure out what is wrong with this sentence: “After 
being lost for years, John Smith discovered the crown jewels hidden behind 
a staircase.” Most of us can probably ¿ gure out what that sentence is trying 
to say—that a guy named John Smith found the crown jewels, which had 
been lost for some time. The way it is written, however, the phrase “after 
being lost for years” is misplaced—the sentence reads as if John Smith, and 
not the jewels, had been lost. 
Number seven on my list is the rampant use of the word “ironically” when 
the speaker or writer really just means “coincidentally.” Newscasters 
in particular seem to be in love with “ironically,” and they consistently 
use it when they shouldn’t. Let’s take this example, which was uttered 
by a sportscaster on the late-night news not too long ago: “The team will 
play its next game in Toronto—which, ironically, is where their coach 
began his career 25 years ago.” Is it ironic that the coach is going back to 
the place where his professional career began? In fact, it’s coincidental. 
Here’s an example of the correct usage of irony: “Ironically, the ¿ re station 
burned down.”
Number eight on our list of common errors is misspelled words. Granted, 
with modern word-processing programs, a lot of these errors get caught on 
the computer screen, but some words may slip through. For example, I have 

105
had students misspell the proper names of authors and characters that they 
are writing about. If you do this in any context, it’s going to cause you to lose 
credibility in the eyes of your audience. Take a look at the list below of 50 
commonly misspelled words.
Another common error in usage has to do with the problem of words that 
sound like other words. Most frequently, I see this error in the phrases “could 
have,” “should have,” and “would have”—as in “I could have gone to the 
park, but I had a lot of work to do.” The problem comes from the penchant 
of English speakers to contract words in order to speak more quickly: “I 
could’ve gone to the park.” The contracted form sounds an awful lot like 
“could of,” and people frequently write these forms unthinkingly. 
Fifty Commonly Misspelled Words
Have a friend test you on these frequently misspelled words.
1. acceptable
2. accidentally
3. accommodate
4. argument
5. believe
6. calendar
7. category
8. committed
9. conscience
10. conscientious
11. consensus
12. de¿ nite
13. discipline
14. embarrass
15. exhilarate
16. ¿ ery
17. foreign
18. gauge
19. guarantee
20. harass
21. height
22. hierarchy
23. immediate
24. independent
25. indispensable
26. inoculate
27. jewelry
28. judgment
29. leisure
30. liaison
31. library
32. license
33. maintenance
34. maneuver
35. medieval
36. memento
37. millennium
38. minuscule
39. mischievous
40. occasion
41. occurrence
42. pastime
43. receive
44. referred
45. reference
46. schedule
47. separate
48. supersede
49. vacuum
50. weird

106
Lecture 23: Avoiding Common Errors in Grammar and Usage
The ¿ nal common grammar and usage mistake is the frequent misspelling 
of the various forms of “there” and “your.” “They’re going to put their stuff 
over there.” Although when spoken it sounds as if the same word is used 
three different times, in fact three different spellings are required. “They’re” 
is really a contracted form of “They are.” “Their,” as in “their stuff,” 
indicates possession. The spelling differentiation helps to keep this meaning 
distinct from the ¿ nal form, in which “there” indicates a location. These are 
easy mistakes to make—and again, this is why it’s always a good idea to set 
your writing aside for awhile and then come back to it with fresh eyes. Ŷ
The Chicago Manual of Style.
Clouse, The Student Writer.
Gordon, The Deluxe Transitive Vampire. 
Grif¿ th, Writing Essays about Literature.
Lanham, Style.
O’Connor, Woe Is I.
———, Words Fail Me.
Strunk and White, The Elements of Style.
Trimble, Writing with Style.
Truss, Eats, Shoots and Leaves.
Tufte, Artful Sentences.
1. Identify the errors in the sentences below and then rewrite them so that 
they are correct.
They’re dog is tired, he’s been playing in the backyard all day.
To who did her give the present?
    Exercise
    Suggested Reading

107
She brought plenty of food for us to eat: salad’s, muf¿ ns, and hamburgers.
Its hard when someone breaks there promise.
Your not being very nice to him.

108
Lecture 24: The Power of Words
The Power of Words
Lecture 24
If I had to give you one piece of advice for becoming a more engaged 
reader and a more effective writer, it is simply to read and to write as 
much as you can.
I 
began this course with an example of appallingly bad writing. What I 
would like to do in this ¿ nal lecture is discuss an example of wonderful 
writing, in the hope that it inspires you to keep up the practice of writing 
and reading long after this course is over. I’ve chosen the American classic 
Walden, by Henry David Thoreau—a text that is in some respects both essay 
and autobiography. Here are the opening lines:
When I wrote the following pages, or rather the bulk of them, I 
lived alone, in the woods, a mile from any neighbor, in a house 
which I had built myself, on the shore of Walden Pond, in Concord, 
Massachusetts, and earned my living by the labor of my hands only. 
I lived there two years and two months. At present I am a sojourner 
in civilized life again.  
Thoreau is not often given credit for the beauty of his prose, probably 
because most readers are drawn to his work by the ideas he expresses rather 
than the manner in which he expresses 
them. The Thoreau most people know and 
understand is primarily a thinker and an 
activist. His status as a writer is something of 
a secondary concern, if it is a concern at all.
But the opening paragraph of Walden is 
among the most carefully crafted pieces of 
writing in all of American literature. It’s not 
only a lucid summary of the book’s content, 
but it’s also a really elegant reÀ ection of its overall structure. In other words, 
you can ¿ nd in these few lines a microcosm of the most intriguing and most 
The opening paragraph 
of Walden is among the 
most carefully crafted 
pieces of writing in all 
of American literature.

109
important ideas that Walden, as a whole, has to offer, and it’s also a model of 
the form that those offerings take. 
Moreover, the passage provides a kind of guide for how to read Walden 
insofar as it establishes the terms of the relationship between narrator and 
reader, and it also mirrors the relationship between Thoreau and the social 
world from which he partially and temporarily withdrew during those two 
years and two months on the shores of Walden Pond.
Let’s start by looking at that sense of partial and temporary withdrawal—
because for many scholars it’s the most important thematic dimension of 
Walden. While many people think of Thoreau as withdrawing from the world 
because he wanted to get away from its burdens and preoccupations, it’s also 
true that his larger purpose in getting away was to better understand those 
burdens and the preoccupations that go along with them by giving himself 
a new relationship to them, one that involved less participation and more 
observation. His purpose was not to leave his home environment, but rather 
to give himself a chance to view and experience it from a position that was 
slightly off-center. We can think of Thoreau as wanting to hold his life in 
Concord at arm’s length.
We can see this in the content and the structure of those opening lines. Each 
detail builds on the next to tell us something more about how he removed 
himself from his previous life. These details are held together like links in a 
chain—each phrase is discrete but connected to all of the others by a series 
of commas to form a single complete sentence, which creates a sense of 
distance and a sense of connection all at the same time. The very structure 
of that sentence compels us to recognize the narrator’s desire—and 
Thoreau’s desire—to maintain a link to the world while, as I said, holding it 
at arm’s length.
The remove is not permanent though. Just as the conclusion of Walden 
advises readers to break away from their own social worlds so they can learn 
something new about them, so too does the opening paragraph emphasize 
the need to eventually lessen that distance and ultimately reengage with the 
social world. 

110
Lecture 24: The Power of Words
Finally, this structural pattern of the opening lines—carefully marking out a 
series of steps that take one away from that which is known and familiar, and 
then eventually acknowledging the need to turn back around again and look 
at the familiar with new eyes—is itself a guide for how to read Walden. 
Each chapter, and all the chapters taken together, follows a similar pattern: a 
deliberate movement outward and away from the status quo, away from that 
which is recognizable and easily comprehended—followed, eventually, by a 
return to the same territory where we started. Yet because of the removal and 
displacement we’ve experienced, we’re now sojourners with a different feel 
for the ground we’ve walked before. Thoreau’s piece is a masterful example 
of engaging an audience—he conveys to his audience his main argument 
not just in the content of his words, but in the style with which he executes 
his argument. 
If you really want to be an astute, engaged reader and writer, then my best 
piece of advice would be: Be promiscuous—read everything you can; 
write whenever you can. You can make yourself a beautiful space in which 
to write. Write with a pen or a pencil, on the computer, on the back of an 
envelope. Read everything you can—editorials, short stories, histories, 
biographies, novels, poems, plays. The world around us is ¿ lled with words; 
take in as many as you can, and then give us some back. Ŷ
Lunsford and Ruszkiewicz, Everything’s an Argument.
McLaughlin and Coleman, Everyday Theory.
Roberts, Writing about Literature.
Strunk and White, The Elements of Style.
Tufte, Artful Sentences.
    Suggested Reading

111
1. Take an issue about which you feel strongly, and draft an opening 
paragraph of an argumentative essay. Paying attention to all the issues 
we’ve discussed in this course—concerns about audience, tone, style, 
establishing an ethos, using powerful language, and so on—make sure 
that your main claim is clear and speci¿ c and that you point toward the 
direction your argument will go.
2. Now write the concluding paragraph to an essay on this same topic. 
Remember that a strong conclusion recapitulates the main points of your 
argument without simply restating what you wrote in your introduction.
    Exercises

Bibliography
112
Bibliography
Barnet, Sylvan, and William E. Cain. A Short Guide to Writing about 
Literature. New York: Longman, 2008. Particularly useful for its sample 
student essays and step-by-step guides to “unpacking” a text. 
Bullock, Richard. The Norton Field Guide to Writing. New York: W. W. 
Norton and Company, 2009. A user-friendly guidebook that allows students 
to explore the writing process in brief and in depth. 
Carpenter, Scott. Reading Lessons: An Introduction to Theory. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2000. An introduction to the reading and writing 
process with emphasis on theoretical/critical approaches. 
The Chicago Manual of Style. 16th ed. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2010. The style guide for writing and publishing, especially in the 
academic world. 
Clouse, Barbara Fine. The Student Writer. 5th ed. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1999. Geared toward students who are just taking the ¿ rst steps in 
becoming writers. 
Crowley, Sharon, and Debra Hawhee. Ancient Rhetoric for Contemporary 
Students. 2nd ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1999. Demonstrates how the 
application of classical rhetorical strategies can be useful in the modern 
student’s quest to improve his or her writing. 
DiYanni, Robert. Literature: Approaches to Fiction, Poetry, and Drama. 
New York: McGraw Hill, 2006. Introduces students to basic approaches to 
writing about these three different literary genres. 
Freedman, Diane P., and Olivia Frey, eds. Autobiographical Writing across 
the Disciplines. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003. Uses examples 

113
of some of the best autobiographical writing in a variety of circumstances to 
help you learn to make use of autobiography in your own writing. 
Gardner, Janet. Writing about Literature. New York: Bedford St. Martin’s, 
2008. Geared for college students; provides strategies for engaging with and 
writing about literature. 
Gordon, Karen Elizabeth. The Deluxe Transitive Vampire: A Handbook 
of Grammar for the Innocent, the Eager and the Doomed. New York: 
Pantheon, 1993. A grammar and punctuation guide whose examples include 
a memorable cast of gargoyles, monsters, and other exotic creatures. 
Grif¿ th, Kelley. Writing Essays about Literature: A Guide and Style Sheet. 
Boston: Wadsworth, 2010. Full of practical, useful advice and examples both 
of essays about literature and of writing intended to generate the student essay.
Guerin, Wilfred, Earle Labor, Lee Morgan, Jeanne Reesman, and John 
Willingham. A Handbook of Critical Approaches to Literature. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2010. An excellent introduction to major trends 
in critical approaches to literature, including gender/feminist, Marxist, 
postcolonial, and formalist. 
Harmon, William, and Hugh Holman. A Handbook to Literature. Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2008. A handy reference book with more 
than 2,000 de¿ nitions of key literary and linguistic terms and concepts. 
Kennedy, X. J., and Dana Gioia. Literature: An Introduction to Fiction, 
Poetry, Drama, and Writing. 11th ed. New York: Longman, 2009. An 
excellent introduction to engaging with and writing about various genres 
of literature. 
Lanham, Richard A. Revising Prose. 5th ed. New York: Longman, 2006. A 
step-by-step guide to improving your prose writing. 
———. Style: An Anti-Textbook. Philadelphia: Paul Dry Books, 2007. A 
witty and at times ruthless examination of offenses against style and how not 
to make them. 

114
Bibliography
Lunsford, Andrea, and John J. Ruszkiewicz. Everything’s an Argument. 
New York: Bedford St. Martin’s, 2009. Introduces students to the idea that 
everything—from ads to vehicles to clothing—can be read as an argument. 
Lynn, Steven. Literature: Reading and Writing with Critical Strategies. 
Shows you how to use critical approaches to improve your writing. New 
York: Pearson Longman, 2004. 
McLaughlin, Becky, and Bob Coleman. Everyday Theory: A Contemporary 
Reader. New York: Pearson Longman, 2005. For those who wish to become 
more serious students of approaches to argumentation and writing. 
MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers. 7th ed. New York: 
Modern Language Association, 2009. The standard reference book in most 
undergraduate English programs in the United States. 
O’Connor, Patricia T. Woe Is I: The Grammarphobe’s Guide to Better 
English in Plain English. 3rd ed. New York: Riverhead Trade, 2010. A 
clear and humorous guide to recognizing and avoiding common grammar, 
punctuation, and style issues. 
———. Words Fail Me: What Everyone Who Writes Should Know about 
Writing. New York: Mariner Books, 2000. An excellent reference tool 
for beginning writers who want to know how to most effectively craft an 
argument to reach a particular audience. 
Oliver, Paul. The Student’s Guide to Research Ethics. Maidenhead, UK: 
Open University Press, 2003. A guide to avoiding common errors in 
research, with particular emphasis on ethical concerns about plagiarism and 
original argumentation. 
Ramage, John D., John C. Bean, and June Johnson. Writing Arguments, 
Concise Edition: A Rhetoric with Readings. 5th ed. New York: Longman, 
2009. A good basic introduction to rhetorical approaches to writing. 

115
Roberts, Edgar V. Writing about Literature. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 2009. A guide with clear, concrete examples for composing essays 
about various types of literature. 
Smith, Sidonie, and Julia Watson. Getting a Life: Everyday Uses of 
Autobiography. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1996. A guide 
to using autobiography appropriately in your writing. 
Strunk, William, and E. B. White. The Elements of Style. New 
York: Longman, 2008. The classic handbook for writers in a new 50th 
anniversary edition. 
Trimble, John. Writing with Style: Conversations on the Art of Writing. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2000. Clever and witty; helps 
students generate ideas and then perfect them in written form. 
Truss, Lynne. Eats, Shoots and Leaves: The Zero Tolerance Approach 
to Punctuation. New York: Gotham, 2006. A humorous guide to common 
punctuation errors and how to avoid them. 
Tufte, Virginia. Artful Sentences: Syntax as Style. Cheshire, CT: Graphics 
Press, 2006. How to move beyond the utilitarian to the artful in the 
composition of essays. 

Credits
116
Credits
Music provided by FRaNCo Pellegrini/Pump Audio/Getty Images.
Audio excerpts of lecture given by Dr. (H) Rose Van Thyn courtesy of 
Centenary College of Louisiana News Service.
Text Permissions:
2003 winning entry, Bulwer-Lytton Fiction Contest (Mariann Simms).
J303: “The soul selects her own society” by Emily Dickinson is reprinted by 
permission of the publishers and the Trustees of Amherst College from THE 
POEMS OF EMILY DICKINSON, Thomas H. Johnson, ed., Cambridge, 
Mass.: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, copyright (c) 1951, 
1955, 1979, 1983 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College.
“The Red Wheelbarrow” and “This Is Just to Say” by William Carlos 
Williams, from THE COLLECTED POEMS: VOLUME I, 1909–1939, 
copyright © 1938 by New Directions Publishing Corp. Reprinted by 
permission of New Directions Publishing Corp. and Carcanet Press Limited.
The lines from “anyone lived in a pretty how town,” copyright 1940, (c) 
1968, 1991 by the Trustees for the E. E. Cummings Trust, from COMPLETE 
POEMS: 1904–1962 by E. E. Cummings, edited by George J. Firmage. Used 
by permission of Liveright Publishing Corporation.

Notes

Notes

Notes

Notes

Notes

Notes

