

Android® Smartphones For Dummies®
Published by: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street,
Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, www.wiley.com
Copyright © 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New
Jersey
Published simultaneously in Canada
Android Smartphones For Dummies is not based on or derived
from Android For Dummies, Second Edition or Android Phones
For Dummies, Fourth Edition.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or
otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the
1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior written
permission of the Publisher. Requests to the Publisher for
permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030,
(201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at
http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Trademarks: Wiley, For Dummies, the Dummies Man logo,
Dummies.com, Making Everything Easier, and related trade dress
are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons,
Inc. and may not be used without written permission. Android is a
registered trademark of Google, Inc. All other trademarks are the
property of their respective owners. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. is
not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
LIMIT OF LIABILITY/DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY:
WHILE THE PUBLISHER AND AUTHORS HAVE USED
THEIR BEST EFFORTS IN PREPARING THIS WORK, THEY
MAKE NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES WITH
RESPECT TO THE ACCURACY OR COMPLETENESS OF
THE CONTENTS OF THIS WORK AND SPECIFICALLY
DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, INCLUDING WITHOUT
LIMITATION ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF

MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE. NO WARRANTY MAY BE CREATED OR
EXTENDED BY SALES REPRESENTATIVES, WRITTEN
SALES MATERIALS OR PROMOTIONAL STATEMENTS
FOR THIS WORK. THE FACT THAT AN ORGANIZATION,
WEBSITE, OR PRODUCT IS REFERRED TO IN THIS WORK
AS A CITATION AND/OR POTENTIAL SOURCE OF
FURTHER INFORMATION DOES NOT MEAN THAT THE
PUBLISHER AND AUTHORS ENDORSE THE
INFORMATION OR SERVICES THE ORGANIZATION,
WEBSITE, OR PRODUCT MAY PROVIDE OR
RECOMMENDATIONS IT MAY MAKE. THIS WORK IS
SOLD WITH THE UNDERSTANDING THAT THE
PUBLISHER IS NOT ENGAGED IN RENDERING
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. THE ADVICE AND
STRATEGIES CONTAINED HEREIN MAY NOT BE
SUITABLE FOR YOUR SITUATION. YOU SHOULD
CONSULT WITH A SPECIALIST WHERE APPROPRIATE.
FURTHER, READERS SHOULD BE AWARE THAT
WEBSITES LISTED IN THIS WORK MAY HAVE CHANGED
OR DISAPPEARED BETWEEN WHEN THIS WORK WAS
WRITTEN AND WHEN IT IS READ. NEITHER THE
PUBLISHER NOR AUTHORS SHALL BE LIABLE FOR ANY
LOSS OF PROFIT OR ANY OTHER COMMERCIAL
DAMAGES, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO SPECIAL,
INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, OR OTHER DAMAGES.
For general information on our other products and services,
please contact our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at
877-762-2974, outside the U.S. at 317-572-3993, or fax 317-572-
4002. For technical support, please visit
https://hub.wiley.com/community/support/dummies.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by
print-on-demand. Some material included with standard print
versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-
on-demand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD
that is not included in the version you purchased, you may

download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For
more information about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2022947349
ISBN 978-1-119-90038-2 (pbk); ISBN 978-1-119-90040-5 (ebk);
ISBN 978-1-119-90039-9 (ebk)

Android® 
Smartphones 
For
Dummies®
To view this book's Cheat Sheet, simply go to
www.dummies.com and search for “Android
Smartphones For Dummies Cheat Sheet” in the
Search box.
Table of Contents
 
1. Cover
2. Title Page
3. Copyright
4. Introduction
1. About This Book
2. Foolish Assumptions
3. Icons Used in This Book
4. Beyond the Book
5. Where to Go from Here
5. Part 1: The Unboxing
1. Chapter 1: Introducing All Things Android
1. What Are Android Devices?
2. Looking at the Different Flavors of Android
3. Transitioning from an iPhone to an Android: It’s Possible!
2. Chapter 2: Checking Out and Charging What’s in the Box
1. Your Contents May Vary

2. What Should You Keep (and What You Can Discard)
3. Installing the SIM Card
4. A Quick Tour of Your Device’s Hardware
5. Keeping Your Device Charged and Current
6. Caring for Your Smartphone
3. Chapter 3: Deciding on Carrier Service
1. What Are Locked and Unlocked Smartphones?
2. Big Box Carriers: No, They Aren’t Used for Moving
3. Checking Out Alternative Carriers
4. What Can You Do Without Service?
4. Chapter 4: Setting Up Your Device
1. Activating Your Phone
2. Parlez-Vous Français? Android Is Multilingual
3. Customizing Your Vision Settings
4. Accessing Wi-Fi
5. Adding a Gmail Account
6. Setting Up Security
7. How About a Couple of Extras?
8. Setting Up Multiple Users
5. Chapter 5: Tapping and Swiping Your Way around the Phone
1. Starting with Standard Navigation
2. Moving on to Advanced Navigation
6. Part 2: The Grand Tour
1. Chapter 6: Unlocking the Secrets of the Screens
1. The Lock Screen versus the Home Screen(s)
2. Securing Access to the Phone with the Lock Screen
2. Chapter 7: G-Whiz: The Google Experience
1. Keeping Tabs on Your Life

2. Emailing and Sending Messages
3. Capturing Special Moments
4. Figuring Out the Functional Side of Google
3. Chapter 8: Investigating Apps for Everything
1. Exploring the Preinstalled Apps
2. Installing New Apps
3. Viewing App Information
4. Moving and Organizing Apps
5. Sideloading Apps
4. Chapter 9: Finding Widgets for Your Gadget
1. What Is a Widget?
2. Selecting, Placing, and Sizing Widgets
3. Removing Widgets
5. Chapter 10: Enjoying Quick Access Features
1. Settings That Help You Use Your Device
2. Settings That Help You Use Other Devices
3. Settings That Help Apps Help You
4. Editing the Quick Access Screen
6. Chapter 11: Staying in the Know with Notifications
1. Receiving Notifications
2. Using the Notification Drawer
3. Swiping for More Information
4. Configuring Notifications
5. Setting Do Not Disturb
7. Chapter 12: Customizing Your Settings
1. Resting Your Eyes with Night Light
2. Where Did My Memory Go?
3. Keeping Your Life in Balance with Digital Wellbeing

4. Understanding the Volume Controls
7. Part 3: Communicating Anytime, Anywhere
1. Chapter 13: Texting to Keep in Touch
1. Exploring Messages
2. Tap, Tap, Typing and Other Ways to Enter Your Message
3. Copying, Pasting, and Deleting Texts
4. Group Texting
5. Using Third-Party Texting Apps
2. Chapter 14: Using the Phone as a … Phone
1. Seeing Who’s Who in Your Life
2. Making Contact with Your Contacts
3. Being Prepared for an Emergency
3. Chapter 15: Browsing the Internet and Maintaining Your
Privacy
1. Feeling at Home with Chrome
2. Installing Third-Party Browsers
4. Chapter 16: Keeping It Social
1. Installing Social Media Apps
2. Using Social Media
5. Chapter 17: Smile! Using the Camera
1. Opening the Camera App
2. Navigating the Camera Interface
3. Holding Your Phone for the Best Shot
4. Editing Your Images
8. Part 4: Personalizing Just the Way You Like It
1. Chapter 18: Customizing Your Device
1. Setting Custom Ring Tones and Notification Sounds
2. Adding a Splash of Color

3. Setting Wallpaper Images
4. Changing the Font Size
2. Chapter 19: Saying ‘Hey’ to Google
1. Getting the Most from Your Smartphone with Google Assistant
2. Setting Up Google Assistant
3. Creating Google Assistant Routines
9. Part 5: The Part of Tens
1. Chapter 20: Ten Cool Tips and Tricks
1. Send Someone Your Current Location
2. Double-Tap to Wake Up
3. Turn Your Smartphone into a Ruler
4. Take a Screenshot
5. Access App Context Menus
6. Switch to One-Handed Mode
7. Screencast
8. Tap and Zoom
9. Disable App Notifications
10. Use the Two-Finger Swipe
2. Chapter 21: Ten Settings to Enable
1. Skip Lock Screen
2. Wireless Emergency Alerts
3. Battery Percentage
4. Dial Pad (DTMF) Tones
5. Screen Timeout
6. Night Light
7. Auto-Rotate Screen
8. Screen Lock
9. Emergency Location Service

10. Find My Device
3. Chapter 22: Ten Settings to Disable
1. Turn On Wi-Fi Automatically
2. Sensitive Notifications
3. Show Media Recommendations
4. Identify Songs Playing Nearby
5. Adaptive Brightness
6. Add Users from Lock Screen
7. Show Wallet
8. Personalize Using App Data
9. Developer Options
10. Back Up Using Mobile Data
10. Index
11. About the Author
12. Connect with Dummies
13. End User License Agreement
List of Illustrations
 
1. Chapter 2
1. FIGURE 2-1: The protected handset.
2. FIGURE 2-2: Some light reading material.
3. FIGURE 2-3: The electrical bits included with the Google Pixel 4 XL.
4. FIGURE 2-4: All of the goodies.
5. FIGURE 2-5: Everything that is not part of the smartphone.
6. FIGURE 2-6: The secret SIM tray access point.
7. FIGURE 2-7: An empty SIM card tray.
8. FIGURE 2-8: The SIM card installed.

9. FIGURE 2-9: The front of the smartphone.
10. FIGURE 2-10: The back of the smartphone.
2. Chapter 4
1. FIGURE 4-1: Preparing for setup.
2. FIGURE 4-2: The initial greeting screen.
3. FIGURE 4-3: You can choose from lots of languages.
4. FIGURE 4-4: Making sure you can see your screen.
5. FIGURE 4-5: Looking for Wi-Fi.
6. FIGURE 4-6: Connecting to the Internet.
7. FIGURE 4-7: Copying data from one Android phone to another.
8. FIGURE 4-8: Entering your account information.
9. FIGURE 4-9: Two-factor authentication.
10. FIGURE 4-10: Setting up your fingerprint.
11. FIGURE 4-11: Setting the backup PIN.
12. FIGURE 4-12: Setting up Google Assistant.
13. FIGURE 4-13: Android recognizes your voice.
14. FIGURE 4-14: The default home screen after the initial setup.
15. FIGURE 4-15: The current user(s).
16. FIGURE 4-16: Confirming your choice.
3. Chapter 5
1. FIGURE 5-1: The search bar at the bottom of the home screen.
4. Chapter 6
1. FIGURE 6-1: The lock screen.
2. FIGURE 6-2: The notification drawer and gear icon.
3. FIGURE 6-3: The default home screen.
4. FIGURE 6-4: The Power Menu.
5. Chapter 7
1. FIGURE 7-1: You look busy.

2. FIGURE 7-2: Changing your view.
3. FIGURE 7-3: On July 4, I don’t have much going on.
4. FIGURE 7-4: Keeping good time with the Clock app.
5. FIGURE 7-5: Is it time for bed?
6. FIGURE 7-6: A blank email.
7. FIGURE 7-7: The Message interface.
8. FIGURE 7-8: The default camera view.
9. FIGURE 7-9: The Maps icon default view. Go Sox!
10. FIGURE 7-10: The Tab view.
11. FIGURE 7-11: Google Pay, or GPay.
6. Chapter 8
1. FIGURE 8-1: The Android Phone app.
2. FIGURE 8-2: Files, files, and more files.
3. FIGURE 8-3: Let’s watch a movie.
4. FIGURE 8-4: Play some music.
5. FIGURE 8-5: Some settings.
6. FIGURE 8-6: Let’s play! The Play Store home screen.
7. FIGURE 8-7: Helpful information about apps.
8. FIGURE 8-8: Gmail sends me approximately 15 notifications per day.
9. FIGURE 8-9: There’s no place like home.
10. FIGURE 8-10: Categorizing two apps.
11. FIGURE 8-11: An app folder.
7. Chapter 9
1. FIGURE 9-1: The home screen context menu.
2. FIGURE 9-2: Widgets, widgets, everywhere!
3. FIGURE 9-3: Widget options.
4. FIGURE 9-4: The App grid option.
5. FIGURE 9-5: So many sizes!

6. FIGURE 9-6: Placing the widget on your home screen.
7. FIGURE 9-7: The widget is in place.
8. FIGURE 9-8: Resizing the widget.
9. FIGURE 9-9: Remove that unwanted widget.
8. Chapter 10
1. FIGURE 10-1: The notification drawer with a few of the quick access settings.
2. FIGURE 10-2: Quick access! More settings to choose from.
3. FIGURE 10-3: Even more quick access settings.
4. FIGURE 10-4: My external device.
5. FIGURE 10-5: Turn off Wi-Fi when you are roaming around.
6. FIGURE 10-6: Here’s where you turn on your hotspot.
7. FIGURE 10-7: Casting a wide net.
9. Chapter 11
1. FIGURE 11-1: The notification bar.
2. FIGURE 11-2: The notification drawer.
3. FIGURE 11-3: Silent but … visible.
4. FIGURE 11-4: One Outlook notification.
5. FIGURE 11-5: It’s starting to feel a little crowded.
6. FIGURE 11-6: More information about the Outlook notifications.
7. FIGURE 11-7: The full preview.
8. FIGURE 11-8: Reply from Outlook.
9. FIGURE 11-9: Different action buttons appear based on notification type.
10. FIGURE 11-10: Settings for notifications.
11. FIGURE 11-11: Adjusting app settings.
12. FIGURE 11-12: Do not disturb.
10. Chapter 12
1. FIGURE 12-1: Display settings.
2. FIGURE 12-2: The Night Light configuration screen.

3. FIGURE 12-3: Night Light turned off.
4. FIGURE 12-4: Night Light turned on.
5. FIGURE 12-5: Storage settings.
6. FIGURE 12-6: Apps, apps, and more apps.
7. FIGURE 12-7: Storage settings for the Facebook app.
8. FIGURE 12-8: Android found some junk.
9. FIGURE 12-9: Memories! All alone in the …
10. FIGURE 12-10: A breakdown of memory stats.
11. FIGURE 12-11: Lots of apps are using lots of memory.
12. FIGURE 12-12: A snapshot of your wellbeing.
13. FIGURE 12-13: A detailed look at app usage.
14. FIGURE 12-14: Limiting usage.
15. FIGURE 12-15: Time to focus.
16. FIGURE 12-16: Goodnight phone.
17. FIGURE 12-17: The ringer volume slider.
18. FIGURE 12-18: Adjust the volume of all media in this handy screen.
11. Chapter 13
1. FIGURE 13-1: The Messages icon.
2. FIGURE 13-2: QWERTY to the rescue.
3. FIGURE 13-3: Long press letter options.
4. FIGURE 13-4: The GBoard includes accents!
5. FIGURE 13-5: Special character keyboard.
6. FIGURE 13-6: Emojis.
7. FIGURE 13-7: Stickers! Like the 1980s only more electronic.
8. FIGURE 13-8: GIFs.
9. FIGURE 13-9: Swiping out the word “It’s.”
10. FIGURE 13-10: Keyboard options.
11. FIGURE 13-11: Google Voice Typing keyboard: ready and listening.

12. FIGURE 13-12: A message in Select mode.
13. FIGURE 13-13: Starting a new group conversation.
14. FIGURE 13-14: A new group.
12. Chapter 14
1. FIGURE 14-1: 3-2-1 contact! The default Contacts screen.
2. FIGURE 14-2: Creating a contact.
3. FIGURE 14-3: Phone dialer contacts screen.
4. FIGURE 14-4: A contact’s contact screen.
5. FIGURE 14-5: Recent calls.
6. FIGURE 14-6: Telephone keypad.
7. FIGURE 14-7: Emergency settings.
8. FIGURE 14-8: Changing the emergency phone number.
13. Chapter 15
1. FIGURE 15-1: The Chrome browser.
2. FIGURE 15-2: Using the keyboard to search the web.
3. FIGURE 15-3: Google Lens.
4. FIGURE 15-4: Mysterious flowers.
5. FIGURE 15-5: Roses!
6. FIGURE 15-6: An expensive paintbrush.
7. FIGURE 15-7: Current open tabs.
8. FIGURE 15-8: A new tab.
9. FIGURE 15-9: Selecting tabs to group.
10. FIGURE 15-10: A group of tabs.
11. FIGURE 15-11: Installing a third-party browser.
14. Chapter 16
1. FIGURE 16-1: Lots of results for social media apps.
2. FIGURE 16-2: The Facebook news feed.
3. FIGURE 16-3: Wares for sale.

4. FIGURE 16-4: Creating a new Facebook post.
5. FIGURE 16-5: Giving Facebook access to your photos.
6. FIGURE 16-6: See something interesting?
7. FIGURE 16-7: Picking people to follow on Instagram.
15. Chapter 17
1. FIGURE 17-1: The default camera interface.
2. FIGURE 17-2: Camera settings for a Pixel smartphone.
3. FIGURE 17-3: Finding the top shot.
4. FIGURE 17-4: Image file save locations.
5. FIGURE 17-5: Quick image sharing.
6. FIGURE 17-6: More camera settings.
7. FIGURE 17-7: Look, Ma! No lines.
8. FIGURE 17-8: Zoom, zoom, zoom. Switching to the 2x camera.
9. FIGURE 17-9: A portrait.
10. FIGURE 17-10: Video mode.
11. FIGURE 17-11: Panorama mode.
12. FIGURE 17-12: Photo Sphere mode.
13. FIGURE 17-13: The Camera app photo editor.
14. FIGURE 17-14: Brightness.
15. FIGURE 17-15: Contrast.
16. FIGURE 17-16: It’s getting hot in here.
17. FIGURE 17-17: Adjusting the tint.
18. FIGURE 17-18: Lots of Snapseed options!
16. Chapter 18
1. FIGURE 18-1: Ring tone settings.
2. FIGURE 18-2: Sound & vibration.
3. FIGURE 18-3: Complete the action with an app.
4. FIGURE 18-4: The Bat Phone should have its own ring.

5. FIGURE 18-5: Searching for notification sounds.
6. FIGURE 18-6: Changing that ding!
7. FIGURE 18-7: The home screen settings menu.
8. FIGURE 18-8: Picking out the perfect color.
9. FIGURE 18-9: Color preview.
10. FIGURE 18-10: So many wallpaper choices.
11. FIGURE 18-11: Look at the motion.
12. FIGURE 18-12: Changing the font size.
13. FIGURE 18-13: A very large font.
17. Chapter 19
1. FIGURE 19-1: Searching for Google Assistant.
2. FIGURE 19-2: Google Assistant settings.
3. FIGURE 19-3: The Google Assistant toggle switch.
4. FIGURE 19-4: Step one.
5. FIGURE 19-5: Repeat after me …
6. FIGURE 19-6: The end, or is it?
7. FIGURE 19-7: Google Assistant on the lock screen.
8. FIGURE 19-8: Tap to wake up Google Assistant.
9. FIGURE 19-9: Personal results settings.
10. FIGURE 19-10: Creating a routine.
11. FIGURE 19-11: Good morning, Google.
18. Chapter 20
1. FIGURE 20-1: A Google Maps context menu.
2. FIGURE 20-2: The sharing menu.
3. FIGURE 20-3: Keyboard settings.
4. FIGURE 20-4: A more reachable keyboard.
5. FIGURE 20-5: Magnification screen.
6. FIGURE 20-6: Extra zoom!

Introduction
The first Android smartphone was released in 2008, and over
these past 15 years, smartphones have become more feature-rich
and more complicated — to the point that many of them include
capabilities that people may not even realize are possible.
Smartphones have become so ingrained in our daily lives that
manufacturers may now simply assume everyone knows how to
use every feature of every smartphone. On top of that, any
smartphone manufacturer can use the Android operating system
on its hardware, which adds another level of complexity to an
already diversly complex platform. Android Smartphones For
Dummies demystifies Android smartphones, from the most basic
functionality to the hidden gems that even seasoned users may not
realize are there.
About This Book
I wrote this book to put everyone using an Android smartphone
on a level playing field. If you have ever thought that smartphone
technology has passed you by, this book is the tool you need to
catch back up with the crowd. Here you find all the basics as well
as many tips, tricks, and cheats that make using an Android
smartphone easy and trouble-free.
Android Smartphones For Dummies covers everything from the
initial setup of your smartphone to calling, texting, and tweeting
right from your device. You even discover how to take enviable
photographs, customize your device to suit your personality and
needs, and set up Google Assistant routines to help make your life
even easier. The material in this book is stripped down to basic,
easy-to-follow, jargon-free steps that are a breeze to understand.
Foolish Assumptions
This book assumes you have already purchased or are interested
in purchasing an Android smartphone. That’s really it. There is no

further skills or knowledge needed other than an interest to learn
to ins and outs of your Android smartphone.
Icons Used in This Book
Throughout this book, icons in the margins highlight certain types
of valuable information that call out for your attention. Here are
the icons you’ll encounter and a brief description of each.
 The Tip icon marks tips and shortcuts that you can use to make
configuring and exploring your Android smartphone easier.
 Remember icons mark the information that’s especially
important to know. To siphon off the most important information in
each chapter, just skim through these icons.
 The Technical Stuff icon marks information of a highly
technical nature that you can skip over if you don’t want to get into the
nitty-gritty details.
 The Warning icon tells you to watch out! It marks important
information that may save you headaches while using your Android
smartphone.
Beyond the Book
In addition to the abundance of information and guidance related
to Android smartphones that I provide in this book, you get

access to even more help and information online at Dummies.com.
Check out this book’s online Cheat Sheet. Just go to
www.dummies.com and search for “Android Smartphones For
Dummies Cheat Sheet.”
Where to Go from Here
I wrote Android Smartphones For Dummies to be nonlinear. That
means you can pick it up at any point, in any chapter, and get
something useful out of it without having to read the whole book
from the first chapter on.

Part 1
The Unboxing

IN THIS PART …
 
Discover the ins and outs of the Android mobile operating system and
what makes a smartphone an Android smartphone.
Explore what comes packaged with your smartphone, how to install a
SIM card, and how to care for your device.
Understand the difference between a locked and unlocked smartphone
and what carrier services you need to get the most out of your phone.
Find out how to set up your Android smartphone and customize
security and accessibility settings.
Become a pro at navigating the smartphone interface and understand
the difference between a tap, a swipe, and a hold.

Chapter 1
Introducing All Things Android
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Discovering what make a device an Android device
 Checking out the different versions of Android software
 Comparing Android versus iPhone
In this chapter, you explore the details of the Android mobile
operating system and Android-based smartphones. If you are new
to Android smartphones, this is the perfect place to start your
journey. If you are switching to Android from iPhone, this chapter
also outlines some of the differences between the two platforms.
What Are Android Devices?
There is no such thing as the one Android smartphone. Unlike its
major market competitor — the iPhone — Android is an open-
source mobile operating system that any smartphone
manufacturer can use for its devices. Because of this, hundreds of
different Android smartphones are available around the world —
and they all offer different features.
 The term open source means that the source code (all the lines
of programming code that make the Android software what it is) is
available freely to anyone who wants to use it.
One of the consequences of making Android open source is that
any smartphone manufacturer can change the Android code to do
anything it wants it to do. And so there are going to be some
major differences between these phones. Some phones are going

to have bigger or smaller screens, sharper or wider cameras, and
more or fewer buttons. The Android software itself may also
appear slightly different on different smartphones and be able to
do slightly different things.
Think of it this way: Everyone knows what a car stereo is. Every
car has a car stereo in it. However, no two car manufacturers are
going to have the exact same stereos. Some will have access to
satellite radio, some will have cassette players, some will have
touchscreen controls, and some will have physical buttons. But in
the end, they all have similar basic functions. In the following
sections, I outline some of the most popular Android smartphone
brands and highlight some of the differences between them.
Samsung
Samsung phones are some of the most popular smartphones in the
world. In fact, a recent report from Counterpoint Research shows
that Samsung is the most popular brand of Android smartphone,
and the second most popular smartphone in the world behind
Apple’s iPhone.
Samsung produces several different models of smartphone for
sale around the world, but its most popular is the flagship Galaxy
line.
 A flagship smartphone is the most featured model of
smartphone from a particular manufacturer. It is meant to showcase the
abilities of the manufacturer’s line.
The Galaxy brand comes in several models:
 
Galaxy A
Galaxy S
Galaxy Z

The Galaxy S line is also further divided into the S, S+, and S
Ultra models. The differences between the S, S+, and S Ultra are
mainly screen size, except the S Ultra also comes with a stylus
that enables you to draw and interact with the screen.
 If you are familiar with older Samsung models, the Galaxy
Note is now the Galaxy S Ultra. This is why the Galaxy S Ultra comes
with the familiar Galaxy Note stylus.
Other model highlights include the innovative folding screens of
the Galaxy Z models, and the affordability of the Galaxy A line.
Google Pixel
Google is the manufacturer that “owns” the Android software.
Even though it offers the source code openly, Google still owns it.
However, Google did not always make its own Android
smartphones. Starting in 2010, Google began a branding
relationship with manufactures such as HTC, Samsung, LG, and
Motorola to create the Google Nexus line of phones. These
phones were meant to showcase the functionality of the Android
mobile operating system as Google intended it to be used.
 Google began manufacturing its own smartphones in 2016.
These smartphones became the Google Pixel line of phones.
Today you can get the Pixel 6 and Pixel 6 Pro smartphones from
Google. The major difference between these models is the size of
the screen — with the Pixel 6 Pro having a slightly larger screen
than the Pixel 6.
Other hot brands
The list of Android smartphones seems endless. Other popular
brands and models include:
 

Motorola Edge
Motorola Edge Plus
Nokia 8.3
One Plus 9
One Plus 9 Pro
Sony Xperia 1 ii
Xiaomi Mi 10
Looking at the Different Flavors of
Android
Android software changes from year to year. In Android, these
changes are known as flavors, and there is a delicious history
behind why Android versions are known as flavors.
When the Android operating system was first introduced to the
public in 2009, Google decided to forego the popular structure of
numbering its versions and instead chose to name each version of
Android after a sweet treat. Version 1.5 of Android was therefore
named Cupcake. From there, the list of Android flavors continued
in alphabetical order:
 
Cupcake
Donut
Éclair
Froyo
Gingerbread
Honeycomb
Ice Cream Sandwich
Jelly Bean
KitKat

Lollipop
Marshmallow
Nougat
Oreo
Pie
Android Pie was released in 2018, and was the last flavor of
Android to be publicly released with a sweet name. Starting in
2019, Android switched to Android 10 — with Android 11,
Android 12, and Android 13 released in subsequent years.
Samsung’s version of Android
The fact that Google offers Android as an open-source software
platform has led to one of the most confusing aspects of using
Android smartphones among consumers. Most Android
smartphone manufactures, Samsung included, have tweaked
Android to set their phones apart. These tweaks include features
and applications (most often referred to as an app) that are only
available on that manufacturer’s phones.
For example, Samsung developed several versions of Android
specifically for use on Samsung devices. Using a Samsung
Android smartphone gives users access to features not found on
other devices. For example:
 
Samsung devices have a virtual assistant known as Bixby. (See
Chapter 19 for more on using virtual assistants.)
Samsung devices have software-based navigation buttons to help you
“go back,” “go home,” and view your running apps. (See Chapter 5 for
details on navigating your way around an Android phone.)
Samsung devices have a home screen dedicated to Samsung Free, a list
of free news articles, podcasts, games, and other content compiled by
Samsung (this is replaced by Google Feed on other Android devices).
Samsung devices include their own version of some Google apps such
as Calendar, Calculator, Photos, and camera.

Lastly, users of Samsung Android smartphones will notice some
differences in the way many menus look. Keep in mind that even
with some of these differences, the basic functionality persists
through all Android smartphones.
 An app is an application that you install to your smartphone.
These apps expand the features of your smartphone — like getting
access to weather information from around the world or shopping from
your favorite stores.
Google Pixel’s ‘pure Android’
Soon after the release of Android, it became evident that
consumers were confused about what Android was — because
every smartphone seemed to have a different version of it. For
this reason, Google began to release its own flagship smartphone
— the Google Pixel — with the key feature being that the Google
smartphone would include an unadulterated version of the
Android operating system known as “pure Android.” As such,
users who purchase the Google Pixel line of smartphones use a
version of Android that has not been changed.
 The examples offered throughout this book use pure Android
running on a Google Pixel smartphone. However, the basic
functionality shown still exists in most Android smartphones — even
if it looks a little different or goes by a slightly different name on
another phone.
No matter the brand smartphone you use, with an Android phone,
you have access to the Google ecosystem of apps to help you with
just about every aspect of daily life. Chapters 7 and 8 explore
these apps as well as what additional apps are pre-installed and
where you can find more.

Transitioning from an iPhone to an
Android: It’s Possible!
Many people switch from one smartphone platform to another.
Personally, I have switched from Android to iPhone and back
over the years. Now, I use both an iPhone and a Google Pixel
Android smartphone on a daily basis. Having used both, I can say
that the two are not as different as they might seem on the surface.
Following are some of the major differences you should be aware
of when moving from iPhone to Android:
 
Apple has very strict control over the type and content of apps that
are approved for use on iPhone. When moving from iPhone to
Android, the exact app you are looking for might not be available in
some cases — but there should be a number of similar options for
Android.
Android keeps all apps in the app drawer by default. This is the
standard location for all installed apps on Android smartphones.
Android smartphones do not clutter up the home screens with apps;
instead, apps are kept in a special menu until they are moved onto the
screen. Chapter 6 goes into detail about how Android organizes apps
and the home screen(s).
Text messages are not color-coded in Android. Using an iPhone
often means seeing text messages in either blue or green text fields
(blue if the other party is using an iPhone, and green if they are not).
This concept does not exist in Android. For the most part, the type of
smartphone other parties are using cannot be inferred from the color
assigned to their text messages. In Chapter 13 you discover how
texting is one of the most convenient ways to keep up with friends,
family, and coworkers.
Android’s silent feature isn’t where you think it’d be. iPhones have
a toggle switch on the side of the phone to turn the ringer from sound
to vibration mode. Android smartphones do not have a separate button
for this. On an Android smartphone, you use the volume buttons to

turn the phone down all the way (as you discover in Chapter 12, as
well as how to control the volume of all Android apps and features).
After hitting the lowest volume level, the phone enters vibration mode.
Going down one more level from vibration mode puts the phone in
silent mode (no sound or vibration). Let’s see iPhone do that!
In the next chapter, you explore the contents of a brand new
Android smartphone box and discover the best ways to care for
your new smartphone.

Chapter 2
Checking Out and Charging What’s in
the Box
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Unboxing your smartphone
 Understanding the purpose of and installing a SIM card
 Checking out your device’s hardware
 Giving your Android phone some TLC
Before ripping into your shiny new phone’s packaging like a kid
on Christmas morning, take some time to appreciate just what is
in the box. While included contents have changed over the years,
you’ll find more than just a handset in the box. Smartphone
manufacturers try to include everything needed for the initial
experience of using a new smartphone.
In this chapter, you discover what may come packaged with your
smartphone and what you should keep, as well as how to install
your SIM card and how to keep your phone in tip-top shape for as
long as you wish to use it.
 In technical terms, the physical smartphone is also known as a
handset. This is a term that goes back to the earliest days of
telephones, where the handset was the piece held up to the ear (as
opposed to the piece you spoke into).
Your Contents May Vary

 One word of caution here — the exact contents of a new
smartphone box varies from manufacturer to manufacturer. However,
smartphone manufacturers usually include some basic items in the box
along with the handset. These items include documentation and user
guides, basic tools, and a means for keeping the smartphone charged.
The phone shown in the examples that follow — a Google Pixel 4 XL
— offers a good idea of what contents are usually included. Other
smartphone manufacturers may also include earphones, cleaning kits,
styli, and other accessories that may be useful on their specific
handset.
Hello, handset!
Break the seal on the box — typically a couple of pieces of
strategically placed tape or adhesive — and remove the top of the
box. This should immediately reveal the most important item in
the box, the handset. The handset will be wrapped in a protective
film, as shown in Figure 2-1.

FIGURE 2-1: The protected handset.
The first thing I always want to do is rip off the protective plastic
and admire the shiny new smartphone — but wait! There’s more.
Lift the smartphone from its holding tray and then remove the
holding tray from the box to reveal more items. Typically it is
easier to remove the tray if you remove the phone from the tray
first. In the case of the Google Pixel 4 XL, removing the
smartphone holding tray reveals a documentation packet, as
shown in Figure 2-2.

FIGURE 2-2: Some light reading material.
This documentation packet includes a quick start guide (covered
in detail in Chapter 3), some device usage warnings, and — most

important — a SIM card removal tool.
 Depending on how you buy your phone, whether you buy it
directly from the manufacturer or if you buy it from a wireless carrier
or service provider like AT&T or Verizon, the documentation packet
will also include a SIM card, which is the small computer chip your
phone needs to connect your phone to a cellular network. Typically, if
you buy the smartphone from the manufacturer, an “unlocked” SIM
card may be included in the documentation packet on a credit card–
sized piece of plastic. If you buy the smartphone from a wireless
carrier, the carrier will send you a SIM card specific to their cellular
network in the mail in separate packaging.
You’re not doing anything without the power
cord
In the case of the Google Pixel 4 XL, the USB charging cable,
adapter, and power block are all found under the documentation
packet, as shown in Figure 2-3. The USB (short for universal
serial bus) charging cable is one item that may vary greatly from
manufacturer to manufacturer. In the case of the Google Pixel 4
XL, both ends of the cable are USB-C ports. However, some
manufacturers may include cables that are USB-C on one end and
USB-A on the other. They may even include cables that include a
micro USB port on one end and a USB-A port on the other.
Whatever configuration the charging cable is found in, it will be
the specific cable needed to charge the handset.
 Take note of the specific configuration of the charging cable in
your smartphone package. Knowing the specific configuration of the
charging cable is handy when buy additional cables.
Note that Figure 2-3 shows that the Google Pixel 4 XL also
includes an adapter that converts the charging cable from USB-A

to USB-C, just in case that is needed.
FIGURE 2-3: The electrical bits included with the Google Pixel 4 XL.

 The handset should come from the manufacturer with
approximately 25 percent to 75 percent charge remaining. This amount
may vary based on how old the handset is. Most smartphones leave the
manufacturer with almost a full charge. However, over time, all
batteries slowly lose charge. This is why the handset may end up only
being slightly charged by the time it is opened.
Accessories may be included, but maybe not
Unfortunately, the number of accessories included with
smartphones has dwindled over the years. While the Google Pixel
4 XL used in this chapter as an example includes a charging
block, this too has become a surprising feature to find included in
the package. Smartphone manufacturers are starting to include
only the barest of essentials with the handset; and given that they
assume most people already have a plethora of charging blocks
from other devices, these blocks are being left out of smartphone
packages.
Other accessories that may be found in the smartphone packaging
include:
 
Ear buds
Stylus (for phones like the Samsung Galaxy Note)
Extra styli
Stickers
What Should You Keep (and What You
Can Discard)
A lot of material comes in the smartphone box. Figure 2-4
illustrates a completely unpacked smartphone case. The charging
cable, charging block, SIM card removal tool, and handset are

required for using the handset. Putting those aside leaves a lot of
material and packaging that can be sifted through, as shown in
Figure 2-5.
Keeping the box as a place to store your smartphone, the
following items can be discarded:
 
Protective screen covering
Documentation packet and SIM card removal tool mounting card
Documentation packet holder
FIGURE 2-4: All of the goodies.

FIGURE 2-5: Everything that is not part of the smartphone.
 Remove the SIM card removal tool from the SIM card
removal tool mounting card before discarding it.
 If you plan to sell this smartphone at a later date, or possibly
even return it, save all of the items in the box and put them aside.
Installing the SIM Card
The SIM card is very important to the functionality of your
smartphone. The SIM card acts as a key that enables you to
access the cell towers of a specific wireless carrier. In other
words, if you want to communicate with a cellular network to
access the Internet, text family and friends, or place phone calls
(archaic I know) — the SIM card is how the owner of the cell
towers knows a specific smartphone has access to the network.

 Before booting your smartphone for the first time, the SIM
card should be installed. Installing the SIM card first helps expedite
the setup process as outlined in the next chapter. Yes, it is still possible
to set up the smartphone without the SIM card installed — there are
just a couple of steps that would be initially skipped.
The first step in installing the SIM card is to locate the SIM card
tray. This can be difficult to locate because it is meant to blend in
with the phone. Luckily, the tray will have a hole in it, as shown
in Figure 2-6. Notice that the SIM card removal tool has a pointy
stick on it. Insert this part of the tool into the hole in the SIM card
tray and it should pop right open (as shown in Figure 2-7).
The last step in the process is to place the new SIM card in the
tray and close it. Don’t worry about doing this step wrong; you
can’t! The SIM card and tray are both notched so that the card
will only fit onto the tray the correct way. Figure 2-8 illustrates
the correct placement of the SIM card on the tray for the Google
Pixel 4 XL.

FIGURE 2-6: The secret SIM tray access point.

FIGURE 2-7: An empty SIM card tray.

FIGURE 2-8: The SIM card installed.
A Quick Tour of Your Device’s
Hardware
A smartphone is a collection of myriad parts, pieces, and sensors
that all work together. While many smartphones may look slightly
different to the consumer, for the most part they contain the same

general features. The sample hardware discussed in this section is
from the Google Pixel 4 XL; however, most modern smartphones
have the same or similar hardware.
Not all Android smartphones look the same
While the Google Pixel 4 XL might have a big black square on
the back to house the camera, the camera on other smartphones
may be composed of three small circles. However, each
smartphone has a camera, and it will be in the same general
location. Figure 2-9 shows the location of the hardware on the
front of the Google Pixel 4 XL. Figure 2-10 illustrates the
hardware that can be found on the back of the smartphone.

FIGURE 2-9: The front of the smartphone.
Sometimes the differences are in the inside

Most smartphones also include a number of sensors inside the
device that cannot be seen from the outside. These include:
 
Radar/proximity sensor
GPS
Compass/orientation sensor
Temperature sensor

FIGURE 2-10: The back of the smartphone.
Altimeter
Impact sensor

Light sensor
 Some smartphones may include hardware inside the device
that others do not. For example, some smartphones may come
equipped with fingerprint readers or removable memory cards.
Keeping Your Device Charged and
Current
While charging your phone might seem like one of those subjects
that is elementary when it comes to electronic devices, some
finesse and care should be taken around when charging a new
smartphone. For example, have you ever noticed (or hear others
say) that the older a smartphone gets the faster the battery dies?
While there is some controversy around the cause of this —
conspiracy theorists may say that the smartphone manufacturers
purposely sabotage old phones to sell the newest models — there
are steps you can take to keep your battery healthy from an
electrical standpoint. It all comes down to how and when you
charge your phone.
This next section of the chapter is going to be somewhat
technical. (This is where I get to flex my nerdy electronic
engineering muscles.) If you want the quick and dirty of charging
it is this:
 For the life of the battery to last longer, wait for it to be as low
as possible before charging it; as soon as the battery has reached full
charge, disconnect it from the charger.
Now, if you want to know the technical stuff behind why this
helps the battery health of the smartphone, read on.

 The first thing to remember is that the smartphone is not
perfect. When it comes to reading the amount of charge left in its
battery, the smartphone can only tell two things for certain: when the
battery is completely full, and when the battery is completely empty.
Anything in between is an educated guess.
Now, being a capable computer, the educated guess is very good,
but it is still a guess. The smartphone uses methods such as
measuring the amount of flow resistance into and out of the
battery to guess how much is left. How does this affect charging
and battery life?
Suppose the smartphone literally has 49.992 percent charge left in
it. The smartphone does its internal guessing and tells us “Hey,
there is 50 percent battery.” Not a bad guess, so we plug the
phone in. We charge the phone until it says there is a charge of 60
percent (we were in a hurry). However, because the smartphone
only knows 0 percent and 100 percent with certainty, the actual
charge in the battery could be 59.991 percent now. What has
happened is the precision of the guess has slipped by .001
percent. Not a big deal right now, but over a few years and a
couple thousand charges, the educated guess could be one to two
percent off. This means the battery has less charge in it than the
smartphone thinks it does — thus giving the appearance that it is
not lasting as long.
So to avoid this, always try to charge the phone to 100 percent
before disconnecting it. Just leave the phone plugged into the
charger overnight and that will take care of it, right?
Not exactly.
The phone can tell when the battery is at 100 percent; however, it
has to use electronics to do this — the same electronics that make
the educated guess about how much battery life is left. While the
smartphone is on the charger, the educated guesser chips (that is
not the technical term for them), is constantly asking the battery:

 
“Are you full yet?”
“What percent are you?”
“Are you full yet?”
This happens constantly, for as long as the phone is plugged in.
Once the battery reaches 100 percent, if the charger is still
plugged in, the smartphone will say “Okay, I’m full now, please
turn off the charger.” The educated guesser chips will then go
back to work and, after a few minutes, guess that the battery has
dropped from 100 percent to 99.5 percent. They will turn the
charger back on (because it is still plugged in) and top off the
battery.
The problem with this scenario is that every time this top-off of
the battery happens, the educated guesser chips are going to lose a
little more precision in their guess. The result being, over a couple
of years, the smartphone’s educated guess about how much life is
in the battery may no longer be as educated as it once was.
 Therefore, to ensure that the battery life stays as healthy as
possible, wait until the battery is as low as possible before charging it.
When it reaches 100 percent charge, remove it from the charger.
Caring for Your Smartphone
Another way to ensure you get as much life out of your new
smartphone as possible is to properly care for it. Screen protectors
and phone cases are a great way of protecting a smartphone
against most daily hazards. However, there are other ways to
protect your smartphone. Cleaning the device and storing it
securely when not in use can go a long way to extending the life
of your new smartphone.

Cleaning your device
Most smartphone screens are made of a product that is very
strong and very scratch resistant. However, this does not mean
that they are impervious to damage. Cleaning a smartphone
screen regularly with a microfiber cloth is a great way to keep
damaging little particles off of the screen.
 Some clothing fabrics can be abrasive to smartphone screens
and create micro-scratches. Try to resist the urge to clean the screen by
wiping it on your sleeve or pant leg.
Cleaning the screen regularly can also help with the smartphone’s
touch detection. Dirt, grease, and other oils from your fingers and
face can build up on the screen and interfere with the
smartphone’s ability to recognize what you want to do.
 Cleaning the smartphone screen with a microfiber cloth is
important. This cleaning routine should also be extended to
smartphone’s front and rear cameras and sensors as well. However,
take care not to use any cleaning liquids or damp or wet cloths to clean
the smartphone. These can cause damage by lifting and removing
protective coatings or even seeping into the smartphone and damaging
circuits.
Storing your device
When not in use, a smartphone should be stored safely and
securely to avoid the risk of damage from an accidental knock or
fall. Try to keep the smartphone away from ledges to lessen the
risk of damage from a fall. Also, keep charging cables tucked
away to avoid the risk of someone catching a cable and knocking
the phone onto the floor.

 In general, smartphones should not be stored long-term
outdoors or in cars. Extreme changes in temperature can not only warp
the frame of the smartphone, but also cause the screen and other
internal components to crack. And extreme heat (like that inside a hot
car) can drain the battery more quickly.

Chapter 3
Deciding on Carrier Service
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Checking out what you can and cannot do without service
 Figuring out where to go for service
 Traveling with your smartphone
One of the more important considerations to make when setting
up a new smartphone is what wireless carrier to use for service. A
carrier is a fancy technical term for a phone company. That is, the
company that is going to provide cellular service to the phone. In
this chapter, you explore the ins and outs of wireless carriers, the
services they provide, and what service is required to get the most
out of your Android smartphone.
What Are Locked and Unlocked
Smartphones?
Most people purchase smartphones through a wireless carrier, in
which case their phones are locked to that carrier and the decision
of which wireless service to use is already made for them (unless,
of course, they want to switch carriers for a better deal). However,
smartphones can also be purchased “unlocked” directly from the
smartphone’s manufacturer. These unlocked smartphones can be
brought to almost any wireless carrier and set up on that carrier’s
network.
 When a smartphone is locked, that means it is tied to a specific
wireless carrier’s network. The smartphone will only work with that

carrier. This is to prevent people from purchasing smartphones from
one carrier during a sale, and then bringing the phone to another carrier
for service. Unlocked smartphones, on the other hand, work on most
any network.
 If a smartphone is purchased through a wireless carrier, AT&T
for example, and the owner wants to move to another carrier, such as
Verizon, the owner must get the smartphone unlocked through AT&T
first. Without AT&T unlocking the phone, it will not work on the
Verizon network.
Big Box Carriers: No, They Aren’t Used
for Moving
A big box carrier is not a moving service. Rather, it is a fun way
of referring to any one of the larger cell service providers that
offer service to smartphones. These carriers all have recognizable
names — AT&T, T-Mobile, and Verizon — and they tend to be
the more popular options when selecting service.
 Carriers are called carriers because their equipment carries
your signal from one location to another. In more technical terms,
cellular phones are basically really complicated radios, and in radio
technology, carrier waves — or carrier signals — are used to transmit
information from one line to another.
The larger carriers can offer a few things other carriers cannot. A
larger carrier is generally going to be able to offer a larger
coverage area, more extensive customer service, and better
discount rates in areas where they own towers. What makes
AT&T, T-Mobile, and Verizon the larger carriers really has less to
do about the number of customers (although that is a big part of

it) and more to do with how many cellular towers they own. The
number of towers a carrier owns gives that carrier control over a
specific region, and while all carriers can offer service throughout
most of the world, they may only own a relatively low number of
cellular towers.
How does this work? Suppose you live in Anytown and you
decide to go with Verizon as your wireless carrier. T-Mobile
might own every cellular service tower in Anytown. However,
behind the scenes, T-Mobile made a deal with Verizon and AT&T
to allow those companies’ customers to use T-Mobile’s Anytown
towers for a fee. Because of this deal, Verizon and AT&T can
offer service in Anytown.
The advantages of this are that the big box carriers can all offer
service that covers most of the country. Transparent to the
customer, any one of the three big carriers may be carrying the
signal at any one time. However, sometimes carriers are not able
to come to an agreement, and you may run into situations when
one carrier’s smartphone may work in a particular area while
another’s does not.
The disadvantage of this system is that the carriers cannot control
the quality of towers they do not own. Here’s an example: Carrier
A owns all the towers in Anytown. It agrees to let Carrier B use
the towers for a fee. However, Carrier A only gives Carrier B’s
customers the lowest quality channels. Therefore, while Carrier B
can say it offers service in Anytown, the service is not good
quality.
 Before selecting a big box carrier for a new smartphone, try to
research which carrier actually owns the towers in your area. Chances
are, you will get a better quality of service from the carrier that owns
the towers.
After selecting a carrier, the carrier will send you a SIM card that
is compatible with its network. The SIM card is the key to using a

carrier’s service. Once installed in the smartphone, it should
connect seamlessly to the network.
Checking Out Alternative Carriers
While the big box carriers seem to rule the carrier waves, you do
have other options. Several smaller carriers exist that can offer
features the bigger companies may not be able to.
 A smaller carrier can typically offer a lower rate for monthly
service at the expense of owning its own towers. The advantage to the
customer is that the customer pays less money for monthly service. For
customers on a budget, this might be the guiding factor in making a
selection. Also, smaller carriers tend to offer greater customer service,
though this is anecdotal as the true measure of customer service is an
individual’s satisfaction.
The disadvantage of getting service through a smaller carrier is
that the carrier doesn’t own any of its own cellular towers. This
means the service it provides is wholly dependent on the contracts
it has with a big box carrier for tower access.
 Because a smaller carrier usually does not own any cellular
towers, the service it provides will be on another carrier’s network of
towers. Therefore, if the smaller carrier has a good contract with the
carrier that owns the towers, it might have access to higher quality
channels. Conversely, if it has a less than optimal contract, it might
only have access to lower quality channels or no channels at all.
Finally, a customer’s experience with the quality of a smaller
carrier’s service is at the mercy of the carrier who owns the
towers. For example, if Small Carrier A has a contract to use Big
Carrier A’s towers, and Big Carrier A’s towers have a problem,

need maintenance, or need to be upgraded, that will affect Small
Carrier A’s service.
Some of the popular alternative carriers are Google Fi, Mint
Mobile, and v*s*ble. Google Fi and Mint Mobile offer service
over T-Mobile’s network of cellular towers, while v*s*ble uses
Verizon’s cellular towers.
What Can You Do Without Service?
Some people may choose to not use a wireless carrier at all.
Believe it or not, smartphones can still function without carrier
service. Carrier service gives a smartphone access to cellular
network towers. These towers act like giant two-way radio
antennas that let smartphones send and received data. The data
sent and received over the towers can be a telephone call, or the
data can be the Internet.
 However, smartphones have more than one radio.
Smartphones also have Wi-Fi radios built into them. This means that
almost anything a smartphone can do through a cellular tower —
texting, using the Internet, and placing and receiving phone calls — it
can also do over Wi-Fi without paying for carrier service. You can also
obtain a traditional phone number with apps such as Google Voice,
MizuDroid, and Skype without carrier service. This phone number can
be used to place and receive phone calls as long as the smartphone is
connected to Wi-Fi.

 The advantages of using Wi-Fi service rather than carrier
service is not having a reoccurring monthly fee. Most common
functions such as texting, using the Internet, and placing and receiving
phone calls still work well when using Wi-Fi. However, the
disadvantage is that the smartphone will only have service where it has
access to Wi-Fi. While you may have Wi-Fi access at home, in some
cars, at work, and while at some coffee shops, the vast majority of the
country is not covered by publicly accessible Wi-Fi. Also, many Wi-Fi
apps do not allow for calling 911. If foregoing carrier service is what
you want for your smartphone experience, be aware that depending on
the app used, you might not be able to call 911.
CALLING EMERGENCY SERVICES
One important disadvantage to not using a carrier service is that many 911 call centers can
now access mobile E911 data. This means that when you call 911 from a smartphone,
depending on your local 911 call center’s equipment, the 911 operators can either triangulate
your location based on data received from the cellular towers carrying your signal, or gather it
from the GPS within the smartphone. This is not possible with most Wi-Fi calling solutions. In
fact, many apps that allow for Wi-Fi calling do not support calling 911 at all.
However, you can still place a call to 911 without a carrier service. To place a call to 911
without carrier service, you must first disable your Wi-Fi and/or Wi-Fi calling applications,
and then place the call. All smartphones, regardless of service, must be allowed to place 911
calls through emergency channels in cellular towers. However, because the smartphone has no
service, and therefore has no phone number though the carrier, if your call to 911 is
disconnected, the 911 operator cannot call you back. Also, the 911 call center may not be able
to determine your location.

Chapter 4
Setting Up Your Device
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Getting your phone set up and ready to use
 Customizing accessibility settings
 Making sure your phone is secure
 Adding additional users to your phone
Now it is time to set up your shiny new smartphone. The Android
operating system needs a lot of information to get a smartphone
up and running. Luckily Android has a great visual tutorial to
guide new users through the process of getting everything set up.
In this chapter, you walk through the startup process to get your
phone up and running, including setting specific language and
accessibility settings as well as setting up your Wi-Fi connection,
email account, and security. You also discover how to add
additional users to your phone if you need to share your phone
with others.
Activating Your Phone
Power on your smartphone. If this is the first time the device has
been turned on, and no previous setup has been completed, the
phone will begin preparing for the setup process. You should see
a screen similar to that shown in Figure 4-1.

 There are many different Android smartphones, and many
different versions of the Android operating system that can run on each
of them. The setup process followed in this chapter is only one of the
possible setup procedures. Fortunately, no matter which version of
Android you are using, the setup process should be very close to this.

FIGURE 4-1: Preparing for setup.

 If you are unsure how to respond to any of the settings in the
setup process, or are afraid you set something up wrong, don’t worry
— almost every setting in the setup process can be changed any time
after the process is finished.
Parlez-Vous Français? Android Is
Multilingual
Android realizes that not everyone speaks the same language. For
this reason, the next step in the setup process is to determine what
language you would prefer your smartphone to be in.
As soon as the smartphone has finished preparing for setup, you
are presented with a greeting screen. Chances are this screen will
be in English (see Figure 4-2). If you want your smartphone to
use another language other than English, this is the time to let
Android know. Simply tap the English (United States) indicator to
be presented with the full list of language options, as shown in
Figure 4-3. At last count, Android could understand and be set up
in around 200 different languages.

FIGURE 4-2: The initial greeting screen.

FIGURE 4-3: You can choose from lots of languages.

 If you miss this step in the setup, or change your mind later,
you can change Android’s language at any time after the setup is
complete. Go to Settings ⇒  System ⇒ Languages & Input. From here
you can not only select a new language, but you can also switch
between languages on the fly.
Customizing Your Vision Settings
After setting your preferred language, tap the Start button to begin
the setup process. The first step is to set your vision options. This
enables Android to be sure you can see all the information
presented to you (see Figure 4-4). If you usually have trouble
seeing the icons on your smartphone screen or reading text on the
device, this is where you set the default size of both. Once you
select (or choose not to change) the visibility setting, click Next.
 If you are visually impaired, there is also an accessibility
setting here that allows you to select items for Android to read aloud.

FIGURE 4-4: Making sure you can see your screen.
Accessing Wi-Fi

During the next step in the process, Android sets up the
smartphone to connect to your Wi-Fi network. Figure 4-5 shows
the Wi-Fi setup screen. If you do not have a Wi-Fi connection, or
you are not in a place with access to your home connection, you
can tap the Skip button at the bottom of the screen. However, if
you do have access to your Wi-Fi network, you should set this up
now. Once you locate and establish a Wi-Fi connection, Android
connects to the Internet (see Figure 4-6). Then comes the
important stuff.
With a connection to the Internet is established, Android begins to
download any critical Android updates that have been released
between the time the smartphone was manufactured and when
you set it up. Typically this process only takes about four to five
minutes.
After the updates have been downloaded, the setup moves to the
next step in the process: copying data (see Figure 4-7). If you are
upgrading from an older Android smartphone and you have
backed-up the contents of the smartphone to your Google
account, you can use this step to download that data to this
smartphone.

FIGURE 4-5: Looking for Wi-Fi.

FIGURE 4-6: Connecting to the Internet.

 This step also works if you are transferring the contents of one
Android smartphone to another. To transfer your data, first make sure
the phones are connected (typically by a USB cable), and then tap
Next on the Copy Apps & Data screen shown in Figure 4-7 to start the
transfer process. Android will ask you which data you want to copy
over to the new smartphone. If you are not interested in coping data
from one phone to another, you can skip this step by tapping the Don’t
Copy option in the lower-left corner of the screen.
 While most steps in the setup process can be skipped and
changed after the setup process is complete, copying data is not one of
them. If you want to copy data from an older device to this device after
the setup is complete, you will need to reset the smartphone and start
the setup process again — wiping out any data that is on the new
smartphone.

FIGURE 4-7: Copying data from one Android phone to another.
Adding a Gmail Account

With any old data copied over (or not), Android now asks you for
your Google Account information, as shown in Figure 4-8. If you
are unsure of the credentials for your Google Account, your
username is typically your Gmail email address.
 You do not need to use a Gmail email address to set up a
Google Account. However, if you have one, use it here. If you are
unsure, or do not have a Google Account, tap Create Account to set
one up.
If you have an existing Google Account, once you enter your
login information, you are asked to provide two-factor
identification. This means Google will attempt to contact
whatever device you set up us as your two-factor authentication
device to ensure you are who you say you are. This step is
illustrated in Figure 4-9.
Once your account has been verified, Google asks you if you
want to add the phone number of the smartphone you are
currently setting up to your account as a backup. This is a
personal preference; choose to add your phone number if you
want to add this smartphone to your account. The smartphone
setup will not change if you add the phone to your Google
account or not.

FIGURE 4-8: Entering your account information.

FIGURE 4-9: Two-factor authentication.
After entering your Google Account credentials, or following the
on-screen steps to create a new account, tap Next to move to the

next step in the process. At this point, Google asks you to accept
the Google Terms of Service. Tap I Agree to accept the terms
move to the next step.
Setting Up Security
You have reached the most important part of the setup process:
securing your device. Unfortunately, smartphones are lost or
misplaced every day. Without the proper security setup, any
information on that smartphone is open to anyone who finds the
device. This includes access to your primary email address, which
can then be used to reset the usernames and passwords on almost
any other online account you have.
Device security on an Android smartphone can take many forms,
from using biometric identification (fingerprint and facial
recognition), to drawing a pattern on the screen with your finger,
to the tried-and-true PIN to unlock your phone. If you choose to
set up a biometric locking system, Android still asks you to
establish a PIN, just in case your biometrics are not working.
 Having biometrics that do not work is not as nefarious as it
may sound. Wearing gloves while using your phone will get in the way
of a fingerprint sensor, just as wearing a mask, sunglasses, or a ski cap
will interfere with facial recognition.
Figure 4-10 illustrates the screen for setting up a fingerprint
sensor. Not all Android smartphones contain fingerprint sensors;
however, if yours does, follow the on-screen prompts in this step
to register your fingerprint on your smartphone. Once Android
has detected your fingerprint, you are asked to also provide a PIN
just in case your fingerprint cannot be read, as shown in Figure 4-
11.
Once your fingerprint has been added successfully, Android
prompts you to move on to the next step in the process, which is

to confirm that you want to continue with the setup or finish
setting up any additional features your particular smartphone may
have such as a stylus, Google Pay, and/or Google Assistant. Tap
Continue to continue with the setup, or tap Leave & Get
Reminder to finish the rest of the setup at another time.

FIGURE 4-10: Setting up your fingerprint.

FIGURE 4-11: Setting the backup PIN.
How About a Couple of Extras?

At this point in the process, Android has enough information that
if you were to stop the setup process, Android would be able to
start up your smartphone and run. However, you can choose to set
up a few extras. Some of these extras may be specific to the type
of smartphone you have. For example, if your smartphone comes
equipped with a stylus, you may be asked to set that up now.
For the Google Pixel 4 XL, the next step of the setup process
asked me to set up Google Assistant. Figure 4-12 illustrates the
Google Assistant setup screen.
 The functionality of Google Assistant is covered in detail in
Chapter 19, but for those coming from an iPhone environment, think
of Google Assistant as Siri, or even Alexa, for your Android
smartphone. The good thing is that you can choose to not set up
Google Assistant now and do it at a later time.
If you do choose to set up Google Assistant now, Android
prompts you to repeat a couple of phrases that will help it
recognize your voice. Android will congratulate you once it has a
grasp on how to recognize your voice, as shown in Figure 4-13.

FIGURE 4-12: Setting up Google Assistant.

FIGURE 4-13: Android recognizes your voice.
To finish setting up the features of your phone, continue to walk
through any of your smartphone’s specific installation steps.

There should not be many of them, and just remember that you
can choose to skip any of them to complete the process.
Congratulations! Your Android smartphone is now fully
configured and ready to use. Figure 4-14 shows the default home
screen of a configured Android smartphone. You should see a
screen similar to this on your smartphone.

FIGURE 4-14: The default home screen after the initial setup.
Setting Up Multiple Users

Now that Android is set up, one feature you may find useful is the
ability to have multiple users on each phone. If you are in a
situation where you may need to share your phone with other
people, but you do not necessarily want to share all your secrets
with them, you can set them up as additional users.
 Having multiple users works very similarly to having a
computer that multiple people can log onto. When the phone is
restarted, and at any time after, the current phone user can be logged
off and a different user logged on.
To add a second user to your smartphone, go to Settings ⇒ 
System ⇒ Multiple Users. You should see a screen that looks
similar to the one shown in Figure 4-15. If you tap the plus sign
(+) indicator to add a new user, Android confirms the action (see
Figure 4-16). Accepting the confirmation by tapping OK begins
the setup process.
The rest of the process for adding a second user is identical to the
setup process covered in this chapter. Think about it this way:
You are “setting up” the phone for a new user; therefore, you
must follow the same setup steps for that user that you did for
you.

FIGURE 4-15: The current user(s).

FIGURE 4-16: Confirming your choice.
Once the new user has been added, you can switch between users
at any time. To switch between users, swipe down from the home

screen to expose the notification bar, then swipe down again to
expand it. Once the notification bar is expanded, tap the user icon
to open a screen from which you can select the user profile you
want.

Chapter 5
Tapping and Swiping Your Way
around the Phone
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Navigating around your device
 Finding out the difference between a tap, a swipe, and a
hold
 Using advanced navigation techniques
Now that your smartphone has been set up, it is time to discover
how to navigate around this technical marvel. While the
smartphone interface may seem straightforward, there are some
intricacies to navigating around the interface. In this chapter, you
explore the standard navigation techniques of tapping, swiping,
and holding, and then discover how to use the more advanced
navigation techniques of gestures and waving.
Starting with Standard Navigation
The standard way to navigate around your Android smartphone’s
interface is by using the touchscreen. And in order to master the
Android interface, you need to know some basic functions.
The touch interface
When navigating your smartphone using the touch interface,
remember the following:
 
Every part of the screen is touchable and probably does something.
Android knows the difference between a tap, a swipe, and a hold —
and the difference is probably more subtle than you expect.

The touch interface is not always going to work if you are wearing
gloves, have cold hands, or have dirty hands.
That being said, let’s dive right in and explore the touchscreen.
The tap
The main interaction between you and your smartphone is the tap.
A single tap is used to “click” on buttons, open emails and
messages, and myriad other functions on an Android smartphone.
Having just set up your phone, Android should have placed a
number of app icons on your home screen. While the contents of
your home screen can change, in general you should see the icons
for:
 
Phone Dialer
Messages
Google Play
Chrome (web browser)
Camera
Tap the Messages app once to open it. This should launch
Messages. When you open them, most apps fill your entire
smartphone screen. This means that you cannot see or interact
with anything on your home screen while you are in the app. To
do that, you have to minimize the app or send it to the
background.
 If you come from a computer environment, you may be used
to “double-clicking” on things to interact with them. Do not “double
tap” in the home screen on your Android smartphone — you will only
end up opening the app twice. All you need is a single tap to open an
app.

To practice sending apps to the background and returning to your
home screen, you are going to use your first gesture to send the
Messages app to the background. To get back to your home
screen, follow these steps:
 
1. 
Place your finger just off the bottom edge of the screen.
If you start on the screen (rather than off) Android will think you
are just trying to scroll through data in the app.
2. 
In one motion, drag your finger about halfway up the screen
and release it — like you are flicking a coin off of a table.
If you hold the gesture too long, Android will not recognize it.
This motion might take a couple of tries to get right if you have
never done it before. The important parts to remember are:
 
Begin the motion just off the bottom edge of the screen.
Let your finger come off the screen at the halfway point.
 This kind of motion is known as a gesture in Android.
Gestures are special ways of navigating the touch interface, and you
explore a few more later in this chapter.
The double tap
There is one place in the Android environment where the double-
tapping action works. If your smartphone is locked and has gone
to sleep (the screen is either all black, or it is black and just the
time is visible), a double tap anywhere on the screen will wake it
up.

USING GESTURES ON A SAMSUNG
PHONE
If you are using a Samsung smartphone, you may notice that gestures are not working. By
default Samsung smartphones include navigation buttons in the notification bar that enable
you to perform many of these actions. However, if you want to switch from using navigation
buttons to using gestures (like the ones used throughout this book), follow these steps:
 
1. Open Settings and search for “navigation bar.”
2. Tap Navigation bar from the results and then tap Navigation bar again.
3. Select Full Screen Gestures to activate gestures.
To try this, place your smartphone on a table or other flat surface
and press the power button once to put your phone to sleep. Then,
without moving the phone, double tap anywhere on the screen.
The smartphone should now wake up and display the current time
— plus the rest of your lock screen.
The hold
Next, let’s take a look at the tap’s older sibling, the hold. Also
known as the long press, the hold is used to select items on the
interface. The hold can also be used to bring up secret menus. In
short, a hold is just a tap that you do not release until another
action happens on the smartphone. To do a hold, place the tip of
your finger on an item and do not release it for one second.
 One second might not sound like a long time, but to a
computer (like the one in your Android smartphone), it is a very long
time. Smartphones process information in milliseconds; this means
that in the one second you are holding your finger on the screen, your
smartphone could have theoretically done one thousand other things.

If you have an app that contains a list of items, such as Messages
or Gmail, the hold can be used to select an item and put the app
into select mode. For example, in Messages, if you want to delete
five text messages, hold the first message. After one second,
Android gives you a little vibration to let you know that it
recognized the hold, and the first message is selected (which is
indicated with a check mark). Messages are now in select mode.
You can select the remaining four messages simply by tapping
each one.
 The hold can also be used to display secret menus. If you hold
the icon for Messages (rather than tapping it to open the app), a menu
appears. From this menu you can start a new text message or open
Messages directly to a previous conversation. These context-specific
menus come in handy when you want to perform an action quickly.
Swiping
The next method to master in your quest of understanding all
things Android is the swipe. Where the tap and the hold are used
to select something, the swipe is used to perform an action.
Swiping is useful in several places: on the lock screen, on the
home screen, and within an app.
First, as the name implies, a swipe is a dragging motion across the
screen of your Android smartphone in a particular direction. You
can either swipe up, swipe down, swipe left, or swipe right.
 There is no difference between “swipe up” or “up swipe,” as
there is no official term for the action; it is more up to whatever sounds
best to your ear. For consistency sake, in this book I stick to swipe up,
swipe down, swipe left, and swipe right — but feel free to up swipe,
down swipe, left swipe, and right swipe all you want.

In the previous section you discovered your first gesture — a
swipe up that started off the bottom edge of the phone. The
difference between the swipe gesture and this swipe action is that
this swipe starts and ends on the screen.
To swipe, place your finger on the screen and with a fluid motion,
swipe it in the desired direction — up, down, left, or right —
releasing your finger before you reach the edge of the screen.
 The motion must be fluid, and the swipe must start when you
finger touches the screen. Otherwise Android will read it as a hold.
Swiping on the lock screen
Two types of swipes can be performed by default on the lock
screen: the swipe up and the swipe down. Depending on how
your settings are configured, you can also perform a swipe left.
From the lock screen, a swipe up unlocks your smartphone. Give
this a try: From your Android smartphone’s lock screen, make an
upward sweeping motion with your finger on the screen. You will
be presented with the unlock screen.
Not too shabby, right?
If you are not that easily impressed, try this: Again, from the lock
screen, swipe down. You just opened the notification drawer and
part of the quick access settings drawer. You can access several
features here, which are discussed in more detail in later chapters.
However, right now you are just exploring the interface.

 If your phone is configured to display notifications on the lock
screen, a swipe left discards the notification. This does not delete or
change anything; all it does is tell Android, “I don’t want to see this
notification anymore.” For example, if a notification from Gmail
appears telling you that you received a new email from Aunt Polly, a
swipe left on the notification does not delete the email, mark it as read,
or do anything else — it just tells Android, “Thank you for letting me
know, I’ll look into that later.”
Swiping on the home screen
The swipe up, swipe down, swipe left, and swipe right motions
are all available from the home screen. While on the home screen,
a swipe up opens the application drawer. This is where all your
apps have been hiding. When you install a new app, it lives here,
in alphabetical order, with all its friends.
A swipe down from the home screen opens the same notification
drawer and partial quick access settings drawer you opened on the
lock screen in the previous section. The quick access settings
drawer is one of the most commonly accessed features of Android
smartphones, so Google made sure you could get to it from
almost anywhere on the interface.
The swipe left and swipe right motions are used to navigate
between your home screens. That’s right, you can have multiple
home screens (which is further explained in Chapter 6), and
swiping right or left moves you back and forth between them.
That is, except on the main home screen. If you are on your main
home screen and you swipe right, you will open the Google Feed,
which is a feed of interesting articles gathered from multiple
sources by Google based on your interests.
Swiping within an app

 When you are in an app, the rules for what the swipe up, swipe
down, swipe left, and swipe right motions do go out the window. The
swiping action can do whatever the developer of the app wants it to do,
within certain boundaries. However, here are some basic guidelines:
 
Swipe up and swipe down will almost always be used to scroll through
content. Whether it is a list of movies playing at the theater, a
spreadsheet, or a web page, swipe up and swipe down provides your
scrolling action.
Swipe left and swipe right are a little more flexible. In general, these
actions navigate between views, pages, or forms. However, the swipe
left and swipe right actions can also be used to delete items from a list,
archive items, close items, and possibly initial transactions.
 Swiping within an app is contextual and should be apparent
based on the clues provided by the app’s developer.
Searching
Searching for information is quite easy on an Android
smartphone, and can be done two ways — depending on the type
of information desired.
Google Assistant
The first way to search is with Google Assistant. You may or may
not have already noticed a search bar with a G on it at the very
bottom of the home screen, as shown in Figure 5-1. This is the
Google Assistant search bar that you can use to search for apps
that are installed on your smartphone, as well as to search for
anything on the Internet. Think of the Google Assistant search bar
as the Google search, plus your smartphone!

FIGURE 5-1: The search bar at the bottom of the home screen.
Suppose you have an app for Joe’s Moving Outlet installed on
your smartphone, and you just can’t seem to find it. Simply begin
typing “Joe” in the Google Assistant search bar and the icon for
Joe’s Moving Outlet should appear in the search results. Also,
suppose you need a really good eggplant parmesan recipe for
tonight (because let’s be honest, who doesn’t?), simply enter
“eggplant parmesan recipes” into the Google Assistant search bar
and the power of Google will scour the Internet looking for
eggplant parmesan recipes.

 The Internet-searching capabilities of the Google Assistant
search bar only works if your smartphone has a connection to the
Internet. If you are in an area with no phone service, or you are not
connected to Wi-Fi, Google Assistant will not be able to search the
Internet.
Contextual search
The second type of search available on your Android smartphone
is contextual searching. Most Google-developed apps contain a
search bar that enables you to search for data within that specific
app. For example, if you open the Settings app, you will see a
search bar at the top of the app. This search bar lets you search for
specific settings. Likewise, Gmail has a search bar that lets you
search through your email, and Messages has a search bar that
lets you search through your text messages.
Moving on to Advanced Navigation
You’ve now covered the basics of navigating the Android
smartphone interface. It’s time to move on to more advanced
navigation techniques: using gestures, pinching to zoom in and
out, and waving.
Using gestures
Earlier in this chapter, I quickly introduced the gesture of swiping
up from off the bottom edge of the screen to send an open app to
the background. However, what if you want to open it back up, or
conversely, what if you want to close the app completely?
From the home screen, tap the Messages app to open it again.
Then, use the swipe up gesture to send it to the background. Now,
you should be back at your home screen. Try the swipe up gesture
again; this opens the All Open Apps view. From the All Open
Apps view, you see a minimized version of all of the apps
currently running on your smartphone. To open one back up,

simply tap on it. However, if you want to close the app
completely, you need to do another gesture, the flick.
 To close the Messages app, place your finger on the app and
flick it up as though you are throwing it off the screen. It’s harsh, I
know, but it’s how we close things here. The Messages app is now
closed, and you discovered another gesture.
The next important gesture you need to learn to successfully
navigate your way around your Android smartphone is the back
gesture. The back gesture does two things. First, it navigates you
back from where you are now to where you were before within an
app. Second, like the swipe up gesture, it can be used to send an
app to the background. For example, tap to open your Gmail app
(assuming you have it configured). You may see a list of emails
that you most likely have not replied to yet (like the one you just
got from Aunt Polly). Let’s call this the Gmail home screen.
Now, tap Aunt Polly’s email, or any other email, to open the
email message. The email fills your entire screen. How do you get
back to the Gmail home screen? Place your finger on the right-
hand edge of the screen (your finger should be touching the very
border of the screen only), and slowly drag it toward the middle
of the screen. After about a half inch or so, you should see a white
arrow appear on the right side of the screen pointing toward the
left. This arrow is telling you that if you release your finger now,
you will perform the back action and go back to the last screen
you were on — the Gmail home screen. Release your finger and
you should see the Gmail home screen.
 This also works as a gesture from the left. However, be
careful: The gesture from the left to the right is still the back gesture.
Do not expect to go forward if you gesture from the left. A gesture
from either the left or the right will still bring you back.

Now from the Gmail Home screen, you can send Gmail to the
background by either performing the swipe up gesture or
performing the back gesture again. Within any app, performing
the back gesture from the home screen of that app sends you back
to Android’s home screen, and sends the app to the background.
 If you are using a Samsung smartphone and you enabled full
gestures (covered earlier in this chapter), this particular gesture may
not work as expected. For Samsung smartphones, swipe right moves to
the previous page, while swipe left moves to the next page. If you want
to move back, you need to swipe up, diagonally, from the bottom right
corner of the screen.
Pinch to zoom
Another common gesture to be aware of is the pinch to zoom. If
you are viewing a picture, website, document, or some other form
of media and want to zoom in or out for a better view, use the
pinch gesture. Much like it sounds, the pinch is performed by
placing two fingers, apart, on the screen. Then, move your fingers
away from each other to zoom out, or closer to each other to
zoom in. A neat little trick here is that you can also move your
fingers clockwise or counter-clockwise to rotate the image.
Waving
Depending on the age and model of your Android smartphone, it
may be equipped with proximity sensors that understand more
gestures. In fact, these gestures can be performed without even
touching the screen. Earlier in the chapter, you used the double
tap to wake up Android. However, if your phone is equipped with
the proximity sensor, you can simply wave your hand about two
to three inches over the phone to wake it up.

 The wave gesture is a single motion from right to left or left to
right, similar to turning the page of a book.
The wave gesture can also be used in place of the back gesture in
some apps, like Chrome, or it can be used in some music apps to
move forward and backward through your playlist.
 Some people found using these proximity gestures
cumbersome, and they never really caught on. However, if your
Android smartphone is so equipped, give them a try; you might like
them.

Part 2
The Grand Tour

IN THIS PART …
 
Find out the difference between the lock screen and the home screen
and you can choose to have more than one home screen.
Become a whiz at navigating the Google apps that come preinstalled
on your Android smartphone, including the Google Calendar, Maps,
Gmail, Chrome, and GPay.
Discover how to search for and install new apps and why you can’t
delete some apps from your smartphone.
Explore widgets and how they can turn your Android smartphone into
a productivity powerhouse.
Understand how to set up Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and a mobile hotspot.
Customize how you receive notifications and how to view and respond
to them.

Chapter 6
Unlocking the Secrets of the Screens
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Navigating the lock screen
 Exploring the home screen(s)
 Keeping your smartphone secure
The majority of your interaction with an Android smartphone
happens between two screens: the lock screen and the home
screen. In this chapter, you find out how to tell the difference
between, and navigate around, these two screens.
 The Android operating system enables you to have more than
one home screen, something I explain later in this chapter. Therefore, I
often refer to the home screen as the “home screen(s).” If you do
choose to have more than one home screen, the information in this
chapter applies to all of your home screens.
The Lock Screen versus the Home
Screen(s)
The easiest way to think about the difference between the lock
screen and the home screen is to picture your house. Your house
could have a plain, unassuming door. If this door has a small
window in it, you might be able to get a quick glance inside the
house, but that is about it. The main purpose of the door is to
block others from entering your home uninvited. You achieve this
goal by putting a lock on your door.

Once you are through the locked door, you can access the home.
All of your stuff is inside your home. You may even have it
arranged in rooms with some stuff in one room and even more
stuff in another. There might even be stuff you put in a specific
room because you have no use for it, but just can’t seem to let go
of it. However, for the most part, you know where everything is
in your house.
 This is a good analogy for your smartphone. The lock screen
serves as the door. It can — and should — contain a lock that keeps
uninvited users from accessing your smartphone. The lock screen can
even be configured to give you a quick glimpse into what is going on
inside. Whereas the home screen(s) are like your home. The home
screen(s) contain, organize, and present your apps and other
information in a way that is meaningful to you.
What you can do on the lock screen
The lock screen is the first screen you see when you access your
smartphone, and it is used to secure your phone from the prying
eyes of would-be hackers. After all, you wouldn’t want just
anyone seeing your high score in Wordle. However, that is not all
the lock screen does. The lock screen can be configured to
provide you with some very useful information, while still
keeping your Wordle score safe.
The lock screen can be configured to present you with the
following information:
 
The current time
The current date
Notifications
Icons of any applications currently running on your smartphone
Current battery level

Lock status
Accessing the lock screen
You access the lock screen in several different ways. The default
way is to press the power button once. One quick press is all you
need.
 Do not quickly press and release the power button multiple
times — doing so activates the panic button and begins an emergency
routine that is covered in Chapter 14. Also, you should not hold the
power button down for a long time. The smartphone interprets this as
you wanting to power off or reboot the device.
Once the lock screen is activated, you should see a screen that
looks similar to the one shown in Figure 6-1. To enter your phone
from this screen, you simply swipe up, assuming you have not yet
configured any kind of password or lock. Placing your finger at
the bottom of your smartphone’s screen and swiping it more than
halfway up your screen opens the lock screen and lets you into
the smartphone.

FIGURE 6-1: The lock screen.
In Android, swiping up is known as a gesture. Gestures are
shortcuts to unlocking abilities in your Android smartphone that

would otherwise need a physical button or app (both of which
take up valuable space).
You have a set amount of time in which to complete the swiping
gesture before the smartphone assumes you don’t know what you
are doing. If you are not familiar with swiping or smartphone
gestures in general, and find that Android isn’t quite
understanding what you want to do, you might just need a little
bit of practice. In the end, it should be a quick, smooth, deliberate
motion. (The details of tapping and swiping your way around the
phone, including using gestures, are discussed in Chapter 5.)
 Swiping up unlocks your lock screen. However, swiping up
again or — if you are trying to out-smart your smartphone — swiping
down does not relock it. These gestures are reserved for other actions
on the home screen. To relock your smartphone, give the power button
another quick press and that should do the trick.
After swiping up to open the lock screen, you are now on the
home screen, and you should see a couple of preinstalled apps.
However, you are not quite done on the lock screen yet. With the
lock screen opened, you can access a couple of configuration
options to make opening it easier in the future.
Configuring the lock screen
In the previous section, you learned that quickly pressing the
power button activates your lock screen. This is a very intuitive
thing to do — pressing the power button turns things on.
However, you can configure Android to recognize other actions
for accessing the lock screen.
With the lock screen opened, swipe down from the top of the
screen. This opens the notification drawer. Swiping down again
while the notification drawer is open expands it, as shown in
Figure 6-2. Somewhere around the middle of the screen you
should see a gear icon. Tap the gear icon to enter the

smartphone’s settings. Scroll down through the settings until you
see Display. Tap Display and look for Lock Screen.
FIGURE 6-2: The notification drawer and gear icon.

 It is important to note that, if you are using a Samsung
smartphone, the easiest way to access the settings screen is to tap the
All Apps icon from the home screen, and select the Settings app.
 While on the settings screen, you can also tap the magnifying
glass at the top of the screen to search for a specific setting. Searching
for “Lock Screen” brings you to the settings that you are looking for
here.
Once you are in the lock screen’s display settings, you can
configure how the smartphone should respond to your attempts to
wake it. Your options are:
 
Idle lock screen: This setting tells Android to use its geomagnetic
field sensor, also known as the Position Sensor, to detect when you are
nearby and automatically display the lock screen for you.
Reach to check phone: This setting, like Idle lock screen, uses the
Position Sensor to detect if you are physically reaching for your
smartphone. If it detects that you are, it displays the lock screen.
Tap to check phone: This setting pretty much does what it says. If
you set this to On, tapping on your smartphone’s darkened screen
wakes it up and displays the lock screen.
Lift to check phone: Another win for descriptive setting names. Set
this to On to have Android automatically display the lock screen when
you lift up your device.
What you can do on the home screen(s)
Now that you have opened the door and accessed the home, um,
screen, what can you do?
The home screen is where you can place all of your important
apps and information in a way that is meaningful for you. By

default, the home screen should present you with the following
information:
 
Time
Date
Icons of currently running apps
Icons of apps that have presented you with a notification
Signal indicators
Battery strength indicator
Preinstalled app icons
Google Assistant search bar
Figure 6-3 illustrates the default Android home screen.

FIGURE 6-3: The default home screen.
Android displays what it interprets as the most useful apps (or the
apps it wants you to find as most useful) and displays them

prominently on the default home screen. You should see some
variation of the following apps on your default home screen:
 
Chrome: Web browser
Photos: A photo gallery
Phone: Used to make phone calls
Messages: Used for texting
Google Play: The app store
Gmail: An email app
Camera: The smartphone’s camera
These are not the only apps that are currently installed on your
smartphone. In fact, there are probably around 30 preinstalled
apps on your smartphone right now. You can access them with
another gesture, the swipe up!
You can perform three different swipe up gestures from the home
screen, and they all do different things. The difference between
two of them is where you start the swipe. The third depends on
what is on the screen.
Place your finger in the middle of the screen and swipe up. This
gesture opens the app drawer. The app drawer contains a
scrollable list of all the apps installed on your smartphone in
alphabetical order. You can access any of your apps from the app
drawer. Pretty convenient, right?
If you attempt to open the app drawer and find that you are left
with a blurred screen that reads “No recent items,” don’t panic.
You just discovered the second type of swipe up gesture. This is
called a home swipe. The home swipe performs two different
functions depending on where your finger starts the gesture. To
see this in action, from your home screen, tap the Messages icon.
The text messaging app opens. This is great if you want to send a
text message, but right now you just want to get back to your
home screen. Performing a home swipe minimizes the Messages

app and sends you magically back to your home screen. That is
the first function of the home swipe.
To bring the Message app back, swipe up from the bottom edge of
the screen. A screen with a smaller version of your Messages app
appears. This tells you that Messages is still running in the
background. You can do three things from here:
 
Tap the Messages app to go back to it and read or compose texts.
Put your finger on the Messages app and fling it to the top of the
screen to close it.
Home swipe again to go back to your home screen.
Swipe up again, only this time start the swipe with your finger
closer to the center of the screen than to the edge. You should
open the App drawer — a list of all of your installed apps.
 If you are using a Samsung smartphone, these two gestures are
very distinct. Swiping up from the bottom of the screen opens your app
drawer, while swiping up from the bottom-left corner opens your list
of running apps.
 You should check your list of running app frequently. Closing
apps that you are no longer using frees up memory and keeps your
smartphone running smoothly.
You can perform two more gestures from the home screen: the
left swipe and right swipe.
The left swipe — placing your finger on the right edge of the
screen and swiping it to the left — navigates you between home
screens. If you add another home screen to your smartphone,
which I discuss how to do in the next section, the left swipe lets
you navigate between them.

The right swipe is more of a key to a secret portal. Well, not
really, but it can seem that way. The right swipe — placing your
finger on the left edge of the screen and swiping it to the right —
opens the Google Feed (or the Bixby home screen if you are
using Samsung). The Google Feed can only be accessed from
your default home screen and is a type of news feed where
Google displays stories you may find interesting.
 A left swipe only displays the Google Feed from the default
home screen. If you have more than one home screen, and you are on
your second home screen, a left swipe navigates you back to your
default home screen.
Securing Access to the Phone with the
Lock Screen
As discussed in Chapter 4, having a lock on your smartphone is
one of the best ways to secure your device and keep your
information safe. A password secures your smartphone in the
event that you lose your device or it is stolen from you; a
password is also a convenient way to simply keep your secrets
away from the prying eyes of others.
 The lock screen does not show any critical data and does not
allow any apps on your phone to be opened or used. Typically, the only
information shown on the lock screen is the time, battery life, and
possibly notifications (this setting is configurable).

 If you are currently using your Android smartphone and you
want to quickly switch to the lock screen, all you have to do is give the
power button a quick tap. This should send your smartphone to the
lock screen immediately.
Once the lock screen is engaged, the only way back into your
smartphone is to enter the password (which can be either a PIN, a
pattern, facial recognition, or a fingerprint) you created during the
initial set up process. If you pressed the power button a little too
long, don’t worry. Performing a long press on the power button,
as opposed to a little tap, brings up the Power Menu shown in
Figure 6-4. To lock your smartphone from the Power Menu,
simply tap the Lockdown icon.

FIGURE 6-4: The Power Menu.
Changing your password

You may want to change your smartphone’s password from time
to time — someone might have figured out your password, your
password is getting old, or you might just want a nice change of
pace. Whatever your reason is, changing your password is easy
on Android.
To change your password, follow these steps:
 
1. Swipe down on the home screen to open the notification drawer.
2. 
Swipe down again to expand the notification drawer and then
tap the gear icon (refer back to Figure
6-2 for the location of
the gear icon).
This opens the smartphone’s settings.
3. 
From the settings screen, navigate to Security  ⇒  Screen
Lock.
To access Screen Lock, you need to enter the smartphone’s
current password.
4. 
Enter your current password.
From the Screen Lock screen, either change your smartphone’s
current password or choose a new type of password altogether —
just to keep yourself on your toes.
 Information technology security experts recommend changing
your smartphone password every 90 days.
Setting up facial recognition
If your smartphone is equipped with facial recognition as a
security feature, and you want to disable it, change it, or activate
it, follow these steps:
 
1. Swipe down on the home screen to open the notification drawer.

2. Swipe down again to expand the notification drawer and then tap
the gear icon to open the smartphone’s settings.
3. Navigate to Security  ⇒  Face Unlock.
4. 
Enter the smartphone’s password to access the Face Unlock
menu where you can make your changes.
This is Android’s way of making sure you are who you say you
are.
 If you have not activated Face Unlock before, Android will
ask you to pose for some pictures. What Android is really doing here is
learning your face. If you want to get technical, Android is using an
infrared dot projector to cover your face in a bunch of invisible dots,
creating a digital map of what you look like — no, really. Android
saves that map, and every time you want to unlock your phone using
facial recognition, it projects the infrared dots back onto your face and
checks that they line up with the models that are saved in its memory.
Once Android captures your face (or a digital map of it), you can
activate several settings. Just tap the toggle button to the on
position to activate any of the following settings:
 
Unlock your phone: This setting tells Android to use facial
recognition to unlock your phone instead of a PIN or password.
Verify it’s you in apps: This setting allows Android to use facial
recognition in place of some passwords on apps. For example, if your
banking app supports facial recognition, Android will allow the app to
use it. If you do not set this, you will just need to use your password
every time you open the app.
Skip screen lock: This setting lets Android to open your phone as
soon as it recognizes your face. That means Android will scan your
face and then, if it matches, Android will open your phone directly to
the home screen. If you do not turn this setting on, Android will still

use facial recognition to unlock your phone, but you will need to swipe
up on the lock screen to access the home screen.
Require eyes to be open: Much like the name suggests, this setting
requires Android to make sure your eyes are open when using facial
recognition. This prevents someone from holding your smartphone up
you while you are sleeping and unlocking it, as creepy as that sounds.

Chapter 7
G-Whiz: The Google Experience
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Using Google’s suite of apps on your phone
 Sending texts, email, and selfies, oh my!
 Finding the right apps for you
One of the great perks of using an Android smartphone is that the
phone comes with a host of helpful, preinstalled Google apps that
are ready to go as soon as you set up your phone. The Google
Ecosystem (as it is known) has been built up around helping
smartphone users get the most out of their experience. Everything
from learning something new to keeping in touch with loved
ones, and even getting the most out of bedtime, are all covered by
a Google app. In this chapter, you discover all the ways the
Google apps are designed to help you with a myriad of daily tasks
right from your Android phone.
 You can find all the apps installed on your phone by
performing a swipe up gesture. This opens the app drawer, which
contains all of your apps.
Keeping Tabs on Your Life
A handful of Google smartphone apps are designed to help you
you organize and make sense of your daily routine. Two apps in
this category are Calendar and Clock.
Calendar

The Google Calendar is your look into what your daily, weekly,
and monthly schedules have in store for you. Calendar defaults to
the Month view, as shown in Figure 7-1. This view shows you the
events you have scheduled for the entire month on the day that
they occur.

FIGURE 7-1: You look busy.

 If your event is not an “all day event” but rather it takes place
at a specific time, that information is visible from the daily view.
The information that is displayed in your calendar comes from a
number of sources. The calendar colors shown in Figure 7-1
represent a different source for the event:
 
The green events are from the Calendar app’s built-in source of
holidays.
The orange events are events I manually entered into my own calendar.
The purple events are events from a shared calendar that I have access
to.
The blue events are reminders of scheduled events gathered from your
email, such as travel or dinner reservations.
 When you set up an event, you can change the color for that
event to be whatever you want it to be. However, if you do not change
it manually, the color of the event defaults to the color the Calendar
app assigned to that source.
One of the great features of the Calendar app is that it combines
multiple calendars into one central location. For example, I have
my own calendar for all of my appointments, deadlines, and other
events; however, my children each have a calendar that is shared
from their respective schools and sports teams, and my wife also
has a calendar that she shares with me. Google Calendar takes all
the events from all of these different sources and combines them
into one view. Now you have no more excuses for missing a
school concert or football game.
Aside from the Month view, Calendar offers weekly, three-day,
and daily views as well. Figure 7-2 shows where you can select

between these options. The daily view gives you an hour-by-hour
breakdown of any appointments and events you have scheduled
for the day. Any events scheduled at the same time appear next to
each other, and any “all day” events appear at the top of the day.
Figure 7-3 shows the daily view.

FIGURE 7-2: Changing your view.

FIGURE 7-3: On July 4, I don’t have much going on.

 If you need to add a new event to your Calendar, tap the plus
sign (+) at the bottom of the view. This lets you add a new event and
select which calendar you wish to add it to.
Clock/Alarm
Are you worried about how to make sure you are awake for all
the events in your Calendar? Luckily, Android smartphones have
you covered. The Clock app contains a multifunction alarm. The
Alarm feature lets you set a number of reoccurring and one-time
alarms. You can select the time and day of the alarm as well as the
sound you wish to wake up to. Figure 7-4 shows the Alarm screen
within the Clock app.
Maybe waking up would be a little easier if you also got to bed on
time? The Google Pixel line of Android smartphones has you
covered here too. Notice the options at the bottom of the Clock
app also include Bedtime (refer to Figure 7-4). You can set a
bedtime within the Clock app and at that time Android will gently
remind you that it is time for bed, silence your phone for you, and
even dim your phone screen. Figure 7-5 illustrates the Bedtime
function of the Clock app.

FIGURE 7-4: Keeping good time with the Clock app.

FIGURE 7-5: Is it time for bed?
Emailing and Sending Messages

Your Android smartphone has a few built-in apps that enable you
to connect with friends, loved ones, and those around you. Gmail,
the default email app, and Messages, the default texting app, are
two of these. The best part is that, because you already provided
your Google account information when you set up your
smartphone, no extra setup need to be done to use these apps; you
can just open the apps and go.
 Just because Gmail and Messages are the default email and
texting apps, respectively, does not mean you can’t install others.
Android smartphones give you the freedom to install and use Outlook
and WhatsApp, for example, or any other combination of email and
texting apps you may already be comfortable with. However, Gmail
and Messages are already on your smartphone, so let’s take a look at
them.
Gmail
Chances are, you are already familiar with the online version of
Gmail — or at the very least, email in general. Whether you use
Yahoo!, Hotmail, or your local cable provider, email generally
works the same way no matter the email client. Gmail is no
different. To compose an email message, Gmail includes a nice
large “Compose” button at the bottom of the Gmail screen that
opens a blank email template, as shown in Figure 7-6.
 One of the great things about Gmail is that you can configure
it to also show your messages from other email clients too. So even if
you don’t have a Gmail account, you can configure your Gmail app to
display, read, and send your Yahoo! Email and most any other email.
To add another email account to Gmail, tap the hamburger icon in the
upper-left corner of the Gmail interface. From the menu, tap Settings  
⇒  Add Account. Gmail walks you through the rest.

 Yes, the technical term for the three horizontal lines that
represent a menu is hamburger. Because it looks like a … well, you get
it.

FIGURE 7-6: A blank email.
Email categories

To help you manage all the email you may receive, Gmail tries to
organize your email into areas of interest. Google has applied a
lot of research into trying to figure out what email you will be
interested in and what might be spam. Gmail uses this research to
then sort through your incoming email and place it in an
appropriate container for you. To see the email categories Gmail
sorts your messages into, tap the hamburger icon in the upper-left
corner of the Gmail screen. This opens a sidebar menu that lists
three categories of email Gmail sorts your messages into:
 
Primary: Primary represents your main mailbox. The majority of your
email goes into this area. All the email you receive from friends and
family should filter directly into Primary.
Promotions: Email you receive that is related to a shopping
opportunity but that Gmail has not detected as spam is filtered
into the Promotions mailbox.
For example, suppose you often purchase supplies from Joe’s
Supply Shop. If Joe’s Supply Shop emails you a receipt for those
purchases, that email would go directly into your Primary
mailbox because you solicited the mail. Conversely, if Joe’s
Supply Shop sends you an email letting you know about a sale on
decorative glass pumpkins because you regularly do business
with them, Gmail knows this is not a spam message. However, it
is also something that you might not want cluttering up your
Primary mailbox. Therefore, Gmail sends this email to
Promotions. Pretty convenient, right?
Social: Any email you receive from a social network such as
Facebook, LinkedIn, and Twitter that is not a direct message, Gmail
sends to the Social mailbox. Therefore, if LinkedIn sends an email
about a new group that it thinks you might be interested in joining,
Gmail sorts that message into Social. However, if LinkedIn sends you
an email about a friend who has messaged you in the app, that message
goes into your Primary mailbox because it may have been solicited.

 A sidebar menu is an app menu that appears from the side of
the app, rather than from the top.
Deleting and archiving email
At this point, you may find that your Primary mailbox is getting
pretty full, and it may be time for a little housekeeping. You have
two options to get rid of email you no longer want in your
Primary mailbox: delete it or archive it.
Let’s look at deleting first. To delete an email you no longer want,
long press on the email to select it. Once it is selected, an icon of
a trash can should appear in the upper-right corner of the app.
Simply tap this trash can to send the email to the Trash folder.
 A long press is when you place your finger down on the screen
and leave it there for one second.
What if you don’t want to delete it, but you still don’t want to
look at it in your Primary mailbox? Well, luckily for you Gmail
has an archive option. Archiving email is a great way to move
email out of your Primary mailbox without deleting it. Long press
on the email you want to archive and once it is selected, you
should see an icon of a box with a down arrow in it in the upper-
right corner of the app. Tap this icon to archive the email.
Now, I know what you may be thinking — there must be an
easier way to delete and archive email without all of the long-
pressing and icon-tapping. Actually, there is. You can use gestures
to do the same thing. To assign gestures to delete and archive
email, follow these steps:
 
1. Tap the hamburger menu.

2. Scroll to the bottom of the sidebar menu that appears and tap
settings.
3. 
Navigate to General Settings  ⇒  Swipe actions.
This brings you to the swipe action configuration screen, which is
where you can tell Gmail what action you want to happen when
you either right swipe or left swipe on an email.
4. Tap Change to select the action for each swipe.
5. 
Set the right swipe to Delete, and the left swipe to Archive.
Returning to the Primary mailbox, you can now right swipe an
email and send it directly to its doom — or you can left swipe on
it and save it for later in the archive.
Now that you have gone through your Primary mailbox and sent a
bunch of email to the archive, how do you find it again?
Searching for email
Return to the sidebar menu and scroll down until you see a folder
named All Mail. As the name implies, this is where Gmail keeps
all of your email. Whether the email is in your Primary mailbox,
Promotions, Social, or Archive, it also appears in All Mail. This is
also where you go to find that email you archived away. As you
can imagine, All Mail can get rather full, and looking for an email
you archived two months ago can be a challenge. Therefore,
Gmail implemented a robust search tool to help with this exact
problem.
Suppose you archived an email that contained Uncle Jed’s
rhubarb pie recipe last week, and now you have company coming
over and you need that recipe. Simply navigate to the All Mail
folder and, at the top of the app, tap into the Search bar. Enter
“rhubarb pie” and Gmail will fetch Uncle Jed’s recipe for you
(and probably also that email from Joe’s Supply Shop from the
rhubarb sale they had last year).

 The great thing about the search feature is that it also works on
items in your Trash folder. If you mixed up your gestures and
accidently right swiped on Uncle Jed’s recipe sending it to the trash,
search will still find it — with some exceptions.
Recovering email
When you delete an email, either by long pressing and tapping the
delete icon or by swiping it away, the email is not permanently
erased from all existence; Gmail just moves it to a custom folder
named Trash. As long as the email is still in this folder, you can
search for it, find it, read it, and even recover it back to your
Primary mailbox.
Open the sidebar menu and navigate to the Trash folder to see
what emails have been sent to trash. If you find an email in the
Trash folder that you did not intend to delete, you can move it
back to the Primary mailbox. Long press on the email in question,
and from the menu in the upper right-hand corner of the app,
select Move to  ⇒  Primary. This sends the email back to your
Primary mailbox.
 You can select any of your folders as a Move to destination.
So if the email you delete is still here — it is just in a folder
named Trash — is anything really deleted? The answer to this is
yes, and you need to be careful when dealing with it. Navigate
back to the Trash folder. At the top of the folder you should see
the option to Empty Trash. This is the permanent delete — the
delete from which there is no coming back.
When you send an email from your Primary mailbox to the Trash,
you can still search for it and recover it. However, once you
Empty Trash, then anything that was in the Trash folder is

permanently erased — you can no longer find it or recover it.
Therefore, be careful when emptying your trash.
 Gmail automatically deletes any email that is in the Trash
folder every 30 days. So even if you don’t manually tap the Empty
Trash action in the Trash folder, Gmail will still permanently delete
any email in the Trash folder that is more than 30 days old.
 If you want a little bit of added assurance to help you not
archive or delete email inadvertently, open the sidebar menu and
navigate to Settings  ⇒  General Settings  ⇒  Action confirmations.
Here, you can choose to have Gmail ask you for a confirmation before
deleting, archiving, or even sending any email.
Messages
Messages is the default texting app on Android smartphones. It
organizes your texts by sender and lets you quickly find and reply
to messages. Figure 7-7 shows the Message interface.
Sending texts
To send a text message, tap to open the Message app and then
locate and tap the Start Chat button at the bottom of the screen
(refer to Figure 7-7). From here you can select a contact (or enter
a phone number) before typing out your text.

FIGURE 7-7: The Message interface.

 If you are coming from an iPhone background, you may be
used to the blue text versus green text hierarchy. That is, if your texts
were blue, the user you were chatting with was also on an iPhone,
whereas if your texts were green, the user was not. This concept does
not exist in Messages on Android. Messages does not indicate what
type of mobile operating system the user you are chatting with is
using.
Deleting texts
Deleting text messages works a little differently than deleting
email. While Messages makes use of a Spam folder, the algorithm
for putting items into it is not as robust as in Gmail. So how do
you take care of any annoying texts that are unsolicited? If you
receive a text letting you know that your car’s warranty is about
to expire (and you don’t care), the first thing you can do is delete
it.
Text messages are organized by conversations. That means all
texts sent between you and a specific contact are contained within
the same text string, or conversation. Deleting can be done to both
a specific text and an entire conversation. To delete a specific text
message, but not the entire conversation, follow these steps:
 
1. Tap within the conversation in Messages to open the conversation.
2. From within the conversation, locate the specific text message to
be deleted and long press it.
3. 
Once it is selected, tap the trash icon in the upper-right corner
of the Messages app.
This deletes only the highlighted text and leaves the remaining
conversation intact.

 Unlike email, once a text message is deleted, it does not come
back and there is no way of recovering it, so be careful.
 Deleting a text from a conversation only removes it from your
smartphone. The other party of the conversation still has the text on
their phone. So those embarrassing texts that you tried to delete are
still out there, but at least you don’t have to look at them anymore.
If deleting one text is not enough and you want to erase the entire
conversation, navigate back to the conversation view of
Messages. Long press on the conversation you want to delete and
tap the trash can icon.
 Long pressing on either a single text or a conversation puts
Messages into what is called select mode. While in select mode you
can tap on any other texts or conversations and delete them all at the
same time.
Blocking senders
Sometimes deleting a text is not enough. Sometimes, after the
third or fourth text you are really tired of hearing about that
warranty expiring. In these cases, you can block the text — and
all future texts — from a specific phone number.
Long press on the text that you want to block. From the upper-
right corner of the app, tap the icon of the circle with a line
through it. This blocks all further texts from that phone number.
But what happens if you blocked a number and then realized you
really do want to text someone about your car’s extended
warranty?
From the menu in the upper-right corner of Messages, navigate to
Spam & Blocked. This shows you all the texts you received that

were either blocked or determined to be Spam. Next, navigate to
Blocked Contacts. This is where you can see all the phone
numbers you previously blocked. Simply unblock a number to
begin receiving texts from it again.
Capturing Special Moments
One of the most used features of any smartphone is the camera.
As social creatures, we love to save and share memories, and one
of the best ways to do that is with your Android smartphone’s
camera.
Camera
To open the camera, tap the camera icon from your home screen.
This opens the rear-facing camera to the Camera photo function.
By default, you are now ready to take a non-zoomed picture from
your rear-facing camera without a flash. Figure 7-8 shows the
default Camera view. To snap a picture, tap the big shutter button
that appears at the bottom center of the screen.

FIGURE 7-8: The default camera view.
To change from the rear-facing camera to the selfie camera, tap
the button in the lower-left corner of the camera screen that looks

like a circle with two arrows in it. This switches the app from
rear-facing to selfie mode.
 If the image from one or both of your camera lenses looks a
little blurry, try cleaning the lens with a silk or microfiber cloth. Dirt
and oils from your skin can be easily transferred to the lenses during
normal smartphone use, even with a screen protector.
 For a more in-depth tutorial on using the Android smartphone
camera, see Chapter 17.
Photos
Now that you have taken a few pictures, how do you view them?
Android smartphones include an app called Photos for storing and
viewing the pictures you take. To access Photos, tap the Photos
icon from the home screen (it should look like a pinwheel). This
opens your Photos app to the default view. Android divides the
default view into two main sections: Albums and Timeline.
Albums
Albums are displayed at the top of the default view and are, as the
name implies, digital photo albums used to categorize your
photos. These albums can be created at any time by long pressing
on a photo to enter select mode. While in select mode, tap the
photos you want to place in an album and then tap the plus sign
(+) that appears in the upper-right corner of the Photos screen. A
menu pops up from the bottom of the screen from which you can
choose an album to add the picture to. If you want to create a new
album for this set of pictures, select Create  ⇒  Album from this
menu to create a new one.

 One of the great features of albums is that they can be shared
with others. Suppose you recently returned from vacation and want all
of your relatives to be jealous of your tour of the International
Museum of Boredom. When adding the pictures that you took in the
museum to an album, rather than selecting Create  ⇒  Album, select
Create  ⇒  Shared album. This sets up a special album that is then
shared with anyone you choose.
When you share an album, the album will exist on the Google
Photos website (www.google.com/photos/about), which you can
access using your Google account. The users with whom you
choose to share the album receive a link in their email to view the
album on your Google Photos share site — they will not receive
actual copies of the photos, and they will not be able to see any of
your other photos (unless you share those too).
Albums you create are only one part of the album section in
Photos. Android (with the power of Google Photos) also creates
albums for you. For example, you may see albums you did not
create appear in the album section with names such as “Holiday
2023” or “Spotlight on Joe.” Android creates these albums for
you as a way of helping you preserve your memories and
organize them.
You may be asking yourself, if Android created an album for me
called “Spotlight on Joe,” how did it know that all of those
pictures are of Joe? And how does it know who Joe is?

 Just like how Google runs algorithms on all of your texts and
email looking for patterns to determine labels, spam, and reminders, it
also runs pattern matching on your pictures. Google can run facial
recognition algorithms on your photos and know that “these five
photos are the same person” or “these two people are in these ten
photos.” Then, using information about what faces it is recognizing, it
can then match that against other information in your contacts or even
on the web to help identify the people and objects in your photos.
Timeline
The second section of the Photos default view is the timeline of
all of your pictures. Timeline sorts and displays your pictures
from most recent to oldest.
If you are like most people, there could be hundreds if not
thousands of photos here. How do you find that one picture of an
iguana that you took on vacation five years ago? Well, you could
try scrolling through the timeline view until you find it — or you
can tap the Search icon at the bottom of the Photos app. Simply
type in the word “Iguana” into the search bar and Android will
return all of the pictures it thinks contain an iguana. While it is
not always 100 percent accurate, it is very close. Give it a try and
you may be surprised at what it can recognize.
 If the search is a little too Big Brother for you, Android does
make scrolling through the timeline a little quicker. If you long press
and hold the slider on the right side of the timeline view and use that to
scroll, Photos displays the approximate date of the pictures you are
scrolling past. This may help you quickly scroll to a specific point in
time to narrow your search.
The default view only displays images that you take using the
phone’s camera. However, there are other images on your

Android smartphone, including screenshots, images you received
from texts, and images you downloaded from the Internet. How
do you view these? These photos are in the Library.
Library
Tap the Library icon in the lower-left corner of the Photos default
view to open the Library view. The Library view includes a list of
functions on the top of the screen:
 
Favorites
Utilities
Archive
Trash
The Favorites function filters all of your pictures down to just the
ones you favorited. This is a convenient way of looking for
pictures that you know you marked.
 To favorite a picture, open the picture in Photos and tap the
outline of the star in the upper-right corner of the screen. This marks
the picture as a favorite.
Utilities opens a new screen that contains a number of useful
items. Scrolling through the list you will see Back Up Device
folders. This is where you can set your device to automatically
back up your information for you. If you lose or upgrade to a new
Android smartphone, you can then restore your information from
the backup.
Utilities also contains options for creating new animations or
collages based on your pictures. These are fun options to play
with if you are inclined to making your own awe-inspiring visual
masterpieces to share with others.

 What if you have pictures you never want anyone to see, like
the code for your house alarm that you took a picture of because you
knew you would never remember it? Photos has you covered there too.
Near the bottom of the Utilities list is a folder labeled Locked Folder.
The Locked Folder is an encrypted location on your Android
smartphone that requires a password to open. You can store pictures in
this folder safely, without worry of them falling victim to prying eyes.
 While the Locked Folder is a secure way to store sensitive
images, security comes at a price. When you move a picture to the
Locked Folder, it is permanently removed from the Timeline and
Google Photos and physically moved to the encrypted folder on your
Android smartphone. The repercussion of this is that the images only
exist in that encrypted folder, and if you lose or break your
smartphone, the Locked Folder is gone with it — there is no backup.
If you are upgrading your smartphone and wish to move the
images in your Locked Folder, you must remove them from the
Locked Folder and put them back into your pictures folder (with
all of your other pictures). Once your new smartphone is set up
and the pictures are transferred over, you can look for all of the
sensitive images and add them to the new Locked Folder.
Figuring Out the Functional Side of
Google
Android has many apps and features that can help you explore the
world around you. From the physical to the digital, apps such as
Maps, Chrome, Drive, and GPay can help you get around,
discover, and pay for almost anything you find.
Maps

Your Android smartphone is quite useful when it comes to getting
around and exploring. Maps is a great tool for not only finding
where you are but also where you are trying to go.
Open Maps by swiping up on your home screen to access the app
drawer, and then locate and tap the Maps icon. Figure 7-9
illustrates the Maps default view. Maps should open to your
current location.

FIGURE 7-9: The Maps icon default view. Go Sox!
One useful feature of Maps is to use it to analyze and explore
where you are. Explore the map using your fingers to magnify the

Maps screen. (See Chapter 5 for a refresher on pinching to zoom
in.) Move the map around and see what you can discover.
Depending on your settings, you should see some streets with
street names and some city labels. Try zooming in and out of the
map to see more or less information. As you zoom you should go
from seeing city names, to major roads and interstate names, to
street names, to buildings and labels.
Depending on your area, you may also see the streets outlined in
either green, yellow, or red (shown earlier in Figure 7-9). These
colors represent real-time traffic data as gathered by Google. The
green represents little to no traffic, whereas the red indicates
heavy traffic.
 Google gathers traffic data from road sensors and location data
it receives from other Android or Google Maps users. For example, if
ten people are using Google Maps and they are all on Main Street, but
not moving, Google takes that data and extracts from it that there must
be heavy traffic there.
 If you need Maps to provide walking directions to the local
deli, for example, simply type the name of the deli in the search bar at
the top of the Maps default view. From the list of results that appear,
tap the icon of a street sign with an arrow in it. This opens the
directions view.
The directions view defaults to driving directions. However, this
can easily be changed. Near the top of the map are several small
icons. Notice that the icon that looks like a car is highlighted,
which indicates that you are looking at driving directions. Locate
the icon of a person walking and tap it; Maps will now display
walking directions.
Maps can provide the following types of directions:

 
Driving
Public Transit
Walking
Ride share (provided via Lyft at the time this book was written)
Biking
So what information does Maps provide in the directions? The
top of the Maps directions view displays your current location
(usually called “Your location”), followed by the location you
want to go to.
 Once you reach your destination, to go back to where you
started, tap the two up-and-down arrows that appear to the right of the
destination on the directions view. This reverses the locations and
provides you with directions back.
Next, in the largest section of the view, the map highlights the
overall route you will be taking. You can zoom in or zoom out to
see as much or as little of the route as you want. Your current
location on the route is also highlighted.
If you can take multiple routes to the same location, those routes
are also indicated on the map in a lighter color, and the travel time
each route takes is displayed. This lets you tap the route option
you wish to take. In general, Maps suggests the quickest route,
but enables you to change that per your own preferences.
Finally, in the lower section of the directions view are your step-
by-step directions. The first piece of information you will see is
the overall estimated route time and distance, followed by a
general route street or direction — for example, 1 hr 7 min (3.5
mi) via Main Street. If you tap the directions drawer and slide it
up, it reveals the directions that will lead you to your destination.

 If you are using walking directions, depending on your
location, the directions may also have helpful street-level photos to
make identifying your turns easier.
To start your journey, tap the start button at the bottom of the
view. Maps now changes to Live view. Here you will see an
unobstructed map of your current location and an arrow pointing
you in the direction you should go. The current direction and the
next immediate direction will be highlighted in green above the
map.
 To aid in your searching, Maps provides some predefined
search buttons. These include Restaurants, Gas, and Coffee. These
buttons are found under the Maps search bar.
Chrome
Android smartphones come with a default web browser —
Google Chrome. If you are used to using Chrome on a desktop or
laptop, you may already be familiar with some of its features.
Many of Chrome’s features are also available to Android
smartphone users.
Open Chrome by locating and tapping the Chrome logo icon on
your home screen. Once Chrome is open, you should see a
familiar Google home page. The uppermost part of the screen
includes several menu items including a Home button, an account
icon, a square with a number in it that represents what tab you are
on, and a More icon. Below the menu bar is the Google logo and
the search bar. This is where you can search for all of the many
things you search for on the Internet, like cat pictures.
Finally, Google lists a number of news stories and other articles
that, based on what it knows of you, it thinks you may find
interesting. If you decide that you are not interested in the articles

Google has displayed here for you, simply tap the menu button
below the article and what you are not interested in.
If you are like most people, you may have no less than 3,762
Chrome tabs open at any one time … okay, maybe slightly less.
To manage these, tap the box with the tab number indicator on the
menu bar to open the Tab view as shown in Figure 7-10.

FIGURE 7-10: The Tab view.
The Tab view displays all your currently open tabs. You can open
a specific tab by tapping that tab, or you can close it by tapping

the X in the upper-right corner of the tab.
Drive
Google Drive is a convenient cloud-storage location to store files
that can be accessed from multiple locations. You have free
access to Drive with your Google account; however, options with
more storage capacity are available for a monthly fee. Open the
Drive app by tapping the icon with a multi-color triangle from the
app drawer.
 The Drive home view shows you your recently accessed files.
Keep in mind that these files are available to you from your Android
smartphone as well as from any other computer you may be logged
into. Therefore, the recently accessed files may be files you accessed
from a PC and not necessarily your smartphone.
 While your Android smartphone is pretty robust and can open
almost any type of file, you may have files in your Drive that are
associated with a specific piece of desktop software. If you try to open
one of these files, your smartphone will most likely tell you that it
cannot be opened.
You can move files between your Android smartphone and your
Drive by locating the file on Drive, tapping the menu next to it,
and selecting Download. Conversely, you can upload files to
Drive by locating the file on your smartphone, selecting it via a
long press, tapping the Share icon, and choosing Drive.
GPay
GPay, also known as Google Pay, is a contactless mobile payment
system that is available to all Android smartphone users. Open
GPay by tapping the GPay icon in the app drawer. Upon opening,
you should see a screen that looks similar to Figure 7-11. Right

now, GPay shown in this example cannot be used to make
purchases because there is no payment method associated with it.
FIGURE 7-11: Google Pay, or GPay.

 In a nutshell, GPay is not a payment method by itself. Think of
GPay as a wallet that holds one of your credit or debit cards (or more
than one). You enter your credit (or debit) card information into GPay,
and then you can use your phone to make a purchase with that card.
When you hold your phone up to a contactless payment point and enter
in your password, GPay sends that information to the cash register and
your credit or debit card is charged accordingly.
To add a card to GPay, tap the Add a payment method button in
the center of the GPay screen.
 Some credit or debit card vendors may want to verify your
information before authorizing your card on GPay. This means that
when you add the card to GPay, the card issuer may contact you via
phone or text to confirm that you in fact added the card to GPay. It’s a
nice added level of security.
Once you add a card to GPay, you are good to go and spend all of
that hard-earned cash (or credit). Just remember to make sure that
the vendor or store you are buying from accepts Google Pay as a
contactless payment method.

Chapter 8
Investigating Apps for Everything
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Finding out what apps are already installed on your
smartphone
 Learning why you can’t delete some apps
 Searching for and installing new apps
 Understanding the dangers of sideloading apps
Now that your Android smartphone is set up and you have begun
to explore its contents, you may have noticed that there are quite a
few apps already installed. In this chapter, you find out what apps
are preinstalled on Android smartphones, discover what they do,
and look at tips and techniques for finding and installing new
apps.
Exploring the Preinstalled Apps
A number of apps are preinstalled on your Android smartphone
during the setup process. These apps perform many of the core
functions of your smartphone.
 While Android may preinstall an app for a specific function,
such as Messages for texting, you can always install a different app
from a third party later.
Most of the preinstalled Android apps cannot be removed from
your smartphone. This is because they are either built into the
Android operating system, or they are there because of a carrier

agreement. Let’s take a look at what apps Android may have put
in your smartphone.
The apps on every new Android phone
Just as each Android smartphone is going to look a little different
from one another depending on the manufacturer, so too will each
smartphone come with different preinstalled apps. For example,
Google Pixel phones (and any other Android smartphones
running pure Android) come with a certain set of preinstalled
apps, whereas Samsung phones, such as the Samsung Galaxy
Note, have a slightly different set of apps tailored specifically to
Samsung phones.
 Keep in mind that Android is an open-source operating
system. This means that manufacturers are allowed to change Android
to suit their specific needs. For this reason, while all Android
smartphones will have a preinstalled app for texting, the one that is
preinstalled on a Google Pixel phone is going to look a little different
from the one that is installed on a Samsung Galaxy phone.
Following is a list of the most common apps preinstalled on
Android smartphones as found on a Google Pixel (if you have a
different brand of smartphone, the names might be different, but
the functions will be the same):
 
Calculator
Calendar
Camera
Chrome
Clock
Files
Gmail

Google Pay
Keep Notes
Maps
Messages
Phone
Photos
Play Movies
Play Music
Play Store
Settings
YouTube
 This is not a definitive list. As Android changes and updates,
manufacturers may choose to preinstall new apps that other
manufacturers do not have. For example, a Samsung Galaxy Note
comes preinstalled with apps for using and configuring a stylus.
Because other Android smartphones do not have styli, they will not
come with these apps.
Many of these apps are covered in Chapter 7; what follows is a
quick primer on the other apps that come preinstalled.
Phone
It probably goes without saying that Phone is the app that enables
you to make and receive phone calls. Without this app your
smartphone would just be a … smart? Figure 8-1 illustrates the
Android Phone app.

FIGURE 8-1: The Android Phone app.
Files

The Files app enables you to navigate through the files you may
download to your smartphone. It’s easy to download a file from a
website and not know how to get to it later. With Files, you can
find and interact with your downloaded files. Files also enables
you to delete files that you no longer need. The interface for the
Files app is shown in Figure 8-2.
 Be careful when deleting files from any smartphone. Be sure
the file you are deleting is no longer needed because you may
inadvertently delete a file that is needed for another app to run.

FIGURE 8-2: Files, files, and more files.
Keep Notes

Keep Notes is another useful app preinstalled by Google. This
app gives you a place to jot down and record quick notes. For
example, if you are talking to someone and quickly need to take
note of a phone number or other critical information, simply open
Keep Notes and type away. It is also great for making lists, such
as shopping lists.
Play Movies and Play Music
Play Movies and Play Music are apps specific to the Google Play
service. The Play Store (covered later in this chapter) is your one-
stop shop for apps; however, you can also find and purchase
movies on the Play Store. These movies can then be watched in
the Play Movies app. The interface for purchasing movies is
shown in Figure 8-3.
Play Music, on the other hand, is still available if you have an
existing Play Music account, but you cannot create a new
subscription. The Play Music service has since been discontinued
in favor of YouTube Music. However, the app is still available
and can be used in a diminished capacity. Figure 8-4 shows the
Play Music app.

FIGURE 8-3: Let’s watch a movie.

FIGURE 8-4: Play some music.
Settings

The Settings app is where you find the configuration options for
your Android smartphone. Almost anything you want to change
about how your Android smartphone works can be done from the
Settings app. The default Settings screen is shown in Figure 8-5.
See Chapter 12 for more details on using the Settings app to
customize how your smartphone works.
YouTube
The YouTube app comes preinstalled on all Android smartphones
because Google has owned YouTube since 2006. If you are
keeping track, the first Android smartphones were announced in
2008. Therefore, it only seems right that Google include the
YouTube app with all Android smartphones.

FIGURE 8-5: Some settings.

Carrier-installed apps and why you can’t
remove them
So far in this chapter you have explored a few of the apps that are
preinstalled by Android to make your initial Android smartphone
experience a little easier. However, another type of app may be
preinstalled on your phone. As I mention earlier in this book,
there are two ways you can buy an Android smartphone: directly
from Google, Samsung, or another manufacturer, or directly from
a smartphone carrier such as AT&T, T-Mobile, or Verizon.
 Some carriers have agreements with Android smartphone
manufacturers that allow them to lock the smartphones they sell so that
the smartphone will only work on that carrier’s network. For example,
a carrier may have an agreement with Samsung to sell Samsung’s
Android smartphones, but the smartphones will be locked so that they
will only work on that carrier’s network. You will not be able to take
the smartphone to another carrier without having it unlocked first.
As part of these carrier agreements, carriers often install their own
apps on the smartphones. These apps tend to relate specifically to
the carrier’s network or managing your account with the carrier.
For this reason, while the smartphone remains locked to their
network, these apps cannot be removed.
For example, Verizon installs an app called My Verizon on all
Android smartphones that are locked to the Verizon network. This
app helps users manage their accounts with Verizon. In the past,
Verizon has also had agreements with other app developers to
preinstall certain games on all smartphones it sells as well.
Installing New Apps
The apps that come preinstalled on your new Android smartphone
are great, but what if you want something more? There is a whole

world of new and different apps out there to choose from — you
just need to know where to look.
Finding the perfect app for what you need
The Play Store — sometimes referred to by its original name, the
Google Play Store — is your one-stop shop for any and all
Android apps. If you can think of it, chances are there is an app
for it on the Play Store app.
Open the Play Store app and you are greeted with a default screen
similar to the one shown in Figure 8-6. To the untrained eye, the
Play Store home screen may seem confusing. However, once you
get a feel for its layout, it become easy to navigate.
The Play Store is divided into several sections. At the top of the
screen is the search bar and tab menu. Below that is a list of
popular Play Store offerings. Next is the “Recommended for you”
section, which includes suggestions of apps Google thinks you
may like. Following that are apps that paid to be front and center
on your home screen (ads), and finally, you see more popular
offerings and search results.
Recommended for you
The “Recommended for you” section is pulled from a number of
criteria, including your search history on Google. Here Google
suggests apps that are similar to ones you have used or searched
for in the past, other apps created by the developers of apps you
have downloaded before, and apps downloaded by people who
downloaded similar apps to you. There is probably much more to
it, but this gives you an idea as to how Google comes up with
recommendations for you.

FIGURE 8-6: Let’s play! The Play Store home screen.
Suggested for you

The “Suggested for you” section is a little easier to understand.
This section includes apps whose developers paid to be placed
higher up on your list. They are ads for popular apps and games
that Google hopes you will download.
Searching for apps
So how do you find the perfect zombie sudoku game? The short
answer is the search bar. Spoiler, as of the time this book was
written, there were no zombie-themed sudoku games on the Play
Store. Someone needs to fix that.
To see if a particular app exists on the Play Store, type in any
descriptors for what you may be interested in, and the Play Store
will serve you up a plethora of suggestions. Some may be exactly
what you need, others may only be kind-of related, but chances
are you are going to find many things that interest you.
Interpreting Google Play listings
So you searched for the perfect app, and now you are facing a
wall of search results. How do you interpret this information and
find the best app in the bunch? Luckily, the Play Story gives you
a lot of information to use when making your decision.
Each result in the list includes a rating underneath it. This rating
is out of five stars. For example, I searched for a chat app and
Google Chat came back in the results list with a 3.3 rating. This
means that, of the people who downloaded this app, the average
rating they gave it was 3.3 out of 5 stars. To get more information
about the app, tap the result in the search list. Figure 8-7
illustrates the app download screen for Google Chat.

FIGURE 8-7: Helpful information about apps.
On this screen, you can see that the 3.3 rating was based on
77,000 individual ratings. This is helpful because if the app had a

5.0 rating, but was only rated by one person, that might not tell
you the whole story. However, right next to that, you can see that
the app was downloaded over ten million times. This means a lot
of people downloaded this app, and of those ten million, only
77,000 offered a rating.
Next to the number of downloads is a content rating. This rating
is very much like the ratings you see for TV shows, movies, and
video games. In the case of Google Chat, the rating is E for
everyone.
 If you are coming over from an iPhone environment, you may
be used to Apple’s strict content policies to not allow apps with mature
or adult content. This rule does not apply to the Play Store. Therefore,
you need to be careful and look at the content rating before
downloading anything.
Below the ratings is a helpful “About this app” section. This
section contains a write up, pictures, and sometimes videos about
what the app does, how to use it, and who made it. This
information can be useful in trying to determine if the app you
found will do exactly what you are hoping it will do.
Next in the list of information is the rating again (3.3); however,
this time it is followed by not only a breakdown of how that score
was compiled, but also a list of comments from users explaining
why they scored it the way they did. Again, this information can
be helpful when trying to pick an app.
If you determine that this is the app for you, tap the big green
Install button. In the case of Google Chat, there is no cost to
download the app. If the app did have a cost associated with it,
that cost would be listed here as well.
WARNING! NOT ALL FREE APPS ARE
FREE

Just because you download an app that does not have a cost associated with it does not mean
the app doesn’t contain costs later. There are two ways free apps can be monetized. The first is
with ads.
Most games are monetized with ad revenue. This means that these apps often serve up ads to
you when you are playing the game, either in the form of a banner at the top or bottom of the
screen, as full-screen ads during breaks in the actions, or a combination of the two. While ads
can be annoying, they are an unavoidable part of “free” apps.
However, another way free apps can be monetized is through in-app purchases. For example,
you may download an app that lets you track the inventory of your kitchen. The app may be
free, but after using it you may find that you can only add ten items to the inventory. If you
want to add infinite items, you need to “unlock” the app for an added fee or subscription cost.
This model is common for productivity apps. Games have a model that can be a little more
dangerous if you are not careful. Microtransactions and the pay-to-win model are how game
developers monetize free games. This means that you cannot win the game without buying
helpful items for a small amount of money. However, costs can begin to skyrocket if you lose
track of the number of items you purchase.
Choosing an install location
 If you are using an older Android smartphone or one with
expandable memory (the ability to add a memory card for more
storage), you have the ability to choose where you want to install any
new apps you download. You can choose between installing apps to
the Android smartphone’s core memory or installing apps to the
expanded memory card you installed. However, if you do not have an
Android smartphone with expandable memory, all of your apps will be
installed in the app drawer.
The choice you make will be transparent to you when you are
using your smartphone. Just by using an app you cannot tell
which memory it is installed to. The only time you will notice a
difference is if you happen to have apps installed on an
expandible memory card and then you remove that card from the

smartphone. In that case, those apps would no longer appear in
your app drawer.
Viewing App Information
You can tell a lot about an app that is installed on your
smartphone if you know where to look. Want to know how much
space an app is taking up? How much data it uses? Or how many
annoying notifications it sends you? Then you are in luck!
 Go to any app icon on your Android smartphone and long
press on it. A context menu appears. Tap the I with a circle around it
— this is the App Info button — to open the app information screen
(see Figure 8-8). From the app information screen you can see all the
information you could ever want to know about the app, from how
much space it takes up to how many minutes per day you use it. This
screen also includes three useful buttons: Open, Disable, and Force
stop.
The Open button opens the app directly from here. The Disable
button keeps the app from running temporarily. This is useful if
you are using more carrier data than you expect and you want to
keep things in check. Finally, the Force stop button closes the app
if it has become unusable. From time to time you might open an
app only to find that it is not behaving properly. The Force stop
button forces the app to shut down so that you can try again later.

FIGURE 8-8: Gmail sends me approximately 15 notifications per day.
Moving and Organizing Apps

By this point you have searched, researched, and installed all your
favorite apps, but your home screen looks kind of empty. Your
app drawer is full of shiny new apps and you want to show them
off (or organize them better than just alphabetical order). What
can you do?
Moving apps to your home screen(s)
You can move apps from the app drawer to your home screen(s)
very easily. Here’s how:
 
1. Open your app drawer and locate an app you want to move to
your home screen.
2. 
Long press on the app icon.
 When the context menu appears, do not release your
finger from the screen.
3. 
Drag your finger toward the top of the screen.
The app icon will follow your finger, and Android will present
you with your home screen and a number of highlighted locations
you can drop the app icon (see Figure 8-9).
4. 
Release your finger from the screen to drop the app icon into
its new home.
The best part is, the app icon will still appear in the app drawer if
you just happen to look for it there.
You can get really creative in organizing your app on your home
screen. In fact, you can even group similar apps together into app
folders.

FIGURE 8-9: There’s no place like home.
Creating app folders

If you want to group together two or more similar apps into one
location on your home screen — for example, Play Music and
Keep Notes — all you have to do is drag and drop the icons into
the same grid location on the home screen. Take a look at Figure
8-10. Notice that Keep Notes looks like it is being dropped right
on top of Play Music. Release the second app (in this case, Keep
Notes) and Android creates a folder with both apps in it. The
result is shown in Figure 8-11.
Repeat this process as many times as you need to create folders
for all of your apps.

FIGURE 8-10: Categorizing two apps.

FIGURE 8-11: An app folder.
Adding more home screens

You may have noticed that your home screen can quickly get
crowded if you keep added apps to it. Once again, your Android
smartphone has you covered. If you drag an app to your home
screen and keep dragging the app icon to the right, Android
creates an additional home screen. You now have a clean slate to
clutter … I mean organize.
Sideloading Apps
Sideloading apps refers to installing apps on your Android
smartphone that are not found on the Play Store. While Android
does allow this type of operation, it is not without its dangers and
should only be done if you are certain you can trust the app you
are installing.
The dangers of sideloading
 There are many, many hackers in the world who would just
love to get their fingers on your personal information. One of the ways
they can do this is by creating apps that include viruses or malware.
The Play Store usually catches these apps before you download them.
For this reason, hackers often hack a popular app or game to make it
free, put their viruses in it, and offer it up for sideloading on websites
that may look official.
Again, do not sideload any apps if you are not completely sure of
their legitimacy. Now, let’s talk about legitimate reasons and ways
to sideload an app.
How to find legitimate apps outside of the
Play Store
One popular category of app is the VPN. A VPN, or virtual
private network, can help you navigate and use the Internet more
safely. Some VPN apps offer other features such as virus
protection and ad blocking.

This sounds great, right? Unfortunately, Google made a rule not
too long ago that apps featuring ad blocking are no longer
permitted on the Play Store. Therefore, these legitimate app
developers will create one version of their app without ad
blocking and post it for download on the Play Store. However, if
you want the version of the app that includes ad blocking, you can
download it to your smartphone directly from the manufacturer’s
website.

Chapter 9
Finding Widgets for Your Gadget
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Understanding what widgets are and what they do
 Adding widgets to your home screen and resizing them
 Deleting widgets
One little item that sets Android smartphones apart from others is
the innovation of home screen widgets. This concept became so
popular that other smartphone manufacturers eventually followed
Android’s lead and began offering widget-like components to
their home screens as well.
Widgets can be placed on, moved around, and resized on your
home screen(s). With widgets, you can customize your Android
smartphone in a way that is not only distinctly you, but also
enables you to work with your apps in exactly the way you want
to work. In this chapter, you discover how to find, place, and size
widgets as well as how to remove the widgets you don’t need
anymore to turn your Android smartphone into a productivity
powerhouse.
What Is a Widget?
A widget is an extension of an app that can be added to an
Android smartphone home screen. This is technospeak for, it’s a
really amazing way to get more from your smartphone. Widgets
are like windows into applications. You can get information and
functionality from an app by using its widget, without having to
open the full app and navigate to the screen you need. For
example, using the Gmail widget, you can see, scroll through, and
open email that is in your inbox, all from your home screen and
without having to open the Gmail app.

 Widgets are created by app manufacturers. This means that not
all apps have widgets, but many do. If you are trying to find a widget
for a particular app and just can’t seem to find it, chances are the
developers for that app did not create one.
Selecting, Placing, and Sizing Widgets
Navigate to your Android smartphone home screen to begin.
Long press on an empty space on the home screen (and not on an
app icon) to open the home screen context menu (see Figure 9-1).
The context menu should list three options: Wallpaper & style,
Widgets, and Home settings. Tap the Widgets menu item to open
the Widgets menu. The Widgets menu lists all available widgets
(based on the apps installed on your phone) in alphabetical order
(see Figure 9-2).

FIGURE 9-1: The home screen context menu.

FIGURE 9-2: Widgets, widgets, everywhere!
Let’s explore the Calendar widget by Android. Because Calendar
is a built-in Android app, your phone should have it. However, if

your specific Android smartphone’s manufacturer replaced
Calendar with its own calendar-like tool, work with that.
Scroll through the list of widgets until you locate Calendar in the
Widget menu. Tap the Calendar menu item to expand the list, as
shown in Figure 9-3. According to this, there are two available
Calendar widgets to choose from. The first is a 2 x 3 Calendar
schedule, and the second is a 4 x 5 Calendar month view. What do
these sizes mean?

FIGURE 9-3: Widget options.

 Android divides all home screens into a grid of boxes known
as the home screen app grid. Home screen app grids can be anywhere
from 2 x 2 to 5 x 5 in size. These grids define how many app icons can
be placed on your home screen — or in the context of this chapter,
what size widget can be placed on your home screen. However, if the
grids can be anywhere from 2 x 2 to 5 x 5, this must mean that they
can changed right? Of course! This is Android, and almost anything is
configurable.
To edit the Android home screen app grid, open the Wallpaper &
style menu option from the home screen context menu (refer to
Figure 9-1). Scroll through the options in this menu to find one
labeled App grid (see Figure 9-4). Beneath the menu option,
Android tells you what the grid is currently set to. In the case of
this example, it is set to 5 x 5. Tap the App grid menu option to
change the size of your app grid. Figure 9-5 shows the different
grid size options. With the Android home screen app grid set to 5
x 5, there should be plenty of room to add a 2 x 3 Calendar
widget.

FIGURE 9-4: The App grid option.

FIGURE 9-5: So many sizes!
Long press on the 2 x 3 Calendar schedule widget to disengage it
from the menu. Once it is disengaged, you will be brought back to

your home screen, as shown in Figure 9-6. A black 2 x 3 outline
should be visible under the widget.
 This outline shows what space the widget will occupy once
you place it. You can use this outline to get a better idea of where you
want the widget to go.
Release the widget to drop it into place on the home screen. Once
dropped, the widget will fill the 2 x 3 space that was outlined
under your finger. Figure 9-7 shows what the widget looks like in
place.

FIGURE 9-6: Placing the widget on your home screen.

FIGURE 9-7: The widget is in place.
Once you place the widget on the home screen, you may be
wondering, what are they black dots on the top and sides of my

widget? (Take another look at Figure 9-7 if you do not see them
on your screen.) These dots are handles for you to resize the
widget. The 2 x 3 size of the widget is just the minimum size
required for the widget. Most widgets can be resized larger once
they are placed on the home screen.
Long press on one of the black dots and drag it to a new location.
An outline of the side of the widget that you are dragging will
follow your finger, as shown in Figure 9-8.
 With the Calendar schedule widget in place, you can scroll
through your day’s events without even opening the Calendar app.
This is a great tool for getting a glance at how your day is looking. If
you need more information, simply tap one of the events and Android
opens the Calendar app for you, directly to the information screen for
the event you tapped.

FIGURE 9-8: Resizing the widget.
There are a lot of useful app widgets that can be found in the
widget menu. Do some exploring and see which ones would make

your Android smartphone experience easier and more enjoyable.
Removing Widgets
What happens if you do not like the widget you placed, or you
simply find that you are not using it the way you thought you
would? Don’t worry; Android gives you an easy way to remove
app widgets.
Long press on an app widget that has already been placed on your
screen. The app widget disengages from the home screen as if
you are going to move it. However, if you look at the top of the
screen, you will see the word “Remove” (see Figure 9-9).

FIGURE 9-9: Remove that unwanted widget.
While you are long pressing on the widget, drag it to the word
Remove and drop it. This removes the widget from your home

screen. Keep in mind, if you want the widget back, you can
always find it in the widget menu and add it again.

Chapter 10
Enjoying Quick Access Features
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Exploring the quick access settings
 Expanding functionality with the tap of a button
 Using Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and setting up a mobile hotspot
 Setting up GPay and turning on airplane mode
Overall, Android smartphones have about 1.2 trillion settings that
you can adjust. (Okay, maybe fewer, but it sure seems like that
many.) The most commonly used of these settings are referred to
as the quick access settings, and they can be accessed from almost
anywhere on your device. These settings are useful in configuring
and adjusting your Android smartphone for everyday tasks. In
this chapter, you discover the most common of the quick access
settings and how to access and use them.
 To navigate to the quick access settings on your smartphone,
all you need to do is swipe down from any screen to reveal the
notification drawer. At the top of the notification drawer you may see
two (or more) of the quick access settings. Swipe down again while the
notification drawer is open to collapse any visible notifications and
reveal more quick access settings.
 Depending on your brand of Android smartphone, some of the
settings mentioned in this chapter may not be available as quick access
settings on your device (Samsung, for example). Fear not; you can still
find many of them by searching for them in Settings.

Settings That Help You Use Your Device
Swipe down from any screen on your Android smartphone to
open the notification drawer. Depending on the notifications you
have, you should be able to see four quick access settings:
Internet, Night Light, Auto-rotate, and GPay, as shown in Figure
10-1. If your four quick access settings are slightly different,
don’t worry; you will be able to adjust what settings are shown
here and move them around by the end of the chapter.

FIGURE 10-1: The notification drawer with a few of the quick access settings.
Swipe down from the top again to expose the remaining quick
access settings. Figure 10-2 shows the result of exposing the full

quick access settings menu. You should be able to see a total of
eight settings from the expanded quick access screen.
But wait! There’s more. This settings drawer is actually paged.
Take look at Figure 10-2 again and look for two small dots under
the eight quick access settings. These dots indicate that the
settings list is paged and that there is one more page to view.
Right swipe on the list of settings to view the second page, which
is shown in Figure 10-3.
Let’s take a look at some of the more common settings and how
they work.

FIGURE 10-2: Quick access! More settings to choose from.

FIGURE 10-3: Even more quick access settings.
Adjusting the backlight

Once you expose the full list of quick access settings, the top of
the list shows a slider bar running horizontally across the screen
(refer to Figure 10-2 or Figure 10-3). This is the Brightness slider,
and it adjusts the brightness of your screen. Moving the slider all
the way to the right puts your screen at full brightness, while
moving the slider all the way to the left puts your screen at the
dimmest setting.
 The brightest setting is best for seeing your Android
smartphone outdoors in daylight. Whereas the dimmer settings are best
for seeing your smartphone in dark indoor spaces or at night.
 Most smartphone screens actually do not produce any light. To
be able to see them, you must shine a light through them from behind.
The Brightness slider adjusts the intensity of this light.
The Night Light setting works a little bit differently. Tapping the
Night Light quick access setting button tints the screen in a shade
of yellow that is easier on the eyes at nighttime. This setting can
also be configured to turn on automatically at a specific time.
(See Chapter 12 for more on configuring Night Light to your
liking.) Android is always looking out for you!
Setting the auto-rotation
Your Android smartphone contains an orientation sensor that can
detect if you turn your smartphone from portrait to landscape
orientation (and back). The Auto-rotate quick access setting
controls whether your phone reacts to such changes in orientation.
If you turn your smartphone from portrait to landscape
orientation, you probably want whatever app you are using at the
time to change orientation as well. For example, when you are
watching a video, you probably want the video to be a big as
possible on the screen. Expanding the video would involve

changing the smartphone’s orientation to landscape. With Auto-
rotate turned on, the video would automatically adjust to the new
orientation.
However, there may be times when you don’t want the phone to
respond at all to changes in orientation. For these times, you can
use the Auto-rotate quick access button to turn off the orientation
sensor.
Accessing the flashlight
One of the more common uses of a smartphone is as an ad hoc
flashlight. Yes, what you really own is an expensive,
multipurpose flashlight. Maybe you dropped something or you
need to peek into a dark space; the quickest solution is already in
your hand — your Android smartphone.
Android thought ahead, knowing that you were going to need
your camera flash to double as an emergency flashlight, so it
dropped a button on the quick access settings menu for this very
purpose.
Settings That Help You Use Other
Devices
Some external devices, such as speakers, security cameras,
thermostats, and door locks can use common protocols for remote
management. In the event that you use any of these devices, your
Android smartphone can interface with and control them with the
Device control quick access setting.
To effectively control a device, follow the manufacturer’s
instructions for initially connecting your device to your Android
smartphone. Once a connection has been established, your device
appears on the Device control quick access setting screen and you
can control it from there, as shown in Figure 10-4.

FIGURE 10-4: My external device.
Turning Wi-Fi on or off

Chances are good you connected your smartphone to your home
Wi-Fi network during the Android setup process. However, Wi-Fi
is one of those things that you might not want to leave on,
especially if you are traveling. For example, most people use their
own private Wi-Fi network to safely browse the Internet when
they are at home. What many people do not realize, however, is
that depending on how your Wi-Fi connection is configured,
when you leave your house, your Wi-Fi may continue to look for
and connect to other open sources of Wi-Fi. This can be unsafe
and lead to viruses or even leave you open to hacking. The best
practice is to turn off your Wi-Fi when you are not specifically
using a connection that you know and trust.
The Internet quick access setting gives you a fast way to turn your
Wi-Fi on or off, or to connect to another trusted Wi-Fi network.
Figure 10-5 shows the interface for the Internet quick access
setting.

FIGURE 10-5: Turn off Wi-Fi when you are roaming around.
Using Bluetooth

Another way to connect to other devices from your Android
smartphone is through Bluetooth. Today, almost all smartphone
peripherals connect to your phone via a Bluetooth connection. If
you plan on using a smartwatch, wireless headphones, Android
Auto, or any number of other conveniences, you need to use your
Android smartphone’s Bluetooth settings.
Bluetooth is a form of shortrange, wireless communication
between electronic devices. It can be used to allows two devices to
exchange data within a certain range of each other, typically about 30
feet.
Like Wi-Fi, Bluetooth is not something you want leave on when
you are not using it. Leaving Bluetooth activated when it is not in
use can leave you open to attack from unscrupulous evildoers
who may use it to try to connect to your phone. The Bluetooth
quick access setting button gives you a quick way to toggle your
smartphone’s Bluetooth setting on and off with a tap.
Setting up a mobile hotspot
Have you ever run into a situation when you had an internet
connection on your smartphone, but you really needed to use it on
your laptop? Or perhaps you had a great connection to a private
Wi-Fi network, but your friend didn’t, and you wished you could
share with them? Well, Android has a solution.
Your Android smartphone enables you to share your internet
connection with other devices by turning it into a mobile Wi-Fi
hotspot. This means that with the Hotspot setting activated, other
devices can connect to the Internet using your Android
smartphone as a Wi-Fi connection.

 While a great way to get some quick work done or help a
friend out, turning your Android smartphone into a mobile hotspot can
also use up a lot of data. If you are not on a Wi-Fi connection, and you
have a carrier plan that requires you to pay for data, be very careful
because you may end up using a lot of costly data bits.
If you haven’t configured a hotspot on your smartphone yet,
tapping the Hotspot quick access setting should take you to the
Wi-Fi hotspot configuration screen shown in Figure 10-6. This
configuration screen enables you to name the hotspot and
determine a password for it. Once the hotspot is configured,
tapping the Hotspot quick access setting button toggles the
hotspot on and off.
Once you turn the hotspot on, simply open the Wi-Fi connection
settings on the device you want to connect and look for a Wi-Fi
connection with the hotspot name you configured. Then, enter the
password you configured to complete the connection. Magic!
(Well, really cool technology, but it seems like magic.)

FIGURE 10-6: Here’s where you turn on your hotspot.
Sharing content with ScreenCast

Some televisions enable an Android device to “cast” content to
them. This means that you can show the current contents of your
Android smartphone on a television screen for others to see. No
more crowding around a tiny smartphone to watch funny cat
videos!
 Unfortunately, Apple’s AirPlay and Android’s ScreenCast are
two very different technologies and are not interchangeable. Just
because a TV might support AirPlay does not necessarily mean your
Android smartphone can cast to it — the TV must specifically support
Android casting.
Tapping the Screen Cast quick access setting button activates
ScreenCast, prompting Android to search for nearby devices that
are compatible with casting. This search is illustrated in Figure
10-7. If your Android smartphone finds a device that is suitable
for casting, you have the option to connect to it. Just make sure
the device Android finds is the one you are expecting before you
begin to cast, as the device it finds could be the neighbor’s or a
TV in another room.

FIGURE 10-7: Casting a wide net.

USING SMARTVIEW ON A SAMSUNG
PHONE
If you are using a Samsung Android smartphone and have a compatible television, you will
use another technology known as SmartView to screencast. To screencast via SmartView,
follow these steps:
 
1. Swipe down to open the quick access settings.
2. 
Tap the SmartView icon to open the SmartView app.
A list of available devices appears.
3. Locate your television in the list and tap it.
4. Tap Start Now from the confirmation pop-up menu to start the screencast.
Settings That Help Apps Help You
As our daily lives become more and more digital, it only makes
sense that the process for paying for goods and services also is
becoming more digital. Digital wallets are more prevalent now,
and people look for contactless ways to exchange money.
The following sections cover GPay, the digital wallet used on
some Android smartphones. If, however, you are using a
Samsung smartphone, your digital wallet is called SamsungPay.
The process may vary between the two, but the concepts are the
same.
Paying with GPay
GPay is a Goggle service that enables you to use the contactless
payment terminals in many stores. As first mentioned in Chapter
7, GPay stores your payment card information (which can be a
credit card, a debit card, a store gift card, or all of the above) on
your smartphone, and then, when you are ready to pay for
something, you enable GPay and hold your phone up to the

contactless terminal. Google transmits the payment card
information to the terminal and completes the transaction.
 GPay works with a technology called near-field
communication (NFC). This means that your Android smartphone
must be very close to the contactless terminal for it to detect that you
are using GPay — typically within an inch or two.
 The best practice for using GPay is to toggle it on when you
use it (using the GPay quick access setting button), and then toggling it
back off when it is no longer in use.
As an added level of safety, many credit and debit card companies
contact you when you attempt to add a card to the GPay system to
verify that it is really you, and that you really want your card to
be available within GPay. Also, GPay will always ask you to
confirm that you are trying to conduct a transaction before
completing it. This is a way to safeguard against you causing a
transaction to run through GPay that you were not expecting to
make.
 GPay and Apple Pay are two different technologies. While
most contactless payment terminals support both, some may only
support one or the other. Check with your vendor to make sure GPay is
supported before you try to use it.
Turning on Location Services
Some Android apps, features, and even websites require that you
have Location Services turned on. Apps such as Google Maps
need to access your location (which it does via the smartphone’s
internal GPS sensor) to function correctly. Your Android

smartphone gives you the ability to turn the internal GPS sensor
off and on as needed using the quick access settings buttons.
 Turning Location Services off when not in use can help ensure
that no apps use your location data without you knowing it, and it can
also help save a little bit of your battery life as well. That’s a win-win!
Putting your phone into airplane mode
Airplane mode enables you to quickly turn off all radios in your
Android smartphone. Yes, believe it or not, your Android
smartphone is really just a complicated collection of radios. The
Wi-Fi, cellular, and Bluetooth functions of your smartphone are
actually using tiny two-way radios, and by putting your phone
into airplane mode, you turn all of these services off.
 Tap the Airplane mode quick access setting button to toggle
your Android smartphone into and out of airplane mode.
Editing the Quick Access Screen
You may be looking at the quick access setting buttons and
thinking, “I wish there was a quick access button for do not
disturb mode or battery saver.” If this is you, you are in luck.
There are as many as 30 possible quick access settings that you
can add to the quick access settings screen.
To edit which quick access settings buttons you see, swipe down
to open the notification drawer, then swipe down again to expose
the quick access settings buttons. Under the quick access settings
buttons are four smaller buttons. The first of these should be a
pencil. This is the edit button.

 Tap the edit button to change what quick access settings
buttons are visible. You can long press on a settings button to add it to,
remove it from, or reorder it within the quick access buttons list.

Chapter 11
Staying in the Know with Notifications
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Taking a look at the notification bar
 Opening the notification drawer
 Getting more from a notification
 Customizing how you receive notifications
Notifications are Android’s way of letting you know that
something needs your attention. It could be the smartphone itself
that needs your attention — perhaps you have a pending software
update that you need to apply. It could also be an app that needs
your attention — maybe you received a text message or an email.
In this chapter, you discover how your Android smartphone alerts
you of notifications, how to view and respond to them, and how
to customize how you receive them.
Receiving Notifications
When you receive a notification, it appears at the top of the
screen, whether your Android smartphone is open to the home
screen or you are currently inside an app. It slides down from the
top to reveal a small preview of the notification contents, and then
slides back up to disappear. To see more of the notification, or to
see past notifications that have not been deleted, you must open
the notification drawer.

 If you are really on the ball and catch a notification as it is
coming in, you can forgo opening the notification drawer all together
by tapping on the notification. This opens the app that sent the
notification. Most apps open directly to the subject of the notification.
For example, a text message notification, when tapped, opens the
Messages app directly to the correct conversation.
After the notification has slid back up and off your screen, an icon
representing the app that sent the notification appears in the
notification bar. The notification bar is always at the top of the
screen and displays such information as the current time and your
cellular signal strength. Figure 11-1 shows the Android
notification bar.

FIGURE 11-1: The notification bar.

 Notice in Figure 11-1 that there are several notification icons.
There’s one for a news app, one for Outlook, and a few more. These
icons tell you that you received notifications from all of these apps.
However, what it doesn’t tell you is how many notifications you
received from each. You could have ten email notifications and five
text messages, but you will only see two icons on the notification bar.
These icons simply let you know that you have at least one notification
from that particular app, and maybe more.
Using the Notification Drawer
If you receive a notification, use the swipe down gesture to open
the notification drawer to view it. The notification drawer stores
all of your notifications for you until you can act on them.
Technically, the notification drawer is divided into two sections:
the upper half includes the quick action settings, which are
discussed in Chapter 10, while the lower half displays
notifications. Figure 11-2 illustrations the notification drawer with
a notification from Outlook.

FIGURE 11-2: The notification drawer.

 Notifications in the notification drawer are divided into
sections based on the app that sent them. This means that all text
messages are grouped together in one section, all emails in another,
and so on. This makes finding and reading notifications easier.
Depending on how your phone is configured, your Android
smartphone makes a sound, vibrates, or both when you receive a
notification. However, some notifications don’t actually notify
you. These are called silent notifications. These notifications can
be found by scrolling to the bottom of the notification drawer.
Silent notifications are usually sent from apps or processes that
are running in the background on your smartphone such as the
current weather or your VPN status. Figure 11-3 shows an
example of some silent notifications.

FIGURE 11-3: Silent but … visible.
Once the notification drawer is open, it might feel a little
crowded, even if you only have one notification. For example,
Figure 11-4 shows what a single notification from Outlook looks
like. A lot of information displays in the notification for such a
small space. Because I only have one email notification form
Outlook, the full contents of the notification are displayed.
However, if I had more than one notification from any app, the
notifications in that section of the notification drawer collapse and
only a small portion of the notification is shown (see Figure 11-
5).
So how do you see more information? I’m glad you asked.

FIGURE 11-4: One Outlook notification.

FIGURE 11-5: It’s starting to feel a little crowded.
Swiping for More Information
To expand the notification drawer, swipe down within the section
you want to expand. If you want to expand the section of Outlook
notifications to see more information about them, swipe down
within just the Outlook section. The result is shown in Figure 11-
6.

 However, even this expanded view might not be enough. If
you want to view the full preview of the notification (and get a few
helpful goodies), perform another swipe down gesture on the specific
notification you want to preview. This expands the notification and
gives you the full preview of the notification, as shown in Figure 11-7.
For email notifications, the full preview typically shows the sender,
most of the subject line, and the first line or two of the email body.
Other notifications may show more or less information based on what
is in them.

FIGURE 11-6: More information about the Outlook notifications.

FIGURE 11-7: The full preview.
However, you also get some helpful context buttons in the full
preview. For the Outlook message shown Figure 11-7, the context

buttons are Archive, Delete, and Reply. Tapping Archive sends
the email to my Outlook archive folder. Tapping Delete deletes
the email from Outlook. Tapping Reply, on the other hand, opens
Outlook directly to a prepopulated email reply, as shown in
Figure 11-8.

FIGURE 11-8: Reply from Outlook.

 Different types of notifications show different action buttons.
The buttons may also act differently. For example, the action buttons
you get for a text message from the Messages app are Mark as Read
and Reply. Take a look at Figure 11-9 to see the full preview of a text
message. A big difference here is that tapping the Reply button lets
you reply directly to the text message from the notification! No need to
open Messages.
 Notice also that Android offers possible replies for you to send
without having to type out anything. For example, in Figure 11-9, to
reply “Thanks,” simply tap the Thanks reply and away it goes.
Because Android has implemented machine learning techniques into
its software, the more you reply certain ways to certain emails and text
messages, the smarter Android becomes about what automatic replies
it suggests to you. The theory being that, if you always reply to texts
from Aunt Bessie with “Yes Ma’am!”, eventually Android picks up on
that and begins to suggest “Yes Ma’am” as an automatic response
whenever you get a text from Aunt Bessie.

FIGURE 11-9: Different action buttons appear based on notification type.
Configuring Notifications

Android smartphone notifications are configurable as well. You
have the power to determine what app can and cannot send you
notifications, when they can send them, and what Android does
with them once they do.
Follow these steps to configure your notifications:
 
1. 
Open the notification drawer by swiping down from the top of
your screen and scroll to the bottom.
After any silent notifications you should see a button labeled
Manage on the left side of the notification drawer.
2. 
Tap the Manage button to open Android’s settings.
The Notification settings screen opens, which is where you can
configure your notifications (see Figure 11-10).
Two settings to take note of here are App settings and (scrolling
down) Do Not Disturb. App settings give you the power to
determine which apps can and cannot send you notifications.
3. 
Tap App settings to display the App notifications screen
shown in Figure
11-11.
From this screen you can tap each app to configure how you want
it to send you notifications (or not).

FIGURE 11-10: Settings for notifications.

FIGURE 11-11: Adjusting app settings.
While my list of apps may look completely different than yours,
the important detail to notice is the toggle switch that appears to

the right of each app. This toggle determines whether that app can
or cannot send notifications. If the toggle is set to the right, the
app is allowed to send you notifications. However, if you have an
app that is peppering you with notifications day and night and you
want it to stop, simply look for it in this list and tap the toggle
switch to turn it off. That’ll teach ’em.
 Turning off an app’s ability to send notifications does not
affect the application’s ability to run — usually. Most apps continue to
function perfectly well if you disable notifications. However, be aware
that Android gives app developers the ability to choose to disable or
decrease the functionality of their app if notifications are turned off —
if they feel notifications are an integral part of the app. If you see a big
difference in the performance or functionality of an app after turning
off notifications, try turning them back on to see if the app goes back
to normal again.
Setting Do Not Disturb
Another important setting is Do Not Disturb. Do Not Disturb is
found by going to the Notification settings screen (refer to Figure
11-10) and scrolling to the bottom. Tapping the Do Not Disturb
setting displays the screen shown in Figure 11-12. Do Not Disturb
is a setting that tells Android, “Hey, if I get any notifications,
don’t let me know.” With Do Not Disturb activated, Android
takes any notifications you receive and just sends them directly to
the notification drawer — without any dings, bings, or buzzes.
Most people find this setting useful at night or when they are in
important meetings. The best part about setting Do Not Disturb is
its flexibility.

FIGURE 11-12: Do not disturb.

 Keep in mind that turning on Do Not Disturb affects all
notifications — including phone calls. This means that while your
Android smartphone is in Do Not Disturb mode, you will not be
notified if you get an incoming phone call as well as other app
notifications.
From the Do Not Disturb setting, you can turn on Do Not Disturb
immediately by tapping the Turn on now button. However, if you
know that you do not want to be disturbed every night between 9
p.m. and 6 a.m., you can create a schedule by tapping the
Schedules setting.
 You can exclude people and apps from Do Not Disturb. For
example, if you want any texts from Uncle Jeb to still notify you, even
if you are in Do Not Disturb mode, tap the People setting. Here you
can add Uncle Jeb and configure whether he can text or call you, or
both.
Similarly, tap the Apps setting to configure any specific apps you
want to be able to notify you while you are in Do Not Disturb
mode. For example, if you still want to receive notifications from
text messages only, add Messages to the list of Apps that can
notify you while you are in Do Not Disturb mode.
 Do Not Disturb mode does not affect local and nation
emergency broadcasts. Amber alerts, Silver alerts, tornado warnings,
and other emergency warnings will continue to sound on your Android
smartphone even while it is in Do Not Disturb mode.

Chapter 12
Customizing Your Settings
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Configuring when Night Light turns on and off
 Freeing up space on your smartphone
 Setting parental controls with the Digital Wellbeing app
 Adjusting the volume controls
As you first discover in Chapter 10, Android smartphones have a
vast array of settings and features that you can set, tweak, and
customize. There are so many that an entire book could be
dedicated just to the different settings on your smartphone. In this
chapter, I focus on just a handful of these settings — Night Light,
Storage, and Digital Wellbeing — and offer tips on how to use
and customize them to your liking. I also describe how to adjust
the volume controls, which behave differently depending on what
app you are in at the time.
 To access any of the settings featured in this chapter, perform a
swipe down gesture from your home screen to open the notification
drawer, and then swipe down again to expand the quick access
settings. Tap the gear button that appears in the lower-right corner of
the quick access settings list and type the name of the setting you want
to access in the search bar.
Resting Your Eyes with Night Light
Night Light was added to Android smartphones a number of years
ago. Have you ever used your phone throughout the day while
also working on a computer monitor? If so, chances are good that

by the end of the day your eyes may have been pretty tired from
eye strain. Night Light is a feature of Android smartphones that
tries to help you alleviate eye strain. The settings for Night Light
are found in the Display settings area, as shown in Figure 12-1.

FIGURE 12-1: Display settings.

 If you are using a Samsung smartphone, this setting is called
Eye Comfort Shield, and it works similarly to Night Light.
Notice in Figure 12-1 that Night Light is set to turn on at 22:00
(10 p.m.). Yours may be set to a different time by default. To
change this setting, tap Night Light to enter the Night Light
configuration screen, as shown in Figure 12-2. From here you can
set an automatic start time, an automatic end time, and an
intensity. However, if you are in immediate need some eye relief,
just tap the Use Night Light toggle button to turn Night Light on
right now.

FIGURE 12-2: The Night Light configuration screen.
So once Night Light has been activated, what does it do? It is
thought that blue light emitted from electronic devices including

computer monitors and smartphone screens is a major cause of
eye strain. Therefore, when Night Light is activated, your
Android smartphone limits the amount of blue light that is pushed
from your screen. To illustrate this, take a look at two screenshots
taken from the same website: one with Night Light turned off
(Figure 12-3), and one with Night Light turned on (Figure 12-4).
 To be honest, Figure 12-4 is a very good simulation of what
the Wiley.com homepage looks like with Night Light turned on. The
image had to be simulated because Android does not actually let you
take a screenshot of the effect that Night Light has on your screen.
Even I learn something new every day.

FIGURE 12-3: Night Light turned off.

FIGURE 12-4: Night Light turned on.
Where Did My Memory Go?

One of the biggest problems many users have with any
smartphone is that the smartphone’s memory and storage only
goes so far. That is, once you load up your 43rd different version
of Zombie Sudoku, you start to run out of storage. Also, if you try
to run all 43 versions at the same time, your Android smartphone
would most likely turn into a zombie.
 I am going to get a little technical here because Android gets a
lot technical here. That is, most people tend to think the terms memory
and storage are interchangeable; however, especially in regard
Android smartphones, memory and storage are two different things.
When you install an app on your smartphone, it uses storage to, well,
store that app. When you run an app, not only does it use storage, but it
also uses memory to run. Both memory and storage are finite on your
smartphone, and when either of them have been used up, you must free
up resources. The good thing about this is that (most times) when an
app is shut down, it frees up the memory it was using — in the same
way that when an app is deleted, it frees up the storage it was using.
While your Android smartphone cannot magically give you more
memory or storage to install or run a 44th version of Zombie
Sudoku, it can help you in other ways.
The Storage setting
The first way your Android smartphone can help with your
storage problem is by letting you see just how much space each
app is using. Open the notification drawer and search for
“Storage” in the search bar. You should see the Storage settings
area of your Android smartphone, as shown in Figure 12-5.
In nice bold type, Storage settings tells me that I am using 55GB
of the 64GB available to me as storage. Okay, that is good
information to have, but now I want to know what is taking up all
that storage. Scrolling down the list, I see that apps take up 32GB
of space, images 2.1GB, and games 1.1GB.

FIGURE 12-5: Storage settings.

 The System section of the Storage settings indicates the
amount of storage used by the Android operating system and its related
software. In my case, System is taking up 19GB.
To see why apps are taking up so much storage, tap Apps in the
Storage settings list. This displays a list of the installed apps on
your smartphone and how much storage each one is using. Figure
12-6 shows the Apps storage list from my smartphone. From
here, I can see that Facebook is using 472MB of storage — and I
don’t use Facebook anymore. So what can I do?
Tap Facebook to open the Storage settings screen for the
Facebook app, as shown in Figure 12-7. One of the great things
Android does here is it breaks down the amount of storage an app
takes up on your smartphone. In Figure 12-6 you can see that
Facebook takes up 472MB of storage. In Figure 12-7, you can see
that 182MB of that is the app itself, while 289MB of that is “user
data.” This information is helpful in identifying apps that might
be using more storage than you expected.

FIGURE 12-6: Apps, apps, and more apps.

FIGURE 12-7: Storage settings for the Facebook app.
Clear Storage and Clear Cache buttons

Another helpful tool Android gives you to help you manage your
storage is a set of two buttons on an app’s Storage settings screen
labeled Clear Storage and Clear Cache. (To see the Clear Storage
and Clear Cache buttons on some Samsung devices, you need to
tap Storage first.)
 Be careful before you tap on either of these buttons. After
either button is tapped, the process cannot be undone. Be sure you
understand exactly what each button does and the reason behind its
function before you decide to tap either one.
 The following descriptions of the clear storage and clear cache
functions are valid for most apps. However, some apps may utilize
cache storage in a way that is not industry standard, and therefore,
using these buttons may have unintended consequences.
The least destructive of the two buttons is Clear Cache. On
Android smartphones, cache is a place where apps can
temporarily store information that helps them run a little better or
faster. For example, an app might enable you to download
customization themes. These themes might be downloaded to
cache while you figure out which one you want.
Cache is meant to be temporary. However, some apps forget to
delete this information when you are done using the app. Over
time, this data can build up and cause the app to run slowly. To
combat this, Android gives you the ability to delete the app’s
cache. In theory, by clearing the cache you are deleting
information that is not critical to the operation of the app, and you
are only affecting one app.
Clearing storage is different from clearing cache. Tapping the
Clear Storage button deletes everything the app has saved to your
smartphone. In other words, after the clear storage function has

finished, the app will be just as it was when it was first installed
— no configuration, no user profile, just a clean app.
 While clearing storage has a bigger impact, there are times
when it is the right thing to do. For example, if some data corrupts the
app and the app no longer works, or if you simply want to “start over,”
clearing storage is the solution.
Free Up Space button
One final storage option to take note of is the Free Up Space
option. It appears as a button under the total storage used on the
Storage settings screen shown earlier in Figure 12-5. By tapping
this button, Android identifies any apps on your smartphone that
you have not used (or use very infrequently) and suggests them
for removal. This button can be useful in getting rid of things you
may have forgotten you even downloaded. Tap Free Up Space to
see what Android suggests for you (don’t worry; it won’t actually
delete anything unless you tell it to). Figure 12-8 shows the Free
Up Space screen.
 Samsung devices handle this process a little differently. To do
this on your Samsung smartphone, swipe down and access your
settings. Tap on Battery and device care. Then locate and tap on
Optimize Now.

FIGURE 12-8: Android found some junk.
Developer options

That covers storage, but what about memory? A typical Android
smartphone has much less memory than storage — usually in the
neighborhood of 6 to 12GB. When your Android smartphone runs
an app, the app is loaded into memory; when you close the app,
the app is removed from memory.
If you open an app and it constantly freezes, or has problems
running, there may be too many things loaded into memory.
Android gives you a way to check.
 To access the memory settings, you have to enable what are
called developer options on your Android smartphone. Enabling
developer options itself is not bad. However, doing so gives you access
to more settings that, if you do not know what they are used for, can
cause problems if you change them. So if you are not comfortable with
infinite Android power, you can skip this section.
To enable developer options, open the default settings screen and
scroll down to the About phone option. Tap About phone and
scroll to the bottom. You should see a label called Build Number
(on Samsung smartphones you may need to search for Build
Number in the settings search). Now — this is the fun part — tap
rapidly on Build Number until a pop-up menu appears and tells
you that developer options have been enabled. Now, navigate
back to the settings default screen and search for “Memory” to
access the Memory settings, as shown in Figure 12-9.

FIGURE 12-9: Memories! All alone in the …
Here you can see that I use an average of 4.2GB of my
smartphone’s 5.7GB of memory. Okay, but what is using that

memory? Tap the Memory setting to find out. You should see a
screen similar to the screen shown in Figure 12-10. This screen
tells you more about how your Android smartphone is running
and gives you some statistics on memory usage, but the important
bit is at the bottom of the screen. At the bottom is a button labeled
Memory used by apps. Tap that to explore what apps are using
memory and how much memory they use. Figure 12-11 shows
what this screen looks like.
 While you cannot stop any apps from running or prevent them
from using memory on this screen, what you can do is see how much
memory a specific app tends to use when it runs. Therefore, if you see
that your Zombie Sudoku app is suddenly using 5GB of memory when
it runs, it might be a sign that something is wrong with the app and you
should look into it further.

FIGURE 12-10: A breakdown of memory stats.

FIGURE 12-11: Lots of apps are using lots of memory.

Keeping Your Life in Balance with
Digital Wellbeing
The Digital Wellbeing feature enables you to get more control
over when and how you use your Android smartphone — and
helps you keep that all important balance in your life. If you are a
parent of a young Android smartphone user, the Digital Wellbeing
app also gives you some parental controls that you can implement
to help them as well.
 Digital Wellbeing is specific to Google Pixel phones; however,
most manufacturers, like Samsung, do include their own version of it.
While the process for setting it up may differ from manufacturer to
manufacturer, the concepts are still the same.
To open the Digital Wellbeing app, navigate to the settings default
page and scroll down to Digital Wellbeing & parental controls.
Tap on this setting to open the default Digital Wellbeing screen as
shown in Figure 12-12.

FIGURE 12-12: A snapshot of your wellbeing.
At the top of the screen, Digital Wellbeing tells you how much
time you have spent on your phone today and how you spent that

time. Each slice of the time wheel is a category of application you
spent time on today, and how much time you spent on it. If you
want to get a little more detail, tap the time wheel to open the
Dashboard, as shown in Figure 12-13.
The Dashboard breaks down just how you spend your time on
your Android smartphone. It may be surprising to see just how
much time you spend on Zombie Sudoku, but once you see how
much time you spend on it, Android can help you limit it (if that’s
what you what to do).
App timer
Suppose you spend 8 hours per day in the Chrome web browser,
and you feel that it is taking over your life. How can Android help
with this? The solution is in the Dashboard. Scroll down until you
see Chrome, and tap on it. Figure 12-14 shows the detail screen
for Chrome.
Notice under the details of your Chrome app usage, there is a
setting labeled App timer. Here is where you can specify how
much time Android should let you use Chrome per day. When
you reach your limit, Android lets you know and prevents you
from using the app for the rest of the day. This is a great way
Android helps keep you focused on the things outside of your
Android smartphone.

FIGURE 12-13: A detailed look at app usage.

FIGURE 12-14: Limiting usage.
However, what if you still need help focusing on things outside
your smartphone, like on work for instance? Maybe you just keep

getting peppered by notifications or distracted by games. Once
again, Android has you covered.
Focus mode
Android’s Focus mode (found under Digital Wellbeing in
Settings) helps you limit the time certain apps can notify you. On
the Focus mode screen, shown in Figure 12-15, you can select the
apps that are causing an distraction for you and pause their
notifications. Simply tap the checkbox to the right of each app to
select it. Then, tap Set a schedule to create a custom time frame.
This time frame could be during work hours, during family time,
or any other time you know you get distracted by apps. Once you
set the schedule, Android takes care of the rest. During the
selected time frame, notifications from these app are silenced. No
more distractions for you!

FIGURE 12-15: Time to focus.
Bedtime

The next setting in Digital Wellbeing that may be helpful to you is
Bedtime. No, Android will not read you a bedtime story.
(Although, Android, if you are reading this, a bedtime story
feature would be nice.) Bedtime acts like Focus mode, but with a
few added features. Figure 12-16 shows the Bedtime default
screen.
Bedtime, like Focus mode, silences your apps within a specified
time frame to keep distractions from creeping in while you are
trying to get to sleep. However, Bedtime also turns your screen
from color to black and white. If you happen to wake up in the
middle of the night and check your phone, you won’t be hit in the
eyes by a technicolor blast. Rather, a gentle grayscale breeze will
wash over you.
 If you set an alarm at a time that conflicts with Bedtime,
Android automatically turns off Bedtime when the alarm sounds. For
example, if you set your Bedtime schedule for 10 p.m. to 8 a.m. every
day, but today you have to wake up at 6 a.m. so you set an alarm,
Android automatically turns off Bedtime mode when the 6 a.m. alarm
goes off.

FIGURE 12-16: Goodnight phone.
Understanding the Volume Controls

You may notice that the volume controls in Android are a little
different than those on other smartphones because in Android,
they are contextual in nature. The location of the volume controls
may be a little different as well. In this section, you discover how
to use your Android smartphone’s volume controls.
Locating the volume buttons
Most Android smartphone models place separate Up and Down
volume controls on the right side of the smartphone underneath
the power button. Android smartphone manufacturers do this for
two major reasons.
The first is that, when you are using your smartphone as a phone,
you can adjust the volume of the call with one hand (assuming
you are holding the phone in your left hand up to your left ear).
The second being that, when in photo-taking mode, the Up
volume button will be at top of the phone and can be used as a
shutter button to take pictures.
 If you have an Android smartphone model that does not have
volume controls on the right side of the phone, they should be on the
left side — but I’m sure you already figured that out.
It’s all about context
The important thing to know about the volume controls on an
Android smartphone is that they are contextual. That means,
pressing the Up or Down volume button does something different
depending on what app you are in at the time. For example, if you
open your Android smartphone to the home screen and press
either the Up or Down volume control, you should see a volume
slider similar to what is shown in Figure 12-17. This is the ringer
volume.
When no app is open, the volume control changes the ringer
volume. If you notice that when you receive phone calls, the
ringer is either too quiet or too loud, go to your home screen and

adjust the volume control. The ringer volume, when adjusted
here, represents the volume at which all your notification sounds
will play.
 Don’t try to adjust the ringer volume while your phone is
ringing. While it might seem like the logical time to want to turn your
ringer up or down, pressing either of the volume controls while your
phone is ringing silences the ringer.
If you are already on a phone call, the same volume controls can
adjust the earpiece volume of the call. Android assumes that, if
you already on a phone call and you are pressing the volume
controls, you don’t want to adjust the ringer, you want to adjust
the call volume. Pretty smart for a phone.
 In the same way Android knows you want to adjust the call
volume, if you are in any app that plays sound — for example,
YouTube — adjusting the volume controls while in that app adjusts the
volume of that app.

FIGURE 12-17: The ringer volume slider.
At this point, you might be saying to yourself, “I wish there was a
place I could go to set all of these different volumes at once.”

Well, you are in luck!
Notice in Figure 12-17 the three dots at the bottom of the volume
control slider. These dots tell you that there is a menu you can
explore. Tap on the three dots to pull up the volume control menu,
as shown in Figure 12-18. From the volume control menu, you
can adjust the volume of media, calls, the ringer and notifications,
and alarm all in one place. This is helpful if you know you want
to turn your YouTube (Media) volume down before you open the
app.
Sometimes you need to be quiet
Some smartphones have “mute” buttons on the left side of the
smartphone. The problem with these buttons is that they have
only one function to mute the phone — but the vibration function
still makes noise. Android has you covered here too. Android
smartphones forego the mute button for a volume control that
turns your ringer from sound, to vibrate, to nothing.

FIGURE 12-18: Adjust the volume of all media in this handy screen.
Looking again at Figure 12-17, notice the circle above the volume
control that has a vibration icon inside it. This indicates that, right

now, my phone ringer is set to vibrate mode. Therefore, if I get a
call, my phone will not ring (no matter what the volume is set to)
— it will vibrate instead. Tap on this circle to expand your
options. There are three possible options that you can set your
ringer volume to. The first is a bell. This indicates that the ring
will sound out when you receive a call. The second is a bell with
a line through it. This option is for complete silence. If set, the
phone will not ring or vibrate when you receive a call. The third
option is vibrate mode.

Part 3
Communicating Anytime, Anywhere

IN THIS PART …
 
Explore the default texting app in Android and the various ways to
send texts, from typing on the virtual keyboard to swiping words
without lifting a finger to using only your voice.
Discover the features of the smartphone’s most basic function —
making calls — and how to add and edit your contacts list.
Find out how to set emergency contacts and what features are available
to help you during an emergency.
Explore how to use the Google Chrome web browser to access the
Internet and how to find and install other web browsers.
Understand the basics of social media and how to find and install
social media apps.
Become familiar with the Camera app including how to hold the phone
for the best shot and how to edit your images.

Chapter 13
Texting to Keep in Touch
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Touring the Messages layout
 Texting your closest friends
 Finding out how to text without lifting a finger
 Sending group texts
Texting is one of the most convenient ways to keep up with
coworkers, family members, and loved ones. Being able to
quickly type out a message to one person, or to a group of people,
is a great way of letting people know what is happening in a quick
and immediate way.
Android makes texting even easier by offering a number of ways
to get your message across. From typing on a virtual keyboard to
swiping words without lifting a finger to using voice-to-text
capabilities, Android has you covered. The best part is, if you
don’t like Android’s default texting app and features, you’re free
to install any one of the myriad third-party texting apps that are
available on the Google Play Store.
 The tutorial and screenshots in this chapter pertain to the
Google Pixel version of pure Android. If you are using a phone from a
manufacturer that uses a modified version of Android, like Samsung or
Motorola, your experience may be slightly different. However, the
tutorials should still be helpful in navigating your particular
smartphone.
Exploring Messages

The default texting app in Android is Messages. The Messages
app is preinstalled on your phone (unless it has been replaced by
the phone’s manufacturer with another texting app). To open
Messages, tap the blue icon with the page of text on it, as shown
in Figure 13-1.
FIGURE 13-1: The Messages icon.
Upon opening, the default Messages screen is divided into four
sections:

 
Search
Auto-grouping categories
Conversations
Action button(s)
 One of the best features of Android Messages is the ability to
search within all your text conversations for a specific word or phrase.
The search bar at the top of the default Messages screen is quick and
easy to use. If you know Aunt Bess texted you a great pecan pie recipe
two years ago, but that is too far to scroll, simply type “pecan pie” in
the search bar. In no time, Android retrieves the text for you (and any
other text that happens to mention “pecan pie”).
Another feature of Android Messages is auto-grouping. Android
uses adaptive machine learning to determine whether your texts
are personal or business-related and groups them by these
categories. At the time of publication of this book, there was no
way to influence what category a conversation was placed in.
However, you can view the conversations in each category by
selecting the All, Personal, or Business category view.
 All conversations are listed in the middle of the screen. Keep
in mind that these are not individual messages; these are
representations of entire conversations. However, on this screen you
only see the latest text that was sent or received in the conversation.
All the conversations on this screen are ordered by the date the last text
was sent or received.
To open a specific conversation, simply tap on it. This opens the
conversation screen where you can view and read each text

message in the conversation. You can also send a new text
message to other members of the conversation.
To start a new conversation with someone, the action button for
that is near the bottom of the default Messages screen. Tap the
Start chat button to open a blank text message. With the text
message screen open, you have more than one way to get you
thoughts into the message — let’s explore them.
Tap, Tap, Typing and Other Ways to
Enter Your Message
With Android, you have three main ways to get words from your
head and into a text message. The first and most common is by
typing letter by letter on the Android keyboard — also known as
the GBoard.
Using the keyboard
Most people are familiar with the layout of a standard QWERTY
keyboard. The GBoard is no different. Figure 13-2 shows the
layout of the GBoard. With the GBoard open, all you need to do
to enter your message is tap each letter on the GBoard. There is
no surprise here. However, if you look closely at the GBoard
shown in Figure 13-2, you may notice that the top row of letters
also include small numbers in the upper-right corner.
To access the numbers while you are tapping out your message,
long press on the button that contains the number you want to
type. For example, the letter W on the GBoard also corresponds
to the number 2. Long press on the W, and a smaller option board
displays with the number 2 in it, as shown in Figure 13-3.

FIGURE 13-2: QWERTY to the rescue.

FIGURE 13-3: Long press letter options.
Long press letter options also work for international characters.
Are you texting someone in France and need access to the elusive

E accent circumflex? Simply long press on the E key in the
GBoard and all the international E accents are offered up for your
choosing (see Figure 13-4).
 The Return key on the GBoard does not send your text; rather,
it is used to move your cursor to the next line. This is a great way to
format longer texts so that they are more readable.
Special characters
Android tries to keep the most common characters on the main
keyboard. Not only do you have access to numbers and letter
accents, you also have access to the comma and period.
Sometimes though, you may need other special characters than
just the comma and period.
If you are looking for more than just numbers and accents, you
need to pull up the special character keyboard. This is a second
keyboard that you can switch to with more character options such
as # and &. To switch to the special character keyboard, tap the ?
123 button that appears in the lower-left corner of the GBoard.
Figure 13-5 shows the special character keyboard.

FIGURE 13-4: The GBoard includes accents!

FIGURE 13-5: Special character keyboard.
Emojis, stickers, and GIFs

Sometimes you may want to get your message across with more
than just words. The Android GBoard also supports more visual
ways of saying what is on your mind, such as with emojis,
stickers, and GIFs. The smiley face button that appears to the left
of the spacebar on the GBoard takes you to the noncharacter
keyboards. The first one that displays is the emoji keyboard.
 The emoji keyboard displays first the first time you access the
noncharacter keyboards. All future times you access them, the last
keyboard you used is the one that displays by default. Therefore, if the
last keyboard you used was the GIF keyboard, that one opens by
default when you tap the smiley face button.
Figure 13-6 shows the emoji keyboard. Want to send a friendly
smiley face? Maybe the dreaded “pile of poo”? These emojis can
all be found on the emoji keyboard.

FIGURE 13-6: Emojis.

 As of the writing of this book, Android supports over 3,600
standard emojis. So chances are good you will be able to find the exact
emoji that expresses what is on your mind.
Are emojis just not doing the job? Try using a sticker. The next
noncharacter keyboard is the stickers keyboard. A sticker, like its
namesake, is a small, simple piece of artwork that conveys a
message. Figure 13-7 illustrates the stickers keyboard. One of the
best things about stickers is that they are sent to the recipient as
an image. That means the recipient does not necessarily need to
be using Android to see the sticker you send them.
The last specialized noncharacter GBoard you can use is the GIF
keyboard, shown in Figure 13-8. GIFs are pictures that contain a
short video clip, much like a flip-book. GIFs can be a quick and
amusing way of getting your point across without using any
words at all. Like all the other noncharacter keyboards, the GIF
keyboard displays the last GIF you sent first … oops.

FIGURE 13-7: Stickers! Like the 1980s only more electronic.

FIGURE 13-8: GIFs.
However, if tapping out messages letter by letter isn’t really your
thing, and you are looking for a quicker way to get words out, you

can try swiping.
Swipe typing
The Android GBoard is also capable of swipe typing, which refers
to typing by swiping your finger across the keyboard from key to
key. When you swipe on your keyboard, you can enter in entire
words at a time. This method of texting can take some practice to
get used to, but it can be a real time-saver if you stick with it.
 To enter text by swipe typing, place your finger down on the
first letter of the word you want to type. Then, leaving your finger on
the GBoard, move your finger around the board, touching all the letters
in the word. When you reach the last letter, lift your finger off the
GBoard and Android figures out what word you wanted to type based
on the path your finger took.
For example, if you want to swipe the word “it’s,” you would
place your finger down on the letter I. Then you would drag your
finger across the GBoard to the letter T and finally to the S.
Figure 13-9 shows the path your finger would take when swipe
typing the word “it’s.”

FIGURE 13-9: Swiping out the word “It’s.”

 The more you practice with swipe typing, the more you will
remember the patterns for common words. These words will then
become very easy for you to enter quickly.
Looking at the GBoard, you might notice that there are times
when two or more words can be typed with the same swipe. For
example, top and tip would both start on the letter T, end on the P,
and pass through both the I and O. In cases like this, Android
does its best to determine which word you mean through context.
Voice-to-text
Swiping entire words at once is a quick way to enter a text. An
even quicker way to text is by not typing at all and speaking your
message into the Google Voice Typing keyboard. Voice-to-text is
different from a voice message. While Android does support
sending a voice recording in a text message, voice-to-text is
similar to dictation — you speak your message, and Android
transcribes it to written text.
 Android implements voice-to-text capabilities with the Google
Voice Typing keyboard. To switch from the GBoard to the Google
Voice Typing keyboard, tap the keyboard icon that appears on the
bottom-right side of the screen below the GBoard. This displays the
keyboard input method screen, as shown in Figure 13-10.
If you select the Google Voice Typing keyboard from the list, the
GBoard is replaced with the Google Voice Typing keyboard and it
immediately starts listening for you to speak. Figure 13-11
illustrates the Google Voice Typing keyboard ready and listening.
Simply speak your message and Android types it out for you in
the chat box. This is a simple and efficient way to text someone
when your hands are otherwise occupied.

 If you want to insert punctuation into your text, just say the
word. For example, if you are asking a question and want to add a
question mark, say the words “question mark” at the end of your text
and Android contextually knows to insert a ? symbol. However, if you
are an investigator, you might have to get creative when texting your
partner, “I am going to question Mark.”
 The Google Voice Typing keyboard does not remain selected
once you close Messages. That is, the next time you open Messages,
the GBoard becomes the default keyboard. If you want to use Google
Voice Typing, you need to select it again.

FIGURE 13-10: Keyboard options.

FIGURE 13-11: Google Voice Typing keyboard: ready and listening.
Copying, Pasting, and Deleting Texts

Android enables you to copy, paste, and even delete entire texts
from a conversation. For example, take a look at Figure 13-12,
which is a conversation I had with myself (between two of my
phones). To copy or delete the message, “Please don’t screenshot
this for your book,” you just need to long press on the message.
The message then becomes highlighted, showing that it has been
selected, and Messages goes into Select mode.
 Once Messages is in Select mode, you can select other texts by
tapping them. To unselect a specific message, just tap it again.
At the top of the Messages screen are the icons for copy and
delete (refer to Figure 13-12). To copy the selected text, tap the
copy icon. Once the text is copied, you can paste it into another
text by long pressing in the new text box and tapping Paste from
the context menu that appears. If you want to delete the text(s)
instead, tap the delete icon while in Select mode. The selected
text(s) is promptly removed from your conversation.

FIGURE 13-12: A message in Select mode.

 Android treats a copied text message just like regular text.
That means you can paste the contents almost anywhere — into a note
or even into a search engine.
 If you delete texts from a conversation there is no way to get
them back. And remember, if you delete texts from a conversation,
they are only deleted from your smartphone. The texts still appear in
the conversation on the recipients’ smartphones.
Group Texting
If you want to text more than one person at a time, group texting
is what you need. The Messages app enables you to create and
name groups with anyone you want, regardless of the smartphone
platform they are using.
In a group text conversation, each participant gets a copy of each
message sent. Android collects these texts together into one
common conversation and displays them together within
Messages.
You start a group conversation the same way you start a
conversation with one contact, by taping on the Start chat button
at the bottom of the Messages default screen to display the New
conversation screen, as shown in Figure 13-13. Near the top of
the New conversation screen is a button labeled Create group. Tap
this button to open the New group conversation screen and select
contacts to add to your group. Figure 13-14 shows the New group
conversation screen.

FIGURE 13-13: Starting a new group conversation.

FIGURE 13-14: A new group.

 There is a limit to the number of recipients you can have in
group. While the limit varies per smartphone manufacturer and carrier,
most impose limit of ten recipients per group.
 When setting up your group conversation, you are not limited
to only adding recipients from your existing contacts. You can also
enter a phone number in the To: line, and Android will include that
phone number in your group text — even without a contact.
Using Third-Party Texting Apps
Android Messages is a full-featured texting app; however, it
might not be the right fit for you. If you need features that aren’t
found in Messages, Android gives you the flexibility to install and
use another texting app.
You can find many different texting apps on the Google Play
Store. One of the most popular is WhatsApp. This texting and
messaging app is extremely popular outside the United States in
countries where reliability, security, and privacy may be an issue.
WhatsApp is just one example of the myriad third-party texting
apps available to you on Android.

Chapter 14
Using the Phone as a … Phone
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Adding and editing your contacts
 Making calls
 Knowing what to do in case of emergency
At its most basic, a smartphone is still a phone. It can make and
receive phone calls as most telephones have done for over a
hundred years, keeping you in touch with friends and loved ones
over long (and short) distances. In this chapter, you explore the
features of the Android smartphone’s telephone function that help
it truly stand out from its 20th-century counterparts, including
features that could save your life in the case of an emergency.
Seeing Who’s Who in Your Life
All the information needed to communicate with any of your
friends, family, or coworkers is stored on your smartphone as a
contact. In Android, a contact is a collection of personal
information that defines someone you want keep in touch with.
For example, a contact on your smartphone could contain
someone’s:
 
Name
Address
Phone number
Email address
Birthday
Company details

Keep in mind, a contact is not just for names and telephone
numbers. Your Android smartphone can store a lot of personal
information about your contacts. Some of the information
Android can store about your contacts includes:
 
First name
Last name
Address(s)
Birthday
Company
Phone number(s)
Email address(s)
Website
Let’s take a look at how to view, enter, and maintain contacts on
your Android smartphone.
Entering contacts
Contact information is stored in an Android app called … wait for
it … Contacts. This app is one of the default Android apps, so you
should not have to install anything new to use it. Perform a swipe
up gesture to open the app drawer and then locate and open the
Contacts app by tapping on it. The default screen of the Contacts
app, shown in Figure 14-1, displays your Android smartphone’s
contacts in alphabetical order by first name.
 The Contacts app enables you to “star” certain contact who are
important or otherwise stand out from the rest. These starred contacts
are called favorites, and they will always be at the top of the Contacts
list, regardless of alphabetical order. You find out how to set a contact
as a favorite in the next section.

 Even if you have not explored the Contacts app before, you
may have some preinstalled contacts to view. Some carriers preinstall
contact information for common carrier services such as Customer
Service, Sales, and Automated Account Information. So don’t be
alarmed if you open Contacts for the first time and find information
that you did not put there.

FIGURE 14-1: 3-2-1 contact! The default Contacts screen.
To add a new contact, tap the plus sign (+) that appears in the
lower-right corner of the default screen. This opens the Create

contact screen, as shown in Figure 14-2.
Android gives you a blank template to begin adding your
contact’s vital information. You start with the basics: first name,
last name, and company. You can leave any of these fields blank,
so for example, if you only know your favorite bagger at the
grocery store as “Joe,” you can leave the last name field blank.
Some of your contacts may have multiples of a particular piece of
information such as home, mobile, and work telephone numbers.
For this reason, when you begin to enter in a contact’s phone
number, Android adds a new, blank phone number field to the
template immediately below the field in which you are typing.
This gives you the ability to add as many telephone numbers,
email addresses, and physical addresses as you need for any given
contact.
Once you are finished entering your contact’s information, tap the
Save button in the upper-right corner to save the contact to your
Contacts list.

FIGURE 14-2: Creating a contact.

 One great feature of your Android smartphone is that you can
also upload photos of your contacts. By adding a photo to a contact,
whenever you receive a call or a text from that contact, a friendly or
recognizable face appears. Simply tap the Add photo icon at the top of
the contact template to add an image. You have the option to either
take a photo using your smartphone camera or select from the photos
you have already taken (in your Photos app).
Viewing contacts
Once you enter your contacts into the Contacts app, you can view
them in two ways: (1) through the Contacts app itself, as
described in the previous section, and (2) through the phone
dialer.
To view your contacts through the phone dialer, open the phone
dialer by tapping the phone icon on the Android home screen.
Once open, tap the Contacts icon that appears at the bottom of
phone dialer default screen to open the contacts screen, as shown
in Figure 14-3. Here, your contacts are listed in alphabetical order
by first name — just as they are in the Contacts app. This makes
it easy to scroll through and find the contact you are looking for.

FIGURE 14-3: Phone dialer contacts screen.

 Android provides a handy search feature at the top of the
contacts screen. If your contacts list is long, or if you are having
trouble locating the exact contact, try using the search feature.
Setting up favorites
As I mention earlier in this section, when you open the Contacts
app, your contacts appear on the default screen listed in
alphabetical order by first name. But what if you have some
special contacts — ones you like more than anyone else — and
you want them sorted to the top of the list at all times? Once
again, your Android smartphone can do that for you.
To set up a list of favorite contacts, open the Contacts app by
tapping the Contacts icon in the app drawer. Then, locate the first
contact you want to sort to the top of the list and tap it to open the
contact information screen. At the top of the screen, you should
see a small outline of a star in the upper-right corner of the screen.
Tap this star to “favorite” the contact. You can favorite as many
contacts as you like, and all the favorited contacts will be sorted
to the top of the contact list regardless of where they place in the
alphabet.
Making Contact with Your Contacts
Now that you have all your friends, family, coworkers, and
everyone else entered in as contacts, you can reach out to them
and say “hi.” It is time to use your Android smartphone as a
phone and call a contact or two.
Calling a contact
Just as with most features on Android smartphones, there are
multiple ways you can go about calling a contact. The first is
directly through the Contacts app. Calling a contact through the
Contacts app is easy!

First, open the Contacts app and locate the contact you wish to
call. Once located, tap on the contact to open the contact screen,
as shown in Figure 14-4. This screen will be different from the
one you used to enter the contact data. The contact screen shows a
picture of the contact if you uploaded one, otherwise it shows the
first letter of the contact’s first name with a colorful background.
If the contact’s name does not start with a letter (as shown in
Figure 14-4), Android displays a generic “no image” image.

FIGURE 14-4: A contact’s contact screen.
Below the contact’s image, Android provides three options: Call,
Text, and Video. These are the functions you can perform with

this contact. Call lets you place a phone call, Text is used to send
a text message, and Video lets you place a video call. The lower
half of the screen is devoted to listing the contact’s remaining
contact details, such as additional phone numbers, email
address(es), and address.
 These options may vary based on manufacturer and carrier.
To place a call to this contact, simply tap the Call button in the
middle of the screen and just like magic, Android begins placing
your call. If your contact has multiple phone numbers, the tapping
the Call button places your call to the first number you entered for
the contact.
 If you want to call a different number, look for that number in
the lower half of the contact’s information screen. Once located, tap
the telephone icon to the right of the phone number. The call will now
be placed to the desired number.
Another way to place a call to one of your contacts is through the
phone dialer. At the bottom of the phone dialer screen are two
buttons of interest: Recents and Contacts. Tapping on Contacts
brings you to the same Contacts screen you’ve already seen. You
are already a pro at placing calls from there — so have at it.
However, tapping the Recents button displays a list of your most
recent placed and received calls. The calls are placed in
chronological order (newest at the top). The list includes the
number or contact of the call and the call direction (if it was
incoming or outgoing). Figure 14-5 illustrates the recent calls
screen.
To place a call to a recent contact, simply tap the phone icon to
the right of the recent call information. Once again, just like
magic, your call will be connected.

Calling without a contact
Sometimes you need to place a call to someone who is not in your
contacts list. Not to worry, your Android smartphone has you
covered.
From the home screen, tap the phone icon to open the phone
dialer. In the lower-right corner of the phone dialer screen, you
should notice a button that looks like a telephone keypad. Tap this
button to open the telephone keypad, as shown in Figure 14-6.
Then, just dial up your number and tap the green phone icon to
place your call.

FIGURE 14-5: Recent calls.

FIGURE 14-6: Telephone keypad.
Being Prepared for an Emergency

While we all like to think that an emergency situation will never
happen to us, it is always good to be prepared — just in case.
Your Android smartphone has a couple of features that can help
you out in case of an emergency, and you should know how to use
them.
Setting emergency contacts
When you start to think about emergencies, the first thing to keep
in mind is that you need to identify the contacts you want to be
notified in the event that you need help. In the previous section,
you created contacts and also favorited them. Now, you will mark
one or more as emergency contacts.
 Setting emergency contacts serves two purposes. First, it helps
emergency responders know who to contact in the event you are
unable to communicate with them (and they have access to your
phone). Second, and more important, it helps your Android
smartphone know who to contact when you trigger its emergency
features.
To begin, swipe down from the home screen to open the
notification drawer, then swipe down again to expand it. Once
expanded, tap the gear icon to open the settings screen. Search for
“Safety & Emergency” in the settings search bar to open the
Safety & Emergency settings screen, as shown in Figure 14-7.
To enter emergency contacts, tap the Emergency contacts setting.
Tap the Add contact button that appears in the center of the screen
to open the Contacts screen. Select a contact who you want to use
as your emergency contact. Repeat this process as many times as
you need to.
While this may seem like an easy step, it is very important to the
operation of your Android smartphone’s emergency procedures.

FIGURE 14-7: Emergency settings.
Activating the panic button

Your Android smartphone has a feature known as Emergency
SOS, referred to colloquially as the panic button. This feature is
activated by quickly pressing and releasing the power button five
times. Once activated, your smartphone enters into a quick
countdown (the countdown gives you a chance to cancel in the
case that the activation was accidental). After the countdown
expires, Android presents you with up to three options:
 
Call Emergency Services
Send an emergency text to your Emergency contacts
Send a live video message to your Emergency contacts
 These actions are all configurable within Android, and these
options are presented to you with large, distinct, buttons and all other
features are disabled.
The first option — Call Emergency Services — does exactly that,
it calls the predefined emergency service number that has been
configured into it. By default this is 911, however if 911 is not
readily available in your area, you can configure a different
number.
To configure a different emergency number, select Emergency
SOS from the Safety & Emergency settings screen. On the
Emergency SOS settings page, find the setting for Call
Emergency Services and tap it. The Call Emergency Services
settings screen opens where you can change the number to call
(see Figure 14-8).

FIGURE 14-8: Changing the emergency phone number.
The second option is to send an emergency text to your
Emergency contacts with a predefined message. Along with the

message, Android also sends your Emergency contacts your
current location (as well as gives them access to continue
retrieving your current location for up to one hour).
The third option sends a live video message to your Emergency
contacts. This will be a short video taken from both of your
Android smartphone’s cameras to give your contacts a view of
what is happening around you.
 Because different smartphone manufacturers are able to alter
Android any way they need to, it is important to familiarize yourself
with the exact emergency features of your specific phone model. For
example, while pure Android smartphones like the Google Pixel use
Emergency SOS (activated with five taps of the power button),
Samsung smartphones use Send SOS message (activated with three
taps of the power button). Therefore, it is very important to refer to
your smartphone’s manufacturer documentation to make sure you use
the correct emergency procedure for your specific smartphone.
Calling 911
Calling 911 may seem like a basic emergency procedure, but
when calling 911 from a smartphone, it is important to be aware
of one important fact. While all smartphones (including Android)
sold in the United States today allow for the calling of 911 and
send crucial location data to the local 911 dispatch office, it is up
to the dispatch office in your area to handle that data.
 Depending on the software and the equipment being used at
your local 911 dispatch office, they may receive very detailed location
information directly from your smartphone, or they may only receive
general location information triangulated from the cell towers around
you. The only way to be certain which data is available to your local
911 dispatchers is to contact your local emergency services officials.

Chapter 15
Browsing the Internet and
Maintaining Your Privacy
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Browsing the Internet with Chrome
 Using Google Lens to identify objects
 Finding and installing third-party browsers
More and more, smartphones are becoming our gateway to the
Internet. From shopping to doing quick research, your Android
smartphone is a handy and available tool for hitting the Internet
anytime and anywhere. And just as there are a million things to
do on the Internet, there are nearly just as many ways to browse
the Internet on an Android smartphone. Luckily, your Android
smartphone comes preinstalled with one of the premiere web
browsers — Google Chrome.
 If you are using a Samsung smartphone, your phone may have
the Samsung Internet Browser installed by default and not Chrome.
However, if you used Chrome in the past and it is not your thing,
or you just want a change of pace, you are free to install any
number of other web browsers. In this chapter, you explore how
to use Google Chrome on your smartphone as well as how to
install third-party browsers to access the Internet.
Feeling at Home with Chrome
On most Android smartphones, the default web browser is
Chrome. Chrome was created by Google and has been a mainstay

on the Android platform since it was released.
 Chrome is built on web browser technology created mainly by
Google called Chromium. Chromium is also used as the backbone for
some of the other most popular third-party browsers like Samsung
Internet Brower, Microsoft Edge, and Opera.
One of the features of Chrome that makes it a popular choice on
Android smartphones is its seamless integration with the desktop
version of Chrome. If you use the desktop version, and you are
logged into it using the same Google account you used to log into
your Android smartphone, then you should notice that items such
as your recent searches and your bookmarks instantly carry over
between your smartphone and your desktop. This means that if
you search for chocolate chip muffin recipes on your Android
smartphone and bookmark a web page with a great-looking
recipe, that bookmark will appear on your desktop version of
Chrome the next time you log into it.
Opening Chrome
To open Chrome, simply tap on the Chrome icon from the home
screen. Chrome opens to the mobile version of the Google search
website — www.google.com — as shown in Figure 15-1. At the
top of the screen is a menu bar with a home button (which when
tapped takes you back to this screen), a link to your Google
profile, a tab indicator, and the More Options button to access the
settings menu. Below the menu bar is the familiar Google logo
and search bar.
Chrome opens to the Google search website by default; however,
you can change this if you want to. To change Chrome’s default
homepage, follow these steps:
 
1. Tap the More Options button (three vertical dots) that appears in
the upper-right corner of the screen to open the settings menu.

2. Scroll down until you see a setting for Homepage.
3. Tap the Homepage setting and change the setting from Chrome
Homepage to Enter a Custom Website.
4. Type in the address of the site you want as your homepage.

FIGURE 15-1: The Chrome browser.
While everything below the search bar is blank in Figure 15-1,
yours probably looks different. Immediately below the search bar,

Chrome will have links to the most recent sites you visited. This
helps you get back to sites you have been to recently. After the
recently visited sites, Chrome displays a news feed based on your
interests and web activity.
Searching with Chrome
Because Chrome opens to the Google search page by default, let’s
take a quick look at the three ways you can search the Internet
using Chrome and your Android smartphone.
Using the keyboard
The first is by typing what you are searching for into the search
bar. This is the most common form of using the search bar —
simply tap anywhere on the search bar and Android’s keyboard
pop ups, enabling you to type out your search, as illustrated in
Figure 15-2.

FIGURE 15-2: Using the keyboard to search the web.
Using the microphone

Another way you can enter a search term is by tapping the
microphone icon in the search bar. This brings up the voice input
service, enabling you to quickly speak your search term. Once
you finish speaking, Android translates what you said into text
and places it in the search bar. This is convenient when do not
have an available hand to type with or it is not safe to be typing.
Using Google Lens
 One of the hidden gems of your Android smartphone is
searching the Internet using Google Lens. Google Lens is a feature that
enables you search the Internet using images rather than written words.
For example, suppose you see an unfamiliar bird and you want to
know what kind it is. You could try to describe it in words and hope
that your description is enough to find the correct results, or you could
use Google Lens to snap a picture of the bird and let Google compare
the millions of known pictures of the same bird and return the result to
you.
To search using Google Lens, tap the icon of a camera in the
search bar. Google Lens opens, as shown in Figure 15-3. On the
default Google Lens screen, you have two options to search using
an image. The first is to use a picture you already took, and the
second is to let Google Lens search using your camera. To do this,
select the Search with your camera option. Notice that the shutter
button (used to take a picture) has been replaced with a search
icon. Point your camera at the subject you want to search for and
tap the search icon to proceed.

FIGURE 15-3: Google Lens.
In Figure 15-4, I select a picture of some flowers that I took. After
selecting to photo, Google Lens evaluates the contents of the

image and returns the results. Figure 15-5 shows the results —
roses!
Searching with Google Lens can also return shopping results. For
example, check out the paint brush options I received when I
pointed my camera at a paint brush in Figure 15-6.
Navigating to a site
Chances are good that if you are using your Android smartphone
to browse the web, you have a specific website in mind.
Navigating to a website in Chrome is very easy.

FIGURE 15-4: Mysterious flowers.

FIGURE 15-5: Roses!

FIGURE 15-6: An expensive paintbrush.
Use the search bar shown earlier in Figure 15-1 to enter the
address of the site you want to visit. This can be achieved either

by typing on the keyboard or speaking the address using the
Microphone icon. When you finish entering the address, tap the
enter key on the keyboard and Chrome will do the rest.
 A handy feature of the Chrome browser is that it will not close
a website if you exit the bowser unexpectedly. That means that if you
navigate to a website and then close Chrome without exiting the
website, Chrome automatically returns to that site the next time you
launch Chrome. This is a great feature, but I know what you might be
thinking — how will I keep track of all the sites I might have opened
and never closed? The answer is tabs.
Working with tabs
Chrome’s Tabs feature is a great way to keep all your open
websites manageable. Tabs can be used to keep multiple websites
open at one time on your Android smartphone, even after you
close Chrome and reopen it — tabs are forever. You can also
group websites (tabs) into tab groups, which enables you to
manage them even further.
You access your current tabs through the tab indicator icon in the
menu bar at the top of the Chrome default screen. The tab
indicator, shown earlier in Figure 15-1, looks like a box with a
number inside of it. This number represents the number of tabs
you currently have open in Chrome.
Tap on the tab indicator to display the screen shown in Figure 15-
7. The image shown in Figure 15-7 shows the current tab with a
label indicating the website that is open in that tab. If you want to
close this tab, thus closing the website for good, tap the X that
appears in the upper-right corner of the tab.
To add a new tab, allowing you navigate to another website
without closing any existing tabs, tap the + New tab button that
appears in the upper-left corner of the screen. This adds another
tab, as shown in Figure 15-8.

If you have two or more open tabs, and you want to group them
together, tap the More Options button in the upper-right corner of
the screen and then tap on Group tabs. Chrome now enables you
to select the tabs you want to group together (see Figure 15-9).
After you select the tabs you want to group by tapping in the
empty circle to select it, tap the Group button that appears in the
upper-right corner. Your tabs are now grouped together for more
manageability, as illustrated in Figure 15-10.

FIGURE 15-7: Current open tabs.

FIGURE 15-8: A new tab.

FIGURE 15-9: Selecting tabs to group.

FIGURE 15-10: A group of tabs.
Installing Third-Party Browsers

Some people choose to install a third-party web browser because
it either offers features not available on Chrome, or because they
have used a particular browser in the past and are comfortable
with the look and feel of it. Whatever your reason, there is no
shortage of third-party browsers on the Google Play Store.
Following is a short list of some of the more popular third-party
browsers that can be found on the Play Store as of the writing of
this book:
 
Brave Private Web Browser
Duck Duck Go
Firefox
Microsoft Edge
Opera
Samsung Internet Browser
To install one of these browsers on your Android smartphone,
find its listing on the Play Store and tap the green Install button,
as shown in Figure 15-11.

FIGURE 15-11: Installing a third-party browser.
Voilà! Your new Internet browser is ready to go.

 There is nothing stopping you from having multiple web
browsers installed on your Android smartphone. Feel free to install as
many or as few as you want, try them out, and see what you like and
what you do not.

Chapter 16
Keeping It Social
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Exploring the basics of social media
 Finding and installing social media apps
 Staying in touch with millions of your closest friends
Social media can be a sounding board of new thought and ideas, a
vehicle for expressing oneself in ways you could not otherwise
do, and a method for keeping in contact with friends and family
that may be spread around the globe. In addition, social media is a
highly visual form of communication. Many social media posts
consist of pictures, videos, and text. Given that your Android
smartphone has a very capable camera and an internet connection
included, it is the perfect device for creating and uploading social
media content. Whatever your reason for using social media
might be, one of the best platforms to use social media apps is
your Android smartphone. In this chapter, you discover how to
download and install social media apps and then use those apps
on your phone.
Installing Social Media Apps
Installing new social media apps is a breeze on your Android
smartphone. To begin, open the Play Store. A quick search for
“social media apps” yields hundreds of results — from the most
popular household names to some specialized platforms that are
only used in certain countries (see Figure 16-1). From here you
can select your favorite app(s) and begin installing.

 When you install a new app, Android places the app in the first
available grid space on your home screen. The more social media apps
you install, you can add them to an app folder to keep them organized
(see Chapter 8 for information about creating folders).

FIGURE 16-1: Lots of results for social media apps.
Using Social Media

Social media can be expressive and freeing, but also deeply
personal at times. How you choose to express yourself, and the
apps with which you do it, are a personal decision based on what
you want to share and who you want to share it with. There are
three main types of social media based on the kind of content
found on the platform:
 
Text and mixed media (text with images and videos)
Short video content
Static images with some short videos
Platforms such as Facebook, Reddit, and Twitter are text and
mixed media apps. This means that the primary form of
communication on these platforms is text-based with some static
images and some video content. Whereas platforms such as
TikTok and Instagram specialize in static images or short video
content. In this section I cover four of the more popular social
media platforms and why you may want to use them. Each one
has a slightly different use and a slightly different audience.
Facebook
Facebook is one of the most popular social media platforms in the
world. While it started as a mixed media social platform, it has
grown to include a news aggregate, a virtual reality platform, a
shopping marketplace, and advertising.
At the core of Facebook is the concept of “friends.” You add other
Facebook users to your friends list and, when creating posts —
which can consist of text, pictures, and/or short videos — you can
then determine who can see your posts based on friend status. All
the posts made by the users on your friends list, and those posts
made by other users that are set to be visible by everyone, are
compiled into a feed.
In addition to a feed of content from other Facebook users,
Facebook also offers other content, including news. The news
feed can be a good resource for finding some interesting articles

while you are on the go, or while you are already in Facebook.
Tap on the newspaper icon to access the news feed, which is
shown in Figure 16-2. The new feed lists articles from several
news sources based on Facebook’s profile of what it thinks you
may or may not be interested in.
 While Facebook says its news feed is sourced from hundreds
of reputable news sources, you should also try to research and confirm
from multiple sources any stories that you see in social media.
One of the more recent features to be added to Facebook is
Marketplace. The Marketplace is an area of Facebook where
users can list items they have for sale. Tap on the storefront icon
to access the Facebook Marketplace, as shown in Figure 16-3.
 It is important to remember that the Marketplace is really just
like a giant yard sale. That means you are buying items directly from
— and making payment directly to — other Facebook users, and not
Facebook itself. Facebook does not actually sell any of the items on
the Marketplace; it is only facilitating the ability for other users to list
and sell their items.
If you are ready to use Facebook to post your thoughts, insights,
humor, or other meanderings to the world, and you’ve created an
account, here is how you get started. Near the top of the default
screen, you should see a text box that contains the words, “What’s
on your mind?” This is where you create and share posts. Tap on
the words, “What’s on your mind?” and a new screen opens, as
shown in Figure 16-4.

FIGURE 16-2: The Facebook news feed.

FIGURE 16-3: Wares for sale.

FIGURE 16-4: Creating a new Facebook post.
On this screen, you can choose who you want to be able to see the
post. In Figure 16-4, I selected “Friends” as the group who can

see my post. This means that only people on my friends list can
see what I am about to write. You can choose Friends, Everyone
(meaning anyone on Facebook will be able to see it), or you can
mix and match between specific people or groups of people.
Facebook is very granular in its security model, and it gives you a
lot of flexibility here.
After selecting who can view the post, it is time to write
something out. Again, you are presented with the text “What’s on
your mind?” This is the area of the screen where you can choose
to type out a message. Sometimes, though, what you want to say
may be better said with an image. Below the text area are a
number of selectors for you to choose other medial to include in
your post. For example, if you want to include an image, tap the
Photo/video option.
 The first time you try to add a photo or video from your
Android smartphone to Facebook, Facebook asks your permission to
access your smartphone’s photos, as shown in Figure 16-5. Once you
grant Facebook access to your photos, you can scroll through and
select any that you wish to share. Now you are well on your way to
creating amazing content!

FIGURE 16-5: Giving Facebook access to your photos.
Reddit

Reddit is another text and mixed media social media platform that
is more focused on the sharing of topical opinions and thoughts.
Where other social media platforms, like Facebook, are focused
on sharing things with friends, Reddit is organized by topic. Users
share their thoughts, ideas, and musing on each topic, which is
known as a subreddit.
 Reddit contains subreddits with mature and violent content.
These subreddits are tagged with NSFW (not safe for work), and can
be filtered out. If you are switching from iPhone to Android, be aware
that the iPhone version of Reddit filters out NSFW content by default;
the Android version does not.
TikTok
TikTok is a social media platform that focuses on video content
by interest. Whereas Facebook and Reddit allow video content
but lean heavily on text-based content, TikTok is solely focused
on short-form video content and video with overlaid text.
Short-form video content refers to a video that is typically several
seconds long. This short content makes it easy to scroll through
and digest a lot of content in a short amount of time. TikTok made
its name in viral dance videos a number of years ago and has
remained a popular place for younger social media users to post
dance, music, and tutorial videos.
Upon opening TikTok for the first time, you will be asked to
select some topics that express your interests. TikTok uses your
interests to help determine what content (including ads) to display
to you in your feed. Figure 16-6 shows the interest selection
screen of TikTok. After selecting a list of interests, TikTok will
begin to add content to your feed based on these interests.
Instagram
Instagram is a social media app focused around static images and
some short videos. Facebook purchased Instagram a number of

years ago. It balances Facebook’s mainly textual content with
image and video content. While Facebook is based on the concept
of sharing content with friends, Reddit on sharing content about
specific topics, and TikTok on sharing video content, Instagram is
based on the concept of sharing content — mostly images and
short videos — with followers.

FIGURE 16-6: See something interesting?
Upon installing Instagram, your first action is to select other
Instagram users to “follow.” Instagram starts by suggesting some

of the most popular users on the platform (see Figure 16-7).
Posting to your Instagram story is easy from your Android
smartphone. With the Instagram app open, tap on the square icon
with a plus inside it (located at the top of the screen). The New
post screen opens to a view of the existing images in your
Gallery. You can any of these images to post to your story, or you
can tap on the camera icon to open your camera and take a new
picture.
Once you select an image, tap the right arrow at the top of the
screen. Now you can select to apply filters to your image for that
little extra pizzazz. Lastly, add a caption to your image and tap on
the check mark to post it to your story.

FIGURE 16-7: Picking people to follow on Instagram.

Chapter 17
Smile! Using the Camera
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Exploring the features of the camera app
 Using the different camera modes
 Editing your images with the editing tools
Digital cameras burst onto the commercial scene in the mid-1980s
as a high-end photography tool. They were expensive and clunky,
but they started a slow revolution in photography. In 1999,
someone had the idea to include a digital camera in a cell phone,
and thus the world of personal photography was changed forever.
Those early camera phones were nowhere near the quality of
today’s smartphone cameras. Today’s Android smartphone
camera has more features and more capabilities than most people
would have imagined were possible in a device that is barely
thicker than a few stacked credit cards. It has so many features, in
fact, that most people are not aware of exactly what their Android
smartphone camera is capable of. In this chapter, you explore the
uses, functionality, and power of the Android smartphone camera
app.
Opening the Camera App
The Camera app is your gateway to taking pictures and video
with your Android smartphone. To open the Camera app, tap on
the Camera icon, which should be located on your home screen
by default. If it isn’t, swipe up to open the app drawer and locate
the Camera app there.

 Before you open the camera, you should check that your
smartphone is ready to take the best pictures and video possible.
Because your smartphone most likely does not have a camera cover
(unless you purchased an after-market one), you should check that the
lenses of both the front and back of the smartphone are clean and free
of debris and if needed, clean the lenses with a silk or microfiber cloth.
It is easy for the camera lenses to become smudged from daily phone
use — especially the front-facing camera. Dirty lenses will give your
pictures and videos a dark or unfocused look.
Once your lenses are clean and clear and you opened the Camera
app, you should see an interface similar to that shown in Figure
17-1. The Camera app opens to the rear-facing camera by default.
The Camera app also opens to Camera mode by default. This
means that, upon opening the camera, you are ready to begin take
pictures through the rear-facing camera.

FIGURE 17-1: The default camera interface.

 Depending on the brand of Android smartphone you have, the
interface of your Camera app may look slightly different than that
pictured in this chapter. Each Android smartphone manufacturer is
allowed to change any app to suit their particular brand, and this
includes the camera. If you have trouble locating any of the camera
features in this chapter, please refer to your smartphone manufacturer’s
specific documentation.
Navigating the Camera Interface
The camera interface shown in Figure 17-1 may be a bit
intimidating; there seems to be a lot going on here. All you want
to do is take a picture, so what are all of these other options on the
screen? Let’s take a look at the camera interface and break down
exactly what is going on here.
The camera interface includes the following features:
 
Settings
Save location
Image view finder
Grid lines
Zoom
Camera selector
Shutter
Last image taken/sharing
Camera mode
Settings
Tap the gear icon that appears at the top of the camera interface to
bring up a list of camera settings. On the Pixel phone used in this

example, the settings list includes four options that can be set on
this screen (and a More settings button for more): Flash, Top
Shot, Timer, and Ratio. The available settings are shown in Figure
17-2.

FIGURE 17-2: Camera settings for a Pixel smartphone.

 A shortcut to opening the settings menu is to down swipe on
the image view finder — just make sure you start the swipe on the
image view finder and not above it.
Flash
The first setting, Flash, turns your rear-facing camera’s flash on
and off. As shown in Figure 17-2, the flash is off. This is denoted
by a lightning bolt symbol with a line through it. You have two
options when turning the flash on. The icon of a lightning bolt
with an A next to it is the Auto-flash setting. This setting lets the
camera determine if a flash is needed based on the lighting levels.
However, if you know you want the flash on no matter the
lighting, you can select the On setting, which is the icon of the
lightning bolt.
Top Shot
The next setting is Top Shot. Top Shot is similar to a burst photo
or continuous shooting mode. This means that when Top Shot is
turned on, rather than take a single picture, the camera takes a
short video about one to two seconds long. Your Android
smartphone then goes through the video frame by frame and
determines which frame represents the best picture.
 The Top Shot setting is particularly useful when you are trying
to photograph action. Sporting events and large gatherings are great
subjects for Top Shot. To use Top Shot, select between Auto and On.
With Top Shot in Auto mode, your Android smartphone determines if
there is action taking place and, if so, uses Top Shot to get the best
picture. Setting Top Shot to On indicates to your smartphone to always
use Top Shot, even if it is not necessary.
When using Top Shot, take a picture as you normally would.
After you take the photo, tap the thumbnail of it in the Last Image
Taken window (refer to Figure 17-1). With the image open, tap

the three dots that appear in the far-right corner of the menu to
open the information screen for the image, as shown in Figure 17-
3. Notice the line of images in the middle of the screen. This
represents every frame of video that Top Shot took. The frames
with a dot over them are the images Android thinks came out the
best; however, you can select any image you want from those
taken.

FIGURE 17-3: Finding the top shot.
Timer

What if you want to take a picture, but you also want to be in the
picture? This is where the shutter Timer setting comes in. The
shutter timer enables you take a picture on a delay, giving you
time to rest the camera on something sturdy and hop into the
frame. You have two options when using the Timer: a three-
second delay and a ten-second delay. Simply select the amount of
delay you think you will need to jump into the picture. Just make
sure your Android smartphone is secure first.
Ratio
The Ratio setting enables you to set the size of the images you
take. You have two options: 16:9 (wide crop) and 4:3 (full crop).
If you are a videophile, you may already be familiar with these
aspect ratios. The aspect ratio of 16:9 is used in movie theaters,
modern televisions, and most smartphones. The 4:3 aspect ratio is
more square and is closer to the ratio used in older television
content.
Save location/last image taken/sharing
When you take a picture, your smartphone saves the photo to
your device. The save location is identified by an icon of a folder
at the top of the camera interface (refer to Figure 17-1). Tapping
on the folder icon tells you the exact location your image files are
being stored once you take a picture. Figure 17-4 shows the
options available to some Android smartphones (your phone may
have other options available).

FIGURE 17-4: Image file save locations.
Figure 17-4 shows the Photo Gallery as the default option;
another option is the Android Locked Folder. If you do not

change the default option, all images will be saved to your Photo
Gallery app. However, if you want to change this location, simply
tap another option and Android will send all new images there.
 If you want to see the images you took without leaving the
camera and without having to open the Photo Gallery app, locate the
last image taken icon that appears in the lower-right corner of the
camera interface. This icon is a thumbnail of the last image you took.
This thumbnail updates every time you take another photo.
The last image taken icon serves two functions. The first is to
provide you with a mini photo gallery where you can quickly
swipe through images you took. To access this gallery, tap the last
image taken icon. Once open, you can swipe though a collection
of images. The second function of the last image taken icon is as
a quick sharing portal. Place your finger on the icon and swipe
up. If done correctly, a list of quick sharing options appears, as
shown in Figure 17-5. This lets you take a picture and then
quickly share it to several social media apps with the swipe of a
finger. Convenient!

FIGURE 17-5: Quick image sharing.
Image view finder/grid lines

The image view finder is your gateway to the world. Okay, maybe
it is not that exciting, but it is how you see the subject that you
want to take a picture of. The image view finder is a good
representation of what your final image will look like before you
edit it.
Your Android smartphone camera may or may not have grid lines
turned on by default. Grid lines are one of those things in life that
people either love or hate. The purpose of these lines is to help
you with composing a more aesthetically pleasing image.
However, if that is not your thing, you can turn them off very
easily (conversely, you can turn them on just as easily).
To turn the gird lines on or off, tap the settings gear icon at the top
of the screen. Next, tap the More settings option on the settings
menu to open the Camera settings screen, as shown in Figure 17-
6. Tap the setting for Grid type, and then select None to turn off
the lines. Figure 17-7 shows the Image view finder without grid
lines.

FIGURE 17-6: More camera settings.

FIGURE 17-7: Look, Ma! No lines.
Zoom

The zoom feature on your Android smartphone can be a
complicated and confusing subject. Take a look at the back of
your phone and note the number of lenses you have — each one
may be a separate camera. Some Android smartphones could
have anywhere from one to four separate cameras.
Each of these cameras serves a different specialty in the Camera
app. For example, one camera may be used for taking “normal”
pictures, while another may be a telephoto camera specifically for
taking images that are zoomed in, while yet another might be
specifically for taking images in low light. The Camera app does
a great job of blending all these images from the different
physical cameras together so that you don’t even notice.
But what does all this have to do with zoom? I’m glad you asked.
Take a look back at Figure 17-1. The zoom on my sample camera
shows a 1x and 2x option. This means that the Android
smartphone used here has two cameras: One is a 1x camera, and
the other is a 2x camera. Tapping the 2x switches the smartphone
to the 2x camera, as shown in Figure 17-8. So far this seems
pretty straightforward. However, this is where it gets interesting.
Each of those two cameras is capable of different levels of optical
and digital zoom.

FIGURE 17-8: Zoom, zoom, zoom. Switching to the 2x camera.

 The 1x camera is capable of a 2x optical zoom. This means
that the 1x camera has a physical lens that can move in and out to
zoom between 1x and 2x. The 2x camera has a digital zoom that is
capable of going from 2x to 8x. (A digital zoom refers to a zoom
feature that uses software to adjust the image within the camera itself.)
Now for the fun part! These cameras work together seamlessly to give
you an image zoom from 1x to 8x.
Using the image view finder (set to 1x), place two fingers on the
screen and zoom in. Notice that you can easily pinch and zoom
the image from 1x to 8x in and out. However, what you don’t
notice is that the Camera app changes cameras as you do it. When
you pinch and zoom between 1x and 2x, you are using one
camera, and between 2x and 8x you are using another.
 The number of cameras and their specific zoom capabilities
may be different on your Android smartphone, but the functionality of
switching camera as you zoom stays the same.
Camera selector
Taking pictures of other people and places is fun, but sometimes
you just gotta take a selfie or two. Luckily your Android
smartphone has you covered. The Camera selector (shown earlier
in Figure 17-1) is used to switch between the rear-facing
camera(s) to the selfie, or forward-facing, camera. Simply tap this
icon and take your selfie!
Shutter
The shutter button is arguably the most important button in the
Camera app — without it you can’t take pictures. Okay, that is not
entirely true; there is a shortcut for that too. However, you get the
point. The shutter button is used to tell the Camera app to take a

picture. Just tap the shutter button and the Camera app sends a
picture to your chosen storage location. But wait! There’s more.
Long press the shutter button and you will take a short video. The
video ends when you release the shutter. Keep in mind that this is
not the same as taking a video in Video mode, but it is a quick
way to take a short video.
 Speaking of shortcuts … that shortcut for taking pictures
without taping the shutter button? Use the volume buttons on the side
of the phone, either one will do the trick.
Camera modes
Your Android smartphone camera is capable of capturing images
in many different ways by adjusting the camera mode. (The
camera mode selector was shown earlier in Figure 17-1.) Again,
while your specific Android smartphone may offer different
options, these are the most common camera modes:
 
Night Sight
Portrait
Camera
Video
Panorama
Photo Sphere
Lens
Night Sight
Night Sight is a special mode on your camera that holds the
shutter open longer when taking a picture in dark lighting.
Holding the shutter open longer means that more light will come
into the camera, giving you a brighter image in low-light
conditions.

 A valuable use of Night Sight is for astrophotography. If you
are the kind of person who likes to get away from city lights and gaze
up at the night sky, then chances are good you have tried to take a
picture of the night sky. My guess is that, while the starry night looked
amazing in person, the black picture of it you took did not. Night Sight
is great for taking pictures of the night sky that show a little more stars
than before.
 The downside of Night Sight is that you have to hold the
phone very still while the shutter is open or the image will blur.
Portrait
Portrait mode is a special camera mode that blurs the background
of a picture. Using Portrait mode when taking pictures of
someone can give the picture that little extra wow factor. Figure
17-9 shows how portrait mode blurs the background of an image.
Notice that the items behind the block figure are blurred. Without
portrait mode, these items would all be in focus.

FIGURE 17-9: A portrait.
Camera

Camera mode is the default mode when you open the Camera
app. This is the mode you want to be in to take a picture —
whether with the rear-facing camera or with the selfie camera.
Video
Video mode is the mode you want to be in when you want to take
a video. Sliding the mode selector to Video places the Camera
app into Video mode and gives you three more options for how to
record your videos, as shown in Figure 17-10. You have three
options for taking video with the Android smartphone Camera
app: Slow Motion, Normal, and Time Lapse.
Slow Motion, like the name suggests, takes video in various
speeds. Tap the Slow Motion option to see the speeds at which
you can slow your video down. Common settings for slow motion
speed are 1/8 speed and 1/4 speed. Keep in mind that when using
Slow Motion, the resulting video will be much longer than the
length of time you took the video. For example, if you take a
Slow Motion video for 30 seconds at 1/4 speed, the resulting
video will be two minutes long.

FIGURE 17-10: Video mode.
Normal video mode takes videos at regular speed. This is the
default option when you place your Android smartphone Camera

app into Video mode. Time Lapse takes video over a long time
period and compresses it down to a short time. That is, a Time
Lapse video is achieve by taking one frame of video every few
seconds. The result is a sped-up video that show a lot of action in
a short time.
 In Normal mode, most Android smartphones take video at a
rate of 60 frames every second. In Time Lapse, the options are 5x, 10x,
30x, and 120x. This means that in 5x speed, the camera takes 12
frames every second; in 10x the camera takes six frames every second;
in 30x the camera takes two frames every second; and in 120x the
camera takes one frame every two seconds.
Panorama
You may have seen panoramic images in the past — very wide
images that show a large crowd or landscape. These images are
typically made with a very special camera or by stitching multiple
photographs together to create the effect. Your Android
smartphone uses software in the Camera app to stitch together
multiple images to create stunning panoramic photos. Tap the
Panorama option to put the Camera app into Panorama mode, as
shown in Figure 17-11.

FIGURE 17-11: Panorama mode.
Notice that when in Panorama mode, two arrows appear on either
side of your image view finder. These arrows let you know that

you can physically move your camera in either of these directions
to begin the panorama process. As you move your camera, the
app begins stitching together the image that is coming into the
camera to form one long image.
 To begin taking a panoramic photo, tap the shutter button and
then slowly move your camera in one of the directions noted. Your
Android smartphone will give you helpful hints along the way. If you
are moving your phone too quickly, the Camera app will ask you to
slow down. Also, if you begin to drift from the horizontal plane along
which you are taking your photo, the Camera app will display arrows
directing you to move the phone up or down to get it back on track.
Photo Sphere
What is a photo sphere? The best way to describe a photo sphere
is to imagine a lot of panoramic photos stitched together into a
ball. The process of taking a photo sphere image is the same as
when taking a panorama; however, to take a photo sphere, you
move your camera all around, rather than in only one direction.
Figure 17-12 shows the Camera app in Photo Sphere mode.

FIGURE 17-12: Photo Sphere mode.
The image view finder looks a little lonely when compared to the
view finder for taking a panorama shown earlier in Figure 17-11.

There are no arrows here to tell you where to move the camera
because, well, you have to move everywhere. As you move your
phone around, up and down and to both sides, images begin to
populate in the image view finder. These images are going to look
very strange at first However, when you are finished with the
photo sphere, the Camera app software stitches and blends all the
images together into a more cohesive-looking picture.
Lens
Lens is one of the more interesting features of Android
smartphone cameras. With your camera in Lens mode, Android
performs a Google web search on whatever you are taking a
picture of. For example, if you are walking by a window display
with a piece of art in the window and want to do know more
about the piece or the artist, put your camera into Lens mode and
snap away. In seconds, Android will return to you whatever
information it was able to find about the art and the artist.
 This feature works well for artwork and products you might be
shopping for. Does a friend have a nice pair of shoes but they don’t
remember where they bought them? Snap a picture of them and Lens
will try to find active shopping result on the web for you.
Holding Your Phone for the Best Shot
While it really comes down to personal preference of how to hold
your Android smartphone when taking a picture — whether you
choose to take pictures in portrait or landscape orientation, for
example — there are some pointers to keep in mind to help you
get the best shot.
The first is to keep your fingers clear of the lenses, flash, and any
other sensors that may be on the back of your smartphone. Most
Android smartphones now have raised housings for all the various
camera parts. The best way to know that you are not covering any
vital hardware with your fingers is to feel for this raised housing.

The second pointer to keep in mind is to try to reduce your
motion when taking the picture. A moving camera tends to take
blurry images. Therefore, if you can, steady yourself or your
camera on a sturdy platform before tapping the shutter. This can
help you take those perfect pictures.
Editing Your Images
Your Android smartphone Camera app includes a well-featured
image editor. While it is not on par with a professional image-
editing software suite, it does include enough tools and filters to
let you edit your images into perfect pictures. In fact, there are so
many features in the Camera app’s photo editor that I simply
cannot cover them all here. But wait! There’s more. Your Android
smartphone also includes an even more fully featured (if that is
possible) photo editing app called Snapseed. With all these
features, I cannot hope to cover them all. Therefore, let’s take a
look at some of the more commonly used ones.
 Okay, this is not really a bad warning, it’s more of a
disclaimer. While my background is in art and computer science, I am
not a professional photo editor, and there are a lot of technical spells
and potions being used by the Camera app’s editing tools. What
follows is not a deep dive into how the tools work; rather, I discuss
how using each tool can impact your image visually.
To access the Camera app’s editing features, tap the last image
taken icon on the main camera interface (refer to Figure 17-1).
After the image opens, tap the Edit button below the image to
open the photo editor, as shown in Figure 17-13. Here is where
you choose which editing tool to use.

FIGURE 17-13: The Camera app photo editor.
Crop

How many times have you taken an image and something in that
image just does not need to be there? The Crop tool is a quick and
easy way to remove unwanted parts of your pictures.
From the photo editor screen, tap on the word “Crop” to open the
Crop tool. The Crop tool gives you four anchor points to move
around the image. These anchor points determine the boundary of
the saved portion of your image. Anything outside of these anchor
points will be cropped out of the image. This is also illustrated by
the shading in the photo editor — the portion of the image that is
to be cropped out is shaded, while the portion of the image that is
to be saved (within the anchor points) is not.
When you have placed your anchor points in the right spots, tap
the Save button and a new, cropped copy of your image is saved
to the default storage location.
Blur
The Blur tool helps you draw attention to a particular part of a
photograph. Suppose you took a nice picture of a bee landing on a
beautiful, multicolor flower. Because of the Android smartphone
camera’s focal length, everything in that image would be in focus.
This means that, while you might want people to focus on the
bee, they may be distracted by the colorful flower, the kids in the
background, or even the trees in the distance. The Blur tool lets
you select an area of your image to remain in focus, and then it
blurs anything outside of that area.
To blur part of your photo, tap the word “Blur” to open the Blur
tool. Next, tap the image to set a circular area you want to remain
in focus. You can place the area anywhere on the image, and you
can pinch and zoom it to any size. Once placed, use the slider to
determine the amount of blur to apply outside of the circular area.
You can also set the Depth of the blur effect. This means that the
tool can apply more blur to parts of the image that are further
back in the distance.
Brightness and contrast

It’s best to talk about the Brightness and Contrast tools together
because it is easy to confuse what each one does. The Brightness
tool, illustrated in Figure 17-14, lightens or darkens the entire
image. If you take a picture and some of the details seem to be
washed out in the lighting, you can darken the image with the
Brightness tool and get back some of those details. Conversely, if
the picture you took is too dark, you can use the Brightness tool
to lighten the entire image.
The Contrast tool, on the other hand, does both of these things at
the same time. What the Contrast tool does is make the dark
colors in your image darker and the light colors lighter. The black
and white objects in Figure 17-15 show how this affects the
image. Compare Figures 17-14 and 17-15 to see the difference
between brightness and contrast.
Warmth and tint
In much the same way brightness and contrast affect the
perceived lighting in an image, warmth and tint work together to
bring out certain colors or color groups in an image.
 The amount of red in an image is known as that image’s
warmth. Conversely, the amount of blue in an image is known as that
image’s coolness. An image’s warmth or coolness can have nothing at
all to do with the subjects of your photo. Certain cameras can take
images that are more warm or more cool than another camera taking
the same picture. Also, certain smartphone screens may display images
as being more cool or warm than that same image would appear on
another smartphone. (Technology is funky that way.)

FIGURE 17-14: Brightness.

FIGURE 17-15: Contrast.
The Camera app’s Warmth tool lets you adjust the level or red or
blue in an image to make it warmer or cooler. Tap on Warmth to

open the Warmth tool and then use the slider to adjust the warmth
or coolness of your image (see Figure 17-16).
The Tint tool works like the Warmth tool in that it applies a color
filter over your entire image that you can adjust with a slider.
However, the Tint tool works from green to purple. The Tint tool
is illustrated in Figure 17-17.
Markup
The Markup tool lets you draw on your image. This is useful if
you need to call attention to a particular part of the image with an
arrow or a caption. Tap on Markup to open the Markup tool. The
Markup tool gives you a variety of pencil and marker effects to
draw with on your image as well as a color selector. Simply tap
the utensil and the color you want to use and begin drawing right
on your image.

FIGURE 17-16: It’s getting hot in here.

FIGURE 17-17: Adjusting the tint.
Snapseed

The Snapseed photo editing app comes preinstalled on some
Android smartphones. It is a separate more full-featured image
editor than the Camera app’s editor. If your Android smartphone
is equipped with the Snapseed app, you may see an option to open
it from within the Camera app, or you can locate it by swiping up
to open the app drawer. When you open Snapseed, you are
presented with an almost overwhelming number of photo editing
options. Take a look at Figure 17-18.
 Even if your specific Android smartphone did not come
preinstalled with Snapseed, you can always install it for free from the
Play Store.
Many of the tools covered in this chapter are also found in
Snapseed. However, Snapseed offers many, many, more tools.
Feel free to open an image in Snapseed and tap around to explore.
I encourage you to try each tool and see what it does. You might
just discover something cool … or warm.

FIGURE 17-18: Lots of Snapseed options!

Part 4
Personalizing Just the Way You Like
It

IN THIS PART …
 
Customize your device to make it uniquely yours, from changing your
ring tone and wallpaper to adding a splash of color and selecting a font
size that is easier to see.
Become familiar with the capabilities of Google Assistant and how it
can be used for so much more than just giving you the weather
forecast.
Take a look at why some people have expressed concern about privacy
and Google Assistant.
Discover one of Google Assistant’s most powerful features — routines
— and how to create routines to help simplify your life.

Chapter 18
Customizing Your Device
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Changing your ring tone and notification sounds
 Setting different ring tones for different people
 Changing your wallpaper
 Selecting font sizes that are easier to see
One of the best things about your Android smartphone is that it is,
well, yours. Android gives you a number of great ways to
customize your smartphone to add a touch of personality and
make it one of a kind. In this chapter, you discover some of the
ways you can add a little personality to your Android smartphone
and make it a unique device for a truly unique user experience.
 Keep in mind that the customization instructions I include here
are based on a pure Android device. Different Android smartphone
manufacturers may use slightly different wording for similar features
or you may need to access the settings in a slightly different way than
what is outlined in this chapter. If you have trouble locating any of the
settings used to customize your Android smartphone experience,
consult your manufacturer’s documentation.
Setting Custom Ring Tones and
Notification Sounds
One of the fun little splashes of personality you can add to your
Android smartphone is a custom ringtone or two … or more.
Theoretically, you can have a custom ringtone for every contact in

your Contacts list, and another for everyone else who is not a
contact in your phone. First, let’s look at how to change the main
ringtone on your phone, which affects every call you receive.
Change your ringtone
To change the main ringtone on your Android device, follow
these steps:
 
1. Swipe down from the home screen to open the notification drawer,
and then swipe down again to expand it.
2. Tap the gear icon to open the settings screen.
3. 
Search for “ring tone” in the settings search bar.
You should see a settings screen like that shown in Figure 18-1.
4. Tap on the Phone ringtone option to open the Sound & vibration
settings screen shown in Figure
18-2.

FIGURE 18-1: Ring tone settings.

FIGURE 18-2: Sound & vibration.
5. 
From the Sound & vibration settings screen, tap again on the
Phone ringtone option to change the ringtone of your Android

smartphone.
Android prompts you to complete your action in another app, as
shown in Figure 18-3. This particular Android smartphone
prompts me to use an app called Sounds or a third-party app
called Zedge.
6. 
Use the app your Android smartphone suggests for you or go
to the Play Store and download any custom ringtone app of
your choosing, and then follow the prompts provided to
change your ringtone.
Any phone call that you receive will use the new ringtone.

FIGURE 18-3: Complete the action with an app.
Assign different ringtones to different people

What if you want to assign different ringtones to different people?
This is useful if you want to know right away when a certain
person is calling you based on the ringtone. Let’s take a look.
First, locate the person you want to set a custom ringtone for in
your Contacts app. (Swipe up to open the app drawer and look for
the Contacts app and then tap to open.) Once you open the contact
for the person, tap the three dots in the upper-right corner to
access the More Options menu, as shown in Figure 18-4.
Next, tap Set ringtone to select this option. Similar to changing
the ringtone for all calls, Android prompts you to complete your
action in another app where you can select the ringtone for just
this contact. Now, all you have to do is repeat this process for
each contact you want to assign a custom ringtone. How’s that for
personalization?

FIGURE 18-4: The Bat Phone should have its own ring.
Change text notification sounds

What if you are the kind of person who gets more text messages
than phone calls? You might want to change the text notification
sound. The notification sound is that little “ding” you hear when
you receive a text message. To change your text notification
sound, follow these steps:
 
1. Return to the settings menu and search for “notification sound” to
open the settings screen shown in Figure
18-5.
2. 
Tap the Sound & vibration setting.
Android takes you directly to the settings for notification sounds,
as shown in Figure 18-6.
3. Tap the Default notification sound setting and you are once again
prompted to complete your action in another app.
4. 
Choose any one of the notification sounds that are available to
you and presto! You have a new sound to play when you
receive a text message.
Your Android phone is now becoming a unique experience.

FIGURE 18-5: Searching for notification sounds.

FIGURE 18-6: Changing that ding!
Adding a Splash of Color

 Are you getting tired of looking at the same old wallpaper on
your home screen? Spruce it up with a splash of color! Your Android
smartphone lets you customize the background of your home screen(s)
and your lock screen with different colors.
To begin, long press on your home screen background. After a
second, a menu should pop up, as shown in Figure 18-7. This is
the home screen settings menu. It contains the settings options for
using, customizing, and troubleshooting your home screen. The
first thing to notice about the home screen settings menu is that it
shows you with a check mark what your background is currently
set to. Tap the Wallpaper & style setting to proceed.

FIGURE 18-7: The home screen settings menu.
From the Wallpaper & style screen you can modify your home
screen background, your lock screen background, the color tinting

of your menus, and even switch between your smartphone’s light
and dark theme. To change the color of your home screen
background, select Change wallpaper from the Wallpaper & style
screen.
The Change wallpaper screen has myriad options to choose from
(some of which you explore in the next section). To set a color,
scroll down until you see Solid colors and tap it. You should see a
color selector screen as shown in Figure 18-8. When you find a
color that suits you, tap it. Android shows you a preview of the
new color and how it looks on both your home screen and lock
screen, as shown in Figure 18-9.
When you are sure that this is the color for you, tap the small
check mark that appears in the lower-right corner of the screen.
Your Android smartphone now prompts you to select if you want
this color to be the home screen background, the lock screen
background, or both.

FIGURE 18-8: Picking out the perfect color.

FIGURE 18-9: Color preview.

 The good part about this confirmation screen is that you can
have a different background for both your home screen and your lock
screen. So you can set a nice, soothing color (like hot pink) for your
lock screen, and use a custom photo for your home screen background,
as discussed in the next section.
Setting Wallpaper Images
The process for changing your background from a solid color to
an image starts exactly like that for a solid color (as outlined in
the previous section). Long press on your home screen, tap
Wallpaper & style, and then tap Change wallpaper. This opens the
Wallpaper menu shown in Figure 18-10.
The wallpaper choices here are seemingly endless. Your Android
smartphone groups some of the more popular, preinstalled
wallpapers into categories that you can browse until you find the
perfect one. You can even select a picture from your Photo
Gallery by selecting My photos. However, your Android
smartphone is capable of using pictures with motion in them —
known as living wallpaper — as your background. Let’s look at
using one of those.

FIGURE 18-10: So many wallpaper choices.
Tap on Living Universe to see the selection of motion-enabled
images you can choose for your background. The nice, serine

coastline with a lapping shore might be a good choice. Select it to
see a preview, as shown in Figure 18-11.
 If you want to choose this image, you might need to download
it first. Android doesn’t take up space on your phone for things you
might not need, like a lot of living wallpaper options. Instead, you can
download only the ones you need, when you need them.
If your preview screen shows a download icon in the lower-right
corner instead of a check mark (refer to Figure 18-11), simply tap
to download the wallpaper. You then have the option to set it as
your wallpaper on your home screen, or use it for both your home
and lock screens. All you have to do now is decide which screen
to add this wallpaper to, sit back, relax, and enjoy the waves …
virtually of course.

FIGURE 18-11: Look at the motion.
Changing the Font Size

If you are like a lot of people, the font on your Android
smartphone might be a little too small. Fear not! Your Android
smartphone lets you customize the size of the font used for most
of the built in apps and settings.
To begin, swipe down from the home screen to open the
notification drawer and swipe down again to expand it. Tap the
gear icon to open the settings screen and then search for “font” in
the settings search bar. Tap the Font size option to go to the
Display setting for font sizes, as shown in Figure 18-12. From
here you can select from very small to very large as the size for
your Android fonts, and Android gives you a preview of the font
size you select. The very large font size is illustrated in Figure 18-
13.
Confirm your selection, and Android applies it to your
smartphone. Now your Android smartphone is just as unique as
you are.

FIGURE 18-12: Changing the font size.

FIGURE 18-13: A very large font.

Chapter 19
Saying ‘Hey’ to Google
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Using Google Assistant
 Running routines
 Putting the power of Google to work for you
Your Android smartphone comes with a powerful tool: Google
Assistant. If you are familiar with other voice-based assistants
such as Siri and Alexa, then you have an idea of what Google
Assistant is like. However, Google Assistant offers so much more
than just a friendly voice for looking up strange facts. One of the
most under-explored and incredibly powerful features of Google
Assistant is its ability to run routines. A routine is a string of
actions that are all triggered from a single key phrase. In this
chapter, you discover how to set up Google Assistant, customize
how Google Assistant works for you, and how to use routines to
simplify your life even more.
 The instructions outlined in this chapter follow the specific
setup and usage steps for Google Assistant. Google Assistant is
preinstalled — but not activated — on most Android smartphones. If
you have a Samsung smartphone, your phone has a different digital
assistant named Bixby. While the setup steps for Google Assistant are
not the exact same as those for Bixby, you should still have a good
idea of how to set up Bixby from the instruction in this chapter.

Getting the Most from Your Smartphone
with Google Assistant
Google Assistant was introduced in 2016 as part of the Google
Home initiative. Google Home was a series of smart speakers that
could be placed within your home’s living area and that would
listen to and respond to voice commands. It could provide Google
Search–based data and perform simple home connectivity tasks,
all triggered from an audible command. Eventually, Google
Assistant made its way onto Android smartphones.
Setting up Google Assistant is pretty easy, and once it is set up,
Google Assistant can be activated simply by saying “Hey,
Google” within range of your Android smartphone.
 Before you set up your Google Assistant, however, I must
address a common privacy-based concern with using digital voice
assistants on smartphones — Google Assistant included. In order for
Google Assistant to be ready to respond to your commands at a
moment’s notice, it must always be listening for you to say “Hey,
Google.” This means that, when activated, your Android smartphone
will be listening for you to say “Hey, Google” at all times. Some
people have expressed concern about privacy. If an Android
smartphone with Google Assistant activated is always listening for you
to say “Hey, Google,” what else is it hearing?
Google came forward and said that as long as the Android
smartphone does not hear the key phrase, “Hey, Google,” it does
not record or respond to anything else that is said — in essence,
everything else is ignored. However, Google also said that there
may be times when Google Assistant mistakenly thinks it hears
“Hey, Google” and starts to listen to the rest of what is being said.
These cases are reviewed by language experts within Google to
improve how Google Assistant works.

 If you are concerned about Google Assistant possibly picking
up on a conversation that might not be related to a voice request, you
do not need to set it up. Your Android smartphone will still be useful to
you in many other ways with or without Google Assistant activated.
Setting Up Google Assistant
To set up Google Assistant, it’s best to start with its settings.
Swipe down from the top of the home screen to open the
notification drawer, and then swipe down again to expand it.
Once the notification drawer is expanded, locate and tap the gear
icon to open the settings screen and search for “Google Assistant”
in the search bar. Your results should look something like those
pictured in Figure 19-1. Tap the Assistant Settings option. This
brings up a rather lengthy list of Google Assistant settings, as
shown in Figure 19-2.

FIGURE 19-1: Searching for Google Assistant.

FIGURE 19-2: Google Assistant settings.
The setting to turn on Google Assistant is located in the Hey
Google & Voice Match setting. Tap the Hey Google & Voice

Match option to open the settings screen and begin the Google
Assistant activation process, as shown in Figure 19-3. Notice that
there is only one option on this screen: a toggle switch that allows
you to turn on (or off) Hey Google.
 Hey Google is the setting that allows your Android
smartphone, and Google Assistant, to respond to the voice command,
“Hey, Google.” If this setting is turned off, Google Assistant no longer
listens for you to say, “Hey, Google” and will not reply if you do say it.
Once you enable the Hey Google toggle, if you have not already
set up Google Assistant in the past, the Google voice match setup
will begin. This setup quickly trains your Android smartphone to
recognize how you speak. Many of us have different accents,
different cadences, and a general way speaking that differentiates
us from everyone else. Even if we all say the same thing (in this
case, “Hey, Google”), we all say it with a difference that is slight
enough that a computer may not be able to understand everyone.
This is why your Android smartphone needs to be trained to listen
to your exact voice. Figure 19-4 shows the first screen of the
Google voice match setup.

FIGURE 19-3: The Google Assistant toggle switch.

FIGURE 19-4: Step one.
Tap the Next button to begin the setup process. Your Android
smartphone presents you with a quick disclaimer. You must agree

to this disclaimer to continue with the setup. Once you agree to
the disclaimer, your Android smartphone prompts you to read a
phrase out loud. Speaking this phrase begins the training process
that helps Google Assistant recognize your voice. While the
phrase may change from time to time, Figure 19-5 shows the first
training question as of the writing of this book.

FIGURE 19-5: Repeat after me …
Once your voice print has been recognized, you are prompted to
speak a different phrase. These phrases have be selected for the

difference in sounds and letter combinations that help Android
recognize how you say certain words and phrases. At this point, if
your Android smartphone was able to understand the phrases you
spoke, you should see a screen like that shown in Figure 19-6 that
tells you that your smartphone now recognizes your voice. Tap
the Finish button to complete the setup.
Google Assistant settings
Before you start using Google Assistant, it is helpful to explore a
couple of its settings (refer to Figure 19-2 to see the list of Google
Assistant settings).

FIGURE 19-6: The end, or is it?
Lock screen

The first setting to review is the Lock screen option, which is an
important setting to pay attention to. Tap the Lock screen option
from the settings list to open the screen shown in Figure 19-7.
 If you leave this setting off, you will need to unlock your
Android smartphone if you want to use Google Assistant. First, this
takes away the hands-free aspect of using a digital assistant. Second, if
you need to unlock your phone to use Google Assistant, you might as
well take the extra step and look up the information you wanted (or
open the app you wanted open) while your fingers are tapping away.
 Android smartphones do not allow any access to the contents
of your phone while the lock screen is activated. This is done for
security reasons, and it is a feature many of us take for granted.
Turning the Lock screen setting on enables Google Assistant to work
while your phone is locked.
Looking at the pros and cons of the lock screen setting, the pro is
that your Android smartphone will truly be a hands-free digital
assistant that is always ready to help you, even when you cannot
get to your phone or when your hands are otherwise occupied.
The con is that Google Assistant has the ability (if you ask it to)
to dictate and read to you your text messages, make phone calls,
and access your contacts. Normally these items are not available
to you when your lock screen is activated, but Google Assistant
will have access to them while your screen is locked.

FIGURE 19-7: Google Assistant on the lock screen.
Tap to wake

Another Lock screen setting is to allow Google Assistant to be
woken up by tapping on your lock screen rather than having to
say, “Hey, Google.” The toggle switch for this is shown in Figure
19-8. This is an older method for accessing Google Assistant that
was first introduced a few years ago. If you used an older Android
smartphone that responded to tapping on the lock screen, you may
want to toggle this setting on for a feeling of nostalgia.
Personal results
The final important Google Assistant setting to review is the
Personal results option, shown in Figure 19-9. The Personal
results settings helps you rein in what Google Assistant does and
does not have access to when you are using it. If, for instance,
you are worried about Google Assistant being able to read and
send text messages, access your contacts, and make phone calls,
you can turn that ability off.

FIGURE 19-8: Tap to wake up Google Assistant.

FIGURE 19-9: Personal results settings.

 In my opinion, being able to access personal information is
one of the biggest conveniences of using a digital assistant. However,
you can choose to turn off access if you want at the tap of a button.
Take a moment to browse through the remaining settings in
Personal results. Feel free to turn off or on any settings that will
make your Google Assistant experience everything you want it to
be.
‘Hey, Google’ and other magic commands
Once Google Assistant is set up, all you have to do to access it is
speak the magic words: “Hey, Google.” Google Assistant can
then respond to a number of commands and requests.
 Google claims that Google Assistant can recognize and
respond to over one million different requests.
While it would take many volumes to cover all the spoken
requests Google Assistant can respond to, following are some of
the most useful, or fun, commands.
Hey, Google …
 
What is the weather?”
Google Assistant will read of the current weather in your current
location. You can modify this command a number of ways. For
example, you can say, “Hey, Google, what is tomorrow’s
weather?”; “Hey, Google, what is the current weather in
Saskatchewan?”; or “Hey, Google, will it rain next Monday?”
What is the traffic like?
Google Assistant will access the current traffic for your area and
let you know if there are any backups you should know about.

Send a text to <contact> <message>.
Google Assistant will text your message to the contact you
specify. For example, “Hey, Google, text Joanie dinner’s ready”
or “Hey, Google, send a text to Grandma, I need cookies.”
Tell me a joke.
Yes, Google Assistant will try its best to tell you a joke.
Define <word>.
Google Assistant can help you with the definition of almost any
tough word.
What is …?
This is a very flexible Google Assistant command. “What is” can
be followed by conversions, math equations, or even general
knowledge questions. For example, “Hey, Google, what is 345
times 19902?”; “Hey, Google, what is three and a half cups in
milliliters?”; or “Hey, Google, what is the geographic center of
the United States?”
These commands represent just a small portion of the capabilities
of Google Assistant, and they barely scratch the surface of how
Google Assistant can help you. However, so far you have only
looked at single commands. Google Assistant is capable of
stringing together multiple commands into what are known as
routines.
Creating Google Assistant Routines
A Google Assistant routine refers to a number of Google
Assistant commands that are strung together into a sequence of
actions that perform certain tasks with a single activation. Ever
watch The Jetsons? If you have, you may have an idea of this sort
of automation. For example, if you had a Google Smart Home
device that could turn on your coffee maker, TV, lights, and a
smart thermostat, you could create a routine so that when you say,
“Good morning, Google,” Google Assistant will tell you the
current weather, read you the news, read you your calendar, check

the traffic, turn on the lights, turn on the television, make your
coffee, and set the thermostat to 74 degrees.
To begin creating a routine, check Figure 19-2 again. Locate and
tap on the setting for Routines. This brings up the Routines
setting screen, as shown in Figure 19-10.
Explore the Routine settings page. A number of premade routines
are ready for you, including Good Morning, Bedtime, and I’m
Home. Each of these routines can be customized to your unique
specifications. Let’s take a quick look at the Good Morning
routine. Tap the Good Morning routine to open it up and see what
six actions it provides by default. This routine is illustrated in
Figure 19-11.
The first aspect of this routine that you can change is what
command or phrase will activate it. This is called the Starter. By
default, this routine is activated when you say either “Hey,
Google, good morning” or “Hey, Google, tell me about my day.”
However, if you want this routine to kick off when you say, “Hey,
Google, let’s get ready for work,” simply tap the Add starter
button. Now you can customize how this routine starts.

FIGURE 19-10: Creating a routine.

FIGURE 19-11: Good morning, Google.
Next is the list of actions this routine will perform. By default, the
Good Morning routine will:

 
Tell you the weather.
Tell you about your calendar for today.
Tell you any reminders you have for today.
Tell you any birthdays that are today.
Tell you if your phone’s battery is low.
Play the news.
You can add or remove any action to this list, such as turning on
the lights or adjusting the smart thermostat. To save any changes
you make, tap the Save button.

Part 5

The Part of Tens

IN THIS PART …
 
Discover how to change up your navigation techniques, zoom in on
anything on your screen, send someone your exact location, and turn
your smartphone into a ruler.
Find out how to cast the content of your Android smartphone right to a
TV screen.
Explore the settings you may want to consider enabling, from making
sure your phone is ready for emergencies to finding your phone if you
misplace it.
Identify the settings you may want to consider disabling, from
blocking sensitive information to controlling what actions can be done
from the lock screen.

Chapter 20
Ten Cool Tips and Tricks
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Changing up your navigation techniques
 Zooming in on anything
 Taking a screenshot from your phone
 Taking measurements without a ruler
Your Android smartphone is a powerful, fun, and clever tool that
can be useful in a number of situations. It is a great
communication device, yes, but it also has quite a few tricks that
you can unlock to help make your life even easier. Let’s take a
look.
Send Someone Your Current Location
There are times when a picture, or map, can say a thousand
words. If you want someone to meet you at a specific location, or
you are lost and need a little help, not to worry. You Android
smartphone lets you text someone a map location.
 The map location you send using this method does not have to
be your current location; it could be any location that you can find in
Google Maps.
Here are the steps to send someone a map location:
 
1. Open Google Maps.

2. Find the location you want to share (if this location is your current
location, look for the blue map pin).
3. Long-press on the location to open a context menu, as shown in
Figure
20-1.
4. Tap the Share button at the top of the screen to open the sharing
menu shown in Figure
20-2.
5. Locate and select the contact you want to send your location to.
6. Tap the Send button to send that contact the location as a Google
Maps link.

FIGURE 20-1: A Google Maps context menu.

FIGURE 20-2: The sharing menu.
Double-Tap to Wake Up

Sometimes you may want to check the current time, or quickly
see if you missed any message notifications. However, when your
Android smartphone is asleep, the screen goes dark. You have to
pick up your phone to wake it — which means that if your hands
are full, you have to put down whatever you are carrying before
you can access your phone. Right? Not anymore! Simply tap
twice on the dark screen to wake up your Android smartphone.
Now you can see the time and all your missed notifications.
Turn Your Smartphone into a Ruler
You have likely been in situations when you want to quickly
measure something. And in these situations, there never seems to
be a ruler or tape measure handy. No problem! Your Android
smartphone can become that ruler or tape measure. The Google
Play Store offers dozens of apps that use augmented reality (AR)
through your Android smartphone’s camera to accurately measure
items. Simply search the Google Play Store for “measure tool” or
“ruler” for a list of apps that can turn your Android smartphone
into a handy measuring device when you need it.
 Before installing any apps, check out the reviews and watch
for microtransactions.
Take a Screenshot
Do you need to show someone something on your phone but you
are in Boston and they are in Peoria? Or maybe you are writing a
book about Android smartphones and need pictures of how
Android works. No worries; Android has you covered. Just take a
screenshot!
To take a screenshot of your phone’s current screen, quickly press
the power button and lower volume button at the same time. If
done correctly (and you haven’t muted your sound), you will hear

a camera shutter sound and see a quick flash on your screen. (If
done incorrectly, you will either turn down your volume, lock
your screen, or possibly power down your smartphone.)
Access App Context Menus
Most of the apps on your Android smartphone have a context
menu, which is a secret menu that can be accessed without having
to open the app. You can usually perform key app functions from
this menu. For example, want to take a look at all the screenshots
you have taken? Long press on the Photos app to display a
context menu that includes the option to view screenshots.
 Each app’s context menu is different. For example, the context
menu for the Camera app lets you jump right into selfie or video mode.
Switch to One-Handed Mode
The screens on Android smartphones are getting bigger and
bigger every year. Unfortunately, our thumbs are not and it can be
difficult to reach all the keys on the on-screen keyboard. Once
again, your Android smartphone has a solution for this: one-
handed mode.
To switch into one-handed mode, when you are in an app that
uses the on-screen keyboard, tap the gear icon to bring up a
settings menu, as shown in Figure 20-3. Then, tap the icon for
One-handed mode. The keyboard will resize to fit within three-
fourths of the screen, enabling you to reach the full set of keys
without having to stretch (see Figure 20-4). Use the arrows on the
edge of the screen to move the smaller keyboard from left-handed
to right-handed mode and back.

FIGURE 20-3: Keyboard settings.

FIGURE 20-4: A more reachable keyboard.
Screencast

Sometimes you may want to share some funny cat videos with the
whole room. If you have a casting-capable TV, or Google
Chromecast on your TV, you can cast the content of your Android
smartphone right to the TV screen. Here are the steps:
 
1. Open an app that shares content such as YouTube.
2. 
Locate and tap the casting icon to open the connection screen.
The casting icon looks like a television-shaped rectangle with
waves in the corner.
3. 
Tap to select your TV or Chromecast from the list of found
devices.
You should now see your Android smartphone on the big screen.
Tap and Zoom
Tap and zoom is an Accessibility feature in Android that lets you
tap to zoom in and magnify any part of your smartphone’s screen.
This is especially helpful if your eyes have trouble focusing on
some of the small icons and fonts. To enable this feature, follow
these steps:
 
1. Swipe down to open the notification drawer, and then swipe down
again to expand it.
2. Tap the settings gear icon.
3. Tap Accessibility settings.
4. Locate and tap on Magnification to open the Magnification screen,
as shown in Figure
20-5.
5. 
Tap the toggle to turn on the Magnification shortcut.
With Magnification turned on, a pink magnifying glass icon
appears in the corner of your screen.
6. 
Tap the magnifying glass icon to enter magnification mode, as
shown in Figure
20-6.

Once enabled, just single tap anywhere on the screen to quick
zoom into that spot. You can also pinch to zoom the screen.
FIGURE 20-5: Magnification screen.

FIGURE 20-6: Extra zoom!
Disable App Notifications

Notifications are a convenient feature of Android that lets you
know when an app might need your attention. However, some
apps seem to abuse the feature. Sometimes you get peppered with
notifications about things you don’t really want to know. Not to
worry — your Android smartphone lets you turn of notifications
from any app. Here’s how:
 
1. Swipe down to open the notification drawer, and then swipe down
again to expand it.
2. Tap the settings gear icon.
3. Tap Notifications and then tap App notifications.
4. Locate the app for which you want to turn off notifications and tap
the toggle next to it to turn them off.
Use the Two-Finger Swipe
Are you tired of swiping down to open the notification drawer,
then swiping down again to expand it? A few different menus
require you to perform the same swipe twice. However, Android
lets you simply swipe with two fingers and perform both swipes
at the same time. Place two fingers at the top of the screen and
swipe down slowly, but steadily. You should now be looking at
the expanded notification menu. Presto!

Chapter 21
Ten Settings to Enable
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Making sure your phone is ready for emergencies
 Setting battery percentage and dial tones
 Locking the screen
 Finding your phone if you misplace it
Your Android smartphone comes set up to appeal to the widest
audience possible. It is up to you to tweak and customize it to be a
tool specific for you and your tastes. In this chapter, you look at
ten settings that you may want to enable. Keep in mind that
depending on your make and model of Android smartphone,
some of these setting may already be enabled. Also, some of these
settings may have different names depending on which
smartphone you have, but the functionality is the same.
Skip Lock Screen
Skipping the lock screen is one of those nuisance settings that can
save you a tap or a swipe. By default, when you unlock your
Android smartphone, you are presented with your lock screen and
an icon of an open lock. This lets you know that your phone is
unlocked and you can swipe up to get to your home screen.
However, Android has a setting that can skip this screen. You can
set your Android smartphone so that when you unlock your
phone, you are brought directly to your home screen — skipping
the unlocked locked screen altogether. Unfortunately, this setting
does not seem to appear on the Samsung S22.
To enable this setting, tap the gear icon that appears in the lower-
right corner of the quick access settings list and search for “skip

lock screen” in the search bar.
Wireless Emergency Alerts
Wireless emergency alerts are the alerts that are pushed to your
smartphone from local, state, and even federal agencies. They
include Amber and Silver alerts, threatening weather alerts, and
other public safety issues. To turn on this setting, search for
“wireless emergency alerts” in the settings search bar and make
sure the Allow Alerts toggle is enabled.
Battery Percentage
Believe it or not, for some versions of Android, the percentage of
battery remaining is not displayed on the status bar. Some phones
might show a graphic of a battery with different fill levels
indicated. However, if you are like me, you like to see the exact
percentage written out. Luckily for us, this setting can be enabled.
Search for “battery percentage” in the settings search bar and
make sure the Battery Percentage toggle is enabled.
Dial Pad (DTMF) Tones
This next setting first confused me when I came across it. When I
set up my Android smartphone and tried to call one of those
automated phone systems, I tried to press buttons for options, but
nothing happened.
The key is to enable dial pad tones. These are the sounds a phone
key makes when it is pressed. Who knew there was an option to
turn this off? Search for “dial pad tones” in the settings search bar
and make sure the Dial Pad Tones toggle is enabled.
Screen Timeout
Has this happened to you? You are using our phone and put it
down for a minute or two, and then realize that anyone walking

by could have seen or read what was on the screen. Even worse, if
you are like me and have lost a phone, someone could have
access to all the phone’s contents. For this reason, I now enable
the automatic screen lock. While the timing of this lock is
customizable, I set mine to 15 seconds. This means that if I stop
using my phone and put it down, after 15 seconds the screen
automatically locks. Search for “screen timeout” in the settings
search bar to enable this setting.
 Another toggle associated with the Screen Timeout setting —
Screen Attention — enables you to prevent your screen from turning
off and locking when you are actively looking at the screen. This tip
was a two for one!
Night Light
After a long day of looking at screens — smartphone screens,
computer screens, television screens — your eyes need a break.
For this reason, you can set your Android smartphone’s Night
Light feature to turn on at a specific time every night and give
your eyes a break while you peruse the Internet. Night Light
removes some of the blue light from the display, giving it a
yellow tint. This can be easier on your eyes when they are
strained.
Search for “night light” in the settings search bar (or “eye comfort
shield” if you are on a Samsung smartphone) and make sure the
Use Night Light toggle is enabled.
Auto-Rotate Screen
The auto-rotate screen setting makes sure that when you turn your
smartphone on its side, the contents of the screen rotate to be the
proper orientation. This setting can be toggled on or off. To turn
on this setting, search for “auto-rotate screen” in the settings

search bar and make sure the Auto-Rotate Screen toggle is
enabled.
Screen Lock
The Screen lock setting lets you use your power button as an
automatic lock for your Android smartphone. That is to say, if
you want to immediately lock your phone before you put it down,
you can give the power button a quick press and your phone will
lock (turning off the screen in the process). A cool feature, right?
Search for “screen lock” in the settings search bar and make sure
the Power Button Instantly Locks toggle is enabled.
Emergency Location Service
In Chapter 14, you read about how 911 services work with mobile
phones. The key to this functionality is the Emergency Location
Service setting. Enabling the Emergency Location Service setting
could help 911 locate you when you call for help, even if you are
unable to provide then with a location verbally.
 Keep in mind that your local 911 dispatch (local to where you
are when you call 911) must also have the hardware necessary to
support emergency location services for this setting to work.
To turn this setting on, search for “emergency location services”
in the settings search bar and make sure the Use Emergency
Location Service toggle is enabled.
Find My Device
It happens to all of us. We put our phone someplace safe so it
won’t get lost, and we end up picking a spot so safe we forget it’s
there — like on the chair at the restaurant we went to last night.
Find My Device is a setting that enables you to see the location of

your smartphone from any place you can log into your Google
account (a laptop, a tablet, or even another smartphone).
Search for “find my device” in the settings search bar and make
sure the Use Find My Device toggle is enabled.

Chapter 22
Ten Settings to Disable
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Blocking sensitive information
 Telling Android what information you want and what you
don’t
 Adjusting what can be done from the lock screen
Some features on your Android smartphone can be either unsafe,
expensive (in terms of battery power or data usage), or just plain
annoying. In this chapter, you explore some settings on your
smartphone that you may decide to disable. As always, use your
own discretion when turning any of these settings off, and you
can change your mind at any time.
Turn On Wi-Fi Automatically
This setting is both good and bad, depending on your situation,
but I put it on the bad list because it can have unintentional
consequences. For example, if you have ever been in a jam and
had to connect to a public Wi-Fi network for a moment to get
something done (such as while waiting in an airport) and forget to
disable Turn on Wi-Fi Automatically, every time you are near this
network again, Android will try to reconnect to it — whether you
want to or not. In fact, Android will automatically try to connect
to any Wi-Fi network you once connected to, even if you don’t
want to connect.
This behavior can be problematic because you may begin
browsing sensitive information on your smartphone (like making
a credit card purchase, or using your banking app) without
knowing that you are connected to a public Wi-Fi. How is this
bad? Unfortunately, public networks can be scanned by hackers,

and they can potentially intercept and view any information that
flows across it — thus exposing your information. To disable this
setting, search for “turn on wi-fi automatically” in the settings
search bar and slide the toggle to the left.
 Be aware that if you do disable this setting, when you come
back home after a long day out, you will need to turn your Wi-Fi back
on to connect to your home network.
Sensitive Notifications
Turning off the Sensitive Notifications setting makes sure that if
you get a notification (such as a text from a doctor’s office), no
information other than the fact that you received a text is
displayed on the lock screen. This prevents people from seeing
details about your messages while you are away from your phone.
To make sure sensitive notifications aren’t displayed on the lock
screen, search for “sensitive notifications” in the settings search
bar and slide the toggle to the left.
Show Media Recommendations
Whether we like it or not, big media companies like Google (and
many, many others) know a lot about us. By using their products,
we give them (intentionally or not) data on what we like to see,
listen to, or interact with. While you cannot stop Android from
collecting some data, you can stop it from trying to suggest stuff
to you based on your online habits.
Your Android smartphone can place suggestions for media to
watch or listen to in your notification drawer based solely on
other media you have watched or listened to in the past. Some
people enjoy this level of personalization. However, I turn this
setting off. If you don’t want to receive media recommendations

from Android, search for “show media recommendations” in the
settings search bar and disable this setting.
Identify Songs Playing Nearby
This is another setting that seems cool on the surface. Your
Android smartphone can automatically display for you the name
and artist of any song that is playing around you. Are you
watching TV and want to know what song was playing in that
commercial? Glance over at your Android smartphone and the
song title and artist will be displayed on the screen.
 For this to work, your Android smartphone must have its
microphone open and listening to the ambient noise around you at all
times. This can be a drain on your battery at best, and an invasion of
privacy at worst. To disable this feature, search for “identify songs
playing nearby” in the settings search bar and disable this setting.
Adaptive Brightness
The Adaptive Brightness setting enables your Android
smartphone to adjust the brightness level of your screen based on
ambient conditions. If you are outdoors in the bright sunlight,
Android will automatically turn up the brightness of your screen.
If you are in a dimly lit room, Android will automatically turn
down the brightness of the screen.
The major problem with this setting is that it can be a drain on the
battery. If you want to disable this feature, search for “adaptive
brightness” in the settings search bar and move the Adaptive
Brightness toggle to the left.
Add Users from Lock Screen

The Add Users from Lock Screen setting enables you to add a
new user to your smartphone while the screen is locked. While
this can be useful if you permanently lock yourself from your
phone, the chances of that are slim enough that you probably
don’t need this — and the risk is that anyone else with the right
knowledge could add themselves to your smartphone. To disable
this setting, search for “Add users from lock screen” in the
settings search bar and slide the toggle to the left.
Show Wallet
Show Wallet is a setting that, if you use a digital payment wallet,
enables you to access it from the lock screen. This, like the Add
Users from Lock Screen setting, can be a privacy concern as you
would not have to unlock your phone to begin a wireless financial
transaction. To disable this setting, search for “show wallet” in the
settings search bar and slide the toggle to the left.
Personalize Using App Data
The Personalize Using App Data setting allows apps to share your
usage information with Android. While this sharing is most likely
not done for nefarious reasons, it is still a form of datamining. If
you want to disallow apps to share your usage information with
Android, search for “personalize using app data” in the settings
search bar and disable this setting.
Developer Options
Developer Options is a setting that is not turned on by default.
However, if you followed along with the instruction in this book,
you may have enabled it to allow yourself a way of installing
apps that are not found on the Google Play Store (known as
sideloading). However, Developer Options include many other
features that if used incorrectly could expose potential security
risks — like being able to access information on your phone
while you are charging it. Let’s make sure you turn it back off.

Search for “developer options” in the settings search bar and
switch the toggle for Use Developer Options to the left.
 Keep in mind, the Developer Options setting will only show
up in your search if it has already been enabled.
Back Up Using Mobile Data
A great feature of your Android smartphone is that it can
automatically back up your phone periodically. The contents of
your phone are backed up to a Google server, and if anything
happens to your phone, you can always restore the contents from
a backup. However, these backups can be very data-intensive. To
save your data usage, make sure Android only backs up your
phone while you are connected to Wi-Fi and not while you are
using your mobile (cellular) service. To do this, search for
“backup using mobile” in the settings search bar and disable the
Back Up Using Mobile or Metered Wi-Fi Data setting. With this
setting disabled, Android will only back up your smartphone
when you are connected to Wi-Fi.

Index
A
 
 
“About this app” section (Play Store app), 98
 
Accessibility features, 251–252
accessing
context menus for apps, 249
current tabs, 187
editing features in Camera app, 214
flashlight, 116
lock screen, 56–58, 62–65
memory settings, 142
Power Menu, 62–63
settings, 135
Wi-Fi, 34–36
accessories, 15
action buttons, 130
Adaptive Brightness setting, 261
Add Photo icon, 172
Add users from Lock Screen setting, 261
adding
cards to GPay, 87
color, 227–229
events to Google Calendar, 70

Gmail accounts, 36–38
home screens, 102
tabs, 187
adjusting
backlight, 115–116
font size, 231–232
passwords, 63–64
ringer volume, 149
ringtones, 224–225
text notification sounds, 226–227
airplane mode, 122
AirPlay, 120
Alarm feature (Clock app), 70
alarms, Bedtime and, 148
albums (Photos app), 79–80
All Open Apps view, 50
alternative carriers, 27–28
Android. See also specific topics
about, 5–6, 7
flavors of, 7–9
Google Pixel, 7
Samsung, 6
transitioning from iPhone to, 10
Android Cupcake, 8
Android Pie, 8
app drawer, 61
app timer (Digital Wellbeing), 145–147
Apple, 10

Apple Pay, 122
apps
about, 89
accessing context menus for, 249
Apple compared with Android, 10
carrier-installed, 94–95
choosing install locations for, 99
Clock, 70
creating folders for, 101–102
defined, 9
Digital Wellbeing
about, 144–145
app timer, 145–147
Bedtime setting, 147–148
Focus mode, 147
disabling notifications for, 252
Drive, 85–86
Facebook, 140, 193–195
Files, 91–92
finding, 95–96
free, 98
Gmail
about, 71–72
adding accounts, 36–38
archiving email, 73–74
deleting email, 73–74
email categories, 72–73
recovering email, 74–75

searching for email, 74
Google Calendar, 68–70
Google Chat, 98
GPay
about, 86–87
using, 121–122
Instagram, 196–198
installing, 95–99
Keep Notes, 92, 101
Maps
about, 82–84
sending current location, 247–248
for measuring, 249
Messages
about, 44, 75, 156–157
blocking senders, 77
closing, 50
copying text messages, 164–165
deleting text messages, 76–77, 164–165
group texting, 165–166
pasting text messages, 164–165
sending texts, 75–76
typing in, 157–164
moving, 100–102
My Verizon, 95
organizing, 100–102
Phone, 91
Photo Gallery, 205

Photos
about, 79
albums, 79–80
Library view, 80–81
timeline, 80
Play Movies, 92–93
Play Music, 92–93
Play Store, 95–96
preinstalled, 89–95
ratings for, 97–98
Reddit, 196
searching for, 96
Settings, 93, 94
sideloading, 102–103
Snapseed, 218–219
social media, 191–192
swiping within, 48
third-party, 167
TikTok, 196
viewing information for, 99–100
YouTube, 93
archiving email, 73–74
assigning ringtones to people, 225–226
auto-grouping, in Messages app, 156–157
Auto-rotate screen setting, 116, 257
B
 

back gesture, 51
Back Up Device folders, 81
Back Up Using Mobile Data setting, 262
background, for home screen and lock screen, 229
backlight, adjusting, 115–116
battery, 21. See also
charging
Battery percentage setting, 256
Bedtime setting (Digital Wellbeing), 147–148
big box carriers, 26–27
biometrics, 38–39
blocking senders, 77
Bluetooth, 118
Blur tool, 215–216
Brightness tool, 115, 216
browser
about, 181
Chrome, 182–189
installing third-party, 189–190
C
 
cache, 141
Calendar app, 68–70
Calendar widget, 107–110
calling
contacts, 174–175
911, 180
without contacts, 175–176

Camera app
about, 78, 199
Blur tool, 215–216
Brightness tool, 216
camera modes, 209–213
Camera selector, 208
Contrast tool, 216
Crop tool, 215
editing images, 214–219
Flash setting, 202
grid lines, 206
holding phone, 214
image view finder, 206
last image taken, 204–205
Markup tool, 217–218
navigating interface, 201–213
opening, 199–201
Ratio setting, 204
save location, 204–205
settings, 201–204
sharing from, 204–205
shutter button, 208
Snapseed app, 218–219
Timer setting, 203–204
Tint tool, 216–217
Top Shot setting, 202–203
Warmth tool, 216–217
zoom, 207–208

Camera modes, 209–213
Camera selector, 208
cameras, switching, 78. See also
Camera app
care and maintenance, 23
carrier service
about, 25
alternative carriers, 27–28
big box carriers, 26–27
emergency services, 29
locked compared with unlocked, 25–26
Wi-Fi service, 28
carrier-installed apps, 94–95
categories (Gmail app), 72–73
Change wallpaper screen, 228
charging, 21–22
Cheat Sheet (website), 2
Chrome app
about, 84–85, 182
navigating in, 185–187
opening, 182–183
searching with, 183–185
tabs, 187–189
Chromium, 182
cleaning devices, 23
Clear Cache button, 140–141
Clear Storage button, 140–141
Clock app, 70
closing Messages app, 50

color, adding, 227–229
color-coded texts, 76
commands, for Google Assistant, 241–242
configuring
apps for Do Not Disturb, 134
lock screen, 56, 58–59
notifications, 131–133
contacts
about, 169–170
activating panic button, 178–179
calling, 174–175
calling 911, 180
calling without, 175–176
entering, 170–172
setting for emergencies, 177–178
setting up favorites, 173
viewing, 172–173
Contacts app
calling contacts, 174–175
calling without contacts, 175–176
entering contacts, 170–172
setting up favorites, 173
viewing contacts, 172–173
content, sharing with ScreenCast, 120
contents (of box)
about, 12
accessories, 15
care and maintenance, 23

charging, 21–22
handset, 12–13
hardware components, 18–20
installing SIM card, 16–18
power cord, 14–15
what to keep, 15–16
context menus
accessing for apps, 249
for home screen, 106
contextual search, 49–50
contextual volume controls, 149–150
Contrast tool, 216
conversations, in Messages app, 157
Copy Apps & Data screen, 35–36
copying text messages, 164–165
creating
app folders, 101–102
Google Assistant routines, 242–243
credit cards, adding to GPay, 87
Crop tool, 215
customizing
about, 223
adding color, 227–229
assigning ringtones to people, 225–226
changing font size, 231–232
changing ringtones, 224–225
changing text notification sounds, 226–227
devices, 223–232

setting custom ring tones, 223–227
setting notification sounds, 223–227
setting wallpaper images, 229–231
settings, 135–151
vision settings, 33–34
D
 
Dashboard (Digital Wellbeing app), 145
data, transferring between phones, 35
Day view (Google Calendar), 69
debit cards, adding to GPay, 87
default view (Maps app), 83
deleting
email, 73–74
files, 92
text messages, 164–165
texts, 76–77
developer options, 142–144
Developer Options setting, 262
devices
cleaning, 23
customizing, 223–232
setting up, 31–42
storing, 23
Dial pad (DTMF) tones setting, 256
Digital Wellbeing app
about, 144–145

app timer, 145–147
Bedtime setting, 147–148
Focus mode, 147
directions view (Maps app), 83–84
Disable button, 99
disabling
Adaptive Brightness setting, 261
Add users from Lock Screen setting, 261
airplane mode, 122
app notifications, 252
Back Up Using Mobile Data setting, 262
Bluetooth, 118
Developer Options setting, 262
Do Not Disturb, 133–134
grid lines, 206
Identify Songs Playing Nearby setting, 260–261
Location Services, 122
Night Light, 136
notifications, 132–133
Personalize Using App Data setting, 262
Sensitive Notifications setting, 260
Show Media Recommendations setting, 260
Show Wallet setting, 261
Wi-Fi, 117–118, 259–260
displaying
Google Feed, 62
secret menus, 46
Do Not Disturb, setting, 133–134

documentation packet, 13
double tap gesture, 45–46, 248
 
“double-clicking,” 44
 
Drive app, 85–86
E
 
editing
home screen app grid, 108
images, 214–219
quick access screen, 123
email
archiving, 73–74
deleting, 73–74
recovering, 74–75
searching for, 74
emergency calls
about, 177
setting emergency contacts, 177–178
Emergency contacts setting, 177–178
Emergency Location Service setting, 258
emergency routine, activating using power button, 56
emergency services, 29
Emergency SOS, 178–179
emojis, for text messages, 160–161
enabling

airplane mode, 122
Auto-rotate screen setting, 257
Battery percentage setting, 256
Bluetooth, 118
developer options, 143
Dial pad (DTMF) tones setting, 256
Do Not Disturb, 133–134
Emergency Location Service setting, 258
emergency routine using power button, 56
Find My Device setting, 258
grid lines, 206
Hey Google toggle, 235
Location Services, 122
Night Light, 136
Night Light setting, 257
panic button, 178–179
phones, 31–32
Screen lock setting, 257
Screen timeout setting, 256–257
Skip lock setting, 255
Wi-Fi, 117–118
Wireless emergency alerts setting, 256
entering contacts, 170–172
events, adding to Google Calendar, 70
Eye Comfort Shield, 136
F
 

Face Unlock, 64
Facebook app, 140, 193–195
facial recognition, setting up, 64–65
favorites, setting up, 173
favoriting pictures, 81
files, deleting, 92
Files app, 91–92
finding
apps, 95–96
volume buttons, 149
widgets, 105–111
fingerprint sensor, 38–39
Flash setting, 202
flashlight, accessing, 116
flavors, of Android, 7–9
Focus mode (Digital Wellbeing), 147
folders, creating for apps, 101–102
font size, changing, 231–232
Force Stop button, 99
free apps, 98
Free Up Space button, 141–142
G
 
Galaxy Note, 6, 91
Galaxy S Ultra, 6
GBoard
about, 157–158

emojis, 160–161
GIFs, 160–161
special characters, 158–159
stickers, 160–161
swipe typing, 162–163
voice-to-text, 163–164
gear icon, 201
gestures
back, 51
defined, 45, 57
double tap, 45–46, 248
hold, 46
left swipe, 62
for notification drawer, 58
pinch to zoom, 51
right swipe, 62
on Samsung phones, 45, 61
searching, 48–50
swiping, 46–48
tap, 44–45
touch interface, 44
using, 50–51
wave, 51–52
GIFs, for text messages, 160–161
Gmail app
about, 71–72
adding accounts, 36–38
archiving email, 73–74

deleting email, 73–74
email categories, 72–73
recovering email, 74–75
searching for email, 74
Google (website), 182
Google Account, adding Gmail accounts, 36–38
Google apps
about, 67
Camera app, 78
Chrome app, 84–85
Clock app, 70
Drive app, 85–86
Gmail app, 71–75
Google Calendar app, 68–70
GPay app, 86–87
Maps app, 82–84
Messages app, 75–77
Photos app, 79–81
Google Assistant
about, 233
commands for, 241–242
creating routines for, 242–243
searching with, 49
setting up, 39–40, 234–242
settings, 237–241
using, 233–234
Google Calendar app, 68–70
Google Chat app, 98

Google Drive, 85–86
Google Ecosystem, 67
Google Feed, 62
Google Lens, searching with Chrome app using, 184–185
Google Maps, 247–248
Google Photos (website), 79
Google Pixel
about, 7
Digital Wellbeing app, 144–148
preinstalled apps on, 90
texting on, 155–167
version of Android, 9
Google Pixel 4 XL, 12–20, 39–40
Google Voice Typing keyboard, 163–164
GPay app
about, 86–87
using, 121–122
grid lines, for camera, 206
group texting, 165–166
grouping tabs, 187
H
 
hamburger menu, 71
handset
about, 12–13
current charge on, 15
defined, 11

hardware
about, 18
differences in, 18–20
 
“Hey, Google.” See
Google Assistant
 
hold gesture, 46
holding phone to take pictures, 214
home screen
adding, 102
background for, 229
compared with lock screen, 55–62
context menu for, 106
default apps on, 60
moving apps to, 100–101
settings for, 227–229
swiping on, 48
uses for, 59–62
home screen app grid, 107
home swipe, 61
home view (Drive app), 85
Hotspot quick access setting, 119
I
 
icons
Add Photo, 172
explained, 2

gear, 201
Remember, 2
search, 185
Technical Stuff, 2
Tip, 2
Warning, 2
Identify Songs Playing Nearby setting, 260–261
image view finder, for camera, 206
images
editing, 214–219
screenshots, 249
setting for wallpaper, 229–231
information, viewing for apps, 99–100
Instagram app, 196–198
installing
apps, 95–99
choosing install locations for apps, 99
SIM card, 16–18
social media apps, 191–192
third-party browsers, 189–190
interface, camera, 201–213
Internet quick access setting, 117–118
iPhone, transitioning to Android from, 10
K
 
Keep Notes app, 92, 101
keyboards

emoji, 160
GIF, 161
Google Voice Typing, 163–164
searching with Chrome app using, 183–184
stickers, 161
typing text messages with, 157–161
L
 
landscape orientation, 116
languages, 32–33
Languages & Input setting, 33
last image taken, for camera, 204–205
left swipe gesture, 62
Lens setting, 213
lenses, for cameras, 200
Library view (Photos app), 80–81
living wallpaper, 229–230
location, sending current, 247–248
Location Services, turning on/off, 122
lock screen
accessing, 56–58, 62–65
background for, 229
compared with home screen, 55–62
configuring, 56, 58–59
swiping on, 47
uses for, 56–59
Lock screen option (Google Assistant), 238–239

Locked Folder, 81, 205
locked smartphones, 25–26
long press
defined, 73, 77
for texting, 158
M
 
maintenance and care, 23
Maps app
about, 82–84
sending current location, 247–248
Marketplace (Facebook), 193
Markup tool, 217–218
measuring apps, 249
memory
accessing settings for, 142
storage compared with, 138
Messages app
about, 44, 75, 156–157
blocking senders, 77
closing, 50
copying text messages, 164–165
deleting text messages, 76–77, 164–165
group texting, 165–166
pasting text messages, 164–165
sending texts, 75–76
typing in, 157–164

microphone, searching with Chrome app using, 184
mobile E911 data, 29
mobile hotspot, setting up, 118–119
Month view (Google Calendar), 69
moving apps, 100–102
Multiple Users setting, 41–42
muting, 150–151
My Verizon app, 95
N
 
navigation
about, 43
advanced, 50–52
camera interface, 201–213
double tap gesture, 45–46
gestures on Samsung phones, 45
hold gesture, 46
pinch to zoom, 51
searching, 48–50
standard, 43–50
swiping gesture, 46–48
tap gesture, 44–45
touch interface, 44
using gestures, 50–51
wave gesture, 51–52
to websites, 185–187
near-field communication (NFC), 121

Next button, 237
Night Light setting, 116, 136–138, 257
Night Sight mode, 209
 
911 calls, 29, 180
 
Normal video option (Video mode), 211
notification drawer
gestures for, 58
opening, 114, 177
using, 127–128
notifications
about, 125
configuring, 131–133
disabling, 132–133, 252
receiving, 125–126
setting Do Not Disturb, 133–134
setting sounds, 223–227
silent, 127
swiping, 129–131
using notification drawer, 127–128
O
 
 
1x option, 207–208
 
one-handed mode, 250

Open button, 99
open source, 5, 90
opening
about, 144
camera, 78
Camera app, 199–201
Chrome app, 84, 182–183
context menu for home screen, 106
Drive app, 85
GPay app, 86
Maps app, 82
Messages app, 156
notification drawer, 114, 177
quick access settings, 113
settings menu, 202
organizing apps, 100–102
Outlook notifications, 129–131
P
 
panic button, activating, 178–179
Panorama setting, 211–212
passwords, changing, 63–64
pasting text messages, 164–165
people, assigning ringtones to, 225–226
Personal results option (Google Assistant), 239, 240
Personalize Using App Data setting, 262
Phone app, 91

phones
about, 169
activating, 31–32
contacts, 169–176
emergencies, 177–180
Photo Gallery app, 205
Photo Sphere setting, 212–213
Photos app
about, 79
albums, 79–80
Library view, 80–81
timeline, 80
pinch to zoom, 51
placing widgets, 106–110
Play Movies app, 92–93
Play Music app, 92–93
Play Store app, 95–96
Portrait mode, 209–210
portrait orientation, 116
power button, activating emergency routine using, 56
power cord, 14–15
Power Menu, accessing, 62–63
preinstalled apps, 89–95
Primary category (Gmail app), 72
Promotions category (Gmail app), 72–73
Q
 

quick access screen, editing, 123
quick access settings
about, 113–115, 116–117, 121
airplane mode, 122
auto-rotation, 116
backlight, 115–116
Bluetooth, 118
editing screen, 123
flashlight, 116
GPay, 121–122
Location Services, 122
mobile hotspot, 118–119
ScreenCast, 120
SmartView, 121
Wi-Fi, 117–118
QWERTY keyboard, 157
R
 
ratings, for apps, 97–98
Ratio setting, 204
receiving notifications, 125–126
Recents button, 175
 
“Recommended for you” section (Play Store app), 95
 
recovering email, 74–75
Reddit app, 196

Remember icon, 2
removing widgets, 110–111
resizing widgets, 109
Return key, on GBoard, 158
right swipe gesture, 62
ringtones
assigning to people, 225–226
changing, 224–225
setting custom, 223–227
routines, for Google Assistant, 242–243
S
 
Samsung Free, 9
Samsung phones
about, 6
accessing settings screen on, 59
browser for, 181
Eye Comfort Shield, 136
freeing up space on, 142
gestures on, 61
using gestures on, 45
using SmartView on, 121
Samsung version of Android, 8–9
save location, for camera, 204–205
Screen lock setting, 257
Screen timeout setting, 256–257
ScreenCast

about, 251
sharing content with, 120
screens
about, 55
accessing phone using lock screen, 62–65
lock screen compared with home screen, 55–62
screenshots, 249
search icon, 185
searching
about, 48
for apps, 96
with Chrome app, 183–185
contextual search, 49–50
for email, 74
Google Assistant, 49
secret menus, 46
security, setting up, 38–39
select mode, 77
Select mode (Messages app), 164
selecting
install locations for apps, 99
widgets, 106–110
senders, blocking, 77
sending
current location, 247–248
texts, 75–76
Sensitive Notifications setting, 260
setting(s)

accessing, 135
Adaptive Brightness, 261
Add Users from Lock Screen, 261
Auto-rotate screen, 116, 257
Back Up Using Mobile Data, 262
Battery percentage, 256
for camera, 201–204
custom ringtones, 223–227
customizing, 135–151
Developer Options, 262
Dial pad (DTMF) tones, 256
Do Not Disturb, 133–134
Emergency contacts, 177–178
Emergency Location Service, 258
Find My Device, 258
Flash, 202
Google Assistant, 237–241
Hotspot quick access, 119
Identify Songs Playing Nearby, 260–261
Internet quick access, 117–118
Languages & Input, 33
Lens, 213
Multiple Users, 41–42
Night Light, 116, 136–138, 257
notification sounds, 223–227
Panorama, 211–212
Personalize Using App Data, 262
Photo Sphere, 212–213

quick access
about, 113–115, 116–117, 121
airplane mode, 122
auto-rotation, 116
backlight, 115–116
Bluetooth, 118
editing screen, 123
flashlight, 116
GPay, 121–122
Location Services, 122
mobile hotspot, 118–119
ScreenCast, 120
SmartView, 121
Wi-Fi, 117–118
Ratio, 204
Screen lock, 257
Screen timeout, 256–257
Sensitive Notifications, 260
Show Media Recommendations, 260
Show Wallet, 261
Skip lock screen, 255
Storage, 139–140
Timer, 203–204
Top Shot, 202–203
wallpaper images, 229–231
Wi-Fi, 259–260
Wireless emergency alert, 256
Settings app, 93, 94

setup
about, 31
accessing Wi-Fi, 34–36
activating devices, 31–32
adding Gmail accounts, 36–38
customizing vision settings, 33–34
devices, 31–42
events in Google Calendar, 69
of extras, 39–41
facial recognition, 64–65
favorites, 173
Google Assistant, 39–40, 234–242
languages, 32–33
mobile hotspot, 118–119
multiple users, 41–42
security, 38–39
sharing
albums, 79
with camera, 204–205
content with ScreenCast, 120
Show Media Recommendations setting, 260
Show Wallet setting, 261
shutter button, 185, 208
sidebar menu, 73
sideloading apps, 102–103
silent feature, Apple compared with Android, 10
silent notifications, 127
SIM card

about, 13
installing, 16–18
SIM card removal tool, 16
sizing widgets, 106–110
Skip lock screen setting, 255
Slow Motion option (Video mode), 210
SmartView, 121
Snapseed app, 218–219
Social category (Gmail app), 73
social media
about, 191
Facebook app, 193–195
Instagram app, 196–198
installing apps for, 191–192
Reddit app, 196
TikTok app, 196
using, 192–198
special characters, for text messages, 158–159
stickers, for text messages, 160–161
storage
for devices, 23
memory compared with, 138
Storage setting, 139–140
 
“Suggested for you” section (Play Store app), 96
 
swipe typing, for text messages, 162–163

swiping gesture
about, 46–47
within apps, 48
on home screen, 48
on lock screen, 47
notifications, 129–131
two-finger, 253
for unlocking lock screen, 57
switching
cameras, 78
to one-handed mode, 250
T
 
Tab view (Chrome app), 85
tabs, in Chrome app, 187–189
Tap and zoom feature, 251–252
tap gesture, 44–45
Tap to wake option (Google Assistant), 239, 240
Technical Stuff icon, 2
text messages. See also
Messages app
about, 155
Apple compared with Android, 10
changing notification sounds for, 226–227
deleting, 76–77
sending, 75–76
third-party apps for, 167
typing, 157–164

third-party apps, for texting, 167
third-party browsers, installing, 189–190
Three-day view (Google Calendar), 69
TikTok app, 196
Time Lapse option (Video mode), 211
timeline (Photos app), 80
Timer setting, 203–204
Tint tool, 216–217
Tip icon, 2
tools
Blur, 215–216
Brightness, 115, 216
Contrast, 216
Crop, 215
Markup, 217–218
Tint, 216–217
Warmth, 216–217
Top Shot setting, 202–203
touch interface, 44
transferring data between phones, 35
transitioning from iPhone to Android, 10
Trash folder (Gmail app), 75
turning on/off. See
disabling; enabling
 
2x option, 207–208
 
two-finger swipe, 253

typing text messages, 157–164
U
 
universal serial bus (USB), 14
unlocked smartphones, 25–26
users, setting up multiple, 41–42
Utilities list, 81
V
 
Video mode, 210–211
viewing
app information, 99–100
contacts, 172–173
virtual private network (VPN), 103
vision settings, customizing, 33–34
voice-to-text, for text messages, 163–164
volume buttons
about, 149
muting, 150–151
volume controls
about, 148
contextual, 149–150
volume buttons, 149
W
 

wallpaper, setting images for, 229–231
Wallpaper & style screen, 228
Warmth tool, 216–217
Warning icon, 2
wave gesture, 51–52
websites
Cheat Sheet, 2
Google, 182
Google Photos, 79
navigating to, 185–187
Weekly view (Google Calendar), 69
WhatsApp, 167
widgets
about, 105–106
finding, 105–111
placing, 106–110
removing, 110–111
resizing, 109
selecting, 106–110
sizing, 106–110
Widgets menu, 106
Wi-Fi
accessing, 34–36
turning on/off, 117–118
Wi-Fi service, 28
Wi-Fi setting, 259–260
Wireless emergency alert setting, 256

Y
 
YouTube app, 93
Z
 
zoom, with camera, 207–208

About the Author
J.F. DiMarzio is an IT professional. For the past 30 years, he has
worked in large, enterprise settings such as the U.S. Department
of Defense and Siemens Stromberg-Carlson. For the past 12
years, has worked as a staff software engineer for The Walt
Disney Company. In 2008, he was tapped by Google to test the
yet-to-be-released Android operating system and write the first
book explaining how the new smartphone platform works. Jerome
has authored 15 books on a wide range of IT subjects from
Android and Java to game development and network routing. He
currently resides in sunny Central Florida with his wife and six
children.

Dedication
To Jennifer, Christian, Sophia, Giovanni, Katie, Sarah, and Joe.
Go Sox!

Author’s Acknowledgments
I would like to thank all the people whose hard work made this
book happen — Katharine Dvorak, Elizabeth Stilwell, Kelsey
Baird, Vicki Adang, Jim Minatel, Scott Proctor, and the entire For
Dummies team at Wiley.

Publisher’s Acknowledgments
Acquisitions Editor: Elizabeth Stilwell
Managing Editor: Kelsey Baird
Project Manager and Development Editor: Katharine Dvorak
Technical Editor: Scott Proctor
Production Editor: Saikarthick Kumarasamy
Cover Image: © AYUB KHAN PK/Shutterstock

Take Dummies with you everywhere you
go!
Go to our Website
Like us on Facebook
Follow us on Twitter
Watch us on YouTube
Join us on LinkedIn
Pin us on Pinterest

Subscribe to our newsletter
Create your own Dummies book cover

WILEY END USER LICENSE
AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.

