
Android®
Fully Loaded
Rob Huddleston
Wiley Publishing, Inc.

Android® Fully Loaded
Published by:
Wiley Publishing, Inc.
111 River Street
Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774
www.wiley.com
Copyright © 2011 by Wiley Publishing, Inc.
Published by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published simultaneously in Canada
ISBN: 978-0-470-93002-1
Manufactured in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or
otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of
the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923,
978-750-8400,
fax
978-646-8600,
or
on
the
web
at
www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission
should be addressed to Permissions Department, John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201)
2

748-6011,
fax
(201)
748-6008,
or
online
at
http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
LIMIT OF LIABITLITY/DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY:
THE
PUBLISHER
AND
THE
AUTHOR
MAKE
NO
REPRESENTATIONS
OR
WARRANTIES
WITH
RESPECT TO THE ACCURACY OR COMPLETENESS
OF
THE
CONTENTS
OF
THIS
WORK
AND
SPECIFICALLY
DISCLAIM
ALL
WARRANTIES,
INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION WARRANTIES OF
FITNESS
FOR
A
PARTICULAR
PURPOSE.
NO
WARRANTY MAY BE CREATED OR EXTENDED BY
SALES OR PROMOTIONAL MATERIALS. THE ADVICE
AND STRATEGIES CONTAINED HEREIN MAY NOT BE
SUITABLE FOR EVERY SITUATION. THIS WORK IS
SOLD
WITH
THE
UNDERSTANDING
THAT
THE
PUBLISHER
IS
NOT
ENGAGED
IN
RENDERING
LEGAL, ACCOUNTING, OR OTHER PROFESSIONAL
SERVICES.
IF
PROFESSIONAL
ASSISTANCE
IS
REQUIRED,
THE
SERVICES
OF
A
COMPETENT
PROFESSIONAL
PERSON
SHOULD
BE
SOUGHT.
NEITHER THE PUBLISHER NOR THE AUTHOR SHALL
BE LIABLE FOR DAMAGES ARISING HEREFROM. THE
FACT THAT AN ORGANIZATION OR WEBSITE IS
REFERRED TO IN THIS WORK AS A CITATION AND/
OR
A
POTENTIAL
SOURCE
OF
FURTHER
INFORMATION DOES NOT MEAN THAT THE AUTHOR
OR THE PUBLISHER ENDORSES THE INFORMATION
THE ORGANIZATION OR WEBSITE MAY PROVIDE OR
RECOMMENDATIONS
IT
MAY
MAKE.
FURTHER,
READERS SHOULD BE AWARE THAT INTERNET
WEBSITES
LISTED
IN
THIS
WORK
MAY
HAVE
3

CHANGED OR DISAPPEARED BETWEEN WHEN THIS
WORK WAS WRITTEN AND WHEN IT IS READ.
For general information on our other products and services or
to obtain technical support, please contact our Customer Care
department within the U.S. at (800) 762-2974, outside the
U.S. at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic
formats. Some content that appears in print may not be
available in electronic books. For more information about
Wiley products, please visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2010935567
Trademarks: Wiley, the Wiley Publishing logo, and all related
trademarks,
logos,
and
trade
dress
are
trademarks
or
registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its
affiliates. All other trademarks are the property of their
respective owners. Wiley Publishing, Inc. is not associated
with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
4

Acknowledgments
No technical book should be trusted that does not have a good
tech editor backing up the author, but in the case of this book,
I can say without question that it could not even have been
written without the tech editor, Phil Nickinson. Phil is the
editor at AndroidCentral.com, the online resource for all
things Android and a site that all readers should bookmark
and visit regularly. He is a pretty busy guy, between blogging,
responding to forum posts, traveling to mobile device
launches, and most importantly, taking care of his family.
Editing a book like this was not, I think, high on his list of
things to add to his plate, but he graciously agreed to do so
nonetheless. True, I suspect he only agreed because he and I
are cousins, but whatever the reason, I am in his debt. So my
thanks to Phil and also to Shannon for letting me monopolize
more of her husband’s time and to Mia for letting me make
her daddy busier. Phil also became a father again while we
worked on this book. Welcome to the family, Bella.
Speaking of family, I am as always thankful to Kelley,
Jessica, and Xander for their love and continued support for
my writing and odd schedule. Thanks as well to my mom and
dad for your support and for always being willing to hop on a
plane to visit and help out with the grandkids.
The people at Wiley continue to be a wonderful group with
whom to work. I’ve now had the pleasure to work with
Stephanie McComb on two books, and I look forward to even
more going forward. Thanks for being so kind and supportive,
and for lunch. Kelly Henthorne did a great job editing, and
Debbie
Abshier
and
David
Sechrist
pulled
everything
5

together to produce the beautiful book you hold in your
hands.
6

Credits
Senior Acquisitions Editor
Stephanie McComb
Editorial Director
Robyn B. Siesky
Vice President & Executive Group Publisher
Richard Swadley
Vice President & Executive Publisher
Barry Pruett
Business Manager
Amy Knies
Marketing Manager
Sandy Smith
Production
Editor,
Copy
Editing,
Layout,
Design,
Proofreading, and Indexing
Abshier House
Cover Image
Michael E. Trent
7

About the Author
Rob Huddleston has been developing Web pages and
applications since 1994 and has been an instructor since 1999,
teaching Web and graphic design to thousands of students.
His
clients
have
included
the
U.S.
Bureau
of
Land
Management, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, the
States of California and Nevada, and many other federal, city,
and county agencies; the United States Army and Air Force;
Fortune 500 companies such as AT&T, Bank of America,
Wells Fargo, Safeway, and Coca-Cola; software companies
including Adobe, Oracle, Intuit, and Autodesk; the University
of California, San Francisco State University, and the
University of Southern California; and hundreds of small
businesses and nonprofit agencies, both in the United States
and abroad.
Rob is an adjunct professor in the Interactive Media program
at the Art Institute of California, Sacramento. He is an Adobe
Certified
Instructor,
Certified
Expert,
and
Certified
Developer, serves as an Adobe User Group Manager, and has
been named as an Adobe Community Professional for his
volunteer work answering user questions in online forums. He
also
helps
users
as
an
expert
moderator
on
Adobe’s
Community Help system. Rob lives in Northern California
with his wife and two children.
Rob is the author of XML: Your visual blueprint™for
building expert websites using XML, CSS, XHTML, and
XSLT; HTML, XHTML and CSS: Your visual blueprint™
for
designing
effective
websites;
Master
VISUALLY:
Dreamweaver CS4 and Flash CS4 Professional; ActionScript
8

3: Your visual blueprint™for creating interactive projects in
Flash CS4 Professional; the Adobe Flash Catalyst CS5 Bible,
and Teach Yourself VISUALLY Web Design. You can visit
Rob’s blog at www.robhuddleston.com or follow him on
Twitter at twitter.com/robhuddles.
9

Introduction
Adobe MAX is a conference sponsored by Adobe every year
to bring together developers and designers who work with
Adobe technologies and enable them to learn new techniques,
network with one another, and, in general, get excited about
the company and its products. Of course, the attendees of a
conference like MAX are almost by definition geeks: These
are folks who pay thousands of dollars and in some cases
travel halfway around the world to attend. Like all large
conferences, MAX kicks off every year with a lavishly
produced keynote address, and being a conference populated
primarily by geeks, you should not be surprised to discover
that many attending the keynote use social media networks
like Twitter to breathlessly report every announcement.
I have attended MAX, with a few exceptions, each year since
2005, and have noticed an interesting shift amongst the
attendees during the keynote. Even two years ago, the crowd
would have been lit by an almost unearthly blue glow from all
of the people with open laptops. This year, however, few
laptops were to be seen. This did not signal a shift away from
social media use, but instead a shift in the devices being used.
I would suspect that more people actually tweeted during the
keynote than in the past, simply because more people use
Twitter today than two years ago. The difference was that
almost everyone in the theater was using a mobile phone.
MAX itself has recognized this shift: There is no question that
the primary focus of the event is mobile development. A great
10

many of the sessions focus on developing for mobile devices,
and the conference’s main sponsors have shifted from Internet
firms like Yahoo to mobile providers. In fact, the two biggest
sponsors at MAX this year were Motorola and BlackBerry,
both of whom actually gave away phones to attendees;
Motorola in fact went so far as to give every person at the
conference — close to 5,000 in all — a new Droid 2.
MAX is something of a microcosm, but in many ways, it
really reflects a tectonic shift in the bigger world as well.
Even five years ago, the term “smartphone” was still new; if
you had one, you were likely to be the focus of a lot of
discussion. Today, the discussion has shifted from “is that a
smartphone?” to “what smartphone is that?”
Smartphones have created a massive shift in how we interact
online. Today, most people visiting the top sites on the Web
still use desktop and laptop computers, but that trend is
quickly changing. In fact, estimates are that by 2013,
smartphones actually will surpass traditional computers to
become the primary means by which we get online.
Smartphone technology also has opened up a new world for
developers, providing an exciting and rapidly expanding
market for applications built for mobile devices, providing
you, the end user, a seemingly limitless supply of apps that
will increase your productivity by enabling you to check
e-mail, read and edit documents, view presentations, and
much more — all on your phone. At least as many apps exist
to decrease your productivity as well: No shortage of games
exist to allow you to kill time and drain your battery while
having fun.
11

I assume you are buying this book because you recently
bought an Android-based smartphone. You hold in your hand
a miniature computer; a computer so far advanced from those
that took us to the moon that it is almost unfair to label both
with that same term, computer. Certainly, referring to it as a
phone at all is even misleading.
In some ways, carrying a device with that kind of speed and
capabilities can be a bit daunting. Hopefully, reading through
this book will help strip away some of that mystery, will help
you better understand your new device, and will enable you to
truly leverage all that it can do.
Most of all, please enjoy your new device.
12

Part I: The Basics
Chapter 1: Android Basics
The Skim
Which Version of Android Do I Have? - Setting Up Your
Android Phone - Getting a Google Account - Synching Your
Phone with Your Accounts - Accessories - The Home Screen
- The Applications Launcher - The Notification Bar - Phone
Settings - Wireless and Network Settings - Ringtones -
Silencing Your Phone - Orientation and the Accelerometer -
Lock Your Phone - Storage - Text Input - Phone Information
- Charging
About a month ago, I took my parents to see “Star Trek: The
Exhibition” at the Sacramento Aerospace Museum. The
exhibition is a museum piece celebrating the iconic sci-fi
series. In addition to the normal array of props, costumes, and
ship models, it has a series of displays on how Star Trek
impacted real-world science and technology. Although things
like transporters and warp drives are, unfortunately, likely
impossible, Star Trek did directly inspire developers at
Motorola in the creation of the first cell phones. Characters on
the show also carried around small, portable computers called
PADDs. As visionary as the show was, however, even they
did
not
envision
a
world
in
which
those
portable
communicators would merge with PADDs into a single
device.
13

In many ways, we are at the dawn of a new age in computers.
Our children will marvel at the thought of carrying around a
device that can only make calls. My kids, in fact, are already
used to the idea that Daddy’s phone can take pictures, provide
voice-guided directions, and, most importantly in their 8- and
4-year-old minds, allow them to play games.
Modern mobile devices really are nothing less than portable
computers with all of the power — and complexity — that
that implies. This chapter is designed to get you started using
your Android device and understanding its key features.
Which Version of Android Do I Have?
Android is an operating system like Windows or Mac OS.
Well, honestly, it’s a bit more like iOS, which runs the
iPhone, iPod touch, and iPad, because like iOS, Android has
been specifically designed to run on mobile devices. Today,
dozens of smartphones run on Android, as do other types of
devices, including tablet computers, e-readers — even
microwave ovens.
Like all software, Android has undergone a series of
revisions, with Google pushing out new versions of the
software on a regular basis. Also like all software, each
version is referred to by both a formal version number and a
less formal code name or nickname. To date, all of the
nicknames for Android have been pastries and other tasty
snacks. (Google must not feed its developers well.)
The first publicly released version of Android, version 1.1,
was made available on February 9, 2009. First-generation
14

Android-based phones, such as the G1 for T-Mobile, initially
were based on version 1.1.
In April 2009, Google released Android 1.5, otherwise known
as Cupcake. It was followed in September 2009 by Donut, or
version 1.6. Both of these updates introduced exciting new
features, such as a video camera and improved market
experience.
A little over a month after the release of Donut came Éclair,
Android 2.0, which very quickly was followed by 2.0.1. Also
code-named Éclair, version 2.1 followed shortly thereafter in
January 2010. Éclair added a ton of new features, all of which
required significant improvements in the hardware on the
phones running it, which is the polite way of saying that
Éclair represented the point at which Google left early
adopters, like myself, behind, as first-generation phones like
my G1 would not be able to support 2.0 or future updates.
As of this writing, the most recent version of Android is
version 2.2, nicknamed FroYo. For those of us who aren’t as
obsessed with sweets as the folks at Google, FroYo is the
trade name for frozen yogurt. FroYo increases the speed and
memory capabilities of Android and adds some exciting new
features such as the ability to store applications on your
device’s memory card, and USB tethering, which allows you
to use your phone’s 3G data connection as a wireless hotspot
for your computer’s laptop. The market has seen a rush in
new applications built specifically for FroYo, including
Adobe’s Flash Player, which enables those with this version
of the OS to surf the actual Web.
15

In addition to these official versions, several so-called
“flavors” of Android are available, offered by the various
device manufacturers. Currently, four such flavors of Android
exist. Vanilla or “stock” Android is the version officially
offered by Google and runs on Google’s own Nexus One
phone, the Motorola Droid, and a few others. Devices with
this flavor often receive major upgrades such as the latest
version of the operating system before those with the other
flavors. HTC, one of the leading manufacturers of Android
devices, has a flavor known as Sense that adds a lot of custom
home screen widgets. The Droid Eris, Droid Incredible, and
Evo devices currently ship with HTC Sense. The other
leading device manufacturer, Motorola, installs a custom
version on many of its phones, including the Droid X and
Droid 2. Finally, Samsung offers TouchWiz as its customized
flavor of Android on many of its devices.
Setting Up Your Android Phone
When you first purchase a new phone, the salesperson likely
will take you through the process of setting up your phone.
Most of the steps are things that she needs to do, such as
creating your account with the wireless provider. The final
few steps, however, will be done by you. The most important
of these is either setting up a Google account or logging into
your existing e-mail and social networking accounts.
Getting a Google Account
You need an account with Google in order to use most of the
services available on Android. (Don’t worry, you can still use
a different kind of e-mail if you want.) The account is free
16

and takes only a few moments to set up. If you already have a
Google account, you can skip this section and move on to the
fun stuff that follows.
You will be able to set up a Google account directly on your
phone when you get it, but you can also do it in advance on
your computer. Go to Google’s home page, and move your
mouse over the seemingly blank area at the top of your screen
to make the site’s additional menu items appear. On the
top-right corner, you’ll see a link that says “Sign in,” which
you can click to go to the page that allows you to create your
account. On this page, click the “Create an account now” link
to proceed. The sign-up form is fairly straightforward; unless
you’ve been living on Mars for the last decade or so, I’m sure
you’ve filled out a dozen or so forms like this before. You
need to provide a current e-mail address and create a
password. Google has a cool little widget that tells you how
strong your password is; because this password will be the
gatekeeper for all of your Google information, including a lot
of data you will get from your phone, you want to make it as
strong as possible.
The next set of options on the form isn’t terribly relevant to
setting up your phone. Personally, I do use Google as my
desktop browser’s home page, but nothing bad will happen if
you elect not to. Your location and birthday are in there, as far
as I can figure, so that Google can collect demographic data
on its customers. I’ve had a Google account for many years,
and they’ve never sent so much as a card on my birthday. The
word verification is needed to make it more difficult for
spammers to create accounts. You can read the “Terms of
Service” (TOS) if you want, but I suspect that it is just a
bunch of legal mumbo jumbo; I know I’ve never read a TOS
17

in my life. Click “I accept. Create my account,” and you’re
done.
What Makes a Good Password?
A good, strong password protects your data in the same way
a good, strong deadbolt protects your house. The first rule in
making a good password is to pick something that has
nothing at all to do with you personally. A very common
method of trying to get someone’s password is a method
known as “social engineering.” Many people pick passwords
that relate to their personal life in some way — a child’s or
spouse’s name, the name of a pet, an anniversary date or
birthday, or something similar. Keep in mind that in these
days of hyper-connectivity, a person doesn’t need to know
you to get this data, as it can be gleaned from Facebook,
other social networking sites, or even by simply doing a
search on your name. If the obvious passwords don’t work,
the next thing the hacker will try to do is known as a
brute-force attack. I’m sure you’ve seen movies in which the
barbarian hordes try to beat down the castle gates with a
battering ram, the theory being that even the strongest gates
eventually will crack if you hit them repeatedly enough
times. Brute-force password attacks work on the same
theory, only with fewer sweaty, foul-smelling soldiers and
18

less blood. Instead of a battering ram, the hacker uses a
computer program that simply keeps entering passwords
until it stumbles across the right one. Although a truly
determined hacker might try every possible combination of
letters, most will instead rely on dictionaries, starting with
“a” and going through “zythum,” or something along those
lines. The best defense against a brute-force attack is to
make sure that your password is not a real word at all, so
that it won’t appear in that dictionary list. Longer passwords
are better than short ones; it’s also better if you use some
lowercase and uppercase letters and use the character keys
on your keyboard as well. If the dictionary attack fails, the
hacker might actually try using all combinations of these
characters, but some straightforward math reveals how
longer passwords help defend against this. There are
308,915,776 possible combinations of the 26 letters in the
English alphabet, but if you add in mixed cases, numbers,
and
the
other
characters,
that
number
jumps
to
646,990,183,449 possibilities. Add just two more characters,
and the number of possibilities shoots all the way up to
5,595,818,096,650,401. The point here is that it is going to
be a lot harder to hack a password when it is one of several
quadrillion choices, rather than one of several hundred
million.
Synching Your Phone with Your Account
After you have your phone unpackaged and charged and
you’ve created your Google account, you can synchronize the
two. This will give your phone access to the same data as you
have on your computer; for example, if you choose to use
Gmail, Google’s e-mail service, you will be able to use it
19

from
either
your
phone
or
your
computer.
This
synchronization is very easy: simply enter your Google
username, which will be the e-mail address you used when
you registered for the account, and your password into your
phone and then give the service a minute or so to do its
magic. Note that some people who have had accounts with
Google for a long time might have a distinct username, rather
than an e-mail address.
Accessories
With Android sales rising rapidly, more and more accessories
are becoming available all the time. Following is a list of
some of the most essential accessories to consider purchasing.
You can find many of these accessories at the same store
where you purchased your phone or online at sites such as
www.androidcentral.com.
• Car charger (see Figure 1.1). You are likely going to
want to invest in a car charger to keep the phone
charged
while
you
drive.
This
is
particularly
important if you’re going to use Navigation, the
turn-by-turn GPS directions application (see Chapter
6 for details on Navigation). Navigation is one of the
truly awesome applications available, particularly
because it is free, but it will drain your battery very
quickly, so I always make sure to keep my phone
plugged in when I use Navigation. Android devices
charge via a USB port, so car chargers may be
interchangeable between them. Unfortunately, almost
all current devices have moved from a mini USB port
to a smaller and appropriately named micro USB
20

port, so my G1 charger would not work with my
Droid X, but the Droid X charger works fine with my
wife’s LG Ally Android phone.
• Screen protectors (see Figure 1.2). Your screen really
is your phone, and if it becomes too scratched or
damaged, you will not be able to use your phone at
all.
Thus,
invest
immediately
in
some
screen
protectors. These clear plastic sheets stick to your
screen and absorb all of the scratches and a lot of the
other abuse your phone is likely to endure. When one
becomes too scratched, simply peel it off and apply
another. Just be sure to carefully clean the screen
before applying the protector, or else you will end up
with unsightly bubbles.
• Headphones (see Figure 1.3) or Bluetooth device (see
Figure 1.4). In 2009, California adopted a law
making it illegal to talk on your phone while driving
unless you used a hands-free device of some kind.
Many states and other jurisdictions are following suit,
so this accessory can be seen more as a legal
requirement. Keep in mind, though, that you will not
only be talking on your phone, as your Android
device also will be your MP3 player, podcast player,
in-car navigation system, and much more. All of
these require that you be able to hear the phone,
which in turn requires a headset or Bluetooth device.
The Droid X includes a standard headphone jack, so
any headphones you already own for your MP3
player or other devices will work, at least for
listening to music and movies. However, you will
need some other device — likely a Bluetooth headset
— in order to talk into your phone without holding it.
21

• Car mount (see Figure 1.5). This device allows you to
mount your phone on your dashboard, which can be
very helpful when using Navigation and when using
the phone as an alternative to your car stereo. When
you insert your phone into the car mount, it switches
to a special car mode. For more details on Car mode
and using the car mount, see Chapter 7. Your car
mount may include a car charger.
• Extra storage (see Figure 1.6). Most phones today
include the ability to add storage with a MicroSD
memory card. As the name implies, these cards are
similar to the larger SD card you already may be
using for your digital camera, only smaller. Your
device will almost certainly have a MicroSD card in
it when you purchase, but you should check to see
whether you can replace it with one with a larger
capacity.
• Protective case (see Figure 1.7). A protective case
may reduce damage if the phone is dropped. I have a
soft gel that wraps around the back of the phone and
has the advantage of being very easy to remove,
which is handy because I cannot place the phone in
the car mount with the case on.
• Micro USB cable (see Figure 1.8). One of these
cables should have come with your phone, but as you
will need this cable to charge your phone as well as
connect it to your computer to transfer files, you may
want one or two extras. I keep one plugged into the
wall charger, another plugged into the computer, and
a third in the bag with my laptop, thus ensuring that I
will be able to plug my phone in just about anywhere.
22

Figure 1.1
A car charger with the micro USB connector
23

Figure 1.2
A set of screen protectors; be sure to buy a brand designed
specifically for your model of phone.
24

Figure 1.3
A standard set of headphones that I use to listen to my phone
Figure 1.4
A Bluetooth headset
25

Figure 1.5
A car mount for the Droid X
Figure 1.6
26

The 16GB MicroSD card, on the left, came preinstalled in my
Droid X. The 8GB SD card on the right is shown for scale.
Figure 1.7
A soft gel case, one of many styles available
Figure 1.8
A micro USB cable
27

The Home Screen
The home screen in Android is like the desktop on your
computer (see Figure 1.9). It provides a place for you to place
shortcuts to your favorite and most-used applications. You
can also customize your home screen with widgets for
applications that display the time, up-to-the-minute stock
quotes or sports scores, the song you currently are listening
to, Google search, and much more. You can set the
background
to
anything
you
like.
See
Chapter
2
for
information on adding shortcuts and widgets to your home
screen.
You can access the home screen any time on your phone by
pressing the Home button. All Android phones include a
button on the phone itself, usually with an icon representing a
house, to go to the home screen. Figure 1.10 shows this
button on a Google G1 phone, and Figure 1.11 shows it on a
Motorola Droid X, and Figure 1.12 on the Motorola Cliq.
The home screen actually is composed of several different
screens. Older phones such as the G1 had three screens, while
newer models such as the Droid X have as many as seven,
depending on the flavor of Android your device runs. Each of
these screens works the same as each of the others, providing
a place to put shortcuts and widgets. You can move between
screens by sliding your finger to the right or left. Some
phones also provide small icons you can use to quickly access
your other screens.
See Chapter 3 for more details on customizing and working
with your home screen.
28

Figure 1.9
The default main home screen on the Droid X
29

Figure 1.10
The Home button on the G1
Figure 1.11
The Home button on the Droid X
30

Figure 1.12
The Home button on the Cliq
The Applications Launcher
You are likely to have more applications than can fit on your
home screen, so Android provides the Applications Launcher
to store the rest of them. On most phones, the launcher can be
accessed by tapping the button found at the bottom of the
screen (see Figure 1.13). The launcher automatically lists all
of your installed applications alphabetically. You can scroll
through them by simply sliding your finger up on the screen.
Touch an application to launch it. Unlike the home screen, the
launcher does not provide any customization, so you cannot
rearrange or even rename applications.
The Notification Bar
The top of your Android screen is the Notification Bar, an
area where the operating system and applications give you
alerts and let you know what is going on. One side of the bar
31

is reserved for applications, and the other is an area for
applications to run. Table 1.1 shows some of the more
common icons you will find on the bar. Note that you will not
see these icons all of the time, and some of them will
occasionally show up while a process is running, so unless
you happen to glance at your screen at the right moment, you
may not see it at all. Also, you may install additional
applications that add their own notification icons.
If you need to see details for your notifications, you can pull
the
Notification
Bar
down.
Simply
press
your
finger
anywhere on the bar and drag down to expand it to fit your
screen. Depending on the applications you have running, you
should see details of the notifications, such as the number of
applications that need updating or the number of unread
e-mail messages you have waiting.
32

33

Table 1.1
Common Android notification Icons
Figure 1.13
The Applications Launcher
34

Phone Settings
This is an area where you can customize much of the
functionality on the phone, very similar to the way you can
use the Windows Control Panel to customize your PC.
On most phones, you can access the settings by pressing your
phone’s Menu button while on the home screen (see Figure
1.14). Settings is also an installed application, available in the
Applications Launcher. When you dig into specific settings,
you can use your phone’s Back button to return to the
previous screen.
The precise options available in the settings will vary slightly
from one phone to the next and even from one carrier to
the next, but in general, they contain the same basic groups of
settings, as shown in Table 1.2.
Other devices may include additional settings. For example,
the Droid X also includes an HDMI settings screen for
connecting your device to a high-definition television or
projector. See Chapter 9 for more details on this feature.
Verizon includes a feature on its service plans called Backup
Assistant to help back up your phone’s data, so Verizon’s
phones also include a settings widget for it.
35

Table 1.2
Settings Categories
36

Figure 1.14
Getting to Settings from the home screen
Wireless and Network Settings
Your phone has a wide variety of controls to deal with
wireless connectivity. You can access these controls from
your phone’s Settings application. See the previous section
37

for details on getting to the settings, but when there, select the
first option: Wireless & Networks.
The first option in this screen turns Airplane mode on or off,
which disables all connections into and out of your phone (see
Figure 1.15). As its name implies, it is designed for when you
are in an airplane. Airplane mode is important because in the
United States, it is illegal to have your phone turned on and
potentially transmitting data while the plane you are in is in
flight. Although the actual science behind whether or not a
phone could interfere with a plane and bring it down is still a
matter of debate, the law is clear. Generally, your phone
needs to be completely powered off during takeoff and until
the plane reaches 10,000 feet and then again once the plane
descends below 10,000 feet until it lands. Between those
times, however, you can use your phone to listen to music,
play games, or watch movies — any of the activities you can
do without data connections. By the way, if a flight attendant
tells you to turn off your phone even above 10,000 feet and
even when it is in Airplane mode, I would suggest that you do
so. It really is not worth having to spend your time talking to
Homeland Security when you land.
The next setting available is a simple toggle that enables you
to turn Wi-Fi on or off. When I purchased my first Android
phone, the Google G1, I asked the T-Mobile salesman what
the heck 3G was, because it seemed to be one of those terms
that people like to throw around but actually have no idea
what it really is. I don’t honestly think he did, either, but he
gave me a plausible answer nonetheless: 3G provides, in his
words, “high-speed-like connections to the phone.” What
does “high-speed-like” mean, exactly? Well, in short, it
means that you are not getting actual high-speed Internet
38

access, but if you are old enough to remember surfing the
Web on 56K modems, it is not quite that slow. In practice, it
turns out to be somewhere in between most of the time.
However, your phone does not have to use 3G at all if you do
not want it to. Instead, if you are within range of a Wi-Fi
connection, you can switch over to that and get true high
speed. This also can be nice if you have, for example, an old
G1 phone that is no longer connected to a wireless provider’s
plan. Using Wi-Fi, you can still surf the Internet, play games,
listen to music, and download new applications. Thanks to
this, my old phone has now become a gaming device for the
kids.
Tidbit
3G is all the rage right now for people marketing mobile
devices. If you watch TV at all, you likely have seen the
commercials by AT&T and Verizon in which they each try
to claim that they have more or better or faster 3G coverage.
However, some inquiring minds might wonder whether there
was ever a 1G or 2G. The answer, in short, is yes. 3G is
defined, rather dryly, by Wikipedia as “International Mobile
Telecommunications-2000 (IMT — 2000), better known as
3G or 3rd Generation, as a generation of standards for
39

mobile phones and mobile telecommunications services
fulfilling
specifications
by
the
International
Telecommunication Union.” So 3G actually stands for “3rd
Generation,” which, of course, means that there must have
been a 1st and 2nd generation. 1G was, in fact, the mobile
technology used by the first mobile phones in the 1980s. It is
worth noting, however, that the 1G moniker was applied
only to these phones in retrospect after 2G was adopted in
the early 1990s. Neither was really exciting enough to be
worth advertising about, which is why 3G was the first one
that anyone ever heard about. 4G, by the way, already is
being rolled out by Sprint, with Verizon to follow in 2011.
T-Mobile has a pseudo-4G service called HSPA+.
To connect to a Wi-Fi network, you need to not only turn
Wi-Fi on, but you also need to tell your phone that you want
to connect to a network by selecting Wi-Fi. These settings
display all of the networks in range of your phone and their
relative signal strength. Figure 1.16 shows the networks
available at my house. The Serenity network is my home
Wi-Fi, and you can see I have a very strong signal but that the
network is secure. The others are, I assume, my neighbors’
networks. If I select a secure network to which I am not
connected, I will be prompted to enter the key code for that
network. Assuming I enter the correct code, my phone will
connect to that network and then remember it, automatically
connecting any time it comes in range. When I select a
network to which I am connected, I can see status information
for that network. Remembered networks also will display on
the main list of networks even if they are not in range. Press
and hold on a network and you’ll get an option to “forget” it.
40

Press your phone’s Back button to return to the Wireless &
Network Settings screen, where you can enable Bluetooth and
configure the settings using the next two controls on the main
Wireless Settings screen. In order to use a Bluetooth headset,
you need to enter its name, although if you select the Scan for
Devices control, your phone automatically will discover the
headset. See Chapter 4 for more details on setting up and
using Bluetooth.
Many
corporate
networks
allow
employees
to
access
protected internal network documents using a Virtual Private
Network (VPN). Assuming you have proper access to a VPN,
you can use the VPN settings screen, accessible from the
main Wireless & Network Settings screen to configure your
connection. If you do not know how to connect to your VPN,
contact your company’s IT department.
The Mobile Networks settings allow you to control what
happens when you leave your carrier provider’s coverage
area. Be aware that many providers charge handsomely for
the privilege of using your phone outside their coverage area.
In 2009, I had the opportunity to teach a class on Grand
Cayman island and discovered that my carrier at the time was
going to charge me more than $1 per minute just to have my
phone on and connected to some foreign network. That cost
did not include the cost of making any calls. Data charges
were even worse, at $1.50 per megabyte. The Web is full of
horror stories of people traveling abroad and returning home
to cell phone bills in the thousands of dollars. You can avoid
these charges by setting your phone to the Home only option
in the settings. When I was in the Caymans, I kept my phone
in Airplane mode, just to be on the safe side.
41

Figure 1.15
The phone with Airplane mode enabled. The signal indicator
displays an airplane when this mode is enabled.
42

Figure 1.16
The Wi-Fi networks available at my house
Ringtones
Ringtones can be a highly personal and, of course, highly
annoying, feature of your phone. Android phones allow you
to set a default ringtone from one of about a few dozen
choices out of the box. Later, when you have music uploaded
43

to your phone, you can use those songs as your ringtone,
which is discussed in Chapter 7. You also can set specific
ringtones for specific people, which is covered in Chapter 3.
For now, we want to look at setting a default ringtone.
In the main Settings screen, select Sound & Display. Then
select Phone ringtone. A list of the default ringtones will
display. Touch each in turn to listen to it. When you find one
you like, tap OK. Back on the Sound & Display Settings
screen, you can set the volume of the ringtone using Ringer
volume; simply slide your finger along the slider to increase
or decrease the volume.
Another important default sound is the Notification ringtone,
which is the sound that plays whenever your phone or an
application wants to let you know that something is
happening. Like the call ringtone, you can select from a list of
default notification sounds, or you can further customize it
using third-party applications.
Silencing Your Phone
Although I am sure that you have never forgotten to turn off
your ringer when sitting in an important meeting, you, of
course, know people who have. On Android, you have a few
methods by which you can silence your phone. The easiest
method, only available on most (but not all) newer devices, is
to use the slider on the phone’s lock screen (see Figure
1.17).The easiest way to get to the lock screen is to press the
power button once to dim the phone and then again to wake
it. (Don’t worry, you’re not actually turning it off.)
44

If your phone is not already asleep, you can go into the Sound
& Display settings and tap the first option: Silent mode. A
quicker method, though, is available anywhere on your
phone: press and hold the power button for 2–3 seconds. On
the Droid X, this button is located on top of the phone. Other
older models may use the End Call button (if there is one).
You will see a menu appear that enables you to silence your
phone or, if it is already silenced, turn the sound back on.
This menu also allows you to quickly enter and exit Airplane
mode.
Phones that are running Android 2.1 or below can be silenced
by pressing the volume-down button repeatedly, which cycles
through the different volume levels (the Droid X has 15 of
them), through vibrate mode, and finally to silent mode. This
function was removed in Android 2.2.
Newer phones such as the Droid X include a great feature
known
as
the
Smart
Sensor
to
help
keep
you
from
embarrassing yourself by leaving the ringer on when you do
not mean to. These settings are located at the very bottom of
the Sound & Display settings. Unfortunately, neither of these
settings is clearly explained on the phone. The first,
Double-Tap to Silence, enables you to quickly silence the
ringtone when a call comes in by double-tapping. It does not
completely free you from the glares of your boss and
co-workers, because the phone will likely begin ringing
before you realize a call is coming in, but it will be the fastest
way to shut the thing up. The second, Smart Profile: Face
Down to Vibrate, lets you simply flip the phone over on its
face to put it in vibration mode when an alert or call comes in.
45

Figure 1.17
Silencing the phone from the Lock screen
Orientation and the Accelerometer
The accelerometer is one of the coolest features of modern
smartphones. Essentially, it is a device inside that phone that
knows which direction the phone is moving. Some pretty cool
games rely on the accelerometer, but so does a basic function
46

of the phone. Although the normal way most people hold a
phone lends itself to a portrait orientation, in which the screen
is taller than it is wide, the accelerometer can let the phone
reorient itself when you turn it in your hand, so that even if
you hold it sideways, everything will still be right-side up.
Although
this
has
an
obvious
use
when
watching
a
wide-screen movie or video, it can often be helpful when
simply reading a Web page or e-mail. I honestly can’t think of
a good reason to turn this off, but if you really want to, you
can do so in the Screen & Display settings.
Lock Your Phone
When you do not use your phone for more than a few
minutes, it will save battery life by turning off the screen.
Different devices have different ways of waking it back up,
mostly involving pressing one of the buttons, generally
Home, on the phone. When you wake up the phone, you will
need to unlock it by sliding the Unlock button (see Figure
1.18).
You always have to consider the possibility of losing your
phone, or even just setting out somewhere where others could
get into it, say on your desk at work. Android 2.2 introduces
several new ways to security lock your phone. If you would
like to prevent unauthorized use, you can lock the screen so
that whenever you turn it back on, you need to enter a special
pattern. You configure this feature by going into the Location
& Security settings and then scrolling down and selecting
Screen lock.
47

Figure 1.18
Unlocking the phone
Securing with a Pattern
From the Security settings, if necessary select Security lock
type and then Pattern lock. If you use the pattern, you are
presented with a screen that provides instructions. When you
click Next, you see an example of what you need to do, which
48

involves drawing something that connects at least four of the
dots. When you click Next again, you can draw your own
pattern. Click Continue, and you will have to draw your
pattern again to make sure you know what it is. When you
click Confirm, you will be taken back to the Settings screen.
From here, you can set the Security lock timer, so you can
control whether you need to enter the pattern every time the
monitor is off or only when the phone has been idle, with the
screen off, for a set period of time.
The next time your phone’s screen locks, you will need to
provide the pattern again to unlock it. Should you decide at
some point to remove this feature, return to the Settings
screen and deselect the Security lock pattern option. Note that
you will have to provide your pattern again in order to turn
this feature off.
Tip
Your phone gives you five attempts at the pattern. After that,
it locks itself down for 30 seconds. When this timeout is
finished, you will see a “Forgot pattern?” button. Selecting
this brings up a screen that allows you to unlock your phone
by entering your Google username and password. When
entered correctly, your phone will unlock and take you right
49

to the pattern screen where you can create a new pattern that
you will, at least hopefully, remember this time.
Securing with a Passcode
The Droid X and other devices with Android 2.2 enable you
to use a password instead of a pattern to lock the phone. You
access the password settings using the same process as
outlined previously for the pattern, but selecting Security &
Location, Security Lock, Security Lock Type, and finally
Passcode Lock. You are presented with a numeric grid that
you can use to enter your passcode, which must be at least
four digits. Type in the code you want to use and select the
check mark in the lower-left corner. You need to enter the
code a second time to confirm it. Then the next time your
phone locks, you need to enter the passcode to unlock it.
Storage
You can use the MicroSD card as additional storage for the
data on your phone. By default, any pictures or videos you
take with the phone’s camera will be stored on the card, as
will application data such as your contacts and high scores on
your games. If your device is running at least Android 2.2,
you can even store some applications themselves on the card,
which is a great feature as older phones were often very
limited in the number of applications you could install simply
because the phone’s internal storage was limited.
Every phone has a slightly different place to insert the
MicroSD card, so you need to read the manual that came with
your phone to find it (see Figure 1.19). If you are the type
50

who likes to throw the manual away, unread, the very second
you open the box, then you can find instructions online. Be
aware that every phone has a limit as to how big of a card it
can read, so be sure to check that before you waste money on
a card that is too big for your phone.
After you have the card in your phone, you can transfer files
to and from your computer. You simply need to plug the USB
cable that came with your phone into a standard USB jack on
your computer. You should see an icon appear on the
Notification Bar telling you that the USB is connected. If you
have it enabled, you also will hear the notification sound.
Then pull down the Notification Bar from the top of the
screen and select the USB Connection notification.
Tip
You should avoid simply unplugging your phone from the
USB cord when it is connected to the computer and using
the USB Storage option, as this might cause the files on the
card to become corrupt. Instead, you should eject the USB
drive from your computer and then remount the smart card
on your phone. The process of ejecting the drive differs
depending on the operating system of your computer, but on
most modern versions of Windows, you can right-click the
51

USB icon on your task tray and select Eject. On a Mac, you
generally can drag the drive’s icon to the trash can. On your
phone, you should go back to the same USB Settings menu
you used to mount the drive originally and select Unmount.
On the Droid X, you have four options as to how your device
should
connect
to
your
computer
(see
Figure
1.20).
Traditionally, you attach a smartphone to a computer and
mount the SD card as a USB drive so that you can transfer
files. This is a long-established technology and is widely
supported across a wide range of devices, from desktop and
laptop computers to modern car stereos and more. The
downside to this system, though, is that while you have the
card mounted on the computer, the device itself cannot read
it, so for example, you would be unable to listen to music or
view pictures stored on the card via the phone while you have
it mounted. The Droid X supports this with its USB Mass
Storage mode. However, the Droid X and a few other newer
phones also support a new method, called PC mode, that
actually allows for two-way communication, so both your
computer and your phone retain full access to the card. The
Windows Media Sync mode is intended to streamline
synchronizing media files, such as music, between your
computer and your device. Finally, Charge Only simply lets
your phone know that it is plugged in to charge the battery
and that you do not intend to transfer files. This mode can be
helpful when you plug the phone into a computer in a tightly
restricted office environment that might disallow installing
the necessary drivers or transferring files to your device.
At this point, if you are using Windows, you will get a dialog
box on your machine asking how you want to deal with the
new drive that suddenly appeared, because your computer
52

may see your phone as an additional hard drive. The Droid X,
when connected to a Windows 7 computer, displays a special
Control Panel window that provides information about the
phone and links to tasks such as synching media and
transferring files. I generally select the Open folder to view
files option to open Windows Explorer, at which point I can
simply drag files from my computer’s drive to the phone or
vice versa. The procedure is essentially the same if you are on
a Mac.
Figure 1.19
The Droid X MicroSD card is accessed by removing the back
cover, then the battery.
53

Figure 1.20
Choosing the mode to use to connect to the computer
Text Input
While
some
Android-based
phones
include
a
physical
keyboard, all have an onscreen keyboard you can use. Typing
on an onscreen keyboard can be a challenge, but after you get
used to it, I think you’ll find it fairly easy to use. My G1 was
54

one of those phones that had a physical keyboard, and yet by
the end of the time I used it, I found that I relied on the
onscreen keyboard at least as often as I used the physical one.
The Language & keyboard settings screen provides you with
some options to control your keyboard. From the main
Settings screen, tap Language & keyboard, which will display
the Text settings.
Multitouch Keyboard
The Droid X ships with two possible text input methods: the
multitouch keyboard or Swype. The default multitouch
keyboard functions as a simple onscreen keyboard that will
appear automatically whenever you are in a text field of some
kind. You can select the arrow key in the lower-right corner
for Shift, or the key below it to display numbers and special
characters. Additional characters are available by tapping the
Alt key.
The Text settings screen does provide a few additional
settings for the multitouch keyboard. You can turn on
vibration
and
sound
for
keypresses
and
enable
auto-capitalization and auto-punctuation, both of which will
save you a considerable number of taps when entering longer
blocks of text. The keyboard also includes suggestions for
words as you type and auto-correction.
If your phone has a physical keyboard, the onscreen keyboard
will likely not appear if you have the physical keyboard out,
so you need to be sure to keep the phone collapsed if you
want to use the onscreen keyboard.
55

Swype
The other input method provided by default on the Droid X is
Swype, an application that greatly simplifies inputting text
into your phone. You can enable Swype by selecting it as the
input method.
Swype takes some getting used to, and you will need to
practice a bit to fully get the hang of things. After you have it
figured out, I suspect you will love it. Swype allows you to
trace paths across the keyboard to spell words, rather than
having to tap each letter individually (see Figure 1.21). As
you trace the path, the software guesses what letters you wish
to use and from that, guesses the word you are trying to spell.
Saying that Swype is guessing might imply that it is not very
accurate, but in fact, you will be surprised at how often it
guesses correctly. When Swype is unsure, it prompts you with
choices for words it thought you might be spelling.
Tip
The Swype keyboard includes a quick, hands-on tutorial on
its use. Long-press the key in the lower-left corner of the
keyboard to display a Tips screen and then select Tutorial to
56

access it. The Tutorial should take about 5 minutes to
complete, and will show you how to do pretty much
everything you need to do with the keyboard, along with
allowing you to practice as you go. I found that I was quite
comfortable
using
Swype
almost
immediately
after
completing the tutorial.
As of this writing, the Droid X comes with Swype
preinstalled. However, Swype should be available on an
ever-increasing number of devices as time goes on, so if your
phone does not yet support it, keep checking the Market and
online blogs such as the one at http://androidcentral.com for
details on its availability.
57

Figure 1.21
Tracing the word Google on the Swype keyboard
Phone Information
The main Settings page also includes an About Phone page.
From here, you can check to see whether you are eligible to
upgrade to a new version of Android, to check your phone’s
58

current status, and to find out the model number of your
phone and which version of Android you are running.
Charging
An unfortunate reality of all smart phones is that they tend to
have a much shorter battery life than traditional mobile
phones. Although each generation of smartphones can remain
unplugged longer, you should plan to keep your phone
plugged in as much as possible. You have three primary ways
you can charge your phone: a wall socket, car charger, and
USB. Your phone will have come with a wall charger, so
simply plug it into any standard outlet and plug the other end
into your phone. The same applies to the car charger, which
like other devices, charges off of what used to be the cigarette
lighter but is in most modern cars simply a power outlet. USB
charging is perhaps the nicest method, as you can charge your
phone off of any computer with a USB plug. In fact, on many
newer phones, the wall charger actually uses the same micro
USB cable you rely on to connect and charge your phone off
of your computer (see Figure 1.22). If you work in an
environment with very tight computer restrictions whereby
you cannot normally use USB devices, you need not worry;
plugging the phone in to charge it does not necessarily mean
you will be mounting the USB drive. You can, in fact, even
charge your phone off a computer that is turned off,
something I do frequently in hotels when I turn my laptop off
to go to bed but keep my phone plugged into the computer
and allow it to continue to charge. Charging off your
computer is generally slower than charging off a wall outlet,
so if you are in a hurry you should plug it into the wall.
59

The amount of time your phone takes to charge will vary
from one model to the next, but in general, you should allow
several hours of charging if you have completely depleted the
battery. Likewise, the amount of time you can go without
charging will vary depending not only on the model of phone
you use but also on what applications you are running. Most
phones should be able to go several days at least if you leave
them alone, but may hold only a few hours’ charge if you use
battery-intensive applications such as anything involving GPS
or Bluetooth.
Figure 1.22
The stock wall charger that was included as the only
accessory with the Droid X; the cable is a standard micro
USB.
60

Chapter 2: Applications
The Skim
Using the Android Market - Searching for Applications -
Downloading and Installing Free Applications - Paying for
Applications - Downloading and Installing Applications from
Other
Sources
-
Keeping
Applications
Up
to
Date
-
Uninstalling Applications
Early cell phones were just that — phones. Later, their
capabilities
began
to
expand
to
include
texting,
and
eventually they allowed users to play simple games, take
pictures, or browse Web pages. Still, they were phones that
could sort of act like computers. Today’s smartphones, on the
other hand, are portable computers, first and foremost. They
just happen to be computers that can, almost incidentally,
make phone calls.
Using the Android Market
The Android Market is the primary resource to find
applications for download. Although no requirement demands
that developers use the Market, most will because of the
visibility it provides their applications.
You can access the Market at any time using the application
that comes preinstalled on your phone (see Figure 2.1). The
main screen on the Market application allows you to browse
through popular featured applications, browse apps or games,
or search for applications.
61

The Apps tab brings up a new screen that displays categories
of applications. Selecting one of these categories displays a
list of the applications in that category. You can sort the list
by Top paid, Top free, or Just in. Each application is listed by
its name, the name of the developer, its cost, and its current
user rating (see Figure 2.2).
Selecting an application brings up a page that shows the
details of the application, screen shots, and user reviews (see
Figure 2.3). At any point, you can use your phone’s Back
button to return to either the application list or the main
screen of the Market.
62

Figure 2.1
The Market main screen
63

Figure 2.2
A list of applications within a category
Searching for Applications
If you have a particular application in mind, you can use the
Market’s search feature to find it. From the Market’s main
screen, select the search icon. Type the name or keywords of
the application you want to find and then select the
64

magnifying glass icon to see a list of matching applications.
As with browsing, the search list displays the name of the
application, the name of the developer, the cost, and the rating
of the application.
Figure 2.3
An application’s information screen
65

Downloading and Installing Free Applications
Many of the applications you will find in the market are free.
In fact, the Android Market has a higher percentage of free
applications than any other mobile application marketplace,
due in large part to the fact that Google imposes a much
smaller initial fee for developers than some of its competitors
do. When you find a free application that interests you, select
the Install button at the bottom of the application’s detail
page. Your phone then will display a message page detailing
what services on the phone the application will need access to
(see Figure 2.4). Press OK, and the application will begin
downloading.
You are taken back to your most recent search or browse
page, and the Notification Bar will display an icon letting you
know that the application is downloading. The Notification
Bar will inform you after the download is complete, at which
point you can select the application to launch it (see Figure
2.5).
Tip
66

You can link a credit card to your Google account to
simplify the process of purchasing applications. After it is
linked, the card will display directly on the checkout screen,
so you do not have to keep entering information over again.
Entering
these
linked
cards
involves
going
to
http://checkout.google.com, logging in with your Google
account, and then entering the credit card information on the
screen provided.
Tip
You can get a full refund on any application purchased
through the Android Market within 24 hours of that
purchase. To return an application and get a refund, go to the
Downloads section of the Market (usually by pressing the
Menu button), select the application, and select Uninstall
and refund. If you only see an Uninstall button, then you are
either looking at a free app or your 24-hour period has
expired.
Paying for Applications
If you decide to download an application that requires
payment, you can purchase it directly through your phone. Go
to the page for the application and select Buy. As with free
67

applications, the download process for paid apps begins with
an information screen letting you know what services the
application might use when it runs. Following that, however,
is the additional step whereby you actually pay for the
application (see Figure 2.6). Android uses the Google
Checkout service, allowing you to pay for the application
using either your mobile company (if the carrier supports it;
currently, only T-Mobile does), meaning that the charge for
the app will appear on your next bill or a credit card. If you
elect to use a credit card, you will be prompted to enter the
usual credit card information if it’s not already in your
Google Checkout account. When complete, your application
will
download
and
install.
You
also
will
receive
a
confirmation e-mail for your purchase.
Downloading and Installing Applications from
Other Sources
Android is a completely open system, so developers are not
required to use the official Android Market to distribute their
applications. Instead, developers are free to distribute their
applications directly from their own Web sites or via alternate
markets. In order to download an alternate application, you
need to find its location online. You can download the .APK
file from the developer’s site. If you are using your desktop or
laptop computer, you need to transfer the application to your
phone via USB, by e-mail or any other file-transfer method.
You then can install the application. You also will need to
specifically enable this ability on your phone by going into
the phone’s Settings from your Home screen and then
selecting Applications and enabling the check box labeled
Unknown sources.
68

Tidbit
AT&T locks down its Android-based devices, preventing their
users from installing applications that do not come from the
Market. However, a Windows-based application known as the
Android
Sideload
Wonder
Machine
provides
a
legal,
easy-to-use work-around. You can download the application
and get details on using it at www.androidcentral.com/
sideload-android-apps-all-you-want-sideload-wonder-machine.
Many developers are providing an alternate and much easier
way to install applications: QR codes, which look a lot like
normal barcodes. You need to install the free Barcode
Scanner app, available in the Android Market. Then when
you encounter a barcode, you can scan the code using the
phone’s camera. The application displays the location of the
app it found, at which point you can select the link to
download the app. Note that barcodes may be found on Web
sites or in printed materials such as books and magazines, on
buildings — anywhere, really. And they’re not just for
installing applications. They also can lead you to a Web page,
video, or any other online content.
69

Figure 2.4
The services needed by the application
70

Figure 2.5
The application, ready to use
Keeping Applications Up to Date
Android includes an automatic application update process by
default. Whenever an application you have installed through
the Android Market has an update available, the Notification
Bar displays an icon letting you know that you have updates
71

available. Expand the Notification Bar and select Updates
available, which takes you to the My Downloads section of
the Market. All apps that have current updates are displayed.
Select the app you want to update, read through the
information screen, which often has information on what
exactly has been updated in the app. If you want to run the
update, select Update, which prompts you to be sure that you
want to replace the older version of the app with the new one.
After you select OK, you are taken to the screen that notifies
you which services the app will use, and then the application
downloads and installs.
Tidbit
Android 2.2 allows some applications to be installed on your
device’s SD card, rather than on the phone’s internal
memory. As the SD card provides expandable memory, this
may allow you to install many more applications. Note,
however, that this feature needs to be enabled by the
application’s developer, so it may not be possible on some,
or even many, applications you download. Some widgets
may not work if the application is installed on the card, and
you may not be able to install if the card is mounted on your
computer.
72

Beginning with Android 2.2, you have the option to set an
application to update itself automatically, in the background,
without needing your permission (other than the initial OK).
However, if an application’s permissions (the services that are
listed when it’s initially installed) are changing, you’ll have to
update the application manually as a security measure.
Uninstalling Applications
Should you change your mind about keeping an application,
you can uninstall it to free up additional space on your phone.
Uninstalling an application involves going to the Downloads
section of the Market and selecting the application. (Or,
alternately,
going
to
Settings>Applications>Manage
applications) You are taken to the normal application page.
Select Uninstall at the bottom of the page. You are asked to
confirm whether you really want to uninstall (see Figure 2.7),
and then are presented with a screen asking for the reason for
the uninstall, which may help the developer improve the app
for future customers (see Figure 2.8). Note that if you do not
uninstall a paid app within 24 hours of purchasing it, you will
not be issued a refund when you uninstall.
73

Figure 2.6
Purchasing the application
74

Figure 2.7
Uninstall confirmation
75

Figure 2.8
Justifying your decision
76

Chapter 3: Your Home Screens
The Skim
Adding Application Shortcuts to Your Home Screen - Adding
Widgets to Your Home Screen - Organizing Your Home
Screen Shortcuts with Folders - Changing the Wallpaper
- Use Open Home for Further Customization
When I teach introductory Windows classes, one of the first
things students always want to learn is how to customize their
desktop. I have, in fact, been amazed by the number of
students who take a two- or three-day class on something else
entirely who nonetheless customize the desktop on the
training center’s computers. Your Android phone offers
almost as much customization as your computer. As with
your computer, you can change most of the appearance of the
phone to make it more of an extension of your personality.
Adding Application Shortcuts to Your Home
Screen
Once installed, all applications reside in the Applications Bin.
Although you can search through the bin when you need an
app, it will be easier if you add a shortcut to your home screen
instead.
You
can
add
shortcuts
by
first
opening
the
Applications Bin and finding the app you want. Then
long-press the app until you feel the phone vibrate and the
Application Bin collapses. Drop the app wherever you want
on the home screen. You also can add shortcuts by
long-pressing on your home screen and selecting Shortcuts. If
77

you have an HTC Sense phone, you will find a plus icon on
your home screen that you can tap to add shortcuts.
You can move apps around on the home screen by repeating
the same procedure: long-press the app’s shortcut until you
feel the vibration and then drag it to a new location.
Remember that your device will actually have more than one
home screen — usually, either five or seven. You can move
shortcuts to other screens by dragging the shortcuts to the
edge, waiting for the next screen to appear, and then dropping
them in place.
You can remove shortcuts from the home screen by pressing
and holding and dragging the shortcut to the Trash Can,
which will be on the Applications Bin’s tab. If you uninstall
an application, its shortcut is removed automatically.
Adding Widgets to Your Home Screen
Many applications provide home screen widgets. A widget is
essentially a miniature version of the application that runs
directly from the home screen. Widgets can take up a lot of
space on the home screen, or be the same size as an app
shortcut. Either way, they provide instant access to the
application’s data.
Tidbit
78

The Droid X and other devices running Motorola’s version
of Android include a set of Motorola widgets along with the
Android widgets. Many of these widgets are actually quite
useful. I’m particularly fond of the set of widgets that enable
you to quickly toggle Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, GPS, and Airplane
mode on and off; the Photo Slideshow is also pretty cool.
You can add a widget to a home screen by long-pressing a
blank area of the home screen until a menu appears that
includes the option to add widgets. Select this option to bring
up a list of all of the available applications that contain
widgets (see Figure 3.1), and then select the desired
application to add it to your home screen.
Widgets can be removed in the exact same manner as
application shortcuts: long-press the widget and drag it to the
Trash Can.
79

Figure 3.1
The applications I have that contain widgets
Organize Your Home Screen Shortcuts with
Folders
Folders enable you to organize your home screen, allowing
you to place many more application shortcuts than might
otherwise fit. You can create a folder by pressing and holding
80

your finger on the home screen and then selecting Folders
from the menu that appears. Another menu appears, asking
you to determine which kind of folder you want (see Figure
3.2). Select New folder to create a new, blank folder on your
home screen.
You can rename the folder by selecting the folder to open it
and then pressing and holding again on the title bar of the
folder. Applications can be added to the folder by dragging
them onto its icon.
81

Figure 3.2
Types of folders on the Droid X
Changing the Wallpaper
Just as you have likely customized the background or
wallpaper on your computer, you can change the wallpaper on
your device as well. To get started, long-press on the home
screen and select Wallpapers. You then can choose Live
Wallpapers, Media Gallery (to select a specific photo), or
Wallpapers (to select a stock wallpaper). Alternately, you can
press the menu key while on the home screen and select
Wallpapers.
Stock Wallpapers
Each device comes with a set of stock wallpaper art. My
Droid X has 15 mostly dark, moody, and abstract wallpaper
designs, and my wife’s LG Ally shipped with 33 wallpapers,
most of them bright, happy landscapes. I suspect that these
designs have as much to do with the target audience of the
device as they do with any real design sense, although I am
not sure what the Droid X’s wallpapers say about me.
You can choose the wallpaper by selecting the Set wallpaper
button. This selection returns you to your home screen, where
you will see the new wallpaper stretched across all of your
screens (see Figure 3.3).
82

Figure 3.3
The new wallpaper applied to the home screen
Alternate App
83

Many additional live wallpapers are available in the Android
Market. Simply search for “live wallpaper” to view the list.
A few are free, but most cost between $1 and $2.
Media Gallery
Your Media Gallery stores all of your images and videos. The
gallery is discussed in detail in Chapter 9; for now, we will
just use it to set the wallpaper using your own image. If you
do not have any images in the gallery yet, you might skip
ahead and read Chapter 9 now and then come back when you
are done.
Using your own picture as the wallpaper involves selecting
Media Gallery from the wallpaper options. The gallery opens,
displaying all of the images currently stored on your SD card.
Select the image you want to use and then crop it to the
appropriate dimensions for the home screen. Select Save, and
the picture is applied as the wallpaper.
Live Wallpapers
Live wallpapers are essentially animated backgrounds for
your home screen. As with the stock wallpapers, each device
84

that supports live wallpapers ships with a slightly different
set. Several of the live wallpapers display waveforms based
on the currently playing music track. The Droid X includes a
Google Maps live wallpaper that uses GPS to always display
your current location. After you find the live wallpaper you
want, click Set Wallpaper to apply it to the home screen (see
Figure 3.4). You can download new live wallpapers from the
Android Market. Note that older phones may not be able to
run live wallpapers.
85

Figure 3.4
Live wallpaper applied to the home screen
Use Open Home for Further Customization
You can take home screen customization even further by
using one of the many applications that provide additional
settings beyond adding and removing shortcuts and widgets
and changing the wallpaper. One of the most popular of these
is Open Home. Open Home is available for $4. After you
install Open Home, you can purchase and install Open Home
Themes, most of which cost around $1, although a few free
ones exist. It seems that there is an Open Home theme for
practically any hobby, interest, or obsession.
Open Home not only changes your desktop, it also customizes
application and system icons. Figure 3.5 shows my Droid X
with Open Home installed. Although the wallpaper has not
yet been changed, you can see that the App Launcher button
and home screen navigation are all different. Also, all of the
widgets and shortcuts I previously had placed on the home
screen are gone.
86

Figure 3.5
Open Home’s default screen applied to the home screen
87

Chapter 4: Actually Using Your Phone
as a Phone
The Skim
Adding Contacts - Managing Contacts on Your Computer
- Organizing
Contacts
into
Groups
- Calling
a
Contact
- Manually Dialing Numbers - Using Favorites - Speed Dial
- Using the Call Log - Voice Dialing - Calling from the
Browser - Using the Speaker Phone - Conference Calling
- Google Voice
Recently, I was cleaning out the kitchen junk drawer when I
stumbled across our old address book. Flipping through it
made me chuckle, as it was littered with addresses that had
been scribbled out and replaced as friends and family moved,
and even entire entries that were crossed out for some now
long-forgotten reason. Of course, it also was hopelessly
disorganized; yes, the “a” names were under A, but they were
in an essentially random order after that. The entire book was
absolutely useless, because it was sitting, buried, in the back
of the junk drawer as we had long since stopped using it,
having transferred all of those addresses and phone numbers
to the computer and, now, to our phones.
Adding Contacts
Your mobile device includes a powerful contact manager.
Most people make most of their calls to a select group of
people: friends, family, and co-workers. Although prior
88

generations actually had to remember the phone numbers of
the people they wanted to call, your phone now can remember
them for you, leaving you more memory for random Monty
Python quotes and the like.
Because your Android device is synched with your Google
account, you may find that you have contacts immediately
upon setting up your phone, as any contacts you have in your
Gmail account are imported. If you are using a mobile carrier
that relies on SIM cards, such as T-Mobile or AT&T, your
contacts from your previous phone likely also are imported.
Whether you begin with many contacts or have a completely
empty Contacts list, you can begin adding new contacts right
away, directly on your phone. Begin by opening the Contacts
application, which can be found in the Applications Bin. You
also can open Contacts by either selecting the Call button on
the home screen or by pressing the Call button, if your phone
has one.
After you are in your Contacts application, press your phone’s
Menu button and select Add Contact or New Contact,
depending on your model (see Figure 4.1). Enter any or all of
the information for the contact. If you plan to use the contact
for calls, then you will need to enter at least a name and a
phone number. You can specify multiple numbers for each
contact and set whether the number is for work, mobile,
home, or any other custom type. If you have a picture of the
person on your phone, you can also add the picture to the
contacts, which will display both in the Contacts list and as
caller ID when that person calls you or you call him.
89

At the bottom of the Add Contact screen, select Additional
Info or More to display more fields. The Droid X’s Contact
application enables you to enter birthday and anniversary
dates, both of which are added to your calendar so that you do
not forget them. Most Android devices provide fields for
nicknames and Web sites for the person.
Tip
If you have a contact for which you need to dial a number,
wait a few seconds, and then dial an extension, you can add
pauses into the number by entering commas between the
number and the extension. Each comma adds a two-second
pause. For example, if you needed to dial 555-1212, wait
four seconds, and then dial extension 123, you could enter
the number as 555-1212,,123.
Each contact can have its own custom ringtone, so that you
can tell who is calling without even looking at your phone.
When adding the contact, select Ringtone and then select a
ringtone from the list that appears. You also can use music
you have uploaded to your phone as your contact’s ringtone;
see Chapter 8 for more information.
Tip
90

If you want a particular contact to appear at the top of your
Contacts list, add a space to the beginning of the name. In
Figure 4.1, note that the first contact in my list is Home. It
shows up there, rather than down with the other H contacts,
because there is actually a space before the H, which causes
the list to think that it should be alphabetized with the other
contacts that start with nonalphabetic characters.
91

Figure 4.1
The Contact application’s menu
Managing Contacts on Your Computer
All of your device’s contacts are automatically synchronized
online via your Google account, meaning that you can
manage contacts in either location. Sometimes, using your
92

computer may be easier, particularly if your device has only a
small on-screen keyboard.
Managing
your
contacts
online
involves
going
to
www.gmail.com and logging in, using the same username and
password you used when you initially set up the computer.
After you log into Gmail, click Contacts on the left. You can
click a contact in the list to bring up the details, which will
match those on your phone.
Organizing Contacts into Groups
Scrolling through a long list of contacts every time you need
to find someone can be time consuming. Android enables you
to group your contacts into smaller lists so that they are more
manageable. From your Contacts list, press the Menu button
and then select Display Group. In the list that appears, select
Create New Group. Enter a name for your group and select
Add. Select the check box next to any contact you want to
add to the group and then select Done (see Figure 4.2). Each
contact can be added to as many groups as you want, so for
example, a co-worker who is also a friend might be in both a
Work group and a Friends group.
Tip
93

If you use Outlook or another desktop e-mail program, you
can very easily import your existing contacts into Gmail.
You need to export the Contacts list from the program. The
actual steps to do so will vary from one program to the next
and even, in the case of Outlook at least, from one version to
the next, but you should be able to find instructions online.
Just make sure that you export the list in CSV format, or
comma-separated values. Then from your Gmail contacts,
click Import Contacts, select the exported file, and click
Import. I recently went on a vacation with my family, and
we discovered that we could not send postcards because
several other family addresses were stuck at home in
Outlook. Now that I have imported my Outlook contacts into
Gmail, I never need to worry about that again.
After you have your groups created, you can access them by
either following the same first few steps: pressing the Menu
button and then Display group. You can then select the name
of the group to view its contacts. Alternately, you can select
the list at the top of your Contacts list to see your groups.
You can also create and manage your groups in Gmail on
your computer. When viewing your contacts, you will see a
list of your groups on the left side of the page. Clicking any of
these groups displays its members. When in a group, you can
94

click the Add to Group button at the top of the page and type
the name of a contact you want to add. When you are viewing
the Detail page for a contact, you can click Groups at the top
of the page to view a list of your available groups and check
the box next to a group name to add the contact to it. On the
main page of the contact list, the group to which a contact
belongs is displayed on the far-right side of the page.
Alternate App
Many alternate contact applications exist in the Market, but
one of the nicer ones is aContacts. This Contact replacement
displays your contacts in a picture-oriented interface, so if
you have pictures associated with many of your contacts,
you can pick that contact from a grid of pictures rather than
a list of names. This app also enables you to set up multiple
ways to contact people, including integration with social
networking sites such as Facebook and Twitter.
95

Figure 4.2
Adding members to the group
Calling a Contact
You can select any contact to display its details. From there,
select the small green phone icon to place the call. You also
can long-press a contact in the Contacts list and select Call
Contact from the menu that appears.
96

If your phone has a dedicated Call button, you can press it to
go directly into the dialer. If you do not have a Call button,
you can select the phone icon from your home screen to place
a call directly. In the dialer, you can select Contacts to view
your list and then select the green phone icon to place the call
(see Figure 4.3).
Figure 4.3
Calling a contact from the dialer
97

Manually Dialing Numbers
Although most of the calls you place likely will be to your
contacts, of course, sometimes need to directly dial a number.
Either press your phone’s call button or select the phone icon
on the home screen to launch the Dialer application. From
there, select Dialer to display a normal phone keypad, type
the number you want to call, and select the green phone icon
to connect (see Figure 4.4).
Tidbit
Motorola includes additional home screen widgets on most
of its phones. One of the more useful is the Contact quick
tasks, which adds a widget personalized for a contact. The
widget displays the contact’s picture and can be customized
to show up to four ways to connect to the contact, either via
multiple phone numbers or multiple numbers to send text
messages. After the contact is associated with the widget and
the numbers entered, you can enable one-touch dialing so
that you can select the widget and directly place a call. HTC
Sense phones include a home screen widget that shows your
favorite contacts.
98

Figure 4.4
Manually dialing a number
Using Favorites
Those numbers that you call most frequently can be added to
your Favorites list for easy access. You can call a Favorite
directly by selecting the green phone icon.
99

To add a contact to your Favorites, long-press the contact’s
name on the Contacts list and then choose Add to Favorites.
Likewise, if someone has fallen out of favor, you can
long-press the contact on the Favorites list and select Remove
from Favorites. While viewing a contact’s details, you can
select the small star icon to the right of the contact’s name to
add that contact to your favorites.
Speed Dial
Not all Android devices support speed dial, instead relying on
Favorites to provide quick access to frequently used contacts,
but some devices such as the Droid X do have this
long-standard feature. From the Dialer application, press the
Menu button and select Speed dial setup. Next, select Add
Speed dial and then select the contact. When set up, you can
go to the dialer and long-press the appropriate speed dial
number to connect. Honestly, although people have relied on
speed dial to quickly reach contacts for years, in Android you
probably can call a contact as quickly by going to your
Favorites as you can by going to the Dialer, and using
Favorites does not require that you memorize which contact is
associated with which number, so this is not really all that
exciting a feature. If you have a phone that does not support
speed dialing, you are unlikely to miss it.
Whether or not your phone supports speed dial, all Android
devices enable you to add a shortcut to your home screen to
directly dial a number. To add one, long-press on the home
screen, select Shortcuts, and then select Contact or Direct
Dial.
100

Using the Call Log
Your phone’s call log shows the most recent calls you have
placed or received (see Figure 4.5). The number of calls listed
in the log will vary from one device to the next. Although
there are easier ways to connect to your contacts, the log is
useful to return missed calls or call back to a number that you
manually dialed.
An even more useful feature of the call log is the capability to
add new contacts from it. If someone calls you, and you want
to add him or her to your list, you can long-press the number
and then select Add to contacts. From there, you have the
option to either add the number to a new or an existing
contact. If you select New, you are taken to the Add contact
page, where the number will be filled in for you.
If you want to clear the log and remove the history of calls,
you can press the Menu key and then select Clear list.
101

Figure 4.5
The call log
Voice Dialing
You can use voice dialing to place calls by talking to your
phone. When you are driving, it is unsafe to be distracted
while you find a contact or manually dial a number, so voice
dialing enables you to keep your eyes on the road and still
102

place the call. From the Dialer application, go to the manual
dialer and select the Voice Dial icon. Speak the name of the
contact you want to call.
Tip
In order to effectively use voice dialing, you need to speak
slowly and clearly. You also need to try to minimize
background noise, so it may not be a terribly effective way
to call someone from a crowded bar or rock concert. If you
have a hands-free device, you can speak directly into its
microphone, which is likely to be more effective than simply
shouting in the general direction of the phone.
Of course, the steps required to get into the voice dialer pretty
much defeat its purpose, so for added safety, you can add a
shortcut to the home screen. The Droid X includes a Voice
Commands application that enables you a considerable
amount of control over your phone by talking to it. Although
the application is discussed in detail in Chapter 14, you can
use it now by launching the application and then saying “Call
Home” or something similar (see Figure 4.6).
103

If your phone has a physical Call button, you have even easier
access to the Voice Dialer: press and hold the Call button for
about 4 seconds, and you should see the Voice Dialer appear.
Figure 4.6
Using the Voice Commands application to place a call
104

Calling from the Browser
One of Android’s nicest features is the way in which the
phone functionality integrates with the Web browser. My
wife and I recently have been trying to figure out how to get
phone companies to stop sending us physical phone books, as
we never use them anymore. Instead, when we need to call a
local business, we use Google on our phones to look them up
and then place the call directly from the Web.
Launch your phone’s browser from your Applications Bin or,
if you have one, a shortcut on the home screen. If you know
the address of the Web site for the company or organization
you are trying to reach, you can enter it directly; otherwise,
search Google and then click the link to its site. When on the
site, look around for their phone number; most sites have a
Contact or About Us page that lists this, although many will
place it on the bottom of each page. When you find the
number, select it. This action opens the dialer with the
number pre-entered, and you can press the Call button to
place the call.
Tip
105

You can do a local search on Google and likely get the
company or organization’s phone number without having to
go to its site. In Google’s search bar, type the name you
want to search, followed by a city and state. For example,
you could type “White House, Washington, DC.” When the
listing appears, you may see the number for the company
directly on the Google results page, which you can click to
go to the dialer. You can also search for people, although
your results will vary. Be sure to spell their names correctly
and include a city and state to increase your chances of
finding them.
Tidbit
The process outlined in this section on calling a number
directly from the browser is, in fact, not limited to the
browser. When you search for an address in the Google
Maps application on your phone, you often will get the
phone number at that address and will be able to select it to
place the call directly within Maps. Many other applications
provide similar functionality.
106

Using the Speaker Phone
While placing a call, you can turn on the speaker phone so
that you do not have to hold the phone up to your ear. To
enable the speaker phone, select Speaker while the call is
ringing or at any time during the call. Turn the speaker back
off by pressing the same button. I find the speaker phone
particularly useful when calling companies that are either
entirely computer-driven, such as the monthly call I make to
pay my mortgage electronically or when sitting on hold for an
extended period of time. Note that the speaker is not an
acceptable alternative to a hands-free device while driving, as
you will need to hold the phone fairly close to your head in
order to hear and be heard.
Conference Calling
You can speak to more than one person at a time using
conference calling. To use this feature, place a call to the first
person to whom you want to connect. Then while in that call,
select Add Call. When the second call connects, select Merge
calls to connect the second call to the first (see Figure 4.7).
107

Figure 4.7
Merging calls
Google Voice
Google Voice is the company’s phone service. Google Voice
gives you a dedicated phone number in an area code of your
choosing. The Google Voice number is attached to you, not to
108

any particular device, and can be set up to ring multiple
phones simultaneously.
You can request a Google Voice number by visiting
www.google.com/voice and logging in with your Google
account username and password. You then are prompted to
search for an available phone number by entering either a
desired area code, city, or zip code or a word or phrase to
which you want to map the number. You then can select from
a list of available numbers. Next, you need to enter a PIN to
use for accessing your Google Voice voice mail and accept
Google’s terms and privacy policy. After you have your PIN
selected, the system prompts you to enter a phone number to
which you want to forward Google Voice calls. Finally, you
are shown a screen with a two-digit confirmation key. Press
the Call me now button to have Google Voice call you; when
you answer, enter the two-digit number. At this point, your
Google Voice account is set up.
After you have your Google Voice account set up, you can
begin associating numbers such as your mobile device with it.
That way, when someone calls your Google Voice number,
the call is forwarded to your mobile.
Installing the Google Voice App on Your Phone
To fully use the features of Google Voice on your phone, you
need to install the free Google Voice application, which you
can get from the Android Market. Once installed, the
application enables you to associate your Google Voice
account with your device.
109

The next step is to decide which calls you want to make with
Google Voice. You have four options: use Google Voice to
make all calls, do not use Google Voice to make any calls,
only use Google Voice for international calls, and ask every
time I make a call (see Figure 4.8). If you decide to use
Google Voice to make calls, your Google Voice number
appears as the caller ID for these calls, rather than your actual
mobile number.
You also can use Google Voice as the voice mail provider for
your phone, so that all calls are routed to the Google Voice
Voicemail box instead of your regular voice mail. See the
following section, “Google Voice Voicemail,” for details on
its advantages.
You also can enable a feature that sends you a text message
whenever you get a call. Be aware that if you have a mobile
plan with limited text messaging, you may not want to enable
this feature.
110

Figure 4.8
Calling options with Google Voice
Google Voice Voicemail
When someone calls your Google Voice number and you do
not answer, the call is transferred to your Google Voice
Voicemail box. To your caller, the process is the same as any
other voice mail. However, you have two options as to how to
111

retrieve the voice mail message. You can call into Google
Voice and listen to the message as normal, or you can read
the
message,
thanks
to
Google
Voice’s
transcription
capabilities. Although the transcription is not always perfect,
it will give you a good idea of what the message says. You
can also view your voice mail box from any computer by
logging into Google Voice in your browser.
Placing Calls from Your Desktop Computer
As was shown in the section “Calling from the Browser,” you
can use your mobile device’s browser to find a phone number
on a Web site and call it directly. However, using Google
Voice and the Mozilla Firefox browser, you can do the same
from your desktop computer.
To enable this great feature, first you need to install Mozilla
Firefox
if
you
do
not
already
have
it
by
going
to
www.getfirefox.com. After you have the browser installed, go
to https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/11167/ and
click Add to Firefox. You may get a message stating that the
extension has not been reviewed by Mozilla; if you do, click
Add to Firefox again to continue. The extension should take
no more than a few seconds to install, and you then are
prompted to restart your browser.
After the browser restarts, you should see a message in the
lower-right corner letting you know that the you need to enter
your Google account information. Right-click on the message
and
select
Settings.
Type
your
Google
username
and
password and click OK, and you see your Google Voice
number displayed in the browser. Now, you can navigate to
any page that contains a phone number and click it. A
112

message appears letting you know that Google Voice is
calling the number (see Figure 4.9), and a few seconds later
your mobile device will ring, saying you have a call from
your Google Voice number. Accept the call, and it will ring
through to the number you clicked on the browser.
Figure 4.9
Calling a number from the browser
Other Google Voice Features
You can set personalized voice mail greetings for your
contacts in Google Voice, so you can have one outgoing
message for business contacts and another for friends and
family. To set up this feature, open the contact in your
computer’s browser, either through the Google Voice page or
your Gmail contacts and click Edit Google Voice Settings.
You can use Google Voice to place international calls, usually
at much cheaper rates than you will find elsewhere. You need
to add credits to your Google Voice account in order to pay
for these calls, which can be done from the Google Voice
home page on your computer. You can place the call from
your browser, which then rings through to your phone, or if
you have the Google Voice application installed on your
phone and have configured it to either make all calls or all
international calls, you can dial the number directly.
113

Google Voice also can be set up to receive text messages.
Whenever you receive a text, it appears in the texting
application in your phone, and also in your Google Voice
inbox. In addition, you can configure the system to send you
an e-mail when you receive a text.
Tip
Many calling plans today include a feature that enables you
to add a limited set of numbers from which calls are always
free. A creative use of Google Voice can potentially enable
you to get essentially unlimited calling minutes each month:
add your Google Voice number to your free list and then
give out your Google Voice number to your contacts rather
than your actual mobile number. That way, almost all calls
into your phone appear to be coming from the Google Voice
number, and will, thus, be free.
The Block Caller feature of Google Voice enables you to
permanently prevent particular callers from reaching you.
From your Google Voice inbox on your computer, you can
click the More link and then select Block Caller. When that
caller attempts to contact you again, he or she gets a message
that your number has been disconnected or is no longer in
114

service. It is particularly handy for those annoying solicitation
calls.
Back in ancient times, people used their answering machines
to screen callers — they would let the call go through to the
machine, listen to the message, and then pick up the phone if
it turned out that the caller was someone to whom they
actually wanted to speak. Voice mail systems long ago
removed this capability, but for better or worse, Google Voice
gives it back to you. When a call comes in, you have the
option of answering or sending the call to voice mail; if you
choose the latter, you can listen as the message is left and
press the star key to pick up. It is probably going to be fairly
obvious that you were screening the call, though, so you
might use this feature with caution.
Google Voice also enables you to send SMS, or text
messages, via its service rather than your mobile providers.
This essentially means that you can get around any charges
your provider imposes for text messages you send.
115

Chapter
5:
21st-Century
Communication
The Skim
Switching to Gmail - Accessing Gmail on Your Phone
- Getting Other E-mail on Your Phone - Instant Messaging
- Texting - Multimedia Texting - Social Networking
I spent the summer after graduating high school as an intern
for my congressman. Not only was that my first experience in
an office, it also was my first experience with e-mail. Later
that year, after settling into the residence halls, I was lucky to
be one of the first people in the hall to get Internet access in
my room and, along with it, another e-mail account, although
it relied on a system known as Kermit that was, even at the
time, rather primitive.
Little did I know that I was not just learning some new toy,
but rather learning something that would, decades later,
become my primary means of communication. Most of my
business contacts today are via e-mail, and, in fact, I have had
exactly one phone conversation with the people at Wiley, the
publishers of this book. Although publishing obviously
happened before the advent of e-mail, I am not sure I would
even know how to go about the publishing process without
the connectivity offered by e-mail.
Within the last few months, I have had another major shift in
the way I communicate. I still rely on e-mail, but today, my
primary means of reading and writing e-mail has shifted from
116

my laptop and desktop machines to my phone. Now, I only
check messages on my computers when they include an
attachment that I cannot open or edit on my phone.
Switching to Gmail
In 2004, Google began issuing invitations to a special beta of
its newest service, Gmail, which it was touting as a new way
to work with e-mail. I do not recall precisely when I got my
then-coveted invite, but I do remember my initial first
impression of Gmail; mostly, it seemed to be yet another free
e-mail service. As I already had e-mail, both personal and
business, coming into Outlook and already was using a
separate Yahoo account to monitor groups, I did not really see
the value of Gmail.
You stopped needing an invitation to join Gmail in 2007; in
2009, the company finally removed the “beta” label from the
service. Over the years, I maintained my Gmail account as a
repository for spam, but checked it only once every few
months.
That all changed earlier this year, when, quite suddenly, my
laptop died. I still do not know exactly what happened, but
whatever fried the motherboard took the hard drive with it.
Thankfully, all of my important documents, including the
book I was writing at the time, were backed up on my home
desktop computer, but I had been lax in backing up my
Outlook file, so when the laptop died, I lost about six months
of important e-mail. As I need access to e-mail when I’m
away from home, switching over to Outlook on the desktop
until I replaced the laptop was not really feasible, and the
company with whom I host my Web site and, by extension,
117

my personal e-mail provides an online e-mail application that
is horrible, to put it nicely.
All of these factors, along with the fact that as an Android
user I knew that I could easily get Gmail on my phone forced
me to, at long last, take a serious look at Gmail, and it took
only about a day to realize how horribly, completely wrong I
had been all those years. Gmail is, in fact, far more than “just
another free e-mail service.”
Signing Up with Gmail
If you do not already have a Gmail account, you can get one
easily enough: simply go to www.gmail.com and click Create
an Account. However, as an Android user, you almost
certainly already have a Google account, so you, in fact, have
a Gmail account as well, so rather than creating a new
account, you should instead sign in with your username and
password.
Organizing E-mail
The most difficult thing about switching to Gmail from every
other e-mail system I’ve used is getting used to Google’s
approach to e-mail organization. Outlook, along with every
other desktop e-mail application, allows you to organize your
e-mail into folders. Other free online e-mail systems such as
Yahoo Mail follow the same model. In Gmail, however, you
do not have folders. Really, all of your e-mail always simply
resides in a mailbox. Instead, you use a concept known as
labels to sort and filter your messages. The Inbox, in fact, is
nothing more than one of those labels.
118

Creating New Labels
To create new labels in your Gmail account, click Labels and
then select Manage Labels from the buttons along the top of
your inbox. On the Settings page that appears, type a new
label and click Create. Should you create a label that you
decide you do not want, you can click the remove the link
next to the label in question.
Tip
One of the advantages of using labels in Gmail as opposed
to the traditional folder-based approach of other systems is
that any message may have multiple labels applied to it. If
you have a message that might logically fall under several
different categories, you would have to either pick a single
one or create duplicate copies of the message when using
folders. With Gmail’s Labels feature, you can apply all of
the matching labels to a message, in effect organizing it into
multiple categories.
119

Manually Labeling Messages
You can apply a label to messages when they arrive in your
inbox. Simply click the message to open it and then click the
Labels drop-down and select the label you want to apply to
the message (see Figure 5.1).
Figure 5.1
Adding a label to a message
Automatically Labeling Messages
When I used Outlook, I relied on its Rules feature to
automatically move incoming messages into appropriate
folders. With Gmail, I can use Filters to the same affect;
120

incoming messages are automatically
given appropriate
labels. To create a filter, open a message that matches the
criteria you want to use and then click the small drop-down
arrow next to the Reply button and select Filter messages.
A page will now open, allowing you to set up the criteria you
want to use for the filter. The e-mail address of the person
who sent the message will be automatically set, but you can
add criteria or remove the address and filter based on
something else. When you have the criteria set, click Next
Step.
The next page enables you to set the action to be taken by the
filter. Although you can apply actions such as marking
messages as read or deleting messages, I tend to use filters
simply to apply labels. From the drop-down list of labels,
select the one you want to use; you also can choose New
Label to create a label on the fly. When the label is selected,
select the Also apply this filter to the conversations below
check box and click Create Filter. From then on, messages
matching
the
filter
will
have
the
appropriate
label
automatically applied when they arrive in your inbox.
Viewing Messages by Label
On your main inbox page, you will see a list of your labels to
the left (see Figure 5.2). You can click on any of these labels
to view all of the messages tagged with that label (see Figure
5.3). In effect, this is the same functionality you had in your
old e-mail system when you would view the messages in a
folder, except with the important caveat that in Gmail,
121

messages can have multiple labels, so a single message might
appear under more than one label.
Figure 5.2
The list of labels on the Inbox page
122

Figure 5.3
Messages under a particular label
Archiving Messages
A recent trend being pushed by organizational experts is
known as inbox zero. The idea is that you want to keep your
inbox empty by either deleting or filing all messages as soon
as they arrive. Achieving inbox zero involves a fairly obvious
procedure
in
folder-based
e-mail
systems:
move
each
message you want to keep out of your inbox and into a folder.
In Gmail, the solution is less obvious but in many ways
easier. As you have already seen, Gmail relies on labels to
organize messages, but by default labeling a message does not
remove it from the inbox view. Instead, you need to archive
123

your messages. Archiving a message really does nothing
more than remove the message from the inbox view. The
message is not deleted. Instead, it will only show up when
you view the messages for a particular label.
You can archive a message while reading it by simply
clicking the Archive button at the top of the message’s
window. You can archive messages in bulk by clicking the
check mark next to each message to be archived in the main
inbox and then clicking the Archive button. Note that you can
select a group of messages with different labels and archive
them at once, something that you cannot do under traditional
e-mail systems.
Note that archiving messages is useful even if you do not
want to achieve inbox zero. One definite limitation of Gmail
is that its Web-based interface limits the number of messages
you can see at the same time, so if you have a lot of messages
in your inbox, you may need to click the Next arrow button to
see the next set. Archiving messages allows you to limit your
inbox to only those very important messages you want to see
at a glance. Note, however, the important difference between
archiving and deleting. Archived messages remain in your
mailbox, in the same way that a traditional e-mail program
stores them in folders. Deleting messages removes them from
the mailbox altogether, and deleted messages are removed
permanently after 30 days.
Searching Mail
Google is, of course, primarily a search company, so you
would rightfully expect its e-mail system to include a
powerful search capability, and you will not be disappointed
124

when using Gmail. The top of every page in the system
includes a search box that allows you to search either your
own mail or the Web for particular terms. You can search for
anything in the message, whether it is the sender’s address or
text in the body of the e-mail.
Spam
Ever since Gary Thuerk sent the first unsolicited e-mail in
1978, spam has been an unfortunate fact of modern life.
According to Wikipedia, 183 billion spam messages were
being sent every day in January 2010, and that number is
likely to continue to grow. All e-mail systems include some
sort of spam filtering, but in all my years of being online and
using e-mail, I have never worked with a system that filters
messages as effectively as Gmail. In Outlook, I had my spam
setting at its maximum, meaning that although almost no
actual spam got through to my inbox, a lot of legitimate
messages got marked as spam. This meant that I had to check
my spam folder constantly for these false positives. The
irony, of course, is that this meant that I was still needing to
look at all of my spam.
Since switching to Gmail, I have gotten almost no spam. No
e-mail system will ever be absolutely perfect in spam
detection, so “almost no spam” is the best one can hope for.
The real beauty of Gmail, though, is that I also have almost
no false positives. I’ve gone from checking my spam folder
several times a day to essentially never checking it at all. As I
wrote this, I went ahead and looked in my spam folder just to
verify that I was not lying. I currently have 852 spam
messages there, and although I am not going to go through
125

every one of them, I can say that none that have arrived in the
last week are false positives. That is a far, far better
percentage than I have seen on any other system, and yet
another reason why I wonder why it took me so look to
switch over to Gmail.
Importing Your Other Accounts
An initial concern when switching to Gmail was my desire to
keep my old e-mail account, which I have had for more than a
decade. Fortunately, you can quite easily import almost any
e-mail account to Gmail so that messages sent to it will
appear in your inbox alongside any messages e-mailed to you
directly at your gmail.com address.
To import other e-mail accounts, click the Settings link in the
top-right corner of any page in Gmail and then select
Accounts and Import. About halfway down this page, you
will find a button labeled Add POP3 e-mail account. Click
this button to launch the Import Wizard. You will need to
provide the e-mail address you want to import, your
username, password, and server for the account. If you do not
know any of these details, you can ask your Internet service
provider or your company’s IT department for help.
Tip
126

Many larger corporations use Microsoft Exchange Server,
which uses a system known as IMAP for sending e-mail,
rather than the more common POP3. Gmail may be able to
import messages from Exchange or other IMAP-based
systems, but you will need to test it to be sure. Some
organizations
also
may
intentionally
block
third-party
systems such as Gmail from accessing their servers, so it is
possible that you will be unable to import your corporate
mail. Thankfully, you may still be able to check your
corporate e-mail on your phone, which will be discussed in
“Getting Other E-mail on Your Phone,” later in this chapter.
Accessing Gmail on Your Phone
One of the biggest reasons to switch to Gmail as your primary
source of e-mail is its close integration with Android phones.
The Gmail application comes preinstalled on your phone, and,
in fact, the process of configuring your phone and synching it
to
your
Google
account
when
you
first
purchased
it
completed the setup process for the e-mail. All you need to do
is launch the program to start receiving e-mail (see Figure
5.4).
127

Figure 5.4
The preinstalled, preconfigured Gmail application
Viewing Your Inbox
Gmail on your phone works almost exactly the same way as
Gmail on your computer. As messages come in, you see an
icon appear in your Notifications Bar. Slide the Notifications
Bbar down to see details. If you have only a single unread
128

message, the sender and first bit of the message will appear,
but if you have more than one, you will see an indication of
how many messages you have in that account. Select the
notification to go to the Gmail application, which takes you
directly to the first unread message. After reading, you can
select one of the three buttons at the bottom to either archive
or delete the message or go to the next oldest message in your
inbox. You also can archive, label, or delete multiple
messages at a time by selecting the check box next to the
message and then selecting the appropriate option.
Replying and Forwarding
If you want to reply to the message or forward it, you will see
Reply, Reply to all, and Forward buttons, either at the top or
bottom of the message, depending on the version of Gmail
your device is running. Selecting either Reply or Reply to all
will bring up a new message screen, enabling you to enter
your response while displaying the original e-mail (see Figure
5.5). Selecting Forward likewise displays a new message,
with the added necessary To field highlighted. In either case,
your on-screen keyboard should appear automatically unless
your device has a physical keyboard. When you finish
entering your response or the forwarding address, select either
Send to send the message immediately, Save as draft to
continue working on it later, or Discard if you change your
mind about sending it at all.
129

Figure 5.5
Replying to a message
Viewing HTML E-mail
Often, you receive messages that contain formatting and
images.
Your
Gmail
application
automatically
displays
formatting in the message, but not images. This is done to
speed up the rendering of complex e-mails on slower
130

connections, but at any time, you can select the Show pictures
button at the top of the message to view images along with
the e-mail.
Viewing Messages by Label
As was discussed earlier, Gmail relies on labels rather than
folders for organization. Any labels and filters you have set
up on your computer are visible and accessible on your
phone. From your main inbox, you can press the Menu key on
your phone and then select View labels to see a list of all of
the labels you have configured. Select a label to view the
messages labeled with it (see Figure 5.6).
131

Figure 5.6
Viewing messages for a particular label
Composing Mail
When you need to send a new message, click the Menu button
on your phone and then select Compose from the options that
appear. Enter the address of the person to whom you want to
send the message, the subject, and the body and then select
132

Send. You can also select Save as draft if you need to
interrupt writing the message or Discard if you change your
mind about sending the message.
Tidbit
Prior to getting the Droid X, I would have recommended
against anyone seriously trying to compose more than
extremely simple e-mails on their phones. Even with a
physical keyboard, typing long messages was inefficient at
best. That has all changed now, however, and not due to
anything inherent about the Droid X but rather, because of
Swype. If you have Swype available on your phone for text
input, I cannot recommend it enough, and if you skipped
over the part in Chapter 1 that discussed how to enable and
use it, I also would suggest that you go back and reread it,
because honestly it is about the single coolest thing on your
phone.
Getting Other E-mail on Your Phone
While Gmail is probably the easiest e-mail system to use on
your phone, you are by no means limited to it. (In fact, most
phones don’t even have the Gmail app on the main home
133

screen by default.) In addition to the Gmail application, your
phone comes preinstalled with another application, simply
called Email. Using this application requires a few additional
steps to set up. After launching the application, press the
phone’s Menu button, then select Manage accounts. On the
next screen, select Add account, and then Email. Enter the
e-mail address and your password for the account you want to
use and select Next (see Figure 5.7). After that, one of two
things will happen: either the account will be set up and ready
to use, or, more likely, you will get a message saying that the
account cannot be set up automatically and that you need to
manually configure it.
Alternate App
Unlike its competitors, Android enables developers to create
applications that directly compete with or supplant the
built-in applications, and e-mail is no exception. One very
popular alternate e-mail application is K-9, which offers
improved controls over features such as how often messages
are pulled from the server and the number of messages to
display.
When you need to manually configure the account, you are
presented with four categories: General Settings, Incoming
134

Server, Outgoing Server, and Other Settings. The General
Settings screen will contain a name for the account, your
name, and your e-mail account. The incoming server settings
are one of the two places where you will likely need to make
some configuration changes. At the top of the screen, set the
type to the appropriate value; if you are using corporate
e-mail, it likely needs to be changed from POP mail server to
IMAP. Make sure that the server address is correct; contact
your IT department if you are unsure what the server address
is. The port is the really technical bit here; this is another
setting you need to just check with your IT department.
Double-check your username and password, and again ask IT
whether you need a secure connection and certificate
verification. The outgoing server settings are similar to the
incoming and are mostly things that you will again need to
verify with your IT staff.
Tip
When setting up your e-mail, you need to decide whether
you want to delete the messages from the server or leave
them. If you plan to rely on your phone as a secondary
e-mail application, but still want to use Outlook or some
other desktop application as your primary e-mail client, then
135

make sure that you specify that your phone should not delete
messages as it pulls them down. Be aware that the reverse
also can cause issues: if you have your desktop client delete
messages from the server as it retrieves them — which is a
common and often default setting — then you will not be
able to also get those messages on your phone.
After you complete the setup, you should see a message
letting you know that the setup was successful and that you
can now access your e-mail. Tap Done. You should then be
taken to the e-mail application where you can view, reply, and
manage your e-mail.
136

Figure 5.7
Entering your username and password
Instant Messaging
Instant messaging has long been an effective way for people
to keep in touch on their computers. IM, or chat, allows you
to communicate in real time with one or more others. Initially,
chat systems suffered from a limitation whereby users could
137

chat with other users only on the same system. If you wanted
to chat with one friend who used only AOL’s chat and
another who relied on the MSN system, you would have to
download and install two separate chat programs, one for
each system. Today, many applications exist to allow you to
chat on multiple systems at once, thus removing this
limitation.
Thanks to several free applications available on Android, you
can now take your chatting with you wherever you go.
However, your phone also should have included the Google
Talk application, which has the ability to connect to multiple
accounts. To launch Talk, simply open your Application tray
and select its icon.
Tidbit
Although your chat application will allow you to connect to
multiple IM systems at the same time, you still need an
account on each system in order to actually send or receive
messages. Thankfully, all of these accounts are free, so
while there will be some initial annoyance in connecting to a
new friend who uses a system on which you are not yet
registered, it should take only a few minutes to sign up. You
138

also gain additional geek street cred when you belong to
dozens of systems, so there’s an advantage there as well.
Alternate App
The application mentioned previously is one of many
available chat systems. You might also want to look at
Meebo, available in the Android Market. Meebo includes
many
features
not
available
in
Talk.
Talk’s
biggest
disadvantage is that you must send an invitation to anyone
with whom you want to chat, even if you previously had
connected with that person in another chat application.
Meebo, on the other hand, connects directly to the various
chat services, so you will have instant access to any friends
lists that you already have established.
When you first launch Talk, your Google contacts who also
use the Google chat service will be displayed. You can see
each contact’s status, and begin chatting with any who
currently are available by simply selecting his name (see
Figure 5.8).
You can add connections by pressing your phone’s Menu
button and selecting Add friend. This selection opens a screen
into which you can enter an e-mail address of the person with
139

whom you want to chat and then send them an invitation.
After your friend receives and approves the invitation, he will
be added to your contact list.
Figure 5.8
Chatting with a contact
140

Texting
Texting was introduced fairly early in the development of
mobile phones. Depending on your age, you likely either love
or loathe texting, but even older users often can find it a
useful means of communication — I receive at least as many
texts from my dad as I do from anyone else. Of course, early
phones had a significant limitation on texting, as typing
messages on a phone’s dialer was annoying, to say the least.
Typing the word “hello” on a traditional 10-key pad requires
13 keypresses: 44-33-555-555-666. Although some were able
to learn to type longer messages quite quickly, most limited
their messages or refused to adopt texting altogether because
it was simply too difficult to type.
Your Android phone, of course, removes this limitation
altogether, because whether it has a real keyboard or a virtual
on-screen one, you have the full set of keys to work with, so
typing “hello” is back to requiring only 5 keypresses. Even
better, if your phone supports Swype, it is really one
press-and-drag action.
Tip
141

Of course, you need to be careful when texting, as many
mobile carriers impose significant costs on the practice.
Most offer a plan with unlimited texting, but if you chose a
different plan, you likely are limited on the number of texts
you can send and receive before the bill starts going up. One
friend of mine recently reported that her then-12-year-old
daughter sent more than 18,000 text messages in a single
month. Thankfully for both all involved, the family had an
unlimited texting plan, as otherwise their phone bill likely
would have been in the thousands of dollars.
Sending Texts
Your phone should have a texting or SMS application built in.
Sending a text is as easy as launching the application,
selecting New text message, and then typing the name of the
contact to whom you want to send the message. Watch your
phone as you type, as it will offer suggestions of the contacts,
so you should not need to type the entire name. You also can
enter a phone number if you need to send a message to
someone not in your contact list.
After entering the contact, tap in the message section to type
your message. Be aware that the SMS system limits messages
to 160 characters. Most phones these days allow you to send
messages of any length, but longer messages likely are split.
If you do not have an unlimited texting plan, this can result in
a single message being counted as several against your plan
or, if you are over your limit, result in multiple charges per
message.
Tidbit
142

SMS stands for “Short Message Service.” Although many
think of texting as a relatively new phenomenon, it has been
around for quite some time — it evolved from the radio
telegraphy signals used in pagers, and the standards devices
use to send and receive messages were adopted in 1985,
although the first text message actually was sent on
December 3, 1992. The idea of keeping messages short —
the standard limits messages to 160 characters — was
adopted because the original idea was to transmit the
messages on otherwise-unused portions of the cell phone’s
signal. This allowed SMS to be supported instantly across
the mobile space, so unlike modern technologies with 3G
where available infrastructure often lags behind the user’s
desire to adopt, the SMS networks essentially already
existed by the time anyone started using it. Today, texting is
a massive industry, accounting by some estimates to close to
$100 billion in revenue to carriers, in large part because
although carriers charge customers to send and receive texts,
the cost to the carrier for sending the messages is essentially
zero.
143

Receiving Texts
When someone texts you, you will see an icon in your
Notifications Bar and hear your default notification sound.
Pull the Notifications Bar down to see who sent the message;
select the message to read the full text. From there, you can
type out a reply or press the Menu button and then delete to
remove the message.
Alternate App
Although the default SMS application is serviceable, other
alternatives do exist. Of particular note are chompSMS and
Handcent SMS. chompSMS includes a fully customizable
interface and the ability to create shortcuts for commonly
texted
words.
Handcent
SMS
is
likewise
extremely
customizable and has a Batch mode to send or delete
multiple
messages
at
once.
Google
Voice,
which
is
discussed in detail in Chapter 4, can also serve as a text
messaging application.
144

Social Networking
Social networking has become an important part in many
people’s lives. Whether you use it to reconnect to old friends
or keep in touch with business associates, social networking
allows even the most home-bound to maintain relationships.
The two biggest social networks today are Facebook and
Twitter, and your Android phone allows you to use both. Of
course, you can use your phone’s browser to view either of
them via their Web interfaces, but a variety of applications on
your phone make the process much easier.
Facebook
As of June 2010, more than 300 million people were using
Facebook, making it one of the five most-visited sites on the
Web. From keeping up with the latest news from family
members to playing social games, Facebook has become one
of the primary motivators for many people to be online.
The Facebook application gives you many of the primary
features of the site directly on your phone. Some Android
devices ship with the application preinstalled, but if yours did
not, you can find it, free-of-charge, in the Market.
When you first launch the application, you will be presented
with a log-in screen. Enter your e-mail address and password
— the same credentials you use to log into Facebook on the
Web — to connect.
145

After you log in, you will be shown a Helpful tips page.
Choose Finish to go to your News Feed and see the latest
posts from your contacts (see Figure 5.9).
From any page in the application, either select the Facebook
logo at the top of the screen or use your phone’s Back button
to access the application’s main page. This main page
displays links to the seven sections of the application, along
with pictures recently posted by your contacts. Select Profile
to view and edit your personal profile, write on your Wall, or
access your Facebook photos.
Returning to the main page, the Friends link displays your list
of friends. You can select the link for any friend to be taken to
his Profile page. The search box at the top of the screen
allows you to quickly filter the list to find a particular friend.
This is actually one of the features I like the most about the
Android
application,
as
Facebook’s
Web
interface
unfortunately makes it relatively cumbersome to get to this
list.
The Photos link on the main page displays your Facebook
photo gallery. The camera icon at the top of the screen
launches your phone’s camera application, enabling you to
take and upload a picture directly to Facebook; see Chapter 9
for more details on using this feature.
The Events link displays your Facebook calendar. Although
this is a feature of the Facebook Web site, I honestly never
knew it was there until I used the Android application. In this
case, the calendar is removing any excuses I might have had
when forgetting someone’s birthday.
146

From the main page, you can click Messages to view any
messages that have been sent to you, view updates from
Facebook, and see messages that you sent to your friends.
Finally, the Requests page displays any friend requests you
have pending. From here, you can either confirm or ignore the
request.
If you want to update your status, you can select the icon at
the top of the main page. This will take you back to the News
Feed page and, if you have a virtual keyboard, open the
keyboard to allow you to write your update.
Tidbit
To many users, the most important aspect of Facebook is the
games, such as Farmville and Mafia Wars. The Facebook
application does not yet directly support feeding your
Farmville habit, although future versions might. However,
many of the games, including Mafia Wars, can be played via
your phone’s browser. Simply go to the browser, navigate to
Facebook.com, sign in, and play as usual. Other games such
as Farmville, however, rely on Adobe Flash, and so you may
or may not be able to play them on your phone. See Chapter
11 for details on whether or not your phone currently
supports Flash Player.
147

Figure 5.9
The News Feed page
Facebook Widgets
The Facebook application allows you to install several
widgets on your home screen. These include a simple widget
that displays the most recent post to your News Feed and
allows you to quickly post your own updates, as well as a
148

Facebook Phonebook folder that gives you a quick way to call
any of your Facebook friends who have added their phone
numbers to their Facebook profile. See Chapter 1 for details
on adding widgets and folders to your home screen.
Twitter
Twitter is a social network with an interesting twist: All
messages or status updates on the system can be no more than
140 characters in length. Thus, it encourages, or some might
say forces, its users to post only short, concise messages.
Dozens of applications exist to allow you to use Twitter on
your Android device. My favorite is a fairly recent addition to
the
market:
Tweetdeck,
an
adaptation
of
a
popular
desktop-based Twitter client.
You can sign up for Twitter for free by either visiting
www.twitter.com on your browser in either your computer or
your phone, or you can sign up for the service directly
through Tweetdeck.
After you have an account, you need people to follow.
Tweetdeck enables you to search for others on Twitter and
then follow them. You can search by either Twitter username
or, if the user included it in her profile, real name. For
example, you can find me by either searching for my Twitter
username, robhuddles, or by my real name. When you find
someone you want to follow, simply select the Follow button
on that person’s profile page (see Figure 5.10), and you will
begin receiving their “tweets” or updates in what is known as
your timeline.
149

Alternate App
Another extremely popular Twitter client is the one created
by Twitter itself: Twitter for Android. Like all clients, this
one is free. Personally, I prefer the much-cleaner look and
feel of Tweetdeck and the way it integrates messages from
other social networks such as Facebook, but the official
Twitter application is nonetheless a viable alternative. A
close third place would be Twidroyd, which was the client I
actually used before the release of Tweetdeck
Tip
Twitter traditionally has had a very low adoption rate.
Estimates are that less than one-third of those who sign up
for the service actually use it regularly. Although I have had
many friends and family members sign up, few have adopted
150

Twitter and continue to use it. I almost joined that statistic: I
did not start using the service heavily until about six months
after I first joined. Part of the problem, I think, is that the
design and layout of Twitter.com — most people’s starting
point — is truly horrible and a definite barrier to adoption.
The other, I believe more important factor, is finding the
right people to follow. That is what it did for me: For those
first six months, I was following a bunch of people who
were, frankly, not interesting to me. I did not get hooked on
Twitter until I found several real-world friends who used it
as an effective communication tool and then, through them,
found many others to follow who were regularly posting
updates that I found interesting. So, if the service does not
grab you initially, give it time and try to find those key
people to follow who will make it interesting to you.
Tidbit
Strictly speaking, your tweets cannot contain images.
Instead, you can upload an image to one of the many free
services that exist to support Twitter images and then
include a link to the image in your tweet. If you use a service
recognized by Tweetdeck, such as Twitpic, then your image
automatically will appear in the application. Otherwise, your
followers will be able to click the link in the tweet and view
151

the image in the browser.
Web site addresses often can be quite long and can take up
most or all of your 140-character limit. Therefore, most
users who post links to Twitter use a URL-shortening
service such as bit.ly, which takes a long URL and converts
it into a much shorter version. Because users will not be able
to see the actual link, you always should include a
description of the page to which you are linking in your
tweet. The desktop version of Tweetdeck includes automatic
URL shortening, but as of this writing, the Android
application does not, so you will need to use your device’s
browser to go to bit.ly or one of the other services and
shorten URLs, which you can then paste into your tweet.
Thanks to the enforced brevity of tweets, you will be able to
read
the
entirety
of
each
message
in
your
Timeline.
Frequently, however, tweets will include pictures or links to
Web sites. In this cases, you can choose the message to view
it in its own window. If a picture is referenced in the tweet,
you can view it. If it included a link, you can select the link to
open the relevant page in your browser.
Social networks work only if they are a two-way street. Some
of the people you follow will decide to follow you back;
others will find you by looking through the lists of people
following those that they follow. You should contribute to the
community by posting tweets that will be read by your
followers. You can post these tweets by selecting the Update
button at the bottom of the Tweetdeck window.
Type your post — remember that it must be no more than 140
characters — and select Send. The counter to the left of the
152

button lets you know how many characters you have left. You
will need to get used to the short character count, but after
using the service for a while, you will get used to it.
Figure 5.10
Following someone on Twitter
153

Replying to Tweets
If you want to reach out to someone you follow, you can
target a message directly at him by beginning the post with
the @ symbol and his username. For example, you can send
me a message by posting to @robhuddles. These tweets will
appear in your target’s timeline and be visible to anyone who
follows both of you, but also will appear in a separate column
in Tweetdeck. The columns are not readily visible as the
application is optimized to fit on the small screen, but you can
swipe the application window to the left to see your Replies
column and view these posts. You also can reply to users you
follow by selecting one of their posts in your timeline.
Sending a Direct Message
You can send a message to another user, and only that user,
by typing the letter d, followed by a space and her username.
For example, you could direct message or DM me with d
robhuddles.
The
difference
between
replies
and
direct
messages is that any user who follows both you and the
recipient will see replies, but only the recipient sees direct
messages. However, in order to help prevent spam, Twitter
imposes a special limit on direct messages: you can send only
a DM to a user who you follow and who follows you back.
Therefore, if you follow me and I follow you, we can DM one
another, but if you are one of the million or so followers of a
celebrity such as Adam Savage of the TV show Mythbusters,
you cannot direct message him. By the way, Savage, who’s
Twitter username is @donttrythis, is well worth following.
154

Retweeting
An important aspect of building the Twitter community is
having users share information posted by other users, a
process known as retweeting. You can take any message on
your timeline and select it to view the details. Then select the
Retweet button. You can edit the message and then select
Send to post a copy of the original message to your timeline.
The idea here is that while I might follow Star Trek’s Wil
Wheaton, you might not, so when he posts something I find
interesting, I can retweet it. Now, even though you do not
follow Wheaton, you will see what he posted through me.
You can view the post and enjoy his wit or wisdom, and it
might, and in the case of Wheaton should, encourage you to
go ahead and start following him. Wheaton’s Twitter name,
by the way, is @wilw.
Unfollowing Users
You might, for a variety of reasons, choose to stop following
someone. Tweetdeck makes the process easy: simply select a
tweet from a user, and then select his username. You will see
a page that displays the profile of that user and includes an
unfollow button: the button with the person and the small “x”.
Simply select this button to stop following. In case you are
worried about offending someone, users are not informed
when others stop following them.
Facebook Integration
Tweetdeck integrates Facebook and other social networks
into your timeline. Each network’s items are displayed using
155

a different color. You can add these networks by pressing the
Menu button, then Accounts, and then selecting the plus sign
next to each network (see Figure 5.11). Enter the account
information for that network, and you will begin seeing its
updates.
Figure 5.11
Adding social networks
156

Chapter 6: Managing Your Time
The Skim
Google Calendar - To-Do List - Alarm Clock
When I quit my last full-time job and became an independent
contractor, I knew that I needed an effective way to keep
track of my schedule. Of particular importance was the ability
to have a calendar that I could access anywhere, anytime. I
also needed something that would be easy to use and require
little or no setup. As I was just embarking on a new career
and facing somewhat uncertain finances, whatever I ended up
using needed to be free. Thankfully, I quite quickly found a
solution that met all of those criteria: Google Calendar.
Google Calendar
Google Calendar’s Web-based interface ensured I could get to
it easily, and as I began to explore its features I realized it
offered even more advantages. Years later, Android’s built-in
integration with Google Calendar was a major selling point
for me, as the phone would allow me to have true anywhere
access to my schedule. As with other Google services, the
calendar is free. You can access it online by simply going to
www.google.com/calendar.
Using the Google Calendar on Your Computer
Before you take a look at the calendar on your phone, I would
like to spend some time showing you some of the key features
157

of the calendar on your computer. This way, you can get an
idea of how you can manage your time whether you are at
your computer or on your phone.
Viewing the Calendar
Your default calendar requires no setup: simply go to the
calendar page when you are logged into Google and you will
see it. Like other calendar applications, you have a variety of
views to use to see your calendar. You can switch between
these views using the buttons in the top-right corner of the
screen (see Figure 6.1). You can view the calendar by day, by
week, or by month. You also have an option of viewing four
days at a time, which is a view very similar to the weekly but
easier to work with on smaller screens, and in a list-style
Agenda view.
158

Figure 6.1
Use the buttons in the top-right corner to change how you
view the calendar. Shown here is the Month view.
Navigating the Calendar
The buttons in the top-left corner of the calendar allow you to
navigate. In any view, you can use the arrow buttons to move
back and forth; how far you move depends on the view, so the
right arrow moves you ahead one day in the Day view, but
one month in the Month view. At any point, you can click the
Today button to return to, well, today.
To the left of the calendar itself, you see a monthly grid
displayed at all times. You can click on any day to jump
there, use the arrows in this calendar to move forward or back
through the months, or click directly on the name of the
month to switch to Month view.
If you have a mouse with a scroll wheel, you can use it to
navigate as well. While your mouse pointer is over the main
calendar, scrolling up moves you backward in time, and
scrolling down moves you forward, based on your view. You
also can hover your mouse over the smaller monthly grid on
the left and scroll quickly through the months.
Add Events
You can add events to your calendar by simply clicking in the
place where you need the event. If you are in the Day, Week,
or 4 Days views, you can click in any half-hour space to add
159

an event for that time; in the Month view, click on any day to
automatically add an all-day event. The only exception here is
the Agenda view, which does not allow you to add events by
clicking in the window, although you can still add events
using the other methods outlined later in this section.
When you add an event, you need to provide a name for the
event. However, you often need to change other details of the
event. For example, all events added in the Day, Month, and 4
Days views are assumed to be one-hour events, and all events
added in the Month view are assumed to be all-day events. As
the majority of things I need to track on the calendar are
all-day events, I tend to stay in the Month view, but there are
times when I need shorter events. If your schedule is better
viewed in one of the other views, you likewise will encounter
events that are more or less than one hour. You can change
the timing and other details of an event by clicking the Edit
event details link. This will display the event in its own page,
from which you can change the timing, along with adding
details, such as the location and description of the event,
configuring reminders, and changing how the calendar shows
your time if you share the calendar with others.
You also can add events by clicking the Create Event button
on the far-left side of the screen. This takes you directly to the
event details page to add any and all information you need.
The Quick Add link opens a small window into which you
can type the name, time, and date of the event; the window
includes an example of how to add an event. Both of these
work in any view, including Agenda; in fact, they are the only
ways to add events while in Agenda view.
160

You can edit an event’s details at any time or delete the event
by clicking on it in the calendar and then selecting the
appropriate option.
Tip
You quickly can alter the starting time for an event by
including the time in the name if you use the Month view.
For example, in the Month view, you can create a one-hour
event by entering “Dinner with Editor 6pm”. The calendar
will add an event called Dinner with Editor, and set it as a
one-hour event beginning at 6pm. This is a really great
feature that saves me a lot of time when I need to add events
that are not all-day. Unfortunately, it does not work on other
views.
Adding Other Calendars
Before switching to Google Calendar, I was a longtime
Outlook calendar user. In Outlook, I used to differentiate
between business and personal events by color-coding, and it
took me some time to figure out how to mimic this
functionality in Google. As it turns out, you cannot directly
color-code events; instead, you need to create individual
161

calendars for each set of events you want to track. Although
this seemed to require a lot of extra work when I first started
using the calendar, I have discovered that it is, in fact, an
extremely effective way to work. Separating events onto
individual calendars allows you to quickly filter your calendar
view to see only the events on that calendar. Also, you can
share individual calendars with others, so, for example, I have
several clients who have access to my work calendar so that
they can know when I already am scheduled elsewhere, but
they do not see my personal calendar. Likewise, I keep all
school-related events for my kids on a separate calendar that I
then can share easily with their grandparents.
You can add a new calendar by simply clicking the Add link
in the My Calendars section on the left side of the screen.
You need to give the calendar a name, but all of the other
settings are optional. I have never exactly figured out where
Google displays the description, so I never provide it. Users
who work with people in other time zones likely will find the
per-calendar time zone setting useful, while sharing the
calendar will be discussed later.
Each calendar is automatically color-coded, which will
determine the color of the bar indicating events on that
calendar, but you can change the color by clicking on the
small arrow to the right of the calendar’s name after you get
back to the main calendar screen. At any time, you can return
to the calendar’s settings page by clicking the same arrow and
selecting Calendar settings.
Any event you add will be automatically added to your main
or default calendar, but you can easily set an event to go onto
a different calendar by choosing it in the drop-down list that
162

will now appear when you add an event. You also can add an
event to a calendar by clicking on the calendar’s arrow in the
left margin and selecting Create event on this calendar.
Sharing Calendars
You
can
share
your
calendars
with
friends,
family,
co-workers, clients, and anyone else you might want. Each
calendar can be configured individually; again, this is one of
the biggest advantages of the Google system of separating
events onto individual calendars. You can share a calendar by
clicking the arrow button to the right of the calendar name in
the left margin of the screen and selecting Calendar Settings.
Then click the Share this calendar link.
You now have two options: You can make the calendar
public, allowing anyone with the proper URL to access it, or
you can share it with specific people. Many organizations rely
on public calendars to share event information with members.
As mentioned earlier, I rely on sharing my calendars with
individuals such as my wife, my parents, and select clients.
When sharing with individuals, you can enter their e-mail
addresses and then decide what permissions they have on the
calendar. You can allow them to merely view the calendar,
view your time as free or busy, make changes to events, or
make changes and manage permissions for others.
Adding Public Calendars
Google, along with many third parties, make public calendars
available. Although you cannot edit these calendars, you can
163

display their events in your calendar. You can add one of
these calendars by clicking the Add button under the Other
calendars section on the left side of the screen and selecting
Browse Interesting Calendars. You can add holidays from just
about any country in the world, add the schedule for your
favorite sports team, or add birthdays from your contacts,
moon phases, and more. After you find a calendar you like,
simply click the Subscribe link.
Adding Individual Calendars
If another Google user has shared a calendar with you, you
can add it to your calendar. Click the same Add link you used
earlier to access public calendars, but select Add a friend’s
calendar. You need to add the contact’s e-mail address in the
box that appears. If the calendar has been shared with you, it
simply is added. If not, you are given the opportunity to send
an e-mail asking the person to share his or her calendar.
Using Google Calendar on Your Phone
Now that you understand how to use and manage the calendar
on your computer, you can switch over and look at using it on
your phone.
Viewing the Calendar
Your phone will have shipped with a Calendar application,
which will be available in your Applications bin. The
calendar will open in the Day view, showing today and any
events you might have scheduled for today (see Figure 6.2).
164

Figure 6.2
The default Day view on the Calendar
Switching Views
You can switch to other views by pressing your phone’s
Menu button, which will display options to view the calendar
in the Agenda, Week, and Month views. Ironically, the
designed-for-small-screens 4 Days view is not available on
165

the very small mobile screens. The daily and weekly views
display as many details of the events as they can in the space
available,
and
the
Month
view
simply
displays
bars
representing events (see Figure 6.3). You can select any day
on the Month view to switch back to Day view to see the
details of the event.
Figure 6.3
The Month view on the phone
166

Adding Events on Your Phone
You can add events on your phone basically the same way
you add them on the computer. In the Day and Month views,
long-press at the time you want to add the event and then
select New event from the menu that appears. This displays
the Create event screen that allows you to add all of the same
information for the event that you would have on the
computer.
Viewing Calendars
Any events on any calendars you have set up on your
computer will display on your phone. You can press the
Menu button, then More, then View calendars to see a list of
your calendars. From this screen, you can press Menu again
to add another calendar, or uncheck calendars you don’t want
to see on your phone.
Reminders
Events can have reminders associated with them to let you
know when they are about to begin. When using the computer
interface, reminders simply send an e-mail at the scheduled
time before the event, but on your phone, they display in your
Notification Bar and will play a sound — for me, at least, a
much more effective reminder than simply receiving an
e-mail. You can set the reminder when you create the event
by
pressing
the
phone’s
Menu
button,
selecting
Add
reminder, and then selecting the appropriate value in the
pop-up menu. You can select the X button to the left of the
Reminder pop-up to remove a reminder if you do not want it.
167

You also can add a reminder to an event by pressing the
Menu button while adding an event.
Calendar Settings
You can access the calendar’s settings by pressing the Menu
button from any of the calendar’s main views, and then
selecting More and then Settings. The primary settings
revolve around how reminders should work, so you can set
the ringtone to play and the default reminder time. You also
have the option of setting whether the Week view displays all
seven days or just Monday–Friday.
Using a Calendar Home Screen Widget
Some varieties of Android may include a home screen widget
for the calendar (and can download some from the Market,
too). The version that ships on the Droid X includes one that
displays the current date and any events happening either
today or tomorrow; I can select the widget to open the
calendar’s Day view (see Figure 6.4). Other varieties of
Android may include a slightly different widget.
168

Figure 6.4
The Droid X Calendar widget
To-Do List
The Android operating system does not include a to-do list
application by default. However, many to-do applications
exist in the Market. One popular free application is Astrid.
169

When you first launch the application, you get an essentially
blank screen with a text box at the bottom for you to begin
entering tasks. After entering a task name, you can simply
select the blue plus sign to the left of the text box to add the
task.
You also can tap the icon to the right of the task name to open
a truly impressive list of options for the task (see Figure 6.5).
These options can be accessed for an already-existing task by
long-pressing it in the task list and selecting Edit Task.
The Advanced tab of the settings enables you to configure
task reminders, control its visibility, and set how often it
should repeat. The Add-ons tab enables you to add the task to
your calendar and track your time while working on the task.
170

Figure 6.5
Basic task options, which show only a few of the many
choices available to manage tasks
Alarm Clock
I have never much cared to rely on the alarm clocks in hotel
rooms, because I tend to have problems figuring out how to
set them, and I am always afraid that the volume will either
171

be too high or too low or that the radio alarm will be set to
some station I would never want to wake up to. All of those
concerns are a thing of the past thanks to the alarm clock
provided in my phone. The Alarm application is included as
part
of
the
Android
system
and
is
available
in
the
Applications bin.
The alarm is incredibly simple to use: Select one of the
alarms to access its settings. You can name the alarm if you
want, or simply set its time. You also can configure exactly
which ringtone or sound you want to use, and you can even
configure the alarm to play one of the MP3s or videos on your
phone. For those who are not inclined to wake up when the
alarm goes off, there is even a backup alarm setting to play a
loud beep if you ignore the main alarm.
When the alarm goes off, you can simply slide the bar to
respond to it (see Figure 6.6). The settings screen enables you
to configure whether sliding the bar dismisses the alarm or
sets it to snooze so that it will remind you again in a few
minutes.
A nice feature of the alarm is the ability to save as many
alarms as you want. The application comes with three alarms
set by default, but you can press the Menu button to add
more, so if you have a series of important events to which you
need reminders throughout the day, you can set them all at
once.
The alarm clock also can serve as a timer. By selecting the
Timer tab at the top of the screen, you can set the amount of
time you want to count down from and choose Start (see
Figure 6.7). The timer’s settings, accessible via the Menu
172

button, enable you to change the sound that should play when
the timer goes off, set the phone to vibrate, and set a backup
alarm.
Figure 6.6
The alarm
173

Figure 6.7
Setting the timer
174

Part
II:
Maps,
Music,
Pictures, and the Web
Chapter 7: Maps
The Skim
Using Google Maps - Search in Maps - Getting Directions
- Getting There without a Car - Throw Away Your GPS
Device - View Live Traffic - Other Layers - Driving with
Your Phone - Street View - Google Places - Install a Compass
- Find Out Where You Were with My Tracks - Use Google
Earth
I have to admit to being something of a map geek. For as long
as I can remember, I have loved exploring maps. In college,
my roommate and I had an awesome map of Antarctica on
our wall; someday, I need to ask him what happened to it. I
cannot bear to hear of someplace and not have any idea where
it is.
The first generation of online maps did not foster my love of
cartography. Those early maps were so painfully slow that
they managed to suck whatever pleasure one might have
gleaned from them; certainly, simply exploring the world was
not a realistic option when each page could take 30 or more
seconds to load. Today, however, not only can I waste hours
randomly scrolling through maps online, I can do it on my
175

phone. As a friend of mine likes to say, living in the future
sure is cool.
Using Google Maps
Google Maps changed how many of us get directions in as
big a way as Google Search changed the ways in which we
find information online. Google certainly did not invent
online maps, but it did figure out how to do it right, by
providing an interface through which users could easily scroll
around on the map and zoom in and out, and most important,
it made sure that it would all be fast. Later, Google added
services that made Maps even cooler, with things like satellite
imagery and traffic reports.
Although finding directions from home works, being able to
take those directions with you without having to waste paper
is even better, and, of course, Google integrated its Maps
application into Android from the very beginning.
You can open Maps from the Applications bin, but it is one of
those applications that you are almost certainly going to want
to add to your home screen as a shortcut. When you first open
Maps, it should open to your current location, thanks to your
phone’s GPS system (see Figure 7.1).
When viewing a map, you can zoom in and out using the
buttons in the lower-right corner of the screen. If you have a
phone such as the Droid X that includes multitouch support,
you can also zoom in and out by pinching the screen — place
two fingers relatively far from each other and bring them
closer while remaining in contact with the screen to zoom out,
or use the opposite action to zoom in.
176

Figure 7.1
Maps, showing my location (blue arrow) by default
Tip
177

Watch your battery! Few things drain your phone’s battery
faster than GPS, so whenever you have Maps or any other
application that uses it running, you are reducing your
battery power dramatically. Merely locking your phone
while Maps is up does not shut down the application nor
turn off GPS, which is something I learned the hard way on
my first Android phone. You need to avoid long-term use of
GPS anytime you are not going to be able to plug in your
phone either while you use it or shortly after.
Search in Maps
Most of the time, when you use the Web-based interface for
Google Maps, you begin by searching for an address. You can
do the same in Maps on your phone — simply press the Menu
button and select Search. Type the address you want to find
and select the magnifying glass button. You also can select
the microphone button and speak your destination; this is a
particularly useful, not to mention safe, feature for using
Maps while driving. Assuming that the address you searched
for was found, its location will now display on the map.
178

Getting Directions
After you find a location on Maps, you can get directions to
that location. When your search location appears, select the
balloon tip that is displaying the address to see a screen with
additional options for that location. Select the second icon
along the top, and you will be given the choice between
Navigate and Get directions. See the next section for details
on Navigate; for now, select Get directions. Another screen
then pops up with My location in the top box and the address
you searched in the bottom. Slect Go to have the map
generate driving directions.
Maps now displays a list of turn-by-turn directions to your
location. You can select Show on map at the top of the screen
to return to the Map view, where your route will be
highlighted. Arrows at the bottom of the Map view enable
you to step through the directions, while the small square icon
in the bottom-left corner displays the directions list view
again.
Tip
179

Whether searching on your phone or on the Web, you do not
need to know a specific address in order to find a location in
Google Maps. You can search for an intersection by typing
the names of the streets, so, for example, you could search
for “Pennsylvania Ave and Executive Ave, Washington,
DC” to find the corner near the White House. You also can
search for local businesses near an address or landmark, so
searching for “hotels near San Diego convention center” will
give you ideas of where to stay for next year’s Comic-Con.
One of the coolest tips, though, will likely work only on
your phone: searching “pizza near me” will show all of the
pizza restaurants near your current location.
Getting There without a Car
If you would prefer to get where you need by foot, bicycle, or
bus, Maps can help. When you look up an address and choose
to get directions, you see four buttons along the top of the
screen, just under the addresses. The first, a picture of a car, is
the one that is selected by default and gives you driving
directions. The second button with the bus picture gives you
directions via public transit. The transit directions use any
form of public transit available in your area, including bus,
train, subway, and ferry. The directions show options based
on your time of departure (see Figure 7.2), and the system
creates a route that takes into account necessary transfers. A
particularly nice feature is the included indicators for the fares
each leg of the trip will require.
Bicycle and walking directions (with appropriate icons) take
into account the differences afforded by those choices. Bike
routes take into account special bike trails, and in big cities,
180

they stick as much as possible to routes with dedicated bike
lanes and avoid rider-unfriendly parts of the route like big
hills. Walking directions ignore things like one-way roads
and, similar to bike routes, keep you on as flat a route as
possible and stick to walking trails if possible.
Figure 7.2
Getting there by bus
181

Throw Away Your GPS Device
In early 2010, Google rolled out a new, free application to
many
Android
users,
Navigate,
which
provides
audio
turn-by-turn navigation to your destination. Given that I
frequently travel to new cities, I had at times considered
purchasing a dedicated GPS device, but I am very glad I
waited. Why would I need a special device, along with its
monthly subscription fees, when my phone does it for me?
Whenever you search for an address and then ask for
directions in Maps, it will ask whether you want to use Maps
(Get directions) or Navigate. Navigate generally takes a few
seconds to load, but after it does, you will see your route
highlighted on the screen. The orientation switches to that
roughly first-person perspective you probably have seen in
dedicated GPS navigation systems (see Figure 7.3). You then
receive turn-by-turn directions as you drive, using Navigate’s
built-in text-to-speech voice, which my daughter decided was
named Sierra.
When you reach your destination, you should turn Navigate
off. If it keeps running, even in the background, it will drain
your battery very quickly. Press the Menu button on your
phone and choose Exit Navigate to close it and save battery
life.
By the way, I was kidding in the heading about throwing
away your GPS device. Like all modern electronics, it has all
kinds of nasty chemicals in it, so be sure to recycle it instead!
182

Figure 7.3
Turn-by-turn directions, thanks to Navigate
View Live Traffic
Maps will show you live traffic reports, allowing you to route
yourself around problem areas. You can turn this feature on
by pressing the Menu button on your phone and then selecting
Layers. Select Traffic, and the map updates to display traffic
183

reports. Green lines on roads mean that everything is fine;
yellow lines mean you should expect traffic to be slow but
still moving, and red roads are the ones you want to avoid
(see Figure 7.4). Road hazards are displayed as well: An
orange triangle icon signifies construction, while an icon of a
collision signifies some other hazard, such as an accident or
disabled vehicle.
Tidbit
Google collects traffic data from a variety of sources, but
one of them is reading this book right now. Your
GPS-enabled phone actually transmits your location and
speed to Google in real time. Although I had long suspected
this was the case, I actually confirmed it for myself one
evening when I was driving along a rural road. Maps
showed the route as green, which it was because I was the
only car for miles. However, at one point I got hungry and
pulled into a McDonald’s drive-thru. As I was waiting for
my food, I noticed that the road I had been on, which was
still deserted, now was showing red, because the only data
Google had at that moment was coming from a car that was
stopped. By the way, if this triggers any lingering 1984 fears
you might have, you can choose to opt out of the My
184

Location system on your phone. Details on how to do this
can
be
found
at
www.google.com/support/mobile/bin/
answer.py?hl=en&answer=81875.
Figure 7.4
Monday afternoon traffic in New York City — Yuck!
185

Other Layers
The Layers feature in Google Maps allows you to see the
world in a variety of different ways. Traffic is a layer, but
others exist as well. Each of these layers can be accessed by
pressing your phone’s Menu button, and then selecting
Layers.
Satellite Photos
Instead of the traditional drawn map, you can view your route
using satellite images. Personally, I tend to prefer the map
view when I need to travel, but I have found the satellite view
useful on occasion when trying to find a location: Seeing
what the area around my destination actually looks like can be
very helpful when I get close.
Terrain Maps
Another layer available on Google Maps is Terrain. Hikers
would find this particularly useful in planning routes.
Buzz
Google Buzz integrates social networking with Google Maps
and the company’s other services such as Mail. With Buzz,
you post status updates, similar to Facebook or Twitter. Each
user’s updates then appear on the map as a small thought
bubble icon. You can select the icon to read the status, or
select the colorful icon in the bottom-right corner of the map
to post your own.
186

Latitude
Google Latitude enables you to share your location with
others and easily connect when nearby. When you select the
Latitude layer, it displays your current location. You can
select your name to display a list of options, including Send
location to others. You have the option to broadcast this
location on Facebook, Twitter, or other social networks, as
well as text or e-mail it. If you join Latitude through its
dedicated app, you also can send and receive invitations from
friends
and
then
easily
discover
their
location.
More
information on Latitude is available at www.google.com/
mobile/latitude.
Recent Places
The final set of options on the Layers menu lists the locations
you have most recently searched, making it easy to look up a
recent location and display it on the map.
More Layers
Select the More Layers button at the bottom of the Layers
menu screen to see additional choices. The My Maps option
displays maps you have created and saved on the Google
Maps Web page. More details on creating and saving maps
can
be
found
at
http://maps.google.com/support/bin/
static.py?hl=en&page=guide.cs&guide=21670&topic=21676.
The Bicycling layer displays local bike paths and routes (see
Figure 7.5), and Wikipedia overlays icons on the map that
link to Wikipedia entries for your area. The Transit Lines
layer displays bus, train, and subway maps (see Figure 7.6).
187

Finally, Favorite Places enables you to view maps created by
other users.
Figure 7.5
Bike paths in Sacramento, California
188

Figure 7.6
New York City’s transit map
Driving with Your Phone
Features like Navigate are obviously most useful when used
in your car. They are less useful, however, if your phone is
simply sitting on the center console or in your pocket; in
order to really benefit from the turn-by-turn directions, you
189

need to be able to see your phone. You can maximize both the
safety and convenience of these features by purchasing a car
dock, which is a device designed to securely hold your phone
on your dashboard. Each model of phone has a car dock
specifically designed for it, so be sure to get the right one.
Most car docks include a car charger, so if you are planning
on getting a dock, you may not need to spend the additional
money on a separate charger.
Many newer Android phones include a CarDock application
that puts the phone into a state ready to use in your car. The
phone automatically should detect when it has been put in the
dock and switch to car mode by itself; if it does not, you can
launch the application manually. On the Droid X, the
application includes six oversized, easy-to-hit buttons. Five
are preprogrammed for music, maps, calling, voice search,
and closing the application. The sixth is customizable and can
be linked to any other application on your phone. When I first
began playing with CarDock, I set this sixth button to the
camera, which seemed kind of fun. When I was done playing,
though, I reset it to launch the application I use the most in
the car: StreamFurious, which allows me to listen to Internet
radio stations.
Whenever I drive, I keep the phone in the dock. I usually
launch StreamFurious and set it to the station I want to listen
to, and then select the My Location button in CarDock. This
ties directly into Google Maps, so if you have a layer already
turned on, it will display; I almost always leave Traffic on.
CarDock includes a few additional features, such as a speed
and direction indicator in the bottom-left corner of the map.
You can also search for a location and turn on Navigate to
190

have your docked phone look and act just like a dedicated
GPS device.
When you receive a call while the phone is docked, it will
interrupt whatever else the application may be doing to
display the incoming call. If you have a Bluetooth headset or
other hands-free device, you can accept the call by simply
selecting the appropriate button. If you do not have a
hands-free device, you can still accept the call, at which point
CarDock will turn on the speaker phone, in theory allowing
you to have your conversation without needing to hold the
phone to your ear. I say “theoretically” because although it
does work, you will find that the noise in your car will likely
be too loud to really talk on the phone this way.
A particularly nice feature of the dock is the integrated jack
on the back that allows you to plug your phone in, because
many features — particularly Navigate — would otherwise
quickly drain the battery. Be aware, however, that your phone
is likely sitting exposed on your dashboard and is liable to
overheating, something that has happened to me on several
occasions when it has been more than 100 degrees outside.
When the phone begins to overheat, the first thing it will do is
stop charging, so you should glance at the Notification Bar
every now and then and note whether you are still charging. If
it occurs, remove the phone from the dock and move it
someplace out of the sun until it can cool down. It is also
possible that given that you are using the screen, GPS,
Navigate, and other applications, the car charger will not be
able to actually charge the phone, but will instead just keep it
from discharging. Thus, you may find that when you arrive at
your destination, your battery will not be at 100 percent.
191

Many newer cars include an input jack to allow you to plug a
device into the car stereo. Because your phone uses a standard
jack for the headphone, you can plug your phone in and listen
to music, Internet radio, or Navigate’s directions over the
car’s speakers.
Tidbit
GPS stands for Global Positioning System. Although
consumer-level GPS is relatively new, the technology has
been around for a while. The U.S. government began work
on it in 1973, with the system becoming fully operational by
1995. The system relies on between 24 and 32 satellites and
is still funded by the U.S. government and run by the U.S.
Air Force. The system was designed to allow the Air Force
and Navy to more precisely locate and control military
assets, but following the 1983 destruction of Korean Air
Lines flight 007, which was shot down after straying
accidentally
into
restricted
Soviet
airspace,
the
U.S.
government opened the system to civilian use as well.
Today’s GPS is capable of providing a location anywhere on
the planet to within 20 meters, or about 65 feet.
192

Street View
Street view is perhaps one of Google’s best-known features of
Maps, so it is fairly surprising that although it is available on
your phone, it is very well hidden. Street view allows you to
see photographs of an area on the map, complete with
360-degree views. If you need to find a business or something
in an unfamiliar location, this can allow you to see the area to
which you are traveling. Note that like satellite photos, Street
view is not live.
To access Street view, you need to zoom in on the map. As
you get close to the ground, you begin to see buildings
rendered in 3-D. At this point, you can long-press on a point
on the map, which displays an address. Select the address to
bring up a screen with details of that address, and you should
see an icon on the far right of a person with an arrow. If the
icon is grayed out, you have not zoomed in far enough to use
Street view.
If you have zoomed in enough, the icon will be active, and
selecting it will display that location in Street view (see
Figure 7.7). You can swipe your finger to turn the view
around and see around you, or use the dark arrows to move
forward or backward.
193

Figure 7.7
Google Headquarters in Mountain View, California, as seen
on Street view
Google Places
Recent versions of Google Maps include a new feature called
Google Places, which displays information on restaurants,
coffee shops, bars, hotels, attractions, ATMs, and gas stations
194

near your current location. Places can be accessed by
selecting the pushpin icon at the top of the Google Maps
screen. Selecting this icon displays a menu of categories;
selecting a category from this menu displays businesses
matching that category. You then can select any of these
locations to bring up more details about a business, get
directions to it, or call the business directly.
Install a Compass
Your phone includes an internal compass that, among other
things, ensures that the Navigate arrow is pointing in the right
direction.
The
Android
Market
includes
a
Compass
application that displays this directional awareness as a
traditional compass (see Figure 7.8).
When you first launch the compass, it will prompt you to
calibrate it by waving the phone in a figure-8 pattern several
times. You might want to do this when no one else is around
because you will look rather silly doing it.
You can press the Menu button to change the settings of the
compass, including changing the type to look like an antique
compass or a GPS device that includes your speed, pitch, and
roll.
195

Figure 7.8
The Compass application
Find Out Where You Were with My Tracks
The My Tracks application, available in the Market, enables
you to track your location while walking, hiking, or other
activities. These recorded paths then can be uploaded and
saved and shared either as custom Google Maps or Google
196

Docs. You can also view live statistics of your path while you
go.
The first time you launch My Tracks, you need to agree to the
license agreement and then, if you want, read the provided
help file. After that, you are taken to a map that displays your
current location. You can press the Menu button on your
phone and select Record Track to begin recording. Then
simply walk, run, hike, or drive the path you want to take.
While on your route, you can select the map and then select
the right arrow button that appears to view a screen of
statistics about your track, or the left arrow to view an
elevation profile.
When you have completed your path or route, you can again
press the Menu button and then select Stop Recording, which
displays a Track Details page, where you can give the track a
name, input the type of activity, and describe the track. When
complete, select Save.
To share the track, select the plus icon in the bottom-right
corner of the screen and select the option you want to use.
The Send to Google option uploads the map to either Google
Maps or Google Docs, and Share with Friends enables you to
e-mail a link to the map or send the track in one of several file
formats.
Use Google Earth
Few applications have brought out the map geek in me more
than Google Earth. Earth is an amazing application that
combines Google’s database of satellite imagery together in a
single, easy-to-explore interface. Earth was developed by
197

another company, Keyhole, and released under its current
Google Earth name in 2005. It now can be downloaded for
free from the Android Market, bringing all of its coolness to
your phone.
When you first launch Google Earth, you can pretend
momentarily that you are an astronaut, as you will see Earth
from a distance that so far has only been viewed by the
Apollo astronauts.
You can rotate the globe by simply sliding your finger over it,
and zoom in by either moving two fingers apart from one
another on the screen or by double-tapping. Eventually,
details begin to appear. When you are in far enough to make
out details, you will see yellow squares marking designated
locations; selecting any of these will bring up a screen
detailing that location. You can press your phone’s Back
button to return to the main Google Earth screen from these
detail pages.
Normally, dragging your finger on the screen moves you
around the map. You can select the Look Around icon in the
bottom-left corner of the screen to change this behavior. With
Look Around enabled, dragging your finger will rotate your
view 360 degrees around the center of the screen. You can
select the icon again to turn off Look Around, and select the
compass in the top right-corner of the screen to return to a
north-is-up orientation.
With Look Around turned on, you can tilt your view so that
rather than looking from above, you can see the world from
more of an angle. You can tilt down by dragging upward on
the screen (see Figure 7.9), or tilt up by dragging down on the
198

screen. Although the directions may seem backward — you
drag up to tilt down, and drag down to tilt up — they actually
make a lot of sense when you are interacting with the
application.
No Google application would be complete without Search,
and Google Earth is no different. Press the Menu button on
your phone and select Search, or press your phone’s Search
button. Then type what you are looking for, whether it is an
address, landmark, business, or just about anything else. For
the most part, the same searches that work on Google Maps
work here. The main difference is the cool factor: in Maps,
you are simply taken to your destination, while in Earth, you
get to fly there. When the original Google Earth application
was released, one reviewer described the animation as an
“ICBM view,” which is apt as it will look like you take off,
fly over the planet, and then dive in on your location (see
Figure 7.10).
Unfortunately, many of the desktop application’s really neat
features are missing in this first version of the Android
application, including the ability to go back in time and see
older satellite photos of regions (using this ability to see
pictures
of
New
Orleans
before
and
after
Katrina
is
particularly moving) and exploring the Moon and Mars.
Hopefully, Google will add them as time goes by.
Tidbit
199

Unfortunately, the list of Android devices that support Earth
is far shorter than the list of ones that do. According to the
Google Earth Web site at http://earth.google.com/support/
bin/answer.py?hl=enandanswer=174898,
only
the
Nexus
One and Droids that run at least Android 2.1 support it. If
you are unsure whether your phone supports this app, simply
search for Google Earth in the Market — if it shows up, then
you are in luck; if not, then sorry. That is bad news for most
Android users, but of course, the good news is that
Android-based devices are only going to get better as time
goes on, and so is your phone.
200

Figure 7.9
Seeing Sacramento at an angle
201

Figure 7.10
“ICBM view” of Google Earth
202

Chapter 8: Music
The Skim
Preparing Music for Your Phone - Downloading Music to
Your Phone - Purchasing Music via Amazon MP3 - Listening
to Music - Creating Playlists - Adding a Home Screen Widget
for Music - Using Songs as Ringtones and Notification
Sounds - Listening to Internet Radio - Identifying Music with
Shazam - Downloading and Listening to Podcasts
My entire music collection exists today as MP3s. We have a
really cool CD rack we bought from Ikea on the wall of our
living room, but honestly it exists mostly for decoration. On
the rare occasion that I still purchase a CD, I bring it home
and immediately rip it or convert it to MP3s on the computer.
The CD itself finds its way to the Ikea case, never to be seen
or heard again. I know I am not alone here, either; I cannot
think of anyone I know who still uses actual CDs as their
primary source for music, and why would they? Why would I
want to listen to a single album, and have to keep interrupting
myself to change albums, when I can create a playlist of all of
the songs I want to listen to and just let it play? This is even
more true when you consider that today, you can bring your
music collection with you anywhere you go. Best of all, you
do not need to buy and carry around a separate MP3 player,
either.
203

Preparing Music for Your Phone
In order to transfer music from a CD to your phone, you first
need to convert it to the correct format. Dozens of programs
exist that are capable of performing this task, but the most
popular is Apple’s iTunes application. If you own a Mac, you
already have iTunes installed; if you use Windows, you can
download it free from www.apple.com.
Ripping CDs
You can transfer the music from a CD to your computer’s
hard drive via a process known as ripping the CD. To do this,
simply insert the CD into your computer’s drive with iTunes
running. The program will detect the CD and ask whether you
want to import it into your iTunes library (see Figure 8.1).
Click Yes, and the program begins ripping the songs from the
CD.
When the ripping process is complete, you can click Music
from the Library menu on the left side of the screen to see the
songs that have been downloaded (see Figure 8.2). Unlike
many programs, iTunes does not directly display the location
of the music on your hard drive, as it assumes that you will
use the program to perform all tasks on the songs. However,
if you are curious as to where exactly the music is stored, you
can right-click on a track and select Get Info. The file’s
location is displayed at the bottom of the dialog box.
204

Figure 8.1
iTunes asking whether I want to import a CD onto my
machine
205

Figure 8.2
The CD’s tracks, now transferred to my computer, displaying
in the iTunes library
Change iTunes Settings
iTunes automatically converts your tracks to M4A format.
This format should be fully supported by your Android device
and practically any other media player you want to use, but if
you need or want to use the more common MP3 format, you
can change the settings in iTunes to accommodate that. Click
Edit and then Preferences. On the first tab of the Preferences
dialog box, select Import Settings. In the Import Settings
dialog box, change the Import Using drop-down from the
default AAC Encoder to MP3 Encoder. The Preferences
206

dialog box also can be used to change the default location to
which iTunes copies music files by clicking the Advanced
tab, and then Change.
Download Album Art
iTunes can download album art for your albums, which
displays both in the iTunes library when you listen to the
album on your computer as well as on your phone. In order to
download album art, however, you first need to create an
account with iTunes and log into the iTunes store. You can do
this directly within iTunes by clicking the iTunes Store link
on the menu at the left. Then click Sign In in the top-right
corner. If you already have an account, you can enter your
username and password; if you do not have an account yet,
click Create New Account (see Figure 8.3).
After you are logged in, you can return to your music library.
Then right-click the album and select Get Album Artwork.
You need to confirm that, yes, you really did want to
download the artwork — I would suggest that you select the
Do not ask me again option on this useless dialog box — and
the album art will appear.
207

Figure 8.3
Log into iTunes using an existing account or create a new
one.
Downloading Music to Your Phone
iTunes does not support directly synching songs between
itself and non-Apple devices, but you can still transfer music
between your computer and phone manually. Although some
other media players on your computer may support directly
transferring songs, the steps outlined in this chapter work
regardless of the software you use.
To transfer your music, you first need to plug your phone into
your computer’s USB port and mount your SD card. You can
208

mount your card by pulling down the Notification Bar and
selecting USB connection. Then depending on your version
of Android, select either Mount card or PC Mode or USB
Mass Storage. See Chapter 1 for a discussion on the
differences between PC Mode and USB Mass Storage.
When mounted, your phone’s SD card should appear as a
drive on your computer. From here, you can drag-and-drop
music files from whatever folder iTunes stored them in to the
Music folder on your phone.
Tip
No discussion of working with music files would be
complete without a discussion of copyright issues. When
you purchase an audio CD, you have the legal right to copy
that music to another medium such as your computer so long
as you are going to use that music only for you to listen to.
You cannot distribute the music files to others or use it for
any public performance. You can find many more details on
this and other issue surrounding copyright from the U.S.
Copyright Office’s Web site at www.copyright.gov/.
209

Purchasing Music via Amazon MP3
In addition to copying music from your computer to your
phone, you also can purchase music directly on your phone.
Although many applications exist to do this, most Android
phones come with a preinstalled application to enable you to
purchase music from Amazon. You can launch the Amazon
MP3 app from your Application Launcher. From here, you
can either search for a song or album or browse bestselling
albums, songs, or genres (see Figure 8.4). When you find
what you are looking for, you can select the album to display
the tracks. From here, you can either purchase the entire
album or individual songs by selecting the price and then
selecting it again when it turns into a Buy button.
Next, you are prompted to log into your Amazon.com
account; you can click the link at the top of the dialog box to
create one if necessary. As soon as you log in, the purchase
process begins automatically and cannot be cancelled, so be
sure you want to purchase the album before entering your
username and password.
Note that the Amazon MP3 store is not available in some
countries, so it is possible that your phone will not support it,
depending on your location.
210

Figure 8.4
Amazon MP3’s starting page
Listening to Music
After you have your music on your phone, you can use
Android’s built-in music player to listen to it. Simply launch
the Music app from your Application Launcher to see a list of
the albums on your phone (see Figure 8.5). Choose an album
211

to see a list of the tracks, and select any song to begin
playing.
While a song is playing, you can pause it or move to the
previous or next song using the buttons at the bottom of the
screen. You also can drag the slider to move backward or
forward through a song or press and hold your finger on the
Forward or Back buttons to fast-forward or fast-reverse the
current song. Higher on the screen, just below the album art,
are three buttons that enable you to return to the track list,
shuffle the songs to play the album in a random order, or
repeat the current song. You also can select the album art
itself to switch between the art and an animated visualization
while the song plays. You can use your phone’s Back button
to return to the track list and then use the button again to
return to the album list. From here, you can view your music
by artist or song. You can also select the Playlists tab to
display any playlists you may have on your phone; see
“Creating Playlists” later in this chapter.
You can use any other function of your phone while a song is
playing. Simply press the Home button to return to the home
screen. The Notification Bar displays an icon letting you
know that a song is playing; you can pull the Notification Bar
down to view the title, album, and artist of the song. Select
the notification to return to the Now Playing screen.
Your music also continues playing when the phone sleeps. On
some versions of Android, the Lock screen displays the
current song and provides buttons that enable you to pause,
skip forward, and skip back without unlocking your phone
(see Figure 8.6).
212

Tip
The Music app underwent an important, and in my eyes,
negative change sometime between Android 1.6 and 2.1.
When I would listen to songs on my G1 running 1.6, the
album list displayed songs in track order, so if I selected the
first song in the album, it would play through all of the
songs in the order the artist intended. In Android 2.1,
however, the tracks are listed alphabetically. This is fine if
the track’s filename happens to begin with the track number,
but if the track does not, you get the songs in a rather
arbitrary order. Fortunately, there is a workaround: From the
album list, you can long-press the album and select Play
from the menu that appears, which plays the album in track
order. We can hope that Google will fix, or rather refix, this
in some future release.
Alternate App
213

Many other applications exist for managing and listening to
music on your phone. Two particularly popular apps are
TuneWiki
and
Meridian
Player.
TuneWiki,
which
is
available in a free, ad-supported version or for purchase for
$4.99 without ads, enables you to both play songs on your
phone as well as stream tunes from Internet radio stations.
The free Meridian Player includes features similar to
TuneWiki’s, minus the Internet radio. Both are available on
the Android Market.
214

Figure 8.5
The album list in the Music app
215

Figure 8.6
The Lock screen showing the current song; not available on
all devices
Creating Playlists
Often, you want to play songs from more than one album.
You might have a mix of songs you happen to like, or perhaps
have a series of albums you listen to in succession. Either of
216

these can be handled easily with a playlist. You can create
playlists from songs currently on your phone. To do this,
long-press a song — either directly in the Library’s Song list
or in an album list — and select Add to playlist (see Figure
8.7). Select New and type a name for the playlist. You can
then add additional songs to the playlist by long-pressing the
song, choosing Add to playlist, and then selecting your
playlist.
You can delete playlists you no longer need by long-pressing
them in the Playlists section of the Library and selecting
Delete. Note that deleting a playlist does not delete the list’s
songs from your phone.
217

Figure 8.7
Long-press a song to display the menu with the Add to
playlist option.
Adding a Home Screen Widget for Music
You can directly access your music and play songs from your
home screen by adding a widget. As with other widgets, you
218

can long-press on the home screen, select Widgets or Android
Widgets, and then scroll to Music.
The widget displays the song currently playing, as well as
enables you to pause the song and skip to the next song in the
album or playlist (see Figure 8.8). You can also select the
song directly to access the Music app.
Figure 8.8
219

The Music home screen widget
Using Songs as Ringtones and Notification Sounds
You can use a song in your library as the ringtone for your
phone or for specific contacts. You can also set songs as
notifications for operating system events and for some
applications. You can set the ringtone to a song by
long-pressing the song in the library and selecting Use as
phone ringtone.
You can also use songs as ringtones for specific contacts so
that you can tell when they are calling without looking at your
phone. Unfortunately, Android by default does not make this
process obvious, as the settings for contact ringtones display
only the default system tones and the phone’s current
ringtone. However, this actually provides a workaround. You
need to first set the song you want to use for your contact as
the phone’s ringtone by following the steps outlined in the
previous section. Then, you can open your Contact app, select
the contact you want to use, and then press the Menu button
and select Edit. Scroll through the contact’s details until you
see the setting for Ringtone — you may need to select the
Additional info bar to see it. Select the Ringtone setting, and
you see the song you just set as the phone’s ringtone in the
list. Select it and then click OK. Obviously, you then need to
go back and reset your phone’s ringtone.
Although a built-in method to make this easier would be nice,
several third-party apps have been developed to solve this
problem. One of the more popular is Ringdroid, which is
available free in the Market. When you launch Ringdroid, it
automatically brings up a list of all of the songs on your
220

phone and includes a handy search to quickly locate a
particular song. Ringdroid’s primary purpose is to enable you
to edit songs to use as ringtones and notifications, so when
you select a song in the application, it opens the song in a new
screen that shows the waveform for the song with simple
buttons you can drag to set the beginning and ending points
(see Figure 8.9). After you finish editing, press the phone’s
Menu button and select Save, at which point you are
presented with a dialog box that enables you to name your
edited clip and select whether the phone will be saved as a
ringtone, a notification sound, alarm, or music. If you choose
to save as a ringtone, you then are presented with options to
set the ringtone as the default tone for your phone or assign it
to a particular contact.
Tip
Another method of setting notifications and ringtones is to
save your songs into a proper folder on your phone. If you
connect your phone to your computer and mount it as a USB
drive, you can explore its folders. You see a Music folder,
which contains the songs and albums you have uploaded or
synched to the phone. You also see a media folder, which
contains an audio folder that, in turn, contains ringtones and
221

notifications folders. The music player sees the songs in the
Music folder, and ringtones and notifications see songs in
the media folder. This is why your music player’s library is
not cluttered with all of the phone’s ringtones, but is also
why those songs do not appear when you try to set your
ringtone or notification. You can copy a song into either the
ringtones or notifications folder to have it appear when you
set either sound on your phone.
Figure 8.9
222

Editing a song
Listening to Internet Radio
Internet radio stations enable you to listen to a variety of
songs, just as you would on a traditional over-the-air radio
station. One of the more popular applications to listen to
Internet radio is Pandora, available for free from the Market.
Pandora enables you to specify artists or genres that you like,
and it then plays songs not only from what you specified but
from similar artists as well, enabling you to discover songs
you might not otherwise know of. When you first install the
app, you need to create a new free account with Pandora if
you do not already have one.
Once registered, the application asks you for your favorite
artist, song, or composer. It then creates a new radio station
for you with songs from that artist or composer, as well as
similar songs (see Figure 8.10). While a song is playing, you
can select the thumbs-up or thumbs-down icons at the bottom
of the screen to tell Pandora whether you like the song or not.
If you vote thumbs down, the song immediately stops and
does not play in your station again, but if you vote yes, the
current song is used as criteria for picking other songs.
You can press the Menu button on your phone and then the
first of the icons on the menu to display a list of your stations.
From here, you can again press the Menu button and select
Create Station to specify an artist or song.
223

Figure 8.10
My Pandora station, based on Foreigner
Tidbit
224

Pandora limits the number of times you can skip a song,
regardless of whether you skip by giving the song a thumbs
down or just use the skip button. You can skip up to six
songs per hour, and if you remain with a free account, you
can only skip 12 times per day. A Pandora One account,
currently priced at $36 per year, lifts the daily (but not the
hourly) limit, along with removing the advertising. You can
get more details on subscribing at http://blog.pandora.com/
faq//contents/64.html.
Identifying Music with Shazam
Science fiction author Arthur C. Clarke once stated that any
sufficiently advanced technology was indistinguishable from
magic. Shazam seems to prove him right. With this simply,
well, magical application, you can have your phone listen to
any music playing, whether on the radio or over the speakers
in a store or restaurant, and it will identify the song,
displaying the song title and artist and even allowing you to
purchase the album.
Shazam is technically a free application, meaning that you
can download it without paying. However, the company
recently changed the rules for using the application to limit
225

free users to identifying five songs per month. If you think
you need to identify more than that, you can purchase a
subscription to the service.
After the application is downloaded and installed, the
application could not be simpler to use. All you need to do is
launch the application and select anywhere on the screen. The
app takes a minute or so to listen to the music before
displaying the information about the song (see Figure 8.11).
You should note that Shazam will not be able to identify
absolutely every song you try. You often cannot use it in very
loud situations such as bars, as too much other noise can
interfere with its ability to listen to the song. Also, it cannot
identify live recordings or performances, and I have noted
that it generally has trouble with classical music. Still, despite
these limitations, the app is pretty darned amazing.
Tidbit
Obviously, Shazam does not actually rely on magic. Rather,
it records a sample of the song it hears and submits it to
Shazam’s servers. There, the recording is analyzed for its
“acoustic fingerprint;” that is, it looks for the song’s
frequency peaks and then compares it to those songs in its
226

database. Although I have encountered many times when it
was unable to find a match, I have yet to encounter a time
when it gets something wrong.
Figure 8.11
A song identified by Shazam
227

Downloading and Listening to Podcasts
A podcast is a nonstreamed audio broadcast, which is the
fancy way of saying that it is a recording you can download
and listen to at your leisure. The term podcast replaced the
original name, webcast, thanks to the rise in people who
chose to listen to them on their iPods. Many traditional radio
programs are now recorded and distributed via podcast, but a
large number of podcasts today are recorded specifically for
that medium.
The accepted standard for recorded podcasts is to save them
as MP3s, and you can treat them as such: You can simply
download the MP3, transfer it to your phone, and listen to it
using your phone’s Music player. However, most podcasts are
not one-time events; rather, podcasts usually are recorded on
some schedule. What really distinguishes a podcast from any
other MP3 is that you can subscribe to a podcast and have
them downloaded automatically as new recordings become
available. Many podcasts are distributed completely free of
charge, and others may require a subscription fee.
Find and Subscribe to a Podcast with Google
Listen
In order to subscribe to a podcast and take advantage of
automatic downloading, you need to install a podcast
application such as Google Listen, available as usual from the
Market. After you have the app installed, you can begin to
subscribe
to
podcasts.
Within
Listen,
you
can
search
for podcasts using the search icon at the top of the screen.
228

After you find the podcast you are looking for, select one of
its episodes and then select Subscribe (see Figure 8.12).
You can listen to the current episode immediately. You also
can return to the main Listen screen by pressing your phone’s
Back button several times, and then select the My listen items
link. This selection displays a list of items you have listened
to or are waiting to listen to; select the title of an episode to
listen.
229

Figure 8.12
Subscribing to a podcast
Manually Add a Podcast to Listen
Occasionally, you may encounter a podcast that has not been
indexed by Google and so will not display in the search
results. Fortunately, you can add the podcast manually using
your phone’s Web browser. You simply need to go to the
podcast’s Web site and find a link to the RSS feed for the
podcast, which should be somewhere on the home page.
Select the link to display a list of the applications you have
installed that can handle the feed; click Listen. A screen
appears, asking you to confirm that you want to add the
subscription, so click Add to launch Listen (see Figure 8.13).
The podcast is displayed as if you had searched for it, so you
can now select Subscribe.
230

Figure 8.13
Adding a Podcast subscription
231

Chapter 9: Taking Pictures
The Skim
Using
Your
Phone’s
Camera
- Viewing
Your
Pictures
- Sharing Your Pictures - Downloading Pictures to Your
Computer - Finding Out Where You Took a Picture - Edit
Pictures on Your Phone
The most-photographed person in the world in the nineteenth
century was Gen. George Armstrong Custer. There are around
200 known pictures of him. Even a few decades ago, taking
pictures was a costly enterprise. When I visited the Soviet
Union on a high school class trip, I took around 300 pictures
over the course of two weeks. But that, of course, has
changed, quite dramatically, in the last few years: on a recent
weekend trip to Disneyland, I took close to 1,000 pictures.
This meteoric rise in picture taking can be directly attributed
to two factors. First, the fact that digital photography has
made individual pictures free. My limit of 300 pictures on the
trip to Russia was due primarily to the amount of film I could
afford, but to my kids, the very concept of “film” is as
outdated as a sundial. Second, and just as important, is the
sudden proliferation of cameras. Today, nearly everyone
owns a camera simply because nearly everyone owns a
mobile phone, and they are one in the same. Good news here:
Although early mobile phones included cameras that took
less-than-stellar pictures, today’s devices contain cameras that
rival what you would expect to pay several hundred dollars
for in a dedicated camera.
232

Tidbit
As good as the cameras included in today’s phones are, they
are still in the end point-and-shoot cameras. Most will not
allow you to adjust things like f-stop and ISO speeds. (If you
do not know what an f-stop is, then you probably don’t care
that your phone will not allow you to change it, so you need
not worry. In fact, you can go ahead and stop reading this
sidebar and return to the main text.) Many cameras suffer
from slow shutter speeds as well — my old G1 had such a
ridiculously slow shutter that it was all but impossible to get
a clear shot of anything that was not absolutely still, which is
a nice way of saying that it was basically worthless for
getting shots of the kids. Only the newest models even
include a flash. Although it is certainly nice that your phone
includes a camera, keep in mind that it is still first and
foremost a phone. If you are really into photography, your
phone is not likely to replace your dSLR anytime soon.
Using Your Phone’s Camera
Your phone’s camera can be accessed in a number of ways.
Your
phone
might
include
a
button,
usually
located
somewhere along the outside edge, which is used to actually
233

snap the pictures, but also can be pressed to simply launch the
camera application, or you can launch it as you would any
other application on your phone.
After you launch the app, your screen should display
whatever you happen to be pointing the camera at. On some
phones, this is all you will see, but on others, you may have
additional controls and options visible on-screen. At its
simplest, taking a picture simply involves pointing your
phone’s camera at the subject and pressing the camera button
on the phone. The picture is saved automatically. On some
phones, the new picture may appear briefly before you return
to the camera view, while on others you will be taken back to
the camera view immediately. If your phone includes a flash,
it will fire — or not — at the software’s discretion.
Viewing Your Pictures
The fact that pictures are now free is, as I mentioned, one of
the really great things about digital photography. Another
great thing is the fact that you can view pictures instantly to
see whether you really got the shot you were looking for. My
kids take this for granted; every time someone points a
camera at them, which is a lot because they are, of course,
really cute kids, they expect to be able to walk — or more
often run — over and see the picture right away.
Whether your phone’s camera displays the image for a few
seconds or not, the most recently shot image will display as a
small thumbnail in the bottom corner of the camera app while
you prepare to snap the next photo. Simply select the
thumbnail to display it. Depending on your phone and the
exact version of Android you are running, you either get the
234

last photo full-screen, or some other display of your images.
On the Droid X, the images appear in the so-called Camera
Roll, which allows you to scroll through them with a cool
animated effect (see Figure 9.1).
You also can view your photos without going into the camera
at all by using the Gallery application, one of the standard
applications in all versions of Android. Once again, the exact
details of what the Gallery displays varies between models
and variants of Android, but the basics are the same: You see
your images organized into some sort of folder structure.
Usually,
the
pictures
you
have
taken
with
your
camera’s phone will be separate from pictures you may have
downloaded off the Web and separate from pictures you may
have transferred from your computer. You can select each
folder to display its images, and then select any image to
display it full-screen.
Most phones automatically rotate pictures as you rotate your
phone, so that pictures with landscape orientation will shrink
to fit the available space when you hold your phone normally
but rotate to display full-screen when you hold your phone
sideways (see Figure 9.2). The opposite applies to pictures
taken with a portrait orientation.
235

Figure 9.1
The Droid X Camera Roll
Figure 9.2
Pictures automatically rotate with the phone.
236

Sharing Your Pictures
Any picture you take with your phone can be shared instantly
with others, using text messaging, Facebook, Twitter, or other
applications.
Tip
An irony of newer phones is that they often take pictures too
large to send via text message. Therefore, you may see a
warning that the picture you are sending is too large and
needs to be resized. Simply select Resize to have the
application do this for you. Do not worry, though, as only
the copy of the picture that is being sent is resized, and the
original will remain untouched.
Sharing with MMS
Although texting was, as the name implies, designed for text,
the system has been expanded to now include the ability to
transmit multimedia content such as pictures. Technically, it
uses a slightly different technology, known as MMS or
Multimedia Messaging Service. Android enables you to very
237

easily add a picture to a text message without worrying about
which technology is being used.
If you want to text a picture you have just taken, you can do
so directly within the Camera or Gallery app. When viewing
the picture full-screen, press the phone’s Menu button and
then select Share. You get another menu that lists the
applications on your phone capable of sharing pictures (see
Figure 9.3); select Text Messaging. A standard text message
window will open, in which you can type the recipients to
which you want to send the picture and a note explaining it.
When done, select Send.
238

Figure 9.3
The applications on my phone that can be used to send
pictures
Sharing on Facebook
Facebook originally was conceived as a service built around
the idea of sharing pictures, and it has, in fact, become a
common way for many people to share pictures of family,
239

vacations, or important events. If you have the Facebook app
installed on your phone, it integrates with the Gallery to
enable you to easily upload pictures you take with your phone
to Facebook. See Chapter 5 for details on installing and
setting up the Facebook app on your phone.
To begin, follow the steps outlined in the preceding section to
select a picture and display the menu of photo-sharing
services. This time, obviously, you want to select Facebook.
Doing so launches the Facebook app to the Upload photo
section. You can type a caption for the photo and then select
Upload. It may take a moment or two to upload the photo, but
after you do, it will appear on your Wall and in the Photos
section of your Facebook account.
Tip
Unfortunately, the Facebook app does not automatically
rotate your pictures and, in fact, does not provide any means
of doing so, so if you have pictures taken in the portrait
orientation, they show up sideways on your account. At best,
this will be a bit annoying, and, at worst, you might have
friends like mine who will rather mercilessly mock you for
committing such a faux pas. Thankfully, although the
Facebook app does not provide help, you do have ways of
240

editing the picture so that it is rotated properly before you
post; read the section “Edit Pictures on Your Phone” later in
this chapter for details.
Sharing on Twitter
The Twitter service itself allows you to post only short text
messages of no more than 140 characters. Pictures and
anything else are not supported. However, a number of
services have sprung up to enable Twitter users to upload
their images and then post a link to the image on Twitter.
Many
of
the
Twitter
clients
even
display
the
image
automatically when viewing a tweet. See Chapter 5 for details
on getting started with Twitter on your phone.
To post a picture to Twitter, follow the steps outlined
previously to select the picture and display the menu of
applications that can share it. This time, select Twitter. The
application
automatically
generates
a
link
on
the
photo-sharing site Twitpic, which will be inserted into your
Tweet (see Figure 9.4). Type any other text you want to add
to the tweet — keeping in mind that the entire message,
including the Twitpic link, must be no more than 140
characters — and select Update. The picture then is uploaded
to Twitpic, and your tweet is posted for all of your followers
to see.
241

Figure 9.4
Preparing to send a tweet with the link to Twitpic generated
automatically
Sharing via E-mail
You can also go old school and simply e-mail a picture to
someone. If you have a person who has an older phone that
cannot directly accept MMS messages, or perhaps works in
242

an environment that does not allow access to or use of
phones, e-mailing remains a reliable sharing model.
Follow the steps outlined previously to select the picture, this
time choosing either Email or Gmail as the sharing option,
depending on which one you use. See Chapter 5 for details on
both. Either way, a new message is generated with the picture
added as an attachment. Simply enter the recipient addresses,
a subject, and a message body, just as you would any other
e-mail and select Send.
Other Sharing Methods
Your phone may contain other applications that support
sharing photos. For example, the Droid X includes a social
sharing application that connects to a number of social
networks and enables you to post the picture to multiple
networks at the same time. It also includes an application that
can connect to certain retail outlets to directly print your
images.
Downloading Pictures to Your Computer
In addition to sharing images electronically, you also can
download your images to your desktop or laptop computer.
To do this, you need to simply plug your phone into your
computer using USB. Then mount your SD card by pulling
down the Notification Bar and selecting USB Connection.
Depending on your version of Android, you are either given a
simple dialog box with the choice to mount your SD card, or
a more complex one with several options (see Figure 9.5). If
you have the former, select the button to mount the card; if
243

the latter, choose either PC Mode or USB Mass Storage, as
either will work in this case. See Chapter 1 for a more
thorough explanation of these options.
Tip
Computers are primarily sold by throwing a bunch of
numbers at unsuspecting customers, hoping that they will
not know or really worry about what those numbers mean.
Just about everyone has a vague sense that somehow higher
numbers are better. Digital cameras suffer from this as well,
but unfortunately, the big number everyone discusses is
something of a red herring: megapixels. Walk into any
electronics or photography store, and you will hear the word
thrown about with reckless abandon, but ask the people in
the store — customers and salespeople alike — what it
actually means, and you will likely get a bunch of
half-mumbled responses that, in the end, all translate to “I
don’t know.” So then, what is it? Well, your computer’s
display is sort of like a big sheet of graph paper, and each
little square on the graph is known as a pixel. Mega is the
prefix for a million, so in literal terms a megapixel is a
million pixels. How this relates to photography is that every
image is a rectangle made up of pixels, so megapixels
244

describe the size of the image: An image that is 1000 pixels
wide by 1000 pixels tall would contain 1 million pixels and
would, thus, be 1 megapixel. The number of megapixels
associated with a camera, therefore, describes the maximum
size of image the camera can take. Why, then, did I describe
this as a red herring? Well, because ultimately, to quote
Yoda, “Size matters not.” Lots of megapixels means that
you are getting big pictures, but that does not necessarily
mean that you are getting good pictures. Two much more
important factors govern the quality of images, neither of
which has changed in the slightest since the camera’s
invention roughly 150 years ago: the quality of the optics in
the camera, and even more important, the quality of the
photographer behind it. Only time and practice can improve
the second factor, but consider the first the next time you
buy a camera: a 6-megapixel camera with really good optics
will beat a 12-megapixel camera with bad optics every
single time.
With the card mounted, your computer should automatically
detect your phone as a new hard drive. If you use Windows,
you are shown a dialog box with a set of options for how to
deal
with
the
card.
If
you
have
a
photo-editing
or
management tool installed on your computer such as Adobe
Photoshop
Elements,
you
should
see
an
option
to
automatically import the photos into it, which is the easy way
to download the images. If you do not have a program that
can import for you, select the option to open Windows
Explorer.
If you need to manually download the images, you can simply
use either Windows Explorer or Mac Finder to drag the
images from the phone’s Albums folder to your hard drive.
245

Figure 9.5
SD card mounting options on the Droid X
Find Out Where You Took a Picture
Your phone includes a GPS device. Most of the time, we
think of using GPS within Maps to find directions to places,
as is covered in Chapter 7. However, many other applications
can and do use GPS, including your camera. If enabled, the
246

GPS function in your camera can record the latitude and
longitude of every picture you take in a process known as
geotagging. How is this useful? Well, it allows you to display
a map on your phone of the precise location for each picture,
which can be particularly helpful when you are traveling and
may end up taking pictures of fairly similar monuments or
sites. After you transfer your pictures to your computer, you
may have programs that can perform similar functions as well
using the geotag embedded by your phone.
Enabling GPS on Your Camera
Many newer models of phones come with geotagging enabled
on the camera by default; this was the case with my Droid X.
Other cameras may need it to be turned on. The exact steps
needed to enable the geotagging on the camera phone may
also vary slightly, but in general they will be located in either
the settings or tags sections of the menu. On the Droid X, you
can turn geotagging on or off by pressing the Menu button on
the phone, selecting Tags, and then either checking or
unchecking the Auto Location Tag setting (see Figure 9.6).
When taking pictures on the Droid X, you can tell whether
geotagging is on by looking in the top-left corner of the
screen when you first launch the camera. If enabled, you will
see a small tag icon and, for a few seconds, your current
location. If the location has disappeared, you can tap the tag
icon to display it again.
247

Figure 9.6
Enabling or disabling geotagging with the Auto Location Tag
setting
Using Geotagging on Your Phone
After you have taken pictures with geotagging enabled, you
can display the latitude and longitude by bringing up a picture
in the Gallery and tapping the information icon — the small I
in the corner of the screen. This will display details about the
image, including the location where it was taken (see Figure
9.7). From the same information screen, you can select the
Maps icon to the left of the coordinates to launch your Maps
application and see where you took the picture.
Tip
248

Geotagging
on
your
camera
suffers
from
the
same
shortcomings as any GPS-enabled application: Your phone
must have a clear line of sight to one of the GPS satellites,
which in the Northern Hemisphere generally means a line of
sight to the southern sky. Thus, pictures taken inside will not
generally get tagged, as will other pictures taken when the
signal might be blocked, such as downtown in large cities.
Also,
be
aware
that
your
camera
and
GPS
are,
independently, two of the biggest drains on battery power,
so combining them means that you will lose power much
faster than normal if you are taking a lot of pictures.
249

Figure 9.7
The information screen for one of my pictures, showing the
coordinates at which it was shot
Edit Pictures on Your Phone
For more than 20 years, Adobe Photoshop has been the
industry-standard photo-editing tool. The desktop application,
while extremely powerful, is unfortunately quite expensive.
250

Fortunately, however, you can now leverage much of the
power of Photoshop directly on your phone absolutely free.
You can download the Photoshop Express application from
the Android Market. Once installed and launched, it will
display all of the images on your phone (see Figure 9.8).
Choose any image to display it full-screen. Then press your
phone’s Menu button and select Edit Photo (see Figure 9.9).
You can also press the Edit button at the bottom of the app
window and then choose the image you want to edit. This will
reload the image, this time including a set of tools both above
and below.
The first of the tools along the top is the Crop tool. Selecting
the tool displays a menu of tools, including Crop, Straighten,
Rotate, and Flip. Cropping enables you to cut away areas of
the image to either make it smaller or to focus your viewer’s
attention on some particular part of the image. When you
select the tool, you will see the image with a box highlighting
the area to be saved. You can drag to resize or move this crop
area. The lock icon at the bottom of the screen allows you to
maintain the image’s aspect ratio as you crop. After you have
the area you want to save selected, simply select the green
check mark, which returns you to the editing window. You
can also select the red circle with the X to cancel your edits
and return to the Edit window.
The Straighten, Rotate, and Flip tools all do exactly what they
say. If you take a picture when you are not holding the
camera perfectly level, you can use the Straighten tool to
correct your mistake. The Rotate tool spins your image in
90-degree increments, which can be helpful if you are
planning to upload your image to a service such as
251

Facebook.com that will not automatically rotate pictures
taken in the portrait orientation. The Flip tool flips your photo
either horizontally or vertically. As with the Crop tool, you
can select the green check mark to apply your changes or the
red X to cancel them, each returning you to the Edit screen.
You can make adjustments to the image using the tool to the
left of the Crop. Selecting this tool gives you choices for
Exposure, Saturation, Tint, Black & White, Contrast, and
Brightness (see Figure 9.10). All except the Black & White
tool work in essentially the same way, enabling you to drag
your finger on the image to either increase or decrease the
effect of the tool. Exposure changes the overall lightness or
darkness
of
the
image.
Saturation
either
increases
or
decreases the amount of color in the picture, and Tint changes
the overall colors (see Figure 9.11). Contrast and Brightness,
like Exposure, change the lightness and darkness of the
image, but whereas Exposure affects the overall image,
Contrast only lightens or darkens the shadows of the image,
while Brightness affects the highlights. The final tool in the
set, Black & White, does what it says: It converts your image
to black and white. It does not have any adjustable settings.
The final two top menus apply effects. The first button
applies a soft focus filter to your image, which you can adjust
by dragging (see Figure 9.12). The second displays a menu
with an option to apply other effects and one to apply borders.
The effects include filters such as Vignette Blur and Soft
Black & White; it is really easiest to simply play with these
on images to see the effect. Borders enable you to apply a
border such as simple white lines or an old film emulsion
look.
252

The options along the bottom of the screen, from left to right,
enable you to cancel all edits you have made to the image,
undo your last edit, redo your last edit, or save the image. A
very nice feature of the program is that it always saves your
edits to a copy of the image, so you can really do whatever
you want to a picture and not worry about ruining the
original.
After you complete your editing and either save or cancel,
you are returned to the main app screen. From here, you can
upload your image to the Photoshop.com Web site, Facebook,
or Twitpic, where you can easily share your pictures with
others. The Photoshop.com Web site requires that you create
a free account before you can upload images; when you select
the Upload button and select Photoshop.com, you are given
the choice of either logging into your existing account or
creating a new one.
If you have or create a Photoshop.com account, you can
access any photos you have uploaded via the Online tab at the
top of the applications main screen. You can view these
images and set them as your phone’s wallpaper, but you
cannot directly edit them.
253

Figure 9.8
Photoshop Express loaded on the phone
254

Figure 9.9
Preparing to edit the image
255

Figure 9.10
The menu of options for editing your image
256

Figure 9.11
Changing the tint of the image
257

Figure 9.12
Applying the Soft Focus filter
258

Chapter 10: Video
The Skim
Capturing Video on Your Phone - Viewing Your Videos on
Your Phone - Uploading a Video to YouTube - Watch
YouTube Videos - Stream Video with Qik - Upload Video
from Your Computer to Your Phone - Connect Your Phone to
a High-Definition TV - Watch TV Online
I am an unapologetic film buff. A friend recently asked what I
thought was the single worst movie I have ever seen, and
honestly, it was a question I could not easily answer. That
was not to say that I have not seen any bad movies, but rather,
that I have seen far too many bad movies to be able to pick
out any one in particular. I really will see almost anything and
have on more than one occasion simply showed up at a
theater and bought a ticket for whatever happened to be
starting next. (He knew he did not need to ask what my
favorite movie was, because you need only spend a little time
with me to discover my undying devotion to Joss Whedon’s
Serenity. In fact, you do not even need to get to know me,
because I do manage to throw at least a few references to the
movie or the TV show upon which it was based into every
one of my books.) Given this love of film, it should be no
great surprise to find that I like shooting video as well.
Growing up, video cameras were too bulky and far too
expensive to be anything more than a novelty to many, but
today, the same factors that have pushed the astronomical rise
in still photography have begun to apply to video. Cameras
are smaller and cheaper than ever before and have become
259

progressively easier to use. Android phones have, from fairly
early on, included the ability to capture video, but many of
today’s models include cameras capable of capturing video in
high definition.
Capturing Video on Your Phone
Depending on your model of phone and your variant of
Android, the exact name of your video application may vary;
on the Droid X, it is appropriately enough called Camcorder.
You can also access the video camera by going into your
phone’s regular camera and finding the button, displayed
somewhere on the screen, that switches the camera’s mode to
video.
Either way, once you are in the camera you can simply point
and shoot: Press the same button on the camera you use for
taking a picture to start recording, and then press that same
button again to stop. Some models allow you to zoom in and
out on the video while shooting. The Droid X uses the volume
buttons for this, but instructions on zooming should display
on the camera when you first launch it.
You do have a limited amount of time you can shoot. For all
the advances in video, one big hurdle remains: video files are
huge. Thus, you will find that you can fill your SD card quite
quickly if you use the video camera a lot; plan to download
the video to your computer frequently. Your device may also
impose a limit on each video; on the Droid X, you are limited
to 30 minutes per shot.
Tip
260

Unless you are intentionally trying to shoot video in the style
of The Blair Witch Project, you should try as best as
possible to remain still while shooting. Along the same lines,
if you are going to zoom in or out, do so slowly. While
underlighting worked well for Ingmar Bergman, you will
likely find that the better the lighting in the area you are
shooting, the better your movie will look. If your phone
includes a flash, you will be able to select the Light button
on the camera app to turn on the flash, but be aware that this
will cause a significant strain on the battery.
Viewing Your Videos
You can watch your movies as soon as you shoot them by
selecting the screen immediately after stopping the video and
then pressing the Play button (see Figure 10.1). Videos are
also available via the Gallery, alongside your photos (see
Figure 10.2).
On some newer phones, you may be able to play a video
directly on your TV. The Droid X and a few other models
include an HDMI jack. If your phone includes the jack and
you have a high-definition TV, you can purchase an HDMI
261

cable for your phone from your local electronics store and
then plug the phone in and play video.
Figure 10.1
Play a video by pressing the play button — the large triangle
in the middle of the screen.
262

Figure 10.2
Videos in the Gallery
Sharing Your Video
If you would like others to see your cinematic masterpiece,
you can easily upload your video to YouTube from your
phone. From the Gallery, select the video to open it, then
press the Menu button and select Share. From the resulting
menu, select YouTube (see Figure 10.3). You can add a title
to your video and select More details to add a location and set
the video to either Public or Private (see Figure 10.4). If you
select Public, the video will appear on the YouTube site for
all to see; if Private, only you will be able to view it by
logging into YouTube.
Once the video has been uploaded, you can continue to view
it on your phone via the Gallery or with the YouTube
application that comes as a standard part of Android. You can
also view it online via the YouTube Web site (see Figure
10.5).
Tip
263

You may not know this, but you already have a YouTube
account. Several years ago, Google bought the video sharing
service after attempting, and failing, to create a competitor,
so the same Google account you needed to create in order to
start using your phone works on YouTube.
Figure 10.3
Sharing your video via YouTube
264

Figure 10.4
Setting the details on the video
265

Figure 10.5
Viewing a video shot on my phone on YouTube
Streaming Your Video with Qik
Qik is an oddly spelled but useful online service that allows
you to directly stream video from your phone to Qik’s Web
site. Using Qik, you can shoot a video of your child’s
elementary school play and let grandparents in a different
state watch live online.
To use this service, you need to download and install the Qik
application from the Market, and then set up a free account
(see Figure 10.6). You can then start broadcasting your videos
right away — simply select Record (see Figure 10.7) and then
266

select the big red button to begin. The address on which
others can view the video will display at the bottom of the
recording window.
Press the Menu button, then Settings, then Sharing to set up
preferences for sharing your video with others. You can enter
your
usernames
and
passwords
to
Facebook,
Twitter,
YouTube, and GTalk to have the service automatically post
messages when you broadcast (see Figure 10.8).
267

Figure 10.6
Registering for an account on Qik
Figure 10.7
Record and stream a video by selecting Record.
268

Figure 10.8
Setting up sharing preferences
Preparing a Video to Upload to Your Phone
In addition to shooting and watching your own videos, you
can also upload videos from your computer to your phone. In
order to do this, however, you need to do a few things to the
video on your computer first.
Of course, the very first step is to make sure that it is legally
okay to convert and upload the video you are trying to use. In
very broad terms, you should be able to transfer videos you
purchase or download online to your phone, so long as you do
269

not
plan
to
use
that
video
for
any
public
viewing.
Store-bought videos such as DVD or Blu-ray discs, may have
additional restrictions, but many newer movies include a
digital copy expressly for this purpose. If you have one of
those, you can pretty much skip this entire section, because
the digital copy will already be all set for transferring to your
phone.
Once you are sure you can use the video, you may need to
convert it to the proper format. According to Google, Android
supports movies in 3GP and MP4 formats, but they do
include a nice little caveat devices “may provide support for
additional formats or file types”. Just this week, I dropped an
AVI file on my Droid X and had no problems. So there are
two bits of bad news here: First, there is a pretty good chance
that whatever format your video is in, it will be wrong; and
second, there is no easy, sure-fire way to know that. The good
news is that you can, fairly easily, convert video from one
format to another, albeit with a few caveats. While I cannot
say with any certainty what format your particular device
does or does not support, I can tell you two formats that it
most definitely will not: DVD and Blu-ray. Technically,
neither of those is a format per se, but the point is that you
can definitely not expect to put a DVD into your computer’s
drive and find a file to drag onto your phone and expect it to
play. Those you will definitely have to convert, assuming that
they are not encrypted. You will need some software on your
machine to perform the conversion for you. Here again is
good news, as a handy piece of software has been created for
just this purpose: Handbrake. It is able to convert video from
almost any format to almost any other format, completely
free, and both looks and acts identical on both Windows and
Mac.
Download
Handbrake
from
http://handbrake.fr/
270

downloads.php and install it. Once complete, launch the
program (see Figure 10.9).
Tip
Handbrake can do a fine job ripping non-copyright-protected
DVDs, but what about ones that are protected? And hey, it is
the twenty-first century, so how about Blu-ray? Well,
Handbrake cannot handle encrypted DVDs without some
help, and it cannot deal with Blu-ray at all. It is possible to
decrypt copy-protected DVDs, but the legality of doing so,
particularly in the United States, is still in the realm of things
being argued by lawyers and judges. If you are interested in
doing it anyway, there are plenty of resources online to walk
you through it. As for Blu-ray: These are the discs where
you are likely to find a digital copy, so you may be in luck.
If not, you can read instructions for ripping a Blu-ray disc at
http://gizmodo.com/5161848/how-to-rip-blu+ray-discs; note
the important point the site makes that it takes a very long
time to rip Blu-ray discs.
Click the Source button in the top-left corner and select the
video you wish to convert. If you need to convert a video you
already have on your computer into a different format, select
Video file; if you are going to try to convert a DVD, select
271

that option. Then select the format into which you wish to
convert; remember, for Android you want MP4. Then click
the Video tab and select H.264 from the Video Codec
drop-down list (see Figure 10.10). Next, go to the Picture tab
and change the Anamorphic setting to loose, which will allow
you to manually enter a size for the video. Go up to the Width
text box just above that and enter the width of your screen; if
you do not know what it is, you should be able to look it up
on Google by searching on your phone and the words “screen
resolution”. For example, typing “Droid X screen resolution”
tells me that my screen is 480 x 854, so I would set the width
to 854 or less — note that you cannot size videos up in
Handbrake, so if the width is already less than your
resolution, you should leave it at its original size (see Figure
10.11). Finally, click Start (see Figure 10.12). Be aware that
video compression can be very slow, so you will need to be
patient.
Figure 10.9
272

Handbrake on Windows; a Mac version is also available and
is identical in both look and function. And no, I have no idea
what the cocktail glass and pineapple represent.
Figure 10.10
Specifying video settings for the conversion
273

Figure 10.11
Setting the resolution
Figure 10.12
Starting the conversion
274

Upload a Video to Your Phone
You can upload videos from your computer to your phone
exactly as you would any other file. Plug the phone into your
USB port and mount the SD card by pulling down the
Notifications bar, selecting USB Connection, and either
Mount SD Card, PC Mode, or USB Mass Storage; any will
work. Once mounted, your phone will appear on your
computer as an additional drive. Navigate to the Video folder
on the card and drag your movie there. Then unmount the
card by clicking the icon on your task tray in Windows and
selecting either Eject or Stop, or on a Mac by dragging the
drive to the trash can. On your phone, pull down the
Notifications bar and select Unmount. Keep in mind that
video files can be quite large, so you will need to be sure that
you have enough space on your SD card for them.
Once you have the video transferred to your phone, you will
find it in the Gallery alongside any videos you shot yourself
(see Figure 10.13). You can play these videos exactly as you
would any other: Simply select it in the gallery to begin
playing. A set of playback controls will appear for a few
seconds when the movie starts with a pause button and a
slider that allows you to move to any part of the movie; you
can get these controls back at any time by double-tapping on
the screen.
275

Figure 10.13
A movie copied from my computer to the phone appearing in
the Gallery
Watching TV on Your Phone
Several techniques exist to allow you to watch TV shows on
your phone. A simple one that works on almost all Android
devices is the TV.com application, available free from the
Market. TV.com streams TV shows from its servers. None of
it is live TV, and a lot of the content is in fact old shows such
as the classic Star Trek (see Figure 10.14). Newer content is
available from CBS, UPN, Showtime, and a few other
networks (see Figure 10.15). Despite its limited content, the
application does provide everything for free, so it is
nonetheless worthwhile.
276

Figure 10.14
The “Trouble with Tribbles” is still funny, even on a 4-inch
screen
277

Figure 10.15
Some of the offerings of the TV.com application
278

Chapter 11: The Web
The Skim
Surfing the Web on Your Phone - Installing Flash Player to
View the Whole Web - Using Browser Windows - Bookmark
Sites - Save Pictures from the Web - Install an Alternate
Browser - Search the Web from the Home Screen - Use Voice
Search
Few technologies have changed the world as quickly as the
Web. While the inventions of the wheel, the printing press,
and sliced bread might, in the bigger sense, be more
important, none took hold of our collective consciousness as
quickly as the Web, which in 2010 was only 20 years old.
Equally as interesting is the fact that no one saw the Web
coming. In the 1960s, Star Trek predicted an impressive array
of modern technology, including mobile phones and portable
computers, but if you go back and rewatch the whole series,
you will never hear Mr. Spock tell Captain Kirk that, rather
than asking about the capabilities of that Romulan ship or
whether or not that planet is habitable, he could just Google
it.
While having the entirety of human knowledge at your
fingertips is pretty cool, we were, for most of the Web’s
existence, limited to looking things up on a heavy desktop
computer that was inconveniently attached to the wall via
cables. Wi-Fi let us break free of the cables, and now our
phones take us a step further, allowing access to the Web
literally anywhere.
279

Figure 11.1
Opening a Web page by typing its address in the browser’s
address bar
Surfing the Web on Your Phone
All Android devices include a browser, which is built on
Google’s Chrome desktop browser. Most likely, your carrier
placed a shortcut to the browser directly on the home screen,
280

but, of course, it is available in the Application Launcher. By
default, your home page is a search engine. In many cases it
will, not too surprisingly, be Google.
The behavior of the browser varies from one version of
Android to the next. On some phones, pages will appear full
size, with buttons in the lower corner that allow you to zoom
in and out. Newer models contain a browser that displays
pages zoomed out by default, so that you can see the entire
page at a glance, and then either allow you to zoom in by
pressing buttons or, on phones such as the Droid X that
support multitouch, allow you to zoom by pinching the
screen. You can also zoom in to view the page full size on the
page by double-tapping anywhere on the screen, and zoom
back out to see the entire page by double-tapping again.
You can navigate to pages in the same way you would on a
traditional desktop browser. You can type the address of the
site you wish to visit in the address bar at the top of the
browser, and then select Go (see Figure 11.1). As you type,
you will get suggestions for Web sites that match what you
type, both from your favorites and history as well as Google’s
search. If the site you are looking for appears in the
suggestions, you can simply select it to save typing the rest of
the address.
Searching the Web
As you are using a device running an operating system made
by Google, the fact that you can easily search the Web from
your phone should come as no surprise. You actually have a
variety of ways that you can perform a search.
281

Searching the Old-Fashioned Way
Of course, you can use your phone’s browser to navigate to
Google, type the term on which you wish to search, and
choose the search button — the magnifying glass to the right
of the search field. This will display the results just as they
would on your computer.
Limiting Search Results
You can limit your search results to a particular region by
adding a locale to the search. For example, a search for
“pizza” will return millions of results related to all things
pizza, but a search for “pizza, San Francisco, CA” will return
a list, and map, of the pizza restaurants in San Francisco. A
search for “pizza near me” will return a list of the restaurants
near your current location (see Figure 11.2). You can limit
your search to a specific Web site by including it in the results
as well, so a search for “Android” returns a massive amount
of sites devoted to Android, while a search for “Android
site:wiley.com” returns a much more focused list of books
and articles related to Android on this book’s publisher’s Web
site.
Google search can also serve as a calculator by simply typing
a mathematical expression in the search box. You can
perform unit conversion by typing something like “1 cup in
tablespoons”, “350 Euros in US dollars”, or “78 degrees
Fahrenheit in degrees Celsius”. Best of all, none of the
techniques here is limited to your phone — they all work in
Google on the desktop as well.
282

Figure 11.2
Results targeted near your current location
Search without Returning to Google
If you are currently viewing some other page on your phone’s
browser and need to search for something, you do not need to
return to Google’s home page. Instead, you can press your
phone’s Search button, which will display the browser’s
283

address bar. Type the phrase on which you wish to search and
press Go. The browser will send the term to Google and the
results page will appear.
Voice Search
You can also talk directly to your phone to perform a search.
Select the microphone icon to the right of the address bar on
the browser to bring up the voice search box, and then say the
term or terms on which you wish to search. This will display
the results of your search in the Voice Search application,
from which you can choose any link to open the page in the
browser.
Search Outside the Browser
Both text-based and voice search are available anytime on
your phone, without first launching your browser. From your
home screen, you can press your phone’s Search button to
display a search field into which you can type a search term;
pressing the search icon will launch your browser to the
Google search results page.
Voice search is available from the same search box; instead of
typing the phrase on which you wish to search, simply select
the microphone icon and say your search phrase instead. You
can also access the Voice Search application directly in your
Application Launcher.
A home screen widget for search is also available. Long-press
on your home screen, select Widgets or Android Widgets, and
then select Google Search. From the menu of search options
284

that appears, you can select either All, Web, or Apps to
determine what is searched. Once you have the widget on
your home screen, you can type a search phrase or choose the
microphone to use Voice Search.
Use Flash Player to View the Whole Web
Adobe Flash Player is the most-installed software in history,
currently
residing
on
more
than
99
percent
of
all
Internet-connected desktop and laptop computers. Its ubiquity
has led to its adoption on a wide array of Web sites, from ads
to games to video.
That ubiquity, however, applies to traditional computers.
Only recently has Flash Player begun to find its way into the
mobile space, and Adobe has targeted Android as the first
platform on which to push Flash Player. In order to get Flash,
you first need to be sure you are running Android 2.2, also
known as Froyo. If you are still waiting for your carrier to
upgrade you to Froyo, then go ahead and skip this section and
come back when it does. If you have Froyo, however, you
may still not have Flash, as some carriers use specialized
versions of Android that require additional testing from
Adobe before they release Player for it. Thankfully, the
company is maintaining a Web site, which can be found at
www.adobe.com/flashplatform/supported_devices/
smartphones.html that lists all of the phones that currently
support Player. If your phone is not on the list, keep checking,
as the number of phones that support Flash is constantly
growing.
If your phone is on Adobe’s list, you may have Flash Player
already installed, so check your Application Launcher to see
285

if it is there, or simply visit a Flash-based Web site on your
phone. If you are on a supported phone but do not have it yet,
you can download it, free of charge, from the Market. (You
can use the Market as an alternate method of finding out if
your phone is supported or not — simply search for Flash
Player. If it shows up, then you are all set; if not, well, try
back later.)
Once you have Flash Player installed, you do not need to do
anything else. Simply use the browser to visit a page with
Flash content and it will appear and work, just as it would on
your desktop or laptop computer (see Figure 11.3)
Tidbit
Prior to Adobe’s release of Flash Player 10.1 for Android,
some Android phones were able to access limited Flash
content via the Flash Lite player. Flash Lite was developed
in the early days of Web-capable phones. If you are on a
phone running Android 2.1, you may be able to download
and install Flash Lite, but be aware that many Flash-based
sites will not work on Flash Lite.
286

Figure 11.3
Flash content running on an Android phone
Using Browser Windows
You can have more than one Web page open at a time by
using browser windows. You can open a new window by
pressing the phone’s Menu button while on the browser and
selecting New window. This will appear to reload the
287

browser, returning you to your home page, from which point
you can either navigate directly to a new site or search again.
You can press the Menu button and select Windows to see a
list of all of the windows you currently have open. Select any
of them to return to that window, or select the minus to close
the window (see Figure 11.4). You can also open another new
window from this screen.
You are limited as to the number of windows you can have
open at once. On the Droid X, you can only have eight
windows. Be aware that some Web sites open links in new
windows by default, so you may have windows open of
which you are not aware. Also, if you reach your maximum
number of windows and attempt to click a link on a page that
opens in a new window, the browser will display an error
message. You will need to manually close some of your
windows in order to follow the link.
288

Figure 11.4
The windows currently open in my browser
Bookmark Sites
Just as you can on a desktop browser, you can save a
reference to a site as a bookmark to make it easy to return to
the site later. While viewing a site, you can press the
bookmark icon on the browser’s address bar. The bookmark
289

icon looks like a small flag with a star on it. Selecting this
icon will display the browser’s Bookmarks screen, which
shows all of your current bookmarks as page thumbnails (see
Figure 11.5). The current page will appear in the top-left
corner of the screen with the word Add superimposed on it.
Select the page’s thumbnail, either type a new name or accept
the default, and select OK to add the bookmark.
You can also bookmark a page by pressing the phone’s Menu
button, then Bookmarks, which takes you to the same place as
selecting the bookmark icon on the browser’s address bar. In
addition, you can press the Menu button, then More, then Add
bookmark. This will display the same dialog box as before,
prompting you to change or confirm the bookmark name. It
will not, however, display the Bookmarks screen.
You can navigate back to a bookmarked page by pressing the
phone’s Menu button, then Bookmarks, to display the
Bookmarks screen. Simply select any thumbnail to go to that
page.
The same Bookmarks screen also includes tabs for Most
visited and History. Most visited lists the sites you frequently
visit, allowing you to quickly return to your favorite sites
even if they are not bookmarked. History displays all of the
pages you have visited in the last month.
You can get even quicker access to pages by saving them as
shortcuts directly on your home screen. While viewing a
page, press the phone’s Menu button, then More, then Add
shortcut to Home.
290

Figure 11.5
The browser’s Bookmarks screen, showing the page I want to
add in the top-left corner
291

Figure 11.8
Firefox on Android
292

Change the Home Page
While Google’s search page provides a convenient starting
place, you may decide you would prefer a different page as
your browser’s home page. You can set a bookmarked page
by going to the Bookmarks screen on your browser and
long-pressing on the desired page’s thumbnail, then selecting
Set as homepage from the menu that appears.
You can also change the home page by pressing the Menu
button, then selecting More, then Settings. Scroll down to the
Set home page option and select it, then type the address of
the page you wish to use as the home page.
Installing a Different Browser
While the default browser from Google is very good, you
may decide that you wish to experiment with one of the
alternate browsers currently available on the Market. While
almost all browsers will display Web pages in basically the
same way, other browsers may offer features not found in the
default.
Dolphin
A long-popular alternate browser for Android is Dolphin. If
you are running Android 2.0 or later, you can get Dolphin
Browser HD from the Market; users running Android older
than 2.0 can get a version without the “HD” moniker.
Regardless, both are free.
293

Dolphin browser includes one major feature missing from the
default browser: tabs (see Figure 11.6). Tabbed browsing
allows you to open multiple Web pages within the same
browser window; odds are very good that you have at least
seen tabbed browsing before as every major desktop browser
has included the feature for several years.
Dolphin also incorporates many more features into the main
interface than does the default browser. You can access
bookmarks and your most-visited sites by simply swiping
your finger to the right, while swiping to the left reveals a
toolbar with an option to browse full-screen, hiding both the
browser’s address and tab bar and the phone’s Notification
Bar. In full-screen mde, you can swipe down to reveal a menu
screen to switch between open tabs.
Dolphin supports the creation of plug-ins by third-party
vendors. You can access a list of plug-ins by selecting the
puzzle-piece icon at the bottom of the toolbar, then selecting
Get more Add-ons. As of this writing, almost 50 add-ons are
available, doing everything from changing how you view
Web pages to helping protect your passwords. You can also
download the plug-ins directly from the Market.
You can also apply themes to the browser to change its
overall appearance. Themes are available from the Android
Market. Most of the themes simply change the color scheme
of the browser to something other than the default green.
294

Figure 11.6
The Dolphin Browser showing tabs for navigating to multiple
Web sites
Opera
Opera is an old standby in the desktop browser scene. While
most casual users have likely never heard of it, many Web
professionals rely heavily on Opera thanks to the fact that in
295

many
environments,
it
displays
pages
faster
than
its
competitors. Opera offers an Android-based version of its
browser, known as Opera Mini, free on the Market (see
Figure 11.7).
Like Dolphin, Opera supports tabbed browsing, although it
does so through a somewhat unusual interface: Rather than
arranging the tabs along the top of the browser like Dolphin
and most desktop browsers, Opera bundles the open tabs into
a single button in a toolbar at the bottom of the screen,
resulting in an experience more like the default browser’s
multiple windows than a true tabbed browser.
Opera’s biggest feature is one which is well hidden but
important if you are not on an unlimited data plan. Rather
than simply pulling down Web pages, the browser relies on
compression technology that the company claims can reduce
your bandwidth usage by as much as 90 percent.
The browser also includes a feature called Opera Link that
allows you to synchronize your bookmarks between your
phone and your desktop computer, as long as you also use the
Opera browser on your desktop.
296

Figure 11.7
The Opera Mini browser
Mozilla Firefox
The Mozilla Firefox browser is, by most measures, the
second-most popular browser in the desktop world. You may
remember
the
days
when
Netscape
was
battling
with
Microsoft for dominance in the browser market. When
297

Microsoft won, Netscape was eventually sold off to AOL,
which in turn spun the browser development off into an
open-source, nonprofit organization that became the Mozilla
Project. Fans of Firefox, including myself, have long waited
for their browser to find its way to Android, and it almost has.
In the summer of 2010, Mozilla released Fennec, the
prerelease version of Firefox for Mobile, named for a type of
fox found in the Sahara desert (see Figure 11.8). The browser
promises to offer many of the features that make the desktop
Firefox browser so popular, including tabbed browsing and
support for a plethora of add-ins. It will also offer a
synchronization feature similar to that found on Opera and
Opera Mini. Keep in mind, however, that as of this writing
Firefox for Android is only available as a beta release,
meaning that it is still in fairly early stages of development
and therefore is likely missing features and may be unstable,
which is the polite way of saying that you should use it at
your own risk. As a beta release, it is not yet available in the
Market, but if you want to give it a try, you can download it
from www.mozilla.com/en-US/m/beta.
298

Chapter 12: Documents
The Skim
PDF - Working with Google Docs - Working with Microsoft
Office Documents - Reading eBooks
We are still some time away from having our mobile devices
replace our laptop and desktop computers. I now use my
phone as my primary e-mail and Twitter platform, but if I
need to create something new, I still need my computer.
While creating new documents may not yet be completely
practical on phones, reading existing documents, in a wide
variety of formats, certainly is here today.
PDF
In the early 1990s, many users consistently encountered
difficulties
sharing
documents
with
others,
as
those
documents were more than likely in incompatible formats.
Workers at a company that used WordPerfect could not easily
exchange information with other workers at companies that
relied on Microsoft Word. Adobe created the Portable
Document Format, or PDF, as a solution: While the
WordPerfect users could not send an editable document to the
Word users, they could at least send one that was readable.
Today,
format
incompatibility,
particularly
in
office
environments using word processors, is much less of a
concern, mostly due to the total dominance of the market that
Microsoft Word now enjoys. Even still, those few offices
299

(mostly in the legal realm) that use WordPerfect no longer
have to worry about incompatibility, because for the most part
Word and WordPerfect can now read each other’s documents.
PDF still has a role to play in those situations, but its primary
use today is in protecting documents: the very noneditability
that was initially perceived as a drawback to the format is
now one of its biggest advantages.
For the most part, you cannot create new documents as PDFs.
Rather, the vast majority of users convert existing documents
into the format. Many ways now exist to do this conversion.
You can rely on Adobe Acrobat, but a lot of the software you
use on your computer may include the ability to convert to
PDF without Acrobat. Microsoft Office 2010 on Windows
can convert Word, Excel, or PowerPoint documents to PDF
without Acrobat. Creative professionals using the other
programs in the Adobe Creative Suite, such as Photoshop,
Illustrator, and InDesign, can likewise convert to PDF without
additional software. Macintosh users have the ability to
convert almost any document on their computer to PDF.
Converting to PDF, however, is only half of the equation:
You also need to be able to read documents. Most often,
reading on desktop and laptop computers is accomplished via
the free Adobe Reader software, although alternate readers do
exist. On your Android phone, you have the exact same
solution: You can read PDFs sent to you thanks to any one of
several dozen PDF readers in the Market, including Adobe’s
official version of Reader (see Figure 12.1).
You will likely get PDFs on your phone in one of three ways:
by clicking a link on a Web site, by having one sent as an
300

e-mail attachment, or by manually copying one to your
phone’s SD card.
Figure 12.1
Reading a PDF on the phone via the Adobe Reader
301

Working with Google Docs
Google Docs is a free, Web-based alternative to a standard
office
software
suite.
It
includes
a
word
processor,
spreadsheet, presentation, drawing, and form application. All
documents you create in Google Docs are saved to their
servers, meaning that they can be accessed at any time from
any computer — or phone — with Web access (see Figure
12.2).
In order to start working with Google Docs, you need a
Google account, which, of course, you already have. You can
create new documents on your computer by going to
http://docs.google.com. You will need to log in with your
Google username and password, at which point you will be
taken to the main Google Docs page. On the left-hand side of
the page, you will see a Create new button that presents you
with a menu of choices of which kind of document you wish
to create. If you select Document, a new tab will open in your
browser, allowing you to create a document in Google’s word
processing application. Although not as fully featured as
something like Microsoft Word, the Google application
allows you to type your document and apply most of the
common formatting you are familiar with, such as changing
the font, size, and color of text. You can save your document
at any time by clicking the Save now button in the top-right
corner
of
the
screen,
although
the
application
does
automatically save for you every few seconds.
You can return to the main Google docs window by simply
switching back to its tab in the browser or by closing the
document’s tab. Selecting Presentation from the Create new
302

button opens Google’s alternative to PowerPoint. As with the
word processor, you will find many of the basic features here
if you are familiar with PowerPoint. The biggest missing
feature — the exclusion of which can be considered either a
good or bad thing, depending on your views of PowerPoint —
is that you cannot apply animation or transition effects in
Google’s application. You can right-click on items on the
slide and select Incremental Reveal to control how text boxes
appear on the slide, but that is as close as the application
comes to the sorts of effects with which you may be familiar.
When in the Presentation application, you will find a Start
presentation and Save button in the top-right corner. As with
the word processor, presentations are automatically saved on
a regular basis.
The main Google Docs window’s Create new button also
includes an option to create a new spreadsheet, which opens a
window and presents an application similar to Microsoft
Excel. While again some more advanced features are missing,
the basics are all here, including the most important feature
for any spreadsheet application: the ability to simplify math
through functions. If you are familiar with editing documents
and using functions in Excel, you will find the Google Docs
version easy to use.
The Google Doc’s drawing program is the one in the set that
offers the fewest features. If you need to create some
relatively simple drawings to accompany a presentation, it
might suit your needs, but artists in particular will find it
lacking. It functions much more closely to the embedded
drawing tools in Microsoft Office programs than a true
drawing application.
303

Finally, perhaps the most unique of the Google Docs
applications is Forms, which allows you to create surveys
with a variety of question types. Best of all, it automatically
records the responses in a spreadsheet, making it easy to
analyze the results.
One of the nicest features of Google Docs is the ability to
share documents with others. Any document can be shared
with any number of users, and you have the ability to control
whether those users can edit or merely view documents. In
this way, workers at remote sites can have easy access to
important documents; one training center I work for with sites
throughout California maintains its master class schedule on
Google Docs, allowing the managers at each site to view and
edit the schedule for all sites.
All of the Google Docs applications are available on your
Android
device,
as
the
docs
are
available
to
any
Internet-connected device. Using your phone’s Web browser,
simply navigate to http://m.google.com/docs. You will likely
need to log in again, but then you should see the list of the
documents you have created. You can view, but not edit,
word processing and presentation documents. Spreadsheets,
on the other hand, can be edited to a limited extent: you can
alter data in existing cells by selecting the Edit link on each
row (see Figure 12.3), but you cannot add more rows or
columns to the document.
Tidbit
304

A few applications exist in the Market to work with Google
Docs, but in September 2010 the company announced that it
was readying an official application that would allow users
to edit and view documents in Google Docs, with the focus
on improving security. Unfortunately, the app was not
released in time to be included in this book, but may be
available in the Market by the time you read this.
305

Figure 12.2
The main page of Google Docs, showing the documents I
have created
306

Figure 12.3
A Google spreadsheet displaying on the phone. Select the
Edit link to alter data.
Working with Microsoft Office Documents
A wide variety of programs exist to allow you to work with
Microsoft Office documents on your phone. You should
carefully evaluate your needs for an Office application before
307

downloading a free one or purchasing a commercial app. In
particular, you should decide if you need merely to be able to
read documents, which most of the free apps can accomplish,
or whether you need to be able to edit documents, which in
general will require that you purchase an app.
One such paid app that not only allows you to both read and
edit documents but also allows you to create new ones is
Quickoffice. Verizon actually bundles Quickoffice with many
of its phones, including the Droid X. If you are not a Verizon
customer, you can purchase Quickoffice from the Market.
Quickoffice can read, edit, and create new Microsoft Word,
Excel, and PowerPoint documents, as well as read PDFs. The
application even supports documents created in the newest
versions of Office.
Editing Documents in Quickoffice
In order to edit documents in Quickoffice, you need first to
transfer the file to your phone. Perhaps the easiest way to do
this is via e-mail; simply attach the document and send or
have it sent to an e-mail account that you can access on your
phone (see Chapter 5 for details on working with e-mail on
your phone.) When the message arrives, open the attachment,
which will either open directly in Quickoffice or, if you have
more than one application on your phone that can handle
documents, you can choose Quickoffice from the dialog box
that appears.
You can also attach your phone to your computer and drag
documents from your hard drive to your SD card. See Chapter
308

1 for details. If you choose this method, you will need to open
Quickoffice and select Browse from its start-up screen.
It may not be immediately apparent that the document is
editable, as Quickoffice does not display any tools, but you
can simply choose in the section of the document you wish to
edit to place your cursor. Then press the Menu button on your
phone, choose Keyboard, and begin typing (see Figure 12.4).
You can apply limited formatting to Word documents by
pressing the Menu button and selecting Format. Be aware that
an important limitation of the program is that it does not
contain an undo function, so if you make a mistake in editing
the document, you will either need to manually fix the
mistake or close the document without saving changes.
Excel documents function in much the same manner: Either
transfer the document to your SD card manually or e-mail it,
then open it in Quickoffice. You can double-tap a cell to
select it and then type values into the box at the top; unlike
with the Word app, the keyboard will automatically appear.
Pressing the Menu button gives you access to options to set
the number format or switch to other worksheets in the
document. You can change the text formatting by pressing
Menu, then More, then Font Format. The program supports a
full range of Excel’s functions, but they must be typed
manually into a cell.
PowerPoint
documents
can
be
opened
in
Quickoffice.
Initially, you will see thumbnails of each slide (see Figure
12.5). You can double-tap the slide to zoom in or out, and use
the Menu button to switch to a slide show view. The text on
the slides can be edited by long-pressing the text you wish to
309

edit and selecting Edit Text. You can only change the text
itself; formatting either the text or the slides is not possible.
Figure 12.4
Editing a Microsoft Word document in Quickoffice
310

Figure 12.5
A PowerPoint presentation open in Quickoffice
Creating New Documents
You can create new documents for Word and Excel in
Quickoffice (see Figure 12.6). Keep in mind, however, that
entering text on a phone, even with Swype, is not as quick or
easy — or accurate — as typing on a traditional keyboard, so
311

this capability is unlikely to persuade you to dump your
laptop in favor of your phone. Rather, you should see this as a
great way to have the ability to create documents on the fly in
emergency situations. It may also be useful for certain types
of smaller documents such as notes taken during a meeting.
Quickoffice does not allow you to create new PowerPoint
documents.
When you create new documents, you are first prompted to
select the type. Unfortunately, Quickoffice is not as clear here
as it could be, as your choices are Word Document and Word
97–2003 Document. The app presents a similarly vague set of
choices for Excel. What it is really asking is if you want the
document to be created using Microsoft’s newer file formats
— .docx for Word and .xlsx for Excel — or whether you
would prefer to use the older formats. The new formats create
documents that can only be opened and edited by Office 2007
and 2010, so if you are still using an older version of Office
or if you need to exchange the documents with people who
are, you should select the older format.
312

Figure 12.6
A new document created in Quickoffice. Yes, I really did
write the paragraph on my phone.
Other Applications
Quickoffice is not the only app in the Market designed to
work with Microsoft Office documents. Another popular
application is Documents to Go, which offers a free version
313

for viewing Word and Excel documents, or a paid version that
adds PowerPoint and PDF viewing along with editing
capabilities.
Reading eBooks
Reading books in digital formats is either the best thing to
happen to literature since Guttenberg, or the worst. As a
devoted reader, I have thus far resisted the temptation to
switch to eBooks altogether, although I will admit that the
thought of always having something to read — so long as I
have my phone with me — is in a way quite comforting.
As with the mobile market itself, the eBook market is for the
time being divided into a variety of formats. Thus, you may
need several apps on your phone.
One of the more common formats is PDF, which as you have
already seen can be read using the official Adobe Reader app
or any of the other PDF apps available in the Market. Most
likely, you will need to transfer the PDF to your phone by
manually copying it to the SD card or via e-mail, although
you may also be able to download it directly from a Web site.
Amazon Kindle
Another very common format is that used by the Amazon
Kindle. While the company primarily advertises the Kindle as
a stand-alone device, it has also created a Kindle app to allow
you to purchase and read eBooks directly on your phone. The
official Amazon Kindle app came preloaded on the Droid X
and is similarly automatically available on other devices, but
314

if you do not have it you can download it free from the
Market.
You can only read books that you have downloaded from
Amazon’s Web site on the app. The company stores your
purchase and download history both in the app and on its
Web site, and every time you launch it, the app compares the
books in its library to those recorded online. Unfortunately,
the app’s response to finding books it does not recognize is
not exactly ideal: It simply crashes, and will not start up again
until the offending book is removed.
In order to download books that the app will accept, open the
app, press the phone’s Menu button, and select Kindle Store.
This will launch your browser and display the store, which is
organized into categories including bestsellers, new titles, and
classics (see Figure 12.7). You can browse by category or
search for specific titles.
While most books being published today are available
electronically, many older titles have also been converted, and
a lot of those are available free of charge. The Kindle Store’s
main page includes a link to free popular classics, with great
works such as Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s The Adventures of
Sherlock Holmes, Bram Stoker’s Dracula, most of the works
of Shakespeare, and my own personal favorite book, Mary
Shelley’s Frankenstein (see Figure 12.8).
Newer releases almost always cost nearly as much as the print
version. Keep in mind that the majority of the cost involved in
producing a book is in paying authors and editors and in real
labor costs such as layout, and not the actual printing, so you
should not expect switching to reading titles electronically to
315

significantly reduce your book-buying budget. All books you
purchase with the Kindle app are processed through Amazon,
so if you already have an account you can sign into it on your
phone and use the one-click ordering process, which enables
you to begin reading a book within a few seconds of deciding
to buy it. If you do not have an account already, you can
follow the steps outlined in the Kindle Store to create one.
While reading a book, you can simply swipe your finger from
the right to the left to “turn” the page. You can also press the
phone’s Menu button and choose View Options to adjust the
font size and background color. The app will automatically
remember your spot in the book, although you can manually
add bookmarks as you go if you need the ability to return to
multiple spots later.
Tip
It is actually possible to work around the limitation of only
being able to read books you have downloaded from
Amazon, but it takes some work. Obviously, you should not
take this as a license to download books illegally, but there
are nonetheless times when you may have a book you
acquired legitimately through another source. For example,
as the author of the Adobe Flash Catalyst CS5 Bible, I was
316

able to get an electronic copy of it directly from the
publisher, but as I had not downloaded it from Amazon, the
Kindle app was not willing to open it. After doing some
digging online, I discovered that the app, quite obviously,
only syncs with Amazon’s server when it is online.
Therefore, you can copy a book you did not download into
the Kindle’s directory, then turn off both Wi-Fi and 3G,
launch the app and read the book successfully. The easiest
way to disable Wi-Fi and 3G, by the way, is to turn on
Airplane mode. You just need to be sure to move the book’s
file back out of the Kindle’s directory before you go back
online.
317

Figure 12.7
Categories of eBooks available in the Kindle Store
318

Figure 12.8
Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein. If you think you know the story
from all of the bad movies that have been supposedly based
on it, do yourself a favor and read the actual novel.
Aldiko
A popular, free eBook reader for Android is Aldiko. The app
comes with Sun Tzu’s Art of War and H.G. Wells’ The
319

Invisible Man preinstalled, and includes the ability to
download free public domain books as well as free books
from a few other sources (see Figure 12.9). Aldiko only
supports books in the ePub format.
Aldiko’s only real limitation is that it cannot download books
from commercial sites such as Amazon, so you will not be
able to read the latest bestsellers. However, if you are more
into the classics and lesser-known authors, you will likely not
mind the app’s selections.
Reading on Aldiko is almost identical to the Kindle app; in
fact, if you were just shown a book in both, you would be
unlikely to tell the difference (see Figure 12.10).
320

Figure 12.9
The sources from which Aldiko can download books
321

Figure 12.10
Reading a book in Aldiko
322

Chapter 13: Games
The Skim
Puzzle Games - Classic Board Games - Action Games - Card
Games - Games That Take Advantage of Your Phone’s
Abilities - Web-Based Games
I
recently
heard
someone
describe
smartphones
as
a
technology that allows users to kill time productively, and
thought it an apt description of how I actually use my phone a
lot of the time. I will pull it out to quickly check Twitter or
e-mail while I am in line at the store or waiting to board a
plane. That said, I have to admit that while I use my phone a
lot to kill time, it is not always all that productive: There are
plenty of times that I will spend time in line playing a game
rather than checking e-mail.
The good news for Android users is that the variety of games
available on the platform will suit almost any taste. Serious
gamers can find games that might rival some found on
desktop computers, while more casual gamers like myself can
find titles — usually for free — to match our tastes as well.
Puzzle Games
If you are looking for casual games that you can play in short
bursts here and there that will nonetheless require at least
some thinking, the Market offers a large selection of puzzle
games.
323

Andoku
I have an affinity to Sudoku. It is something that you can do a
little at a time, and can definitely be challenging. When I got
my first Android phone, Sudoku apps were among the first I
looked for. I tried out a variety of the free apps on the Market,
and by far the best I came across was Andoku (see Figure
13.1). It provides puzzles in five levels ranging from “easy”
to “fiendish,” with 100 puzzles in each level. All puzzles are
timed, and the app keeps track of your fastest and slowest
times as well as your average, so you can see if you are
somehow managing to get better with each game. The nicest
thing about Andoku, however, and what really set it apart
from the other Soduko games on the Market was its
intelligent input. Too many others relied on the phone’s
keyboard, which often makes entering numbers slow, while
Andoku presents a number pad at the bottom of the screen.
Also, it is not ad supported, so you will not find yourself
constantly interrupting your game when you accidentally
click an ad.
324

Figure 13.1
Andoku, an excellent Sudoku game
Traffic Jam Free
Years ago, I was given the game Rush Hour for Christmas.
Rush Hour is a simple puzzle game where you take a set of
plastic cars and move them around on a board. The goal is to
move enough cars out of the way to “free” your car to exit the
325

board. Traffic Jam Free is essentially Rush Hour for Android
(see Figure 13.2). The object is the same: You play the yellow
car and need to move the other cars, trucks, and occasional
limousine out of the way so that you can get to the exit. The
game seems almost silly when described, but I think most
people will find it fairly addictive. The game’s settings allow
you to set one of five difficulties, and the free version
includes 160 levels. It also contains four themes, including a
harbor where you need to free your boat instead of your car.
The commercial version of Traffic Jam removes the ads from
the top of the screen.
326

Figure 13.2
Traffic Jam Free
aiMinesweeper
Anyone who has ever used a Windows-based computer has
almost certainly killed time with Minesweeper. Just in case
you have not seen it, it is a simple puzzle game where you are
presented with a grid in which you need to find hidden mines
327

without actually triggering them. You do this by clearing
spaces that reveal numbers indicating how many adjacent
squares contain mines. The game is timed, and those with lots
and lots of time to kill at work can get quite good, clearing a
16 x 30 grid containing 99 mines in a matter a seconds. A lot
of minesweeper clones exist on Android, but the one that
adheres the closest to the original classic is aiMinesweeper
(see Figure 13.3). Game play is basically identical to the
Windows version; really, the only difference is the fact that
the game is green by default rather than gray.
328

Figure 13.3
aiMinesweeper
Tetris
Tetris, invented in 1984 by Russian Alexey Pajitnov, is one of
the most popular video games of all time. According to
Pajitnov’s Tetris Company, the game has sold hundreds of
millions of copies in its lifetime. An official Android version
of Tetris, published by EA Mobile, is available from the
Market for $4.99 (see Figure 13.4). This app maintains the
game play of the original, but unfortunately lacks what to me
was one of the more enjoyable features of the classic game:
its soundtrack of Russian folk songs. Instead, the EA game
has what could best be described as a techno-funk soundtrack.
In May 2010, the Tetris Company sent a cease-and-desist
order to Google demanding that the company remove all
Tetris clones from the Market. At the time, Google complied,
but as dozens of clones are still available, the ongoing future
of unofficial versions of the game remains unclear.
329

Figure 13.4
The official Tetris app
Classic Board Games
Google groups quite a few games under its “Brain and
Puzzle” category that I would more accurately classify as
board games, including classics such as chess, checkers,
backgammon, and mancala.
330

Chess for Android
While the exact origins of chess are deeply debated, no one
questions that people have been playing the game, or at least
something similar, for something close to 1500 years. From
fairly
early
on,
people
have
attempted
to
create
computer-based chess games that can provide fun yet
challenging game play; in 1997, a computer known as Deep
Blue became the first machine to defeat a World Chess
Champion when it beat Garry Kasparov. It is no surprise then
that the Market is full of chess games, but one of the nicest is
titled simply Chess for Android (see Figure 13.5). The app
presents a classic, easy-to-view board. It highlights the spots
to which each piece can move and displays the game’s history
on the lower portion of the screen. I discovered that not only
is the app a great way to play chess, it is also a good learning
tool, as I have been using it to help teach the game to my
daughter. It contains eight levels, although these seem to
relate more to the speed with which your opponent moves
than the actual skill of the opponent.
331

Figure 13.5
Chess for Android
Checkers for Android
I will admit that I’ve never been the biggest fan of checkers. I
know that there is actually a lot of strategy to the game, and
perhaps I just have not devoted enough effort to learning it, so
it is still in the range of games I can play somewhat
332

mindlessly. That, of course, means that I can pretty much
count on getting beaten every time by my phone’s Checkers
for Android, made by the same developer as Chess for
Android (see Figure 13.6). But the look and feel of the
checkers app are very similar to the chess app, including the
same levels option that merely slows down the opponent.
Figure 13.6
Checkers for Android
333

Backgammon
Backgammon is another classic game that has survived for
centuries, with sets for a very similar game having been
discovered in Iran dating to 3000 BCE. Like chess and
checkers, dozens of backgammon games exist on the Market,
and the free game simply titled Backgammon is among the
best (see Figure 13.7). It contains a very nice, classic-looking
board and sound effects of die rolling on wood. One of its
more interesting features, however, is an anticheating mode.
Backgammon games rely partially on luck, thanks to the roll
of the dice, but also on skill, and skillful players can make
moves that increase their chances of being able to capitalize
on
good
rolls
while
minimizing
their
opponent’s
opportunities. Thus, it can often appear as though the
computer is cheating by getting better rolls. To prove that this
is not the case, the game actually includes an option that
allows the human player to roll an actual set of physical dice
and input the values, thus bypassing the game’s die rolls and
proving that you keep losing simply because the game is
better than you.
334

Figure 13.7
Backgammon
Mancala
Mancala is not technically a game, but rather a category of
games. However, the term has come to be commonly
associated with the game Kalah, and the two terms are often
used interchangeably, particularly on the Market. The game
has its origins in agricultural societies, so many games use the
analogy of moving seeds from one pocket to the next, but
most modern versions of the game, including the ones you
will find in the Market, use instead the idea of moving gem
stones. To play, you take all of the stones out of one pocket
and place them, one at a time, into the adjacent pockets. You
can capture your opponent’s stones by counting correctly and
ending your turn in an empty pocket. The game ends when all
of the pockets from one side of the board are empty. The free
335

app in the Market simply called Mancala is among the nicest
available (see Figure 13.8).
Figure 13.8
Mancala
Tip
The only real challenge in finding games to play on your
Android device is in trying to choose which ones to
download, as the Market is full of thousands of titles in
336

practically every genre. The Market lists games in four basic
categories: Arcade and Action, Brain and Puzzle, Cards and
Casino, and Casual. Unfortunately, you will quickly come
across the Market’s biggest limitation: It is designed around
the idea of searching for apps, not browsing for them, so
once you go into any of these categories you find an
overwhelming list of titles, which are presented in a
seemingly random order. You could thus spend all of your
time browsing for games rather than actually playing them.
You might get lucky and stumble upon a couple here and
there, but you are unfortunately better off just doing what
Google wants you to do in the first place, which is search.
Do not search for specific titles, unless, of course, you know
the exact one for which you are looking, but instead search
on more general subjects, such as Sudoku or hearts or poker.
This will generally result in a good list of the titles available
for that type of game, which will allow you to find one you
like. When evaluating games, I would definitely recommend
that you also look at the comments to see what others
thought of the title, and remember that all apps have a
24-hour refund policy so if you find a game you think you
will like that you have to purchase, you can always try it out
and return if it you do not like it after all.
Action Games
When many people think of video games, they think lots of
action and loud explosions. If that is your style, you will find
plenty of choices on Android. Unfortunately, few of these
games are free.
337

Robo Defense
Tower defense games are almost a genre by themselves.
These games revolve around the idea of you defending some
kind of territory by placing weapons in the path of a
seemingly never-ending horde of attackers. You are not
responsible for actually shooting your opponents; instead,
your guns or other weapons fire by themselves, leaving you to
figure out the best placement for your defenses. All of the
games provide you with limited resources and defense of
varying quality — and cost. While a lot of tower defense
games exist on the market, one of the more entertaining is
RoboDefense (see Figure 13.9). The graphics are a bit too
small to make out details, but the idea is that you have to
place guns in the path of robots who are attacking what
appears to be some sort of fortress. Lower levels tend to be
fairly easy, but higher levels become quite difficult. The game
is available in a free version with limited maps and levels and
a larger, more expansive paid version.
338

Figure 13.9
RoboDefense
Angry Birds
On paper, Angry Birds seems like quite a silly game. The
story, such as it is, revolves around a group of pigs who have
stolen the eggs from a bunch of birds. The pigs have then
fortified themselves inside rather poorly made structures of
wood, stone, and ice, and the birds have decided to hurl
themselves at the structures in order to kill the pigs. Or
something. In the game, you take the role of the birds — in
each level, you pull back a slingshot and toss birds at the
pigs’ structures, which then collapse down on them (see
Figure 13.10). You have a limited number of birds, and the
object is to kill all of pigs in as few shots as possible. It is
unquestionably silly, but also shockingly addictive. Angry
Birds is one of the most popular games for Apple’s iPhone
platform, and now you, too can enjoy it on Android.
339

Figure 13.10
Angry Birds
Card Games
Card games are some of the most popular electronic games.
From solitaire to hearts to Texas Hold’em poker, you will
find plenty of options to keep you entertained if you like
playing cards.
Solitaire
Many solitaire games exist on the Market, including the one
simply named Solitaire. This game includes four popular
varieties of the game, including regular solitaire, Spider,
Freecell, and Forty Thieves. The graphics are not spectacular,
but the game play is fast and very smooth (see Figure 13.11).
Another
popular
solitaire
app
is
Fun
Towers,
which
essentially reverses the traditional solitaire game, forcing you
to pull cards from the stack back into your hand. It is both
simple and surprisingly addictive.
340

Figure 13.11
Playing Freecell
Poker
Poker, particularly the Texas Hold’em variety, has become
one of the most popular games over the last few years, with
ESPN even televising the annual World Series tournament
and a plethora of online gaming sites, so it should come as no
surprise to see many Android poker apps available. The
problem with poker as a video game, however, is that it is
very difficult to do well against a computer, because it is a
game in which the best hand does not always win thanks to
the ability of players to bluff, something that computers
cannot easily do nor fall victim to. A few apps exist to solve
this problem by allowing you to play live, online against other
users. One such app is the Red Poker Club, which can be
downloaded for free. You are given a set amount of virtual
chips with which to play each day. As with other online poker
341

games, you will find a wide variety of players to match up
against.
Games that Take Advantage of Your Phone’s
Abilities
While the majority of games for Android are games that have
existed in other forms and have merely been ported to the
phone, a growing number take advantage of the unique
properties of your device.
Graviturn Extended
The object of Graviturn Extended is simple: move red balls
off the board while keeping green balls on it (see Figure
13.12).
The
catch
is
that
you
rely
on
the
phone’s
accelerometer for movement, so you actually need to twist
and turn your phone around to move the balls around. As with
most games like this, Graviturn gets harder as you go and
constantly introduces new challenges, the hardest of which
are squares that, when hit by a ball, actually reverse the
gravity so that tilting the phone one way causes the balls to
move in the opposite direction. Graviturn won an award in the
Android Developer’s Challenge in 2009, and playing it makes
it easy to see why. Best of all, the game is free.
342

Figure 13.12
Graviturn Extended
SpecTrek
SpecTrek is an augmented reality ghost-hunting game. The
idea is that you use your phone’s GPS system to hunt down
ghosts in your neighborhood; when you get close to one, you
can tilt your phone up and begin using the camera, which
overlays the ghost against the real-world backdrop. You can
then choose a net icon on the screen to “capture” the ghost.
The game begins with a warning to play it only on foot, as
you will obviously be looking at your phone’s screen most of
the time, rather than paying attention to what is around you,
so operating a vehicle of any kind can be dangerous. You
should also be aware that playing the game in a crowded
environment such as a city can be equally hazardous, not to
mention that you’re sure to get some odd looks from
343

passers-by. A nice open park is probably the ideal place to
play.
Web-based Games
Most games available on the Web require Flash Player, which
is both good news and bad. The bad news, of course, is that if
your phone is not running at least Android 2.2 and supporting
Flash Player, then you will not be able to access some online
games. The good news is that the number of phones that do
run 2.2 and Flash Player is quickly expanding. See Chapter 11
for more details on getting Flash on your phone.
If you do have Flash, then all you need to do to play
Flash-based games on the Web is to simply go to the site in
question and play as normal (see Figure 13.13). Be aware,
however, that while Flash Player has been optimized for
mobile, many sites might not be. If a game requires keyboard
input, for example, and your phone only has a virtual
keyboard, you may find that the keyboard takes up enough
space on your screen that the game becomes all but
unplayable. Other games may have problems with simply
being too large.
344

Figure 13.13
Playing a Flash-based game at Orisinal.com
345

Chapter 14: Other Cool Apps
The Skim
Stargazing with Google Sky Maps - Finding Local Businesses
- Getting Movie and TV Information with IMDb - Creating
Shopping Lists - Calculating Tips - Taking Notes with
Evernote - Planning Trips with Kayak - Keeping Track of the
Weather with WeatherBug - Researching with Wapedia and
Wikimobile - Finding Recipes - Following Your Favorite
Sports Teams - Scanning Barcodes - Translating with Google
Translate
What separates smartphones from regular cell phones, of
course, are the apps. Apps are what people want to see when
you
show
them
your
phone;
they
are
what
phone
manufacturers focus on in advertising their products; they are
how people are making money in the mobile world. Spend
enough time browsing the Market and you are likely to find
that there is, in fact, an app for that. What “that” is, exactly,
depends on your personal taste.
Stargazing with Google Sky Maps
From a very early age, I have been fascinated with the stars
and space. Some of my earliest memories, in fact, are of
hanging outside with my dad, staring up at the stars. As I got
older, I began learning about constellations and the science of
astronomy. When Halley’s Comet last visited Earth in 1986,
my parents bought me a telescope, and I can recall spending
many evenings outside looking at the planets and stars. Of
346

course, while all of those years of study gave me a
better-than-working knowledge of the sky, I still had to rely
on paper and plastic star charts to figure out where things
were; many times, it was only when I pointed my telescope at
a planet that I figured out which one it was.
A few weeks ago, I got the chance to begin to pass on this
obsession to my kids when my daughter’s science class
learned about the moon, which spurred her to look through
my telescope. While we were looking through that same
telescope I had when I was younger, gone were the plastic
circular star charts. Instead, I had my phone with me outside,
and when I wanted to figure out what planet was hanging out
near the moon (Jupiter, as it turned out) or find a particular
star, I simply opened up Google Sky Maps.
Sky Maps was one of the first apps I downloaded on my old
G1; in fact, it was one of my main motivations to get an
Android-based smartphone in the first place. Sky Maps is
exactly what it says it is. When you launch it, the app uses
GPS or, failing that, triangulation from cell towers to
determine where you are, and then presents a map of the sky
at that moment (see Figure 14.1). You can identify celestial
objects by holding your phone above your head and pointing
it at the area of the sky you are looking it.
Sky Maps has a lot of options that allow you to configure
what you see. You can simply select the screen to view a
menu that allows you to turn on or off sets of objects,
including stars, constellations, Messier objects, planets, the
Right Ascension and Declination grid, and the horizon.
347

Tidbit
Charles
Messier
was
a
seventeenth-century
French
astronomer who created a catalog of galaxies, nebulae, and
star clusters. Today, these objects are known, appropriately,
as Messier objects. The objects are known by a numeric
designation Messier gave them; for example, the Andromeda
galaxy is M31. There are a total of 110 Messier objects.
Nineteenth- and twentieth-century astronomers compiled a
much longer list, known as the New General Catalogue or
NGC, that includes all of the Messier objects, along with
about 7700 additional ones, but most professional and
amateur astronomers, not to mention Sky Maps, still use the
Messier designations for those in his catalog. One of the
things that makes the Messier objects compelling is that
Messier himself did not have a very powerful telescope, so
all of this objects can be seen with either the naked eye or a
relatively small, 4-inch telescope.
Selecting the screen also gives you the ability to zoom in and
out on the map, and the option to switch between manual and
automatic modes. Automatic mode has the map display the
objects that the phone points at, while manual mode lets you
move around the sky yourself, regardless of the orientation of
the phone.
348

You can also press the phone’s Menu button to display still
more options. Search lets you find a particular object by name
or designation. The search will then display a large circle and
an arrow; the circle gradually changes color as you move
closer to the object, going from blue when you are looking in
completely the wrong direction to red and eventually an
expanded yellow circle when you find the object. The Menu
also allows you to toggle on Night mode, which makes the
background black and everything on the display red. Night
mode works because your pupils do not expand when
exposed to red light, so you can look at the screen and not
lose your night vision.
Finally, the Gallery displays a selection of pictures of objects
taken by the Hubble Space Telescope. You can select any
image to view it full screen, and then select Find in sky to be
taken back to the map and shown the location of the object to
see it yourself (see Figure 14.2).
Figure 14.1
349

Google Sky Maps, showing the current locations of Mars and
Venus
Figure 14.2
The Orion Nebula in the Sky Map Hubble Gallery
350

Finding Local Businesses
The rise of e-commerce over the last two decades has had an
undeniably negative impact on smaller local businesses. What
used to require a trip to the local independent bookstore or
music shop can now be done in the comfort of your own
home. Just as important, the Web was not much help for local
businesses because finding information on the Web required
that users be at home in front of their computers.
The rise of smartphones, however, holds the promise to
reverse those losses. Now, you can realistically be out with
friends and find a good local wine merchant, or track down a
hard-to-find rare book that a local used shop happens to carry.
Of course, the easiest way to do this is simply use your
phone’s browser to search just as you would normally, or
even start directly from the home screen with the integrated
search.
For certain items, a traditional search will work well, but for
many others it will not. Unless you live in a very small rural
area, a search for local restaurants is not likely to be terribly
helpful, as you will simply get too many results. If you are in
a large city, even narrowing down that search by the type of
food you want to eat will still likely give you too many hits.
Thankfully, several apps exist on the Market to help you
narrow things down. Two popular ones are Where and Yelp.
Best of all, both are free.
351

Where
Where is a local directory designed to get you to local
business quickly. When you start the app, it will determine
your location based on your cell provider’s network, which is
generally less accurate than GPS, but in this case being a
block or two off really does not matter. The app’s main page
displays a set of categories. From here, you can access
everything from the weather, movie showtimes, traffic
reports, news headlines, and more.
One of Where’s most useful categories is Restaurants. This
displays a list of restaurants organized by type of cuisine, so it
lets me know, for example, that there are unfortunately no
Cuban restaurants near me, but more pizza places than you
can imagine (the city I live in is known for having an
unusually high concentration of pizza restaurants, for reasons
no one can quite determine). You can select a restaurant from
any of the categories to view its details. From here, you can
select Map to display the restaurant’s location, or choose its
phone number to call for more information or, if necessary,
make reservations.
Where’s Places directory, accessible from its main screen, lets
you find businesses in one of 16 categories: Restaurants, Bars
& Clubs, After-Work Bars, Cheap Eats, Lounge, Pool Table,
Singles Bar, Romantic Dining, Nightlife, Grocery, Food,
Bakery, Hotels, Shopping, Trave,l and Spa & Beauty (see
Figure 14.3). Each of these categories displays a list of
businesses, and just as with restaurants, you can select any
business to get details, location, or to call it. Each business
and restaurant contains reviews written by other users and an
352

overall star rating, letting you tell at a glance whether the
place is well liked or hated by other locals.
Another useful feature of Where, also accessible from its
main screen, is its Events category, which displays music,
performing arts, sports, singles, food, and family activities in
your area. These are a great way to figure out what to do on a
lazy Saturday afternoon or to get acquainted with an area new
to you.
Another great feature of the application is its ability to look
up nearby gas prices. You can select the grade of fuel you
prefer, and the app will display gas stations within 10 miles
that carry that type of gas and how much they currently
charge, letting you know that you can save 10 cents a gallon
by driving an extra mile.
353

Figure 14.3
The Where Places categories
Yelp
Yelp serves much the same purpose as Where by providing a
localized directory of businesses and services. It has fewer
categories on its home screen, but if you select the Nearby
icon, then one of the categories such as restaurants, you will
354

see that it ultimately has about as much information as Where
(see Figure 14.4). Like Where, Yelp relies heavily on user
reviews, and displays star ratings on initial listings and
detailed reviews on business pages.
Yelp has less time-sensitive information; for example, it does
not display current gas prices or events, but in general has
more in-depth business directories. It also allows you to filter
the lists based on price or, a particularly nice feature, by
businesses that are currently open.
It also has one very cool feature Where lacks: the so-called
Monocle view. Select this from the main Yelp page, give it a
moment to determine your location, and then hold your phone
in front of you to see a listing of the restaurants in that
direction, displayed on an overlay of your phone’s camera
view. Buttons along the bottom allow you to switch the
overlay to bars or to everything.
355

Figure 14.4
Yelp’s local restaurant view
Getting Movie and TV Information with IMDb
As I mentioned earlier, I am a very big movie buff. Many
years ago, I actually got into Web design because I wanted to
build a film review Web site. As I began working on the site,
I needed a quick way to look up details on the movie, such as
356

the names of the director or stars. I do not recall exactly how I
discovered the Internet Movie Database, or IMDb, but it
quickly became my go-to site for details. It is without
question the only site I have continued to visit regularly for
the entire time I have been using the Web.
IMDb was created off of a collection of lists on a Usenet
discussion board about movies. Over time, the list grew to the
point that it became impractical to merely view it, and on
October 17, 1990, one of the people maintaining the list, Col
Needham, released a set of scripts that could be used to search
the list. By general agreement, this date is considered the birth
of the IMDb. In 1992, it became one of the earliest Web sites.
The organizers incorporated in 1996, and in 1998 the
company was purchase by Amazon, which continues to
operate it as a private subsidiary. Today, IMDb is one of the
most-visited sites on the Web and contains information on
practically every movie or TV show ever produced.
In 2010, IMDb launched its app for Android, which gives
users an easy way to access all of the data on the site. I still
use it primarily for the same thing I have always used the site
for: to quickly look up the names of people in movies and TV
shows I am watching. It is particularly helpful to find the
name of that actor in the show you are viewing who you
recognize but cannot quite place. You can search the app by
pressing the phone’s Menu button and selecting Search, or
more directly by pressing the phone’s Search button.
A key difference between the Web site and mobile app,
however, is that the app also displays local movie times. From
the app’s main page, simply select US Showtimes to see a list
of the movies currently playing in a theater near you. Each
357

movie lists its running time and the local theaters in which it
is playing (see Figure 14.5). Select the film’s title to go to the
IMDb page about the movie, including a link to the trailer,
which you can watch directly on your phone, or select the list
of theaters to go to the page that displays the exact
showtimes.
Several other apps provide movie listings, including both
Where and Yelp. However, none provides the amount of
detailed information about the movie itself as IMDb.
Tidbit
Please be courteous to those around you and stay off your
phone while you actually watch a movie. That said, there is
one other app you might consider putting on your phone,
specifically to have as a reference during the film: Runpee.
This
app,
which
provides
the
information
from
the
Runpee.com Web site, gives you a list of the moments in a
movie in which you can run to the bathroom without missing
anything important. It tells you when the scene occurs, how
long you have, and a description of what you will miss. One
of its nicest features is that it also lets you know which
movies have extra scenes following the closing credits.
358

Figure 14.5
The IMDb app showing local movie listings
Creating Shopping Lists
We all know the importance of using a list when shopping.
Budgeting experts will tell you that you should have a list to
avoid wasting money on impulse items, but the real reason is
because you will likely forget something without one, and, of
359

course, Murphy’s Law says that whatever you forget will be
an item that you simply cannot do without, forcing you to
make a second trip.
Thankfully, quite a few apps exist on the Market to allow you
to create a shopping list directly on your phone. My personal
favorite is OI Shopping list. The OI in the name stands of
Open Initiative; unlike most of the other apps on the Market,
this one has been created by a group of people as an
open-source application.
The application is incredibly simple, as a shopping list app
should be. You can simply launch the app and begin entering
products to create your list. While at the store, simply select
the check mark next to each item as you pick it up to know
that you have it in your cart (see Figure 14.6).
Press your phone’s Menu button and select Clean up list to
remove all checked items in preparation for your next trip to
the store. You can also select Settings, then Sort order to
change the way in which the items are sorted. I prefer the
option unchecked first, alphabetical, which moves each item
to the bottom of my list as I check it off.
If you prefer a bit more detail on your list, you can long-press
an item and select Edit item to bring up a screen that allows
you to enter quantity and price. You can also add tags to
items, so, for example, you can tag milk and eggs as dairy,
while you tag pineapple and grapes as fruit. You can then sort
on these tags to see items that are likely to be close to each
other in the store.
360

The app remembers any item you add, and presents you with
an autocomplete option as you type new items, so the next
time you need to get eggs, you should only need to type “e”
and then select eggs from the list that appears.
The app also supports a few cool optional add-ons, the best of
which is the OI Barcode Scanner, which allows you to scan
the barcode on a product to add it to your list.
Figure 14.6
361

OI Shopping list in action
Calculating Tips
Occasionally, restaurants will print suggested tips directly on
the bill, but most of the time you are expected to calculate the
gratuity in your head. I suppose some people are naturally
good enough at math to be able to do so in their heads, but for
most of us, you can get a rough approximation of 15 percent,
but nothing more. While you could use the calculator that
comes built in with Android, a dedicated tip calculator makes
things easier.
Tip calculators are another popular category for apps. While
the Market does not display the number of apps returned for a
search, doing a search on Tip Calculator brings up a
seemingly never-ending list of apps, ranging from free to
several dollars. After evaluating a variety of the free ones, my
personal favorite is the Nerdy Tip Calculator by LucanaTech
(see Figure 14.7).
Beyond the fact that I like the name, the Nerdy Tip Calculator
is nice because it is one of the few free apps that makes every
field editable. Many others do not allow you to manually
enter the tax amount. I am not exactly sure when I would
need to do this, but it feels nice to have the option.
I also like it because it is again one of the few apps that
allows you to split the bill among the people in your party. It
will not help if each person is paying only for his or her food
— the stock calculator is likely your best bet there — but if
you plan to split the bill evenly, this tip calculator will work
well for you.
362

Figure 14.7
The Nerdy Tip Calculator
Taking Notes with Evernote
I
was
first
introduced
to
Evernote
while
attending
a
conference when a woman next to me noted I was taking
notes in Word and recommended that I try Evernote instead.
At that time, Evernote existed as an online service and a
363

desktop application. The idea is that you can take notes with
the desktop application, but that those notes are automatically
synchronized online, giving you access to them from any
other Web-based computer. I tried it out at the conference and
was quickly convinced as to its utility.
I love the ability to access notes from anywhere, and I use
Evernote for all kinds of things: frequent flyer numbers, lists
of the movies I have seen or books I have read, Wi-Fi access
codes, people who help me out while I write books and need
to be thanked in the acknowledgments and more. The
only thing missing for some time was the ability to get all of
this on my phone. Yes, I could access the Evernote Web site,
but it tended to be pretty slow on the phone and was not easy
to read. I was thus thrilled when Evernote finally released an
app for Android.
In order to use Evernote, you first need to sign up for an
account. The company offers both a free account and a paid
account that gives you additional storage space online. You
can sign up online or within the app. When you log in, you
are given four options to get started: you can take a picture of
something to save as a note, upload a text file, or start a new
text or audio note (see Figure 14.8). You can also search for
an existing note by typing a search phrase in the box at the
top of the screen. You can also press your phone’s Menu
button and select Notes to view all of your existing notes. The
desktop and Web versions of Evernote rely heavily on tags to
organize your notes. In the mobile app, tags can be considered
in searching, but are not as obviously used elsewhere.
The only major limitation with the Evernote app is that unlike
the desktop version, the mobile version does not keep a copy
364

of your notes on your phone. While this is certainly by
design, as phone storage still tends to be limited, it does mean
that you will be completely unable to access your notes if you
find yourself someplace with no 3G or Wi-Fi connection.
Figure 14.8
The Evernote app
365

Planning Trips with Kayak
I do a lot of traveling for work, and needed an app that would
allow me to keep travel arrangements organized. In particular,
I hoped to find an app that would present me with a single
location that I could use to look up flight details, rental car
reservation numbers, and hotel addresses. This is again a
category of apps that is fairly common on the Market, and
something again that I evaluated a variety of apps without
discovering any one that suited my needs. That is, until a
friend recommended Kayak.
I was familiar with Kayak as a flight search tool: You can
visit the Web site, enter your home and destination cities, and
get a list of the cheapest flights between them. However, until
I checked out the mobile app, I had never looked at the rest of
the features the company offers. Now I use Kayak not only to
find flights but also keep myself organized while traveling.
When you open the app you are presented with a set of
options, allowing you to search flights or for hotels or rental
cars (see Figure 14.9). I have used the flight search on
occasion, but generally find the full Web interface to be a lot
easier to use, although I can imagine a situation where I might
use it for an emergency.
What I find particularly nice is Kayak’s Trip feature, which is
the travel organization tool I was looking for. Once you create
a free account with Kayak, you can store your flight, hotel,
and rental car information on its servers, accessing the details
from the Web or within the application. What is really cool,
though, is that you do not need to manually enter any of these
details. Today, just about every travel-related business will
366

e-mail you purchase confirmation receipts. All you need to do
is forward these e-mails to trips@kayak.com and within a few
minutes, the details will appear in your trip. The service is
intelligent enough to group related details together into a
single trip, even if you send receipts separately.
Figure 14.9
Kayak’s main screen
367

Keeping Track of the Weather with WeatherBug
I am not a weather geek. Most of the time, I have a vague idea
that it is hot or cold outside. However, there are plenty of
times when it helps to have a bit more information. It is not a
good idea, for example, to let the kids go to school in T-shirts
and shorts when it is going to be 50 degrees and raining. It
helps when packing for a trip to have an idea of the weather
where you are going.
WeatherBug is a great app whether you are like me and need
some general info about the weather now and then or if you
are a hard-core weather geek. When you launch the app, it
will
display
local
weather
information:
the
current
temperature, wind speed and direction, and today’s high and
low temperature (see Figure 14.10). It also displays today’s
forecast, along with the forecast for the next five days.
The app’s real power is in its additional features. Along the
bottom of the screen you will find a set of extra buttons. The
first takes you to the main page and always displays the
current temperature. The second button gives you a more
detailed seven-day forecast; you can select any day to get
more information. The third of the buttons at the bottom
displays live weather radar for your area, while the fourth
displays images from a variety of local weather cameras. The
fifth and final button loads videos from the WeatherBug Web
site, which give you weather information around the country.
You can press your phone’s Menu button and select Location
to add new locations to the app, helpful if you are traveling or
just want to keep up to date on the weather someplace else.
Also on the menu is an option for Preferences to change
368

temperature displays to Celsius or to add the current
temperature to your phone’s Notification Bar.
Figure 14.10
WeatherBug’s main page
369

Researching with Wapedia and Wikimobile
Several dozen apps exist that give you quick access to
Wikipedia, not counting, of course, using the browser to
simply access the Web site directly. The two that are fastest
and most user friendly are Wapedia and Wikimobile.
Wapedia’s interface is clean and easy to use, and the app
tends to load articles quickly. Articles in Wapedia are laid out
vertically, pretty much exactly as they are on the Wikipedia
Web site, so you can quickly scroll through to find the
information you need (see Figure 14.11). Press the phone’s
Menu button and then select the first option to jump to the
article’s contents. The title of the article displays the number
of pages the article contains, so you have a good idea at the
beginning of how long the article is. Unfortunately, there is
no easy way to get to the additional pages without first
scrolling to the bottom of the current page, but besides that
Wapedia is an excellent app.
Wikimobile is another excellent app for accessing Wikipedia.
Articles load as pages that you read left to right, which can
often be an easier way to read but unfortunately means that
you occasionally have to wait a moment while the next set of
pages loads. The good news is that you get to watch the app’s
cute dog-chasing-its-tail animation, so all is not lost. The app
does not load images from the article by default — a big part
of why articles load quickly — but you can use the phone’s
Menu button to turn on the option to load images if you want.
Unlike Wapedia, Wikimobile also does not attempt to
remember the last page you viewed.
370

Figure 14.11
Wapedia accessing the Wikipedia article on Android
Finding Recipes
I am always on the lookout for new recipes, and the Favorite
Recipes app is a great way to discover new things to cook for
dinner. The app has dozens of categories, and its search
feature brings up a random selection of recipes for each
371

matching phrase. There are no pictures accompanying the
recipes, but the directions are laid out nicely and best of all,
each of the recipes I have tried from the app has been very
good.
For recipes of a different sort, check out Cocktail Hero. While
not an exhaustive cocktail library — it says it contains 260
recipes — its best feature is its “Make It Mode,” where you
can check off the items you have in your liquor cabinet and it
will tell you what cocktails you can make from those.
Following Your Favorite Sports Teams
If you are a sports fan, you can use your phone to keep up
with your favorite teams. It is no real surprise that the best
free app for tracking sports scores comes from none other
than ESPN. Its ScoreCenter app displays a wealth of
information about ongoing and past games. You can set
favorite teams in baseball, basketball, cricket, football, ice
hockey, rugby, and soccer, and have access to all of the major
leagues within each sport. The app defaults to showing you
the scores and information for these favorites, so you get the
information you want quickly without having to wade through
a bunch of data you do not need or care about.
My favorite feature of this app is its Home screen widget,
which displays the upcoming game for each of your favorite
teams (see Figure 14.12). You can scroll through your teams
using the small arrows to the left of the widget, and each
team’s next game displays at the bottom. While a game is in
progress, the widget automatically updates to display the
current score.
372

Figure 14.12
The ESPN ScoreCenter widget
Scanning Barcodes
You can use your phone’s camera to scan barcodes on a
variety of products. A wide variety of applications can use
this data to show you details on the product.
373

The basic barcode scanning application is called simply
Barcode Scanner, by ZXing Team. Using this app, you can
scan QR codes on Web sites to install applications, as is
discussed in Chapter 2. You can also scan the barcode on the
backs of books and many other products, which you can then
use to search the Web for details on the product. This is an
app that should be on everyone’s phone.
Another app that uses the camera to scan barcodes is
Amazon’s app. When you launch the app, you have an option
from the main screen to search using barcodes. When a
barcode is recognized as being from a product Amazon sells,
the company’s detail page about the product will display (see
Figure 14.13). You can purchase the product immediately
from Amazon from here, or, the way I more frequently use it,
you can add the product to your Amazon wish list in the hope
that someone else buys it for you.
Key Ring is yet another great app that relies on scanning
barcodes. This ingenious app lets you scan the barcodes on
customer loyalty cards. It then saves a high-resolution picture
of the barcode from the card. You can then stop carrying the
actual card, and instead have the clerk at the store scan your
phone. You need to be sure that your phone’s screen is clean,
but most of the time this will work without issue. The app
does display the membership number on-screen, so if
scanning does not work the number will be there for the clerk
to type in manually, ensuring that you still get credit for your
purchase.
374

Figure 14.13
Amazon’s detail page, generated from scanning barcodes on
the books
Translating with Google Translate
Science fiction has long had solutions that allow characters to
communicate with others who speak different languages,
from Star Trek’s Universal Translator or The Hitchhiker’s
375

Guide to the Galaxy’s Babel fish. While it does not yet know
Klingon, the Google Translate app brings you close to making
this fiction reality.
When you open Google Translate, you can enter a word or
phrase and select to translate to and from any of 53 languages.
The app will display the word in the chosen language, but
what is particularly cool is its ability to actually speak the
word by selecting the speaker icon (see Figure 14.14). In
order to use the spoken translation, you need to have the
Text-to-speech Extended app installed as well. Fortunately,
Google Translate will automatically prompt you to install
Text-to-speech when you first launch if it is not already
installed.
376

Figure 14.14
Google Translate
377

Chapter 15: Advanced Topics
The Skim
Managing Your Phone’s Power Settings - Getting Your
Computer
Online
with Your
Phone
- Downloading
the
Android
SDK
- Turning
On USB
Debugging
- Taking
Screenshots
For most users, understanding how to work your phone, take
pictures, and install and run apps will be enough. Others,
however, will want to do more. You can fine-tune your
phone’s power settings to get more time between charges, or
use your phone to get your computer online. With the
Android Software Development Kit, you can back up
applications and take screenshots. Finally, if you want
complete control over your phone, you can root it.
Managing Your Phone’s Power Settings
Battery life has gotten significantly better on the latest
generation of smartphones, and it will presumably continue to
improve. That said, no one can deny that smartphones will
drain their battery far faster than a normal mobile phone.
While a non-smartphone user can go days or even weeks
between charges, you will likely need to plan to keep your
smartphone plugged in as much as you can; most cannot go
for more than a day or two between charges, and if you use
things like GPS or the camera, you will get much less than
that.
378

A variety of apps exists to help you improve battery life. On
some phones, Android 2.2 will include a battery manager
application by default in the phone’s settings, accessible by
pressing the Menu button from the home screen.
The Battery Manager displays a large icon showing your
battery’s current remaining power, along with a set of battery
modes. Three modes exist by default: a Maximum battery
saver that stops synching data after 15 minutes regardless of
the time and dims the display, a Nighttime saver that stops
synching at night but leaves data sync on during the day and
does not affect the display brightness, and Performance mode,
which leaves all settings alone and in essence does nothing to
preserve the battery.
You can also set up a custom mode, where you can define
exactly what hours should have automatic synching, how long
the phone should wait until it stops synching, and your
desired display brightness (see Figure 15.1).
If you do not have Android 2.2, you can download one of the
many power management apps from the Market. When I had
the G1 and before my Droid X upgraded to 2.2, I relied on
Power Manager from X-Phone Software. The free version of
the app has a set of profiles preconfigured to progressively
dim the screen as power got lower. It would also begin to
disable features such as GPS when the power reached a
certain threshold. The commercial version of the application,
which only costs $.99, allows you to configure your own
profiles.
You can also help manage power by paying attention to GPS
and Wi-Fi settings, both of which can drain your power. Most
379

apps that require GPS will automatically turn it off as soon as
you leave the app, either to return to the home screen or go to
a different app, but if you ever notice that the GPS indicator is
showing on the Notifications bar when no app is open that
should be using it, you should be aware that you may be
draining your power unnecessarily. Keep in mind that some
apps, such as Navigate, will keep running, and keep using
GPS, even in the background.
I use Wi-Fi on my phone all the time when I am home, as it is
almost always faster than a 3G connection, but then I also
have my phone plugged in, either to the wall or, more likely,
the
computer
when
I
am
home.
Wi-Fi
is
another
power-hungry service, so if you cannot keep your phone
plugged in most of the time, you might think about not using
it.
380

Figure 15.1
Setting up a custom battery saver mode on the Droid X with
Android 2.2
Get Your Computer Online with Your Phone
A recent sit-com episode revolved around a character who
had moved in with his father. The son, a writer, needed to be
online, but the older father did not see the need for the
381

Internet. I can fully relate with the son — I hate having to be
off-line. Unfortunately, I still encounter situations where I
cannot get online easily. I sometimes teach at facilities that,
for security purposes, do not allow me to connect to their
network and do not have guest Wi-Fi networks. Incredibly, I
even teach regularly at a technology school with no Wi-Fi. As
a traveler, it has been a long time since I have been at a hotel
that does not provide Internet service, but many hotels charge
exorbitant fees to get online, and most hotel networks are
painfully slow.
Fortunately, I can now get my computer online with my
phone, using a variety of methods. The first, official method
is to use the Verizon Hotspot utility. Obviously, this only
works if you have a phone running on Verizon’s network, and
even then Verizon does not support it on all of its phones. For
those phones that are supported, such as the Droid X, it is a
very easy process: Simply launch the Mobile Hotspot tool
that came preinstalled on your phone, agree to the terms of
service, and connect. The downside to this method is its cost:
Verizon currently charges $20 per month on top of your
existing service charges. The big advantage is that this turns
your phone into a true mobile hotspot, so other machines
besides yours can connect as well if you allow them. Other
carriers offer similar services along the lines of Verizon’s,
and likewise vary based on which phones they support and
how much they charge, but an additional monthly charge is
the industry standard.
Fortunately, there are several free alternatives. If you have a
laptop with a Bluetooth connection, you may be able to
connect your computer to your phone via Bluetooth and then
use the phone’s 3G connection to get your computer online.
382

The exact steps necessary to enable connecting via Bluetooth
vary greatly depending on your phone, your version of
Android, and your laptop’s operating system, but if it can be
done with your combination of hardware and software, you
should be able to find details online.
PDANet, an app available in the Market, provides another
alternative. The app is very simple to use. Install it on your
phone, and then install a companion piece of software on your
laptop, available from www.junefabrics.com/android/. Once
both programs are installed, you can plug your phone into
your computer via USB, then enable sharing in the app on
your phone. Finally, turn on the connection by simply
clicking the Connect link in the program on your computer
and you will be online.
PDANet is available in a free version that provides a fully
featured trial, after which the app blocks connections to
secure Web sites but continues to work on nonsecure sites.
The full version, which allows connections to secure sites, is
available for purchase.
Another alternative is Proxoid, which sets your phone up as a
proxy server for your computer. Proxoid is free, but requires a
considerable amount of setup on your computer, all of which
will need to be undone when you return to a normal
connection. Thus, it can be helpful for long trips but is
impractical if you need to frequently switch between having
your computer connected to home or work and connecting via
your phone. Proxoid is available in the Market, while details
on
the
necessary
setup
on
your
computer
are
at
http://code.google.com/p/proxoid/.
Using
Proxoid
also
383

requires that you have the Android SDK installed; see the
following section for details.
Downloading the Android SDK
A Software Development Kit, or SDK, is a package of tools
provided by the developer of the language for programmers to
use when creating applications. The Android SDK can be
downloaded
for
free
from
Google
at
http://developer.android.com/sdk/index.html
(see
Figure
15.2). Even if you do not plan to build Android apps, having
the SDK installed on your computer allows you to do a
variety of other things such as take screenshots of your phone
and manually back up its data.
After you download the SDK, unzip it into a folder of your
choosing on your computer. Then open the folder and
double-click the SDK Setup file. If you want to install the
complete SDK, which will allow you to have its full
functionality, select Accept All on the Choose Packages to
Install screen, then click Install Accepted. Be aware that this
might take a while — I have a fast Internet connection and a
fast machine, and this installation took about 15 minutes.
After you have the SDK installed, you will also need to install
the Java SDK, also known as the JDK. Java is the language
on which Android is built, so you cannot do much without it.
Visit
www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/
index.html and download whichever the most current version
of the JDK is.
If you plan to actually begin working on developing Android
applications, you will also need a tool in which you can write
384

your apps. The recommendation from Google is to use
Eclipse, which is a very powerful open-source development
environment. You can download it from www.eclipse.org, but
as this chapter is not about actual Android development you
can skip that if you want.
Figure 15.2
The Android SDK page
Turning on USB Debugging
In order for your phone to communicate with the tools in the
SDK, you will need to enable USB Debugging. This is a very
simple process: On your phone, simply go to the home screen,
then press the Menu buttons and select Settings. In Settings,
385

select Applications, then Development, then select USB
Debugging. You will get a warning message about how
debugging is only for development purposes; select OK. You
will now see an extra indicator on your Notification Bar. In
Android 2.2, this is the Android mascot with extra legs so that
it looks like a bug.
Your next step in getting your phone set up with the SDK is
the part that I had the most troubles with, and from reading
online forums I was clearly not alone. You need to have the
proper drivers installed in order for your phone to fully
communicate with the SDK. Hopefully, as soon as you plug
your phone into your computer, it will detect the device and
display a notification about finding drivers. The operating
system should fail to find the right drivers, so it should ask
you to manually install them, which you can do by going into
the usb_driver folder in the SDK.
When I first attempted to do this with the Droid X on
Windows 7, it did not work, and eventually I needed to go
download new Droid X drivers online. After upgrading to
Android 2.2, I again ran into problems, which I eventually
worked around by turning USB Debugging off when I need
the phone in PC Mode and turning it back on when I need to
work in USB Mass Storage mode.
Taking Screenshots
When I first began work on this book, I knew I would need to
learn how to take screenshots of my phone, but I thought it
was something that authors and bloggers needed to do but
would be of very little interest to anyone else. I was therefore
surprised by how often it comes up on forums and even in
386

people asking me how to do it. I am not sure exactly why so
many people want to do it, but fortunately once you get the
setup done it is a fairly easy process.
The simplest method of doing screenshots is via the oddly
named Dalvik Debug Monitor, one of the tools in the SDK.
Once you have the SDK installed and all of the proper drivers
working, you can launch the monitor by going into the folder
into which you unzipped the SDK, opening the tools folder,
and double-clicking ddms.bat. This tool will open to the
Dalvik Debug Monitor, which will show your phone. If your
phone does not show up, go back and ensure that the proper
drivers are installed. Also, make sure that your phone has
USB Debugging enabled.
If you interact with your phone while plugged into the
monitor, you can see a fairly constant set of information
scrolling across the bottom. Everything happening on your
phone is being monitored and reported, which is useful for
developers but mostly unintelligible to everyone else.
When you are in the monitor, select Device, then Screen
Capture. This will open a second screen, which after a
moment should display your phone (see Figure 15.3). This is
a static picture of your phone; if you change anything on the
phone, you will need to press the Refresh button to update the
image.
From here, you can click Save to save the image to your hard
drive in the PNG format. If you need higher-quality images or
require other formats, you can instead click Copy to place the
image on your clipboard. Then you can open an image-editing
387

tool such as Adobe Photoshop, paste the image, and work
with it from there.
Figure 15.3
Capturing an image off the phone
Tidbit
388

All of the images from the phone in this book were captured
by copying and pasting. I use Adobe Photoshop, which has a
very handy feature whereby if an image exists on the
clipboard, selecting File, then New automatically creates a
new document that is the size of whatever is on the
clipboard. Images from the Debug Monitor will be at your
phone’s native resolution; for the Droid X, that is 854 2 480
pixels. I did not manipulate the image in any way in
Photoshop; instead, I was using it simply to get the images
into the TIFF file format requested by the publisher. I
actually created an action in Photoshop to further simplify
this process. If you are interested in reading more about how
I
did
this,
you
can
read
about
it
on
my
blog
at
www.robhuddleston.com.
389

