A Diorama of the
Infernal Regions, or
The Devil’s Ninth
Question
ANDY DUNCAN
 
 
Here’s as vivid an adventure as you’re ever likely to meet, funny, folksy,
scary, and wise, about a girl who runs from magic of one sort only to run
headlong into sinister magic of another kind, make friends with ghosts,
live in a house of mystery, and compete with the Devil Himself...
 
Andy Duncan made his first sale, to Asimov’s Science Fiction, in
1995, and quickly made others, to Starlight, Sci Fiction, Dying For It,
Realms of Fantasy, and Weird Tales, as well as several more sales to
Asimov’s. By the beginning of the new century, he was widely
recognized as one of the most individual, quirky, and flavor-ful new
voices on the scene today. In 2001 he won two World Fantasy Awards,
one for his story “The Pottawatomie Giant,” and one for his landmark first
collection, Beluthahatchie and Other Stories; in 2002 his story “The Chief
Designer” won a Theodore Sturgeon Memorial Award. His most recent
books are a fiction anthology coedited with F. Brett Cox, Crossroads:
Tales of the Southern Literary Fantastic; and a non-fiction book, Alabama
Curiosities. A graduate of the Clarion West writers’ workshop in Seattle,
he was raised in Batesburg, South Carolina, and now lives in Frostburg,
Maryland, with his wife, Sydney, where he edits Overdrive magazine,
“The Voice of the American Trucker.”
 
* * * *
 
M
Y name is Pearleen Sunday, though I was always called Pearl, and this is
the story of how I met the widow of Flatland House and her 473 dead
friends and sang a duet with the Devil’s son-in-law and earned a wizard’s
anger by setting that wizard free.
 
At the time I did these things, I was neither child nor woman, neither

hay nor grass. I was like a cat with the door disease. She scratches to be
let in or scratches to be let out, but when you open the door she only stands
halfway and cocks her head and thinks deep cat thoughts till you could
drown her. Had I been on either side of the door that summer, things might
have turned out differently, but I could not decide, and so the door stood
open to cold winds and marvels.
 
I grew up in Chattanooga in Professor Van Der Ast’s Mammoth
Cosmopolitan Musée and Pavilion of Science and Art. Musée is the French
word for museum, and cosmopolitan means citified, and Professor Van
Der Ast was born Hasil Bowersox in Rising Fawn, Georgia. Whether his
were the quality Bowersoxes, who pronounce “Bower” to rhyme with
“lower,” or the common Bowersoxes, who pronounce “Bower” to rhyme
with “scour,” I cannot say, for Professor Van Der Ast never answered to
either. The rest of the name of Professor Van Der Ast’s Mammoth
Cosmopolitan Musée and Pavilion of Science and Art is self-explanatory,
although the nature of science and art is subject to debate, and it was not a
pavilion but a three-story brickfront, and I would not call it mammoth either,
though it did hold a right smart of things.
 
You would not find the museum if you looked today. It sat in the
shadow of the downtown end of the new Walnut Street Bridge across the
Tennessee River. Years before, General Sherman had built a bridge there
that did not last any time before God washed it away, but He seemed to be
tolerating the new one for now.
 
I was told my parents left me in a hatbox in the alley between the
museum and the tobacco warehouse. Two Fiji cannibals on their smoke
break took pity and took me inside to the Professor, who made me a paying
attraction before I was two years of age. The sign, I was told, read TRANS-
PARENT HUMAN HEAD! ALL LIVE AND ON THE INSIDE! What was
inside was me, sucking a sugar tit with a bright lamp behind my head so my
little brain and blood vessels could be seen. Every word on the sign was
true.
 
A young girl like myself with no mother, father, or schooling could do
worse in those days than work in an educational museum, which offered
many career opportunities even for girls with no tattoos or beards and all
their limbs. Jobs for girls at Professor Van Der Ast’s included Neptuna the
Living Mermaid, who combed her hair and switched her tail in a pool all day,
and the Invisible Girl, who hid behind a sheet and spoke fortunes into a
trumpet, and Zaiumma Agra the Circassian Princess, Purest Example of
the White Race, who when snatched from the slave traders of
Constan-tinople had left behind most of her clothes, though not enough to

shut us down. Our Purest Example of the White Race in summer 1895 was
my friend Sally Ann Rummage of Mobile, Alabama, whose mother had
been a slave, though not in Constantinople. Sally Ann was ashamed of the
mu-seum and wrote her parents that she had become a teacher, which I
sup-pose she had.
 
I had none of those jobs that summer because I was in that
in-between age, and the Circassian Princess in particular was no
in-between sort of job. No, I was so out of sorts with myself and the world
that Professor Van Der Ast cast me entirely from the sight of the paying
public, behind our Diorama of the Infernal Regions.
 
Now a diorama in those days was only a painting, but a painting so
immense that no one ever would see it all at once. It was painted on a long
strip of canvas ten feet high, and to see it, you rolled it out of a great spool,
like a bolt of cloth in a dressmaker’s shop for giants, and as it rolled out of
the first spool it rolled back up in a second spool about twenty feet away. In
between the spools the customers stood shoulder to shoulder and admired
the sights that trundled past.
 
The spools were turned by an engine, but someone in the back had
to keep the engine running and make sure the canvas threaded smooth,
without snagging and tearing—for your town may have had a fine new Hell,
but Chattanooga’s was as ragged and patched as a family Bible. That
someone in the back was me. I also had to work the effects. As the
diorama moved past, and as Professor Van Der Ast stood on the public
side and narrated the spiel, I opened and closed a bank of lanterns that
beamed light through parts of the canvas—to make the flames of Hell
flicker, and bats wheel through the air, and imps and satyrs wink in and out
of existence like my evil thoughts as I sweated and strained like a fireman in
a furnace room. Every day in the spotty mirror over my washstand upstairs,
I rubbed my arms and shoulders and wondered what man would ever want
a woman with muscles, and what man she might want in return.
 
Ours was the only diorama I ever saw, but Professor Van Der Ast
said that one famous diorama in New York City was a view of the riverbank
along the entire length of the Mississippi, from Minnesota to New Orleans.
Park Avenue swells in boater hats could lounge in air-cooled comfort and
watch it all slide past: eagle-haunted bluffs, woodlands a-creep with
Indi-ans, spindly piers that stopped at the overalled butts of barefoot
younguns, brawling river towns that bled filth for miles downstream.
Professor Van Der Ast himself had been no farther north than Cleveland,
Tennessee, but he described New York’s Mississippi just as well as he
described Chat-tanooga’s Infernal Regions. You felt like you were there.

 
“Observe, my friends, from your safe vantage point this side of the
veil, the ghastly wonders of the Infernal as they pass before you. I say, as
they pass before you!” (The machinery was old and froze up sometimes.)
“First on this ancient scroll, bequeathed us by the Chaldean martyrs,
witness the sulfurous vapors of Lake Avernus, over which no sane bird will
fly. Here is Briareus with his hundred arms, laboring to drag a chain the
width of a stout man’s waist, and at the end of that mighty leash snaps the
hound Cer-berus, with his fifty heads, each of his fifty necks a-coil with
snakes. Here is the stern ferryman who turns away all wretches who die
without Chris-tian burial. Next are the weeping lovers wringing their hands in
groves of myrtle, never to be reunited with their soulmates. Madame, my
handker-chief. Your pity does you honor. Next is the whip of scorpions that
flays those who believed their sins concealed in life. Here is the nine-acre
giant Tityus, chained at the bottom of the abyssal gulf. Here are sufferers
chin deep in water they are doomed never to drink, while others are
doomed to bail the water with sieves.”
 
A weeping schoolmarm might ask: “But what about the realms of the
blessed? the Elysian fields? the laurel groves?”
 
“For such consolations, madam, one must consult canvases other
than mine. And here we have the writhing Pandaemonium of pleasure,
where all noble and spiritual aims are forgotten in the base fog of sensation
and lust. Next is the great—”
 
“Hey, buddy, could we have a little more light on that there
Pandaemonium of pleasure?”
 
“This is the family show, friend, come back at ten. Here is the great
winepress in which hundreds of the damned are crushed together until they
burst. Here are the filthy, verminous infants of ingratitude, which spit venom
even as they are hoisted with tongs over the fire. Note, ladies and
gentlemen, that throughout this dreadful panorama, the plants in view are all
thorny and rank, the creatures all fanged and poisonous, the very stones
misshapen and worthless, the men and women all sick, feeble, wracked,
and forgotten, their only music Hell’s Unutterable Lament! Where all suffer
horrid tor-ments not for one minute, not for one day, not for one age, not for
two ages, not for a hundred ages, not for ten thousand millions of ages, but
for-ever and ever without end, and never to be delivered! Mind your step at
the door, next show two thirty, gratuities welcome.”
 
That was Professor Van Der Ast’s side of the canvas, the public side.
I told no one what I saw on my side: the patches and the stains, the

back-ward paintings, the different tricks played by the light. I could see
pic-tures, too, but only half-glimpsed, like those in clouds and treetops in
leafy summertime. The pictures on my side were not horrible. I saw a man
wrestling a lightning rod in a storm; and a great river catfish that sang to the
crew in the gondola of a low-flying balloon; and a bespectacled woman
pushing a single wheel down the road; and a ballroom full of dancing
ghosts; and a man with a hand of iron who beckoned me with hinged
fingers; and a farmer who waved good-bye to his happy family on the porch
before vanishing, then, reappearing, waved hello to them again; and an
angry face looking out of a boot; and a giant woman with a mus-tache
throwing a man over the side of a riverboat; and a smiling man going over
Niagara Falls in a barrel while around him bobbed a hundred hoodoo
bottles, each with a rolled-up message for Marie Laveaux; and a hound dog
with a pistol who was robbing a train; and a one-eyed man who lived in a
gator hole; and a beggar presenting a peepshow to the Queen of Sheba;
and a gorilla in a boater hat sitting in a deck chair watch-ing a diorama of the
Mississippi scroll past; and a thousand other wonders to behold. My
Infernal Regions were a lot more interesting than Professor Van Der Ast’s,
and sometimes they lighted up and moved without my hav-ing to do a thing.
 
My only other knowledge of magic at the time was thanks to Wendell
Farethewell, the Wizard of the Blue Ridge, a magician from Yandro
Moun-tain, North Carolina, who performed at Professor Van Der Ast’s for
three weeks each summer. I never had the chance to see his act because,
as the Professor liked to remind us, we were being paid to entertain and not
to be entertained, but I was told that at the climax he caught in his teeth a
bullet fired through a crystal pitcher of lemonade, and I believe it was so
because sometimes when a pinhead was not available, the Professor
asked me to go onstage after the show and mop up the lemonade and pick
up the sharp splinters of glass.
 
The tricks I saw the wizard Farethewell perform were done after
hours, when all the residents of the museum went to the basement for
drinks and cold-meat sandwiches and more drinks. I squirmed my way into
the front of the crowd around a wobbly table made of splinters and watched
as he pulled the Queen of Hearts out of the air and walked coins across his
knuckles and floated dollar bills. “Just like the government,” he always said
when he floated a dollar bill, and we always laughed. He showed us
fifty-seven ways to shuffle a deck of cards and seventeen of the ways to
draw an ace off the top whenever one was needed, even five times in a
row. “Do this in a gambling hall,” he said, “and you’ll get yourself shot. Do it
among you good people, and it’s just a pleasant diversion, something to
make Little Britches smile.”
 

That was what Farethewell called me, Little Britches. He was the only
one who called me that. Big Fred, who played our What-Is-It?, tried it once,
and I busted his nose.
 
If the night wore on and Farethewell drank too much, he got moody
and talked about the war, and about his friend, an older man he never
named. “The 26th North Carolina mustered up in Raleigh, and I couldn’t
sleep that first night, without no mountains around to hold me, so I mashed
my face into my bedroll and cried. I ain’t ashamed of it, neither. The others
laughed or told me to hush, but this man, he said, ‘Boy, you want to see a
trick?’ Now, what boy don’t want to see a trick? And after he’s seen it, what
boy don’t want to know how it’s done?” As he talked he stared into space,
but his hands kept doing tricks, as if they were independent of the rest of
him. “At New Bern he taught me the back palm, the finger palm, the thumb
palm; at the Wilderness the Hindu Shuffle and the Stodart Egg; at
Spotsylvania the Biseaute flourish, the Miser’s Dream, the Torn and
Re-stored. I learned the Scotch and Soda and the Gin and Tonic before I
drank either one; and all through the war, every day, I worked on the Three
Ma-jor Vanishes: take, put, and pinch.” As he said that, three coins
disappeared from his hand, one by one. “So that was our war. It kept my
mind off things, and maybe kept his mind off things, too. He had the
tuberculosis pretty bad, toward the end. The last thing he taught me was the
bullet catch, in the stockade at Appomattox, just before he died. I got one
of his boots. The rest, they burned. When they turned out his pockets, it
was just coins and cards and flash paper. It didn’t look like magic no more.
It just looked ... It looked like trash. The magic went when he went, except
the little he left to me.”
 
Someone asked, “What’d you learn at Gettysburg?” and Farethewell
replied:
 
“What I learned at Gettysburg, I will teach no man. But one day, living
or dead, I will hold the Devil to account for what I learned.”
 
Then he began doing tricks with a knife, and I went upstairs to bed.
 
My in-between summer came to an end after the last viewing of a
Saturday night. As I cranked the diorama back into place, I heard the
Profes-sor talking to someone, a customer? Then the other voice got
louder: “You ain’t nothing but an old woman. She’ll do just fine, you watch.”
 
I could hear no more over the winding spool, and I did not want to
stop it for fear of being caught eavesdropping. Then the Professor and the
wiz-ard Farethewell were behind the diorama with me.

 
“Shut off that engine, Little Britches. You can do that later. Right now,
you got to help me.” He had something in his hand, a tangle that glittered in
the lamplight. He thrust it at me. “Go on, take it. Showtime was five minutes
ago.”
 
“What are you talking about?” It was a little sparkly dress with
feathers, and a hat, and slippers with heels. I looked at Farethewell, who
was drinking from a flask, and at the Professor, who was stroking his silver
beard.
 
“Pearl, please mind Mr. Farethewell, that’s a good girl. Just run along
and put that on, and meet us in the theater, backstage.” I held the costume
up to the light: what there was of the light, and what there was of the
cos-tume. “Sukie can’t help Mr. Farethewell with the ten o’clock show. She’s
sick.”
 
“Dead drunk, you mean,” Farethewell roared, and lifted his flask. The
Professor snatched it away. Something spattered my cheek and burned.
 
“Get as drunk as you like at eleven,” the Professor said. “Pearl, it’ll be
easy. All you have to do is wave to the crowd, climb into the box, and lie
there. Mr. Farethewell will do the rest.”
 
“The blades won’t come nowhere near you, Little Britches. The box is
rigged, and besides, you ain’t no bigger’n nothing. You won’t even have to
twist.”
 
“But,” I said.
 
“Pearl,” said the Professor, like there were fifteen R’s in my name. So
I ran upstairs.
 
“What’s wrong with you?” Sally Ann cried when I burst in.
 
I told her while she helped me out of my coveralls and my blue
denims and into the turkey suit. “What in the world are they thinking?” Sally
Ann said. “Hold still, Pearl, if I don’t cinch this, you’ll walk plumb out of it.”
 
“My legs are cold!” I yelled.
 
The hat was nothing I would have called a hat. In a rainstorm it would
have been no cover at all. I finally snuggled it down over my hair and got the
ostrich plume out of my face. Sally Ann was looking at me funny.

 
“Oh, my,” she said.
 
“What?”
 
“Nothing. Come on, let’s go. I want to see this. Clothes do make a
difference, don’t they?”
 
“Not to me,” I said, and would have fallen down the stairs if she hadn’t
grabbed me. “Who can walk in any such shoes as this?”
 
There’s no dark like the dark backstage in a theater, but Sally Ann
managed to guide me through all the ropes and sandbags without disaster.
I carried the shoes. Just inside the backdrop curtain, the Professor made a
hurry-up motion. I hopped one-legged to get the shoes back on and
peered through the slit in the curtain, but was blinded by the lamps shining
onto the stage.
 
Farethewell was yelling to make himself heard over what sounded like
a theater full of drunken men. “And now, my lovely assistant will
demon-strate that no cutlass ever forged can cut her, that she can dodge
the blade of any cavalryman, whether he be a veteran of the Grand Army of
the Republic—”
 
The crowd booed and hissed.
 
“—or whether he fought for Tennessee under the great Nathan
Bedford Forrest!”
 
The crowd whooped and stomped its approval.
 
“Here she is,” muttered the Professor, as he held the curtain open.
 
I blinked in the light, still blinded. Farethewell’s big callused hand
grabbed mine and led me forward. “Ladies and gentlemen, I give you
Aphrodite, the Pearl of the Cumberland!”
 
I stood frozen.
 
The crowd continued to roar.
 
Lying on a table in front of us was a long box like a coffin, open at the
top. A pile of swords lay beside it.
 

“Lie down in the box, honey,” Farethewell murmured. He wore a long
blue robe and a pointed hat, and his face was slick with sweat.
 
I walked to the box like a puppet and looked down at the dirty pillow,
the tatty blanket inside.
 
“And if you don’t believe me when I tell you how amazingly nimble
Aphrodite is, why when I am done shoving cutlasses into the box, those of
you willing to pay an additional fifty cents can line up here, on the stage, and
look down into the box and see for yourself that this young woman has
suffered no injury whatsoever, save perhaps to her costume.”
 
The crowd screamed with laughter. Blinking back tears, I leaned over
the box, stepped out of the shoes: first left, then right. I looked up and into
the face of a fat man in the front row. He winked.
 
In my head I heard the Professor say: “This is the family show, friend,
come back at ten.”
 
I turned and ran.
 
The noise of the crowd pushed me through the curtains, past Sally
Ann and the Professor. In the sudden darkness I tripped over a sandbag,
fell and skinned my knees, then stood and flailed my way to the door and
into the corridor beyond.
 
“Pearl! Come back!”
 
My cheeks burned with shame and anger at myself and the crowd and
Farethewell and the Professor and Sally Ann and those stupid, stupid
shoes; I vowed as I ran barefoot like a monkey through the back corridors
that I would never wear their like again. I ran as fast as I could—not
upstairs, not to the room I slept in, but to the one place in the museum I felt
was mine.
 
I slammed the door behind me and stood, panting, behind the
Diorama of the Infernal Regions.
 
Someone, probably the Professor, had done part of my job for me,
and shut down all the lamps. It was the job I liked least, snuffing the lights
one by one like candles on a cake. But the Professor had not finished
rolling up the canvas. It was backstage dark, but up there on the canvas, at
eye level, was a little patch of light, flickering.
 

I’m sure that when I went missing, my friends thought I had run away,
but they were wrong. I was running away from nothing. I was running to
something, though I did not know what it was. Running to what is the rest of
my story—is all my story, I reckon.
 
I walked right up to the flickering spot on my side of the canvas. The
tip of my nose was an inch from the paint. When I breathed in, I smelled
sawdust and walnuts. When I breathed out, the bright patch brightened just
a little. If you blow gently on a flame, it does not go out, but flares up; that’s
how the canvas was. I almost could see a room through the canvas, a
pan-eled room. Behind me, a woman’s voice called my name, but in front of
me, I almost heard music, organ music.
 
I closed my eyes and focused not on the canvas, but on the room
beyond.
 
I stepped forward.
 
Have you ever stepped through a cobweb? That’s how I stepped out
of Professor Van Der Ast’s Mammoth Cosmopolitan Musée and Pavilion of
Science and Art and into a place without a ticket booth, into my own
can-vas, my own Infernal Regions.
 
* * * *
 
NOT a funeral, a ball. The organist was playing a waltz.
 
I opened my eyes.                                                                      
 
I was in a ballroom full of ghosts.
 
I reached behind to feel the canvas, to feel anything familiar and
cer-tain. Instead I felt a cold hard surface: a magnificent stained-glass
window that ran the length of the wall, depicting mermaids and magicians
and a girl at the lever of an infernal engine. Window and room spun around
me. My knees buckled, and I sank onto a beautifully inlaid wooden floor.
 
The room wasn’t spinning, but the dancers were. Fifty couples whirled
through the room, the silver chandeliers and mahogany paneling and
gold-leaf wallpaper visible through their transparent bodies. I never had
seen such a beautiful room. The dancers were old and young, richly and
poorly dressed, white and black and Indian. Some wore wigs and knee
breeches, others buckskins and fur caps, others evening gowns or
tailcoats. They didn’t look like show people. All moved faster than their

actual steps. No feet quite touched the floor. The dancers were waltzing in
the air.
 
Against the far wall was a pump organ, and sitting at the bench with
her back to me was a tiny gray-haired lady, shoulders swaying with the force
of her fingers on the keys, her feet on the pedals. I tried to see the sheet
music through her but could not. She was no ghost; she was substan-tial. I
looked at my hand and saw through it the interlocking diamond pat-tern of
the floor. That’s when I screamed.
 
The music stopped.
 
The dancing stopped.
 
The old lady spun on her bench and stared at me.
 
Everyone stared at me.
 
Then the dancers gasped and stepped—no, floated—backward in
the air, away from me. There was movement beside me. I looked up to see
a skinny girl in a feathered costume step out of the stained-glass window. I
screamed again, and she jumped and screamed, too.
 
She was me, and she also was becoming transparent.
 
“Five minutes break, please, everyone,” trilled a little-old-lady voice.
“When we return, we’ll do the Virginia Reel.”
 
The second Pearl had slumped onto the floor beside me. A third
Pearl stepped out of the stained glass just as the old lady reached us. She
wore an elaborate black mourning-dress, with the veil thrown back to reveal
chubby, ruddy cheeks and big gray eyes. “There, there,” she said. “This
won’t do at all. The first rule of psychic transport is to maintain integrity, to
hold oneself together.” A fourth Pearl stepped from the glass as the old
lady seized my hand and the second Pearl’s hand and brought them
together, palm to palm. It was like pressing my hand into butter; my hand
began to sink into hers, and hers into mine. We both screamed and tried to
pull back, but the old lady held our wrists in a grip like iron.
 
“Best to close your eyes, dear,” the old lady said.
 
My eyes immediately shut tight not of my own doing but as if some
unseen hand had yanked them down like window shades. The old lady’s
grip tightened, and I feared my wrist would break. My whole body got

warmer, from the wrist onward, and I began to feel better—not just calmer,
but somehow fuller, more complete.
 
Finally, the old lady released my wrist, and said, “You can open your
eyes now, dear.”
 
I did, and it was my own doing this time. I stared at my hands, with
their lines and calluses and gnawed-to-the-quick nails, and they were so
familiar and so solid that I started to cry.
 
The ballroom was empty but for me—one of me—and the old lady
kneeling beside me, and a single ghost bobbing just behind her, a little
ferret-faced mustached man in a bowler hat and a checked waistcoat that
might have been colorful once, but now was gray checked with gray.
 
“Beautifully done,” said the floater. “You have the hands of a
sur-geon.”
 
“The hands are the least of it, Mr. Dellafave, but you are too kind.
Goodness, child, you gave me a fright. Six of you stranded in the glass.
Good thing I was here to set things right. But I forget my manners. My name
is Sarah Pardee Winchester, widow of the late William Wirt Winchester,
and this is my friend Mr. Dellafave.” She eyed my costume, reached over,
and tugged on my ostrich plume. “Too young to be a showgirl,” she said,
“al-most.”
 
I shuddered and wiped my nose with the back of my wonderful
old-friend hand and asked: “Am I. . . Are you . . . Please, is this Heaven or
Hell?”
 
The old lady and the bowler-hatted man both laughed. His laugh
sounded like steam escaping, but hers was throaty and loud, like a much
younger, much larger woman.
 
“Opinions differ,” the old lady said. “We think of it simply as
Cali-fornia.”
 
* * * *
 
SHE called the place Llanada Villa, which she said was Spanish for
“Flat-land House.” I had never lived in a house before the widow took me in,
so you might call Flatland House my introduction to the whole principle of
houses. And what an introduction it was! No house I’ve seen since has
been a patch on it.

 
There was the size, to start with. The house covered six acres.
Counting the rooms that had been walled off and made unreachable except
by ghosts, but not counting the rooms that had been demolished or merged
into larger spaces, the house had 150 rooms, mostly bedrooms, give or
take a dozen. “I’ve slept in only seventy or eighty of them myself,” the
widow told me, “but that’s enough to get the general idea.”
 
Still the place was not finished. Workmen were always in the process
of adding rooms, balconies, porches, turrets, whole wings; or in the
process of dismantling or renovating what they had built just the month
before. The construction had moved far away from the front of the house,
where the widow mostly lived, but the distant sounds of saws and hammers
and the men’s voices calling to one another—”Steady! Steady! Move it just
a hair to the right, please, Bill”—could be heard day and night. They worked
in shifts around the clock. Once a week the foremen took off their hats and
gathered in the carriage entrance for payday. The widow towed from the
house a child’s wagon full of heavy sacks, each full of enough gold pieces
to pay each foreman’s workers the equivalent of three dollars a day. The
foremen were all beefy men, but even they strained to heft the bags and
tote them away. They never complained, though.
 
“Aren’t you afraid?” I asked the widow, that first payday.
 
“Of what, dear?”
 
“Of one of those men breaking into the house, and robbing you.”
 
“Oh, Pearl, you are a caution! You don’t need to worry about robbers,
oh, no. Not in this house.”
 
I suppose intruders would have quickly gotten lost, for many parts of
the house simply did not make sense. Staircases led to ceilings and
stopped. Doorways opened onto brick walls, or onto nothing, not even a
balcony, just the outside air. Secret passageways no taller than the widow
criss-crossed the house, so that she could pop in and out of sight without
warn-ing, as if she herself were a ghost. The widow told me the front door
had never been opened, never even unlocked, since its hinges were hung.
 
I found the outside of the house even more confusing. If I walked
around any corner, I found arched windows, recessed balconies, turrets
and witch’s caps and cupolas with red tile roofs, and miles of gingerbread
trim. If I walked around the next corner, I found the same thing, only more
of it. Many houses, I’m told, have only four corners to walk around, but

Flatland House had dozens. Looking away from the house was no help,
because no matter what direction I looked, I saw the same high cypress
hedge, and be-yond that, rolling hills of apricot, plum, and walnut trees
stretching to the horizon. I never made it all the way around the place, but
would give up and go back inside, and where I went inside always seemed
to be the break-fast room, with the widow knitting in the wicker chair just
where I left her. She always asked, “Did you have a good trip, dear?”
 
In all those 150 rooms was not a single mirror. Which suited me just
fine.
 
I did get lonely sometimes. Most of the ghosts had little to say—to the
living, anyway—beyond “Lovely day, isn’t it?” The few indoor servants
seemed afraid of me, and none stayed in the house past sundown. The
workmen I was forbidden to speak to at all.
 
“Do you never have any visitors,” I asked the widow, “other than the
workmen, and the ghosts, and the servants, and me?”
 
“Goodness, that’s enough, wouldn’t you say? I know there are 473
ghosts, not counting the cats, and Lord only knows how many workmen
coming and going. And don’t ever think of yourself as a visitor, Pearl dear.
Consider this your home, for as long as you wish to stay.”
 
The only ghost willing to spend time with me, other than the cats, was
Mr. Dellafave. Three weeks into my stay at Flatland House, during a stroll
around the monkey-puzzle tree, I asked him:
 
“Mr. Dellafave, what did you do before ...”
 
His face had the look of someone expecting his feelings to be hurt
but game not to let on.
 
“... before you came here?” I finished.
 
“Ah,” he said, smiling. “I worked for a bank, in Sacramento. I was a
figure man. I added, mostly, and subtracted twice a week, and, on
red—letter days, multiplied. Long division was wholly out of my jurisdiction,
that was another floor altogether—but make no mistake, I could have done
it. I was ready to serve. Had the third floor been swept away by fire or flood,
the long division would have proceeded without interruption, for I’d had the
training. But the crisis, like most crises, never came. I arrived at the bank
every morning at eight. I went across the street to the saloon every day at
noon for two eggs and a pickle and a sarsaparilla and the afternoon papers.

I left the bank every day at five, and got back to the boardinghouse for
supper at six. Oh, I was a clockwork, I was. ‘You can set your watch by
Dellafave,’ that’s what they said at the bank and the saloon and the
boardinghouse and, well, those are the only places they said it, really,
be-cause those are the only places where anyone took any notice of me at
all. Certainly that streetcar driver did not. He would have rung his bell if he
had; it’s in their manual. That was a sloppy business all around, frankly, a
harsh thing to say, but there it is. I know the time had to have been 12:47
precisely, because I walked out of the saloon at 12:46, and the streetcar
was not due to pass until 12:49. I was on schedule, but the streetcar was
not. I looked up, and there it was, and I flung up my arms—as if that would
have helped, flinging up my arms. When I lowered them, I was standing in
what I now know as Mrs. Winchester’s potting shed. I was never an
especially spiritual man, Pearl dear, but I considered myself fairly well
versed on all the major theories of the afterlife . . . none of which quite
prepared me for Mrs. Winchester’s potting shed. I didn’t even bring my
newspaper.”
 
“But why—”
 
He held up a hand, like a serene police officer at an intersection. “I
have no idea, Pearl, why I came here. None of us does. And I don’t mean
to imply that we’re unhappy, for it is a pleasant place, and Mrs. Winchester
is quite good to us, but our leaving here seems rather out of the question. If
I were to pass through that cypress hedge over there, I would find myself
en-tering the grounds through the hedge on the other side. It’s the same
front to back, or even up and down.”
 
“I guess Mrs. Winchester is the magnet, and you and the others are . .
.”
 
“The filings, yes. The tacks pulled from the carpet. I stand in the tower
sometimes—if you can call it standing—and I look over all these rooftops
and chimneys, all connected to the same house, and I’m forced to admit
that this is more room than I allowed myself in life. If the boardinghouse
were the front door of Llanada Villa, the bank would be at the carriage
en-trance, and the saloon would be at the third sunporch, the one that’s
been walled in and gets no sun. Which is such a small fraction of the
house, re-ally. And yet the whole house feels such a small part of the Earth,
and I find myself wishing that I had ventured a bit farther, when I could.”
 
We walked together in silence—well, I walked, anyway—while I
reflected that the owner of the house seemed quite unable to leave it
herself. And what about me? Could I leave Flatland House, and were I to

leave it, where would I go? Professor Van Der Ast’s seemed much farther
away than a single continent.
 
“You’d best get inside, Pearl. The breeze from the bay is quite damp
today.”
 
I moved my face toward Mr. Dellafave’s cheek, and when he began to
blur, I figured I was close enough, and kissed the air.            
 
“Shucks,” he said, and dissipated entirely.
 
I felt no bay breeze, but as I ran back to the house I clutched my
shawl more tightly anyway.
 
* * * *
 
THE next day, the earthquake struck.
 
The chandeliers swayed. The organ sighed and moaned. The crystal
chittered in the cabinets. One nail worked its way free and rolled across the
thrumming floorboards. A rumble welled up, not from below the house, but
from above and around the house, as if the sound were pressing in from all
sides. The ghosts were in a mad whirl, coursing through the house like a
current of smoke overhead, blended and featureless but for the occasional
startled face. I lurched along the walls, trying to keep my balance as I
sought the exit nearest me, the front door. Once I fell and yelped as my
palms touched the hot parquet.
 
Plaster sifted into my eyes as I stumbled through the entrance hall. I
knew my mistake when I saw that massive front door, surely locked, the key
long since thrown away or hidden in a far scullery drawer of this lu-natic
house. If the entire edifice were to shake down and crush me, this slab of
swirling dark oak would be the last thing standing, a memorial to Pearl.
 
The grandfather clock toppled and fell just behind me, with the crash
of a hundred heavy bells. I flung myself at the door and wrenched the knob.
It turned easily, as if oiled every day, and I pulled the door open with no
trouble at all. Suddenly all was silent and still. A robin sang in the crepe
myrtle as the door opened on a lovely spring day. A tall black man in a
charcoal tailcoat stood on the porch, top hat in hand, and smiled down at
me.
 
“Good morning,” he said. “I was beginning to fear that no one was at
home. I hope my knock didn’t bring you too dreadfully far. I know this house

is harder to cross than the Oklahoma Territory.”
 
“Your knock?” I was too flabbergasted to be polite. “All that was your
knock?”
 
He laughed as he stepped inside, so softly that it was just an
open-mouthed smile and a hint of a cough. “That? Oh, my, no. That was
just my reputation preceding me. Tell me, pray, might the mistress of the
house be at home?”
 
“Where else would I be, Wheatstraw?” asked the widow, suddenly at
my elbow and every hair in place.
 
“Hello, Winchester,” the visitor said.
 
They looked at each other without moving or speaking. I heard behind
me a heaving sound and a muffled clang. I turned just as the grandfather
clock resettled itself in the corner.
 
Then the widow and the visitor laughed and embraced. She kicked up
one foot behind. Her head did not reach his chin.
 
“Pearl,” the widow said, “this is Mr. Petey Wheatstraw.”
 
“Pet-ER,” he corrected, with a little bow.
 
“Mr. Wheatstraw,” the widow continued, “is a rogue. My goodness,”
she added, as if something had just occurred to her. “How did you get in?”
 
We all looked at the front door. It was closed again, its bolts thrown,
its hinges caked with rust. No force short of dynamite could have opened it.
 
The man Wheatstraw nodded toward me.
 
“Well, I’ll be,” the widow said. “She makes as free with my house as a
termite, this one does. Well, you haven’t come to see me, anyway, you old
good-for-nothing,” she said, swatting him as she bustled past. “It’s a half
hour early, but you might as well join us for tea.”
 
Wheatstraw offered me an arm and winked. This was far too fresh for
my taste, but I was too shaken by the not-quite-earthquake to care. As I
took hold of his arm (oak-strong beneath the finery), I felt my muscles
complain, as if I had done hard work. I looked over my shoulder at the
seized-up door as Wheatstraw swept me down the hallway.

 
“I heard you were here,” Wheatstraw said.
 
“How?”
 
“Oh, you’re a loud one, Miss Big Feet, clomp clomp clomp.” He
winked again. “Or is that just your reputation I heard?”
 
Something was wrong with the corridor, something I couldn’t quite put
my finger on. Then I realized that it was empty. Everything in the house was
back to normal—paintings returned to their nails, plaster returned to the
walls—except the ghosts, which were nowhere to be seen. I was so used
to them flitting past me and over me and through me, even gliding through
my bedroom wall, then retreating with apologies, like someone who didn’t
realize the train compartment was occupied, that their presence hardly
bothered me at all. Their absence gave me a shiver.
 
“They’ll be back after I’m gone,” Wheatstraw said.
 
I laughed. “You telling me you scared off the haints? I mean, are you
saying that Mrs. Winchester’s, uh, guests don’t like you?”
 
“I’m sure they have nothing against me personally. How could they?
Once you get to know me, I’m really a fine fellow, full of learning and grace
and wit, a decent dancer, a welcome partner at whist. I never snort when I
laugh or drag my shirtsleeves in the soup. No, it must be my business
affiliation. The company I represent. The Old Concern. My father-in-law’s
firm, actually, and my inheriting is out of the question. But these days we all
must work for somebody, mustn’t we?”
 
I thought of Sally Ann the Circassian Princess, and of Farethewell’s
hand on mine. “True enough,” I said.
 
* * * *
 
WHEATSTRAW set down his teacup and saucer with a clatter, and said,
“Well, enough chitchat. It’s question time.”
 
“Oh, Petey,” the widow said. “Must you? We were having such a nice
visit. Surely that can wait till later.”
 
“I am in no hurry whatsoever, Winchester, but my father-in-law is
another story. You might say that impatience rather defines my father-in-law.
It is the cause of his, uh, present career. Pearl, please pay close attention.”

 
I said nothing, having just shoved another chocolate cookie
lengthwise into my mouth. I never quite realized that I was always a little
hungry at Professor Van Der Ast’s, until I came to Flatland House.
 
Wheatstraw rummaged in the inside pocket of his jacket and
produced an atomizer. He opened his mouth and sprayed the back of his
throat. “La la la la la,” he said. “La la la la laaaaa. Pitch-perfect, as ever.
Winchester?” He offered her the atomizer. “Don’t, then. Now: Pearl.”
 
He began to sing, in a lovely baritone:
 
Oh, you must answer my questions nine
Sing ninety-nine and ninety
Or you’re not God’s, you’re one of mine
And you are the weaver’s bonny.                                                     
 
“Now, Pearl, when I say, ‘one of mine,’ please understand that I speak
not for myself but for the firm that I represent.”
 
“And when you say ‘God,’“ I said, speaking carefully, “you speak of
the firm that you do not represent.”
 
“In a clamshell, yes. Now, if you’re quite done interrupting—”
 
“I didn’t interrupt!” I interrupted. “You interrupted yourself.”
 
He slapped the table. “The idea! As if a speaker could interrupt
him-self. Why, you might as well say that a river could ford itself, or a fence
jump itself.”
 
“Or a bore bore himself,” the widow said.
 
“You’re not helping,” Wheatstraw said.
 
“And I’m not the weaver’s bonny,” I said, becoming peevish now,
“whatever a weaver’s bonny is.”
 
“Well,” Wheatstraw said, “a weaver is a maker of cloth, such as
aprons are made with, and gags, and a bonny is a beauty, a lovely creature,
a pre-cious thing.”
 
“I don’t know any weavers,” I said, “except my friend Sally Ann taught

me to sew a button. And I’m not beautiful, or lovely, or precious.”
 
“Granted, that does seem a stretch at the moment,” Wheatstraw said.
“But we mustn’t always take things so literally. When you say, ‘I’m a silly
goose,’ you don’t mean you expect to be plucked and roasted, and when
you say, ‘I’m fit to be tied,’ you aren’t asking to be roped and trussed, and
when you say, ‘Well, I’m damned,’ you don’t mean ...”
 
His voice trailed off. A chill crept into the room. The sunlight through
the bay window dimmed, as if a cloud were passing.
 
“... anything, really,” Wheatstraw continued, and he smiled as the sun
came out. “So, for purposes of this song, if no other, who are you?”
 
I folded my arms and forced my shoulders as far as I could into the
padding of the love seat and glared at Wheatstraw, determined to frown
down his oh-so-satisfied smile.
 
“I’m the weaver’s bonny,” I mumbled.
 
Am not, I thought.
 
“Fine and dandy,” Wheatstraw said. “Now, where was I? I’ll have to go
back to Genesis, as Meemaw would say.” He cleared his throat.
 
Oh, you must answer my questions nine 
Sing ninety-nine and ninety 
Or you’re not God’s, you’re one of mine 
And you are the weaver’s bonny.
 
Ninety-nine and ninety what?, I wondered, but I kept my mouth shut.
 
What is whiter than the milk?
Sing ninety-nine and ninety
And what is softer than the silk?
Oh, you are the weaver’s bonny
What is higher than a tree?
Sing ninety-nine and ninety
And what is deeper than the sea?
Oh, you are the weaver’s bonny
What is louder than a horn?
Sing ninety-nine and ninety
And what is sharper than a thorn?

Oh, you are the weaver’s bonny
What’s more innocent than a lamb?                                    
Sing ninety-nine and ninety                                                               
And what is meaner than womankind?                      
Oh, you are the weaver’s bonny.            
 
It was a short song, but it seemed to last a long time; as I sat there
determined to resist, to be defiant and unamused, I realized I wasn’t so
much listening to it as being surrounded by it, filled by it, submerged in it. I
was both sleepy and alert, and the pattern in the parquet floor was full of
faces, and the love seat pushed back and kneaded my shoulders, and the
laces of my high-topped shoes led into the darkness like tracks in the
Lookout Mountain tunnel. I could not vouch for Wheatstraw being a decent
dancer as he claimed (though I suspected decent was hardly the word), but
the man sure could sing. And somewhere in the second hour of the song
(surely, I think now upon telling this, some lines were repeated, or
ex-tended, or elaborated upon), Wheatstraw’s voice was joined by a
woman’s, his voice and hers twined together like fine rope. That voice was
the widow Winchester’s: And you are the weaver’s bonny.
 
I sucked air and sat up as if startled from a dream, but felt less alert   
than a second before. The song was over. The widow pretended to gather
up the tea things, and Wheatstraw pretended to study his fingernails.
 
“That part about womankind is insulting,” the widow said.
 
“I didn’t write it,” he said. “The folk wrote it.”
 
“Menfolk,” she said.
 
“Eight,” I said, and only after I said it did I realize why I had said it.
 
“Hm?” Wheatstraw asked, without looking up.
 
The widow held a tipped teacup, looking at nothing, as a thread of tea
like a spider’s descended to the saucer.
 
“Eight,” I repeated. “Milk, silk, two; tree, sea, four; horn, thorn, six;
lamb, kind, eight.” I sang, rather than spoke, in surprise at my voice: “Oh,
you must answer my questions nine ... It ain’t questions nine, it’s
ques-tions eight. What’s the ninth question?”
 
Wheatstraw looked at the widow, and the widow looked at

Wheat-straw. “Maybe that’s it,” Wheatstraw murmured. “‘What’s the ninth
ques-tion,’ maybe that’s the ninth question.”
 
“No,” I said.
 
“Why no?” Wheatstraw cooed.
 
“Because,” I said. “Because that would be stupid.”
 
Wheatstraw laughed and slapped his thigh with his hat. The widow
slammed two plates together.
 
“Indeed it would be,” she snapped. “Petey, take these plates. Take
them, I say. Do a lick of work for once in your lazy son-in-law of a life.”
 
“So what’s the ninth question?” I asked again.
 
“That’s for you to tell us,” Wheatstraw said.
 
“To tell you, you mean,” the widow said, driving him from the room
beneath a stack of dishes. “Don’t drag me into this.”
 
“Oh, excuse me, Lady Astor, whose house is it? The girl’s a wizard,
Sarah, and you can’t stow a wizard in the china cupboard like a play-pretty,
like one of your ghosts, like Mr. Dellafave in there,” he shouted as he
passed a china cupboard. Its door trembled, and someone inside
squeaked.
 
“You know the rules,” Wheatstraw continued as we all entered the
kitchen in a clump. He dumped the dishes into the sink with a crash and
whirled to face us. I tried to hide behind the widow, though she was a foot
shorter. Wheatstraw pointed at her like he wanted to poke a hole in the air.
His gentleman’s fingernail was now long and ragged, with something
crusted beneath, and his eyes were red as a drunkard’s. “Just look at her,”
he said. “Just stand near her, for pity’s sake! She’s stoked with magic like a
furnace with coal, and the wide world is full of matches. She’s in a different
world now, and she has got to learn.” He turned to me. “Tea party’s over,
my dear. From now on, it’s test after test, and you have your first
assignment, your first nine questions.”
 
“Eight,” I said.
 
He threw back his head and roared like a bull. I clapped my hands
over my ears and shrieked. Our dresses billowed as if in a strong wind. The

cords stood out on Wheatstraw’s neck. His hot breath filled the room. Then
he closed his mouth, and the roar was gone. “All righty then,” he said.
“Eight it is. You owe the Old Concern eight answers—and one question.”
He jammed his hat two-handed onto his head down to his eyebrows, then
sprang into the sink. He crouched there, winked, and vanished down the
drain with a gurgle. His hat dropped to the porcelain and wobbled in place
until it, too, was snatched into the depths. Wheatstraw’s voice chuckled
through the pipes, and ghosts flowed keening from the faucet.
 
“Showoff,” the widow said. She squeezed my arm. “He’s a liar, too.
Absolutely terrible at whist.”
 
“When he said I had to answer those questions, was that a lie, too?”
 
“Ah, no, that part was true enough.”
 
“And the part about me being ... a wizard?”
 
The widow smiled. “Truest of all,” she said.
 
* * * *
 
“ALL wizards have much the same talents,” said the widow, as she washed
the unbroken dishes, and I dried them, “just as all carpenters, all painters,
all landscapers do. But each wizard also has a specialty, some talent she is
especially good at. Some work at the craft for decades before realizing
what their specialty is. Some realize what it was only in hindsight, only on
their deathbeds, if they ever realize it at all. But other wizards have their
talents handed to them, almost from birth, the way we all are granted the
earth and the sky.
 
“I myself was no taller than a turnip when I realized that many of the
little friends I played with every day, in the attic and beneath the grape
ar-bor and in the bottom of the garden, were children that others could not
see, and I realized, too, that my parents did not like for me to speak of
them, to say, ‘Oh, Papa, how funny! Little Merry just passed through your
waistcoat, as you were stirring your tea.’ How cross he became that day.”  
 
She wrung dry a dishcloth in her tiny fists. I blew soap bubbles from
my palm into the face of a sleeping tabby as it floated past. The bubbles
bobbed through the cat, or was it the other way around? The widow had
been scrubbing dishes with pumice, so the bubbles were reddish in color
and seemed more substantial than the wholly transparent cat. Then the
bubbles vanished, and the tabby remained.

 
The widow continued: “And so I began keeping my talent secret, and
once you start keeping your talents secret, why, you’re well along the path
of the wizard.”
 
“My talents are a secret even from me,” I said.
 
“There now, you see how wrong you can be?” said the widow. She
popped my shoulder with the dish towel. “You play with dead cats. You
converse with all my boarders. You unbind the front door and then bind it
again without half-trying. You come here from Tennessee in a single step,
as if the world were a map you could fold. My goodness, that’s a step even
Paul Bunyan couldn’t take, and Paul is a big, big man.” After a moment’s
reverie, she shook her head and with a great splash yanked free the plug.
“Well, that’s done!” she cried over the rush of the emptying sink. “May it all
go down Wheatstraw’s gullet.” She stood on tiptoe and kissed my cheek.
Her kiss was quick, dry, and powdery, like the dab of a cotton swab. “Never
you fret, child,” she said, taking my arm and leading me down the steps into
the garden. “You’ve got talent to burn, as Mr. Winchester would have said.
And now that you’ve begun to focus, well, you’ll tumble across a specialty
or three very soon, I daresay.”
 
“Mr. Wheatstraw said I’m in a different world now.”
 
The widow snorted. “Different world, indeed! You can’t change worlds
like garters, my dear. This is the same world you were born into, the same
world you are stuck with, all the days of your life. Never forget that. But the
older you get, and the more traveling you do, why, the more of this world
you inevitably will see—and inevitably be able to see, I daresay.”
 
“Because I walked through the diorama, you mean?”
 
“That was a powerful bit of traveling, indeed it was. Doubtless it
broadened your mind a bit. Who knows? A few weeks ago you might have
been as ignorant of the spirit world as my carpenters, might have looked
right through Mr. Dellafave without even seeing him, much less being able
to converse with him. And what a shame that would have been,” she said,
not sounding quite convinced.
 
I considered telling her that Mr. Dellafave was in love with her, but
decided she knew that already. Instead, I finally dared to ask a question.
 
“Mrs. Winchester. In all these years since Mr. Winchester died, has
he ever, well . . . visited?”

 
“Ah, that’s sweet of you to ask, child,” said the widow, with a sniff and
a toss of her head. “No, not yet, though early on I looked for him and
listened for him, by day and by night. Especially by night. I confess I even
hired a medium or two to conduct a séance—for those were all the rage, a
few years ago.” She waved absently as we passed a headless brakeman,
who raised his lantern to her. “A phantom herd of buffalo might have
stampeded through the parlor without those frauds noticing. And the mess!
We mopped up ecto-plasm for days.” She leaned against the trunk of an
English yew and stared, not unhappily, into the sky. “I finally concluded that
Mr. Winchester—like my mama and papa, and my old nurse, and my little
dog, Zip, that I had when we were first wed, and my poor child Annie—that I
will be reunited with none of them until I’m as insubstantial as that lady in the
pond over there.”
 
In silence, we watched the woman as she rose from the water, stood
a few moments on the surface, then sank out of sight amid the lily pads, her
face unreadable. Her dress was from an earlier time. Where had all her
lovers got to, I wondered, and what did she remember of them?
 
“I’ll tell you the puzzle that worries me,” the widow Winchester
abruptly said, “and it’s not Mr. Winchester, and it’s not where all the dogs
go. What worries me is that in all these years of receiving the dear departed
in my home, I have met not one—not one—who was, in life, a wizard.”
 
* * * *
 
“SARAH!” the man yelled. “Sarah!”
 
The widow and I ran to the bay window in the parlor. I knew that voice.
 
A two-horse wagon had pulled up in front of the house, and a big man
in a black suit and black hat was climbing out of it. It was a warm fall day, but
his hat and shoulders were dusted with snow, and ice clung to the spokes
of the wheels. The wagon was faded blue and covered with painted stars
and crescent moons. The side read:
 
WIZARD OF THE BLUE RIDGE
MAGICIAN OF THE OLD SOUTH
PURVEYOR OF MAGIC AND MIRTH
 
He removed his hat and called again: “Sarah! I got him! I finally got
him!”
 

It was Mr. Farethewell.
 
By the time we reached the front door—which the widow opened with
a wave of her hand—a horse and rider had galloped up. It was Petey
Wheatstraw, dressed like a fox hunter in red coat, white breeches, and high
boots.
 
“Winchester, do something!” he yelled as he dismounted.
“Farethewell’s gone crazy.”
 
“Crazy, nothing,” Farethewell said. “He’s trapped like a bug in a jar.”
 
“Who is?” the widow asked.
 
“Old Scratch himself!” Farethewell replied. “Here’s your Devil.”
 
He went to the back of the wagon and began dragging out something
heavy, something we couldn’t yet see.
 
The widow looked to Wheatstraw. “Is this true?”
 
He threw up his hands. “Who knows? No one’s seen the Old Man in
days.”
 
Farethewell dragged the whatever-it-was a little closer to the end of
the wagon, and an old boot thumped to the gravel. I stepped closer, out of
the shadow of the porch.
 
“Well, hello, Little Britches,” said Farethewell. “Sarah told me you
were here. So you decided to pull some magic after all?” He pulled a flask
from his jacket, looked at it, then laughed and flung it across the yard. It
landed in the rosebushes with a clank.
 
“She told you?” I cried. I got behind a pillar. Just the sight of
Farethewell made me feel flushed and angry. “You know each other?”
 
“Well, he is a wizard,” Wheatstraw said.
 
Farethewell stood there, hands on hips, and looked pleased with
himself. The widow peered into the wagon.
 
“Where is he? Is that his boot?”
 
Farethewell snatched her up and hugged her and spun her around.

“That ain’t his boot. That’s him! He’s in the boot! Come look, Little
Britches!”
 
“Don’t you call me that,” I yelled, but I stepped off the porch anyway.
Farethewell took hold of the boot with both rough hands and walked
backward, hunched over, dragging the boot toward the house as if he
dragged a big man’s corpse. The boot tore a rut in the gravel.
 
“Couldn’t be,” Wheatstraw said.
 
“It is!” Farethewell said.
 
“Blasphemy,” the widow said.
 
“Bad for business, anyway,” Wheatstraw said.
 
Farethewell let go of the boot and stepped back, gasping, rubbing the
small of his back with his hands. “I run him down in the Sierras,” he said.
“He’d a got away from me, if he had just let go of that chicken. Seven days
and seven nights we fought up and down them slopes. The avalanches
made all the papers. I’ve had this boot since Appomattox. It’s my teacher’s
boot, hexed with his magic and with his blood. On our eighth day of
wrestling, I got this jammed down over the Devil’s head, and just kept on
jamming till he was all inside, and now the Devil will pay!”
 
We all gathered around the boot.
 
“It’s empty,” the widow said.
 
Wheatstraw cackled. “Sure is. Farethewell, you are crazier than a
moonstruck rat.”
 
I did not laugh. Peering out through the laces of the boot was a face.
The two blue eyes got wider when they saw me. The face moved back a
lit-tle, so that I could see more of it.
 
It was Farethewell in the boot.
 
I looked over my shoulder. Yes, big Farethewell stood behind me,
grinning. But the tiny man in the boot was Farethewell also, wearing a robe
and pointed hat, as I last had seen him at Professor Van Der Ast’s.
 
The little Farethewell hugged himself as if he were cold and began
silently to cry.

 
“What’s the matter, child?” the widow asked. I shrugged off her little
spindly hand of comfort. It was like twitching free of a spider.
 
“What you see in there?” Wheatstraw asked.
 
“Tell them, Little Britches!”
 
“Don’t take on so, dear. What could you possibly see? This has
noth-ing to do with you.”
 
“Maybe it does,” said Farethewell. “Who you see in there, girl?
What’s this varmint to you?”
 
“What’s his name this time?” Wheatstraw asked. “The Old Man
an-swers to more names than the Sears and Roebuck catalog.”
 
I didn’t answer. Little Farethewell was backing up, pressing himself
flat against the heel of that old floppy boot. I stepped forward to see him
better, and he shook so the whole boot trembled.
 
“He’s scared,” I said, more loud and fierce than I meant to sound, for
in fact this scared me worse than anything—not that I was faced with a
second Farethewell the size of a doll you could win with a ball toss, but that
I was more fearsome to him than his larger self was. What kind of booger
did he take me for? This scared me but made me mad, too. I snarled and
made my fingers into claws like Book the Panther Boy and lunged.
 
“Yah!”
 
Little Farethewell twitched so hard the boot fell over. The sole was so
worn you could see through it nearly, and a gummy spot at the toe
trea-sured a cigarette butt and a tangle of hair.
 
“He’s ours,” big Farethewell hissed into my ear. “Whatever face he’s
showing you, girl, whoever he once was to you, he is ours now and no
mis-take. All the way here, off the slopes and down the river and through
the groves, it was all I could do to keep him booted and not kicking the
boards out of the wagon, but now you got him broken like a pony. And a girl
loves a pony. He’s mine and yours together now.”
 
“Don’t listen,” the widow said.
 
“Sarah. You forgetting what we got in there? You forgetting

Gettys-burg, Cold Harbor, Petersburg? The tuberculosis that carried off
your William, the marasmus that stole Annie from the cradle? Don’t you
care what this thing has done to the world, what it still could do? Ain’t you
learned nothing?”
 
“Some things ain’t fit to be learned,” the widow said, “and some
wiz-ards breathing God’s free air are cooped up worse than this creature is.
Petey, tell him. You’ve seen worse than Cold Harbor, worse than any of us.”
 
Wheatstraw did not answer at once. He did not seem to be listening.
He was in the act of dusting a metal bench with his handkerchief. He slowly
refolded the handkerchief, then flicked off one last spot of dust and sighed
and settled himself on the bench, perched on the edge as if delicacy alone
could keep his breeches away from the iron. The moment he sat, a
transparent cat jumped onto his lap and settled itself. Wheatstraw
scratched between its ears as it sank out of sight, purring, until Wheatstraw
was scratching only his leg.
 
“What I see,” Wheatstraw finally said, “is that whatever half-dead thing
you dragged in, Farethewell, it ain’t yours anymore. It’s Pearl’s.”
 
“Pearl’s!” said Farethewell and the widow, together.
 
“Pearl’s,” Wheatstraw repeated. “Otherwise, she couldn’t see it, could
she? So it’s hers to do with as she will. And there ain’t no need in y’all
look-ing like you just sucked down the same oyster. Folks making up their
own minds—why, that’s the basic principle of the Old Concern, the
foundation of our industry. And besides,” he added, as he leaned back and
tipped his felt hat over his eyes and crossed his legs at the ankles, “she’s
done made it up anyhow.”
 
When he said that, I realized that I had.
 
“No,” Farethewell said.
 
I picked up the boot. It was no heavier for me than a dead foot. The
thought made me shiver.                         
 
“Wheatstraw,” said Farethewell. “What have you done to me, you
wretch? I can’t move.”
 
“It ain’t my doing.”
 
“Nor mine,” said the widow.

 
“Pearl. Listen to me.”
 
I held up the boot and looked at it, eye to eyelet. The trembling shape
no longer looked much like Farethewell—more like a bad memory of him,
or a bad likeness of him, or just a stain on a canvas that put you in mind of
him, if you squinted just right. To whatever it was, I said, “Go home.”
 
Then I swung the boot three times over my head and let it fly.
 
“Noooo!” Farethewell yelled.
 
The boot sailed over the fence and past the point where it ought to
have fallen back to earth and kept on going, a tumbling black dot against the
pale sky like a star in reverse, until what I thought was the boot was just a
floater darting across my eye. I blinked it away, and the boot was gone.
 
Mr. Farethewell stared into the sky, his jaw working. A tear slid down
his cheek. He began to moan.
 
“Whoo! Don’t reckon we need wait supper on him tonight,”
Wheatstraw said.
 
“I knew it,” the widow said. She snapped her fingers in Wheatstraw’s
face. “I knew it the moment she and her fetches stepped out of the
ball-room window. Her arrival was foretold by the spirits.”
 
“Foretold by the spirits, my eye,” Wheatstraw said. “She’s a wizard,
not the three-fifty to Los Angeles.”
 
Farethewell’s moan became a howl.
 
I suddenly felt dizzy and sick and my breath was gone, like something
had hit me in the gut. I tried to run, without quite knowing why, but
Farethewell already had lunged across the distance between us. He seized
my shoulders, shook me like a rag, howled into my face.
 
“I’m sorry!” I cried. “I had to do it. I had to!”
 
He hit me then, and I fell to the grass, sobbing. I waited for him to hit
me again, to kill me. Instead the widow and Wheatstraw were kneeling
be-side me, stroking my hair and murmuring words I did not understand.
Farethewell was walking jerkily across the yard, like a scarecrow would
walk. He fell to his knees in the rosebushes and scrabbled in the dirt for his

flask, the thorns tearing his face.
 
* * * *
 
I stayed in bed a few days, snug beneath layers of goose down. The widow
left the room only to fetch and carry for me. Mr. Dellafave settled into a
corner of the ceiling and never left the room at all.
 
When she felt I was able, the widow showed me the note Mr.
Farethewell had left.
 
I never should have hit you, Little Britches, and I am sorry for
it, but you never should have got between me and the Devil. Many
women and children in Virginia got between the armies and died.
Hear me. Farethewell.
 
“His fist didn’t hurt you,” the widow said.
 
“I know,” I said. “Doing what I did with the boot, that’s what hurt me. I
need to find out what I did and how to do it right. Mrs. Winchester?”
 
“Yes, child.”
 
“When I am better, I believe I shall take a trip.”
 
“Where, child?”
 
“All over,” I said. “It was Mr. Dellafave’s idea, in a way. I need to see
some of the other things in the diorama, and I need to meet some other
wizards. As many as I can. I have a lot to learn from all of them.”
 
She pulled a handkerchief out of her sleeve and dabbed her eyes. “I
can’t go with you,” she said.
 
“But I’ll always come back,” I said. “And you mustn’t worry about me. I
won’t be alone.”
 
* * * *
 
I considered walking back through the ballroom window, but I had been
there before. I ran my finger over the pebbled face of the stained-glass girl
to say good-bye.
 

When I walked out the front gate of Flatland House, toting an
over-stuffed carpetbag, I half expected to find myself walking in at the back,
like Mr. Dellafave. But no, there were the orchards, and the lane leading
over the hill to San Jose, and Petey Wheatstraw sitting cross-legged on a
tall stump like a Hindu fakir.
 
I waved. He waved and jumped down. He was dressed like a
vagabond, in rough cloth breeches and a coarse shirt, and his belongings
were tied up in a kerchief on the end of a stick.
 
“You’re a sight,” I said.                                                       :
“In the future,” he replied, “they’ll call it slumming. Which way?”
 
“That way, to the top of the hill, then sideways.”
 
We set off.
 
“Also, Mr. Wheatstraw, I have some answers for you.”
 
“Are you prepared to sing them? Anything worth saying is worth
singing.”
 
“l am.”
 
“You’re so agreeable this morning. It can’t last.” He sang:
 
Oh, you must answer my questions nine 
Sing ninety-nine and ninety 
Or you’re not God’s, you’re one of mine 
And you are the weaver’s bonny.
 
I sang back:
 
Snow is whiter than the milk 
Sing ninety-nine and ninety 
And down is softer than the silk 
And I am the weaver’s bonny.
Heaven s higher than a tree
Sing ninety-nine and ninety
And Hell is deeper than the sea
And I am the weaver’s bonny
Thunder’s louder than a horn
Sing ninety-nine and ninety

And death is sharper than a thorn
And I am the weaver’s bonny
A babe’s more innocent than a lamb
Sing ninety-nine and ninety
And the Devil is meaner than womankind
 
—”And MANkind, too,” I said, interrupting myself—
 
And I am the weaver’s bonny.
 
Wheatstraw gave me a half-mocking salute and sang:
 
You have answered my questions nine 
Sing ninety-nine and ninety 
And you are God’s, you’re none of mine 
And you are the weaver’s bonny.
 
Then I asked him the ninth question, and he agreed that it was the
right question to ask, so right that he did not know the answer, and together
we reached the top of the hill and walked sideways, right off the edge of the
world.
 
* * * *
 
JUST this year I made it back to Chattanooga. The town was so changed I
hardly recognized it, except for the bend in the river and the tracks through
the tunnel and Lookout Mountain over everything.
 
The new bridge is still hanging on, though it’s no longer new and
car-ries no proper traffic anymore, just visitors who stroll along it and admire
the view and take photographs. Can you call them photographs anymore?
They need no plates and no paper, and you hardly have to stand still any
time to make one.
 
At the end of my visit I spent a good hour on the bridge, looking at the
river and at the people, and enjoying walking my home city on older,
stronger legs and seeing it with better eyes and feeling more myself than I
had as a girl—though I’m still not as old-looking as you’d expect, thanks to
my travels and the talents I’ve picked up along the way.
 
How you’d expect me to look at my age, I reckon, is dead, but I am
not that, not by a long shot.
 

I wondered how many of these young-old people creeping along with
the help of canes, and candy-faced children ripping and roaring past me,
and men and women rushing along in short pants, my goodness, their
stuck-out elbows going up and down like pistons—how many of them
dreamed of the world that I knew. But what had I known myself of the
invisible country all around, before I passed into the Infernal Regions?
 
Up ahead, sitting on one of the benches along the bridge, was a girl
who put me in mind of my old Chattanooga friend Sally Ann Rummage, with
her red hair and her long neck and her high forehead like a thinker. Probably
about sixteen, this girl was, though it’s hard to tell; they stay younger so
much longer now, thank goodness. She didn’t look very happy to be
sixteen, or to be anything. A boy was standing over her, with one big foot on
the bench like he was planting a flag, and he was pointing his fin-ger in her
face like Petey Wheatstraw was known to do, and his other hand was
twisting her pretty brown jacket and twisting her shoulder, too, inside it, and
she looked cried-out and miserable. He was telling her about her-self, or
presuming to, and when he glanced my way—no more seeing me than he
would a post or a bird or a food wrapper blowing past—I saw that he was
Farethewell. He was high-cheeked and eighteen and muscled, where
Farethewell was old and jowly, and had a sharp nose unlike Farethewell,
and had nothing of Farethewell’s shape or face or complex-ion, but I
recognized him just the same. I would recognize Farethewell anywhere.
 
I stood behind him, looking at her, until she looked up and met my
gaze. This is a good trick, and one that even nonwizards can accomplish.
 
The boy said to me something foul that I will not lower myself to
re-peat, and I said, “Hush,” and he hushed. Of all the talents I’ve learned
since I left Flatland House, that may be the handiest.
 
The girl frowned, puzzled, her arms crossed tight to hold herself in
like a girl I once knew in a California parlor long ago. I smiled at her and put
in her head the Devil’s ninth question:
 
Who am I?
 
And while I was in there, in a thousand places, I strewed an answer
like mustard seeds: I am the weaver’s bonny.
 
Then I walked on down the bridge. The sun was low, the breeze was
sharp, and a mist was forming at the river bend, a mist only I could see. The
mist thickened and began to swirl. The surface of the water roiled. In the
center of the oncoming cloud, twin smokestacks cleaved the water, then

the wheelhouse, then the upper deck. The entire riverboat surfaced, water
sluic-ing down the bulkheads, paddle wheel churning. I could read the
boat’s bright red markings. It was the Sultana, which blew up in 1865 just
north of Memphis, at the islands called the Hen and Chickens, with the loss
of seventeen hundred men. And my, did she look grand!
 
At the head of the steps to the riverfront, I looked back—for wizards
always look back. Have I not been looking back since I began this story,
and have you not been looking back with me, to learn the ways of a wiz-ard?
I saw the girl striding away from the boy, head held high. He just stood
there, like one of Professor Van Der Ast’s blockheads with a railroad spike
up his nose. The girl whirled once, to shout something at him. The wind
snatched away all but one word: “—ever!” Then she kept on walking. The
mustard was beginning to sprout. I laughed as loudly as the widow
Win-chester, and I ran down the slick steps to the river, as giddy as a girl of
ninety-nine and ninety.
 
* * * *

