
 ANIMAL RIGHTS 

 Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s 
 CONTEMPORARY 
 WORLD ISSUES 
 Series 
 American Families in Crisis,  Jeffrey S. Turner 
 Campaign and Election Reform,  Glenn H. Utter and Ruth Ann 
Strickland 
 Chemical and Biological Warfare,  Al Mauroni 
 Childhood Sexual Abuse,  Karen L. Kinnear 
 Climate Change,  David L. Downie, Kate Brash, and Catherine 
Vaughan 
 Corporate Crime,  Richard D. Hartley 
 Domestic Violence,  Margi Laird McCue 
 Education in Crisis,  Judith A. Gouwens 
 Emergency Management,  Jeffrey B. Bumgarner 
 Energy Use Worldwide,  Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith 
 Environmental Justice,  David E. Newton 
 Food Safety,  Nina E. Redman 
 Gangs,  Karen L. Kinnear 
 Globalization,  Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith 
 Lobbying in America,  Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan 
 Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy,  Glenn H. Utter 
 Mental Health in America,  Donna R. Kemp 
 Modern Sports Ethics,  Angela Lumpkin 
 Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation,  Sarah J. Diehl and James 
Clay Moltz 
 Obesity,  Judith Stern and Alexandra Kazaks 
 Policing in America,  Leonard A. Steverson 
 Renewable and Alternative Energy Resources,  Zachary A. Smith and 
Katrina D. Taylor 
 Rich and Poor in America,  Geoffrey Gilbert 
 Sentencing, Dean  John Champion 
 U.S. National Security,  Cynthia A. Watson 
 U.S. Social Security,  Steven G. Livingston 
 Waste Management,  Jacqueline Vaughn 
 For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit  
www.abc-clio.com. 

 Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital 
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution, 
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and 
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly 
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting 
point for research by high school and college students, scholars, 
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, 
activists, and others. 
 Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an 
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical 
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies, 
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index. 
 Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will 
find the information they need to have a better understanding of 
the social, political, environmental, and economic issues facing 
the world today. 


 ANIMAL RIGHTS 
 A Reference Handbook 
 Second Edition 
 Clifford J. Sherry 
 CONTEMPORARY 
 WORLD ISSUES 
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

 Copyright 2009 by ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior 
permission in writing from the publisher. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 Sherry, Clifford J.
 Animal rights : a reference handbook / Clifford J. Sherry. — 2nd ed.
  p. cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-1-59884-191-6 (hardcover : alk. paper) — 
 ISBN 978-1-59884-192-3 (ebook)
1. Animal rights—United States—Handbooks, manuals, etc.
 2. Animal welfare—Law and legislation—United States—
 Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Title.
 HV4764.S5 2009
 179'.3—dc22   2009031357 
 13 12 11 10 9  1 2 3 4 5 
 This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. 
 Visit www.abc-clio.com for details. 
 ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911 
 Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911 
 This book is printed on acid-free paper 
 
 Manufactured in the United States of America 

 To my wife, Nancy C. Sherry, who is my partner and best 
friend and without whom life would not be worth living. 
This book would not have been possible without her. 


ix
 Contents 
 List of Tables, xvii 
Preface, xix
Acknowledgments, xxiii
 1 
Historical and Philosophical Backgrounds, 1 
 What Are Humans, Anyway?, 1  
 How Do We Use Animals?,  2
 Agricultural Animals,  2
 Companion Animals , 3
 Service Animals , 3
 Entertainment , 3
 Pests,  4
 What Is a Right? , 4
 Do Animals Have Rights?, 8 
 Religious Viewpoint , 8
 Secular Viewpoint (Philosophical), 10 
 Secular Viewpoint (Legal), 13 
 How about Dogs?, 14 
 What about Service Animals?, 15 
 What of the Pests?, 15 
 Key Concepts , 16
 Anthropomorphism, 16 
 Speciesism , 18
 Sentience, 19 
 Pain and Suffering, 20 
 Pain , 21
 Background, 21 
 Studying Pain, 23 
 Theories of Pain , 27

x Contents
 Suffering , 28
 Religious Viewpoint, 29 
 Secular Viewpoint, 32 
 Summary , 35
 References , 35
 2 
Problems and Controversies , 37
 Agriculture,  38
 Agricultural Animal Welfare Issues , 39
 Enter the 21st Century , 42
 Science , 45
 How Do Scientists Do Science? , 46
 Testing! Testing! Who Do We Test? Why Do We Test? , 51
 Education , 55
 Animal Fighting , 56
 Dog Fighting , 57
 Cock Fighting , 58
 Bullfighting , 59
 Hunting , 60
 Fox Hunting , 65
 Coon Hunting , 67
 Entertainment , 67
 Circus , 67
 Films and Television , 68
 Rodeo , 68
 Zoos , 70
 Marine Mammal Theme Parks , 71
 Fashion , 72
 Fur , 72
 Feathers , 73
 Leather , 74
 Cetacea: Whales, Porpoises, and Dolphins , 75
 Whaling , 77
 References , 78
 3 
Possible Solutions,  81
 Research, Research, Research! , 81
 Private (Nongovernmental) Solutions , 83
 Animal Welfare , 83
 Animal Rights , 86
 Science Activists , 94
 Governmental Solutions,  96

Contents xi
 United States , 96
 Background , 96
 Federal Regulations (Nonagricultural) , 98
 Federal Regulations (Agricultural) , 106
 United States—State and Local Regulations , 109
 England , 110
 References , 112
 4 
Chronology , 115
 5 
Biographies , 139
 Cleveland Amory , 139
 George Thorndike Angell , 140
 Aristotle , 140
 Bob Barker , 141
 Christiaan Neethling Barnard , 141
 Jeremy Bentham , 141
 Henry Bergh , 142
 Claude Bernard , 142
 Jean François Borel , 143
 Alexis Carrell , 143
 Joseph Sill Clark , 144
 Leland C. Clark , 145
 Frances Power Cobbe , 145
 Carl Cohen , 145
 Doris Day , 146
 Vladimir Petrovich Demikhov , 146
 Walter Elias (Walt) Disney , 147
 Robert Joseph Dole , 147
 Muriel Dowding , 148
 Michael Allen Fox , 148
 Michael Wilson Fox , 149
 Ann Cottrell Free , 149
 Robert K. Jarvik , 150
 Joseph Rudyard Kipling , 150
 John Cunningham Lilly , 151
 Warren Grant Magnuson , 151
 Frank C. Mann , 152
 Emanuel Marcus , 152
 Richard Martin , 152
 James McMillan , 153
 Mark L. Morris, Sr. , 153

xii Contents
 Adrian R. Morrison , 154
 Ingrid Newkirk , 154
 Charles S. Nicoll , 155
 Coles Phinizy , 155
 Thomas Howard Regan , 156
 Joseph Yale Resnick , 156
 Sharon M. Russell , 156
 Norman Shumway , 157
 Peter Singer , 157
 Christine Stevens , 158
 Frankie Trull , 159
 Thomas Tyron , 159
 Betty White , 160
 References , 160
 6 
Data and Documents , 161
 Documents , 161
 Animal Welfare Act of 1966 (Public Law 89–544) , 162
 Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1970 (Public Law 
91–579) , 164
 Animal Welfare Act Amendment of 1976 
(Public Law 94–279), 165 
 Food Security Act of 1985 , 165
 Senate Hearing 161–4, “Improved Standards for 
Laboratory Animals” , 166
 House of Representatives Hearing 161–27, “Improved 
Standards for Laboratory Animals Act; and 
Enforcement of the Animal Welfare Act by the Animal 
and Plant Health Inspection Service” , 175
 Food Security Act of 1985 (Public Law 99–198) , 181
The 1985 Amendments Become Law, 185
 Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990 
(Public Law 101–624) , 186
 Animal Enterprise Protection Act of 1992 (Public Law 
102–346) , 187
 Farm Bill, Title 10, Miscellaneous Provisions, 
Section D (2002) , 189
 Data, 190 
 7 
Directory of Organizations , 197
 Abundant Wildlife Society of North America (AWS) , 197
 Actors and Others for Animals (A&O) , 198

Contents xiii
 Alliance for Animals (AFA) , 198
 Alliance for Contraception in Cats and Dogs 
(ACC&D) , 198
 American Anti-Vivisection Society (AAVS) , 199
 American Association for Accreditation of Laboratory 
Animal Care (AAALAC) , 200
 American Association for Laboratory Animal Science 
(AALAS) , 200
 American Council on Science and Health (ACSH) , 201
 American Association of Zoo Veterinarians (AAZV) , 201
 American Cetacean Society (ACS) , 202
 American Humane Association (AHA) , 202
 American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty 
to Animals (ASPCA) , 203
 American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) , 203
 Animal Agriculture Alliance , 204
 Animal Behavior Management Alliance (ABMA) , 204
 Animal Legal Defense Fund (ALDF) , 205
 Animal Liberation Front (ALF) , 205
 Animal Rights Coalition (ARC) , 206
 Animal Rights International (ARI) , 206
 Animal Rights Mobilization (ARM) , 207
 Animal and Society Institute , 207
 The Animal Society (TAS) , 208
 Animal Transportation Association (AATA) , 208
 Animal Welfare Institute (AWI) , 209
 Animals Voice (AV) , 209
 Associated Humane Societies (AHS) , 210
 Association of Veterinarians for Animal Rights 
(AVAR) , 210
 Association for the Protection of Fur-Bearing 
Animals (Fur Bearer Defenders) , 210
 Beauty without Cruelty (BWC) , 211
 Canadian Association for Humane Trapping (CAHT) , 211
 Center for Whale Research (CWR) , 212
 Cetacean Society International (CSI) , 212
 Citizens to End Animal Suffering 
and Exploitation (CEASE) , 213
 Coalition for Animals and Animal Research , 213
 Committee to Abolish Sport Hunting (CASH) , 214
 Culture and Animals Foundation (CAF) , 214
 Defenders of Animals (DOA) , 214

xiv Contents
 European Biomedical Research Association (EBRA) , 215
 European Fur Breeders Association (EFBA) , 215
 Family Farm Defenders (FFD) , 216
 Food Animal Concerns Trust (FACT) , 216
 Foundation for Biomedical Research (FBR) , 217
 Friends of Animals (FoA) , 218
 Fur Commission U.S.A. (FCUSA) , 218
 Fur Information Council of America (FICA) , 218
 Fur Free Alliance (FFA) , 219
 Fur Takers of America (FTA) , 219
 Incurably Ill for Animal Research (IIFAR) , 220
 Institute of Laboratory Animal Resources (ILAR) , 220
 Institute of Animal Technology (IAT) , 221
 International Association against Painful Experiments 
on Animals (IAAPEA) , 221
 International Association of Human-Animal Interaction 
Organizations (IAHAIO) , 222
 International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) , 223
 International Primate Protection League (IPPL) , 223
 International Society for Animal Rights (ISAR) , 224
 International Whaling Commission (IWC) , 224
 International Wildlife Coalition—USA (IWC-USA) , 225
 Japan Whaling Association (JWA) , 225
 Jews for Animal Rights (JAR) , 225
 Justice for Animals (JFA) , 226
 Laboratory Animal Management Association (LAMA) , 226
 Laboratory Animal Science Association (LASA) , 227
 Last Chance for Animals (LCA) , 227
 Lehigh Valley Animal Rights Coalition (LVARK) , 228
 Mercy for Animals (MFA) , 228
 National Association for Biomedical Research (NAFBR) , 229
 National Centre for Replacement, Refinement 
and Reduction of Animals in Research , 229
 National Federation of Humane Societies (NFHS) , 230
 National Pet Alliance (NPA) , 230
 New Jersey Animal Rights Alliance (NJARA) , 230
 Northwest Animal Rights Network , 231
 Ocean Conservancy , 231
 People for Animal Rights (PAR) , 232
 People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) , 232
 People Protecting Animals and Their Habitats 
(PATH) , 233

Contents xv
 Performing Animal Welfare Society (PAWS) , 233
 Primarily Primates, Inc. (PPI) , 234
 Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
(RSPCA) , 234
 Save the Whales (STW) , 235
 Scientists Center for Animal Welfare (SCAW) , 235
 Society for Animal Protective Legislation (SAPL), 236 
 Society of Animal Welfare Administrators (SAWA) , 236
 Student Animal Rights Alliance (SARA) , 236
 Tree House Animal Foundation (THAF) , 237
 The True Nature Network (TTNN) , 237
 United Action for Animals (UAA) , 238
 United Animal Nations (UAN) , 238
 United Poultry Concerns (UPC) , 239
 U.S. Animal Health Association (USAHA) , 239
 U.S. Sportsmen’s Alliance (USSA) , 240
 Universities Federation for Animal Welfare 
(UFAW) , 240
 Vegetarian Resource Group (VRG) , 240
 Vegan Action (VA) , 241
 Voice for Animals (VOICE) , 241
 Wild Animal Orphanage (WAO) , 242
 8 
Resources , 243
 Print Resources , 243
 Alternatives to Animals , 243
 Animal Rights , 244
 Cetacea: The Whales and Dolphins , 254
 Domestication , 255
 Entertainment , 257
 Farm Animals , 259
 Fur Farming and Trapping , 261
 Horse Racing , 262
 Hunting and Fishing , 262
 Pets , 263
 Primates , 264
 Vegetarianism , 269
 Zoos and Aquaria, 270 
 Government Publications , 271
 Law Compilations and Legal Sources , 273
 Congressional Hearings , 275
 Nonprint Resources , 278

xvi Contents
 Databases , 278
 Computer Simulations , 278
 Video/DVD , 278
 Glossary , 281
 Index , 285
 About the Author , 297

xvii
List of Tables
6.1 
 Number of animals used in scientific research by state 
and species, fiscal year 2007, 190
6.2 
 Total number of animals used in research 1973–2007, 193
6.3 
Number of cattle in the United States, 1993–2002, 195
6.4 
Number of hogs in the United States, 1992–2001, 196
6.5 
 Number of sheep and lambs in the United States, 1993–
2003, 196


xix
 Preface 
 T
 he controversy surrounding the concept of animal rights is 
divisive and potentially volatile. It divides society into three 
unequally sized groups: the animal activists, some of whom 
believe that all human use of other animals should stop immedi-
ately; society in general, which may or may not be aware of the 
controversy and which may or may not have formed an opinion; 
and the people who work with animals. The first and last of these 
groups are discussed in chapter 1. Chapter 2 provides an over-
view of the problems and controversies involved in these issues, 
while chapter 3 discusses private and governmental solutions. 
Chapter 4 provides a timeline of key events and chapter 5 pro-
vides biographies of both historical and contemporary individuals 
involved in the controversy. Chapter 7 presents an annotated list 
of animal rights/welfare organizations, and chapter 8 contains an 
annotated list of key books and other media that discuss animal 
rights/welfare. 
 In case law, an animal is defined as a nonhuman being that is 
endowed with the power of voluntary movement (see  Bernardine 
v City of New York , 44 N.Y.S.2d 881). 
 It is important to distinguish between animal welfare and 
animal rights. 
 Animals as Property 
 Many people have strong emotional attachments to companion 
animals such as dogs and cats. These people often think of and 
treat their pets as members of the family. However, both common 
law (court decisions) and state and local statutory law treat these 
animals, as well as agricultural animals, as property, with no more 

xx Preface
rights than a sofa or a television set. Owners of animals can sue 
and be sued in civil court and charged in criminal court because 
of the actions of the animals they own. Animals cannot be sued or 
sue in civil court or be tried in criminal court because they appear 
to lack the ability to know right from wrong and to be able to pre-
dict the results of their actions. 
 The status of animals as property is confirmed by the fact 
that billions of agricultural animals are commonly bought and 
sold in numerous transactions within a state, across state lines, 
and across international borders. Their owners also have the right 
to slaughter these animals at will. Pets are also bought and sold 
in thousands of transactions, in some cases, where the animal is 
purchased directly for a government agency, such as a shelter for 
abandoned or unwanted animals. 
 The status of animals as property was also confirmed in 
a landmark Supreme Court decision in  Diamond v Chakrabarty 
(447 U.S. 303, 1980). Chakrabarty genetically engineered a bac-
terium that was able to break down crude oil. This bacterium 
could be used to help clean up oil spills. Chakrabarty attempted 
to patent the bacterium but was denied on the basis of a long-
standing informal “rule” that “living things are not patentable.” 
Chakrabarty appealed this decision to the U.S. Supreme Court, 
which ruled, in a 5–4 vote, in favor of Chakrabarty. Since then, 
a wide variety of living organisms, including mammals and pri-
mates, have been patented. Living organisms have been patented 
in the European Union and in Japan, but the Supreme Court of 
Canada decided that living organisms could not be patented. 
 Animal Welfare 
 There is less controversy about animal welfare. The first attempt to 
create laws dealing with animal welfare appears to have occurred 
in 1800 in Britain when Sir William Pulteney tried to ban the “sport” 
of bull baiting, in which dogs set upon a restrained bull. The vote 
in Parliament was close, 43 votes against versus 41 for. In 1822, 
Richard Martin proposed a bill that would make it an offense to 
“wantonly” mistreat certain domestic animals. The bill, which be-
came law, was designed to protect the private property of a human, 
rather than to protect the animal for its own sake. Martin and some 
of his colleagues went on to form the Royal Society for the Preven-
tion of Cruelty to Animals, which continues its work today. 

Preface xxi
 Traditional animal welfare organizations have a long history 
in the United States. For example, the American Society for the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals was organized in 1866, and the 
American Humane Association was organized in 1877. These or-
ganizations seek to prevent cruelty to animals and to promote 
humane care of animals. They are described in more detail in 
chapter 7. 
 In the United States, state governments have enacted animal 
welfare laws to prohibit cruelty to animals. The precise wording 
varies from state to state. Generally, if a police or animal control 
officer believes that an animal is being mistreated, he can obtain 
a warrant to seize the animal and place the animal under the care 
of an appropriate shelter. 
 Local governments (e.g., counties, cities, towns) have also 
enacted anticruelty laws. The precise wording varies, but they 
generally mandate that animals be provided with access to an 
adequate supply of food and water, as well as appropriate vet-
erinary care. These laws also require that animals not be beaten, 
cruelly treated, overloaded, or otherwise abused. 
 Most local ordinances also provide a humane sanctuary 
or shelter for abandoned or unwanted animals. Unfortunately, 
the number of unwanted pets (mostly cats and dogs, but also 
birds, amphibians, reptiles, and other exotic animals) taken 
into shelters generally exceeds the number that are adopted 
out, so the excess is “put to sleep” or “put down,” which are 
euphemisms for euthanasia, or being killed. The precise num-
ber of animals killed is controversial, but estimates put it at 6 
to 8 million cats and dogs per year. The euthanasia methods 
vary from place to place. Many of these shelters require pets 
that are adopted first be spayed or neutered. Local authori-
ties also have licensing laws to help control diseases such as 
rabies. 
 Federal, state, and local statutes prohibit animal-fighting 
venues (e.g., dog fights, cock fights). 
 The Bounds of Human 
Responsibility toward Animals 
 Writers in the 18th century have apparently set the boundaries of 
discussion of animal rights that continues to today. 

xxii Preface
 Immanuel Kant (1930, 205), writing in  Lectures on Ethics , ob-
served: 
 [So] far as animals are concerned, we have no direct du-
ties. Animals are not self-conscious and are there merely 
as the means to an end. That end is man. . . . Our  duties 
towards animals are merely indirect duties towards 
 humanity. 
 At the other extreme is Jeremy Bentham (1935), who is often 
credited with being the first to discuss animal rights. Bentham 
wrote, in  Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation : 
 The question is not, Can they reason? Nor can they talk? 
But, Can they suffer? 
 Do animals have rights, beyond those dealing with their wel-
fare? Who should decide? It is our responsibility, both individu-
ally and collectively, to determine the answers to these complex 
questions. The answers must be based on reason, not on emotion. 
The remaining chapters in this book attempt to provide a balanced 
overview of the issues involved in this controversy and to provide 
the tools and information that will allow you to form an informed 
opinion. Once you have formed an informed opinion, it is hoped 
that you will act on it! 
 References 
 Bentham, J. (1935).  An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and 
Legislation . New York: Doubleday, Doran. 
 Kant, I. (1930).  Lectures on Ethics . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2001. 

xxiii
 Acknowledgments 
 N
o book is the product of one mind. The subject of animal 
rights and animal welfare is complex, controversial, and 
volatile. I have attempted to keep my personal views and 
beliefs in the background and to provide a balanced view of this 
controversy. 
 First and foremost, I would like to thank my wife for her 
patience, encouragement, and help in editing this book. 
 I would also like to thank my colleagues, past and present, 
especially Drs. G. Carroll Brown and W. R. “Bill” Klemm, who 
have acted as a sounding board for many of the ideas expressed in 
this book and have often played the role of devil’s advocate. 
 I would also like to thank my editors at ABC-CLIO, especially 
Holly Heinzer, Lauren Thomas, Kim Kennedy White, and Mildred 
“Mim” Vason for being patient, kind, and understanding. I would 
also like to thank Jennifer Boelter at Apex CoVantage.  


1
1
What Are Humans, Anyway?
Are human beings fundamentally different from other  organisms 
that inhabit Earth? The monotheistic religions (e.g., Judaism, 
Christianity) believe that humans possess a soul or a spirit but 
that animals do not. Some Eastern religions (e.g., Hinduism, Bud-
dhism) believe in transmigration of souls and thus believe that 
some animals have souls.
Those who believe in Darwinian evolution argue that  humans 
are animals and are fundamentally the same as other animals (Dar-
win 1859). Experts tell us that we humans share much of our DNA 
with other organisms. Dr. Evan Eichler, a genome specialist from 
the University of Washington, and his colleagues compared the 
human and the chimpanzee genomes and reported that  humans 
share 96 percent of their DNA with chimps (Ze et al. 2005).
While it is true that a liver is a liver, a pancreas is a pan-
creas, and a lung a lung, it seems likely that the major difference 
 between humans and other animals occurs in the brain, especially 
the cerebral cortex. The cortex is a convoluted layer of nerve cells, 
comprising nearly 90 percent of all the nerve cells in the brain, 
which forms the outer surface of the cerebral hemispheres. The 
major difference in the cortexes of humans and of other organ-
isms occurs in the frontal cortex. This appears to be the site of 
self-awareness (i.e., individual humans recognize that they are 
unique individuals separate from other individuals and from 
their environment and that they have a past and a present). This 
part of the cerebral cortex also appears to be the site responsible 
Historical and Philosophical 
Backgrounds

2 Animal Rights
for the  ability to think logically, critically, and abstractly. Humans 
can plan for the future, using memories of the past and reason to 
make decisions, rather than follow blind impulses.
Generally, most adult humans have a capacity to exercise these 
functions. Humans at other developmental stages have a basic ca-
pacity to engage them that develops over time. But,  unfortunately, 
some humans, because of accidents or developmental disabilities, 
are never able to fully engage these functions. When do we become 
persons? Do we become persons at conception, at implantation, 
at birth, or after adolescence? There is significant division of opin-
ion about the answer to that question, a division that stands at the 
 center of the controversy surrounding abortion and research related 
to human stem cells and cloning. The discussion of personhood and 
all that it implies is beyond the scope of this book.
If an animal possesses some or all of these abilities, should 
the animal be granted limited or full rights? If the animal does not, 
then should it be granted rights, or should humans be concerned 
with the animal’s welfare rather than its potential rights? This 
book is an attempt to provide information to allow an interested 
individual to decide.
How Do We Use Animals?
When thinking about animals and rights, it is convenient to divide 
animals into seven very unevenly sized groups: (1) agricultural 
animals; (2) companion animals (pets, especially dogs, cats, and 
horses); (3) service animals; (4) animals used in the entertainment 
industry (movies, television, zoos, aquaria, circuses, and rodeos); 
(5) pests; and (6) hunting, discussed in chapter 2. The seventh 
group, animals used for basic and applied scientific research, 
education, and product testing, is discussed in chapter 3.
Agricultural Animals
According to U.S. Department of Agriculture statistics for 2005, the 
most recent year for which statistics are available, there are more 
than 33 million cattle, 104 million pigs, 2 million sheep, 9 million 
dairy cows, and almost 9 billion chickens in the United States (U.S. 
Department of Agriculture 2005).
Most agricultural animals are now held for some portion of 
their lives in one of the 250,000 animal feeding operations or one 

Historical and Philosophical Backgrounds 3
of the 17,000 concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFO). The 
CAFOs are commonly called factory farms. The majority of broiler 
and layer chickens, turkeys, and swine are now raised in CAFOs 
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2009). There are rela-
tively few laws governing the operation of CAFOs and the laws that 
exist tend to focus on the environmental impact of CAFOs dealing 
with waste and waste management caused by having a relatively 
large number of animals in a relatively small space (see chapter 2).
Companion Animals
According to the National Council on Pet Population Study and 
Control, there are about 61 million dogs and 76 million cats in 
the United States (NCPPSC 2009). There are no solid numbers on 
other types of pets. Unfortunately, some people become tired of 
their pets, whether dogs, cats, or more exotic animals like birds, 
snakes, and alligators. Some drop these animals at the side of a 
road and drive off. Some drop the animal at a humane sanctuary 
or shelter. Because the number of unwanted animals exceeds the 
holding capacity, more than 6 to 8 million cats and dogs are “put 
to sleep” or “put down” (a euphemism for being killed) each year 
(American Humane Society 2009).
Service Animals
Service animals are a diverse group, and it is difficult to collect 
accurate statistics about the number of these animals. They in-
clude seeing-eye dogs that help blind people get around, dogs that 
help people who are hard of hearing deal with their world, and 
dogs and primates that help other handicapped people, including 
 paraplegics. They also include dogs that help detect dangerous 
contraband, such as explosives and drugs, and cadaver-detecting 
dogs that help locate living and dead humans after natural or man-
made disasters. Dogs in the K-9 corps help the military and police 
guard perimeters, perform search and rescue operations, and detect 
dangerous people hiding in buildings, caves, and other sites.
Entertainment
Accurate statistics are difficult to obtain about the number of ani-
mals used in the entertainment industry. The Performing Animal 
Welfare Society, in Galt, California, seeks to protect performing 

4 Animal Rights
animals in traveling shows, animal acts, and animals that appear 
on television and in the movies. They provide a shelter for abused, 
abandoned, and retired captive wildlife. This group is discussed 
in more detail in chapter 7.
In the past few decades, many zoos have abandoned small 
steel cages used for displaying one or two members of a species 
in favor of larger, more naturalistic displays that contain multiple 
members of a species and often members of several species. Zoos 
also maintain animals that might be endangered or extinct in their 
natural environments.
The number of cetaceans (whales, porpoises, dolphins) and 
pinnipeds (seals and related species) that are held in theme parks, 
such as Sea World, and in aquaria that are owned by cities is 
 difficult to determine, as is the number of fish or invertebrates (e.g., 
octopus). Some aquaria, like some zoos, maintain species that are 
endangered or extinct in the natural environments.
Pests
It is estimated that there are one to two rats and two to three mice 
for every man, woman, and child in large cities. A rat can consume 
more than 27 pounds of food per year, and rats are omnivores, 
which mean they will eat anything. They contaminate 5 to 10 times 
more than they eat with their hair, droppings, and urine. Mice 
eat about 4 pounds per year and also contaminate 5 to 10 times 
that much. According to 2001 statistics from the U.S. Department 
of  Agriculture (the latest data available), wildlife caused more than 
$600 million in damage to field crops, $178 million in damage to live-
stock and poultry, and $146 million in damage to vegetables, fruits, 
and nuts in that year. Even using the most advanced techniques 
available, humans are just barely holding their own when it comes 
to dealing with these pests (U.S. Department of Agriculture 2009). It 
is not clear what would happen if these efforts were stopped.
What Is a Right?
Do animals have rights? Do people have rights? What is a right? 
The Declaration of Independence says:
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are 
created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator 

Historical and Philosophical Backgrounds 5
with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, 
 Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness. That to secure these 
rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving 
their just Powers from the consent of the governed.
When Thomas Jefferson penned those stirring and powerful 
words, he was propounding a radical idea, to liberate human-
ity from the political oppression and servitude that had been the 
destiny of most people from time immemorial and that continues 
to be the fate of most members of our species to this very day. 
Jefferson and the other Founding Fathers were proposing that 
people had a right to be free, not because of a ruler’s decree or a 
majority vote but simply because they were men. This concept is 
at the very foundation of our identity as a nation and gives our 
moral concerns political force; its philosophical foundations have 
been used to endorse a variety of political acts, including violence. 
In order to fully engage these rights, we must liberate ourselves 
from the ravages of disease and premature death, as well as from 
ignorance and poverty.
But, at the time that Jefferson penned these words, he appar-
ently owned slaves, as did many of the other Founding Fathers. 
Many of his male fellow citizens considered women and children 
to be little more than chattel (property), with few, if any, rights.
To establish a government, the Founding Fathers, in 1787, 
penned these mighty words:
We the People of the United States, in Order to form a 
more perfect Union, establish Justice, insure domestic 
Tranquillity, provide for the common defense, promote 
the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty 
to ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain and establish 
this Constitution for the United States of America.
The Constitution is a unique document in the history of humanity, 
and it has survived the test of time. But, as originally written, it 
contained flaws. In Article I, Section 2, Subsection 3, for example, 
it says:
Representatives and direct Taxes shall be apportioned 
among the several States which may be included within 
this Union, according to their respective Numbers, which 
shall be determined by adding to the whole Number of 

6 Animal Rights
free Persons, including those bound to service for a Term 
of Years, and excluding Indians not taxed, three fifths of 
all other persons.
That last phrase, of course, refers to slaves. Clearly, not everyone 
living in the United States was considered a “full” human being. 
As a charter of freedom, the Constitution left other great gaps in the 
protection it afforded individuals from the government and popu-
lar majorities. This was corrected in 1791, when the ratification of 
the Bill of Rights, the name given to the first 10 amendments to the 
Constitution, was completed.
The powerful and potent words of the Bill of Rights, which 
protect the rights of individuals, ring down through history. 
These rights include, among others, freedom of religion, of 
speech, and of assembly and the right to petition the government 
(Amendment I); the right to keep and bear arms (Amendment II); 
the right to be secure in one’s person, house, papers, and effects 
against unreasonable seizures (Amendment IV); the right not to 
be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of 
law (Amendment V); the right in criminal prosecutions to have 
a speedy and public trial, to be informed of the nature and cause 
of accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses against one, 
to have compulsory process for obtaining witness in one’s favor, 
and to have the assistance of counsel for one’s defense (Amend-
ment VI); the guarantee that the enumeration in the Constitution 
of certain rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage others 
retained by the people (Amendment IX); and the provision that 
the powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitu-
tion nor prohibited by it to the States are reserved to the States, 
respectively, or to the people (Amendment X).
A right, in an abstract sense, refers to justice, ethical cor-
rectness, or consonance with the rules of law or the principles of 
morals. Law, in the abstract, is considered the foundation for all 
rights or the complex of underlying moral principles that impart 
the character of justice to all positive law and give it an ethical 
content. In a concrete sense, a right is a power, privilege, faculty, 
or demand, inherent in one person and incident upon another. 
The primal rights pertaining to humans are enjoyed by humans, 
grounded in humans purely as such, in the human personal-
ity, and existing antecedently to their recognition by positive 
law (i.e., a law that was enacted or adopted by a government) 
(Black’s Law Dictionary 1979).

Historical and Philosophical Backgrounds 7
When used as an adjective, the term “right” means morally 
correct, consonant with ethical principles or rules of positive law. 
Legal rights confer a theoretical advantage (i.e., the right) of one 
person over another based on basic and recognized legal rules, 
while the second person has a corresponding disadvantage. The 
basic building block of legal rights is liberty, which allows a person 
to do as he or she pleases without any duty to any other person. 
One person can limit the liberty of another by making a claim on 
that individual. That individual then has a “duty” to either act or 
not act toward the claimant. Claims can exist against specific indi-
viduals or groups of individuals, or they can exist against every 
person in the world (commonly called in rem claims). Immunity 
“disables” one person from interfering with the liberty of another; 
that is, it specifies what we cannot do to another. Power provides 
the ability to sue in a court of law for the violation of a claim or 
immunity.
Equality means that likes should be treated alike. Unequal 
treatment must be morally acceptable and rational. Classifications 
must be reasonable, and unalikes should be treated proportion-
ally to their unlikeliness. If one possesses a quality, such as prac-
tical autonomy (discussed later), that justifies a legal right, one 
should possess that right.
Consciousness, especially self-consciousness, appears to 
 reside in the cerebral cortex, the outer layer of the cerebral hemi-
spheres, which contains the majority of nerve cell bodies. The 
frontal cerebral cortex, which is located above the eyes, is respon-
sible for our most complex mental activities. Other parts of the 
cortex are responsible for such complex activities as language, 
creative thinking, planning, and decision making, as well as the 
ability to use knowledge acquired by learning and passed on by 
word of mouth or other sources.
Some, if not all, emotions are felt and expressed by a complex 
interaction among the frontal cortex, the hypothalamus (an inte-
grating center that controls eating, drinking, and sexual  behavior), 
and the limbic system (a system of brain structures that are in-
volved with the sense of smell and the display of emotions). The 
frontal cortex is likely the site of working memory, which allows 
humans to form mental representations of the world and their 
place in it.
Natural laws exist, can be discovered by human reason, and 
describe the rights and liberties that human beings are supposed 
to possess. A right can be defended in a court. Natural rights 

8 Animal Rights
grow out of and conform to humanity’s nature (people’s whole 
mental, moral, and physical constitution) and depend upon a 
person’s mental, behavioral, tempermental, and emotional as-
pects that characterize a unique individual. Natural rights are 
distinguished from rights created by positive laws enacted by 
government to create an orderly civilized society. Natural rights 
grow from natural law, which are necessary and obligatory rules 
of human conduct.
Humans have rights. The fact that most humans throughout 
history and currently throughout the world cannot exercise these 
rights does not alter the fact that they have them. But how about 
animals—do they have rights? Are we humans violating these 
rights when we use animals for our own purposes?
Do Animals Have Rights?
Various individuals and public and private organizations vary in 
their opinion of whether animals have rights. If animals do have 
rights, do they have the same rights as human beings? Or is the 
level of their rights different? The discussion of animal rights is 
based on religious beliefs, philosophy (especially ethics), and legal 
issues.
Religious Viewpoint
Buddhists acknowledge the unity of all living beings and believe 
that humans are not privileged above other living creatures. They 
believe that the “self” (the atman) passes through many stages, 
including many potential lives as animals, before reaching the 
stage of full and perfect enlightenment. In the words of Buddha 
as recorded in the Lankavatara Sutra (2009):
Whenever there is the evolution of living beings, let peo-
ple cherish the kinship with them, and that all beings are 
to be loved as if they were an only child, let them refrain 
from eating meat.
Animals are also sacred to practitioners of the Hindu religion 
 because they also believe in the transmigration of souls. Earth and 
the life that exists on it are virtually part of god’s body. Cows are 

Historical and Philosophical Backgrounds 9
considered sacred because they are symbols of the provisions of 
god and providers of milk, cream, and butter. They are also con-
sidered symbols of Krishna, the eighth incarnation of the Hindu 
god Vishnu. It is illegal to kill cows in India, and they are allowed 
to wander the streets freely. In the words of Mahatma Gandhi in 
The Moral Basis of Vegetarianism (1959):
It ill becomes us to invoke in our daily prayers the bless-
ings of God, the compassionate, if we in turn will not 
practice elementary compassion towards our fellow 
 creatures. . . The greatness of a nation and its moral prog-
ress can be judged by the way its animals are treated.
In the Hadith, the sayings of the prophet Mohammad, the prophet 
says:
One who kills even a sparrow or anything smaller, with-
out justifiable reason, will be answerable to Allah. When 
asked what would be a justifiable reason, he replied: to 
slaughter it for food-not to kill and discard it. (A Manual 
of Hadith 2009)
When a Muslim slaughters an animal for food, it must be done in 
the quickest and most painless way for the animal—by cutting its 
throat with a sharp object.
The Christian and Jewish view is summarized in the King 
James Version of the Bible in the first chapter in Genesis, verses 
28–30, when God speaks to the first humans:
 
28 And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be 
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and 
subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, 
and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing 
that moveth upon the earth.
 
29 And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb 
bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and 
every tree, in the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; 
to you it shall be for meat.
 
30 And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of 
the air, and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, 
wherein there is life, I have given every green herb for 
meat: and it was so.

10 Animal Rights
In these verses, God places humans in authority (control) over 
animals and mandates that humans have a vegetarian diet. How-
ever, a new Law comes into effect after the flood, when God 
speaks to Noah (Genesis, chapter 9, verses 1–4):
 
1 And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, 
Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.
 
2 And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon 
every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, 
upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the 
fishes of the sea; into your hand are they delivered.
 
3 Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; 
even as the green herb have I given you all things.
 
4 But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, 
shall ye not eat.
God does not change man’s dominion over animals but allows 
humans to eat animal flesh.
Secular Viewpoint (Philosophical)
Aristotle (384–323 B.C.E.) may have been the first philosopher to 
construct a theory of moral responsibility. He believed that nature 
was organized as a ladder, with the gods at the top, humans next, 
and then other organisms. Aristotle believed that humans could 
use animals. The Stoics (third century B.C.E.) believed that nonhu-
man animals were not able to reason and therefore could be used 
by humans. On the other hand, the Pythagoreans (sixth–third 
century B.C.E.) believed in the transmigration of souls; they were 
opposed to any cruelty to animals and supported the idea of a 
vegetarian diet.
Ethical theory, a branch of philosophy, deals with what moral 
agents may do, must do, and must not do. Ethicists argue that 
moral agents must be self conscious (i.e., be aware of themselves 
as separate and unique entities), have a memory for the past, be 
rational (i.e., be able to reason), have moral principles (i.e., be able 
to understand right and wrong, good and bad), evaluate alterna-
tives, and make judgments among the alternatives on the basis of 
self-interest. These judgments occur when the wants or desires 
of the moral agent come into conflict with those of another indi-
vidual or group. Immanuel Kant (1724–1804)  argued that since 

Historical and Philosophical Backgrounds 11
 nonhuman animals cannot reason, they cannot be moral agents, 
but they can be the subject of moral considerations. In other 
words, a moral agent (e.g., a human being) should consider 
what impact his actions have on nonmoral agents (e.g., animals) 
(Kant 1996).
Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832) is often credited with being 
the first philosopher to discuss animal rights in Introduction to 
the Principles of Morals and Legislation (Bentham 1879). Bentham 
was one of the founders of Utilitarianism, a school of philosophy 
that holds that each action is judged by its utility or usefulness. 
One of the key differences between the laws of England and 
those of the United States is that the British seek a utilitarian 
goal, “the greatest good for the greatest number,” while U.S. law 
tends to focus on the greatest good for the individual. Bentham 
and his followers used suffering as one of the criteria for deter-
mining the utility of an action. If an action causes suffering, it 
is objectionable. This prevention of suffering was extended to 
animals and serves as the basis for much thinking about animal 
rights. John Stuart Mill is a consequentialist; he argues that the 
consequences of an act outweigh other considerations and that 
the goal of a moral agent should be to spread happiness and re-
lieve suffering, as well as to maximize freedom of choice. Hap-
piness is caused by maximization of pleasure and minimization 
of pain.
Two influential books, Animal Liberation: A New Ethics for 
Our Treatment of Animals, by Peter Singer, and The Case for Animal 
Rights, by Tom Regan, apparently provide the philosophical basis 
for the modern animal rights movement.
Singer and Regan are philosophers and use the methods 
of analytical ethics. They argue that ethics are objective and are 
rooted in reason and the very logic of our language. Both base 
their positions on modern secular reasons and eschew arguments 
based on religious suppositions. A central tenet of analytical  ethics 
is universalizability, which means that any ethical prescription 
is applicable to everyone in relatively similar circumstances. If a 
duty can be extended to more people or situations, then analyti-
cal ethics demands that it must be extended. Further, if different 
moral judgments are made in two different cases, analytical ethics 
demands that one must demonstrate a morally relevant difference 
between the cases.
Animal Liberation has been called the bible of the animal 
rights movement. Singer, like Bentham, is a utilitarian and, as 

12 Animal Rights
such, argues that one should act to bring about the best balance 
of good and bad consequences for everyone affected by the act. 
Singer’s basic moral postulate is that equal consideration of 
interests is not arbitrarily limited to members of our own spe-
cies. Singer argues that avoidance of pain is a characteristic of 
all sentient creatures, that is, organisms that are responsive to or 
conscious of sense impressions. He maintains that humans have 
ruthlessly and cruelly exploited animals and inflicted needless 
suffering on them and that this must be stopped because all 
sentient beings should be considered as equals with respect to 
infliction of pain. According to Singer, a difference in species 
is no more a morally relevant distinction than other arbitrary 
characteristics, such as race or sex.
Liberation movements demand an end to prejudice and 
discrimination based on these arbitrary characteristics. Singer 
argues that liberation movements force an expansion of moral 
horizons and cause practices that were previously regarded as 
natural and inevitable to be seen as the result of unjustifiable 
prejudice. Further, he argues that, because animals cannot speak 
for themselves, it is our duty to speak for them. He reasons that 
the very use of the word “animal” to mean animals other than 
human beings sets humans apart from other animals and implies 
that we (humans) are not animals.
Regan, on the other hand, argues that animals have moral 
rights because of the concept of inherent value, that is, simple 
nonnatural, unanalyzable properties that are known to us through 
our moral intuition. He develops a cumulative argument for ani-
mal consciousness and the complexity of awareness in animals 
and maintains that an animal’s individual welfare has importance 
to it, whatever its usefulness to others. Any such creature has 
inherent value and should be treated as a moral being with moral 
rights. Regan argues that the benefits of scientific research are real 
but that they are ill gotten because they violate the rights of the 
individual (animal), and this is true even if the research produces 
the best possible aggregate consequences. Thus, Regan uses the 
principles of justice and equality to develop a theory of moral 
rights for humans and animals, based on the idea of the inherent 
value of individuals that are subjects of life.
Despite their differences, as noted, Singer and Regan distin-
guish between animals and humans and maintain that animals 
are not equal to humans in all respects. Both Singer and Regan 
argue that a normal adult human has more value than an animal 

Historical and Philosophical Backgrounds 13
and maintain that if one must choose between the life of an ani-
mal and the life of a human, the death of a human would prima 
facie be a greater harm. Both argue that these situations arise only 
when the life of a human being is in direct conflict with the life of 
an animal.
Secular Viewpoint (Legal)
Hermogenianus, a Roman jurist (fourth century B.C.E.) who was 
one of the first, if not the first, to collect and organize Roman law, 
wrote, “Hominem causa omne jus constitum” (All law was estab-
lished for men’s sake), which has been the basis of legal theory 
since that time.
Steven M. Wise is an attorney specializing in animal rights 
law. He is the president of the Center for the Expansion of Fun-
damental Rights (see chapter 7) and the author of Rattling the 
Cage: Toward Legal Rights for Animals and Drawing the Line: Science 
and the Case for Animal Rights (see chapter 8). Wise would dis-
agree with Hermogenianus and presents a legalistic argument 
for fundamental animal rights.
Wise proposes to assign humans and nonhuman animals an 
autonomy value. He assigns humans an autonomy value of 1.0. 
He also proposes that chimpanzees, bonobos (also known as 
pygmy chimpanzees), gorillas, orangutans, whales, and dolphins 
be granted an autonomy value of 0.90 or higher. Wise argues that 
an animal with an autonomy value of more than 0.90 should be 
granted the status of a “legal person” and recognized as a potential 
“bearer of legal rights” under civil law.
Wise argues that an autonomy value of more than 0.90 would 
guarantee a basic legal right to bodily integrity; that is, no one 
would legally be allowed to invade another’s body. This means 
that animals with an autonomy score of more than 0.90 would 
have the right to physical security and should not be used for 
medical research or any other purpose that might potentially 
cause pain, harm, or death.
The second basic legal right is bodily freedom; that is, ani-
mals with an autonomy value of more than 0.90 should not be 
confined against their will. In other words, chimpanzees and 
other animals with similar autonomy values should not be con-
fined in zoos, parks, or research establishments. It is not clear, in 
Wise’s argument, just what should happen to these animals.

14 Animal Rights
How about Dogs?
Outside zoos or aquaria, most people have not had much con-
tact with the great apes or dolphins or whales. Almost everyone 
has had some experience with dogs, either by owning one as a 
pet or through interactions with a friend’s pet. There are people 
who think of dogs as little automatons whose life is bounded by 
 instinctual responses to the world. Wise disagrees and suggests 
that dogs should be granted an autonomy value of about 0.68. 
Currently, both case and statutory law treat dogs as personal prop-
erty, whose ownership is recognized under law, in much the same 
manner as inanimate objects, like a sofa or bed (see Heiligmann 
v Rose, 16 S.W. 931, 1891). But this treatment is slowly evolving. 
Consider the comments of Judge Eric Andell (Court of Appeals 
of Texas, First District, Houston) in Carl Bueckner v Anthony Hamel 
and Kathy Collins (886 S.W.2d 368, 1994):
The intrinsic value of a beloved dog is, or at least should 
not be strictly determined by the market value of the 
dog, which may be virtually nil. The intrinsic value of 
the dog is personal or sentimental. Many people treat 
dogs as members of the family, in some cases the only 
family members that they have. The loss of a beloved 
dog is not the same as the loss of a valuable inanimate 
object, such as an heirloom. This is because a dog is a liv-
ing entity that seems to embody traits such as love, trust, 
courage, loyalty, and playfulness.
Are dogs special? Dogs, apparently descended from wolves, 
were probably the first animals to be domesticated. Dogs come in 
a bewildering variety of sizes, shapes, colors, and “personalities,” 
and therefore a human seeking a dog is likely to find one that suits 
his needs. Many people who own dogs seem to believe that dogs 
are literally “little people” in fur. Individual dogs can be distin-
guished from other dogs by their responses to their environment 
and their unique responses to the wants and needs of their owner. 
Dogs also appear to experience emotions. On the basis of their 
demeanor and behavior, they can appear to be happy or sad. Wise 
would argue that we should grant some limited rights to dogs. 
However, most experts agree that dogs do not appear to have 
self-awareness or self-consciousness.

Historical and Philosophical Backgrounds 15
What about Service Animals?
Animal rights activates argue for stopping all use of animals and 
animal products. But they do not typically discuss service animals. 
Most service animals are dogs. They help blind and deaf humans 
deal with their world easily and more effectively. Working dogs 
help protect policemen and soldiers as they go about their daily 
activities. Dogs also help detect contraband (especially drugs and 
explosives) and cadavers. Perhaps most important, during time of 
crisis, such as after an earthquake, fire, or inclement weather (tor-
nados, hurricanes), these dogs help locate humans in the rubble.
Given the increasing sophistication of computers and small 
robot-like devices, it is possible that seeing-eye dogs and the dogs 
that help deaf people will be replaced at some time in the future 
with nonliving devices that would be as effective as a dog. But it 
is unlikely that these functions of working dogs will be replaced 
by nonliving devices anytime soon. Removing the working dogs 
from their functions would expose police and soldiers to needless 
and unwarranted danger and make it significantly more difficult 
to perform their jobs. It is extremely unlikely that any nonliving 
device will be able to replace the ability of these dogs to find 
humans, living or dead, in rubble.
What of the Pests?
Secular philosophers, legalists, and other supporters of animal 
rights do not normally discuss pests. There are a number of widely 
advertised and popular products that claim that they kill 99.9 per-
cent of “.” And that really sounds good. But it leaves alive 0.001 
percent of “X.” If “X” happens to reproduce quickly, like a bac-
terium or an insect, then the organisms that are left will rapidly 
reproduce to refill the niche left by the demise of the 99.9 percent 
that were killed. But, and this is a big “but,” these organisms will 
have limited or no susceptibility to the product. This is one of the 
reasons that we have multidrug-resistant tuberculosis and other 
types of bacteria and insects that are no longer susceptible to the 
chemicals that were used to control them. This is the dark message 
of Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring.
Rats and mice do not reproduce quite as quickly as bacte-
ria or insects, but they do reproduce quickly. Both rats and mice 

16 Animal Rights
have lived with humans since people first settled into farming 
and storing products and then started living in towns and cities. 
Throughout history and up to this very day, human efforts to 
control these pests have been difficult and have just managed to 
keep them at bay, without preventing millions, perhaps billions 
of dollars in lost or damaged property. Trapping rodents is rela-
tively ineffective, as are most poisons. The reason is that rats and 
mice are neophobic (i.e., they tend to avoid new stimuli in their 
environment). For example, when presented with a new source 
of food, they tend to take in a small amount. If that makes them 
ill, they avoid that food in the future. One of the more success-
ful ways to deal with them is to use anticoagulants (drugs that 
prevent blood clotting). These drugs do not cause the animal to 
become sick. Instead, gradually, while the animal moves around 
in their environment, any small cuts it receives will continue to 
bleed and bruises will continue to increase in size, ultimately 
killing it. In 2009, Simone Rost, of the University of Wurzburg, 
reports that a series of small mutations in rats allows them to sur-
vive high doses of these anticoagulants. This means that as these 
rats reproduce, humans will need to develop a new drug or other 
procedure to eradicate them.
Key Concepts
It seems likely that a ferocious, man-eating tiger would not 
 engender good feelings and discussion of animal rights, while a 
cute and cuddly baby tiger might. Many people consider giant 
pandas,  especially baby pandas, to be cute. They are cute and 
seem familiar, perhaps because many young children have stuffed 
panda bears. The fact that they appear “cute” makes many people 
believe that they are harmless. While pandas are not carnivorous 
(meat eating), they are not harmless and will attack if provoked. 
Humans tend to empathize with some animals (the baby tiger) 
and are likely to grant them more rights than animals that are 
difficult to empathize with (man-eating tigers).
Anthropomorphism
Why would humans grant human-like rights to animals? One 
 reason may be that we humans tend to anthropomorphize (from 
the Greek anthropos, meaning “human,” and morphe, meaning 

Historical and Philosophical Backgrounds 17
“shape or form”), that is, to attribute human characteristics to 
animals and even inanimate objects.
It was vital for our primitive ancestors’ survival to be able 
to instantly recognize an animal or human. This process was un-
conscious and automatic. Those who lacked this skill did not live 
to pass on their genes. The human brain has specialized sites that 
sense and recognize human faces. Jean Piaget, the Swiss develop-
mental psychologist, found that anthropomorphism is common 
and pervasive in early childhood. It seems to be genetically pro-
grammed into our brains and especially our perceptual systems.
We do this in three ways: (1) in creating fables, stories, car-
toons, movies, and television programs; (2) in ascribing human 
characteristics to actual animals, most commonly companion 
animals, especially dogs but also cats and sometimes horses; and 
(3) in attributing human or animal characteristics to inanimate 
objects.
One of the earliest, if not the earliest, fables to give ani-
mals human characteristics are those credited to Aesop, a story-
teller who lived in Ancient Greece (ca. 620–560 B.C.E.). Many of 
these fables are still known throughout the world today. Many 
other authors, such as Lewis Carroll, Roald Dahl, Brian Jacques, 
C. S. Lewis, Beatrix Potter, and John Lockwood (Rudyard) Kipling, 
have provided animals with human characteristics. Many of these 
tales have been made into animated or live-action films, which 
continue to fascinate young and old alike. Perhaps the most fa-
mous anthropomorphic character is Mickey Mouse, a mouse that 
is familiar to virtually everyone in the world. Mickey began as 
a cartoon character that was initially relatively mouse-like, but 
he morphed into a character that walks on two feet, can use his 
other two feet as hands, wears clothing, speaks, and displays very 
human-like emotions. Mickey has morphed again and has left the 
screen and has become a life-size character that roams the streets 
of Disney theme parks.
The most common inanimate object to be granted human-
like characteristics is the computer. The most famous is probably 
HAL, the “deadly” computer in the film 2001: A Space Odyssey. 
While a computer as sophisticated as HAL probably does not 
exist yet, many people use personal pronouns like “he” or “she” 
when discussing their computers, as well as attributing to them 
ethnicity and politeness. Many people also refer to their automo-
biles using personal pronouns and discuss their actions as if they 
were living organisms.

18 Animal Rights
These days, when computer chips are increasingly powerful 
and shrinking in size, there is an increase in the tendency to treat 
nonliving things as pets and to give them lifelike characteristics. 
Consider AIBO (Artificial Intelligence roBOt, homonymous with 
“companion” in Japanese). AIBO is an autonomous robot that 
resembles a small dog. It can “see” its environment via cameras, 
can respond to its owner’s commands, and appears to learn and 
mature through stimuli produced by its owner and its environ-
ment. Reportedly, a group of AIBOs can play soccer. AIBO was 
introduced to the world by Sony in 1999; production was dis-
continued in 2006. AIBO sold for between $850 and $2,000; about 
150,000 were sold worldwide.
Tamagotchi, a small handheld toy that is treated like a pet, 
was released by Bandai in 1996. It is extremely popular with chil-
dren, and more than 10 million have been sold worldwide. The 
Tamagotchi is egg shaped and has a small screen and three but-
tons. Children seem to enjoy feeding the Tamagotchi a piece of 
food or a snack, playing games with it to help it lose weight, and 
cleaning up its waste, all accomplished by pressing the buttons. 
The toys caused a stir shortly after they were released because 
children were taking them to school so that they could feed them. 
Apparently, some Tamagotchis could “starve” in less than half a 
day. The toy was reprogrammed to prevent it from “starving” in 
less than a day so that children could feed it after school.
Perhaps the most interesting example is the Roomba, which 
was introduced by iRobot (Boston, Massachusetts) in 2000. 
Roomba is one of the first consumer robots that can do work in the 
home. A programmable robotic vacuum cleaner, it is a 13-inch disc 
that crawls around the home in search of dirt. When the Roomba 
encounters an obstacle, it backs up and turns in another direction. Its 
“behavior” seems curiously “animal-like.” People have changed 
their cleaning patterns and the physical arrangements of their 
home to accommodate their Roombas. Some people have gone as 
far as naming their Roomba and treating it as a “pseudo” pet.
Speciesism
The term “speciesism” was apparently coined by Richard D. Ryder, 
a British psychologist, in the 1970s. Like other “isms,” such as rac-
ism, sexism, and ageism, speciesism separates out a class of indi-
viduals that are subjected to some form of ill treatment and denied 
access to their rights on the basis of their  membership in that class. 

Historical and Philosophical Backgrounds 19
Humans and animals are obviously different in terms of brain de-
velopment, behavior, and ability to respond to and modify their 
environment. Humans learn from other humans, both contempo-
rary and those who have gone before, either through oral tradi-
tions or, more commonly today, through books and other media, 
such as the Internet. But are these differences morally relevant? It 
can be argued that animals lack the capacity for moral judgment. 
They cannot exercise or react to moral claims. Animals cannot sue 
or be sued in civil court or be held to account for their actions in 
criminal court.
Evolutionists, Darwinian and others, would argue that  humans 
are merely ordinary organisms that are a part of a larger group 
that includes other living organisms, especially those described as 
 animals. The members of the monotheist religions, Judaism, Chris-
tianity, and Islam, believe that humans are separate from animals 
because humans are made in the image of God and have souls.
Is the lion a speciesist because it hunts, kills, and then eats the 
antelope? Is the dog a speciesist because it apparently cares little 
for the squirrel, other than perhaps to chase it?
It has been suggested that speciesism is either bare or indi-
rect. A bare speciesist might claim that we can eat animals because 
the animals were bred and raised to be eaten. An indirect spe-
ciesist might claim that humans have certain characteristics that 
distinguish them from animals (e.g., the ability to use language, 
to reason, to plan). Some claim that humans engage in speceisism 
because of species loyalty, which allows us to favor humans over 
other organisms.
Sentience
Sentience can be a complex and slippery concept, especially when 
coupled with the idea that it involves the ability to experience suf-
fering. Most dictionaries define “sentience” as “the readiness to 
receive sensations.” Other dictionaries add that it is “a state of 
elementary or undifferentiated consciousness.” This seems to be 
a result of the blurring of two concepts: sentience (from the Latin 
root sentire, to feel) and sapience (from the Latin root sapere, to 
know). This goes directly to the distinction between sensation and 
perception.
Changes in physical events outside the body are brought to 
the brain via the sense organs. The process begins with a physi-
cal stimulus or a change in a physical stimulus out in the world. 

20 Animal Rights
 Specific physical change activates a set of specific nerve endings. 
For example, light triggers a response in the sensors in the eye. 
This causes these nerve endings to generate action potentials 
(i.e., an electrical impulse that is approximately one-millionth of 
a second or one millisecond in duration). The action potentials 
travel down a nerve until they reach a synapse (a gap between 
a nerve and the next succeeding nerve cell body) located in the 
thalamus (a switching station made up of individual groups of 
nerve cell bodies gathered in the same location and that have the 
same function). If enough action potentials reach the synapse, it 
activates the nerve cell and causes it to generate an action poten-
tial that travels down nerves that synapse on nerve cells in the 
cerebral cortex. The cortex, which is best developed in humans, 
is commonly called the gray matter and contains the majority 
of nerve cell bodies in the nervous system. The cortex overlies 
the white matter (made up of nerve fibers) and nuclei (e.g., the 
thalamus).
Visual stimuli activate the sensors in the eye, which activates 
visual cells in the thalamus, and end in the visual cortex that is 
located in the back of the cerebral hemispheres. It is unlikely that 
any interpretation occurs at the level of the thalamus; that is, no 
perception takes place there. It is likely that a limited amount of 
interpretation takes place at this level of the visual cortex. The 
majority of interpretation, comparing these current sensory 
 inputs to ones that happened in the past and determining how 
to respond to the current input, occurs in the frontal cortex, the 
likely site where perception occurs.
Pain and Suffering
There has been a good deal of research into the physiology of 
pain in both humans, who can tell researchers how they feel, and 
animals, which generally cannot. As described in detail later, it is 
likely that humans and animals, especially those that do not have 
a well-developed cerebral cortex, process the perception of pain 
and its consequences differently. These differences are central to 
the question of animal rights. That is, if an animal’s perception of 
pain is similar to that of humans, then the animal’s welfare should 
include methods to minimize pain. There is far less research on 
suffering, which centers on perception. The level of suffering peo-
ple experience varies widely and does not seem to correlate with 
the level of pain experienced.

Historical and Philosophical Backgrounds 21
Pain
Background
All living organisms attempt to avoid certain classes of stimuli. It is 
not clear if this means that these stimuli are painful. For example, 
a paramecium is a single-cell organism. As it swims around in its 
environment, if it encounters a concentrated salt solution, it will 
back away and move in another direction. Clearly, paramecia find 
a concentrated salt solution to be noxious and respond to it. Does 
the paramecium experience pain? Probably not, since it lacks a 
nervous system. Other primitive organisms, like hydra, which is a 
simple multicell organism that possesses different tissues, respond 
in much the same manner as a paramecium when it encounters 
a noxious stimulus. They contract and move away. Do they feel 
pain? Probably not; they are making a relatively simple response to 
a relatively simple stimulus. Flat worms and round worms respond 
in much the same manner. It is unlikely that mollusks (e.g., snails, 
clams, squids) and crustaceans (e.g., lobsters, shrimps, crabs, wood 
lice, water fleas, and barnacles) experience pain.
Changes in the environment of an organism are sensed (de-
tected) by specialized nerve cells. For example, rods and cones 
in the eye sense changes in the amount and quality of light. A 
nociceptor (Latin, nocere, to injure) is relatively unspecialized and 
consists of free nerve endings. Most of these free nerve endings 
are located in the skin, where they sense noxious stimuli.
The difference between activating a nociceptor and expe-
riencing pain is complex and poorly understood. It is not clear 
where in the nervous system nociception activation becomes per-
ceived as pain. Reflex action takes place in the spinal cord, but 
it is unlikely that this activity is perceived as pain. It is also 
unlikely that this occurs in the thalamus (a switching center) or in 
the somatosensory cortex, where other sensory inputs to the skin, 
such as hot, cold, and touch, seem to be “sensed.” The activity of 
nociceptors is likely perceived as pain when the signal reaches 
the frontal cortex. It is unlikely that animals that do not possess a 
well-developed frontal cortex experience pain in the same man-
ner as humans. It is not clear if nonhuman primates, which have 
a frontal cortex, experience the result of noceptive activation as 
pain in the same manner as humans, how the “pain” is perceived, 
and if it has the same “meaning” for these animals as it does for 
humans.

22 Animal Rights
How would you define pain? Virtually everyone has expe-
rienced it at one time or another, sometimes rather intensely. The 
responses to noxious stimuli are summarized in Figure 1.1.
Briefly, the activation of the nociceptors leads to (1) stereo-
typed reactions, which are called reflexes; (2) conscious percep-
tion of the pain stimulus; and (3) a response to the conscious 
perception of the painful stimulus. Oversimplifying, when a 
hand is placed on a hotplate, a reflex is triggered by increased 
activity in nociceptors in the hand. These fibers synapse (connect 
to) interneurons located in the spinal cord, which increase their 
activity, in turn causing an increase in motor neuron activity in 
the same segment of the spinal cord. This causes the muscles 
in the hand and arm to contract and the hand to be withdrawn. 
This is a rather crude movement and typically occurs before the 
subject is aware of any pain and can take any conscious action. 
The interneurons synapse with long fibers that cross the spinal 
cord and ascend to higher centers located in the cerebral hemi-
spheres. These long fibers are a part of the spinothalamic tract, 
which carries the information to the thalamus and from there 
to the somatosensory cerebral cortex, ultimately ending in the 
FIGURE 1.1 A schematic drawing of the connections within the spinal cord and brain involved with 
pain and responses to it.

Historical and Philosophical Backgrounds 23
 frontal cortex. Once the pain is perceived, it triggers a conscious 
response, which involves inputs from the motor cortex (respon-
sible for precise movement of the muscles), the cerebellum, and 
the basal ganglia (which are involved in movements that are 
more automatic, such as walking). These neurons synapse with 
motor neurons in the spinal cord and tend to smooth the with-
drawal response and possibly elicit an expletive, like “ouch!” or 
something more colorful. This does not mean that the subject 
must think “I need to move my arm.” This response is probably 
more automatic, much like walking.
Like humans, animals respond to noxious stimuli with reflex 
movements, but it is not clear if they experience the activation of 
nociceptors as pain. It is likely that their responses are more reflex-
like. This is especially true of animals that lack a well-developed 
cerebral cortex, especially a well-developed frontal cortex.
It is likely that the first reflex response is essentially indepen-
dent of motivational level, but that the conscious response can 
probably be moderated by differences in motivational level.
Nociception and pain are not normally covered in any detail 
in sensation and perception classes in the psychology curriculum 
or in anatomy/physiology or physiology classes in the biology 
curriculum. These topics are normally covered in clinical curri-
cula (medicine, dentistry, veterinary medicine), but generally the 
focus is on pain management, rather than the study of nociception 
and pain. There are hundreds of books, designed for both lay and 
professional readers, that deal with pain and pain management. 
Selected books are highlighted in chapter 8.
Studying Pain
Max Von Frey, in the late 1890s, identified specific sites on the skin 
that, when stimulated, caused pain. These spots were more numer-
ous than those responding to hot, cold, and pressure. Each of these 
spots was associated with specific receptors—in the case of pain, 
free nerve endings, which are called nociceptors. The activation 
of the nociceptors is a protective mechanism for the body. It oc-
curs whenever something biologically harmful is happening, as 
when tissue is being damaged. But it is not clear what the funda-
mental nature of the painful (algesic) stimulus is. However, the 
evidence suggests that the algesic stimulus is one of several small 
molecules that are released when tissue is damaged. Examples are 
bradykinin, prostaglandin, histamine, and serotonin.

24 Animal Rights
Human skin varies in thickness from 0.5 to 2.5 millimeters, 
while the epidermis is never more than one millimeter thick. 
The free nerve endings appear to lie 150 to 200 microns (about the 
thickness of a sheet of paper) below the surface, probably at the 
point where the epidermis and dermis meet. The skin (epidermis 
and dermis) typically lies on top of (subcutaneous) fat that varies 
in thickness from a few millimeters to several centimeters. This, in 
turn, typically lies over muscle and perhaps a bone.
These nociceptive fibers are bipolar, that is, the free endings 
are located in the skin and the cell bodies are in the dorsal root 
ganglion of the spinal cord. The other end of the fiber enters the 
dorsal root and synapses (connects to) secondary fibers.
There are two types of bipolar neurons that respond to stimuli 
that are noxious. Type A-delta, when activated, causes a relatively 
sharp pain, like a toothache, as well as a prickling pain that occurs 
when the skin is struck with a needle or when a widespread area 
of the skin is strongly but diffusely irritated.
The other type of free nerve endings, Type C, causes a more 
diffuse, aching sort of pain that is typically not felt on the surface 
of the body; it is felt deep inside the body, in and around the vis-
cera (the “guts”). Ischemia (decrease or lack of blood flow to an 
organ) can cause pain in organs, as can a muscle spasm. These 
fibers may also be responsible for the burning pain that occurs 
when the skin is burned.
The spinothalamic tracts carry prickling pain sensation to the 
thalamus and from there to the cerebral cortex. The spinoreticular 
fibers, which carry aching or burning sensations, form connections 
with the reticular activating system, which transmits the sensa-
tion to virtually all parts of the brain, especially to the thalamus 
(a switching center located near the center of the brain), the hypo-
thalamus (a center for emotions), and the cerebral cortex. These 
sensations are able to arouse someone who is asleep, to create a 
state of excitement and a sense of urgency, and to cause defense 
reactions. There is a third tract, the spinomesencephalic, that syn-
apses with neurons in the brain stem that send nerves back down 
the spinal cord that regulate pain transmission. (discussed later). 
The brain itself is insensitive; that is, it does not contain any free 
nerve endings.
In contrast to the other senses, nociceptive sensations do not 
normally diminish unless the stimulus is removed. That is, they 
do not adapt. A classical example of adaptation occurs when one 
enters a room that contains fresh flowers; one ceases to smell the 

Historical and Philosophical Backgrounds 25
scent of the flowers after a few minutes, even though the scent 
is actually still present. The physical stimulus (the scent of the 
flowers) is still present, but the sensation gradually decreases 
and then disappears.
Hardy and his colleagues used radiant heat (i.e., infrared) 
stimuli for eliciting pain responses (see chapter 8). They discovered 
that pain thresholds are fairly similar for all humans and likely for 
animals, as well. For example, most people feel pain when a small 
area of their skin is heated to 45°C, and virtually everyone perceives 
pain before the temperature reaches 47°C. Psychophysics is a tech-
nique that allows scientists to develop a mathematical relationship 
between the intensity of a physical stimulus (radiant heat) and a 
subjective psychological response (verbal report of the intensity 
of pain). Using this technique, Hardy was able to determine the 
intensity of a radiant heat stimulus (which can be precisely mea-
sured) that will cause a detectable difference in the degree of pain. 
This is called a just noticeable difference (JND). Most humans can 
detect approximately 22 JNDs between the level where no pain can 
be perceived and the most intense pain a person can distinguish. 
So, contrary to popular belief, the sensory experience of pain is 
probably similar for most people, but their perception of the pain 
may vary widely.
Using a technique called microneurography, a scientist can 
place an electrode in a nerve, such as the peroneal nerve. This 
nerve lies near the surface of the thigh and its position with 
 respect to bony and other landmarks is fairly well known, as is 
the innervation territory of this nerve and its branches. This nerve 
contains both afferent (toward the body, i.e., sensory) and efferent 
(away from the body, i.e., motor) fibers. By stimulating the skin 
with thermal or other painful stimuli and moving the electrode, 
it is possible to identify nerve fibers that carry pain information. 
By noting the transmission speed, it is possible to determine if the 
fibers are type C or A-delta. This allows scientists to determine the 
rate and pattern of action potentials that are generated by a spe-
cific noxious stimulus and also to determine how this correlates 
with the intensity of the physical stimulus and the reported level 
of pain. This allows scientists to compare the effects of a painful 
physical stimulus on the rate and pattern of action potentials in 
animals and in humans and thereby determine the approximate 
level of pain the animal might be experiencing.
In the 1990s, a remarkable new technique, Blood Oxygen Level 
Dependent functional Magnetic Resonant Imaging, commonly 

26 Animal Rights
called BOLD fMRI, was developed. This technique is noninvasive 
and allows images of the brain with a temporal resolution of about 
100 milliseconds and a special resolution of one to two millimeters. 
This means that parts of the brain that are involved with specific 
events, such as pain, can potentially be identified and studied.
The BOLD system works because deoxygenated hemoglobin 
is magnetic, whereas oxygenated hemoglobin is not. Therefore, 
areas of the brain with more oxygenated blood generate more 
intense images. A basic assumption of this technique is that when 
an area of the brain is active, it contains more oxygenated blood 
than when it is not active. It is important to note that there is a 
three- to six-second time lag between when a brain area is acti-
vated and when the blood-flow increases to it can be detected.
The BOLD system allows scientists to identify areas of the 
brain that are involved with pain and to compare and contrast 
these areas for different humans. For example, using the BOLD 
system, Coghill et al. (2003) found that humans with high and 
low sensitivity to a painful thermal stimulus showed differences 
in their response in the anterior cingular cortex (a primitive part 
of the cortex involved with affective [emotional] sensations and 
with the orienting response [directing attention to the painful 
stimulus with emotions]). There were differences in the primary 
somatosensory cortex and in the prefrontal cortex. These differ-
ences were not seen in the thalamus. This suggests that these 
differences are due to subjective psychic responses, rather than 
to direct responses to the physical stimulus. Kurata et al. (2002) 
reported that the secondary somatosensory cortex is also acti-
vated, as is the anterior cingular cortex, the prefrontal cortex, the 
motor cortex, and the lenticular nucleus (located near the center 
of the cerebral hemispheres and involved with the control of the 
muscles). Activation of these centers is involved with evaluation 
of and judgment about the stimulus and planning for movement 
that will minimize injury.
It is possible to use psychophysics and microneurography 
to determine the relationship between the intensity of a physi-
cal stimulus (e.g., infrared) and the rate and pattern of firing of 
nociceptors in humans and then to compare the results to the 
findings of experiments in animals that use the same levels of 
physical stimuli. One can thereby determine if the rate and pat-
tern of firing is similar in animals. If they are similar, then the 
BOLD system could be used to determine if the same brain struc-
tures are involved in animals and in humans. These experiments 

Historical and Philosophical Backgrounds 27
would further our understanding of the way animals perceive 
noxious stimuli.
Theories of Pain
There are three different theories of pain perception. Supporters 
of the specificity theory, which originated with the 17th-century 
philosopher Rene Descartes, argue that when specific pain recep-
tors are stimulated the free nerve endings transmit information 
directly into a pain center in the brain. When these receptors are 
stimulated, we feel pain and only pain. This theory fails to account 
for the many psychological variables that influence the amount of 
pain different individuals experience. Perception of pain depends 
on the level of anxiety and attention. There are numerous exam-
ples of soldiers who fail to notice severe wounds until the heat 
of battle has subsided. In one study conducted in the emergency 
room of a hospital, more than a third of the patients who had 
suffered substantial damage to their bodies did not report feel-
ing pain. This theory also cannot account for phantom-limb pain. 
This occurs when someone perceives pain in a limb even though 
that limb has been amputated. The pain may be quite intense. But, 
how can someone experience pain when the pain receptors are no 
longer present?
Proponents of the pattern theory of pain perception, which 
originated in the second half of the 19th century, claim that par-
ticular patterns of stimulation must be produced and that this 
stimulation must reach a threshold before pain is experienced. 
They argue that there are no specific pain receptors. On the basis 
of our earlier discussion, we can conclude that this theory is 
probably incorrect.
The third theory was developed, in 1965, by Drs. Ronald 
Melzack and Patrick Wall (1989) and combines the specificity and 
pattern theory, with an attempt to include psychological factors. 
This theory is commonly called the gate control theory. Melzack ar-
gues that there are two sets of fibers, one large and the other small, 
involved in pain sensations that form connections with two centers 
in the spinal cord. One of these centers is called the substantia gela-
tinosa (located in the posterior part of the spinal cord and made up 
of nerve cell bodies and very short nerve fibers). The large fibers 
stimulate the cells in the substantia geletinosa, while the small 
fibers inhibit them. Both the large and small fibers and the output 
of the substantia gelatinosa project onto a second set of cells in the 

28 Animal Rights
spinal cord, the transmission cells, which transmit pain sensations 
to higher centers in the brain. The substantia gelatinosa acts as a 
gate. When substantial large-fiber activity is present, the percep-
tion of pain is decreased. When substantial small-fiber activity is 
present, pain perception is increased. Signals from the higher cen-
ters, that is, the brain, also feed into the gate control system (that is, 
the transmission and substantia gelatinosa cells) and modulate the 
control of pain sensations. Therefore, it is clear that pain perception 
is more than the simple stimulation of free nerve endings!
But, the story of pain perception is still more complicated. It 
has been known for centuries that opium and its derivatives are 
analgesics; that is, they decrease or eliminate the effects of pain. 
More specifically, opiates, like morphine, do not block the physi-
cal sensation of pain but they do minimize the suffering that arises 
in our response to pain.
Scientists studying the mechanisms of action of opiates dis-
covered that certain parts of the brain are especially sensitive to the 
effects of opiates. Brain cells in these areas have opiate receptors. 
These receptors work like a lock and key; that is, they respond to 
chemicals that have the chemical structure of an opiate and not to 
any other chemicals. But, opiates are derived from a plant; they 
do not occur in the body. Or do they? These questions sent sci-
entists on a quest to find endogenous opiates, that is, substances 
that resemble the opiates and that are produced inside the body. 
Biochemists and neurobiologists discovered that there are at least 
two classes of molecules that have significant opium-like analgesic 
effects. They are the enkephalins and the endorphins.
A variety of exogenous drugs in addition to the opiates are 
available to help control pain. They include local anesthetics, like 
Novocain, that deaden nerves by apparently increasing their fir-
ing threshold. Another is aspirin, which blocks the production 
and release of endogenous chemicals, the prostaglandins. These 
chemicals are released when tissue is damaged and may be one of 
the chemicals that stimulate the free nerve endings.
Suffering
The precise relationship among nociception, pain, and suffering 
is complicated and controversial. There have been relatively few 
 scientific studies on suffering. Most of the thinking about suffer-
ing is based on religious or legal viewpoints.

Historical and Philosophical Backgrounds 29
Religious Viewpoint
The Christian and Jewish view of the origin of suffering is sum-
marized in the New King James version of the Bible in the third 
chapter in Genesis in verses 1–3, where God forbids Adam and 
Eve to eat from the tree of life:
 
1 Now the serpent was more crafty than any of the wild 
animals the LORD God had made. He said to the woman, 
“Did God really say, ‘You must not eat from any tree in 
the garden’?”
 
2 The woman said to the serpent, “We may eat fruit from 
the trees in the garden,
 
3 but God did say, ‘You must not eat fruit from the tree that 
is in the middle of the garden, and you must not touch it, 
or you will die.’”
When God appeared in the Garden, He discovered that Adam 
and Eve had eaten the fruit of the tree of life. In verses 15–19 of 
Genesis 3, God says that man’s punishment for eating this fruit 
would be to suffer:
 
15 “And I will put enmity between you and the woman, and 
between your seed and her Seed; he shall bruise your 
head, and you shall bruise His heel.”
 
16 To the woman He said: “I will greatly multiply your 
sorrow and your conception; in pain you shall bring forth 
children; your desire shall be for your husband, and he 
shall rule over you.”
 
17 Then to Adam He said, “Because you have heeded 
the voice of your wife, and have eaten from the tree of 
which I commanded you, saying, ‘You shall not eat of it’: 
Cursed is the ground for your sake; in toil you shall eat of 
it all the days of your life.
 
18 Both thorns and thistles it shall bring forth for you, and 
you shall eat the herb of the field.
 
19 In the sweat of your face you shall eat bread till you 
return to the ground, for out of it you were taken; for 
dust you are, and to dust you shall return.”
For Christians, perhaps the most important discussion of suffering 
occurs in the New Testament, especially the Gospels, which describe 

30 Animal Rights
the birth, life, ministry, suffering, crucifixion, and resurrection of 
Jesus Christ. The reason for the suffering of Jesus is described in the 
New International Version of the Bible, Matthew, chapter 16, verses 
15–16, 20–21, and chapter 26, verses 36–39:
Matthew Chapter 16
 15 But what about you?” he asked. “Who do you say 
I am?”
 16 Simon Peter answered, “You are the Christ, the Son of 
the living God.”
 20 Then he warned his disciples not to tell anyone that he 
was the Christ.
 21 From that time on Jesus began to explain to his disciples 
that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things at 
the hands of the elders, chief priests and teachers of the 
law, and that he must be killed and on the third day be 
raised to life.
Matthew 26
 36 Then Jesus went with his disciples to a place called 
Gethsemane, and he said to them, “Sit here while I go 
over there and pray.”
 37 He took Peter and the two sons of Zebedee along with 
him, and he began to be sorrowful and troubled.
 38 Then he said to them, “My soul is overwhelmed with 
sorrow to the point of death. Stay here and keep watch 
with me.”
 39 Going a little farther, he fell with his face to the ground 
and prayed, “My Father, if it is possible, may this cup be 
taken from me. Yet not as I will, but as you will.”
How the suffering of Jesus affects those who believe in Him is 
shown in 1 Peter, chapter 2, verses 20–24, and in Hebrews, chap-
ter 2, verses 7–10:
1 Peter, Chapter 2
 20 But how is it to your credit if you receive a beating for 
doing wrong and endure it? But if you suffer for doing 
good and you endure it, this is commendable before 
God.

Historical and Philosophical Backgrounds 31
 
21 To this you were called, because Christ suffered for you, 
leaving you an example, that you should follow in his 
steps.
 
22 “He committed no sin, and no deceit was found in his 
mouth.”
 
23 When they hurled their insults at him, he did not 
retaliate; when he suffered, he made no threats. Instead, 
he entrusted himself to him who judges justly.
 
24 He himself bore our sins in his body on the tree, so that 
we might die to sins and live for righteousness; by his 
wounds you have been healed.
Hebrews, Chapter 2
 
7 You made him a little lower than the angels; you crowned 
him with glory and honor
 
8 “and put everything under his feet.” In putting everything 
under him, God left nothing that is not subject to him. Yet 
at present we do not see everything subject to him.
 
9 But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the 
angels, now crowned with glory and honor because he 
suffered death, so that by the grace of God he might taste 
death for everyone.
 
10 In bringing many sons to glory, it was fitting that God, 
for whom and through whom everything exists, should 
make the author of their salvation perfect through 
suffering.
Moslems have similar beliefs. In the Koran, chapter 4, verses 
116–120, the Prophet Mohammad says that followers of Satan will 
suffer:
 
116 And whoso opposes the Messenger after guidance has 
become manifest to him, and follows a way other than 
that of the believers, We shall let him pursue the way 
he is pursuing and shall cast him into Hell, and an evil 
destination it is.
 
117 Allah shall not forgive that anything be associated 
with Him as partner, but He will forgive what is short 
of that to whomsoever He pleases. And whoso 
associates anything with Allah has indeed strayed far 
away.

32 Animal Rights
 
118 They invoke besides Him none but lifeless  objects, and 
they invoke none but Satan the rebellious,
 
119 Whom Allah has cursed. He said, “I will assuredly take a 
fixed portion from Thy servants;
 120 And assuredly I will lead them astray and assuredly I 
will arouse in them vain desires, and assuredly I will 
incite them and they will cut the ears of cattle; and 
assuredly I will incite them and they will alter Allah’s 
creation.” And whoever takes Satan for a friend instead 
of Allah, he certainly suffers a manifest loss.
Secular Viewpoint
The concept of “pain and suffering” in legal terms is divisive and 
controversial and has been and continues to be a source of debate 
in civil litigation involving torts (a wrongful act that does not 
involve a contract). This category includes personal injury, prod-
uct liability, professional malpractice, and wrongful death. The 
courts have attempted to define suffering and to determine the 
amount of monetary damages associated with various degrees of 
suffering.
One compelling aspect of this debate occurs when curative 
measures are unavailable or ineffective, such as with patients with 
terminal cancer. These patients often have considerable pain and 
suffer because they are aware that, if untreated, the pain will con-
tinue and potentially increase. Recently, institutions (see Estate of 
Henry James v Hillhaven Corporation, North Carolina Superior Court, 
1991) and individual physicians (see Bergman v Chin, California 
Superior Court, 2001) have been successfully sued in civil courts 
for failure to provide adequate pain medication.
According to the Merriam-Webster Dictionary, the word 
“suffer” comes from Latin (sufferre where sub means “up” and ferre 
means “to bear”). “To suffer” has a number of different definitions, 
including “to feel pain or great discomfort in body or mind”; “to 
undergo something unpleasant”; “to endure something”; “to have 
an illness or weakness”; or “to be adversely affected.”
The philosophical, clinical, and psychological literature deal-
ing with suffering is not as systematic or thorough as that dealing 
with pain. The psychological study of hedonics (pleasure) is rela-
tively new. It is possible to think of suffering as one end of a hedonic 
continuum where one extreme is happiness (subjective well-being) 
and the other is pain and suffering (see Figure 1.2).

Historical and Philosophical Backgrounds 33
Suffering is an unpleasant and disagreeable experience that 
virtually everyone attempts to avoid. Suffering is an individual 
phenomenon. What causes one person to suffer might not cause 
another to suffer at all. Suffering is not purely physical, although 
it is often associated with physical pain.
Suffering is synonymous with awareness. Without awareness 
there can be nociception but not suffering. Suffering does not ap-
pear to depend totally on the magnitude of the pain but rather is 
related to uncertainty about how long the pain will last.
A response to pain has at least three dimensions. The first is 
the sensory discriminative dimension, which provides the basic 
sensory information about the pain, such as its location in the 
body and its sensory quality, that is, whether it is piercing, burn-
ing, or aching. This system helps us to locate where we hurt and 
what the hurt feels like. The second dimension is the motivational 
affective system. This system is primarily responsible for the un-
pleasant feelings that are almost invariably associated with the 
experience of pain. The third dimension is the cognitive evalu-
ative system, which is involved in determining the meaning of 
the sensory experience of pain. It processes sensory information, 
compares it to past experiences, and determines the probable 
outcome of the various methods that can be used to respond to 
the pain. This psychic reaction to pain varies rather dramatically 
among individuals and is determined in part by past experience 
with pain and, in humans, at least, on cultural background. Reac-
tions to pain vary from essentially no reaction at all to anguish, 
anxiety, crying, depression, nausea, and excess muscular excit-
ability. It is this last component that is most closely associated 
with suffering.
Animals that lack higher brain sites such as the cerebral cortex 
(i.e., invertebrates, fish, amphibians, and reptiles) probably expe-
rience pain at the level of sensory motor integration; that is, they 
sense something and respond to it. For animals with more com-
plex brains, that is, those that have a primitive or well-developed 
cerebral cortex (birds and mammals), the experience of pain is 
more complex.
FIGURE 1.2 Most humans strive to avoid pain and achieve happiness.

34 Animal Rights
But, it is unlikely that we share the second and third dimen-
sions with other animals other than possibly the great apes and 
possibly whales and dolphins, which are the only organisms 
whose brain/body ratio approaches (and in some cases exceeds) 
humans. These two dimensions require a well-developed cere-
bral cortex, significant cognitive ability, and self-consciousness. 
Animals other than the great apes and cetaceans do not possess 
these characteristics, and therefore it seems unlikely that they ex-
perience pain and suffering the same way as humans. This means 
that humans should be concerned with these animals’ welfare 
and try and minimize their exposure to noxious stimuli and pain 
but also that these animals do not have rights.
It seems clear that strong advocates of animal rights believe 
that animals perceive and respond to noxious stimuli in the same 
manner as humans. If this is true, as it might be for the great 
apes and cetaceans, then they should possibly be granted some, 
potentially limited rights.
For the first time in history, on June 25, 2008, the Spanish Par-
liament’s environmental committee approved a resolution that 
would grant chimpanzees, bonobos, gorillas, and orangutans the 
right to life and protection from exploitation, either for scientific 
research or entertainment. Backers of this resolution believe that 
it will be signed into law. The resolution also calls for the Spanish 
government to promote similar declarations throughout the Euro-
pean Community. If this resolution does become law in Spain and 
is adopted by other members of the European Community, it will 
have far-reaching effects and undoubtedly lead to considerable 
litigation. It is not clear what would happen to great apes that are 
held by research facilities, zoos, and elsewhere in Spain.
Dr. Martin Balluch, of the Verein Gegen Tierfbriken (Asso-
ciation against Animal Factories, in Vienna, Austria), brought 
suit on February 6, 2007, to have the legal status of a chimpan-
zee named Matthias Hiasl Pan determined in the district court 
in Modling, Lower Austria, and asked that he be appointed the 
legal guardian of the chimpanzee. The court held several hear-
ings and decided not to consider holding a more formal proceed-
ing. The decision was appealed to the Austrian Supreme Court 
for Civil and Criminal Matters on September 26, 2007, where the 
judges refused to decide the issue. The matter appears to  currently 
be on appeal to the European Court of Human Rights in Stras-
bourg, France. If this effort is successful, it will potentially have 
far-reaching effects.

Historical and Philosophical Backgrounds 35
Summary
This chapter provides an overview of the concept of rights and 
how they apply to animals and humans and presents philosophi-
cal, religious, and scientific viewpoints. It also discusses differ-
ences in viewpoints about animal rights, why some observers 
think that animals have rights and others believe that animals 
have no more rights than an inanimate object, such as a sofa or 
television.
It seems that the controversy and divisiveness of this issue will 
not abate and that, despite recent moral and scientific insights, the 
controversy will continue for the foreseeable future. This seems 
especially true for discussions involving the great apes and likely 
for those concerning cetaceans, as well.
If we humans do come to some resolution of this complex 
issue, it is not clear if it will be based on science and logic, on an 
emotional response, on a system of religious beliefs, or on some 
combination of the three.
References
American Humane Society. 2009. Animal Shelter Euthanasia. http://
www.americanhumane.org/about-us/newsroom/fact-sheets/
animal-shelter-euthanasia.html. Accessed April 15, 2009.
Bentham, Jeremy. 1879. Introduction to the Principles of Morals and 
Legislation. http://books.google.com/books?id=EfQJAAAAIAAJ&dq=
Jeremy+Bentham. Accessed April 15, 2009.
Black’s Law Dictionary. 1979. St. Paul, MN: West Broughton.
Broughton, Janet, and J. P. Carriero, (eds.). 2007. A Companion to 
Descartes. New York: John Wiley.
Centers for Disease Control and Preventions. CAFO. http://www.cdc.
gov/cafos/about.htm#bg. Accessed April 15, 2009.
Coghill, R. C., J. G. McHaffie, and Y. F. Yen. 2003. “Neural Correlates 
of Interindividual Differences in the Subjective Experience of Pain.” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 100 (14): 8538–42.
Darwin, Charles. 1859. On the Origin of Species. http://www.gutenberg.
org/etext/1228. Accessed April 15, 2009.
Fitzgerald, P. A. “Hermogenianus.” Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 
http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/1271629/Fitzgerald-P-A. 
Accessed April 15, 2009.

36 Animal Rights
Gandhi, R. K. P. 1959. The Moral Basis of Vegetarianism. Ahmedabad, 
India: Navajivan.
Hardy, J. D., H. G. Wolff, and Helen Goodell. 1952. Pain Sensations and 
Reactions. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.
Kandel, E. R., J. H. Schwartz, and T. M. Jessell. 1991. Principles of 
Neuroscience. New York: Appleton & Lange.
Kant, Immanuel. 1996. The Metaphysics of Morals, ed. Mary Gregor. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Krieger, Dorothy T. 1982. Endorphins and Enkephalins. Chicago: Year Book 
Medical Publishers.
Kurata, J., K. R. Thulborn, F. E. Gyulai, and L. L. Firestone. 2002. “Early 
Decay of Pain-Related Cerebral Activation in Functional Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging: Comparison with Visual and Motor Tasks.” 
Anesthesiology 96 (1): 35–44.
Lankavatara Sutra. fourth century. http://www.darkzen.com/
downloads/The%20Lankavatara%20Sutra.pdf. Accessed April 15, 2009.
Manual of Hadith. eighth century. http://www.aaiil.org/text/had/
manhad/manhad.shtml. Accessed April 15, 2009.
Melzack, R., and P. Wall. 1989. The Challenge of Pain. New York: Penguin.
National Council on Pet Population Study & Control. (2009). Available 
at: http://www.petpopulation.org/. Accessed April 15, 2009.
Regan, Tom. 2004. The Case for Animal Rights. 2nd ed. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Ryder, Richard. 2000. Animal Revolution: Changing Attitudes towards 
Speciesism. New York: Berg.
Singer, Peter. 1983. Animal Liberation: Towards an End to Man’s Inhumanity 
to Animals. Wellingborough, Northamptonshire: Thorsons.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2005. Animal Inventory. http://www.
ers.usda.gov/news/BSECoverage.htm. Accessed April 15, 2009.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. Wildlife Damage Management. http://
www.aphis.usda.gov/wildlife_damage/. Accessed April 15, 2009.
Ze, Cheng, Mario Ventura, Xinwei She, Philipp Khaitovich, Tina Graves, 
Kazutoyo Osoegawa, Deanna Church, Pieter DeJong, Richard K. Wilson, 
Svante Pääbo, Mariano Rocchi, & Evan E. Eichler. 2005. “A Genome-wide 
Comparison of Recent Chimpanzee and Human Segmental Duplications.” 
Nature 205 (437): 88–93.

37
 2 
 Problems and Controversies 
 No man shall exercise any tyranny or cruelty toward any brute 
creature which are usually kept for man’s use. 
 —“The Body of Liberties,” Massachusetts Bay Colony, 1641 
 D
rs. Charles S. Nicoll and Sharon M. Russell analyzed 20 
important books on animal rights as selected by Charles 
R. Magel. Dr. Magel is the author of  Keyguide to Information 
Sources in Animal Rights  (see chapter 8). These books contained 
4,562 pages. Nicoll and Russell found that 2,598 of these pages 
were concerned with ethical and moral questions regarding the 
use of animals by humans; 1,680 pages were critical of the various 
ways in which humans exploit animals; 216 pages considered the 
history of the animal rights movement and its current status; and 
68 pages focused on the plight of wild animals. 
 Of the 1,680 pages that covered the various ways humans use 
animals, 63.3 percent dealt with the use of animals in biomedical 
research and education; 30.6 percent with the use of animals for 
food; and 6 percent with all other uses of animals (2.3% for pets 
and pound animals; 2.3% for hunting; 0.8% for fur garments; and 
no figures are given for entertainment). Nicoll and Russell point 
out that more than 6 billion animals (includes only mammals and 
birds, not fish, amphibians, or reptiles) are used in some way in 
the United States each year, with about 96.5 percent being used for 
food and 0.3 percent for research and teaching. The concern/use 
ratio, that is the ratio of the number of pages in animal rights pub-
lications devoted to a form of animal use to the number of animals 
used for that purpose, is disproportionate. The concern/use ratio 

38 Animal Rights
for animals used for food (30.6% pages/96.5% use) is 0.32, while the 
concern/use ratio for research and teaching (63.3%/0.3%) is 211.00. 
It is not clear why there is so much focus on the use of animals in 
research and teaching. 
 Agriculture 
 As indicated in the introduction, by far the largest group of ani-
mals that people deal with at some level or other is agricultural 
animals: cattle, dairy cows, swine, chickens, turkeys, ducks, goats, 
and sheep. Since the end of World War II, the number of farms and 
ranches in the United States has steadily decreased, and the size 
of the existing operations has steadily increased. For example, 
according to the Department of Agriculture, in 1950 there were 
approximately 3 million pig farms in the United States, housing 
about 19 pigs each. By 2005, the number of pig farms had dropped 
to about 67,000, but they housed about 60 million pigs. Similarly, 
in 1950 there were about 50,000 chicken farms (raising broilers), 
each averaging about 12,000 birds. In 2005, there were fewer than 
20,000 farms, but they averaged more than 300,000 birds per farm. 
Similar trends are seen in cattle and dairy operations, as well as in 
turkey farming. 
 At one extreme, it is estimated that about 0.7 percent of the 
U.S. population are full-time farmers who earn their living by 
being actively involved with dealing with animals on a daily 
basis. About 2 percent of the population is involved in the slaugh-
ter and processing of agricultural animal products. These people 
have a vested interest in the use of animals in agriculture. 
 At the other extreme are people who reject some or all uses 
of animal products (e.g., meat, milk, eggs, hides, and, in some 
cases, even silk or honey). Many of these people identify them-
selves as vegetarians and vegans. A lacto-ovo vegetarian does 
not eat meat, fish, or birds but does eat dairy products and eggs. 
An ovo-vegetarian does not eat meat, fish, birds, or dairy prod-
ucts but does eat eggs. A lacto vegetarian does not eat meat, fish, 
birds, or eggs, but does eat other dairy products. Vegans do not 
eat any animal products, whether meat, fish, birds, eggs, dairy, 
or honey. They also do not use animal products such as leather, 
wool, or silk. The Vegetarian Resource Group (2009) reports that 
in 2006, approximately 2.3 percent of the population considered 
themselves vegetarians and 1.4 percent considered themselves 

Problems and Controversies 39
vegans. For health reasons, many people limit their intake of meat 
and increase their intake of fruits and vegetables, but these people 
do not consider themselves vegetarians. 
 Between these two extremes, seemingly the majority of people 
want to have meat and other animal products easily available, pro-
viding a wide variety of choices, and want them to be inexpensive. 
 In order to take advantage of the economics of scale, as indi-
cated earlier, the size of individual animal operations has signifi-
cantly increased in size. The discovery of vitamin supplements 
that could increase the utility of the feed that is supplied the 
animals, as well as the use of antibiotics and vaccines to control 
disease, has allowed this rapid increase in size. Pesticides have 
allowed control of insects and other pests that are drawn to the 
waste products that are produced and concentrated. There are ap-
proximately 450,000 animal feeding operations (AFO) and 6,600 
concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFO) in the U.S. No 
federal legislation or rules govern the conditions on small farms 
and ranches, AFOs, or CAFOs. A handful of mega-companies 
control a significant percent of the market. They include Tyson, 
ConAgra, and Cargill. For example, approximately 80 percent 
of cattle processing is controlled by IMP, Monfort (owned by 
ConAgra), Excel (owned by Cargill), and Farmland National. 
 Agricultural Animal Welfare Issues 
 Cattle are fed grass and hay. Most cattle are raised on ranches, 
which range in size from a few hundred acres in the Midwest to 
tens of thousands of acres in the West. Many cattle are grazed on 
public land owned by the federal government. Breeding is gener-
ally by “natural presentation,” where a bull mates with a cow that 
is receptive. Cows that fail to conceive are generally culled and 
sent to the feedlot. Most cattle are brought to the feedlot from cow 
and calf operations scattered across the country and treated for 
internal and external parasites. Cattle feedlots were probably the 
first CAFOs. Most feedlots have thousands of animals on location 
at any one time, kept in pens that contain several hundred ani-
mals. They are fed concentrates (corn, soy beans, or other grain), 
with little or no roughage (hay). This means their manure is very 
“loose.” As many as 1 percent of the animals confined in this way 
become “bullers,” or steers that are ridden by other steers (“rid-
ers”). Unless the bullers are removed from the pen, they will be 
ridden to the point of injury or death. 

40 Animal Rights
 Dairies have increased in size and complexity. Many of these 
operations have thousands of cows in a constant cycle of preg-
nancy and milk production. Virtually all of the dairy cows are bred 
by artificial insemination. Calves are removed shortly after birth. 
Cows are retained to replenish the herd, and bulls are typically 
castrated and sent to feed lots or are used for veal production. 
 Male calves are taken from their mothers within a few days of 
birth. Smaller calves are fed milk substitutes and small amounts 
of grain. They are slaughtered before they reach 150 pounds, often 
within days of birth. About one-third of the calves fall into this 
category and are called baby veal (or “bob veal”). The remain-
ing calves are typically confined to a “veal crate,” a box that is 
22 inches wide and 54 inches long, not enough room for the calf 
to turn around or even lie down. This prevents the calf from mov-
ing around and causes the calves’ muscles to atrophy. The calves 
are fed a milk substitute that lacks iron and other essential nutri-
ents. The calves are slaughtered at about 14 weeks of age. The lack 
of exercise makes the veal “tender,” and the lack of iron makes the 
veal pale pink or white. The United Kingdom and other members 
of the European Union banned the use of crates in 2007, and the 
American Veal Association began phasing out crates in 2007. The 
current trend is to house these calves in small groups. 
 Some cattle, generally those in smaller operations, are not 
sent to the feedlot but continue to be fed grass and hay. The meat 
tends to be leaner and have a different flavor from that of animals 
fed concentrates. Small dairy operations allow cows to graze on 
grass, and the milk from dairy cows tends to have a different 
flavor. 
 Most male chickens are killed at one day of age because they 
are not suitable for meat production (their meat has a “gamey” 
flavor that most consumers do not like) and because they are more 
aggressive than hens, which increases housing problems. Broilers, 
which are raised for meat, are generally housed in buildings with 
concrete floors covered with sawdust or chopped straw. Each 
building contains thousands to tens of thousands of chickens. 
Because of the large number of chickens, normal social groups 
typically do not form (i.e., no pecking order is created). Therefore, 
the lighting in these buildings is kept low to discourage the hens 
from pecking each other. Some operators “de-beak” (remove part 
of the upper beak) to also discourage pecking and cannibalism. 
When the chickens reach about five pounds, generally at about six 
weeks of age, they are sent for slaughter. The houses are cleaned 

Problems and Controversies 41
after the chickens are removed. Toward the middle of this cycle, 
the level of ammonia can be very unpleasant, and by the end of the 
cycle it is really unpleasant. 
 Laying hens (egg producers) are typically raised in bat-
tery cages, approximately 18 by 20 inches (about the size of a 
file drawer), which can contain as many as 11 chickens. Food is 
brought to the chickens via conveyers, and manure drops out 
of the bottom of the cage. These chickens are almost always 
de-beaked. These cages are housed in sheds that contain thou-
sands of cages. The lighting in these sheds is constantly varied 
to maximize egg production. These chickens typically produce 
about 300 eggs per year. When their egg production falls off, 
they are sent to slaughter. 
 Because of animal rights activists’ complaints about high-
intensity growing practices, some producers are raising “free 
range” broilers and layers. This means that the animals are not 
confined in large number in buildings or in cages. According to 
rules in both the European Union and the United States, these 
chickens must have access to the outdoors and typically are al-
lowed to graze on natural vegetation, supplemented with grain. 
 In contrast to chickens, both male and female turkeys are used 
for food. They are hatched in incubators, and at about three weeks 
of age they are transferred to growing sheds similar to those used in 
chicken rearing. The turkeys are typically de-beaked, and the wattle 
(a fleshy lobe hanging down from the chin or neck) is removed from 
male turkeys. Turkeys reach market weight at about six months of 
age, when they are sent to slaughter. 
 Ducks and geese are also hatched in incubators and raised in 
sheds similar to chickens. About 28 million ducks were slaugh-
tered in 2006 when they were about seven weeks old. Geese are 
typically slaughtered when they reach 8 to 14 pounds. When 
ducks or geese are slaughtered, the small fine pin feathers (down) 
are removed. The down is used in manufacturing coats and quilts. 
Some geese and ducks are raised for pâté de foie gras (literally 
pie of fatty liver) production. France is the biggest producer, with 
18,450 tons in 2005, while Hungary and Bulgaria produced 1,920 
and 1,500 tons, respectively and the United States produced about 
400 tons, mostly in New York and California. These ducks and 
geese are force-fed grain several times per day, far more than they 
would normally eat. The force-feeding continues twice a day for two 
weeks for ducks and three or four times per day for up to 28 days 
for geese. This causes the liver to be 5 to 10 times larger than the 

42 Animal Rights
liver of a normal bird. In 2004, Governor Arnold Schwarzeneg-
ger of California banned the force-feeding of ducks and geese and 
prohibited the sale of foie gras. Some cooks substitute chicken 
livers, liverwurst, or monkfish livers for duck and geese liver. 
 More than 90 percent of the pigs raised in the United States 
are raised in CAFOs. Virtually all of the pigs are bred by artificial 
insemination. The pregnant and nursing sow is generally kept in a 
metal crate that measures about two feet wide and that is too small 
for her to be able to turn around. Virtually all piglets are removed 
from the mothers when they are about one month old. Hundreds 
of individuals are raised in barns and are fed concentrate (grain) 
so that they will rapidly gain weight. 
 Smithfield Foods is the largest pork producer in the world. 
In response to concerns expressed by several supermarket chains 
and McDonalds, in 2007 Smithfield announced that it would 
phase out the use of these crates over the next decade. 
 Sheep and lambs are typically not raised in CAFOs. Most 
lambs that are slaughtered for food are raised in small flocks in 
the East or Midwest or on larger operations in the West. Sheep 
raised for wool are generally raised in large flocks that are grazed 
on public land in the West. 
 Enter the 21st Century 
 Even before humans stopped being mainly hunters and gatherers 
and settled down to become farmers, they began the domestica-
tion of animals (e.g., dogs). Humans selected traits in animals that 
were beneficial or useful and bred animals to type (i.e., certain 
traits were selected and animals that had these traits were bred to 
each other). This process might require many generations before 
a trait settled and animals bred true to type. These techniques 
have been used for hundreds of years and have stood the test 
of time. Gregor Mendel discovered that he could breed different 
strains of a pea and that he could predict the traits of the off-
spring. Farmers began experiments with corn in the 1930s. They 
found that they could cross two pure strains of corn to produce a 
hybrid that resulted in stronger plants with higher yields, which 
is called “hybrid vigor.” In the past, a farmer would save some 
of his crop to use as seed for the next season. Seeds from hybrids 
do not yield hybrids, so each crop is grown from seed obtained 
from large seed companies. When there were thousands of family 
farms, each farmer might plant a different strain or hybrid. But, 

Problems and Controversies 43
as the number of farms decreased and the average size of existing 
farms increased, there was an increasing tendency for many farm-
ers to plant the same hybrid. This allows farmers to take advantage 
of economies of scale (thousands of acres of crop can be treated 
in the same manner, saving time and money). The major problem 
with planting thousands of acres of the same strain is that if a 
new disease or parasite should appear, it could cause a devastat-
ing loss. 
 Genetic engineering has allowed humans to shorten dramati-
cally the process of selecting for desirable traits, often to a single 
generation. For example, plant geneticists isolate the gene for a 
specific trait in one plant of one species and insert that gene into 
another, unrelated plant of another species. These traits might 
include pest and disease resistance, as well as tolerance for her-
bicides, cold, and drought. Geneticists can also insert genes that 
increase the food value of a plant. For example, the Institute for 
Plant Sciences at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology has 
developed a strain of “golden” rice that contains significant 
amounts of beta carotene or Vitamin A. 
 It is also possible to insert genes from nonplant organisms 
into plants. The best-known example is the insertion of genes from 
a bacterium,  Bacillus thuringiensis  (Bt), into corn. This provides the 
corn with its own “internal” pesticide. The Bt bacterium produces 
crystal proteins that are fatal to insect larva. 
 About 54 percent of the soybeans and 25 percent of all of the 
corn grown in 2000 were genetically modified. Soybean deriva-
tives are very commonly added to food products, so it is likely 
that most Americans have been exposed to genetically modified 
food. 
 In the United States, three regulatory organizations promul-
gate rules dealing with genetically modified foods. The Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency determines if genetically modified 
plants will cause environmental problems; the Department of 
Agriculture determines if it is safe to grow such plants; and the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) determines if they are safe 
to eat. 
 Current FDA rules (developed in 1992) require companies 
that wish to create new genetically modified foods to consult with 
the FDA. This consultation is voluntary, and the company does 
not have to follow the FDA’s recommendations. 
 There are two ways that humans can be exposed to genetically 
modified plants: (1) directly, by eating the plants; and (2) by eating 

44 Animal Rights
products (e.g., meat, milk, eggs) of animals that have been fed 
genetically modified plants. Current FDA rules and regulations 
do not require genetically modified foods to be labeled as such. It 
is not clear what effects eating genetically modified plant food may 
have on humans and other animals. 
 A variety of organizations, both academic institutions and 
private companies, have begun to experiment with inserting 
“foreign” genes into animals. For example, researchers at the 
University of Illinois inserted the cow genes that control milk 
production into pig genes to increase the milk production of 
sows. The FDA has not promulgated rules dealing with geneti-
cally altered food animals, but it seems likely that the FDA will 
treat “foreign” genes under the same rules it applies to new drugs 
for animals. It is not clear what labeling will be required when the 
genetically modified animals reach the marketplace. 
 The FDA has apparently approved the sale of cloned animals. 
There are at least two private companies that are actively clon-
ing food animals: Trans Ova (Sioux Center, Iowa) and ViaGen 
(Austin, Texas). Cloned animals are essentially identical twins of 
the donor animal, which passes on its genes directly to the clone. 
Samples of the donor’s cells, obtained by an ear punch or biopsy, 
are required. The cells are grown in culture and the nucleus (con-
taining the DNA) is injected into an egg that has had its genetic 
material removed. These eggs are implanted in receptive females 
using standard embryo transfer techniques. After a normal gesta-
tion period, a clone is delivered. Clones, which cost more than 
$10,000, are used primarily for breeding purposes and have yet to 
reach the consumer marketplace. 
 There are even plans to eliminate the animal almost entirely. 
There is at least one organization, New Harvest, that is attempt-
ing to grow meat in vitro, literally, in glass. They plan to take a 
small sample of cells from an animal, place them in culture with a 
nutrient-rich medium, and allow the cells to reproduce and grow. 
Jon Vein, of Los Angeles, California, has received U.S. patent num-
ber 6,835,390, titled “Method for Producing Tissue Engineered 
Meat for Consumption.” It is not clear if this method can produce 
enough meat products to be economically viable, how long it will 
take for the cultured meats to reach the marketplace, or how such 
products will be treated by government regulators. People for the 
Ethical Treatment of Animals has offered a $1 million prize to “the 
first person to come up with a method to produce commercially 
viable quantities of in vitro meat at competitive prices by 2012.” 

Problems and Controversies 45
 Since genetic engineering is a relatively new phenomenon, equally 
creditable scientists have been arguing on both sides of safety 
issue. Safety testing has generally been conducted on rats and 
other small organisms. Most of this work has been conducted by 
scientists involved with biotech companies, with relatively little 
work done by independent scientists. The Grocery Manufactur-
ers of America has estimated that more than 70 percent of pre-
pared products (e.g., breads, cereals, frozen pizza, hot dogs) may 
contain genetically engineered ingredients. The number of con-
trolled human studies related to genetically modified food is very 
limited, and there are no long-term human studies, so, while it 
appears that genetically engineered food may be safe, there are 
no guarantees that problems will not arise in the future. Keep in 
mind the number of drugs that were tested under controlled con-
ditions, including in extensive human trials, and then marketed 
but that then had to be recalled. 
 These new methods (genetic modification, cloning, in vitro 
meats) have been available for less than a generation, and it is 
not clear what risk or benefit they will provide for humans in the 
long term. There are no easy answers to these questions, and the 
answers may not be clearly known for generations. 
 Science 
 The second largest use of animals by humans is for scientific 
endeavors, such as basic and applied scientific research and 
product testing, and for education. Animals are also used in the 
training of clinical professionals, medical doctors, dentists, vet-
erinarians, and others in allied medical fields, as well as in high 
school and college biology classes (such as dissections of frogs, 
fetal pigs, or cats). 
 The National Science Board was formed by Congress in 1950, 
as a part of the National Science Foundation. The Board provides 
advice to the president and Congress about science and technol-
ogy. Among its other tasks, the Board performs systematic polling 
and other procedures to determine how Americans view science 
and technology. It published its findings in  Science and Engineering 
Indicators  (National Science Board Science and Engineering Indi-
cators 2008). Among its findings were that Americans get most 
of their information about science from television and that some 
people have difficulty distinguishing between reality and fantasy. 

46 Animal Rights
The Internet is the favorite source of information when people are 
seeking information about specific scientific issues. Both Americans 
and Europeans do not appear to have a solid knowledge of sci-
ence, and as many as 60 percent believe in pseudosciences, such 
as astrology. Most Americans do not clearly understand scien-
tific progress and how new ideas are generated, investigated, or 
analyzed. Many Americans do not believe that scientific research 
pays enough attention to the moral values of society. 
 How Do Scientists Do Science? 
 The main motivation for basic research is to expand humanity’s 
knowledge without regard to any possible commercial value of 
the results of the research. Applied research, on the other hand, 
attempts to answer a specific question for a specific purpose. Typ-
ically, applied research seeks results that have some commercial 
value. For example, a scientist might test a new drug or chemical 
to determine what it does and if it is safe so that officials can 
decide whether it can be marketed. Separate experiments might 
attempt to determine the major effect of the drug, the optimum 
dose of the drug, the best route of administration, the dose at 
which side effects occur, what these side effects are, and whether 
the drug causes cancer, mutations, or birth defects, and, if so, at 
what dose level, as well as the drug’s potential interactions with 
other drugs, foods, and environmental agents. 
 The first step in the process of performing an experiment that 
involves animals, whether it is a basic or applied research proj-
ect, is to determine what is already known about the topic. This is 
important, and current regulations require (see later discussion) 
the scientist to determine what has been published in primary 
sources like hard-copy or online journals, as well as in secondary 
sources such as books, monographs, treatises, theses, and disser-
tations. These sources are located by doing computerized litera-
ture searches and searching the Internet (especially Google Books 
and Google Scholar). The next step is to find, obtain, and read 
the pertinent papers that have been identified by these searches. 
The scientist focuses on the methods and procedures that were 
used in this earlier research; the drug, dose, and route; the animal 
species used, including the number of animals, their strain, age, 
and sex; and the statistical procedures that were used, as well as 
the results obtained. When the important papers have been iden-
tified, the scientist does a computerized Science Citation Index 

Problems and Controversies 47
search (http://thomsonreuters.com/products_services/scientific/
Science_Citation_Index), which yields a list of all papers that have 
cited each author’s work. This allows a scientist to follow the impact 
of a particular idea or technique forward in time. If no one cites a 
particular paper, it may mean that the ideas or techniques described 
in the paper have had minimum or no impact. In contrast, if many 
people cite that paper, it means that the ideas or techniques are 
having an impact. 
 The U.S. Department of Agriculture regulations to imple-
ment the 1985 amendments to the Animal Welfare Act of 1966 
(see chapter 3) require that scientists demonstrate that the pro-
posed work does not duplicate studies that have already been 
performed and that they have refined their experimental tech-
niques to minimize the number of animals required to obtain the 
needed data, as well as to minimize the amount of stress and pain 
the animals are exposed to. They must also demonstrate that the 
animals cannot be replaced with an in vitro, computer, or statis-
tical model or with an alternate (lower) species, such as fish or 
invertebrates. 
 In addition to the searches the scientist performs on a spe-
cific topic, she also searches AGRICOLA (http://agricola.nal.
usda.gov/), which provides worldwide coverage of the litera-
ture dealing with the welfare aspects of animals used in exhibi-
tion, education, and research, and BIOETHICSLINE (http://
wings.buffalo.edu/faculty/research/bioethics/bio-line.html), 
which provides citations related to the ethics of human and animal 
 experimentation. 
 The scientist is now ready to design the experiment and write 
the experimental protocol. The specific format of the protocol var-
ies from institution to institution, but in general it contains at least 
four main sections: introduction/rationale; methods and proce-
dures; staffing; and literature searches/rationale for animal use. 
In the introduction, the scientist provides the background for the 
proposed project based on his own thinking and his reading of the 
papers uncovered by the literature searches. The scientist also dis-
cusses why he thinks it is important to do the experiment and how 
he thinks the experiment will add to our knowledge of our world 
and how it works. The methods and procedures section describes 
how the experiment will be conducted. This includes what species 
of animals will be used, how many animals will be used in each ex-
periment, what experimental procedures will be used, what vari-
ables will be observed, and how these variables will be quantified 

48 Animal Rights
and evaluated. It also discusses what statistical techniques will be 
used to evaluate the data. 
 In the next section, the experimenter describes what litera-
ture searches he did and provides a rationale for why he selected 
the animals he selected and why his data could not be collected in 
an in vitro preparation, in a lower animal, such as an invertebrate, 
or through the use of a computer model. In the last section, he 
describes the people who will work on the project and provides 
information about their background and training. 
 Once the protocol is written, it is likely that the scientist will 
ask some of his colleagues to play devil’s advocates and to read 
the protocol over carefully, looking for any potential problems in 
the rationale, in the design of the study, or in the statistical analy-
sis. In some institutions, this local evaluation may be a formal 
requirement. 
 Once he has completed this informational (or formal) review, 
the researcher is ready to submit his protocol to the Institutional 
Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) (see chapter 3). This 
body represents the general community’s interests in the proper 
care and treatment of animals. During the meeting with the 
IACUC, the experimenter defends his protocol; that is, he must be 
prepared to answer any substantive questions posed by the mem-
bers of the IACUC. One question that usually arises is whether the 
experimenter has considered alternatives to any procedures that 
are likely to cause pain or distress. In any practice that is likely 
to cause pain, the experimenter will be directed to consult with a 
doctor of veterinary medicine to plan the procedure and also to 
help to plan for the use of tranquilizers, analgesics, and anes-
thetics. He will also be questioned about the number of animals 
that he is proposing to use to determine if the number is adequate 
for the purpose but not excessive. He will also be asked about 
the sensitivity of his experimental techniques and his statistical 
procedures. At the conclusion of the meeting, the IACUC either 
signs off on the protocol or requests revisions. Once the protocol 
is approved, the experimenter is responsible for following it in all 
experiments. During the course of the experiments, if any signifi-
cant changes in methods/statistics are required, the protocol must 
be amended to reflect these changes, and the amendments must be 
approved by the IACUC. 
 Now the scientist is ready to seek funds to do the actual 
work. Research is funded by three different mechanisms. Private 
companies fund applied research and sometimes basic research. 

Problems and Controversies 49
The purpose of this research is to develop new products, to improve 
existing products, or to test new products to determine if they are 
toxic and, if they are, at what level and how the toxicity is mani-
fested. For example, a drug company might have its chemists 
synthesize a new chemical compound. Then they will try to de-
termine what the new compound does, and so on, as described. 
 The other two funding mechanisms are contracts and grants. 
There are several major differences between contracts and grants. 
A contract typically defines a specific task or program that the 
government or some private agency wants performed. The agen-
cies of the federal government, for example, advertise their wants 
and needs on the Internet in “Commerce and Business Daily” 
(http://cbdnet.gpo.gov/). A contract generally starts with a Re-
quest for Proposals (RFP), which appears as an advertisement in 
“Commerce and Business Daily” and describes the task or pro-
gram in varying amounts of detail. An individual responds to the 
RFP by describing her experience and capabilities, as well as why 
she thinks she can perform the task (the responder may, of course, 
also be a company). This initial response can contain a descrip-
tion of the applicant’s approach to the task. The professional staff 
of the federal agency then determines who is qualified to do the 
work and provides those applicants with a more detailed descrip-
tion of the task. The applicants take this information, design the 
experiment(s), and determine what staff and materials will be 
needed to perform the work. They then develop two proposals. 
One proposal describes how the experiments will be conducted 
and evaluated, as well as what staff, material, and facilities will 
be required to perform the work. A second proposal defines the 
costs of doing the work. These are submitted to the agency, which 
evaluates the two proposals separately. First, the professional staff 
of the agency determines if the methods, procedures, and staff-
ing are appropriate to the task. Some applicants are eliminated at 
this stage. Second, the agency determines if the costs are realistic. 
Again, some applicants are eliminated. In the final stage, the con-
tract is awarded (in general) to the group with the best design and 
the best price. Private companies, such as drug companies, also 
perform needed work by contracting out the research. Unfortu-
nately, there is no central clearinghouse that describes the needs 
and wants of these companies. 
 Grants are the major mechanism for supporting basic re-
search. Grants are usually generated by applicants. That is, the 
applicant comes up with an idea, does the work described for 

50 Animal Rights
contract applicants (i.e., develops a protocol, has it approved, and 
so on), and then writes a proposal. The proposal can be submitted 
to a federal agency, such as the National Science Foundation; one 
of the branches of the National Institutes of Health; the Environ-
mental Protection Agency; one of the research offices that serve 
the Department of Defense, such as the Office of Naval Research; 
or any of a variety of other federal departments and agencies. Or 
the researcher can send the proposal to a private agency that sup-
ports research, such as the American Heart Association, or to a 
private foundation, such as the Morris Animal Foundation. 
 The deadlines for submission and the form that the proposal 
must take vary from agency to agency. The methods for judging 
the proposal also vary from agency to agency, but they contain the 
major sections mentioned earlier. For example, all applications or 
proposals submitted to the Public Health Service that involve the 
care and use of animals must contain the following information: 
identification of the species and approximate number of animals 
to be used; the rationale for involving animals and for the ap-
propriateness of the species and numbers to be used; a complete 
description of the proposed use of the animals; a description of 
procedures designed to ensure both that discomfort and injury to 
animals will be limited to that which is unavoidable in the conduct 
of scientifically valuable research and that analgesic, anesthetic, 
and tranquilizing drugs will be used where indicated and appro-
priate to minimize discomfort and pain to animals; and a descrip-
tion of any euthanasia method to be used. Most other granting 
agencies have similar requirements with respect to animal use. 
The proposals are subjected to some form of peer review; that is, 
the grant proposal, with or without its budget, is sent to several 
impartial experts in the area covered by the grant proposal. These 
experts are asked to evaluate the proposal and to determine if the 
work proposed is new and unique, if the amount of work that is 
proposed is appropriate for the staffing and budget, and if the 
methods and procedures are appropriate. These experts are also 
asked to provide written comments and to indicate whether they 
recommend funding the project. Some agencies also request these 
experts to assign the proposal a numerical score that represents 
their overall evaluation of the proposal. 
 If the grant or contract is funded, the scientist is ready to 
actually perform the work. It is important to note that this pro-
cess, from the inception of the idea to the start of the work, can 
take as long as a year, sometimes even longer. While the contract 

Problems and Controversies 51
application or grant application is being reviewed by a funding 
agency, there is often little or no feedback. If the researcher does 
not win the contract sought, she has essentially no recourse but to 
apply when another RFP appears. If the grant is not funded, the 
researcher again has little recourse but to reapply, trying to take 
into account the comments made by the reviewers. 
 After the experiment is completed, the experimenter is gen-
erally expected to present her methods, data, and conclusions at 
a scientific meeting and/or publish them in a refereed scientific 
journal. This is an important step. First, it tells other scientists 
what experiment was performed and the results obtained. This 
helps minimize needless repetitions of experiments. Publication 
provides another tier of quality control for science. When a paper 
is submitted to a refereed scientific journal, the editor sends the 
paper to two or more referees, who are (theoretically) impartial 
experts in the area. The experts review the paper in much the 
same way that the IACUC reviews the protocol. If these experts 
find some flaw in the paper, they return it to the author with their 
comments. She has an opportunity to correct the flaws and resub-
mit the paper. If the referees do not find any problems with the 
paper, it is published in the journal. Once it is published, it is open 
for review by the entire scientific community. If anyone finds a 
flaw with the paper, that criticism will very likely be pointed out 
in a future publication in an article by the scientist who found the 
flaw. If a scientist cannot publish her work, it is unlikely that she 
will succeed in obtaining new funding. 
 It is important to note that there is intense competition for 
funds and journal space. There are several tiers of quality con-
trol (i.e., local evaluation of a protocol; evaluation by the IACUC; 
evaluation by a funding agency; evaluation by the referees prior 
to publication; and evaluation by the entire scientific community 
after publication). Also, not all repetitions of an experiment are 
meaningless or wasteful. One way that scientists (and, in fact, society 
at large) come to trust experimental results is to have the experiment 
replicated by another laboratory and to obtain the same results. 
 Testing! Testing! Who Do We Test? 
Why Do We Test? 
 Background 
 With the exception of nutrients, such as carbohydrates, fats, and 
proteins, that provide our bodies with the energy required to carry 

52 Animal Rights
on the basic processes of life, and the nutrients, such as protein, 
minerals, and water, that are necessary for building and main-
taining our bodies, many of the chemicals in our environment are 
potentially toxic. 
 No one, not the Environmental Protection Agency, the Food 
and Drug Administration, nor the bureaucrats who administer 
the Occupational Safety and Health Act, know precisely how 
many new chemicals or chemical compounds are added to our 
environment each year. Best estimates suggest that 2,000 to 3,000 
new chemicals are created by industry each year. Many of these 
chemicals are produced in small amounts (a kilogram or less), and 
few people are exposed to them. Others are produced in multi-
ton quantities, and thousands or millions of people are exposed 
to them. The vast majority of these new chemicals, especially if 
they do not have anything to do with food or drugs, have not 
been screened, on even the most basic level, to determine their 
potential health risks. 
 This category includes chemicals that are obviously poi-
sonous, such as pesticides and herbicides. It also includes sol-
vents and chemical intermediates, the building blocks of many 
of our modern wonders, such as plastics and synthetic fibers. 
But, it also includes less obvious things, such as chemicals that 
are naturally present in our food (e.g., alkaloids, glycosides, and 
tannins), as well as chemicals that are intentionally (e.g., food 
colors, artificial flavors, antioxidants) or unintentionally (e.g., 
antibiotic residues) added to our food. It also includes antibiotics 
and other drugs that are used to treat the maladies and ailments 
that plague humans and animals. 
 The Ethics of Testing 
 One of the more shameful episodes of scientific investigation 
began in 1932 in Macon County, Alabama. The U S. Public Health 
Service set up an experiment involving some 412 persons with 
syphilis, 204 undiseased controls, and 275 individuals who had 
been cured of syphilis with treatments then in use, that is, heavy 
metals such as bismuth, mercury, and arsenic. These subjects 
were poor black farmers. It is unlikely that they understood the 
experiment; they therefore could not give informed consent to 
be a subject in the experiment. This trial was not secret; the data 
was reported in the medical literature from time to time, as was 
acquired. Shockingly, the men with syphilis were not systemati-
cally treated, even after penicillin became readily available in the 

Problems and Controversies 53
1940s. This led Dr. Edmund C. Casey, the incoming president of 
the National Medical Association, an association of black phy-
sicians, to reportedly say at the time the story of the Tuskegee 
experiment became widely known, “First you try it in mice, 
then in rats, and then in blacks—because chimpanzees are too 
expensive.” We can only hope that there will never be a similar 
episode. 
 In order to prevent such outrages, scientists or clinicians who 
use human subjects for biomedical research are generally required 
to acknowledge that they are aware of, understand, and ascribe to 
the two international ethical codes that guide biomedical research 
with human subjects. 
 One is the Nuremberg Code of Ethics in Medical Research, 
which was developed in 1948 by the Allies during the war crimes 
trials that followed World War II. It was used as a standard against 
which the practices of the Nazis involved in horrific (and gen-
erally worthless) experimentation on humans were judged. The 
Code sets forth what criteria must be met before any experiment 
using human beings as subjects can be judged morally acceptable. 
Point (3) of the Code says: 
 The experiments should be so designed and based on 
the results of animal experiments and a knowledge 
of the natural history of the disease or other problem 
under study that the anticipated results (will) justify the 
performance of the experiment. (Grodin 1990) 
 The second standard is the Declaration of Helsinki, which 
was adopted by the 18th World Medical Assembly in 1964 and 
was revised at the 29th World Medical Assembly in 1975. The re-
vised Declaration of Helsinki, in the section titled Basic Principles, 
point (1), says: 
 Biomedical research involving human subjects must 
conform to generally-accepted scientific principles and 
should be based on adequately performed laboratory 
and animal experimentation and on a thorough knowl-
edge of the scientific literature. 
 In the year 1025, Avicenna wrote  The Canon of Medicine , in which 
he described the process of drug discovery and testing. His words 
sound strikingly like those we use in the 21st century: 

54 Animal Rights
 The drug must be free from any extraneous accidental 
quality. 
 It must be used on a simple, not a composite, disease. 
 The drug must be tested with two contrary types of 
diseases, because sometimes a drug cures one disease by 
its essential qualities and another by its accidental ones. 
 The quality of the drug must correspond to the 
strength of the disease. For example, there are some drugs 
whose heat is less than the coldness of certain diseases, so 
that they would have no effect on them. 
 The time of action must be observed, so that essence 
and accident are not confused. The effect of the drug 
must be seen to occur constantly or in many cases, for if 
this did not happen, it was an accidental effect. 
 The experimentation must be done with the human 
body, for testing a drug on a lion or a horse might not 
prove anything about its effect on man. (Avicenna 1999) 
 The Risks of Not Testing 
 Testing helps researchers avoid potential medical catastro-
phes, a few of which are discussed here. Some candidate drugs 
are acute poisons. Exposure to a high enough dose of some of 
these (in some cases, such as organophosphates, as little as a 
few milligrams) will kill on the spot. The effects of exposure to 
chronic poisons are cumulative, and repeated exposure over a 
long time period will cause serious, potentially life-threatening 
problems. 
 Mutagens  cause permanent alterations in the molecular 
structure of the genes (i.e., changes in the structure of the DNA). 
Many of these changes cause severe problems, and many are life-
threatening. 
 Teratogens  cause birth defects. At least 1 out of every 12 live 
births has a birth defect. Clinicians do not know the cause of the ma-
jority of these birth defects; some, perhaps the majority, are caused 
by exogenous (environmental) agents. 
 Carcinogens  cause cancer, which has been and continues to be 
a leading cause of death. There are at least 100 different forms of 
cancer. Normal healthy cells grow, divide, and replace themselves 
in an orderly manner. Cancer cells lose this ability for controlled 
growth and divide and grow rapidly. They invade and destroy 
nearby tissues. And they metastasize, that is, they spread to distant 
parts of the body and form new tumors. 

Problems and Controversies 55
 How Do We Test? 
 Today, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration requires a specific 
protocol for drug testing. During preclinical drug development, 
a sponsor evaluates the drug’s toxic and pharmacologic effects 
through in vitro and in vivo laboratory animal testing. Genotoxic-
ity screening is performed, as well as investigations of drug ab-
sorption and metabolism, the toxicity of the drug’s metabolites, 
and the speed with which the drug and its metabolites are excreted 
from the body. At the preclinical stage, the FDA generally asks, at a 
minimum, that sponsors (1) develop a pharmacological profile of 
the drug; (2) determine the acute toxicity of the drug in at least two 
species of animals, and (3) conduct short-term toxicity studies last-
ing from two weeks to three months, depending on the proposed 
duration of use of the substance in the proposed clinical studies. 
 Traditionally, the first step is to test in mice and rats, then to 
test in other species, such as dogs, mini-pigs, or nonhuman pri-
mates. These tests are expensive and time consuming, and some 
scientists and clinicians claim that they can be replaced by in vitro 
tests, which would minimize the number of animals used. 
 A variety of methods, most using innovative cell cultures of 
individual tissues, are being tested and validated (i.e., the results 
obtained are being compared with those obtained in whole-animal 
studies). For example, MatTek’s patented EpiDerm System uses 
normal, human-derived epidermal keratinocytes (NHEK) that 
have been cultured to form a multilayered, highly differentiated 
model of the human epidermis. These “ready-to-use” tissues, 
which are cultured on specially prepared cell culture inserts using 
a serum-free medium, attain levels of differentiation on the cut-
ting edge of in vitro skin technology. Ultrastructurally, the Epi-
Derm Skin Model closely parallels human skin, thus providing 
a useful in vitro means to assess dermal irritancy and toxicology. 
The European Union has endorsed EpiDerm to replace the Draize 
Skin Irritation Test, which was developed by Dr. John H. Draize of 
the FDA to test cosmetic products. In Dr. Draize’s method, the test 
substance is applied to the animal’s eye or skin and the animals 
are observed for 14 days to detect changes in the skin or eye. 
 Education 
 Approximately 5.7 million animals are killed to be used in class-
room dissections. These include mice and rats, but more typically 

56 Animal Rights
frogs, fetal pigs, and cats. Virtually everyone would agree that sci-
ence literacy is vital to our nation’s ability to remain a leader in 
science and medicine. However, it is unclear what value added 
is obtained from having junior high, high school, and college stu-
dents who are nonscience majors perform dissections of animals 
as part of an introductory or comparative anatomy biology class. 
Advocates claim that this is a unique opportunity to have students 
learn about anatomy and the relative size and placement of internal 
organs. It helps them see, feel, and observe the natural variations of 
these organs. Opponents claim that some students object to actual 
dissections for moral or other reasons. They claim that virtual simu-
lations such as those available on the Internet (e.g., http://www.
digitalfrog.com or http://www.froguts.com) are less expensive 
than dissections involving real animals and provide a similar learn-
ing experience. Anatomical models like the Giant American Bull-
frog (http://www.sciencelab.com) can also be used. The Human 
Society of the United States provides a list of CD-ROMS, videos, 
and anatomical models at its Web site, http://www.hsus.org/. 
 On the other hand, it is unlikely that simulations would pro-
vide students in preprofessional and professional curriculums 
(e.g., medicine, dentistry, veterinary, chiropractic, physical ther-
apy) with the same knowledge and experience they gain in actual 
dissections. For them, dissections provide a background for other 
courses, such as physiology. 
 Live animals are commonly used in physiology and pharma-
cology classes in professional schools. Animal activists argue that 
computer programs and other forms of simulation can be used in 
place of live animals. Most experts, however, agree that experi-
ments with live animals provide the students with knowledge 
and experience about dealing with living organisms. 
 This is especially true of surgeons. If you were about to have 
surgery, would you like your surgeon to pick up his scalpel and 
step to the table, where you are the first living organism he has cut 
into? Probably not! Surgery is still an art, and the only way to learn 
it is by practice, initially in animals, typically dogs or mini-pigs, 
and then, under the guidance of a skilled surgeon, in humans. 
 Animal Fighting 
 While there are aspects of animal rights and animal welfare that 
are the source of disagreement, there is one area where there is 

Problems and Controversies 57
general agreement: animal fighting. One of the reasons that the 
Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and its 
American counterpart were organized in the 19th century was to 
prevent animal fighting, and these groups continue their efforts 
to this day. The enforcement branch of the U.S. Society helps law 
enforcement officials enforce local and federal laws against ani-
mal fighting. The Humane Society of the United States, which was 
established in 1954, is a strong advocate for anti-animal-fighting 
efforts. The Humane Society is backed by 10 million Americans. 
 In the past, there were a variety of forms of animal fighting. In 
the 19th century, bear and bull baiting were apparently the most 
popular types of animal fighting. In these fights, one or more dogs 
was turned on a bear or a bull in a ring. These fights were to the 
death. These types of animal fighting are no longer popular. But 
another form of animal fighting was popular then and continues 
to be popular to this very day in some circles—dog fighting. 
 Dog Fighting 
 Dog fighting is a “contest,” typically between two dogs that are 
placed in a pit (a small arena) where the dogs fight, often to the 
death. The pit is typically 14 to 20 feet square with walls that are 
3 to 4 feet tall. These fights can last several hours and end when 
one of the dogs either cannot or will not continue to fight. While 
any large dog can be used, the American pit bull terrier (also 
known as the American Staffordshire terrier, Staffordshire bull 
terrier, or bull terrier) is the most common “combatant.” Pit bulls 
have extremely strong jaws and are predisposed to inflict severe 
wounds and broken bones. These dogs are bred for generations to 
be aggressive toward other animals, and this aggressiveness can 
generalize to humans, especially children. The crossing of pit bulls 
with bullmastiffs and presa canarios may create larger and more 
vicious fighters. 
 These dogs are typically mistreated (beaten), and they are 
often deprived of food and water to make them more vicious. 
They are exercised on treadmills and catmills (where the dog is 
chained to a pole attached to a central beam and a small dog or 
cat is chained to another pole; the pit bull chases the other animal, 
never catching it). The trainer may also use a jump-pole, which 
has bait attached to it; the dog is trained to jump and hang onto 
the bait. This helps strengthen the jaws and the pit bull’s tendency 
to clamp its jaws on an opponent and not release the hold. The 

58 Animal Rights
dogs typically have chains wrapped around their necks, often with 
added weights, to strengthen their neck and upper-body muscu-
lature. The dogs are “trained” to fight and kill by “practicing” on 
small dogs and other small animals (e.g., cats, rabbits). 
 Dog fighting is not a spur-of-the-moment activity; it takes 
time and effort to set up a pit. Since these events are illegal, they do 
not usually have a permanent location but must move from place 
to place. Dog fights are often attended by dozens of people, includ-
ing children. These people often wager hundreds or thousands of 
dollars on the outcome of the fight. Dogs that do not die as a re-
sult of the “contest” often sustain serious injuries. Some losers are 
killed by their owner. Because of the type of injuries, it is unlikely 
that owners would seek legitimate veterinary care for their animals 
because the veterinarian would likely report them. Therefore, the 
dogs are provided with inexpert care and often suffer for days to 
weeks before succumbing. If they survive, they are often returned 
to the pit, even more vicious because of their experience. 
 Michael Vick was a National Football League (NFL) quar-
terback playing for the Atlanta Falcons. Vick, one of the highest 
paid players in the NFL, was suspended in August 2007 because, 
in April 2007, an elaborate dog-fighting arena was discovered 
on property he owned on Moonlight Road in Surry County, Vir-
ginia. Vick and several co-defendants were convicted of criminal 
conspiracy in U.S. federal district court. Vick lost his NFL salary 
($130 million), as well as his promotional agreements with Nike 
and other sportswear companies. Thanks to plea agreements with 
state and federal authorities, he was released to a federal halfway 
house program in May 2009 and while there was required to work 
at an “approved job.” 
 Dog fighting is not a secret activity. It is popularized in a num-
ber of magazines, such as  The Sporting Dog Journal , which claims a 
circulation of more than 10,000 worldwide. Other magazines that 
promote dog fighting include  The American Warrior  and  The Pit Bull 
Chronicle . “Dogmen” also have a presence on the Internet. 
 Recently, a new form of dog fighting has appeared in urban 
areas. There is no pit. The dogs are just turned on each other and fight. 
Street fighters can buy a fighting dog for a few hundred dollars. 
 Cock Fighting 
 Cock fighting is an ancient blood sport said to have been intro-
duced by Julius Caesar. Gamecocks are specially bred roosters 

Problems and Controversies 59
that have been selected for their fighting abilities for generations. 
Currently, cock fighting is a felony in 33 states and the District of 
Columbia and is a misdemeanor in the remaining states. It is legal 
and very popular in Puerto Rico. 
 A cock fight typically occurs in a ring when two gamecocks 
are released into the ring. They fight until one bird dies; sometimes 
both birds die. Some birds are fitted with a “naked spur,” but, in 
most cases, they wear a cockspur (a leather bracelet attached to 
the bird’s leg) with a curved, sharpened spike. This spike signifi-
cantly increases the ability of the bird to do significant damage to 
its opponent. 
 Although it is illegal in all 50 states, cock fighting, like dog 
fighting, is not a secret activity. The United Gamefowl Breeders 
Association’s mission statement states: 
 The purpose of this Association is to bind breeders and 
fanciers of gamefowl into an organization for their mutual 
benefit and for the exchange of better methods and ideas 
tending toward perpetuation and improvement of the 
various breeds of gamefowl and also to improve market-
ing methods and to cooperate with Universities, State, 
Federal and any other public or private agency which 
seek to control poultry diseases. (United Gamefowl 
Breeders Association 2009) 
 This sport supports at least two magazines, the oldest and best 
known of which is  The Gamecock ; the other  The Feathered Warrior. 
 Bullfighting 
 Bullfighting is a traditional spectacle in Spain, Portugal, south-
ern France, Mexico, and several Latin American countries. Bull-
fighting traces its origins back to ancient Rome. Currently, about 
250,000 bulls, many specially bred on ranches that specialize in 
raising bulls for the ring, are killed each year. These bulls are 
selected for a combination of aggressiveness, strength, vigor, and 
intelligence. Bulls must be more than four years old and must 
weigh more than 900 pounds to be used in the ring. 
 There are a number of different styles of bull fighting. The 
Spanish style is most common. The matador is dressed in a “suit 
of lights.” The actual fight is divided into three stages. The first 

60 Animal Rights
stage begins when the bull enters the ring and is tested by the 
matador. The picador, mounted on horseback, enters the ring 
and stabs a mound of muscle in the bull’s back. The bull loses 
blood from this wound (which weakens the bull) and typically 
holds its head and horns lower for the rest of the fight. In the 
next stage, three banderillas attempt to place two sharp sticks 
near the initial wound. This causes more loss of blood and weak-
ens the bull’s neck muscles. In the third stage, the matador en-
ters the ring with a red cape and performs a series of stylized 
passes with the cape, demonstrating the matador’s bravery 
and his control over the bull. The fight ends when the mata-
dor makes a series of passes with the cape and stabs the bull 
between its shoulder blades, piercing the aorta or heart. When 
this is successful, the bull generally dies within seconds or min-
utes. If the strike is not accurate, the bull may linger for hours 
before it dies. 
 Support for bullfighting may be waning. A Gallup poll 
conducted in Spain in 2002 found that about 70 percent of the 
respondents expressed “no interest” in bull fighting; among the 
30 percent who expressed “some” or “a lot” of interest, more than 
half were 65 years of age or older. 
 Hunting 
 Considering the advent of the iPod and the cell phone and that 
we have robotic explorers on Mars, it is sometimes easy to forget 
that we are fewer than 500 generations from when most of our 
ancestors were hunter-gatherers. Subsistence hunting, a system 
in which animals provide the only or main source of meat (pro-
tein), continued well into the 19th century and in some areas 
into the 21st century. Early hunters had to have considerable 
skill to find, track, stalk, and get close enough to ultimately kill 
an animal, often with a spear or bow and arrow. If the animal 
was merely wounded, the hunter would have to track it until it 
died. 
 These hunters used every part of the animal. Consider the 
words of Red Cloud, a former chief of the Sioux, talking about the 
uses of the buffalo ( Bison bison ): 
 His meat sustained life; it was cut into strips and dried, 
it was chopped up and packed into skins, its tallow and 

Problems and Controversies 61
grease were preserved—all for winter use; its bones af-
forded material for implements and weapons; its skull 
was preserved as great medicine, its hide furnished 
blankets, garments, boats, ropes, and a warm and por-
table house; its hoofs produced glue, its sinews were 
used for bowstrings and a most excellent substitute for 
twine. (Dary 1974) 
 When the first Europeans set foot on North America, it is esti-
mated that there were between 30 and 60 million buffalo on the 
continent, but the animals were hunted to near extinction and 
reduced to a few hundred individuals by the later part of the 
19th century, located mainly in the region near and around Yel-
lowstone National Park. In contrast to hunters like Red Cloud, 
commercial hunters, like Buffalo Bill Cody, killed hundreds to 
thousands of buffalo in a day; they would take the hide, which 
was used in industrial belts or made into clothing, or the tongues, 
which were considered a delicacy in Northern cities, leaving car-
casses weighing 900 to 2,000 pounds to rot. In the late 1880s, buf-
falo bones were collected and shipped to the East, where they 
were ground up to be used as fertilizer. 
 Some estimates suggest that there were more than 5 billion 
passenger pigeons ( Ectopistes migratorius ) in the United States 
when the first Europeans arrived. At this time, they formed the 
second biggest migrating flocks, often containing millions of birds 
(the largest flocks were formed by desert locusts). Commercial 
hunters on a massive scale reduced that number in the late 1800s, 
and the world’s last passenger pigeon died in a Cincinnati zoo in 
1914. 
 White-tail deer ( Odocoileus virginianus ), also called Virginia 
deer, are native to much of North and Central America and to 
northern portions of South America. By the mid 1930s, the total 
population of white tails was reduced to about 300,000 animals, be-
cause of commercial and unregulated hunting and loss of habitat 
due to poor land practices and deforestation. Conservation prac-
tices have proved so successful that the deer is now considered a 
nuisance in many parts of its range. 
 An avid big-game hunter, Theodore Roosevelt saw wildlife 
habitats shrinking as the United States steadily became more 
urban and the number of privately held farms and ranches steadily 
decreased. In order to help conserve the nation’s natural wildlife 
resources, Roosevelt founded the Boone and Crockett Club in 

62 Animal Rights
Missoula, Montana, in 1887. One of the Club’s key precepts is the 
concept of the fair chase: 
 Fair chase as defined by the Boone and Crockett is the 
ethical, sportsmanlike, and lawful pursuit and taking of 
any free-ranging wild, native North American big game 
animal in a manner that does not give the hunter an 
improper advantage over such animals. (Boone and 
Crockett Club 2009) 
 The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (2009) reported in 2001 that 
about 13 million Americans age 16 and over engaged in hunt-
ing. Of these, 11 million sought big game, such as deer and elk. 
Approximately 40 percent hunted on public land. In 2005, the 
service permitted hunting in 319 of the nation’s 545 wildlife 
 reserves in order to manage wildlife populations. 
 The Fund for Animals reported in 2004 that 91 percent of all 
hunters were male, 97 percent were white, and about 50 percent were 
between the ages of 35 and 54. They collectively spent more than 
$6 million for licenses, tags, and other fees required by state wildlife 
agencies. Total expenditures associated with hunting were more than 
$20 billion about half of which was spent on hunting equipment. 
 Each state has its own rules and regulations that control 
the hunting season for native species; specify when hunters are 
 allowed to hunt for specific species; state the fees charged for hunt-
ing specific animals (approximately $100 or less); and impose limits 
on the number of animals that a hunter can kill in a day and in a 
season. For some animals, such as feral pigs ( Sus scrofa ), domestic 
pigs that have returned to the wild, there is no season or limit. 
 The opportunities for sport hunting, where animals are hunted 
for the enjoyment of the hunt, as well as for meat or trophies, are 
limited. In response, some farmers and ranchers lease their land 
to hunters in order to supplement their income. A lease can sell for 
several hundred to several thousand dollars. In exchange for the 
fee, the property owner limits the number of hunters on his land. 
The size of the leases range from tens to thousands of acres, usu-
ally fenced with four- to five-foot-tall fencing. The mammalian 
prey is generally white tail deer or elk ( Cervus Canadensis ), which 
is one of the largest species of deer. These animals are usually 
active around dawn and dusk and hide during daylight hours. 
Most sport hunters are employed and have a limited amount of 
time available to hunt; because of these limits on their free time, 

Problems and Controversies 63
limits on the hunting season, and the fact that animals typically 
hide during the day and can generally escape by jumping the 
fence, often hunters are frustrated and fail to get their quarry. In 
the 1960s, landowners began to supplement forage with shelled 
corn or cottonseed meal (a high-protein byproduct left after cot-
tonseed oil has been removed) that is dispensed by an automatic 
feeder at specific times during the day in order to attract the 
animals to particular areas and thus make it easier for hunters to 
locate them. Laws dealing with feeders vary from state to state. 
Some landowners feed year round, some from the beginning of 
September to mid-March. This provides two benefits: (1) it leads 
to bigger, healthier animals, and (2) perhaps more important, it 
lets hunters know where animals are likely to be found. Hunters 
can build a blind nearby, either on the ground or, more commonly, 
in a tree. When the animal comes to feed, the hunter shoots. 
 In the Western states (e.g., Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, 
Montana, Oregon), much of the land is owned by the federal or 
the state government. Hunting permits are granted on some of 
these lands. Generally, in order to be successful, a hunter must 
employ an experienced local guide to help him locate animals. 
 Wallace Byron Grange, who wrote a book about hunting 
(Grange 1949), was one of the pioneers in the development of 
game farming and game management during the 1940s. He was a 
pioneer in the use of eight-foot deer-tight fencing. 
 Since then, more than 2,000 game ranches or hunting pre-
serves scattered over 25 states have appeared. They range in size 
from less than 100 acres to several thousand acres, all surrounded 
by game-tight fencing, which prevents the exotic animals from 
escaping and keeps native domestic and wild animals from en-
tering. Most of the exotic animals are hoofed stock from around 
the world (e.g., various species of antelope, cattle, deer, goats, 
and sheep). But they also include “surplus” animals, like lions, 
rhinoceros purchased from zoos, and “retired” circus animals, in-
cluding elephants. Animals in these facilities do not roam freely 
(except within the boundaries of the preserve) and are dependent 
on humans for food and shelter. These game preserves are pri-
vately owned, and therefore hunters are not required to have state 
hunting licenses and do not face a bag limit other then the size of 
the hunters wallet. Most of these operations charge a daily fee 
for the use of the facilities and a kill fee that varies according to 
which animal is killed; fees can vary from a few hundred dollars 
to thousands of dollars. Sometimes called “canned hunts,” these 

64 Animal Rights
hunts offer guaranteed trophies, with relatively little actual hunting 
involved. Many game ranches advertise a “No Kill, No Pay” pol-
icy. Most of these hunters are after trophies, such as antlers, heads, 
skins, or displays prepared by a taxidermist. Some take some or 
all of the meat from the animal. It is not clear what happens to the 
remains of the animals if only a trophy is taken. 
 Hunting preserves are a big business. Hunters spend more 
than $250 million at these facilities. In 2007, the Agricultural and 
Food Policy Center at Texas A & M University reported that nation-
wide the exotic wildlife industry has a direct economic impact of 
$679 million annually and supports more than 14,000 jobs, mostly 
in rural America. 
 Many state wildlife agencies are opposed to these facilities 
because they funnel revenue away from the agency. Most game 
wardens are deeply committed to the “fair chase” concept, and 
many are concerned about transmission of diseases such as tu-
berculosis, brucellosis, and chronic wasting disease. On the other 
hand, some state agriculture departments support these facilities 
as a way for farmers and ranchers to increase their profits. 
 There is relatively little federal and state regulation of these 
operations. On the federal level, the Animal Welfare Act does not 
appear to apply to private game preserves. The Endangered Spe-
cies Act does not prohibit ownership of threatened or endangered 
species and potentially allows hunting of these privately owned 
animals. The Humane Slaughter Act has not been interpreted to 
include exotic captive wild animals. A variety of federal legisla-
tion such as the Captive Exotic Protection Act has been proposed, 
but none has been enacted into law. 
 Oregon was apparently the first state to ban hunting of exotic 
or game mammals held or obtained by private parties. Hunting 
of captive mammals is completely banned in Arizona, Califor-
nia, Connecticut, Hawaii, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, 
Montana, Nevada, Washington, and Wyoming, and partial bans 
are in place in Delaware, Georgia, Mississippi, North Carolina, 
Utah, Virginia, and Wisconsin. Five states—Iowa, New Hamp-
shire, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas—include wild animals 
in their anticruelty statutes. 
 The ultimate “canned hunt” was developed by John Lock-
wood. He calls the activity Live-Shot. It allows a hunter to take part 
in a real hunt without leaving the comfort of his living room by 
using the Internet. The first hunt was scheduled for April 9, 2005. 
Reportedly for a $14.95 membership fee and a $1,000 deposit toward 

Problems and Controversies 65
the cost of the animal, along with a valid Texas hunting license, a 
member can use an Internet connection to control the actions of a 
Remington 30–06 rifle that is attached to a small motor. A video 
camera is embedded in the rifle’s scope, allowing the hunter to aim 
the rifle at an animal, which is enticed into range by a feeding sta-
tion, and to pull the trigger using an automobile car-lock activator 
attached to the rifle. The actual location for the hunt is a privately 
owned ranch near San Antonio, Texas. Theoretically, the hunter 
could be located anywhere in the world where Internet access is 
available. Mr. Lockwood reportedly claimed that his main purpose 
for designing the system was to allow people who were unable to 
get into the field for physical or other reasons to be able to hunt. 
 This concept caused a firestorm of controversy. Organiza-
tions that are typically opponents of hunting, such as the Humane 
Society of the United States and the Safari Club International, are 
opposed to computer-based hunting. Buckmasters, a hunter advo-
cacy group, sponsors hunts for disabled people, and proponents 
of hunting such as the Safari Club International are opposed to 
computer-based hunting. 
 Virginia was the first to ban Internet hunting. The Texas Parks 
and Wildlife Department has banned Internet hunting of native 
animals. However, Texas does not have control over nonnative 
species. At least 30 other states have some type of ban on Internet 
hunting. Representative Brad Sherman (D-CA) introduced a bill, 
“Computer-Assisted Remote Hunting,” in the House of Represen-
tatives on June 14, 2007, and Senator Sheldon Whitehouse (D-RI) 
introduced a similar bill in the Senate on December 6, 2007. These 
bills would amend the federal criminal code to ban computer-
 assisted remote hunting and establish penalties for engaging in such 
activity. As of December 21, 2008, these bills had not been voted on. 
 Fox Hunting 
 Fox hunting involves tracking, chasing, and generally killing a fox, 
most commonly a red fox. Fox hunting originated in England in 
the 16th century, when the king owned all of the land and every-
thing on it. Fox hunting is an expensive sport centered on the hunt 
club. Each club has a Master of the Fox Hounds, who maintains 
the kennels and provides training for the hounds, typically dogs 
of a specialized breed, foxhounds, which are trained to follow a 
scent. The Master is responsible for running the hunt in the field. 
Each hunter has one or more specially trained horses, typically 

66 Animal Rights
called field hunters or, more simply, hunters. Fox hunting may 
be the origin of the steeplechase (in which the horse and the rider 
race over a course that contains obstacles over which the horse 
must jump) and “point to point” horse racing (traditional horse 
racing where horses compete on a race track). 
 The hunt is the setting for a variety of social activities, includ-
ing the hunt itself. Hunters typically wear traditional hunting 
gear. The Master generally wears a scarlet coat, riding pants, and 
English dress boots. 
 The hunt begins when the hounds are “cast” into the rough 
brushy areas where red foxes typically hide during daylight 
hours. When the hounds pick up the scent of a fox, they trail it for 
as long as they are able. When the hunters hear the hounds, they 
follow in the most direct route possible, which may mean crossing 
fence lines and other obstacles and trekking across private prop-
erty (i.e., trespassing). The hunt continues until the fox evades the 
hounds, goes to ground, or is overtaken and killed by the hounds. 
The main hunting season runs from November to May. 
 Cub hunting occurs in the autumn and is used to train the 
hounds to restrict their trailing to foxes. This allows young hounds 
to find, attack, and kill young foxes. A hound can enter the pack 
when he successfully joins in a hunt like this. Hunters claim that 
this culls weaker foxes. 
 Opponents, mostly animal welfare activists, claim that fox 
hunting is cruel to the fox, because the hunt causes fear and dis-
tress and ultimately death. Hounds are often euthanized when 
they come to the end of their working life. 
 Hunters claim that fox hunting helps keep down the number 
of foxes, which farmers consider vermin. They claim that the fox 
is generally killed quickly. 
 The British Parliament passed the Hunting Act of 2004, es-
sentially outlawed hunting with dogs (especially fox hunting and 
cub hunting), and the ban took effect in October 2005. The Act was 
challenged in the British courts and in the House of Lords, but 
the challenge was rejected. The Act does not prohibit “drag hunt-
ing,” where an object is dragged over the ground for the hounds 
to follow. This activity does not involve any animals. 
 Fox hunting or, more correctly, fox chasing is popular in the 
United States. Both Thomas Jefferson and George Washington 
reportedly kept fox hounds before and after the Revolutionary 
War. There were 171 registered fox hunter packs in the United 
States and Canada in 2007. In addition to sponsoring fox hunts, 

Problems and Controversies 67
they provide stewardship of the land and attempt to protect fox 
habitat. 
 One of the first official acts of the Nazis when they first came 
to power was to ban hunting with hounds; the ban was ordered 
by Hermann Goering on July 3, 1934, and was extended to Austria 
when Germany annexed it. Considering their treatment of fellow 
humans, the Nazis had among the most stringent animal welfare 
laws (see chapter 3). 
 Coon Hunting 
 A raccoon is a medium-size omnivorous (i.e., plant- and animal-
eating) mammal that is native to North America. It has a characteristic 
black face mask and a ringed tail. Most raccoons are active during 
the evening and night. In populated areas, some humans consider 
them pests. Hunting and road kill are the leading cause of death. 
 Raccoon or, more commonly, coon hunting is a popular sport 
in the United States, especially in the South. Coons are excellent 
tree climbers and swimmers. The hunt begins when the coon 
hound, especially a Bluetick hound, comes across a coon scent. 
The dogs follow the scent and the coon. Hounds on the trail make 
a particular howling bellow when they find a scent and begin fol-
lowing it. They continue to follow the raccoon until they lose the 
scent or the raccoon runs up a tree. The quality of their howling 
changes when the coon is treed. The hunters follow the sound to the 
tree and kill the coon. Hunters claim that raccoon tastes good. 
 Entertainment 
 It is not clear how many animals are used by the various compo-
nents of the entertainment industry and it is not clear how much 
oversight is provided either by public or private agencies. 
 Circus 
 The circus can trace its ancestry back to the Roman Empire. After the 
fall of Rome, there were no large circuses, except for itinerant show-
men who traveled from town to town performing at fairs. The mod-
ern circus, with one or more circular rings surrounded by ranks of 
seating, emerged in the 18th century in England. Circuses consist of 
a variety of acts, including animal acts featuring big cats, elephants, 

68 Animal Rights
horses, birds, sea lions, and a variety of domestic animals. Circuses 
typically travel from place to place, stay for a few days, and then 
move on. Animals are shipped in trucks or by train, often without 
heat or air conditioning. Circus animals, especially the big cats, 
spend most of their time in small cages. Animal trainers generally 
claim that they use positive reinforcement and rewards to motivate 
the animals to perform. Animal rights activists claim that animals 
are often abused, even when performing in public. Circuses and 
other traveling shows are covered by the Animal Welfare Act (see 
chapter 3), but it is not clear how well these standards are enforced. 
In 2007, Ringling Brothers and Barnum & Bailey Circus, the larg-
est circus in the United States, was sued by the Fund for Animals, 
the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and 
the Animal Welfare Institute, which alleged that it mistreated its 
elephants, including using abusive training methods, chaining the 
elephants by one front foot and one back foot, preventing normal 
movement, and separating baby elephants from their mothers. This 
suit began in the district court of the District of Columbia in 2003 
and had not been decided as of the end of 2008. 
 Films and Television 
 It is not clear how many animals are used in films or television or 
how the number changes from year to year. Some animals, like 
Benji, Flipper, Lassie, Rin Tin Tin, Flicka, and Francis the Talking 
Mule, are stars, while other wild and domestic animals have sup-
porting roles (e.g., horses and cattle in westerns on television or in 
motion pictures). The Hollywood Office of the Human Society of 
the United States and the Performing Animal Welfare Society (see 
chapter 7) provide some oversight. Since 1986, the Humane Soci-
ety has presented the Genesis Award annually to major news and 
entertainment media that raise public awareness of animal issues. 
The Humane Society also publishes its annual Foe Paw, which lists 
television shows, magazines, and advertisements that it feels carry 
an anti-animal message. One example is the Happy Cows advertise-
ment from the California Milk Advisory Board. The Humane Society 
maintains that most dairy cows are essentially “milking machines.” 
 Rodeo 
 Rodeos began as ranch-to-ranch contests featuring competition in 
traditional cattle handling. In 1882, Buffalo Bill (Wild Bill) Cody 

Problems and Controversies 69
created perhaps the first, if not the first, rodeo performed for an 
audience. A rodeo typically consists of a series of timed events. 
These include steer wrestling (bulldogging), in which the cow-
boy jumps off a horse and “wrestles” the steer to the ground. 
In calf roping or tie down roping, a cowboy ropes a calf with a 
lariat, and the horse steps back to keep the lariat taut. The cow-
boy dismounts, throws the calf to the ground, and ties three of 
its legs together. Team roping consists of two riders (cowboys or 
cowgirls) who capture and restrain a steer. One of the cowboys, 
the “header,” lassos a running steer around its horns. The sec-
ond rider, the “heeler,” ropes the steer’s two hind legs. Once they 
have control of the animal, the riders face each other and gently 
pull back until the steer falls on its side. Bronc riding takes two 
forms, both of which are timed. In bareback bronc riding, a cow-
boy hangs onto a surcingle (a strap), commonly called “rigging,” 
that circles the horse’s girth (just behind the front legs) while the 
horse tries to buck him off. Saddle bronc riding allows the rider 
to have a saddle bronc saddle, which is a specialized saddle that 
does not have a horn. A heavy lead rope, commonly called a bronc 
rein, is fastened to the halter on the horse. In bronc riding, if the 
cowboy remains on the animal for eight seconds, he is removed 
by a rider on a trained horse. In another rodeo act, cowboys try 
to ride a full-grown bull. Generally the bull has a strap around its 
girth that the cowboy hangs onto while the bull tries to buck him 
off. Bulls are unpredictable and may attack a rider when he is 
on the ground, either because he was bucked off or because he 
dismounted after eight seconds. Rodeo clowns try to attract the 
attention of the bull and keep it from attacking the rider. Cow-
girls take part in barrel racing, in which a horse and rider gallop 
around a cloverleaf pattern of barrels and try not to knock over 
any of the barrels. 
 Individual competitors, both professional and amateur, and 
rodeo sanctioning organizations, such as the Professional Rodeo 
Cowboys Association, claim that rodeos are humane and do not 
harm the animals involved. Sanctioned events have a veterinarian 
present and facilities to deal with injured animals. 
 Animal rights organizations object to some relatively com-
mon rodeo practices. These include bucking or flank straps that 
are designed to cause the horse to buck. During competition, the 
flank strap is loosely fitted around the flank area. When the con-
testant is ready, the chute is opened and the flank strap is pulled 
tight, causing the animal to buck, trying to escape the buck strap. 

70 Animal Rights
If the contestant remains on the animal for eight seconds, he is 
removed by two riders, one of whom picks up the rider and the 
other of whom releases the flank strap; generally, the animal stops 
bucking immediately. Opponents of rodeos also object to metal or 
electric cattle prods that are used to start the animal bucking. 
 Zoos 
 Zoos have evolved from privately held menageries. The first pub-
lic zoo in America was the Zoological Society of Philadelphia, 
which was incorporated in 1859. In March 1889, Congress created 
the National Zoological Park, which was put under the direction 
of the Smithsonian Institution’s Board of Regents. Most of the 
top 50 cities (by population) in the United States have a least one 
and sometimes several zoological gardens. Many smaller cities 
and towns also have zoos. Zoos have changed over the past few 
decades; whereas animals used to be displayed in small cages 
made of concrete and iron, usually with one or two members of 
a species to a cage, today many zoos have slowly replaced these 
cages with large enclosures that contain multiple members of the 
same species and often representatives of several different spe-
cies. These areas are often viewed from trams or monorails. Often 
these enclosures have a specific theme, such as a representation 
of an African savanna that contains animals associated with that 
locale. Zoos are essentially tourist attractions, where the public 
can view different animals, but, in addition, they engage in edu-
cation, research, and conservation, including captive breeding 
programs. 
 In addition to traditional zoos, drive-through safari parks are 
becoming increasingly common. One of the first, if not the first, 
safari park was the Africa U.S.A. in Boca Raton, Florida. In these 
parks, humans are allowed to drive out among the animals and 
feed and pet them through the windows of their car. These parks 
typically have a variety of hoofed stock, both native and exotic, as 
well as ostriches or emus. 
 Lion Country Safari was started in 1967 by a group of South 
African and British entrepreneurs in Loxatatchee, Florida. Six ad-
ditional parks were opened near big cities, but they ultimately 
closed, leaving only the park in Loxatatchee. Visitors were allowed 
to drive through the park, which contained giraffes, rhinos, and 
zebras that roamed freely. Lions were segregated behind fences or 
water barriers. 

Problems and Controversies 71
 In 2004, there were more than 2,400 animal exhibits registered 
with the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Many of these 
were roadside attractions that varied dramatically in size and in 
the quality of care provided the animals. 
 The Association of Zoos and Aquariums (see chapter 7) is 
a nonprofit, voluntary accrediting agency for zoos and aquari-
ums. In order to be accredited, an organization must adhere to 
rigorous standards of animal care, provide educational exhibits, 
and be actively involved with conservation efforts. Fewer than 
10 percent of the organizations registered with the USDA are 
accredited. 
 Marine Mammal Theme Parks 
 There are a number of marine parks scattered across the United 
States. The main purpose of these parks is entertainment. Sea 
Lion Park at Coney Island, New York, founded in 1985, was 
probably the first park of its type. It provided a show featuring 
sea lions performing various tricks. Sea Lion Park closed in 1902. 
In 1938, Marine Studios in Florida set up a large marine tank to 
film underwater shots of dolphins. This became a tourist attrac-
tion, and the dolphins were trained to perform simple tricks. 
During the 1970s, a variety of aquaria with captive dolphins 
opened across the United States, Europe, Japan, and in various 
locations in Southeast Asia. During this time, Sea World USA 
opened parks in Orlando, Florida; San Diego, California; and 
San Antonio, Texas. These parks feature shows in which orcas 
(commonly called killer whales, the largest species of dolphins), 
dolphins, beluga whales, seals, sea lions, and other marine mam-
mals perform tricks. These tricks include “kissing” their trainer, 
fetching balls, jumping through hoops, performing somersaults, 
and making synchronized leaps. Trainers also ride the back of 
the animal or balance on its nose as it comes up and leaps out of 
the water. The tricks are based on natural behaviors or behaviors 
that have been modified by training. The animal is trained to per-
form these tricks on command, generally for a food reward. Very 
few cetaceans breed in captivity, so most of the animals in these 
facilities are captured in the wild. It is not clear when or even if 
wild caught cetaceans adapt to captive life. Indications of lack of 
adaptation include stereotyped behavior (e.g., swimming end-
lessly around in circles), becoming aggressive, or inflicting injury 
on themselves or others. 

72 Animal Rights
 Fashion 
 It is not clear how many animals are used to make clothing and 
other accessories. Typically, mammals are used to make coats and, 
in times past, hats (most notably the beaver hat). Birds are used for 
their plumage. Leather is used to make shoes, boots, and coats. 
 Fur 
 Fur coats have been popular for centuries. Proponents argue 
that fur coats provide warmth, while animal activists claim that 
there are synthetic materials that are as warm as fur. Large cats 
(e.g., tiger, leopard), among the most sought-after skins for coats, 
are endangered species; therefore, it is illegal to possess their skins 
or to make coats or other clothing from their skins. Furriers have 
two sources for other fur-bearing animals: those trapped in the 
wild and those raised on fur farms. 
 European beavers were hunted to virtual extinction for their 
skins and castoreum, a secretion of their scent glands that was 
thought to have medicinal properties and that was used in mak-
ing perfume. Beavers were extinct in England by the 16th cen-
tury and were endangered in most parts of continental Europe. 
The discovery of the American beaver led to the formation of one 
of the oldest corporations in North America, the Hudson’s Bay 
Company (French Compagnie de la Baie d’Hudson), incorpo-
rated by a British royal charter in 1670. The company’s primary 
business was the fur trade, and it provided most of the fur pelts 
that were used for making felt hats, fur coats, and fur trim for 
garments. The company controlled much of this activity in what 
became Canada and in the northern and western parts of the 
United States well into the 19th century. Its traders and trap-
pers (sometimes called mountain men) ranged far and wide and 
were often the first Europeans to explore distant territories. It is 
estimated that when the Europeans arrived in North America, 
there were more than 200 million beavers living there. By 1988, 
that number had been reduced to approximately 10 million. 
 It is estimated that there are about 20,000 people who trap 
nonpest fur-bearing animals. Of this number, about 4,000 are 
considered serious trappers, who earn part or all of their income 
from trapping. These trappers typically live in a rural or small 
community and are usually men in their mid-40s. The rules and 

Problems and Controversies 73
regulations covering trapping vary from state to state; each state 
regulates the types of animals that can be trapped, the season they 
can be trapped, and the number of animals that can be trapped. 
 Steel-jawed (typically leg-hold) traps were invented in the 
late 16th century. These traps consist of two jaws, with or without 
teeth, a spring, and a trigger in the middle. The trap is placed 
along animal trails or is scented with pheromones (smelly chemi-
cals that attract the animal). A trapper typically sets his traps on 
the banks of a lake, river, or pond if he is after beaver, mink, river 
otter, or muskrats. He then returns several days later to determine 
if he has caught any animals; if he has, he kills them. 
 Although many individuals and organizations object to leg-
hold traps and at least six states have prohibited their use, they 
continue to be used. Numerous attempts have been made to rede-
sign these traps to make them more humane, but it is not clear if 
these redesigned traps are being used. 
 More than 30 million animals are raised in cages and killed for 
their fur. Minks are the animal most commonly raised this way, but 
so are large numbers of foxes, sables, chinchillas, and ferrets. Sixty 
to seventy-five percent of the fur coats sold in the United States are 
made from cage-reared animals. This industry is typically regulated 
by state departments of agriculture, and the rules and regulations 
vary from state to state. Mink farming tends to be concentrated in the 
northern states. The animals are typically raised in small wire mesh 
cages. A typical mink cage is about 2.5 feet long, 1 foot wide, and 
1 foot high. The cages are adjacent to each other, which is stressful 
for minks, which are solitary animals that generally come together to 
mate, usually in March; the young (commonly called kits) are born 
in May. Litters vary from 3 to 13 kits. These animals molt in the late 
summer and are harvested when their winter fur is in its prime, in 
late November and in December. They are typically fed agricultural 
byproducts, such as damaged eggs, expired cheeses, or offal (the en-
trails and internal organs of butchered animals, basically everything 
except the bones and muscles) from meat- or poultry-processing 
plants. Minks are euthanized by bottled gas that contains pure car-
bon dioxide and carbon monoxide. It takes approximately 50 mink 
skins to make a mink coat. 
 Feathers 
 Two sorts of feathers are typically used in clothing: down and 
plumage. Down is the small feathers that grow closest to the 

74 Animal Rights
bird’s body. These feathers do not have a quill, which is found 
primarily in the feathers on the chest of the bird. In most cases, the 
down is removed when the bird is euthanized. But some down is 
plucked from live birds, especially from geese and ducks. Geese 
in breeding flocks are plucked every 5 weeks from the time they 
are 10 weeks old until they are four years old. About five ounces 
are collected each time. Down is used to fill coats, quilts, sleeping 
bags, pillows, and comforters. 
 It is not clear who started using feathers in fashion. Marie 
Antoinette is often credited with using feathers as an accessory, 
often inserted into piled up hair styles. Later, plumage was used to 
decorate dresses and especially hats. The use of feathers reached 
a peak in the 19th century, when fashion designers employed the 
plumage of a wide variety of birds, including the ostrich, egret, 
heron, pheasant, peacock, lark, starling, blackbird, oriole, grebe, 
kingfisher, and bird of paradise, as well as various species of 
parrots and parakeets. Reportedly, between 1890 and 1930, more 
than 50,000 tons of feathers were imported into France for use in 
the fashion industry. 
 Feathers were a lucrative business; an ounce of the best-quality 
feathers could sell for $40 at the beginning of the 20th century. 
Imports of feathers were taxed, and, later, the quantity of feathers 
that could be imported was restricted; ultimately importation was 
completely halted in many countries. Smuggling then became a 
significant part of the industry. In the United States, two federal 
laws were passed. The first was the Lacey Act of 1900 (31 Stat 188), 
which made the secretary of agriculture responsible for the pres-
ervation, distribution, introduction, and restoration of game birds 
and other wild birds and required him to report on the propaga-
tion, uses, and preservation of birds covered under the act. The 
act also prohibited the transport of living or dead foreign birds 
or animals. The Migratory Bird Treaty Act (40 Stat 775; 16 U.S. 
Code 702) made it unlawful to pursue, hunt, take, capture, or kill, 
as well as to possess or to offer to sell, migratory birds. Fashion 
changes, and the uses of feathers have declined significantly. 
 Leather 
 Leather is created by tanning (a chemical treatment that changes 
the structure of the skin) the hides or skins of various animals, in-
cluding reptiles, birds, and mammals. Cattle hide is by far the most 
common; the hide is generally a byproduct of the meat industry. 

Problems and Controversies 75
Lamb and deer skins are used because their leather tends to be 
soft and pliable. Other animals whose hides are used for leather 
include ostriches and reptiles (large snakes and crocodiles), which 
are often used to make boots. 
 Cetacea: Whales, Porpoises, 
and Dolphins 
 In the King James Version of the Bible, Genesis 1:19–22 says: 
 
19 And the evening and the morning were the fourth day. 
 
20 And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly 
the moving creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly 
above the earth in the open firmament of heaven. 
 
21 And God created great whales, and every living creature 
that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, 
after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind: 
and God saw that it was good. 
 
22 And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, 
and fill the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the 
earth. 
 Chimpanzees (and the other great apes) are members of the same 
genus as humans and share more than 95 percent of their genetic 
material with humans. The Cetacea, comprising whales, por-
poises, and dolphins, are the only organisms whose brain/body 
ratio approaches (and in some cases exceeds) that of humans. 
Given this brain size, there is significant controversy about just 
how intelligent these creatures are. Since they lack appendages, it 
is unlikely that they have a material culture (e.g., produce tools), 
but many exhibit complex social behavior. Cetaceans produce a 
wide variety of sounds. Some of these sounds are used for echo-
location, for orientation, and for locating food, in much the same 
manner that people use sonar to locate objects in the water. But, 
scientists believe that some of these sounds are used for commu-
nications between individuals. These  songs  are quite complex and 
hauntingly beautiful. 
 John Lilly (see chapter 5) attempted to develop species-to-
species communication with captive dolphins, as well as to un-
derstand dolphin-to-dolphin communications. This intriguing 

76 Animal Rights
work is described in  Man and Dolphin  and  The Mind of the Dolphin 
(see chapter 8). 
 Cetaceans are wholly aquatic mammals that are found in all 
the world’s oceans and seas, as well as in certain rivers and lakes. 
Living cetaceans are divided into 38 genera and consist of approx-
imately 90 species. Dolphins and porpoises are members of the 
family Delphinidae, which contains 18 genera and approximately 
62 species. The word “dolphin” is usually applied to small ceta-
ceans that have a beaklike snout and a slender, streamlined body. 
“Porpoise,” on the other hand, typically refers to small cetaceans 
with a blunt snout and a short, rather stocky body. They typically 
range in length from 4 to 14 feet (1.2 to 4.3 meters) and weigh 
between 50 and 500 pounds (23 and 225 kilograms). The genus 
 Orcinus  contains only one species,  O. orca,  commonly called the 
killer whale. Typically black and white in color, these whales are 
approximately 20 feet (6 meters) in length and weigh about 
386 pounds (850 kilograms). 
 The scientific name for the beluga whale is  Delphinapterus leucas. 
Belugas are typically white; they are about 13 feet (4 meters) long 
and weigh about 227 pounds (500 kilograms). The name “beluga” 
causes some confusion, because it is also applied to the great white 
sturgeon (a fish, not a mammal), which is one of the principal sources 
of caviar. 
 These are the species that are commonly encountered in 
marine aquaria, such as the marine parks discussed earlier. 
For those who wish to see these animals live, an alternative to 
these parks is to observe cetaceans in their natural habitat. Whale 
watching from the shore or from small boats is a popular activity, 
and commercial whale-watching trips on large crafts are becom-
ing increasingly popular. Organizations that offer such excursions 
can be found on both coasts and often specialize in sightings of 
specific whales. 
 The blue whale measures more than 90 feet in length, four 
times the length of a common city bus, and weighs more than 
286,000 pounds (129,727 kilograms). It is the largest living organ-
ism, and its tongue alone weighs more than an elephant! Blue 
whales can be observed from the shores of Big Sur or from boat 
trips into Monterey Bay, both in California. Since this activity is 
very popular, some activists argue that is it important to protect 
whales from intrusion, harassment, or exploitation. However, 
most agree that quietly watching them in their own habitat 
 engaging in their natural behaviors is an amazing experience. 

Problems and Controversies 77
 Cetaceans can be distinguished from fish by the position of 
the tail fluke; in cetaceans it is set in a horizontal position, while 
the tail fin of a fish is set in a vertical position. 
 Whaling 
 The Basques, in northern Spain, were apparently the first whalers; 
they began whaling from the shore in the 12th century. Three gen-
era have been pursued by commercial whalers: the right whale 
( Balana ), the humpback whale ( Megaptera ), and the rorquals or 
finners ( Balanoptera ). The sperm whale ( Physeter macrocephalus) 
and the bottlenose whale have also been hunted. 
 By the middle of the 19th century, whaling appeared to be 
dying out, because the pursued species had been hunted to near 
extinction. In 1860, a Norwegian sailor, Svend Foyn, invented the 
harpoon gun (this did not come into common use until the 1880s). 
The harpoon gun allowed whalers to profitably focus on the cap-
ture of smaller, more active whales. What these whales lacked in 
the amount of oil each one yielded they made up in quantity. 
 Since 1900, more than 800,000 cetaceans have been killed. 
They were hunted for meat and for blubber, which was rendered 
to make whale oil, which in turn was used for making fuel for oil 
lamps and in the manufacture of soap and candles. Whale oil was 
also used as a fine lubricant. Other parts of the whale were used, 
as well. The whale’s bones and teeth were carved and decorated 
(the finished product is called scrimshaw) and were also used to 
make buttons, chessmen, cufflinks, and brooches; its skin was 
used to make shoe leather and coverings for a variety of products; 
its tendons were used to string tennis racquets. Manufacturers use 
spermacerti (sometimes called cetaceum), a pearly white, waxy, 
translucent solid obtained from oil in the head of a sperm whale, to 
make candles; in the production of cosmetics, especially emollients 
(lotions or salves to soothe and soften the skin); as a lubricant, espe-
cially for delicate instruments; and in polishes, soaps, crayons, and 
various food coatings. In addition, although it is very expensive, 
Ambergris, a wax-like, brown colored material that is produced in 
the digestive system of sperm whales and that is found floating 
on the ocean or washed ashore, is commonly used as a fixative for 
high-quality perfumes or soaps. 
 Whales were also killed to obtain whale bone, or baleen. 
Baleen is an elastic, horny substance that grows in place of teeth 
in some whales (suborder  Mysticeti ) and that takes the form of 

78 Animal Rights
thin parallel plates on each side of the palate. Baleen was used to 
stiffen corsets. 
 In 1946, the short-lived League of Nations drew up the 
International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling. Few 
countries followed its mandates. The International Whaling Com-
mission (see chapter 7) was formed in 1949 to control whaling and 
to guarantee a supply of whales for future use. The organization 
has no powers of enforcement, however, and during its first 30 
years of existence, more than 2 million whales were killed. The 
member nations of the Commission voted a moratorium on all 
commercial whaling beginning in 1985, and this remains in ef-
fect today. Two nations, Norway and Japan, continue to engage in 
commercial whaling despite this moratorium. The Commission 
does not bar indigenous or subsistence whaling in various parts 
of the world. The number of whales taken by indigenous people 
is relatively small. 
 Activists claim that whaling is inherently cruel and that 
whales sometimes take hours or days to die. In addition, they 
 assert that modern sonar interferes with whales’ normal commu-
nications. Whalers, on the other hand, claim that, with modern 
harpoons, whales that are taken die quickly. 
 Chapter 3 discusses potential solutions to these problems and 
controversies. 
 References 
 Avicenna. 1999.  Canon of Medicine . Chicago: KAZI Publications. 
 Boone and Crockett Club. 2009. Fair Chase Statement. http://
www.boone-crockett.org/huntingEthics/ethics_fairchase.
asp?area=huntingEthics. Accessed April 26, 2009. 
Dary, David A. 1974. The Buffalo Book: The Sage of an American Symbol, 
Avon Publishing, p 55.
 Declaration of Helsinki. http://www.cirp.org/library/ethics/helsinki/. 
Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 Food and Drug Administration. Code of Federal Regulations Title 21 
Food and Drugs Chapter 1, Subchapter A General, Part 56 Institutional 
Review Boards. http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/
cfCFR/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=56. Accessed August 17, 2009. 
 Food and Drug Administration. Investigational New Drug. http://
www.fda.gov/cder/Regulatory/applications/ind_page_1.htm. 
Accessed April 16, 2009. 

Problems and Controversies 79
 Grange, W. B. 1949.  The Way to Game Abundance. New York: Scribner. 
 Grodin, M. A. 1990. The Nuremberg Code and Medical Research: The 
Hastings Center Report. http://www.questia.com/googleScholar.
qst?docId=5002154468. Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 National Science Board Science and Engineering Indicators. 
2008. Chapter 7: Science and Technology: Public Attitudes and 
Understanding. Available at: http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind08/
pdf/c07.pdf. Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 Nicoll, C. S., and S. M. Russell. 1990. “Analysis of Animal Rights 
Literature Reveals the Underlying Motives of the Movement: 
Ammunition for Counter Offensive By Scientists.”  Endocrinology  
127 (5): 985–89. 
 United Gamefowl Breeders Association. 2009. Mission Statement. 
http://www.ugba.info/. Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 U.S. Fish  and Wildlife Service. 2009. Available at: http://www.fws.
gov/. Accessed August 20, 2009. 
 Vegetarian Resource Group. 2009. Available at: www.vrg.org. Accessed 
April 16, 2009. 


81
 3 
 Possible Solutions 
 Research, Research, Research! 
 Although curiosity about the structure and function of the body 
probably predates written history, prior to the 19th century there 
was relatively little animal research except for dissections. Aristo-
tle (384 –322 B .C.E .) and one of his students, Erasistratus (304 –250 
 B .C.E . ), wrote descriptions of animals that were probably based on 
 dissection. 
 Galen (about 129–216   C.E . ) was not allowed to dissect human 
bodies. He did dissect a variety of animals, including a Barbary 
ape and other mammals, including but not limited to dogs, 
cats, weasels, and camels, as well as fish, reptiles, and birds. 
Galen also performed surgery on living animals, including 
oxen, horses, sheep, swine, and nonhuman primates. This was 
before anesthetics were available, so these animals were awake. 
Galen was the first to point out that the brain was the seat of 
our highest functions. If the brain was damaged, it also affected 
the mind. 
 Claude Bernard, who is often called the father of physiology, 
was born in 1813 in Saint-Julien, France. When Bernard entered 
medical school in 1834, bloodletting was still a common treat-
ment for a variety of diseases. Germ theory (that is, the idea that 
disease could be caused by microorganisms) was not yet estab-
lished, and the drugs in common use could be, in the words of 
Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes, “sunk to the bottom of the sea, it 
would be all the better for mankind—and all the worse for the 
fishes.” Leading physicians of the day believed that chemistry 

82 Animal Rights
and physics could advance in the laboratory, but biology and 
medicine could not. 
 Bernard worked in the laboratory of Francois Magendie 
(1783–1855). Magendie was one of the first of the modern animal 
experimenters. In 1822, Bernard cut the anterior and posterior roots 
of the spinal cord of living animals and discovered loss of sensa-
tion followed section of the posterior roots and loss of movement 
 followed section of the anterior roots. 
 Bernard believed that medical knowledge, like other forms of 
scientific knowledge, could be won by systematic experiments. He 
was the first to state the principle of scientific determinism, that 
is, the principle that identical experiments should yield identical 
results. Bernard published his  Introduction à la médecine expérimen-
tale  (An Introduction to Experimental Medicine) in 1865; the work 
was translated into English by Henry Copley Green in 1927. 
 Drs. Charles S. Nicoll and Sharon M. Russell (1991) note that 
two notable men, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, who died in 1791, 
and Alexander the Great, who died in 323 B .C.E  ,  both died in their 
mid-30s. In the centuries between the deaths of these men, the art 
and science of medicine had not significantly changed. In con-
trast, 80 percent of our current biomedical knowledge has been 
acquired since the 19th century, and 50 percent of it was learned 
in the 20th century. The rapid growth of medical knowledge is at 
least partially the result of animal research in the 19th century (and 
continuing today) as part of an effort to determine how normal 
living systems work and to use this information to determine the 
effects of disease. Modern animal rights activists use the same argu-
ment they used in the 19th century—that we know all we need to 
know. We do know a good deal about how to control infectious 
diseases and parasites, and we are just beginning to understand 
our own impact on the world. Unfortunately, new diseases, like 
AIDS, seem to crop up without warning. An ancient disease, such 
as tuberculosis, which was almost wiped out, has once again be-
come a serious threat because the bacteria that cause TB have 
become resistant to most of the antibiotics and combinations of 
antibiotics that were formerly used to control it. 
 One of the major breakthroughs in the 20th century is the 
development of transgenic mice, both knock-ins and knock-outs 
that hold the promise of being able to test new therapies prior to 
human trials. Knock-out mice are genetically engineered to turn 
off one or more genes to determine their function based on a com-
parison of the changes in function or behavior between the normal 

Possible Solutions 83
and knock-out mouse. A knock-in mouse is genetically altered by 
inserting a foreign gene to replace an endogenous gene. 
 Interest in basic and applied research continued to grow in 
the 20th century but especially around the time of World War II. 
The National Institute of Health was created by the Ransdell Act 
in 1938, the National Institutes of Health in 1948, and the National 
Research Foundation in 1950. The National Institutes of Health 
and the National Research Foundation have been and continue to 
be the major supports for basic applied research. (Perhaps the big-
gest impetus for increased support for science was the launching 
of Sputnik 1 by the Soviet Union on October 4, 1957.) 
 Private (Nongovernmental) 
Solutions 
 Although animal rights (in Europe, more frequently animal 
liberation) and animal protective organizations seem to have 
overlapping goals, they have different historical roots and pur-
sue different goals today. Both trace their lineage to organizations 
that arose in the 19th century in Great Britain. These organizations 
and their more recent descendants are private, nongovernmental 
agencies. They generally have relatively small paid professional 
staff and a larger number of unpaid volunteers and are supported 
by members and by the general public through donations of money, 
goods (sometimes called gifts in kind), or volunteer services. Some 
of these organizations were founded in the 19th century, but most 
of the newer ones were founded in the late 1970s and 1980s (see 
later discussion and chapter 7). 
 Animal Welfare 
 A number of groups exist in England and in the United States 
that are dedicated to promoting animal welfare. The following 
discussion focuses on a few of them. 
 England 
 Bull baiting was a popular “blood sport” in England for several 
centuries. Most towns in England, including London, had a bull-
baiting ring. The bull was chained to an iron stake, which allowed 
it some freedom of movement. Often pepper was blown up the 

84 Animal Rights
bull’s nose to enrage it. Then dogs were set upon the bull in an 
attempt to immobilize it. In a variant of this “sport” commonly 
called “pinning the bull,” dogs were set upon the bull one at a 
time, and the goal was for the dog to fasten his teeth on the bull’s 
snout. 
 Sir William Pulteney proposed a bill to ban bull baiting in the 
House of Commons in April 1800. This was apparently the first 
attempt to pass a law dealing with animal welfare. Two cabinet 
members, William Windham and George Canning, were opposed 
to the bill. They argued that bull baiting, which was enjoyed by 
working-class people, was no crueler than fox hunting, which 
was a sport of the upper classes. The bill was defeated on April 18, 
1800, by a vote of 43 to 41. 
 The first successful animal welfare legislation was the Act 
to Prevent Cruel and Improper Treatment of Cattle (sometimes 
called Martin’s Act), sponsored by Richard “Humanity Dick” 
Martin and passed by Parliament on July 22, 1822. This act pro-
tected horses, mares, geldings, mules, asses, oxen, cows, heifers, 
steer, sheep, and other cattle. The act stated that if any person or 
persons were to wantonly and cruelly beat, abuse, or ill treat any 
of these animals and if a complaint was made to a Justice of the 
Peace or Magistrate within 10 days of the offense, a trial was to be 
held. If the person was convicted, he would be fined no more than 
5 pounds and no less than 10 shillings. If the person would not or 
could not pay the fine, he was to be committed to the House of 
Correction, without bail, for three months or less. 
 Martin was also one of the founders, along with more than 20 
other reformers, in 1824, of the Society for the Prevention of Cru-
elty to Animals. The stated purpose of the Society was to provide 
enforcement of Martin’s Act. At the time the organization was 
formed, there was little or no compassion for animals, which 
were commonly viewed as commodities supplying food, trans-
port, or sport. The Society was granted royal status by Princess 
Victoria and changed its name to the Royal Society for the Preven-
tion of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA) in 1840. Today the RSPCA 
is a charity in England and Wales that promotes animal welfare 
and that is funded by voluntary donations. The RSPCA lob-
bied Parliament throughout the 19th century for the passage of 
animal legislation (discussed later). While the Association has no 
statutory powers, its inspectors try to identify individuals or or-
ganizations that mistreat animals. Its representatives cannot enter 
anyone’s premises without permission but generally seek help 

Possible Solutions 85
from local government officials to obtain search warrants. The So-
ciety has no power to prosecute offenders other than by private 
prosecution. The Society today sponsors more than 100 animal 
clinics and welfare centers, including wildlife centers and several 
sites that can hold lost, neglected, or homeless animals. Its current 
budget is more than 82 million pounds. In 2007, the Society inves-
tigated more than 100,000 complaints of cruelty, which resulted 
in the conviction of more than 1,000 defendants and in 861 orders 
barring individuals from keeping animals. 
 United States 
 The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals 
was founded, in New York City, by Henry Bergh in 1866. It was 
the first humane society in North America, and most of its activi-
ties are centered in New York City and New York state. The major 
goal of the Society is to work toward a day when animals can 
live without unnecessary fear or pain. In the 19th and early 20th 
centuries, the Society focused its efforts on horses and livestock. 
Today the focus is on companion animals. The Society supports a 
variety of animal shelters and has fostered programs for pet adop-
tion; it also actively promotes spay/neuter programs for adopted 
animals to reduce the number of unwanted pets and to minimize 
unnecessary euthanasia. The Society has the legal authority to in-
vestigate and make arrests for crimes against animals. Its Humane 
Law Enforcement (HLE) Division investigates 400 to 500 cruelty 
complaints each month, resulting in approximately 100 arrests a 
year. This aspect of the ASPCA has been featured on the television 
show  Animal Planet . 
 The Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals was founded by George Thorndike Angell in 1868 (the 
organization was renamed MSPCA-Angell in 2003). The Society 
published a periodical, called “Our Dumb Animals,” whose mis-
sion was “to speak for those who cannot speak for themselves.” 
Angell also launched a nationwide network of human education 
clubs called “Bands of Mercy” in 1881 and ultimately recruited 
more than 250,000 boys and girls. 
 Yet another group, the American Human Education Society, 
was founded, in 1880, to provide instruction about kindness, 
compassion, and respect for all living things. 
 The American Humane Association was founded in 1877 
by representatives of 27 humane organizations from 10 states. 
The Association, working through a network of individuals and 

86 Animal Rights
 organizations. Its Mission statement states that their mission is to 
create a more humane and compassionate world by ending abuse 
and neglect of children and animals. The Association publishes  The 
Link , which promotes awareness of the relationship between 
animal abuse and other forms of violence and highlights the 
importance of the benefits from the human-animal bond. The 
regional Los Angeles office of the Association is responsible for 
monitoring the use of animals in the entertainment industry, es-
pecially television and film. If no animals are hurt or killed in the 
making of a movie or television show, its producers are allowed to 
use the No Animals Were Harmed end credit disclaimer. 
 Animal Rights 
 England 
 One of the first organizations, if not the first, to seek animal rights 
(liberation) was the Society for the Protection of Animals Liable to 
Vivisection, which was founded, in 1875, by Frances Power Cobbe 
(1822–1904), a feminist, social reformer, and animal rights activist, to 
protest the use of animal experimentation. Cobbe also founded the 
British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection, in 1898, to protest the 
use of dogs in vivisection. The Union does undercover investiga-
tions of scientific laboratories, engages in political lobbying, and 
promotes cruelty-free cosmetics (i.e., those not tested on animals). 
It also works to eliminate toxicity testing of chemicals on animals 
and supports effective nonanimal substitutes. The organization’s 
ultimate goal is to eliminate all animal experimentation, and it 
publishes a list of health-related charities that do not support 
animal research. The Union was one of the founding members, 
in 1990, of the European Coalition to End Animal Experiments, 
which claims to be the leading organization in the attempt to ban 
animal research in Europe. The Union was also a founding mem-
ber of the International Council for Animal Protection, which is 
developing international guidelines for animal testing. 
 United States 
 The American Anti-Vivisection Society was founded in Jenkin-
town, Pennsylvania, by Caroline Earle White and Mary Frances 
Lovell, in 1883. Early on, the Society was also actively involved in 
developing laws for the treatment of cattle in transit and for en-
forcing the 28-hour law, which requires that cattle be watered, fed, 
and allowed to rest at least once every 28 hours during transport. 

Possible Solutions 87
The Society has continued to propose and support both federal 
and local legislation to end pound seizure laws and to add birds, 
mice, and rats to the Animal Welfare Act. 
 The National Antivivisectionists Society was founded in 1929 
in Chicago, Illinois, by Clarence E. Richards. Early support came 
from a British actor, George Arliss. The Society strives to ban all 
animal research. The Society notes: “The word vivisection literally 
means cutting apart living animals. At the turn of the 20th cen-
tury, the meaning of the term was widely known. Over time, the 
definition of vivisection has commonly come to mean any animal 
experimentation or animal research. Now, vivisection can refer to 
any experimentation on animals including non-invasive psychology 
research, product testing, or dissection.” 
 Between the end of the 19th century and the middle of the 20th 
century, relatively few animal rights organizations were founded 
in England and in the United States. At least in part, because of 
the increase in research utilizing animals that followed the end of 
the World War II, Peter Singer, an Australian ethicist, published the 
book  Animal Liberation . Singer is a utilitarian, which means that he 
believes that actions should do the most good and cause the least 
harm for as many individuals as possible. Most other utilitarian 
philosophers focused on human-human interactions, but Singer 
added what some people consider a novel interpretation—the idea 
that humans must give equal consideration to animals in human-
animal interactions. Singer apparently does not believe in animal 
rights but rather focuses on the moral claims of animals—the belief 
that both humans and animals can suffer. 
 No one would argue that minimizing pain is a worthwhile 
objective. But animals inflict pain on other animals to survive. 
Consider the domestic cat, the most common household pet in the 
United States. It generally lives a relatively pampered and well-fed 
existence and does not have to hunt for food. But cats are instinc-
tive hunters, and, even if they are not hungry, they are ruthless in 
handling the small animals and birds that fall victim to them. The 
cat is acting out of instinct and does not have any knowledge of 
moral considerations. Humans are different from all other species 
in that we are the only species that is concerned about the welfare 
of other species. Humane medical research furthers humans’ abil-
ity to survive by providing a way to develop methods to treat 
diseases that have plagued humans from ancient times and to rec-
ognize and treat new diseases when they occur. Our first duty as 
humans in the constant struggle to survive is to our own species. 

88 Animal Rights
 Not all philosophers agree with Singer and Regan. Dr. Carl 
Cohen, a professor of philosophy at the University of Michigan at 
Ann Arbor, is a strong advocate of humane animal research, which 
he believes serves humans and animals alike. He argues that to 
refrain from using animals in research on utilitarian grounds is 
morally wrong. 
 One of the first of the modern animal rights organizations 
was the People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (http://
www.peta.org), which was founded in Norfolk, Virginia, in 1980, 
by Ingrid Newkirk and Alex Pacheco. The early history of PETA 
is intimately tied to the work of Dr. Edward Taub. 
 In 1981, Dr. Taub, a scientist at the Institute of Behavioral Re-
search in Silver Springs, Maryland, was conducting research on 
the effects of somatosensory deafferentation (the elimination of 
sensation by cutting sensory nerves or interrupting sensor nerve 
impulses) in monkeys in which all sensation had been surgically 
eliminated from one or both forelimbs. According to Dr. Taub, in 
the middle of May 1981, Alex Pacheco approached Taub and asked 
for a job in his laboratory. Since Taub could not afford to pay him, 
Pacheco agreed to work as a volunteer. Pacheco worked in Taub’s 
laboratory for five months. During this time period, Taub asserts 
that Pacheco never pointed out any deficiencies in the facilities or 
questioned any of the procedures used in the laboratory. Without 
Taub’s permission, during the night, Pacheco allegedly took pho-
tographs of the conditions in Taub’s laboratory and admitted five 
observers to the laboratory. Each of the five observers ultimately 
filed an affidavit that was highly critical of the conditions in the 
laboratory. Pacheco, who failed to mention to Taub that he was 
the president and one of the co-founders of PETA, an antivivisec-
tionist organization, took his photographs and affidavits to the 
Montgomery County police. The police raided Taub’s laboratory 
and seized Taub’s research subjects (17 monkeys) and some of his 
research records. 
 The search and seizure received major local and national 
media coverage, which he believes was organized by PETA. The 
monkeys were placed in the care of PETA. When Taub petitioned 
for the return of his monkeys, they disappeared. They were re-
portedly transported to Gainesville and then back to the Washing-
ton area. During this unauthorized transportation, the monkeys 
were subjected to considerable stress. Taub filed charges that al-
leged that the animals had been treated cruelly, but he claims that 
the charges were never investigated. 

Possible Solutions 89
 Dr. Taub was charged with 119 counts of violating the Mary-
land anticruelty statutes (Maryland Code 1957, 1976 Repl. Vol., 
Article 27 § 59). His first trial resulted in the complete dismissal 
of 113 of the 119 counts; he was found guilty of failing to provide 
adequate veterinary care by an outside veterinarian to six mon-
keys ( Taub v State , 296 MD. 439, 441, 463 A.2d 819, 820, 1983). Taub 
maintained that it was extremely rare for a veterinarian to have 
experience with animals with the condition he was studying and 
that he was a recognized expert in its treatment, with more than 
25 years’ experience. In his second trial, Taub was cleared of five 
of the remaining six charges. The conviction related to a monkey 
whose arm was amputated seven weeks after the animal was 
removed from Taub’s laboratory because of a supposed infection 
of the bone (osteomyelitis), which was said to have been caused 
by the inadequate care received in Taub’s laboratory. A pathology 
report based on an examination of the arm reported that the ani-
mal did not have osteomyelitis. On appeal, the Court of Appeals 
of Maryland overturned this final conviction (see 445 –5, 463 A2d 
at 822) on the grounds that the statute did not apply to federally 
funded research, which is covered by the federal Animal Welfare 
Act. (This Act provides for the protection of animals used in research 
facilities, while at the same time recognizing and preserving the va-
lidity of use of animals in research.) Since Taub was the  recipient 
of a grant from the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the court 
found that he was also subject to the pertinent NIH regulations 
governing the care and treatment of animals used in the research 
that was the subject of the grant. 
 During the media uproar surrounding the incident in Taub’s 
laboratory, NIH decided to suspend and then terminate his grant. 
Taub appealed the decision to the Department of Health and 
Human Service Departmental Grant Appeals Board. While the 
Board did not reinstate Taub’s grant, it did report that it found no 
evidence of inadequate veterinary care. It did find that Taub was 
well qualified to treat problems associated with deafferentiation. 
The Ethics Committee of the American Psychological Association, 
the Animal Care Committee of the Society for Neuroscience, and 
an ad hoc committee of the American Physiological Society all 
agreed, reportedly by unanimous vote, that Taub was not guilty 
of any wrongdoing. Taub, who moved to the Psychology Depart-
ment of the University of Alabama at Birmingham, maintains 
that his research at Silver Springs and at Birmingham has led to 
improved treatment of some patients who have suffered a stroke 

90 Animal Rights
and that the disruption of his work delayed the application of this 
treatment to patients by about eight years. 
 PETA is one of the largest and most active of the animal rights 
organizations. According to PETA’s Web site, it has about 2 million 
members and supporters and has affiliates in the United Kingdom, 
Germany, the Netherlands, India, and the Asia-Pacific region that 
it helps support. It conducts rallies and demonstrations to focus 
attention on the exploitation and abuse of animals in experimen-
tation, on the manufacturing of fur apparel, and on the slaughter 
of animals for human consumption; it also hosts special events 
involving celebrities, who use their fame to speak out on animal 
rights issues. PETA also lobbies for, sponsors, and supports animal 
rights legislation and serves as the media contact for some of the 
more radical animal rights organizations (see later discussion). 
 Consider this statement of Ingrid Newkirk, one of the found-
ers of PETA, which has become the battle cry for animal activists: 
 Animal liberationists do not separate out the human ani-
mal, so there is no rational basis for saying that a human 
being has special rights. A rat is a pig is a boy. They are 
all mammals. (Vogue, September 1989) 
 Other comments by Newkirk include: 
 Even if animal research resulted in a cure for AIDS, we’d 
be against it. 
 Even painless research is fascism, supremacism, 
because the act of confinement is traumatizing in itself.
( Washingtonian , August 1986) 
 Alex Pacheco, one of the other founders of PETA, has said: 
We feel that animals have the same rights as a retarded human 
child ( New York Times , January 14, 1989). 
 According to PETA’s IRS Form 990 for 2006 (PETA 2009), the 
group obtained direct public support of more than $28 million. 
In that year, PETA paid its employees more than $5 million and 
spent more than $6 million for consultants, more than $2 million 
for legal fees, and almost $500,000 for professional fundraiser 
fees. PETA supported its overseas affiliates and other animal 
rights organizations through grants that exceeded $3 million. 
 The Animal Welfare Institute was founded in New York in 
1951 by Christine Stevens, a prominent socialite and the widow 

Possible Solutions 91
of Roger Lacey Stevens, a New York real estate magnate. Stevens 
was the president of the Institute until her death, in 2002. The In-
stitute has actively worked to improve the welfare of animals used 
in experimentation, tighten the regulation of concentrated animal 
feeding operations, and regulate the trapping and farming of fur-
bearing animals. The Institute also originated the Save-the-Whales 
Campaign in 1971. Stevens formed the Society for Animal Protec-
tive Legislation as the Institute’s lobbying arm in 1955. The Society 
has helped write more than a dozen laws on behalf of wild and 
domestic animals, including the Humane Slaughter Act and the 
Laboratory Animal Welfare Act, especially the 1985 amendments 
to the Act (see chapter 6). 
 According to its IRS Form 990 filing for 2006 (Animal Welfare 
Institute 2009), the Institute received more than $3 million in direct 
public support; it pays its staff a total of more than $600,000. It pays 
approximately $200,000 in legal fees and allocated about the same 
amount of money for its lobbying efforts. 
 There are a number of more radical groups that are opposed 
to medical and other forms of animal research. These organi-
zations are more shadowy and do not present any information 
about their leadership or membership. It is not clear how many 
members these organization have, how they are supported, or 
whether they meet together. One such organization, the Animal 
Liberation Front, first appeared in England in 1979. Its credo 
states: 
 The Animal Liberation Front (ALF) carries out direct 
action against animal abuse in the form of rescuing 
animals and causing financial loss to animal exploiters, 
usually through the damage and destruction of property. 
(http://www.animalliberationfront.com) 
 Tim Daley, reportedly a member of ALF, said: “In a war, you have 
to take up arms and people will get killed.” 
 Because the activities of ALF are against the law, its activists 
work anonymously, either as individuals or in small groups, without 
any central organization or coordination. ALF provides guidelines 
for individuals or small groups that want to consider themselves 
part of ALF. The purpose is to liberate animals from places of abuse, 
find them good homes, and allow them to live out their lives free 
of abuse. ALF seeks to inflict economic damage to those who profit 
from animal exploitation and to reveal the  actions of individuals 

92 Animal Rights
who exploit animals by performing nonviolent  direct actions and 
liberations. 
 The Animal Rights Militia and the Justice Department, both 
started in England in the 1990s, are shadowy organizations, more 
accurately nonorganizations, of individuals and small groups that 
engage in direct action, including inflicting harm on human be-
ings, in pursuit of their goals. The Animal Defense Militia, another 
group, calls itself an underground movement of covert operatives 
dedicated to the autonomy of nonhuman vertebrates through 
“any means necessary.” According to its Web site, it has declared 
war on PETA, because PETA is not radical enough. 
 Organization and Support 
 Before the advent of the World Wide Web, it was relatively dif-
ficult to obtain information about animal welfare or rights groups 
unless you happened to be on their mailing list. Most of these 
organizations now have Web sites that offer varying amounts of 
detail about their activities. Most provide a relatively detailed 
description of their programs and little else. Others may provide 
additional information, such as a list of officers and perhaps a 
list of the board of directors, as well as the number of members, 
some financial data, and, relatively rarely, an annual report. 
 It is not clear if any of these organizations were started with 
an endowment. An endowment is a transfer of money or property 
to an institution. Generally, an endowment (the principal) is meant 
to be invested and whatever earnings accrue are used to forward 
the mission of the organization. It is likely that most of these 
organizations are supported by membership fees, money or gifts 
in kind from the general public, or bequests (of money, property, 
or real estate) left to the organization in a donor’s will. 
 Donations to many of these organizations are tax deductible 
(i.e., the donor can deduct the amount of money or the fair mar-
ket value of the gifts from his federal and, in some cases, his state 
income taxes). In order for this to occur, the organization must 
apply to the Internal Revenue Service for tax-free status, generally 
as a 501(c)3 entity (the number refers to a specific part of the IRS 
code). The organization must obtain an Employee Identification 
Number and prepare bylaws and articles of incorporation. These 
documents must describe the purpose of the organization and ex-
plain how it expects to achieve its purpose; it must also specify 
how the officers and board of directors will be selected and their 
terms of office. The group must also supply a budget for the first 

Possible Solutions 93
two years. To maintain its status as a 501(c)3 entity, the organiza-
tion must submit a Form 990 (Return of Organization for Income 
Tax) to the IRS, which discloses its financial status. It is possible 
to obtain copies of Form 990 for specific organizations from Web 
sites like GuideStar. 
 Organizations with 501(c)3 status are limited in the amount 
of lobbying (i.e., attempts to influence actions by Congress or state 
or local governing bodies) they may do. They also are required to 
limit their contact (and their suggestions regarding such contact 
to the general public) with members or employees of legislative 
bodies to propose, support, or oppose specific legislation. They 
can, however, involve themselves with issues of public policy by 
conducting educational meetings or preparing or distributing 
 educational materials. These organizations are also not allowed 
to directly or indirectly participate in any political campaign. 
 Demographics 
 Most of the organizations discussed in this chapter and in chap-
ter 6 may or may not provide data about their total membership, 
but none provide any demographic data. Drs. Wesley V. Jamison 
and William M. Lunch (Jamison and Lunch 1992) were able to col-
lect demographic data from some of the participants in a march 
on Washington on June 10, 1990, that was sponsored by animal 
activists, including the American Society for the Prevention of 
Cruelty to Animals, the Doris Day Animal League, the Humane 
Society of America, the New England Antivivisectionist Society, 
and the People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals. There were 
approximately 24,000 marchers representing animal rights groups 
for 25 states, as well as Israel, Canada, and Australia. One of the 
coordinators was Peter Singer, also of the National Alliance for 
Animal Legislation, and the co-chair was the philosopher Tom 
Regan. 
 The researchers collected data from a random sample of the 
marchers (n = 412) using an eight-page survey. These marchers 
were likely more committed and had stronger views than the 
average animal rights activist because they had spent time and 
money to travel to participate in the march. Wesley and Jamison 
found that 79 percent of the sample had some college or university 
education; 22 percent had undergraduate degrees, and 19 percent 
had graduate or professional degrees. Whites made up 93 per-
cent of the responders, blacks 2 percent, and American Indians, 
Hispanic Americans, and Asians 1 percent each, which closely 

94 Animal Rights
mirrors the composition of other social movements. The mean an-
nual income of participants was $37,400, and the median income 
was $33,000. Approximately 8 percent had incomes of $80,000 a 
year or more. Sixty-eight percent of those interviewed were female, 
and 32 percent were male; the mean age was 29, and almost a third 
were under 30. Forty-four percent were professionals (e.g., doctors, 
lawyers), while 69 percent listed their current job as “working for 
pay” and 14 percent were full-time students. Sixty-six percent 
of the respondents lived in metropolitan areas, suburbs, or cit-
ies with a population of more than 50,000. Information sources 
included newspapers (22%), television (22%), magazines (19%), 
and direct mail (15%). 
 Movement activists rejected the domination of humans over 
animals. The activists objected to research that used animals re-
gardless of the level of harm to the animal or the benefit to humans. 
Fifty-six percent of the responders were opposed to animal re-
search that does not harm the animals, while 26 percent approved 
of such use. More than 84 percent were opposed to research that 
would harm the animal. Only 4 percent were opposed to having 
pets in the home. More than 52 percent of the activists believe 
that science does more harm than good. The activists tended to be 
moderately liberal or liberal; 37 percent described themselves as 
independent, 35 percent as Democrats, and 14 percent as Republi-
cans. Parade participants were more politically active and had the 
time and the resources to be involved with social movements and 
politics. Ninety-eight percent approved of contributing money to 
animal rights causes, and 90 percent had already done so, while 
98 percent believed in campaigning for candidates who favor 
animal rights and 38 percent had already done so. Most of the 
respondents were very skeptical of science and scientists. 
 Science Activists 
 Most scientists belong to one or more professional organizations, 
such as the American Society for the Advancement of Science, 
which was founded in 1848 and is the world’s largest scientific 
organization. It serves more than 262 affiliated societies and acad-
emies, which covers most of the biological and physical sciences 
worldwide. Its major publication,  Science,  is the largest peer-
reviewed scientific journal in the world. Many scientists also are 
members of specialized organizations that represent their scientific 
interests, such as the Society for Neuroscience, whose members are 

Possible Solutions 95
involved in basic, applied, and clinical research on the nervous 
system. 
 These organizations have one or more national and/or re-
gional meetings where scientists present their most recent find-
ings. Many of these organizations provide proceedings of these 
meetings (either in print, online, or both), administer one or more 
professional refereed scientific journals, hold symposia that cover 
a variety of topics, such as instructions for using newly developed 
techniques, and publish specialized monographs. Most meetings 
include exhibits by companies that specialize in scientific equip-
ment and other items that might be of interest to the attendees, 
and a jobs bank, where potential employers and employees can 
meet. The majority of the societies that deal with biological, bio-
medical, or psychological research have a protocol or statement 
that defines their views on animal research and how animals that 
are used in research by members should be treated. These orga-
nizations are generally funded by membership fees and journal 
subscriptions. 
 Scientists tend to be more interested in doing research than in 
public relations. Therefore, they have been slow to respond to the 
comments and criticisms raised by the animal rights movement. 
The opponents of animal research, especially those that are politi-
cally astute, tend to focus on restricting the supply of animals and 
increasing the regulatory encumbrances that make doing research 
more expensive, potentially raising costs to an unacceptable level. 
Most of the organizations that promote science and the use of ani-
mals in basic and applied research, in education, and in product 
testing have only recently been organized. 
 There are a number of organizations of scientists that take posi-
tions on animal research. The National Association for Biomedical 
Research, founded in 1979 by Francine Trull in Washington, DC, has 
a membership of about 300 “public and private universities, medi-
cal and veterinary schools, teaching hospitals, voluntary health 
agencies, professional societies, pharmaceutical companies and 
other animal research-related firms.” The Association represents the 
views of its members before Congress and provides information to 
its members about legislative and regulatory issues.  According 
to the organization’s 2006 Form 990, it received about $1 million 
dollars from membership dues and spent about $117,000 in legal 
fees in that year. 
 The Foundation for Biomedical Research was founded in 
1985 by Francine Trull in Washington, DC. The Foundation is 

96 Animal Rights
dedicated to improving human and animal health by promoting 
and supporting humane and responsible animal research. It is 
supported by membership fees. 
 There are several other groups, as well. The Incurably Ill for 
Animal Research was founded in 1985 by a group of multiple scle-
rosis patients who support humane and responsible use of animals 
in research. Americans for Medical Progress was founded in 1991 
by a committee of concerned physicians and scientists. Through 
publications and outreach efforts, it tries to provide a forum for 
scientists and those who are touched by the results of humane, 
necessary, and valuable use of animals in research. A third group, 
States United for Biomedical Research, is a network of nonprofit 
organizations that celebrates the “people, the process, and the 
promise of biomedical research.” 
 Governmental Solutions 
 The laws that deal with animals vary from country to country. 
In this volume we examine closely the laws of England and the 
United States. In the United States, the main legislation dealing 
with animals is the Animal Welfare Act and its amendments (see 
discussion). The Department of Agriculture is responsible for 
promulgating rules and regulations and for enforcing these rules 
under the terms of the Animal Welfare Act. The Department of 
Agriculture is also responsible for enforcing the rules and regu-
lations of the Humane Slaughter Act. As discussed in chapter 2, 
there are relatively complex rules and regulations to deal with the 
waste generated by concentrated animal feeding organizations, 
but there are no laws that deal with the treatment of the animals 
held in these facilities. 
 United States 
 Background 
 As described later, the major U.S. legislation dealing with animal 
welfare is the Animal Welfare Act of 1966, commonly referred to 
as the Research or Experimentation—Cats and Dogs Act, and its 
amendments. The act makes the secretary of agriculture respon-
sible for promulgating and enforcing the rules and regulations 

Possible Solutions 97
included in the Act, and it is the Animal and Plant Inspection Ser-
vice, commonly referred to as APHIS, that is the agency within 
the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) that is directly 
charged with enforcing these rules and regulations. Most of the 
focus is on animals used in scientific research. Organizations that 
display animals, such as zoos, aquaria, and roadside attractions, 
are required to register with APHIS. Farm animals and animals 
used for agricultural research are specifically excluded, as are 
birds and cold blooded animals (e.g., reptiles and amphibians). 
Animals bought and sold through retail pet stores are also not 
covered. 
 The first bill to regulate animal welfare in the United States 
was introduced, in 1896, by Representative McMillan, a Repub-
lican from Michigan. This bill would have regulated vivisection 
in the District of Columbia. After a public hearing, the vote was 
delayed by the Spanish-American War and was never passed. 
A similar bill was proposed by Senator Jacob Gallinger, a New 
Hampshire Republican, but it languished in committee and was 
never passed. 
 After World War II, there was a rapid growth in research 
using animal subjects, but no regulatory activity was attempted 
until the 1960s. Although animal welfare, especially as applied 
to animals used in biomedical research, had been discussed from 
time to time since the turn of the 20th century, there were no real 
efforts to initiate or pass legislation. One of the tipping points oc-
curred in 1965 with the story of Pepper, a five-year-old Dalmatian, 
as reported by Coles Phinizy in  Sports Illustrated , on November 27, 
1965. Pepper was the family pet of the Lakavage family and disap-
peared from her home on a Pennsylvania farm. In an unrelated 
incident, William Miller was arrested for improperly loading a 
shipment of dogs and goats. The animals were temporarily housed 
at a Northampton animal shelter, where a local SPCA worker took 
photographs of the animals. When shown the photos, Mrs. Lakav-
age was sure that one of the Dalmatians shown was Pepper. Mrs. 
Lakavage tracked Miller to a dog farm in High Falls, New York. 
Miller would not let Mrs. Lakavage see his dogs because she did 
not have a search warrant. In what may be an apocryphal story, 
Representative Joseph Resnick (D, New York) was contacted and 
was also refused access to the animals. Unfortunately, it was a 
moot point because Miller had dropped the dog at Montefiore 
Hospital, where it was used in an experiment, euthanized, and 
cremated. 

98 Animal Rights
 The cover of  Life  magazine on February 4, 1966 warned, “Your 
Dog Is in Cruel Danger.” The article, titled “Concentration Camps 
for Dogs,” showed graphic images of sick, lethargic, and skeletal 
dogs, photographed by Stan Wayman on the White Hill, New 
York property of Lester Brown. This article brought an avalanche 
of letters to  Life , reportedly more mail than was inspired by stories 
dealing with the Vietnam War or human rights violations. 
 Federal Regulations (Nonagricultural) 
 On July 9, 1965, Representative Resnick introduced House Bill 
9743, and, after a hearing on September 30, 1965, a similar bill 
was introduced in the Senate by Senators Warren Magnuson 
(D, Washington) and Joseph S. Clark (D, Pennsylvania). 
 Drafting of legislation is a complex task. Typically, an Act is fit 
into a part of the U.S. Federal Code. For example, to amend the An-
imal Welfare Act, it would be Title 7, which deals with agriculture, 
Chapter 54 which deals with the transportation, sale, and handling 
of certain animals, Sections 2131–2159 which deals with the Ani-
mal Welfare Act. The legislation must spell out the changes exactly 
and in detail. Often this means changing punctuation marks, single 
words, sentences, or sections, either by omitting existing ones or 
inserting new ones. 
 Since writing legislation is a relatively technical task, it is 
handled by specialists employed by Congress, often with help 
from people outside Congress, notably people with a stake in 
the legislation, such as lobbyists. Judges and bureaucrats often 
complain about the fact that much of the legislation is open to 
interpretation. This is a result of the political processes at work; in 
order for a piece of legislation to pass, it needs to be rather vague 
so that it can garner the votes needed. A bill is sponsored by one 
or more representatives or senators; often, essentially parallel bills 
are started in the House and in the Senate. 
 Because of the amount and complexity of modern legisla-
tion, both the House of Representatives (http://www.house.
gov/) and the Senate (http://www.senate.gov/) have a number 
of committees and subcommittees to “monitor on-going govern-
mental operations, identify issues suitable for legislative review, 
gather and evaluate information; and recommend courses of ac-
tion to their parent body.” The committee structure “allows mem-
bers of the legislature to develop specialized knowledge of the 
matters under their jurisdiction.” According to the  Senate Web 

Possible Solutions 99
site’s  information page describing the Senate Committee System 
(http://www.senate.gov/general/common/generic/about_com 
mittees.htm): 
 First, [the committee or subcommittee] asks relevant ex-
ecutive agencies for written comments on the measure. 
Second, it holds hearings to gather information and views 
from non-committee experts. At committee hearings, 
these witnesses summarize submitted statements and then 
respond to questions from the senators. Third, a committee 
meets to perfect the measure through amendments, and 
non-committee members sometimes attempt to influence 
the language. Fourth, when language is agreed upon, the 
committee sends the measure back to the full Senate, usu-
ally along with a written report describing its purposes 
and provisions. 
 Government bureaucrats can be invited to attend a hearing 
and to answer questions, provide documents, and offer com-
ments. If they refuse, they can be subpoenaed. Citizens who are 
experts in some relevant area can also be invited to attend and 
can be subpoenaed if they refuse. Experts can also volunteer to 
provide information about and insights into issues of interest. In 
general, a hearing is not just a fact-finding forum but also politi-
cal theater, since the representatives and senators are, after all, 
politicians. 
 Theoretically, once drafted, the bill is sent to the appropri-
ate subcommittee in the Senate or the House, where hearings 
about the topic may or may not be conducted. It is then sent on 
to the full committee with recommendations. Some legislation 
dies in subcommittee or committee. Some, however, is passed 
through the appropriate committee, again generally with recom-
mendations; it then reaches the floor of the House or the Senate, 
where, after debate, it is voted on. If enough members vote yes, 
by the time it reaches this point, the versions in the House and 
the Senate may and probably do vary. The next step is a House-
Senate conference, where these issues are resolved. If the revised 
bill wins approval of both houses of Congress, it is then passed 
along to the White House, where the president has the option 
of signing it, which means that it becomes the law of the land, 
or vetoing it, which means that the process stops or the bill is 
sent back to Congress to rework. This overview is accurate, but 

100 Animal Rights
it  oversimplifies the actual process, an explanation of which is 
outside the scope of this book. 
 The first federal law based on Bill 9743 is commonly referred 
to as the Animal Welfare Act (AWA). It became Public Law 89–544 
(80 Stat. 350) when it was signed by President Lyndon Johnson on 
August 24, 1966. 
 Animal Welfare Act of 1966 
 The purpose of the Animal Welfare Act, commonly called the 
Research or Experimentation—Cats and Dogs Act of 1966, is to 
protect the owners of dogs and cats from the theft of such pets, 
to prevent the sale or use of stolen dogs or cats for the purpose of 
research or experimentation, and to establish humane standards 
for the treatment of dogs ( Canis familiaris ), cats ( Felis catus ), mon-
keys (nonhuman primates), guinea pigs, hamsters, and rabbits 
by animal dealers and medical research facilities. Animal dealers 
who transport animals over state lines are required to be licensed 
by and research facilities must be registered with the secretary of 
agriculture. Research facilities that receive funds from the federal 
government are required to follow the rules promulgated under 
the authority of the Act. There are minimum requirements with 
respect to housing, feeding, watering, sanitation, ventilation, 
shelter from extremes of weather and temperature, separation 
of species, and adequate veterinary care, as well as requirements 
for the humane handling, care, treatment, and transportation of 
 animals by dealers and research facilities. 
 No dealer is allowed to sell or dispose of any dog or cat within 
five business days after acquisition of an animal. Dogs and cats 
must be marked for identification in some humane manner, and 
dealers and research facilities must make and maintain records of 
the sale and purchase of dogs and cats. 
 The Act does not authorize the secretary to promulgate 
rules, regulations, or orders for the handling, care, treatment, or 
inspections of animals during actual research or experimenta-
tion by a research facility as determined by such research. The 
Act describes civil and criminal procedures and penalties for 
violations of its provision. 
 Animal Welfare Act of 1970 
 The Animal Welfare Act of 1970 was signed by President Rich-
ard Nixon on December 24, 1970, and became Public Law 91–579 
(84 Stat. 1560). 

Possible Solutions 101
 This Act amended the Animal Welfare Act to broaden the 
definition of “animal” to include any live or dead warm-blooded 
animal, and expanded its jurisdiction to organizations that do not 
engage in interstate transport. The rules do not apply to horses 
not used for research purposes or to other farm animals, such as 
livestock or poultry, that are used as food or fiber or for improving 
animal nutrition, breeding, management, or production efficiency 
or for improving the quality of food or fiber. 
 This Act requires persons or organizations that hold animals 
for exhibition and for sale as pets, excluding retail pet stores, to 
follow the rules promulgated under the authority of the Act. Ex-
hibitors include carnivals, road shows, circuses, and zoos but do 
not include state or county fairs, livestock shows, rodeos, pure-
bred dog or cat shows, and any other fairs or exhibitions that are 
intended to advance agricultural arts and sciences 
 The Act does not authorize the secretary to promulgate 
rules, regulations, or orders with regard to the design, outlines, 
guidelines, or performance of actual research or experimenta-
tion. However, each research facility must show that profession-
ally acceptable standards governing the care, treatment, and use 
of animals during actual research or experimentation are being 
followed, including the appropriate use of anesthetic, analgesic, 
and tranquilizing drugs. The Act describes civil and criminal 
procedures and penalties for violations of its provisions. 
 Horse Protection Act of 1970 
 This act and its amendments are also administered by APHIS. 
The purpose of this Act was to prevent a painful practice, called 
scoring, used to accentuate a horse’s gait. Scoring involves irritat-
ing the horse’s forelegs with injections and applying chemicals or 
mechanical restraints. Tennessee walking horses and other high-
stepping breeds are the most frequent victims of this abuse. The 
Act provides both civil and criminal penalties for violators. 
 Animal Welfare Act Amendment of 1976 
 The Animal Welfare Act Amendment of 1976 was signed by Presi-
dent Gerald Ford on April 22, 1976, and became Public Law 94–
279 (90 Stat. 417). 
 This Act amended the Animal Welfare Act of 1970 to make 
it unlawful for any person to knowingly sell, buy, transport, 
or deliver to another person any dog or other animal for the 
purpose of having the dog or other animal participate in an 

102 Animal Rights
 animal-fighting venture or to sponsor or exhibit an animal in 
any animal-fighting venture. It does not include the use of one 
or more animals in hunting another animal or animals, such as 
waterfowl, birds, raccoons, or in fox hunting. It also prohibits the 
use of the U.S. Postal Service or any interstate instrumentality to 
promote or otherwise further an animal-fighting venture. The ac-
tivities prohibited by the Act with respect to animal-fighting ven-
tures involving live fowl are illegal only if the fight is to take place 
in a state where it would be illegal. 
 The Act also promulgated rules for the transport of animals 
by intermediate handlers (express companies, forwarders, and 
other persons or facilities that handle live-animal shipments) and 
carriers (airlines, railroads, motor carriers, shipping lines, or other 
enterprises engaged in the business of transporting any animals 
for hire). The rules provide minimum standards for the size of 
shipping containers, impose feed and water requirements, regu-
late the temperature and ventilation of the containers, and contain 
species-specific guidelines for the amount of rest to be provided 
for the animals. 
 The Act prohibits the transportation of any dog, cat, or other 
animal that is less than eight weeks old. A licensed veterinar-
ian’s certificate that the animal appears free of infectious disease 
or physical abnormality that would endanger the animal(s) or 
other animals or endanger human public health must be issued 
before an animal can be transported. The Act prohibits trans-
portation of animals covered by the Act on a C.O.D. basis unless 
the consignor guarantees the round-trip fare, care, and handling 
charges for any animal not claimed within 48 hours. The Act in-
cludes under its provisions persons or organizations that merely 
negotiate the purchase of animals covered by the Act. Any person 
who grosses less than $500 from the sale of animals other than wild 
animals, dogs, and cats, as well as retail pet stores, except those 
stores that sell any animals to a research facility, an exhibitor, or a 
dealer, are excluded from the provisions of the Act. It extends the 
definition of the word “animal” as used in the Act to include all 
dogs, including dogs for hunting, security, or breeding purposes. 
The Act describes civil and criminal procedures and penalties for 
violations of its provisions. 
 Food Security Act of 1985 
 Two hearings were held as this bill was under consideration. 
One of the hearings, titled “Improved Standards for Laboratory 

Possible Solutions 103
Animals,” was conducted before the Senate Committee on Ag-
riculture, Nutrition, and Forestry on July 20, 1983. The second 
was conducted on September 19, 1984 by the Subcommittee on 
Department Operations, Research, and Foreign Agriculture and 
was titled “Improved Standards for Laboratory Animals Act; and 
Enforcement of the Animal Welfare Act by the Animal and Plant 
Health Inspection Service.” A variety of government bureau-
crats and experts testified at these hearings, both for and against 
the bill. Other than the House Conference Report No. 99– 447, 
titled “1985 Amendments, Joint Explanatory State of the Com-
mittee of Conference” (to accompany H.R. 2100, which is avail-
able online at http://www.animallaw.info/administrative/adush
confrep99_447.htm), it is difficult to determine if there were any 
House and Senate floor debates or other actions, such as mark-
ups or other Conference Committee reports. Senator Dole tacked 
the bill onto the Food Security Act of 1985, which established the 
framework for the secretary of agriculture to administer agricul-
ture and food programs for the years 1986–1990. It consisted of 
18 titles dealing with dairy; wool and mohair; wheat and feed 
grains; cotton; rice; peanuts; soybeans; sugar, general commod-
ity provisions; trade; conservation; credit; agricultural research, 
extension, and teaching; food stamp and related programs; mar-
keting; and other miscellaneous matters. Title 17 of the bill con-
sists of 19 subtitles that deal with: Processing, Inspecting, and 
Labeling; Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Com-
mittees; National Agricultural Policy Commission Act of 1985; 
National Aquaculture Policy Improvement Act of 1985; Special 
Study and Pilot Project on Futures Trading; Animal Welfare; 
CCC Storage Contracts; Emergency Feed Program; Controlled 
Substances Production Control; Unleaded Fuel in Agricultural 
Machinery; Potato Advisory Commission; Viruses, Serums, Tox-
ins, and Analogous Products; Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, 
and Rodenticide Act; Users Fees for Reports, Publications, and 
Software; Confidentiality of Information; Land Conveyance to 
Irwin County, Georgia; National Tree Seed Laboratory; Control 
of Grasshoppers and Mormon Crickets; and Study of a Strategic 
Ethanol Reserve 
 Senator Dole inserted the Animal Welfare Act into this long 
and complex bill, as indicated, just prior to the Senate adjourn-
ment for the 1985 Christmas holiday. The vote in the House for 
the Food Security Act of 1985, taken December 18, 1985, was 325 
for and 39 against, and in the Senate the vote was 55 for and 38 

104 Animal Rights
against. The bill, commonly called the Improved Standards for 
Laboratory Animals Act, was signed into law on December 23, 
1985, by President Ronald Reagan and became Public Law 99–198 
(99 Stat. 1645). 
 These amendments are a significant departure from the origi-
nal Animal Welfare Act and its earlier amendments, which all 
stopped at the laboratory doors and had no influence over the 
actual research. They fundamentally changed the way biomedical 
research is conducted. The new Act mandated the establishment 
of an Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at each insti-
tution whose function would be to evaluate experimental proto-
cols to determine if the protocols followed made the best use of 
the animals. The Committee could require changes if it found they 
were necessary. 
 Health Research Extension Act of 1985 
 The Health Research Extension Act of 1985 was signed into law 
by President Ronald Reagan and became Public Law 99–158. It 
provides guidelines for the National Institutes of Health and 
for scientists and clinicians who receive grants from the Insti-
tute. The Act establishes guidelines for the proper care of ani-
mals used in biomedical and behavioral research. It mandates 
the proper use of tranquilizers, analgesics, anesthetics, paralyt-
ics, and euthanasia, as well as appropriate pre- and postsurgical 
care of research animals. The Act also requires the formation of 
an animal care committee that essentially parallels the work of 
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee described in 
detail in chapter 6. 
 Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990 
 The Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990 was 
signed by President George H. W. Bush on November 28, 1990, 
and became Public Law 101–624, Section 2593, Protection of 
Pets. 
 The Act provides that every pound or shelter owned by the 
state, county, or city, every shelter that is under contract to a state, 
county, or city, and every private shelter established for the pur-
pose of caring for animals, such as a humane society, must hold 
and care for any dog or cat that comes into its care for a period of 
not less than five days to enable that dog or cat to be recovered 
by its original owner or adopted by other individuals before it is 
sold to a dealer. 

Possible Solutions 105
 Animal Enterprise Protection Act of 1992 
 The Animal Enterprise Protection Act of 1992 was signed by 
President George H. W. Bush and became Public Law 102–346 
(106 Stat. 928). 
 This Act amends Title 18 of the U.S. Code (Crimes and 
Criminal Procedure) by adding Section 43, Animal Enterprise 
Terrorism. This Act makes it a federal crime for anyone who 
crosses national or state borders and/or uses the mails to cause 
a physical disruption in the functioning of an animal enterprise 
by stealing, damaging, or causing the loss of property, includ-
ing animals and records, that causes economic damage exceeding 
$10,000. An animal enterprise is defined as a commercial or aca-
demic enterprise that uses animals for food or fiber production, 
agriculture, research, or testing; a zoo, aquarium, circus, rodeo, 
or lawful competitive animal event; or a fair intended to advance 
agricultural arts and sciences. This Act mandates restitution in the 
form of the reasonable cost of repeating any experimentation that 
was interrupted or invalidated as a result of the offense and the 
loss of food production or farm income attributable to the offense. 
It also outlines the penalty for infractions. If the violators did not 
instill a reasonable fear of serious bodily injury or death and the 
offense resulted in no economic damage or injury, they are sub-
ject to a fine, imprisonment of not more than one year, or both. 
If no bodily injury occurred and the economic damage exceeded 
$10,000 but was less than $100,000, the punishment is a fine and 
imprisonment of five years or less. If the damage exceeds $100,000 
or the violation resulted in serious bodily injury, the punishment 
is a fine and a prison term not exceeding 10 years. If the offense re-
sulted in bodily injury or damages of $1 million, the punishment 
is a fine and a prison term not exceeding 20 years. If the offense 
resulted in the death of another individual, the violator will be 
imprisoned for life. 
 Farm Bill (2002) 
 Farm Bill 2002, Title 10, Miscellaneous Provisions, Section D, was 
signed into law on May 13, 2002, by President George W. Bush. 
 The Act excludes birds, mice of the genus  Mus , and rats of 
the genus  Rattus  bred for research purposes, as well as horses not 
used for research purposes, from the definition of an “animal” 
in the Animal Welfare Act. It makes it a misdemeanor to ship a 
bird in interstate commerce for the purpose of fighting or to spon-
sor a fight using birds shipped via interstate commerce. The bill 

106 Animal Rights
also requires the National Research Council to provide a report 
to Congress on the implications of including rats, mice, and birds 
within the definition of “animal” in the Animal Welfare Act. 
 Animal Fighting Prohibition Enforcement Act of 2007 
 This Act, signed into law by President Bush on May 3, 2007, makes 
it illegal to buy, sell, transport, or deliver into interstate or foreign 
commerce any sharp instrument meant to be attached to a bird’s 
leg for use in an animal-fighting venture. It amends the federal 
criminal code to impose a fine and/or a prison term of up to three 
years for violating the provisions of the act. 
 The Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals 
 The Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals  (which is avail-
able at http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id+5140 was 
published by the National Research Council, Commission of Life 
Sciences, Institute of Laboratory Animal Research, in 1996 (ISBN 
0–309–05377–3). The  Guide  provides day-to-day methods for 
implementing the rules and regulations promulgated under the 
Animal Welfare Act and its amendments and under the Health Ex-
tension Act, which are published in the U.S. Code. The  Guide has 
been published in French, Spanish, Chinese, Russian, Taiwanese, 
and Korean. An international workshop was held in Washington, 
DC, in 2003 to develop science-based guidelines for laboratory 
animal care, and these proceedings can be viewed online. It is 
likely that this information will be used to update the  Guide . The 
National Academies Press also published  Guidelines for the Care 
and Use of Mammals in Neuroscience and Behavioral Research,  in 2003; 
the text can be viewed online at http://books.nap.edu/catalog.
php?record_id=10732#toc. 
 Federal Regulations (Agricultural) 
 Background 
 Ruminants (dairy cows, cattle, and sheep) are the single largest 
source of methane emissions that result from human activity. 
Methane is a greenhouse gas that is produced during the normal 
digestive process of the animal. 
 Because of the concentration of animals in a CAFO, more 
than 1 billion tons of manure are produced in a year, which is 
about 130 times the amount of human waste produced in the 
same time period. AFO and CAFO ammonia emissions represent 

Possible Solutions 107
 approximately half of all ammonia emissions. Manure also con-
tains nitrogen, phosphorus, undigested organic matter, spilled 
feed, bedding/litter materials, pathogens, antibiotics, and odor-
ous/volatile compounds, such as methane, carbon dioxide, 
hydrogen sulfide, and ammonia. It also tends to increase the con-
centration of trace elements such as arsenic and copper. Stored 
manure also draws insect pests and rats. 
 Federal legislation and rules for AFOs or CAFOs deal only 
with the handling of wastes. The Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) has estimated that approximately 70 percent of 
the pollution in U.S. rivers and streams comes from farms, es-
pecially intensive feeding operations. The 1972 Clean Water Act 
was designed “to restore and maintain the chemical, physical, 
and biological integrity of the Nation’s waters.” The EPA has 
promulgated rules for AFOs and especially CAFOs under the 
authority of this Act. Section 502 of the Act defines these opera-
tions as “point sources” for pollutants. It created a federal permit 
program, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, 
which regulates the quantity and character of the discharge of 
pollutants into U.S. waters. These rules have been revised and 
updated several times, most recently in 2003. The goals of these 
rules seek to limit fish kills, nutrient loading, and offensive odors. 
It is not currently clear if manure is regulated under the Environ-
mental Recovery, Compensation and Liability Act (commonly 
called the Superfund) or the Environmental Protection and Com-
munity Right-to-Know Act. 
 There is no federal legislation to deal with the treatment of 
animals in AFOs and CAFOs. Each state has developed CAFO 
statutes dealing with animal wastes, some of which are more 
stringent than the federal rules. These rules are quite technical 
and complex. They deal with how CAFOs obtain permits that 
allow them to operate, how and where they are allowed to release 
wastes, and the penalties for failure to follow these rules. Some 
states cover some agricultural animals in their anticruelty laws. 
 Humane Methods of Livestock Slaughter 
 The Humane Slaughter Act was sponsored by Senator Hubert 
Humphrey (D, Minnesota) and signed into law by President Dwight 
Eisenhower in 1958. This law, which is enforced by 700 inspectors 
of the Food Safety and Inspection Service of the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, requires cattle, calves, horses, mules, sheep, swine, and 
other livestock to be rendered unconscious (i.e., insensible to pain) 

108 Animal Rights
by a single blow or gunshot or an electrical, chemical or other 
means that is rapid and effective. An animal is considered uncon-
scious if it fails to display a “righting reflex”; that is, it does not at-
tempt to stand and right itself. The Act also allows slaughtering in 
accordance with the ritual requirements of the Jewish faith or any 
other religious faith where the animal is rendered unconscious by 
simultaneous and instantaneous severance of the carotid arteries 
with a sharp instrument. 
 The Act was updated in 1978 and gave U.S. Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) inspectors the authority to stop a slaughter-
ing line when it observed cruelty until the cruelty was corrected. 
The USDA later withdrew this authority because of costs to the 
industry. If inspectors are not allowed to respond to cruelty, then 
it seems likely that even the minimal requirements of the Act are 
not being enforced. The Farm Bill of 2002 included a Resolution 
that the Humane Slaughter Act should be fully enforced, but it 
is not clear if this has caused a change in enforcement of the Act. 
There are efforts to develop methods for dealing with nonambu-
latory livestock, that is, animals that cannot walk to the slaughter 
station. It is likely that these animals are diseased or have been 
injured during transport or at the slaughterhouse. These animals 
are sometimes called “downer cows.” Agriculture Secretary Ed 
Schafer, testifying before a Senate Appropriations subcommittee 
in February 2008, would not endorse an outright ban on the use of 
downer cows. This means that they still may be slaughtered and 
moved into the food chain. 
 The Humane Slaughter Act does not cover poultry, fish, rab-
bits, and other animals that are used for food; therefore, there are 
no rules covering their slaughter. The Act deals only with the last 
few minutes of an animal’s life and does not focus on how the 
animals are treated while in the slaughterhouse. 
 The Act also does not cover the slaughter of horses. Horse-
meat is considered a delicacy in France, Italy, Belgium, and Japan, 
and approximately 90,000 horses were slaughtered each year for 
human consumption. This includes both wild caught and domes-
tic horses (e.g., ponies, retired show horses, family horses). In part 
because of controversy and bad publicity, three horse slaughter 
operations in the United States were closed in 2006. Horseflesh is 
also used in making pet food. The Wild Free-Roaming Horses and 
Burros Act (Public Law 92–195 [85 Stat. 649], see U.S.C. 1331) pro-
tects the included animals from capture, branding, harassment, 
or killing. 

Possible Solutions 109
 The Endangered Species Act of 1973 (Public Law 93–205 
[87 Stat. 884]) and its amendments mandate that the secretary of 
the interior promulgate rules and regulations to protect threatened 
and endangered species of plants and animals. The Act does not deal 
directly with animal welfare except as it applies to these species. 
 United States—State and Local 
Regulations 
 In the United States, state, country and local governments have en-
acted animal welfare laws to prohibit cruelty to animals. The word-
ing of the Texas statute (available at http://www.statutes.legis.state.
tx.us/SOTWDocs/HS/htm/HS.821.36163.31446.htm) is fairly typi-
cal and can be found in Title 10 of “Health and Safety of Animals, 
Chapter 821, Treatment and Disposition of Animals, Subchapter 
A, Treatment of Animals” (http://www.statutes.legis.state.tx.us/
Docs/HS/htm/HS.821.htm). The statute requires a peace officer or 
animal control officer of a county or city who believes that an animal 
has been or is being mistreated to apply to a court or magistrate to 
obtain a warrant to seize the animal. When executing the warrant, 
the officer causes the animal to be impounded and gives written 
notice to the owner for the time and place of a hearing. 
 The wording of the San Antonio anticruelty ordinance is fairly 
typical and can be found at “Code of Ordinances of City of San An-
tonio, Chapter 5, Animals and Fowl, Article 1 In General, Sec. 5-4. 
Cruelty to Animals.” This ordinance states that it shall be unlawful 
for an owner of an animal to beat, cruelly treat, overload or other-
wise abuse an animal, fail to provide that animal with humane care 
and treatment, access to an adequate supply of fresh water, and 
 appropriate veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering. 
 Most local ordinances also provide a humane sanctuary or 
shelter for abandoned or unwanted animals. The wording of the 
San Antonio ordinance (http://www.municode.com/resources/
gateway.asp?pid=11508&sid=43) is fairly typical and can be found 
at “Code of Ordinances of City of San Antonio, Chapter 5, Ani-
mals & Fowl, Article 1, In General, Sec. 5–2 Animal Care Services 
Facility; Erection, Maintenance; Care of Animals, Euthanasia 
Service.” This ordinance requires the city to maintain a sanitary 
facility to house all animals seized, impounded, or  surrounded 
and to provide adequate care and feeding. 
 Unfortunately, the number of unwanted pets (mostly cats 
and dogs, but also birds, amphibians, reptiles, and other exotic 

110 Animal Rights
animals) taken into shelters generally exceeds the numbers that 
are adopted out, so the excess are “put to sleep” or “put down,” 
which are euphemisms for euthanasia or being killed. The precise 
number of animals that are killed is controversial, but estimates 
put it at 6 to 8 million cats and dogs per year. The method of eu-
thanasia varies from place to place. Many of these shelters require 
pets that are adopted to be spayed or neutered. Local authorities 
also have licensing laws to help control diseases such as rabies. 
 One of the controversial aspects of some local ordinances is 
commonly called “pound seizure.” It provides that “surplus” cats 
or dogs that might be euthanized can be released or sold to research, 
testing, or educational institutions. Fourteen states (Connecticut, 
Delaware, Hawaii, Illinois, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New 
Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, 
Vermont, and West Virginia) have laws banning pound seizures, 
while three states (Minnesota, Oklahoma, and Utah) require 
pounds to release animals to research and educational institutions 
(American Anti-Vivisection Society 2009). The remaining states do 
not have specific laws dealing with this issue, so it is left to each 
county or city to determine whether its shelters will release cats 
and dogs to research or educational institutions. The San Antonio 
ordinance mentioned earlier prohibits pound seizures. 
 England 
 As indicated earlier, the first animal welfare act enacted was the 
Act to Prevent Cruel and Improper Treatment of Cattle of 1822. 
This Act was amended by the Cruelty to Animals Act of 1835 to 
include as “cattle” bulls, bears, dogs, and sheep. The Act also pro-
hibited bear baiting and cockfighting. The Cruelty to Animals Act 
of 1849 (An Act for the More Effectual Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals) repealed the 1822 and 1835 Acts and penalties for beat-
ing, ill-treating, overdriving, abusing, and torturing animals. 
 The Cruelty to Animal Act of 1876, which applies to verte-
brate animals, amended the 1849 Act and set up a licensing system 
for animal experimentation administered by the secretary of state. 
The application for a license must be signed by the president of 
the Royal Society, the Royal Society of Edinburgh, the Royal Irish 
Academy, the Royal College of Surgeons, the Royal College of 
Physicians, the General Medical Council, the Faculty of Physicians 
and Surgeons of Glasgow, or a professor of physiology,  medicine, 

Possible Solutions 111
anatomy, medical jurisprudence, material media, or surgery in a 
university. The Act required that the research be designed to fur-
ther knowledge of physiology or knowledge useful for saving 
or prolonging life or alleviating suffering. The Act required that 
test animals be anaesthetized, except where insensibility would 
frustrate the object of the experiment. Animals could be used for 
research only once. Paralytics, such as curare, are not considered 
anesthetics, as they do not prevent painful sensations. The Act also 
provides that animals must be euthanized at the end of the experi-
ment. A person who takes part in an experiment likely to cause 
pain and who lacks the appropriate license is fined 50 pounds for 
the first offense; any second or succeeding offense is punishable 
by a fine of 100 pounds or imprisonment for three months or less. 
 The Animal (Scientific Procedures) Act of 1986 extended 
the meaning of protected animal to include all living vertebrates 
other than humans. Developing vertebrates are covered after 
the first half of gestation. This Act gives the secretary of state 
the right to extend protection to invertebrates. Animals are con-
sidered alive until there is permanent cessation of circulation or 
destruction of the brain. A regulated procedure is defined as a 
scientific procedure that may cause the animal pain, suffering, 
distress, or lasting harm and includes the administration of an 
anesthetic or analgesic, decerebration, or any other method for 
rendering an animal insentient. All experiments are required to 
be conducted under general or local anesthetics. If anesthesia is 
not possible, analgesics and other methods should be used to 
ensure as far as possible that pain, suffering, distress, or harm 
are limited and that the animals are not subjected to severe pain, 
distress, or suffering. 
 The person who performs a regulated procedure, the project 
under which the procedure is performed, and the organization 
in which the procedure is performed must be licensed by the sec-
retary of state. The project license will be granted if the secretary 
 determines that the research is intended to further the prevention, 
diagnosis, or treatment of disease, ill health, or abnormality or their 
effects in humans, animals, or plants. Licenses are also granted for 
the assessment, detection, regulation, or modification of physiolog-
ical conditions in humans, animals, or plants, as well as for the 
protection of the natural environment in the interests of the health 
and welfare of humans or animals. Licenses can also be granted 
for the advancement of knowledge of biological or behavioral sci-
ences, for education or training in primary or secondary schools, 

112 Animal Rights
for forensic inquiries, and for breeding animals for experimental 
or other  scientific uses. The secretary will not grant a license unless 
the project cannot be satisfactorily achieved without the use of pro-
tected animals. The secretary will also not grant a license for the use 
of cats, dogs, primates, horses, or related animals unless he is satis-
fied that no other species is suitable for the program. Institutions 
are required to have a certificate issued by the secretary of state and 
must specify the person responsible for the day-to-day care of the 
animals and a veterinary surgeon or other suitably qualified per-
son to provide advice on the health and welfare of the animals. At 
the conclusion of the procedures allowed by the license, the animal 
is euthanized by the appropriate method. These include exposure 
to overdose of an anesthetic, exposure to carbon dioxide in rising 
concentration, or dislocation of the neck or concussion of the brain 
by striking the cranium. The use of neuromuscular blocking agents 
is prohibited unless expressly authorized by the license, and they 
cannot be used instead of an anesthetic. 
 This Act established an Animal Procedures Committee, 
which consists of a chair and at least 12 members appointed by 
the secretary. One of the members must be a barrister, solicitor, 
or advocate. At least half of the members must hold or have held 
within the past six years any license under the Act. Two-thirds of 
the committee must have full registration as a medical practitio-
ner or veterinary surgeon. No one may serve on the Committee 
for more than four years. The Committee advises the secretary on 
matters concerned with the Act and its functions. The secretary is-
sues codes of practice related to the care of protected animals. The 
Act mandates that no endangered species will be used or any pro-
tected animal taken from the wild and imposes civil and criminal 
penalties for those who violate its provision. 
 The Animal Welfare Act of 2006 brings together and updates 
legislation to promote the welfare of vertebrate animals, except 
for those in the wild. The Act aligns welfare standards for farm and 
 nonfarm animals that were formulated in the early part of the 20th 
century and modified to incorporate scientific findings as they occur. 
 References 
 Act to Prevent Cruel and Improper Treatment of Cattle. http://www.
animalrightshistory.org/library/mar-richard-martin/1822-britian-cattle.
htm. Accessed April 16, 2009. 

Possible Solutions 113
 American Anti-Vivisection Society. http://www.aavs.org/
campPoundSeizureState.html. Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 American Association for the Advancement of Science. http://www.
aaas.org. Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 American Humane Association. http://www.americanhumane.org/. 
Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 Americans for Medical Progress. www.amprogress.org/. Accessed 
April 16, 2009. 
 American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. http://
www2.aspca.org/. Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 Animal Defense Militia. http://www.animaldefense.org. Accessed 
April 16, 2009. 
 Animal Liberation Front. http://www.animalliberationfront.com/ 
ALFront/lab.htm. Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 Animal (Scientific Procedures) Act of 1986. http://www.archive.
official-documents.co.uk/document/hoc/321/321-xa.htm. Accessed 
April 16, 2009. 
 Animal Welfare Act of 2006. http://www.animallaw.info/nonus/statutes/
stat_pdf/UKAnimalWelfareAct2006.pdf. Accessed August 20, 2009. 
 Animal Welfare Institute. 2009. http://dynamodata.fdncenter.org/990_
pdf_archive/135/135655952/135655952_200706_990.pdf. Accessed 
April 16, 2009. 
 Bernard, C. 1957.  An Introduction to the Study of Experimental Medicine . 
Trans. H. C. Greene. New York: Dover. 
 British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection. http://www.buav.org/. 
Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 Cruelty to Animal Act of 1876. http://web.archive.org/
web/20061214034848/; http://homepage.tinet.ie/~pnowlan/
Chapter-77.htm. Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 European Coalition to End Animal Experiments. http://www.eceae.
org/. Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 Foundation for Biomedical Research. http://www.fbresearch.org/. 
Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 Jamison, W. V., and W. M. Lunch. 1992. “Rights of Animals, Perceptions 
of Science, and Political Activism: Profile of American Animal Rights 
Activists.”  Science, Technology, & Human Values 17(4): 438–58. 
 Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. http://
www.mspca.org. Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 National Antivivisectionists Society. http://www.navs.org. Accessed 
April 16, 2009. 

114 Animal Rights
 National Association for Biomedical Research. http://www.nabr.org. 
Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 National Institutes of Health. http://www.nih.gov/. Accessed April 16, 
2009. 
 National Research Foundation. http://www.nsf.gov/. Accessed 
April 16, 2009. 
 New York Times . 1989, January 14. 
 Nicoll, C. S., and Russell, S. M. 1991. “Mozart, Alexander the Great, and 
the Animal Rights/Liberation Philosophy.”  Federation of the American 
Society of Experimental Biology Journal 5 (14): 2008–2892. http://www.
fasebj.org/cgi/reprint/5/14/2888. Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. http://
www.oecd.org/home. Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals. http://www.peta.org; 
http://dynamodata.fdncenter.org/990_pdf_archive/521/521218336/52
1218336_200607_990.pdf. Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. http://www.
rspca.org.uk/. Accessed April 16, 2009.Science-Based Guidelines for 
Laboratory Animal Care. Available at: http://www.nap.edu/openbook.
php?isbn=0309093023. Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 Society for Neuroscience. http://www.sfn.org. Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 States United for Biomedical Research. http://www.statesforbiomed.
org/. Accessed April 16, 2009. 
 Vogue Magazine September, 1989. 
 Washingtonian Magazine August, 1986 . 

115
 4 
 Chronology 
 T
his chronology provides a historical overview of the relation-
ship between humans and animals. Since animal activists focus 
much of their attention on the use of animals in education, 
research, and testing, it highlights the major events in the history 
of science as they relate to animal use, such as the formation of 
organizations related to animals. 
 The Nobel Prize, generally regarded as the most prestigious 
award a scientist can receive, was instituted by Alfred Nobel, the 
inventor of high explosives, and the first Nobel Prize for physiol-
ogy and medicine was awarded in 1901. Winners of the Nobel 
Prize are indicated by a single asterisk (*); many of them used 
animals in their research. 
 John D. MacArthur, who owned Bankers Life and Casualty 
and other businesses, left 92 percent of his estate, valued at more 
than $1 billion, to fund the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur 
Foundation. Fellowships (commonly called Genius Awards), first 
granted in 1981, are given to between 20 and 40 citizens of the 
United States, of any age and working in any field, who “show ex-
ceptional merit and promise for continued and creative work.” Each 
fellow is awarded $500,000 a year for five years, with no strings 
attached. Winners of the MacArthur Award who have  utilized 
 animals in their research are indicated by two asterisks (**). 
 Chronology 
 10000 –7000  B.C.E. 
 The dog is domesticated in Mesopotamia; goats 
and sheep are domesticated in Persia; the pig and 

116 Animal Rights
10000–7000 B.C.E.  
water buffalo are domesticated in eastern Asia; 
 (cont.) 
chickens are domesticated in southern Asia. 
 5000  B.C.E. 
Horses are domesticated in Ukraine. 
 3000  B.C.E. 
 Donkeys and mules are domesticated in Israel, 
camels in Iran, and elephants in India. 
 2950  B.C.E.  
 Imhotep, an Egyptian physician and archi-
tect, is the first scientist whose name has come 
down to us. He is also the only scientist to ever 
become a god. 
 2500  B.C.E. 
Cats are domesticated in Egypt. 
 520  B.C.E. 
Anaximander introduces the idea of evolution. 
 500  B.C.E.  
 Alcmaeon dissects a human cadaver for 
scientific purposes. 
 400  B.C.E.  
 Hippocrates develops the ethical oath named 
after him. 
 323  B.C.E. 
 Aristotle is considered to be the father of 
the life sciences, especially embryology; he 
observes and describes the development of 
embryos in different species. He is the first to 
engage in large-scale classification of plants and 
animals. He introduces the inductive- deductive 
method of reasoning. 
 40  C.E. 
 Pedanius Dioscorides publishes the  De Materia 
Medica , which describes the medicinal proper-
ties of herbs. 
 159 
 Galen, a Greek medical scientist, is one of the 
first scientists to perform experiments on living 
animals. 
 1140 
 Roger II, a Norman king, decrees that only phy-
sicians with a license from the government can 
practice medicine. 

Chronology 117
 1193 
Albertus Magnus describes his dissection of animals. 
 1620 
 Bacon publishes  Novum Organum , in which he rec-
ommends induction and experimentation as the 
basis of the scientific method. 
 1621 
 Fabricius’s  De Formatione Ovi et Pulli (On the For-
mation of the Egg and the Chick) is published. 
 1628 
 Harvey publishes  Exercitatio Anatomica de Motu 
Cordis et Sanguinis in Animalibus  (On the Motion of 
the Heart and Blood in Animals). 
 1637 
 Descartes publishes  Discours de la Méthode pour 
Bien Conduire la Raison et Chercher la Vérité dans les 
Sciences  (Discourse on the Method of Rightly Con-
ducting Reason and Seeking Truth in the Sciences), 
in which he argues for the deductive method in sci-
ence. Descartes, a mechanist, believes that lower 
animals lack a pineal gland, which he believes 
serves as a channel and valve to regulate the flow 
of thought. Therefore, he maintains, lower animals 
are mere living machines. 
 1651 
 Harvey publishes  Exercitationes de Generatione Ani-
malium  (Experiments Concerning Animal Genera-
tion), which describes organ differentiation in the 
 developing embryo. 
 1667 
 Robert Boyle demonstrates that an animal can be 
kept alive by artificial respiration. 
 1676 
 Nehemiah Grew coins the term “comparative anat-
omy.” 
 1683 
 Thomas Tryon publishes  The Way To Health, Long 
Life and Happiness , which is the first book in the 
English language to use the term “rights” in regard 
to animals. 
 1735–1737 
 Carl Linnaeus publishes  Systema Naturae , in which 
he describes the classification of animals, and 

118 Animal Rights
1735 –1737 
Genera Plantorum, which introduces the classification
 (cont.) 
 of plants that is used to this day. 
 1747 
 Albrect von Haller publishes  Primae Lineae Physiolo-
giae, the first textbook of physiology. 
 1761 
 The first school of veterinary medicine is founded 
at Lyons, France. 
 1766 
 Albrecht von Haller, the father of modern experi-
mental neurology, is the first to show that nerves 
stimulate muscles. 
 1775 
 Sir Percival Potts discovers that environmental factors 
can cause cancer. 
 1779 
 Jeremy Bentham, a utilitarian philosopher, pub-
lishes  An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and 
Legislation,  in which he writes of animals, “The 
question is not, can they reason? Nor can they talk? 
But, can they suffer?” This statement becomes the 
battle cry of both the Victorian and the modern 
animal protection movements. 
 1790 
 Luigi Galvani determines the effects of electrical 
stimulation on frog legs. 
  
 Antoine Lavoisier experiments on the relationship 
between maintenance and generation of body heat 
and oxygen in the air. 
 1796 
 Edward Jenner performs the first inoculation 
against smallpox. This is the beginning of the 
development of vaccines that prevent disease. 
 1817 
 Heinz Christina Pander discovers the three differ-
ent layers that form in the early development of the 
chick embryo. 
 1822 
 An Act to Prevent Cruel and Improper Treatment 
of Cattle (a.k.a Martin’s Act) is passed by Parlia-
ment and becomes the first law against cruelty to 

Chronology 119
 animals. It seeks to prevent cruel and improper 
treatment of horses, mares, geldings, mules, asses, 
oxen, cows, heifers, steers, sheep, and cattle. It does 
not cover dogs, cats, other mammals, or birds. 
 1824 
 Henry Hill Hickman uses carbon dioxide as a gen-
eral anesthetic in an animal. 
  
 The Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Ani-
mals is founded in London by Richard Martin with 
the help of Sir Samuel Romilly and Sir William 
Wilberforce. 
 1834 
 If the drugs in common use were to be, in the words 
of Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes, “sunk to the bottom 
of the sea, it would be all the better for mankind—
and all the worse for the fishes.” 
 1835 
 Parliament amends the 1822 Cruelty to Animals 
Act to include bulls, bears, dogs, and sheep. 
  
 Princess Victoria extends patronage to the Society for 
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and it becomes 
the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals. 
 1839 
 Jan Evangelista Purkinje, a Czech anatomist, be-
comes the director of the world’s first Department of 
Physiology, at the University of Breslau in Prussia. 
 1843 
 Sir David Ferrier uses the brains of living primates 
and other animals to locate motor and sensory 
 regions in the brain and to map them. 
 1849 
 The Cruelty to Animals Act of 1849 (An Act for the 
More Effectual Prevention of Cruelty to Animals) re-
peals the 1822 and 1835 Acts and provides penalties 
for ill-treating, overdriving, abusing, and torturing 
animals. 
 1852 
 Hermann von Helmholtz determines the speed of 
transmission of a nerve impulse in a frog’s nerve cell. 

120 Animal Rights
 1856 
 Carl Ludwig is the first to keep animal organs alive 
outside the body. 
 1859 
Charles Darwin publishes  On the Origin of Species. 
 1863 
 Wilhelm Wundt publishes  Lectures on the Minds of 
Men and Animals. 
  
 The National Academy of Science is founded in the 
United States. 
 1865 
 Claude Bernard publishes  Introduction à la médicine 
expérimentale  (An Introduction to Experimental 
Medicine). 
 1866 
 Gregor Mendel publishes his discoveries in genetics 
using peas ( Pisum sativum ) in the  Proceedings of the 
Natural History Society of Brunn , a relatively obscure 
scientific journal. He describes the law of segrega-
tion and the law of independent assortment. 
  
 The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty 
to Animals is founded in New York City by Henry 
Bergh, and the first state charter for an animal pro-
tection society is granted in New York in the same 
year. 
 1866–69 
 Boston, Philadelphia, and San Francisco incorpo-
rate humane societies. 
 1872 
 Charles Darwin publishes  The Expression of the Emo-
tions in Man and Animals , in which he argues that 
the similarity of expression of emotions in humans 
and in animals argues for the evolution of humans 
from lower forms of life. 
 1875 
 The Society for the Protection of Animals Liable to 
Vivisection is founded by Frances Power Cobbe in 
England. 
 1876 
 The Cruelty to Animals Act of 1876 amends the 
Cruelty to Animals Act of 1849 and sets up a 

Chronology 121
 licensing system, administered by the secretary 
of state, for those who wish to engage in animal 
experimentation. 
 1877 
 The American Humane Association is founded by 
representatives of 27 humane organizations from 
10 states. 
 1878 
 The  Home Chronicler , a publication of one of the 
London antivivisectionist societies, publishes a list 
of marginal seats in the House of Commons held 
by members who voted against the bill to abolish 
vivisection. 
 1879 
 Louis Pasteur discovers that a weakened cholera 
organism fails to cause the disease in chickens and 
that chickens infected with the weakened organism 
are immune to the disease. 
 1880 
 Sir William Pulteney proposes a bill to ban bull 
baiting. It is defeated in the House of Commons. 
 1881 
 Louis Pasteur produces the first artificially pro-
duced vaccine by heating a preparation of anthrax 
germs to weaken them and then injecting them into 
sheep. Sheep treated in this manner fail to develop 
anthrax. 
 1882 
 The Association for the Advancement of Medicine 
by Research is founded. 
 1883 
 The first veterinary school in the United States is 
founded at the University of Pennsylvania. 
  
 The American Anti-Vivisection Society is founded 
in Jenkinton, Pennsylvania, by Caroline Earle 
White and Mary Frances Lovell. 
 1887 
 Wolfgang Kohler, one of the founders of the Ge-
stalt school of psychology, studies chimpanzee 
problem-solving abilities. 

122 Animal Rights
 1889 
 Ivan Petrovich Pavlov demonstrates classical con-
ditioning in dogs. 
  
 Oskar Minkowski and Joseph von Mering dis-
cover that the pancreas supplies a hormone 
(insulin) that is essential for normal glucose me-
tabolism by removing the pancreas of dogs and 
noting the results. 
 
The American Humane Education is founded. 
 1892 
 The American Psychological Association is founded. 
 1898 
 The British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection 
is founded by Frances Power Cobb to protest the 
use of dogs in vivisection. 
 1900 
 Mendel’s work on the basic laws of heredity are 
“rediscovered” by Hugo de Vriet, Carl Correns, 
and possibly by Erich von Tschermak. 
 1901 
 The Public Health and Marine Hospital Service is 
founded. 
  
 Emil von Behring receives the first Nobel Prize for 
Physiology or Medicine for his work using rats, rab-
bits, guinea pigs, cows, and horses in the develop-
ment of diphtheria antiserum and for ascertaining 
its usefulness.* 
 1902 
 Ronald Ross uses pigeons and other birds to 
study how malaria enters the organism. His work 
is the foundation for our ability to combat the 
disease.* 
 1904 
 Ivan Petrovich Pavlov receives the Nobel Prize for 
his work on the physiology of digestion. His work 
on conditioned reflexes, which made him famous, 
is an offshoot of this work.* 
 1905 
 Robert Koch uses cow and sheep in the study of 
the pathogenesis of tuberculosis.* 

Chronology 123
 1906 
 Representative James McMillan introduces a bill 
into Congress to control vivisection in Washington, 
DC The bill never comes to a vote. 
  
 Neuroanatomists Camillio Golgi and Santiago y 
Cajal use mice, rabbits, cats, dogs, and a variety 
of birds and reptiles to study the structure of the 
nervous system.* 
 1907 
 Alphonse Laveran uses cows, horses, mice, guinea 
pigs, and birds to demonstrate that protozoa cause 
disease.* 
  
 Ross Granville Harrison demonstrates the in vitro 
growth of living animal tissues. 
 1908 
 Paul Ehrlich and Ilya Metchnikov use fish, birds, 
and guinea pigs in the study of immune reactions 
and phagocytes (cells that engulf other cells).* 
 1910 
 Albrecht Kossel uses rats, guinea pigs, and birds to 
study proteins and nucleic acids.* 
 1912 
 The Public Health and Marine Hospital Service’s 
name is changed to the Public Health Service. 
  
 Alexis Carrel uses dogs to study the rejoining of 
severed blood vessels, which is the first step in 
organ transplantation.* 
 1913 
 Charles Richet uses dogs and rabbits to study the 
mechanism of anaphylaxis.* 
 
 John Watson publishes his first paper on behaviorism. 
 1914 
 Joseph Goldberger of the Public Health Service 
begins a study of pellagra. 
 1916 
The National Research Council is formed. 
 1919 
 Jules Bordet uses rabbits, guinea pigs, and horses 
to study the function of white blood cells.* 

124 Animal Rights
 1923 
 Frederick Banting and John MacLeod use dogs, 
rabbits, and fish in the study of insulin and the 
mechanism of diabetes.* 
  
 Otto Warburg develops a method for studying 
respiration in thin slices of tissue. 
 1924 
 Willem Einthoven develops the electrocardiograph, 
using dogs.* 
 1925 
 R. A. Fisher publishes  Statistical Methods for Research 
Workers , and Alfred J. Lotka publishes  Elements of 
Physical Biology , which contains simple mathematical 
models of biological phenomena. 
  
 The Scopes “monkey trial” is held in Dayton, 
Tennessee; John Scopes, a high school teacher, is 
prosecuted for teaching evolution. 
 1926 
 Johannes Andreas Grib Fibiger demonstrates that 
the nematode  Spiroptera carcinoma  causes cancer 
in rats and mice.* (It is discovered later that this 
specific organism does not cause cancer.) 
  
 George Richards Minot, William P. Murphy, and 
George H. Whipple establish the use of liver as a 
successful treatment for anemia; the treatment is 
based on work in dogs.* 
 1927 
 Thomas Hunt Morgan publishes  Experimental 
Embryology.  
 
Ivan Pavlov publishes  Conditioned Reflexes. 
  
 Henry Copley Green translates Claude Bernard’s 
 Introduction a la médicine expérimentale into English. 
 1928 
 Alexander Fleming discovers penicillin in molds. 
The clinical use of penicillin starts only after 
Howard Florey and Ernst Boris Chain learn how 
to manufacture it in quantity and test its curative 
effects in mice in the 1940s. The chemical  structure 

Chronology 125
of penicillin is studied by x-ray diffraction, and 
it is so complex that an electronic computer is 
needed to work out the tedious mathematics 
 involved.* 
 1929 
 Christian Eijkman and Frederick Gowland Hopkins 
use rats, mice, and chickens to discover the impor-
tance of vitamins.* 
  
 The National Anti-Vivisection Society is founded 
in Chicago by Clarence E. Richards. 
  
 Walter Vogt publishes the first ‘fate map’ of a 
vertebrate embryo. 
  
 Joseph Henry Woodger publishes  Biological 
Principles, an analysis of theoretical biology. 
 1930 
 The Laboratory of Hygiene is enlarged and reorga-
nized as National Institute of Health is formed. 
 1931 
 Ernest William Goodpasture demonstrates that vi-
ruses can be grown in eggs. This is the first step in 
the development of vaccines for viral diseases. 
 1932 
 Charles Scott Sherrington and Edgar Douglas 
Adrian use frogs, dogs, and cats to study the func-
tions of nerves.* 
 1933 
 Thomas Hunt Morgan uses fruit flies to demon-
strate the role of chromosomes in heredity.* 
 1935 
 Hans Spemann uses frogs to discover the “orga-
nizer effect,” a process in which parts of an embryo 
direct the development of groups of cells, tissues, 
and organs.* 
 
Konrad Lorenz describes the social life of animals. 
  
 The first commercial electron microscope becomes 
available. 

126 Animal Rights
 1936 
 Henry Dale and Otto Loewi use cats, frogs, birds, 
and reptiles to study the chemical transmission of 
nerve impulses.* 
  
 Alexis Carrel and Charles Lindbergh develop an 
artificial heart that is used during cardiac surgery. 
 1938 
 The Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (Public 
Law 75–717 [52 Stat. 1040]) is signed into law by 
Franklin D. Roosevelt. 
 
B. F. Skinner publishes  The Behavior of Organisms. 
 1939 
 Gerhardt Domagk, using mice and rabbits, dis-
covers the antibacterial effects of protosil, the first 
sulfa drug.* 
 1940 
 Karl Landsteiner discovers the Rhesus factor in 
human blood. 
 1943 
 Selman Waksman uses guinea pigs to demonstrate 
the antibacterial effects of streptomycin, an antibiotic 
that is effective against gram-negative bacteria. 
 1944 
 Joseph Erlanger and Herbert Spencer Gasser use 
frogs and cats to demonstrate the role of nerve cells.* 
 1945 
 Alexander Fleming, Howard Walter Florey, and 
Ernst Brois Chain use mice to demonstrate that 
penicillin can be used against infectious disease.* 
 1946 
 Hermann Joseph Muller, using fruit flies, demon-
strates that x-rays can produce mutations.* 
 
The Office of Naval Research is formed. 
 1948 
The National Institutes of Health is created. 
 
Morris Animal Foundation is founded. 
 1949 
 The American Association for Laboratory Animal 
Science is founded. 

Chronology 127
  
 Kenneth S. Cole and George Marmont invent the volt-
age “clamp” for controlling cell membrane potential. 
  
 Walter Rudolf Hess uses cats in his studies of the 
midbrain.* 
 1950 
 Edward Calvin Kendall, Tadeus Reichstein, and 
Philip Showalter Hench use rats to discover the 
structure and biological effects of hormones secreted 
by the adrenal cortex.* 
 
The National Science Foundation is founded. 
 1951 
 The Animal Welfare Institute is founded in New 
York City by Christine Stevens. 
 1952 
 Selman Abraham Wakesman uses mice, guinea 
pigs, and chickens to demonstrate the effectiveness 
for streptomycin in treating tuberculosis.* 
  
 The Institute of Laboratory Animal Resources is 
founded. 
  
 Alan Lloyd Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley, using 
neurons from squid and crab, formulate the theory 
of excitation of nerves, which is based on changes 
in sodium and potassium ions. 
 
 A polio epidemic affects more than 47,000 people 
in the United States. 
  
 Jonas Salk develops the killed-virus vaccine against 
polio. It comes into wide use in 1954. 
 1953 
 Evarts Graham and Ernest L. Wydner demonstrate 
that tar from tobacco smoke cause cancer in mice. 
 1954 
 The Humane Society of the United States is founded. 
  
 John Franklin Enders, Thomas Huckle Weller, 
and Frederick Chapman Robbins discover that 
the  poliomyelitis viruses will grow in cultures of 
tissues from animals.* 

128 Animal Rights
 1955 
 Axel Hugo Theodor Theorell uses horses to dis-
cover and understand the mode of action of 
 oxidative enzymes.* 
 1957 
 Daniel Bovet uses rabbits and dogs to discover an-
tihistamines that are used in allergy  medications.* 
  
 The Society for Animal Protective Legislation is 
founded in New York City by Christine Stevens. 
  
 Albert Sabin develops the live, weakened virus 
vaccine for polio. 
 1958 
 The Humane Slaughter Act is signed into law by 
President Dwight Eisenhower. 
 1959 
The National Trappers Association is founded. 
 1961 
 Georg von Bekesy uses guinea pigs and frogs to 
discover how the inner ear works.* 
 1962 
 The Harris-Kefauver Amendment to the Federal 
Pure Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act is signed into 
law. This Amendment requires extensive pharma-
cological and toxicological research before a drug 
could be tested in humans. 
 1963 
 John Carew Eccles, Alan Lloyd Hodgkin, and Andrew 
Fielding Huxley use squid to understand the mecha-
nism of excitation and inhibition of nerve cells.* 
 
 The  Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals is 
published, and the U.S. Public Health Service begins 
to require all recipients to adhere to its guidelines. 
 1964 
 Konrad Bloch and Feodor Lynen use rats to deter-
mine the mechanism and regulation of cholesterol 
and fatty acid metabolism.* 
 1965 
 An article about a five-year-old Dalmatian named 
Pepper who had been stolen from her home ap-
pears in  Sports Illustrated  and is one of the events 

Chronology 129
that causes Representative Joseph Resnick to intro-
duce the bill that ultimately becomes the Animal 
Welfare Act of 1966. 
  
 The American Association for the Accreditation of 
Laboratory Animal Care is founded. 
  
 Harry Harlow demonstrates that monkeys that are 
raised in isolation show emotional impairment for 
the rest of their lives. 
 1966 
 A cover story of  Life magazine titled “A Concen-
tration Camp for Dogs” causes a stir and creates a 
demand for protection for pets. 
 
 The Animal Welfare Act of 1966 (commonly referred 
to as the Research or Experimentation—Cats and 
Dogs Act of 1966) (Public Law 89–544 [80 Stat. 350]) 
is signed into law by President Lyndon Johnson. 
 1967 
 Ragnar Granit, Haldan Keffer Hartline, and George 
Wald use rats, guinea pigs, cats, frogs, and crusta-
ceans to discover the primary physiological and 
chemical processes of the eye.* 
 1968 
 Robert W. Holley, Har Gobind Khorana, and Marsh-
call W. Nirenberg use rats, guinea pigs, and frogs 
to determine how the genetic code is involved in 
protein synthesis.* 
 
The Humane Slaughter Act is amended. 
 1970 
 Bernard Katz, Ulf von Euler, and Julius Axelrod 
discover the mechanism of storage, release, and 
inactivation of neurotransmitters, using mice, rats, 
rabbits, cats, dogs, and cows.* 
  
 The Animal Welfare Act of 1970 (Public Law 91—579 
[84 Stat. 1560]) is signed into law by President Rich-
ard Nixon. 
  
 The Horse Protection Act of 1970 is signed into law 
by President Nixon. 

130 Animal Rights
 1972 
 The Animal and Plant Health Inspection is estab-
lished in the U.S. Department of Agriculture and 
is charged with enforcement of the Animal Welfare 
Act of 1966 and its amendments. 
  
 The Clean Water Act is signed into law. This is one 
of the federal laws that regulates wastes from con-
centrated animal feeding operations. 
 1973 
 Karl von Frisch studies the social behavior of hon-
eybees, and Konrad Lozenz and Nikolass Tinbergen 
study the social behavior of birds.* 
 
 The Endangered Species Act of 1973 (Public Law 
93–205 [87 Stat. 884]) is signed into law. 
 1975 
 Peter Singer publishes  Animal Liberation: A New 
Ethics for Our Treatment of Animals. 
  
 The National Congress of Animal Trainers and 
Breeders is founded. 
 1976 
 Baruch S. Slumberg discovers the hepatitis B virus 
and develops a diagnostic test and vaccine for it. 
  
 D. Carleton Gajdusek describes the first prion dis-
ease, kuku.* 
  
 The Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1976 
(Public Law 94–279 [90 Stat. 417]) is signed into 
law by President Gerald Ford. 
 1977 
 Roger Guillemin and Andrew V. Schally discover 
the role and effects of peptide(small chains of amino 
acids) hormone production of the brain using mice, 
rats, hamsters, guinea pigs, and sheep.* 
 1978 
The Humane Slaughter Act is amended. 
 1979 
Peter Singer publishes  Practical Ethics. 
  
 Allan M. Cormack and Godfrey N. Hounsfield de-
velop computer-assisted tomography (CAT) scans, 

Chronology 131
which allow three-dimensional images of the body. 
They initially use pigs in their research.* 
  
 The National Association for Biomedical Research 
is founded by Francine Trull in Washington, DC. 
  
 The Animal Liberation Front first appears in Eng-
land and claims responsibility for a break-in at an 
animal research facility. 
 1980 
 The People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals is 
founded in Norfolk, Virginia, by Ingrid Newkirk 
and Alex Pacheco. 
  
 Raymond Gillespie Frey publishes  Interests and 
Rights: The Case against Animals , in which he argues 
that animals do not have rights. 
 1981 
 The Foundation for Biomedical Research is founded 
by Francine Trull in Washington, DC. 
 
The disease AIDS is officially recognized. 
  
 Roger W. Sperry works on the functional specializa-
tions of the cerebral hemispheres using monkeys, 
and David H. Hubel and Torsten N. Wiesel study 
how information processing occurs in the visual 
system in cats.* 
 1982 
 Sune K. Bergstrom, Bengt L. Samuelsson, and John 
R. Vance, using rabbits, guinea pigs, and sheep, 
discover prostaglandins, which influence blood 
 pressure, body temperature, and allergic reactions.* 
 1983 
 David Feltman studies the relationship between 
the nervous and the immune systems and the role 
of neurotransmitters in cancer.** 
  
 Raymond Gillespie Frey, a utilitarian, like Jeremy 
Bentham and Peter Singer, rejects the claims of 
moral vegetarianism in  Rights, Killing, and Suffering: 
Moral Vegetarianism and Applied Ethics.  

132 Animal Rights
 1983 (cont.) 
Tom Regan publishes  The Case for Animal Rights. 
  
 Scientists demonstrate that a genetically engi-
neered yeast can protect chimpanzees from hepa-
titis B. 
 1984 
 George Archibald pioneers methods for saving 
cranes, which are on the verge of extinction.** 
  
 Arnold Mandell applies nonlinear dynamics to 
biological systems.** 
  
 Carl Woese revises the phylogenic tree to include 
archaea, a single-cell microorganism.** 
  
 Roger Payne discovers whale songs and is active in 
attempts to end commercial whaling.** 
  
 Arthur Winfree applies mathematical modeling to 
biological phenomena.** 
 
 The Laboratory Animal Management Association 
is founded. 
 1985 
 George Oster studies the basic physics and chem-
istry of protein motors, which allow single-cell 
organisms to move.** 
  
 The Food Security Act of 1985—Subtitle F, Ani-
mal Welfare (Public Law 99–198 [99 Stat. 1645]) 
is signed into law by President Ronald Reagan. 
This law causes a major change in the way bio-
medical and psychological research in animals is 
conducted. 
  
 The Health Research Extension Act of 1985 is 
signed into law by President Reagan. 
 
Incurably Ill for Animal Research is founded. 
  
 The National Association for Biomedical Research 
is founded. 

Chronology 133
  
 The Fur Farm Animal Welfare Coalition is founded. 
 1986 
 Rita Levi-Montalcini and Stanley Cohen discover 
nerve growth factors in mice, chickens, and other 
animals.* 
  
 Michael A. Fox publishes  The Case for Animal Experi-
mentation: An Evolutionary and Ethical Perspective.  
  
 Robert Shapley gains recognition for studying 
visual processing in cats and monkeys.** 
  
 Parliament passes the Animal (Scientific Proce-
dures) Act of 1986, which extends the term “pro-
tected animal” to cover all living vertebrates and 
which provides rules and regulations for conducting 
animal research. 
 1987 
 Ira Herskowitz studies cell function and gene regu-
lation in yeast.** 
  
 Eric Lander studies the relationship between com-
plex genetic systems and disorders like cancer and 
diabetes.** 
  
 Roger Morris Sapolsky studies the relationship 
between stress and neural degeneration.** 
  
 Jon Seger studies the evolutionary genetics of 
whales and vertebrate smell receptors.** 
  
 Richard Wrangham studies chimpanzee behavior 
in Kibale Forest National Park and draws compari-
sons to human behavior.** 
 1988 
 James W. Black synthesizes propranolol and dis-
covers that it can be used to treat high blood pres-
sure and migraine headaches; Gertrude B. Elion 
invents drugs to treat a variety of disorders; and 
George H. Hitchings discovers drugs to treat can-
cer. They use rats, guinea pigs, dogs, and cats in 
their research.* 

134 Animal Rights
 1988 (cont.) 
 Naomi Pierce studies the relationship between 
butterfly larvae and ants and genetic trends in but-
terflies.** 
 1989 
 J. Michael Bishop and Harold E. Varmus, using 
chickens, discover the role of viruses in the devel-
opment of cancer.* 
 1990 
 M.A.R. Koehl studies how body structure affects 
mechanical function.** 
  
 The Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trade 
Act of 1990 is signed into law by President George 
H. W. Bush. 
  
 The first animal rights march is held in Washing-
ton, DC. 
  
 The European Coalition to End Experiments is 
founded. 
  
 The Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development is founded and develops interna-
tional standards for animal testing. 
 
 Medical Scientists’ Legal Defense Fund is founded. 
 1991 
 The Coalition for Animals and Research is founded. 
  
 Martin Kreitman studies molecular genetics in 
Drosophila (fruit flies).** 
 1992 
 Edmond H. Fisher and Edwin G. Krebs, using mice 
and rabbits, describe how cells regulate proteins 
and various cellular processes.* 
  
 Geerat J. Vermeij studies living and fossil marine 
mollusks. Dr. Vermeij is blind.** 
  
 Gunter Wagner uses mathematical model-
ing to understand the development of control 
genes.** 

Chronology 135
  
 The Animal Enterprise Protection Act of 1992 (Pub-
lic Law 102–346 [106 Stat. 928]) is signed into law 
by President George H. W. Bush. 
 1993 
 Victoria Foe studies the timetable of early develop-
ment of Drosophila.** 
  
 Heather Williams studies the evolution of bird 
song.** 
 1995 
 Edward B. Lewis, Christiane Nusslein-Volhard, 
and Eric F. Wieschaus discover how genes control 
early embryonic development in the fruit fly.* 
  
 Sharon Emereson studies predator-prey interac-
tions.** 
  
 Nicholas J. Strausfeld studies the function of and 
analyzes insect visual systems and publishes an 
atlas of an insect brain. 
 1996 
 Peter C. Dolherty and Rolf M. Zinernagel, using 
mice, discover how the immune system protects 
the body from viruses.* 
  
 An updated edition of the  Guide for the Care and Use 
of Laboratory Animals is published. 
  
 Barbara Block studies the cellular mechanisms that 
underlie heat production of force production in 
tuna and billfishes.** 
  
 Thomas Daniel studies flight control in dragon 
flies, using implantable microelectrodes.** 
 1997 
 Stanley B. Prusiner studies and characterizes prions 
in knockout mice and hamsters. Prions are a new in-
fective agent, responsible for “mad cow disease.”* 
  
 Russell Lande studies the relationship among mor-
phological, behavioral, and physiological charac-
teristics and genetic and environmental factors.** 

136 Animal Rights
 1997 (cont.) 
 Nancy A. Moran studies symbiosis between multi-
cellular hosts and microbes.** 
 1998 
 Robert F. Furchgott, Louis J. Ignarro, and Ferid 
Murad discover that nitric oxide is a signaling 
molecule in mice, rats, rabbits, guinea pigs, and 
snails.* 
  
 Leah Krubitzer studies sensory integration in ani-
mal models.** 
 1999 
 David M. Hillis studies the evolutionary history of 
organisms, focusing on amphibians.** 
 2000 
 The Farm Bill, Title 10, Miscellaneous Provisions, 
Section D, is signed into law by President George 
W. Bush. 
 2001 
 Timothy Hunt, Paul Nurse, and John Sulston dis-
cover the cyclin molecule, which regulates cell 
division, in the sea urchin egg.* 
  
 Michael Dickinson studies underlying physical 
and biological principles of insect flight, focusing 
on the fly.** 
  
 Geraldine Seydoux studies key developmental 
processes called polarization in the round worm 
 C. elegans , which establishes distinct anterior and 
posterior regions in the single-celled embryo.** 
 2002 
 Sydney Brenner, H. Robert Horvitz, and John E. Sul-
ston discover how genes regulate the development 
of organs and the mechanism of programmed cell 
death, using the nematode  C. elegans.* 
  
 Bonniee Bassler studies how bacteria communi-
cate.** 
 2003 
 Paul C. Lauterbur and Sir Peter Mansfield receive 
recognition for their work with magnetic resonance 
imaging, initially using rats.* 

Chronology 137
  
 Xiaowei Zhyang uses advanced optical imaging 
techniques to study the behavior of individual bio-
logical molecules.** 
  
 An international symposium to develop science-
based guidelines for laboratory animal care is held 
in Washington, DC. 
  
 The National Academies Press publishes  Guidelines 
for the Care and Use of Mammals in Neuroscience and 
Behavioral Research . 
 2004 
 Richard Axel and Linda B. Buck analyze the anat-
omy and physiology of odor receptors and the or-
ganization of the olfactory system in the mouse, 
rat, and fruit fly.* 
  
 Joseph DeRisi profiles gene expression in the pro-
tozoan that causes malaria.** 
 2005 
 Barry J. Marshall and J. Robin Warren, using pigs 
and gerbils, discover the bacterium  Helicobacter py-
lori and its role in gastritis and peptic ulcers.* 
  
 Nicole King uses molecular processes to determine 
the relationship between organisms in the “tree of 
life.”** 
 2006 
 Andrew Z. Fire and Craig C. Mello, using the nem-
atode worm,  C. elegan , discover RNA interference 
and gene splicing by double-stranded RNA.* 
  
 Parliament passes the Animal Welfare Act of 2006, 
which brings together and updates legislation to 
promote the welfare of vertebrate animals. 
  
 Kenneth C. Carania studies the organization and 
function of mammalian sensory systems, focusing 
on star-nosed moles and shrews, which are among 
the smallest mammals, and naked mole rats.** 
  
 Kevin Eggan studies the reasons that cloned animals 
have organ defects and immunological problems.** 

138 Animal Rights
 2007 
 Mario R. Capecchi, Martin J. Evans, and Oliver 
Smithies discover how to introduce specific genes 
into mice by the use of embryonic stem cells.* 
  
 The Animal Fighting Prohibition Enforcement Act 
of 2007 is signed into law by President George 
W. Bush. 
  
 Yoky Matsuoka combines neuroscience and robot-
ics to develop more realistic prosthetics (functional 
artificial limbs).** 
 2008 
 Francoise Barre-Sinoussi and Luc Montagnier dis-
cover treatments for the human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV), which causes AIDS. Work on the nude 
mouse, sheep, house (standard lab mouse), and 
goat (begun in 1983) helps lead to a better under-
standing of the mechanisms of how HIV develops 
and possible treatments.* 
  
 Susan Mango studies organogenesis (the forma-
tion of organs).** 
  
 Sally Temple studies how neuro-progenitor cells 
develop into numerous and diverse cells in the 
nervous system.** 

139
 5 
 Biographies 
 I
n this chapter, we present biographies of both historical and 
contemporary individuals involved with animal rights and 
animal welfare. 
 Animal rights activists claim that animal research does not help 
either animals or humans. However, animal research has played a 
large role in, for example, heart-transplant surgery and open-heart 
surgery. Described in this chapter are some, but not all, of the key 
scientists and physicians who developed the techniques needed 
to perform these valuable surgical procedures (Drs. Alexis Carrell, 
Frank C. Mann, Vladimir Petrovich Demikhov, and E. Marcus). 
Both Drs. Barnard and Shumway, who performed the first and the 
second human heart transplant, respectively, performed numerous 
experiments on animals, mostly dogs, before moving on to perform 
the surgery on humans. Animals were also used to develop the 
heart-lung machine that allows surgeons to stop the heart of the re-
cipient so that it can be removed safely and then to implant the 
donor heart (Leland C. Clark) or an artificial heart (Robert K. Jarvik). 
When these surgical techniques were perfected, patients still faced a 
significant problem—rejection of the donor heart by the recipient’s 
body. Animal experiments played a key role in the development of 
the first antirejection drug, cyclosporine (Jean François Borel). 
 Cleveland Amory 
(Sept. 2, 1917–Oct. 14, 1998) 
 Cleveland Amory was born in Nahant, Massachusetts. He was 
a freelance writer, lecturer, and television commentator. Amory 

140 Animal Rights
was on the board of directors of the Humane Society of the United 
States from 1962 to 1970 He founded the Fund For Animals in 
1967, which he said is committed to “litigation, legislation, educa-
tion, and confrontation,” and was its first president. The Fund is 
famous for painting baby seals on the ice floes off the Magdalene 
Islands in Canada with red organic dye that did not harm the 
seals but made their coats worthless to the sealers who kill them 
for their coats. The Fund is also known for its rescue of the burros 
in the Grand Canyon; it owns and runs the Black Beauty ranch 
for abused and injured horses and other animals. Amory was the 
president of the New England Anti-Vivisection Society from 1987 
to 1998. He is the author of  The Cat Who Came for Christmas (Little 
Brown, 1987), which describes his rescue of his feline compan-
ion, Polar Bear, and of  Man Kind?: Our Incredible War on Wildlife 
(Harper, 1974). Amory recruited celebrities like Doris Day, Angie 
Dickinson, and Mary Tyler Moore for his campaign for compas-
sionate clothing. 
 George Thorndike Angell 
(June 5, 1823–March 16, 1909) 
 George Thorndike Angell was born in Southbridge, Massachu-
setts. He graduated from Dartmouth College, studied law at the 
Harvard Law School, and was admitted to the bar in 1851. He 
founded the Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty 
to Animals in 1868 and served as its president. In 1889, he founded 
and served as president of the American Humane Education 
Society. 
 Aristotle 
(384 B .C.E. –322  B.C.E . ) 
 Aristotle was born in Stageira, Chalcidice. The earliest natural-
ist whose writings have survived, he dissected animals but not 
humans. He studied the sea life around Lesbos. In  Generation 
of Animals,  he described the embryological development of the 
chicken by breaking open a fertilized egg to visualize the devel-
opment of the embryo. 

Biographies 141
 Bob Barker (b. Dec. 12, 1923) 
 Bob Barker, whose full name is Robert William Barker, was born 
in Darrington, Washington. He had a long career as the host of 
various television game shows, most notably  The Price Is Right . 
Barker became a vegetarian in 1979 and promoted animal rights, 
ending each episode of  The Price Is Right  with the phrase “Help 
control the pet population; have your pet spayed or neutered.” 
Barker founded the DJ&T Foundation in 1995. The goal of the 
Foundation is to fund spay/neuter clinics and voucher programs 
to relieve pet overpopulation. 
 Christiaan Neethling Barnard 
(Nov. 8, 1922–Sept. 2, 2001) 
 Barnard was born in South Africa and received his Ch.B. (Bach-
elor of Surgery) at the University of Cape Town Medical School in 
1946. He received a two-year scholarship for postgraduate train-
ing at the University of Minnesota, where he became acquainted 
with the work of Dr. Norman Shumway. He received his Master 
of Science in Surgery degree in 1958 for a thesis titled “The  Aortic 
Valve—Problems in the Fabrication and Testing of a Prosthetic 
Valve” and his Ph.D. in the same year for a dissertation titled “The 
Aetiology of Congenital Intestinal Astresia.” When he returned to 
Cape Town, he performed more than 50 heart transplants in dogs. 
He performed the first human heart transplant on December 3, 
1967. The recipient, a 54-year-old male, survived for 18 days 
before he succumbed to pneumonia caused by the immunosup-
pressive drugs he was taking to prevent the rejection of the heart. 
Barnard continued to perform experiments and transplants until 
his retirement in 1983 because of rheumatoid arthritis in his hands 
that prevented him from performing surgery. 
 Jeremy Bentham 
(Feb. 15, 1748–June 6, 1832) 
 Jeremy Bentham was born at Red Lion Street, Houndsditch, London, 
and attended Queen’s College, Oxford, as a young man. His first 

142 Animal Rights
book,  Fragment on Government , published in 1776, is credited with 
marking the beginning of philosophic radicalism. In his book  An 
Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation , he defined the 
principle of utility: “that property in any object whereby it tends 
to produce pleasure, good, or happiness, or to prevent the hap-
pening of mischief, pain, evil, or unhappiness to the party whose 
interest is considered” (Bentham 1907, pg. 2). 
 Bentham claimed that humanity was governed by two 
sovereign motives, pain and pleasure, and that the principle of 
utility recognized this subjection. Bentham argued that humans 
are hedonistic (pursue personal pleasure and avoid pain) and 
pursue general happiness. Crime should be punished swiftly by 
sanctions, such as arrest (political sanction); ostracism (moral or 
social sanction); or punishment hereafter (theological sanction). 
Bentham wrote of animals, “The question is not, can they reason? 
Nor can they talk? But, can they suffer?” Bentham maintained 
that because they can suffer, they have a right to life, liberty, and 
the pursuit of happiness. This argument became the centerpiece for 
and the battle cry of both the Victorian and the modern animal 
protection movements. 
 Henry Bergh 
(Aug. 29, 1811–March 12, 1888) 
 Henry Bergh studied at Columbia College and received an in-
heritance on the death of his father. He traveled extensively in 
the United States and Europe and founded the American Society 
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals in April 1866. Bergh, 
with Elbridge T. Garry and John D. White, founded the New 
York Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children in 1875. 
 Claude Bernard 
(July 12, 1813–Feb. 10, 1878) 
 Claude Bernard was born in Saint-Julien, France. In 1841, he 
joined the laboratory of François Magendie at the College de 
France. Bernard wrote, “La fixité du milieu intérieur est la con-
dition d’une vie libre et indépendante” (“The constancy of the 

Biographies 143
internal environment is the condition for a free and independent 
life”). This is still the underlying principle of homeostasis today. 
Bernard believed that medical knowledge, like other forms of 
scientific knowledge, could be won by systematic experiments. 
He was the first to state the principle of scientific determinism, 
that is, that identical experiments should yield identical results. 
The real beginnings of animal research probably date from the 
publication of his book,  Introduction à la médicine expérimentale , 
in 1865. This book was translated into English ( An Introduction 
to Experimental Medicine ) by Henry Copley Green in 1927. 
 Jean François Borel (b. 1933) 
 One of the fundamental problems with organ transplants, includ-
ing heart transplants, is that the recipient’s body’s immunologi-
cal system attacks the “foreign” organ. While screening fungi 
for active compounds, Borel isolated cyclosporine from a fungus 
( Tolypocladium inflatum ). Working at Sandoz Laboratories, Borel 
discovered that cyclosporine allowed selective immunoregula-
tion of T cells in the recipient’s body, without excessive toxicity. 
Borel continued experiments to identify side effects and to 
determine the correct dose and method of administration. These 
experiments were completed within four years. Clinical trials 
demonstrated that cyclosporine could prevent rejection of kidney 
transplants and bone marrow transplants in humans. It continues 
to be used today as an immunosuppressant. 
 Alexis Carrell 
(June 28, 1873–Nov. 5, 1944) 
 Carrell was born in Sainte-Foy-les-Lyon, France, and received 
his medical degree from the University of Lyon. Carrell joined 
the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research in New York. He 
developed a method to suture (sew) two blood vessels together 
end-to-end, which is called an anastomosis. He used this tech-
nique to transplant whole organs. For example, he attempted 
to transplant the kidney of a dog to the neck, using the carotid 
 artery and the jugular vein to provide blood flow to the kidney. 
He also performed the first heart transplant, severing the carotid 

144 Animal Rights
artery and using it to provide blood flow to the pulmonary veins 
of the transplanted heart and returning blood to the body via 
the transplanted heart’s aorta sutured to the jugular vein. Carrell 
attempted to keep organs or portions of organs alive by pass-
ing blood through the organ’s own blood vessels. He developed 
the perfusion pump with Charles A. Lindbergh, the famed pilot. 
Carrell and Lindbergh published their results in a book entitled 
 The Culture of Organs . This pump was a crucial step in the devel-
opment of the heart-lung machine, which made it possible for 
open-heart surgery and heart transplants to be performed. Carrell 
kept an embryonic chicken heart alive in culture for more than 
34 years, far longer than the lifetime of a chicken. This proved 
his contention that all cells could grow indefinitely. More recent 
researchers claim that this was an anomalous result, that is, that 
differentiated cells can undergo only a limited number of divi-
sion before dying. This phenomenon is commonly called the 
Hayflick limit. Carrell received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or 
Medicine in 1912 in recognition of his work. 
 Joseph Sill Clark 
(Oct. 21, 1901–Jan. 12, 1990) 
 Joseph Clark was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. He re-
ceived a B.A. from Harvard University in 1923 and his law 
degree from the University of Pennsylvania in 1926. He was 
admitted to the bar and started a law practice in Philadelphia 
in 1926. Clark served with the U.S. Army Air Corps during 
World War II, achieved the rank of colonel, and acted as the 
deputy chief of staff for the Eastern Air Command. He received 
the Bronze Star, the Legion of Merit, and the Order of the Brit-
ish Empire. 
 Clark served as the controller for the city of Philadelphia 
from 1950 to 1952 and as mayor from 1952 to 1956. He was sworn 
in to the U.S. Senate on January 3, 1957, and served until January 
3, 1969, when he was defeated for re-election. During his ten-
ure in the Senate, Clark, a Democrat, was one of the sponsors 
of Public Law 89–544 (the Animal Welfare Act). After his Senate 
career, he was the president of the World Federalists, U.S.A., and 
the chairman of the Coalition on National Priorities and Military 
Policy. 

Biographies 145
 Leland C. Clark 
(Dec. 4, 1918–Sept. 25, 2005) 
 Clark was born in Rochester, New York, and received his Ph.D. 
in biochemistry from the University of Rochester in 1948. In the 
early 1950s, Clark began experiments that would ultimately lead 
to the development of a heart-lung machine that would allow 
blood to be pumped through the machine, where it was oxygen-
ated, and then pumped back into the body. This allowed surgeons 
to stop a heart patient’s heart, remove it, and replace it with a 
donor heart. Clark’s experiments utilized dogs as the subjects. 
Clark and his colleagues tested their machine by placing cannuli 
into the vena cava (arteries that carry deoxygenated blood from 
the body back to the heart), bypassing the heart and lungs. The 
dog’s blood pressure remained constant, and its reflexes and 
pupils were normal. Clark initially used the machine for patients 
who needed assistance with oxygenation of their blood (e.g., a 
fireman with damaged lungs). By the mid-1950s, the heart-lung 
machine was in common use. 
 Frances Power Cobbe 
(Dec. 2, 1822–April 5, 1904) 
 Frances Power Cobbe was born in Dublin, Ireland. She was a so-
cial reformer, feminist theorist, and animal rights activist. Cobbe 
founded the Society for the Protection of Animals Liable to Vivisec-
tion in 1875, which was the world’s first organization to campaign 
against animal experimentation. She also founded the British 
Union for the Abolition of Vivisection, in 1898. She is the author of 
 Vivisection in America (Swan Sonnenschein, London, 1890). 
 Carl Cohen (?–) 
 Carl Cohen is a professor of philosophy at the Residential College 
of the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. Cohen is perhaps best 
known for his participation in the events that led to a Supreme 
Court ruling that race could not be given substantial weight when 
deciding which students should be admitted to the University. 

146 Animal Rights
Cohen engaged in a point-counterpoint debate with Tom Regan 
on the issue of animal rights, which was published as  The Animal 
Rights Debate.  Cohen defends the use of animals in research (“The 
Case for the Use of Animals in Biomedical Research,”  New England 
Journal of Medicine , October 2, 1986). He also defends the limited 
use of prisoners as research subjects (“Medical Experimentation 
on Prisoners,”  Perspectives in Biology and Medicine , Spring 1978). 
 Doris Day (b. April 3, 1924) 
 Doris Day was born Doris Mary Anne von Kappelhoff, in Cincin-
nati, Ohio. Day was a recording, radio, and movie star, as well as 
a television singer and actress. In 1971, she co-founded Actors and 
Others for Animals and appeared in a series of advertisements 
with Mary Tyler Moore, Angie Dickinson, and Jayne Meadows, 
who were also television celebrities, to promote a ban on the wear-
ing of fur. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, Day promoted the an-
nual Spay Day, USA. She provides funds for the Doris Day Animal 
League, which uses Day’s celebrity to lobby for the humane treat-
ment of animals. The League merged with the Humane Society of 
the United States in September 2006. 
 Vladimir Petrovich Demikhov 
(July 18, 1916–Nov. 22, 1998) 
 Demikhov was born at the Kulini Farm in Russia. He developed 
an artificial heart that was too large to fit inside the chest cav-
ity of a dog but that kept a dog alive for more than five hours. 
 Demikhov also transplanted a “piggyback” heart by performing 
an end-to-side anastomoses of the donor aorta, pulmonary artery, 
and vena cavae. That is, he opened the recipient’s aorta and 
sutured the aorta of the donor’s aorta to it. The pulmonary veins 
of the donor heart were joined together and attached to the left 
atrium of the recipient. His dogs survived for as long as 15 hours 
and demonstrated that an allograft could provide pumping func-
tion for the recipient heart. Demikhov is perhaps most famous for 
his head transplantations. He removed the head of one dog and 
transplanted it to the neck of another, using an anastomoses of the 
carotid artery and jugular vein. 

Biographies 147
 Walter Elias (Walt) Disney 
(Dec. 5, 1901–Dec. 15, 1965) 
 A mouse in a kitchen or restaurant is considered vermin and is 
killed with poison or a trap. But Disney, who was born in Chicago, 
Illinois, provided the world with an anthropomorphic mouse 
with a personality in 1928 when he created a silent animated 
 cartoon,  Plane Crazy , starring Mickey Mouse and his girlfriend, 
Minnie. Initially, Mickey had some mouse-like characteristics, like 
the tail and paw-like “hands” he showed in  Steamboat Willie , one of 
the first cartoons with a sound track. Gradually, Mickey morphed 
into a human-like character that wore red shorts, stood on two 
legs, wore yellow shoes, and used his forepaws like hands, wear-
ing white gloves with a thumb and three fingers. In  The Karnival 
Kid , in 1929, Mickey spoke for the first time, saying, “Hot dogs, hot 
dogs”; Disney provided his voice. Over the years, Mickey became 
more and more human-like. In addition to Minnie, Donald Duck, 
a whole family of ducks, and Goofy, an anthropomorphized dog, 
were added to the human-like pantheon of cartoon characters. 
Pluto, on the other hand, was Mickey’s dog and did not speak; 
he was not as anthropomorphized as the other characters but did 
have a wide range of facial expressions. 
 Bambi is a cartoon based on the book  Bambi: A Life in the 
Woods , by Felix Salten, published in 1923. Bambi and other char-
acters, like Thumper (a rabbit) and Flower (a skunk), were not 
as anthropomorphized as Mickey and his friends. Bambi and the 
others spoke but otherwise remained fairly animal-like. 
 When Disneyland opened, in Anaheim, California, in 1955, 
Mickey, Donald and the other cartoon characters morphed again 
into human-size characters that strolled the streets of the amuse-
ment park, interacting with guests and providing photo ops. 
 Robert Joseph Dole 
(b. July 22, 1923) 
 Robert Joseph Dole was born in Russell, Kansas. He graduated 
from Russell High School in 1941 and enrolled in the University 
of Kansas, but his studies were interrupted by World War II. He 
joined the Army in 1942 and was wounded in his upper right back 

148 Animal Rights
and arm by German machine gun fire in April 1945. After the war, 
Dole attended the University of Arizona and earned his law 
degree from the Washburn University School of Law in 1952. Dole 
was elected to the Kansas House of Representatives for a two-
year term beginning in 1950. He became the county attorney 
for Russell County in 1952 and served until 1960, when he was 
elected to the House of Representatives from the First Congres-
sional District. He was elected to the Senate in 1968 and re-elected 
in 1974, 1980, 1986, and 1992. While in the Senate, Dole was the 
ranking Republican on the Agriculture Committee from 1975 until 
1978 and the chairman of the Finance Committee from 1981 to 
1985. He served as the Senate Majority Leader from 1985 to 1987 
and again from 1995 to 1996. With no specific committee reports 
and no real debate on the House or Senate floor, Dole tacked Sub-
title F, Animal Welfare, onto the Food Security Act of 1985, which 
is a very long law dealing with all aspects of federal farm subsi-
dies, just prior to the Senate adjournment for the 1985 Christmas 
holidays. It is not clear where the language of the Act came from or 
whether Dole had any knowledge of or interest in animal research 
or animal welfare (see chapter 6). 
 Muriel Dowding 
(March 22, 1908–Nov. 20, 1993) 
 Muriel Dowding was born in London and married Lord Hugh 
Dowding on August 24, 1936, making her Lady Dowding. Lord 
Dowding was a longtime British politician and commander-in-
chief of the Royal Air Force, as well as a vegetarian and anti-
 vivisectionist. Lady Muriel Dowding founded Beauty Without 
Cruelty. She was the president of the National Anti- Vivisection 
Society and the International Association Against Painful Experi-
ments in Animals. In November, 1998, the British Government an-
nounced that it would no longer license the testing of cosmetics or 
their ingredients on animals. 
 Michael Allen Fox (b. 1940) 
 Michael Allen Fox was born in Cleveland, Ohio. He received his 
B.A. from Cornell University and his M.A. and Ph.D. from the 

Biographies 149
University of Toronto. He has worked at the University of Toronto 
as an instructor and is currently a full professor of philosophy at 
Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario. He published  The Case for 
Animal Experimentation: An Evolutionary and Ethical Perspective in 
1986. He later repudiated the views expressed in this book and 
has written articles and books favoring vegetarianism and animal 
rights, such as  Deep Vegetarianism , published in 1999. 
 Michael Wilson Fox 
(b. Aug. 13, 1937) 
 Michael Wilson Fox was born in Bolton, England and received 
his B. Vet. Med. from the Royal Veterinary College in 1962, his 
Ph.D. from the University of London in 1967, and his D.Sc. in 
1976. Fox was employed as a medical research associate at State 
Research Hospital, Galesburg, Illinois (1964–1967); as an associ-
ate professor of psychology at Washington University, St. Louis, 
Missouri (1967–1976); as vice president of bioethics of the Hu-
mane Society of the United States, Washington, DC (1976–1998), 
and as a senior scholar in bioethics at the Humane Society of 
the United States, Washington, DC (1998– ). He has also served 
as a senior adviser to the Office of the President of the Humane 
Society of America. 
 He published  Between Man and Animals: The Key to the King-
dom  in 1976 and  Returning to Eden: Animal Rights and Human 
Responsibilities  in 1980; he edited  On the Fifth Day: Animal Rights 
and Human Obligations in 1977. 
 Ann Cottrell Free 
(June 4, 1916–Oct. 30, 2004) 
 Ann Cottrell Free was born in Richmond, Virginia. In the late 1950s, 
Free began writing about animal protection. Her exposure of the 
mistreatment of beagles used for testing color dye at the Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) in the U.S. Department of Agri-
culture (USDA) building helped start the debate about laboratory 
animal welfare. Free was a supporter of Rachel Carson’s environ-
mental work and was responsible for the establishment of the 

150 Animal Rights
Rachel Carson National Wildlife Refuge in Maine. In 1982, Free 
testified about a plan to allow hunters to hunt deer in a fenced 
facility of the National Zoo. Because of her testimony, the hunt 
was canceled. She also authored two books:  Forever the Wild Mare 
and  Animals, Nature and Albert Schweitzer , as well as a volume of 
poetry titled  No Room, Save in the Heart . The National Press Club 
established the Ann Cottrell Free Animal Reporting Award in her 
honor. 
 Robert K. Jarvik 
(b. May 11, 1946) 
 Jarvik was born in Midland, Michigan, and graduated from Syra-
cuse University in 1968 with a bachelor’s degree in zoology. He 
attended the medical school at the University of Bologna in Italy 
and returned to the United States to obtain a M.A. degree in 
occupational biomechanics from New York University. In 1967, 
he joined the Institute of Biomedical Engineering at the Univer-
sity of Utah, where he began developing an artificial heart. In 
the mid-1970s, Jarvik developed a plastic and aluminum device 
that could replace the functions of the right ventricle (which 
pumps deoxygenated blood from the body to the lungs) and the 
left ventricle (which pumps oxygenated blood to the body). On 
December 2, 1982, the Jarvik-7 artificial heart was implanted in 
Barney Clark, who survived for four months. A number of other 
patients were implanted with modified Jarvik hearts, and the 
longest survival time exceeded 620 days. The heart was also used 
as a stopgap measure for patients who were awaiting natural 
heart transplants. 
 Joseph Rudyard Kipling 
(Dec. 30, 1865–Jan. 18, 1936) 
 Kipling was at Bombay, India. One of the most popular authors 
in English and a master of the short story, he won the Nobel Prize 
for Literature in 1907. The prize citation praised Kipling’s talent 
for narration, observation, and imagination and the virility of his 
ideas. Kipling published  Jungle Book  in 1894 and the  Second Jungle 

Biographies 151
Book  in 1895. These books consisted of a series of short stories or 
fables about a feral child, Mowgli, who was raised by anthropo-
morphized wolves with the help of Baloo, a bear, and Bagheera, 
a panther. The villain is a tiger named Shere Kahn. The anthro-
pomorphism was limited to allowing the animals to speak, but 
Kipling otherwise maintained their animal-like characteristics. 
In one of the stories, “Tiger! Tiger!” Mowgli returns to live with 
humans but has a hard time adjusting and soon returns to the 
jungle. The books were the basis for a number of live-action and 
animated movies; perhaps the best-known version is Walt Dis-
ney’s cartoon, which appeared in 1967 and was one of his most 
popular and successful films. 
 John Cunningham Lilly 
(Jan. 6, 1915–Sept. 20, 2001) 
 Lilly was born in St. Paul, Minnesota. He studied physics and biol-
ogy at the California Institute of Technology and received an M.D. 
from the University of Pennsylvania in 1942. Lilly was involved 
in a variety of controversial projects to study the dimensions of 
human consciousness, including experiments with hallucinogenic 
drugs and isolation tanks. In the 1960s, Lilly opened Communica-
tion Research Institute on the island of St. Thomas in the Caribbean 
to study large-brained marine mammals. He especially focused on 
dolphins in an effort to understand their communications and to 
attempt to communicate with them. His book  The Mind of the 
Dolphin  (also titled  The Mind of the Dolphin: A Nonhuman Intelli-
gence ; Doubleday, 1967) describes these experiments. 
 Warren Grant Magnuson 
(April 12, 1905–May 20, 1989) 
 Magnuson was born in Moorhead, Minnesota, and attended the 
University of North Dakota at Grand Forks and North Dakota 
State College. He received a B.A. from the University of Washing-
ton in 1926 and a J.D. degree from its law school in 1929. He was 
admitted to the bar in 1929 and started a law practice in Seattle. 
He served in the U.S. Navy during World War II and attained the 

152 Animal Rights
rank of Lieutenant Commander. He was sworn in to the House 
of Representatives on January 3, 1937, and served until Decem-
ber 13, 1944, when he resigned and was appointed to the Senate 
the next day, December 14, 1944, to fill a vacancy caused by the 
resignation of Homer T. Bone. Magnuson was sworn in to the Sen-
ate on January 3, 1945, and served until January 3, 1975. During 
his tenure, he was one of the sponsors of Public Law 89–544 (the 
Animal Welfare Act). 
 Frank C. Mann 
(Sept. 11, 1887–Sept. 30, 1962) 
 Mann was born on a family farm in Indiana. He received his 
M.D. degree in 1913 from Indiana University. He joined the Mayo 
Clinic as the Director of Experimental Medicine and Pathological 
Anatomy in 1914. He and his colleagues developed methods to 
remove the heart of an animal and transplant it to a site on the 
neck. They used the carotid artery to supply blood through the 
aorta to the heart, which also allowed blood to circulate through 
the coronary system. The blood flowed to the right atrium and 
into the right ventricle and through the pulmonary vein into an 
anastomosed jugular vein. They were able to keep the heart alive 
for as long as eight days. 
 Emanuel Marcus (?–) 
 Marcus and his team, S. N. Wong and A. A. Luisada, at the Chi-
cago Medical School, modified Mann’s technique and anastomo-
sed both ends of the recipient’s common carotid artery to the donor 
aorta, allowing the donor coronary arteries to function. They also 
anastomosed the common carotid artery to the left atrium. 
 Richard Martin 
(Jan. 15, 1754–Jan. 6, 1834) 
 Richard Martin was born in Ballynahinch, County Galway, Ire-
land. The Act to Prevent the Cruel and Improper Treatment of 

Biographies 153
Cattle was sponsored by Martin and passed in Parliament on 
July 22, 1882. Martin was one of the founders of the Society for the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals in 1824. 
 James McMillan 
(May 12, 1838–Aug. 10, 1902) 
 McMillan was born in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, and was edu-
cated in the public schools of Hamilton. He moved to Detroit in 
1855 and started the Michigan Car Co. In 1863, he built and was 
the president of the Duluth, South Shore, and Atlantic Railroad. 
He was a member of the Detroit Board of Park Commissioners 
and the Board of Estimates. McMillan became a member of the 
Michigan Republican State central committee in 1876 and served 
as its chairman. He was later elected to the U.S. Senate, where 
he served from March 3, 1889, until his death. While in the Sen-
ate, he was the chairman of the Senate Committee on the District 
of Columbia. He was appointed the chairman of a commission 
that was to develop a plan to beautify Washington, DC, for the 
celebration of the city’s centennial, in 1900. McMillan and other 
members of the commission, architects Daniel H. Burnham and 
Charles F. McKim; sculptor Augustus Saint-Gaudens; and land-
scape architect Frederick Law Olmsted, Jr., recommended that 
railroad tracks and a stone depot be removed from the Mall. This 
was accomplished and yielded the large landscaped area that 
is a major attraction for visitors to Washington, DC to this day. 
Senator McMillan also introduced a bill to regulate vivisection in 
Washington, DC in 1896. The bill was defeated. 
 Mark L. Morris, Sr. 
(Nov. 18, 1900–July 8, 1993) 
 Mark L. Morris, Sr., was a veterinarian, humanitarian, and vision-
ary. He was concerned about the poor quality of pet food and 
began preparing his own pet food. It became popular, and Mor-
ris teamed with Burton Hill, the owner of the Hill Packing Co., 
to begin producing Prescription Diet pet foods, which are avail-
able only through veterinarians. A portion of the price of each can 

154 Animal Rights
goes to the Morris Animal Foundation, which sponsors humane 
animal research. 
 Adrian R. Morrison 
(b. Nov. 5, 1936) 
 Morrison was born in Philadelphia, PA. He received his Doctor 
of Veterinary Medicine degree from Cornell University in 1960 
and his Ph.D. from the University of Pennsylvania in 1964. A 
neuroscientist who studied the sleep-wakefulness cycle, he also 
published a series of articles dealing with the animal rights 
controversy. These include “A Scientist’s Perspective on the Eth-
ics of Using Animals in Behavioral Research” (in M. E. Carroll and 
J. B. Overmier, eds.,  Animal Research and Human Health: Advancing 
Human Welfare through Behavioral Science  [American Psychological 
Association, 2001], pp. 341–56); “Perverting Medical History in 
the Service of ‘Animal Rights’” ( Perspectives in Biology and Medi-
cine  45 [2002]: 606–19); “Unscientific American: Animal Rights or 
Wrongs” (with Jack H. Bottling) (Biomednet [http://biomednet.
com/hmsbeagle/]; and “Animal Research Is Vital to Medicine ” 
(with J. H. Botting) ( Scientific American  [February 1997]; avail-
able at http://www.sciamdigital.com/index.cfm?fa=Products.
ViewIssuePreview&ISSUEID_CHAR=F1C2CBCD-B61D-4FDF-9 
F7E-9E8CCB2A04A&ARTICLEID_CHAR=02EA00AB-617F-40 
F7–98ED-D09F652DA20). 
 Ingrid Newkirk 
(b. June 11, 1949) 
 Ingrid Newkirk was born in Surrey, England. In 1967, she settled 
in Maryland, where she volunteered in the local animal shelter, 
working her way up to director. By 1978, Newkirk was an asser-
tive cruelty investigator for the Humane Society in Washington, 
DC Reading Peter Singer’s  Animal Liberation  changed her life. In 
1980, she and Alex Pacheco formed People for the Ethical Treat-
ment of Animals. PETA advocates that people stop eating meat 
and wearing fur; opposes experimentation and the breeding of 
cats and dogs; and would retire circus animals and close zoos. 

Biographies 155
“Companion animals,” a term Newkirk coined, would be adopted 
from shelters and the streets. 
 Charles S. Nicoll 
(b. April 11, 1937) 
 Nicoll was born in Toronto, Ontario, and became an American citi-
zen in 1975. He received his Ph.D. from Michigan State in 1962. 
Nicoll is an endocrinologist and has been a professor of physiology 
at the University of California, Berkeley, since 1974. Nicoll has writ-
ten a series of articles dealing with the animal rights controversy. 
“A Physiologist’s Views on the Animal Rights/Liberation Move-
ment” appeared in  The Physiologist  in 1991 (http://www.the-aps.
org/publications/tphys/legacy/1991/issue6/303.pdf). Nicoll has 
also written a series of articles with his wife, Sharon Russell. “Anal-
ysis of Animal Rights Literature Reveals the Underlying Motives of 
the Movement: Ammunition for Counter Offensive by Scientists” 
appeared in  Endocrinology  in 1990 (vol. 127, pp. 985–89). Another 
article, this one titled “Animal Research vs. Animal Rights,” ap-
peared in the Federation of American Societies for Experimental 
Biology journal (http://www.fasebj.org/cgi/reprint/3/5/1668.
pdf). “Mozart, Alexander the Great, and the Animal Rights/Liber-
ation Philosophy” was a special feature that appeared in the same 
journal in 1991 (vol. 5, pp. 2888–92; http://www.fasebj.org/cgi/
reprint/5/14/2888.pdf). A series of letters to the editor about this 
article appeared in the journal in April 1992 (http://www.fasebj.
org/cgi/reprint/6/7/2489.pdf.). “Critical Perspective: The Unnatural 
Nature of the Animal Rights/Liberation Philosophy” appeared in the 
 Proceedings of the Society of Experimental Biology  in 1994 (https://
dspace03.it.ohio-state.edu/dspace/bitstream/1811/23580/1/
V093N5_118.pdf). Responses to this article can be found at http://
www.ebmonline.org/cgi/reprint-embargo/205/4/269. 
 Coles Phinizy (?–) 
 Coles Phinizy was a graduate of the Hill School and Harvard Col-
lege, where he was the chairman of the Harvard  Lampoon . He began 
his journalist career at  Life  magazine and in 1954 joined the staff of 
 Sports Illustrated . As a reporter for  Sports Illustrated , he covered the 

156 Animal Rights
story of Pepper, the family pet of the Lakavage family, which dis-
appeared from the family farm. This article was one of the tipping 
points that led to the development of the Animal Welfare Act. 
 Thomas Howard Regan (b. 1938) 
 Thomas Howard Regan was born in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. He 
received his B.A. from Thiel College and his M.A. and Ph.D. from 
the University of Virginia. He was an assistant professor of philoso-
phy at Sweet Briar College from 1965 to 1967. He joined the faculty 
of North Carolina State University at Raleigh in 1967 and is cur-
rently a full professor in the philosophy department. In 1983, Regan 
published  The Case for Animal Rights , which provides a scholarly 
defense of the controversial claim that animals have rights. Regan 
argued that animals have rights that humans are morally obligated 
to recognize and respect. Regan disagrees with utilitarians (e.g., 
Bentham, Singer) that the ability to feel pleasure and pain does not 
provide a strong case for animal rights. Regan edited  Animal Rights 
and Human Obligations (1976) and  Matters of Life and Death (1980). 
 Joseph Yale Resnick (1924–1969) 
 Joseph Yale Resnick was born in Ellenville, New York. He was 
the founder and chairman of the board of the Channel Master 
Corporation, which engaged in electronics and plastics research 
and development. Resnick was a Democrat and was elected to 
the House of Representatives for the 89th and 90th Congresses. 
While a member of the House, Resnick introduced the bill that 
ultimately became the Animal Welfare Act of 1966 (a.k.a the Re-
search or Experimentation on Cats and Dogs Act of 1966) (Public 
Law 89–544 [80 Stat. 350]). Resnick unsuccessfully sought nomi-
nation to the U.S. Senate. 
 Sharon M. Russell 
(b. May 14, 1944) 
 Russell received her Ph.D. from Stanford University in 1971. Rus-
sell specializes in the study of hormones in development. She has 

Biographies 157
been an associate research physiologist at the University of Cali-
fornia, Berkeley, since 1989. Russell is married to Charles S. Nicoll 
(see Nicoll biography), and they have collaborated on research. 
 Norman Shumway 
(Feb. 9, 1923–Feb. 10, 2006) 
 Shumway was born in Kalamazoo, Michigan, and received his 
M.D. from Vanderbilt University in 1949. Shumway perfected a 
way to cool a donor heart to minimize damage to it and was the 
first to use a rotating disk oxygenator. He performed numerous 
experiments on dogs. He was the first to carry out a human 
heart transplant in the United States, in 1968. The recipient was 
a 54-year-old male who lived for 14 days after the surgery. 
 Peter Singer (b. July 6, 1949) 
 Peter Singer was born in Melbourne, Australia. Singer attended 
Scotch College and the University of Melbourne, where he 
received his B.A. in history and philosophy and an M.A. degree 
in philosophy. He then studied at University College, Oxford, 
where he received a B.Phil. degree in 1971. Singer remained at 
the university as the Radcliffe lecturer. Several of Singer’s fellow 
students (Stanley and Rosalind Godlovitch and John Harris) at 
Oxford gathered a series of articles providing information about 
factory farming and animal experimentation and calling for the 
ethical treatment of animals. The resulting book,  Animals, Men, 
and Morals , was published in England in 1971. Singer wrote a long 
review of the American edition in which he combined the views 
of the contributors into a single coherent philosophy of animal 
liberation, and this appeared as the article “Animal Liberation” in 
the  New York Review of Books.  Singer wrote the book  Animal Libera-
tion in 1973 and 1974, during his last year at Oxford and while he 
was a visiting professor of philosophy at New York University. 
(The 1990 edition of  Animal Liberation  includes an account of the 
programs and campaigns that the book inspired.) Singer returned 
to Australia in 1974 and joined La Trobe University in Bundoora, 
Victoria, as a senior lecturer of philosophy. He reportedly does 
not object to illegal measures, such as raiding animal laboratories, 

158 Animal Rights
when results cannot be obtained in any other way. But, he stands 
firmly against violence that harms other people. Singer and Jim 
Mason published  Animal Factories , in which they describe the use 
of animals as biomachines to produce food, in 1980. In 1977, Singer 
joined the faculty of Monash University as a professor of philoso-
phy and became the director of the university’s Center for Human 
Bioethics in 1987. Singer, with Helga Kuhse, published  Should the 
Baby Live? The Problem of Handicapped Infants,  in 1985. He received 
considerable attention from the press when he lectured at several 
universities in Germany for euthanasia for severely handicapped 
newborn babies. He has served on the editorial boards of the  In-
ternational Journal for the Study of Animal Problems, the  Australian 
Journal of Philosophy,  and  Ethics.  He is the co-editor of  Bioethics. He 
is currently the Ira W. DeCamp Professor of Bioethics at Princeton 
University and laureate professor at the Centre for Applied Phi-
losophy and Public Ethics (CAPPE), University of Melbourne. 
 Christine Stevens (1918–2002) 
 Christine Gesell was born in St. Louis and attended the Univer-
sity of Michigan. Her father, a physiologist who headed the physi-
ology department at the University of Michigan, was a pioneer 
in the compassionate treatment of research animals. He helped 
shape his daughters views on animals and animal welfare. Gesell 
married Roger Lacey Stevens, a New York real estate magnate, 
Broadway producer, fundraiser, and arts patron and the founding 
chairman of the John. F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. 
A syndicate led by Stevens bought the Empire State Building and 
provided free office space for the founding of the Animal Welfare 
Institute in 1951. The Stevenses moved to Washington, DC, where 
Stevens formed the Society for Animal Protective Legislation in 
1955. She originated the Save-the-Whales-Campaign, in 1971. Ste-
vens lobbied Congress to promote animal welfare legislation; for 
example, on September 19, 1984, she gave extensive testimony at 
a hearing, titled “Improved Standards for Laboratory Animals Act; 
And Enforcement of the Animal Welfare Act by the Animal and Plant 
Health Inspection Service,” before the House of Representatives 
Committee on Agriculture, Subcommittee on Department Opera-
tions, Research, and Foreign Agriculture; she also testified on July 
20, 1983, before the Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, 
and Forestry, on improved standards for  laboratory animals. Her 

Biographies 159
testimony was instrumental in the passage of the Food Security 
Act of 1985, which caused a major change in the way biomedi-
cal research is conducted. It is likely that Steven’s organization 
helped draft the Act and the regulations promulgated under its 
authority. 
 Frankie Trull (?–) 
 Trull received her undergraduate degree from Boston University 
and her master’s degree from Tufts University. She is the founder 
and president of the Foundation for Biomedical Research. She 
is also president of the National Association for Biomedical Re-
search (NABR), the nation’s leading advocate for sound public 
policy on the role of animal models in biomedical research and 
testing. Trull is also the founder and president of Policy Direc-
tions, Inc., a Washington, DC-based government relations/strate-
gic government communications firm, which assists corporations 
and nonprofits in addressing legislative and regulatory initiatives 
and influencing policy development. 
 A frequent guest speaker and media resource, Trull has written 
numerous articles on the importance of biomedical research and 
the threat posed to the American research community by animal 
rights extremism. She played an instrumental role in coordinating 
congressional consensus for the passage of the Animal Enterprise 
Terrorism Act (AETA), landmark legislation signed by the presi-
dent in 2006 that provides greater protections for researchers from 
animal rights extremists. 
 Thomas Tyron 
(Sept. 6, 1634–Aug. 21, 1703) 
 Thomas Tyron was probably the first author to use the word 
“right” with regard to animals; he did so in  The Way to Health, 
Long Life and Happiness  (Andrew Sowle, London, 1683), in which 
he also said he “would fain be an absolute monarch or arbitrary 
tyrant, making nothing at his pleasure to break the laws of God, 
and invade and destroy all the rights and privileges of inferior 
creatures” (Perkins 2003, p. 41). Tyron was born in Bibury, Eng-
land, attended the village school, and acted as a shepherd  tending 

160 Animal Rights
his father’s flock. When he was 18, he left Bibury for London, 
where he apprenticed himself to a castor-maker (hatter) in Bride-
well Dock, Fleet Street. Following the example of his master, he 
became an Anabaptist (a radical movement within Protestantism 
that advocated Church membership and baptism for adult mem-
bers only). In 1657, he broke with the Anabaptists and became a 
vegetarian. In 1682, he began to write and publish his convictions 
to the world. His writings are a curious mixture of mystical philos-
ophy and dietetics. Lewis Gompertz, the founder of the Society for 
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, was an admirer of Tyron. 
 Betty White 
(b. Jan. 17, 1922) 
 Betty White was born in Oak Park, Illinois. A television star and a 
frequent guest on the 1960s television game show  Password , White 
is a pet enthusiast and animal welfare activist. She supports the 
Los Angeles Zoo Commission, the Morris Animal Foundation, 
and Actors and Others for Animals. 
 References 
 Bentham, J. 1907.  An Introduction to Principles of Morals and Legislation . 
Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
 Perkins, D. 2003.  Romanticism and Animal Rights . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

161
 6 
 Data and Documents 
 T
 his chapter provides an overview of federal legislation dealing 
with animals, especially those used in scientific research. Se-
lected sections of the Animal Welfare Act (AWA) are presented 
to allow the reader to understand the scope of the federal legis-
lation, which gives the secretary of agriculture limited authority 
over animal welfare, beginning with cats and dogs. This authority 
was expanded and increased by amendments to the Act, as shown 
by the key sections of several of the amendments to it. 
 Congress obtains information about issues under consider-
ation by holding hearings. Two congressional hearings about the 
1985 amendments to the AWA are provided to give the reader in-
sight into the type of information provided at such hearings. The 
chapter also provides statistics on the use of animals in agricul-
ture and science. 
 Documents 
 Although animal welfare legislation was first proposed in 1896, it 
was not until the 1960s that the first federal animal welfare legisla-
tion was passed. This came in response to fears that unscrupulous 
animal dealers were stealing pets and then selling them to laborato-
ries to be used in experiments. The full text of the Animal Welfare Act 
and its amendments, as well as the text of the Animal Welfare Reg-
ulations, can be found at the USDA National Agricultural Library 
Web site (http://awic.nal.usda.gov/nal_display/index.php?info_
center=3&tax_level=3&tax_subject=182&topic_id=1118&level3_
id=6735&level4_id=0&level5_id=0&placement_default=0). 

162 Animal Rights
 Animal Welfare Act of 1966 
(Public Law 89–544) 
 Commonly called the Research or Experimentation—Cats and Dogs Act 
of 1966, this is the first federal law to regulate the treatment of animals 
and how animals will be used in research and experimentation. 
 Section 1. Congressional Statement of Policy 
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United 
States of America in Congress assembled. That, in order to protect the own-
ers of dogs and cats from theft of such pets, to prevent the sale or use of 
dogs and cats which have been stolen, and to insure that certain animals 
intended for use in research facilities are provided humane care and 
treatment, it is essential to regulate the transportation, purchase, sale, 
housing, care, handling, and treatment of such animals by persons or 
organizations engaged in using them for research or experimental pur-
poses or in transporting, buying, or selling them for such use. 
 Section 2. Definitions 
 When used in this Act— 
 (a)  The term “person” includes any individual, partnership, firm, 
joint stock company, corporation, association, trust, estate, or 
other legal entity; 
 (b) The term “Secretary” means the Secretary of Agriculture; 
 (c)  The term “commerce” means commerce between any State, ter-
ritory, possession, or the District of Columbia, or the Common-
wealth of Puerto Rico, but through any place outside thereof; or 
within any territory, possession, or the District of Columbia; 
 (d) The term “dog” means any live dog (Canis familiaris); 
 (e) The term “cat” means any live cat (Felis catus); 
 (f)  The term “research facility” means any school, institution, 
 organization, or person that uses or intends to use dogs or cats 
in research, tests, or experiments, and that (1) purchases or 
transports dogs or cats in commerce, or (2) receives funds under 
a grant, award, loan, or contract from a department, agency, or 
instrumentality of the United States for the purpose of carrying 
out research, tests, or experiments; 
 (g)  The term “dealer” means any person who for compensation or 
profit delivers for transportation, or transports, except as a com-
mon carrier, buys, or sells dogs or cats in commerce for research 
purposes; 
 (h)  The term “animal” means live dogs, cats, monkeys (nonhuman 
primate mammals), guinea pigs, hamsters, and rabbits. 

Data and Documents 163
 Section 3. Licenses to Dealers 
 The Secretary shall issue licenses to dealers upon application there-
for in such form and manner as he may prescribe and upon payment of 
such fee established pursuant to section 23 of this Act:  Provided, That no 
such license shall be issued until the dealer shall have demonstrated that 
his facilities comply with the standards promulgated by the Secretary 
pursuant to section 13 of this Act:  Provided, however,  That any person who 
derives less than a substantial portion of his income (as determined by 
the Secretary) from the breeding and raising of dogs or cats on his own 
premises and sells any such dog or cat to a dealer or research facility 
shall not be required to obtain a license as a dealer under this Act. The 
Secretary is further authorized to license, as dealers within the meaning 
of this Act upon such persons’ complying with the requirements speci-
fied above and agreeing, in writing, to comply with all the requirements 
of this Act and the regulations promulgated by the Secretary hereunder. 
 Section 4. License Requirements 
 No dealer shall sell or offer to sell or transport or offer for transpor-
tation to any research facility any dog or cat, or buy, sell, offer to buy or 
sell, transport or offer for transportation in commerce to or from another 
dealer under this Act any dog or cat, unless and until such dealer shall 
have obtained a license from the Secretary and such license shall not 
have been suspended or revoked. 
 Section 5. 
 No dealer shall sell or otherwise dispose of any dog or cat within 
a period of five business days after the acquisition of such animal or 
within such other period as may be specified by the Secretary. 
 Section 7. Purchase Restrictions 
 It shall be unlawful for any research facility to purchase any dog or 
cat from any person except a person holding a valid license as a dealer 
issued by the Secretary pursuant to this Act unless such person is ex-
empted from obtaining such license under section 3 of this Act. 
 Section 12. Humane Standards Promulgation 
 The Secretary is authorized to promulgate humane standards and 
recordkeeping requirements governing the purchase, handling, or sale 
of dogs or cats by dealers or research facilities at auction sales. 
 Section 13 .
 The Secretary shall establish and promulgate standards to govern 
the humane handling, care, treatment, and transportation of animals by 
dealers and research facilities. Such standards shall include minimum 
requirements with respect to the housing, feeding, watering, sanita-
tion, ventilation, shelter from extremes of weather and temperature, 

164 Animal Rights
 separation by species, and adequate veterinary care. The foregoing shall 
not be construed as authorizing the Secretary to prescribe standards for 
the handling, care, or treatment of animals during actual research or ex-
perimentation by research facility as determined by such research facility. 
 Section 16. Investigations or Inspections 
 The Secretary shall make such investigations or inspections as he 
deems necessary to determine whether any dealer or research facility has 
violated or is violating any provision of this Act or any regulation issued 
thereunder. The Secretary shall promulgate such rules and regulations as he 
deems necessary to permit inspectors to confiscate or destroy in a humane 
manner any animals found to be suffering as a result of a failure to comply 
with any provision of this Act or any regulation issued thereunder if (1) 
such animals are held by a dealer, or (2) such animals are held by a research 
facility and are no longer required by such research facility to carry out the 
research, test, or experiment for which such animals have been utilized. 
 Section 18. 
 Nothing in this Act shall be construed as authorizing the Secretary 
to promulgate rules, regulations, or orders for the handling, care, treat-
ment, or inspection of animals during actual research or experimentation 
by a research facility as determined by such research facility. 
 Source : http://www.nal.usda.gov/awic/legislat/pl89544.htm. Accessed 
May 15, 2009. 
 Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 
1970 (Public Law 91–579) 
 Section 3. 
 (e) The term “research facility” means any school (except an el-
ementary or secondary school), institution, organization, or person that 
uses or intends to use live animals in research, tests, or experiments, and 
that (1) purchases or transports live animals affecting commerce, or 
(2) receives funds under a grant, award, loan, or contract from a depart-
ment, agency, or instrumentality of the United States for the purpose of 
carrying out research, tests, or experiments:  Provided, That the Secretary 
may exempt, by regulation, any such school, institution, organization, or 
person that does not use or intend to use live dogs or cats, except those 
schools, institutions, organizations, or persons, in biomedical research or 
testing, when in the judgement of the Secretary, any such exception does 
not vitiate the purpose of this Act; . . . 
 (g) The term “animal” means any live or dead dog, cat, monkey 
(nonhuman primate mammal), guinea pig, hamster, rabbit, or such 

Data and Documents 165
other warm-blooded animal, as the Secretary may determine is being 
used, or is intended for use, for research, testing, experimentation, or 
exhibition purposes, or as a pet; but such term excludes horses not 
used for research purposes and other farm animals, such as but not 
limited to livestock or poultry used or intended for use for improving 
animal  nutrition, breeding, management, or production efficiency, or for 
 improving the quality of food or fiber. 
 Source : http://www.nal.usda.gov/awic/legislat/pl91579.htm. Accessed 
May 15, 2009. 
 Animal Welfare Act Amendment of 
1976 (Public Law 94–279) 
 Section 17. Animal Fighting Venture, Prohibition 
 (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sponsor or 
exhibit any animal in any animal fighting venture to which any 
animal was moved in interstate or foreign commerce. 
 (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell, buy, 
transport, or deliver to another person or receive from another 
person for purposes of transportation, in interstate for foreign 
commerce, any dog or other animal for purposes of having the 
dog or other animal participate in an animal fighting venture. 
 (c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly use the mail 
service of the United States Postal Service or any interstate 
 instrumentality for purposes of promoting or in any other man-
ner furthering an animal fighting venture except as performed 
outside the limits of the States of the United States. 
 (d)  Not withstanding the provisions of subsection (a), (b), or (c) of 
this section, the activities prohibited by such subsection shall be 
unlawful with respect to fighting ventures involving live birds 
only if the fight is to take place in a State where it would be in 
violation of the laws thereof. 
 Source : http://awic.nal.usda.gov/nal_display/index.php?info_center=3%20
&tax_level=4&tax_subject=182&topic_id=1118&level3_id=6735&level4_
id=11094&level5_id=0&placement_default=0. Accessed May 15, 2009. 
 Food Security Act of 1985 
 There were two committee hearings on the proposed Bill that would 
remain the Animal Welfare Act of 1966. These committee  hearings 

166 Animal Rights
were to determine what changes should be made, and are the 
source of  expert testimony about the Bill. Government bureaucrats 
can be invited to  attend a hearing and be prepared to answer ques-
tions, provide documents, and comments. Citizens who are experts 
in some area of the Bill under consideration can also volunteer to 
provide information about and insights into issues of interest. 
 Prior to the subsequent amendment to the bill, the authority of 
the secretary of agriculture stopped “at the laboratory door”; that 
is, the secretary could not regulate the conduct of the research or 
experimentation. This amendment allowed the secretary to have 
each research institution appoint an Institutional Animal Care 
and Use Committee (see later discussion), which would review 
experimental protocols and, if necessary, require that investigators 
modify the protocol.
Senate Hearing 161– 4, “Improved 
Standards for Laboratory Animals” 
 The first of the hearings (July 20, 1983), Senate Hearing 161–4, 
“Improved Standards for Laboratory Animals,” was conducted 
before the Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and For-
estry in 1983. The entire hearing is available on microfiche at 
 Federal Depository Libraries; the location of the libraries can be 
found at http://catalog.gpo.gov/fdlpdir/FDLPdir.jsp. 
 Senator Robert Dole (R, Kansas) was presiding, and Senator 
Melcher was present. They were the only two Senators reported 
to be present. This hearing was on Senate Bill 657, which was 
introduced as an amendment to the Animal Welfare Act, “to help 
insure a more humane and uniform treatment of lab animals.” 
 In his opening remarks, Senator Dole commented on the 
content of Senate Bill 657. This bill would ask that alternative 
methods to using animals for research or testing be considered. It 
would encourage an information service to be established at the 
USDA National Library of Agriculture and the National Library 
of Medicine. It would establish an animal studies committee 
within each institution that would consist of at least three per-
sons, one of whom would be an outside person not related to the 
institution and one a veterinarian. This committee would review 
the ongoing care, treatment, and practices of the facility, focus-
ing on minimizing animal pain and distress. The bill would allow 
committee members to review practices of the facility  during 

Data and Documents 167
experimentation but preserve the institution’s right to design its 
own experiments. Senator Dole reported that he had received let-
ters that supported and opposed animal welfare legislation. A re-
peated comment was “although it is important to treat animals 
humanely, we must not impede scientific research.” 
 Bert Hawkins, the Administrator of the Animal Plant Health 
Inspection Service (APHIS), reported that APHIS is responsible for 
registration and inspection of approximately 3,300 research sites. 
The current bill would require APHIS to expand the definition 
of research facility to include each federal department, agency, 
or instrumentality. Since federal agencies are required to comply 
with the same standard of care, Mr. Hawkins questioned the need 
to expand the definition of research facility to include federal 
agencies. Mr. Hawkins also questioned the change in standards 
for veterinary care from “minimum” to “proper.” Mr. Hawkins 
said, “This change would require us to develop standards consid-
ered proper for the different segments of the industry and vari-
ous animal species covered by the act. The term ‘proper’ would 
have to be qualified, that is, proper requirements with respect to 
the type of animal, the species, the use of the animal, its immedi-
ate environment, and other factors. The term ‘minimum,’ on the 
other hand, is more definitive and more enforceable in a court of 
law.” Mr. Hawkins also did not favor adding “adequate exercise” 
as a required standard, as it would be difficult to determine what 
amount of exercise was adequate for each species. Mr. Hawkins 
believed that the determination of whether an animal is suffer-
ing for momentary pain or discomfort during the actual research 
should be left to the professional judgment of a veterinarian. 
 William F. Raub, Associate Director for Extramural Research 
and Training for the National Institutes of Health, testified with 
regard to how oversight of the use of animals by the National 
Institutes of Health and its grantees is managed. The Institutes 
require all of its intramural staff and grantees to provide a written 
description of the uses of all vertebrate animals and to ensure that 
the institution has an animal care committee with a veterinarian as 
one of its members. Mr. Raub also testified that the NIH was coop-
erating and funding the Institute of Laboratory Animal Resources 
of the National Academy of Science to update its  Guide for the Care 
and Use of Laboratory Animals . 
 Senator John Melcher reported that the current AWA stan-
dards were minimum standards, meaning that they were open 
to interpretation by APHIS, the research facility, and Congress. It 
was the intent of Congress and the public that animal facilities be 

168 Animal Rights
very clean and adequate in size. Senator Melcher was concerned 
about how appropriations were handled. Senator Melcher also 
mentions that Christine Stevens had started to coordinate and 
expedite all the various groups that were affected by this bill. 
 The Department of Health and Human Services, National In-
stitutes of Health, provided a list of institutions that acknowledged 
use of warmblooded animals in their activities and had received 
approval of their proposed standard of animal care. 
 Stuart Proctor, Assistant Director, National Affairs Division 
of the American Farm Bureau Federation, claimed that farmers 
were under attack by individuals and organizations that made 
false and inaccurate statements about how things are done on 
farms. These individuals and organizations, he asserted, present 
emotional arguments and exaggerated examples of how animals 
are raised, treated, and slaughtered. He was concerned that these 
organizations might be successful in passing legislation based on 
emotion. Many of the animal rights activists who challenge labo-
ratories also challenge the farming industry, he said. 
 Dr. Orr E. Reynolds, Executive Vice President of the American 
Physiological Society, reported that physiologists use more than 
half of the animals required for biomedical and behavioral re-
search and for teaching. He suggested that deviations in research 
protocols could be discussed with the animal studies committee. 
He also suggested that the decision to replicate an experiment 
should be left in the hands of scientists and teachers. 
 Dr. Walter Randall, Professor of Physiology, Loyola University 
of Chicago, Stritch School of Medicine, reminded the subcommit-
tee that physiology is the study of how living beings function and 
that more than half of the animals used in research are used for car-
diovascular, neurophysiological, endocrinological and respiratory 
research. He mentioned that he had undergone quadruple bypass 
surgery and argued that 80 percent of the diagnostic techniques 
and treatment he benefited from were not known to medicine 5 or 
even 15 years ago. He further stated that the bypass surgery was 
based entirely on animal experimentation. He claimed that there is 
significant evidence that researchers and scientists using live ani-
mals follow the standards of the AWA and the guidelines of NIH. 
In addition to these standards, the American Physiological Society 
and other professional societies have published their own guide-
lines. The Society does not support review of research protocols 
or interference with the actual research. Dr. Randall stated that 
the definition of “methodologies and procedures” is  something 

Data and Documents 169
that requires real expertise. An individual who has only textbook 
knowledge is simply not qualified to make this judgment. Re-
search is at the forefront of knowledge and interjection by the staff 
of the secretary could have a stultifying effect on progress. 
 Dr. Frank Standaert, Chairman of the Department of Pharma-
cology, Georgetown University School of Medicine, spoke for the 
American Association of Medical Colleges, which represents 127 
accredited medical schools and 400 major teaching hospitals. Dr. 
Standaert believed that advances in patient care are totally depen-
dent on progress in biomedical research using laboratory animals. 
He said, “Over the last four decades, medical school research 
capacity has grown very rapidly and the application of that new 
knowledge has resulted in profound improvements in the under-
standing as well as in the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of 
human disease.“ The Association was not aware of any deficiencies 
in the care of laboratory animals within academic medical centers. 
 Charles Chambers, Executive Director of the American Insti-
tute of Biological Sciences, reported that the Institute is a federa-
tion of three dozen biological, medical, and agricultural societies. 
The Institute believes that the use of replicable experiments “is 
an indispensable element of scientific validation, and, in order 
to ensure that the knowledge that is obtained in the laboratory is 
sound enough to be used for the improvement of human welfare, 
the validation of that data through replication of the experiments is 
essential.” Mr. Chambers was concerned about the use of a public 
representative as a member of the animal use committee. He cited 
the general decrease in science literacy and said that good research 
data can be obtained only with good animal care. Use of animals 
in student teaching laboratories enhances the student’s sensitivity 
to and understanding of living creatures. 
 Dr. Herbert Rackow, of the Scientists’ Group for the Reform of 
Animal Experimentation, found that the provisions for adequate ex-
ercise and appropriate pre- and postsurgical care are long overdue 
for revision. He says that if animals are to be used as a model for hu-
mans, then the medical and nursing care should be similar. Rackow 
believed that the training for scientists and for those who care for 
the animals that was called for under the bill should be mandatory. 
 Dr. Bennett Derby, Professor of Clinical Neurology and 
 Pathology at New York University, agreed that that a  veterinarian 
should be responsible for dealing with animal pain. The bill went 
beyond the stay of the animal and provided for the need for 
 euthanasia. He mentioned a particularly sensitive practice that 

170 Animal Rights
exists in neurophysiology in which an animal is in a stereotaxic 
holder (a device that holds the skull in a fixed position that allows 
an electrode to be placed in a specific location in the brain) with-
out general anesthesia, which would interfere with the electrical 
activity of the brain as it was being recorded. 
 The American Psychological Association and the Association 
for the Advancement of Psychology argued that a study should 
be conducted prior to enacting the proposed amendments to the 
AWA. They believed that many of the provisions would impose 
an extra regulatory burden on researchers without necessarily 
improving animal welfare. One of the major concerns was that 
there are few alternative methods for studying behavior. 
 Emily F. Gleockler, President of Humane Information Ser-
vices, St. Petersburg, Florida, believed that the small possible addi-
tions to medical knowledge should not be achieved at the expense 
of morally unjustified cruelties to lesser forms of life. She said, 
“At last it is recognized that preoccupation with the problems of 
human welfare does not justify ignoring the problems of animal 
welfare.” She continued, “So, it will no longer serve to defend un-
necessary suffering by laboratory animals because it is a broad ef-
fort to improve public health and save human lives. The public, to 
a constantly increasing extent, wants to know how and why some 
particular source of animal suffering is required to serve some 
socially desirable purpose, and whether or not the end justifies 
the means.” She reported that a random sample of the research 
included in the Index Medicus studied by independent research 
analysts found that 74.6 percent of these studies could have used 
fewer animals, if proper statistical design had been used. 
 The Cosmetic, Toiletry and Fragrance Association represents 
240 companies that manufacture or distribute more than 90 per-
cent of the finished cosmetic products marketed in the United 
States and has 220 members that provide cosmetic raw materials 
and testing laboratories. The Association agreed that animal test-
ing should be conducted in a humane manner and said that it had 
been in the forefront in identifying alternatives to animal research. 
In 1981, the Association established the Center for Alternatives to 
Animal Testing at Johns Hopkins University. The Association be-
lieved that having an “unaffiliated community representative” is 
unworkable because this person may have difficulty appreciating 
the need for a particular study. 
 Steve Kopperud, Legislative Director for the American 
Feed Manufacturers Association, reported that members of the 

Data and Documents 171
Association produce more than 70 percent of formula livestock 
and poultry feed. The Association, he said, was committed to 
the humane treatment of animals. While the Association com-
mended the motivation behind the bill, it questioned the need 
for it. The Association, he added, believed that animal rights 
and welfare activists are well meaning but argued there is no 
verifiable evidence to support their claims. 
 C. Leon Hirsch, President of the United States Surgical Cor-
poration, asserted that most research organizations’ animal care 
standards far exceeded the existing statutory and regulatory 
“minimum” requirements. He believed that the committee and 
Congress should “deliberate very carefully” to avoid “uninten-
tional results which could hamper medical research, developing 
technology or essential training.” He was also concerned about 
the protection of trade secrets and other proprietary rights. Last, 
he was concerned about the costs of good-faith compliance with 
the requirements of the bill. He reported that U.S. Surgical was 
subject to inspections by two federal and two state agencies in 
 addition to having to meet the stringent requirements for American 
Association for Laboratory Animal Care (AALAC) certification. 
He questioned the need for an additional inspection by an “institu-
tional animal studies committee.” He was particularly concerned 
about the requirement that one member of this committee not be 
affiliated with the organization, which he claimed might jeopar-
dize proprietary rights to the treatments or devices that are the 
subject of the research. He was also concerned about the time and 
funds required for the committee to provide annual training for 
personnel involved with animal care and treatment. 
 John McArdle, Director of the Laboratory Animal Welfare 
at the Humane Society of the United States, reported that there 
should be a reduction of pain and suffering endured by animals 
used in research. He believed that everything that an animal 
experiences has a real or potential impact on the validity of the 
results of the research. Any attempt to compare results between 
two or more institutions must assume equivalent care of the an-
imals involved. He argued that the standards set by the AWA 
and the NIH are minimum standards that may not be sufficient 
to establish and maintain normal behavioral and physiological 
 responses. Dr. Michael Fox, the Scientific Director of the Society, 
endorsed a change from “adequate” to “proper” species-specific 
requirements, including the need for physical exercise and the 
opportunity to engage in natural behavioral repertoires. 

172 Animal Rights
 Christine Stevens, Secretary of the Society for Animal Pro-
tection Legislation, supported the bill. She said that remarkable 
progress had been made in the use of alternatives to animals. For 
example, the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association and the 
National Society for Medical Researchers have stated that the rou-
tine use of the quantitative lethal dose 50 percent (i.e. the level 
of drug that kills 50% of the subjects exposed to it) is not scien-
tifically justified. The lethal dose 50 percent is used to determine 
the lethal dose of a drug or chemical. Ms. Stevens believed that 
animal study committees are important. She suggested that these 
committees include a veterinarian and someone not associated 
with the facility. She argued that this committee would be similar 
to one intended to protect human subjects, the Institutional Re-
view Board. She provided USDA reports of inspections of medi-
cal schools and other scientific institutions that she had obtained 
under the Freedom of Information Act. She proceeded to provide 
quotes from these documents that suggest that the inspections 
were inadequate. She argued that an animal should be used in 
no more than one major operation and reported seeing animals 
that had been subjected to as many as seven operations. She was 
also in favor of the exercise provision of the bill and the provision 
forbidding discrimination against those who report violations, as 
well as the requirements for training for scientists and animal care 
technicians. She mentioned that even though farm animals are ex-
empt from the bill, some farm organizations still opposed the bill. 
She reported that the Association for Biomedical Research, report-
edly funded by Charles River Breeding Laboratories, in Wilming-
ton, Massachusetts, favored a study of the state of animal welfare 
and asserted that this was a stalling tactic 
 Peyton Hawes Dunn, Chairperson of Working for Animals 
Used in Research, Drugs, and Surgery (WARDS), argued that the 
USDA had failed to enforce the AWA and believed that the De-
partment of Health and Human Services, which was the source of 
most of the funding for biomedical research, should be tasked with 
enforcing animal welfare. Mr. Dunn presented a discussion of the 
Silver Springs monkey case. After discussing this case, Mr. Dunn 
said that “one of the main purposes of NIH is to prevent inter-
ference with research by laws and inspectors ignorant of the pur-
poses and procedures of research.” He asserted that professional 
handling of animals is vital to meaningful research. He was also in 
favor of developing alternatives and proposed to create a Center 
for Alternatives that would include representatives of government 

Data and Documents 173
agencies concerned with research. Mr. Dunn did not believe that 
the current method for reporting the number of animals used in 
painful experiments had no value. Mr. Dunn reports that a 1978 
survey by the Institute of Laboratory Animal Resources reported 
that only 14 of the 21 research organizations working with the NIH 
were following NIH guidelines. This survey found that 77 percent 
of the laboratories that responded claimed that they were follow-
ing the NIH guidelines, and 23 percent admitted they were not. 
 Dr. John F. Kullberg, Executive Director of the American Soci-
ety for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, said that the Society 
supported the bill. He reported that the Director of the National 
Center of Toxicological Research was committed to the develop-
ment of alternatives to animals, that Bristol Myers had committed 
itself to reducing the number of animals it used and to use nonani-
mal tests when possible, that Revlon was using computer searches 
to determine whether products similar to its own were in use to 
minimize animal testing, and that Johnson and Johnson was using 
a cell culture as a preliminary screen for potential irritants. He 
found that Johns Hopkins University, Rockefeller University, and 
the University of Texas were also seeking alternatives. He strongly 
recommended the use of research committees and was in favor of 
language in the bill that changed “minimum standards” to “appro-
priate standards.” 
 Dr. Kenneth J. Shapiro, Executive Director of the Psychologists 
for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, reported that his organization 
supported the bill, especially the provision for including an outside 
member on the animal use committee. 
 Dr. W. M. Decker of the American Veterinary Medical Associ-
ation recommended that the AWA be adequately enforced before 
new legislation is considered. 
 Orville K. Sweet, Executive Vice President of the National 
Pork Producers Council, supported the exclusion of farm and 
food animals from the bill. 
 Tom Gustafson, Chairman of the National Cattlemen’s Asso-
ciation Subcommittee on Animal Care, said that cattlemen were 
interested in animal welfare and had an economic interest in ani-
mals. The Association supported the idea that farm animals should 
not be included under the bill. The Association was concerned that 
the animal use committee might try to derive solutions to a prob-
lem without really understanding the nature of the problem. The 
Association also believed that the wording of the section concern-
ing in vitro testing, encourages but does not legislate their use. 

174 Animal Rights
 Virginia Chipuroni, President of the New York Humane Soci-
ety, maintained that animals kept in relatively small cages should 
have an opportunity to exercise and that adequate veterinary care 
is vital. The Society also was in favor of constructive steps toward 
the development of alternative research methods and of training 
of researchers. 
 John Gleiber, Executive Secretary of the Society for Animal Pro-
tection Legislation, provided resolutions by the Lycoming County 
SPCA, Williamsport, Pennsylvania; the Animal Rescue Foundation, 
Middlebury, Connecticut; Defenders of Animals, Inc., West Allis, 
Wisconsin; the Orlando Humane Society, Orlando, Florida; and the 
Humane Society of Rochester and Monroe County, Fairport, New 
York, all in support of the bill. 
 Dr. Claude Migeon, Chairman of the Public Affairs Com-
mittee of the Endocrine Society, which represents more than 
4,000 scientists and physicians, argued that adequate animal 
care is essential to excellent research. But the Society felt that it 
was important to determine the current status of animals before 
initiating new legislation. 
 The Academy of Clinical Laboratory Physicians and Scientists 
endorsed the further study of animal welfare before enacting new 
legislation. 
 Jean Harper, President of the Leon County Humane Society 
of Tallahassee, Florida, supported the bill. 
 Robert Markmann, President of the Society for the Protection 
and Preservation of Animals, supported the bill. 
 Dr. Samuel M. Peacock, of Psychopharmacology Research, 
Inc., supported the bill and said, “It has been my experience, 
based on almost 40 years of research at seven institutions, that the 
individual investigators and the science administrator, for a vari-
ety of reasons, will not be concerned with the human treatment 
of research animals. It is not that these people are in-humane, but 
rather that there is a certain overriding zeal to get the research 
done, coupled with frequent budget limitations which dictate that 
the funds be spent elsewhere.” 
 Dr. Jay Glass of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, supported the bill. 
 Bianca Beary, President of the Washington Humane Society, 
said that lab animal facilities should be inspected by the USDA 
and that the inclusion of a member of the public provides impor-
tant oversight. 
 Alex Pacheco, of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, 
believed that the bill would prevent abuses that were causing pain 

Data and Documents 175
and distress to animals. He also believed that the Animal Studies 
Committee would provide valuable assistance to the USDA. 
 Dr. Marjorie Anchel, President of the New York State Humane 
Association, maintained that the bill should be enacted. The As-
sociation, she said, was familiar with the effects of small cages for 
companion animals and believed that the requirement for exercise 
is essential. The Association also was familiar with the misuse of 
paralytics and suggested that these agents should not be used for 
euthanasia. 
 House of Representatives Hearing 
161–27, “Improved Standards for 
Laboratory Animals Act; 
and Enforcement of the Animal 
Welfare Act by the Animal and Plant 
Health Inspection Service” 
 A second hearing was before the House Subcommittee on De-
partment Operations, Research, and Foreign Agriculture on Sep-
tember 19, 1984. A transcript of the entire hearing is available on 
microfiche at the Federal Depository Libraries; the location of the 
libraries can be found at http://catalog.gpo.gov/fdlpdir/FDLP-
dir.jsp. 
 The subcommittee chairman was George E. Brown. The 
members present for this hearing were Representatives Harvey O. 
Staggers, Timothy J. Penny, Thomas S. Foley, Harold J. Volkmer, 
Pat Roberts, Steve Gunderson, Cooper Evans, and Webb Franklin. 
Representative Charles Rose, a member of the full committee, and 
Cristobal P. Aldrete, special counsel, were also present. 
 The hearing dealt with H.R. 5725, a revised version of S. 657 
introduced by Senator Dole. Congressman Brown reported that 
there was no law that required researchers to use painkillers dur-
ing experiments that cause pain to animals. The bill would require 
the use of painkillers unless it specifically interfered with the 
research protocol. This bill would also establish a voluntary na-
tional database to help reduce unintended duplication of research 
and to ensure that researchers are aware of alternatives (e.g. lower 
animals, in vitro methods, and computer simulations). The bill, 
said the congressman, “would not interfere with the freedom of 
the decision of a scientist to conduct an experiment but instead 

176 Animal Rights
takes precautions to ensure that humane handling of animals oc-
curs whenever possible.” Brown maintained that no field should 
be free of scrutiny or improvement. Each witness before the com-
mittee was asked to limit testimony to five minutes; additional 
information could be added to the official record. 
 Dr. James B. Wyngaarden, Director of the National Institutes 
of Health, asserted “that the bill reflects a general understanding 
of some of the fundamental concerns and needs of the biomedi-
cal research community.” He believed that existing law and ad-
ministrative authority were satisfactory and that new legislation 
was not needed. Institutions that receive support from NIH must 
provide assurances that they will comply with NIH guidelines; ap-
proximately one-third are accredited by the American Association 
for Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care, and the remaining 
institutions are either in full compliance or working toward full 
compliance. In 1983, NIH inspectors visited 10 randomly selected 
institutions and found no abuses of animals; the institutions were 
in compliance with the guidelines. NIH added a requirement that 
the animal use committee have one member not affiliated with the 
institution, required more frequent updating of institutional assur-
ance statements, and initiated an educational campaign. NIH also 
sponsored a series of workshops on the subjects of “alternative” or 
“adjunct” methods of research. 
 Gretchen Wyler, Vice Chairman of The Fund for Animals, 
which has 250,000 members, reported that her members were 
surprised that the requirements outlined in the proposed bill 
were not already laws. She claimed that current enforcement 
was grossly deficient, that the budget of APHIS was too low to 
do an adequate job, and that, because of budgetary restrictions, 
inspectors might not be well enough trained. She reported that 
a comprehensive survey by Dr. Michael Glannelli, a member of 
the American Psychological Association and science adviser to 
the Fund, found that “1984 animal research published in the APA 
journals raises reasonable questions about the necessity of much 
of the published work and removes all reasonable doubt that ani-
mals are routinely made to bear suffering and despair.” The Fund 
supported the bill. 
 Christine Stevens, Secretary of the Society for Animal Protec-
tive Legislation, noted that the biomedical research organizations 
supported the AWA and its amendments. The data collected by 
the Society showed “major and repeated deficiencies or alleged 
violations of the minimum standards of the Animal Welfare Act 

Data and Documents 177
by 23.7 percent of a sample of 186 institutions whose inspection 
reports and annual reports have so far been examined. Another 
22 percent had less frequent major violations, and 28.5 percent 
have minor ones; 1.6 percent are under investigation and the rest, 
according to the USDA veterinary inspectors’ records, are abiding 
by the, and I repeat, minimum standards.” Ms. Stevens suggested 
that USDA inspectors have overlooked serious violations in the 
past. This means that only 24.2 percent of registered research in-
stitutions were regularly meeting the AWA standards. Ms. Stevens 
argued that the number of animals used in research was not di-
minishing. She provided a list of research institutions and showed 
video sequences taken by the Lifeforce Foundation. She also men-
tioned tapes stolen by the Animal Liberation Front of scientists 
at the University of Pennsylvania Head Injury Clinical Research 
Center; People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals prepared 
a half-hour of excerpts from a 60-hour-long tape. Ms. Stevens 
showed this tape with commentary. After presenting the tape, she 
reported that the University of Pennsylvania had claimed in its 
annual report to have caused no unrelieved pain to animals. She 
discussed “learned helplessness” experiments. She then went on 
to report that the current bill was the product of a years’ work and 
involved meetings with the American Physiological Society, the 
American Psychological Association, the Association of American 
Medical Colleges, the Society of Animal Protective Legislation, 
the Humane Society of the United States, the American Humane 
Society, and the People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals. This 
process led to S. 657, sponsored by Senator Dole. She believed 
that two statements—“and shall concern themselves with the 
welfare of animal subjects” and “an outside member who shall be 
responsible for the welfare for representing community concerns 
regarding the welfare of animal subjects”. She acknowledged the 
controversy around defining standards that are “proper” and 
those that are “minimum” and suggested that “proper” would be 
a better term to use in the standards. She indicated that the USDA 
was asking for additional guidance on the standards for exercise 
for dogs and that the agency questioned the need for veterinar-
ians to visit other federal agencies, which she believes would be 
highly beneficial. She reported that the Association for Biomedical 
Research is funded by the Charles River Breeding  Laboratories, 
which is a multinational, multi-million-dollar business that had, 
according to the Boston  Globe , $45 million in sales and $6.2 mil-
lion in earnings in 1983. Ms. Stevens claimed that “these sales 

178 Animal Rights
are achieved by skillful and unrelenting promotion of the sale of 
the maximum number of animals to scientific institutions.” She 
reported that NIH was a big customer of Charles River, where 
in 1983 it spent more than $3 million. Ms. Stevens claimed that 
Frankie Trull, the Executive Director of the Foundation for Bio-
medical Research and the Association for Biomedical Research, 
worked closely with NIH and that Ms. Trull had worked to con-
vince Congress not to act on the current bill until the completion 
of an 18-month study by the National Academy of Sciences. 
Ms. Stevens stated that agricultural interests opposed the enact-
ment of the current bill even though farm animals were exempt 
from its terms. 
 The American Heart Association asserted that animal research 
has had a substantial impact on the reduction of cardiovascular 
disease. 
 Representative Par Roberts maintained that the new legislation 
might not be required but that the USDA should actively enforce 
existing regulations. He asked if APHIS had sufficient funds to make 
the necessary inspections. 
 Representative Charles Rose asserted that the bill was fair 
and realistic. 
 Bert W. Hawkins, Administrator of the Animal and Plant 
Inspection Service, argued that to administer the AWA required 
judgment. He reported that inspectors visited, on average, each 
registered site at least twice annually. But this was not always pos-
sible or necessary, which was where judgment came into play. 
 Dr. Gerald van Hoosier, Jr., testifying on behalf of the Na-
tional Association of State Universities and Land Grant Colleges, 
the American Council on Education, and the Association of Amer-
ican Universities, said that the bill was a thoughtful attempt to 
address important issues about animal care. But, he believed that 
new legislation should wait until the completion of the National 
Academy of Science study. In addition, NIH was revising its 
guidelines, and any differences in the language between the bill 
and the NIH guidelines might cause confusion. He did not believe 
that “alternative” research methods were reasonable, because for 
some forms of research there are no substitutes for animals, except 
possibly humans. 
 Dr. John McArdle, Director of Laboratory Animal Welfare for 
the Humane Society of America, believed that there should be con-
sistent interpretation of inspection and enforcement requirements 
and that some inspectors have inadequate training. He discussed 
the failure of APHIS enforcement at the University of California, 

Data and Documents 179
 Berkeley. He asked that another section be added to the bill and titled 
“Civil Enforcement Suits”; this section would enable any person to 
commence a civil suit to compel the secretary of agriculture to apply 
and enforce the provisions of the AWA. He argued that he was 
 concerned about the combined use of paralytics and anesthetics. 
 Dr. Glenn Geelhoed, Director of Surgical Research Labora-
tories, speaking on behalf of the Association of American Medi-
cal Colleges, which represents 127 medical schools, 400 teaching 
hospitals, and 70 professional and academic societies, claimed that 
violations of standards were rare and that a comprehensive study 
should be conducted to determine if problems existed and if there 
was a need for future legislation and, if so, what it should con-
tain. He believed that APHIS lacked sufficient funds to ensure full 
compliance with the law. He stated that three agencies were revis-
ing guidelines and that future legislation should wait until this 
process was complete. 
 Dr. Walter C. Randall, Professor of Physiology, Stritch School 
of Medicine, Loyola University of Chicago, speaking on behalf 
of the American Physiological Society, presented testimony that 
physiologists are the largest users of animals and that more than 
half of the total number of animals used in research are used for 
cardiovascular, neurophysiological, endocrinological, and respi-
ratory research. Most of the spectacular advances in medicine are 
based on animal experiments, he said. The number of dogs, cats, 
and frogs used for educational purposes has declined. Dr. Randall 
argued that where nonanimal adjunct methods were available, 
they were used voluntarily by physiologists. Dr. Randall believed 
that the secretary of agriculture should initiate new regulations 
and that new legislation was not needed. The Association rec-
ommended that the AWA be amended to provide for federal 
prosecution of persons or organizations that either directly or 
indirectly interfered with federally funded research; if convicted, 
such persons or organizations should be held liable for punitive 
damages and for the cost of replacing materials, data, equipment, 
animals, or records, as well as the cost of repeating the experi-
ments that were interrupted or invalidated. 
 Dr. Edward C. Melby, Jr., Dean of the Cornell Veterinary Col-
lege and President of the Association of Bio-medical Research, 
which represents about 200 organizations and companies that 
use animal models in biomedical research and testing, said that 
the Association agreed with the basic premise of the bill but 
recommended that it wait for the outcome of the study by the 
National Academy of Science. He claimed that APHIS inspections 

180 Animal Rights
were often inconsistent and lacking in uniformity. The Associa-
tion  believed that the current bill, because of the nonspecificity 
of some of the language, implied that the secretary of agriculture 
had the authority to interfere with actual research performance. 
The Association argued that this approach was full of pitfalls, 
 especially if assumed that “that all USDA inspectors do possess 
a broad-based knowledge of the vast types of research being con-
ducted in this country and enough expertise to assess the quality 
or necessity of this research.” The Association also disagreed with 
wording describing an outside member of the committee as “one 
who represents community concerns regarding the welfare of 
animal subjects.” This definition, the speaker said, assumes that 
no one else on the committee is concerned about animal welfare, 
and it would be difficult to determine to what extent an outside 
member was aware of the general community’s concerns and had 
some understanding of the scientific process and of the ethical 
considerations attached to using animals in research. 
 Dr. Barbara Orlans, Executive Director of the Scientist Center 
for Animal Welfare reported that the Center was an organization 
of scientists concerned about the humane treatment of animals. 
The Center runs workshops on how to run an animal care and 
use committee. The Center supported the legislation and believed 
that training for investigators was vital. 
 Dr. Marshall Steinberg, Secretary of the Society for Toxicol-
ogy, which has members from academia, government, and indus-
try, reported that in vitro techniques are valuable but that they 
cannot replace animals. The Society suggested that the definition 
of “distress” needed to be clarified. The speaker said, “Safety 
studies are required by regulation to produce a toxic effect at a 
high dose.” He believed that the animal use committee should be 
run like a quality assurance unit. 
 Howard C. Brown, Vice President for Scientific Affairs of the 
National Association of Life Sciences Industries, a trade organi-
zation of independent toxicology testing laboratories commonly 
referred to as “contract laboratories,” was concerned about the 
requirement that a nonassociated community member be given 
access to proprietary information, with fines and imprisonment, 
as well as actual and consequential damages, as deterrents; the 
consequences to the owner may be tested in organizations where 
this exposure is not possible. 
 Marc H. Rosenberg, Executive Director of the National Coali-
tion for Science and Technology, an organization that represents 

Data and Documents 181
approximately 1,000 research scientists, educators, businesspeo-
ple and engineers, as well as corporations and professional socie-
ties, said that the Coalition did not support this legislation and 
wanted to wait for the report of the Office of Technology Assess-
ment that was due in 1985. In a series of workshops, a consensus 
was reached that more could be done to reduce duplication of ani-
mal research. The Coalition was concerned that local animal use 
committees would be left to establish their own standards, which 
might lead to confusion. The Coalition also believed that a swift 
and definite appeals process should be available to researchers. 
The Coalition agreed that it would be useful to have a national 
clearinghouse for information about animal research and alterna-
tives, but it suggested that this clearinghouse should have its own 
line item in the budget. 
 John H. Seamer, a member of the British Veterinary Associa-
tion, representing the Humane Information Services of the United 
States, reported that he had read the AWA and the proposed 
amendments and found that they were very different from the 
law in Britain, which was more restrictive. The British law applied 
to all vertebrates, while the AWA applied only to warmblooded 
animals. The British law required that “If an animal at any time 
during any experiment is found to be suffering from severe pain, 
which is likely to endure, such animal shall forthwith be pain-
lessly killed.” This was the case even if the objective of the experi-
ments had not been achieved. 
 Food Security Act of 1985 
(Public Law 99–198) 
 Title XVII-Related and Miscellaneous Matters 
 Section 1751. Congressional Findings 
 For the purposes of this subtitle, the Congress finds that 
 (1)  the use of animals is instrumental in certain research and educa-
tion for advancing knowledge of cures and treatment for dis-
eases and injuries which afflict both humans and animals; 
 (2)  methods of testing that do not use animals are being and con-
tinue to be developed which are faster, less expensive, and more 
accurate than traditional animal experiments for some purposes 
and further opportunities exist for the development of these 
methods of testing; 

182 Animal Rights
 (3)  measures which eliminate or minimize the unnecessary dupli-
cation of experiments on animals can result in more productive 
use of Federal funds; and 
 (4)  measures which help meet the public concern for laboratory 
 animal care and treatment are important in assuring that 
 research will continue to progress. 
 Section 1752. Standards and Certification 
 (1)  redesignating subsections (b) through (d) as subsections (f) 
through (h) respectively; and 
 (2)  striking out the first two sentences of subsection (a) and in-
serting in lieu thereof the following new sentences: “(1) The 
Secretary shall promulgate standards to govern the humane 
handling, care, treatment, and transportation of animals by 
dealers, research facilities, and exhibitors. 
 (2)  The standards described in paragraph (1) shall include mini-
mum requirements 
 (A)  for handling, housing, feeding, watering, sanitation, venti-
lation, shelter from extremes of weather and temperatures, 
adequate veterinary care, and separation by species where 
the Secretary finds necessary for humane handling, care, or 
treatment of animals; and 
 (B)  for exercise of dogs, as determined by an attending veteri-
narian in accordance with general standards promulgated 
by the Secretary, and for a physical environment adequate 
to promote the psychological well-being of primates. 
 (3)  In addition to the requirements under paragraph (2), the stan-
dards described in paragraph (1) shall, with respect to animals 
in research facilities, include requirements 
 (A)  for animal care, treatment, and practices in experimental pro-
cedures to ensure that animal pain and distress are minimized, 
including adequate veterinary care with the appropriate use 
of anesthetic, analgesic, tranquilizing drugs, or euthanasia; 
 (B)  that the principal investigator considers alternatives to any 
procedure likely to produce pain to or distress in an experi-
mental animal; 
 “(C) in any practice which could cause pain to animals 
 (i)  that a doctor of veterinary medicine is consulted in the 
planning of such procedures; 
 (ii) for the use of tranquilizers, analgesics, and anesthetics; 
 (iii)  for pre-surgical and post-surgical care by laboratory 
workers, in accordance with established veterinary 
medical and nursing procedures; 

Data and Documents 183
 (iv) against the use of paralytics without anesthesia, and 
 (v)  that the withholding of tranquilizers, anesthesia, an-
algesia, or euthanasia when scientifically necessary 
shall continue for only the necessary period of time; 
 (D)  that no animal is used in more than one major operative 
experiment from which it is allowed to recover except in 
cases of 
 (i) scientific necessity; or 
 (ii)  other special circumstances as determined by the 
Secretary; and 
 (E)  that exceptions to such standards may be made only when 
specified by research protocol and that any such exception 
shall be detailed and explained in a report outlined under 
paragraph (7) and filed with the Institutional Animal Care 
Committee.” 
 (b) Section 13(a) of such Act is further amended 
 (1) by designating the third and fourth sentences as paragraph (4); 
 (2) by designating the fifth sentence as paragraph (5); and 
 (3)  by striking out the last sentence and inserting in lieu thereof the 
following: 
 “(6)(A) Nothing in this Act 
 (i)  except as provided in paragraphs (7) of this subsection, 
shall be construed as authorizing the Secretary to 
promulgate rules, regulations, or orders with regard to 
the design, outlines, or guidelines of actual research or 
experimentation by a research facility as determined by 
such research facility; 
 (ii)  except as provided subparagraphs (A) and (C) (ii) 
through (v) of paragraph (3) and paragraph (7) of 
this subsection, shall be construed as authorizing the 
Secretary to promulgate rules, regulations, or orders 
with regard to the performance of actual research or 
experimentation by a research facility as determined by 
such research facility; and 
 (iii)  shall authorize the Secretary, during inspection, 
to interrupt the conduct of actual research or 
experimentation. 

184 Animal Rights
 (B) No rule, regulation, order, or part of this Act shall be con-
strued to require a research facility to disclose publicly or to the 
Institutional Animal Committee during its inspection, trade secrets 
or commercial or financial information which is privileged or confi-
dential. 
 (7)(A) The Secretary shall require each research facility to show 
upon inspection, and to report at least annually, that the provisions 
of this Act are being followed and that professionally acceptable stan-
dards governing the care, treatment, and use of animals are being 
followed by the research facility during actual research or experimen-
tation. 
 (B) In complying with subparagraph (A), such research facilities 
shall provide 
 (i)  information on procedures likely to produce pain or dis-
tress in any animal and assurances demonstrating that the 
 principal investigator considered alternatives to those pro-
cedures; 
 (ii)  assurances satisfactory to the Secretary that such facility is 
 adhering to the standards described in this section; and 
 (iii)  an explanation for any deviation from the standards promul-
gated under this section. 
 (8) Paragraph (1) shall not prohibit any State (or a political subdivi-
sion of such State) from promulgating standards in addition to those 
standards promulgated by the Secretary under paragraph (1).” 
 (c) Section 13 of such Act is further amended by inserting after 
 subsection (a) the following new subsections: 
 (b)(1) The Secretary shall require that each research facility 
 establish at least one Committee. Each Committee shall be appointed 
by the chief executive officer of each such research facility and shall 
be composed of not fewer than three members. Such members shall 
possess sufficient ability to assess animal care, treatment, and prac-
tices in experimental research as determined by the needs of the 
research facility and shall represent society’s concerns regarding the 
welfare of animal subjects used at such facility. Of the members of 
the Committee— 
 (A) at least one member shall be a doctor of veterinary medicine; 
 (B) at least one member— 
 (i)  shall not be affiliated in any way with such facility other 
than as a member of the Committee; 
 (ii)  shall not be a member of the immediate family of a person 
who is affiliated with such facility; and 
 (iii)  is intended to provide representation for general community 
interests in the proper care and treatment of animals; and 

Data and Documents 185
 (C)  in those cases where the Committee consists of more than 
three members, not more than three members shall be from 
the same administrative unit of such facility. 
 (2)  A quorum shall be required for all formal actions of the Com-
mittee, including inspections under paragraph (3). 
 (3)  The Committee shall inspect at least semiannually all animal 
study areas and animal facilities of such research facility and 
review as part of the inspection— 
 (A) practices involving pain to animals, and 
 (B) the condition of animals, 
 to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act to minimize 
pain and distress to animals. Exceptions to the requirement of 
inspection of such study areas may be made by the Secretary if 
animals are studied in their natural environment and the study 
area is prohibitive to easy access.” 
 Source : http://www.nal.usda.gov/awic/legislat/pl99198.htm. Accessed 
May 15, 2009 
 The 1985 Amendments 
Become Law 
 Once the 1985 Amendments were signed into law, the bureaucrats 
at the USDA Animal and Plant Protection and Inspection Service 
began the process of promulgating the regulations and standards 
that would be used to enforce this law. Generally, the secretary 
and other appointed officials of the USDA are only minimally in-
volved in this process. The first step in this process is to solicit in-
formation and public comment for the drafting of regulations and 
standards called for in this amendment. This is accomplished by 
publishing a notice in the Federal Register (http://www.gpoac-
cess.gov/fr/), which is the official daily publication for rules, 
proposed rules, and notices of federal agencies and organizations, 
executive orders, and presidential documents. 
 “Animal Welfare; Final Rules, Parts 1 and 2, Final Rule” was 
published in the Federal Register on August 31, 1989 (vol. 54, no. 
163, pp. 36112–163) and is summarized: “Often referred to as the 
‘Preamble’ to the Animal Welfare Act amendments of 1985, the 
explanations of the regulations are used to identify the intent of 
the regulations published in Title 9, Code of Federal Regulations. 

186 Animal Rights
This issue contains final regulations developed to enact the 1985 
amendments to the Animal Welfare Act covering the Definitions 
and Regulations sections. Extensive commentary is provided to 
respond to public comments about each of the proposed regula-
tions. Comments and final regulations are provided in many areas 
including the structure and functions of the Institutional Animal 
Care and Use Committee; the principal investigator’s consider-
ation of alternatives that reduce, refine, or replace animal use; 
records; licensing; registration; stolen animals; and research facili-
ties.” This document is available at http://www.nal.usda.gov/
awic/legislat/awafin.htm. 
 Once the comments are received and evaluated, the bureau-
crats begin the process of promulgating the regulations and stan-
dards, which are published in the Code of Federal Regulations, 
Title 9, Chapter 1, Subchapter A—Animal Welfare. 
 Source : http://cfr.vlex.com/source/1058. Accessed May 15, 2009. 
 Food, Agriculture, Conservation, 
and Trade Act of 1990 
(Public Law 101–624) 
 Section 28. Protection of Pets 
 (a) HOLDING PERIOD.— 
 (1)  REQUIREMENT.—In the case of each dog or cat 
acquired by an entity described in paragraph (2), such 
entity shall hold and care for such dog or cat for a 
period of not less than five days to enable such dog or 
cat to be recovered by its original owner or adopted 
by other individuals before such entity sells such dog 
or cat to a dealer. 
 (2)  ENTITIES DESCRIBED.—An entity subject to 
paragraph (1) is— 
 (A)  each State, county, or city owned and operated 
pound or shelter; 
 (B)  each private entity established for the purpose 
of caring for animals, such as a humane society, 
or other organization that is under contract 

Data and Documents 187
with a State, county, or city that operates as a 
pound or shelter and that releases animals on a 
voluntary basis; and 
 (C)  each research facility licensed by the 
Department of Agriculture. 
 Source : http://awic.nal.usda.gov/nal_display/index.php?info_center=3%20
&tax_level=4&tax_subject=182&topic_id=1118&level3_id=6735&level4_id=
11096&level5_id=0&placement_default=0. Accessed May 15, 2009. 
 Animal Enterprise Protection Act of 
1992 (Public Law 102–346) 
 Section 2. Animal Enterprise Terrorism 
 (a)  IN GENERAL.—Title 18, United States Code, is amended by 
inserting after section 42 the following: 
 § 43. Animal enterprise terrorism 
 (a) OFFENSE.—Whoever— 
 (1)  travels in interstate or foreign commerce, or uses 
or causes to be used the mail or any facility in 
interstate or foreign commerce, for the purpose of 
causing physical disruption to the functioning of 
an animal enterprise; and 
 (2)  intentionally causes physical disruption to the 
functioning of an animal enterprise by intentionally 
stealing, damaging, or causing the loss of, any 
property (including animals or records) used by 
the animal enterprise, and thereby causes economic 
damage exceeding $10,000 to that enterprise, or 
conspires to do so; shall be fined under this title or 
imprisoned not more than one year, or both. 
 (b) AGGRAVATED OFFENSE.— 
 (1)  SERIOUS BODILY INJURY.—Whoever in the 
course of a violation of subsection (a) causes 
serious bodily injury to another individual shall 
be fined under this title or imprisoned not more 
than 10 years, or both. 

188 Animal Rights
 (2)  DEATH.—Whoever in the course of a violation of 
subsection (a) causes the death of an individual 
shall be fined under this title and imprisoned for 
life or for any term of years. 
 (c)  RESTITUTION.—An order of restitution under section 3663 
of this title with respect to a violation of this section may 
also include restitution— 
 (1)  for the reasonable cost of repeating any 
experimentation that was interrupted or 
invalidated as a result of the offense; and 
 (2)  the loss of food production or farm income 
reasonably attributable to the offense. 
 (d) DEFINITIONS.—As used in this section— 
 (1) the term “animal enterprise” means— 
 (A)  a commercial or academic enterprise that 
uses animals for food or fiber production, 
agriculture, research, or testing; 
 (B)  a zoo, aquarium, circus, rodeo, or lawful 
competitive animal event; or 
 (C)  any fair or similar event intended to 
advance agricultural arts and sciences; 
 (2)  the term “physical disruption” does not include 
any lawful disruption that results from lawful 
public, governmental, or animal enterprise 
employee reaction to the disclosure of information 
about an animal enterprise; 
 (3)  the term “economic damage” means the 
replacement costs of lost or damaged property or 
records, the costs of repeating an interrupted or 
invalidated experiment, or the loss of profits; and 
 (4)  the term “serious bodily injury” has the meaning 
given that term in section 1365 of this title. 
 (9e)  NON-PREEMPTION.—Nothing in this section preempts 
any State law.” 
 (b)  CLERICAL AMENDMENT.—The item relating to section 43 
in table of sections at the beginning of chapter 3 of title, United 
States Code, is amended to read as follows:
“43. Animal enterprise terrorism.” 

Data and Documents 189
 Source : http://www.nal.usda.gov/awic/legislat/pl102346.htm. 
 Accessed May 15, 2009. 
 Farm Bill Title 10, Miscellaneous 
Provisions, Section D (2002) 
 Section 10301. Definition of Animal under the Animal Welfare Act 
 Section 2(g) of the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. 2132(g)) is 
amended in the first sentence by striking “excludes horses not used for 
research purposes and”’ and inserting the following: “excludes (1) birds, 
rats of the genus Rattus, and mice of the genus Mus, bred for use in 
 research, (2) horses not used for research purposes, and (3).” 
 Source : http://www.rma.usda.gov/news/2002farmbill/title10.pdf. 
 Accessed May 15, 2009. 

 Data  
TABLE 6.1
Number of animals used in scientific research by state and species, fiscal year 2007 
Species
All other 
covered species
Cats
Dogs
Guinea pigs
Hamsters
Nonhuman 
primates
Other farm 
animals
Pigs
Rabbits
Sheep
Total by state
States
AK
614
52
30
696
AL
2,730
211
1,904
503
214
1,463
610
1,174
1,807
28
10,644
AR
49
70
251
441
85
128
194
429
533
0
2,180
AZ
6,582
120
275
206
69
94
33
443
274
50
8,146
CA
16,380
2,195
3,498
27,774
6,175
4,470
7,241
4,970
49,396
2,056
124,155
CO
2,092
394
587
5,622
1,830
0
87
623
503
483
12,221
CT
763
36
592
622
2,408
339
10
584
525
51
5,930
DC
5,660
107
48
576
527
224
41
844
405
33
8,465
DE
932
266
377
5,158
1,481
0
507
41
16,176
570
25,508
FL
2,723
441
403
462
151
716
881
1,237
303
232
7,549
GA
7,024
1,037
1,940
1,214
10,226
3,334
166
1,269
5,043
76
31,329
HI
5
51
50
5
478
0
0
38
31
0
658
IA
1,337
2,180
2,229
5,646
43,809
23
919
974
5,163
512
62,792
ID
238
16
40
0
0
0
49
0
34
2
379
IL
4,513
975
3,074
2,788
3,046
652
761
1,792
5,051
300
22,952
IN
2,810
329
1,983
750
1,862
709
364
927
2,257
135
12,126
KS
1,350
565
1,533
670
813
220
112
138
667
0
6,068
KY
2,309
56
177
254
372
63
26
140
535
0
3,932
LA
1,029
237
380
4
240
2,561
359
83
1,032
7
5,932

(Continued )
MA
6,258
106
3,287
22,436
9,229
5,211
714
5,286
14,857
752
68,136
MD
8,462
87
810
19,849
5,061
6,304
1,725
1,656
7,465
377
51,796
ME
716
0
0
48
0
0
340
31
234
3
1,372
MI
6,493
463
6,784
15,291
913
3,361
286
2,912
4,482
563
41,548
MN
1,281
1,734
3,072
10,814
104
216
1,127
3,808
5,691
1,067
28,914
MO
1,440
1,874
2,413
3,978
8,126
108
450
1,813
3,373
66
23,641
MS
171
5
70
118
7
84
46
76
442
0
1,019
MT
26
9
0
28
532
5
125
0
313
84
1,122
NC
1,989
1,138
1,699
8,731
1,098
2,085
4,772
3,074
4,237
593
29,416
ND
36
149
21
3
2
81
24
952
443
1,711
NE
1,835
649
1,032
1,302
7,317
89
261
9,132
815
46
22,478
NH
394
23
9
1
265
16
0
256
7
31
1,002
NJ
3,692
135
6,427
13,668
2,193
4,461
42
1,284
8,260
0
40,162
NM
341
21
228
134
88
295
0
66
972
0
2,145
NV
1,947
0
121
163
0
0
9
0
188
380
2,808
NY
8,074
2,325
4,595
14,708
43,974
2,230
869
1,422
13,665
245
92,107
OH
4,159
1,113
6,052
13,438
3,884
2,151
192
4,304
13,827
137
49,257
OK
646
93
657
533
3
113
173
21
451
52
2,742
OR
576
46
37
1,022
101
2,369
645
708
416
299
6,219
PA
3,997
1,743
5,627
11,557
2,388
4,183
1,364
2,544
38,618
692
72,713
PR
971
0
0
0
287
3,066
0
36
14
0
4,374
RI
943
12
0
61
247
25
50
201
322
58
1,919
SC
635
238
199
248
55
471
44
289
617
0
2,796
SD
356
21
14
7
94
17
624
125
307
6
1,571
TN
2,179
120
466
161
990
171
239
1,440
732
11
6,509
TX
12,261
585
1,455
8,506
3,826
4,389
3,380
3,080
17,189
952
55,623
UT
1,418
107
291
423
4,190
16
14
214
791
198
7,662

TABLE 6.1
Number of animals used in scientific research by state and species, fiscal year 2007 (Continued )
Species
All other 
covered species
Cats
Dogs
Guinea pigs
Hamsters
Nonhuman 
primates
Other farm 
animals
Pigs
Rabbits
Sheep
Total by state
VA
2,109
80
283
360
321
94
125
4,389
1,212
37
9,010
VT
213
18
17
450
0
0
12
89
137
1,280
2,216
WA
2,221
162
795
4,687
359
4,596
248
795
1,949
26
15,838
WI
955
300
6,192
1,820
2,972
8,859
722
834
3,914
203
26,771
WV
230
40
20
14
27
9
0
0
307
81
728
WY
345
5
23
3
7
0
37
0
20
23
463
Species 
Total
136,509
22,687
72,037
207,257
172,498
69,990
31,106
65,615
236,511
13,240
Report Total
1,027,450
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Animal Care Annual Report of Activities: Fiscal Year 2007.

TABLE 6.2
Total number of animals used in research, 1973–2007
FY
Dogs
Cats
Primates
Guinea pigs
Hamsters
Rabbits
Farm animals
Other covered animals
Totals
1973
195,157
66,165
42,298
408,970
454,986
447,570
Not reported
38,169
1,653,345
1974
199,204
74,259
51,253
430,439
430,766
425,585
“
81,021
1,692,527
1975
154,489
51,439
36,202
436,446
456,031
448,530
“
42,523
1,625,660
1976
210,330
70,468
50,115
486,310
503,590
527,551
“
73,736
1,922,100
1977
176,430
62,311
53,116
348,741
393,533
439,003
“
46,535
1,519,669
1978
197,010
65,929
57,009
419,341
414,394
475,162
“
58,356
1,687,201
1979
211,104
69,103
59,359
457,134
419,504
539,594
“
76,247
1,832,045
1980
188,783
68,482
56,024
422,390
405,826
471,297
“
49,102
1,661,904
1981
188,649
58,090
57,515
432,632
397,522
473,922
“
50,111
1,658,441
1982
161,396
49,923
46,388
459,246
337,790
453,506
“
69,043
1,577,292
1983
174,542
53,344
54,926
485,048
337,023
466,810
“
108,549
1,680,242
1984
201,936
56,910
55,338
561,184
437,123
529,101
“
232,541
2,074,133
1985
194,905
59,211
57,271
598,903
414,460
544,621
“
284,416
2,153,787
1986
176141
54,125
48,540
462,699
370,655
521,773
“
144,470
1,778,403
1987
180,169
50,145
61,392
538,998
416,002
554,385
“
168,032
1,969,123
1988
140,471
42,271
51,641
431,457
331,945
459,254
“
178,249
1,635,288
1989
156,443
50,812
51,688
481,712
389,042
471,037
“
153,722
1,754,456
1990
109,992
33,700
47,177
352,627
311,068
399,264
66,702
257,569
1,578,099
1991
107,908
34,613
42,620
378,582
304,207
396,046
214,759
363,685
1,842,420
1992
124,161
38,592
55,105
375,063
396,585
431,432
210,936
529,308
2,134,182
1993
106,191
33,991
49,561
392,138
318,268
426,501
165,416
212,309
1,704,505
1994
101,090
32,610
55,113
360,184
298,934
393,751
180,667
202,300
1,624,649
1995
89,420
29,569
50,206
333,379
248,402
354,076
163,985
126,426
1,395,463
(Continued )

TABLE 6.2
Total number of animals used in research, 1973–2007( Continued )
FY
Dogs
Cats
Primates
Guinea pigs
Hamsters
Rabbits
Farm animals
Other covered animals
Totals
1996
82,420
26,035
52,327
299,011
246,415
338,574
154,344
146,579
1,345,739
1997
75,429
26,091
56,381
272,797
217,079
309,322
159,742
150,987
1,267,828
1998
76,071
24,712
57,377
261,305
206,243
287,523
157,620
142,963
1,213,814
1999
70,541
23,238
54,927
266,129
201,593
280,222
155,409
165,939
1,217,998
2000
69,516
25,560
57,518
266,873
174,146
258,754
159,711
166,429
1,286,412
2001
70,082
22,755
49,382
256,193
167,231
267,351
161,658
242,251
1,236,903
2002
68,253
24,222
52,279
245,576
180,000
243,838
143,061
180,351
1,137,580
2003
67,875
25,997
53,586
260,809
177,991
236,250
166,135
199,826
1,188,469
2004
64,932
23,640
54,998
244,104
175,721
261,573
105,678
171,312
1,101,958
2005
66,610
22,921
57,531
221,286
176,988
245,786
155,004
231,440
1,177,566
2006
66,314
21,637
62,315
204,809
167,571
239,720
105,780
144,567
1,012,713
2007
72,037
22,687
69,990
207,257
172,498
236,511
109,961
136,509
1,027,450
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Animal Care Annual Report of Activities: Fiscal Year 2007.

TABLE 6.3
Number of cattle in the United States, 1993–2002 (in thousands)
Year
All cattle and calves1
Cows and heifers that have calved
500 pounds and over
Calves under 500 pounds
Heifers
Steers
Bulls
Beef cows
Milk cows
Beef cow replacements
Milk cow replacements
Other
1993
99,176
33,365
9,658
6,092
4,176
8,550
16,940
2,278
18,118
1994
100,974
34,603
9,507
6,364
4,125
9,104
17,086
2,312
17,873
1995
102,785
35,190
9,482
6,452
4,121
9,302
17,513
2,385
18,341
1996
103,548
35,319
9,420
6,189
4,090
9,948
17,815
2,384
18,384
1997
101,656
34,458
9,318
6,042
4,058
10,212
17,392
2,350
17,826
1998
99,744
33,885
9,199
5,764
3,986
10,051
17,189
2,270
17,401
1999
99,115
33,745
9,133
5,535
4,069
10,170
16,891
2,281
17,290
2000
98,198
33,569
9,190
5,503
4,000
10,147
16,682
2,293
16,815
2001
97,277
33,397
9,183
5,588
4,057
10,131
16,441
2,274
16,206
20022
96,704
33,100
9,110
5,561
4,060
10,057
16,800
2,244
15,773
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural Statistics Service.
1Totals may not add due to rounding.
2Preliminary.

TABLE 6.4
Number of hogs in the United States, 1992–2001
Year
Value
Number
Per head
Total
Thousands
Dollars
1,000 dollars
1992
58,202
71.2
4,146,646
1993
57,940
75
4,339,509
1994
59,738
53
3,178,123
1995
58,201
71
4,115,118
1996
56,124
94
5,280,742
1997
61,158
82
4,985,532
1998
62,206
44
2,765,847
1999
59,342
72
4,254,293
2000
59,138
77
4,542,493
20011
58,774
77
4,549,370
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural Statistics Service.
1Preliminary.
TABLE 6.5
Number of sheep and lambs in the United States, 1993–2003
Year
Value
Number
Per head
Total
Thousands
Dollars
1,000 dollars
1993
10,201
70.6
714,163
19941
9,836
69.9
681,384
19951
8,989
74.7
663,449
19961
8,465
86.5
732,197
19971
8,024
96
761,650
19981
7,825
102
797,826
19991
7,215
88
637,634
20001
7,032
95
668,750
20011
6,965
100
694,495
20021,2
6,685
92
618,123
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural Statistics Service.
1Beginning in 1994 includes new crop lambs.
2Preliminary.

197
 7 
 Directory of Organizations 
 T
 his chapter highlights organizations that promote animal 
rights and animal welfare. Each entry contains, where avail-
able, the name, address, e-mail address, and Webpage for the 
organization and information about its activities. Some of these 
organizations are small, while others are large and have a national 
or international presence. When available, I have included bud-
gets and size of membership, which allows you to have a sense of 
how much influence the organization may have. 
 Abundant Wildlife Society of North America (AWS) 
 P.O. Box 2 
 Beresford, SD 57004 
Founded: 1991 
 Phone: (605) 751-0979 
 Fax: NA 
 E-mail: NA 
 URL: http://www.aws.vcn.com 
 This is a group of interested individuals who support multiple use 
of public lands and the management and protection of wildlife. 
It keeps members apprised of environmental and animal rights 
agenda. 
 Selected publications include  Conservation-vs.-Environmentalism: 
Yellowstone National Park ,  Wolf Predation in Alaska , the fact sheets 
“Wolf Reintroduction in the United States,” “Mountain Lion,” 
“Wolf Attacks in the United States,” and “Endangered Species Act: 
Flawed Law.” 

198 Animal Rights
 Actors and Others for Animals (A&O) 
 11523 Burbank Blvd. 
 North Hollywood, CA 91601-2309 
 Founded: 1971 
 Phone: (818) 755-6045 
 Fax: (818) 755-6048 
 E-mail: webmistress@wom-designs.com 
 URL: http://actorsandothers.com 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 The organization was founded by Richard and Diana Basehart. 
It encourages spaying and neutering of pets, helping the City of 
Los Angeles with its mobile sterilization services. One focus is 
on pit bulls and pit bull mixes. Founding members include Doris 
Day, Jackie Joseph, and Lucie Arnaz, who used their celebrity to 
promote their ideas. A variety of other celebrities are involved, 
including JoAnne Worley, Loretta Swit, Betty White, and Earl 
Holliman. 
 Alliance for Animals (AFA) 
 232 Silver St. 
 South Boston, MA 02127-2206 
 Founded: 1988 
 Phone: (617) 268-7800 
 Fax: NA 
 E-mail: shelter@afa.arlington.ma.us 
 URL: http://www.afaboston.org 
 Membership: 3,500 
 Budget: NA 
 It promotes animal protection, fosters human-animal bond, raises 
the status of animals and animal caretakers, and provides direct 
rescue, adoption, and affordable veterinary care. It publishes a 
quarterly newsletter. 
 Alliance for Contraception in Cats 
and Dogs (ACC&D) 
 14245 NW Belle Ct. 
 Portland, OR 97229 

Directory of Organizations 199
 Founded: 2000 
 Phone: (503) 358-1438 
 Fax: NA 
 E-mail: info@acc-d.org 
 URL: http://www.acc-d.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 It promotes the distribution and development of nonsurgical 
methods and products for dogs and cats to help control pet popu-
lation control. ACC&D has joined with the Found Animal Foun-
dation (www.foundanimals.org) to launch the Michelson Prize in 
Reproductive Biology, which supports research on nonsurgical 
methods of sterilization. 
 American Anti-Vivisection Society (AAVS) 
 801 Old York Rd., Suite 204 
 Jenkintown, PA 19046 
 Founded: 1883 
 Phone: (215) 887-0816 (Toll-free: 800-SAY-AAVS) 
 Fax: NA 
 E-mail: aavs@aavs.org 
 URL: http://www.aavs.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 AAVS was the first nonprofit animal and protection organization 
in America. It is dedicated to ending the use of animals in research, 
testing, and education and promoting the use of nonanimal alter-
natives. AAVS has two main branches, Animalearn, which focuses 
on ending vivisection and dissection in the classroom, and The Sci-
ence Bank, which focuses on alternatives to animal experiments, 
from basic dissection to psychology experiments. It publishes a 
quarterly magazine,  AV  Magazine, which focuses on a specific 
topic and is available at the Web site. 
 It seeks to end attempts at animal cloning, especially pet 
cloning. It seeks to ban pound seizures and to add mice, rats, 
and birds to the meaning of “animal” in the Animal Welfare Act. 
AVVS sells a variety of items in its online shop. It also provides a 
free Compassionate Shopping Guide on its Web site. 

200 Animal Rights
 American Association for Accreditation of Laboratory 
Animal Care (AAALAC) 
 5283 Corporate Dr., Suite 203 
 Frederick, MD 21703 
 Founded: 1965 
 Phone: (301) 696-9626 
 Fax: (301) 696-9627 
 E-mail: accredit@aaalac.org 
 URL: http://www.aaalac.org/ 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 AAALAC provides institutions involved with animal research an 
independent, unbiased expert assessment of their programs and 
accredits those that meet or exceed standards. Accredited insti-
tutions must demonstrate that they are in compliance with the 
 Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals  (National Research 
Council, 1996). The AAALAC publishes a newsletter, as well as 
the magazines  Animal Lab News ,  Comparative Medicine ,  ILLAR 
Journal , and  Lab Animals . AAALAC provides pdf files on animal 
welfare issues, rules and regulations. 
 American Association for Laboratory 
Animal Science (AALAS) 
 9190 Crestwyn Hills Dr. 
 Memphis, TN 38125 
 Founded: 1949 
 Phone: (901) 754-8620 
 Fax: (901) 753-0046 
 E-mail: info@aalas.org 
 URL: http://www.aalas.org/index.aspx 
 Membership: None 
 Budget: NA 
 AALAS is the premier forum for the exchange of information and 
expertise in the use of laboratory animals. It provides a certifica-
tion program for laboratory animal technicians. It publishes the 
 Journal of the American Association for Laboratory Animal Science , 
 Techtalk , and  AALAS in Action . AALAS also provides information 
for members of Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees 
and links to other organizations. 

Directory of Organizations 201
 American Council on Science 
and Health (ACSH) 
 1995 Broadway, 2nd Floor 
 New York, NY 10023 
 Founded: 1978 
 Phone: (212) 362-7044 (Toll- Free: (866) 905-2694) 
 Fax: (212) 362-4919 
 E-mail: acsh@acsh.org 
 URL: http://www.acsh.org/ 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 The American Council on Science and Health (ACSH) is “a con-
sumer education consortium concerned with issues related to 
food, nutrition, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, lifestyle, the environ-
ment and health. ACSH is an independent, nonprofit, tax-exempt 
organization.” 
 American Association of Zoo 
Veterinarians (AAZV) 
 581705 White Oak Rd. 
 Yulee, FL 32097 
 Founded: 1960 
 Phone: (904) 225-3275 
 Fax: (904) 225-3289 
 E-mail: rhilsenrothaazv@aol.com 
 URL: http://www.aazv.org 
 Members: 1,200 
 Budget: NA 
 The AAZV seeks to advance programs for preventive medicine, 
husbandry, and scientific research for free-ranging and captive 
wild animals, as well as to promote the general welfare of these 
animals. Its annual meeting presents a forum for the presenta-
tion and discussion of problems related to these animals. ACZM 
provides a short course in zoological medicine. It publishes  Zoo 
News from Around the World , which is available on its Web site, as 
are links to information about infectious diseases in wildlife and 
to worldwide veterinarian and zoological organizations. It also 
provides a link to the AZA Wildlife Contraception Center, located 
at the St. Louis Zoo. 

202 Animal Rights
 American Cetacean Society (ACS) 
 P.O. Box 1391 
 San Pedro, CA 90733-1391 
 Founded: 1967 
 Phone: (310) 548-6279 
 Fax: (310) 548-6950 
 E-mail: info@acsonline.org 
 URL: http://www.acsonline.org 
 Membership: 1,500 
 Budget: NA 
 The ACS seeks to protect whales, dolphins, porpoises and their 
habitats via public education, research grants, and conserva-
tion activities. ACS sponsors whale watching trips. The ACS 
provides annual reports online and provides its public policy 
statements. 
 American Humane Association (AHA) 
 63 Inverness Dr. East 
 Englewood, CO 80112-5117 
 Founded: 1877 
 Phone: (303) 792-9900 (Toll-free: (800) 227-4645) 
 Fax: (303) 792-5333 
 E-mail: publicpolicy@americanhumane.org 
 URL: http://www.americanhumane.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: $11 million 
 AHA supports organizations and individuals seeking to pre-
vent cruelty to children and animals and issues position state-
ments on a variety of topics, including but not limited to animal 
fighting, animals in research, and captive wild animals, that are 
available as downloadable PDF files. It publishes  The Link , which 
discusses the relationship between animal abuse and other forms 
of violence. Its Los Angeles office monitors the use of animals in 
film and television and authorizes the  No Animals Were Harmed® 
end credit disclaimer. It provides a copy of its Annual Report 
on its Web site. AHA offers a variety of items in its online gift 
shop and provides animal and child welfare information and 
resources. It has a Facebook site ( http://www.facebook.com/
pages/American-Humane-Association/5943727453). 

Directory of Organizations 203
 American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty 
to Animals (ASPCA) 
 424 E. 92nd St. 
 New York, NY 10128-6804 
 Founded: 1866 
 Phone: (212) 876-7700 (Toll-free: (800)-628-0028) 
 Fax: NA 
 E-mail: shonalib@aspca.org 
 URL: http://www.aspca.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 ASPCA was the first humane organization in the Western Hemi-
sphere. It offers discussions of its policies and positions and 
responds to frequently asked questions. It provides links to its 
various programs and services and to information about dog 
fighting, puppy mills, farm animal cruelty, horse cruelty, cock-
fighting, circus cruelty, and animal hoarding. It sells a variety of 
merchandise in its online store and is a source of pet health insur-
ance. ASPCA provides links to pending federal and state legisla-
tion and encourages its member and others to lobby on behalf of 
animals. 
 American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) 
 1931 N. Meacham Rd., Suite 100 
 Schaumburg, IL 60173 
 Founded: 1863 
 Phone: (847) 925-8070 (Toll-free: (800) 248-2862) 
 Fax: (847) 925-1329 
 E-mail: avmainfo@avma.org 
 URL: http://www.avma.org 
 Members: 78,000 
 Budget: NA 
 The AVMA was founded by practitioners along the East Coast, 
and its first meeting, in New York, was attended by delegates 
representing New York, Massachusetts, New Jersey, Pennsylva-
nia, Maine, Ohio, and Delaware. AVMA is a professional society 
for veterinarians and is the accrediting agency for the nation’s 
28 schools of veterinary medicine. The AVMA conducts educa-
tional and research programs; provides animal-related scientific 

204 Animal Rights
 information in a variety of venues, including annual meetings 
and the  American Journal of Veterinary Research ; and offers awards 
to outstanding veterinarians. It also sponsors National Pet Week 
(www.petweek.org). The purpose of AVMA is to improve animal 
and human health and to advance the veterinary medical profes-
sion. AVMA publishes point papers dealing with animal issues on 
its Web site, including one dealing with biosecurity issues, as well 
as brochures and fact sheets dealing with animal and public health 
issues. It provides a placement service for vets seeking work. 
 Animal Agriculture Alliance 
 P.O. Box 9522 
 Arlington, VA 22219 
 Founded: 1987 
 Phone: (703) 562-5160 
 E-mail: info@animalagalliance.org 
 URL: http://www.animalagalliance.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: $250,000 
 The purpose of the Alliance is to provide the public with 
 science-based information about the role of animal agriculture 
in helping feed a hungry world. It uses behavioral, physiologi-
cal, biochemical, and pathological criteria to assess the wellbeing 
of farm animals. These criteria include access to clean water and 
nutritionally balanced diets, access to veterinary care as needed, 
adequate shelter, and the use of science-based husbandry practices 
(handling and during transportation). The AAA Web site contains 
information for teachers to enable them to spread the truth about 
animal agriculture The site also provides extensive links to other 
organizations. 
 Animal Behavior Management Alliance (ABMA) 
 3650 S Pointe Circle, No. 205 
 Laughlin, NV 89029 
 Founded: NA 
 E-mail: sekard@sandiegozoo.org 
 URL: http://www.theabma.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 

Directory of Organizations 205
 The ABMA seeks to improve animal care using enrichment and 
training to enhance husbandry. Its members consist of trainers, 
handlers, and keepers of animals. It hosts an annual meeting and 
has a job bank. It publishes  ABMA Wellspring , which is available 
as a pdf file on its Web site. 
 Animal Legal Defense Fund (ALDF) 
 170 E. Cotati Ave. 
 Cotati, CA 94931 
 Founded: 1979 
 Phone: (707) 795-2533 
 Fax: (707) 795-7280 
 E-mail: info@aldf.org 
 URL: http://www.aldf.org 
 Membership: 100, 000 
 Budget: $3 million 
 ADLF uses litigation to protect the lives and advance the interests 
of animals. ADLF provides legal assistance to prosecutors han-
dling animal cruelty cases and strives to strengthen anticruelty 
statutes. It initiates lawsuits to stop animal abuse and to expand 
the boundaries of animal law and encourages government agen-
cies to enforce existing animal protection laws. It provides leader-
ship, encouragement, and funding for student groups interested 
in protecting animal lives and improving and advancing the cause 
of animal welfare through litigation. 
 Animal Liberation Front (ALF) 
 Address: NA 
 Founded: 1971 
 Phone: NA 
 Fax: NA 
 E-mail: NA 
 URL: http://www.animalliberationfront.com/ 
 The ALF uses direct action in rescuing abused animals and caus-
ing financial harm through damage and destruction of property, 
while minimizing harm to animals ( human and otherwise). ALF’s 
activities are illegal, and the group does not have a central orga-
nization but functions through small groups or individuals. The 
Web site has links to videos, slide shows, and literature dealing 
with animal rights. 

206 Animal Rights
 Animal Rights Coalition (ARC) 
 P.O. Box 8750 
 Minneapolis, MN 55408-0750 
 Founded: 1980 
 Phone: (612) 822-6161 
 Fax: NA 
 E-mail: animalrightscoalition@msn.com 
 URL: http://www.animalrightscoalition.com 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 ARC is the oldest animal rights organization in Minnesota. It 
supports a furless vegan emporium. ARC has convinced the 
University of Minnesota Medical School to stop using dogs in its 
cardiology laboratory and the American Humane Society to stop 
using gas chambers for euthanasia. It funds the first mobile facil-
ity for spaying and neutering feral cats. It provides information 
about animal welfare at a variety of venues. 
 Animal Rights International (ARI) 
 P.O. Box 1292 
 Middlebury, CT 06762 
 Founded: 1974 
 Phone: (203) 598-0554 
 E-mail: info@ari-online.org 
 URL: http://www.ari-online.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 ARI was founded by Henry Spira. The organization originally 
targeted experiments at the American Museum of Natural His-
tory that utilized cats and sought the repeal of New York State’s 
pound seizure law. ARI helped increase the use of alternatives to 
animal testing in the cosmetics industry. ARI has been attempt-
ing to stop the use of the lethal dose 50 percent test to determine 
the lethal dose of drugs and chemicals. ARI persuaded slaugh-
terhouses to stop the shackling and hoisting of animals during 
slaughter and to replace this method of control with upright re-
strainer technology. The ultimate goal of ARI is to reduce animal 
suffering by reducing the consumption of animal products. The 

Directory of Organizations 207
Web site has links to various animal rights and vegetarian orga-
nizations. 
 Animal Rights Mobilization (ARM) 
 P.O. Box 805859 
 Chicago, IL 60680 
 Founded: 1981 
 Phone: (773) 282-8918 
 Fax: NA 
 E-mail: spayneuterchicago@earthlink.net 
 URL: http://www.animalrightsmobilization.org/ 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 ARM members advocate for the elimination of animal exploita-
tion and abuse, foster cooperation within the rights movement, 
and promote awareness of the natural relationship between 
human and animal liberation. They conduct campaigns to elimi-
nate the wearing of fur and to end the use of animals in laboratory 
experiments and product testing. They also promote spaying and 
neutering. 
 Animal and Society Institute 
 2512 Carpenter Rd., Suite 201-A2 
 Ann Arbor, MI 48108 
 Founded: 1979 
 Phone: (734) 677-9240 
 Fax: (734) 677-9242 
 E-mail: bee.friedlander@animalsandsociety.org 
 URL: http://www.animalsandsociety.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: $200,000 
 The ASI was a result of the merger, in 2005, of the Institute for Ani-
mals and Society and the Animal and Society Forum , which were 
formerly the Animal Rights Network and Psychologists for the 
Ethical Treatment of Animals, respectively. ASI promotes advo-
cacy for animal rights issues in public policy development by con-
ducting scholarly research and analysis, providing education and 
training, and fostering cooperation with other social  movements 

208 Animal Rights
and interests. It argues that creditable economic, political, legal, 
philosophical, and scientific arguments must be identified and 
used to change commercial, religious, and academic attitudes and 
actions that involve animals. The Web site provides links to other 
organizations and publications. 
 The Animal Society (TAS) 
 723 S Casino Center Blvd., 2nd Fl. 
 Las Vegas, NV 89101 
 Founded: 2000 
 Phone: (702) 477-9677 (Toll-free: (877) 227-7487) 
 Fax: NA 
 E-mail: support@animalsociety.org 
 URL: http://www.animalsociety.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 AS is “dedicated to preventing suffering, neglect, abuse, and 
cruelty to animals, providing information, raising public aware-
ness of animal issues, promoting responsible pet ownership, and 
kindness towards all living things.” Its focus is national in scope 
and promotes responsible pet ownership 
 Animal Transportation Association (AATA) 
 111 East Loop N. 
 Houston, TX 77029 
Founded: 1976 
 Phone: (713) 532-2177 
 Fax: (713) 532-2166 
 E-mail: info@aata-animaltransport.org 
 URL: http://www.aata-animaltransport.org 
 Members: 300 
 Budget: $100,000 
 AATA is dedicated to the safe and humane transport of animals 
by carriers, shippers, forwarders, humane and animal welfare 
groups, zoos, and animal breeders. ATTA publishes a magazine, 
 Migrations . The Web site provides links to animal transport pro-
fessionals around the world, as well as to AATA publications. 
AATA provides a certification program for animal attendants of 
horses. 

Directory of Organizations 209
 Animal Welfare Institute (AWI) 
 P.O. Box 3650 
 Washington, DC 20027 
 Founded: 1951 
 Phone: (703) 836-4300 
 Fax: (703) 836-0400 
 E-mail: awi@awionline.org 
 URL: http://www.awionline.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 In its early years, AWI focused on the needs of animals used for 
experimentation, on encouraging nonanimal alternatives, and on 
seeking a ban on the use of animals in science fair projects. AWI’s 
focus has broadened to factory farms and the cruelty inflicted 
on pigs, cows, chickens, and other farm animals. AWI seeks to 
ban leg-hold traps and wire snare traps, as well as to minimize 
human-generated ocean noise and to ban commercial whaling. 
AWI publishes the magazine  AWI Quarterly , which is available 
on its Web site, and provides links to other AWI Web sites. It also 
provides eAlerts called The Compassion Index, which provides 
information about legislative action. 
 Animals Voice (AV ) 
 1354 East Ave., No. R-252 
 Chico, CA 95926 
 Founded: 2000 
 Phone: (530) 343-2498 (Toll-free: (800)-82-VOICE) 
 Fax: (530) 343-2498 
 E-mail: veda@animalsvoice.com 
 URL: http://www.animalsvoice.com 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 AV publishes the magazine  Animal Voice ; current editions are 
available at the Web site, as are links that describe their current 
concerns. Its bookstore includes the books  In Your Mouth: For 
Food: An Eating Animals Pictorial ;  At Our Hands: A Pictorial of Ani-
mal Exploitation ; and  All Heaven in a Rage: Essays on Eating Animals . 
AV resources provide links to books and fact sheets. 

210 Animal Rights
 Associated Humane Societies (AHS) 
 124 Evergreen Ave. 
 Newark, NJ 07114-2133 
 Founded: 1906 
 Phone: (973) 824-7080 
 Fax: (973) 824-2720 
 E-mail: contactus@ahcares.org 
 URL: http://www.associatedhumanesocieties.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 AHS is the largest animal shelter in New Jersey. It runs a federally 
licensed zoo for exotic animals called Popcorn Park. AHS pub-
lishes  Humane News , which is available at its Web site, along with 
other publications and videotapes. AHS supports the purchase of 
bulletproof vests for K-9 working dogs. 
 Association of Veterinarians for 
Animal Rights (AVAR) 
 P.O. Box 208 
 Davis, CA 95617-0208 
 Founded: 1981 
 Phone: (530) 759-8106 
 Fax: (530) 759-8116 
 E-mail: info@avar.org 
 URL: http://avar.org 
 Membership: 2,500 
 Budget: NA 
 AVAR strives to provide rights for nonhuman animals by educating 
the public and the veterinary profession. It provides a searchable 
database for alternatives to animals in education, scientific research, 
and product testing. It publishes two newsletters, including  Direc-
tions and Alternatives in Veterinary Medical Education , as well as a va-
riety of fact sheets and brochures. It provides links to other animal 
rights organizations and discussions of animal rights issues. 
 Association for the Protection of Fur-Bearing 
Animals (Fur Bearer Defenders) 
 225 E. 17th Ave., Suite 101 
 Vancouver, BC, Canada V5V 1A6 

Directory of Organizations 211
 Founded: 1944 
 Phone: (604) 435-1850 
 Fax: (604) 435-1840 
 E-mail: fbd@banlegholdtraps.com 
 URL: http://www.banlegholdtraps.com 
 Membership: 3,500 
 Budget: $125,000 
 This organization strongly opposes trapping using conibears, 
snares, and leghold traps. It works to end the trade in the fur of 
dogs and cats. It provides videos of animals struggling in traps 
and claims that traps do not discriminate and can trap pets and 
endangered species. The Association proposes to ban both padded 
and unpadded leghold traps. It would also ban the use of the coni-
bear trap, which is designed to be an “instant kill” trap but often 
smashes down on parts of the body without killing the animal. 
 Beauty without Cruelty (BWC) 
 1340-G Industrial Ave. 
 Petaluma, CA 94952 
 Founded: 1989 
 Phone: (888) 674-2344 
 Fax: (707) 769-7342 
 E-mail: info@beautywithoutcruelty.com 
 URL: http://www.beautywithoutcruelty.com/ 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 BWC’s goal is to manufacture and distribute natural-color cosmet-
ics that are not tested on animals and that do not contain animal 
products, but are made according to plant-based formulas. BWC 
also provides information about cosmetics that are not tested on 
animals and that do not contain animal products. BWC sells such 
products at its online store. 
 Canadian Association for Humane Trapping (CAHT) 
 P.O. Box 71115 
 Maplehurst Postal Outlet 
 Burlington, ON, Canada L7T 4J8 
 Founded: 1954 
 Phone: (416) 363-2614 

212 Animal Rights
 Fax: (905) 637-3912 
 E-mail: caht1@cogeco.ca 
 URL: http://www.caht.ca/caht 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 CAHT “works constructively toward abolishing the suffering 
imposed on wild animals by devices or trapping systems used to 
capture them. It is not a trapping, anti-trapping or animal rights 
organization.” CAHT does promote research and development 
of humane traps. Wild foxes have adapted to urban settings and 
are difficult to take in live traps, so CAHT recommends that un-
less the fox is ill, it should be left in place. It also has recommen-
dations for beavers, coyotes, and other wildlife. 
 Center for Whale Research (CWR) 
 P.O. Box 1577 
 Friday Harbor, WA 98250-1577 
 Founded: 1986 
 Phone: (360) 378-5835 
 Fax: (360) 378-5954 
 E-mail: orcasurv@rockisland.com 
 URL: http://www.whaleresearch.com 
 Membership: 1,000 
 Budget: $100,000 
 CWR strives to “develop, promote, and conduct benign studies of 
free-swimming Cetaceans ( Whales, Dolphins, and Porpoises) for 
the purpose of conserving their populations and informing gov-
ernments and the public of their ecosystem needs.” It provides 
sound recordings of whale calls, as well as links to other organiza-
tions dealing with cetaceans. 
 Cetacean Society International (CSI) 
 P.O. Box 953 
 Georgetown, CT 06829 
 Founded: 1974 
 Phone: (203) 770-8615 
 Fax: (860) 561-0187 
 E-mail: rossiter@csiwhalesalive.org 
 URL: http://www.csiwhalesalive.org 

Directory of Organizations 213
 Membership: 400 
 Budget: NA 
 CSI promotes whale and dolphin watching and noninvasive 
 research, nonlethal, and humane research. CSI seeks the cessation 
of all killing and captive display of whales, dolphins, and por-
poises by advocating for laws and treaties to prevent commer-
cial whaling and habitat destruction. CSI publishes a quarterly 
newsletter,  Whales Alive! 
 Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation 
(CEASE) 
 P.O. Box 440456 
 Somerville, MA 02144 
 Founded: 1979 
 Phone: (617) 379-0535 
 E-mail: info@ceaseboston.org 
 URL: http://www.ceaseboston.org 
 Membership: 20,000 
 Budget: $75,000 
 CEASE is dedicated to ending animal cruelty and exploitation, 
particularly of fur-bearing animals. It provides links to Web sites 
with information about trapping and fur farming. It also pro-
vides information about the use of animals in entertainment and 
research and about pet overpopulation. 
 Coalition for Animals and Animal Research 
 University of Arizona 
 P.O. Box 210101 
 Tucson, AZ 85721 
 Founded: NA 
 Phone: NA 
 Fax: NA 
 E-mail: antrnweb@ahsc.arizona.edu 
 URL: http://www.swaebr.org/cfaar/index.htm 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 The Coalition seeks to provide the general public with information 
about the true nature of animal research and animal researchers. 
The Coalition is dedicated to improving human and animal health 

214 Animal Rights
by supporting humane and responsible use of animals in research. 
It provides links to publications and other organizations. 
 Committee to Abolish Sport Hunting (CASH) 
 P.O. Box 13815 
 Las Cruces, NM 88013 
 Founded: 1976 
 Phone: NA 
 Fax: NA 
 E-mail: CASH@AbolishSportHunting.com 
 URL: http://www.all-creatures.org/cash/ 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 CASH promotes nonconsumptive enjoyment of wildlife in its 
native habitat. The mission of CASH is to abolish all hunting, 
especially bait and shoot, where an animal is lured to a site with 
food and then shot, and to foster wildlife watching. CASH works 
to stop trapping. In order to accomplish its mission, the Associa-
tion promotes letter-writing campaigns to local officials and the 
media. It provides sample letters, fact sheets, posters, and even 
chants to use at protests. 
 Culture and Animals Foundation (CAF) 
 3509 Eden Croft Dr. 
 Raleigh, NC 27612 
 Founded: 1985 
 Phone: (919) 782-3739 
 Fax: (919) 782-6464 
 E-mail: nancy@cultureandanimals.org 
 URL: http://www.cultureandanimals.org 
 Members: 14,000 
 Budget: $40,000 
 Philosopher Tom Regan, the author of  The Case for Animal Rights , 
leads this organization, which explores the role of music, film, 
dance, poetry, and philosophy in understanding and promoting 
animal welfare. CAF provides grants to other organizations in 
three categories: research, creativity, and performance. 
 Defenders of Animals (DOA) 
 P.O. Box 5634 

Directory of Organizations 215
 Weybosset Hill Station 
 Providence, RI 02903-0634 
 Founded: 1978 
 Phone: (401) 738-3710 
 E-Mail: dennis@defendersofanimals.org 
 URL: http://www.defendersofanimals.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 DOA strives to provide rights to companion animals and wildlife. 
DAO provides help and support for a low-cost spaying and neu-
tering clinic, promotes pet adoption, and provides a reward for 
information leading to the apprehension, conviction, and sentenc-
ing of individuals guilty of animal cruelty. DOA protests the use 
of gas chambers to euthanize animals and greyhound racing. It 
provides links to other animal rights organizations. 
 European Biomedical Research Association (EBRA) 
 c/o Membership Secretary 
 25 Shaftesbury Ave. 
 London W1D 7EG, United Kingdom 
 Founded: 1994 
 E-mail: secretariat@ebra.org 
 URL: http://www.ebra.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 EBRA was founded by individuals and organizations to educate 
and provide understanding of the importance of animals in medi-
cal and veterinary research. It provides a link to European animal 
use regulations and statistics on animal use in Europe. It publishes 
the  EBRA Bulletin , which is available on its Web site. 
 European Fur Breeders Association (EFBA) 
 Ave. des Arts 3-43-5, 8th Fl. 
 1210 Brussels, Belgium 
 Founded: 1968 
 Phone: 322-2091170 
 Fax: 322-2091179 
 E-mail: info@efbanet.com 
 URL: http://www.efba-eu.com/ 
 Members: 6,000 
 Budget: NA 

216 Animal Rights
 EFBA is an umbrella for 15 national associations of fur breeders 
working to give the general public a realistic image of fur farm-
ing. EFBA promotes scientific research on fur farming and strives 
to standardize European practices and legislation. It provides 
links to other fur-farming organizations. 
 Family Farm Defenders (FFD) 
 P.O. Box 1772 
 Madison, WI 53701 
 Founded: 1994 
 Phone: (608) 260-0900 
 Fax: (608) 260-0900 
 E-mail: familyfarmdefenders@yahoo.com 
 URL: http://www.familyfarmdefenders.org 
 Members: 1,500 
 Budget: $75,000 
 FFD’s “mission is to create a farmer-controlled and consumer-
oriented food and fiber system, based upon democratically-
controlled institutions that empower farmers to speak for and 
respect themselves in their quest for social and economic jus-
tice. FFD has worked to create opportunities for farmers to join 
together in new cooperative endeavors, form a mutual market-
ing agency, and forge alliances with consumers through pro-
viding high quality food products while returning a fair price 
to farmers.” Family farms are those on which a family provides 
the labor and makes management decisions. FFD publishes a 
newsletter,  The Defender . It has a variety of ongoing campaigns 
related to agrofuels, a national animal identification system, 
bovine growth hormone, corporate organics, fair trade, farm 
workers’ rights, food sovereignty, genetic engineering, ir-
radiation, cloning, local food systems, mad cow disease, and 
milk protein concentrate. It sells a variety of items in its online 
store. 
 Food Animal Concerns Trust (FACT) 
 P.O. Box 14599 
 Chicago, IL 60614 
 Founded: 1982 
 Phone: (773) 525-4952 
 Fax: (773) 525-5226 

Directory of Organizations 217
 E-mail: info@foodanimalconcerns.org 
 URL: http://www.foodanimalconcerns.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: $400,000 
 FACT does on-farm research and advocacy, which it uses to make 
science based recommendations to agricultural, public health, and 
environmental organizations, as well as to the federal government 
(e.g., Food and Drug Administration, Department of Agriculture, 
and Centers for Disease Control) FACT strives to improve farm 
animal welfare and to address public health issues related to the 
safety of meat, milk, and eggs. The Web site contains links to FACT 
newsletters, fact sheets, and annual reports. 
 Foundation for Biomedical Research (FBR) 
 818 Connecticut Ave. NW, Suite 900 
 Washington, DC 20006 
 Founded: 1981 
 Phone: (202) 457-0654 
 Fax: (202) 457-0659 
 E-mail: info@fbresearch.org 
 URL: http://www.fbresearch.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: $1.1 million 
 FBR is dedicated to improving human and veterinary health by 
promoting public understanding of and support for humane and 
responsible animal research in the ongoing, sometimes violent 
debate that surrounds animal research. FBR provides informa-
tion about animal research to the news media, as well as to teach-
ers, students, and pet owners. It also monitors the activities of 
animal activists. FBR publishes a number of brochures, includ-
ing  Fact vs. Myth ,  Proud Achievements ,  The Importance of Being a 
Mouse ,  Species in Research ,  Animal Rights Activism , and  AIDS and 
Animal Research , and has a virtual library of books and other ma-
terials dealing with animal research, as well as an online store. 
FBR provides a radio show entitled  The Animal Research Minute 
to more than 3,500 radio stations. It is the nation’s oldest and 
largest organization dedicated to improving human and veteri-
nary health by promoting public understanding of biomedical 
research. 

218 Animal Rights
 Friends of Animals (FoA) 
 777 Post Rd., Suite 205 
 Darien, CT 06820 
 Founded: 1957 
 Phone: (203) 656-1522 
 Fax: (203) 656-0267 
 E-mail: info@friendsofanimals.org 
 URL: http://www.friendsofanimals.org 
 Membership: 200,000 
 FoA seeks to bring about a respectful view of animals, including 
both domestic animals and free-living animals, to free animals 
from institutionalized exploitation, and to promote a vegetarian 
lifestyle. Its online magazine,  ActionLine,  is available on its Web 
site. It sells a variety of merchandise in its online store. 
 Fur Commission U.S.A. (FCUSA) 
 826 Orange Ave. 
 PMB 506 
 Coronado, CA 92118-2698 
 Founded: 1994 
 Phone: (619) 575-0139 
 Fax: (619) 575-5578 
 E-mail: info@furcommission.com 
 URL: http://www.furcommission.com 
 Membership: 650 
 Budget: NA 
 FCUSA represents 300 fur farms throughout the United States 
that market more than 3 million mink pelts. It provides a certifi-
cate program for fur farmers. These farms use beef, fish, dairy, 
and poultry “leftovers” to feed their animals. FCUSA provides 
links to discussions of mink biology, real fur and the environment, 
animal rights vs. animal welfare, education, perspectives, and a 
reading list. 
 Fur Information Council of America (FICA) 
 8424A Santa Monica Blvd., No. 860 
 West Hollywood, CA 90069 
 Founded: 1958 
 Phone: (323) 782-1700 

Directory of Organizations 219
 Fax: (323) 651-1417 
 E-mail: info@fur.org 
 URL: http://www.fur.org 
 Membership: 300 
 Budget: NA 
 Membership Dues: NA 
 FICA membership consists of wholesale and retail outlets and fur 
manufacturers. FICA promotes the wise use and humane care of 
fur-bearing animals and works closely with wildlife biologists to 
develop and maintain habitats for fur-bearing animals. FICA pro-
vides a discussion of fur fashion, facts about fur and fur bearers, 
and a searchable database of fur retailers, as well as fact sheets to 
counter what it sees as the distortions and misrepresentations of 
anti-animal-use groups. 
 Fur Free Alliance (FFA) 
 P.O. Box 22505 
 Sacramento, CA 95822 
 Founded: NA 
 Phone: (916) 447-3085 
 Fax: (916) 447-3070 
 E-mail: info@respectforanimals.org 
 URL: http://infurmation.com 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 FFA is a coalition of more than 35 animal protection groups that 
seeks to stop the exploitation and killing of animals for their fur 
and that encourages consumers to use available alternatives. 
FFA performs in-depth investigations of fur farming and seeks 
to advance legislation to ban fur farming and leghold traps. FFA 
proposes legislation to ban or restrict trapping, fur farming, and 
seal hunting and then supports the proposals with campaigns, 
including letter writing. FFA also provides posters, videos, and 
banners to help with these efforts. 
 Fur Takers of America (FTA) 
 c/o Ramona Plueger, Membership Coordinator 
 17453 130th Ave. 
 Monticello, IA 52310 

220 Animal Rights
 Founded: 1968 
 Telephone: NA 
 FAX: NA 
 E-mail: ckrum2003@yahoo.com 
 URL: http://www.furtakersofamerica.com 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: $70, 000 
 FTA members include fur trappers, fur buyers, trapping-supply 
people, hunters, fur dressers, conservationists, and other interested 
individuals. FTA seeks to educate trappers about humane methods 
of trapping and conservation ethics. FTA provides a professional 
trapping school, which covers topics like bait/lure applications, 
furbearer management, trap and snare placement, fur skinning, 
grading and marketing, and public relations. 
 Incurably Ill for Animal Research (IIFAR) 
 2510 Champion Way 
 Lansing, MI 48910 
 Founded: 1985 
 Phone: (517) 887-1141 
 Fax: (517) 887-1710 
 E-mail: info@iifar.org 
 URL: http://www.iifar.org 
 Membership: 2,500 
 Budget: NA 
 IIFAR is currently inactive; the URL opens a Web site called Health 
News, Improving Health Through Research. IIFAR was founded 
by persons who have health problems and interested individuals 
who are concerned that animal research for medical purposes will 
be stopped or severely limited because of the efforts of animal 
rights activists. It supports the use of animals for the purpose of 
medical research, teaching, and testing. 
 Institute of Laboratory Animal Resources (ILAR) 
 The National Academies 
 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Keck 687 
 Washington, DC 20001 
 Founded: NA 
 Phone: (202) 334-2590 

Directory of Organizations 221
 Fax: (202) 334-1687 
 E-mail: ILAR@nas.edu 
 URL: http://dels.nas.edu/ilar_n/ilarhome/ 
 Membership: No membership 
 Budget: NA 
 The purpose of ILAR is to “evaluate and disseminate information 
on issues related to the scientific, technological, and ethical use 
of animals and related biological resources in research, testing, 
and education. Using the principles of refinement, reduction, and 
replacement (3Rs) as a foundation.” ILAR publishes the  Guide for 
the Care and Use of Animals , which is currently being updated. 
 Institute of Animal Technology (IAT) 
 5 S Parade 
 Summertown 
 Oxford OX2 7JL, United Kingdom 
 Founded: 1949 
 Phone: (44) (0) (800) 085-4380 
 E-mail: admin@iat.org.uk or info@iat.org.uk 
 URL: http://www.iat.org.uk 
 Membership: 2,200, including 60 corporate organizations from 
the U.K. and Europe 
 Budget: NA 
 IAT’s purpose “is to advance knowledge and promote excellence 
in the care and welfare of animals in science and to enhance the 
standards and status of those professionally engaged in the care, 
welfare and use of animals in science.” IAT provides training and 
certification for animal technologists. It publishes the  IAT Bulle-
tin and the  Animal Technology and Welfare Journal , as well as two 
books,  Introduction to Animal Technology  and  Manual of Animal 
Technology , as well as educational videos and CD-ROMs. It also 
provides links to other animal welfare organizations. 
 International Association against Painful 
Experiments on Animals (IAAPEA) 
 P.O. Box 14 
 Hampshire 
 Hayling Island PO11 9BF, United Kingdom 
 Founded: 1969 

222 Animal Rights
 Phone: (44) 2392-46-3738 
 E-mail: iaapea@hotmail.com 
 URL: http://www.iaapea.com 
 Members: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 The IAAPEA is the only organization dealing with animal testing 
that has consultative status with the UN. The Association estab-
lished  World Day for Laboratory Animals  in 1979 and organizes and 
finances undercover work to obtain photographic evidence of the 
cruelty of animal research, which it supplies to other animal rights 
organizations. The Association also funds research into cancer, 
heart disease, diabetes, and other illnesses that does not rely on 
animal research. It publishes a newsletter,  International Animal Ac-
tion , which is available online. Its  International Charter for Health and 
Humane Research  is available as a PDF file in Spanish, Portuguese, 
English, and Italian. It also has a list, “101 Misleading Results from 
Vivisection,” and downloadable PDF files. The Association has 
published two books by Dr. Robert Sharpe, Scientific Director of 
IAAPEA,  Alternative Strategies  and  Human Tissue . The Association 
is opposed to use of animals in weapons testing. 
 International Association of Human-Animal 
Interaction Organizations (IAHAIO) 
 c/o Delta Society 
 875 124th Ave. NE, Suite 101 
 Bellevue, WA 98005-2531 
 Founded: 1990 
 Phone: (425) 226-7357 
 Fax: (425) 235-1076 
 E-mail: info@iahaio.org 
 URL: http://www.iahaio.org 
 Members: 22 
 Budget: $16,000 
 The IAHAIO provides a coordinating structure for national hu-
mane associations and related organizations to advance under-
standing of the human-animal link and the unique role animals 
play in human wellbeing and quality of life. The IAHAIO holds 
an annual conference, the proceedings of which are published, 
and supports two international awards, the Distinguished Scholar 

Directory of Organizations 223
Award and the IAHAIO Pioneer Award, which it presents every 
three years. 
 International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) 
 290 Summer St. 
 Yarmouth Port, MA 02675-0193
Phone: (508) 744-2000 
 Founded: 1969. 
 Fax: (508) 744-2009 (Toll-free: (800) 932-4329) 
 E-mail: info@ifaw.org 
 URL: http://www.ifaw.org 
 Membership: 300,000 
 Budget: NA 
 IFAW was founded in Canada to ban the harp seal pup hunt. IFAW 
rejects the idea that the interests of humans and animals are sepa-
rate. The IFAW works to protect whales; to rescue animals during 
disasters; to encourage marine conservation and whale watching; 
to protect the Mediterranean monk seal; and to protect African 
and Asian elephants, and it is working to create ocean sanctuaries 
for whales. It provides annual reports, IFAW newsletters, animal 
fact sheets, and program publications. 
 International Primate Protection League (IPPL) 
 P.O. Box 766 
 Summerville, SC 29484-0766 
 Founded: 1973 
 Phone: (843) 871-2280 
 Fax: (843) 871-7988 
 E-mail: info@ippl.org 
 URL: http://www.ippl.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 IPPL is a grassroots organization that works to protect all species 
of primates. It provides grants and advice to organizations seek-
ing to protect primates in the United States and overseas. At its 
Summerville location, it provides a sanctuary for gibbons rescued 
from research, pet, and zoo backgrounds. It publishes a newsletter, 
which can be obtained online, along with links to other primate 
organizations and annual reports. 

224 Animal Rights
 International Society for Animal Rights (ISAR) 
 965 Griffin Pond Rd. 
 Clarks Summit, PA 18411-9214 
 Phone: (570) 586-2200 (Toll-free: (800) 543-ISAR) 
 Fax: (570) 586-9580 
 Founded: 1959 
 E-mail: contact@isaronline.org 
 URL: http://www.isaronline.org 
 Membership: 50,000 
 ISAR was one of the first organizations to use the words “ani-
mal rights” in its corporate name. It was responsible for the first 
successful state and federal litigations to invoke the moral prin-
ciple of animal rights. ISAR’s founder, Helen Jones, believed 
that humans have a moral responsibility to end the suffering 
and exploitation of animals. ISAR originated and sponsors the 
International Homeless Animals’ Day. It has a blog and news-
letters that are available online, as well as a MySpace page 
( http://www.myspace.com/i_s_a_r). It has a cat spay/neuter 
video. 
 International Whaling Commission (IWC) 
 The Red House 
 135 Station Rd. 
 Impington 
 Cambridge CB24 9NP, United Kingdom 
 Founded: 1946 
 Phone: (44) 1223-233971 
 Fax: (44) 1223-232876 
 E-mail: secretariat@iwcoffice.org 
 URL: http://www.iwcoffice.org 
 Membership: 58 
 Budget: £624,000 
 IWC was set up under the International Convention for the Reg-
ulation of Whaling. The membership consists of commissioners 
who each represent a country with an interest in whaling. IWC 
strives for proper conservation of whale stocks by encouraging, 
coordinating, and funding whale research and works to develop 
humane killing techniques. The  Journal of Cetacean Research and 
Management is available on its Web site. 

Directory of Organizations 225
 International Wildlife Coalition—USA (IWC-USA) 
 70 E. Falmouth Hwy. 
 East Falmouth, MA 02536 
 Founded: 1984 
 Phone: (508) 457-1898 (Toll-free: (800) 548-8704) 
 Fax: (508) 457-1898 
 E-mail: iwchq@iwc.org 
 URL: http://www.iwc.org 
 Membership: 150,000 
 Budget: $3 million 
 IWC-USA was started by a group of individuals from a variety 
of animal rights and environmental groups. Initially, the group 
raised money for whale conservation. It advocates for prevention 
of cruelty and killing of wildlife and for protection of wildlife 
habitat. It also lobbies and promotes letter-writing campaigns 
to protect wildlife and wildlife habitats in the United States, Sri 
Lanka, Brazil, Australia, the United Kingdom, and Canada. 
 Japan Whaling Association (JWA) 
 Toyomishinko Bldg. 7F 
 4-5 Toyomi-cho 
 Chuoh-ku 
 Tokyo 104-0055, Japan 
 Founded: 1988 
 Telephone: NA 
 Fax: NA 
 E-mail: kujira@whaling.jp 
 URL: http://www.whaling.jp 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 The JWA Web site is in Japanese. Japan is one of two nations that 
 continue commercial whaling despite an international ban on all 
whaling. JWA promotes the sound development of whaling in 
Japan. 
 Jews for Animal Rights (JAR) 
 255 Humphrey St. 
 Marblehead, MA 01945 
 Founded: 1985 

226 Animal Rights
 Phone: (781) 631-7601 
 E-mail: micah@micahbooks.com 
 URL: http://www.micahbooks.com/JAR.html 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 The JAR follows the teachings of Rabbi Avraham Kirk, the first 
chief rabbi of Israel, which are found in “A Vision of Vegetarianism 
and Peace.” JAR believes that the Torah contains many examples 
of great leaders of the Jews who showed kindness to animals and a 
compassion for animal life. For example, in Genesis 24:14, Rebecca 
says, “Drink and I will give thy camels drink also.” 
 Justice for Animals (JFA) 
 P.O. Box 33051 
 Raleigh, NC 27636-3051 
 Founded: 1993 
 Phone: (919) 787-5190 
 Fax: (919) 836-9949 
 E-mail: jfa_nc@juno.com 
 URL: http://www.justiceforanimals.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 JFA is a coalition of individuals and groups in North Carolina 
who seek to achieve more effective anticruelty laws. Its members 
volunteer their legal and other professional expertise. 
 Laboratory Animal Management Association 
(LAMA) 
 7500 Flying Cloud Drive, Suite 900 
 Eden Park, MN 55344 
 Founded: 1984 
 Phone: (952) 253-6235 
 Fax: (952) 835-4774 
 E-mail: NA 
 URL: http://www.lama-online.org/ 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 

Directory of Organizations 227
 LAMA seeks to advance the laboratory animal management pro-
fession (directors, managers, and supervisors) through education, 
knowledge exchange, and professional development. LAMA 
publishes the  LAMA Review . It certifies directors, managers, and 
supervisors of animal care facilities. 
 Laboratory Animal Science Association (LASA) 
 P.O. Box 3993 
 Tamworth B78 3QU, United Kingdom 
 Founded: 1963 
 Phone: (44) 1827-259130 
 Fax: (44) 1827-259188 
 E-mail: lasa@btconnect.com 
 URL: http://www.lasa.co.uk 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 LASA was founded by industrial, university, ministry, and research 
council representatives to ensure the provision and best use of ani-
mal models, including organs, tissues, and cellular components 
for medical, veterinary, and other scientific purposes. It provides 
small grants to support training in reducing, replacing, and re-
fining experimental techniques to minimize the use of animals. 
The Association also awards the LASA medal to individuals or 
organizations that have made a significant contribution to labora-
tory animal welfare. LASA publishes guidelines and point papers 
dealing with animal welfare issues. 
 Last Chance for Animals (LCA) 
 8033 Sunset Blvd., No. 835 
 Los Angeles, CA 90046 
Founded: 1984 
 Phone: (310) 271-6096 (Toll-free: (888) 882-6462) 
 Fax: (310) 271-1890 
 E-mail: development@lcanimal.org 
 URL: http://www.lcanimal.org 
 Membership: 60,000 
 Budget: $1 million 
 LCA opposes the use of animals for entertainment, clothing, or food 
or to satisfy scientific curiosity. LCA uses “Direct Action” in the 

228 Animal Rights
form of well-planned and -executed peaceful protests and supports 
vegan ideals. LCA’s Special Investigations Unit seeks to validate 
information, detect suspect activity, and expose illegal or unethical 
practices. LCA sells a variety of merchandise in its online store. 
 Lehigh Valley Animal Rights Coalition (LVARK) 
 P.O. Box 3224 
 Allentown, PA 18106 
 Founded: 1982 
 Phone: (610) 821-9552 
 E-mail: pstacks@enter.net 
 URL: http://www.enter.net/~pstacks/ 
 Membership: 600 
 Budget: NA 
 LVARC is a grassroots organization that seeks to educate the 
 public via direct action, letter writing, and public outreach about 
the misuse and abuse of animals wherever and whenever it oc-
curs. LVAR seeks to provide students with alternatives to class-
room dissection, to reduce fur sales, to ban pigeon shoots in 
Pennsylvania, and to assist in providing low-cost spay/neutering 
clinics. LVARC provides rewards for the apprehension of parties 
involved in acts of cruelty. It supplies libraries with  Animal Agenda 
magazine and other  anti-abuse literature and provides links to 
other animal welfare organizations. Its goal is to inform the pub-
lic about Pennsylvania animal rights issues, pet issues, and world 
and national wildlife issues. 
 Mercy for Animals (MFA) 
 P.O. Box 363 
 Columbus, OH 43216 
 Founded: 1999 
 Toll-free: (866) MFA-OHIO 
 E-mail: info@mercyforanimals.org 
 URL: http://www.mercyforanimals.org 
 Membership: 25,000 
 Budget: NA 
 MFA believes that animals are irreplaceable individuals that have 
a right to life free from unnecessary suffering and exploitation 
because they have morally significant interests. MFA provides a 
voice for animals through grassroots activism such as undercover 

Directory of Organizations 229
investigations, rescues, and advertising campaigns. MFA focuses 
on promoting and advocating for cruelty-free food choices. It pro-
vides information about factory farms, including those for poultry, 
pork, beef, dairy and veal, eggs, and fish, as well as information 
about animal experimentation, animals in entertainment, and the 
fur industry. It publishes the  Compassionate Living  newsletter and 
provides a variety of merchandise in its online store. 
 National Association for Biomedical Research (NAFBR) 
 818 Connecticut Ave NW, Suite 900 
 Washington, DC 20006 
 Founded: 1979 
 Phone: (202) 857-0540 
 Fax: (202) 659-1902 
 E-mail: info@nabr.org 
 URL: http://www.nabr.org/ 
 Membership: 300 
 Budget: NA 
 NABR provides a unified voice for the scientific community on 
legislative and regulatory matters dealing with laboratory animal 
research. It also provides information about the laws governing 
animal research. 
 National Centre for Replacement, Refinement 
and Reduction of Animals in Research 
 20 Park Crescent 
 London W1B 1AL 
 Founded: 2004 
 Phone: (44) 020-7670-5331 
 Fax: (44) 020-7670-5178 
 E-mail: enquiries@nc3rs.org.uk 
 URL: http://www.nc3rs.org.uk/ 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 The Centre brings together scientists and administrators from aca-
demia, industry, government, and animal welfare organizations 
to disseminate and advance the principles of replacement, refine-
ment, and reduction (the 3Rs) of animals in research. The Centre 
provides grants for research dealing with the 3Rs. In 2008, grants 

230 Animal Rights
totaled £2.6 million. The Centre publishes the  NC3Rs newsletters 
and has a library of articles dealing with the 3Rs, as well as a FAQ. 
 National Federation of Humane Societies (NFHS) 
 2100 L St. NW 
 Washington, DC 20037 
Founded: 2006 
 Phone: (563) 582-6766 
 E-mail: humanejane@dbqhumane.org 
 URL: http://www.humanefederation.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 The NFHS is a fee-based national trade federation representing 
animal shelters, animal care and control agencies, and regional and 
national animal welfare organizations. It provides a unified voice 
of advocacy for these organizations. NFHS seeks to find consensus 
on issues such as pets in housing, puppy mills, novelty pets/exot-
ics, animal fighting, and animal-friendly practices, policies, and 
procedures for business organizations. It also monitors legislation 
and promotes legislation to include pets in disaster planning. 
 National Pet Alliance (NPA) 
 P.O. Box 53385 
 San Jose, CA 95153 
Founded: NA 
 Phone: (408) 363-0700 
 E-mail: karenj115@aol.com 
 URL: http://fanciers.com/npa/ 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 NPA was founded by purebred dog and pedigree cat owners to 
promote the care and wellbeing of these companion animals. NPA 
recognizes that the majority of animals euthanized by  humane 
societies and animal shelters are cats, so NPA promotes trapping, 
testing, vaccinating, and release programs for feral cats to mini-
mize cat overpopulation. 
 New Jersey Animal Rights Alliance (NJARA) 
 P.O. Box 174 
 Englishtown, NJ 07726 

Directory of Organizations 231
Founded: 1983 
 Phone: (732) 446-6808 
 Fax: (732) 446-0227 
 E-Mail: njara@nj-ara.org 
 URL: http://www.nj-ara.org 
 Membership: 2,000 
 Budget: NA 
 NJARA is a statewide organization that is dedicated to ending 
animal exploitation. It is an educational organization that seeks 
peaceful, nonviolent coexistence for humans and animals. NJARA 
seeks to educate the public about animal abuse, to encourage ac-
tivism to end cruelty, and to promote lifestyles that reduce or 
eliminate suffering. It provides links to information about animals 
and to other welfare organizations. It provides information and 
advice about legislation in New Jersey dealing with animals. 
 Northwest Animal Rights Network 
 902-A NE 65th St. 
 Seattle, WA 98115 
Founded: 1986 
 Phone: (206) 525-2246 
 E-mail: info@narn.org 
 URL: http://www.narn.org 
 Membership: 1,200 
 Budget: NA 
 NARN seeks to end animal exploitation in the food, entertain-
ment, and fashion industries, as well as animal experimentation. It 
publishes a weekly online newsletter containing announcements 
and action items for the week and news or noteworthy items, as 
well as a blog dealing with animal issues and links to other orga-
nizations with similar interests. 
 Ocean Conservancy 
 1300 19th St. NW, 8th Fl. 
 Washington, DC 20036 
Founded: NA 
 Phone: (202) 429-5609 (Toll-free: (800) 519-1541) 
 E-mail: membership@oceanconservancy.org 
 URL: http://www.oceanconservancy.org 

232 Animal Rights
 Membership: 150,000 
 Budget: NA 
 OC promotes the protection of marine habitat and marine  wildlife 
by increasing public awareness and education. It has an interac-
tive map on its Web site that provides information about ongoing 
problems in specific areas of the coastal United States. It publishes 
the  Ocean Conservancy Magazine  and e-cards you can send to a 
friend, as well as ocean computer wallpapers for your computer. 
 People for Animal Rights (PAR) 
 P.O Box 15358 
 Syracuse, NY 13215-0358 
 Founded: 1982 
 Phone: (315) 488-7877 
 E-mail: ldestefano3@twcny.rr.com 
 URL: http://www.geocities.com/par-ny 
 Membership: 250 
 Budget: NA 
 PAR is “a local group that educates about animal rights and pro-
tecting the earth. We host vegan meals, bring in speakers on a 
variety of topics, have a legislative network, produce a newslet-
ter and other material, produce a cable TV program, and provide 
educational material and speakers to schools and others.” PAR 
provides presentations on environmental protection and animal 
rights to schools, colleges, libraries, houses of worship, and clubs 
in Onondaga and nearby counties. It provides its members with 
alerts dealing with legislation about animals and provides links to 
other organizations with similar interests 
 People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) 
 501 Front St. 
 Norfolk, VA 23510 
 Founded: 1980 
 Phone: (757) 622-7382 
 Fax: (757) 622-0457 
 E-mail: info@peta.org 
 URL: http://www.peta.org 
 Membership: 1 million 
 Budget: $27 million 

Directory of Organizations 233
 PETA is likely the largest and best-funded animal rights organi-
zation in the world. It focuses on the use of animals on factory 
farms, in scientific research, in the clothing trade, and in the en-
tertainment industry. PETA proposes to stop all use of animals 
by humans and fosters a vegan lifestyle. It provides a variety of 
merchandise in its online shop and has a blog, action alerts that 
highlight alleged abuse by specific organizations, such as Ken-
tucky Fried Chicken, McDonalds, and Pet Marts. PETA provides 
a variety of videos dealing with topics such as the killing of seals. 
It has a channel on YouTube and provides forums on a variety of 
topics where you can post your comments about a topic and see 
comments by others. 
 People Protecting Animals and Their Habitats (PATH) 
 P.O. Box 12022 
 Fort Pierce, FL 34979-2022 
 Founded: NA 
 Phone: (617) 354-2826 
 E-mail: animalpath@aol.com 
 URL: http://www.ppath.org/ 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 PATH is attempting to create a world where people and animals 
thrive together. It focuses on animal welfare in the developing 
world by combining animal welfare, education, and community 
development. PATH advocates the human treatment of animals 
and the conservation of areas that are vital to the survival of 
endangered and threatened species. 
 Performing Animal Welfare Society (PAWS) 
 P.O. Box 849 
 Galt, CA 95632 
 Founded: 1984 
 Phone: (209) 745-2606 
 Fax: (209) 745-1809 
 E-mail: info@pawsweb.org 
 URL: http://www.pawsweb.org/about_paws_
home_page.html 
 Membership: 45,000 
 Budget: $3.6 million 

234 Animal Rights
 PAWS seeks to protect performing animals and to provide a sanc-
tuary for abused, abandoned, and retired wildlife, to promote 
standards of care for captive wildlife, and to improve public 
awareness of captive wildlife issues. It provides sanctuary to 11 
African and Indian elephants and 33 tigers, as well as primates, 
bears, and African and mountain lions. PAWS sells animal-related 
merchandise in its online store. 
 Primarily Primates, Inc. (PPI) 
 26099 Dull Knife Trail 
 San Antonio, TX 78255 
 Founded: 1978 
 Phone: (830) 755-4616 
 Fax: (830) 981-4611 
 E-mail: primarilyprimates@friendsofanimals.org 
 URL: http://primarilyprimates.org 
 Membership: 18,000 
 Budget: $1 million 
 PP provides sanctuary, rehabilitation, lifetime care, and shelter to 
abused or unwanted nonnative species of primates, birds, mam-
mals, and reptiles. PP has videos of a variety of rare and unusual 
primates engaged in a variety of behaviors. 
 Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty 
to Animals ( RSPCA) 
 Wilberforce Way 
 Southwater 
 Horsham RH13 9RS, United Kingdom 
 Founded: 1824 
 Phone: (44) 300-1234555 
 Fax: (44) 303-1230284 
 URL: http://www.rspca.org.uk 
 Membership: 53,754 
 Budget: £37.3 million 
 RSPCA was founded by Richard Martin and 22 others. It was the 
first animal protection society in the world and provided enforce-
ment inspectors who predated the police force. The Society also has 
a team of undercover inspectors that investigates illegal acts, includ-
ing dog fighting, badger baiting, wild bird trapping, and puppy 

Directory of Organizations 235
farming. The Society uses private prosecutions to curtail such illegal 
acts. The Society works closely with decision makers and politicians 
in support of legislation dealing with animal welfare issues. The So-
ciety provides policy statements to provide guidelines for further 
action and to encourage compassionate attitude toward animals. 
 Save the Whales (STW) 
 1192 Waring St. 
 Seaside, CA 93955 
Founded: 1977 
 Phone: (831) 899-9957 
 Fax: (831) 394-5555 
 E-mail: maris@savethewhales.org 
 URL: http://www.savethewhales.org 
 Membership: 10,000 
 Budget: $80,000 
 STW seeks to educate children and adults about marine mam-
mals, their environment, and their preservation. STW provides 
information about various species of whales. It collects infor-
mation about marine mammal stranding and entanglements. 
Whale-related items are sold in the online store, and the Web site 
provides links to other sites about whales. 
 Scientists Center for Animal Welfare (SCAW ) 
 7833 Walker Dr., Suite 410 
 Greenbelt, MD 20770 
Founded: 1978 
 Phone: (301) 345-3500 
 Fax: (301) 345-3503 
 E-Mail: info@scaw.com 
 URL: http://www.scaw.com 
 SCAW serves as an “objective, creditable source of information for 
the research community, the media, and the general public” about 
basic and applied scientific inquiries involving animals. It spon-
sors conferences and workshops and provides links on its Web 
site to publications dealing with animals and animal research. It 
provides an online mechanism that enables Institutional Animal 
Care and Use Committee members at different institutions to 
communicate with one another. 

236 Animal Rights
 Society for Animal Protective Legislation (SAPL) 
 P.O. Box 3719 
 Washington, DC 20027 
 Founded: 1955 
 Phone: (703) 836-4300 
 Fax: (703) 836-0400 
 E-Mail: sapl@saplonline.org 
 URL: http://www.saplonline.org 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: $150,000 
 The SAPL is the legislative and litigation arm of the Animal Wel-
fare Institute. It provides members of Congress and their staffs 
with information about animal welfare. It monitors state and fed-
eral legislation dealing with animals and animal welfare. 
 Society of Animal Welfare Administrators (SAWA) 
 15508 W. Bell Road, Suite 101-613 
 Surprise, AZ 85347 
 Founded: 1970 
 Phone: (888)-600-3648 
 Fax: (866)-299-1311 
 E-mail: SAWAconnect@ymail.com 
 URL: http://www.sawanetwork.org/contact.htm 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 SAWA is a nonprofit management organization composed of pro-
fessional administrators of organizations involved in animal care 
and control. It provides a Certified Animal Welfare Administrator 
exam. SAWA provides a copy of its annual report and its newslet-
ter online and sells merchandise in its online store. 
 Student Animal Rights Alliance (SARA) 
 275 Seventh Ave., 23rd Fl. 
 New York, NY 10001 
Founded: 2001 
 Phone: (212) 696-7911 
 E-mail: info@defendanimals.org 
 URL: http://www.defendanimals.org 

Directory of Organizations 237
 SARA is dedicated to youth mobilization, education, and leader-
ship development to build a strong and diverse youth movement 
for animal protection, because animals are living, feeling individ-
uals that deserve to live free from torture, slaughter, abuse, and 
exploitation. SARA recommends that students get involved with 
animal rights legislation at the state and local level. It hosts the 
National Student Animal Rights Conference, provides training 
for student lobbyists, and is attempting to set up a grassroots net-
work of students interested in animal welfare and animal rights. 
 Tree House Animal Foundation (THAF) 
 1212 W. Carmen Ave. 
 Chicago, IL 60640-2902 
 Founded: 1971 
 Phone: (773) 784-5488 
 Fax: (773) 784-2332 
 E-mail: jschlueter@treehouseanimals.org 
 URL: http://www.treehouseanimals.org 
 Membership: 10,000 
 Budget: NA 
 THAF provides a no-kill shelter for unwanted and feral cats, as well 
as a low-cost spay/neuter clinic. THAF works with Chicago Ani-
mal Care and Control and other open-admission shelters to transfer 
cats to THAF. THAF is expanding its Trap-Neuter-Return program 
for feral cats. THAF adoption counselors interview prospective 
adopters to understand their needs, with the hope of providing a 
permanent loving home for all cats. THAF publishes a semiannual 
newsletter,  Kittenville , and sells Tree House T-shirts on its Web site. 
 The True Nature Network ( TTNN ) 
 P.O. Box 20672 
 Columbus Circle Station 
 New York, NY 10023-1487 
Founded: 1985 
 Phone: (212) 581-1120 
 E-mail: abull@ix.netcom.com 
 URL: http://www.greenpeople.org/listing/The_True_Nature_
Netw_2206.cfm 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 

238 Animal Rights
 TNN produces and distributes educational videos about animal 
rights and vegetarianism, which it makes available free to schools, 
television stations, and libraries. The videos include  Animal Rights 
Concerns ,  9th Life Hawaii  (dealing with overpopulation of cats in 
Hawaii), and  Paws for Peace , among others. 
 United Action for Animals (UAA) 
 P.O. Box 635 
 New York, NY 10021 
Founded: 1967 
 Phone: (212) 249-9178 
 E-Mail: info@ua4a.org 
 URL: http://www.ua4a.org 
 UAA strives “to establish and encourage the observance of ethical 
standards of conduct and practices in the field of animal welfare; 
to educate mankind on available alternatives to the use of animals 
in medical research and testing methods, and to actively work to 
promote the use of such alternatives; to protect all living things 
from abuse and neglect, to conduct intensive public education on 
cruelties of national scope; to cooperate with other ethical socie-
ties in the U.S. and abroad whose aims are comparable with those 
of this society; to compile, select, disseminate and distribute data 
and information of all kinds which may be useful in furthering 
the aims and purposes of this society.” UAA promotes the use 
of nonanimal alternatives for leather and other forms of apparel. 
UAA fosters adoption of stray animals from the Cayman Islands. 
 United Animal Nations (UAN) 
 P.O. Box 188890 
 Sacramento, CA 95818 
Founded: 1987 
 Phone: (916) 429-2457 
 Fax: (916) 429-2456 
 E-mail: info@uan.org 
 URL: http://www.uan.org 
 Membership: 20,000 
 Budget: $1.5 million 
 UAN provides leadership in emergency animal sheltering and 
disaster-relief services. It provides financial assistance to Good 
Samaritans and rescue organizations, helps find homes for horses 

Directory of Organizations 239
that might otherwise be slaughtered, and offers rewards to 
witnesses to animal cruelty who come forward. 
 United Poultry Concerns (UPC) 
 P.O. Box 150 
 Machipongo, VA 23405-0150 
 Founded: 1990 
 Phone: (757) 678-7875 
 Fax: (757) 678-5070 
 E-mail: info@upc-online.org 
 URL: http://www.upc-online.org 
 Membership: 7,000 
 Budget: $60,000 
 UPC is concerned about the treatment of chickens and other birds 
by commercial agricultural, scientific, and educational institutions 
and promotes a vegetarian lifestyle. UPC wants to stop the prac-
tice of de-beaking chickens, turkeys and other birds. It provides 
links to other organizations on its Web site and has a YouTube 
page, www.YouTube.com/upcnews. 
 U.S. Animal Health Association (USAHA) 
 P.O. Box 8805 
 St. Joseph, MO 64508 
 Founded: 1887 
 Phone: (816) 671-1144 
 Fax: (816) 671-1201 
 E-mail: usaha@usaha.org 
 URL: http://www.usaha.org 
 Membership: 1,400 
 Budget: $150,000 
 USAHA’s “1,400 members are state and federal animal health 
officials, national allied organizations, regional representatives, 
and individual members. USAHA works with state and federal 
governments, universities, veterinarians, livestock producers, na-
tional livestock and poultry organizations, research scientists, the 
extension service and seven foreign countries to control livestock 
diseases in the United States. USAHA represents all 50 states, 
4 foreign countries and 34  allied groups serving health, technical 
and consumer markets.” 

240 Animal Rights
 U.S. Sportsmen’s Alliance (USSA) 
 801 Kingsmill Pkwy. 
 Columbus, OH 43229 
 Founded: 1978 
 Phone: (614) 888-4868 
 Fax: (614) 888-0326 
 E-mail: info@ussportsmen.org 
 URL: http://www.ussportsmen.org 
 USSA “provides direct lobbying and grassroots coalition support 
to protect and advance the rights of hunters, fishermen, trappers 
and scientific wildlife management professionals. This is accom-
plished through coalition building, ballot issue campaigning and 
legislative and government relations.” 
 Universities Federation for Animal Welfare (UFAW) 
 The Old School 
 Brewhouse Hill 
 Wheathampstead AL4 8AN, United Kingdom 
 Founded: 1926 
 Phone: (44) 1582-831818 
 Fax: (44) 1582-831414 
 E-mail: ufaw@ufaw.org.uk 
 URL: http://www.ufaw.org.uk 
 Membership: NA 
 Budget: NA 
 UFAW seeks to develop and improve the welfare of animals 
through scientific and educational activities, provides information 
to government and regulatory bodies, and offers grants, fellow-
ships, and training. UFAW publishes the journal  Animal Welfare , 
as well as a series of books, including  Environmental Enrichment 
for Captive Animals , by Robert J Young;  Physiology and Behaviour of 
Animal Suffering , by Neville G Gregory; and  Animal Welfare Limp-
ing towards Eden , by John Webster, all of which can be ordered 
online. UFAW’s Web site provides links to other  organizations. 
 Vegetarian Resource Group (VRG) 
 P.O. Box 1463 
 Baltimore, MD 21203 
 Founded: 1982 
 Phone: (410) 366-8343 

Directory of Organizations 241
 Fax: (410) 366-8804 
 E-mail: vrg@vrg.org 
 URL: http://www.vrg.org 
 Membership: 20,000 
 VRG strives to educate the public on vegetarianism. It publishes 
the  Vegetarian Journal  and vegetarian cookbooks. VRG provides 
information about vegetarian nutrition and links to vegetarian 
sites. The Web site has an interactive online restaurant guide that 
helps readers locate vegetarian restaurants, as well a list of restau-
rant chains that have vegetarian items on their menus. 
 Vegan Action (VA) 
 P.O. Box 4288 
 Richmond, VA 23220 
 Founded: 1993 
 Phone: (804) 502-8736 
 Fax: (804) 254-8346 
 E-mail: information@vegan.org 
 URL: http://www.vegan.org 
 Membership: 1,600 
 Budget: $19,000 
 VA provides information about the vegan lifestyle and how it 
helps animals. VA provides suggestions on how to start and main-
tain a vegan lifestyle and provides links to reading material and 
other organizations. 
 Voice for Animals (VOICE) 
 P.O. Box 120095 
 San Antonio, TX 78212 
 Founded: 1987 
 Phone: (210) 737-3138 
 E-mail: voice@voiceforanimals.org 
 URL: http://www.voiceforanimals.org 
 Membership: 950 
 Budget: $2,500 
 VFA seeks to inform the public about animal rights issues and to 
advance the compassionate treatment of animals. VFA’s Web site 
provides links for compassionate shopping 

242 Animal Rights
 Wild Animal Orphanage (WAO) 
 P.O. Box 690422 
 San Antonio, TX 78269 
 Founded: 1983 
 Phone: (210) 688-9038 
 Fax: (210) 688-9514 
 E-mail: wao@stic.net 
 URL: http://www.wildanimalorphanage.org 
 Membership: 50,000 
 Budget: $656,000 
 WAO provides a permanent home and lifetime care for un-
wanted, neglected, and abused animals, including animals from 
the exotic pet trade, roadside zoos, and breeding facilities. It also 
provides a home for primates retired from medical research, the 
pet industry, and the entertainment industry. Its publications 
 include the bimonthly  Wild Means Wild  and a newsletter, available 
online, that contains stories about animal rescues and discourages 
the keeping of wild animals as pets. 

243
 8 
 Resources 
 T
 his chapter provides selected print resources that allow the 
reader to follow up on topics of interest. It highlights classic 
books from the beginnings of the animal rights movement to 
modern treatments of the topic, including books on vegetarian-
ism. It includes selections that deal with the specific ways humans 
use animals and that focus on nonhuman primates and whales 
and dolphins. Also included are books that deal with legal issues, 
the U.S. Code and the Code of Federal Regulations, and selected 
congressional hearings. Finally, it suggests selected sources of 
nonprint information, such as databases and videos. 
 Print Resources 
 Alternatives to Animals 
 The Food Security Act of 1985 (see chapter 6) mandates that the 
principal investigator in research consider alternatives to any 
procedures that are likely to cause pain or distress to an animal 
used in an experiment. This Act also mandates that each scien-
tist consider methods that could reduce or replace animal use or 
minimize animal pain and distress. 
 Stratmann, G. C., Stratmann, C. J., and Paxton, C. L.  Animal Exper-
iments and Their Alternatives. Braunton, UK: Merlin Books, 1987. 
 This is the classic reference on how to achieve the three R’s: 
 refinement, replacement, and reduction. Stratmann recommends a 
careful examination of existing experimental protocols and careful 

244 Animal Rights
planning when developing new protocols. “Refinement” means 
improvement of experimental technique to reduce the possible 
suffering and stress of the animal and to avoid poor  experimental 
results due to improper handling and care of the animals. “Re-
placement” means the use of techniques that eliminate the use of 
animals while still permitting the researcher to obtain the desired 
result. “Reduction” means the use of fewer animals to achieve the 
desired results by improving experimental methods and through 
critical examination of statistical methods. 
 Animal Rights 
 Animal rights activists argue that animal rights is an ethical con-
cept and that the issues of animal rights are philosophical issues. 
The definition of animal, in its broadest sense, refers to an or-
ganism that possesses sensorimotor abilities and that can sense 
changes in its environment and respond to them. By this defini-
tion, “animal” includes humans and other primates, as well as 
mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, fish, and many inverte-
brates. Further, several themes reoccur in the animal rights lit-
erature. Animals, humans and nonhumans, are sentient (have the 
capacity to enjoy and suffer, to experience pleasure and pain), and 
their lives have significant value. To obstruct an animal, to cause 
it pain, distress, suffering, misery, or terror; to mutilate an animal; 
or to kill an animal is to harm the animal. We have a duty not to 
harm animals, and animals have a right not to be harmed by us. 
 Bentham, Jeremy.  An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and 
Legislation. New York: Dover, 2007. 
 This is a reprint of Bentham’s book, which was originally pub-
lished in 1779. Bentham was a utilitarian philosopher who wrote 
of animals, “The question is not, can they reason? Nor can they 
talk? But, can they suffer?” This statement became the battle cry of 
both the Victorian and the modern animal protection movement. 
Bentham maintained that because they can suffer, animals have a 
right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. 
 Best, Steven, and Nocella II, Anthony J.  Terrorists or Freedom Fight-
ers? Herndon, VA: Lantern Books, 2004. 
 This book contains a series of essays dealing with the Animal 
Liberation Front, one of the more radical animal rights organiza-
tions. It discusses the history, ethics, politics, and tactics of this 

Resources 245
organization, which engages in civil disobedience, sabotage, and 
threats against people who use animals, especially those involved 
with biomedical or testing issues. 
 Brown, Anthony.  Who Cares for Animals? London: Heinemann, 
1974. 
 This book was written for the 150th anniversary of the Royal 
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. It presents a 
living portrait of the people who work for the Society and the 
work that they do. 
 Darwin, Charles.  On the Origin of Species: The Illustrated Edition . 
New York: Sterling, 2008. 
 This book celebrates the 150th anniversary of Darwin’s book, in 
which he discusses his belief that species evolve because of com-
petition for resources and that natural selection provides the fittest 
organism to occupy a given ecological niche. 
 Darwin, Charles.  The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex.  
New York: Quill Pen Classics, 2008. 
 This is a reprint of Darwin’s book, originally published in 1902, 
in which he argues that animals and humans form a biological 
and psychological continuum. Further, he claims that there is no 
fundamental difference between man and higher mammals. 
 Dodds, Jean W., and Orlans, Barbara F. (Eds.).  Scientific Perspec-
tives on Animal Welfare.  New York: Academic Press, 1982. 
 This book highlights the four basic stages by which scientists are 
held accountable for the proper use of animals in experimenta-
tion. In the first stage, the individual experimenter develops an 
idea for an experiment and formalizes the idea as an experimen-
tal protocol. In the next stage, the research institution, via its 
institutional animal care and use committee, determines that the 
protocol is in compliance with local, state, national, and federal 
standards of animal welfare. In the next stage, the funding agency 
determines if the protocol has scientific merit and its experimen-
tal procedures are humane. In the fourth stage, the experimenter 
is expected to publish the results of his experiment in a refereed 
scientific journal, where it is reviewed to determine whether it 
contains an adequate description of the experimental procedures 

246 Animal Rights
and results and whether it has scientific merit. The principles of 
refinement, replacement, and reduction are also discussed, as are 
the feasibility of reducing the invasiveness of the experimental 
procedures and the economic and ethical costs of animals used in 
experimental research. 
 Favre, David.  Animal Law: Welfare, Interest, and Rights . New York: 
Aspen, 2008. 
 Favre provides an overview of topics including animal owner-
ship, veterinarian malpractice, harm to pets, state regulation of 
ownership, anticruelty laws, agricultural animals, the Animal 
Welfare Act, and the jurisprudence and social movements dealing 
with animal rights. He also discusses access to the courts, focus-
ing of standing and legal injury. Each major section of the book 
provides an overview of a broad topic and then reviews relevant 
case law. For example, the section dealing with animal ownership 
covers what constitutes ownership; how one obtains, transfers, 
and loses ownership status; bailments (temporary control over or 
possession of personal property); interference with owners’ rights 
and expectations; the obligations of ownership; and new issues. 
The section on the Animal Welfare Act provides a discussion of 
the background of the Act, discusses how the federal law changed 
over time, and includes the statement of the policy of Congress, as 
well as reviewing selected committee reports dealing with the Act 
and how the Act is administered. Each section provides questions 
and notes. 
 The section dealing with the animal rights movement begins with 
a discussion of the background of the movement, including the 
first national conference at which lawyers considered animal 
rights issues, which occurred at the Brooklyn Law School in 1981, 
and the founding of the peer-reviewed  Journal of Animal Law , at 
the Michigan State University College of Law. 
 Fox, Michael Allan. T he Case for Animal Experimentation: An Evo-
lutionary and Ethical Perspective . Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1988. 
 Fox suggests that modern antivivisectionists are presenting a 
one-sided, distorted view of animal welfare issues, often focus-
ing on animal suffering during research. He suggests that the 
antivivisectionists fail to mention the efforts to maintain and 

Resources 247
improve animal care and/or the benefits gained from the research. 
Fox holds that animals are not the moral equals of human beings 
and that there is no compelling reason for treating them as such. 
In both common and scientific discourse, “animal” is defined as 
any living thing that is not a plant and thus includes creatures 
as simple as sea cucumbers or as complex as humans. Fox asks 
which of these creatures, if any, should be treated as the moral 
equivalent of humans. He suggests that much of the attention 
and energy used to improve the lot of animals would be better 
directed at ameliorating human need and suffering, a goal that he 
thinks  deserves more of our dedication because humans are more 
important than animals. Fox maintains that there are three factors 
that led to the controversy about animals: (1) the speed at which 
new information is acquired and processed; (2) the rise of ecol-
ogy as a major scientific field; and (3) the general broadening of 
moral concern that is the legacy of the counterculture and the 
civil rights and antiwar movements. Further, because of fairy 
tales and cartoons, as well as bestsellers such as  Jonathan Livings-
ton Seagull  and  Watership Down,  many people have developed a 
false sense of animals and their abilities and natures and paint a 
picture of nature as peaceful and idyllic. Fox also contends that 
existing evidence suggests that humans and their ancestors are 
natural omnivores. 
 Fox, Michael D., and Nibert, David,  Animal Rights/Human Rights. 
New York: Rowman & Littlefield, 2002. 
 The authors argue that the treatment of both humans and animals 
is entangled with the structure of our social arrangements. They 
argue that human use of animals is unnatural and has done little 
to improve the human condition. 
 Fox, Michael W.  Between Animal and Man.  New York: Coward, 
McCann & Geoghegan, 1976. 
 Fox, a veterinarian, suggests that veterinary school taught him a 
good deal about diseases and the healing arts but did not teach 
him anything about normal behavior or animal psychology. 
When Fox began to study wild canids (wolves, coyotes, and 
foxes), his basic view of research began to change. At the begin-
ning, he was a scientist studying animals to gain knowledge for 
knowledge’s sake. But, he gradually changed his view toward 
conservation and human values. This book highlights his views. 

248 Animal Rights
Fox has also written extensively about dogs and cats and the use 
of companion animals in human therapy. 
 Francione, Gary L.  Animals, Property, and the Law.  Philadelphia: 
Temple University Press, 1995 (reprinted with corrections, 
2005). 
 Francione discusses the reasons that animals are considered 
property and what impact this status has on their treatment. He 
provides a detailed analysis of the concept of standing, which pre-
vents consideration of the legal rights of animals. He also provides 
a detailed analysis of the purpose and function of anticruelty stat-
utes and how these laws have allowed the exploitation of animals. 
In his discussion of the Animal Welfare Act, which focuses on 
the administrative regulations promulgated for the enforce-
ment of the Act, he discusses the difference between “symbolic” 
and “functional” legislation and maintains that the Act is sym-
bolic, because Congress failed to address the administrative and 
political constraints that can block implementation of the Act. 
Functional legislation, in contrast, instructs agencies, such as the 
Department of Agriculture, how to balance competing interests 
when setting standards. 
 Francione, Gary L.  Rain without Thunder: The Ideology of the Animal 
Rights Movement.  Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1996 
(reprinted with corrections, 2005). 
 Francione argues that until the late 1970s, activists’ concerns 
about animals were limited to concerns about humane treatment. 
In the late 1970s and 1980s, the modern animal rights movement 
emerged. Animal welfare activists sought to regulate the exploi-
tation of animals, while animal rights advocates sought the abo-
lition of exploitation of animals. Henry Spira, a New York high 
school teacher and labor organizer, is sometimes called the inspi-
ration for the rights movement. When he found that the American 
Museum of Natural History in New York was conducting experi-
ments on the sexual behavior of cats, he and his colleagues pick-
eted the museum. Museum officials refused to meet with Spira, 
so he published a detailed account of the experiments in a New 
York weekly newspaper. His campaign elicited thousands of let-
ters and phone calls to the newspaper. Spira’s activities caught 
the attention of Congressman Ed Koch, and many members of 
 Congress became interested in the project. The National Institutes 

Resources 249
of Health withdrew funding, and the laboratory closed. Spira, 
with the help of other activists, brought about the repeal of the 
Metcalf-Hatch Act in New York, which permitted research insti-
tutions to use unclaimed animals for research. 
 Hauser, Marc D., Fiery Cushman, and Matthew Kamen (Eds.). 
 People, Property, or Pets?  West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University 
Press, 2006. 
 This book consists of a series of essays dealing with the philo-
sophical and legal issues associated with the views that animals 
are property and that animals are entities that have rights. It pro-
vides a detailed evaluation of “personhood” and discusses the 
impact of fixing the boundaries that determine whether an entity 
is a person. Individual essays describe the role of cognitive sci-
ence in evaluating the status of animals and review the moral and 
practical issues linked to animal experimentation and the need 
to develop alternatives to using animals for biomedical research. 
The authors observe that veterinarians are committed to promot-
ing the health and welfare of animals, as well as reducing poten-
tial suffering of animals. Current state and federal laws establish 
both negative obligations with respect to animals (e.g., state and 
local anticruelty statutes) and positive obligations, such as pro-
viding the great apes with opportunities to engage in species 
specific behaviors. 
 Magel, Charles R.  Keyguide to Information Sources in Animal Rights.  
London: Mansell Publishing Ltd., 1989. 
 Magel presents an overview of the animal rights literature, includ-
ing an annotated bibliography arranged in chronological order 
and a list of animal rights organizations. 
 Newkirk, Ingrid.  Free the Animals!: The Untold Story of the U.S. 
Animal Liberation Front and Its Founder, “Valerie.”  Chicago: Noble 
Press, 1992. 
 Newkirk, the National Director of People for the Ethical Treat-
ment of Animals, sometimes acts as a spokesman for the Animal 
Liberation Front. Newkirk discusses the formation of the Ani-
mal Liberation Front in the United States and provides insight 
into the values and beliefs of its leader, known simply as Valerie. 
The Animal Liberation Front, which focuses on organizations 

250 Animal Rights
that perform biomedical experiments, uses many different tech-
niques to achieve its goal of liberating animals. 
 Newkirk, I.  Save The Animals: 101 Easy Things You Can Do. New 
York: Warner Books, 1990. 
 Newkirk, one of the founders of People for the Ethical Treat-
ment of Animals (PETA), maintains that we should question 
not how animals should be treated within the context of their 
usefulness or perceived usefulness to us but whether we have 
a right to use them at all. She provides 101 ways that ordinary 
individuals can stop using animals. Each chapter is headed by 
quotes from celebrities and contains specific suggestions, from 
becoming a vegetarian to avoiding the products of companies 
that use animals in their product testing. 
 Nussbaum, Martha C.  Frontiers of Justice: Disability, Nationality, 
Species Membership. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard 
University Press, 2006. 
 In a chapter titled “Beyond Compassion and Humanity,” Nuss-
baum discusses the ideas of the Greco-Romans, the Stoics, and 
world religions, as well as of the philosopher Immanuel Kant, 
concerning the differences between animals and humans. She 
 provides a detailed discussion of utilitarianism, focusing on 
consequentialism (the belief that the right act promotes the best 
overall outcome) and sum-ranking (i.e., how to aggregate con-
sequences across lives) and discusses the views of Bentham and 
Singer. Finally, she suggests how humans should evaluate the 
capabilities of animals and the effect this should have on our 
 interactions with them. 
 Regan, Tom.  Animal Sacrifices: Religious Perspectives on the Use of 
Animals in Science. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1987. 
 Regan presents an overview of historical and modern Christian, 
Jewish, Moslem, and Hindu thought on the use of animals in sci-
ence. 
 Regan, Tom.  The Case for Animal Rights. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 2004 (originally published, 1994). 
 The preface of the current book responds to the critics of the 
1994 edition. Regan develops a cumulative argument for ani-

Resources 251
mal consciousness and the complexity of awareness in animals. 
He critiques rational egoism, contractarianism, the belief that 
 humanity is an end in itself, and hedonistic and preference utili-
tarianism. Regan uses the principles of justice and equality to 
develop a theory of moral rights for humans and animals, which 
he bases on the inherent value of individuals that are subjects of 
life. Regan believes that vegetarianism is morally obligatory. 
 Regan, Tom, and Singer, Peter (Eds.).  Animal Rights and Human 
Obligations. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1976. 
 This book contains a set of readings on animal rights and is 
intended for use in college-level courses in ethics and humani-
ties. The authors of the readings range from Aristotle to Henry 
S. Salt to Peter Singer and Richard Ryder. 
 Rood, Ronald.  Animals Nobody Loves. Brattleboro, VT: Stephen 
Greene Press, 1971. 
 Rood describes 12 animals or groups of animals that many people 
do not like. They include the wolf, rat, flea, mosquito, octopus, 
bat, snake, spider, vulture, pig, eel, and coyote. He suggests that 
this attitude is based on the way the animal looks or acts. 
 Ryder, Richard D.  Animal Revolution: Changing Attitudes towards 
Speciesism. Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell, 1989. 
 Ryder, who coined the term “speciesism,” presents a histori-
cal analysis (focusing on Britain) of the changing relationship 
 between humans and nonhumans (sentients). He believes that 
when we place humans in opposition to animals, it is an expres-
sion of prejudice, since humans are animals. Modern animal rights 
ideology seeks to conquer suffering and to protect nonhuman life 
universally. He believes that the conclusion that it is illogical and 
unjust to discriminate on the basis of species arose spontaneously 
in many people in the 1960s and 1970s. He argues that our primi-
tive ancestors depended on other sentients for food, clothing, 
and tools but that, because modern people have alternate sources 
of food, clothing, and power, they no longer need to depend on 
other sentients for these items. 
 The central tenet of the book is that species alone is not a valid 
criterion for cruel discrimination, any more than race or sex is. 

252 Animal Rights
Like race or sex, the term “species” denotes physical and other 
differences that do not nullify the basic similarity of species, 
their capacity to suffer. This capacity exists because all vertebrate 
classes possess biochemical substances (e.g., endorphins) that are 
known to mediate pain. We use emotive words, such as “pest” 
and “vermin,” to stifle compassion toward other species. Modern 
techniques of molecular biology allow the introduction of human 
genes into nonhuman species, such as the cancer-prone mouse 
that was recently patented. Ryder seems to be asking how many 
human genes are required to make a creature human in the eyes 
of the law. 
 Salt, Henry S.  Animals ’  Rights: Considered in Relation to Social Prog-
ress. Clarks Summit, PA: Society for Animal Rights, 1980. 
 This is a reprint of a book that was originally published in 1892. 
Salt wrote more than 40 books dealing with abuses in schools, 
prisons, and other sites. Although not well known himself, he in-
fluenced friends, such as George Bernard Shaw and Gandhi. Salt 
believed that animals have a fundamental right to live a natural 
life, which permits individual development. He asserts that the 
idea that animals are radically different from humans or that 
animals have no soul or emotional life is wrong and argues that 
avoidable infliction of pain or suffering is morally wrong. 
 Sebeck, Thomas A., and Rosenthal, Robert (Eds.).  The Clever Hans 
Phenomenon: Communication with Horses, Whales, Apes, and People. 
New York: New York Academy of Science, 1981. 
 Clever Hans was a horse that lived in Berlin, Germany, in the early 
part of the 20th century. He belonged to a retired schoolteacher, 
Wilhelm von Osten, who believed that animals could be taught 
to think, talk, and calculate if instructed by the right method. The 
method, invented by von Osten, was to assign a number to each 
letter of the alphabet. The association between the number and the 
letter was learned by the trainer writing the number on a black-
board. The horse used its front hoof to tap out numbers. Eventu-
ally, the horse learned to combine letters into words and words 
into sentences and could also add, subtract, multiply, divide, and 
solve problems of musical harmony. But, careful experiments by 
Oskar Pfungst, of the Psychological Institute of the University of 
Berlin, strongly suggest that Clever Hans could not add, subtract, 
or do any of the other feats credited to him. Pfungst suggested that 

Resources 253
Clever Hans was a careful observer and responded to very small, 
subtle, and probably unconscious movements by von Osten when 
the correct number of knocks had been reached. 
 Sebeck and Rosenthal suggest that the story of Clever Hans 
should provide a major lesson about the subtlety of communica-
tion, witting or unwitting, between members of different  species. 
Further, they and the other authors whose work appears in this 
book suggest that many modern  thinking  animals, such as dol-
phins and chimpanzees, may be very subtle examples of the 
Clever Hans phenomena. 
 Singer, Peter.  Animal Liberation: A New Ethics for Our Treatment of 
Animals . New York: Harper Collins, 2001. 
 This is a revised edition of the original edition, which was pub-
lished in 1975.  Animal Liberation  has been called the bible of the 
animal rights movement. Singer’s basic moral postulate is that 
equal consideration of interests should not be arbitrarily limited 
to relations with members of our own species. He maintains that 
humans have ruthlessly and cruelly exploited animals and in-
flicted needless suffering on them and that this must be stopped. 
Singer proposes to think through the question of how we ought 
to treat nonhuman animals and to expose the prejudices that lie 
behind our present attitudes and behavior. Liberation movements 
have demanded an end to prejudice and discrimination based on 
arbitrary characteristics, such as race or sex; Singer argues that 
liberation movements have also forced us to expand our moral 
horizons and to view practices that were previously regarded as 
natural and inevitable as the result of unjustifiable prejudice. Fur-
ther, he argues that since animals cannot speak for themselves, it 
is our duty to speak for them. He reasons that the very use of the 
word “animal” to mean “animals other than human beings” sets 
humans apart from other animals and implies that humans are 
not animals. 
 Singer, Peter (Ed.).  In Defense of Animals. New York: Wiley, 2006. 
 This book includes a series of essays that attempt to define the 
animal liberation movement by activists in Europe, the United 
States, and Australia. The animal liberation movement is rela-
tively new, a product of the 1970s. It is distinct from more tradi-
tional animal welfare movements, most of which were started in 

254 Animal Rights
the 19th century and which sought to protect animals only when 
no serious human interest was at stake. In the event of conflict, 
the animals’ interests were to be sacrificed to our own. Modern 
animal liberationists challenge this notion. They argue that mem-
bership in the human species is not morally relevant and that 
when humans override animals’ interests to further their own, it 
is an example of species-selfishness, or speciesism. 
 Singer argues that modern Western views of animals arise from an-
cient Greece, where Aristotle, for example, believed that there is a 
hierarchy in nature in which those with less reasoning ability exist 
for the sake of those with greater reasoning ability. In other words, 
plants exist for animals, animals exist for humans, and so on. The 
other wellspring of modern thought is the Judeo-Christian view 
of animals as expressed in the first few chapters of Genesis, where 
humans are made in the image of God and man is given dominion 
over animals. Again, the animal liberationists condemn these ideas 
as examples of speciesism. Further, they argue that when animals 
and humans have similar interests, such as avoiding physical pain, 
those interests must be given equal respect. 
 Young, Thomas.  An Essay on Humanity to Animals. New York: 
Continuum International Publishing Group, 2003. 
 Originally published in 1798, Young’s book argues that animals 
are capable of pleasure and pain and that cruelty is against God’s 
will. Young opposes animal experimentation “only to gratify curi-
osity” and argues that a morally sensitive person should not walk 
on worms or snails and should help flies in distress. 
 Cetacea: The Whales and Dolphins 
 Lilly, John Cunningham.  Man and Dolphin. Pyramid Books, 1965. 
 Dolphins produce a wide variety of complex sounds. Lilly de-
scribes a series of experiments in which he and his colleagues at-
tempted to develop meaningful communication between a human 
and a nonhuman intelligence, the bottlenose dolphin ( Torsions 
truncates).  Lilly chose the dolphin because it is approximately 
the same size as a human and because its brain weighs approxi-
mately 1,700 grams (the average human brain is approximately 
1,450 grams). In many ways this work is far more daunting than 
attempts to communicate with chimpanzees (see, for example, 

Resources 255
the Kellogg and Linden citations in the section on primates). This 
is because we have a good deal of common life experience with 
large primates. But, a dolphin’s life experience is very different! 
 Lilly, John Cunningham.  The Mind of the Dolphin: A Nonhuman In-
telligence . New York: Avon, 1973. 
 Lilly describes additional experiments in his attempt to establish 
meaningful communication between humans and dolphins. On 
the basis of his work with dolphins, Lilly believes that creatures 
with a brain above a certain size (e.g., whales, dolphins) should be 
considered “equal” to humans. 
 Domestication 
 The process of animal domestication (that is, the adapting or tam-
ing of an animal to live and breed in intimate association with and 
to the advantage of humans) began about 18,000 years ago, dur-
ing the Stone Age. Neolithic people were undoubtedly interested 
in a general-utility animal, one that could serve equally well for 
carrying loads, for hunting, and, if the need arose, for food. There-
fore, they chose hoofed vertebrates, because they were strong and 
durable and provided a large amount of meat. This included vari-
ous species and breeds of cattle, sheep, and pigs, supplemented 
in some localities by goats, reindeer, and rabbits. Birds, such as 
chickens, ducks, and geese, as well as fish, such as carp or catfish, 
also supply substantial amounts of meat. Mammals also provide 
wool (sheep, goats) and hides (cattle) to make clothing and shelter 
for humans. 
 It is estimated that of the more than 700,000 species of insects, 
only the honeybee, the silkworm, and two species of scale insects 
(used to produce lac, which is used to make shellac, and cochi-
neal, a dye) have been quasi-domesticated. Although the honey 
and beeswax that bees produce are important products, the bee’s 
most important contribution to humans’ wellbeing is as a pollina-
tor. Indeed, some species of food and decorative plants could not 
exist without bees. 
 Clutton-Brock, Juliet.  A Natural History of Domesticated Mammals. 
Austin: University of Texas Press, 1989. 
 Clutton-Brock describes the way humans have manipulated 
and changed mammals, from about 10,000 years ago until the 

256 Animal Rights
Roman Empire, when the common domestic mammals were well 
established as discrete breeding populations that were isolated 
from their wild parent species. 
 Humans, unlike other living primates, evolved as carnivorous 
predators. Therefore, early humans had to depend on their mental 
and physical prowess to hunt and kill other animals. Later, they 
learned to domesticate animals, which began to change as a result 
of artificial selection by humans, rather than as in response to en-
vironmental, climatic, or other conditions and reproductive isola-
tion. Humans began keeping wolves during the last Ice Age, more 
than 125,000 years ago. Most mammals can be tamed if they are 
taken from their mothers early in life and reared by a human. An 
animal’s relative tameness as an adult depends on the species’ 
innate social patterns, that is, is it solitary (cats, except for the 
African lion) or social (wolf) in its way of life? 
 Clutton-Brock divides domestic animals into four major catego-
ries: (1) man-made animals (animals that have been inbred and 
modified), which include dogs, sheep, goats, cattle, pigs, as well as 
horses, asses, and mules; (2) exploited captives, which include cats, 
elephants, camels and llamas, reindeer, and Asiatic cattle; (3) small 
mammals, which include rabbits and ferrets, as well as rodents 
and carnivores that are exploited for their fur; and (4) animals that 
are used in game ranching, such as deer and bovids. She discusses 
the process of domestication for each group and describes the un-
gulates that were exploited by pre-Neolithic humans. 
 Clutton-Brock, Juliet (Ed.).  The Walking Larder: Patterns of Domesti-
cation, Pastoralism, and Predation. London: Unwin Hyman, 1989. 
 Various authors describe the manifold relationships between 
 humans and animals, both in the past and in the present, and how 
these relationships affect the process of domestication. Early hu-
mans were constantly on the move, trying to expand their territory 
and find new resources. These early humans, like modern humans, 
needed a source of protein. They found it in the wild animals that 
they followed and hunted, as well as in domestic animals that they 
drove along in their travels and which they used as a store of meat 
on the hoof, that is, as livestock. The book also describes the devel-
opment of pastoralism (how humans became shepherds and herds-
men) in Europe, Asia, and Africa and discusses the effects of human 

Resources 257
predation on shellfish, fish, and birds and the impact of predators 
on humans, who are both competitors and potential prey. 
 Zeder, Melinda A., Daniel G. Bradley, Eve Emshwiller, and Bruce 
D. Smith (Eds.).  Documenting Domestication: New Genetic and Ar-
chaeological Paradigms. University of California Press, 2006. 
 Our primitive ancestors shifted from hunting and gathering to 
farming. In the process, they domesticated a number of plants, 
such as maize (corn), and animals such as sheep, goats, and pigs. 
In the past, our knowledge of the relationship between humans 
and these domesticated species depended on the archeological 
record (e.g., seeds or animal bones found around human habita-
tions). Modern DNA techniques, such as analysis of mitochon-
drial DNA, have allowed researchers to document changes that 
have occurred to plants and animals over time. 
 Entertainment 
 The first time an animal was used to amuse and entertain a human 
being predates written history. The number of species of animals 
used by the various components of the entertainment industry 
varies. The rodeo industry typically uses just two species: horses 
and cattle. The circus typically uses horses, elephants, large wild 
cats, domestic dogs, and, more rarely, bears, primates (especially 
chimpanzees), seals and sea lions, and birds (especially parrots 
and macaws). The motion picture and television industries use a 
wide variety of species of domestic and wild animals. Public and 
private zoos and aquaria generally have the largest number of 
species of wild animals. 
 Circus 
 The one-ring circus has been in existence for at least 2,500 years. 
The Romans called them  circulators.  They consisted of troupes of 
jugglers and mountebanks (a con artist, who sells by deception, 
often quack medicines) who made their living by performing 
feats of acrobatics and magic and by exhibiting trained animals. 
The modern circus was born in the 1770s in Great Britain; acro-
bats, clowns, and trained animals did not appear until the end of 
the 18th century. Animals have been a popular part of the circus 
tradition for centuries, and it is likely that as long as the circus 
 exists, animals will be a part of it. 

258 Animal Rights
 Bouissae, Paul.  Circus and Culture: A Semiotic Approach. Blooming-
ton: Indiana University Press, 1976. 
 In this classic, Bouissae provides a brief history of the circus and 
then describes the culture of the circus. He devotes several chap-
ters to the interrelationship between animals and their trainers. 
He describes how trainers train a horse to perform in a standard 
horse act. The process is similar to that of training any perform-
ing animal. The first step is to establish rapport with the animal. 
This is done by presenting the animal with pleasurable rewards 
such as food (carrots, candy) and scratching or patting the an-
imal while speaking in a pleasant voice. Incorrect behavior is 
punished with light blows and a disapproving voice. Gradu-
ally, the animal learns to recognize the trainer and treats him 
with attachment and respect, in much the same manner that he 
would treat a higher-ranking member of his own species. The 
animal gradually learns to respond to the trainer’s hand and 
body signals. The balancing of rewards and punishment is a 
delicate task. The goal is not to break the animal’s spirit but to 
teach him to remain near the trainer and follow his movements. 
For example, horses can be trained to begin and stop pawing the 
ground when cued by very subtle movements on the part of the 
trainer. These movements, which should be subtle enough that 
an observer is unaware of them, are what circus trainers call the 
 keys to training. 
 Films and Television 
 Animals have been part of the motion picture industry since its 
beginnings. The first commercial movie was David Wark Grif-
fith’s  The Great Train Robbery  (1903), which was a western, or cow-
boy movie, that used horses. Some animals were stars in their 
own right, far more famous than their trainers or, in some cases, 
even their human costars. Many human costars complained about 
being upstaged by their animal costars. Lassie (reportedly several 
generations of male collies) and Rin Tin Tin were well-known dog 
stars. Trigger and Champion, both horses, had almost as much 
name recognition as their human owners, Roy Rogers and Gene 
Autry. 
 In the early days, some trainers used fear and violence to 
control an animal’s behavior. These have been replaced by more 
rationale training methods based on the method of successive 
 approximations and positive reinforcement. 

Resources 259
 Helfer, Ralph.  The Beauty and the Beast: Tales of Hollywood’s Wild 
Animal Stars . New York: Harper Paperbacks, 2007. 
 Helfer is an animal trainer who provides insight into the training 
methods he uses. He uses positive reinforcement rather than fear 
to train his animals 
 Rodeos 
 Rodeo is a popular sport in the United States and Canada. The 
Professional Rodeo Cowboys Association and the International 
Rodeo Association together sanction more than 1,000 annual 
rodeos that are attended by more than 14 million paying spec-
tators. Many communities and organizations, such as the 4-H, 
Little Britches, and Girls Rodeo Association, also sponsor rodeos 
throughout the spring, summer, and fall. 
 Rodeo traces its origin back to two diverse sources. The first is 
the sports and contests of the early working cowboys that they pur-
sued for their own amusement. The second is the uniquely Ameri-
can outdoor entertainment, the Wild West Show, which was started 
by William Frederick (“Buffalo Bill”) Cody in the summer of 1882 
in North Platte, Nebraska. This show included performances called 
“Cowboy Fun,” which included attempts to ride wild broncos 
and mules, steer wrestling, and other skills of the range. In con-
trast to their modern counterparts, these early cowboys were paid 
performers. Modern rodeo cowboys get paid only if they win. 
 Lawrence, Elizabeth A. Rodeo : An Anthropologist Looks at the Wild 
and the Tame. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982. 
 Modern professional rodeo is almost totally a man’s world. Women 
are typically not allowed to participate as contestants or officials. 
The typical rodeo is divided into rough-stock (bronco riding, bare-
back bronco, riding and bull riding) and timed events (calf roping, 
steer wrestling, team roping, and steer roping). The only event in 
the standard rodeo that women are allowed to enter is the barrel 
race. As the name implies, this is a timed event, where the horse 
races around a clover-leaf pattern around a series of barrels and 
then races out of the arena in the shortest amount of time possible. 
 Farm Animals 
 Prior to World War II, there were about 6 million farms in the 
United States covering approximately 1,061 million areas of 

260 Animal Rights
farmland. The amount of farmland has remained relatively con-
stant, but the number of farms has dropped steadily. As the costs 
of farm labor increased, there was an increased dependence on 
mechanization, including the adoption of intensive industrialized 
husbandry methods and techniques for raising cattle, pigs, and 
poultry. 
 Coats, C. Davis, and Michael W. Fox.  Old MacDonald ’ s Factory 
Farm: The Myth of the Traditional Farm and the Shocking Truth about 
Animal Suffering in Today’s Agribusiness. New York: Continuum 
International, 1989. 
 In modern times, Old MacDonald’s farm, with a few animals frol-
icking in a field, does not really exist. Coats and Fox discuss how 
modern, business-oriented farms use mass-production techniques 
to produce high volumes of standardized products, whether beef, 
milk, or pork. 
 Harrison, Ruth.  Animal Machines: The New Factory Farming Indus-
try. New York: Ballantine Books, 1966. 
 In this classic book, Harrison describes modern mechanized fac-
tory farming as it is applied to broiler chickens, laying chickens, 
and veal calves, as well as to rabbits and pigs, in Great Britain. 
She argues that “more does not always mean better.” Farmers 
add small amounts of antibiotics, such as penicillin, aureomycin, 
or terramycin, and/or synthetic estrogens to the feed of animals 
to improve growth rate. But the use of antibiotics will ultimately 
lead to the development of strains of bacteria that are resistant to 
these antibiotics, and the synthetic estrogens are contaminating 
the meat of these animals. 
 Rollin, Bernard E.  Farm Animal Welfare: Social, Bioethical, and 
 Research Issues . New York: Wiley-Blackwell, 2003. 
 Rollin discusses common practices in the beef, swine, dairy, veal, 
and poultry industries. For example, branding of cattle with a hot 
branding iron goes back more than 4,000 years. It creates a third-
degree burn, which is painful. Alternate procedures of marking 
animals include freeze branding, which is apparently not painful; 
ear tags; and implantation of microchips. 
 Westendorf, Michael L.  Food Waste to Animal Feed. New York: 
Wiley-Blackwell, 2000. 

Resources 261
 Animals grown in concentrated animal feeding operations are 
often fed grains and other foodstuffs that could be utilized by hu-
mans. Westendorf suggests that human waste (garbage) that is 
high in nutrient value and fat content could be used as animal 
feed, rather than ending in a land fill. 
 Zayan, Rene (Ed.).  Social Space for Domestic Animals. New York: 
Springer, 1985. 
 This book presents the proceedings of a seminar that focused on 
the spatial needs of laying hens in battery cages, as well as the 
spatial needs of pigs, dairy cattle, and sheep. This book focuses on 
the relationship between spatial measures (group size and floor 
space/animal) and social behavior. 
 Zayan, Rene, and Robert Dantzer (Eds.).  Social Stress in Domestic 
Animals. New York: Springer. 1990. 
 The essays in this volume deal with density and its impact on 
aggression, productivity, and health. 
 Fur Farming and Trapping 
 Fur farmers maintain that natural fur is a green alternative be-
cause it is an infinitely renewable, biodegradable natural fiber, 
whereas synthetic fibers are made from nonrenewable resources. 
More than 4.5 million mink per year are raised on more than 2,000 
family-owned fur farms. In addition to using the fur for clothing, 
modern industry uses the fat between the skin and the carcass to 
make mink oil, which in turn is used to make hypoallergenic cos-
metics and conditioners for fine leather. The mink carcass is sold 
to feed companies, which combine it with other meat, fish, and 
poultry products to make feed for pets and livestock. 
 Harding, A. R.  Fur Farming. Columbus, OH: Fur Fish Game, 1979. 
 Harding provides details about fur farming, including what type 
of animals are farmed and how they are housed and fed. 
 Spencer, Jim.  Guide to Trapping. Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole 
Books, 2007. 
 Spencer provides a species-by-species review of trapping tech-
niques for animals such as raccoon, muskrat, mink, otter, beaver, 
coyote, gray fox, red fox, bobcat, skunk, and opossum. 

262 Animal Rights
 Horse Racing 
 Horse racing is undoubtedly one of the oldest diversions of humans, 
probably starting soon after the domestication of horses. Kikkuli, an 
expert in the employ of a Hittite king, may have written the first trea-
tise dealing with the breeding and training of horses in about 1500 
B .C.E.  The 23rd Olympiad (about 624  B.C.E.) probably included races 
involving mounted horses. The Jockey Club, which exercises con-
trol over racing and breeding in England, was formed around 1750. 
The stallions and mares that provided the foundation for  American 
thoroughbred breeding were imported during the 1700s. 
 Horse racing actually consists of three rather distinct sports. In 
thoroughbred racing, the jockey is mounted on the horse’s back, and 
the horse races around an oval track. The track is dirt and usually 
about a mile in length. In steeplechasing, a jockey is mounted on the 
horse’s back and the horse must run a complex course that contains a 
variety of obstacles that the horse must jump over. The steeplechase 
race course can contain as many as 30 jumps and tends to be longer 
than the thoroughbred race course. In harness racing, the driver sits 
in a sulky, which is a two-wheeled vehicle of the lightest possible 
construction, with two pneumatic tires. Most harness racetracks are 
about one-half mile long. The horses are trained to trot or pace. 
 Mooney, Bill, and George Ennor.  Complete Encyclopedia of Horse 
Racing: Illustrated Guide to the World of the Thoroughbred . London: 
Carlton, 2006. 
 This book provides an insightful look at horse racing from its be-
ginnings to the present and provides a behind-the-scenes look at 
the horses and the people who work with them. 
 Hunting and Fishing 
 Our primitive ancestors, as early as the Cro-Magnon period, were 
hunters, and they apparently held the animals they hunted in al-
most mystical regard. The earliest paintings, such as those in the 
caves of Lascaux in the Dordogne region of France, which were 
made in late Paleolithic times, depicted animals such as bulls, 
horses, and deer. The earliest engravings, reliefs, and sculptures 
were also of animal subjects. Archaeologists believe that these 
paintings and other objects were used in magico-religious rites 
bound up in the hunting culture. In many parts of the world 
today, people still hunt and fish in order to survive. 

Resources 263
 In the industrialized countries, hunting and fishing are not 
typically required for survival but are pursued as sports. Many 
modern sportsmen claim to have the same regard for the animals 
they hunt that our primitive ancestors did. They argue that no 
species of animal has become extinct because of sport hunting or 
fishing. Game species and their habitats are often better protected 
than nongame species because of the work of sportsmen. They also 
point out that, with or without the presence of sportsmen, the fate 
of most wild animals is death by starvation, disease, or predation. 
 It was Theodore Roosevelt, an ardent sportsman, who made 
conservation a household word. Conservation, for Roosevelt and 
others of his generation, was a reform movement that used politi-
cal and legal methods to ensure the wise use of limited resources. 
The Boone and Crockett Club, started by Roosevelt and other 
prominent sportsmen in 1887, was the first private organization 
to deal with conservation issues on a national scale. The Sierra 
Club, started by John Muir, represents the opposite viewpoint. 
Countless books and magazine articles have been written about 
hunting and fishing. 
 McIntyre, Thomas.  The Way of the Hunter: The Art and the Spirit of 
Modern Hunting. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1988. 
 Humans in the developed (industrialized) world do not have to 
hunt to survive or to put food on their table. But, for some, the 
pursuit of animals in the wild in order to kill them and consume 
their flesh provides a connection to our primitive ancestors. 
 Reiger, John F.  American Sportsmen and the Origins of Conservation . 
Corvallis: Oregon State University Press, 2000. 
 Reiger presents a historical review of the conservation movement 
and its early leaders, such as Theodore Roosevelt. These hunters 
held a waste-not want-not ethic that was shaped by organizations 
like the Boone and Crockett Club and publications like  Field and 
Stream  and  American Sportsman . These conservationists helped 
fund our system of national parks. 
 Pets 
 Dogs were domesticated by Neolithic man about 18,000 years ago 
and were used to help humans hunt, as draft animals, to help con-
trol herds of hoofed stock, and, when necessary, for food. They 

264 Animal Rights
also provided early and modern humans with companionship. 
More recently, in the 19th and 20th centuries, a variety of species 
of small mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and fish have been 
quasi-domesticated and kept as pets. 
 Anchel, Marjorie (Ed.).  Overpopulation of Cats and Dogs: Causes, 
Effects, and Prevention. New York: Fordham University Press, 
1990. 
 This book presents the proceedings of a conference sponsored by 
the New York Humane Association. It provides an overview of the 
problems associated with surplus animals, especially unwanted cats 
and dogs, and possible solutions to help resolve them, such as neu-
tering (castration or spaying) and euthanasia. It also discusses who 
is responsible for pet overpopulation, how animals are controlled 
in rural, urban, and metropolitan areas, and the role of animal shel-
ters and pounds. It also stresses the importance of education and 
appropriate legislation in preventing pet overpopulation. 
 Anderson, P. Elizabeth.  The Powerful Bond between People and Pets: 
Our Boundless Connections to Companion Animals. Westport, CT: 
Praeger, 2008. 
 Anderson provides an insightful analysis of the relation-
ship between humans and companion animals. She discusses 
studies that demonstrate that people who have a companion, 
human or animal, generally feel better and live longer. Because 
of the unconditional, nonjudgmental love displayed by these 
animals, they often have a therapeutic effect on their human 
owners. 
 Beck, Alan M.  The Ecology of Stray Dogs: A Study of Free-Ranging 
Urban Animals . West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press. 
2002. 
 Unwanted dogs are often just abandoned at the curb to fend for 
themselves. These dogs often form small packs and tend to be 
active at night and are cautious of humans. 
 Primates 
 Carl von Linne (better known by the Latinized version of his 
name, Linnaeus), the great classifier, placed the human species, 

Resources 265
which he named Homo sapiens ( Man, wise ), in the same order as 
the monkeys and apes. He named this order Primates; the order 
consists of 11 families, 60 genera, and approximately 191 species. 
 Recent research suggests that the African apes (that is, the goril-
las and chimpanzees) and humans split off from a common ancestor 
about 4 million years ago. Modern geneticists tell us that humans and 
chimpanzees share in common 99 percent of their genes. 
 Recently, reports of remarkably human-like behaviors such 
as fashioning and using simple tools, learning and even invent-
ing new signs in the American Sign Language, and learning to 
manipulate tokens in a totally synthetic language suggest that we 
might have to re-evaluate our ethical and moral stand with regard 
to chimpanzees and the other great apes. 
 The Food Security Act of 1985, Subtitle F, Animal Welfare 
(Public Law 99–198, 99 Stat. 1645) amends the Animal Welfare Act 
of 1966 and extends the minimum standard of care to provide a 
physical environment that is adequate to promote the psychologi-
cal wellbeing of primates. 
 Fossey, Dian.  Gorillas in the Mist. Boston: Mariner Books, 2000. 
 Fossey founded the Karisoke Research Center, in Rwanda, to 
study mountain gorillas in 1967. In this book, she describes her 
studies at the Center. Fossey, who was murdered on December 26, 
1985, strongly opposed the poaching and capturing of gorillas for 
zoos or scientific exploitation. 
 Goodall, Jane.  Through a Window: My Thirty Years with the Chim-
panzees of Gombe . Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1990. 
 Goodall has had a unique life experience. She has spent most of 
her adult life studying and living with chimpanzees in their natu-
ral habitat, treated as almost one of their number. She eloquently 
makes the point that chimpanzees are more like us than any other 
living creature. This book reads like a novel describing the daily 
life of the chimpanzees at the Gombe Research Station. 
 Goodall, Jane, and Hugo Von Lawick (photographer).  In the 
Shadow of Man. Boston: Mariner Books, 2000. 
 Goodall was one of the first humans to spend a significant amount 
of time observing chimpanzees in their natural habitat. She pro-
vides one of the first descriptions, if not the first, of tool making 
and use by chimpanzees. She describes how a chimpanzee strips 

266 Animal Rights
the leaves off a small branch and inserts the stick into a termite 
mound to extract termites. Tool making and language (see Liden, 
this section) are two hallmarks of  humanness,  the characteristics 
that separate humans from the rest of the animals. 
 Kellogg, W. N., and L. A. Kellogg.  The Ape and the Child. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1933. 
 In one of the first attempts to establish meaningful communication 
between a chimpanzee and a human, the Kelloggs took a seven-and-
one-half-month old female chimpanzee, Gua, from its mother and 
raised it alongside their own nine-month-old son, Donald. They com-
pare and contrast the growth and development of the two infants. 
 Kirkwood, James K., and Katherine Stathatos.  Biology, Rearing, and 
Care of Young Primates.  Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992. 
 In the past, nonhuman primates used in research, for display in 
zoos, or for pets were captured from their natural habitats. This is 
no longer possible because many nonhuman primates, including 
all of the great apes, are considered endangered species. Therefore, 
it is vital that we develop the methods and procedures needed to 
breed and maintain primates in captivity. This is especially true 
since it is likely that populations of many species of primates, 
 especially the great apes, will continue to decrease in their natural 
habitat because of poaching and habitat destruction. It is vital that 
we maintain sufficient numbers of selected primates to maintain 
genetic diversity for the future. 
 Kirkwood and Stathatos provide basic information about the ap-
propriate sex ratio, gestation period, breeding season, and longev-
ity of 18 species of primates, including representatives of 9 of the 11 
primate families. It also describes details on infant management, ac-
commodation, and how to reintegrate artificially reared infants into 
peer or family groups. It also provides important information about 
energy intake throughout the period of growth and development. 
 Linden, Eugene.  Apes, Men, and Language. New York: Penguin, 
1981. 
 Although chimpanzees are relatively close relatives of human 
beings, their vocal tract is relatively short and poorly controlled. 
Therefore, it is unlikely that they can produce speech. 

Resources 267
 Linden provides a popular overview of the work of Drs. R. Allen 
and Beatrice Gardner, who attempted to teach a chimpanzee, 
named Washoe, American Sign Language, or Ameslan. Ameslan 
is a language developed to help deaf people communicate. It is 
based on a series of hand and arm gestures that signify words 
or concepts. Ameslan gestures can be supplemented with finger 
spelling to convey ideas for which there are no gestures. While 
their claim is still controversial, the Gardners and their associ-
ate, Dr. Roger Fouts, assert that Washoe used Ameslan in a very 
human-like manner. 
 Linden also provides an overview of the work of Dr. David Prem-
ack and the chimpanzee Sarah. The language that Sarah is learning 
is very different from Ameslan. It consists of a series of arbitrarily 
shaped and colored plastic tokens. The tokens represent specific 
concepts, and Premack and Sarah communicate by arranging 
these tokens into messages written from top to bottom. 
 Novak, Melinda A., and Andrew J. Petto (Eds.).  Through the Look-
ing Class: Issues of Psychological Well-Being in Captive Nonhuman 
Primates. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 
1991. 
 The only rational reason for using nonhuman primates as surro-
gates for humans in biomedical or psychological research is that 
they resemble humans so closely. Chimpanzees, for example, and 
humans share 99 percent of their genetic material. 
 Clearly, an unhealthy primate, whether physically or psychologi-
cally unhealthy, is not an accurate model of humans. Therefore, 
scientists and clinicians have sought methods and procedures to 
maintain the physical and psychological health of the primates in 
their charge long before the mandates outlined in the 1985 amend-
ments to the Animal Welfare Act of 1966 (Food Security Act of 
1985, Subtitle F, Animal Welfare (Public Law 99–198, 99 Stat. 1645, 
see also chapter 3). 
 This book describes how to evaluate psychological wellbeing in 
nonhuman primates and describes some of the methods and pro-
cedures that can be used to promote their psychological health. It 
also provides a brief overview of public (nonscientist) perceptions 
of primate research. 

268 Animal Rights
 Reynolds, Vernon.  The Apes: The Gorilla, Chimpanzee, Orangutan, and 
Gibbon: Their History and Their World . Boston: E. P. Dutton, 1967. 
 In this classic, Reynolds provides an excellent introduction to the 
behavior and natural life of the great apes, that is, chimpanzees, 
gorillas, gibbons, and orangutans. He describes the circumstances 
under which humans first encountered these species. The natural 
environment of each species and their adaptations to their natural en-
vironment are described. All of the great apes are considered endan-
gered species in their natural habitats. Hunting or trapping these 
species has been illegal for several decades, but poaching is still a 
problem, as is the loss of habitat because of human development. 
 Because of their similarity to humans, great apes have been used 
as surrogates for humans in medical and psychological experi-
ments. The great apes, and particularly the chimpanzee, have 
made invaluable contributions to the study of the causes of vari-
ous diseases, including malaria, poliomyelitis, diphtheria, syphilis, 
whooping cough, heart disease, and cancer, and to the develop-
ment of methods to prevent or cure these ills. In the early 1960s, 
two chimpanzees, Ham and Enos, made important space flights 
that demonstrated that launching, acceleration, weightlessness, 
and reentry were safe for human beings. These early chimpanzee 
flights allowed manned space flight to develop, allowed humans 
to set foot on the moon, and will (it is hoped) allow us to visit the 
other planets in our solar system and ultimately to reach the stars. 
 Schaller, George B.  The Year of the Gorilla. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1997. 
 Schaller provides an overview of the scientific literature deal-
ing with the ecology and behavior of the mountain gorilla and 
supplements this information with his own observations of 
mountain gorillas in their native habitat. 
 Yerkes, Robert M.  Chimpanzees: A Laboratory Colony. New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 1943. 
 Yerkes was one of the pioneers in the study of the behavior of 
nonhuman primates. Most of his work focused on the study of 
the abilities of the chimpanzee. This book provides an overview 
of his work and describes the methods he and his colleagues used 
to set up one of the first laboratory colonies, if not the first, for the 
breeding and study of nonhuman primates. 

Resources 269
 Vegetarianism 
 Many animal rights activists argue that animals have an equal 
natural right to life and that vegetarianism is therefore morally 
obligatory. 
 Davis, Brenda, and Melina Vesanto.  Becoming Vegan: The Complete 
Guide to Adopting a Plant Based Diet.  Summertown, TN: Book Pub-
lishing, 2000. 
 This book provides a historical overview of the beginnings of 
the vegan lifestyle and discusses how to achieve that lifestyle by 
avoiding animal products in the diet. 
 Greeley, Alexandra.  The Everything Guide to Being Vegetarian: The 
Advice, Nutrition information, and Recipes You Need to Enjoy a Healthy 
Lifestyle. Cincinnati, OH: Adams Media, 2009. 
 Greeley, a former editor of  Vegetarian Times , provides an over-
view of the vegetarian lifestyle, including how to obtain com-
plete proteins and iron. She also discusses preparation of soy 
based foods. She discusses the difference between vegetarians 
and vegans. 
 Hur, Robin.  Food Reform: Our Desperate Need.  Austin, TX: Heidel-
berg Press, 1975. 
 Hur maintains that the vegan diet, which avoids animal fat and 
protein, sugar, salt, and processed foods, leads to a decrease in 
degenerative diseases. 
 Inglis, Jane.  Some People Don ’ t Eat Meat. n.p.: Oakroyd Press, 
1987. 
 This book is designed to describe the vegetarian lifestyle to pri-
mary and elementary school children. 
 Marcus, Erik.  Vegan: The New Ethics of Eating.  Ithaca, NY: McBooks 
Press, 2000. 
 Marcus provides an overview of the vegan lifestyle, which elimi-
nates all animal products from both the diet and daily life. 
 Perry, Cheryl L., Leslie A. Lytle, and Teresa Jacobs.  The Vegetarian 
Manifesto. Philadelphia, PA: Running Press, 2004. 

270 Animal Rights
 This is a handbook designed for teenagers and young adults who 
want to eliminate meat and fish from their diet. It provides back-
ground on what vegetarian is, describes living in a nonvegetarian 
world, and explains how to maintain good health with adequate 
whole protein and maintain a safe and healthy weight. 
 Robbins, John. The Food Revolution:  How Your Diet Can Help Save 
Your Life and Our World . Newburyport, MA: Conari Press, 2001. 
 Robbins argues becoming a vegetarian helps feed the hungry, pre-
vents cruelty to animals, and enables people to avoid genetically 
modified foods and live longer. 
 Salt, Henry S.  The Logic of Vegetarianism: Essays and Dialogues . n.p.: 
BiblioLife, 2008. 
 In this classic originally published in 1906, Salt provides ar-
guments for vegetarianism and refutes common arguments 
against it. 
 Tryon, Thomas.  The Way to Health, Long Life and Happiness. Lon-
don: Andrew Sowle, 1683. 
 Tryon was born in 1634; in 1657, he decided to avoid eating any 
kind of flesh, confining himself to bread and fruit, to which at a 
later point he added butter and cheese. This is the first book in the 
English language to use the term “rights” in regard to animals. 
Tryon was widely read in both England and America, and Benja-
min Franklin was greatly impressed after reading these books and 
reportedly became a Tryonist for a time. 
 Zoos and Aquaria 
 Menageries have existed since ancient times in Egypt, Rome, and 
China. Modern zoo keeping dates from the founding of the Im-
perial Menagerie at the Schonbrunn Palace in Vienna in 1752. It 
opened to the public in 1765 and is still in operation. The Zoologi-
cal Society of London established its collection in Regents Park 
in 1828. This zoo was one of the first to replace its traditional 
cages with more natural habitats. The first zoological garden 
was established in the United States in Philadelphia in 1874. 
 Today, virtually every major city in the United States has a 
zoological garden, and several cities, such as Chicago and New 

Resources 271
York, have several. In the past, zoological gardens housed one or 
two members of each species in small cages with iron bars across 
the front. Today, these cages are being replaced by larger, more 
natural habitat areas. Recently, drive-through nature parks have 
become popular. In these parks, the humans remain in their car 
and the animals are allowed to roam free. In the United States, 
these parks generally contain exotic hoofed stock and large birds 
(ostrich, emu). 
 Many zoological gardens are attempting to set up breeding 
populations of specific species. Young produced by these breed-
ing populations can help replenish the zoo’s own collection and 
provide animals to other zoos. This breeding program is espe-
cially important for species that are endangered in their natural 
habitat, such as the great apes and the large carnivores. 
 Zimmerman, Alexandra, Mathew Hatchwell, Lesley A. Dickey, 
and Chris West (Eds.).  Zoos in the 21st Century: Catalysts for Conser-
vation? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007. 
 This comprehensive book, which focuses on science-based tech-
niques, provides an insightful discussion of the way zoos and 
aquaria can help maintain threatened and endangered species. 
 Government Publications 
 Animal Welfare Information Center Bulletin 
 The Bulletin is distributed free by the National Agricultural Li-
brary. It is designed to provide current information on all aspects 
of animal welfare to scientists, technicians, administrators, and 
the public. It is available online at http://www.nal.usda.gov/
awic/pubs/bulletin.shtml. 
 Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals 
 The Institute of Laboratory Animal Resources (ILAR) of the Na-
tional Research Council was founded in 1952 to act as a national 
and international clearing resource for compiling and dissemi-
nating information on laboratory animal resources and promot-
ing high-quality and humane care of laboratory animals in the 
United States. The ILAR published the first edition of the  Guide 
for Laboratory Animal Facilities and Care  in 1963. The publication 
was revised in 1965 and 1968. In 1972, it was revised again and 

272 Animal Rights
given its current title; yet another revision was published under 
that title in 1978. The 1996 edition is the most recent version and 
is widely accepted by scientific institutions as the primary refer-
ence on animal care and use. 
 The  Guide  puts the requirements and recommendations of Public 
Law 89–544 (Animal Welfare Act) and its amendments, as well as 
other federal, state, and local laws, regulations, and policies, into 
a practical format that can be used to make day-to-day decisions 
about the care and use of laboratory animals. It is important to 
note that “Nothing in the  Guide  is intended to limit an investiga-
tor’s freedom—indeed obligation—to plan and conduct animal 
experiments in accord with scientific and humane principles.” 
 The  Guide ’s longest chapter deals with laboratory animal hus-
bandry. It discusses space recommendations for laboratory animals 
and covers issues such as opportunities for social interactions, tem-
perature, humidity, ventilation, illumination, noise levels, food, 
bedding, water, sanitation and waste disposal, and vermin control 
(for pests such as cockroaches, flies, wild rodents). A standard for 
veterinary care, such as daily observation of all animals to assess 
their health and welfare and using appropriate methods to prevent, 
control, diagnose, and treat diseases and injuries, is presented. 
Veterinarians are also expected to monitor surgical programs and 
postsurgical care and to guide scientists and other animal users on 
handling, restraint, anesthesia, analgesia, and euthanasia. 
 The requirements of the physical plant, such as appropriate build-
ing materials for floors, walls, and ceilings; the placement of drains; 
the size and placement of doors and windows; and how an aseptic 
surgery should be set up and run are discussed, as are methods for 
controlling hazardous agents, such as chemical carcinogens. Each 
chapter has a detailed bibliography. Three appendices are provided: 
a detailed bibliography of books and journal articles dealing with 
laboratory animal care and use; a description of the professional or-
ganizations that deal with laboratory animals and the organizations 
that certify personnel who work with animals; and a summary of 
the laws that deal with laboratory animals. The  Guide  is available 
online at http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=5140. 
 Public Health Service Policy on Humane Care and Use of Laboratory 
Animals 

Resources 273
 This is a policy statement of the Public Health Service, National In-
stitutes of Health, Office of Protection from Research Risks (OPRR), 
whose goal is to help scientists and other individuals who have 
grants from or contracts with one of the National Institutes of Health 
or another branch of the Public Health Service to implement the 
regulations and recommendations contained in the Animal Welfare 
Act (Public Law 89–544) and its amendments, other federal statutes, 
and the “U.S. Government Principles for the Utilization and Care of 
Vertebrate Animals Used in Testing, Research, and Training,” which 
was developed by the Interagency Research Animal Committee. 
 This policy statement deals primarily with the Institutional Ani-
mal Care and Use Committee (IACUC), focusing on its constitu-
ency and its responsibilities. When a grant proposal or contract 
is submitted to the Public Health Service, it must be accompa-
nied by a verification letter from the IACUC stating that it has 
reviewed the proposal and found that it is in compliance with all 
of the requirements of PL 89-544 and its amendments, as well as 
with other federal statutes dealing with animals and animal use. 
A sample verification letter is provided. 
 The policy can be found online at http://grants.nih.gov/grants/
olaw/references/phspol.htm. 
 Law Compilations and Legal Sources 
 U.S. Code Congressional and Administrative News 
 This is an unofficial, chronological (arranged by congressional 
session) compilation of federal statutes. The text of each statute is 
presented, as well as its legislative history. The legislative history 
includes an opening statement, a statement of the purpose of the 
statute, a summary of the outcome of congressional hearings, and a 
list of the committees that worked on the statute and their reports. 
A chronological record of the actions of the House and the Senate 
with regard to each bill and the passage of each statute is included. 
 U.S. Code. 
 The U.S. Code is the official compilation of law, arranged by topic. 
The sections dealing with animal welfare are found in Title 7, Agri-
culture, Chapter 54, Transportation, Sale, and Handling of Certain 

274 Animal Rights
Animals, Sections 2131–2159. The most recent version is for 2007 
and is available online at http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/
html/uscode07/usc_sup_01_7_10_54.html. 
 U.S. Code Annotated (U.S.C.A.). St. Paul, MN: West. 
 This is a multivolume, unofficial compilation of federal statutes and 
their amendments, arranged by topic. In addition to the text of the 
statute,  U.S.C.A.  presents historical footnotes, annotations to law re-
view articles, and cases construing various statutory provisions. It is 
updated annually by pocket pieces and paperbound advance sheets. 
 Code of Federal Regulations 
 This official, multivolume compilation of federal regulations and 
their amendments as issued by federal agencies is arranged so that 
regulations covering the same topic are printed in the same section 
of the book. Federal regulations are published chronologically in the 
Federal Register and then codified in the  Code of Federal Regulations . 
Federal regulations dealing with animal welfare are found in Title 9, 
Chapter 1, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
of Agriculture, Subchapter A, Animal Welfare. The 2009  revision 
is available online at http://ecfr.gpoaccess.gov/cgi/t/text/text-
(idx?sid=81664c32190028ab4383ef9078a40369&c=ecfr&tpl=/ecfr 
browse/Title09/9tab_02.tpl. 
 Corpus Juris Secundum 
 CJS is a multivolume treatise or commentary on the law. It pro-
vides an analysis of federal, state, and local statutes and regula-
tions, as well as case law (court decisions, both federal and state) 
dealing with a wide variety of issues, including animals and cru-
elty to animals (vol. 3A). 
 Favre, David S., and Murray Loring.  Animal Law. Westport, CT: 
Quorum Books, 1983. 
 Favre and Loring provide a detailed analysis of the humane, anti-
cruelty, and duty-to-provide-care laws, including a comparison of 
individual state statutes. They also discuss the powers and duties 
of Societies for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. Ownership, 
limitations of ownership, bailment, sale, medical care, and recov-
ery for injury by animals are treated in individual chapters with 
detailed bibliographies. 

Resources 275
 Moretti, Daniel S.  Animal Rights and the Law. New York: Oceana, 
1984. 
 This book introduces the reader, in nontechnical language, to the 
subject of people’s legal rights and responsibilities with respect to 
animals. Moretti presents a state-by-state overview of anticruelty 
laws, laws on animal fighting, humane slaughter, and transporta-
tion regulations, including the citations needed to find the official 
text of the law. State and federal wildlife protection laws, with ap-
propriate citations, are also discussed, as are animal trapping laws. 
Moretti also discusses the case of  Edward Taub v. State of Maryland 
(1983) (Silver Springs Monkey Case), which is the first example of 
a scientist being convicted of violating a state’s anticruelty statute 
(Code 1957, 1976 Repl. Vol. 27 § 59); he also discusses how Taub’s 
conviction was overturned on appeal. 
 Congressional Hearings 
 Congress, both the House of Representatives and the Senate, have 
a large number of committees and subcommittees that deal with 
a wide variety of issues. These committees periodically hold hear-
ings about topics pertinent to the committee at which witnesses 
with expertise in the issues under consideration are called to 
testify. These experts may be members of the Executive branch, 
 especially employees of the various Cabinet departments, such as 
the Department of Agriculture and its agencies. Experts who are 
not employed by the government may be academics, attorneys, 
and businesspeople, and others with special knowledge. Much of 
the work of Congress takes place in these committees, including 
drafting of new acts, some of which will become laws. 
 Hearing before the Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. Senate, 
108th Congress, Serial Number J-108–76, May 24, 2004, Animal 
Rights Activism vs. Criminality (Y 4.J 89/2:S HRG.108–764). This 
report is available online at http://purl.access.gpo.gov/GPO/
LPS59196. 
 Senator Orrin Hatch of Utah was the chairman of this commit-
tee. The witnesses called to testify included Jonathan Blum, Yum! 
Brands; William Green, Chiron Corporation; John Lewis, Deputy 
Assistant Director, Counterterrorism Division, Federal Bureau of 
Investigation; Scott McGregor, U.S. Attorney, Eastern District of 

276 Animal Rights
California; and Stuart M. Zola, Director, Yerkes National Primate 
Laboratory. 
 The Committee was investigating fringe animal activists, 
extremists who have resorted to criminal activity to further their 
goals of eliminating all human use of animals. These include 
groups like the Animal Liberation Front (ALF), the Earth Libera-
tion Front (ELF), and Stop Huntingdon Animal Cruelty (SHAC). 
As its name implies, SHAC focuses its efforts on Huntingdon 
Life Sciences, which tests drugs using animals, and any com-
panies that do business with it. SHAC, which is active primar-
ily in Great Britain, uses a pattern of vandalism, arsons, animal 
releases, and harassing telephone calls directed at the staff of 
Huntingdon, as well as the staffs of companies that do business 
with Huntingdon. 
 These organizations target individuals and companies that 
use animals in research and use a variety of tactics, including 
vandalizing and pipe-bombing research facilities, threatening 
employees and the families of employees, and posting the names 
and telephone numbers of employees on the Internet. These acts 
are not carried out by individual activists but appear to be care-
fully planned and executed efforts to threaten and ultimately shut 
down lawful enterprises. 
 Hearing before the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Home-
land Security of the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of 
Representatives, 109th Congress, May 23, 2006. H.R. 4239, Ani-
mal Enterprise Terrorism Act (Y 4.J 89/1:109–125). This report is 
 available online at http://purl.access.gpo.gov/GPO/LPS74929. 
 The chairman of the Subcommittee was Congressman Howard 
Coble of North Carolina. The witnesses included Brent McIntosh, 
Deputy Assistant Attorney General of the United States; Dr. Michele 
Basso, Department of Physiology, University of Wisconsin; Wil-
liam Trundley, Vice President GlaxoSmithKline; and William Potter, 
 journalist. 
 This hearing was held to determine whether the existing 
animal enterprise terrorism statute, 18 U.S. Code 43, should be 
expanded to prohibit the use of force, violence, or threats against 
entities that do business with animal enterprise organizations. 
 Hearing before the Committee on Environmental and Public 
Works, U.S. Senate, 109th Congress, May 18, 2005, Eco-Terrorism 
Specifically Examining the Earth Liberation Front and the  Animal 

Resources 277
Liberation Front (Y 4.P 96/10:S.HRG. 109–947). This report is 
available online at http://purl.access.gpo.gov/GPO/LPS86049. 
 The chairman of the Committee was James M. Inhofe, of 
Oklahoma. The witnesses included Bradley Campbell, Commis-
sioner, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection; 
 Carson Carroll, Deputy Assistant Director, Bureau of Firearms 
and Explosives; John Lewis, Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of 
Investigation; David Martosko, Director of Research, Center for 
Consumer Freedom; Monty McIntyre, Garden Communities; and 
David Skorton, President, University of Iowa. 
 As the name of the hearing implies, it focused on the domes-
tic activities of the Earth Liberation Front and the Animal Libera-
tion Front. These organizations may have common personnel and 
are designated as terrorists because they use intimidation threats, 
acts of violence, and property damage in an attempt to force their 
views on others. They use arson, sabotage, and harassment to 
cause fear as a means to obtain their goals. It is estimated that 
they have caused more than $110 million in damage in more than 
1,100 acts of terrorism in the decade that preceded this hearing. 
In November 2004, the University of Iowa laboratory suffered 
$450,000 in damages, and the names and addresses of the profes-
sors associated with the laboratory were published on the ALF 
Web site, inviting further acts of terror against these individuals. 
ALF reportedly caused damages of more the $20 million to Gar-
den Communities by burning down the condominium complex, 
reportedly leaving a banner that read, “If you build it, we will 
burn it, the ELFs are mad.” 
 Hearing before the Committee on Environment and Public Works, 
U.S. Senate, 109th Congress, October 26, 2005, Eco-Terrorism Spe-
cifically Examining Stop Huntingdon Animal Cruelty (“SHAC”) 
(Y 4.P 96/10:S.HRG. 109–1005). Available online at http://purl.
access.gpo.gov/GPO/LPS92610. 
 The chairman of the Committee was James M. Inhofe, of 
Oklahoma. The witnesses included Richard P. Bernard, Executive 
Vice President, New York Stock Exchange; Mark L. Bibi, general 
counsel, Huntingdon Life Science; Skip Boruchin, Legacy Trading 
Company; John E. Lewis, Deputy Assistant Director, Counterter-
rorism Division, Federal Bureau of Investigation; Barry M. Sabin, 
Chief, Counterterrorism Division, Federal Bureau of Investiga-
tion; and Dr. Jerry Vlassak, press officer, North American Animal 
Liberation Press. 

278 Animal Rights
 This hearing focused on the activities of the Stop Hunting-
don Animal Cruelty (SHAC) against the Huntingdon Life Sci-
ence, a drug-testing company that uses animals as part of its 
testing protocol. 
 Nonprint Resources 
 Databases 
 AGRICOLA 
 AGRICOLA is an online searchable database of the National 
Agriculture Library that contains more than 2 million records. It 
provides information about agricultural books and articles and is 
available online at http://agricola.nal.usda.gov. 
 PubMed 
 PubMed is the most comprehensive searchable database of arti-
cles dealing with the life sciences and biomedical research. It con-
tains more than 11 million records from more than 7, 300 journals 
worldwide. It provides bibliographic information, an abstract, 
and a list of articles of related interest. It provides hyperlinks to 
the full text of most articles, some free and some that are available 
for a fee. Searches begin online at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
PubMed. 
 Computer Simulations 
 SimEarth is a life simulation game that allows the player to vary 
a planet’s atmosphere, temperature, and land masses and intro-
duce various forms of life to watch them evolve. The challenge is 
to develop sentient life, which develops an advanced civilization, 
while avoiding natural disasters such as hurricanes, wildfires, 
and volcanic eruptions. This game can be downloaded at http://
www.abandonia.com/en/games/185. 
 Video/DVD 
 There are hundreds of videos dealing with animal rights and 
animal welfare at YouTube (http://www.youtube.com/). 

Resources 279
 Meet Your Meat  is a video narrated by Alec Baldwin that 
shows factory farming footage from birth to slaughter. This is a 
very graphic video. It can be viewed at http://www.goveg.com/
factoryFarming.asp. 
 People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals provide several 
hundred videos, including celebrity interviews, dealing with a 
variety of issues such as animal abuses in laboratories and farms. 
These videos are available on the PETA Channel on YouTube at 
http://www.petatv.com/tvpopup/archive.asp. Many of these 
videos are very graphic. 
 The Test of a Civilization , narrated by James Cromwell, describes 
medical and product testing on animals from mice to nonhuman 
primates.  The Case for Animal Bill of Rights  is narrated by Dr. Tom 
Regan. These videos, as well as the other videos at this site, are quite 
graphic. They, as well as other videos, can be viewed at http://
animalrights.change.org/blog/view/10_recommended_animal_
rights_videos. 


281
 Glossary 
 Animal Rights Believers in animal rights argue that because humans 
are animals, at least some animals (e.g., great apes) or all animals should 
have the same rights as humans. 
 Animal Welfare Animal welfare activists believe that animals should 
be treated humanely and not subjected to unnecessary pain. 
 Anthropomorphism Anthropomorphism is the practice of attributing 
to animals or inanimate objects human-like characteristics. 
 Autonomy Value Some believers in animal rights assign an arbitrary 
number to an organism that determines the level of rights that that organ-
ism should have. Humans are assigned a 1.0, making them legal persons 
with full rights, whereas the great apes and whales and dolphins have 
a value of 0.8, granting them the right to bodily integrity and bodily 
freedom. 
 Battery Cage A cage about the size of a file drawer (e.g. 18 × 20 inches) 
that houses as many as 11 chickens is known as a battery cage. 
 Broiler Broilers are a type of chicken or turkey that is raised for its meat, 
generally in large houses containing hundreds of thousands of birds. 
 Buller In a feedyard, bullers are steers that are ridden by other steers. 
 Cetacean The order “cetacean” contains whales, dolphins, and porpoises. 
 Companion Animals “Companion animal” is another term for pets, 
especially dogs and cats 
 Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation (CAFO) CAFOs are opera-
tions that house large numbers of animals for part or all of their lives. For 
example, cattle feedlots are CAFOs. 
 Consequentialism A moral theory, consequentialism holds that a 
morally right action is one that produces a good outcome. 
 Consciousness The ability to remember the past and to plan for the 
future is called “consciousness.” 

282 Glossary
 Cull An animal that is discarded because of some undesirable charac-
teristic (e.g., day-old male chickens because adult male chickens have a 
gamey taste) is referred to as a cull. 
 Equality Equality is the belief that things that are alike should be 
treated the same way. 
 Free Range Some chickens and other farm animals, called free-range 
animals, are not caged but allowed to roam freely in a barnyard. 
 Frontal Cerebral Cortex The part of the cortex involved with memory, 
planning, creativity, and other complex activities is called the “frontal 
cerebral cortex.” 
 Gate Control Theory Two sets of fibers are found in the spinal cord that 
are theorized to control the perception of pain. 
 Gene The fundamental unit of heredity found on the chromosomes is 
the gene. 
 Genetically Modified Food A plant that has had a specific gene inserted 
in it that originally occurred in an unrelated plant is considered to be 
genetically modified. 
 Hybrid The result of breeding two pure stains of an organism, such as 
corn, to produce a stronger plant with higher yields is called a “hybrid.” 
 Hypothalamus The hypothalamus is a switching center located near the 
center of the brain that controls eating, drinking, and sexual behavior. 
 Invertebrates Animals without backbones, such as mollusks (e.g., 
snails, clams, or squids) and crustaceans (e.g., lobsters, shrimps, crabs, 
wood lice, water fleas, and barnacles) are invertebrates. 
 Lacto-ovo Vegetarian A vegetarian who does not eat meat, fish, or birds, 
but does eat dairy products and eggs is called a “lacto-ovo vegetarian.” 
 Lacto Vegetarian A vegetarian who does not eat meat, fish, or birds but 
does eat dairy products is called a “lacto vegetarian.” 
 Layer A chicken that is raised to produce eggs is known as a layer. 
 Limbic System The limbic system is a group of structures in the brain 
that are involved in the sense of smell and the display of emotions. 
 Nociceptor A nociceptor is a relatively unspecialized nerve ending that 
senses noxious stimuli. 
 Ovo Vegetarian A vegetarian is a person who does not eat meat, fish, 
birds, or dairy products but does eat eggs. 
 Pain A sensory event that is unpleasant and that is avoided if possible 
is called “pain.” 
 Pâté de Foie Gras Pâté de foie gras is a dish made from the fatty liver of 
a duck or goose that has been force-fed grain. 

Glossary 283
 Pattern Theory Pattern theory proposes that pain is the result of a 
specific pattern of stimulation that reaches a threshold. 
 Pesticides Chemicals that help control insects, weeds, and other 
 undesirable organisms are called “pesticides.” 
 Rider In a feedyard, a “rider” is a term for a steer that rides another 
steer. 
 Right A theoretical advantage of one person over another is called a 
“right.” 
 Sapience Sapience is the state of having a memory of the past and the 
ability to plan for the future. 
 Sentience The readiness to receive sensations is called “sentience.” 
 Service Animals Animals, generally dogs, that help people (e.g., seeing-
eye dogs, guard dogs) are called “service animals.” 
 Speciesism Some humans deny that they are part of a larger group that 
includes other living organisms, including animals. 
 Specificity Theory The theory that stimulating specific pain receptors 
transmits information directly into the pain centers of the brain is known 
as specificity theory. 
 Suffering Suffering is an unpleasant and disagreeable experience that 
virtually everyone would attempt to avoid. 
 Thalamus The thalamus is a switching center located near the center 
of the brain that is involved with all of the senses except smell and that 
controls the muscles. 
 Utilitarianism Utilitarianism is a school of philosophy that holds that 
each action is judged by its utility or usefulness and that strives for the 
greatest good for the greatest number. 
 Vegan Vegans do not eat meat, fish, birds, eggs, dairy products or honey 
and do not use animal products, such as leather, wool, or silk. 
 Vivisection The cutting of animals, as while performing experiments, 
is called “vivisection.” 


285
Index
 Abundant Wildlife Society of 
North America (AWS), 197 
 Actors and Others for Animals 
(A&O), 198 
 Act to Prevent Cruel and 
Improper Treatment of 
Cattle, 84, 110 
 Aesop, 17 
 AGRICOLA, 47 
 Agricultural animals, problems 
and controversies, 38 – 45 
 in 21st century, 42 – 45 
 overview of, 38 – 39 
 welfare issues, 39 – 42 
 Agricultural animals, use of, 2 – 3 
 AIBO, 18 
 Aldrete, Cristobal P., 175 
 Alexander the Great, 82 
 Alliance for Animals (AFA), 198 
 Alliance for Contraception in 
Cats and Dogs (ACC&D), 
198 – 199 
 American Anti-Vivisection 
Society (AAVS), 86 – 87, 
110, 199 
 American Association for 
Accreditation of 
Laboratory Animal Care 
(AAALAC), 176, 200 
 American Association for 
Laboratory Animal Care 
(AALAC), 171 
 American Association for 
Laboratory Animal Science 
(AALAS), 200 
 American Association of Medical 
Colleges, 169 
 American Association of Zoo 
Veterinarians (AAZV), 201 
 American Cetacean Society 
(ACS), 202 
 American Council on Science and 
Health (ACSH), 201 
 American Farm Bureau Federation, 
168 
 American Feed Manufacturers 
Association, 170 – 171 
 American Heart Association, 178 
 American Humane Association 
(AHA), 85 – 86, 202 
 American Human Education 
Society, 85 
 American Humane Society, 3 
 American Institute of Biological 
Sciences, 169 
 American Physiological Society, 
168 
 American Psychological 
Association, 176 
 Americans for Medical Progress, 
96 
 American Society for the 
Advancement of Science, 
94 

286 Index
 American Society for the 
Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals (ASPCA), 68, 85, 
93, 173, 203 
 American Veterinary Medical 
Association (AVMA), 173, 
204 – 205 
 American Warrior, The (magazine), 
58 
 Amory, Cleveland, 139 – 140 
 Anchel, Marjorie, 175 
 Andell, Eric, 14 
 Angell, George Thorndike, 85, 
140 
 Animal (Scientific Procedures) 
Act of 1986, 111 
 Animal Agriculture Alliance, 204 
 Animal and Plant Inspection 
Service (APHIS), 97, 176, 
178, 179 
 Animal and Society Institute, 
207 – 208 
 Animal Behavior Management 
Alliance (ABMA), 204 – 205 
 Animal Enterprise Protection Act 
of 1992, 105, 187 – 189 
 Animal feeding operations (AFO), 
39, 106 – 107 
 Animal fighting, 56 – 60 
 Animal Fighting Prohibition 
Enforcement Act of 2007, 
106 
 Animal groups, 2 – 4 
 agriculture, 2 – 3 
 companionship, 3 
 entertainment, 3 – 4 
 pests, 4 
 service, 3 
 Animal laws.  See Federal 
regulations, agricultural; 
Federal regulations, 
nonagricultural 
 Animal Legal Defense Fund 
(ALDF), 205 
 Animal Liberation: A New Ethics for 
Our Treatment of Animals 
(Singer), 11 – 12, 87 
 Animal Liberation Front (ALF), 
91, 205 
 Animal Planet, 85 
 Animal Plant Health Inspection 
Service (APHIS), 167 
 Animal Procedures Committee, 
112 
 Animal research, 81 – 83 
 Animal Rights Coalition (ARC), 
206 
 Animal Rights International 
(ARI), 206 – 207 
 Animal Rights Militia, 92 
 Animal Rights Mobilization 
(ARM), 207 
 Animal Society, The (TAS), 208 
 Animals Voice (AV), 209 
 Animal Transportation 
Association (AATA), 208 
 Animal Welfare Act Amendment 
of 1976, 101 – 102, 165 
 Animal Welfare Act of 1966, 47, 
64, 68, 89, 96 – 97, 100, 
162 – 164 
 Animal Welfare Act of 1970, 
100 – 101, 164 – 165 
 Animal Welfare Act of 2006, 112 
 Animal Welfare Institute (AWI), 
90 – 91, 209 
 Anthropomorphism, defined, 
16 – 17 
 Antoinette, Marie, 74 
 Aristotle, 10, 81, 140 
 Arliss, George, 87 
 Arnaz, Lucie, 198 
 Associated Humane Societies 
(AHS), 210 
 Association for Biomedical 
Research, 177 
 Association for the Protection of 
Fur-Bearing Animals (Fur 
Bearer Defenders), 210 – 211 
 Association of Veterinarians for 
Animal Rights (AVAR), 210 
 Association of Zoos and 
Aquariums, 71 
 Autonomy value, 13 

Index 287
 Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt), 43 
 Balluch, Martin, 34 
 Barker, Bob, 141 
 Barnard, Christiaan Neethling, 
141 
 Basehart, Diana, 198 
 Basehart, Richard, 198 
 Battery cage, 41, 261 
 Beary, Bianca, 174 
 Beauty without Cruelty (BWC), 
211 
 Beluga whale, 76 
 Bentham, Jeremy, 11, 141 – 142 
 Bergh, Henry, 142 
 Bernard, Claude, 81, 82, 142 – 143 
 Bill of Rights, 6 
 BIOETHICSLINE, 47 
 Blue whale, 76 
 BOLD fMRI, 25 – 27 
 Boone and Crockett Club, 61 – 62 
 Borel, Jean François, 143 
 British Union for the Abolition of 
Vivisection, 86 
 British Veterinary Association, 
181 
 Broiler chicken or turkey, 38, 40, 
41 
 Brown, George E., 175 
 Brown, Howard C., 180 
 Brown, Lester, 98 
 Buffalo hunting, 60 – 61 
 Bull baiting, 83 – 84 
 Buller, 39 
 Bullfighting, 59 – 60 
 Bush, George H. W., 104, 105 
 Bush, George W., 105, 106 
 Caesar, Julius, 58 
 Canadian Association for 
Humane Trapping 
(CAHT), 211 – 212 
 Canned hunts, 63 – 65 
 Canning, George, 84 
 Canon of Medicine, The (Avicenna), 
53 – 54 
 Carcinogens, 54 
 Carrell, Alexis, 143 – 144 
 Carroll, Lewis, 17 
 Carson, Rachel, 15 
 Case for Animal Rights, The 
(Regan), 11 
 Casey, Edmund C., 53 
 Cattle population, 1993–2002, 195 
 Center for Alternatives to Animal 
Testing (Johns Hopkins 
University), 171 
 Center for the Expansion of 
Fundamental Rights, 13 
 Center for Whale Research 
(CWR), 212 
 Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, 3 
 Cetaceans, 75 – 77 
 Cetacean Society International 
(CSI), 212 – 213 
 Chambers, Charles, 169 
 Charles River Breeding 
Laboratories, 176 – 177 
 Chipuroni, Virginia, 174 
 Circus animals, 67 – 68 
 Citizens to End Animal Suffering 
and Exploitation (CEASE), 
213 
 Clark, Joseph S., 98, 144 
 Clark, Leland C., 145 
 Clean Water Act of 1972, 107 
 Coalition for Animals and 
Animal Research, 213 – 214 
 Cobbe, Frances Power, 86, 145 
 Cock fighting, 58 – 59 
 Cody, Buffalo Bill, 61, 68 – 69 
 Cohen, Carl, 88, 145 – 146 
 Committee to Abolish Sport 
Hunting (CASH), 214 
 Companion animals, 3 
 Concentrated animal feeding 
operations (CAFO), 3, 39, 
42, 106 – 107 
 Consciousness, 7, 19, 151 
 Coon hunting, 67 
 Cosmetic, Toiletry and Fragrance 
Association, 170 
 Cruelty to Animals Act of 1835, 
110 

288 Index
 Cruelty to Animals Act of 1849, 
110 
 Cruelty to Animals Act of 1876, 
110 – 111 
 Cull, 39, 66 
 Culture and Animals Foundation 
(CAF), 214 
 Dahl, Roald, 17 
 Daley, Tim, 91 
 Day, Doris, 146, 198 
 Decker, W. M., 173 
 Declaration of Helsinki, 53 
 Defenders of Animals (DOA), 
214 – 215 
 Delphinapterus leucas, 76 
 Demikhov, Vladimir Petrovich, 
146 
 Derby, Bennett, 170 
 Descartes, Rene, 27 
 Disney, Walt, 147 
 Dog fighting, 57 – 58 
 Dole, Robert Joseph, 103, 
147 – 148, 166 
 Dolphin, 75 – 76 
 Doris Day Animal League, 93 
 Dowding, Muriel, 148 
 Draize, John H., 55 
 Dunn, Peyton Hawes, 172 – 173 
 Eichler, Evan, 1 
 Eisenhower, Dwight, 108 
 Endangered Species Act of 1973, 
64, 109 
 Endocrine Society, 174 
 England, governmental solutions 
in, 110 – 112 
 England, nongovernmental 
solutions in 
 animal rights, 86 
 animal welfare, 83 – 85 
 Entertainment animals, 3 – 4, 
67 – 71 
 circus, 67 – 68 
 films/television, 68 
 rodeo, 68 – 70 
 theme park, marine mammals, 
71 
 zoo, 70 – 71 
 Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA), 43, 50, 52, 107 
 Environmental Protection and 
Community Right-to-
Know Act, 107 
 Environmental Recovery, 
Compensation and 
Liability Act, 107 
 Erasistratus, 81 
 European Biomedical Research 
Association (EBRA), 215 
 European Coalition to End 
Animal Experiments, 86 
 European Fur Breeders 
Association (EFBA), 
215 – 216 
 Evans, Cooper, 175 
 Extramural Research and 
Training for the National 
Institutes of Health, 167 
 Family Farm Defenders (FFD), 
216 
 Farm Bill 2002, 105 – 106, 108, 
189 
 Fashion, animals and, 72 – 75 
 Feathered Warrior, The (magazine), 
59 
 Feathers, 73 – 74 
 Federal regulations, agricultural, 
106 – 109 
 background of, 106 – 107 
 Endangered Species Act of 
1973, 109 
 Humane Slaughter Act, 
107 – 109 
 1972 Clean Water Act, 107 
 Wild Free-Roaming Horses and 
Burros Act, 108 
 Federal regulations, 
nonagricultural, 98 – 106 

Index 289
 Animal Enterprise Protection 
Act of 1992, 105 
 Animal Fighting Prohibition 
Enforcement Act of 2007, 
106 
 Animal Welfare Act Amendment 
of 1976, 101 – 102 
 Animal Welfare Act of 1966, 
100 
 Animal Welfare Act of 1970, 
100 – 101 
 drafting of legislation and, 
98 – 100 
 Farm Bill 2002, 105 – 106, 108 
 Food, Agriculture, 
Conservation, and Trade 
Act of 1990, 104 
 Food Security Act of 1985, 
102 – 104 
 Guide for the Care and Use of 
Laboratory Animals, The, 
106 
 Health Research Extension Act 
of 1985, 104 
 Horse Protection Act of 1970, 
101 
 Films and television animals, 68 
 Finners ( Balanoptera ), 77 
 Foe Paw, 68 
 Foley, Thomas S., 175 
 Food, Agriculture, Conservation, 
and Trade Act of 1990, 104, 
186 – 187 
 Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), 43 – 44, 52, 55 
 Food Animal Concerns Trust 
(FACT), 216 – 217 
 Food Security Act of 1985, 
102 – 104, 165 – 175 
 Ford, Gerald, 101 
 Found Animal Foundation, 199 
 Foundation for Biomedical 
Research (FBR), 95 – 96, 217 
 Fox, Michael Allen, 148 – 149 
 Fox, Michael Wilson, 149 
 Fox hunting, 65 – 67 
 Foyn, Svend, 77 
 Franklin, Webb, 175 
 Free, Ann Cottrell, 148 – 149 
 Free range, 41 
 Friends of Animals (FoA), 218 
 Frontal cerebral cortex, 7 
 Fund for Animals, The, 62, 68, 176 
 Fur, 72 – 73 
 Fur Commission U.S.A. (FCUSA), 
218 
 Fur Free Alliance (FFA), 219 
 Fur Information Council of 
America (FICA), 218 – 219 
 Fur Takers of America (FTA), 
219 – 220 
 Galen, 81 
 Gallinger, Jacob, 97 
 Gamecock, The (magazine), 59 
 Gandhi, Mahatma, 9 
 Gate control theory, 27 – 28 
 Geelhoed, Glenn, 179 
 Gene, 43 
 Genetically modified food, 43 – 44 
 Genetic engineering, 43 – 45 
 Glannelli, Michael, 176 
 Glass, Jay, 174 
 Gleiber, John, 174 
 Gleockler, Emily F., 170 
 Globe (Boston), 177 
 Goering, Hermann, 67 
 Grange, Wallace Byron, 63 
 Green, Henry Copley, 82 
 Guide for the Care and Use of 
Laboratory Animals, The, 
106, 167, 200 
 Guidelines for the Care and Use of 
Mammals in Neuroscience 
and Behavioral Research, 106 
 Gunderson, Steve, 175 
 Gustafson, Tom, 173 
 Hadith, 9 
 HAL, 17 

290 Index
 Harper, Jean, 174 
 Harpoon gun, 77 
 Hawkins, Bert W., 167, 178 
 Health Research Extension Act of 
1985, 104 
 Hermogenianus, 13 
 Hirsch, C. Leon, 171 
 Hog population and value, 
1992–2001, 196 
 Holliman, Earl, 198 
 Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 81 
 Horse Protection Act of 1970, 
101 
 Human beings, defined, 1 – 2 
 Humane Information Services, 
170 
 Humane Law Enforcement 
(HLE), 85 
 Humane Slaughter Act, 64, 91, 
107 – 109 
 Humane Society of America, 93 
 Humane Society of the United 
States, 56, 57, 65, 68 
 Human rights, 4 – 8 
 Humpback whale ( Megaptera ), 77 
 Humphrey, Hubert, 107 
 Hunting, 60 – 67 
 Hybrid, 42 – 43 
 Hybrid vigor, 42 
 Hypothalamus, 7, 24 
 Improved Standards for 
Laboratory Animals Act, 
175 – 181 
 Incurably Ill for Animal Research 
(IIFAR), 96, 220 
 Institute of Animal Technology 
(IAT), 221 
 Institute of Laboratory Animal 
Resources (ILAR), 220 – 221 
 Institutional Animal Care and 
Use Committee (IACUC), 
48, 51 
 International Association against 
Painful Experiments 
on Animals (IAAPEA), 
221 – 222 
 International Association 
of Human-Animal 
Interaction Organizations 
(IAHAIO), 222 – 223 
 International Convention for the 
Regulation of Whaling, 78 
 International Council for Animal 
Protection, 86 
 International Fund for Animal 
Welfare (IFAW), 223 
 International Primate Protection 
League (IPPL), 223 
 International Society for Animal 
Rights (ISAR), 224 
 International Whaling 
Commission (IWC), 78, 
224 
 International Wildlife Coalition-
USA (IWC-USA), 225 
 Internet hunting, 64 – 65 
 Introduction à la médecine 
expérimentale (Bernard), 82 
 Introduction to the Principles of 
Morals and Legislation 
(Bentham), 11 
 Invertebrates, 4, 33, 111, 244 
 Jacques, Brian, 17 
 Jamison, Wesley V., 93 
 Japan Whaling Association 
(JWA), 225 
 Jarvik, Robert K., 150 
 Jefferson, Thomas, 5, 66 
 Jews for Animal Rights (JAR), 
225 – 226 
 Johnson, Lyndon, 100 
 Jones, Helen, 224 
 Joseph, Jackie, 198 
 Justice for Animals (JFA), 226 
 Kant, Immanuel, 10 – 11 
 Keyguide to Information Sources in 
Animal Rights (Magel), 37 

Index 291
 Killer whale, 76 
 Kipling, Joseph Rudyard, 17, 
150 – 151 
 Kirk, Avraham, 226 
 Kopperud, Steve, 170 
 Krishna, 9 
 Kullberg, John F., 173 
 Laboratory Animal Management 
Association (LAMA), 
226 – 227 
 Laboratory Animal Science 
Association (LASA), 227 
 Laboratory Animal Welfare Act, 
91 
 Lacey Act of 1900, 74 
 Lacto-ovo vegetarian, 38 
 Lacto vegetarian, 38 
 Lankavatara Sutra, 8 
 Last Chance for Animals (LCA), 
227 – 228 
 Layer chickens, 3, 41 
 Leather, 74 – 75 
 Legal secular viewpoint, 13 
 Lehigh Valley Animal Rights 
Coalition (LVARK), 228 
 Lewis, C. S., 17 
 Life (magazine), 98 
 Lilly, John Cunningham, 75, 151 
 Limbic system, 7 
 Link, The (American Humane 
Association), 86 
 Lion Country Safari, 70 
 Lockwood, John, 64 – 65 
 Lovell, Mary Frances, 86 
 Luisada, A. A., 152 
 Lunch, William M., 93 
 Magel, Charles, 37 
 Magendie, Francois, 82 
 Magnuson, Warren Grant, 98, 
151 – 152 
 Man and Dolphin (Lilly), 76 
 Mann, Frank C., 152 
 Manure, 106 – 107 
 Marcus, Emanuel, 152 
 Marine mammals in theme parks, 
71 
 Markmann, Robert, 174 
 Martin, Richard, 84, 152 – 153 
 Matthias Hiasl Pan (chimpanzee), 
34 
 McArdle, John, 171, 178 
 McMillan, James, 153 
 Melby, Edward C., Jr., 179 
 Melzack, Ronald, 27 
 Mendel, Gregor, 42 
 Mercy for Animals (MFA), 
228 – 229 
 “Method for Producing Tissue 
Engineered Meat for 
Consumption” (patent), 44 
 Mickey Mouse, 17 
 Migeon, Claude, 174 
 Migratory Bird Treaty Act, 74 
 Mill, John, 11 
 Miller, William, 97 
 Mind of the Dolphin, The (Lilly), 
76 
 Mohammad, 9 
 Moral Basis of Vegetarianism, The 
(Gandhi), 9 
 Morris, Mark L., Sr., 153 – 154 
 Morrison, Adrian R., 154 
 Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 82 
 Mutagens, 54 
 National Alliance for Animal 
Legislation, 93 
 National Antivivisectionists 
Society, 87 
 National Association for 
Biomedical Research 
(NAFBR), 95, 229 
 National Cattlemen’s Association, 
173 
 National Centre for Replacement, 
Refinement and Reduction 
of Animals in Research, 
229 – 230 

292 Index
 National Coalition for Science 
and Technology, 181 
 National Council on Pet 
Population Study and 
Control, 3 
 National Federation of Humane 
Societies (NFHS), 230 
 National Institutes of Health 
(NIH), 50, 83, 89, 167, 176 
 National Medical Association, 53 
 National Pet Alliance (NPA), 230 
 National Pollutant Discharge 
Elimination System, 107 
 National Pork Producers Council, 
173 
 National Research Foundation, 83 
 National Science Board, 45 
 National Science Foundation, 
45, 50 
 National Zoological Park, 70 
 New England Antivivisectionist 
Society, 93 
 New Jersey Animal Rights 
Alliance (NJARA), 
230 – 231 
 Newkirk, Ingrid, 88, 90, 154 – 155 
 Nicoll, Charles S., 37, 82, 155 
 Nixon, Richard, 100 
 Nociceptor, 21 – 22, 23 
 Northwest Animal Rights 
Network, 231 
 Nuremberg Code of Ethics in 
Medical Research, 53 
 O. orca, 76 
 Occupational Safety and Health 
Act, 52 
 Ocean Conservancy, 231 – 232 
 Orcinus, 76 
 Orlans, Barbara, 180 
 Ovo-vegetarian, 38 
 Pacheco, Alex, 88, 90, 174 – 175 
 Pain, 20 – 28 
 background of, 21 – 23 
 BOLD fMRI and, 25 – 27 
 nociception and, 22 – 23 
 responses to, 22, 33 
 studies on, 22 – 27 
 theories of, 27 – 28 
 Passenger pigeon hunting, 61 
 Pâté de foie gras, 41 
 Pattern theory, 27 
 Peacock, Samuel M., 174 
 Penny, Timothy J., 175 
 People for Animal Rights (PAR), 
232 
 People for the Ethical Treatment 
of Animals (PETA), 44, 
88 – 90, 93, 174, 232 – 233 
 People Protecting Animals and 
Their Habitats (PATH), 233 
 Performing Animal Welfare 
Society (PAWS), 4, 233 – 234 
 Pesticides, 39, 52 
 Pests, 4 
 Philosophical secular viewpoint, 
10 – 13 
 Phinizy, Coles, 97, 155 – 156 
 Piaget, Jean, 17 
 Pit Bull Chronicle, The (magazine), 
58 
 Porpoise, 76 
 Potter, Beatrix, 17 
 Primarily Primates, Inc. (PPI), 234 
 Proctor, Stuart, 168 
 Professional Rodeo Cowboys 
Association, 69 
 Psychologists for the Ethical 
Treatment of Animals, 173 
 Public Law 99–198, 181 – 186 
 Pulteney, William, 84 
 Rackow, Herbert, 169 
 Randall, Walter C., 168, 179 
 Raub, William F., 167 
 Reagan, Ronald, 104 
 Red Cloud, 60 – 61 
 Regan, Thomas Howard, 11, 12, 
93, 156 

Index 293
 Religious viewpoint, 8 – 10 
 suffering and, 29 – 32 
 Research, animal, 81 – 83 
 Resnick, Joseph Yale, 97, 98, 156 
 Reynolds, Orr E., 168 
 Richards, Clarence E., 87 
 Riders, 39 
 Rights, human, 4 – 8 
 Constitution and, 5 – 6 
 defined, 4 – 5 
 Right whale ( Balana ), 77 
 Roberts, Pat, 175, 178 
 Rodeo animals, 68 – 70 
 Roomba, 18 
 Roosevelt, Theodore, 61 – 62 
 Rose, Charles, 175, 178 
 Rosenberg, Marc H., 181 
 Rost, Simone, 16 
 Royal Society for the Prevention 
of Cruelty to Animals 
(RSPCA), 57, 84 – 85, 
234 – 235 
 Russell, Sharon M., 37, 82, 
156 – 157 
 Ryder, Richard, 18 
 Safari Club International, 65 
 Sapience, 19 
 Save the Whales (STW), 91, 235 
 Schafer, Ed, 108 
 Schwarzenegger, Arnold, 42 
 Science, 94 
 Science activists, 94 – 96 
 Science and Engineering Indicators, 
45 
 Science Citation Index, 46 – 47 
 Scientific Affairs of the National 
Association of Life 
Sciences Industries, 180 
 Scientific research and animals, 
45 – 56 
 animals used in 
 1973–2007, 193 – 194 
 2007, 190 – 192 
 applied research and, 46 – 47 
 education and, 55 – 56 
 experimental protocol and, 
47 – 48 
 funding for, 49 – 51 
 Institutional Animal Care and 
Use Committee and, 48 
 testing and, 51 – 55 
 Scientists Center for Animal 
Welfare (SCAW), 180, 235 
 Scientists’ Group for the 
Reform of Animal 
Experimentation, 169 
 Sea Lion Park, 71 
 Seamer, John H., 181 
 Sea World USA, 71 
 Secular viewpoint 
 legal, 13 
 pain and suffering and, 32 – 34 
 philosophical, 10 – 13 
 Sentience, 19 – 20 
 Service animals, 3 
 Shapiro, Kenneth J., 173 
 Sharpe, Robert, 222 
 Sheep and lamb, population and 
value of, 1993–2003, 196 
 Sherman, Brad, 65 
 Shumway, Norman, 141, 157 
 Silent Spring (Carson), 15 
 Singer, Peter, 11 – 12, 87, 93, 
157 – 158 
 Society for Animal Protective 
Legislation (SAPL), 91, 
172, 174, 176, 236 
 Society for Neuroscience, 94 – 95 
 Society for the Protection 
of Animals Liable to 
Vivisection, 86 
 Society for Toxicology, 180 
 Society of Animal Welfare 
Administrators (SAWA), 
236 
 Solutions, governmental 
 England, 110 – 112 
 United States 
 background of, 96 – 98 

294 Index
Solutions (continued)
 federal regulations 
(agricultural), 106 – 109 
( See also Federal 
regulations, agricultural) 
 federal regulations 
(nonagricultural), 
98 – 106 ( See also 
Federal regulations, 
nonagricultural) 
 state and local regulations, 
109 – 110 
 Solutions, nongovernmental 
 animal rights and 
 demographics of, 93 – 94 
 in England, 86 
 organization and support of, 
92 – 93 
 in United States, 86 – 92 
 animal welfare, 83 – 86 
 in England, 83 – 85 
 in United States, 85 – 86 
 science activists, 94 – 96 
 Speciesism, 18 – 19 
 Specificity theory, 27 
 Sperm whale ( Physeter 
macrocephalus ), 77 
 Sporting Dog Journal, The 
(magazine), 58 
 Sports Illustrated (magazine), 
97 
 Staggers, Harvey O., 175 
 Standaert, Frank, 169 
 State and local regulations, 
109 – 112 
 in England, 110 – 112 
 in United States, 109 – 110 
 States United for Biomedical 
Research, 96 
 Steinberg, Marshall, 180 
 Stevens, Christine, 90 – 91, 
158 – 159, 172, 176 – 178 
 Stevens, Roger Lacey, 91 
 Student Animal Rights Alliance 
(SARA), 236 – 237 
 Suffering, 28 – 34 
 defined, 32 
 religious viewpoint on, 29 – 32 
 secular viewpoint on, 32 – 34 
 Superfund, 107 
 Sweet, Orville K., 173 
 Swit, Loretta, 198 
 Tamagotchi, 18 
 Taub, Edward, 88 – 90 
 Teratogens, 54 
 Thalamus, 20, 21, 24 
 Theme park animals, marine 
mammal, 71 
 Trapping, 72 – 73 
 Tree House Animal Foundation 
(THAF), 237 
 True Nature Network, The 
(TTNN), 236 – 237 
 Trull, Frankie, 95, 159, 178 
 2001: A Space Odyssey (movie), 17 
 Tyron, Thomas, 159 – 160 
 United Action for Animals 
(UAA), 238 
 United Animal Nations (UAN), 
238 – 239 
 United Gamefowl Breeders 
Association, 59 
 United Poultry Concerns (UPC), 
239 
 United States, governmental 
solutions in 
 background of, 96 – 98 
 federal regulations 
(agricultural), 106 – 109 
( See also Federal 
regulations, agricultural) 
 federal regulations 
(nonagricultural), 
98 – 106 ( See also 
Federal regulations, 
nonagricultural) 
 state and local regulations, 
109 – 110 

Index 295
 United States, nongovernmental 
solutions in 
 animal rights, 86 – 92 
 animal welfare, 85 – 86 
 United States Surgical 
Corporation, 171 
 U.S. Animal Health Association 
(USAHA), 239 
 U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
2, 4, 38, 43, 47, 71, 96, 
107 – 108 
 U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 62 
 U.S. Sportsmen’s Alliance 
(USSA), 240 
 U.S. Constitution, 5 – 6 
 Universities Federation for 
Animal Welfare (UFAW), 
240 
 USDA Animal and Plant 
Protection and Inspection 
Service, 185 
 Utilitarianism, 11 
 Van Hoosier, Gerald, Jr., 178 
 Vegan, 38, 39 
 Vegan Action (VA), 241 
 Vegetarian Resource Group 
(VRG), 38, 240 – 241 
 Vegetarians, 38 – 39 
 Vein, Jon, 44 
 Verein Gegen Tierfbriken 
(Association against 
Animal Factories), 34 
 Vick, Michael, 58 
 Vishnu, 9 
 Vivisection, 86, 87, 97 
 Voice for Animals (VOICE), 241 
 Volkmer, Harold J., 175 
 Von Frey, Max, 23 
 Wall, Patrick, 27 
 Washington, George, 66 
 Wayman, Stan, 98 
 Whaling, 77 – 78 
 White, Betty, 160, 198 
 White, Caroline Earle, 86 
 Whitehouse, Sheldon, 65 
 White-tail deer hunting, 61 
 Wild Animal Orphanage (WAO), 
242 
 Wild Free-Roaming Horses and 
Burros Act, 108 
 Windham, William, 84 
 Wise, Steven, 13 
 Wong, S. N., 152 
 Working for Animal Used in 
Research, Drugs, and 
Surgery (WARDS), 173 
 World Medical Assembly, 53 
 Worley, JoAnne, 198 
 Wyler, Gretchen, 176 
 Wyngaarden, James B., 176 
 Zoo animals, 70 – 71 
 Zoological Society of 
Philadelphia, 70 


 About the Author 
 CLIFFORD J. SHERRY received a Ph.D. in psychology from the Illinois 
Institute of Technology and a paralegal certificate from the University of 
Texas at San Antonio. Dr. Sherry has more than 60 professional publica-
tions in refereed scientific journals. He has taught human physiology, 
psychopharmacology, introductory psychology, and sensation and per-
ception. He has written  Opportunities in Medical Imaging Careers: Revised 
Edition; Medical Imaging Careers; Contemporary World Issues: Endangered 
Species; Contemporary World Issues: Animal Rights; The New Science of Tech-
nical Analysis: Using the Statistical Techniques of Neuroscience to Uncover 
Order and Chaos in the Markets; Inhalants; Opportunities in Medical Imaging; 
Drugs and Eating Disorders;  and  Mathematics of Technical Analysis: Apply-
ing Statistics to Trading Stocks, Options, and Futures.  




