
Animate to Harmony

Animate to Harmony
The Independent Animator’s Guide to Toon Boom
Adam Phillips

First published 2015
by Focal Press
70 Blanchard Road, Suite 402, Burlington, MA 01803
and by Focal Press
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Focal Press is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2015 Taylor & Francis
The right of Adam Phillips to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted by him in accordance with sections 77
and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical,
or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Noticcs
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden our understanding,
changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and using any information,
methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own
safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation
without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Phillips, Adam.
Animate to harmony : the independent animator’s guide to
Toon boom / Adam Phillips.
 pages cm
ISBN 978-0-415-70537-0 (paperback)
1. Toon boom. 2. Computer animation. I. Title.
 TR897.72.T66P45 2014
 777.7-dc23
 2014012005
ISBN: [9780415705370] (pbk)
ISBN: [9780315889842] (ebk)
Typeset by Alex Lazarou

Contents
Introduction
CHAPTER 1
Interface
CHAPTER 2
Tools
CHAPTER 3
Animation
CHAPTER 4
Effects
CHAPTER 5
Camera
CHAPTER 6
Audio
CHAPTER 7
Rendering

APPENDIX A
Advanced Tools
APPENDIX B
Slightly Technical Stuff
Index

I
 
 
 
 
Introduction
n this book I’ll teach you how to use Toon Boom software to create your own 2D animation.
The three Toon Boom programs we cover are Animate, Animate Pro and Harmony.
Which one is right for you? There are significant differences between Animate at the low end,
Animate Pro in the middle and Harmony at the top, but across all three, the interface is almost
identical. This means that if you’re familiar with one of them, you pretty much know your way
around them all.
0.1
As of this writing, the current versions are Animate 3, Animate Pro 3 and Harmony 10.3.
Throughout this book then, we’ll start with the tools and techniques at the Animate level, most
of which serves as a foundation for the other two. From time to time you’ll see specific
mention of ‘Pro only features’ or ‘Harmony only features; indicated by the icons in Figure 0.2.

These paragraphs, pages or chapters refer to advanced features available only in those
programs.
0.2
When weighing up which program you need, the decision usually comes down to the list of
tools you expect to use most in your work. If you’re a complete beginner and just want to get a
feel for the software, you don’t necessarily need the high-end programs. However, with
software it certainly doesn’t hurt for the apprentice to have access to the master’s cabinet.
There will be tools that currently look like alien technology but they’ll wait quietly until you’re
ready to use them.
If you have yet to make a decision about which one you need, you can download a free PLE
(Personal Learning Edition) – a non-expiring, fully featured trial from Toon Boom’s website, ​-
w​w​w​.t​o​o​n​b​o​o​m​.c​o​m​. The table opposite is not an exhaustive comparison; merely a short list
of categorised features that you’re likely to use most in your day-to-day work.
The red check marks 
 indicate advanced features that were previously exclusive to Animate
Pro or Harmony, but are now available in Animate 3 and Animate Pro 3. If you’re using
Animate 2, or Animate Pro 2, you won’t have access to these red checked features.
Table 0.1


WHO THIS BOOK IS FOR
Whether this book is for you depends on your animation and software experience, as well as
your future animation plans. In writing, I’ve targeted a broad range of 2D animators. If you can
identify with any of the following, this book was written especially for you.
THE INDEPENDENT ANIMATOR
Animation isn’t your career, but you create animation whenever you get the chance. You
regularly complete short projects and have a few larger ones in the works. You have more
ideas under construction than you can ever complete but ultimately wish you could do this full-
time. You’ve animated a few pieces for payment but mostly your animation doesn’t pay the
bills. Lately you’ve been hearing about Toon Boom as an alternative to your current software
choice and you decide it’s time to take your work to the next level.
0.3
THE INDEPENDENT ANIMATION PROFESSIONAL
You earn a living by animating, probably from home. Contracts vary wildly, from simple web
adverts, to games, to fully animated web cartoons. You rarely get a holiday and your own
projects have sadly taken a backseat but in the eyes of many, you’re living the dream. Your
work has outgrown your usual software of choice and you’re intrigued by what others are
doing with Toon Boom. It’s time to get serious.
0.4

THE PROFESSIONAL
You work for – or are applying for a job at – an animation studio. You have plenty of digital
animation experience using other software but the studio is now hiring experienced Toon Boom
animators and you need someone to show you the ropes, fast-like!
0.5
THE HOBBYIST
Because of your artistic talent, friends and family have always come to you for designs or
illustrations. You’re comfortable using digital animation software and have a few simple
animated projects under your belt. Perhaps you’ve even submitted your work to YouTube or
Newgrounds and received feedback, praise or insulting comments (it happens to us all!).
Today, you believe you have a future in animation and want the best possible start.
0.6
THE DINOSAUR
Some may find it insulting to be referred to as a dinosaur but in animation it’s a badge of
honour. It means you’re a battle-scarred veteran of traditional ‘pencil and paper’ animation.
You’ve spent decades honing your skills and taking great pride in your craft. Now with all this
newfangled digitrad or tradiggity or whatever the kids are calling it these days, you’ve decided
it’s time to drag your skills into the twenty-first century to show them how it’s done. This book
is your manual.

0.7
WHY SHOULD I USE TOON BOOM?
Toon Boom software is 100 per cent animation software. Everything you see in the program is
designed for one thing – to create 2D animation. This means that whatever power the program
is drawing from your computer’s resources, it’s going entirely into helping you create
animation.
Toon Boom is also vector-based. What that technically means, you’ll find outlined in
Appendix B, starting on page 436, but in practical terms it means that all art created within the
software can be scaled up or down to any size. We can finish an entire movie at smartphone
size, then in mere seconds, scale it up to cinema-screen size with no loss of quality. This
flexibility isn’t afforded to users of raster-based software such as TVPaint or Photoshop.
ADOBE FLASH AND THE SAGA OF FILE SIZE
A discussion of vector-based animation software wouldn’t be complete without a mention of
Adobe Flash.
From its very beginnings, Flash’s biggest draw card as an animation tool has been its shallow
learning curve and the low file size of the .swf (Shockwave Flash) movie format. Slick – and
too many not-so-slick – animated banners lit up the web with sliding text, sound and colour
transitions all for just a few kilobytes to download. Early on, an animated Flash intro was the
must-have for every website and it wasn’t long before entire websites were being built in
Flash. Newgrounds.com still thrives as a Flash portal, with new animators seizing the
opportunity to make their own games and movies.
As internet speeds increase and low file sizes become less important, HD video has become
the new king of engaging web content. With the rise of YouTube have come filmmakers and
animators showcasing their skills, experiments and telling their own stories. And while there
are still many animators devoted to the super slim .swf format, there is nonetheless a now-
dominant video presence as animators turn to more reliable and powerful software. Studios
that once used Flash to develop entire seasons of primetime cartoons are now turning to Toon

Boom for everything from web shorts and online games, to television series and feature films.
Speaking from personal experience, I believe the reason animators initially fall in love with
Flash is generally the same reason they later become frustrated and outgrow it: Flash is great
for simple animation. Those just starting out in digital animation take to it very quickly.
As your confidence, skills and animation ambitions grow, you may find that Flash starts to
struggle. Your files grow larger and more complex, and you start to notice performance and
stability issues. As much as you swear and scream, you can’t really blame Flash because
animation is only a thin wedge of what it’s designed for.
I should add here that some animators’ styles are so well-suited to Flash that they don’t find a
reason to move on. If you’ve never had any issues with Flash, congratulations!
ANIMATING GAMES WITHOUT USING FLASH
One major reason animators might stick with Flash is for its scripting language, ActionScript,
and the ability to create interactivity for game development. You may think that to animate
Flash games you have to use Flash. Actually it’s possible – and perfectly acceptable – to
create animation in another program, then bring it into Flash for coding. Toon Boom is no
exception here. In fact, I created the animation in Toon Boom Animate Pro for my own game
Dashkin then imported it all into Flash for programming.

0.8
Dashkin art and animation were created entirely in Toon Boom Animate Pro, then imported into Flash for programming.
In March 2014, Toon Boom announced a new ‘Gaming Pipeline’ workflow. Using this, game
designers and animators can create art assets in Toon Boom Harmony and export them as sprite
sheets and transform data, ready for use by almost any game engine.
MOBILE GAMES
Mobile game development is a squillion-dollar industry and because Flash has art,
programming and mobile app export capability, it’s running near the front of the pack.
There is, however, a number of other game development programs streaking ahead of Flash.
Three examples are Unity3D, UDK (Unreal Development Kit) and GameMaker Studio.
They’re all inexpensive and easy to learn, ideal for web, mobile and console game
development. However, when it comes to 2D, these three programs don’t have their own
inbuilt drawing tools, relying instead on 2D plugins, or imported assets, such as sprite sheets,
backgrounds and animation sequences.

Whether you create these assets in Flash, Toon Boom or Photoshop, it doesn’t matter. The point
here is that if you want to make games, even Flash games, you can create the art in any program
you like.
WHAT YOU NEED TO GET STARTED
Beside the fact that we’re learning computer software and I therefore assume you know your
way around a computer, I’ll need to make a couple of other assumptions.
First, you have a basic grasp of how animation works – how the rapid, sequential display of
images gives an illusion of movement. Ideally, you’re familiar with the concept of frames on a
timeline, or perhaps even cels on an X-sheet (for those coming from a traditional 2D
background).
Second, you have some ability to draw, or at the very least a willingness to try. If you want to
learn 2D animation software without ever making a single brush stroke, you might be in for a
rough time. Sure, you can animate pre-drawn 2D assets, such as cut-out characters (more on
those later in the book) but almost all of the exercises in this book will require you to draw
something, or many somethings.
Finally, passion! Enthusiasm! When you’re passionate about something, it never feels like
work and you’ll naturally improve with experience. Whether you’re a mechanic, stuntman,
wine-taster or an animator, without passion it gets tedious quicker.
0.9
HARDWARE

The number one essential piece of hardware for digital artists is a graphics tablet, or tablet
monitor. The range of size, features and price varies across brands, but if you don’t have any
peripheral graphics hardware, you’ll likely be stuck drawing with your mouse. For anyone
who is comfortable drawing or painting with a real pencil or brush, the graphics tablet makes
the most sense for translating your real-world pencil skills to digital art.
0.10
Apart from the usual freehand drawing and painting tools, most art software has an additional
set of drawing tools for architectural precision with straight lines and perfect curves. The way
these tools work makes them ideal for users who don’t have a graphics tablet, or aren’t
comfortable drawing freehand. Especially if you’re using a mouse, these helpful tools provide
a little more control. One downside is that they’re not ideal for organic shapes like faces,
bodies and other natural objects. They can be very useful though, so we’ll look closely at them
in Chapter 2.
SOFTWARE
Generally speaking, Toon Boom exports video formats, so more often than not, when you finish
a scene or project, you’ll render it as a video file or image sequence. Video editing software is
therefore required to stitch your scenes together.
0.11

Within Toon Boom we can preview animation with simple playback controls, as well as use
Toon Boom Play: a kind of movie player that is built into Animate, Animate Pro and Harmony.
We’ll look closer at Play later in the book.
My personal solution for previewing and sequencing video outside of Toon Boom is
QuickTime Pro. There are several other low-cost solutions available for quickly pasting
together a few scenes so if you don’t already have one, you can hunt around for an inexpensive
or free solution.
For a final export though, you might want a more fully featured video editing program, like
Adobe Premiere, After Effects or Final Cut. At the low-cost end, I’ve found that Adobe
Premiere Elements has everything I need for simple video audio editing and export.
NOTE
In Toon Boom it is possible to create entire movies in a single file, but be warned, things
can quickly get extremely large and messy unless you split the project into manageable parts.
You’re less likely to experience stability issues or slow computer response if your project is
organised as individual scene files. Creating a new file for each scene is like writing with
spaces between words; it’s the best practise and makes the most sense.
DRIVERS
Installing the latest drivers for your graphics tablet will ensure you can use Toon Boom’s
drawing tools with pressure sensitivity enabled. This allows you to make pencil and brush
strokes with variable thickness, depending on how hard you press the pen to the tablet.
TERMINOLOGY
There are one or two conflicts between 2D animation terminology and live action film
terminology. For the information of readers who may be familiar with live action terminology,
there are a couple of minor differences. In this book I’ll be using the animation terms, so what
is known as a ‘shot’ in live action is known as a ‘scene’ in animation. What is known as a
‘scene’ in live action is known as a ‘sequence’ in animation.
Animation and live action share the terms ‘frames’ and ‘feet’ (i.e., footage), which is the

industry standard measurement for film. Scenes (or shots) are therefore measured by how many
frames they have. For example, Scene 7 could be 60 frames long.
TIP
There was a time when ‘animation’ was a mass noun with no plural. Despite the word
‘animations’ becoming more and more common, most traditional 2D animators still wince
whenever someone says ‘Do you make animations?’ or ‘I did an animation!’ Just like the
words ‘music’ or ‘poetry’. You never hear anyone say ‘Do you make musics?’ or ‘I did a
poetry!’
Therefore, if you ask a traditional 2D animator, we make animation. We don’t make
animations. I created seven animated shorts, seven pieces of animation, seven scenes, seven
cartoons or seven cycles. But I did not make seven animations.
APPENDICES
What we can cover in this book is limited by the page count, so in order to get you up and
running with the essentials, it has been necessary to skip over some technical explanations as
well as some advanced features.
Appendices A and B at the end of the book will cover a range of these subjects in brief,

explaining some of the more technical aspects of the software, as well as giving you a taste of
some advanced tools.
Additionally, help is at hand with Toon Boom documentation for all their programs available
at ​d​o​c​s​.t​o​o​n​b​o​o​m​.c​o​m​.
SOFTWARE VERSIONS
This book covers Animate, Animate Pro and Harmony. While I was writing this book
throughout 2013, Toon Boom released new versions of all three programs. At the time of
publication, current versions are Animate 3, Animate Pro 3 and Harmony 11.
If you’re using Harmony 11, you will find that some parts of the program differ from the
screenshots. Be sure to visit this book’s companion website at ​w​w​w​.f​o​c​a​l​p​r​e​s​s​.c​o​m​/​c​w​/​P​h​i​l​l​-
i​p​s​ for a ‘What’s New in Harmony 11’ video, as well as forthcoming updates of screenshots,
errata and downloadable files.
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
Chapter Files
In many exercises there will be a suggestion to use a provided file. You can download these
from this book’s companion website which is: ​f​o​c​a​l​p​r​e​s​s​.c​o​m​/​c​w​/​P​h​i​l​l​i​p​s​
Download the files suitable for the Toon Boom program that you are using.
As well as downloadable files, you’ll find supplementary videos to help you with features that
we couldn’t cover in the book.
THANKS
We’ve wanted a Toon Boom book for many years and most users agree that it’s been a long
time coming. I’m honoured to be the guy to finally write it. Thank you to David Bevans, Caitlin
Murphy and the team at Focal Press for your patience, fantastic support and work on this title.
Thanks to all the excellent people at Toon Boom, particularly to Steve Masson, Lilly
Vogelesang, Karina Bessoudo, Philip Greenstein and Stacey Eberschlag for responding to my
emails and IMs.
Thanks to Wizards of the Coast art directors, Jon Schindehette and Daniel Gelon for help with
the DUNGEONS & DRAGONS® image permissions process; to Bernard Derriman for
answering my OSX questions; to Dan Forster for his wealth of information on the days of

traditional animation camera; to Tom Olczyk for technical advice on OpenGL and software
rendering. To all my family, friends and colleagues, past and present for putting up with me.
Lastly but absolutely mostly, thank you to my favourite person Jeanette Imer for keeping me
alive and grinning. Oblong to you!
ILLUSTRATIONS
Every single illustration in this book I created with Toon Boom Animate, Animate Pro or
Harmony.

I
CHAPTER 1
Interface
START YOUR ENGINES
n this chapter you’ll explore the Toon Boom interface and learn how to perform basic
program actions.Traditionally, a software book might spend a few pages, or a chapter,
going into detail about the directory structure, video codec, aspect ratio and file formats.
That stuff is definitely good to know but first and foremost, this book is a practical guide for
artists and animators to start creating great animation as soon as possible.
1.1

OPENING THE PROGRAM
Now to crack open the software and look around. A reminder that we’ll start with the core
features at the Animate level, with later chapters dedicated to advanced features.
Start Animate, Animate Pro or Harmony now and you’ll briefly see the splash screen.
NOTE
After you install and run Toon Boom Animate for the first time, you’ll get a popup message
asking if you’d like to use Adobe Flash style shortcuts (see Figure 1.2). I strongly
recommend you click ‘No’ here. First, because I believe it’s better to learn Toon Boom as a
new program, rather than try to make it conform to your Flash workflow and second,
because throughout the book I’ll list the Toon Boom shortcuts alongside each tool and
function.
 
1.2
If you clicked ‘Yes’, don’t panic. It’s not that important right now and just ahead, on page 18,
I’ll show you how to change it back.
Assuming you have already activated the licence (see Appendix B), when the program opens,
whichever one you’re using, we should all now be seeing pretty much the same thing.
The Create button at the bottom is greyed out, making it impossible to start without first
specifying a few parameters. Even if you check the ‘Do not show this window at startup’
checkbox, you’ll be unable to start working in Toon Boom until you’ve completed this
preliminary setup.

> 1.
> 2.
1.3
SETTING UP A PROJECT
Our very first step is to set up project directories so that Toon Boom knows whereto save our
work. Throughout the book, we’ll be doing a lot of short, quick exercises – scenes in which we
can make an absolute mess and not worry about being careful or even saving. So in the first
exercise below we’ll set up one of those ‘throwaway scenes’ for use in this chapter.
> EXERCISE 1.1
  CREATING A PROJECT FOLDER AND SCENE FILES
The first input field on the left is labelled Project Directory and it specifies where your file
will be saved. By default, this should show a path to your documents folder.
1.4
Click ‘Choose’ – or if you’re using Harmony, the browse folder icon.
Choose your Desktop and click ‘OK’.
The next field is your Project Name. You can also think of this as a scene title, which can
beany name you want to call that scene. I recommend using numbers in the title, so that as your
movie comes together, you have your scene folders listed in a sensible order. For example, the
third scene in my project might be ‘Scene_3’ or ‘Sc_3’ or simply ‘3’.

> 3.
As this is just a scene for experimentation, we don’t need to worry about numbering.
In the Project Name field, type test scene.
NOTE
Note that as you type this, the space is replaced by an underscore, so you end up with
test_scene. The reason is because this will become a folder name; generally in the uptight
world of file and folder naming conventions, spaces are considered sloppy practice, so this
merely autocorrects it for you.
Almost done. Now Toon Boom knows the name and location of your project. Unless you’re
using Harmony 10, the Create button here is still greyed out, so a final piece of setup required
is to specify your movie’s resolution and framerate. You can see a list of useful resolution
presets.
For simple projects or throwaway exercises, you can choose whichever resolution you like.
No need to concern yourself with it too much, as you can easily change at any time throughout
your project (even right at the end) and everything in your movie will resize itself to fit. I
normally use the HDTV (1920 × 1080) preset. We’ll talk more about frame rates later.
1.5
If you’re using Harmony, the HDTV_Vertical (1920 × 1080) resolution is selected by default, so you could click the Create
button right after entering your project name. If you require a different resolution though, you can simply select another

> 4.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
before creating the scene.
Choose your resolution, click ‘Create’ and hold your breath.
… aaaand breathe. A new, blank scene is open and awaits your scribblings. Exercise
complete. Hoorah!
THE WORKSPACE LAYOUT
Now we’re here, let’s quickly make sure we’re all seeing the same layout.
> EXERCISE 1.2
  PREFERENCES AND SHORTCUTS
In the top right part of the program you’ll see the workspace layout list. If you’ve never
touched this before, it should display ‘Default’. Change it now to ‘Animating’.
1.6
The workspace will shuffle and shift momentarily. When it comes back, the layout should have
changed. Now cast one or more eyes over the interface. There are a number of sections,
typically known as panels and views. We’ll discuss each of these only briefly, but as you use
them more and more, you’ll get to know them better.
Now remember back on page 15 when I advised against the Adobe Flash shortcuts? I’ll be
using the Toon Boom shortcuts from hereon, so if you chose the Flash style, let’s switch that
back to the Toon Boom shortcuts now.
In the top menu, choose Edit → Preferences or press [Ctrl U] on Windows, [⌘] or [⌘
U] on OSX.
The first tab here is Shortcuts. Simply choose Toon Boom Animate from the dropdown
list, as shown in Figure 1.7.
1.7 For Harmony users, the option here will be Toon Boom Harmony.

> 4.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
In the bottom right of the Preferences window, click ‘OK’.
Let’s get back to the Toon Boom interface. Figure 1.8 shows the ‘Animating’ layout with the
main areas labelled.
1.8
A WORD ON FOCUS
An active view or panel is indicated by a thin red outline. Usually when you first open the
program, the Camera View has the thin red border (see Figure 1.8, arrow A), which indicates
that this view ‘has focus’. It works much like when you have multiple folders open on your
computer; clicking one folder brings it to the front, allowing you to work in it.
> EXERCISE 1.3
  FOCUS AND WORKSPACE NAVIGATION
Tap anywhere in the Camera View to make sure it has the red border (see Figure 1.8,
arrow A).
On your keyboard, press the [1] key several times to zoom out.
Press the [2] key to zoom back in.
Hold down [Spacebar] to activate the panning tool, which allows you to drag the
workspace around.
Hold down [Ctrl/⌘ Alt] to activate workspace rotation, and drag in the view.
Press [Shift X] to reset rotation back to 0°, or [Shift M] to reset all (pan, zoom and
rotation).

> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
TIP
Another way of zooming is to use the presets in the bottom left of the Camera View, as
shown in Figure 1.9.
 
1.9
Click in the timeline to give it focus. Notice that the red border is now around the
timeline.
Again, press the [2] and [1] keys to zoom in and out, respectively. Another way of
zooming in the timeline is to use the magnifier slider as seen in Figure 1.10.
1.10
New in Harmony 10.3 is the ability to pan in the Timeline using [spacebar].
Because the timeline now has focus, note how the zooming keys affect the timeline and not the
Camera View.
TIP
A preference you might find handy is Focus on Mouse Enter, which makes the panels active
when you hover over them, rather than needing to click. This happens to be my personal
preference. You’ll find it in: Edit → Preferences, or [Ctrl/⌘ U]. Then on the General tab

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
there’s a checkbox over on the right: Focus on Mouse Enter.
Be aware that this can also be a little frustrating if you’re not used to it. For example, you
might click to rename a layer or colour, but if your cursor strays outside the panel (usually
into another) typing won’t work because focus was lost.
TOOLBARS AND PANELS
The main interface elements are toolbars and panels. While the timeline and workspace are
often called views, they’re actually within panels that can be moved around, grouped and
docked. As we get deeper into the program you’ll encounter other views.
Toolbars are parts of the interface that hold the various tools and other icons. It’s pretty
obvious that the thin vertical bar on the left – packed with tools – is the main Toolbar, but
almost every icon you see across the top of the interface is also in a toolbar.
> EXERCISE 1.4
  CUSTOM LAYOUT
To avoid messing up the Animating layout, we’re going to do two things. First we’ll turn off
layouts auto-saving so we can play around without ruining the defaults, then we’ll create a new
custom layout that we can personalise.
Go to Edit → Preferences, or [Ctrl/⌘ U], then click the General tab.
At the very top left, ensure ‘Automatically Save Workspace’ is unchecked. With this
unchecked, you can make as many changes to the interface as you like, but none of them
will be saved until you deliberately save it.
Click ‘OK’ to save the preference and return to the program.
At the top right of the Toon Boom interface, click the ‘Workspace Manager’ button on the
top toolbar, as shown in Figure 1.11 (if you don’t see this menu or button, you’ll also
find it in Windows → Workspace → Workspace Manager).
1.11
A window opens with two columns. On the left: Available workspaces – while on the
right: Toolbar.

> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
> 10.
> 11.
> 1.
In the left-hand column, click to select the Animating layout.
Click the small add  button at the bottom left.
You have just created a duplicate of Animating that’s automatically named Animating 2.
Give it another name using the Rename button if you wish.
Finally, load your custom layout onto the toolbar. Do this by select ing it in the list, then
clicking the right-facing triangular icon button.
Click ‘OK’ to close the Workspace Manager.
1.12
Now choose your new layout from the Workspace drop-down menu.
If you have any experience with digital graphics and animation software, much of what we’ve
seen so far will feel familiar. The timeline, tools, main work area and panels can all be found
in other programs, as well as the ability to customise your workspace layout. Let’s now
explore some of the toolbars.
> EXERCISE 1.5
  TOOLBARS
You could say the default interface is full of icons. Cluttered, even. Look closely and you’ll see
that one end of every toolbar has a grip handle, which enables you to move it.
Let’s get minimalist and remove all the toolbars to see how much space we can free up.
Go to Window → Toolbars and uncheck everything in the list.
Most toolbars are just full of handy buttons and input fields that can be accessed elsewhere via
menus or shortcut keys. So when you really need some elbow room, you might find removing
them all is the way to go.
For some of these menu items, the toolbars are specific to certain views. For example, as you

> 2.
•
•
•
•
> 3.
uncheck the Timeline View, notice it doesn’t hide the timeline itself; just the toolbar of buttons
on the timeline. Likewise, unchecking the Camera View will just remove the buttons toolbar
from the Camera View.
Again in Window → Toolbars bring back the following toolbars:
Advanced animation – this is off by default, but I recommend turning it on. When
we start animating, we’ll be using it a lot.
1.13
Playback controls – again, when we start animating, this is a handy toolbar, not just
for playback controls, but it also displays your scene’s current frame, start/stop
frames and frame rate.
1.14
Tools – needs no explanation. Power users might leave it off and access each tool
with its keyboard shortcut, but sometimes if you can’t remember a tool’s shortcut
key, it’s nice to just reach up and click the button. Note from Figure 1.15, you can
place your Tools toolbar horizontally across the top, if you need that little bit more
screen width. Likewise, you can move some horizontal toolbars into the vertical
space, if that’s how you like it.
1.15
Timeline View – for beginners, there are some handy buttons here for common
timeline tasks, like adding and removing keyframes.
Shuffle and reorder your toolbars however you like them.
A reminder that this is a practice workspace, so don’t worry if it seems to be getting too
messed up. Remember that if you followed Exercise 1.4, none of your changes will be saved
unless you click the Save Workspace button (the tick icon, seen back in Figure 1.11). Until you
do that, if it really gets out of hand, you can always reselect your custom layout, or any of the
defaults from the Workspace Layout menu to reset everything.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> EXERCISE 1.6
  TOOLS AND THE TIMELINE
The brush tool [Alt B] is the third button in the main Toolbar. Select it now and write
your name anywhere inside the Camera View, preferably within the rectangular border
of the movie.
1.16
Beautiful work. Hey that’s a nice name.
Now press the [.] key on your keyboard.
Hmm, your signature has disappeared from the Camera View… OK, let’s try again.
Rather than signing your name though, draw something else. No need for great art here.
It’s just a demonstration.
1.17
Let’s pause here for a sec to look at the Timeline. Under the numbered strip, you see two little
vertical ‘blocks’on frames 1 and 2, with a red marker sitting above frame 2. You’ve done two
drawings in this scene and here they are, represented by these small rectangles on the timeline.
1.18
Press the [,] key on your keyboard. Your signature is back.
Press the [.] key again and your second image reappears.
As you alternately press the [,] and [.] keys, watch the red marker in the Timeline. This marker
is called the playhead. Wherever the playhead sits, the content for that frame appears in the
Camera View. That is, when the playhead is on frame 1, your first drawing appears in the

> 1.
camera view. When it’s on frame 2, your second drawing appears in the Camera View. As you
press [,] and [.] you’re stepping back and forward along the timeline, frame-by-frame.
You can also move along the timeline by dragging the playhead. This is known as scrubbing
the timeline. Try it out now.
1.19
At its most basic, this is how to create animation in Toon Boom. You draw directly into the
Camera View for one frame, then move to another frame and draw more. Eventually your
timeline is filled with individual drawings that, when displayed at 24 frames per second, give
the illusion of movement. Animation!
> EXERCISE 1.7
  PANELS
Every part of the interface with a named tab is a panel that can be moved, undocked and
grouped with other panels. Figure 1.20 for example shows two panels docked together: the
Colour panel and the Tool Properties panel.
1.20
The instantly recognisable title tab is the first clue that you’re looking at a panel. The second
clue is the two icons beside the title tab. The tiny arrow 
 is a menu list of all other panels.
It’ll corneas no surprise that the  icon – being a somewhat universal ‘close’icon – closes the
panel.
We’ll be using the Drawing View later in the book so let’s open it now.
At the top of the Colour panel, click the  icon and choose Draw ing from the list. If
your colour panel isn’t open, you can open it, or simply perform these steps in any other
panel.
The Drawing View opens and becomes docked alongside your colour panel. You can show
either of them by clicking their title tabs. There’s one problem here: Drawing View is a
drawing workspace much like Camera View, so really, it should be large. I’ve been a bit
sneaky here and deliberately instructed you to open it in a small panel, just so I can show you
how to move it.

> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
Click the Drawing view’s name tab and drag it onto the Camera tab.
When you’re hovered over the Camera tab (or any other tab) just before you release the drag
you’ll notice the receiving tab changes slightly: it gains a fine black border. This is saying ‘if
you drop that tab on me, we’re going to be docked together’.
In the Colour panel once more, click the 
. This time, choose Top from the list. We’ll
talk more about this particular view in a later chapter.
Instead of docking it to another tab, drag your new Top view around the interface,
noticing the outlines that preview where you can drop it.
What if you don’t dock it anywhere? Drop the new Top view in the middle of the
Camera View (crazy, I know!)
Your Top view is now a separate floating window. This is especially useful for those of us
using dual monitors. You can create whole panel groups floating independently of the main
program window.
If you do have a dual monitor setup and want to keep this separate floating window, I
recommend adding the Side view panel, which is another useful view we’ll talk about
later.
Finish up this exercise with your own panel opening, docking and shuffling experiments.
Don’t forget – if you’re happy with your workspace, click the ‘Save Workspace’ button.
It’s a layout icon with a tick on the Workspace layout menu.
At this point, if you’re curious about the other layouts and panels, take some time now to
switch workspace layouts, either by the layout manager dropdown list, or the menu Windows
→ Workspace → Workspace. Explore the other panels in the list and get accustomed to shifting
stuff around.
SAVING THE PROJECT
Before we end this chapter, remember the folder you set up in Exercise 1.1? If you go to your
desktop and look inside that folder now, you’ll see a few more folders.
Save your scene now and check again. There should now be some additional new files in
there, including the file you’ll use in future to open your scene. In the image below, this is the
coloured icon with the name test_scene.

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
»
»
»
»
1.21
The rest of these folders and files all contribute to your scene in some way. Again, we cover
some of these in greater detail towards the back of the book in Appendix B. Feel free to flip
forward if you really want to know what it all means, but understanding it isn’t crucial at this
early stage. Needless to say, everything to do with your scene, whether audio, colour palettes,
imported images or saved animation, they’re all filed neatly away here.
Once saved, you can now close your file. In the next chapter, we’ll get to know the interface
with more exercises. Before that though, take a moment to read this brief list and come back to
it if you need any reminders.
Directory structure is set up when you hit the ‘Create’ button, but isn’t actually created
until you save the scene.
The thin red border indicates which view has focus. Clicking in a view gives it focus.
The timeline is a linear representation of frames in the scene.
The scene can be shortened, or lengthened by dragging the end marker.
The ‘playhead’ is the current frame indicator in the Timeline.
‘Scrubbing’ means dragging the playhead back and forth.
See Appendix B on page 436 for information on technical aspects.
Useful shortcut keys:
[1] and [2] – Camera and Timeline zooming
[.] and [,] – stepping forward and back one frame
[Ctrl/⌘ Alt] – workspace rotation
[Shift M] – reset view

»
[Shift X] – reset workspace rotation only.

CHAPTER 2
Tools

I
CREATING ART
n later chapters you’ll have the opportunity to animate a couple of simple movies, each
consisting of several scenes with titles, credits, effects and audio. Of course, in order to
create animation, you’ll want to know how to get your art into the program – whether by
scanning and vectorising drawings from paper, importing images from another program or by
drawing and painting directly into Toon Boom.
In the first part of this chapter you’ll learn all about the tools available to you for creating art.
In the second part, you’ll learn about colour management, layers and rendering. First let’s
briefly cover how to bring in images from outside the program.
IMPORTING ART
The art style of your project may require you to create backgrounds or animation in another
program and import those images into Toon Boom. Generally throughout this book, we want to
focus on the tools within Toon Boom, so the following is just a brief introduction to importing.
To import artwork, simply go to File → Import → Images. The Import Images window
appears, giving you options to create new layers or add the imported images to existing layers.
2.1
WARNING

Turn OFF Vectorise Imported Items – The Import Images window gives you an option to
‘vectorise imported items’. If you’re importing complex images with lots of colours and
detail, or you’re just importing sketches as reference images, you should turn vectorising off!
It converts bitmap images into vector art, which can really slow down your computer when
used on complex images like photographs or full-colour paintings. Don’t worry at this stage
if you don’t know what bitmap and vector mean. You can learn more about scanning,
importing and when to vectorise in Appendix B, page 436.
Before we move on, it’s nice to note that you can import layered image files with their layering
intact, for example, .psd and .tif formats. Just select ‘All Layer Images’ from the dropdown list
in the Import Settings window (shown in Figure 2.2). This is extremely useful for scenes with
multilayered backgrounds through which the characters can move.
2.2
ILLUSTRATING WITH TOON BOOM
The Toon Boom universe revolves around animation but it also happens to be excellent vector
illustration software. Notjustforthe drawing tools, but also the colour, paint, effects filters and
the built-in scanning interface.
In this chapter, the individual tool sections and their exercises have been written to stand
alone. While I encourage you to get a feel for all of them, you can jump forward and back to the
tools you want to learn, doing the exercises given for each.

2.3 ©Wizards of the Coast LLC.
To help you grow accustomed to using the tools, this chapter contains a number of exercises for
each tool, an occasional tool challenge and then, at the end, a more substantial illustration
project. All this will familiarise you not only with drawing and painting in Toon Boom, but
also text, colour and rendering.
ILLUSTRATION PROJECT
The illustration project at the end of the chapter steps through making an example comic strip
that I’ve already written for you. You should however feel free to get creative; use your own
characters, text and colours as you see fit. The finished product will be suitable for print,

online and whatever else you want to do with it. Let’s prepare by looking closely at the tools
and putting each into practice as we go.
TOOL PROPERTIES PANEL
As you may remember from the previous chapter, the Tool Properties panel is context-
sensitive. That is, its contents change depending on which tool you have selected.
Go ahead and try it out; watch the panel update as you select different tools in the toolbar. Tool
Properties is one of those panels you’ll have permanently open, or at least within easy reach
for calibrating each tool you use.
If you can’t see it in your workspace, or you closed it in the previous chapter, you should open
it now. Once again, you can access it from any panel with the  icon. I recommend putting it
somewhere it can remain open at all times so you can change tool settings as you work without
breaking your stride.
The panel is divided into sections, each of which contains different options, modes, fields and
buttons depending on the tool you have selected. Figure 2.5 shows the Properties panel for the
Brush tool.
2.4

2.5 
left: Animate 2 Brush properties; 
right: Animate 3 Brush properties.
SHORTCUT KEYS
While all the tools are easily accessible from the toolbar, every tool can be activated by a
shortcut key. Usually, the tool shortcut is holding down [Alt] while pressing the appropriate
tool key, for example [Alt B] for the Brush tool.
WARNING
Shortcut keys are also context-sensitive! Before you use a shortcut key, be sure that the
intended panel or view has focus. In the Camera View, the [D] key activates the Dropper
tool, while in the Timeline [D] does something completely different.
In this chapter, unless specified otherwise, the shortcut keys listed are for the Camera and
Drawing Views only.
If you take a look through Edit→ Preferences→ Shortcuts you’ll find a lot of overlap on
shortcut keys for different views and panels. We’ll talk more about this when we get around
to setting up a few custom shortcut keys later in the book.
OVERRIDE KEYS

As well as the [Alt] tool shortcuts, you’ll also see mention of override keys. These usually
correspond to the [Alt] key shortcuts. For example, the Brush tool shortcut is [Alt B] but its
override key is [B]. In other words, regardless of what tool you have, you can temporarily
activate the Brush just by holding down [B]. This is demonstrated several times in upcoming
exercises.
TIP
The name of your active tool always appears in the bar at the bottom of the Camera View.
When you activate an override key, you’ll see its name displayed in red.
Shortcut keys are at the core of an efficient workflow. While I’ve emphasised them strongly in
this chapter, nobody is expected to memorise each and every one from the start. It’s
recommended that you memorise just the one or two you use most and associate the mental
image of the tool alongside its shortcut key.
THE TOOLBAR
As you know by now, the main toolbar is like a weapons rackfrom which you select the right
implement for the task at hand. You’ve already had a chance to experiment with one or two of
them in the previous chapter.
2.6      
The tools can be loosely categorised for drawing, painting, selecting, transforming, editing
and, of course, animation. So let’s start off with the drawing and painting tools before moving
on to selecting and editing. We’ll look into animation tools later in the book.

BRUSH [ALT B]
 The Brush tool is extremely versatile with a good range of adjustable properties. If you’re
the type of artist who draws everything directly into the software (rather than scanning) you’ll
find the Brush to be one of your most-used tools. When rendered, it’s a beautiful line and with
pressure sensitivity of your tablet, feels really nice to use. I have a feeling you two will get
along just fine.
The underlying feature of a Brush stroke is that it isn’t really a line. It’s actually a long, thin
area of paint contained inside a vector border. Figure 2.8 illustrates this.
2.7
2.8
This isn’t important to understand right now but on page 83 we’ll talk about manipulating that
border for ultra-fine control. You can read more about vectors and points in Appendix B.
Looking at the Tool Properties panel with the Brush tool selected, you can see there are plenty
of options to play with. Again, if you haven’t got the Tool Properties panel open, you can do
that using the  icon on any panel.
2.9

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
The Option buttons activate modes of the Brush. You won’t need a tutorial exercise for
everyone of these. For example, Normal mode is pretty self-explanatory and certain others are
beyond the scope of this particular chapter. Let’s just look at the important ones right now.
NOTE
From this point onward, I’m going to assume you know how to start a new scene in
yourToon Boom software. Please revise in Chapter 1, page 16 if you need a reminder.
Whether you use one file for many exercises, save separate files for each exercise, or
whether you even save these exercises at all, I’ll leave entirely up to you.
For the end of chapter project, I’ll specify project setup, naming and saving in the steps.
> BRUSH EXERCISE 1 
  RESIZING THE BRUSH
In a new scene file, click frame 1 in the Timeline. You should develop this habit of
selecting the frame you’re about to work in.
2.10
Ensure the Camera View has focus by clicking its name tab – again, more habit-forming.
For a reminder of ‘panel focus’, see Chapter 1, page 19.
2.11
On your keyboard, press [Alt B] to arm yourself with the Brush. Right away you’ll see
that the Brush cursor is a kind of crosshair 
Again on your keyboard, this time hold down the [O] key and drag left to right in the
Camera View. The [O] key is the interactive resizing shortcut for all drawing tools. In
the Camera or Drawing Views, watch the cursor as you drag the Brush size smaller and

> 5.
> 6.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
larger. Release the [O] key and in the Brush tool properties, see how the value for the
Maximum Brush Size has changed.
2.12
On your keyboard, this time hold down [Shift O] and again, drag in the Camera View.
In the tool properties, watch the Brush minimum size values changing.
[Shift O] is the shortcut for the minimum size of the Brush. When you use a graphics tablet with
pressure sensitivity, you’ll settle on a minimum size that you like and rarely change it. Mine is
almost permanently set to 0.1 and I rarely use [Shift O] at all.
> BRUSH EXERCISE 2 
  SHORTCUTS OVERRIDE
If shortcut keys speed up your workflow, the override keys take it to the next level. Working
with any tool, you can hold down another tool’s key to temporarily arm it.
NOTE
Tool shortcuts and overrides, like the tools themselves, only work in the Camera and
Drawing Views. The [O] shortcut has different functions in other views.
In the Timeline, select frame 1.
Resize your Brush with [O] to a good drawing size. Anything between 10 and 20 should
be good. In the Brush properties, into the minimum size field, enter 0.1.
In your Camera View with the Brush tool active [Alt B], start sketching. Some primitive
shapes will do.

> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
> 10.
> 1.
> 2.
2.13
On your keyboard, hold down [E] to temporarily activate the eraser tool.
Without releasing [E], erase parts of your sketch.
Release [E] and the Brush returns.
Sketch more things!
Hold down [S] to temporarily activate the Select tool. Notice while holding [S] the
cursor has changed to the select tool.
While holding [S], drag a selection area around parts, or all, of your sketch.
On your keyboard press the [Delete] key to delete the selected strokes.
> BRUSH EXERCISE 3 
  MIXING A COLOUR FOR ROUGH SKETCHING
We’re taking a brief detour here to better understand a couple of other Brush modes.
In your colour panel, locate the black colour swatch. In Animate and Animate Pro, this is
named Default Line, while in Harmony it’s simply named Black.
In the colour panel, double-click the black rectangular swatch itself (not the name) and
the Colour picker will open.
TIP
If you can’t see your colour panel tab anywhere, remember you can open it from any of the
panels using the 
. Refer to Exercise 1.7, page 18, if you need a refresher.

> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 1.
Enter the HSV (Hue, Saturation, Value) values as shown in Figure 2.14. I’m using a very
dark blue for the purpose of these screenshots, but I would normally use a much paler
blue. You may use whatever values work for you.
2.14
Move the Alpha slider to about a third of the way, or simply type 85 into the Alpha value
field.
2.15
In the Name field at the top, rename this colour by replacing Black (or Default Line)
with Rough Blu.
Close the Colour Picker and your new Rough Blu colour should now be at the top of the
Colour panel.
2.16
> BRUSH EXERCISE 4 
  SHOW AND FLATTEN STROKES
In the Timeline, select frame 1.

> 2.
> 3.
4.
Give the Camera View focus then take some time to sketch a few random shapes. Use the
Brush tool with the new rough colour you created in the Brush exercise 3.
2.17
Because the rough colour is semi-transparent, you can see layered opacity where the strokes
overlap. You can also see how each stroke remains separate from the others. While this makes
it easier to select, edit, move or delete each individual stroke, you can always flatten your
strokes together so they form a single line.
In the top menu, go to View → Show → Show Strokes. Alternatively you can simply
press [K] on your keyboard.
Zoom in using the [2] key and drag-pan with [Spacebar] to get a good close up look at
the Brush strokes. If you zoom in too far, press [1] to back out.
Notice that, even though you may have many strokes in your sketch, the blue vector outline
defines the border around them as a whole, rather than outlining each one individually.
Show Strokes is useful in many ways, but one particularly handy application is revealing areas
of difficult-to-see colour, or even hidden colour. For example, suppose one of your colours
was almost the same grey as the Camera View background. It would be difficult to see.
Similarly, if you were using white in the Drawing View, which has a white background, Show
Strokes will reveal the outline.

> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
2.18
WARNING
Use Show Strokes with caution. On a very complex sketch, showing strokes can lock up
your computer momentarily. The program may become unresponsive for anywhere from a
few seconds to several minutes, depending on the power of your computer and the
complexity of the sketch.
On your keyboard, press [K] again to hide the strokes.
In the Brush tool properties, activate the Auto-Flatten button.
2.19
In the Camera View, zoom out if necessary using the [1] key and then continue your
sketch.
As soon as you lift your pen after the first stroke, all the existing strokes merge to become one.
There’s no longer any visible overlapping of strokes.
While this Brush option flattens your strokes as you draw, you may find it removes detail or
nuances you prefer to keep. For example, in my sketch above, the slightly darker parts of the
eyes lose their appeal when flattened.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
2.20
For this reason, I usually leave the Auto-Flatten option turned off, and only flatten drawings
when I need to, by selecting it, then Drawing → Optimise → Flatten [Alt Shift F].
> BRUSH EXERCISE 5 
  PAINT BEHIND MODE
Ensure Auto-Flatten is turned off.
With the default black paint, draw some Brush strokes in the Camera View.
From your colour panel, choose any other colour.
In the Brush tool properties, activate the Paint Behind option.
2.21
In the Timeline, select frame 1.
In the Camera View, the Paint Behind cursor looks like this . Draw some strokes over
the top of your sketch. When you release the pen, your colour strokes will appear behind
your sketch.
2.22

> 1.
> 1a.
> 1b.
There are many uses for this mode. You might later find it useful for filling in tiny holes in
paintwork, or perhaps drawing a shirt collar behind a character’s neck.
> BRUSH EXERCISE 6 
  REPAINT BRUSH
One exceptionally useful Brush mode is the Repaint Brush. It allows you to repaint any
existing painted areas with another colour.
2.23
2.24
Start by choosing a solid dark blue from the colour panel.
ANIMATE PRO HARMONY ONLY
Animate users have 120 existing colours to choose from but Animate Pro and Harmony users might like to create a
completely new colour.
In the colour panel, click the 
 button.
Double-click the new colour swatch to mix a solid dark blue. If you need guidance, revisit Brush exercise 3 (on page
40).

> 1c.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
Input HSV values as shown in Figure 2.24.
There will be more on colour mixing and management later in this chapter starting on page 101.
In the colour panel, ensure this new colour is selected.
In the Timeline, select the frame with your shape sketches from exercise 4.
Select the Repaint Brush using the shortcut [Alt X], Alternatively you can activate the
Repaint Brush in the Brush tool properties panel, as shown in Figure 2.23.
In the Camera View try sketching in an empty part of the scene.
Repaint mode only repaints existing colour. It won’t sketch like the normal Brush mode
because it only works on already-painted areas and strokes.
With the Brush holding the new colour, paint over your existing sketches.
Here you can see how the sketch strokes, and nothing else, are repainted with the new colour
you chose in step 2.
2.25
> BRUSH EXERCISE 7 
  CUSTOM BRUSHES
I’ve intentionally skipped the remaining mode buttons as they’re linked to more advanced
concepts and will be covered later in the book.
2.26

> 1.
•
•
> 2.
In the Brush properties panel, we have the list of Brush presets. In earlier versions of the
software, this is a drop-down list that, by default, shows ‘Brush 1’. In the most recent version,
large Brush previews take up most of the panel. This is a list of saved Brush and texture styles
(note: Brush textures are not available in Animate 2).
Custom Brush styles store the sizes, texture, shape, and smooth/optimise information. They do
not save colour information.
2.27
Select each Brush preset in turn, note the Preview stroke and test it out by drawing in the
Camera View.
Any texture file in .psd format, including your own custom textures, can be applied to your
Brushes via the Brush Properties:
Animate Pro 2 and Harmony 10.3 – textures are accessed at the bottom of the Tool
Properties panel as shown on the left in Figure 2.28.
Animate 3, Animate Pro 3 and Harmony 11 – textures are accessed from the Extended
Brush Properties window, which you can find by clicking the large triangular icon in the
Brush Tool properties, shown in Figure 2.28.
The list of preset brush styles may be the only ones you’ll ever need. Then again, you might
like to continue this exercise to create your own.
In the Brush tool properties, click the New Brush icon  new Brush style is now in the
list with a default name like Brush 7. You may need to scroll down the list to find your
new style.

> 3.
•
•
> 4.
With your new Brush style selected in the list, rename it.
Animate 2, Animate Pro 2 and Harmony 10.3 – Click the Rename Brush icon: 
.
Animate 3, Animate Pro 3 and Harmony 11 – Use  to access the ‘Rename
Brush’ menu item.
Name your Brush style whatever you like and click ‘OK’. I’ve called mine roughs.
2.28 (left) Animate Pro 2, Harmony 10.3 Enable texture; 
        (right) Animate 3, Animate Pro 3 and Harmony 11 Brush properties
Earlier Toon Boom versions don’t allow you to change the Brush order. Each new Brush is
created at the bottom of the list. However, the latest versions of Toon Boom software allow
you to shuffle the ordering of your Brush presets. You can drag your favourite, most frequently
used brushes to the top of the list.

2.29
Brushes can be resized on-the-fly so why not just use the same Brush and resize it with the [O]
key as needed? If that’s what you’re thinking, there’s nothing stopping you from deleting some
of them using the Delete Brush button .
On the other hand, custom styles can be useful for common tasks. For example, you may have
your ‘roughs’ style and a separate ‘cleanup’ style for cleaning up your character sketches.
With the release of Animate 3 and Animate Pro 3, users have access to an awesome feature
called Dynamic Brushes, which were previously available in Harmony only. You can learn
more about textures and dynamic Brushes in Appendix A.
In the Brush tool properties, we can see numerical fields for minimum and maximum thickness,
smoothing and optimising, and Brush shape. In the most recent versions, you will find these in
the Extended Brush Properties window, accessed by clicking the big triangle (see Figure 2.28).
Go ahead and experiment with each of fields and settings, and watch the Preview stroke in the

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
panel (see Figure 2.29). If you create something you like, why not save it using what you’ve
learned from this exercise?
> BRUSH EXERCISE 8: 
  BRUSH SHAPES
We have a selection of Brush shapes to choose from, each offering a unique line for a range of
tasks. For example, you may find the flat styles useful for calligraphic pen effects, or perhaps
something as simple as drawing a ribbon. These shapes aren’t available on texture brushes.
2.30
In the Timeline, select frame 1.
In the Brush Properties panel, choose an angled Brush shape.
Type in a minimum Brush size of 80 and a maximum of 80.
In the Camera View, draw a flowing length of ribbon.
Experiment with other angles, sizes and Brush shapes for different effects.

2.31
PENCIL [ALT /]
 The Pencil draws a central vector – rather than a vector border filled with paint, as you
saw with the Brush tool. It’s built like a strand of electrical wire: a central core with a coating
of colour.
2.32
Harmony users and those with Animate 3 or Animate Pro 3 will find that the Pencil is super
powerful and rivals the Brush in many ways. The first two exercises will cover the basic
version then we’ll see what’s so great about its new features.
Once again, you can learn more about vector strokes and lines in Appendix B towards the back
of this book.
The Pencil tool behaves much like the Brush and its options are very similar to those you saw
in the Brush tool exercises. We have modes for Paint Behind and Auto-Flatten, as well as the
now-familiar style presets list where custom values can be saved and renamed.
Just as you learned in the first Brush exercise on page 38, the Pencil can also be resized using

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
the [O] key.
> PENCIL EXERCISE 1 
  PENCIL LINES
Arm the Pencil now by using the shortcut key [Alt /] and let’s take it for a spin.
In the Timeline, select frame 1.
In the Camera View, draw a line, a triangle and a circle.
Hold down [Shift] to draw straight lines. Even in the middle of a stroke, you can hold
[Shift] to draw straight and then release [Shift] to return to freehand mode. If you’re
using Animate 2 or Animate Pro 2, right away you’ll notice that the Pencil line has no
pressure sensitivity, so it has a consistent width from end to end. This may be desirable
for some tasks, especially for mechanical or architectural lines. For organic shapes
though, it’s definitely a hard, wiry, almost-too-perfect look.
Press [K] to Show Strokes.
2.33
Unlike the blue outline of the Brush stroke, the blue line you see in Figure 2.33 is the central
vector. A single, central line is much lighter and faster for the computer to process than the
Brush stroke’s vector outline.
The triangle is fully closed, but the yellow and red squares represent unconnected points and
are designed to show up gaps in your line-work. If you haven’t carefully closed the circle and
triangle, these little end markers will reveal the gap, at a glance.
PENCIL EXERCISE 2 
CLOSING GAPS

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
Ensure you have the Pencil [Alt /] selected.
In the tool properties panel, for the purpose of this exercise, make sure the Auto Close
Gaps button is off.
2.34
In the Camera View, deliberately draw a square without quite closing the gap at the end,
as shown below.
2.35
On your keyboard, press and hold [Y] (paint unpainted tool) and try to flood the square
with colour by clicking in it. The gap in the square doesn’t allow you to fill it.
Important: Ensure Show Strokes is on using [K] on your keyboard. The thin blue central
vector will appear in your Pencil lines.
Now hold down [C] (close gaps override) and draw an invisible line across any gaps to
close them. Once the gap is closed, the end markers should disappear.
2.36
On your keyboard, hold down [Y] once again and click inside the square to fill it with

> 8.
> 9.
> 10.
> 11.
> 12.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
colour.
Hide Strokes now with [K]. Step 2 of this exercise instructed you to turn off the Auto
Close Gaps button. Now let’s turn it on and see how it affects things.
In the Pencil tool properties, turn on the Auto Close Gaps button (see Figure 2.34).
Click the Camera View’s name tab to give it focus.
Show Strokes with [K].
In the Camera View, draw a circle or square.
With Auto Close Gaps turned on, you don’t need to be so precise. You will certainly find this
to be a huge time-saver when you’re drawing frame after frame of character animation.
> PENCIL EXERCISE 3 
  VARIABLE WIDTH
The new advanced Pencil is available only in Animate 3, Animate Pro 3 and all versions of
Harmony. It has minimum and maximum size input fields in the properties panel. This means it
can have variable width, just like the Brush tool, yet all the CPU-friendly economy of a central
vector line.
Select the Pencil [Alt /] and in the Tool Properties panel choose ‘Pencil 1’ from the
styles list.
In the Extended Pencil Properties (the big triangle button), enter the values shown in
Figure 2.37.
2.37
In the Timeline, select frame 1.

> 4.
> 5.
> 1.
> 2.
Draw some strokes. Just like the Brush, the Pencil lines are variable depending on the
tablet pressure you use.
Show Strokes using [K], or View → Show → Show Strokes.
2.38
Regardless of the width, the Pencil is still just a central vector with the line built around it.
Tryout some of the styles provided in the list and note their settings. You can create your own
custom styles here, in much the same way as you did in Brush exercise 7, back on page 46.
> PENCIL EXERCISE 4 
  LINE BUILDING MODE
Line Building mode is an incredible feature, originally Harmony-only, but now in Animate 3
and Animate Pro 3. Like the Auto Close Gaps button, it eliminates the need for meticulous
precision and tedious manual gap-closing.
In the Timeline, select frame 1.
In the Pencil properties, activate Line Building mode. It’s the button with a hammer icon.

> 3.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
2.39
In the Camera View, begin sketching a simple shape using multiple strokes, just as you
might do with a real pencil.
Right away it’ll become apparent just how awesome this is. You can ‘sketch’ an entire outline
and at the end, have a beautiful clean drawing.
The only slight downside of this mode is that you’re handing over some control, so
occasionally you’ll have a situation where the line building mode merges the wrong lines, or
otherwise produces unwanted results. After a bit of experience with it though, you will get a
feel for the drawing tasks that are best suited for this mode and find yourself toggling Line
Building on and off.
> PENCIL EDITOR EXERCISE 1 
  PENCIL EDITOR TOOL
As well as the Pencil tool properties, the Pencil Editor tool gives you an ultra-fine level of
control over how your Pencil lines look. Once again, this was previously a Harmony-only
feature but is now available in Animate 3 and Animate Pro 3 as well. If you use Animate 2 or
Animate Pro 2, you unfortunately won’t have these features.
In the Timeline, select frame 1.
With the Pencil, draw some lines in any colour or style.
Obviously I’ve drawn the handle lines way too thick giving me a convenient excuse to use the
Pencil Editor!
Press [Alt W] to select the Pencil Editor. Alternatively click-hold the Contour Editor in
the Toolbar and choose the Pencil Editor from the list that appears.

> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
2.40
 
2.41
Press [K] to Show Strokes
With the Pencil Editor, click on, or drag across the central vector of any Pencil stroke. A
red outline with solid square points surrounds the Pencil stroke.
2.42
Drag any point to widen or thin the stroke.

> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
> 10.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
Hold [Shift] then drag any point to uniformly widen the stroke on both sides of the
vector.
Hold [Ctrl] and click the central vector to add more control points.
Draw a selection around any point, or group of points to reveal tangent handles (also
known as Bezier handles). Experiment with the tangent handles to adjust the curvature of
the stroke.
Hold [Alt] then drag any tangent handle to break the connection with its opposite handle.
2.43
> PENCIL EDITOR EXERCISE 2 
  PUMP AND SHRINK
With the Pencil Editor [Alt W], drag across any Pencil stroke to select it.
Drag a region around any point, or group of points to reveal the tangent handles on those
points.
2.44
In the Pencil Editor properties, click the Pump Pencil Pressure button a number of times
to watch the line widen.
Experiment with Pump as well as the next button, Shrink Pencil Pressure, and take note how
each affects twin points or group selections.
> PENCIL EDITOR EXERCISE 3 
  MERGE LINES

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
2.45
The Line Building mode, as you saw back in Pencil exercise 4, joins lines together as you
draw. But sometimes you’ll want to join lines up after you’ve drawn them. You’ll find the
Merge Lines button in the Pencil Editor properties for just this purpose.
In the Timeline, select frame 1.
Select the Pencil tool [Alt /] and a colour of your choice.
In the Pencil tool properties, ensure Line Building mode is turned off.
Sketch a simple shape with a number of individual strokes.
2.46
Select the Pencil Editor [Alt W] and drag a selection area around all of the Pencil
strokes.
In the Pencil Editor properties, click the Merge Lines button.
This heavy-handed approach to merging everything at once can create problems. Chances are
the merge has created gaps or merged too much.
On your keyboard, press [Ctrl/⌘ Z] to undo the merge.
Now try again by selecting just a few strokes at a time and merging them.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
2.47
Later we’ll talk about manipulating the lines to smooth out any undesirable curves.
> PENCIL EDITOR EXERCISE 4 
  PENCIL TEMPLATES
Similar to Brush and Pencil presets, Pencil templates allow you to save line styles that you’ve
created using the Pencil Editor.
In the Timeline select frame 1.
With the Pencil [Alt /] hold down [Shift] and draw a short, straight line.
With the Pencil Editor [Alt W], drag across the line to activate the red handles.
Create a new pair of manipulator points by holding down [Ctrl] and clicking the central
vector as shown in Figure 2.48. As you add the new point, a pair appears; one on either
side of the vector.
2.48
Select individual points and manipulate them and their handles to create a pair of lips in
the line. A reminder that [Alt] breaks the connection between tangent handles.

> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
> 10.
2.49
When you’re happy with the lips, making sure that the red manipulator envelope is still
up, click the New Pencil Template button in the Pencil Editor properties. Figure 2.50
shows the Pencil Template button in previous versions of Toon Boom (left) and the
latest (right).
2.50
You’ll now find your new template at the bottom of the templates list, named ‘Pencil Template
1’.
Select ‘Pencil Template T from the list and use the Rename menu 
 to call your
template ‘smile’.
2.51
Now it’s time to use your first Pencil template!
Grab the Pencil [Alt /].
In the tool properties, select ‘smile’ from the bottom of the styles list. You’ll probably
need to scroll the list to find it, but you can drag it to the top of your list if you like.
In the Camera View, draw some short strokes until you can’t help but smile back.
NOTE

•
•
•
•
> 11.
> 12.
> 13.
A couple of things to note as you experiment with this:
You can curve the line up like a smile, or down to make it more pouty.
If the line is longer, the smile will be stretched.
If you draw the line from right-to-left, the smile will be upside-down
Templates might be fun for short strokes like smiles, leaves and bats but the general
idea is to create interesting line styles with longer sections for entire character
outlines.
Finally, you can apply this template to any existing Pencil stroke. In earlier versions of
Animate Pro and Harmony, you would first need to select the stroke using the Pencil Editor
tool [Alt W], and then click the Apply Pencil Template  button. It’s much simpler in Animate
3, Animate Pro 3 and Harmony 11, as follows:
Select any Pencil stroke with the Select tool [Alt S].
Simply select any of the Pencil Styles in the Pencil Properties to change the style of the
selected stroke.
Experiment further by applying Pencil templates to various Pencil strokes.
For a bit of fun you can practice creating various shapes with the Pencil Editor, as illustrated
in Figure 2.52. Some of them might even turn out to be useful!

2.52
ERASER [ALT E]
 Right after learning about the Brush and Pencil tools, it makes sense to talk about erasing.
The Eraser is as simple as it gets though, so this will be brief.
It’s an eraser, so it erases. It works like a negative paint Brush – simply drag to erase.
The Eraser options are the same as we’ve seen for the Brush and Pencil, although there are no
mode buttons in the eraser’s properties panel. It includes the familiar minimum and maximum
size fields, which means you can use the [O] key to resize the eraser as you work in the
Camera view. There is also a list of Eraser styles just like that of the Brush and Pencil.
The eraser in Animate 3, Animate Pro 3 and Harmony gives you one option button, which is
circled in Figure 2.53. This applies specifically to erasing Pencil or any other central vector
line. When you use the Eraser to break up Pencil or Shape tool strokes, Harmony provides
three options for how the line ends are capped. As you saw in the Pencil tool properties, lines
drawn can be capped with rounded, square or bevelled ends. In the eraser properties, simply
enable the option for how you want your lines to be cut as you erase them.

2.53
 
2.54
SHAPE [ALT \]
 The Shape tool has three modes: Line, Rectangle and Ellipse.
For traditional artists and animators, these tools may seem too primitive for everyday use, but
they are in fact extremely useful in practice. Every day we are surrounded by mathematically
solid lines and arcs. Just look around you.
You can set options for each Shape tool mode in the properties panel.
NOTE

> 1.
> 2.
The shortcut for this tool is Alt + back slash [Alt \], not to be confused with the Pencil’s
forward slash [/].
When used in conjunction with the Contour Editor (we’ll talk about that later on page 83) each
line can be manipulated with great precision, providing excellent control when drawing
architecture, machinery, perspective grids and more.
By now, most of the buttons in the Shape properties panel will be familiar to you, with just a
couple of exceptions.
2.55
> SHAPE EXERCISE 1 
  LINE SNAPPING
If you’re new to software, it might help to know that the term ‘snapping’ has nothing to do with
breaking. It refers to the magnet-like snapping together of line ends to other objects.
In the Timeline, select frame 1.
Select the Shape tool with [Alt \], The tool properties show that it’s in Line mode.

> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
In the Camera View, click-drag and release to create lines of various angles. You can
hold down [Shift] to snap lines to 15° angles.
Click the Snap to Contour button in the tool properties.
2.56
NOTE
Snap to Contour has a shortcut key. Simply hold down [Alt] when drawing with the Line,
and your line ends will snap together.
It’s not necessary to keep [Alt] held down while dragging the line. Once the line sticks, you
can release the [Alt] key throughout the drag and the start of the line will remain snapped.
If you’ve released the [Alt] key while dragging, you can simply hold it again to snap the end
of your line to another Pencil line or Brush stroke.
Draw some polygons and see how the line ends snap together as if magnetic. This is
useful for ensuring your linework has no gaps, when it comes time to paint.
Press [Ctrl/⌘ ’], or go to View → Grid → Show Grid.
In the Shape tool properties, turn the Snap to Grid button on.
2.57
As the cursor hovers in the Camera View, notice that a tiny circle jumps around the grid.
Click-drag to draw some new lines and you’ll see how the start and ends of your line are
aligned perfectly to the grid intersections.

> 10.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 1.
> 2.
You can turn off grid snapping by toggling the button off. The grid itself can be turned off
simply by pressing [Ctrl/⌘ ’] again.
> SHAPE EXERCISE 2 
  RECTANGLE AND ELLIPSE
From the toolbar, select the Rectangle tool from behind the Line tool, or press [Alt 7].
You’ll notice that the tool properties panel is barely distinguishable from the Line tool
settings.
2.58
In the Camera View, draw a rectangle by dragging diagonally in any direction. You’ll
see the rectangle preview stretch and distort as you move the cursor around.
While dragging, hold down [Shift] to constrain the Rectangle tool to a perfect square,
and [Alt] to create the rectangle from the centre. You can also use [Shift Alt] together to
create a perfect square from the centre.
The Ellipse options are exactly the same as the Rectangle. Select it as you did the Rectangle in
Step 1, or press [Alt =], and repeat the above steps.
> SHAPE EXERCISE 3 
  AUTO FILL
2.59
The Rectangle and Ellipse shapes have the Auto Fill option. Activate this button to
automatically fill your rectangle or ellipse with the chosen colour. Alternatively you could
simply fill the empty rectangle or ellipse using the Paint tool, which we’ll talk about after this
exercise.
In the Shape tool properties, turn the Auto Fill option on.
In the Camera View, draw rectangles and ellipses.

If you have solid black chosen as your colour, your rectangles and ellipses will be filled with
solid black.
NOTE
If your lines and fills are different colours, don’t worry for now; at least you know the Auto
Fill works. Later, in the Colour Management section starting on page 101, we’ll look at
linking and unlinking colours so that your outlines can be a different colour to the fill.
From this day forward, whenever you need to fill the screen with blue for a sky background, or
whenever you need to draw a filled white circle for the moon, chances are you’ll be using the
Shape tool.
> SHAPE EXERCISE 4 
  NO OUTLINE
To create a rectangle, circle or any other closed shape without an outline, simply set the line
thickness to zero and ensure that Auto Fill is turned on (see exercise 3). You may receive a
popup message that your strokes are invisible, but simply click OK and then you can Show
Strokes with [K] to see your invisible lines.
PAINT [ALT I]
 With the paint bucket you can flood-fill closed areas with colour. Considering most 2D
animation consists of outlines filled with colour – from a simple background rectangle filled
with sky blue, to a crowd scene with potentially hundreds of individually coloured areas –
you’ll quickly grow familiar with this tool.
The fantastic thing about Toon Boom paint is its ease of application. To fill tiny areas like
eyes, jewellery and buttons, it’s not necessary to painstakingly click inside those empty spaces
(even though you can, if that’s what you like to do). The paint bucket has marquee and lasso
modes, so to paint a closed area no matter how small, you can simply drag your lasso through
or around it. The paint bucket detects which areas are closed and fills them. This makes
painting very fast. No more zooming in 1200 percent to delicately click in a small area!
In the tools properties, you’ll find several Paint modes which we’ll see in the upcoming
exercises.

> 1.
> 2.
2.60
As you may have already seen in the Pencil exercises, paint cannot exist without a vector
border around it. Just like a real life paint can, it won’t hold any paint if there’s a hole in it.
Similarly, if there’s a gap anywhere in your vector border, the Paint tool simply doesn’t work.
Hence this constant emphasis on closing gaps in your linework.
The beginning part of each exercise below will require you to use those drawing tools you’ve
already learned (Brush, Pencil, Shape) to create various outlines for filling.
2.61
> PAINT EXERCISE 1 
  CLICK, LASSO AND MARQUEE
In the Timeline, select any frame you’d like to draw on.
From the toolbar, choose the Brush or press [Alt B].

> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
In the Camera View, draw any closed shape you like. Carefully ensure the linework is
completely closed, leaving no gaps.
2.62
Choose the Paint (bucket) tool from the toolbar, or use the short cut [Alt I]
With the Paint tool, click once inside the closed shape.
If the area hasn’t been flooded with paint, you may have gaps in your linework. In this case, we
can take advantage of the Auto Close Gaps option in the Paint tool properties. Alternatively,
you can revisit Pencil exercise 2 on page 52 for a refresher on finding and closing them.
TIP
Does your paint bucket seem to be painting with the wrong colour? It may be that your tool
colours are unlinked. Skip ahead to page 115 and see how tool colour linking works, then
skip back here.
Next, we’ll look at the lasso mode of the Paint tool.
In the Timeline, select the frame you’d like to work in.
Using the Pencil or Brush with black paint, draw a character’s head and eyes in
linework. Ensure each of these is a closed shape, and notice in Figure 2.63, even the
shirt has a line closing the area. Incidentally, in animation, this is called a cutoff line. It’s
usually just outside the border of the movie where it won’t be seen, and exists purely to
close the area for paint.

> 8.
> 9.
> 10.
> 11.
> 12.
> 13.
2.63
Select the Paint tool from the toolbar, or press [Alt I].
From the colour panel, now choose a colour for the character’s skin.
NOTE
If you’re using Animate Pro or Harmony, feel free to mix a new skin colour. Refresh your
memory if necessary by revisiting Brush exercise 3 on page 40. There is a substantial
section dedicated to Colour Management coming upon page 101.
In the Paint tool properties, make sure the mode is set to Lasso.
2.64
With your Paint tool now, ‘draw’ a stroke across the hair.
As long as your stroke passes through the hair, it’ll be filled with hair colour. But we have a
problem: the black outline has also been painted. Let’s undo the last step and fix that.
Press the shortcut key [Ctrl/⌘ Z] to undo the Paint fill.
Try the exact paint motion again but this time, hold down [Y] as you do so.

> 14.
> 15.
> 16.
[Y] is the shortcut for the Paint Unpainted mode of the tool. When held down, your Paint cursor
changes to this icon  It means that anything that is already painted (such as the black character
outline) won’t be painted again. It only works on empty, unpainted areas. Rather than hold the
override key down every time, you can equip the Paint Unpainted tool with [Alt Y].
Repeat the above steps to fill his skin and shirt colours in the same way.
2.65
Now that he has a shirt on, a full head of hair and a skin colour, let’s finish with the eyes.
Choose another colour for the eyes. For this exercise, no need to bother with pupils,
irises, eyelashes or bloodshot capillaries. Just a typical cartoonish blue-white will do.
With the Paint tool, again hold down [Y] and draw a lasso area around the eyes.
Because you have Paint Unpainted mode active, the other colours are left untouched. Only the
eyes have been filled, because they were the only unpainted, closed areas.
2.66
Like a lot of things in this software, once you get used to it, this method of painting is
remarkably efficient. To watch an adept user apply complex colouring with flicks and swishes

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
is very impressive.
Finally, the Marquee mode of the Paint tool is simply a rectangular area, rather than the Lasso’s
freehand area. You can enable it in the properties panel or by holding down [Alt] while the
Lasso mode is enabled.
> PAINT EXERCISE 2 
  REPAINT AND UNPAINT
You’ve already seen the Paint Unpainted mode so let’s look at two others: Repaint and
Unpaint.
In your colour panel, select or create a completely different skin colour.
Choose the Paint tool in Repaint mode with [Alt R].
In the tool properties panel, you could also have used the Repaint mode button.
2.67
In the Camera View, click anywhere on the character’s skin to repaint it with the new
skin colour.
The reason we clicked, instead of using Lasso or Marquee is because we don’t want to repaint
the black outline. Repaint works on existing paint, which includes the outline. Later you’ll see
how to protect colours so they can’t accidentally be repainted or erased.
Now let’s look at Unpaint.
Hold down [U] and click in the character’s eyes to unpaint them. Alternatively, you
could activate Unpaint mode in the Paint tool properties.

> 5.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
2.68
Choose another colour and then hold down [Y] to fill the eyes with Paint Unpainted
mode.
NOTE
If all these modes and their shortcut keys are confusing you, don’t worry. You don’t need to
memorise them all right away. They’ll become second nature for whatever modes and tools
you use most. Even after several years of using Toon Boom software, I often find myself
dipping into Edit → Preferences → Shortcuts to learn some new keys.
TEXT [ALT 9]
 Text is all around us in our everyday lives, whether on signposts, clothing, computer screens
or poster prints. It makes sense that when adding realism to your scenes, you’d make frequent
use of the Text tool.
> TEXT EXERCISE 1 
  ADDING TEXT
Select frame 1 in the Timeline.
Choose the Text tool from the toolbar, or just press [Alt 9].
In the Text properties, set a size, font and colour of your choice.
In the Camera View, click to place the text cursor .
Type your pet’s name.

> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
If you’d like to start a new line, press [Enter/Return].
Press your [Esc] key to finish typing and deselect your text.
2.69
Keep this text here for the next exercise.
Although made up of several characters, your text can be manipulated as a single object.
> TEXT EXERCISE 2 
  REFORMATTING TEXT
To change your text after it has been typed, you can use the Text tool to click and drag-select
characters, just as you would in any word program or internet browser.
If you deleted your text from the previous exercise, grab the Text tool and type something
in the Camera View.
Deselect the text by clicking a blank area of the Camera View, or press [Esc].
With the text tool selected, hover over your text to see the text edit cursor .
Click and drag across some of the characters to select them.
2.70
You can now change the selected characters in the text properties panel, or type new
characters. If you’d like to change the colour of the selected characters, simply choose any
other colour in your Colour panel.
> TEXT EXERCISE 3 
  BREAKING TEXT APART
While text is initially created as a single object, you have the option break it down into

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
individual characters, allowing you to reposition, recolour and animate them independently.
Broken down just once, characters will retain their text properties, allowing you to select and
retype the individual characters. However, you can break them down even further to a vector
art level, so you can paint, morph and manipulate them. Beware, however, that once you’ve
broken it down all the way, you’ve destroyed the font information and it can no longer be cha
nged with the Text tool.
With the Select tool, drag a selection around your block of text.
Go to Drawing → Convert → Break Apart Text Layers.
This step has broken the text from a single text object, down to individual characters. You can
still use the keyboard to retype or reformat these characters individually.
Using the Text tool, drag-select any character and retype it.
Equip the Select tool [Alt S] and move the individual characters around. If you’re a bit
confused by the selection handles, there’s no harm skipping forward to the Select tool on
page 78.
As you can see, the words no longer exist as a single text object. It’s a scattered collection of
individual characters.
2.71
Now let’s break it down even further by turning it into raw vector art. This step is identical to
the previous steps 1 and 2.
Once again, drag a selection around your text.
In the top menu, choose Drawing → Convert → Break Apart Text Layers.
The result looks like text, but you won’t be able to format it with the Text tool, nor will you
find text options in the tool properties panel. This is now vector art.
Choose or create a new bright colour in your Colour panel.
Equip the Brush in Repaint mode. The shortcut for the Repaint Brush is [Alt X].

> 9.
Paint a few strokes through your text. I’ve added a few more words too.
2.72
Breaking text apart allows you to customise it fully, removing the constraints of the font and
adding your own touches. An example is my Brackenwood logo (Figure 2.73), which uses two
fonts fully broken down, then painted and manipulated to the point that it’s unique.
2.73
STROKE [ALT V]
 Now and then your work might call for a colour separation without any visible linework.
For example, the colour of a character’s lips might look a little nicer if there is no outline. You
could use the Pencil with a thickness of zero, or you could use the Stroke tool, which was
made for jobs like this.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
2.74
> STROKE EXERCISE 1 
  DRAWING INVISIBLE LINES
Get the Stroke tool by pressing [Alt V], The cursor looks like .
In the Camera View, draw a stroke.
Gotcha! Right away, there’s a popup warning that says you won’t be able to see your stroke.
You may have seen this earlier if you used the Pencil or Shape tools with zero line thickness.
Personally I find this warning a bit intrusive but it’s a handy reminder for beginners.
2.75
Feel free to check ‘Don’t show this message again’ if you like, then click ‘OK’ to close
the warning.
On your keyboard, press [K], The line you drew in step 2 is now revealed as a blue
hairline vector with red and yellow points, or ‘vertices’.
Now that you can see what you’re drawing, make a few simple closed shapes. The
Stroke tool properties panel has options for straight lines and end-snapping. Using both
of them together makes for some very fast polygon drawing.
Hold down [Y] and trace a line through all of the shapes to fill them.

> 7.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
Hide strokes now by pressing [K] again.
2.76
You’ve created some filled shapes with no visible outline! Lovely.
SELECT [ALT S]
 You’ve already used the Select tool here and there in other exercises. It has pole position at
the top of the Tools toolbar. There are a few aspects to the Select tool that we will need to
cover later, but the following exercises will demonstrate the basics of selection.
The properties panel for the Select tool presents two sets of properties. There are the
properties for the tool itself, then there are properties for any currently selected objects. For
example, if you use the Select tool to select text, the tool properties will display Select tool
options at the top of the panel, then Text options down lower, as shown in Figure 2.77.
Likewise, selecting Brush or Pencil strokes will display options for altering them in the Select
tool properties.
> SELECT EXERCISE 1 
  OBJECT SELECTION
In the Timeline, select any blank frame to work on.
Using the Brush or Pencil, draw something simple in the Camera View.
Choose the Select tool from the toolbar, or just press [Alt S].
In the Select tool properties panel ensure the Lasso mode is active.
In the Camera View, trace a freehand selection area around your new drawing.

> 1.
2.77
 
2.78
This orange box around the selected object indicates your object is selected. Dotted around the
orange outline area number of white squares and a circle in the middle. These are the
manipulation handles. Let’s take a closer look.
> SELECT EXERCISE 2 
  PIVOT, POSITION, ROTATION AND SCALE
Mouse over any of the corner handles to see the  scale cursor.

> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
> 10.
> 11.
2.79
Drag this handle around to scale your object. Hold down [Shift] while scaling to
constrain the proportions.
Mouse over any of the side handles to see the  squash and  stretch cursor.
Experiment with the squash and stretch handles for different sizes and effects.
Mouse over any of the side rails to see the skew cursors 
 and .
Drag the side rails to skew the drawing.
Hover the mouse just outside any corner handle until you see the rotation cursor .
Drag the handle to rotate your object and note that object pivots around the circular
handle in the centre.
Hover the mouse over the circular centre handle and note the  cursor. This is the
selection pivot.
Drag the pivot just outside of the object and use the rotation handles again.
2.80
Deselect the drawing now using the [Esc] key.

> 12.
> 13.
> 14.
> 15.
> 16.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
Again, using the Select tool draw a selection area around the object.
Note how the pivot has returned to the centre. The Select tool pivot will always reset every
time you reselect a drawing object. Later, you’ll see other types of pivot that remain fixed
wherever you place them.
Drag the pivot aside and note the square handle that remains in the centre. This is the
position handle.
Hover your mouse over the square translate handle and you’ll see the cursor .
Drag this handle to move the selection around.
You can also drag using any part of the drawing itself, which is fine for large objects but what
if your drawing is too small and fiddly for click and drag? Consider a snowflake, star or – as
in Figure 2.81 – an eye. When selected it’s obscured by the selection handles themselves. The
position handle you saw in step 13 is the cure for this very situation.
2.81
Finally, deselect using the [Esc] key.
> SELECT EXERCISE 3 
  TOOL PROPERTIES
We’ve already seen how the Select tool properties will change depending on what you have
selected. For example, selecting text will give you text options at the bottom of the Select tool
properties. Likewise, selecting a Pencil stroke will allow you to manipulate its properties,
such as size, colour and texture.
Press [Alt 9] to arm the Text tool.
Click in the Camera View to place a cursor.
Type any word or short phrase.

> 4.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
Choose the Select tool and then select the text.
2.82
Text options are now available at the bottom of your tool properties panel as you saw back in
Figure 2.77. You may need to use the panel scrollbar to see these options.
Here you have formatting options, as well as size, colour and font styles. As long as your text
is selected in the Camera or Drawing Views, any changes will update the text as you make
them.
2.83
> SELECT EXERCISE 4 
  PENCIL STROKES
Any existing Pencil strokes can be selected and have their properties manipulated in the Select
tool properties panel.
In the Timeline, select frame 1.
In the Camera View, draw a few simple shapes with the Pencil tool.
Select one or more strokes with the Select tool [Alt S].
In the Select tool properties, adjust the width, colour and texture of the stroke.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
2.84
CONTOUR EDITOR [ALT Q]
 The Contour Editor is very much like the Select tool but rather than selecting whole objects,
it allows you to select the components that make up that object; that is, the sub-objects. You
may have noticed that I’ve mentioned ‘vector points’ a few times. These are the subobjects
known as vertices. They define the vectors (lines) that make up all vector art.
2.85
The Contour Editor allows you to manipulate each and any individual vertex of your strokes
and fills, which gives you ultra-fine control over how your art looks. If one of your strokes is
not quite where you want it, or perhaps it’s just a little too thick, you can use the Contour
Editor to manipulate it all the way down at the vertex level to get it looking perfect.
> CONTOUR EDITOR EXERCISE 1 
  CURVING LINES AND MANIPULATING VERTICES
Press [Alt \] to select the Shape tool in Line mode. Note that Line mode is shown in the
toolbar and in the Shape Tool Properties panel.
Anywhere in the Camera View, drag out a straight line.
Now select the Contour Editor tool from the tools panel, or press [Alt Q].
Hover the cursor over the line and you’ll see it change to a small .

> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
> 10.
Drag the middle of the line to curve it in any direction.
Immediately upon clicking, the points on each end are suddenly revealed. There’s one vertex
on each end of the line. You’ll also see a preview curve as you drag. When you stop dragging,
the curve is created.
2.86
Hover your cursor over the vertices on each end. The vertex cursor is a square .
Draw an ellipse and a rectangle in the Camera View. A reminder that these tools can be
found in the Toolbar behind the Line tool, or with [Alt =] and [Alt 7].
2.87
Now with the Contour Editor [Alt Q], click on your new ellipse. Note that it’s made up
of eight vertices.
Trace a selection around the ellipse’s top three vertices, and then drag them up to deform
it into an egg shape.
Experiment with reshaping your rectangle by moving vertices and curving the lines.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
2.88
Later in the book, you’ll be creating morph sequences where one shape is animated into
another. You’ll think back to this exercise and hopefully gain a little insight as to how it works
behind the scenes.
> CONTOUR EDITOR EXERCISE 2 
  MANIPULATING CURVES
Each vertex has one or two handles with which you can manipulate the curve. In Figure 2.89,
the end vertices have only one handle, but the middle vertex has twin handles; one on either
side.
2.89
Twin handles are usually locked at 180° to one another, so that when you move one, the other
responds; but you can break that connection.
Create a new ellipse in the Camera View then touch it with the Contour Editor.
Trace a selection around the topmost vertex to show its tangent handles.
Hover your cursor over a handle and note the handle cursor  is different to the vertex
cursor you saw in the last exercise  It’s helpful to know the difference when you’re

> 4.
> 5.
working in a cluster of vertices and their handles.
Hold [Alt] while dragging the left handle to break the connection between the two.
Drag the left handle upwards and then do the same with the right.
Breaking the connection allows you to create sharp corners and more interesting shapes. The
shape in Figure 2.90 was created, starting with an ellipse and simply [Alt] dragging every
other handle in toward the centre.
2.90
This fine level of control mayor may not be something you use a lot, but it’s nice to know that
you can tweak every vertex to this extent.
NOTE
After breaking the connection between handles, if you release the [Alt] key and continue
dragging, they will realign when one of them is dragged 180° to its twin.
> CONTOUR EDITOR EXERCISE 3 
  DELETING, ADDING AND CHANGING VERTICES
Vertices have corner or curve behaviour – or both. You may have noticed that the ellipse has
tangent handles on every vertex but the rectangle doesn’t. That’s because the rectangle has no
curve information; the lines are all straight. Tangent handles only show up when the vertices

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
have curve information. If you want tangent handles on a rectangle, you first need to add them –
which we’ll do in just a moment – or drag-curve the lines, as you saw in the first exercise.
In this exercise, we’ll lookat changing the behaviour of vertices, as well as deleting and adding
new ones.
Create an ellipse in the Camera View.
Use the Contour Editor and click the ellipse to reveal the vertices.
Trace a selection around the top three vertices then press [Delete].
Do the same for the bottom three so your ellipse has only two vertices, as shown in
Figure 2.91.
2.91
As you can see here, an ellipse really only requires two vertices. If you really wanted to, you
could fiddle with the tangent handles on these two to make it more circular.
We’ve just removed six vertices for the sake of the exercise, but let’s now add two of them
back.
Hold down [Ctrl] and your cursor will gain a little add icon 
Click on the curve at the top of the ellipse and a new vertex will be placed on the path.
2.92
Do the same at the bottom to place a new one.
Hold down [Alt] and note the cursor shows a negative sign  [Alt click] the bottom
vertex to remove the curve information from it. It becomes a corner point, rather than a
curve point.
Do the same with the top vertex, turning it into a corner point as well.

> 10.
> 11.
> 12.
> 13.
> 1.
> 2.
By moving vertices around and using the tangent handles on the two side vertices,
reshape this thing into a love heart.
2.93
To add handles to a corner point, you can simply [Alt drag] the vertex.
Create a rectangle in the Camera View.
Using the Contour Editor, hold down [Alt] and drag any vertex.
Release the handles to finish the curve.
2.94
> CONTOUR EDITOR EXERCISE 4 
  SMOOTHING
Smoothing makes your curves more graceful and efficient by reducing the number of vertices.
This can be especially useful for smoothing out ragged linework.
Choose the Brush tool and in the Tool Properties, set it to Auto Flatten.
In the Camera View, sketch something fairly simple.

> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
When you’re done, select the Contour Editor and click on your sketch.
2.95
Depending on your complexity, you may now be seeing a lot of vertices, but we turned on
Auto-Flatten for a good reason: it flattens many individual strokes into one, so right away we
avoid having a ridiculous number of vertices. Revealing the vertices on a really complex,
unflattened sketch can slow down or even crash your computer, so be careful. Try to avoid
using the Contour Editor on anything with extreme detail.
You can see that the chair in Figure 2.96 is actually a rough sketch, which is why it has so many
vertices, as opposed to the clean lines in the previous figure. I’ve also shown the handles here
(overleaf) just to give you an idea of how a full screen sketch might lock up your computer if
you use the Contour Editor on it.
2.96
With the vertices of your sketch showing, make a mental note of how many there appear
to be.
In the top menu, go to Drawing → Optimize → Smooth. Note that its shortcut key is [Alt

Shift S].
If your sketch is relatively simple, you may see an immediate reduction in the number of
vertices. In a more complex sketch though, it may be hard to see any difference right away. You
can hit [Alt Shift S] a number of times to watch the number of vertices gradually recede.
Smoothing multiple times will eventually result in your strokes having a more angular
appearance. Of course, it’s possible to smooth a sketch into oblivion; removing more and more
vertices, creating gaps and cutting off corners until it bears little resemblance to the original
linework.
This is sometimes a heavy-handed solution, so you may occasionally find it necessary to zoom
in and manually remove or manipulate the vertices. Although fiddly, this level of control can
become quite addictive.
2.97
PERSPECTIVE [ALT 0]
 This handy tool is in the sub-menu of the Contour Editor. You can select your art with the
perspective tool, then use its manipulator handles to distort into a perspective simulation.
2.98

2.99
When you’re working with this, you may notice that it’s not exactly true perspective. The
Perspective tool merely distorts, whereas in true perspective, distant detail is squashed more.
Still, it’s a decent distortion tool with many uses aside from faking perspective on walls, doors
or signs like the one in Figure 2.99.
CUTTER TOOL [ALT + T]
 You’ll find the Cutter tucked neatly away behind the Select tool. The way you use it is just
like the Select tool but rather than simply selecting objects, you’re slicing up the artwork. This
is particularly useful for segmenting characters in preparation for cut-out style animation.
Suppose you have a character drawing and want to cut the head off to put it on a separate layer.
With the cutter tool you’d trace a selection around his head in the same way you might use the
Select tool.
Once cut, the affected area has a washed-out appearance with green manipulation handles.
From here you can alter the area in the same way as you would with the Select tool’s
manipulator handles, with rotation, skew or scaling. You can also move, delete or cut and paste
this segment.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
2.100
Sometimes when animating frame-by-frame, the best of us can fall victim to ‘volume change’.
This is where something, for example the character’s head, gradually becomes too large or too
small over the course of the scene. The cutter tool is very handy for tweaking things like that,
so you don’t have to redraw the head, simply cut and then, with the Perspective tool (see
Figure 2.99) tweak it to the right size on each frame.
> CUTTER EXERCISE 1 
  REMOVING OVERHANGING LINES
One fantastic feature of the Cutter allows you to cut off overhanging lines with a click or
swipe. It really speeds up your workflow, removing the need for tedious drawing or erasing
precision.
In the Timeline, select a blank frame to work in.
Using the Shape tool in rectangle mode [Alt 7], draw three tall, thin rectangles, placing
them fairly close together as shown in Figure 2.101.
2.101
Using the Select tool, click on the middle rectangle.

> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
Now hold [Shift] and drag a corner point to rotate the selection 90°.
2.102
This is almost a letter H but there are some overhanging lines. Let’s get rid of them with the
cutter tool.
On your keyboard, press [2] to zoom in and view the lines at a comfortable size.
If you don’t already have the Cutter, press [Alt T].
As shown in Figure 2.103, click the overhanging part on the left end of the middle
rectangle to select it.
2.103
Toon Boom has detected where the lines intersect and isolates the overhanging lines for you.
Press [Delete] on your keyboard to remove those overhanging lines.
Repeat the process to do the same on the other end, and you should have something that
looks more like a H.

> 10.
2.104
Before you go ahead and remove the other unwanted lines, I wanted to introduce you to another
feature of the Cutter. Enabled by default, there’s a ‘mouse gestures’ feature in the Cutter tool
properties. It allows you to quickly swipe a line to remove it.
2.105
With the Use Mouse Gestures mode activated, swipe across the remaining unwanted
lines to complete the H.
2.106
POLYLINE [ALT SHIFT -]
 Just like the Shape tool, Polyline draws by plotting points. However, while the Shape tool
automatically plots points (vertices) for lines, rectangles and ellipses, Polyline lets you create
more complex objects by placing vertices manually.
As I mentioned earlier in the book, if you’re using a mouse, this tool may even become your
best friend. Though it takes some getting used to, combined with the Contour Editor it grants
ultimate control, even if you are a tablet user.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> POLYLINE EXERCISE 1 
  PLOTTING POINTS
Let’s draw a pentagon by plotting five points.
In the toolbar, you’ll find the Polyline behind the Shape tool. Alternatively you can press
[Alt Shift -].
In the Polyline tool properties, activate the Snap to Contour option. This will make it
easier to close the shape leaving no gaps.
2.107
In the Timeline, click any blank frame to work in.
In the Camera View, click to create the first point. This red vertex is the point from
which your first line will be drawn. Red is always the colour of your most recently
placed vertex.
Mark out the pentagon by placing the other vertices. Note that these are created as corner
points, resulting in perfectly straight lines.
Hover over the first point you created and your cursor becomes a  icon. Click to close
the shape.
2.108
To finish the job, now click the red vertex.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
TIP
Clicking the red vertex will finish the shape regardless of whether the shape is closed or
open. Holding [Ctrl] and clicking anywhere has the same effect.
Once your line or shape is finished, you can tweak it using the Contour Editor, or fill it with
colour. With your Polyline tool’s contour snapping on (as shown back in step 2), you should
have no trouble closing the shapes.
> POLYLINE EXERCISE 2 
  PLOTTING CURVE POINTS
In the previous exercise you plotted corner points. That’s good for angular shapes, but if you’re
drawing more organic stuff, like characters, you’ll need to know how to make curves.
If you don’t already have the Polyline tool, choose it from the toolbar, or press [Alt Shift
-].
On a new blank frame in the Camera View, click, drag and release.
This has created a vertex with a tangent handle. The length of your drag equates to the length of
the handle.
Elsewhere in the Camera View, click and drag in any direction to create your second
vertex.
The curve appears and now you get to see how the handle lengths affect the curve. Don’t worry
if it all seems too much like guesswork at this stage. You’ll grow accustomed to it the more you
use it.
> POLYLINE CHALLENGES
Here are a few challenges to help you get used to the Polyline tool. Try to recreate each shape
in Figure 2.109, attempting to draw the curved lines with as few vertices as possible.

2.109
TIP
Don’t necessarily concern yourself with getting each shape right the first time. The Polyline
is made to be used alongside the Contour Editor. Place your vertices and curves as best you
can, then tweak them with the Contour Editor.
When you’ve finished drawing the shapes, fill them with colour using the Paint tool. Remember
that if your paint isn’t working, you may need to activate the Auto Close Gaps option in the
Paint tool properties.
DROPPER [ALT D]
 No art software can be taken seriously without an eyedropper tool for picking colours.
Because of the way colour works in Toon Boom, its Dropper only picks colours that you’ve
already created and used in your drawings. It can’t pick colours from the interface icons,
imported images or the desktop.
Later on page 106 you’ll learn about creating new colours, including using a separate type of
eyedropper that lets you pick colours from the desktop, interface or imported images and save

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
them as new colours in your Colour panel.
> DROPPER EXERCISE 1 
  PICKING COLOURS
In the Timeline select a blank frame.
Using the Brush, draw several strokes of various colours in the Camera View.
2.110
Select the Paint tool in Repaint mode with [Alt R].
Hold [D] and click one of the coloured strokes.
NOTE
Note that while using the [D] override, your cursor changes to an eyedropper  and the red
text at the bottom of the Camera View shows ‘Dropper’.
Confirm that the colour you just picked is now selected in the Colour panel.
When you release [D] your Repaint tool returns to the cursor  (see step 3). Trace a line
through any of the coloured strokes to repaint it with the selected colour.

> 7.
2.111
Hold [D] and pick another colour, then release [D] and repaint another stroke.
From this exercise, you can probably see now how the override function of each tool, in this
case [D], can really help speed things up.
MORE TOOLS AND WHERE TO FIND THEM
So far, because we’ve mostly been focusing on drawing and painting, we haven’t covered tools
pertaining to animation. We’ll look at those in the animation chapters.
HARMONY ONLY – TOOL PRESETS
Generally, switching tools and constantly tweaking their properties as you work is par for the course. However, there will
always be one or two tools that you’ll use more than others, with special settings for certain tasks.
Suppose, for example, that in every project, one of the first things you do is to draw a sky for the background. In the Shape
tool options you’d choose the rectangle mode, resize the line thickness, set the mode to Auto Fill, choose a colour and drag
out your rectangle shape in the Camera View.
With Tool Presets, you can save these custom settings, assign a shortcut key and even create your own icon for it!
Thereafter, you’d simply select your ‘sky’ Tool Preset and draw the rectangle without manually setting those options. In
Figure 2.112, I have created a Brush tool preset with its own icon and colour settings. If it was a real brush, it would be my
most-used and probably worn and filthy, which is why I named it ‘oldFilthy’.

2.112
The Harmony documentation has a thorough walkthrough on creating your own tool presets, so I won’t clutter the chapter
by rewriting it here. In the Harmony Help file [F1], you’ll find it under Stage User Guide → Drawing Chapter → Drawing
→ Tool Preset View.
Additionally there are one or two advanced tools that we will use in the course of future
exercises, such as a gradient manipulator which you’ll see in the Gradient Colour section up
ahead.
CAMERA VIEW VERSUS
DRAWING VIEW
Up until now we’ve mostly been working in the Camera View, which displays all layers of the
scene together; for example, in Figure 2.113 we see sky, smoke, effects and characters. It’s the
ideal overview of your scene coming together as a whole.
The Drawing View, on the other hand, isolates a layer. In Figure 2.113, it’s helping the
animator see just the smoke without the distraction of the characters and background layers.
Certain traditional animation tools and functions are available only in the Drawing View, as
you’ll later see.
When it comes to drawing and painting though, if you can do it in the Camera View, you can do
it in the Drawing View, and vice versa.

2.113
BASIC COLOUR MANAGEMENT
Toon Boom’s colour management system is legendary. Behind the scenes, all colours have a
unique colour ID that can be named, saved, selected and grouped into palettes. You can even
have several identical colour values – say, three identical reds – each unique by their ID.
One of my personal favourite features is the way entire projects can be painted with temporary
colours and changed later. This means if you decide at the end of a project that your blue-
skinned characters should instead have green skin, it takes mere seconds to apply that change
across the entire project!
The basics of colour management are covered here, while the more advanced colour concepts
will be covered in Appendix A.
2.114

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> COLOUR EXERCISE 1 
  TWEAKING USED COLOURS
Select any colour in your Colour panel.
With any of the drawing tools, draw something simple in the Camera View.
Now back to the Colour panel, on the colour you used, double-click the rectangular
swatch, or right-click → Edit.
Shift the Colour Picker window aside so you can see your drawing in the Camera View.
In the Colour Picker window, change the colour values, watching it update in your
Camera View as you do so.
This is an incredible feature, allowing easy colour tweaks right into the 11th hour of a project.
2.115
THE COLOUR PANEL
At first glance, there doesn’t seem to be a lot going on in the Colour panel, but scratch the
surface and you’ll find more layers of functionality. We’ll postpone some of the advanced stuff
for now and cover it later in Appendix A.
All of the colours and palettes contained in your project are accessed from the Colour panel. If
you don’t already have it open, you’ll find it (as always) listed in the  panel menu.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
2.116
> COLOUR EXERCISE 2 
  PARTS OF THE COLOUR PANEL
This panel consists of two main parts: palettes are listed at the top, and the colours themselves
are listed below.
Expand the palette list with the 
 button. In a file with multiple palettes, selecting one in
this list will display its colours below.
Right-click a palette and choose Display Colour Values. This toggles the RGBA (red,
green, blue, alpha) values of each colour in the panel.
2.117
Right-click in the colour palette and chose Swatch mode to see the colours as larger
swatches with their names. The colours form a grid that, with very large palettes, is
much tidier than a long list.
PALETTES
If you’re using Animate, there are 120 colours in your starting palette. Animate Pro and
Harmony palettes, however, have just six; the idea being that advanced users create colours as
needed.
A new scene will have a default palette with the same name as the scene file. That is, if your
scene file is called ‘Scene_1’, then the starting palette will have the same name.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
2.118
> COLOUR EXERCISE 3 
  CREATING A NEW PALETTE
If it’s not already open, expand the palette list by clicking the 
 button (see Figure
2.118).
Click the New Palette 
 button and name your new palette ‘foliage’.
With the foliage palette selected in the palette list, move down to the colour list and
you’ll see a single Default black.
2.119
Save the scene with [Ctrl/⌘ S].
By saving your scene now, foliage.plt becomes one of the saved scene assets. You’ll find it
there in your scene’s palette-library folder.

2.120
Your main scene palettes are saved as a .pit file in your scene’s palette-library directory, as
shown in Figure 2.120. You can send it to colleagues, link to or import this palette into any
other scene using the Colour panel’s menu. This is useful when you have a character palette
that you want to reuse in other files or projects, or send to colleagues to use in their scenes.
Once again, you can learn more in Appendix A.
2.121
SOLID AND GRADIENT COLOURS
A solid colour is a single colour value, as opposed to a transition between two values, which
is otherwise called a gradient. A gradient swatch may consist of several colours with
transitions between them, as shown in Figure 2.122
2.122
The first gradient bar here shows a single transition between two flat colours. Underneath that
is a four-colour gradient.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
You’ve created some colours in previous tools exercises, so in the following exercise you’ll
be mixing more, including gradients.
> COLOUR EXERCISE 4 
  CREATING SOLID COLOURS
From the previous exercise, select your ‘foliage’ palette in the Colour panel.
Select the Default black swatch and click the Add Colour button 
.
A new swatch is created with the same values as Default and the name ‘New O’.
Double-click the rectangular swatch of this new colour to open the Colour Picker
window.
The Colour Picker window contains everything you need to mix your New O colour. There are
controls here for HSV (hue, saturation and value), RGB (red, green and blue), Alpha
(transparency) and gradients (linear and radial). First though, let’s rename it.
In the Name field, replace ‘New O’ by typing ‘bushes’.
NOTE
If you press [Enter] and your colour mixing window expands into Multi Wheel mode, feel
free to look around but we’ll be using the Single Wheel mode for its simplicity. If you like
the Multi Wheel mode though, there’s no harm in staying. Otherwise, return to Single Wheel
mode with the button that says … uh … Single Wheel Mode.
Click the Hue (H) radio button so the top colour bar changes to a hue slider.
I’m moving the slider along to somewhere green.
2.123
Click the Value (V) radio button and the top bar changes to a brightness slider.
Move the slider about halfway along.

> 9.
> 10.
> 11.
> 12.
> 13.
> 14.
Click the Saturation (S) radio button. The top bar changes to a saturation slider.
Move the slider back to about one-third of the way.
2.124
With ‘bushes’ selected in the Colour panel, once again click the Add Colour button.
Notice that new colours are created with the same values as the colour you have selected. This
is useful for making variations on a selected colour. In this case we want to make a shade of
the same green by simply adjusting theV (value) slider.
Double-click the new green swatch to open the Colour Picker.
Rename this new one to ‘bushesDark’.
Let’s leave the Hue and Saturation fields alone. Click the V (value) radio button and
drag the slider slightly to the left so it’s a little darker than ‘bushes’.
2.125
You now have two shades of the same green colour for light and dark bushes. Mixing from a
selected colour is an easy way to create a bunch of colours with similar values. You could use
the same method for mixing skin tones, for example.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
2.126
> COLOUR EXERCISE 5 
  CREATING GRADIENTS
Click the New Palette button and call the new palette ‘skies’.
In your new ‘skies’ palette, select the Default black and click the New Colour button.
Double-click the new swatch to open the Colour Picker window.
Rename your new colour ‘skyGrad’.
Just below the Alpha slider, you’ll see that the colour is currently set to Solid, with the
gradient section below greyed out.
Click the Gradient radio button to activate the gradient mixer.

> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
2.127
As shown in Figure 2.127, select the Radial gradient type.
Immediately after step 5 you’ll see the gradient bar below has two swatches that look like tiny
houses. These pointer swatches, sometimes called ‘chips’ or ‘tacks’ can be moved along the
bar to vary the transition.
Notice that the first tack  has a small square inside it, indicating that it’s selected. The bar at
the top of the mixer window is black to reflect this.
Start moving HSV sliders around to give this tack a colour. Mine is a light sky blue.
Select the tack on the right (Figure 2.128, step 1).
2.128
Click the Colour Picker’s own eyedrop per (Figure 2.128, step 2) and then pick the same
blue directly from the left-hand tack (Figure 2.128, step 3).
This particular eyedropper is different to the Dropper tool. While the Dropper tool only
selects saved colour values, the Colour Picker eyedropper allows you to choose colours from

> 10.
any part of the program interface, which is what we just did in step 9.
Therefore, to pick colours from imported images or photographs, or the program icons
themselves, first add a new colour in the Colour panel and then use the Colour Picker’s
eyedropper to pick the values you need.
With the left-hand tack selected now, raise the V slider up and/or bring the S slider
down to make the colour brighter.
2.129
Once you’re happy with your sky gradient, close the Colour Picker. In the Colour panel now,
your skies palette contains a nice radial gradient ready for painting. Now go ahead and try it
out using the Rectangle tool with the Auto Fill option turned on.
ADDING AND REMOVING TACKS
If you click anywhere on the gradient bar, you’ll add more tacks. New tacks added will be the
colour of the one currently selected. Therefore if your currently selected tack is white, a new
white tack is created.
Click the tacks to select them, slide them to the desired position, use the sliders or eyedropper
to assign colours, or remove any unwanted tacks simply by dragging them away and off the
gradient bar. This is the process for creating a swatch with multiple gradients.
2.130

MANIPULATING GRADIENTS
Once applied to your drawing, gradients are centred on the artwork. For example, if you draw
a box filled with a radial gradient, that gradient will be centred on each surface of the box, as
shown below. The gradient can then be manipulated using the Edit Gradient/Texture tool [Shift
F3]. Equip this tool and click on the gradient to be manipulated.
2.131
NOTE
The size of the manipulation envelope is proportional to the artwork. To adjust the gradient
for a large area – a sky for example – you will need to zoom out to see the handles. For a
tiny area like an eyeball, you may need to zoom in to manipulate the gradient.
Depending on what type of gradient or texture you’re manipulating, the manipulation handles
will be slightly different. Figure 2.132 shows the manipulation handles for Linear and Radial
gradients.
2.132

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
In the same way we can move a gradient around on the drawing, we can also position, rotate
and scale textures. There’s more texture info later in Appendix A.
PROTECTING COLOURS
Once you’ve painted something, for example a character, you can protect certain colours so
that they can’t be erased or repainted. Protect Colour allows you to freely paint or erase some
colours while leaving others untouched.
> COLOUR EXERCISE 6 
  PROTECT AND REPAINT
In the Colour panel, select your Default black and click the Add Colour button.
Rename the new black ‘flower line’.
Select frame 1 in the Timeline.
With the ‘flower line’ colour and the drawing tool of your choice, create some line art of
a flower similar to the one in Figure 2.133. Be careful to leave no gaps in the linework.
2.133
Add five new colours to the palette and name them as follows: ‘petal’, ‘face’,
‘faceTone’, ‘stem’ and ‘stemTone’.
Colour mixing time! Adjust the colour values of each to suit the parts of the flower.
‘stemTone’ should be the same hue (H) as ‘stem’, but a lower value (V) to make it
darker. Likewise, ‘faceTone’ should be the same hue as ‘face’, but darker.

> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
> 10.
2.134
In the Colour panel, select the ‘stem’ colour.
Using Paint Unpainted [Alt Y], fill the flower stem with the colour called ‘stem’. Fill the
petals with ‘petal’ and the middle of the flower with ‘face’.
Remember to use one of the Gap Closing options in the paint tool properties if you’re having
trouble with gaps. At the end of it, your flower should be painted with flat colours.
2.135
In the colour panel, select your ‘flower line’ colour, then while holding [Shift] select the
last colour in the panel. All of the flower colours should now be selected.
Right-click any of the selected colours and, at the bottom of the menu, choose Protect
Colour. You can also use the Colour panel’s own menu 
 → Colours → Protect
Colour.
2.136

> 11.
> 12.
> 13.
> 14.
> 15.
> 16.
> 17.
> 18.
> 19.
All of the selected colours will have a red bar indicating that they are all protected.
In the Colour panel, press [Esc] to deselect all of the selected colours.
Using the Eraser in the Camera View, try to erase the flower.
If your colours are all protected, the eraser will have no effect.
In the Colour panel right-click the ‘face’ colour and choose Protect Colour once again,
to unprotect it, so that we can paint onto the face.
In the Colour panel, select the ‘faceTone’ colour.
In the Camera View press [Alt X] to equip the Brush in Repaint mode.
Scribble wildly over the flower and notice how the tone colour only works on the face.
This is because face is unprotected while all other colours are protected.
Press [Ctrl/⌘ Z] to undo the wild scribble.
Resize the maximum Brush size using [O] to around 30.
2.137
Paint a tone on the underside of the face as shown in Figure 2.138.
2.138
Just as the ‘flower line’, ‘petal’ and ‘stem’ colours were protected from the eraser, they’re also

> 20.
> 21.
> 22.
> 23.
protected from being repainted. This makes it very easy to paint tones without any concern for
accidentally painting the petals, or the line art.
NOTE
Colour protection is not drawing protection. In other words, colour protection doesn’t stop
the colours from being selected or manipulated with the Select tool. You can select a piece
of colour with the Select tool and then simply delete it using your keyboard’s [Delete] key.
You can protect the drawing and you’ll see how in the upcoming Timeline section.
In the Colour panel, deselect any colours by pressing [Esc].
Right-click and protect the ‘face’ colour.
Right-click and unprotect the ‘stem’ colour.
Select ‘stemTone’ and paint a tone in on the stem, once again using Repaint mode.
2.139
You may find yourself protecting and unprotecting colours very frequently throughout a project.
As of this writing, there’s no shortcut key for Protect Colour, so the quickest way is to right-
click and protect.
COLOUR-TO-TOOL LINKAGE
In the Colour panel at the top of the colours list, you’ll find three colour buttons with Brush,
Pencil and bucket icons. This allows you to assign colours to these tools. For example, when
unlinked, you can assign black to the Pencil and red to the Paint bucket. When you draw a
rectangle with the Shape tool, it’ll have a black outline with a red fill. Then if you’re using the

Brush, you can choose new colours at will without losing the chosen Pencil and Paint colours.
2.140
While very useful at times, this feature can be a little confusing for a beginner. If you switch
tools and suddenly find you’re painting with an unexpected colour, it’s possible that the colour
buttons are unlinked and the tool you’re using has a colour assigned to it.
Alongside those colour buttons, the next icon to the right is a chain link . This toggles the
linkage between the three colour buttons. When linked, the chosen colour will be applied to all
tools. This is the setting I would recommend for beginners to avoid confusion. Simply toggle
the chain on  and choose your colour.
TIMELINE LAYERS
Like most digital art and animation programs, Toon Boom has a system of layers that allows
you to separate elements from one another – for example, having a background held for 60
frames on its own layer, while a character moves on another layer over the top.
2.141
When it comes to drawing scene elements on layers, we use the Timeline. One common
technique is to make rough sketches on one layer and clean linework on another. In the
upcoming project, you’ll do just that: use Timeline layers to separate your rough drawings from
your finished line art.
NOTE

> 1.
> 2.
In Toon Boom there is another type of layering that occurs within a drawing. It’s a much
more advanced concept though, so we’ll save that discussion for the next chapter.
There are many types of layers in the Timeline. Right now we’re only concerned with Drawing
layers, into which we can create art with the drawing tools. At the start of a new scene file, as
you know by now, there is a single layer in the Timeline called Drawing.
LAYER PROPERTIES
In the same way that the Tool Properties panel lets you control tools, so the Layer Properties
panel gives you information and options for the selected layer. You’ll find it in the panel menus
.
At first glance it may be a bit daunting with all its numerical input fields. Indeed, it’s a little
advanced and not something you’ll use a lot at first. But we’ll use it briefly in the upcoming
exercise and I recommend keeping it handy for later.
> LAYERS EXERCISE 1 
  ADDING AND RENAMING TIMELINE LAYERS
In the Timeline, hit the  Add Drawing Layer button.
2.142
Select the bottom Drawing layer and look at your Layer Properties panel. Again, if it’s
not open, you’ll find it in the panels menu.
At the top left you have the Enable/Disable checkbox (see Figure 2.143). This does the same
job as the layer checkboxes in the Timeline; it simply hides, or unhides the layer.

> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
2.143
On the top right is a padlock. As mentioned in the Colour Protect exercise, you can protect
your drawing from accidental editing.The padlock here in the Layer Properties panel does the
same job as the padlock on each Timeline layer.
Next is the Name field. You’ll see that the name corresponds to that in the Timeline. Select
each layer and see the Name field update.
Below the Name field, if you’re using Animate, you’ll see two tabs. If you’re using Animate
Pro or Harmony, there are three tabs. Each of these tabs has a handful of useful options and
settings. Go ahead and browse if you feel so inclined, but we’re only concerned with the Name
field for now.
In the Name field, remove the default name and type ‘rough’. Note that it updates in the
Timeline.
Select the second layer you added.
In the Layer Properties, rename it ‘clean’.
You could go nuts and add a hundred layers if you like, giving them all names of what you
expect to put in your scene, like sky, sun, cloud, mountain, city, flagpole and so on. Although,
like colours, you might simply add them as you need them.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> LAYERS EXERCISE 2 
  HIDING AND DELETING LAYERS
On the left-most side of the Timeline are checkboxes for every layer. To hide layers, you can
uncheck these visibility checkboxes one by one. You can also hide/show all layers by clicking
the  eyes.
In the Timeline, select the ‘rough’ layer and click the checkbox on the far left. This hides
the layer.
Look at the Layer Properties to see that ‘rough’ is disabled.
If you disable a layer, it remains in the scene with everything intact. It is simply hidden and can
be enabled at any time. Disabling layers will come in handy when you want to render your
final scene and hide any rough sketches.
Still with the ‘rough’ layer selected, delete it using the  Delete Layers button. You’ll
get a confirmation popup window in which you can click ‘OK’.
The layer has been deleted completely from the scene, taking with it any drawings or animation
it contained, hence the confirmation popup window in step 3.
> LAYERS EXERCISE 3 
  SHUFFLING LAYER ORDERING
The bottom layer on the Timeline represents the bottom layer in the scene. So as an example
your sky would be on the bottom, while foreground scene elements will be on top.
2.144
As you create new layers, they are added above the layer you currently have selected, but
sometimes you just want to add a ton of layers, rename them and then put them in order. Let’s
do that now.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
NOTE
This is just a layer ordering exercise, so you won’t need to actually draw anything here. In
fact, you could maximise yourTimeline to fill the workspace if you really wanted to.
As you learned in Layers exercise 1, add five layers to your scene and name them ‘sky’,
‘mountain’, ‘flower’, ‘cloud’ and ‘bee’.
Click and drag the topmost layer down wards. You’ll see a preview line between other
layers.
When the preview line appears between two other layers, drop it.
2.145
Now instead of dropping between layers, drag any other layer onto another layer.
2.146
When you drop a layer onto another, the dropped layer will be indented underneath the other.
This means you’ve just created a hierarchy. The indented layer has become a child of the
upper. This is known as parenting one layer to another – the upper layer being the parent.
Hierarchies are an essential part of Toon Boom workflow, especially when it comes to cutout
character animation. We don’t need it for this particular exercise though, so let’s unparent it.
Don’t worry, there’ll be a lot of parenting to be done in the next chapter.
Drag the child layer away to unparent it and drop it between two others.

> 6.
> 1.
Using what you’ve just learned, reshuffle the order of the layers so they make sense –
and ensure there is no indenting or parenting – as shown in Figure 2.147.
2.147
SUMMARY
We’ve covered a massive amount of information in this chapter. You’ve learned to use most of
the tools and how to control them using the Tool Properties panel. You’ve seen how to create
and name palettes, mix colours and gradients, as well as protecting certain colours from being
repainted or erased.
You’ve visited the Timeline and seen the basics of layer ordering and how adding, naming and
order shuffling are done.
All that’s left to do in this chapter is put what you’ve learned into practice with an illustration
project! Each step of the way will have page numbers for reference, so you can revisit earlier
exercises if you need to revise.
PROJECT 1: COMIC STRIP
It’s time to put all those tools and techniques into action and create a comic strip. By the end of
this project, you’ll have some practical experience as well as a fully rendered image that you
can post online, set as your desktop image or even print for your wall.
Throughout this project you’ll learn more about colour management, rough construction,
Timeline layers and rendering.
> PROJECT 1 – TASK 1 
  SET UP THE SCENE
You can revise scene setup in Chapter 1 starting from page 16.
Open your Toon Boom program to create a new scene with the name ‘comic’.

> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
2.148
Choose the HDTV resolution.
Click ‘Create’ and a fresh scene opens.
In the top menu, go to Scene → Scene Settings…
Instead of 1920 × 1080, change the dimensions to 2480 × 1748 (see Figure 2.149).
Click ‘OK’ to close the Scene Settings window.
At 300 dots per inch (a standard minimum print resolution) these pixel dimensions equate to an
A5 print.
If your work happens to involve making a lot of A5 prints, you could save these dimensions as
a custom preset by clicking the Save icon, as shown in Figure 2.149.
2.149
Once again in the Scene menu, this time choose Scene Length…
Set the value to 1 and click ‘OK’.
Press [Ctrl/⌘ S] to save this scene file.
Now the scene is just one frame long. It’ll contain no animation so we’ll only need a single
frame in the Timeline.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
TIP
Another way to reduce or extend the scene length is to drag the red end marker in the
Timeline. This may be awkward on very long scenes though.
2.150
> PROJECT 1 – TASK 2 
  CREATE A NEW PALETTE
Revise palettes starting on page 103.
If the palette list isn’t already open in the Colour panel, expand it using the 
 icon.
Create a new palette and name it ‘sketching’.
2.151
Your new palette is added with a single Default colour.
Select the new ‘sketching’ palette to prepare for mixing some new colours in the next
task.
Press [Ctrl/⌘ S] to save your scene.
On your computer, open up the scene folder. If you followed along in task 1, the folder is
on your desktop, called ‘comic’.
Inside that folder, you’ll see the palette-library folder. Open it up to find two palette
files. One is called comicplt and the other, sketching.plt.
These are your scene’s palette files. Like most scene files, they can be stored, emailed, linked,

imported and updated in any other scene. There’s much more colour management to come in
Appendix B.
2.152
> PROJECT 1 – TASK 3 
  CREATE A COLOUR FOR ROUGH SKETCHES
Revise how to add new colours starting on page 106.
Whether we’re talking about design, sculpture, painting or animation, one of the very first steps
towards creating art – and one that any good art teacher will emphasise – is to start rough. It’s
essential to loosely define the major volumes and lines of your subject before adding any level
of detail. And if you’ve ever seen a pencil test, you’ll know that rough sequences of animation
are beautiful in their own way and can be just as mesmerising as a finished scene.
2.153
Traditionally in 2D animation, animators used a non-photo blue pencil for preliminary roughs
because light blue wasn’t detected by the Xerox copier and, later, the digital scanner. For this
reason, light blue was also used for notes, labelling and timing grids on each drawing. After
constructing animation roughly with this light blue pencil, they later sketched over with the
black/lead pencil.
Of course, in this digital age, using blue or red is just tradition but hey, it looks nice and makes
sense, so let’s go with it all the same and create a new light blue and a red for rough sketching.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 1.
In your Colour panel, be sure your ‘sketching’ palette is selected. This ensures the
colours you’re seeing belong to the ‘sketching’ palette.
Select the Default black and add two new colours.
Edit the colours with the values shown in Figure 2.154, including alpha. Don’t forget the
names.
2.154
Close the Colour Picker window and in your Colour panel now, you’ll see Rough Blu and
Rough Red waiting, just begging to be splashed around.
Save your scene with [Ctrl/⌘ S].
> PROJECT 1 – TASK 4 
  SKETCH THE PANEL LAYOUT
Revise brush sketching starting on page 37.
Before you do any sketching, it might help to have a written description of what happens in the
comic strip then break it down to what happens in each panel.
Retelling a favourite joke in comic strip form is an excellent exercise in panel-based
storytelling. Go ahead and use your own story if you prefer. I’m proud to announce that the
world-class joke below was plumbed from the depths of my own comic genius.
Man sitting on the hood of his car, says ‘hey, baby’.
Pretty lady is pushing a baby carriage. The baby says ‘hey, man’.
I know, right? Comedy gold. Once you’ve recovered from your giggle fit, we’ll sketch up just
two panels with a rough composition for each. In film and animation terms, this process of
composing shots, or scenes, in sketch form is known as the storyboard.
In the Timeline, select the Drawing layer by clicking on it.

> 2.
> 3.
Click the name and rename this layer ‘sketch’.
Click frame 1 of the sketch layer and begin your rough sketching.
If you don’t find the Camera View’s grey background very pleasant to sketch against, you can
add a Colour-Card to your scene. You can do so in the Timeline by dropping down the Add
Layers menu .
2.155
By default the Colour-Card is a white background, but you can change it to any colour you like
in the Layer Properties panel.
If you add a Colour-Card, be sure to reselect frame of the sketch layer to resume your sketch.
2.156
In my own sketch I’ve used the Brush with the Rough Blu colour. For the composition, I’ve
carefully considered howto convey all of the information in just two panels.The first panel
composition is only wide enough to show this overconfident fellow trying to get a pretty lady’s
attention, while not yet revealing the baby carriage. I’ve also factored the speech bubbles into
the composition.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
2.157
Panel 2 is a reversed camera angle, so it’s a wider shot of the woman with the baby sitting up
in the pram and the guy silhouetted in the foreground. Again, the speech bubble is an important
composition consideration.
> PROJECT 1 – TASK 5 
  ADD NEW LAYERS FOR CLEAN LINEWORK
Revise adding timeline layers starting on page 116.
In the Timeline, there are several ways to add a new layer. You’ve already seen the Add
Drawing Layer button . The menu path is Insert → Drawing. The quickest way though, as if
your mind wasn’t already overflowing with shortcut keys, is to use [Ctrl/⌘ R].
Select your ‘sketch’ layer name in the Timeline.
Add a new drawing layer by any of the above methods.
Rename the layer ‘panelBorders’ either in the Timeline or the Layer Properties panel.
In the Timeline, select frame 1 of the new ‘panelBorders’ layer and draw the borders,
either with the Shape tool in rectangle mode, or using the Brush. Remember you can hold
down [Shift] to constrain a Brush stroke to straight lines, and hold [Alt] as well to snap
it to 90° angles.

> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
2.158
In the Timeline, add four more drawing layers. Figure 2.159 shows the names.
2.159
Once you’ve added these new layers, reorder the layering if necessary (see page 119).
Finally, save your scene with [Ctrl/⌘ S].
> PROJECT 1 – TASK 6 
  ADD THE LINEWORK
Revise your chosen tool: Brush on page 37, Pencil on page 50, Polyline on page 95.
Everything’s falling into place. Looks like you’re ready to start drawing your linework!
Select and configure your chosen drawing tool, including colour and size.
Select frame 1 of the spBubbles layer.
Using your rough sketch as a guide, clean up the speech bubbles with closed line art.
2.160

> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
As shown in Figure 2.160 the Polyline tool has been used for the speech bubbles. Resist the
urge to paint the speech bubbles for now. They will only obscure the work for the panel art.
Select frame 1 of the panel1 layer.
Using the rough sketch as a guide, createtheclean lineartfor this panel.
Select frame 2 of the panel2 layer.
Using the rough sketch as a guide, once again create the clean lines.
Save with [Ctrl/⌘ S].
2.161
In Figure 2.161 you might have noticed I’ve used a lighter line for the car. This is so the
characters with their heavier lines are thefocus of the scene.
> PROJECT 1 – TASK 7 
  MIX AND PAINT WITH NEW COLOURS
Revise Colour exercises 4 and 6 (pages 106 and 112).
You now need to create new colours for every area of linework that needs filling.
In the Colour panel’s palette section, create three new palettes. Name them ‘man’,
‘woman’, ‘baby’.
Select the ‘man’ palette and create a few colours for him. He’ll need ‘skin’, ‘pants’,
‘hair’, ‘shirt’ and so on.
Do the same for the ‘woman’ and ‘baby’ palettes.
If you’d like to add additional palettes for the car and baby carriage, feel free to do so,

> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
otherwise you can simply add car and carriage colours to the existing ‘comic’ palette.
In the main ‘comic’ palette, add colours for text and speech bubbles.
How many colours you create will depend on the complexity of your line art. Have you
zoomed in and drawn buttons and zips on the character’s clothing? Will you need colours for
shoelaces and watch buckles? The finer the detail, the more colours you’re likely to need.
NOTE
Of course, if you want to go all the way, you could even mix two variations for each, having
a dark tone for some colours.
If you’d like to paint tones like these, revisit the Protect and repaint exercise on page 112.
2.162
 
Select frame 1 of the panel1 layer.
Use the Paint tool in Paint Unpainted mode [Alt Y] to fill in the colours. Remember that
if the Paint tool isn’t working, it could mean you have small gaps in your linework. In
that case, the easiest thing to do will be to turn on Auto Close Gaps to help you.
Repeat steps 5 and 6 for the panel2 layer.
TIP

> 8.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 1.
A reminder: you needn’t adjust the colours to perfection just yet. Go ahead and paint with
temporary colours for now. You can always tweak them at the end.
Finally, select frame 1 of the spBubbles layer, then fill them with the speech bubble
colour, using [Alt Y].
> PROJECT 1 – TASK 8 
  ADD THE TEXT
Revise this topic starting on page 73 with the Text tool exercises.
In the Timeline, select frame 1 of the text layer.
Choose the Text tool and adjust its properties, such as font, size, colour and alignment.
Place a cursor in the first speech bubble and type the text.
Get the Select tool and select the text.
In the Select tool properties (you may need to scroll down) adjust the text properties
some more if necessary, to better align the text.
Repeat steps 1–5 for panel 2.
2.163
> PROJECT 1 – TASK 9 
  HIDE THE ROUGH SKETCH LAYER AND PREVIEW THE RENDER
Select the rough sketches layer

> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 1.
> 2.
At the top of the Layer Properties panel, uncheck the Enable/disable box. You could
also do this by unchecking the layer’s visibility box in the Timeline.
2.164
At the bottom left of the Camera View, press the Render button 
 to see how the finished
image looks.
If you need to go back and do some more work, you can switch out of the Render view
and back to your workspace with the  button.
> PROJECT 1 – TASK 10 
  EXPORT TO AN IMAGE
We haven’t covered exporting yet, so consider this task a brief, step-by-step introduction.
The export process in Animate Pro and Harmony gives you a wide range of customisable
export options. In Animate, however, it is simplified.
ANIMATE ONLY
Render your comic image via the top menu: File → Export→ Images…
Choose your favourite format as the file type. I usually go with PNG because of its overall quality and reasonable file
size.
Take note of the export directory. It will be the scene’s frames folder, but you can change that by hitting the Browse button
and choosing any location on your computer.

> 3.
> 4.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
2.165
Leave all other settings as they are and hit ‘OK’.
Navigate to your scene directory and into the frames folder where you’ll find the rendered image.
ANIMATE PRO & HARMONY ONLY
In the next chapter you’ll get a proper Introduction to the Network view. While daunting at first, it’s an advanced and
extremely sensible visualisation of your scene structure.
If it’s not already open, you’ll find the Network view in the panel menus.
In the Network view you’ll see a cluster of modules and connecting wires. The module we want is named Write. Pan
around in the network using the [Spacebar] if necessary.
On the Write module, click the yellow box to open its Layer Properties.
2.166
These settings tell Toon Boom how to ‘write’ your output. In other words, these are your export settings.
Set the output directory to any location on your computer, or simply leave it set to your scene’s frames folder.
Into the Drawing Filename field, type ‘comic’.

> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
> 10.
In the formats list, select whatever format you’d like your comic image to be. I usually go with PNG because of its
overall quality and reasonable file size.
Close the Layer Properties.
In the top menu, go to File →Export → Render Network, or use its shortcut key [Ctrl/⌘ Shift Y].
2.167
 
2.168
Leave these settings as they are and click ‘OK’.
Navigate to the location you specified in step 4 to find the exported image.
CONCLUSION
This concludes the comic strip project and this chapter. Feel free to go ahead and experiment
more with all of the tools and settings you’ve learned so far. In the next chapter, you’ll be
creating more advanced art and making it move!

2.169 
Don’t forget your signature!


T
     
CHAPTER 3
Animation
oon Boom is advanced software technology, but many of the tools are directly descended
from those used by traditional animation pioneers. The traditional animation disc, peg bars,
X-sheets and light table all have their software equivalents.

3.1
These links are often lost on the modern-day animator who may have never peered into a
lightbox, never ‘rolled’ drawings, filled in an X-sheet or understands just how funny it is to hit
your funny bone on a peg. These connections to traditional tools can be a bit puzzling and take
some getting used to.
On the flip side though, traditional animators – particularly the dinosaurs – while at ease with
traditional methods, may be just as bewildered by some of the technological advances, like
particles, deformation, inverse kinematics and node-based compositing.

3.2
Toon Boom brings the two worlds together with just enough for each, not only to feel
comfortable, but also to learn about the other. If you consider yourself a modern-day animator
and don’t know much about traditional animation, you’ll reap huge benefits from learning about
the techniques and tools of the original craft. Likewise, if you’re a traditional animator, you’re
probably already discovering how advances in technology have made animation tasks quicker
and easier with amazing new tools.
WHAT’S IN THIS CHAPTER?
In the previous chapters we touched lightly on frames and layers in the timeline. But with all
those drawing and painting exercises of Chapter 2, most of what you’ve learned so far has to
do with single frame images. Here in the animation chapter we’ll learn all about using the
Timeline (and various other views) for animation.
FPS
Animation is a series of still images, or frames, flashing by at high speed. The rate at which
frames are displayed, commonly known as the frame rate, is measured in frames per second
(FPS). The standard frame rate for cinematic film is 24 fps. This means that in every second,
24 images are rapidly displayed in sequence. At this frame rate, you need 72 frames for just 3
seconds of animation.
Being the traditional standard, 24 fps is the default frame rate in Toon Boom. However, you
can change the scene’s frame rate at any time in the FPS field of the top toolbar, as shown
below.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
3.3
Frame rates vary wildly, from 10 fps in web banner ads, right up to 60 fps in some games.
While certain video formats require 24, 25, 30 or even 48 fps, generally while learning Toon
Boom animation, you’ll get by just fine working at the default 24 fps.
THE TIMELINE
The annotated image shown as Figure 3.4 (overleaf) is followed by a list of the various
Timeline parts. Although most of these may be new to you, we’ll certainly cover them all
before this chapter’s through.
3.4
Layers: There are many types of layer. You may think of Drawing layers as individual
flipbooks, each with their own pages.
Visibility of all layers:  Toggles visibility of all layers on or off.
Show selected layer only:  Shows the selected layer, hiding all others.
Add and Delete layer buttons:   Add various layer types; Delete layers.
Add Drawing:  Dedicated button for adding new Drawing layers.
Add Peg:  Adds a peg for moving the selected layer. Must have a layer selected first.
Pegs are discussed ahead on page 177.
Visibility modes:  Choose to show only certain layer types, e.g., only show drawings
in the Timeline.
Paste modes: 
 Choose to paste only certain frame types, e.g., keyframes.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
Data view:  Expands layer and keyframe data.
Playhead, (sometimes called the scrub bar): Current frame indicator.
Frames: The playhead travels along the timeline displaying frames as it crosses them.
End Scene marker: Drag this to mark the end of the scene.
Loop markers: Drag these to define the start/finish frames for Timeline playback.
Motion Keyframes: Points marking the beginning or end of a movement.
Drawings: Displayed as the playhead passes over them.
Layer onion skin:  Toggle the onion skin for the layer.
Layer Lock:  Enable/disable editing the layer contents.
Layer Colour:  Define the colour of the layer shown in the Timeline.
Layer Name: Rename the layer by clicking the name.
Layer Type Icon: 
   Indicates the type of layer, e.g., Drawing 
, Peg , Effect .
Function Expand: + − Scroll out the layer’s transform values (pan, rotate, scale).
Layer Visibility checkbox: Enables/disables the layer visibility.
FRAMES
As you probably know, traditional animation was drawn by hand onto individual sheets of
paper. Each of these sheets represents a single frame in a strip of film.
If you’re new to digital animation software, it’s often helpful to think of frames in the timeline
as a stack of these drawings. The drawings in the timeline are individual pieces of paper, each
on a single frame that, when flipped like a flipbook, contributes to the illusion of movement.
You may have noticed that the book you’re reading right now has flipbook images at the top.
Try it out!

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
3.5
Looking at the Timeline now, your layer named ‘Drawing’ is like a flipbook. You create your
animation on those individual frames, just like pieces of paper.
> FRAMES EXERCISE 1 
  FRAME-BY-FRAME ANIMATION
Create a new scene with a name and resolution of your choice.
In the Timeline, drag the red scene end marker back to frame 36. Alternatively you can
set the scene length to 36 in the top menu: Scene → Scene Length…
In the timeline, rename your default Drawing layer ‘ant’.
In the Colour panel, choose the Default black.
Select frame 1 in the Timeline.
Select the Brush tool and give it a max size setting of around 10.
In the lower left corner of the Camera View, paint a very short diagonal stroke.
3.6
If anyone asks, this is an ant! You’ll now animate this ant frame-by-frame across the scene.

> 8.
> 9.
> 10.
> 1.
> 2.
Press your [.] key to go to the next frame. Alternatively you can select the blank frame 2,
in the Timeline.
In the Camera View, make the second drawing of your ant. It should be about a body-
length forward of the first drawing. In Figure 3.7, all of the drawings are faded to
illustrate the distance between them.
Continue drawing your ant on each frame up to and including frame 12. Feel free to make
him wander in any direction, or walk in a straight line.
3.7
This has been a simple exercise in the ‘straight ahead’ method of frame-by-frame animation.
Later in the chapter we’ll talk much more about this and other frame-by-frame methods.
> FRAMES EXERCISE 2
LOOPING PLAYBACK
Let’s test this piece of animation. If it’s your first, you may like to crack open the biscuit tin and
gather your friends and family around.
In the program’s top toolbar, you’ll see four numeric input fields, two of which are labelled
Start and Stop (see Figure 3.8). The names for these fields also happen to be clickable buttons.
Position the playhead on frame 12, or whichever frame is your last ant drawing.
Click the name of the Stop field. It’s not very obvious that it’s a button.
3.8
Looking at the timeline now, you’ll notice that frame 12 has a black triangular marker like a
tiny bookend. This is a playback marker (see Figure 3.4, number 13). Instead of clicking the
buttons, you could enter a specific frame number or simply drag these markers along the

> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
timeline to define the frames that you want to be played.
As shown in Figure 3.9, set your playback to loop.
Press Play or [Shift Enter] to watch the ant scramble across the scene repeatedly.
To stop the playback, press [Shift Enter] again, or click anywhere in the Timeline.
3.9
Press [Ctrl/⌘ S] to save your progress. You’ll be using this file in the next exercises.
ONION SKIN TOOL
 You may have seen a real world light table or lightbox before.
Used by many artists, from architects to graphic designers, from book illustrators to animators,
it’s a glass topped table with a bright light underneath. It allows the artist to see through
several layers of paper, which is essential in animation.
3.10
In traditional terms, ‘onion skin’ is actually a type of translucent tracing paper. In software
though, it simulates the tracing paper effect. When turned on, it reveals your previous drawings
underneath, just like tracing paper, or a lightbox.
NOTE

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
Incidentally, the circular disc of an animator’s desk (shown back in Figure 3.1 at the start of
this chapter) allows the animator to freely rotate the drawing to a comfortable working
angle. As you saw earlier in the book, this is activated in Toon Boom with the [Ctrl Alt] key
combination, so now you know what the onscreen disc icon represents.
> FRAMES EXERCISE 3
  THE ONION SKIN
Now let’s look at the ant animation with the onion skin to see how it works.
In the Timeline, select frame 5 of your ant layer.
Turn on the layer’s onion skin using the onion skin button . You can also right-click the
playhead and choose Show Onion Skin [Alt O].
3.11
In the Camera View you should now see two faded red and two faded green ant images. Also
shown in Figure 3.11 are two blue markers on the playhead showing that you can see two
frames behind and two frames in front of your current drawing. These blue markers can be
dragged, just like the looping playback markers you saw in the previous exercise.
In the Timeline, drag the onion skin markers out on each side of the playhead until you
can see all of your animation from frames 1 to 12.
3.12
I like to think of red and green as past and future. In the Camera View, the number of past (red)
ants corresponds to the number of frames under the left onionskin marker. Likewise the number
of future (green) ants corresponds to the number of frames under the right handle.
Before we wrap this exercise up, one final thing to note is how the intensity of these green and

> 4.
> 5.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
> 10.
red ants is gradually faded to illustrate how far those drawings are away from the playhead. In
Figure 3.13, note the frame numbers and how the ant is more faded, the further it gets from the
current frame.
3.13
Finally, in the Timeline, hide the ant layer by unchecking its visibility checkbox.
You can safely close this file without saving as you won’t need it from here on.
> FRAMES EXERCISE 4
  FIREBALL ANIMATION
Now let’s put what you’ve learned into practice. In this exercise you’ll animate a simple
magical fireball projectile; the kind a magician might throw in battle.
Create a new scene called ‘fireball’ with the HDTV_Vertical resolution.
Set the Scene Length to 36.
In the Timeline, rename the default layer ‘rough’.
In the Colour panel, choose the Default black for sketching.
Get the Brush and set its max size to somewhere between 5 and 10.
In the Timeline, select frame 1.
Sketch a horizontal fireball in the Camera View, as shown in Figure 3.14.
In the Timeline, on the fireball layer, turn on the onion skin using the  button.
Still in the Timeline, select frame 2 of the fireball layer or just press [.] to step forward
one frame.
Draw two more frames of the fireball for a total of four.

> 11. Now might be a good time for a break. Save your scene here with [Ctrl/⌘ S].
3.14
NOTE
As this is a flying projectile, the general idea is to make the flames flow away from the ball.
We’re animating this fireball in place because later, you’ll learn a special way of moving it
across the scene.
3.15
If you’d like to test your fireball animation, position the playback markers as demonstrated in
Frames Exercise 2, make sure the loop playback button is on, and press [Shift Enter].
This is four drawings at a rate of 24 fps which, as you can see, makes the flames frighteningly
fast (that’s one-sixth of a second). In the next exercise we’ll learn about timing to slow it down
a bit.

> 1.
TIMING
The animation is very fast because you have animated it on ‘singles’ or ‘ones, meaning there’s
a drawing on every single frame in the timeline.
3.16
In the next exercise, we’ll be ‘timing’ these drawings so we can control the speed of the
animation.
> FRAMES EXERCISE 5
  TIMING METHOD 1
When you animate something on singles, as you’ve just done with the ant and fireball, you may
need to add time to your drawings so that they play slower. On the other hand, it’s possible that
occasionally you may want to speed up parts of the animation by removing drawings or frames.
Each fireball drawing is currently ‘exposed’ for just one frame. We’ll now slow the animation
down by exposing each drawing for two frames. In animation terms, we’re about to put this
animation ‘on doubles, also called ‘twos’.
NOTE
If you’d like a starting file for this exercise, open up fireball_rough from the download files
for this chapter. You’ll find it in the ‘fireball’ scene folder.
In the Timeline, [Shift]-select all the drawings in your fireball layer. That is, with the
first frame already selected, hold [Shift] and then click the last frame as shown in Figure
3.17.
3.17

> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 1.
Right-click any of the selected frames and choose Exposure – Set Exposure to 2.
Each drawing of your fireball should now be exposed for two frames. The length of this
animation should now be eight frames.
Position the playhead on frame 8.
In the top toolbar, press the Stop field name. The little triangular loop end marker should
now be braced against the back of frame 8 like a little bookend.
Ensure looping playback is active and press Play, or hit [Shift Enter].
3.18
In step 2 you may have noticed that there are more timing options in the right-click menu. Go
ahead and experiment with other timings for these frames if you get the urge. Just repeat the
above exercise.
NOTE
At 24 fps, exposures greater than 2 will appear jerkier, because each drawing is held for
longer. Jerky animation can always be smoothed out with inbetween drawings, which you’ll
see later in this chapter.
CYCLES
You’ve seen how to loop a few frames using the playback markers, but what if you want to
loop these four drawings repeatedly for the full 36 frames of the scene? This is a very easy
process with several ways of doing it so let’s look at one of those right now.
> FRAMES EXERCISE 6
  CYCLES
In the Timeline, [Shift]-select all eight frames of your fireball animation.

> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
3.19
Right-click the selected frames and choose Create Cycle.
A cycle window opens prompting you for a number. We have eight frames that we want to
cycle to the end of the scene.
Enter 5 and click ‘OK’. The Timeline is instantly populated with your eight frames
cycled to the end of the scene.
Drag the playhead to the end of the scene. Then, in the main tool bar, press the Stop
field’s label.
3.20
In the top toolbar, turn off the playback loop.
Now reposition the playhead at frame 1.
Press Play or hit [Shift Enter] to watch the playback.
You’ve only done four drawings, but that sequence of four drawings is now looping over 36
frames. Being able to cycle a few drawings, rather than redrawing each frame over and over, is
a huge time-saver, particularly for more complex animation like a character walk cycle.
Before we finish this exercise, I recommend you repaint all of your rough drawings with
a lighter rough sketch colour. This will make it easier to clean up the linework, a few
pages from now.
Finally, save the scene with [Ctrl/⌘ S] and close it. We’ll come back to it later in the
chapter.
DUPLICATING DRAWINGS
Sometimes you’ll want to use one drawing as the basis for a new drawing. Take for instance a
seedling growing in time lapse. You might redraw the sprout on every frame working carefully
to keep the stem consistent as more leaves sprout from it. An easier way would be to duplicate
each drawing and alter it on the next, as we’ll see now.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> FRAMES EXERCISE 7
  DUPLICATING DRAWINGS
Start a new scene with a name, location and resolution of your choice.
In the Timeline, rename the default Drawing layer to ‘seedling’.
In the Timeline, select frame 1 of the seedling layer.
Using the Brush tool with any colour, draw a narrow shoot coming from the ground.
3.21
In the Timeline, select frame 5 of the seedling layer
Press [F5] to extend the drawing one exposure up to this frame. You could instead right-
click frame 5 and choose Extend Exposure.
So you have one drawing held for five frames. To start animating this seedling, you obviously
want a second drawing.
Select frame 2 of the seedling layer
Click the Duplicate Drawings button at the top of the Timeline (see Figure 3.22).
Another way of doing this is to right-click frame 2 and select Drawings – Duplicate
Drawings or simply press [Alt Shift D].
This has added a dußlicate of vour first drawina. indicated by a small separation line between
frames 1 and 2 of the seedling layer.

> 9.
> 10.
> 11.
> 12.
> 13.
> 14.
> 15.
> 16.
> 17.
3.22
NOTE
If you don’t see the buttons across the top of the Timeline as shown in Figure 3.22, you can
turn them on with Windows → Toolbars → Timeline View.
Alter the drawing on frame 2 by adding a tiny leaf shoot.
In the Timeline, select frame 3.
Again, click the Duplicate Drawings button.
Turn on the onion skin for the seedling layer using the  button.
Using the Eraser or Cutter tool, remove the small leaf. Through the onionskin, you can
now see your previous leaf drawing on frame 2.
Redraw the leaf slightly larger in this frame.
3.23
Repeat the process for frames 4 and then 5; erasing and redrawing the leaf growing
slightly larger on each frame.
Now that you have five individual drawings, go back to the drawing on frame 2 and add
another tiny leaf.
On frames 3, 4 and 5 you won’t need to duplicate the drawing or erase the new leaf.
Simply animate this new leaf growing on the existing drawings.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
3.24
This short, simple sequence of animation demonstrates how useful Duplicate Drawings can be
in frame-by-frame animation. As you get into more complex projects, you’ll find Duplicate
Drawings useful in other ways.
> FRAMES EXERCISE 8
  TIMING METHOD 2
Now, just like in exercise 5, let’s slow down the animation of the seedling by increasing the
exposure of the drawings. Back in exercise 5 you saw how to put your drawings on doubles
(that is, expose each drawing for two frames each) by right-clicking the frames and choosing
Exposure → Set Exposure to 2. You could do the same here, but let’s step through a different
method.
If you’d like a starting file for this exercise, you’ll find it in the download files for this chapter.
It’s called seedling_timing.
In the Timeline, select your first seedling frame.
Now right-click the frame and take note of the shortcut keys for Increase [+] and
Decrease Exposure [−].
In the Timeline, select the first seedling drawing and press [+] now.
NOTE
If you have a numeric keypad on your keyboard, these are straightforward shortcut keys and
easy to remember. If you don’t have a numeric keypad though, you’ll need to press [Shift =]
for Increase; that is to say, type [+].

> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
3.25
This has increased the exposure of the selected drawing by one frame. You could continue
pressing [+] a number of times to add more exposure to this frame, or press [−] to reduce the
exposure of any drawings. I’ve exposed the first seedling drawing for four frames.
Using the same method, increase the exposure of the other seedling frames.
3.26
When you’ve timed each frame, watch how it plays with [Shift Enter].
Is it too fast? Too slow? Experiment with different timings to get the speed you think works
best. If you wanted to give, say, 12 frames exposure to each drawing, you may need to lengthen
the scene. Feel free to do so to accommodate the seedling speed you want.
Close the scene with File – Close. As this has been a throwaway scene, you don’t need
to save it if you don’t want to.
The timing method in this exercise has done exactly the same job that the right-click → Set
Exposure method would have; but this is a little quicker for timing individual frames.
DRAWINGS AND FRAMES: THE DIFFERENCE
Cast your mind back to the beginning of the chapter, when I mentioned that at 24 fps, there are

24 frames flashing by every second. As you’ve seen though, that doesn’t necessarily mean 24
drawings. The frame rate remains constant, regardless of how many drawings you use.
Working on doubles (each drawing exposed for two frames) there are only 12 drawings per
second. If you’re animating on 4s (each drawing exposed for four frames), you’ll only need six
drawings per second. Timed on 8s, you only need three drawings per second, and so on.
Once again though, the longer the exposure of each drawing, the more jerky the animation will
appear when played back.
FRAMES SUMMARY
It may surprise you, but what you’ve learned so far is almost all you need to know about
animating frame-by-frame in Toon Boom. With what you’ve learned, you could safely go ahead
and animate any linework and any scene, from a wandering ant to a smoky explosion. Of
course, there is so much more to Toon Boom; so many professional tools and time-saving
features that we’ve yet to cover.
DRAWING SUB-LAYERS
Before we talk about Timeline Layers, there’s another type of layer that’s built into every
drawing; a kind of sub-layer for different types of artwork within the drawing. Let’s look at
these and see why you might use them.
Imagine you have clear sheets called cels. You do all your work on these clear cels until one
day on closer inspection, you discover that each cel is actually two thinner sheets pressed
together; let’s call them L and C.
You soon find that you can draw your linework on the L sub-layer and then apply your colour to
the C sub-layer, keeping them separate. You can even hide L so just the colour art is visible, or
hide C so you only see the line art. And yet to the casual observer, it’s still just one cel.
Magical, right?
3.27

3.28
In the Camera or Drawing views, look at the icons on the bottom left. If you’re using Animate,
your drawings have these L and C sub-layers. Animate Pro and Harmony though, have O, L, C,
U – Overlay, Line, Colour and Underlay sub-layers.
NOTE
For the Animate user: if you don’t see these buttons in your Camera and Drawing views, you
can turn them on via Edit – Preferences – General tab. In the middle of the window towards
the bottom, check the box Use Advanced Art Mode. It requires you to close and restart the
program. Upon restarting, you’ll see those L and C buttons shown in Figure 3.28.
TIP
The reason they’re disabled in Animate by default is because they’re designed for an
advanced workflow. How you use these sub-layer levels, or whether you even use them at
all, is entirely up to you and the needs of your scene.
The great thing about sub-layers is that your line art can be kept separate from your colour art,
even though they’re actually counted as the same drawing. The whole idea is to make it easy to
colour and treat your lines separately from your paint fills.

> 1.
> 2.
3.29
As for the U and O layers (Animate Pro and Harmony only), I usually use the Underlay for my
rough sketches/animation and then clean up on L. Where Toon Boom is used in animation
studios, Overlay is often reserved for notes, corrections and timing charts.
Each of these sub-layers can be hidden from the final render too, so that notes and rough
animation don’t need to be deleted from the scene – just hidden. There’ll be more on how to do
this, starting on page 227.
When you open a scene, the L sub-layer is selected by default. Everything we’ve done
throughout the book so far has taken place on the L sub-layer. Let’s now explore the others.
> DRAWING SUB-LAYERS EXERCISE 1
  LINE AND COLOUR ART
Thus far in the book we’ve been drawing everything on the L sub-layer.
Open your fireball scene, if it isn’t already open. If you’d like a starting file for this
exercise, open up fireball_cycle from the chapter files, and skip to step 3.
In the Timeline add a new Drawing layer using the button , drag it to the top and
rename it ‘cleanFireball’.

> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
3.30
We’ll now create clean linework for the fireball. The Line Art button  should be active by
default. If not, activate it now.
In the Timeline, select frame 1 of the cleanFireball layer.
Clean up only the first four drawings. Later you’ll cycle them to the end of the scene, just
as you did with the rough fireball.
3.31
Expose each drawing for two frames using the [+] keyboard shortcut.
In the Timeline, select the fireball layer and then click the  button to switch to the
Colour Art sub-layer.
If you were to try erasing some fireball lines, you’ll find that you cannot, because you’re
currently on the Colour sub-layer, while the linework is on the Line sub-layer. Also, trying to
fill the linework with colour won’t work for the same reason: on the Colour sub-layer there are
no lines to fill.
It means that we need to create invisible borders to fill with paint. So maybe now you’re
dreading the thought of creating invisible duplicates of your linework. You’ll be relieved to
know that with a shortcut keystroke, Toon Boom can automatically generate those for you.
Get the Select tool [Alt S] from the toolbar.
Make certain that you’re currently on the Colour sub-layer. Press [Shift 8] or, in the top
menu, go to Drawing – Create Colour Art from Line Art.
You should now be seeing those invisible vector borders as wiry blue lines. If not, toggle

> 9.
> 10.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
strokes on with [K], or go to View → Show → Show Strokes. Also, if you switch over to the
Drawing view and click the  button, you’ll see the wiry blue vector border as shown in
Figure 3.32.
3.32
Choose, or mix up, a fiery orange colour and then, using the Paint Unpainted tool [Alt
Y], fill the closed flames on all drawings. Again, be sure you’re filling the invisible
strokes on the Colour sub-layer and not filling the linework on the Line sub-layer.
Hide strokes with [K] at any time to see the coloured areas without lines.
TIP
If you’re working in the Drawing view, you may not be able to see the Line Art level while
working in the Colour Art level. However, using the Preview Line and Colour Art button 
you can see both levels together while working in one of them.
> DRAWING SUB-LAYERS EXERCISE 2
  REPAINTING LINES
Let’s repaint the fireball’s linework with a second fiery colour.
At the bottom-left of the Camera View, click the 
 Line sub-layer button.
Select the Paint tool in Repaint mode [Alt R].
In the Tool Properties panel, hit the ‘Apply current tool to all drawings’ button. This
useful function lets us repaint all of the drawings at once!

> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
3.33
Using a new fiery colour with the Repaint tool, draw an area around your fireball.
Step through the frames with [,] and [.] to confirm that the lines have been repainted on
every frame. For any that were missed, simply trace an area around them with the
Repaint tool.
In the Timeline, select all of your clean drawings and cycle them to the end of the scene
(right-click – Create Cycle).
3.34
Finally, loop the playback and hit play to watch the animation.
Save your progress now because you’ll use this file later to make the fireball fly across
the scene.
While considered an advanced concept, you’ve just seen how keeping your lines separate from
colour keeps your art highly organised and makes it easier to repaint, treat or otherwise change
parts of it.
LAYERS
Timeline Layers have a variety of types and uses. So far we’ve really only explored the
Drawing layer type, which happens to bear a resemblance to a flipbook. Other layer types
include Effects, Groups, Cameras and, one of the most fundamentally useful layer types, Pegs.

SELECTING AND DESELECTING LAYERS
Each time you select a frame in the Timeline, you’re also activating that Layer for editing, or
drawing. This is indicated by the edit pencil 
 icon, which tells you you’re now working on
this layer.
3.35
Because each layer is covered in buttons, boxes and labels, the best way to select a layer
without clicking any buttons is to simply click the layer name, any of its frames or any blank
part of the layer. You can also use the keyboard shortcuts [H] and [J] to move up and down the
layers.
NOTE
Should you click the name of a layer that’s already selected, you’ll be prompted to rename
the layer. If this happens and you don’t want to rename the layer, simply press [Enter] or just
click a blank part of the layer.
To deselect any selected layers, ensure the Timeline has focus and press your keyboard’s [Esc]
key. You can also click any of the blank areas above or below the Timeline layers.
LAYER PROPERTIES
Just like the tools, every type of layer has properties to mess with. As you go through the Layer
exercises, keep the Layer Properties panel close by. I suggest docking it with the Tool
Properties so you can switch easily back and forth between the two.

> 1.
> 2.
> LAYERS EXERCISE 1
  EXPANDING AND COLLAPSING
Almost all layers have a prominent + icon. Clicking this expands a list of parameters that can
be animated over time.
On any layer, click the Expand Function + icon.
3.36
Note the tiny  icons, indicating all these values can be animated. Drawing layers have values
relevant to transform, such as position, scale, rotation and skew. We’ll see other values as we
explore other layer types in the exercises that follow.
To collapse the layer back into itself, click the Collapse − icon and the list rolls back up.
FUNCTION CURVES
All throughout the Timeline and Layer Properties panel, you’ll see the function curve  icon.
Whenever you see this, it means a parameter can be animated. For example, the Position
attribute of a bird layer is what you animate to make the bird fly across the sky. The Scale
value can make a boat gradually shrink as it sails into the distance. The Transparency effect
module (seen in the next chapter) can be animated to make a cloud of smoke fade off over time.
3.37
Whenever you see this  function icon in the Timeline, you can double-click it to open up that
parameter’s function curve, which is essentially a motion graph for fine control over the
animation timing. We’ll use this much more in later exercises.

•
•
•
3.38
In any scene, simply click the + button on any Timeline layer to roll out the layer attributes.
None of these will be clickable until animation keyframes are added; for now we’re just
browsing, but we’ll animate these later. Drawing layer attributes are specifically for
transformation: position, scale, rotation and skew. Notice also that you can add  function
curves for each attribute.
DUPLICATING LAYERS
There are many reasons you might need to clone or duplicate a layer. Here are a few examples.
Crowds, flocks, schools and swarms.
Waves, flames and clouds.
Glows, shadows and other filters.
Duplicate and clone each have their own special uses.
DUPLICATE
A duplicate may be altered in any way without affecting the original. This is useful for the
above crowd example. Suppose you have animated three incidental crowd members. If you
duplicate these three, you can alter each character with different colours or clothing to make
the crowd appear larger and more varied. You’ve probably seen this technique in television
animation where you can see several versions of the same guy in the crowd, each with different
coloured skin or clothing.

3.39
CLONE
When you clone a layer, any changes you make to the clone will also alter the original, and
vice versa. One example where the technique may be useful is for creating a character shadow
on a wall. The character can be cloned and the clone used as a Shadow matte. Any changes you
make to the character will also be made to the shadow.
3.40
> LAYERS EXERCISE 2
  DUPLICATING AND CLONING
In this scene we’ll animate a raindrop ripple and duplicate it a number of times for an effect of
rain on a pond surface.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
Create a new throwaway scene.
In the Timeline, rename the default layer ripple and then select frame 1.
Using drawing tools and colours of your choice, animate a four-drawing sequence of
some ripples growing outward from the centre and dissipating, as shown in Figure 3.41.
Add exposure to each drawing so they’re on doubles/twos (see page 149).
3.41
Right-click the ripple layer’s name and choose Duplicate Selected Layers.
The duplicated layer is automatically named with ‘_1’ appended for you, but like any layer,
you can rename it if you prefer. At this point, the layers should appear as shown in Figure 3.42.
3.42
In the Timeline, [Shift]-select the first four frames (two drawings) of the duplicated
ripple.
Press [Ctrl/⌘ X] to cut them from the Timeline. The blank frames should still be
selected.
3.43
Making sure the blank frames are still selected, on your keyboard, press [Z]. This pulls
the remaining drawings back to frame 1, leaving a gap at the end.
NOTE

> 9.
> 10.
> 11.
> 1.
> 2.
The [Z] key function in the Timeline is known as Clear and Pull, which can also be
accessed by right-clicking drawings or blank frames Exposure → Clear Exposure and Pull.
In the ripple_1 layer, select frame 5 and then press [Ctrl/⌘ V] to paste those frames you
cut in Step 7, onto the end.
Move the playhead to frame 8 and click the Stop Frame label in the top toolbar.
3.44
Activate playback looping and press [Shift Enter] to watch the playback.
In this exercise you’ve created two ripples from one, in a fraction of the time it’d take to
animate two. For rain on a pond surface, you could fill the scene with these ripples, offsetting
each by a different number of frames.
In the next exercise I’ll set you on the path to do this yourself, where you’ll reposition all the
drawings of your duplicated ripple layer.
> LAYERS EXERCISE 3
  REPOSITION ALL DRAWINGS
In the previous chapter we skipped some of the tools because they are animation tools. Now
that we’re animating, let’s revisit the toolbar and check out the Reposition All Drawings tool.
In the Timeline, select frame 1 of the ripple_1 layer.
In the toolbar behind the Select tool you’ll find the Reposition All Drawings tool (Figure
3.45).
3.45

> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
Once the Reposition All Drawings tool is selected, your drawing is automatically selected
ready for repositioning, scaling and rotation.
Using the middle handle of the Select tool (a reminder to move the pivot point aside to
access the reposition handle) move the drawing to the other side of the scene.
Scrub the Timeline and you’ll see that all your drawings have been moved together.
We’ll use this scene in the next exercise.
DRAWING LAYERS
By now you have plenty of experience working with Drawing layers. The ant, fireball and
ripple animation you’ve done along the way, as well as all the drawing tools exercises in the
previous chapter, have been done on Drawing layers.
DRAWINGS IN THE LIBRARY
Every drawing you do is automatically stored in the Library. Even if you delete a drawing from
the Timeline, it remains in the Library and you can put it back on the Timeline quickly and
easily at any time. Later we’ll work more in the Library but the quick exercise below is a brief
introduction.
> DRAWING LAYER EXERCISE 1
  THE LIBRARY
We’re still working in the ripple scene for this exercise.
If the Library panel isn’t already open, choose it from the  panel menu.
In the Timeline, [Shift]-select four drawings in your ripple layer and delete them using
your keyboard’s [Delete] key.
Select frame 1 of the ripple layer, which should be now blank.
With frame 1 of the ripple layer selected, your Drawing Substitution window will show the
layer name, while the preview pane is blank.

> 4.
> 5.
3.46
In the Library, move the Drawing Substitution slider back and forth to see previews of
all your ripple drawings. Each ripple shows in the preview pane.
Position the slider on your first ripple drawing (Figure 3.47).
3.47
When you position the slider on the first ripple drawing, it appears in the Drawing Substitution
preview, the Timeline and the Camera View. You can move the slider to whichever drawing
you want to show on frame 1.
NOTE
When a Drawing is selected in the Timeline, also take note of the Drawing name at the
bottom of the Camera or Drawing View. This name is a unique identifier that allows you to
access it from any frame in the ripple layer. When you have a blank frame selected, the name
here will say so.

> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
3.48
Drawing names will also appear in a tooltip when you hover the mouse cursor over
drawings in the Timeline.
In the Timeline, select frame 3 of the ripple layer which should currently be blank.
In the Library, as shown in Figure 3.49, move the slider along to the second drawing.
3.49
As you release the slider, ripple drawing 2 appears on the Timeline. Notice that the first
drawing is exposed for two frames, filling the gap between 1 and 3.
Select frame 5 in the Timeline.
Move the Drawing Substitution slider to the third drawing.
This process of quickly inserting specific drawings at specific frames is called drawing
substitution and is perfect for lip-sync animation. There’s a whole project dedicated to
drawing substitution near the end of this chapter.
NOTE
Now and then in the Drawing Substitution window, you’ll find your numbers aren’t perfect.
For example, if you draw something on frame 3, delete it and draw something else on the
same frame, the deleted one will be named 3, but the new one will be named 3_1. If you
ever want to correct your drawing names, you can do so individually with [Ctrl/⌘ D].
Alternatively, you can venture into the X-sheet view. Select all drawings in the layer
column, then right-click and choose → Drawings → Rename by Frame.

LIMITING DRAWING SELECTION
When you have several layers in your scene – let’s say a separate bird and sky layer – it can be
annoying when you try to select the bird in the Camera View, and the sky also becomes
selected.
3.50
By default, in the Camera View the Select tool works on multiple layers at once. This has its
uses but you can set the select tool to only work on your currently selected layer. To make the
change go to Edit → Preferences → Camera tab → Select tool works on single drawing
(Figure 3.51).
3.51
When this preference is unchecked, the select tool will select anything in the Camera View, on
all unlocked layers. My personal preference is to have this preference checked, so that the
Select tool only works on the currently active layer.
ANIMATING A DRAWING LAYER
Earlier you saw the various parameters that you can animate with function curves. On a

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
Drawing layer, these parameters are position, scale, rotation and skew. Let’s animate some of
these parameters.
> DRAWING LAYER EXERCISE 2
  LAYER ANIMATION
The Transform tool is another animation tool we skipped over in the last chapter. Now you’ll
get to use it.
Create or open a throwaway exercises scene file.
In the Timeline, add a new layer named ‘propeller’.
Select frame 1 of the propeller layer.
With your choice of drawing tools and colours, draw a propeller in the Camera View.
This propeller can be as simple or complex as you like. Mine is a simple polyline drawing of
a triple-bladed marine-style propeller (Figure 3.52).
3.52
In the Timeline, extend the exposure of the propeller drawing to the end of the scene. The
quickest way to do this is to select the last frame of the propeller layer, then press [F5].
Return to frame 1 of the propeller layer by selecting it in the Timeline.
In the Tools toolbar ensure Animate Mode is on (Figure 3.53).

> 8.
> 9.
> 10.
> 11.
3.53
When the Animate button is active, any transformation you make to a Drawing layer will
automatically create a keyframe in the Timeline, as demonstrated in the following steps.
Directly below the Animate Mode button in the toolbar, choose the Transform tool. The
manipulator handles appear on the propeller drawing.
As you can see, the Transform tool has similar handles to the Select tool manipulation handles
you’re already familiar with. You’ll also see a pivot point.
Get the Drawing Pivot tool [Shift P] and click the centre of the propeller to place the
pivot there.
Using the Transform tool, rotate the propeller now.
3.54
When you finish rotating the propeller, you’ll notice in the Timeline that a keyframe has been
created on frame 1, indicated by a tiny black square. The reason this keyframe was created is
because Animate Mode is on (see Step 7 and Figure 3.53).
In the Timeline, expand the propeller layer’s function parameters by clicking the +
button. You’ll find that the keyframe has been created on all parameters.

> 12.
> 13.
> 14.
3.55
Move the playhead to the end of the scene, or simply select the last frame of the
propeller layer.
In the Camera View, again with the Transform tool, rotate the pro peller around one
complete revolution.
A second keyframe has been created in the Timeline and on all parameters a line is drawn
between the two, indicating changing values between keyframes.
3.56
Drag the playhead or press play to watch the propeller animating on the Timeline.
Congratulations! You’ve just animated the rotation value of this propeller. You could go ahead
and animate with position and scaling parameters in just the same way: position the playhead
where you want a keyframe, then use the Transform tool on the drawing.
To finish up this exercise, why not challenge yourself to refine the propeller rotation for a
seamless cycle?
KEYFRAMES
As you’ve just seen, a whole layer can be animated by keyframing its transformation
parameters. There is a downside to animating a layer in this way however. The keyframes of
the motion are attached directly to the drawings.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
For example, if you want to remove a keyframe from the Timeline, you can’t simply select and
delete it with the [Delete] key, otherwise it’ll delete both the drawing and the keyframe.
As another example: when you want to drag a keyframe in the Timeline it will drag the
drawing with it. Sometimes you want to move keyframes independently of drawings. The
solution for this is coming up soon when we talk about the Peg layer type. For now, let’s look
at how to add and remove transformation keyframes effectively.
> DRAWING LAYER EXERCISE 3
  ADDING AND REMOVING KEYFRAMES
Let’s look at some shortcut keys that allow you to add and remove keyframes without
transforming the object in the Camera View, or interfering with drawings in the Timeline. This
is useful for setting out your keyframes first, then applying the transformations later.
In the Timeline select any frame of the propeller layer.
Press [F6] to create a keyframe. The tiny black square appears on that frame.
In the Timeline, select an existing keyframe.
Press [F7] to remove that keyframe.
In summary, animating the transformation values of a Drawing layer has its uses, but it’s often
more efficient to keep the motion separate from the Drawings themselves, as you’ll see next.
PEG
The Toon Boom documentation defines a Peg as a trajectory onto which you can hook your
drawings. You can also use a Peg for static or non-animated transformations without
trajectories.
Rather than transforming the Drawing layer as you’ve just seen, you can attach it to a Peg. The
Peg is a dedicated layer type that holds the Drawing layer transformation, keeping the motion
separate from the Drawing layer itself.
Additionally, if you ever need to rework the Drawing layer after you’ve animated the
transformation values, you can temporarily disable the Peg to ‘hide’ all of the motion and
transformation.
In the propeller exercise you learned to animate the Drawing layer. However, this time it’s the
Peg that is keyframed.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> PEG EXERCISE 1
  PEG ANIMATION
In this exercise, you’ll send your fireball flying across the scene by attaching it to a Peg layer.
If you’d like to use a starting file, you’ll find fireball_Peg in the ‘fireball’ directory.
Open the fireball scene and scrub the Timeline to watch the fire ball animation flaming
away on the spot for 36 frames.
Select the cleanFireball layer.
Add a Peg using the  button.
3.57
Now you have a dedicated movement layer for your fireball. It has been automatically named
cleanFireball-P and has the original clean-Fireball Drawing layer ‘nested’ underneath it.
NOTE
Nested layers indicate a hierarchy. In this little hierarchy the Peg is the parent and the
Drawing is the child. Essentially it means that however you transform the Peg, whatever the
Peg does, the Drawing follows.
3.58
Hierarchies are the basis for building puppet-style characters as you’ll see towards the end
of this chapter. A character’s arm, for example, would be a child of the torso. Wherever the
torso layer goes, therefore, the arm layer follows.
Now you’re ready to keyframe the transform parameters of this Peg. It’ll keep all that

> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
movement separate from the Drawing layer.
In the Timeline, select frame 1 of the fireball’s Peg layer.
Ensure Animate Mode is on.
Select the Transform tool.
At this point, you will notice either that the Transform manipulator has a yellow border, or the
fireball itself is washed with yellow. Yellow is indicative of a Peg with Animate mode on,
whereas when you transform a Drawing layer, it’s a pinkish-purplish border or wash.
3.59
NOTE
You can choose to show selected elements with the bounding box style (the border) or the
tint style (the wash). At the bottom of the Camera View, open the Camera Display  menu
and toggle Box Selection Style.
Using the Move handle of the Transform manipulator, drag the fireball to a starting
position on the screen.
Select the last frame of the Peg layer.
Once again using the move handle, move the fireball to its finish position.

> 10.
> 1.
> 2.
In the Peg layer, there’s now a line joining the two keyframes, indicating there’s motion. And
that’s it! The Peg is animated from one side of the scene to the other, taking the fireball with it.
Hit the play button or press [Shift Enter] to watch the fireball flying across the scene.
Now if you need to move keyframes around in the Timeline, you can simply drag them back or
forward in the Timeline without interfering with any drawings.
3.60
If you need to change the fireball’s animation drawings, you can disable the Peg (in the Layer
Properties panel, uncheck the Enable/Disable box) to remove the transformation. Make your
changes and then re-enable the Peg.
Save the fireball scene now and leave it open for the next exercise.
CAMERA
The Camera layer type is exactly what its name implies. When you add a Camera to the scene,
you can add a Peg to it, then keyframe its position, zoom and rotation for quick and easy
camera moves.
Cameras in Toon Boom are incredible. There’s a whole chapter dedicated to the Camera later,
but let’s quickly add one to the scene and see how it works.
> CAMERA EXERCISE 1
  ADDING A SCENE CAMERA
If you want a starting scene for this exercise, open up fireball_Camera from the chapter files.
In your fireball scene add a new layer, name it ‘background’ and drag it to the bottom of
the layer order.
On this layer, draw a simple background sketch. No need to add colour or detail if you
don’t want to, as this is just for demonstration purposes. Also note in Figure 3.61 that
I’ve extended the sketch beyond the scene border to accommodate a camera move.

> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
3.61
In the Timeline, click the  button and choose Camera from the drop-down list. Right
away the Camera appears in the Timeline with the default name: Camera.
With the Camera layer selected in the Timeline, now add a Peg using the button.
3.62
In the Camera View you may see nothing different, but a Camera does now exist in the scene
and is attached to a Peg. As shown in Figure 3.62, the Timeline confirms this with a layer
named Camera-P. It’s ready to pan, zoom and rotate.
Rather than use the Transform tool for this, let’s use the Advanced Animation tools. If you can’t
see them in your main toolbar above the Camera View, go to Windows → Toolbars →
Advanced Animation and the tools will appear.
3.63
In the Tools toolbar, ensure Animate Mode is on.
In the Timeline, select frame 1 of the Camera’s Peg layer, Camera-P.
From the Advanced Animation tools, select the Translate tool. Its shortcut is [Alt 2].
In the Camera View, a move handle appears, the cursor has a four-way move icon  and the
scene border is yellow.

> 8.
> 9.
> 1.
> 2.
Anywhere in the Camera View, click and drag to move the Camera Peg to a starting
position, just as you did for the fireball Peg. As you drag, you can watch the scene
panning. You could also use the Translate tool handles.
Select the last frame of the Camera Peg layer and then in the Camera View drag the
Camera Peg to its end position.
As you might expect by now, the Timeline shows that the Camera Peg has two keyframes and
the line between them indicates motion.
3.64
Experiment with the other Advanced Animation tools: Rotate [Alt 3], Scale [Alt 4] and Skew
[Alt 5] and experiment with the pivot positions. Don’t worry about Maintain Size and Spline
Offset for now; we’ll cover those later in this chapter.
COLOUR-CARD
The Colour-Card is just a plane of solid colour that sits behind all of your scene art, just like a
theatre backdrop. It’s useful as a background placeholder, or to simply replace the dull grey of
the Camera View. Unlike Drawing layers, the Colour-Card cannot be drawn or painted on.
> COLOUR-CARD EXERCISE
  CHANGING THE COLOUR
In the Timeline of the fireball scene, drop down the  menu and add a Colour-Card.
3.65
With the Colour-Card layer selected in the Timeline, go to the Layer Properties panel

> 3.
> 4.
and down at the bottom, click the white colour swatch shown in Figure 3.66.
3.66
When the Colour Picker opens, change your Colour Card to any colour you like.
Close the Colour Picker window
NOTE
When you make a test render of your scene, empty areas are rendered completely black. If
your rough animation happens to be in black, and you don’t have a background or Colour-
Card, nothing will show up in the render.
This is how, particularly when creating quick, rough animation, Colour-Cards come in very
handy. They’re a quick solution to an otherwise empty backdrop.
QUADMAP
The Quadmap layer type is a super-cool feature for distorting layers. It also allows more
realistic perspective distortion than the Perspective tool. The best thing is that the Quadmap
distortion can be animated, so you can simulate and animate some great depth effects.
> QUADMAP EXERCISE 1
  DISTORTING A LAYER

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
In this exercise, you’ll draw a flat chessboard, distort it to look like it’s lying flat, then animate
the distortion.
Create a new scene called quadmap Test with any resolution.
Rename the default layer ‘chessboard’ and select its first frame.
With the Shape tool in Line mode, draw an undistorted grid of eight squares high and
eight squares wide as shown in Figure 3.67.
3.67
If you’d like to paint the squares, go right ahead. Go nuts with detail and gradients if you
really want to.
In the Timeline, choose Quadmap from the  drop-down menu.
In the Timeline, drag the chessboard layer onto the Quadmap layer.
TIP
To help you draw your chessboard, turn on the grid using View → Grid → Show Grid and
also View → Grid → Square Grid. Then activate grid snapping in the Shape Tool
Properties.

> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
3.68
You may also need to add a Colour-Card to help you see the grid better. Don’t forget to turn
grid snapping off when you’re finished, to avoid difficulty with other tools later.
NOTE
Harmony users: if you get an error when you try to add a Quadmap in the Timeline, change
your display settings via Scene – Default Display – Display All.
3.69
You’ve just created a hierarchy similar to the Peg-Drawing relationship. The Quadmap is now
the parent of the chessboard art. Whatever you do to the Quadmap now, the art will follow.
In the Timeline, select the Quadmap.
Go to View → Show → Control to see the Quadmap manipulator handles. The shortcut
to show controls is [Shift F11].
In the toolbar, turn Animate Mode off. We’re doing this so that no keyframes are created

> 10.
on the Timeline when we distort the chessboard.
The border surrounding the chessboard turns red. Once again, red borders indicate that
Animate Mode is off. Note that you may need to zoom out a bit to see the Quadmap manipulator
handles.
Using the Translate tool [Alt 2] move the handles labelled 1, 2, 3, and 4 to distort the
chessboard (Figure 3.70).
3.70
If you’d like to animate the distortion, feel free to turn on Animate Mode and create keyframes
for the start and end frames.
USES OF THE QUADMAP
As you’ve just seen, the Quadmap can help give perspective effects and other types of
distortion to a drawing.
One very common use for a Quadmap is character shadows, but you’re only limited by how
you think to use it. Why not try it out on helicopter rotors, or ripples on a pond? Animate those
elements first without distortion, just as you did with the chessboard. Then apply the Quadmap
to make them fit into perspective.
3.71
ANIMATE ONLY
The following two layer types, Masks and Effects, are available only in the Animate Timeline. Animate Pro and Harmony
have their own versions of these (covered in the next chapter) but only in Animate can we access these via the Timeline.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
MASK
Known also as a cutter, the Mask is a layer of art that hides or reveals parts of a Drawing layer. Creating a Mask effect
requires two components: the matte and the art itself. The matte is the mask that will hide or reveal your art.
Because both matte and art are created on Drawing layers, Masks can be animated frame-by-frame or on pegs. They can
also have transparency, blur and variable opacity effects for a huge range of possibilities.
MASK EXERCISE 1: ADDING A MASK
Create a new scene called ‘mask’ and make two layers called ‘window’and ‘rain’.
In the rain layer, with the drawing tool of your choice, draw a full screen of rain streaks.
Now in the window layer, draw some filled shapes representing the glass in a window. It doesn’t matter what colour
you use here because the mask will be invisible.
3.72
In the Timeline, use the 
 button to add a Mask.
The Mask consists of a ready-made hierarchy waiting for your art. We need to drag the window and rain into this hierarchy.
Inside the Mask is an empty group 
 also with the name Mask. Let’s rename that group first, to avoid confusion.
Inside the Mask hierarchy, rename the Mask group to ‘CutterArt’. This is the window pane art that will be used to cut
or mask the rain.
Drag the rain layer onto the Mask layer name (Figure 3.73).
The window layer is your cut-out matte, so drag window onto the CutterArt group (Figure 3.73).

> 8.
> 9.
> 10.
> 11.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
3.73
At this point the rain appears and the window matte, now invisible, is cutting out the rain art.
In the Mask Layer Properties panel, check the Inverted checkbox. Rather than cutting out the rain, the CutterArt is
now revealing it.
In the Timeline, select the rain layer and add a Peg.
Animate the rain by creating start and finish keyframes on the rain Peg.
Test your rain animation by scrubbing the playhead, or using the toolbar’s Play button.
This has been a simple demonstration of how masking works. As you might have guessed, the more obvious way to achieve
this particular effect is to not use a Mask at all, but to simply make an upper layer – a wall with a window cut out of it – and
have the rain on a layer underneath. However there may come a time when you’re using a background that doesn’t consist
of layers, such as an illustration or painting done in another program.
Beyond just cutting out characters and backgrounds, there are many useful effects applications for a mask. Consider a sword
glint. The sword could have a matte that reveals an entire scene reflection, or a simple band of light shimmering across its
surface.
3.74
EFFECT
Effects are added by selecting a level and choosing the effect from the menu. For example, to add a glow to some animated
lightning, simply choose Effect → Glow from the 
 menu button. The Layer properties then allow you to control various
aspects of the Glow, such as colour and blur values. The next chapter is on Effects but let’s do a quick effect exercise now
by applying glow to a lightning strike.
EFFECT EXERCISE 1: ADDING A GLOW EFFECT
Create a throwaway scene and in the Timeline, rename the default layer ‘lightning.
Select frame 1 of the new lightning layer.
Using the brush tool, draw a white lightning strike in the Camera View.

> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
3.75
From the 
 dropdown list, choose Effect → Glow.
In the Timeline, drag the lightning layer onto the Glow layer to create the glow hierarchy.
As the Glow is applied, the lightning art becomes semi-transparent. To see how this will look in the final render, let’s check it
in the Render View.
At the bottom of the Camera View, click the Render View 
 button to show the render.
In the Timeline, select the Glow layer and open the Layer Properties panel.
Increase the blur’s Radius value to 8.
At the bottom of the Glow properties, change the colour to a bright blue.

> 10.
> 11.
> 12.
> 13.
> 14.
3.76
This isn’t looking much like lightning. The bolt you drew has become the glow. We need to clone the lightning so we can use
one for Glow and the other for the bolt itself.
In the bottom of the Render View, click the 
 button to go back to the Camera View.
In the Timeline, select the lightning layer.
Above the Layers, click the Clone button (see Figure 3.77). Alternatively you can right-click the lightning layer and
choose Clone Selected Layers.
3.77
Drag the original lightning layer to the bottom of the Timeline, so it’s outside the Glow hierarchy.
3.78
Now check the Render View again using the 
 Render View button. You should have a good solid lightning bolt, with
a soft blue glow.

3.79
OTHER EFFECTS
In the Effects list, most of the other effects are added in the same way. To blur a drawing, for example, simply add a Blur
Effect layer to the Timeline, then drag the Drawing layer onto it.
The next chapter is dedicated to effects so we’ll go deeper into the technical controls for Effect layers. For now, you might
like to explore the other Effects in the menu and experiment with their settings. Why not get a head start by applying the glow
effect to your fireball animation? Just follow along with the previous exercise.
ANIMATE PRO & HARMONY ONLY
The layer types below can be found in the 
 menu in Animate Pro and Harmony only.
GROUP
A Group is a container for multiple layers of any type, even other Groups. This allows you to organise related elements. For
example, sky, stars, moon and clouds might all go together into a sky Group. The sky Group may even then be placed with
other background elements into a background Group.
3.80

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
GROUPING EXERCISE 1: GROUPING LAYERS
In a throwaway scene, use the 
 button in the Timeline to add an empty Group.
In the Timeline, drag any other layers onto the Group layer.
Just as you can with Pegs and any other hierarchy, you can collapse and expand the Group using the arrow button to
the left of the Layer name.
SOUND
There is a full audio chapter later in the book, so the Sound layer is mentioned here merely to complete the list of layer types
that can be added via the Timeline’s Add Modules drop-down menu 
.
A specific audio file is best added through the top menu: File → Import → Sound…
ANIMATION TOOLS
The tools we covered in the previous chapter are dedicated to drawing and painting; the
creation of art assets. Now that you’ve also seen frames and layers, let’s revisit the toolbar and
learn about the animation tools.
You’ve already seen a couple of them: the Reposition All Drawings tool and the Transform
tool. As we look at some more, you’ll put them into practice to see how they work and the
situations to use them.
ADVANCED ANIMATION TOOLS
Advanced Animation tools are for transforming Drawing layers for animation keyframes and as
such, they only work in the Camera View.
Even though they’re called Animation tools, they’re not exclusive to animation tasks. You may
simply want to alter a layer as a whole without setting a keyframe, just as we did back on page
186 with the chessboard.

•
•
•
While the Transform tool encompasses the translate, rotate and scale functions, the Advanced
Animation tools each take care of a specific type of transformation.
Before we look at the handles themselves, we should briefly cover some of their common
attributes.
TOOL PROPERTIES
When you have one of the Advanced Animation tools selected, the properties panel shows just
two options. We’re interested in the second one, Peg Selection Mode (Figure 3.81).
3.81
When animating with Pegs, I always recommend selecting the Peg frames in the Timeline rather
than the drawing in the Camera View, otherwise you mayl occasionally move the Drawing
layer by accident, instead of the Peg.
Activating Peg Selection Mode ensures that if you move the object in the Camera View, it will
ignore the Drawing layer and only let you move the Peg. As an extra safeguard against
accidentally keyframing Drawing layers, you could lock them so they’re impossible to alter.
If you’re a beginner, this may not mean much to you right now, but it’ll probably mean more
after you have some experience with Pegs and the Advanced Animation tools.
HANDLE COLOURS
In Animate, objects can be manipulated in 2D (two dimensions: vertical and horizontal); in
Animate Pro and Harmony, also in 3D (three dimensions: vertical, horizontal, depth).
Green. The y axis is vertical. A green handle will move the object up and down, rotate
it around the vertical axis, or scale it vertically.
Red. The x axis is horizontal. A red handle will move the object left and right, rotate it
toward or away from the viewer, or scale it horizontally across the scene.
Blue. The z axis is also horizontal but runs toward and away from the viewer. A blue
handle will move an object nearer or further away, rotate it around the z axis – think of a

clock hand spinning around its pivot – or scale an object on that axis.
3.82
PIVOTS
As well as the manipulator handles, each of the Advanced Animation tools shows the pivot
point of the selected Drawing or Peg. You can reposition Pivots by dragging them, but they
cannot be animated.
Unlike the Select and Transform tool, the Advanced Animation tool Pivots remember where
they were placed.
3D TRANSFORM TOOLS
Coming up on page 207, Animate Pro and Harmony users will see how to enable 3D on any
Peg or Drawing layer and over the next couple of pages, you’ll see the 3D manipulator handles
for those tools.
TRANSLATE [ALT 2]
 Not to be confused with Transform, Translate is for repositioning a Drawing or Peg layer.
With this tool, there’s no need to click-drag the object itself. With the four-way move cursor 
you can drag the object by click-dragging anywhere in the view.
There are also a couple of ways you can constrain the dragging to vertical or horizontal axes.
The first way is to click the arrows. The arrowhead will turn pink when you’re dragging on
that particular axis. The second way is to hold [Shift] then click-drag either horizontally or
vertically. The dragging will be constrained to whichever axis motion is detected first.

3.83
3D TRANSLATE
With 3D enabled (ahead on page 207), the Translate tool can move an object towards or away
from the viewer. The blue manipulator arrow is for altering the layer depth, otherwise known
as Z-depth. While Animate doesn’t have 3D enabled layers (that is a Pro and Harmony feature
only), you can still move your drawings forward and back in 3D space.
ROTATE [ALT 3]
 Rotation happens around the Pivot, wherever that may be placed on the Drawing or Peg. A
wheel or propeller rotates from a centre pivot, while a pendulum rotates from the end of a
shaft.
3.84
3D ROTATE
Is it just me, or is rotating a 2D drawing in 3D the best thing ever? When you draw a flat door,
for example, moving the Pivot point to the hinge location and rotating it open is something I
never grow tired of.
While you can use 3D rotation for simple tasks like doors or the cover of a storybook, it can
also be used to create 3D sets. Later in the book we’ll set up a 3D environment by rotating and
positioning walls, ceiling and floor in 3D.
If you’re using Harmony, Appendix A has info on how to import 3D models that you manoeuvre
into position using the 3D transform modes of the Advanced Animation tools.
SCALE [ALT 4]
 There are a various ways to make objects grow or shrink, but it makes sense to use the Scale
tool, in most cases. Like the Rotate tool, scaling happens around the Pivot point.

3D SCALE
Objects that have depth, particularly imported 3D models (see Appendix A), can be scaled on
the z axis using the blue (z) scale handle of the Scale tool.
Z-scaling is only effective on 3D models. Ordinary Drawing and Peg layers are infinitely flat;
their depth, or thickness, cannot be scaled.
3.85
SKEW [ALT 5]
 Skewing distorts an object by sliding its opposite sides against one another, such as the top
and bottom sides, or the left and right.
MAINTAIN SIZE [ALT 6]
 While moving objects back or forward in z-space, they tend to shrink into the distance, or
grow larger with proximity, as they should! The Maintain Size tool is for depth positioning (z-
movement only) but it automatically scales the object so it appears to be the same size.
We’ll use this incredibly useful tool later, when we start positioning scene layers at various
depths, from extreme foreground bushes to distant mountains and skies.
VIEWS AND PREVIEWS
Toon Boom rendering is capable of the highest quality graphics and simulations suitable for
feature films. However, the Camera and Drawing Views are optimised work spaces. The
quality of graphics in these views is somewhat lower for real-time previewing, which is why
you may see pixelated lines in those views. In the program, this preview quality is known as
OpenGL mode, which is the name of the rendering technology and stands for Open Graphics
Library.
OpenGL mode allows you to work without too much computer power spent rendering linework
and effects. You can work in fast, low quality using  OpenGL mode, then when you want to
see how things look in final render quality, you switch to the Render View using the  button.

3.86
NOTE
If you have a fast computer, you may like to increase line smoothness in the Camera and
Drawing workspaces. If so, go to Edit → Preferences → OpenGL tab. About halfway down,
turn on Real-Time Antialiasing. With this enabled you can enter a value to increase the
render factor, which relates directly to the smoothness of the line.
To test it out, in the OpenGL preferences activate Real-Time Antialiasing with a factor of 1.
Click OK and the lines will appear smooth.
Go back into the OpenGL preferences and raise the Real-Time Antialiasing render factor to
2. When you close the preferences you should see your line quality is even higher now and
you can zoom in further before the pixels start to show. Bear in mind that increasing this
value increases the smoothness, but thereby increases the processing power required by the
computer to draw lines and brush strokes.
3.87

Also remember that the OpenGL settings have no impact on your final render. It’s only for
the line quality in your Camera and Drawing working environment
Render View takes longer and is harder work for your computer, but it compiles all of your
layers, levels and effects into a high quality rendered frame.
At the bottom left of the Camera View, there are a few additional options for the workspace.
You’ve already seen the zoom menu and the render buttons. Click the Camera icon (Figure
3.88) to open a menu.
3.88
One at a time, in a scene with several layers, select each menu item here to see the result in the
Camera View. Each of these options exists to make your work easier or more comfortable in
one way or another. For example, in a complex crowd scene with many individual layers of
characters, you can activate the Light Table or the Current Drawing on Top option so that a
selected character is easier to work on, either by dimming the other distracting layers or
bringing the selected one to the front.
3.89
DATA VIEW
You’ve seen the main parts of the Timeline, so let’s now look at some of its underlying
functionality. There is one particular view within the Timeline we haven’t covered yet.

> 1.
You can expand and collapse the Data View using the  icon.
Expand a Drawing layer using its + icon and you’ll see all the various attributes listed in the
Data View.
3.90
Earlier we touched briefly on how these layer parameters can be animated using Function
Curves, such as Position, Velocity and Rotation. The Data View makes these accessible via the
Timeline. For example, suppose you want to animate the Rotation attribute of a layer. Through
the Data View, you can easily set keyframes by numerical input, such as 90° rotation on frame
1, to 30° rotation on frame 50.
3.91
You can also add keyframes to any attribute on the Timeline simply by positioning the playhead
where you want the keyframe, then click the + button on that attribute. Let’s put this into
practice right now.
> DATA VIEW EXERCISE 1
  ANIMATING ROTATION
In this exercise we’ll animate the arm of a metronome using only Data View inputs. If you need
a starting file, open up ‘metronome’ from the chapter files.
If you’re not musically inclined and were wondering what a metronome is: it’s a kind of
inverted pendulum that clicks as it sways from side-to-side. The regular, audible tick helps a
musician keep to a beat.
In the Timeline add a new layer called ‘metronome’.

> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
Select frame 1 of the new metronome layer.
In the Camera View, with a drawing tool and colour of your choice, draw your
metronome arm perfectly vertical, as shown over the page in Figure 3.92.
Extend the exposure of this drawing to frame 25.
From the Advanced Animation tools, choose the Rotation tool, or press [Alt 3].
In the Camera View, drag the pivot point to the bottom of the metronome arm.
3.92
Expand the metronome layers attributes using +.
If it’s not already open, expand the Timeline’s Data View using the  icon.
3.93

> 9.
> 10.
> 11.
> 12.
> 13.
> 14.
Making sure the playhead is on frame 1, click the Add Keyframe button + in the
metronome’s Rotation attribute layer.
3.94
Even though you haven’t actually input an initial value or rotated the arm, you’ve nonetheless
created a keyframe with the value of 0° rotation.
Move the playhead to frame 12 and click the + Add Keyframe button again to add the
second keyframe of the swing.
Now you have two keyframes. Both have 0° rotation. Let’s change them.
With the playhead on frame 1, type 45 in the Rotation value field.
Move the playhead to frame 12 and type −45; a negative value.
3.95
The arm swings from left over to the right. Now to make it swing back:
Move the playhead to frame 25 and again, for the Rotation value, type 45.
Save the scene with [Ctrl/⌘ S]
Over 25 frames, your metronome arm should now swing from left to right, then back to left. If
you set your playback to loop and hit [Shift Enter], you’ll see the arm going back and forth. The
movement is linear and not very pleasant, but we’ll address that next with some easing.
EASING WITH FUNCTION CURVES

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
When you create animation on an attribute, such as rotation in the previous exercise, you also
create the function to which you can add easing.
> FUNCTION CURVES EXERCISE 1
  EASING
In the Timeline, double-click the metronome’s Rotation Function Curve  icon.
3.96
Your keyframes are represented as points on this graph, plotting linear movement between
values. As you can see, the positions of these points on the graph correspond to the rotation
values you entered in the previous exercise.
The jerkiness of motion occurs because the transitions between keyframes are absolutely
linear. Moving from the first position, the metronome arm hits the second keyframe and jerks
immediately back towards the first position. To soften this, we need to change these hard,
straight lines into curves.
Click, or drag a selection around individual points, to reveal tangent handles; these are
very much like those you’ve seen in the Polyline and Contour Editor tools.
Drag these handles around to slow down the movement on each side of the points, as
shown in Figure 3.97.
3.97

> 4.
In the Playback toolbar, set the Stop marker to frame 24 (because frame 25 is exactly the
same as frame 1, we no longer need it) and watch the playback.
TIP
Generally you can just ‘eyeball’ the handle positions but if you’d like to be more precise,
you can enter values for each handle’s length and angle. Simply select a point and then enter
values of 180° (left handles) and 0° (right handles) for perfectly flat handles, or 90° and
270° for perfect verticals. Equal values for handle lengths will ensure that the easing is
identical on each keyframe, if that’s what you want. Figure 3.98 shows how much fun you
can have with timing movement in the Function Editor.
3.98
The motion has been smoothed out and the movement feels much more natural.
EASING SUMMARY
If a property or attribute can be animated, its easing can be precisely controlled with function
curves: from a ball bounce to a camera move across the scene; from the gentle morphing of a
smoke cloud to the aggressive attack of a bee swarm.
LAYER PROPERTIES PANEL
Drawing and animation is obviously a huge part of what goes into creating a scene, but another
crucial part is adjusting Layer Properties for fine-tuning the animation. You will need to visit

the Layer Properties almost as much as the Tool Properties.
Each layer type has its own unique set of properties to modify. We’ve previously scratched the
surface of Layer Properties, including the name of a Layer, the Enable/Disable checkbox to
view or hide the Layer and the  icon. As you can see, looking at the Layer Properties panel,
there is yet much more to discover.
Just like Tool Properties, the Layer Properties panel is context-sensitive. The controls
displayed will depend on the layer type selected. There are tabs, fields and function curves for
a daunting array of options.
3.99
As we go through the rest of this book, we’ll frequently visit the Layer Properties panel for
controlling the various Layer types, such as Drawing, Peg, Camera and Effect layers.
3.100
The big one here is in Animate Pro and Harmony only. It’s the unassuming Enable 3D checkbox
on Drawing and Peg layers (Figure 3.100), which allows you to use the 3D versions of the
Advanced Animation tools.
PLAYBACK CONTROLS
As an animator, you’ll frequently need to test the playback to ensure everything’s moving well.
Sometimes you’ll want to flip back and forth between a couple of drawings to make sure things

are looking right — other times you’ll want to sit back and stretch while the whole scene plays
on a loop. Traditional animators using pencil and paper learn a method of flipping paper
between the fingers, known as ‘rolling the drawings’ for a mini playback.
3.101
In those days no animator could get very far without this essential skill. Even today, digital
animators frequently flip back and forth through the frames using shortcut keys to watch the
movement and be sure everything is working well.
Apart from the Playback controls in the main toolbar (Window → Toolbars → Playback
Controls), Toon Boom provides a number of helpful tools to support this useful technique.
STEPPING
If you cast your mind back to the frame-by-frame animation exercises, you’ll recall stepping
back and forth through single frames using the [,] and [.] keys.
This gets a little tedious if your drawings are timed on twos, fours or more, so you’ll be
pleased to learn that, rather than step individually through frames, you can step through
drawings with the [F] and [G] keys, and through keyframes with [;] and [’].

3.102
SCRUB AND JOG
Ordinary Timeline scrubbing is quite useful for short frame spans, but it’s not very practical for
long scenes. Try to scrub any further than the width of your program window and it gets a bit
unwieldy and imprecise; even more so if your timeline is squeezed into a small window.
Scrubbing is aided by a Jog frames tool, which allows you to scrub longer sections of frames
without using the Timeline at all.
In version 2 of both Animate and Animate Pro, the Jog tool is in the Playback toolbar. It’s a
small ◄► button, right beside the Frames field. Click and drag it back and forth to scrub the
Timeline without using the Playhead.
In Animate 3, Animate Pro 3 and Harmony, the Jog tool is much better. It’s a spring-slider with
variable speed scrubbing.
3.103
The further you drag the slider, the faster the scrubbing. When you release the slider, it springs
back to the centre.
TIP
If you have playback looping enabled, Jogging will loop back to the start when it reaches the
end.
LOOPING

•
•
•
The tiny triangular loop markers that you position on the Timeline define the start and end of a
loop. By default, these are positioned at the start and end of your scene, but as you’ve already
seen, you can position these in the following ways:
By dragging them to the chosen start and stop frames.
By entering values in the main toolbar.
By positioning the playhead then clicking the Start or Stop frame buttons.
Once these markers are positioned, you can activate playback looping and hit Play to watch a
looping playback.
EASY FLIPPING
While the [F] and [G] keys are definitely the easiest way to step through your drawings, there
is a special tool provided for this. You may not see it in your toolbar, so go to Window →
Toolbars → Easy Flipping to turn it on.
The Easy Flipping toolbar provides a handy slider that you can use in conjunction with your
keyboard shortcuts for faster flipping. While using the [F] and [G] keys, the slider controls the
flipping speed. Hold the slider slightly forward and use [G] to flip forward two or three
drawings at a time. Hold it further forward, and the [G] key will leap over more drawings and
reach the end of the scene very fast. The same goes for moving the slider backwards, then
stepping back through the drawings with the [F] key.
3.104
The two buttons on the Easy Flipping toolbar do the same job as the [F] and [G] keys.
TIP
Two incidental Timeline shortcuts that you might find useful are [<] and [> ] – i.e., [Shift ,]
and [Shift .] – which send you to the Start and End frames, respectively. Note that these
aren’t necessarily the first and last frames of the scene, but the frames marked by your Start
and End markers. Therefore, if you place the Start marker at frame 10 and the End marker on
frame 33, these shortcut keys will take you to those frames.

> 1.
> 2.
At the time of this writing, the [<] and [> ] shortcuts don’t scroll the Timeline view for you.
Suppose your scene has 500 frames – usually too many to fit in the Timeline view. Sitting on
Frame 1, type [> ] – that is, press [Shift .] – and the playhead will disappear from the start
of the scene. The Frame field in the toolbar shows that you’re on frame 500, but the Timeline
view is still sitting on frame 1 and the playhead is nowhere in sight. Simply scroll along the
Timeline and you’ll find the playhead sitting silently, looking very guilty, on the final frame.
3D SPACE
I mentioned z-depth earlier with regards to moving Drawing layers toward or away from the
viewer. While you may be familiar with y (height) and x (width), it’s the third dimension, z
(depth) that gives us a feeling of realistic space in the scene.
In Toon Boom there are some special views that give us a new perspective on the scene. These
views show the scene layers as flat sheets existing in a 3D space. These are the Perspective,
Top and Side Views.
PERSPECTIVE, TOP AND SIDE VIEWS
Consider traditional animation cels; clear sheets upon which characters are painted. When
looking at them from the front, we can see them just fine. Look at them from the top though, and
you can only see the top edge; little more than a thin, straight line. Here’s an exercise to
illustrate that point.
> 3D SPACE EXERCISE 1
  VIEWING LAYERS IN Z-SPACE
If you need a starting scene for this exercise, open up fireball_zSpace from the chapter files.
In the fireball scene, click the panel menu  button and open the Perspective View. I
suggest docking this view with the Camera and Drawing Views. If you’d like to add it to
your workspace, remember to save it using the Save Workspace button.
3.105
You should now be viewing the scene in 3D space, directly from the front with a
reference grid beneath.

> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
Hold [Ctrl Alt] to activate 3D space rotation. Drag left and right, up and down to tumble
your view around the scene in 3D space.
3.106
Manoeuvre the view so you’re looking at the scene layers from directly above. Notice
how, from that angle, the layers appear as thin lines.
Manoeuvre around now to see the layers directly from the side. Again, thin lines.
TIP
Use [1], [2] to zoom and [Spacebar] to pan. Press [Shift X] to reset the view if it starts
getting away from you.
The Perspective View is a fantastic visualisation of your scene’s depth. It’s only for viewing
the spatial relationships of the layers though; you can’t draw or paint in here.
> 3D SPACE EXERCISE 2
  THE TOP VIEW

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
From the panel menu  button, choose Top to open the Top View. I suggest docking this
view with other tall, thin panels, like the Colour panel or Tool Properties.
In the Top View, we’re looking directly down on the scene. There’s a list of layer thumbnails
stacked in order on the left, shown in Figure 3.107 (A). Showing as a solid black line (B), the
scene layers are stacked at the scene centre. The triangular shape (C) represents the field of the
Camera View.
3.107
Ensure the Top View has focus, then, on your keyboard, press [2] to zoom out and [1] to
zoom in. Just like other views, you can also pan around the view using [Spacebar].
In the Timeline, select the background Peg layer.
Choose the Translate tool [Alt 2] from the Advanced Animation toolbar.
See in the Top View how, with the layer selected and the Translate tool armed, there are the
Translate handles. Be sure to have the Camera View open so you can watch the result as you
move it around.
In the Top View, drag the blue handle (z) up and down. Remembering that this is a top-
down view of your scene, the blue handle is actually moving your layer forward and
back in z-space.

> 6.
When you’re happy with the z-depth of this layer, return to the Perspective View and
orbit around the scene to see how all this is corresponds to the Top View.
3.108
USING MAINTAIN SIZE TOOL
Something you may have noticed, and will no doubt understand, is that when moving a layer
back in z-space, it shrinks into the distance. Likewise, bring it toward camera and it appears to
grow.
This may be the desired effect. However, there are times when you might want to move your
layer back into space without it shrinking. In the previous exercise, moving the background
away has made it shrink and it’s now too small for the scene (Figure 3.109).

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
3.109
Usually the solution is to simply use the scale tool [Alt 4] to resize the layer after moving it.
But there is a better way.
The Maintain Size tool is a z-only translate tool. It allows you to move a layer forward and
back, but it also resizes the layer automatically so it appears unchanged in the scene.
> 3D SPACE EXERCISE 3
  MAINTAIN SIZE
In the Timeline, disconnect the background Peg from the background, and then delete it
using the  button.
Select the background layer and add a brand new Peg using the  button.
Make sure Animate mode is off, then select the Maintain Size tool [Alt 6] from the
Advanced Animation tools.
In the Timeline, select the background’s new Peg layer. In the Top View, provided you
have Animate mode off, the Peg will be highlighted red.
With the Maintain Size tool, anywhere in the Top View, click and drag upwards to move
the background a short distance behind the fireball.

> 6.
3.110
Open the Perspective view and orbit around using [Ctrl Alt]. Depending on how far
back you moved it, you’ll see how the background has been scaled larger to compensate
for the distance.
Now that the depth of the scene has changed, scrub the Timeline to see that the Camera move
isn’t quite the same. You may like to rework the Camera Peg start and end positions, so that it
travels the full length of the background. In turn, you may also need to rework the fireball Peg’s
keyframes so they work with the new Camera move.
3D SPACE SUMMARY
Why would anyone bother with all this z-space arrangement? Hopefully the answer to that
question was mind-meltingly obvious when you saw the Camera move in the previous
exercise. In any 2D scene, the combination of camera motion and layers arranged in z-depth
never fails to impress.
TYPES OF ANIMATION
Toon Boom software caters to several different schools of 2D animation. In this final part of
the chapter we’ll look at each of these in turn, starting with the various traditional frame-by-
frame methods, before moving on to the modern, digital methods.

FRAME-BY-FRAME
Frame-by-frame animation means the animator has hand-drawn every frame of a movement.
Instead of making a four-drawing bird cycle and sliding it across the scene on a Peg, the bird is
fully animated, frame by frame, over the entire length of the scene with few, or no reused
drawings. Figure 3.111 shows 13 drawings of bird animation which is only possible with
frame-by-frame.
3.111
It’s very common for frame-by-frame animation to be timed on double frames (twos) which,
depending on frame rate, equates to 12–15 drawings per second. Sometimes, however, for a
particularly fast or smooth motion, we need to work on singles (ones), which means doing the
full 24–30 drawings per second. For this reason, frame-by-frame animation, also known as
‘full animation’ has the most line mileage of all.
3.112
Despite its complexity and high skill prerequisite, the big advantage of frame-by-frame is that
in experienced hands, there’s no type of motion that cannot be animated. If you can draw it, you
can animate it: full character turnarounds, tumbling props, realistic elemental effects, fluid lip-
sync and natural expressions – each of these falls short if not done frame by frame.

3.113
Traditional frame-by-frame animation has always been expensive not only in terms of time and
money but also in terms of equipment and physical space – after all, those scene folders
containing tens of thousands of individual drawings and paintings need storing somewhere.
Generally speaking, only big budget studios (if any at all) embark on full, traditionally
animated frame-by-frame feature films nowadays.
Beneath the umbrella called frame-by-frame – which I’ll abbreviate hereafter as FxF – there
are a couple of sub-categories. They are ‘Straight Ahead’ animation and ‘Pose to Pose’
animation. Let’s look at them both.
STRAIGHT AHEAD
In the ‘Straight Ahead’ method, the animator starts with the first drawing, then moves on to
drawing number 2. When drawing 2 is complete, the animator starts on drawing 3 – and so on
until the animation is complete, with many individual hand-drawn frames.
You’ll recall at the beginning of this chapter when you animated the ant wandering across the
scene using this method.
Straight Ahead is ideal for special effects animation such as explosions, fire, water splashes or
electricity. By their nature, these animation tasks are best animated linearly, from the beginning
of the effect to the end.

3.114
Straight Ahead is ideally suited to chaotic action or unpredictable things, like explosions, fire,
electricity and water splashes. For more predictable movements – i.e., actions that, once
started, have a predictable end, like a falling object – the Pose to Pose method would be more
suitable and we’ll talk about that next. For now, try out this challenge.
STRAIGHT AHEAD CHALLENGE
Try out the Straight Ahead method by animating an exploding fireworks projectile; starting
with the initial rocket drawings, then upward into the explosion. When you’re done, play it
back using [Shift Enter]. If you notice any animation problems, stop the playback and address
those, then replay and refine some more. If you need to add or reduce exposure to drawings,
simply select them in the Timeline and use the [−] and [+] shortcut keys.
3.115
POSE TO POSE
As the name suggests, this style of animation is roughly sketched as a sequence of key poses.
To animate a character dancing or fighting, for example, you’d first draw the key poses of the
moves and then work on the exposure timing for each key.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
•
•
•
3.116
When the timing is working, you may need to smooth out the movement with one or two extra
drawings between the keys. These extra drawings are known as breakdowns because they
break down the movement.
Pose to Pose is good for predictable actions. With a character movement that you have planned
in your head, you can often predict the character’s pose before you draw it.
To go back to the much simpler example of a falling object, once the fall is in motion, the
object has a predictable end position.
> POSE TO POSE EXERCISE 1
  KEY POSING
Let’s suppose we have a closed book falling open. In the first key pose the book is lying on its
spine, and in the final key pose it’s lying open on the table.
Start a new throwaway scene called ‘bookOpen’.
Rename the default layer ‘rough’.
Grab the Brush from the toolbar, and a sketching colour from the Colour panel.
On three single keyframes, sketch the poses of the book:
standing on its end;
open on the desk with some pages yet to fall;
lying open on the table, all pages settled.

> 1.
> 2.
3.117
EXPOSURE TIMING
Once the key drawings are done, you’re ready for the process of timing: adding exposure to
each pose in the Timeline. Three singles will be way too fast for this movement. Realistically,
the front and back covers will start falling slowly and speed up slightly until they hit the desk.
In your mind, visualise and play back the natural motion. Use your mind’s stopwatch to guess
how long you think it should take. Half a second? A whole second? Maybe a gigantic wizard’s
book takes more than a second to open, while a smaller book might only take a few frames.
You could even grab a camera and record your own reference to study the real life motion and
count the frames.
> POSE TO POSE EXERCISE 2
  TIMING
In this exercise, we’ll work on the timing for the book poses you did in the previous exercise.
If you’d like to use my key poses, you can open up the bookOpen scene from this chapter’s
download files and follow along.
In the Timeline, right-click the book’s first key pose and choose Exposure → Set
Exposure…
Enter your desired exposure value and click ‘OK’ (I set mine to 10). Your first key now

> 3.
1.
2.
3.
has its new exposure, and the other drawings have been shifted along to make room.
Add exposure to the two remaining keys. Try to guess how long each key will need
before the next comes in. Using your intuition then testing it with a playback helps you
develop your sense of timing.
As shown in Figure 3.120 I’ve added exposure to each keyframe for what I think might be
natural falling, impact and settle speeds for this large book. For traditional animators, I’ve
started the timing charts with circled keyframe numbers.
3.120
TIP
Circled in Figure 3.118 is a handy Timeline button you should add if you like to use this
method of timing. Rather than right-clicking a frame to change its exposure, you can select a
frame and hit this button.
3.118
To add it to the Timeline toolbar, do the following:
Right-click the Timeline toolbar and choose Customize…
In the left-hand pane, scroll down to find Set Exposure.
Click the right-facing triangle to add it to the toolbar and click ‘OK’.

3.119
Now, whenever you want to add a specific exposure value, simply select the drawing in the
Timeline and click this button.
Drawing 1 is the first keyframe and is exposed for ten frames. The second drawing sits on
frame 11, so it’s numbered 11 and is exposed for a further 12 frames. Finally, the last drawing
is on frame 23, so it’s numbered 23 and is exposed until the end of the scene.
TIMING CHARTS
In the days of traditional animation, we needed to draw the timing charts, or inbetween scales
on each key (illustrated in Figure 3.120). This important step is so the inbetweener knows in
what order to create the inbetween drawings. If you’re not familiar with these processes, we’ll
talk more about inbetweening in just a bit.
NOTE
If you were to play back the book scene now, it wouldn’t appear natural because there are
no inbetween drawings to smooth out the action. Even so, if you watch it a few times, it’s
easy to mentally fill in the motion as it plays. As you work on a scene, it’s a good habit to
watch it play as often as possible so you can visualise and refine as you go.
At this point, the animator decides where to break down the motion with additional drawings,
called breakdowns. I’ve done breakdowns for frames 7 and 17 in this sequence, and indicated
them on the timing charts with a transversal stroke (Figure 3.121). These are numbered
accordingly, but not circled.

3.121
A breakdown drawing is an inbetween that the animator has roughly sketched. It serves a
couple of purposes: primarily it gives the inbetweener a helping hand and clarifies the
animator’s intentions. It also smooths out the play test for a better glimpse of how the motion
looks.
The heavy covers of the book will fall open faster, but a few pages will open a bit slower
because they’re light and floaty. Later in this section we’ll talk about smoothing out the motion
with some inbetweening. Figure 3.122 shows the remaining strokes on the timing chart each
representing a drawing with its frame number.
3.122
The length of the strokes indicates which inbetweens are drawn first. For example, in the first
set (frames 1–11), breakdown 7 is done first, followed by 5 and then 3 and 9. This order of
inbetweens determines the easing and is decided by the animator in the timing process.
CLEANUP
At some point you need your rough sketches turned into clean line drawings. Typically, in a
collaborative studio environment with specialised artistic departments, the animator’s rough
drawings are turned into clean line drawings by an assistant animator, sometimes called a
cleanup artist.
In Toon Boom, as you saw with your fireball scene, rough animation can be done on its own
layer, then cleaned up and inbetweened on a separate layer. This is the suggested workflow for
Animate users.
In Animate Pro and Harmony, while you could do it in the same way, you also have the sub-
layer options. The rough animation can be done on the Underlay sub-layer, while the cleanup is

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
done on the Line sublayer. Any notes or timing charts may be done on the Overlay.
> CLEANUP EXERCISE 1
  CLEANUP WITH THE LIGHT TABLE
A cleanup artist only cleans the key poses and – depending on the studio or the animator – may
clean up the breakdowns too.
If you animated your own book in the previous exercises, you can use that here.
Otherwise, you can use bookOpen_cleanup provided in the chapter files.
Create a new layer called ‘clean’ and, in the Timeline, make sure it’s above the ‘rough’
layer. Select the first frame of this layer, ready to clean up
With the drawing tool of your choice, start tracing the first rough key drawing onto your
clean layer.
3.123
Continue your cleanup of the keys. Be ever mindful of closing gaps, as this linework will
need filling with paint, eventually. Show strokes with [K] to see where you have gaps in
the linework.
Draw the timing charts on each key too (see Figure 3.123); the inbetweener will need
those. Draw them outside the movie border so they don’t show up in the final render.
When cleanup is complete, hide the original rough sketches layer so they don’t cause
visual interference when inbetweening.
NOTE
If you’re finding it difficult to see your rough layer, it could be that you have the Light Table
on and it’s faded. You could give your sketch colours a higher Alpha value so they’re not so
transparent, or if the Light Table is on, you can disable it. Both will help.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
To turn the Light Table off: use the  icon at the bottom of the Camera View and uncheck
Light Table in the menu.
ANIMATE PRO & HARMONY ONLY
If you’ve used the Overlay and/or Underlay sub-layer for your rough keys and timing charts, you can now hide these sub-
layers as follows:
In the Timeline, select the layer of your book animation.
In the Layer Properties panel, go to the Drawing tab.
Uncheck the Underlay and Overlay layers to hide them from the scene.
3.124

> 1.
> 2.
Now that all the rough animation is hidden, the scene only has clean linework and timing charts
for when the inbetweener takes the reins.
INBETWEENING
If you want to be an animator and you’re lucky enough to land a trainee position in an
animation studio, chances are you’ll be trained in inbetweening first. It’s the starting point from
which you learn about every other department and the entire process of animation.
Many inbetweeners aspire to become animators, while some are happy to settle into a career
of inbetweening. To maintain high quality for the long term takes a special kind of inbetweener.
The inbetweener is the heavy lifter of animation. The line mileage must be high in both quality
and quantity. It involves doing all the drawings between the key poses, so the movement is
smooth and natural.
Let’s continue the opening book scene by inbetweening it.
> POSE TO POSE EXERCISE 3
  INBETWEENING
Open up your scene from the previous exercises, unless you’d like to use the starting scene I’ve
provided, called bookOpen_inbetweening. You’ll find it in this chapter’s file downloads.
To prepare for inbetweening, the first step is to create empty drawings between the key
drawings. Looking at the first key drawing, the numbering on the timing chart is in two-frame
increments. This tells us that each drawing will be exposed for two frames.
In the Timeline, select frame 7 of the clean book layer and click the Create Empty
Drawing button (Figure 3.125). The shortcut key is [Alt Shift R].
3.125
Do the same for frames 3, 5 and 9.
Once this is done, the first inbetween set of your clean book layer should have a bunch of blank
drawings – like blank pieces of paper – ready for inbetweens.

> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
Move the Playhead to frame 1 (Figure 3.126) and look at the timing chart.
3.126
According to the timing chart, the first inbetween to be done here is the drawing on frame 7
because it has the longest line.
Select frame 7 of the clean layer and clean up the drawing. If you’re using the provided
scene file, you should use the Pencil tool with the settings shown in Figure 3.127.
3.127
Once again, go back to look at the timing chart on drawing 1. The next inbetween is
frame 5, which is a halfway drawing between 1 and 7.
In the Timeline, select frame 5 and drag the Onion Skin handles to cover frames 1 to 7
(Figure 3.128).

> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
> 10.
> 11.
> 12.
> 13.
> 14.
3.128
Draw the frame 5 inbetween. Sometimes if the inbetween isn’t an easy one, it helps to do
a rough sketch first.
Yet again, revisit frame 1 to look at the timing chart. Now that frame 5 is done, frame 3
is the next inbetween to be done.
Select frame 3 and adjust the Onion Skin handles so they only cover frames 1 to 5.
Repeat the steps for the frame 3 inbetween.
Finally, select frame 9 in the Timeline.
This drawing is an inbetween of 7 and 11, so adjust the onionskin handles to only cover
drawings 7–11.
Complete the inbetween for frame 9.
Scrub the Timeline back and forth, step through the keys with [F] and [G], or use the jog
wheel to watch the animation.
If you’d like to go ahead and do the next set of inbetweens from 11–23, just follow the same
steps. The first inbetween, frame 17, has a breakdown sketch. Wasn’t it nice of the animator to
provide that?
Once all the inbetweening is done, providing all the linework is closed, the scene is ready to
paint. Feel free to go ahead with that using what you learned in the previous chapter.
FRAME-BY-FRAME SUMMARY
Because we don’t have unlimited pages in this book, take a look at Appendix A in which I

introduce you to some really awesome specialised tools for advanced inbetweening and
traditional animation workflows.
One of these is the X-sheet view. It’s a fundamental part of traditional animation but because
it’s so vast and specialised, I only mention it briefly throughout this book where necessary.
The other is called Shift and Trace, which is a handy interface designed to make complex
inbetweens much easier.
PEG ANIMATION
Earlier you learned that the Peg is a movement layer to which you attach drawing layers. A
fireball cycle was animated in place and then attached to a Peg layer. The Peg was then
keyframed across the scene taking the fireball cycle with it.
Pegs are also suitable for transforming non-animated art, like a rising moon, a spinning wheel
or an entire background. In fact, when it comes to animating cutout characters in the puppet
style you could have every limb segment controlled by its own Peg.
3.129
KEYFRAMES AND INTERPOLATION
When animated, Pegs take numerical values from one keyframe and transition them into values
on another keyframe. When two keyframes are set, the position value of the first keyframe will
gradually transition into the position value of the next. In the Timeline, the gradual interpolation

between them is marked by a horizontal line (Figure 3.130).
3.130
EASING
Any motion you add between keyframes is completely linear at first, and you may need to add
your own custom easing. Just like the Drawing layers, you can expand the transform values of a
Peg layer to see the parameters that you can animate. Once values have been key-framed and
values entered, double-clicking any of these parameters will bring up the easing graph for the
layer.
For traditional animators still coming to grips with the software, you may initially find a line
graph confusing. There is another way to look at it though. In this figure you can see exactly
how a graph translates to a traditional hand-drawn timing chart. The only real difference is that
the first key is on the bottom and the next key is at the top. Hopefully this image also explains
to digital animators exactly what a timing chart means.
3.131
SET EASE FOR MULTIPLE PARAMETERS
There is a simplified easing graph, accessible from the Timeline, which allows you to set ease

on several parameters at once. You’ll find it by right-clicking any layer and choosing Set Ease
for Multiple Parameters.
There’s also a button you can add to the Timeline toolbar. If you can’t see the ‘Set Ease for
Multiple Parameters’ button, open the Timeline’s toolbar manager (right-click the Timeline
toolbar and choose Customise…) find the button in the left-hand list and add it to the toolbar
using the right-facing triangle button (Figure 3.132).
3.132
If you can’t find the Timeline toolbar, you can also turn it on via Windows → Toolbars →
Timeline View (Figure 3.133).
3.133
With this fairly self-explanatory easing interface, the parameters you selected in the Timeline
are shown. If you selected the whole Peg, or Drawing layer, then this window displays all of
the parameters for transforming. You can apply easing to multiple parameters at once, or
isolate any of them using the checkboxes. Click Apply/Next to advance through the keys, or
Apply/Previous to go back.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
3.134
TRAJECTORIES
When we first talked about Pegs back on page 177, the fireball exercise stepped you through
creating a straight-line path. We can make these paths much more interesting though by curving
their trajectories.
> PEG ANIMATION EXERCISE 1
  TRAJECTORIES
In this exercise you’ll curve the fireball’s trajectory so it appears to be thrown in an arc. If
you’d like to use my fireball scene file, you’ll find it in this chapter’s download files. It’s
called fireball_trajec.
As we work on the fireball trajectory, the background and camera movement may be a little
distracting, so let’s turn those off first.
In the Timeline, uncheck the background and the Camera to turn off those layers.
In the Timeline, select frame 1 of the Fireball-P layer (the Peg).
Grab the Translate tool [Alt 2]. The Translate handles appear on the fireball.
WARNING
Is the fireball – or the box around it – pink? If so, you have the colourFireball layer

> 4.
selected! You don’t want that for this exercise. You need to select the Peg layer. When the
Peg layer is selected in Animate Mode, the fireball or box around it should have a yellow
tint, or yellow bounding box as shown in Figure 3.135.
3.135
Now let’s Show Control so we can see the Peg’s trajectory.
With the fireball’s Peg selected in the Timeline, press [Shift F11], or go to View →
Show → Control.
3.136
The Peg trajectory appears, complete with strokes representing frames. If you haven’t added
any easing to the fireball, the strokes are evenly spaced along the perfectly straight line, making
a very consistent movement. Choose the Select tool from the toolbar so the translate handles
disappear. Now, as you scrub the Playhead back and forth, you will see that the current frame
is highlighted on the trajectory with a tiny bright green marker (Figure 3.136).
TRAJECTORY CONTROL POINTS
We could set more keyframes along the path to curve and shape it, but in some tasks, that can
complicate the easing process. We can instead add control points, which affect the shape of the
path alone and are unaffected by timing. It means that your carefully crafted easing can be

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
independent of the trajectory!
> PEG ANIMATION EXERCISE 2
  CONTROL POINTS
In the Timeline, select the fireball’s Peg layer.
Make sure you can see the trajectory. If not, press [Shift F11].
Select the Transform tool, or any of the Advanced Animation tools.
With one of these tools, hover the cursor over the trajectory and press [P] on your
keyboard to add a control point. Simple as that!
3.137
Using the Transform or one of the Advanced Animation tools, move the control point
around to watch the trajectory changing.
A fireball thrown by a wizard may have a natural arc, just like a javelin or baseball. However,
feel free to experiment by adding more control points for a more complex path.
Delete any unwanted control points simply by selecting them and hitting your keyboard’s
[Delete] key.
3.138
If you now expand and double-click the Peg’s velocity parameter in the Timeline, the easing
graph will show you this movement has only two keyframes. You can now apply independent
easing to this trajectory and even add extra keyframes for more interesting timing.

3.139
CONVERTING CONTROL POINTS TO KEYFRAMES
There may be times when you want to convert one or more of your control points into
keyframes so that you can apply specific easing at that part of the trajectory. The Locked in
Time feature was made for this purpose.
> PEG ANIMATION EXERCISE 3
  CONTROL POINTS LOCKED IN TIME
Locked in Time is really just another way of saying ‘convert control point to keyframe. Once
you grow comfortable working with control points you might like to keep the Coordinates and
Control Points panel (Figure 3.140) within reach. As always, you’ll find this in the panel menu
.

3.140
NOTE
If you find yourself doing a lot of work with control points, there is a condensed version of
the Coordinates and Control Points panel in the form of two small toolbars. You can access
them via Windows → Toolbars → Coordinate, and Windows → Toolbars → Control Points
(Figure 3.141). Once added, these will appear at the top of the program window along with
your other toolbars, and they can be positioned and docked to your liking.

3.141
The Coordinates and Control Points panel gives you ultra-fine control over your points. The
one we’re looking for here is the Locked in Time checkbox (Figure 3.142). This converts the
selected Control Point to a keyframe which then appears on the Timeline and has its own
tangent handles in the easing graph.
3.142
Also worth noting is that the selected control point’s coordinates are listed in the Position
section of the panel.
TENSION, CONTINUITY, BIAS
Unlike vector points and function keyframes, control points don’t have handles to help you
alter the trajectory. However, there are three parameters you can adjust, should you need that
fine level of control. The T, C and B fields can be found in the control points toolbar and at the
bottom of the Coordinate and Control Point panel. All three parameters have a default value of
zero and take inputs between −1 and +1.
Tension controls how tight the angle is. At the maximum tension of +1, the trajectory is pinched
to a tight corner. At −1, it’s a nice easy curve.
3.143
Continuity defines whether or not the trajectory emerges from the point the same way it went
in. With a neutral continuity (zero) the trajectory passes easily through the point. With negative
or positive continuity though, the trajectory is altered.

3.144
Bias is the side that the curve favours. With a negative value, the bias favours the left side of
the point, while a positive favours the right.
3.145
OFFSETTING THE TRAJECTORY
With the fireball’s Peg trajectory visible, you may find it gets in the way. You could always
hide the control altogether using [Shift C] but if you still want it to be onscreen, you can move
it aside using the Spline Offset tool. This is the last of the Advanced Animation tools.
3.146
It’s a tool dedicated to moving trajectories around. With any trajectory visible, simply select
that layer in the Timeline, then with the Spline Offset tool, drag anywhere in the Camera View
to move the trajectory around.
Crucially you’ll notice that the Peg’s pivot point remains where you left it.
TRAJECTORIES IN Z-SPACE
A final point about trajectories is that they can have depth. In the Top View, you can manipulate

control points and keyframes on a trajectory so that the object travels along a 3D path. This is
ideal not just for novelties like a helical trajectory (Figure 3.147), which you might create for
rising bubbles, or a character being whipped up into a tornado, but any object or character that
moves away or toward camera.
3.147
MOTION AND STOP-MOTION KEYFRAMES
In the Timeline, you know that the line drawn between keyframes indicates motion, or a
gradual transitioning, or interpolation, from one parameter value to another.
3.148
We love our Motion keyframes dearly but from time to time you’ll want two keyframes without
motion between them. For example, if you want a sorceress to magically ‘pop’ from one side
of the scene to the other with no inbetween motion, you can set the first keyframe to be Stop-
Motion. This will keep her in place and then when the Playhead arrives at the second
keyframe, she instantly appears at the new position.

Select any keyframe and use [Ctrl/⌘ L] to set it to Stop-Motion or [Ctrl/⌘ K] for Motion.
3.149
In the easing graphs you’ve seen what motion looks like. Create some Stop-Motion keyframes
in your Timeline and then check them out in the Function editor.
CUT-OUT ANIMATION
In cut-out animation, characters are drawn in segments, like a paper cut-out puppet that is
pinned together at the joints. Maximising segmentation and reusability of character parts, this
style minimises the need for new drawings.
The hierarchies you’ve already seen are the parent-child relationship of layers, such as Pegs
and Drawings. Cut-out hierarchies are the same, even though some rigs can become very
complex. The hierarchy in Figure 3.151 is a very simple one!
3.150

•
•
3.151
WHAT ARE FK AND IK?
With character segments arranged into a hierarchy, you are fully set up to animate in either FK
(forward kinematics) or IK (inverse kinematics).
Forward kinematics means that you can move a parent segment, and the attached child
segments move accordingly. To animate a character raising his arm then, you will pose
the upper arm, and the lower segments will naturally follow.
Inverse kinematics means that when you move a child segment at the end of the chain,
like a hand or foot, all the segments above it (shin, thigh) rotate and move accordingly.
So to make the same character raise his arm with IK, you pull the hand and raise it high.
All the segments further up the hierarchy will rotate naturally.
Each has its advantages and disadvantages. Most importantly, you’re not locked in to using one
or the other; they’re really just two different methods for posing your cut-out puppet, so you
can switch from using FK to IK and back at any time throughout the animation process.
NOTE
Complex character rigging is beyond the scope of this book. Full cut-out rigging is a
specialised, technical subject. This book would be twice as thick if we were to cover all of
it. What you’ll learn in this section will show you the basics of cut-out hierarchies and some
simple rigging exercises. There is a more substantial rigging project ahead starting on page
273 and you can study the nitty-gritty in the Toon Boom documentation [F1] → User Guide
→ Cut-Out Animation.

> 1.
> 2.
DESIGN
When embarking on a project, designers must decide in what style the animation should be.
Will it be frame-by-frame, will it be in cut-out paper puppet style, or a hybrid of styles?
Usually where schedule and budget is a concern, cut-out animation wins because, while it isn’t
as all-capable as FxF, it’s much more economical and modular. It’s quicker and therefore
cheaper to animate.
The majority of the hard work in cut-out animation is in the setup. Much like 3D animation, the
characters are designed, modelled, rigged and fully prepped for trouble-free animation, so the
animator can concentrate on the puppetry.
The whole idea of the cut-out style is to eliminate drawing from the job of animation. Just like
3D, once the character is rigged, it’s all just puppetry.
SEGMENTS
Segmentation is at the heart of the cut-out style. In the following exercise you’ll draw an arm in
segments and then arrange them in a hierarchy.
> CUT-OUT EXERCISE 1
  LIMB SEGMENTS
It’s always easier to start animating a character from a boring, neutral pose, rather than from
some cool, dynamic pose that may not always be suited to the scene you’re animating. If you
plan on rigging characters or objects, it’s generally good practice to create them in a neutral
pose. In 3D, this is called the T-pose or bind pose.
I’ll be drawing this arm in a horizontal position. Vertical would also be suitable.
Start a new scene called ‘hierarchy’.
Rename the default layer ‘rough’ and sketch the arm from shoul der to hand. You might
also like to plan the segmentation in your sketch as I’ve done in Figure 3.152.
3.152

> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 1.
Add three new layers. This will be a right arm, so I’ve named the layers arm Upper_R,
armFore_R and hand_R.
In the Timeline, select the first frame of the armUpper_R layer, and do a clean drawing
of the upper arm.
On the armFore_R Layer, draw the forearm, then draw the hand_R on the hand layer.
Extend the exposures of all three layers to the end of the scene.
Finally, fill each segment with colours of your choice. Don’t worry that the parts may
appear in the wrong order for now. We’ll fix that next.
NOTE
Good, clear layer naming becomes crucial in character rigging and building hierarchies. A
full rig can have dozens within dozens of individual parts and it’s important that you’re able
to easily find any particular segment in the Timeline.
3.153
> CUT-OUT EXERCISE 2
  HIERARCHY
If you’d like a starting file for this exercise, open up hierarchy_arm from the chapter files.
In the Timeline, drag the hand_R layer onto the armFore_R layer (Figure 3.154). The
hand is now ‘parented’ to the forearm.

> 2.
3.154
Complete the hierarchy by dragging the armFore_R layer onto armUpper_R.
DEPTH ORDERING
You may notice that once your hierarchy is created, there could be a layer ordering problem.
For example, the hand is appearing behind the forearm, but what if the character is wearing a
glove? In that case you may want the hand in front of the forearm.
3.155
Animate Pro and Harmony have advanced layer ordering as you’ll see in the next chapter. If
you’re using Animate though, you’ll often need to ‘nudge’ layers backwards and forwards,
depending on the segment ordering that your scene requires.
This depth nudging can be keyframed too, so a character can place his hands behind his head,
and then in the same scene place them over his mouth, achieved without swapping layers in the
Timeline but simply by keyframing the depth order.
> CUT-OUT EXERCISE 3
  DEPTH NUDGING
While this method is necessarily used in Animate, it’s a handy technique for Animate Pro and
Harmony users as well.

> 1.
> 2.
In the Timeline, select the hand_R layer
In the Coordinate toolbar or panel, set the z (depth) Position value very slightly forward
by entering a number greater than zero. Larger numbers will mean a more noticeable
distance, so very small numbers are usually best.
3.156
As shown in Figure 3.156, I’ve nudged the hand forward 0.01 F. The F here stands simply for
‘forward. You can also nudge elements back which are denoted with B.
Entering values into fields will set keyframes on the Timeline, regardless of Animate Mode
being on or off.
Once placed correctly into their hierarchies, each of these segments can move and behave in
accordance with its connections.
NOTE
Something staring us in the face right now is the fact that no matter what the ordering, the
segment outlines are showing. There are a few ways of getting around this, but perhaps the
most obvious solution is to simply not have outlines – a lineless style is quite popular in
cutout animation.
If you do have outlines in your work, one particular solution involves ‘patching’ or covering
the lines with a small patch of skin colour on another layer. You can learn about this and
other cut-out techniques in the documentation [F1] → User Guide → Character Building.
PIVOT POINTS

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 1.
In order to have segments rotating properly, it’s necessary to place pivots for each of them. If
you grab the Rotate tool [Alt 3] and rotate any of the segments, you’ll find that they’re rotating
around a point at the centre of the scene. In this exercise you’ll place that rotation point for
each segment.
> CUT-OUT EXERCISE 4
  PIVOTS
In the toolbar, there’s a dedicated Drawing Pivot tool that looks like a crosshair. This is for
precise placement of drawing pivots.
From the Tools toolbar, choose the Drawing Pivot tool [Shift P].
In the Timeline, select the armUpper_R layer.
In the Camera View, click where the shoulder joint would be to place the pivot.
3.157
Next, select the armFore_R layer and place the Pivot on the elbow.
Finally on the hand_R layer, place the Pivot at the wrist.
ANIMATION KEYFRAMING
You have just rigged a character limb and the most time-consuming part of this simple rig is
complete. In this exercise, we’ll start moving it around and take a look at the IK tool’s modes
and options.
> CUT-OUT EXERCISE 5
  INVERSE KINEMATICS
In the toolbar, make sure Animate Mode is on and then select the IK (inverse kinematics)
tool [Shift I].

> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
The bones and joints appear in the Camera View as red kite-shaped wireframes and white
circles.
3.158
Ensure the Playhead is sitting on frame 1.
Using the IK tool in the Camera View, drag the hand bone around to see the arm bending.
Hold [Alt] to rotate any bone from its joint without moving its parent.
[Shift]-click a joint or bone to lock it in place. This activates the ‘Nail’ constraint (see
the IK Tool Properties). [Shift]-click the joint again to unlock it.
Place the limb in various poses by dragging the other bones and joints.
3.159
When you finish dragging, take a look at the Timeline. Because Animate Mode is active, it has
automatically set keyframes on each layer.
In the Timeline, move the Playhead to frame 10.
In the Camera View, drag the hand to another position. Keyframes will be set on frame
10 for all three layers.

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Go ahead and experiment with some more poses and animation. Why not animate the arm
waving? You have already learned how to add easing to layer motion, so you could apply some
natural easing on various parts of this arm. Revisit page 204 if you need a refresher on easing.
Finally let’s look at some of the IK tool’s settings and what they mean.
IK Manipulation – could possibly be called ‘Pose Mode; as it’s the main mode you’ll
use when moving bones and joints for posing.
Apply IK Constraints – applies selected constraint options (E) for the active bone.
Edit Min/Max Angle – (Animate Pro and Harmony only) limits how far joints can bend
so they don’t fold up too far, or bend the wrong way, e.g., knees and elbows.
Bone Editing – lets you change the angle and size of a bone so it suits the art. Useful for
extremities like feet and hand bones.
Constraints – each of these will constrain the selected bone or joint in some way.
Coming up on page 273 is a rigging project to which you can apply all that you’ve learned
here.
3.160
DRAWING SUBSTITUTION
Each static segment of the arm is on its own Drawing layer, which means it can also contain
several frames within it. The hand layer, for example, may contain a number of different hand
shapes. This allows you to switch hands during the animation, depending on what the scene
requires.

If a character is standing idle, with hands hanging loosely by his sides, then suddenly points at
something, you can’t very well leave the relaxed hand on the end of his arm. Here you’d want
to swap to a hand with finger pointing, so it actually looks natural.
3.161
In limited animation, Drawing substitution is also used for lip-sync. Mouth drawings are
swapped in and out to match the dialogue. When the character is making the ‘CH’ sound, the
CH mouth shape is inserted at that frame.
3.162
At the end of this chapter there is an animation project that will have you animating lip sync
using Drawing substitution.
MORPHING
As the name implies, the Morphing tool is designed for transitioning one shape into another. It
works by animating the vertices of the art itself.
Long, slow sequences of very gradual movement are particularly well-suited to morphing. In
traditional animation, it’s very difficult to create a smooth sequence with perfectly consistent
volumes and line widths. Morphing makes this process easier and helps to ensure every
drawing in the sequence is consistent.
MORPHING TOOL [F3]

 Finally we get to the last tool in the toolbar. The Morphing tool isn’t required to create
morphing, but you’ll need it if you want to control the morphing.
Almost like some kind of robot inbetweener, a morph creates all the drawings between two
key poses. A simple ribbon of smoke rising from a dying fire may have several key poses, each
morphed into the next. Rather than give this scene to a human inbetweener, it might be quicker
and easier to give it to the robot.
Morphing doesn’t have a creative mind. It makes purely mathematical decisions on which
vertices should move where. For this reason, it often needs your guidance with the Morphing
tool.
With the Morphing tool selected in the toolbar, take a look at the options in the Tool Properties
panel.
3.163
3.164
Most Morphing options are available only with a morph selected in the Timeline, so let’s get
started on creating a morph.

•
•
•
•
•
•
RULES OF CONSISTENCY
There are a few rules of consistency to bear in mind for morphing.
Most of these will become fairly obvious once you’ve used the Morphing tool successfully a
few times.
Same colour – you can only morph shapes or lines if they use the same colour swatch.
You cannot morph a green shape into a red one, for example. If you want to create colour
transitions, you’d use Effects, which we’ll cover in the next chapter.
Shapes and lines – a key pose drawn with line tools (Pencil, Shape, Polyline) can only
be morphed with other line drawings. Likewise, drawings created with the Brush tool
only morph into other Brush strokes, or other paint shapes.
Sub-layers – make sure your keys are on the same sub-layer. A morph will not work if
one drawing is on the Line sub-layer and the next is on the Colour sub-layer.
Disappearing and appearing – if the morph doesn’t find a corresponding shape in both
key drawings, parts of it will either appear or disappear throughout the morph. You can
use this to your advantage in some scenes.
Same layer – morphing only works between drawings on the same layer. You cannot
morph a drawing from Layer A into a drawing on Layer B.
Symbols and drawings – if you have symbols in your layer, you cannot morph them with
ordinary drawings. You can however create morphing inside symbols.
SIMPLICITY IS KEY
Morphing almost always works when used on simple art; the fewer vertices, the better. You
can still create complex morphs but these generally require more guidance. The more you need
to guide it, the more time-consuming and less practical it all becomes.
While morphing the fire drawings in Figure 3.165 is certainly possible, it’s definitely much
quicker just to draw the inbetween by hand.

3.165
If you plan on using a morph, you should deliberately design your key poses to suit the morph.
The first lesson is to keep it simple! The tangled mess in Figure 3.166 is the result of morphing
those ill-considered fire drawings.
3.166
> MORPHING EXERCISE 1
  MORPHING SIMPLICITY
For the following exercise I’ve provided a scene file called morphing_ simple in the chapter
files. The steps below are written specifically for this file, but feel free to create your own
similar scene and follow along.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
In the Timeline, select a frame of the first drawing.
Right-click the selected frame and choose Morphing → Create Morphing [Alt M]. In
Animate Pro and Harmony there’s also a handy Create Morphing button in the Timeline
toolbar (Figure 3.167).
3.167
In the Timeline, the morph appears as a series of arrows between the two drawings (Figure
3.168).
3.168
Scrub the Timeline back and forth to watch the morph.
Save this scene ready to use in the next exercise.
Really, there’s not much that could have gone wrong here. As you can see, we’ve morphed a
very simple shape into another and it has worked perfectly well. The interesting thing here is
that before we applied the morph, we weren’t really sure how it would turn out. We merely
hoped that the robot would do a good job and the result was a mild surprise. ‘Oh look, the
points rotate slightly. That’s nice.’
What if you didn’t want this though? Suppose that instead of pulling slightly anti-clockwise
into the circle, you wanted each point of the star to roll clockwise? Or do something entirely
different?
The Morphing tool provides you this type of creative control so let’s now look at how that
works.
MORPHING HINTS
When the software guesses how and where to move vertices throughout a morphing sequence,
it will sometimes get it right and sometimes get it wrong. The Morphing tool is essentially a

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
guidance system to help you guide the morph whenever it guesses wrong.
In the parts where a morph isn’t quite working, you can place a hint in the first drawing on the
problem area. Then, in the second drawing, you place a corresponding hint where you want it
to be at the end of the morph.
3.169
In Figure 3.169, the first drawing has hints placed at key points on the flag. The second
drawing has corresponding hints guiding the morph so the flag moves as the animator intended.
> MORPHING EXERCISE 2
  HINTS
In the morphing_simple scene file, let’s make those star arms move in a different way using
hints.
Scrub the Timeline back and forth to remind yourself of how the morph looks without
any guidance.
Select the Morphing tool from the toolbar. Cast your eye over the Morphing tool
properties in the Properties panel.
In the Timeline, select frame 1. This is the first key drawing.
In the Camera View with the Morphing tool, click to place your first hint.
You can now drag it and it will snap to the art. Position it on the top point of the star.

> 6.
> 7.
3.170
This places your first hint, labelled 0 (zero). It’s green, indicating that this is a starting hint.
3.171
In the Timeline select your second drawing at the end of the scene.
At this point, the hint you’re seeing in the Camera View is red, indicating that it’s a destination
hint.
Now position the destination hint where you’d like that star point to move to.
Scrub the Timeline once again to watch the morph doing something completely different.

> 1.
> 2.
3.172
TIP
When working with morphing hints, you can select the morph in the Timeline, then use the
[F4] key to toggle back and forth between your key drawings..
> MORPHING EXERCISE 3
  MORPHING MULTIPLE KEYS
Morphing a star into a circle isn’t really that impressive, so let’s do something a little more
interesting. In this exercise you’ll create a number of key poses and then apply morphing
between each of them.
If you’d like a starting file with key poses already done, open up morphing_smoke from the
morphing_simple folder.
In the Timeline, add a new layer called ‘smoke’.
If you’re not using the provided file, use the Brush tool and a colour of your choice to
animate several key poses of a rising smoke ribbon.
Just as you would for a human inbetweener, consider carefully each drawing and how it relates
to the previous pose and the next. Make sure the inbetweener can easily understand how the

> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
smoke should move. In Figure 3.173 you can see how there’s a certain flow in the key
drawings.
On each key drawing, fill the smoke with paint so that each pose is a flat, solid area of
colour. For now, resist the temptation to add more colours or any detail to the smoke.
3.173
Extend the exposures so that, together, the drawings span the length of the scene.
In the same way you applied the morph in the first exercise, do so between each key
pose of the smoke. That is, select the exposure of each drawing, then hit the Create
Morphing button, or [Alt M].
3.175
Scrub the Timeline or hit [Shift Enter] to watch the results.
TIP
It’s a good idea to flatten your drawings before you use morphing. It’s not always necessary
but it reduces the number of strokes and vertices, thereby reducing the chance of tangled
morphs.

> 7.
3.174
You could work with Auto-Flatten turned on in the Brush properties. To flatten a finished
drawing, first drag a selection around it in the Camera or Drawing View using the Select
tool. Then choose Drawing → Optimize → Flatten [Alt Shift F], or simply hit the Flatten
button in the Select tool properties under Operations (see Figure 3.174).
If you’re incredibly lucky or you’ve just been very careful with your key drawings, maybe
everything moves perfectly. Chances are that there are some tangles here and there, or bits that
don’t move quite the way you’d like.
For each problem area, identify which part could benefit from a hint or two, apply them
and scrub again.
The process of guiding a morph to perfection takes some time, but it’s nowhere near the amount
of time it would take to draw those inbetweens by hand.
HINT TYPES
The hints you’ve used so far are contour hints, placed on the perimeter of the shapes. In the
properties panel you can see this option, and the other hint types behind it.

•
•
•
•
•
> 1.
> 2.
3.176
Contour hints – these are placed on paint edges, including inner edges and colour
borders within a drawing.
Zone hints – place zone hints in areas to influence the surrounding area, rather than
edges.
Pencil hints – these are specifically for use with lines drawn with the Pencil, Shape and
Polyline tools.
Vanishing point hints -in the case of something that exists in pose 1, but is gone in pose 2,
these Hints tell pieces of the drawing where to vanish.
Appearing point hints – converse to the vanishing point hint; define the point where art
missing from pose 1 will appear in pose 2.
MORPH EASING
There are a couple of ways to ease your morphing. The first is found within easy reach at the
bottom of the Morphing tool properties. Knowing what you already know about easing graphs,
there’s not much to say about this one; only that it’s very limited and as you adjust the values,
there’s a small line representation of the easing as a visual aid.
The second, more powerful way is via the Velocity editor’s easing graph.
> MORPHING EXERCISE 4
  MORPHING VELOCITY
In the Timeline, select any frame of a morph.
In the Layer Properties panel, go to the Drawing tab and scroll all the way to the bottom.
If you’re using Animate, you’ll find this at the bottom of the Advanced tab.

> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
3.177
Click the function curve button shown in Figure 3.177 to create a function curve for the
Morphing Velocity.
Click the button a second time to open the graph.
3.178
Move the playhead to frame 1 and, in the Velocity editor, add a keyframe with the
add/remove keyframe button (see Figure 3.178).
In the Timeline, move the playhead to the end of the scene, then once again click the
add/remove keyframe button to add that second keyframe.
Enter 1 into the Value field and the diagonal line appears with handles, ready for easing
(Figure 3.179). You can pan and zoom in the graph view using [1], [2] and [Spacebar].

3.179
NOTE
This has applied a single curve over the entire length of the scene. Using the add/remove
keyframe button (see Figure 3.178), you can add more keyframes on the line for easing
individual morphing sequences between particular drawings.
3.180
Also worth noting is that by creating a function curve, you can now use Set Ease for
Multiple Parameters, which you saw earlier in the Peg layers section.
A WORD ON MORPHING LAYERS
The middle section of the Morphing tool properties is dedicated to Morphing Layers. This

gives you the ability to separate layers of motion within a single drawing; kind of like a
timeline within a timeline. All of this is controlled from within the Morphing tool properties
panel.
3.181
However, for most users, especially if you’re just getting comfortable with the main Timeline,
it’s quite painful to try to learn a new visually and functionally different Timeline.
For this reason, we’ll skip this section. If you’d like to read up and learn to use Morphing
Layers, you’ll find it in the Toon Boom documentation [F1] → User Guide → Morphing
Chapter → Morphing → Morphing Layers.
ANIMATION PROJECTS
We’ve almost reached the end of the animation chapter, so now’s the time to practise what
you’ve learned by completing a few simple projects. Each of these will have you calling upon
what you learned in this chapter and the previous one.
Every step in these projects has been covered so far in the book and there are page references
throughout, in case you need to revisit topics covered previously.
ANIMATION PROJECT 1: FRAME-BY-FRAME ANIMATION
In this animation project you’ll use drawing tools, frame-by-frame animation, Peg animation,
trajectories and a mask layer. You’ll create a scene in which a balloon rises and bumps against
the angled ceiling a few times before escaping through an open skylight. When you think about
it, this gentle upward bump-bump motion is merely a slowmotion, upside-down ball bounce.
> PROJECT 1 – STEP 1
  SCENE SETUP
Start a new scene file and increase the scene length to 200 frames. Rename the default layer
‘bg_layout’ and draw a rough layout of your background. Extend the exposure of this rough
layout right to the end of the scene.

3.182
> PROJECT 1 – STEP 2
  ANIMATION LAYOUT
Add a new Layer called ‘anim_layout’ and draw rough layout poses for the balloon and string
positions throughout the scene.
The layout artist is not an animator! So there’s no need to add timing at the layout stage. You’re
just putting in the rough balloon positions for the scene with just a few key poses, as shown in
Figure 3.183. It’s very common for the animator to deviate from layout poses, as they’re
merely a guide for scene composition.

3.183
> PROJECT 1 – STEP 3
  BALLOON SETUP
On a new layer called ‘balloon; draw and fully colour your balloon. I’ve used the Ellipse
shape tool, and then manipulated the vertices with the Contour Editor [Alt Q] before adding the
knot with the Pencil tool.
In the Timeline, extend the balloon’s exposure to the end of the scene. Select the balloon layer
and then click the 
 Add Peg button. In the Timeline, select the new balloon Peg, then in the
Camera View use the Translate tool [Alt 2] to drag the pivot to the centre of the balloon.
Revisit page 79 to revise pivots.

3.184
> PROJECT 1 – STEP 4
  BALLOON ANIMATION
In the Timeline, select frame 1 of the balloon’s Peg. Turn on Animate Mode and, in the Camera
View, use the Translate tool [Alt 2] to set the balloon’s first key position. Position the Playhead
to where you’d like the next keyframe and move the balloon into its second pose.
Add keyframes for the bounces, show the trajectory (Shift F11) and bend the path with Control
Points. Remember you can set the Tension values on those Control Points for sharp corners in
the trajectory (see page 241). Finally, expand the Peg layer and add a function curve to the
Velocity so you can apply easing for each bounce.

•
•
•
•
•
3.185
TIP
Where necessary, you should feel free to:
Use other Advanced Animation tools, or just use the Transform tool.
Either use [F6] in the Timeline to create keyframes on the Peg layer, or just let
Animate Mode set keyframes automatically as you move the balloon.
Reposition the pivot to wherever you think it works best.
Show [Shift F11] and hide [Shift C] the trajectory and practise using control points
[P].
Make the balloon burst as it touches a nail or splinter, instead of escaping through the
skylight. This will require frame-by-frame animation as the rubber and string (see next
step) fall down off the screen.

3.186
> PROJECT 1 – STEP 5
  STRING ANIMATION
Add a new Drawing layer and call it ‘string. Parent the string layer to the balloon.
3.187
Using the Pencil tool, draw key poses of the string on fours or eights, taking care to keep its
length consistent. Apply a morph between the key poses, adding Pencil hints, easing and timing
adjustments where necessary (see page 253).
3.188
You’ll note in Figure 3.188 that I’ve got extra drawings in the morph, right where the bounces
take place. This is where I’ve animated the string reacting to the bounce. To convert a morph to
drawings so you can hand-tweak and manipulate them, just right-click the morph in the
Timeline and choose – Morphing – Convert Morphing to Drawings.

> PROJECT 1 – STEP 6
  MASK
If you’re using Animate Pro or Harmony feel free to skip this step, as you’ll be using Cutters in
the next chapter. As suggested back in step 4, you may instead like to animate the balloon
bursting as it touches a nail or splinter.
If you’re using Animate, add a Mask to the Timeline and then create artwork for the skylight
that cuts off the balloon as it escapes (reference masking on page 188).
3.189
> PROJECT 1 – STEP 7
  BACKGROUND
Complete the background with the drawing tools and colours of your choice. If you’re really
enjoying the scene, why not add a camera move to follow the balloon?

3.190
ANIMATION PROJECT 2: SIMPLE RIGGING
In this project you’ll practise what you learned about hierarchies to build a partial character
rig. As mentioned earlier, rigging is a huge subject that we can’t completely cover in this book.
This project won’t have you fully rigging a character, but it’ll get you started with just a couple
of limbs.
> PROJECT 2 – STEP 1
  SCENE SETUP
Create a new scene file called ‘eyebot’ with the resolution of your choice. In the Timeline,
rename the default Timeline layer ‘rough’. For now, set the scene length to one frame via Scene
→ Scene Length… Later when you start animating the rig, you’ll lengthen the scene.

3.191
> PROJECT 2 – STEP 2
  ROUGH SKETCH
In the rough layer, sketch a walking pose of a two-legged robot as shown in Figure 3.191. As
you can see, this simple machine is a spherical body on two legs … probably piloted by a tiny
supervillain.
> PROJECT 2 – STEP 3
  LAYERS AND SEGMENTS
In the Timeline, add new Drawing layers for the body and the leg segments for one leg only –
later we’ll duplicate one leg to make the other. I’ve named the leg segments with ‘_F’ because
it’s the front (nearest) leg.
3.192
> PROJECT 2 – STEP 4
  ART

For each of the layers, create the art. You might like to start with the body so you have a
reference point for the legs.
A reminder that whatever your character, the limbs are best created in a neutral pose. For the
eyebot, I’ve created its leg segments vertical and will pose them more naturally once the
hierarchy is set up.
3.193
> PROJECT 2 – STEP 5
  HIERARCHY
Now to arrange the layers into a hierarchy: in the Timeline, drag the foot onto the lower leg,
then drag the lower leg onto the upper leg and finally, drag the upper leg onto the body.
Looking at the bot now, it’s obvious that there are some depth issues. In order to layer the
segments at the proper depth, they’ll require moving forward or backward in z-depth. In my
eyebot example, the body is at zero z-depth, and I’ve nudged the segments 0.01 F (forward).

3.194
Do this via the Timeline’s Data View, as shown in Figure 3.195, for each leg segment.
3.195
TIP
You won’t need to arrange them at 0.01, 0.02, 0.03, etc. Once placed into a hierarchy, each
segment inherits the transform values of its parent. So you only need to bring each individual
segment forward 0.01.
3.196
In the Top View, zoom in to see the spaces between the layers.
> PROJECT 2 – STEP 6

  PIVOTS
In the Timeline, select the foot layer and using the Pivot tool [Shift P], place the pivot on the
ankle joint. For the lower leg, place the pivot on the knee. With the upper leg selected, place
the pivot on the hip joint. Finally, place the body pivot somewhere at the centre of the body.
3.197
Select the IK tool with Animate Mode turned on and the bone chain appears. With the
hierarchy, z-depth and pivots complete, you’re ready to duplicate this leg.
If you drag the foot around with the IK tool now (ensure Animate Mode is on to see the bones),
the body will be pulled around. I suggest’nailing’the body’s bone and joint in place by [Shift]-
clicking them both.They’ll change colour to indicate that they’re locked.
3.198

Note that in the IK tool’s properties there is a number of options for controlling joints, one of
which is a Nail. This pins the joint to the spot so it can be rotated, but not translated.
> PROJECT 2 – STEP 7
  DUPLICATE THE LEG CHAIN
In the Timeline, [Shift]-select all three leg layers and duplicate them (Right-click → Duplicate
Selected Layers…). A brand new leg with all its hierarchy, pivot and keyframe information is
now a child of the body.
The final step is to nudge the new leg back into z-depth so it sits behind the body. If you set the
upper leg to 0.03 B (back), you shouldn’t need to touch the values on the other segments.
This simple rig is now complete and ready for animation!
> PROJECT 2 – STEP 8
  ANIMATE THE RIG
Just a reminder that you must have Animate Mode enabled if you want to see the bones. If
you’d like to use IK, choose the IK tool [Shift I] and take a look at the tool properties, shown
in Figure 3.199. For a refresher, revisit the cut-out animation section starting on page 242.
3.199
Once the rig is all set, extend your scene length to 60–80 frames, and then start animating the
eyebot’s walk animation. With Animate mode turned on, pose the animation keys using IK and
FK.

3.200
RIGGING SUMMARY
This project and the introduction starting back on page 277 have been a simple introduction to
rigging. If you’d like to go deeper into this technical subject, I recommend getting comfortable
with simple rigging tasks like the one in this project, and gradually iterate on rig complexity.
When you’re ready to go further, I recommend studying the rigging chapter in the Toon Boom
documentation [F1] → User Guide → Cut-Out Animation.
ANIMATE PRO & HARMONY ONLY
In Appendix A, you can read a bit about deformation, which is in many ways superior to simple segment rigging. You’ll also
find a video called “Introduction to Deformation” on this book’s companion website.
ANIMATION PROJECT 3: DRAWING SUBSTITUTION

In this project, you’ll create a layer of mouth shapes and animate them in sequence using
Drawing Substitution.
> PROJECT 3 – STEP 1
  SCENE SETUP
Create a new scene file with a resolution and frame rate of your choice. Rename your default
Timeline layer ‘rough’.
> PROJECT 3 – STEP 2
  ROUGH SKETCH
On frame 1 of your rough layer, loosely sketch out a character head with the standard face
parts: eyes, eyebrows, nose and mouth. For the sake of simplicity, make it a front-on pose.
From this sketch, think about the parts that you need separated for animation. For this project,
you need only separate the mouth, but in future, you may need to separate eyebrows, eyes and
maybe even hair.
3.201
> PROJECT 3 – STEP 3
  MOUTH SHAPES

Create a Drawing layer called ‘mouth’ (Figure 3.202). On this layer, with clean linework,
draw a number of different mouth shapes, each on their own frame.
3.202
Figure 3.203 is a set of nine essential mouth shapes you’ll see in limited animation, for
example in television and web cartoons.
3.203
There’s nothing stopping you from adding more than nine mouth shapes. It’s not uncommon to
have dozens of them in one Drawing layer. The mouths in Figure 3.203 should suffice for most
simple dialogue scenes but it’s a neutral set. If a character is smiling while talking, it will
need a separate set of smiley mouths. Likewise, if the character is raging angry, a set of angry
mouth shapes will be required for those scenes. This is not to mention mouth shapes for
different head angles, such as three quarter and profile sets.
> PROJECT 3 – STEP 4
  ANIMATING LIP-SYNC
Later in the book we’ll be learning how to use audio on the Timeline to synchronise mouth
shapes with dialogue. There’s no audio on this Timeline, but it’s not necessary for this project.

In the mouth layer, delete all but the first drawing from the Timeline, and then extend the
exposure of the first drawing to the end of the scene. Now you’ll use Drawing Substitution to
put your chosen mouth shapes on specific frames.
In the mouth layer, select frame 10. Then in the Library move the Drawing Substitution slider
along to choose another mouth shape (Figure 3.204). The chosen mouth shape appears in the
Camera View and the Timeline shows a separation mark between your drawings.
3.204
Repeat the above steps for any mouth shape you want to use; simply select the frame of the
mouth layer and then use the Drawing Substitution slider to choose the mouth shape you want at
that frame.
If you place the wrong mouth shape, simply select it in the Timeline and change it using the
Library slider. By the end of this step, your mouth layer should have a bunch of drawings.
3.205
> PROJECT 3 – STEP 5
  EYES AND EYEBROWS
With the same method you used for mouth shapes, you can make eye blinks and eyebrow
shapes. Simply draw your different states on the respective layers, and then use the Substitution
slider to place a blink or a frown anywhere in the scene.

> PROJECT 3 – STEP 6
  PEGS AND DRAWING KEYFRAMES
It’s a great idea to add a Peg to a mouth or eyebrows layer, because sometimes you just want to
move them up and down, or side to side without changing their shape. Of course, you can do
this without a Peg if you prefer; simply keyframing the Drawing layer will have the same
effect.
3.206
ANIMATION PROJECT 4: DEPTH AND MORPHING
In this project you’ll create a campfire scene. You’ll add z-depth to the background layers and
morphing smoke for the dying campfire. At the end, you’ll create a camera move to zoom
slowly in on the ashes and coals.
> PROJECT 4 – STEP 1
  SCENE SETUP
Start a new scene file and rename the default layer ‘rough.
> PROJECT 4 – STEP 2
  ROUGH LAYOUT
Roughly sketch the layout of the scene elements. The fireplace will be the main focus in the
middle of the scene. Other campsite ideas might be a tent, some bushes, a pile of firewood,
folding chair and so on.

3.207
> PROJECT 4 – STEP 3
  LAYERS
Add new layers for each major element of the scene. You’ll need a ground and sky layer on the
bottom, then bushes, firewood, tent and fireplace all on their own layers. In the Timeline create
as many layers as you like and then arrange them into their proper order.
At this stage you may like to fully colour and finish the background elements, or you could just
add some basic, temporary colour for now. Either way, don’t forget to extend the exposure of
each layer to the end of the scene.
3.208
Using the Maintain Size tool [Alt 6] (see page 215), position each layer in 3D space. Using the
Top and Perspective views, think about the proportional distances that might realistically
separate each element; for example, the tent’s distance from the background bushes, or the
space between the firewood pile and the fireplace. Putting some thought into these distances
will make your Camera moves work much better.

> PROJECT 4 – STEP 4
  KEY ANIMATION
In the smoke layer, use the Brush [Alt B] and a dark, temporary colour to draw key smoke
poses as it rises skyward. As you’ll be morphing the smoke, take care to make the key poses
suitable for morphing; that is, don’t make them too complex. Try to make each drawing flow as
smoothly as possible from the previous and into the next.
You might consider making the smoke lineless, as this reduces the complexity of the artwork to
make it more morph-friendly. The lineless style also happens to suit realistic smoke effects
very well.
3.209
> PROJECT 4 – STEP 5
  MORPHING AND HINTS
If you didn’t use Auto-Flatten when cleaning up and painting, it’s a good idea to select each
smoke drawing and flatten it [Alt Shift F] before applying a morph. Once again, this isn’t
always necessary, but simplifying the art increases the chance of trouble-free morphing.
In the Timeline, whether you have just two keys or many, extend the exposure of each smoke
key so they go to the end of the scene. Still in the Timeline, select each drawing of the smoke
layer one by one and click the Create Morphing button, or press [Alt M].

•
3.210
Scrub or play back the morph to see if there is any tangling or oddness. If so, use the Morphing
tool to smooth out those problems with hints (see page 257).
TIP
With ribbon-style smoke, if you’ve been very careful designing your key poses, I’ve found
that one or two hints at the base will fix most problems by locking the smoke at its source, as
shown in Figure 3.211.
3.211
> PROJECT 4 – STEP 6
  EASING
If the morph is jerky or the timing isn’t quite what you’d like, you can add some easing via the
Layer Properties panel.
In Animate, the morphing velocity field is at the bottom of the Advanced tab.

•
In Animate Pro and Harmony, you’ll find it at the bottom of the Drawing tab.
3.212
Click the function curve icon to first create the function curve, and then click it again to open
the Veolcity Editor. From there, it’s a matter of adding keyframes and using the tangent handles
to control the easing (see page 262).
> PROJECT 4 – STEP 7
  CAMERA
Back in step 3, the reason we separated the scene elements with z-depth is for the benefit of a
Camera move. If you’re not using a Camera move in any given scene, z-depth between your
layers may not be necessary.
Add a Camera to the scene via the Timeline’s , button. With the Camera layer selected in the
Timeline, click the 
 button to add a Peg for the Camera.
In the Timeline, select the first frame of the Peg layer. Then in the Camera View, using the
Translate tool [Alt 2] with Animate Mode on, drag to move the Camera around the scene.
Note that a keyframe is created on the Timeline in the Peg layer. If, at any time, you’re not
happy with the Camera position, you can always reset the move by deleting that keyframe from
the Peg. Simply select it in the Timeline and press [F7].

3.213
SUMMARY
This enormous chapter has given you a mere glimpse into what you can do with Toon Boom
and there’s a lot we were unable to cover due to page count restrictions.
Once again, if your experience is in traditional animation and you’d like to use the X-sheet,
there’s nothing really to stop you opening it from the panel menu and using it, much like you
would have in the old days, except with an infinite number of levels (layers) and crazy modern
enhancements.
On the other hand, if you’re an animator with mostly digital experience, but would like to learn
about the X-sheet all the same, I recommend learning it from the Toon Boom documentation
[F1]. It’s just another Timeline, after all.
The same goes for learning IK and rigging. As I mentioned earlier, rigging is a massive topic
that is best taken in small steps. The documentation is more than enough to get you started and
keep you going!
In the next chapter you’ll learn about effects and how to polish your scenes to a professional
level.

CHAPTER 4
Effects

I
EFFECTS ANIMATION AND EFFECTS FILTERS
n traditional animation, the term ‘effects’ covers elemental phenomena such as dust, water,
smoke, lightning and fire. You often see these written as ‘FX’ (effects), ‘VFX’ (visual
effects) or ‘SFX’ (special effects). Throughout this chapter we’ll refer to these as ‘effects
animation’.
In digital animation, ‘effects’ is a generic term referring to digital treatments and filters such
as blur, glow, refraction, lens flares and so on. So when we talk about these in Toon Boom and
this chapter, we’ll use the term effects ‘filters’ or ‘treatments’
4.1 
Elemental hand-drawn effects animation

4.2 
A digital refraction treatment
HOW TO APPLY EFFECTS
Depending on which Toon Boom program you’re using, effects are either layer-based, or node-
based. This means that you’ll apply effects in one of two ways: via the Timeline or via the
Network view. The Network view is a feature of Animate Pro and Harmony, so if you’re using
Animate, you’ll be working in the Timeline.
ANIMATE ONLY
In Animate, effects are added via the Timeline menu.
 
4.3

1.
2.
3.
4.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Adding effects via the Timeline is designed to be a very simple process. Here are the general steps for applying any effect in
Animate, but we’ll get into specifics as we cover each effect.
Create any necessary matte drawings for the effect (e.g., masks, tones, highlights, shadows).
Choose the effect itself from the Timeline’s drop-down menu 
.
Connect your animation/drawing layer (e.g., character, props) to the Effect layer.
Control any parameters via the Layer Properties panel or Timeline Data View.
4.4
The next 15 pages are for Animate Pro and Harmony only. So if you have Animate, you should
now skip forward to page 306.
ANIMATE PRO HARMONY ONLY
NODE-BASED EFFECTS
In Animate Pro and Harmony, Effects are found in the Module Library and then dragged into the Network View. Like any
other panel, you can open the Module Library panel using the 
 button.
Effects are generally added as follows, but we’ll go into specifics as we cover each effect.
Create any necessary art for the effects.
Drag the effect from the Module Library into the Network.
Connect the effect to the appropriate art layers.
Control the effect’s parameters in the Layer Properties panel.
THE NETWORK VIEW – ANIMATE PRO AND HARMONY ONLY
OK, time to come clean: I could have introduced you to the Network View much earlier. Indeed many layering and
organisational tasks, like hierarchies and layer ordering, are much easier via the Network View. However, for most beginners
(especially those with little software experience) it’s a very daunting view, so to keep your mind from cluttering too early, I
reckoned it best saved for later. Well here we are!

NOTE
The Network View is not a drawing or animation view; you can’t control any timing or frame-by-frame aspects of the
scene. It’s a scene-structuring view by which you organise layers and create connections between them, such as
connecting effect filters to a character.
When it comes to layer ordering, the Timeline is limited to simple top-down stacking. Unless reordered in z-space, layers are
always displayed in their Timeline stacking order, with lower layers appearing behind higher layers. In Figure 4.5, the eyes will
appear behind the head layer, because they’re at the bottom of the hierarchy, so you’d need to nudge them forward.
4.5
The Network View, on the other hand, allows you to have something at the bottom of a hierarchy, yet appear on top of the
other layers, with no nudging required. The eye layers, while at the bottom of the hierarchy in the Timeline, can appear in
front of all other elements.
In Figure 4.6, the head layer is the top of the hierarchy, yet is ‘plugged in’ at the far right, underneath all the other layers.
4.6
NAVIGATION
Moving around in the Network View is similar to the Drawing and Camera Views, except there is no rotation. Hold down
[Spacebar] to pan around the view.

4.7
Those of us who have played RTS (real-time strategy) games are familiar with the kind of panning navigator that you see in
the Network View. Much like a mini-map, it allows you to move quickly around large networks by simply dragging the
square. Notice that the size of the square adjusts according to your zoom level.
If you’d like to hide the navigator, or position it in any other corner, you can do so via Edit – Preferences [Ctrl/ U] and then
go to the Network tab.
4.8
WHAT ARE MODULES?
Your scene layers are represented as rectangular nodes called modules, all plugged into the main scene ‘Composite’. These
can be dragged around to your liking. It’s the plugging order that matters, otherwise there’s no right or wrong position for
these; you are free to organise them however you see fit. When you have a large network containing dozens upon dozens of
modules, you’ll need to move things around so everything is laid out in a readable fashion.

4.9
Without knowing what the cables and modules do, you may be daunted by Figure 4.9. Let’s start off simple by going over the
default modules in a new scene. When you create a new scene file, the default Timeline layer is called Drawing. Opening up
the Network View reveals Drawing as a module, connected to a couple of other modules.
4.10
THE DRAWING MODULE
Layers in the Timeline are reflected as modules in the Network. The [tvg] suffix on a Drawing module is the file format of
the layer, saved in the elements folder of your scene. If you were to import any other image format, the suffix would appear
on the module.

4.11
Click the yellow box on any module to bring up the Layer Properties in a floating panel. Previously you’ve accessed this
information by selecting Timeline layers and opening the Layer Properties panel. Either method can be used, because
modules and Timeline layers are essentially the same thing, visualised in different ways.
4.12
THE COMPOSITE MODULE
You might compare Composite modules to rainwater tanks. Art and Effect layers flow down the pipes into the tanks and all
the tanks ultimately feed into a main reservoir.
4.13
 

4.14
The Composite is a meeting point where all of the layers in your scene come together. There is a bit more to it than that
though; it not only brings everything together but, via the Properties panel, it also decides how your scene layers are brought
together – or composited.
Everything that goes into a Composite module is flattened into a single image for output. A Composite that you might name
‘headComposite’ for example, with head, eyes and mouth all plugged in, will be flattened into one complete head image.
4.15
In turn, you could plug the headComposite and body into another Composite called ‘characterComposite’. Finally, plug the
characterComposite along with a sky layer into the main scene Composite.

4.16
 
NOTE
Besides the water tank comparison, another way to illustrate how the network works is by using it to represent a typical
studio workflow. Each department flows down into the others, resulting in a finished product ready for publishing.

4.17
THE DISPLAY MODULE
A Display module is responsible for displaying your scene. Without it you wouldn’t see anything at all, which is why it’s one of
the default modules in a new network.
You can plug most layers into a Display module. This is particularly useful when you want to render only part of a scene. By
default, the Display module is plugged in at the bottom of the network, which means it’ll render everything above it.

4.18
Right at the bottom of the network isn’t the only place for a Display module. Suppose you have this monstrous, technical
nightmare of a scene with dozens of layers and tons of effects. Rendering the entire scene may take some time but maybe
you’re working on a small part, like a simple moonlight glow. Simply plug the moon and its glow into a Display module and
you can now render these alone, without the need to render the entire scene.
4.19
Your scene can contain multiple Displays and ahead on page 302 you’ll learn how to add other modules to the Network. Any
particular one can be rendered via the Display drop-down in the main program toolbar. If you don’t see it anywhere, you can
bring it up with Window → Toolbar → Display. When you render a scene or a single frame, your chosen Display module
determines what will be rendered.
4.20
THE WRITE MODULE
When your scene is composited and you’re ready to export it, you’ll want to ‘write’ it as a movie or sequence of images. The

•
•
Write module is where you control this output. In the Layer Properties panel you will specify the resolution, number of
frames, output directory and format, whether video or images. Later in the Rendering chapter, we’ll export some of each.
4.21
NODES, CABLES AND PORTS
Almost every module has one or more ‘ports’ or input/output sockets by which you connect it to others.
Input – top ports are ‘in’ ports.
Output – bottom ports are ‘out’ ports.
4.22
Click and drag any of these ports to make or break a connection. Try it out by unplugging all of the modules, drag them
around and reconnect them in different ways. There are some rules and you’ll find that not all connections are possible; for
example, you can’t plug an input into another input. To unplug a module, you remove its plug from whatever it’s plugged into,
exactly like the plug of a household electrical appliance.
TIP
You can drag several output cables from a single module. This enables multiple inputs from a single layer. For example, a
sun drawing can be plugged in twice, and a Glow attached to one of them. In turn, that Glow can be plugged in multiple
times for a stronger effect.
 

4.23
Once you’ve experimented with plugs and cables, you’ll need to reconnect everything properly if the scene is to be displayed.
You should be able to refer back to any of the screenshots all the way back to Figure 4.10 if you need guidance.
LAYER ORDER
When you have multiple layers in your scene, such as with a character hierarchy or a multilayered background, they will all
be connected to your main scene Composite, which automatically lengthens to accommodate more connections.
4.24
The right-most connections correspond to the lowest layers of your Timeline. Therefore, in a typical scene, the background
elements will be plugged in on the right, while foreground elements are plugged in further to the left.
4.25
This method of layer ordering, by simply adjusting the order of connections, is a very fast and easy way to organise your
scene. Believe me, once you’ve done this a few times, shuffling Timeline layers feels so very clunky!

A.
B.
C.
And now we return to what I said about advanced layering. Mouth, nose and eyes layers may be at the bottom of a ‘head’
hierarchy, but in the Network View you can simply plug the head in behind (to the right of) all the face parts. There’s no
need to nudge anything forward or back in z-space.
4.26
 
NOTE
Don’t worry; your z-space nudging skills aren’t obsolete. Just like layers in the Timeline, the order of these connections
cannot be animated. A time will come when you want a layer to initially appear in front and then move behind. For
example, a character running around a boulder: he runs in front, runs behind and then comes around in front again. In a
scene like this, you’ll nudge that character, or boulder, forward and back in z-space.
MODULE BUTTONS
You may have already found them by clicking around, but each module has two or more clickable buttons. Each of these is
listed below.
Module/Layer Properties – as you’ve already seen, the yellow box (A in Figure 4.27) opens the Layer Properties in
a separate window. This is the same window that opens when you double-click a Timeline layer. If you have your
Layer Properties panel docked and open in your workspace though, you may never need to click the yellow box.
Preview – the dark triangular arrow on the left side of a module (B in Figure 4.27) expands a thumbnail preview of
the art on that layer. As shown in the face hierarchy screenshots, you can expand a module preview for Drawing,
Group and Composite layers. If you expand a Group or Composite module, the thumbnail preview will display
everything contained within. But be warned that a large network with all thumbnails displayed may slow down your
computer.
Enter Group – Group modules have a second triangular arrow button (C in Figure 4.27) that, when clicked, takes you
inside that Group.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
4.27
ADDING AND DELETING MODULES
When you add Timeline layers, they automatically appear as modules in the Network. Another way to add modules is via the
Module Library, which we’ll talk about in just a moment.
To delete any module, you only need to select it and use your keyboard’s [Delete] key. For certain modules there will be no
confirmation, but for others, such as Drawing layers containing drawings and animation, you’ll get a popup warning (Figure
4.28) that you’re about to delete them, along with a choice to keep or delete them from the scene file directories.
4.28
THE MODULE LIBRARY
While Animate users access effects through a Timeline menu, you’ll be using the Module Library. This panel is designed to
work hand-in-hand with the Network View; therefore, they should be in separate panels so you can drag effects from the
Module Library into your Network.
4.29
What is immediately obvious is that the Module Library is conveniently organised into several tabbed categories. You can
even create your own tab by choosing New Category from the panel menu 
.
FAVOURITES
For effects that you use a lot, you’ll want to add them to your Favourites tab for quick access. The Favourites tab is already
populated with a few frequently used modules. You can remove any of these using the [Delete] key, if you don’t think you
need them. Don’t worry; you can always add them back later. In the following exercise we’ll add some others.
MODULE LIBRARY EXERCISE 1 FAVOURITES
On the various Module Library tabs, modules are listed in alphabetical order. Your most frequently used effects may be far
down the list, like Tone and Transparency, which are way down at the bottom of the Filters tab‥
In the Module Library, go to the All Modules tab.
Scroll all the way down to find the Tone module.
Drag and drop the icon onto the Favourites tab (Figure 4.30).

> 4.
•
•
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
4.30
 
NOTE
Depending on how narrow your Module Library panel is, you may not be able to see the Favourites tab. In this case you
can shuffle along the tabs using the horizontal arrows (Figure 4.31).
 
4.31
I always have my Module Library docked with the Timeline (Figure 4.32), because you rarely need both open at the same
time, and I find it’s much easier to find things in a wide Module Library.
4.32
Add the following modules to your Favourites tab:
From the Filters tab – Blur Directional, Blur Variable, Brightness Contrast, Gradient, Highlight, Matte Blur,
Refract, Shadow.
From the Move tab – Apply Image Transform.
Browsing the other tabs, you may see modules that you recognise. For example, on the Move tab, you have your Camera,
Quadmap and Peg modules. Dragging these into your network and connecting them up is quick and easy as you’ll see next.
MODULE LIBRARY EXERCISE 2 ADDING MODULES TO THE NETWORK
Make sure your Module Library and Network View are both open.
In the Module Library, go to your Favourites tab.
Drag a Camera and a Peg into your Network and position the Peg above the Camera.
From the bottom (output) port of the Peg module, drag the cable and plug it into the top (input) port of the Camera
(Figure 4.33).
Click the yellow properties box of the Peg layer and rename it ‘Camera-Peg.
Close the Layer Properties window.

4.33
In the Timeline now, you’ll see those layers have been added.
After adding effects to your Favourites tab, there’s no need to save them. They’re automatically saved to your preferences
and are available for use in other scenes.
ORGANISING THE NETWORK
The easiest way to add Drawing layers is with the Add Drawing 
 Timeline button, or to press [Ctrl/ R] in the Timeline or
Network. As you do this, those new modules are automatically added to the Network. However, they’re added at the centre
of the Network View. Quite often, after adding many layers in the Timeline, you may switch over to the Network View to
find a multitude of layer modules all clustered at the centre.
4.34
It’s a tangled nightmare. You could spend time dragging and positioning all of your modules so the network is readable, but
there’s an automatic process that can do it for you with the click of a button. In fact, there are two buttons!
The first button (marked A in Figure 4.35) orders your Network upwards. You select a module at the bottom of the Network
(the main Composite, Write or Display module will do) and then click this button.
4.35
You have a few spacing values to play with, but generally you can simply click ‘OK’ and everything above the selected
module is shuffled and spaced out nice and evenly.
4.36
 
NOTE

I like a compact network, so my settings are as shown in Figure 4.37.
4.37
The second button, marked B in Figure 4.35, orders the Network downwards. Select a module at the top, click this button,
then after OK on the popup window, everything below it is ordered.
Whether you use upward, downward or specific spacing values will depend on how you use it and how neat you like to keep
your networks. It’s a huge time-saver if you’re working on files from colleagues who don’t keep their networks tidy.
EFFECTS
Between now and the end of the chapter, we’ll cover many effects. In Animate Pro there are
more than 50 effects; in Harmony, more than 100. We don’t have the page space to cover them
all in this chapter, so we’ll be looking at a number of the most common and useful.
First up, we’ll look at the Glow effect in depth to get a feel for how effects are generally
applied and controlled. Thereafter, we’ll be relatively brief with the other effects, unless
specifics are necessary.
We’ll be controlling these effects via the Layer Properties panel and sometimes the Timeline’s
Data View. Depending on the effect, there will be a number of options and parameters to
adjust. Some of these will be common to a range of effects, while others will be unique to a
particular effect.
For most of the exercises in this chapter you’ll do a lot of work in the Layer Properties panel,

so open it up and dock it somewhere within easy reach.
APPLYING THE EFFECTS
From here on, I’ll assume you know how to apply the effects in the Toon Boom program you’re
using. That is, if you’re using Animate, you’ll be applying your effects using the menu in the
Timeline (see page 290 and Figure 4.38). If you use Animate Pro or Harmony you’ll add the
effect by dragging it from the Module Library into the Network (see page 304 and Figure 4.39).
4.38 
Animate - Effects in the Timeline
4.39 
Animate Pro and Harmony - Effects in the Network
In Animate Pro and Harmony, there may be additional steps listed for any effect that might have
special connecting instructions, but we’ll cover those as we come to them.
MATTE EFFECTS

> 1.
4.40
A number of effects require additional art to act as a matte, so let’s look at them first. For some
of these you can duplicate your animation and use it as the matte, while others may need a
separate layer of art or animation created especially.
GLOW
Let’s start with the Glow effect. We’ve already seen it in action back in the previous chapter on
the lightning example. The steps for this effect will be very similar to most other effects
covered in the coming pages.
4.41
> EFFECTS EXERCISE 1 
  GLOW
In the download files for this chapter, open the effects_glow scene. If you prefer, you
might like to use your fireball scene.
A Glow needs a shape or matte. You could create a new layer and draw a dedicated Glow
matte, but as we’ve already seen, it’s often easier and quicker to reuse existing art, especially

> 2.
> 3.
with animated things like lightning or, in this case, fire. We’ll use the fireball and all its flame
animation as the glow matte.
4.42
Prepare the glow matte:
Animate – in the Timeline, clone the fireball layer (Right-click → Clone Selected Layers)
and rename it ‘fireballClone’ (Figure 4.43).
Animate Pro and Harmony – in the Network, drag a second cable from the fireball
module and plug it into the main Composite (Figure 4.44).
Using what you now know about applying effects, add a Glow effect to your fireball
clone.
Animate – select the Glow from the Timeline’s  → Effect menu and then drag the
fireballClone layer onto the Glow layer (Figure 4.45).
Animate Pro and Harmony – drag the Glow module from the Module Library
into the Network (Figure 4.46). Once it’s in the Network View, hold down [Alt] and drag it
onto the cable to connect it under the fireball module.
4.43

4.44
4.45
4.46

> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
4.47
Now that your glow is applied, you can control its values to get the look you want. The following steps are the same for
Animate, Animate Pro and Harmony.
Ensuring the Glow layer (in the Timeline) or Glow module (in the Network) is selected,
open the Layer Properties panel to see its parameters.
Enter a blur Radius value of about 25 and give it a suitable colour
At the bottom left of the Camera View, activate the Render View by clicking the 
button.
To make the Render automatically update when you change these values, ensure Auto-
Render is turned on at the bottom-left of the Camera View.
NOTE
In the future, when you’re working in complex scenes with lots of effects, the program may
slow down significantly. One reason may be that you still have Auto-Render turned on and
it’s rerendering in the background each time you make changes, even small ones. You can
always turn it off via this little menu (see Figure 4.48) and only turn it on when you need it.
Play with more settings and values to get a glow you’re happy with. Be sure to try out

> 9.
> 10.
the ‘Directional’ blur (as opposed to the default Radial), which is useful for giving the
fireball an interesting motion effect.
Switch out of the Render View and back to the Camera View by clicking the OpenGL 
button at the bottom-left of the Camera View.
4.48
If your fireball layer is underneath the Glow, any internal fireball detail may be obscured. This
may not be such a big deal for certain things, like a moon, electricity or a magical effect. For a
glowing character, though, you may need to put the glow layers behind so as not to obscure
features and other linework. As you can see in Figure 4.49, when this particular glow is in
front of the character, it flares brightly, obscuring his features. It works much better behind.
To move the Glow behind or in front of the fireball:
Animate – in the Timeline, move the fireball layer above, or below the Glow layers.
Animate Pro and Harmony – in the Network view, drag the Glow connection to the left
or right of the fireball connection.
4.49
Finally, you may find that the glow is weak, even at full alpha settings. Higher blur values will
also soften it considerably. To strengthen a glow:
Animate – double the strength by simply duplicating the entire Glow hierarchy (Figure

4.50).
Animate Pro and Harmony – drag a second connection from the Glow module into the
Composite module (Figure 4.51). You can go crazy with this and drag many connections as you
like, if you want a really intense glow.
4.50
4.51
SHADOW
To make a shadow, you first create a shadow matte. This matte can take any shape you like. It
can be a fully animated silhouette, or a shapeless blob of darkness at the character’s feet. The
latter is the simplest, so that’s what we’ll do in this exercise.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
4.52
> Effects Exercise 2 
  Shadow
In this exercise, we’ll create a ‘drop shadow’ underneath a creature. The steps in this exercise
are specific to the provided file, though you should be able to follow along with your own, if
you prefer.
Open effects_shadow scene from the chapter files.
Create a new layer, rename it ‘dropShad’ and ensure it is below the creature layer
(Figure 4.53).
On the new dropShad layer, using bright green paint, draw the creature’s shadow (Figure
4.54).
You’re right: bright green is an odd colour for a shadow. In fact, you can use any colour you
like. Green is just for the purpose of demonstration and I’ll clear that up just ahead in step 5.
Add and connect the Shadow effect to your dropShad art:
Animate – with the  → Effect menu, add a Shadow layer, and then drag the dropShad
layer onto the Shadow layer (Figure 4.55).
Animate Pro and Harmony – Drag a Shadow module from the Module Library into the
Network view. Hold [Alt] and drag the Shadow module to connect underneath the dropShad
layer (Figure 4.56).
4.53

> 5.
4.54
4.55
4.56
Immediately you’ll notice that the shadow has turned light grey. This is the default colour for a
Shadow effect and it ignores whatever colour you used for the artwork.
In the Layer Properties panel, adjust the Shadow parameters to your liking, including the
Shadow colour. Experiment with different alpha and Radial blur values.
4.57
Remember to switch to Render View  so you can see the changes update as you make them.

> 6.
Save your scene if you wish to keep it for later.
TIP
In the Shadow layer properties, you could try out the Directional blur. This may be useful if
you find an ordinary Radial blur isn’t matching the ground plane, or otherwise doesn’t look
natural.
ANIMATE PRO & HARMONY ONLY
Generally you would apply a Peg to offset a clone’s position. However, there is a module ahead that was designed
specifically for offsetting a layer.
Just as you cloned the fireball to use as a Glow matte, you could clone the creature to use as a
Shadow matte. The creature and its shadow would occupy the same space though, so the
shadow would need repositioning as well as some distortion with a Quadmap.
TONE
Sometimes also called a body shadow or self-shadow, a tone is the dark, shadowy side of a
character or scene element. Tones can be simple, complex or anywhere in between.
The simplest tones may be little more than a few broad stripes of shadow across the face, torso
and limbs; while complex tones may be much finer, with hair, eyebrow and nose shadows on
the face and wrinkle shadows on clothing.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
4.58
Just like the glow and shadow, a tone requires a matte input. A hand-drawn matte layer has the
best results in terms of precision and quality but is usually time-consuming. Even so, for the
sake of using the Tone module for its intended purpose, let’s learn the hand-drawn matte
method.
> Effects Exercise 3 
  TONE
Open the effects_tone scene from the chapter files.
In the Timeline, use the  button to create a new ordinary Drawing layer and name it
‘toneMatte’.
On this new layer, using a solid colour for the matte artwork, draw the line of shadow
(see A in Figure 4.59).
Before they can be filled with colour, the shadow areas need to be closed. You can do this by
looping outside the character silhouette, because the tone only affects the character. Everything
outside the silhouette will be cut off automatically.
Close off the shadow areas (B in Figure 4.59) and fill them with colour (C).
Add a tone to the scene:
Animate – in the Timeline’s  → Effect menu, select Tone.
Animate Pro and Harmony – from the Module Library → Favourites tab, find the Tone
module and drag it into the Network. You’ll also find it on the Filters tab, in case you didn’t
add it to your Favourites back on page 303.

> 6.
Apply the Tone to the creature:
Animate – In the Timeline, drag the creature layer onto the Tone layer, and then drag your
new toneMatte layer into the Mask group (Figure 4.60).
Animate Pro and Harmony – Connect the creature module into the tone’s top-right input
port, and your toneMatte module into the tone’s top-left input port.
Finally plug the tone’s output port into the Composite. Unplug the existing creature connections
to the Composite so the creature is only connected to the Composite through the Tone module
as shown below.
4.59
4.60

> 7.
> 8.
4.61
Once connected, your tone artwork affects the character.
Switch to the Render view to see how the tone looks.
Adjust the various parameters in the Tone’s Layer Properties, such as blur Radius,
colour and alpha settings.
4.62
In the next exercise we’ll create the tone in a different way that requires no matte drawing.
> Effects Exercise 4 
  OFFSET TONE
In the previous exercise you saw how to create a tone effect using a dedicated hand-drawn
matte. This time we’ll use a clone of the creature layer. This is called an offset tone because

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
we offset the position of the clone. It’s a great time-saver and quite effective, though it may not
be suitable in all instances.
Open effects_offsetTone from the chapter files.
Create a clone of the creature layer and rename it ‘creatureClone’.
Add a tone effect to the Timeline (Animate) or Network (Animate Pro and Harmony).
Apply the tone to the clone:
Animate – in the Timeline, drag the creature into the Tone group, and the clone into the
Mask group (Figure 4.63).
Animate Pro and Harmony – Connect the clone to the Tone’s top-left input port (Figure
4.64).
In the Timeline or the Network view, select the creatureClone layer We’ll now offset it
from the creature.
Using the Translate tool [Alt 2] in the Camera View, move the tone slightly up and to the
left.
4.63
4.64

> 7.
4.65
4.66
Right now we have the tone taking up most of the character, with a thin edge of light on the
bottom right. This looks pretty cool and would suit the scene if the light was behind and below
the creature. However, for more of a daylight feel, we need to invert this effect.
Select the Tone layer or module, and open its Layer Properties and check the Invert
Matte option (Figure 4.66).
That’s all there is to the offset tone effect. While it’s quite limited, it can often quickly and
cheaply add quality to almost any scene.
HIGHLIGHT

> 1.
There will be no step-by-step exercise for the highlight because the process is identical to the
tone. Rather than an area of shadow, however, a highlight creates a light area.
To try this one out, follow the steps in both tone exercises, substituting a highlight in place of
the tone effect.
Some useful examples of this effect are: a low, flickering highlight for a fireside scene; a
bright, white highlight on a character lit by a flash of lightning; or perhaps some soft, blue
under-lighting in an underwater cavern. Figure 4.67 shows two uses of the highlight: the hand-
drawn matte (left) and the offset effect (right).
4.67
CUTTER
You could think of a Cutter as an invisibility cloak. It’s a mask of artwork that hides (or
reveals) a layer. If you use Animate, you saw how to apply masking in the previous chapter
with a rainy window scene and the balloon through the window project. In both scenes, you
created matte art especially for the purpose of cutting other layers.
> Effects Exercise 5 
  Cutter
In this exercise we’ll use the Cutter to create an old traditional effects animation trick called
the ‘scribble cel’. This clever technique added life to a water surface with a glistening effect,
using just two drawings.
Create a new scene file called scribbleCel with a resolution of your choice.

> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
In the Timeline, rename the default Drawing layer ‘scribble’ and using white paint in the
Camera View, draw some random scribble with the Brush tool (Figure 4.68).
Add a new drawing layer and call it ‘moonlight’.
On the moonlight layer, in any colour, paint a bunch of small dots and strokes
representing glints on a water surface, as shown in Figure 4.69.
4.68
4.69
We now have two layers of art, ready for the Cutter.
Add a Mask/Cutter to the scene:
Animate – from the Timeline’s  → Effects menu, choose Mask. Inside the Mask
hierarchy, rename the Mask group ‘Matte’ to avoid confusion with the following steps.
Animate Pro and Harmony – in the Module Library, from the Filter tab, drag a Cutter
into the Network.

> 6.
Set up the Mask/Cutter hierarchy:
Animate – drag the moonlight layer into the Matte group, and then drag the scribble layer
onto the Mask effect layer (Figure 4.70).
Animate Pro and Harmony – connect the modules as shown in Figure 4.71.
4.70
4.71

> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
> 10.
> 11.
> 12.
•
•
•
•
4.72
So now the scribble is being cut by the moonlight, but for this particular effect we actually want it revealed by the moonlight;
we want the scribble visible only through the glints. To do that, we need to invert the effect.
Go into the Mask/Cutter’s Layer Properties and turn Invert on with the checkbox (Figure
4.72). The scribble should mostly disappear from the Camera View, visible only where
the moonlight glints are.
Extend the exposure of both your scribble and moonlight layers to the end of the scene.
In the Timeline, select the scribble layer and then equip yourself with the Translate tool
[Alt 2].
Ensure Animate mode is on, and in the Camera View, drag the scribble cel upward
slightly.
Even before it is keyframed, you may already see this remarkable effect in action. It’s easy to
see how it works just moving the scribble around in the Camera View. The scribble is only
revealed through the moonlight glints and when panned very slowly, adds this subtle glistening
surface effect with just two drawings.
Move the playhead to the end of the scene, then using the Translate tool, drag the
scribble downward slightly (Figure 4.73).
Finally, play the scene with [Shift Enter] to watch the scribble cel in action.
4.73
I’ve found that this effect works best when the movement is slow and subtle, but how it moves
is entirely up to you. Also, experiment with different designs and animation for both the
scribble and glint mattes. Here are some things for your experiment list:
A morphing matte layer.
A rotating scribble cel.
A mask/cutter painted with alpha gradients instead of solid colours.
A slightly blurred scribble layer for a more subtle glint effect.

•
•
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
Cutters have innumerable applications, from obvious cutter effects, to some cool, not-so-
obvious tricks, like the scribble cel.
The following matte effects are found in Animate Pro and Harmony only. If you have Animate,
this marks the end of the matte effects section and you should skip to the filter effects section
starting on page 329.
ANIMATE PRO & HARMONY ONLY
REFRACT
A Refract module lets you create interesting warp effects, such as ‘heat haze’ and water reflections. Even though a heat
haze is invisible, it bends light so the background appears to warp and shimmer. You’ve probably seen this for yourself on a
highway in summer where distant objects appear fragmented at ground level.
 
 
4.74
EFFECTS EXERCISE 6 REFRACT
In this exercise you’ll make a simple heat haze effect using the Refract module. Just like the other matte effects, this effect
module requires two inputs:
a layer to be warped;
an art layer to do the warping.
Open up effects_refract from the chapter files.
In the Timeline, above the background layer Group, create a new layer called ‘warp’ (Figure 4.75).
Select the Brush tool [Alt B] and choose white paint from the colour panel.
On your new warp layer, paint some strokes to act as the heat haze matte. I’ve gone with some swirly lines to loosely

> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
illustrate clouds of heat (Figure 4.76).
From the Module Library’s Filters tab, drag a Refract module into the Network and plug it into the main Composite.
Disconnect your warp module from the Composite and plug it into the top-left input port of the Refract module.
4.75
 
4.76
We want this effect to warp the entire background. I’ve grouped all the background layers so we can run a single cable into
the Refract input. You could have done the same thing by adding a Composite module for all the background layers. You’ll
learn more about Groups up ahead, starting on page 343.
Disconnect the background Group from the Composite and plug it into the top-right input port of the Refract module
(Figure 4.77).
If connected as shown, the warp art has vanished from the scene. Don’t worry, it’s still there; it’s just an invisible matte now.
We’re now ready to work on the Refract settings.
With the Refract module selected in the Network, or Timeline, open the Layer Properties panel to see the settings
(Figure 4.78).
4.77
 

> 9.
> 10.
> 11.
> 12.
> 13.
4.78
Intensity and Height are the two values that control a Refract effect, using your warp matte. Note also that these values can
be animated using function curves. Let’s switch to Render Mode so we can watch the effect updating as these parameters
are adjusted.
Switch to Render mode using the 
 button at the bottom left of the Camera View.
With its default settings, you may already be able to see the Refract working in the scene. It’s pretty hard-edged at the
moment but we’ll soften it in the next steps.
In the Refract layer properties, set both the intensity and height to 10.
Because you have Auto-Render activated, the frame should rerender each time you update the values. Remember that Auto-
Render is turned on in the bottom left of the Camera and Render views.
NOTE
There’s a good reason that the provided scene file is at half HD resolution (960 × 540). Refract is a heavy effect. It takes
significantly more processing power to calculate and render than simpler ones like Shadow and Glow. For this reason,
frames will take longer to render; the render time of each frame depends on the resolution of the movie, the complexity of
your scene and the power of your computer.
Once the frame rerenders and the new values have taken effect, it’s still looking hard-edged. The solution is to soften the
warp layer by blurring it.
From the Module Library, drag a Blur module into the Network.
Holding down [Alt], connect it underneath your warp module.
In the Blur properties, enter a Radius value of 5 (Figure 4.79).
4.79
Your heat haze has been softened by blurring the warp art. Let’s take a quick look at how that’s working before we move on

> 14.
> 15.
> 16.
> 17.
to rendering the scene.
In the Network view, drag a second output cable from the Blur module and plug it into the Composite above
everything else (far left). The blurred warp art should now be showing in the Render view.
4.80
 
4.81
If you look carefully at the rendered image, you may see where the background is being distorted by the warp art. This
illustrates how blur makes the warp transition gradual, rather than hard-edged.
Disconnect the second cable from the Blur module. The blurred warp art should disappear from the scene leaving just
the warp through a single cable connection.
Switching back to the Camera View, go ahead and animate a few frames of the warp clouds. You might consider using
morphing, Peg or frame-by-frame animation on the warp layer.
In the Playback toolbar, select Render and Play.
4.82
 

NOTE
Rendering may take a minute or two, depending on the speed of your computer. Refraction is one of the heavier effects, so
don’t be alarmed if it does take a few minutes even for a simple scene like this, especially if you have animated those Blur
and Refract values and even more so if your scene resolution is high.
 
4.83
When rendering is complete, Toon Boom Play opens. Once the frames are loaded, you can play the preview using the
playback controls at the bottom of the Play window.
4.84
If you’re not quite satisfied with the heat haze effect, close the Play window and tweak those values before rerendering.
NOTE
With a render preview, Toon Boom Play generates the frames, storing them in the scene’s frames directory. Each time you
run a new render preview, you’ll receive a warning that your previous preview will be overwritten (Figure 4.85).
 
4.85
In most cases like this, it’s safe to click ‘Yes. There will be some more on this subject in the Rendering chapter.
VARIABLE BLUR
This filter effect uses white and black values from a matte layer. Here, transparency = black, Either can be used, because
both are essentially an absence of white.

4.86
With a white and black/transparent matte layer, you can input values into the layer properties, as well as animate those over
time.
The scene in Figure 4.87 has a matte that uses white and transparency values to blur the scene. As shown in the Variable-
Blur properties (Figure 4.86), the white part of the matte will apply a blur of 8. Then as the gradient becomes more
transparent, it applies less blur until finally it arrives at 0. Because of the way the matte drawing was created for Figure 4.88,
it gives field depth, with the foreground and background blurred, while the pencil is in sharp focus.
4.87
The Network for a Variable Blur is similar to the Refract network (see previous exercise). Into the Variable-Blur’s top-left
port, the white gradient matte is connected. In the top-right port, the rest of the scene is connected.
4.88
As well as this kind of field depth effect, variable blurs are useful in many other ways, particularly in the area of animated
effects, like light, smoke, water and so on.

4.89
FILTER EFFECTS
4.90
The filter effects in this section are quick and easy to apply because they require no matte to
control the effect. A filter merely affects the layer with the values it is given. For example, a
Blur filter will simply apply blur to the entirety of a layer. No fuss.
There isn’t room to cover all filter effects, so those covered here are the seven most common.
Let’s take care of these in order of how frequently you might use them.
TRANSPARENCY
In any situation where you need something to fade on or off you’d animate the Transparency
effect. As shown in Figure 4.91, it’s not only useful for animated fades. A ‘local’ (static)
transparency value comes in handy for things like reflections, shadows and much more.

4.91
With a Transparency layer or module selected, the Layer Properties panel has a Transparency
input field for a value between 0 and 100 (Figure 4.92). A low value (e.g., 20) is slightly
transparent, while a higher value (e.g., 80) is mostly transparent. 100 therefore is completely
transparent.
4.92
This value can also be animated for fading effects, like titles and credits or a dissipating dust
cloud (Figure 4.93).
4.93
BLURS
Blurring is often used for depth effects, like blurring a foreground element to make it appear
closer. Directional blur in particular is very useful for showing motion, for example, a fast-
moving character or object.

Let’s not forget how vital blurs are for animated effects too. Dust and smoke, for example, are
given realism with some animated blur; starting the scene with a sharp-edged, dense cloud and
gradually blurring more and more as the cloud expands, thins and dissipates.
If you’re using Animate Pro or Harmony, you’ve already seen the Variable blur back on page
328. The remaining blurs, available in all three programs, are Radial, Directional and Motion.
Harmony users also have a number of new blurs that were added in Harmony 10.3. They are
Box, Gaussian, Zoom and Spin. Let’s look at all of these now.
4.94
RADIAL BLUR (LEGACY)
Radial blur is the basic depth blur that you would use in everyday focal effects. For example,
darkened foreground foliage framing the scene always looks nice with a bit of Radial blur.
4.95 
Image by A. Phillips for Clear Vision 3, courtesy of Dan Erhard Olsson.
In Animate, this effect is simply called Blur, but in Animate Pro and Harmony, you’ll find it in

> 1.
the Module Library with the name Blur-Radial.
In Harmony 10.3 powerful new radial blurs were introduced (starting on page 337), so this one
is considered obsolete. In the Harmony 10.3 module library it’s called Blur-Radial-Legacy.
In the Layer Properties, you simply increase the Radius value for more blur, or decrease it for
less. Watch the blur update in the Render View as you experiment with different values.
4.96
> EFFECTS EXERCISE 7 
  RADIAL BLUR (LEGACY)
To apply a Radial blur to any drawing layer:
Animate – from the Timeline’s  menu, choose Effect → Blur. In the Timeline, drag your
drawing layer onto the Blur layer. Animate the values using the Timeline’s Data view.
Animate Pro and Harmony – from the Module Library’s Filter tab, drag the Radial Blur
into the Network. Then, holding down the [Alt] key, drag it onto your drawing’s cable to
connect it just underneath. Adjust the values either in the Timeline Data view, or in the Blur
module’s Layer Properties.
4.97

> 1.
> 2.
4.98
DIRECTIONAL BLUR
When you use blur to show movement, you can only get so far with the standard fuzzy radial
blur. With ordinary radial blur, an object flying through the air looks very much like… well, a
blurry object flying through the air!
With a Directional blur you can make a drawing appear smeared or streaked in motion, for a
bit of added realism.
4.99
> Effects Exercise 8 
  Directional Blur
In this exercise we’ll drop a rock through the scene and you’ll apply a directional blur.
Incidentally, this needn’t necessarily be a rock; anything with some weight will do. It can be a
ball, a briefcase or a whole person, if you like.
On a new layer with drawing tools of your choice, draw a rock and attach it to a Peg.
Apply the Directional Blur to the rock:
Animate – select Directional Blur from the Timeline’s Effect menu and drag the rock layer
onto it.
Animate Pro and Harmony – from the Module Library’s Filter tab, drag a Directional
Blur into the Network. Connect it to the rock layer’s cable, just underneath (Figure 4.100).

> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
In the Timeline or the Network View, select the Directional Blur and open the Layer
Properties panel.
In the Radius field, type in 25. Note the Angle field shows 0 by default.
Switch to the Render View and see how your rock looks with a blur value of 25.
4.100
4.101
The default angle is 0° which makes a horizontal blur. The right edge is not blurred which can
be useful in some effects (e.g., fire), but in this case we want to blur both edges, as well as
make the blur angle vertical.

> 6.
NOTE
In Toon Boom effects, angles start at 0° to the left, then go counterclockwise to 90°
downwards, 180° to the right and 270° upwards.
 
4.102
You may also enter negative values. For example −45° is the same as entering 315°. Figure
4.102 shows these angle values, which includes the directional blurs in the tone, highlight
and glow effects.
Using Figure 4.102 as reference, you can see that an upward blur is 270°, so enter that
into the Directional blur’s Angle field.
The hard bottom edge may work for this particular scene and other motion, but in live action
film, objects are realistically blurred both ways, in line with the direction of travel.

> 7.
4.103
Turn on Ignore Alpha by checking its checkbox (Figure 4.103).
In the Angle field you can enter negative or positive values between 0 and 359, depending on
what your scene requires. This value can also be animated, if you need it to change direction
over time. For example: an object thrown in an arc might initially have a 45° directional blur
that flattens to 0° at the top of the arc and, as it falls, rolls around to a value of −45°.
MOTION BLUR
This module simulates a motion blur by creating a trail of faded images. Suppose you have a
superhero flying over the city skyline, The superhero is attached to a Peg and zooms across the
scene.
4.104
NOTE
The Motion blur effect does not work on frame-by-frame animation It applies the motion
trail based on Peg motion.
The Motion blur properties allow control for the number of frames, number of samples (how
many images in the trail), fall-off rate and intensity.

4.105
While the effect does have a port for matte input (in case you’d like to use a custom shape for
the trail) no matte is necessary for a simple trail effect.
4.106
HARMONY ONLY
NEW BLURS IN HARMONY 10.3
The new blurs introduced in Harmony 10.3 open up a world of new effects possibilities and supersede the standard Radial
and Directional blurs. Each of these outlined below also has a matte input (left port) if you want to confine or mask the blur
effect, just as you would with a cutter module.
4.107
BOX BLUR

•
•
•
This works by separately blurring horizontally (X) and vertically (Y), creating a boxy blur effect. The X and Y parameters are
locked to take a single value, but, using the Directional checkbox, may be unlocked to take separate values. For example,
Length:0 and Width:12 creates a horizontal blur. Additionally, you can input an angle value to suit the blur direction you need,
and check the Bi-directional checkbox to make the blur go both ways.
GAUSSIAN BLUR
This is a smoother, stronger and all round more attractive blur. Just like the Box blur, you can use the Directional checkbox to
separate the horizontal and vertical parameters, add an angle value for directional blur effects, and make the effect bi-
directional.
RADIAL
The amazing new type of Radial blur has two main modes: zoom and spin, but also has halfway modes for a twist blur effect.
These are selected as preset buttons, or a custom field that you can animate with a function curve!
Zoom blur works by blurring towards, or away from, a point.
Spin blur works by blurring around a point.
Twist blur is a combination of zoom and spin.
4.108
By default the blur is at the centre of the scene, but chances are you’ll need to centre it at the pivot of your spinning object;
for example, the middle of a wheel (Figure 4.109).
4.109
The centre point is revealed by first selecting the Radial blur module, then in the Camera View pressing [Shift F11] or via the
menu Show → Control. It appears as a small red dot that you can drag into position.
BRIGHTNESS CONTRAST
With this effect you can make a drawing layer bright, dark, dull or vivid. In Animate Pro and
Harmony, you’ll find Brightness Contrast on the Module Library’s Filter tab, as well as the
Plugins tab.

For both Brightness and Contrast, the value of zero means the colours are unchanged. The
Brightness value can be raised to a maximum of 255 and a minimum of −255. The Contrast
however requires values between 100 and −100. Anything outside that range may result in
weird colours.
4.110
While the Brightness value makes the difference between lightness and darkness, the Contrast
value exaggerates (positive values) or reduces (negative values) that difference.
4.111
COLOUR OVERRIDE
This effect lets you alter the colours of drawing layers without repainting them. It means you
can take a character painted in ordinary day palette and apply a Colour Override with, say, an
underwater palette.

4.112
Just like all other effects, you attach a drawing layer to the Colour Override in the following
ways:
Animate – Drag your drawing layer onto the effect layer (Figure 4.113).
Animate Pro and Harmony – the Colour Override module has three input ports. Plug the
drawing layer into the top right port. For a standard colour override, the other ports need no
input (Figure 4.114).
4.113

4.114
At first, the Colour Override interface in the Layer Properties panel may seem a little
overwhelming, but we can start by minimising the palette sections leaving just the colour
sections.
For the colours you want to override, drag them into the Colour Overrides pane.
4.115
In the Colour Overrides pane, double-click a colour swatch (A in Figure 4.116) and then use
the Colour Picker to change it. Repeat this for each colour you want to override.

4.116
If you’d like to use the same override for this character in other scenes, it might be worth
renaming the module (B in Figure 4.116) so you can find it later and import it into other scenes.
Saving and importing templates will be covered in Appendix A.
NOTE
The Colour Override only works on .tvg layers (the native format for drawings created and
painted in Toon Boom). This means you cannot use Colour Override on an imported image;
say, a .jpg or .png.
COLOUR SCALE
Suppose your project has a nightmare sequence where the scene starts in normal colours but
gradually becomes blood red. To animate this transition, you can use the Colour Scale module
to increase the Red channel, or animate the Hue value.

•
•
4.117
In the RGBA-HSV fields of the Colour Scale properties, the channel fields each have a default
value of 1 which indicates that the colour is unchanged.
Generally you’ll work with numbers between 0 and 2. For example, a Red value of 0.1 is an
extremely small amount of red, while a value of 1.8 is approaching maximum red.
There are a couple of quirks worth mentioning here.
An Alpha of 1 is 100% opaque, so anything over 1 is pointless; you can’t get more
opaque than that.
Hue is a looping value. It starts at 0 and as you increase it, you eventually return to the
same hue as the 0 value. It works on the principle that a colour wheel starts at red, goes
through the spectrum and returns to red. That said, Hue takes your artwork colour and
applies the value to its current position. So for example if you have a blue sky and apply
a 0.5 hue, it will likely result in the orange-yellow range. Again, think in terms of a
colour wheel.
You can always set each of these fields back to 1 if your experiment starts getting away from
you.

4.118 
Image by A. Phillips for Clear Vision 3, courtesy of Dan Erhard Olsson.
In Appendix A, you’ll see ways to alter an entire colour palette in just a few clicks and slides,
but using Colour Scale you can very easily disable, or delete the module to return to normal
scene colours. Additionally, you can save a Colour Scale module and its settings and import it
into any scene. Again, that’s covered in Appendix A.
ANIMATE PRO & HARMONY ONLY
OTHER USEFUL MODULES
Not all effects and modules in the library can be classified as matte effects and filters. Now let’s look at some really
important modules that you’ll find useful across a wide range of tasks.
THE GROUP MODULE
A Group is a module containing other modules; a network within the Network. You place modules into a Group in order to
organise the Network and keep things tidy. For example, in a background hierarchy, you might have a sky Group that contains
sky, stars, clouds, and moon.
First, it’s best to organise these layers into sets, each with their own Composite (see Figure 4.119), to help you organise the
scene better.

4.119
The easiest way to group modules is to select each set, including their Composite module (to multiple-select, drag a selection
around modules, or [Ctrl]-click them one-by-one) and then press [Ctrl/ G]. In Figure 4.120, each set of layers has been
grouped and renamed. You can enter a Group by [Shift]-clicking it, or simply clicking the module’s right-most triangular
button.
4.120
 
NOTE
There’s a handy keyboard shortcut for grouping a set of modules that also automatically inserts a Composite module.
Multi-select all the layers you want to group and then press [Ctrl/ Shift G]. In the Network you’ll find the layers have been
grouped and inside each group, you’ll find them all plugged into a Composite module – often it’s somewhat untidy in there,
so you may need to shuffle things around a bit, or use the Order Network buttons (see page 305).
To leave a Group, click the word ‘Top’ in the bottom left of the Network view to go back to the top Network. New in
Harmony 10.3, when inside a Group, a prominent, blue triangular button appears at the top of the Network. You also can click
this to leave the Group.

4.121
In the Timeline, all layers within a group will appear nested under the Group layer. Like any hierarchy, the Group itself can be
expanded and collapsed with the triangular button and the expand + and collapse − icons on the Group layer.
4.122
The best thing about all of this is that you can attach your Group to a Peg, or plug effects in underneath it, so the Group can
be controlled as a single element.
APPLY IMAGE TRANSFORM
This is a special ‘offset’ module particularly useful for matte effects because it makes cloning layers unnecessary. It’s called
Apply-Image-Transformation, and you’ll find it in the Module Library on the Move tab.
4.123
The name doesn’t exactly roll off the tongue but the Apply-Image-Transform module is exceptionally useful, especially in
complex scenes where many duplicates or clones could get heavy and messy.
IMAGE TRANSFORM EXERCISE 1 OFFSET AND SHADOW

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
Follow along with a scene of your choice. In the following steps, I’m reusing the creature shadow exercise scene file from
back on page 312.
To use the Apply Image Transformation module with your animation (see Figure 4.124):
Drag a second cable from the animation into the input port of the Apply-Image-Trans-form module. Then connect it to
the Composite (A).
Run the Apply-Image-Transform output cable through a Shadow module (B).
4.124
Excellent! There are now two creature inputs; one of which is a shadow that needs offsetting.
Connect a Peg to the top-left input port of the Apply-Image-Transform module (C). Don’t worry about the middle input
port at all here.
Finally, select the Peg you just added, go to the Camera View and, using the Translate tool [Alt 2], move the Shadow
into place.
This same process can be used for tones or highlights; any matte effect where you might otherwise use a clone or duplicate.
Figure 4.125 shows the Apply Image Transform setup for an offset tone effect.
4.125
HARMONY ONLY
PARTICLE EFFECTS

 
4.126
A completely separate book could be written on all there is to learn about Particles. In this section we’ll just cover some
basics by creating a simple Particle system that generates snowflakes.
If you’d like to go beyond what’s written here, I recommend turning to the [F1] Help files for Particle reference. This will
help you understand the purpose of each module and its controls.
There are endless applications for Particle effects in any given project. From a snowy blizzard, a smashing pane of glass, a
swarm of insects or feathers in a pillow fight.
Traditionally, hand-drawn Particle effects are among the most time-consuming of all animated effects in 2D. Before
advances in technology made particle simulations possible, all of these had been meticulously hand-drawn by skilled effects
animators.
4.127
Because particles generally have individual movement and behaviour, though they may be part of a larger cloud or swarm,
each one needs individual attention in animation. Imagine a 2D marble; essentially it’s just a circle. Ten marbles bouncing on a
hard surface will each require careful timing and trajectories, ensuring it moves realistically. Now imagine a scene with a
bucket full of marbles spilled onto the floor and you can begin to see why these tasks are nowadays usually handled with
sprites and particle emitters. In the past, due to the sheer number of manual animation hours required, it would have been
madness to put such a scene into production.

4.128
Toon Boom’s particle systems make a wide range of effects possible that would otherwise take many hours, days, even
weeks of frame-by-frame, hand-drawn animation.
4.129
Like the network of drawing layers and effects with which you’re now familiar, a particle system is a net-work of modules
connected by cables. At first it may look confusing so it’ll help to know what the various modules are and how they affect the
particle system. Not all of them will be covered here, but the following will serve as an introduction.
FOUNDATION MODULES
Just like the network of an ordinary animated scene, there are a few ‘building blocks’ common to all particle systems. As a
beginner, it may be some time before you need to build a particle network from scratch, but when the time comes, these are
the three you’d start with, and build upon.
PARTICLE-SYSTEM-COMPOSITE
The Particle-System-Composite is just like the main scene Composite, only this one is especially for compositing particle
systems. It simply funnels all the information of the particle system and outputs as a single image.

4.130
PARTICLE-BAKER
Taking the composited particles, the Particle-Baker determines how many particles there will be, the quality and randomness
of the simulation, the number of Pre-Roll frames (we’ll use that in our snowfall exercise), and a few particle behaviours.
PARTICLE-VISUALIZER
With all the information read from the Particle-Baker, the system passes into the Particle-Visualizer module, which essentially
outputs the final result of the particle network. This module has two Peg inputs at the top: the top left for controlling the x and
y position; the top right controls the z position so for example, the particles can appear behind or in front of a character.
ACTION MODULES
Plugged into the Particle-Composite module, there will generally be a number of purple modules. These are the various
physics controls and emitters called action modules. Most of these tell the particles what to do and how to behave. While
there are several action modules, there’s one we need to know up front.
THE EMITTER
A fundamental piece of any particle system is the Sprite-Emitter. It defines the point from which the particles are ‘born’as
well as how they look and behave.

4.131
An Emitter requires two inputs: something to emit (e.g., snowflake art) and something to emit from (a region or point). An
example of particles being emitted from a point would be from a metal grinder shooting out sparks. An emitter region on the
other hand is like a sky, or a shower head; it’s a broad area from which water is emitted.
The Layer Properties for the Emitter let you control the number of particles emitted every frame, the rate at which they’re
emitted and when they should ‘die’, if at all. Don’t worry: when particles die, it’s very quick, they don’t feel a thing. They’re
simply snuffed out of existence. This is useful where you need particles to be removed once they go outside the scene border.
You don’t want to waste processing power on particles that you can’t see.
4.132
WHAT IS A SPRITE?
Under the hood of a particle system, each particle is a mathematical point; an infinitesimal speck visualised in the software as
a tiny placeholder dot.

4.133
Only when we replace the dot with images or animation does the particle effect really start to look interesting. A drawing or
layer of animation attached to the particle is called a sprite.
A simple example of an animated sprite would be a bee cycle with wing animation. This little bee clip can be attached to the
Emitter, so that every dot becomes a bee, forming a swarm.
4.134
The same can be done with static art. You can, for example, apply a static snowfake sprite to a particle system for a wintry

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
snowfall scene, as you’ll see in the upcoming exercises.
PARTICLE EXAMPLES
In Harmony you may rarely need to build a complete particle system from scratch. For most standard particle tasks, you can
drop one of the pre-built particle systems into the scene and tweak it according to your needs.
Suppose, for example, you need to create gentle snowfall. You could drop in the Rain particle system and alter the art and
physics, so each particle falls more gently, like snow. In these next exercises, we’ll do just that and learn more about particle
systems along the way.
4.135
PARTICLES EXERCISE 1 TURNING RAIN INTO SNOW
Rain is one of the pre-built particle examples and is a fairly ‘toony’ simulation. Let’s add that to a scene and tweak the
settings for a snowfall scene.
Create a new scene file called ‘snow, with half HD resolution (w960 × h540).
You won’t need the default Drawing layer, so delete it from the Timeline.
Open the Module Library and go to the Particle-Examples tab.
Drag the Rain example module into your Network and plug it into the main Composite.
Using the playback controls, watch the simulation play.
Even though this is a completely different scene to the one we want, we can use some of this simulation’s attributes in our
snow scene.
Stop the playback and look at the Network view.
The particle network is contained inside the Rain group, and there’s a Peg attached. Right away this tells us that the entire
particle system can be moved around by simply keyframing the Rain Peg.
In the Network view, go inside the Rain group and let’s see what makes up this system (Figure 4.136).

> 8.
> 9.
4.136
 
4.137
This network of cables and coloured nodes may be confusing at first, but we can break it down module by module and see
that each node controls a specific aspect of the system. Some of the names may be self-explanatory, for example, Velocity,
while others with names like Sink and 3D-Region will need some explanation. For now we’ll press on with the snowfall scene
and things will be explained as we encounter them. Remember, if you want to leave the Group, use the ‘Top’ link at the
bottom left of the Network view (see A in Figure 4.137).
In the Network view, inside the Rain group, select the Rain-Sprite module.
In the Timeline, press the [O] key a few times until the Rain-Sprite layer is revealed.
This Rain-Sprite module is the drawing layer that contains the raindrop art. In the Timeline you’ll see that it consists of three
frames, each with a different raindrop.

> 10.
> 11.
> 12.
> 13.
> 14.
> 15.
> 16.
4.138
In a particle system, frames can be used either as different particle states, or as particle animation. For example, you can
make six different snowflakes on six frames, so your snowfall has a variety of snowfake shapes. Alternatively you can have
six frames for a bee cycle that plays six frames of wing buzzing animation.
In our snowfall scene, we’re going to replace the three frames of raindrop art with three snowfakes, though you should feel
free to add as many as you like.
In the Drawing view, zoom in closer to the raindrop. If you can’t see it in the Drawing view, turn on the grid with [Ctrl/
′] and you’ll find the raindrop at the centre.
On frame 1, drag a selection around the raindrop art and press your [Delete] key.
In the raindrop’s place, draw your own snowf ake design about the same size as the raindrop. Turn on the Onionskin
tool if you need the raindrop sizes for reference.
4.139
You’ll notice in Figure 4.139 that I’ve drawn my snowfake in dark blue. Because you’re working in the Drawing view with a
white background, you’ll initially need to draw the snowfake in a dark colour, and then repaint it with white when you’re
done.
Repeat steps 11 and 12 to replace the other two raindrops on frames 2 and 3 with snowfakes.
If you’ve used a dark colour to draw your snowfakes, repaint all of them white now.
This is no longer a rain scene, but a snow scene. To avoid any confusion, now is a good time to rename the various parts of
this system.
Wherever you see the word Rain, replace it with Snow, as in Figure 4.140.
Finally, if you added more than three snowfakes, you’ll need to go to the Emitter proper ties and enter the new number
to Particle Type 1. For example, if you have seven frames of unique snowfakes, add the value 7 to the Particle Type 1
field.

> 17.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
Save your scene with [Ctrl/ S]
4.140
Now that you’ve replaced the raindrops with snowfakes, go back to the Camera View and use the playback controls to play
the simulation. 
PARTICLES EXERCISE 2 SNOWFALL SPEED
We’ve replaced all the raindrops with snowfakes, but it’s all falling way too fast. We need to play with some values and find a
number that works.
One of the ‘actions’(purple) in this system is a Velocity module. This one determines the speed of the particles, controlling
how far each one moves every frame.
In the Network view, select the Velocity module.
In the Layer Properties, we have X, Y and Z directions. The snow is falling down (Y-1) but it’s also falling slightly to the right
(X 0. 5). Let’s make it fall straight down.
In the Velocity module properties, set X to 0 (Figure 4.141).
Just below the Direction fields, in the Speed section, set the maximum to 0.05 (Figure 4.141).
Go to frame 1 and play the simulation.

> 1.
> 2.
4.141
Well, now we have a slight problem. The snow is falling slower, so it takes longer to arrive in the scene. In fact, snow doesn’t
even enter the scene until about frame 45. We’ll fix that in the next exercise.
PARTICLES EXERCISE 3 PARTICLE-BAKER
We don’t want the snow to start when the scene starts; we want it to appear as if it’s already snowing. For this we’ll add
some Pre-Roll frames. This calculates what the simulation would look like after a specified number of frames and makes
that the start position.
Select the Particle-Baker module and open its Layer Properties.
Change the number of Pre-Roll frames to a higher number. As shown in Figure 4.142, I’ve input 1000.
4.142
By adding a high number of Pre-Roll frames, it means that from the very first frame of the scene we’ll have a simulation
that’s well and truly in progress.
TIP
Slow effects like this tend to need more Pre-Roll frames to become established. If the intended effect is fast, however, like

> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 1.
> 2.
heavy rain, your particles will need fewer Pre-Roll frames. If we want the audience to see the beginning of an effect, for
example a burst of sparks from a magician’s wand, you’ll need no Pre-Roll frames at all.
I feel like there are far too many snowflakes in the snowfall simulation. If there are any characters in the scene, I wouldn’t
want the snow to be distracting. There are a couple of places we can tweak the number of particles, but let’s stay in the
Particle-Baker for now.
In the Particle-Baker’s properties, reduce the Maximum Number of Particles to 100.
Play back the simulation.
And we have another problem! The snowf akes are coming down in solid bands, because the simulation generates 100
particles, then stops. We specified that 100 particles should be the maximum, so it waits for some of them to leave the scene
before generating more.
Change the Maximum Number of Particles to 5000. That’s still too many but it should be just enough to fill the entire
screen and we’ll tweak some other settings.
Save the scene ready for use in the next exercise.
PARTICLES EXERCISE 4 EMISSION RATE
We can reduce the emission rate even further via the Emitter module.
In the Network view, select the Emitter module.
The Number of Particles is currently set to 20, while the Probability of Generating Any Particles is currently at 100. That
means there’s a 100% chance that 20 particles will be generated on every frame. Let’s reduce them both substantially.
In the Emitter’s Properties, change the Number of Particles to 12.
Change the Probability of Generating Any Particles to 20.
Now there’s only a 20% chance that a particle will be generated up to a maximum of 12 per frame. I think these numbers
make for a better simulation of gentle snowfall, but you should play around with them and find a rate that you like.
PARTICLES EXERCISE 5 REGIONS
The Region modules are invisible 3D areas where particles can be created or destroyed. In the snow network, the Emitter is
connected to a Planar-Region module, and there’s another module called Sink, connected to a 3D-Region.
While invisible by default, we can make these areas visible in the Camera View, just as we viewed Peg trajectories in the
previous chapter.
In the Network View, select the Planar-Region module.
In the Camera View, press [Shift F11], or go to View → Show → Control.
The Planar-Region is visible in the Camera View. You may need to zoom out using [1] on your keyboard.

> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
4.143
If you play the scene, you can see how the particles are emitted from the entire plane area. It’s quite a bit larger than the
scene borders though, so let’s resize and reposition it.
In the Planar-Region’s properties, change both width and height to a value of 25.
In the Network view, select the Planar-Region’s Peg.
Turn off Animate mode and, in the Top view, bring the Planar-Region closer to camera.
4.144
Play the scene and be amazed! Your snowfall scene should really have some depth now, with some nice distance between
the snowflakes being emitted closest to the camera and those at the back of the scene. To give it even more depth, you could
increase the height parameter of the Planar-Region. This will put more distance between the furthest and nearest snowfakes.

> 6.
> 7.
4.145
The other region in this scene is a 3D-Region, attached to the Sink module. You could think of the Sink as the area in which
particles can survive. Once they go outside the Sink, they cease to exist. This is useful for destroying particles that are no
longer needed, but could also be used to stop particles going through surfaces; say, an umbrella.
In the Network view, select the Sink’s 3D-Region module.
In the Camera View, press [Shift F11] or go to View → Show → Control.
The 3D region appears in the Camera View now. It’s a wireframe cylinder that surrounds the entire particle system. Any
particles that go outside this cylinder are removed from the simulation. If you wanted to, you could invert the region via the
Sink properties, so that particles only appear outside the region.
4.146
The Layer Properties of the 3D-Region have various shapes that you can use depending on the needs of your scene. We can
just stick with the default cylinder for this scene, but take a look at the other shapes if you want and resize them using their
properties, or blue vertex handles in the Camera View (you’ll need to use the Transform or Translate tool for this). Whatever
shape you settle on, be sure to check it out in the Perspective View to get a sense of how it works with your scene.
As always, to hide the regions in the Camera View, simply press [Shift C], or go to View → Hide All Controls.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
4.147
PARTICLES EXERCISE 6 PARTICLE ROTATION
The only thing that seems to be missing is some rotation on the snowfakes. In this exercise we’ll add the Rotation-Velocity
module to the system so each fake tumbles gently as it falls.
From the Module Library’s Particle tab, choose Rotation-Velocity and drag it into the Snow network.
From the Multi-Port-In (where everything else in this system is connected) drag a cable out and plug it into the
Rotation-Velocity input.
Drag a cable from the Rotation-Velocity output into the Particle-System-Composite (Figure 4.149). Plugged in between
the Sink and Move-Particles cables will be fine.
With the Rotation-Velocity module selected in the Network, apply the settings via the Layer Properties panel as shown
in Figure 4.150.

4.149
4.150
The Axis fields control how each particle rotates. Positive values are a forward rotation; negative values are a backwards
rotation; zero is, of course, no rotation. It may help you remember these x, y, z axis rotation values if you think of them as
pitch, yaw and roll, or alternatively, tumble, turn and spin, as shown in Figure 4.151.

> 5.
> 6.
4.151
Finally, in the Sprite-Emitter properties, go to the Rendering tab and enable ‘Use Rotation of Particle’.
Play the simulation to see some lovely tumbling, turning, spinning snowflakes.
4.152
If you think your snowflakes are too large, you can adjust the Size over Age value, which can be found on the Rendering tab
of the Emitter properties.
4.153
This simulation is now ready to drop into any snow scene that comes your way. You can fine-tune the Sprite-Emitter,
ParticleBaker, Rotation Velocity and Region settings according to the needs of any given scene. In Appendix A you’ll learn
how to save modules to your library so they can be shared and imported into any project.
PARTICLE EXAMPLES SUMMARY
The past six exercises have demonstrated that a completely new effect can be built around a pre-configured particle
example. This is very much the case with a great number of particle effect needs. You can take something from the Module
Library’s Particle-Examples tab and reconfigure it to look and behave exactly how you want it.

EFFECTS SUMMARY
This chapter has introduced you to some of the most frequently used effects. For Animate Pro
and Harmony, you only need to look at the Module Library to see just how much more there is
to explore.
When you use effects and use them well, you breathe life into your characters and atmosphere
into your scenes.

CHAPTER 5
Camera

T
he Camera View is so called because it is the view from a scene camera. If you don’t add
your own Camera, the scene uses its own static camera which isn’t found in the Timeline or
Network, nor can it be animated. You do have limited control over this default camera,
including the resolution, FOV (field of view angle) and grid settings, all of which you can
access in Scene → Scene Settings.
5.1
Generally you would add a Camera only if you want to animate the view, such as panning,
zooming, trucking or rotating. If your scene doesn’t require any of this camera animation, then
there’s usually no reason to add one.
5.2

Camera move terminology can differ slightly between animation and live action. In live action
film, ‘panning’ generally means turning left and right on the spot without travelling. In
animation, you may hear the same term used for moving left and right, as well as up and down
and turning.
FIELD OF VIEW
When added to the scene, a new Camera inherits the FOV specified in the Scene settings.
However, in your Camera’s Layer Properties panel, you have options to override the scene
Camera settings with your own FOV.
You can animate this value in the Timeline’s data view but you can get the same effect by
simply animating the scale of the Camera Peg, which is much more intuitive.
5.3
5.4

> 1.
> 2.
ADDING A CAMERA
As far as Timeline layers are concerned, a Camera is much like other layers. It can be added
via the Timeline 
 button. If you’re using Animate, this is the only way to add the Camera, but
with Animate Pro and Harmony, you have the additional option to add it into the Network from
the Module Library. If it’s not already on your Favourites tab, you’ll find it on the Move tab.
5.5
CAMERA MOVES
In order to animate the Camera transformation, it must first be attached to a Peg. Once this is
done, you can simply keyframe the Peg around the scene to create start and end positions, as
well as control the easing and trajectories with control points.
> CAMERA EXERCISE 1
  CAMERA PEG AND KEYFRAMES
We’ll now create a simple camera movement around a large background. The following
exercise steps through a provided scene file, but feel free to create your own scene with a
sufficiently large background that the Camera can pan around.
Open up the provided scene called camera_basic from this chapter’s files.
Add a Camera to the scene:
 Animate – use the 
 button in the Timeline to add a Camera. The Camera appears at the
bottom of the layer stack in the Timeline.

> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
5.6
 
 Animate Pro and Harmony – from the Module Library’s Favourites tab, drag a
Camera into the Network view and leave it floating off to one side.
5.7
In the Timeline, select the Camera layer and add a Peg by clicking the 
 button. If
you’re using Animate Pro or Harmony, you could also simply drag a Peg from the
Module Library’s Favourites tab into the Network and attach it. However, if you do it in
the Timeline, the Peg is automatically named.
In the Timeline, select the first frame of the Peg layer (Camera-P).
5.8
Ensure the Animate button is on.
With the Camera Peg selected, the scene border becomes yellow, indicating that keyframes
will be set as you move the Peg around the scene. With the Animate button turned off, the scene
border is red, so the Camera Peg and all of its keyframes will be moved together without

> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
setting any keyframes.
In the Camera View, using the Translate tool [Alt 2], move the Camera to a starting
position.
In the Timeline, move the playhead to the last frame.
In the Camera View, move the Camera to its end position with the Translate tool.
5.9
Now if you scrub the playhead in the Timeline, or play back the scene using the playback
controls, you’ll see the Camera movement in action.
Just like other Peg movements, you can make a function curve for the Velocity parameter and
create some easing. Revisit page 204 if you need to a refresher on how to add easing to a
function curve.
5.10
WHERE IS THE CAMERA?
By now you’re well and truly familiar with the Camera View and we’ve also touched briefly

on the Top, Side and Perspective Views back in Chapter 3 in the ‘3D space’ section starting on
page 211.
In the Camera View, you can’t actually see a Camera because you’re looking through it. The
only visualisation you have of the Camera itself is the movie border. When selected, this
border changes colour (usually red or yellow, depending on whether Animate mode is off, or
on).
In the Top and Side Views, however, you can see the Camera, visualised as a V shape,
representing the FOV (field of view). When in the Perspective view, you can also show or
hide the Camera using the Show/Hide Camera button in the bottom left.
5.11

5.12
As you can see in the Top and Side Views, the Camera is set back from the scene. The exact
distance is 12F (12 grid units forward) on the z axis, as shown in the Camera’s layer
properties.
CAMERA TRANSFORM
Animating the Camera Peg’s position, rotation and scale is no different to animating Pegs for
other layers. Movement is keyframed, the path manipulated with control points and easing
controlled with function curves.
5.13
CONNECTING OTHER LAYERS TO THE CAMERA PEG
Occasionally you’ll want scene elements to move with the camera. For example, you may have
subtitles or credits over a scene that’s panning across a large background. You could attach the

titles to a Peg, and then match that Peg movement with that of the Camera.
5.14
However, the better option is to simply attach the titles and Camera to the same Peg. This way,
wherever the Camera Peg goes, the titles go.
5.15
ANIMATE PRO & HARMONY ONLY
3D CAMERA
As you learned back in Chapter 3, when you enable 3D on Drawing layers and Pegs, you can create entire rooms by
rotating walls, floors and ceilings into place. When you add 3D rotation to your scene Camera’s Peg, you open up a
world of cinematic possibilities.

5.16
 
In Figure 5.16, an entire set has been built using Drawing layers. In this scene, the Camera sits in the middle of the
table and simply rotates to focus on each character as they deliver their lines. Outside the window there are more
layers and even a snow particle simulation (Harmony only).
The advantage of this setup is that you can endlessly experiment with the Camera position in the scene. The
disadvantage is that unless your camera moves are really carefully planned, characters and other 2D elements can
really look flat in the 3D environment, as illustrated in Figure 5.17.
5.17
Z Depth and Multiplane
When your scene layers are separated along the z axis, the scene has depth. This z space depth
is what turns an ordinary Camera trucking movement into something special.
In the days of traditional animation, this was called a multiplane camera move because the
camera physically travelled past multiple layers (or the layers were moved past the camera),
to give the illusion of real space in the scene.

5.18
Advanced 2D software like Toon Boom allows multiplane camera effects without any
additional work. Merely by adding distance between the layers in 3D space, your scenes
automatically show that depth whenever the camera moves.
VERTIGO
You can animate characters independent of camera and backgrounds for some special camera
effects, like the classic ‘vertigo’ effect, where a camera moves toward the character while
simultaneously zooming out.
5.19
Incidentally, this is called the vertigo effect because it was made famous in the 1958

Hitchcock film Vertigo. The shot starts with a narrow field of view (zoomed in), then, as the
camera moves toward the character, the field of view is widened (zoomed out). As the
character’s onscreen size is maintained, the world around him appears to widen, or if the effect
is reversed, the world closes in.
To achieve this effect, start by attaching the character to your Camera Peg just as you would
with subtitles (see Figure 5.15), then animate the scale of your Camera Peg. Your background
elements will be affected by scale but the character, attached to the Camera Peg, will not.
MULTIPLE CAMERAS
Your scene can contain multiple Cameras, each with its own FOV, Peg and animation settings.
While multiple Cameras are useful for setting up several unique Camera angles in the same
scene, there is also the option of using twin Cameras for creating a 3D stereoscopic scene or
movie.
5.20
CHOOSING WHICH CAMERA TO VIEW
With multiple Cameras in your scene, you can choose which Camera to view through from the
Scene → Camera menu.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
5.21
NOTE
Even with multiple Cameras in the scene, your Timeline may only show the active camera.
To see all Cameras in the Timeline go to Scene → Default Display → Display All.
5.22
> CAMERA EXERCISE 2
  MULTIPLE CAMERAS
From the chapter files, open camera_multiple.
Add a Camera to the scene and rename it ‘Camera_A’.
Select Camera_A and add a Peg via the Timeline 
, so the Peg is automatically named.
Select the Camera_A Peg and then move it to frame the first character.

> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
5.23
Add a second Camera, rename it ‘Camera_B’.
Select Camera_B and once again add a Peg via the Timeline 
.
You now have three Cameras in the scene; the two you’ve just added, plus the original default
Camera. Once again, if you can’t see the new Cameras in the Timeline, go to Scene → Default
Display → Display All.
Make Camera_B the active Camera by going to Scene → Camera → Camera_B.
Using the Translate [Alt 2] and Scale [Alt 4] tools, move the Camera_B Peg so that
Camera_B frames the second character (Figure 5.24).
5.24
Switching Cameras in this way is useful mainly for workflow purposes, especially when
making stereoscopic scenes, but Cameras cannot be switched on the Timeline. That is, you
can’t have the scene shown through Camera 1 for half of the scene and then switch to Camera
2. For something like that, you’d either keyframe the Camera Peg to jump-cut a single Camera
from position 1 to 2, or you would render half the scene from Camera A and the second half
from Camera B.

You’ll learn all about rendering in Chapter 7 where we’ll also touch on multiple Cameras for
stereoscopic and 3D output.
SUMMARY
Cameras are the eyes of the director. The audience, therefore, experiences the story through
that director’s eyes. When you use a Camera, you’re directing the audience to look at
something the way you want them to see it.
Using your favourite angles, close-ups, wide shots and techniques like camera shakes and
vertigo cam, you can develop your own style, creating a unique experience for the audience.
In the next chapter, we’ll look at audio: often the final major step in bringing your movie to
life.
5.25

W
CHAPTER 6
Audio
hat movie would be complete without audio? Even if your script is entirely without
dialogue, it’s likely that you’ll still need to have sound effects, music or both.
A scene that is entertaining in silence will be a hundred times more so with good audio. It’s a
key ingredient in entertaining animation.

6.1
PREPARING AUDIO
Most audio will require at least some preparation before importing. Only rarely will you be
able to buy or record a piece of audio and just plop it raw onto the Timeline. Preparation
means converting, editing or trimming the sound so that it works in the scene.
If you plan to do a lot of audio work, it’ll help to know your way around a sound editing
program, like Adobe Audition, Adobe Sound-booth, Audacity or Apple’s Logic Pro. There are
some limited tools in Toon Boom’s audio interface provided for trimming and volume
adjustment. We’ll look at that a bit later in the chapter. Generally though, it’s advisable to
organise and name your audio files well before bringing them in.
6.2

WHICH FORMATS CAN BE IMPORTED?
Toon Boom accepts three common audio formats for importing to the Timeline. These are
.mp3, .wav and .aiff. If your audio is in a more obscure format, for example .ogg, .3gpp, .m4a
or .cda, you’ll first need to convert it to one of the three acceptable formats before attempting
to import.
NOTE
Converting file formats can be a tricky business and is beyond the scope of this book. Some
formats are strictly controlled by their creators; for example, a song in your iTunes library
may be protected against conversion and therefore cannot be simply imported into Toon
Boom without an evening of online research and messing about with shadowy conversion
software.
As well as the potential legal hassles, it’s very likely that using someone else’s audio
without permission will get your movie taken down from certain video-sharing sites. It’s
always sensible to obtain the proper permissions before simply converting your favourite
song and using it in your project, especially if that project is for public broadcast.
When importing audio, each sound is placed on its own layer; adding three sounds to a scene
will result in three additional Timeline layers (Figure 6.3).
6.3
After saving your scene, any imported audio becomes part of the scene structure and you’ll find
it in the scene’s audio directory (Figure 6.4).

6.4
THE WAVEFORM
A waveform is a visual representation showing audio levels along a line. Silence is
represented by a flat line, while sound makes the line wavy, with peaks and troughs.
Figure 6.5 is a screenshot from Adobe Audition, a sound recording and editing program. When
magnified, you can see the string of points that forms the sound wave.
6.5
Audio is imported as a layer into the Toon Boom Timeline, displaying the audio’s waveform.
> AUDIO EXERCISE 1 
  IMPORTING AUDIO
There are two ways to create a Sound layer; one is to use the  icon and choose Sound.
However, this method only creates a blank sound layer into which audio will eventually need
to be imported.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
In this exercise we’ll import audio directly and then look at the sound layer in the Timeline.
From this chapter’s files, open audio_newsGuy.
Go to File → Import → Sound.
Browse to this chapter’s files and inside the audio folder, choose audio_Line-1.wav.
The newsreader’s audio is imported into the Timeline and appears as an audio layer with a
waveform.
Save the scene here because you’ll use it in the next exercises.
6.6
NOTE
If, for some reason the Timeline doesn’t show any audio, it may be that audio layers are
hidden from your Timeline. Once again, show sound layers in the panel menu 
 → View
→ Show → Show Sounds (Figure 6.7). While you’re there, make sure Show Sound
Waveform is also checked.

> 1.
6.7
 
In the Timeline, an audio layer is identified by a  icon. Where most other layers have a
visibility checkbox, the sound layer has a  speaker icon that can be toggled to mute and un-
mute that layer.
6.8
The right-hand side of the sound layer has a  zoom slider that will increase or decrease the
size of the displayed waveform. This is not a volume value; merely the height of the waveform
displayed in the Timeline. It’s useful for when you have low volume audio and need to look
closer at the waveform for a visual indicator of where key sounds occur.
> AUDIO EXERCISE 2 
  SCRUBBING AUDIO
Audio scrubbing is essential in animation. If you are to animate anything in sync with audio,
you’ll need to hear the sound on the Timeline as you move the playhead back and forth.
On the playback control, activate audio scrubbing. It’s the speaker icon with an S on it
(Figure 6.9).

> 2.
> 1.
6.9
Drag the playhead back and forth to hear each frame of the audio: ‘Welcome to the
evening news.’
I have provided mouth shapes in the library but there’s currently no lip-sync in the scene. Later,
you’ll scrub the audio and insert the appropriate mouth shapes along the Timeline.
THE SOUND EDITOR
There’s a couple of ways to open the Sound Editor window. The simplest is to double-click
the Sound layer’s name in the Timeline. Alternatively, when a sound layer is selected, the
Properties panel has a Sound Editor button (Figure 6.10).
The Sound Editor is an advanced Properties panel for your audio. Here you’ll be able to scrub,
trim, zoom, modify the audio or ‘map’ it to mouth shapes for Auto Lip Sync.
6.10
> AUDIO EXERCISE 3 
  EDITING AUDIO
If you play the provided scene file, you’ll hear that the audio starts immediately. But it would
be better if the news reader paused for around 15 frames before delivering his welcome
message. In this exercise we’ll adjust the start and end frames of the audio.
In the newsGuy scene, double-click the audio_Line-1 layer to open the Sound Editor.
Alternatively you can click the Sound Editor button in the Layer Properties.
At the top section of the Sound Editor is the Sound Element preview with frame numbers along
the top (Figure 6.11).

> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
> 5.
> 6.
6.11
This preview is the audio as it will be heard in the final scene. The news-Guy audio starts at
frame 1 and ends at frame 45.
In the Sound Element (top) section, click the waveform to select it.
Still in the Sound Element pane, drag the green Start Frame flag along to frame 15 (see
Figure 6.12). You can also enter the value in the Start Frame field.
6.12
Now set the sound’s end frame by dragging the yellow End Frame flag to the end of the
scene.
Close the Sound Editor and save your scene.
In the Playback controls, ensure the audio speaker is turned on (Figure 6.13) and play the
scene.
6.13

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
The audio now starts at frame 15 and finishes just before the end of the scene.
> AUDIO EXERCISE 4 
  ADJUSTING VOLUME
We can raise or lower the volume and even fade in/out or silence parts of it. In the lower part
of the Sound Editor we have the Current Sound window. Thin, blue, horizontal lines represent
the volume level and these can be raised or lowered using the control points.
6.14
Drag the volume control points downward to lower the volume and then play back the
audio to hear the effect.
Click anywhere on the horizontal blue lines to create new control points. Delete any
unwanted control points by dragging them off the waveform, just as you would with
gradient tacks when mixing colours (Figure 6.15).
Experiment with the volume levels by raising and lowering these controls. Try creating a
fade-in or fade-out by manipulating the points.
6.15
In the Current Sound section, there are other functions to play with, like zooming, scrubbing,
number of loops. There’s also the ability to trim the audio using the green and yellow flags.

> 4.
> 5.
6.16
Before we move on, delete any experimental control points you added to the volume
lines so the audio is at a constant level
Save the scene for use in the upcoming exercises.
If you’re wondering about the mouth shapes images on the upper right, that is for Auto Lip
Sync, which is something we’ll talk about on page 395.
TIP
It’s possible to make a simple echo or reverb on the Timeline, using two instances of the
same sound. Simply import the sound onto two separate layers. Open the second layer in the
Sound Editor and name it ‘echo’ in the Name field.
Shift the echo along the timeline by three or four frames and lower the volume considerably.
Close the Sound Editor and play the scene to hear the echo.
6.17
 

LIP-SYNC AND PHONEMES
The term ‘lip-sync’ means that a character’s lips are synchronised with the sounds being heard.
When the news reader says ‘Welcome to the evening news’, his mouth will be animated with
the individual shapes to appear as if he’s actually saying those words.
6.18
These individual sounds, called phonemes, are what makes up language and are at the heart of
lip-sync. Each phoneme will have its own mouth shape, which is something you saw back in
Chapter 3’s section on Drawing Substitution (see page 280).
Generally speaking, even the most limited animation styles utilise some form of lip-sync. One
example is the TV series, South Park. It has extremely limited animation, yet the characters
have mouth shapes that are synchronised with the dialogue recording.
6.19
South Park-style mouth shapes
At the other end of the scale, if you’re familiar with Japanese animation, you may have noticed
that its lip-sync tends to have very few mouth shapes, so the mouths are not much more
animated than that of a sock puppet.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
6.20
The number of mouth shapes you use for your lip-sync is up to you, or the style of the project.
Naturally, more fluid and realistic lip-sync will require more mouth shapes and take longer to
animate.
> AUDIO EXERCISE 5 
  LIP-SYNC
In the news reader scene, there is a basic set of mouth shapes in the mouth layer for you to use.
This exercise will step you through using Drawing Substitution to place the mouth shapes at the
correct spots on the Timeline.
Open the news reader scene.
Activate audio scrubbing with the button on the playback controls (Figure 6.21).
Drag the playhead along the Timeline until you hear the first sound of the news reader.
6.21
As you drag the playhead, the first phoneme heard is the ‘w’ in the word welcome.
Position the playhead at the frame where the ‘w’ sound starts.

> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
> 9.
> 10.
Select that frame of the mouth layer.
6.22
In the Library panel, you’ll see the news reader’s mouth preview image.
In the Library, drag the Drawing Substitution slider along until you arrive at the mouth
shape called ‘w’ (Figure 6.23).
6.23
In the Timeline, you’ll now see that the ‘w’ drawing has been inserted. You can scrub the
Timeline to hear while you watch the mouth change.
In the Timeline, position the playhead at the start of the next phoneme: the ‘eh’ sound.
Once again, select that frame of the mouth layer
Use the substitution slider to find the ‘eh’ mouth shape.
Continue along the Timeline, adding the mouth shapes to match the phonemes you hear in
the audio.
TIP
One of the first lessons of lip-sync is that it’s not necessary to insert a mouth shape for every
letter of every word. Watch your own mouth in a mirror while saying the word ‘welcome’
naturally. This can be animated with just four mouth shapes: w – eh – l – m. Perhaps you

could even skip the l mouth shape if it’s spoken quickly enough: w – eh – m. Keep this in
mind when animating this and future lip-sync scenes; it could save you a lot of work.
When you’ve finished all of the lip-sync, ensure you have Sound turned on and play the scene
using [Shift + Enter] or the playback controls.
If the audio sync is slightly out on any particular mouth shape, you can retime it by selecting the
mouth drawing in the Timeline and then dragging it along to its new position. Remember you
also have the keyboard shortcut timing options of [+] and [−].
6.24
LIP-SYNC SETUP
The provided newsGuy scene was fully set up with mouth shapes for you in the Library, but in
the next exercise you’ll see how to do this yourself.
The first step to animating lip-sync is to create a layer of mouth shapes. If your project is in the
cut-out style, you should be able to reuse the set of mouth shapes in other scenes.
NOTE
A character’s mouth layer may include other parts of the face. Suppose for example that your
character has a beard and you’d like the beard and moustache to move and change shape as
the mouth does In this case the mouth shapes may include the facial hair.

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
6.25
Likewise, if you want the character’s jaw and chin to move up and down with certain
phonemes, you could draw the chin and jaw on the mouth shapes layer.
> AUDIO EXERCISE 6 
  MOUTH SHAPES SETUP
In this exercise you’ll draw ten mouth shapes for your own character.
6.26
In your own scene, draw a character with no mouth. It’s not neces sary to make a
finished character design; feel free to use a rough character drawing for this exercise.
Add a new layer called ‘mouth’ for the character.
In the Timeline on the mouth layer, select the first frame and draw a closed mouth shape
(see the first mouth in Figure 6.26).
Still in the mouth layer, move to the second frame and draw the next mouth shape (see
the second mouth in Figure 6.26).

> 5.
> 6.
> 7.
> 8.
Using Figure 6.26 for reference, continue drawing the remaining mouth shapes on new
frames of the mouth layer, until finally you have ten frames.
6.27
Currently the mouth shapes are named by the frames they were created on. However, in the
newsGuy file from earlier, you may have noticed the mouth shapes are named A to J. Let’s
rename the drawings.
In the Timeline, right-click the first drawing on the mouth layer and choose Rename
Drawing. You can alternatively use the keyboard shortcut [Ctrl/⌘ D].
Name the first mouth shape whatever you like. Traditionally a closed mouth shape is
labelled A, but you could name it ‘mbp’ (the sounds a closed mouth makes).
Using the same method, rename each drawing; B, C, D and so on. Or, if you prefer,
‘dstz’, ‘eh’, ‘uh’, ‘oh’, etc., as explained in the previous step.
6.28
TRADITIONAL ANIMATION PHONEMES
In the days of traditional animation, in order to streamline the workflow for television, lip-sync
was standardised with eight essential mouth shapes. These covered most phonemes heard in
ordinary speech and allowed very fast lip-sync.
The standard mouth shapes were lettered A, B, C, D, E, F, G. To aid the animator, phonemes
were plotted on the X-sheet, to match the sounds heard in the audio (Figure 6.29).

6.29
Today, these essential mouth shapes are still used in digital animation, particularly in the cut-
out style. This traditional method of lettering mouth shapes is the basis for Toon Boom’s Auto
Lip Sync tool.
AUTO LIP SYNC
With Toon Boom’s Drawing Substitution method, lip-sync is made easier but it can still be a
time-consuming task. Even the simplest lip-sync scenes will require some manual fiddling.
6.30
While Auto Lip Sync is an impressive feature of Toon Boom, it’s not a magical solution. Much
like morphing, it’s a robot that attempts to put things in place, but, more often than not, it’ll
require some fine-tuning. As such, it’s a relatively minor tool that merely creates a rough pass
for the lip-sync. For this reason, we won’t step through any Auto Lip Sync exercises.
Once you know how to animate lip-sync using Drawing Substitution, you may like to learn how
to utilise Auto Lip Sync to do some of the heavy lifting. If so, I would recommend reading the
Auto Lip Sync section in your [F1] User Guide → Sound Chapter → Lip Sync.
SOUND EFFECTS
Sound effects are the easiest audio tasks in Toon Boom. Once you know the basics of the
Sound Editor, putting a sound effect at the correct place on the Timeline is just about foolproof.
If it doesn’t quite synchronise with the animation, you can simply shuffle it forward or back in
the Sound Editor, as you learned back in exercise 3, starting on page 386.

6.31
Activate the Sound Scrubbing button for precision when synchronising animation to a sound
effect in the Timeline. Also, frequently play back the scene with the Sound on, to test how well
the audio synchronises with the animation.
6.32
MUSIC AND NARRATION
In Toon Boom, as you know by now, we usually work on individual scene files and then, later,
stitch them all together in a video editing program. For sound effects and simple dialogue, that
audio can often be contained within each scene, such as the news reader’s line.
6.33
What about when we have audio that takes place across several scenes; for example, music,
voiceover narration or any audio that spans two or more scenes?

6.34
If sync is not important, it may be acceptable to do all the music or narration in your video
editing program, later. However, where rock solid sync is important, you have a number of
alternative options with cross-scene audio:
Option A: Slicing it up
Using a sound editing program, prepare your audio by slicing it up into parts of individual
scene lengths, and then place each part into its respective scene. This may work well for
dialogue and narration, but for music it may be quite fiddly, because no matter how hard you
try, an audio join can often be audible when the scenes are put together.
Option B: Scratch tracks
Go with option A using temporary placeholder audio, otherwise known as ‘scratch tracks’.
Later, when the scenes are complete, put it all into your video editing program and replace the
scratch tracks with the final, unbroken audio tracks.
Option C: Multiple scenes
Combine several scenes into one scene file. This is rarely advisable, and only then for no more
than a few scenes; never for a whole project. If you have say, an explosion sound happening
over three scenes, you may consider doing all three scenes in one scene file.

Option D: Toon Boom Storyboard Pro
If you own Toon Boom’s Storyboard software, you have a big advantage here. You can
storyboard an entire project on the timeline and lay all of the audio down as an unbroken track
across all scenes. This is the ideal workflow for music sequences where you want animation to
synchronise with a musical rhythm.
Figure 6.35 shows the Toon Boom Storyboard Pro timeline, where an unbroken musical track
spans all of the scenes.
6.35
Once all of the scenes are storyboarded with dialogue, sound effects or music, you go to File
→ Export → Export to Toon Boom.
6.36

From here you can export your entire project as individual scene files, complete in their
directory structure. When you open each scene in Animate, Animate Pro or Harmony, the audio
is perfectly cut for the specific scene length and synchronising audio with animation is very
straightforward.
The big disadvantage to this workflow is that we can’t always finalise the audio at the
storyboard stage. In most cases, audio is best fine-tuned at, or after, the animation stage.
For most independent animators, one solution is to leave any ‘cross-scene’ audio, such as
music or voiceover narration, until last. After the animation is complete and you’ve sequenced
your scenes together in a video editing program, you can then lay down all your audio tracks,
before exporting the complete, final movie.
SUMMARY
In the context of a Toon Boom scene, audio is the final ingredient, appearing as a Timeline
layer. With a bit of practice you will grow familiar with the Sound Editor for trimming, moving
and volume adjustments.
At this point, you should have a solid understanding of how to create a complete scene in your
Toon Boom program, all the way from drawing and animation, to effects, camera and now
audio. In the next chapter, we’ll look at rendering everything into a format that can be watched,
published and shared with the world.

T
CHAPTER 7
Rendering
he end game – here we are! Your final working task of any scene is to render all the
animation, effects, audio and camera moves, and then output it all as a single video file,

which may then be sequenced with the other scenes of the project to create the completed
movie. Figure 7.1 is a screenshot of Adobe Premiere Pro CC, where the individual scene
QuickTime movies are sequenced on the Timeline. While I personally prefer to use Premiere,
the process is very much the same whatever video editing program you use.
7.1
In the same way that rough animation comes before final, you may like to export a series of
rough renders for each scene, leaving the final renders until later. Rough renders may be a
lower resolution, have rough animation, have effects disabled or have temporary sound and
music. These roughs will be quicker to render while giving you a solid idea of how the scenes
work together in sequence. Figure 7.2 shows a scene with background and effects complete,
while the character is still rough.
7.2
TIP
Without delving too deep into specific video editing software, it’s worth mentioning that programs like Premiere don’t import
your movie files, they merely reference them. In other words, Premiere points to the file’s location on your computer, rather
than importing the file into the project. What’s great about that is you can sequence all of your scenes together on the
Premiere timeline long before they are complete, even at storyboard/animatic stage.

Then, back in Toon Boom, you go through your project finishing and rerendering each scene, replacing rough renders with
clean ones, they’ll automatically appear in Premiere because those file reference links are the same (provided you haven’t
changed their filenames). This practical method is a fun way to watch your project transform gradually from rough to clean.
PROCESSING POWER
Rendering speed is proportional to the speed of your computer. It’ll be much more noticeable
on complex scenes with lots of effects and at higher resolutions. This is the case with most
video production programs, which demand a certain percentage of your computer’s processing
power for rendering.
It’s not just the final render that can be demanding. The Camera View’s OpenGL render, while
much less resource-hungry, nevertheless requires a portion of your computer’s power. You may
therefore experience slowdown with very heavy scenes; for example, a scene with lots of
mask/cutters, particles, intricate morphing and so on.
If your animation workstation is built for such work, or doubles as a gaming beast, then even
complex Toon Boom frames should be relatively quick to render. At the other end of the scale,
if you are using a slow family laptop that’s a few years old and cluttered with files and many
other programs, it’s more likely to struggle with complex scenes, or even crash from time to
time due to CPU overload.
7.3
With a ‘low-spec’ computer (i.e., minimal hardware specifications) that’s nevertheless clean
and stable, you may find that complex frames are rendered fine, albeit slowly. In this case you
could keep your largest scenes aside to render them overnight.
RENDER PREVIEWS
More often than not, before you’re ready to render a complete scene you will want to preview
how the final frames will look. You can either preview a single frame, or a sequence of
multiple frames.

SINGLE-FRAME PREVIEW
The Render View is designed to preview one frame render at a time, rather than an entire
scene. This is just to help you see how a single frame will look and is most useful when we’re
fine-tuning the specific values of an effect.
Previously, especially in the Effects chapter, we’ve tested our scenes and various values by
previewing frames in the Render view. Figure 7.4 is a scene from a music video I created for a
song called ‘Into the Woods’ by Australian musician Cilla Jane.
In the OpenGL Camera view before being rendered, you can see the raw art, including the
untreated eye and blush patches. In the final rendered image seen in the render view, the eye
and blush patches, the tones, high-lights and background blur have all come together for the
final scene.
7.4
MULTI-FRAME PREVIEW
When you’d like to test render a sequence of frames, or an entire scene, you can use the Play
preview. Toon Boom Play is an image player built into your Toon Boom software and is
opened from the top menu or 7.5 playback controller (Figure 7.5).
7.5
Before rendering, you can specify the frame range using the Start and Stop frame markers.
When you click the Render and Play button, frames are rendered and saved as a sequence of
images in the frames folder of your scene (Figure 7.6).

7.6
Once rendered, Play loads the frames, at which point you can use the playback controls at the
bottom of the window to watch the sequence.
7.7
After you’ve rendered one preview, any subsequent previews will overwrite the previous
image sequence in the frames folder. The overwrite warning appears letting you know that
you’re about to overwrite the former preview (Figure 7.8).
7.8
TIP
If you’d like to archive any earlier previews, you should move them into another folder

beforehand so they’re not overwritten by the new render. In Figure 7.9, two previous
renders are moved to their own folders so they’re not overwritten by a new render.
7.9
ANIMATE PRO & HARMONY ONLY
DISPLAY MODULES
Every scene has a default Display that allows us to see what’s in the scene. In the Network
View, this Display module is plugged into the main scene Composite, which means that
everything in the scene will be displayed (Figure 7.10).
7.10

However, sometimes you want to preview a specific part of the network without necessarily
rendering everything in the scene. Connecting your Display module to individual scene
elements can lighten the render load, especially in large scenes.
Suppose you have a very complex scene that contains multiple layered characters, effects,
particle systems and intricate background art but right now you’re just working on the moon
glow. You shouldn’t need to display the entire scene if you’re just working on those glow
values. You can simply disconnect the default Display module from the main scene
Composite and then plug it into your sky layers.
In Figure 7.11, the Display is connected to a Composite module that has all the sky elements.
These will be the only layers shown in the Camera and Render views. Alternatively you can
add more Display modules. Simply drag them from the Module Library’s 10 tab, into the
Network and connect them wherever you see fit.
7.11
When you have multiple displays, choose your default from the top menu: Scene → Default
Display. You can also use the Display drop-down list as shown in Figure 7.12. If you don’t
see it on the Toolbar, you’ll find it in Windows → Toolbars → Display.
7.12
WRITE MODULE
You could think of the Write module as the ‘render settings’ module. It is connected to the
main scene Composite by default, so that everything in your scene is written to the export.
However, just as with the Display module, you can render individual scene elements by
connecting the Write module to them.
As shown in Figure 7.13, the Write module’s Layer Properties contains options for format,

>
>
resolution and save destination.
7.13
The options here are mostly for rendering image sequences. When you’re rendering a
QuickTime movie, there are no format choices, but you can adjust the QuickTime-specific
settings using the Customize button.
7.14
Add multiple Write modules to the Network if you want to render several versions of the
scene at the same time. For example, you may want to export your scene as an image
sequence, but you also want to use one specific frame as a promotional image. For this you
can set up two Write modules in the Network as follows:
Write_1 exports all frames as a .png image sequence to the ‘frames’ folder.
Write_2 only exports frame 22 in .psd format to folder called ‘stills.
Once the Write modules are set up, simply use File → Export → Render Network [Ctrl/
Shift Y] to render them all at once.

> 1.
> 2.
EXPORT FORMATS
Most projects require you to export one specific format or another, whether images or video
files. For example, one client may request that your scenes be delivered as an image sequence,
while in a separate project, the client may require your export as a video.
IMAGE FORMATS
Exporting individual frames is useful not only for image sequences but also for print. As
mentioned earlier in the book, Toon Boom is excellent illustration software. In the following
exercise, you’ll see how to render a single image, or a sequence of multiple images.
> RENDER EXERCISE 1
  RENDER IMAGES
This exercise contains image export instructions for Animate, Animate Pro and Harmony.
Open any of the scenes provided with this book’s download files, or any scene that
you’ve created.
Open the Export options from the top menu:
 Animate – go to File → Export → Images [Ctrl/⌘ Shift Y]. Here you will specify file
format and the specific frames to be rendered as images. Once the desired settings are entered,
click ‘OK’ to render the frames (Figure 7.15).
7.15

 
 Animate Pro and Harmony – Go to File → Export → Render Network [Ctrl/ Shift
Y]. Specify the frame range and click ‘OK’ to render those frames (Figure 7.16). Note that you
should already have specified the file names, destination, file types and frame range in the
Write module’s Layer properties.
7.16
NOTE
Unless you enter a custom destination in the Path field, all rendered images will be saved in
your scene’s frames folder.
MOVIE FORMATS
Apple QuickTime (.mov) is a very common video format that works on most computers and is
the only video format you can export from Toon Boom.
Should you need your scenes or movie in any other video format, such as .avi or .mpg, you will
need to convert your rendered .mov videos using another program. Alternatively, you could
export an image sequence, bring it into a video-editing program and export it in your chosen
video format.
You’ll learn more about exporting a movie on page 414.
TIP
If you already have iTunes installed on your computer, there’s a good chance QuickTime is
also installed, so you should be able to play .mov files easily. If not, simply head to the

•
•
•
•
Apple website (www.apple.com), download and install the free QuickTime player.
If you don’t mind spending some money, QuickTime Pro happens to be a very useful and inexpensive program for quickly
sequencing scenes together, simply by copying and pasting scenes together.
SWF EXPORT
There are a few reasons you might export your scene to the Flash .swf format. Here are some
possible scenarios:
You’re making a Flash game, but prefer to create the art assets with Toon Boom.
You’re working for a studio that is developing a Flash series and they want your
deliveries in .fla or .swf format.
You want your movie to be a .swf Flash movie that features interac¬tivity, like menus,
buttons or playback controls.
Your client has requested images in a scalable image format.
When it comes to vector graphics Toon Boom does a good job of exporting to the .swf format.
However, if your scene contains advanced bitmap effects, such as special blurring, refraction
or particle effects, they will not be included in the export. You will probably want to run a few
tests to see what works. To test a .swf render, you can use the Test SWF Movie button in the
Toolbar (Figure 7.17).
7.17
If you’re happy with the test and are ready to go ahead with the .swf render, go to File →
Export → SWF. If any particular effects are causing issues, the Export to Flash Movie (Swf)
window gives you the option to disable some of them, as shown in Figure 7.18

7.18
NOTE
At the time of this writing, Flash CC is the most current version of Adobe Flash, which also
happens to be the most stable version yet. Adobe seems to have achieved this (at least in
part) by sacrificing a number of Flash features. Bizarrely, one of these features was the
ability to import .swf files! Therefore, if you plan on bringing any of your Toon Boom-
created .swf files into Flash, you must do it in Flash CS6 or earlier.
RESOLUTION SETTINGS
The resolution of your movie can be changed at any time, higher or lower; it is very useful to
work on a low resolution project, and later render it at full resolution. The benefit of working
at a low resolution is that even very complex scenes will require less computing power. Even
if you plan to eventually render at full cinematic resolution, you may complete the majority of
your work at low resolution and simply increase it before you render.

To change the resolution at any time, go to Scene → Scene Settings.
7.19
ASPECT RATIO
Aspect ratio is the proportional relationship between width and height for television and
cinema. HDTV for example has an aspect ratio of 16:9 (1.778), while the ‘low’ and ‘film-
1.33’ resolution presets are 4:3 (1.333). We may be seeing the end of 4:3 (1.333) because it’s
the ratio of narrow, old-style screens in early television and pre-1953 cinema. Today most
screens, including those on mobile devices, accommodate the cinematic 16:9 aspect ratio.
7.20
When you decide to work at a low resolution and switch later to higher for rendering, you
should ideally work at the same aspect ratio. For example, if you plan on rendering your scene
at 1920 × 1080, you should choose a lower resolution of the same aspect ratio. The following
resolutions all have an aspect ratio of 16:9 (1.778).

•
•
•
•
•
1280 × 720.
960 × 540.
720 × 405.
640 × 360.
480 × 270.
Keeping your aspect ratio consistent when switching resolutions ensures your scene will
maintain proportions without shrinking or cropping the scene.
MOVIE EXPORT
To export a movie, choose File → Export Movie… This opens a window of settings for the
frame range, destination, the Display module and ‘Movie Options’ (Figure 7.21).
7.21
The Movie Options button allows you to specify additional settings in the QuickTime movie
(Figure 7.22).

7.22
COMPRESSION CODEC
By default, the compression codec is set to Animation, which results in large, high-quality
files. This codec is a standard in broadcast animation (television and cinema). However, for
web video, the Animation codec puts out file sizes that may be unfeasibly large.
WEB COMPRESSION
A very common compression codec for web video is called H.264. It’s freeware and, at the
time of this writing, there’s some buzz about the upcoming H.265. If you don’t find H.264 in
your codec list, I recommend doing an internet search, downloading it from a reputable site
and installing it. When you restart your Toon Boom program, it should appear as an option in
your codec list (Figure 7.23).
7.23
If you have a good eye for colour, you will find that a H.264 render appears slightly more
‘washed out’ than its uncompressed counterpart, but the image quality is still excellent with
more web-friendly file sizes.

•
•
•
MPEG-4 (also shown in Figure 7.23) is a sibling of H.264. The two are considered even
standards in the digital video industry.
With each codec you will be presented with additional options for quality and frame rate.
Experiment with these settings to find something that works for you.
IMAGE SEQUENCE EXPORT
There are many advantages to exporting your scenes as image sequences. Here are just a few:
Unlike a single large video file, image sequences can be divided up and packaged as
smaller manageable chunks for delivery.
Notice a mistake in your scene after a 40-minute render? It’s possible you could
rerender and replace only the problem frames, rather than an entire scene.
If your video editing program doesn’t like QuickTime video, it will almost certainly
accept an image sequence.
> RENDER EXERCISE 2
  RENDER IMAGE SEQUENCE
To render an image sequence:
 Animate – go to File → Export → Images [Ctrl/ Shift Y]. Choose the image format,
frame range and directory, and then click ‘OK’ to start the render.
7.24
 
 Animate Pro and Harmony – in the Write module’s properties, specify the image

format and the destination directory. Then, go to File → Export → Render Network [Ctrl/ Shift
Y]. When the Render Network window opens, input the frame range if necessary, and then
click ‘OK’ to start the render (Figure 7.25).
7.25
Once rendered, the images are saved to the specified directory, which by default is the scene’s
frames folder.
WARNING
When you use Render Network to output an image sequence, there’s no overwrite
confirmation warning; it simply goes right ahead and overwrites any previous image
sequences of the same name. If you want to save a previously rendered image sequence, you
should name them differently, or create archive folders (see the Tip Box on page 405) before
creating a new image sequence.
EXPORT FOR PRINT
One final consideration for rendering is the capability of Toon Boom to create super high-
quality prints. The ease with which you can raise and lower the resolution makes it perfect for
working on prints destined for any size.
Print quality is generally expressed in terms of DPI (dots per inch) or PPI (pixels per inch).
The accepted minimum resolution for professional print is 300 DPI. This tells us that for every
inch of print space, we want 300 pixels, which means at professional print quality, a one-inch
× one-inch print must be at least 300 × 300 pixels.

7.26
Therefore, if we want to print a postcard of 6 × 4 inches, what are the minimum pixel
dimensions for our scene settings? Simply multiply each inch by 300 and you have your
answer: 1800 × 1200.
7.27
Using this formula you can work out the minimum resolution for a print of any size. OK, let’s
get serious: how many pixels for an A2 sized poster? That’s 23.4 inches wide and 16.5 inches
high.
This comes to 7020 pixels wide and 4950 pixels high; a huge scene resolution! With any level
of graphical complexity, it’d likely be very tough even on fast computers. It would make more
sense to work at a fraction of that resolution (say 10% = 702 × 495) and when you’re ready to
render the final, change the resolution to the full A2 size.
The real beauty of this ability to change resolution at any time is that completed scenes may be
printed at sizes never considered at the time of doing the work!
TIP
I whipped up my own online print resolution calculator that converts inches to pixels, and
vice versa. You’ll find the calculator at: bitey.com/px – hope you find it useful!

SUMMARY
With the end of this rendering chapter, you’re equipped to take your scenes and entire movie to
completion. From here you can start to learn about advanced and more technical aspects of
Toon Boom software.
Between now and the end of the book, Appendices A and B will cover some of those in brief
detail. There is so much that could not be covered in this book, so when you’re ready to take it
further – or if you encounter something in your work that demands knowledge not printed here
– I suggest delving into the Toon Boom documentation, which is always just a [F1] key press
away, or online at docs.toonboom.com.

T
APPENDIX A
Advanced Tools
his appendix contains brief information on a handful of advanced tools. Some of these alone
could fill up a separate book but hopefully these short introductions can help you get
started. You’ll find complete documentation on these features in the User Guide [F1] and
online at ​d​o​c​s​.t​o​o​n​b​o​o​m​.c​o​m​.
ADVANCED COLOUR
Colour in Toon Boom is very powerful, but what you’ve already learned about creating and
mixing colours is just surface functionality. You can link colours to tools, reference external
palettes, duplicate, import, tint entire palettes or select strokes by colour. Let’s take a quick
tour of some of these excellent features.
SELECTING BY COLOUR
Rather than repaint strokes, lines and fills one by one, you can select a colour in the Colour
panel, and then press [Ctrl/⌘ Shift A] to select every stroke of that colour in your drawing.
This is a great feature of Toon Boom colour, allowing you to quickly delete or repaint multiple
areas of a common colour.
As an example, suppose your character is supposed to have a black outline. You’ve finished
the line drawing and are just about done painting all his colours. Then you suddenly notice that
you’ve accidentally drawn all of the character outlines using the dark hair colour instead of the
black outline. Don’t feel silly – it’s an easy mistake to make!

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
In the Colour panel, select the dark brown hair colour.
Hit [Ctrl/⌘ Shift A]. Every stroke and spot of that colour in the drawing will be
selected.
Again in the Colour panel, select the character’s outline colour to instantly repaint the
selected strokes.
TIP
 You can also use the Select By Colour mode in the Select [Alt S] tool properties. Using
this mode just click on any colour and all strokes using that colour will be selected, ready
for repainting, deleting or editing.
DUPLICATING PALETTES
A single character palette only goes so far. If your characters visit different locations, in
different seasons and at various times of day or night, you’ll probably need a few palettes.
Once you have created the character’s base, or ‘day’ palette, this is easy to do. The next step is
to duplicate that base palette.
A1
In the Colour panel’s palette window, right click the palette and choose Duplicate (Figure A1).
Rename it according to the palette’s intended lighting conditions. For example, I’ll duplicate
my ‘Dashkin_Day’ palette and use it as a starting point to create the ‘Dashkin_Night’ palette.

Don’t bother going through and manually changing each colour to a night version though. That’s
what the Tint panel is for!
TINT PANEL
Very often, when you’re well into a project, you may need to change individual colours.
Perhaps you’ve decided the skin is a bit too green, or brown snowflakes don’t really look that
great after all. Tweaking individual colours is a simple enough task but what if you want to
change a whole bunch of colours – or all of them?
The Tint Panel allows you to adjust multiple colours at once. In the Colour panel, go to the
menu 
 → Tint Panel…
If you duplicated your day palette and renamed it night as outlined in the previous section, be
sure the night palette is selected in the dropdown list at the top (see Figure A2).
A2
In the left-hand column, as shown above, select individual colours, or [Shift]-select multiple
colours that you want to change. Select the Offset option, turn on the Preview checkbox, and
start playing with sliders. You’ll see the colour swatches updating as you do so and with
Preview checked, any art in the scene using those colours will change.

WARNING
Before you click ‘Apply’ to lock in those changes, be aware that the starting colours will be
overwritten. That’s a pretty good reason to use duplicate palettes when working on tints.
TEXTURES
When we think of 2D cartoons, we generally think of linework filled with flat colours but in
Toon Boom we can paint with texture swatches. Textures can be manipulated with handles in
the same way that gradients can be manipulated using the Gradient/Texture manipulator tool
[Shift F3].
A3
A texture swatch is created by importing a texture image using the  button (Figure A4). Any
bitmap image in .psd or .tga format may be used as a texture, which you can then use to paint
using the Brush tool, or fill with the paint bucket.
A4
IMPORTING PALETTES
Because we work in individual scene files, it’s important to be able to use palettes from
previous scenes. There are a couple of ways to do this: link to external palettes, or import

them (see below). You will find these options in the 
 → Palettes menu, or by right-clicking
anywhere in the palette window of the Colour panel.
A5
LINK TO EXTERNAL
 → Palettes → Link to External. This creates a reference link in your palette list that points
to a palette file elsewhere on your computer. In Figure A6, the Dashkin_Sunset palette is a link
to an external palette. Any changes to the colours in this palette will affect the original and will
be reflected in any other scene that uses it.
A6
WARNING
Edit linked palettes with care. Linked palettes are incredibly useful for when you want any
changes reflected in every scene file (for example, a permanent, project-wide change to the

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.
main character’s hair colour), but it can be disastrous when you finish an overnight render
only to discover a bunch of unwanted colour changes in multiple scenes.
On a studio project, specific palettes may be stored in a centralised location with strict editing
permissions. If you’re a one-person studio, you may have a folder dedicated to project
palettes, or you might just link to the palette in an existing scene folder.
As an example, let’s say that in scene 35, snake-rabbit explodes from the bushes with an evil
squeak. The last time we saw him was back in scene 3. To bring his colours into scene 35, you
can link his palette from the scene 3 → palette-library folder.
Go to 
 → Palettes Link to External.
In your project directory, browse to the scene 3 folder → palette-library.
Select the snake-rabbit palette and click ‘Open’.
IMPORT A PALETTE
 → Palettes → Import. When you import a palette, you’re essentially bringing a duplicate
into the scene. You can make changes to it and the original will remain unaffected.
A particularly quick and useful way to import a palette is to simply import a drawing that you
created in another Toon Boom scene file. A character model sheet with colours is a good
example. When you import it from the library, it brings its palette with it.
ADVANCED DRAWING
We have covered most of the Drawing tools but there are a couple of Advanced Drawing
features that you should find useful.
TEXTURES
Textured brushes are different to texture colour swatches. You might use a texture colour
swatch as a fill for patterned wallpaper or a coarse fabric effect. A textured brush however is
applied as a brush stroke, allowing for, among other things, some natural graphite pencil or

crayon effects.
A7
The chalk drawing and concrete texture in Figure A7 was done with the texture brush.
NOTE
Texture brushes were once an advanced feature, available only in Animate Pro and
Harmony, but this is no longer the case and they are now a standard feature in Animate 3.
DYNAMIC BRUSH
A dynamic brush is essentially a stamp tool, allowing you to quickly paint complex scenes. For
example, you can create a dynamic brush containing several trees and then create an entire
forest with just a few strokes. Another dynamic brush may contain a number of different
buildings, with which you can paint a cityscape in mere seconds.

A8
To create a dynamic brush, first draw each ‘stamp’ (for example a tree or bush) as a single
frame on its own individual layer (see Figure A8). Don’t worry, these are temporary layers;
once the dynamic brush is created, you can delete them all.
In Edit → Preferences → Camera, make sure Select tool works on single drawing is
unchecked. This will allow you to select ail of your stamp layers at once.
You should now be able to select the whole stack with the Select tool, as shown in Figure A8.
Once they’re all selected, grab the Brush tool and in the Properties panel, click the 
 New
Dynamic Brush button. Your new dynamic brush has been created!
You’ll find it at the bottom of the brushes list and it’s called Dynamic Brush I.You can rename
it using the  button or delete it using the 
 button.

•
•
•
•
A9
With the brush saved, you may now safely delete the layers on which you created the stamps.
WARNING
Dynamic brushes come with a couple of downsides. Hopefully these will be addressed in
future versions of Harmony but in the meantime, here are some things to be aware of:
Sub-layers – dynamic brushes will only work on the sub-layers they were created on.
For example, suppose you create grass stamps on the Colour sub-layer; that dynamic
brush will never work on the Line, Overlay or Underlay sub-layers. It’ll only work on
the Colour sub-layer.
Stamp colours – the colours used in your stamps will be saved in your dynamic brush
and not in the scene’s Colour palette. When you use your dynamic brush in other scene
files, you won’t find its colours anywhere in the Colour panel. To add the brush
colours to the scene palette, save and close the scene; when you reopen it, you’ll be
prompted to perform Colour Recovery. Doing so will add the colours to your scene
palette. Those colour names will appear bold in the list. Just save the scene to add
them permanently to the scene palette.
Stamp preview – the slider in the Brush tool properties merely shows you the stamps
in the brush. Unfortunately it doesn’t let you choose which stamp to place. Your brush
stroke will always begin with the first stamp and cycle through them as you draw.
Flattening stamps – dynamic brushes allow you to create hundreds of drawings in
seconds. This means an insane amount of curves and vector points which can bring
your computer to a crawl. The Auto-Flatten function does not work on dynamic
brushes, so as you paint with the dynamic brush, it’s a good idea to regularly select
and flatten the art from the menu Drawing → Optimize Flatten [Alt Shift F]. This
combines all the stamps into one piece of art, minimising its complexity, as shown in
Figure A10.

A10
 
ADVANCED ANIMATION
Except for Deformers, the Advanced Animation tools covered here are available in all three
programs: Animate, Animate Pro and Harmony.
THE X-SHEET
As mentioned earlier in this book, the X-sheet is the father of all Timelines used by traditional
animators. It’s likely that you can get by without ever using it, but certain animation tasks can
only be performed in the X-sheet view, such as ‘marking’ drawings.
MARK DRAWINGS
This is another traditional animation tool that allows advanced use of the onion skin, and is
particularly useful with pose-to-pose animation. In traditional animation, on a key drawing, the
drawing number is circled, indicating that it’s a key. All other drawings are numbered without
circles.

A11
In Toon Boom, rather than circle the drawing numbers, you can mark drawings with K or B,
indicating a Key or Breakdown drawing. These markers are shown in the X-sheet view only.
To mark a key drawing in the X-sheet view, right-click it and choose → Mark Drawing As →
Key. You can alternatively select the drawing and press [K] or [B], Should you ever need to
remove a mark from a drawing, just mark it as an inbetween [I].
ADVANCED ONION SKIN
Sometimes you want to see several key drawings without seeing all the inbetweens through the
Onion Skin. The best thing about marking drawings is that you can filter what is shown through
the Onion Skin. Once you’ve marked your keys and breakdowns, you can use the advanced
Onion Skin toolbar (Windows → Toolbars → Onionskin) to see only keys, or only
breakdowns.
NOTE
The Advanced Onion Skin only works in the Drawing View.

A12
 
SHIFT AND TRACE
Figure A13 illustrates shift and trace in traditional inbetweening. When inbetweening two key
drawings that are far apart (A), it’s often necessary to lift one key off the pegs and line up the
drawings on the lightbox (B), then position the next sheet of paper in order to do the inbetween
(C). When the drawings are placed back on the pegs, not only the pose but also the drawing
position has been inbetweened (D).
A13
This can also bean issue in digital 2D inbetweening but Shift and Trace solves the problem,
allowing you to temporarily reposition drawings to make inbetweening easier. It’s a process
that would take several pages to explain, so checkout the [F1] User Guide → Traditional
Animation → Advanced Traditional Animation → Shift and Trace to learn how to use it.
HARMONY ONLY
DEFORMERS
Ever since deformers were introduced in Harmony 9.2 it’s astounding what some animators have been able to achieve with

them.
A deformer allows you bend a drawing using a bone chain, or a curve. Traditionally for example, a swinging vine would
require many individual drawings and skilful inbetweening to move smoothly and realistically. Using a deformer however, a
single drawing of a vine may be deformed and keyframed so it waves and writhes realistically.
A14
 
The applications for this are endless; from writhing incense smoke, coiling ropes and chains, to character limbs and even
faces!
Deformation and deformation rigging is one of those subjects that could possibly fill a book, so if you’d like to learn how to
use it, check out the documentation [F1] → User Guide → Deformation. There’s also a Deformers tutorial video on this
book’s companion website.
IMPORT 3 D MODELS
In the early days of traditional animation, backgrounds and solid props, like machinery, were notoriously difficult to animate. In
fact, they still are! Even something as simple as a door swinging needs to be carefully planned so it doesn’t morph and
change shape as it moves. 3D is immune to this problem because a model holds its shape perfectly unless deliberately
distorted. So it really was just a matter of time before 3D models could be fully supported in 2D software.
In Harmony, we can easily import 3D models by going to File → Import → 3D models (Figure A15). As of Harmony 10,
accepted 3D formats are .fbx, .osb, .3ds and .obj.
As well as models complete with their textures, you can import animated sequences. Bringing in static models is very
straightforward, but articulated animation cannot be done within Harmony. This means you’ll need to finalise any animation in
your 3D program before importing it.

A15
 
Once you have it in Harmony, the 3D model may be positioned, scaled, rotated or attached to a Peg to move through the
scene Remember to enable 3D in the Peg properties to take full advantage of the 3D positioning and rotation. If the model
contains any animation, its frames can be sequenced on theTimeline using 
 → Exposure→ Sequence Fill…
A16
 
What’s truly awesome about 3D import is that you can quickly import free models and use them as construction guides for
your 2D animation. Download free 3D models of vehicles and props from the internet (or create your own), import them into
Harmony and trace them with the drawing tools. This is a great way to preserve that 2D hand-drawn look, while maintaining
the volume of the object as it turns or tumbles in the scene. Perfect for cars, doors, crates, buildings, terrain, even complex
rigid character parts, like antlers and horns.
Figure A16 illustrates how even the simplest of 3D models can help with constructing objects and staying on model, whatever
the angle.
Thanks to 3D modellers and animators offering their creations for free, there are countless sites from which you can
download 3D models. A simple search for ‘free 3D models’ will turn up pages upon pages of results. Even the official NASA
website has a section where you can download more than 100 free 3D models of their creations. If you’re interested, go to ​-
w​w​w​.n​a​s​a​.g​o​v​ and type ‘3D models’ in the search bar.
TIP
When downloading any pre-built assets for use in your work, always be sure to check the
licensing info and obtain the proper permissions. Even free models can come with
conditions attached, such as non-commercial use or credit to the artist.

> 1.
TEMPLATES AND THE LIBRARY
You saw the Library earlier in the Drawing Substitution exercises, but it’s also where you store
assets for use in other scenes. In Toon Boom these assets are called Templates. You can save
single or multiple assets – including drawings, pegs, groups, effects, even whole scenes – as
Templates, which may then be imported into other scenes.
A colour model sheet for your character is a good starting example. To create a colour model
sheet for use in other scenes, start by drawing and colouring the character on a new layer. This
can be a single drawing or multiple frames with the various angles.
A17
Later when you import the model sheet into other scenes, it will bring its colour palette into the
scene as outlined ahead in Importing Templates (page 435).
SAVING TEMPLATES
First, open the Library with Windows → Library, or via the panel menu. Below the Drawing
Substitution slider you’ll see a hierarchy of folders on your computer where you can save
Templates. The following steps are for saving assets to the Library for use in other scenes.
Select the layer in the Timeline or the Network and hit [Ctrl/⌘ C] to copy it.

> 2.
> 3.
> 4.
In the Library, select your Toon Boom library folder. Depending on the program you use,
this will be called Animate Library, Animate Pro Library or Stage Library.
Right click the folder and choose → Right to Modify. Once unlocked, you’re cleared to
paste your assets.
With the Library folder selected, hit [Ctrl/⌘ V] to paste. Your drawing appears in the
right-hand list. You can rename folders and assets with the right-click menu.
With the right to modify, you can also create new folders in your Library folder for different
projects and categories. Do this using the panel menu 
 → Folders → New Folder.
A18
IMPORTING TEMPLATES
Importing templates is as simple as dragging assets from the Library and into your Timeline or
Network view. When you import a template, its colour palette will come with it and you’ll find
it in the palette window of the Colour panei.
NOTE
If you have, say a ‘Day’ palette in your scene and the imported asset uses the same palette
but with some extra (or different) colours, they will be merged into one palette. Bold colour
names indicate unsaved colours, so save the scene with [Ctrl/⌘ S] to save the palette.

A
Appendix B
Slightly Technical
Stuff
ll over the world, people are operating machinery competently and safely without
necessarily knowing exactly how that machinery works. Meanwhile a champion
motorbike racer has a much deeper knowledge of his machine and understands exactly
what each individual component does.
Similarly, good software must be user-friendly so that anyone can learn to use it without
necessarily knowing how it’s built. Just like the champion motorbike racer though, once you’re
comfortable with it – if you aspire to be a power user – this level of understanding can deepen
your relationship with the software.
This appendix briefly explains a handful of slightly technical concepts that are useful to know,
but not entirely necessary in order to use the software.
WHAT IS VECTOR?
In Toon Boom we create vector art. This means that everything we draw and paint is created
mathematically, not with pixels but with curves calculated between points. A single brush
stroke for example consists of an invisible border filled with colour. This border is made up of
points that mathematically define its contour.
As another example, a line drawn with the Shape tool consists of a single line plotted by two
points. Everything you draw with the Toon Boom drawing tools is created this way.

B1
LIMITATIONS OF .SWF
It is possible to export your scenes as vector using File → Export → .swf. Usually this works
fine for plain vector art and animation. However if your scene contains effects such as glows,
complex blurs, tones and highlights, you’ll soon find that very few effects translate to vector
format and most of them simply won’t appear in the export.
SCANNING, VECTORISING AND IMPORTING
Are you a traditional animator not entirely comfortable using digital drawing tools? You may
consider drawing on paper and scanning them with File → Import → From Scanner.
If you plan on scanning line drawings and digitally painting them, they will need to be
vectorised. In effect this means you’re converting bitmap pixel lines to vectors.
B2
WHY EVEN VECTORISE?
The biggest advantage of vector is that it may be scaled up infinitely with no loss of quality.
This is how in Toon Boom we’re able to change the dimensions of a movie while keeping
everything crisp and clean. A line drawing therefore, can be created at say 100 × 100 pixels,

then later scaled up to 4000 × 4000 and beyond.
In Figure B3, both circles consist of only four points. Even when you scale up that circle,
there’s no additional information; you’ve merely moved the points further apart. So drawing
both circles requires exactly the same file size and computational power.
B3
By contrast, when you scale up a bitmap image a few times the mosaic of pixels becomes less
and less appealing. To create a large bitmap without jagged pixelation, you need more pixels,
which equates to higher file size and more computational crunch.
VECTORISING
When you import bitmap images, whether from a folder or directly from your scanner, you’re
given the option to vectorise shown in Figure B4.

B4
While you can vectorise any bitmap you import, you should ideally use it for line art and avoid
trying to vectorise complex, photographic images. These can lock up your computer as it
attempts to generate potentially millions of vector points and curves.
TIP
Any linework that you draw on paper should ideally be strong and consistent. Fades or
breaks in the linework may result in lots of broken vectorised lines, which makes painting
difficult.
PROGRAM DIRECTORIES AND FILE FORMATS
Your scenes are saved in a folder that contains various files and a number of other folders.
These are only created when you save the scene for the first time, while others are created
when you do something, for example, import a 3D model or create a new colour palette.
Some of them you’ll probably never need, like table lists, thumbnail lists and the .aux files.

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
B5
FOLDERS
Audio – this folder stores any audio that has been imported into the scene.
Elements – contains all your scene layers, including drawings and 3D models you
import.
Environments – this directory links to your central assets database (if you have set one
up) making project-wide templates and palettes accessible from all scenes in your
production. ‘Project-wide assets’ means things that appear in every episode, for
example, main character templates, key backgrounds/sets and their colour palettes.
Frames – the place where your exported frames and image sequences are saved by
default.
Jobs – similar to the environments folder, this directory contains links to your asset
library or database of episode-specific assets and palettes; an example would be assets
featured in just one or a few episodes, like a particular monster, a unique prop, or
special colours.
Palette-library – your scene palettes are saved here. You can copy the palettes within
or link them to other scenes (see Appendix A).
FILES
.ple, anim, .stage or .xstage – the program file used to open your scene.
PALETTE_LIST – a plain text list of your scene’s palettes
scene.elementTable – a list of all the scene elements (layers and drawings).
scene.versionTable – a list of all the scene versions.
tilde (~) – any file suffixed with a tilde character is a backup of your previous save. In

the event of corrupted scene files, you may be able to salvage your work by removing
the tilde character from the name of these files and opening them.
KEYBOARD SHORTCUTS
Below are two tables of frequently used keyboard shortcuts. For a full list, just hit [Ctrl/⌘ U]
or go to Edit → Preferences. On the Shortcuts tab you can see and change every shortcut in the
program.
Table B1 Tool shortcuts
FUNCTION
SHORTCUT
OVERRIDE
Select
[Alt S]
[S]
Brush
[Alt B]
[B]
Repaint Brush
[Alt X]
[X]
Resize Brush
[O]
Eraser
[Alt E]
[E]
Eyedropper
[Alt D]
[D]
Pencil
[Alt /]
[/]
Shape (line)
[Alt \]
Shape (rectangle)
[Alt 7]
Shape (oval)
[Alt =]
Paint
[Alt I]
[I]
Repaint
[Alt R]
[R]
Unpaint
[Alt U]
[U]
Paint Unpainted
[Alt Y]
[Y]
Cutter
[Alt T]
[T]
Invisible Stroke
[Alt V]
[V]
Close Gaps
[Alt C]
[C]
Text
[Alt 9]
[9]
Edit Gradient
[Shift F3]
Table B2 Other shortcuts
CATEGORIES
FUNCTION
SHORTCUT
AVAILABILITY
Animation
Translate
[Alt 2]
All views
Rotate
[Alt 3]
All views
Scale
[Alt 4]
All views
Skew
[Alt 5]
All views
Transform
[Shift T]
All views
Morphing
[F3]
All views
Onion Skin
[Alt O]
All views
Arrange
Flip Horizontal
[4]
Camera, Drawing
Flip Vertical
[5]
Camera, Drawing

Bring Selection to Front [Ctrl/⌘ Shift PageUp]
Camera, Drawing
Push Selection to Back
[Ctrl/⌘ Shift PageDn]
Camera, Drawing
View
Centre on Selection
[O]
Timeline, Network
Centre on Mouse
[N]
Timeline, Network
Zoom in
[1]
All views
Zoom out
[2]
All views
Rotate Workspace
[Ctrl/⌘ Alt]
Camera only
Reset Workspace
[Shift M]
Camera only
Show/Hide Strokes
[K]
Camera, Drawing
Line/Colour Sub-Layer
[L]
Camera, Drawing
Timeline
Next Frame
[.]
Timeline, Camera, Drawing
Previous Frame
[,]
Timeline, Camera, Drawing
Next Drawing
[G]
Timeline, Camera, Drawing
Previous Drawing
[F]
Timeline, Camera, Drawing
Next Keyframe
[ ′ ]
Timeline, Camera, Drawing
Previous Keyframe
[ ; ]
Timeline, Camera, Drawing
Next Layer
[J]
Timeline, Camera, Drawing
Previous Layer
[H]
Timeline, Camera, Drawing
First Frame
[Shift ,]
Timeline, Camera, Drawing
Last Frame
[Shift .]
Timeline, Camera, Drawing
Play Timeline
[Shift Enter]
Timeline, Camera, Drawing
Expand all layers
[0]
Timeline only
Collapse all layers
[9]
Timeline only
THE LICENSE WIZARD
You can open the Toon Boom License Wizard from your computer’s Programs directory at any
time. However, when you first install a Toon Boom program, the License Wizard should
appear before you can start animating. Using the License Wizard to activate and return your
license is a straight forward process.
ACTIVATING
After you receive your Toon Boom product code, you can open the program. If your copy of
Toon Boom hasn’t been activated, you’ll receive a popup message and be directed to the
License Wizard. If you’re connected to the internet, you can use Internet Activation. Just paste
your product key into the fields in the License Wizard and click ‘Activate’. The License
Wizard then contacts Toon Boom’s license server, which should then activate your license on
that computer.

> 1.
> 2.
B6
YOUR LICENCE ON MULTIPLE COMPUTERS
It’s common to have a desktop workstation and a laptop for working on the move, or outside
the office. Toon Boom can be installed on multiple computers, but the licence can only be
activated on one computer at a time. You’ll need to transfer your licence to the computer you
plan to use.
For example, suppose you have your Toon Boom licence installed on your desktop computer
but you’re planning a trip away and you’ll be using your laptop for your animation. Before you
go, transfer the licence from the desktop machine to the laptop in the following way:
On your desktop computer, open the License Wizard to return the licence. In your list of
programs, you’ll find it in Toon Boom <program name> → License Tools.
B7
Choose Manage Licenses → Manage Local Licenses. In the Local License Manager,
select your program and click ‘Return’.

> 3.
B8
On the laptop computer, again using the License Wizard, this time choose Activate
License.
B9
Simple as that! The licence will be transferred from the desktop to the laptop. When you return
from your trip, just transfer it back to use your Toon Boom program on your desktop.
NOTE
When you return your licence and then later reactivate it, everything will be just as you left
it. Transferring licences does not change anything about the program, your preferences or
your scenes, which can be opened on any other computer that has an active licence.
In the event that something terrible happens to your computer, like theft, damage or loss to a
poker opponent, and you cannot transfer the licence yourself, you can always contact Toon

•
•
Boom support and they can return the licence for you. Once you’re up and running on another
computer, you can then install and reactivate the licence.
YOUR PREFERENCES
Over time, as you work in Toon Boom, you’ll readjust your workspace, tweak toolbars, set
preferences and customise keyboard shortcuts. As you grow more familiar in the program and
make it your own, sooner or later you’ll find yourself at a point where you can open your Toon
Boom program and immediately feel right at home. That said, the day will come when you
need to reinstall Toon Boom fresh on your computer, or install it on a brand new computer.
Maybe even going from your home computer to a work computer feels unfamiliar and
awkward.
Your personal preferences like keyboard shortcuts, toolbars, dynamic brushes and workspace
layouts are saved in the Toon Boom Preferences folder on your computer.
Windows: 
Back 
up 
this 
directory 
(Harmony 
10.3 
example) 
–C:\Users\
<username>\AppData\Roaming\ToonBoom\Harmony\full-1030-pref.
B10
OSX: 
Back 
up 
this 
file 
(Harmony 
example) 
–
Go\MacintoshHD\Library\Preferences\com.toonboom.harmony.full.Stage.plist
If the thought of losing your lovingly fine-tuned preferences keeps you awake at night, you can
always back them up regularly. Perhaps zip them up and email them to yourself once a month,
or just store them on free cloud storage, like Dropbox or Google Drive.
Now you know where they’re saved, just take your preferences from one computer and import
them to the same location on another. Restart the program and you’re home again!

WARNING
When installing your preferences on someone else’s computer, it might be considerate to
back up their preferences before overwriting them with your own.

Index
3D Camera 374
3D models, importing 431–2
3D space 211–17; see also z-depth
3D transform tools 196–7
A
action modules (particles) 349
activating your licewnse 443
Adobe Flash 6–7, 410–11
Adobe Premiere Pro CC 401, 402
advanced animation tools 194–5, 429–35
Animate 31–3
Animate Pro 31–3
animating a drawing layer 173–6
animation keyframing 250–51
Animation Projects: Depth and Morphing 282–6; Drawing Substitution 278–81; Frame-by-frame animation 266–72; Simple
Rigging 273–7
animation types 217; cut-out animation 242–52; frame-by-frame 142–3, 217–21; peg animation 177–9, 231–41; pose to pose
220–30; straight ahead 219–20
Apple QuickTime 409
Apply IK Constraints 251
Apply-Image Transformation 345
aspect ratio 413
audio 381–99; adjusting volume 387–9; editing 386–7; importing 382–5; lip-sync 389–95; music and narration 396–99; scrubbing
385; sound effects 396
audio folder 440
audio formats 382

audio waveforms 383
Auto Fill 67
Auto Lip Sync 395
B
bias 239–30
blurs 330–37
Bone Editing 251
Box Blur 337
breakdown drawings 224
breaking text apart 74–6
Brightness Contrast 338
Brush 24, 37–49; colour mixing 40–42; custom Brushes 46–8; dynamic brushes 427–8; Paint Behind Mode 44–5; Repaint Brush
45–6; resizing 38–9; shapes 49; shortcuts override 39–40; Show and Flatten Strokes 42–4
C
cables, modules 299–300
Camera Peg: and keyframes 396–71; connecting other layers 373
Camera View 99, 367, 371–2
cameras 285, 367–79; adding 180–82, 369; movement 369–71; multiple 376–79
cleanup 225–7
cloning layers 165–7
closing gaps 52–3
collapsing layers 162
colour 101–16, 195; Dropper 98–9; duplicating palettes 421; gradients 105, 108–11; importing palettes 424–5; mixing 40–42,
129–30; palettes 103–5; Protect and Repaint 112–15; selecting by colour 420–21; solid 105–8; Tint Panel 421–3
Colour Art sub-layer 158–9
Colour-Card 182–3
Colour Override 339–41
Colour panel 102–3
Colour Scale 341–2
colour-to-tool linkage 115–16
comic strip project 121–34
Composite module 295–6
compression codec 415
continuity 239–30
Contour Editor 83–91
control points, Peg Animation 236–9
cross-scene audio 397–9
curves 83–5, 96–7

custom brushes 46–8
custom layout 21–2
cut-out animation 242–52
Cutter 92–4, 319–22; see also Mask
cycles 150–51
D
Dashkin 7
Data View 200–204
deformers 431
depth see z-depth
depth ordering, cut-out animation 247–8
design 244–5
Directional Blur 332–5
Display modules 298–9, 405–6
distorting layers 184–6
Drawing layers 116–20, 168–76; keyframes 176; layer animation 173–5; Library 169–71; limiting drawing selection 172
Drawing module 294
Drawing Pivot 249–50
Drawing Sub-Layers 156–61
Drawing substitution 252, 278–81
Drawing View 26, 99
drivers 10
Dropper 98–9
duplicating drawings 151–3
duplicating layers 164–7
duplicating palettes 421
dynamic brush 427–8
E
easing: with function curves 204–7; peg animation 232; Set Ease for Multiple Parameters 233
Easy Flipping 209–10
echo 389
Edit Min/Max Angle 251
effects 189–93, 289; applying 290–305; blurs 330–37; Brightness Contrast 338; Colour Override 339–40; Colour Scale 341–2;
Cutter 319–22; Glow 190–92, 308–11; highlight 319; particles 346–65; Refract 323–7; Shadow 312–19; tone 314–18
effects animation 289
effects filters 289
elements folder 440

Ellipse 66
Emitter action module (Sprite-Emitter) 349–50
Enter Group 302
environments folder 440
Eraser 63
expanding layers 162
exporting 132–3; export formats 408–11; image sequences 416–17; movies 414–15; for print 417–19
exposure timing 222–3
F
Favourites (Module Library) 303
Field of View 368
files 440–41
filter effects 329–42
fireball animation exercise 146–8
FK (forward kinematics) 244
Flash 6–7; .swf format 410–11, 437
flatten strokes 4 2–4
flipping 209–10
focus 19–20
folders 440
forward kinematics (FK) 244
FPS (frames per second) 139
frame-by-frame animation 142–3, 217–21, 266–72
frame rate 139
frames 141–55
frames folder 440
frames per second (FPS) 139
function curves 163, 204–7
FX (effects animation) 289
G
Gaming Pipeline 8
Gaussian Blur 337
Glow 190–92, 307–11
gradient colours 105, 108–12
graphics tablets 9
Groups 193, 343–4

H
H.264
codec 415
hardware requirements 9
Harmony 10. 31–3
heat haze effect 323–7
hiding and deleting layers 118
highlight effect 319
I
IK (inverse kinematics) 244, 250–51
illustrating 32
image formats 408–9
image sequence export 416–17
Image Transform 345
importing: 3D models 431–2; art 31; audio 382, 383–4; palettes 424–5
inbetween scales (timing charts) 224–5
inbetweening 228–30
inverse kinematics (IK) 244, 250–51
invisible lines 27–8
J
jobs folder 440
Jog 208–9
K
keyboard shortcuts 35–6, 441–2
keyframes 176; and interpolation 232
L
Lasso 70–71
layer animation 173–5
layer order 300–301
Layer Properties 117–22, 162, 206–7
layers 116–20, 161; adding 117–18, 126–7; distorting 184–6; duplicating and cloning 164–7; expanding and collapsing 162;
grouping 193; hiding and deleting 118; selecting and deselecting 161–2; shuffling layer ordering 119–20; see also Drawing
layers

legacy (Radial Blur) 331–2
Library 169–71; and Templates 433–5
License Wizard 443–5
Light Table and cleanup 226–7
limiting drawing selection 172
Line Art sub-layer 158–9
Line Building mode 56
line snapping 65–6
lip-sync 280–81, 389–95
Locked in Time 238
looping 143–4, 209
M
Maintain Size 197–8, 215–17
mark drawings 429
Marquee 71
Mask 188–9; see also Cutter
matte effects 307–28
Merge Lines 58–9
metronome animation exercise 201–4
mixing colours 40–42, 129–30
mobile games 8
Module/Layer Properties 302
Module Library 302–5
modules 293–5; adding and deleting 302–5; Composite module 295–6; Display module 298–9; Drawing module 294; Write
module 299
morphing 253–65, 284; easing 262–65, 285; hints 257–9, 262; multiple keys 259–61
Morphing Layers 265
Morphing Velocity 263–4
Motion Blur 335–6
Motion keyframes 242
mouth shapes 279–80, 390, 393–4
movie export 414
movie formats 409–10
MPEG-4
codec 415
multi-frame preview 403–5
multiplane camera effects 375
multiple Cameras 376–9
multiple computer licence 444–5

music 396–9
N
narration 396–9
Network View 291–3
node-based effects 291
nodes 299–300
O
object selection 79
offset tone 317–18
offsetting peg trajectory 241
onion skin 144–6, 429
OpenGL mode 198–9
overhanging lines, removing 93–4
Overlay 157
override keys 36, 39–40
P
Paint 68–72
Paint Behind 44–5
palette-library folder 440
palettes 103–5; creating 104–5, 122–3; duplicating 421; importing 424–5
panels 20, 25–7
Particle-Baker 343, 357–8
particle effects 346–65; emission rate 358; regions 358–60; rotation 361–4; speed 356; turning rain into snow 352–5
Particle-System-Composite 348
Particle-Visualizer 349
Peg 177–9
peg animation 177–9, 231–41
Peg Selection mode 194–5
Pencil 50–62; closing gaps 52–3; Line Building mode 56; lines 51–2; and Select tool properties 82; variable width 54–5
Pencil Editor 56–62; Merge Lines 58–9; Pencil templates 60–62; Pump and Shrink 58
Perspective 91
Perspective View 211–13
phonemes 389–90, 395
picking colours 98–9
pivots 79–81, 195, 249–50, 276

playback controls 207–10
playhead 25
Polyline 95–7
ports, modules 299–300
pose to pose animation 220–30; inbetweening 228–30; key posing 221; timing 222
preferences 17–18, 446–7
Preview 302
previewing renders 403–5
print resolution 417–19
program directories 440
project folder 16–17
Pump Pencil Pressure 58
Q
Quadmap 184–7
QuickTime 409–10
R
Radial Blur (legacy) 331–2,
Radial Blur 337
Rectangle 66
reformatting text 74
Refract 323–7
Region modules 358–60
renaming timeline layers 117–18
Render View 131–2, 198–9, 403
rendering 401–19; images 408–9; image sequences 416–17; previews 403–5; speed 402
Repaint 72, 112–15, 160–61
Repaint Brush 4 5–6
Reposition All Drawings 168
resizing the Brush 38–9
resolution 17, 412, 417–19
reverb (echo) 389
rigging 273–7
Rotate 196–7
rotation 79–81, 201–4; particles 362–4
rough renders 401

S
saving a project 27
scale 79–81, 197
scanning and vectorising 437–9
scene files 16–17
scratch tracks 398
scrubbing audio 385
scrubbing the timeline 24, 208–9
segments, cut-out animation 245–7
Select 78–82
selecting by colour 420–21
selecting layers 172
Set Ease for Multiple Parameters 233–4
setting up a project 16–17
SFX (special effects) 289
shadow effect 312–14
Shape 64–7
Shift and Trace 430
shortcut keys 18, 28, 35–6, 441–2
shortcuts override, Brush tool 39–40
Show Strokes 42–3
Shrink Pencil Pressure 58
shuffling layer ordering 119–20
single-frame preview 403
Skew 197
smoothing 89–90
Snap to Contour 65
Spin Blur 337
snow 352–65
software requirements 10
solid colours 105–8
Sound Editor 386–7
sound effects 396
Sound layer 193
Sprite Emitter 349–50
sprites 350–51
stepping 208
Stop-Motion keyframes 242
Storyboard Pro 398
Straight Ahead animation 219–20

Stroke 77–8
sub-layers 156–61
.swf export 410–11, 437
T
tacks 109, 110
Templates: and the Library 433–5; Pencil templates 60–62
tension 239–40
terminology 11
Text 73–6, 131
texture brushes 426
textures 423
Timeline 139–41
Timeline layers 116–20
timing 148–9, 153–5; pose to pose animation 222–3
timing charts 224–5
Tint Panel 421–2
tone effect 314–18
Tool Presets 100
Tool Properties panel 34
toolbars 20–24, 36–7
tools: and the timeline 24–5; see also individual tools
Toon Boom Play 403–5
Toon Boom Storyboard Pro 398
Top View 26, 213–14
trajectories: offsetting 241; peg animation 234–7; in z-space 241
Transform 173–5
Translate 196
transparency 329–30
Twist Blur 337
U
Underlay 157
Unpaint 72
V
Variable Blur 327–8
vector 436–7

vectorising 32, 437–9
vertices 83–5, 87–8
vertigo effect 375–6
VFX (visual effects) 289
video editing software 10, 401, 402
views and previews 198–200
volume adjustment 387–9
W
waveforms 383
web compression 415
workspace layout 17–18
Write module 299, 406–7
X
X-sheet 231, 287, 429
Z
z-depth 211–17, 282–3; and camera movement 375; and trajectories 241
Zoom Blur 337

