
Anim
 ation
to Production
Boca Raton  London  New York
CRC Press is an imprint of the
Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
A  F OCA L  P R ES S BOOK

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
 
© 2018 by UVK Verlagsgesellschaft mbH (Proprietor)
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed on acid-free paper
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-138-04222-3 (Hardback)  978-1-138-04119-6 (Paperback)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts have been made 
to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all 
materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of 
all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has 
not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify 
in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized 
in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, 
microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the 
publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://
www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 
978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For 
organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for iden-
tification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com 

3
Acknowledgments
Prof. Alan Chan, Dean, College of Humanities, 
Arts and Social Sciences (HASS), Nanyang 
Technological University Singapore.
Prof. Vibeke Sorensen, Chair, School of Art, 
Design and Media (ADM), Nanyang Techno-
logical University Singapore,
For their continuous support and encourage-
ment.
Hans Bacher and Ishu Patel, for many years of 
inspiration, collaboration and friendship.
Thomas Silbereis, for designing the wonder-
ful original layout for this book.
All the BFA Digital Animation students at the 
School of Art, Design and Media at Nanyang 
Technological University Singapore, who 
keep amazing me since I started teaching 
there in 2005.

4
Introduction
Animation is a fascinating art form. Unlike 
any other medium, it allows filmmakers to 
have complete artistic control over each im-
age. This book is designed to help beginners 
in getting started, and to provide those with 
advanced skills and "old hands" with new and 
surprising insights.
In order to best achieve this, the focus of this 
volume has been clearly defined: It is about 
the animator in the role of filmmaker - that is, 
the methodology of using artistic concepts to 
implement content-specific objectives. With 
regard to its content, the book follows rough-
ly the general production process of an ani-
mation film and later explores the individual 
major production techniques and animation 
styles. 
Some may rightly argue that job descrip-
tions for those who just completed training 
in the field of animation, particularly coming 
from major studios, are characterized by ex-
treme specialization requirements to indi-
vidual areas.  However, I am convinced that 
knowledge of the larger context is helpful, if 
not indispensable, for seasoned filmmakers 
seeking specialization as well. A character 
animator, for example, must understand the 
principles of film editing in order to provide 
continuity between scenes.
In addition, most animation study programs 
worldwide include the production of an an-
imated short film as a major part of the final 
exam. For the artistic quality, it is essential 
to understand how to utilize one's creative 
resources for the optimal communication of 
content, whether they be linear/narrative or 
abstract/experimental in nature.
A comprehensive book about animation on 

5
Introduction
Hannes Rall
only 300 pages also requires that it be limited 
to the major points. Nevertheless, I hope that 
we have succeeded in bringing transparency 
to complex correlations, while still providing 
detailed and practical information.
This book is not a software manual, and for 
good reason. For one thing, it would go be-
yond the realm of possibility, and secondly, 
software in the field of animation is chang-
ing too quickly and cannot be reflected 
adequately in just one book. I believe that 
understanding the basic design concepts is 
much more important than the knowledge 
of purely technological details. Other media 
are much better suited for teaching this kind 
of information, and our work gives relevant 
pointers by naming and describing the cur-
rently most important programs for every 
technique.
The main focus, however, is clearly on artistic 
themes, which will continue to be relevant 
for years to come. I am pleased and proud to 
be able to feature excellent contributors for 
special topics: Guest author Kathrin Albers is 
a renowned and award-winning animation 
filmmaker and stop-motion expert as well 
as Assistant Professor at the School of Art, 
Design and Media at Nanyang Technological 
University in Singapore. I also wish to thank 
Melanie Beisswenger for her chapter. She is a 
professor for 3D computer animation at the 
University of Applied Sciences, Mainz.
My book designer Thomas Silbereis and I 
have placed great emphasis on the optimal 
combination of text and image, an essential 
approach for this topic. Numerous illustra-
tions, which I designed specifically for the 
book, are complemented with relevant ex-
amples from the work of other animators. 
Therefore, thanks also to the numerous ani-
mation film makers, studios and animation 
students, who have made pictures of their 
work available to us.
The high-profile interviewees, who include 
Annie Award Winner Hans Bacher, star ani-
mator Andreas Deja and Oscar Award Winner 
VFX Volker Engel virtually represent a trium-
virate of the German animation film. Then 
there is the internationally renowned com-
puter animation expert Isaac Kerlow, who 
provides some thoughts about the future of 
the medium.
I sincerely hope that this book will enthuse 
and inspire many aspiring and established 
animators to implement, expand, and even 
challenge the methods shown. Because an-
imation, like almost no other medium, de-
pends on the continuous progression and re-
invention: We are just at the beginning of an 
exciting development. To use the words of a 
famous spacefaring colleague: "To infinity and 
beyond." Or something like that.
Stuttgart, December 2014
Hannes Rall

6
Prof. Melanie 
Beisswenger teaches 
computer animation 
at the University of 
Applied Sciences Mainz 
and works also as a free-
lance 3D character an-
imator, supervisor and 
director. She has been 
involved in a variety of 
international animation 
and VFX films, including 
the Academy Award winner "Happy Feet" and its 
sequel "Happy Feet 2", the TV clip for the BioShock 
game as well as "Iron Man 3" (Oscar nomination 
for the category "Best Visual Effects"), "Riddick", 
"The 7th Dwarf" and "Sapphire Blue", where she 
was the lead animator for the digital character.  
Her animated short film "There's Bliss in the Kiss" 
has won many international awards.
Melanie Beisswenger
Kathrin Albers has 
worked as a stop-motion 
filmmaker for over 13 
years and has produced 
many short films, trailers, 
spots and music videos 
under the label Stoptrick. 
Since 2012, she has been 
working as Assistant 
Professor for Digital An-
imation at the Nanyang 
Technological University 
in Singapore.
Kathrin Albers
Guest authors
Technical terms that are not explained in the text and are highlighted 
as follows- example term - (in the respective chapter color), are 
explained in the glossary. 

7
4
6
7
8
50
76
108
134
144
212
236
254
276
300
312
320
328
334
339
Guest authors/Overview
Overview
 
Introduction Hannes Rall
 
Guest authors
 
Overview
Pre-Production
1.1) Script and Storyboarding
1.2) Figure Drawing for Storyboard and Animation
1.3) Character Design - Virtual Casting Couch for Animated Film Stars
1.4)  What is Production Design for Animation?
Expert Interview:  
 
 "I basically treat every design like a stage in the theater."  
Hans Bacher, animation production designer
Production (in various techniques)
2.1) The Principles of Animation and their Application
2.2) Traditional 2D Animation
Expert Interview:  
 
 "That scene and that character - that's me!"  
Andreas Deja, 2D character animator
2.3) Stop Motion
 
 Guest author: Kathrin Albers, award-winning independent animation 
filmmaker, Hamburg
2.4) Insight into 3D Computer Animation
 
 Guest author: Melanie Beisswenger, Professor of 3D computer animation
Expert Interview:  
 
 "For me, animation is the ultimate fundamental training for  
the elementary understanding of motion."  
Volker Engel, Academy Award Winner VFX
Expert Interview:  
 
 "There will be new ways to make things happen."  
Isaac Kerlow, expert in 3D computer animation
Appendices
 
Glossary 
 
Bibliography/Picture Credits
 
Recommendations for additional reading
 
Extra: Future Animation Projects by Hannes Rall

8
The topic of developing and writing a story 
for animation film is so broad and complex 
that it would require a book of its own and 
cannot be covered in its entirety here.  There-
fore, we have provided a list of recommended 
readings in the appendix.
Nevertheless, I want to share some important 
thoughts and principles: Assuming that this 
is an in-house development, it usually starts 
with an idea, the beginning or end of a sto-
ry - maybe just an image, a visual or narrative 
situation. Now, before proceeding with the 
actual writing, it is important to have a clear 
idea on a few things:
  Which format? (short film, feature film, TV 
series)
  Which narrative format? (Linear narrative 
or experimental)
  Which target group? (For whom do I 
write/develop the story - who is the audi-
ence?)
  What do I want to communicate? (Do I 
want to thrill my audience with enter-
tainment or unsettle them with experi-
ments?)
Of course, the idea or content also deter-
mines or leads to the format. Deciding on a 
final format is very important, since the style 
and form of writing largely depend on it. Like-
wise, let us never forget that movies are not 
primarily made for oneself, but for an audi-
ence. (Exceptions prove the rule.)
Therefore, my story has to communicate 
something, that is, it has to be comprehensi-
ble (more on this later). 
The majority of this book's readers will de-
velop short formats, i.e. animated short films, 
whether in a degree program, as an indepen-
dent animation filmmaker or for a commis-
sioned work. An animated short film should 
meet certain criteria:
  The story must be visually attractive: many 
outstanding animation short films are 
based on a basic concept that is relatively 
simple, but visually concise.
  Why as animation film? Or: What makes 
my story more special when it is told as an 
animation film? In other words: Tell a story 
in such a way, that it can only be told effec-
tively as an animation film.
  Clear and simple: A short film of 2 to 10 
minutes in length does not allow for a 
complex introduction of characters or an 
overload with too many narrative threads 
and/or characters.
Script and Storyboarding
The script, the idea and the story for an animated 
film are almost always developed with a storyboard. 
The storyboard forms the framework, the basis for 
a successfully animated film. It is all about visual 
storytelling: communicating a story through the 
sequence of images.
Chapter 1.1

9
There is this widespread misconception - par-
ticularly among beginners - that complexity 
equals quality, when the opposite is actually 
the case!
Telling a simple story in a comprehensible 
manner is often most difficult. You can cer-
tainly compare this to a well-prepared dish.
More ingredients don't improve the recipe; it 
is all about the correct balance of a few, but 
properly selected ingredients! 
As with anything, there are exceptions here 
as well, but as a rule, such films are made by 
professionals with years of experience in visu-
al storytelling.
I think it is important that you first learn to 
master the smaller and simpler structure by 
applying the proper rules, before being able 
to modify or break those rules.
Some examples of well-designed animation 
shorts with a relatively clear and simple struc-
ture are:
  Michael Dudok de Wit: "Le Moine et le 
Poisson" (1994)
 
 A monk chasing a fish (with the chase be-
coming increasingly surreal).
  Mark Baker: "The Hill Farm" (1989) 
 
 A day on a farm: When visitors from the 
city disrupt the everyday life on an English 
farm, it is marked with bizarre events. Cy-
clical narrative structure, which returns to 
the starting point of the narrative.
  Cordell Baker: "The Cat Came Back" (1988)
 
 You cannot kill a cat, and an attempt to do 
so will only make things worse. The story is 
resolved in a very striking visual gag - very 
specific to animation film!
  Christoph und Wolfgang Lauenstein: 
"Balance" (1989)
 
 A downright exemplary idea for animation 
film: Five characters must keep a free-float-
ing platform in constant balance to keep 
from falling. A visually very striking idea, 
and very well suited as an allegory!
Analyzing well animated commercials can be 
very helpful as well: It is amazing how well 
you can tell a story in 30 or 60 seconds, if you 
stick to the right narrative economy.
A story for animation film, particularly for the 
short form, is rarely developed as a classic 
script, but often comes about exclusively as 
a storyboard:
Script and Storyboarding

10
Storyboard - the Blueprint for Animated Films
What is a storyboard?
A storyboard is often de-
scribed as the "comic strip 
version" of the script - this 
works for a quick descriptive 
explanation, but it is actually 
not quite accurate:
A storyboard translates the 
description of the script into 
images and defines "visual 
storytelling". 
In doing so, each shot is rep-
resented by at least one im-
age. Long or complex shots 
can be illustrated with multi-
ple images.
Chapter 1.1
1he -h'aM:inoV) 
tfOIY1 i-l-J~io-fhe 
nex+ ~),at appear~ 
~raphicJ 11~ e~san+1 
&inCe, it-~~ !:t).(l?ol on 
fhe pY!'noiple o{ -He 
invtr.redla~onal
. 

11
Comparison of Story-
boards and Comic Strips 
by Hannes Rall
COMIC STRIP
Script and Storyboarding

12
This storyboard illustrates a 
tracking shot, combined with 
zooms for a continuous shot. 
It is important to understand 
that although the storyboard 
format can change in size, it 
never changes the relative 
aspect ratio. 
When projected as a movie 
or video, everything is shown 
in the same size! (illustrations 
right)
Chapter 1.1

13
Formats for storyboard
While a comic strip can stand 
alone and already represents 
the final "product", a story-
board is a planning tool for 
the film to be produced. It 
must therefore take into ac-
count the requirements of 
the film format. This includes, 
for example, the constant 
movie or TV screen format, in 
which a film is produced, the 
so-called aspect ratio. Here 
is an overview of the most 
common formats.
When which format?
  TV productions: 
  Today, there is hardly a 
choice: 16 : 9 is the estab-
lished standard today
  Movie theater: 
  Wide-screen 
(1.85 : 1) 
or 
super 
wide-screen 
(2.35 : 1) (Cinemascope)
Aspect Ratio
„Aspect Ratio" is the term 
for the projection or screen 
format of a movie or video. It 
is extremely important to un-
derstand that a composition 
for film - and thus animation 
- must always be "thought 
of" in those terms.
TV
MOVIE
Script and Storyboarding
"\.~~ : /1 
"ACAQ61'1Y 
STAtlt>A-4-D" 
Fi Ll1 fO~AT E:sr~USileD 
E1't lllciiCAbEM'1 OF ndllot-l 
PICf\J~ AND SCI~ 
IN 
TIE 30s .10o.4-i rr 1!..~ 
USED . 
/\. ss ; ..-1 
,, "/IDI!Srt'-1 f't,/l(r ,, 
INTRc:OOC€t> ~ 
l..foRTf.lc "PIBUCAL 
E'f'lc..lfoJlisRO!IS~) rr r.s snu.. \itlt:€Vf 
U.set>"fl:lD4~ . StAt!P~ : "llfrn IN 1t1€t7 
(,II£ u 1 u .STA~ WAI?S.~ ,"' 8r..AP€. RUNNE-R.! 
AW~HoRRI =-7HefiJ.J1 IHAE€. IS 
UCOHPft.S&sEDV AND IS OIV~~t:> 
BY f'RQ~O'-l Will+ ~~IG J&.lS. 
W"IN To USS ~ 
fO~ 
TV- Tot>A4 1.s. TV Pk!>UCfiON.S 
DOll rr ~"-/ Too HlJGfi c~rce : 
16 : L-1 
IS TftS 6SrA8U.Sf.ls:> SI"ANDN217. 
C.INCHA.: W~-~ 
(.., : -1 1&c;)~ 
s;.~!.llll6-SCIG;NC...., : 2,~s;)=GI~.£ 

14
Split Screen
A "split screen" is an addi-
tional segmentation of the 
actual image format into 
additional windows: several 
formats within a format. This 
variation, which is not unlike 
a comic strip, is often used to 
show concurrence of actions. 
Examples can be found in 
the TV series "24" or the 
motion picture film "Hulk" by 
Ang Lee: Here, the stylistic 
element was deliberately 
used to create a "comic-strip-
like" appearance.
Apart from exceptions, such 
as split screen and various 
multi-media 
formats, 
once 
you have selected a format, it 
is used throughout the entire 
production: The drawings for 
the storyboard must be drawn 
in an appropriate format using 
a frame - the composition must 
work within this frame, since ev-
erything that is outside of it will 
not be visible later and becomes 
irrelevant. A common mistake 
for beginners is to neglect this 
simple rule and draw the indi-
vidual storyboards randomly in 
various formats, something that 
does not work for filmmaking.
Choosing a format
Choosing the "correct" type of 
movie or TV screen format de-
pends on several factors. The 
decision can either be moti-
vated artistically or financially, 
or include technical produc-
tion considerations. The key is 
to decide on the format at the 
beginning of the production 
and to stick with it throughout 
the entire process.
Chapter 1.1
-516 N l-FICAIJfL-'1 E'Kffifllq:;t> 
C0ht"Ai1€D 1D 11i6 "01.0~ 
1' -1,~3 FbRMAT 
-cosr-SAVlNE>, S6CAUSG- ~ 
IS tEes CANVAS "lll,q HA>1D 
6'6" u FILLED"'. 
- All(),o,f£. I:>YN A111 C.'> or 11081SNI 
\NT\1£ f"'oRHAT. 
- cAS'-1 CDt!l'OSffiON OF Cl.OS€ -VP';. 
-,AU.oW.S.INf'~l\6 L~ 
)\l-ID a<owP SCIO:Nt\~ (4i~tp 
ful<. iliBUCAL bfiC.S) . 
-t-w; 111€ EffECiltl ~NGLY 
\ h l1e<Sell\E v ltW\OY-' I t-li11€ fiLMIC-
fNVIroNM€NT. 
- IN IDE "SAt't>\.llc>Ttt ('RAt-tO€ Or 
CA\-IEI'tA HOV€HENO-$ ( DYNAMIC... t-\016-
HEt-Tf V/ ITIIIN TilE fORI'W. 
- (l.C.E;E;-Uf's NEED Th BE LA'1EP 
OUT AND PlAI"NcD \)6R~ CAitffi.ltrf. 

15
Cut-Off Area - the "Safety Clearance" in Movie and Television Formats
Due to the so-called projection cut-off area 
for film projectors as well as different screen 
dimensions and standards for TV formats, it is 
important to take into account a certain "safe-
ty clearance" when configuring film images: 
important image elements or components of 
titles should not be positioned outside this "ti-
tle safe area". This does not necessarily have to 
be observed precisely in the storyboard, if the 
positions of the image elements are exactly 
defined in a layout stage later. However, the 
storyboard illustrator can take into account 
the important image elements such as heads, 
etc., making sure that they are not placed at 
the extreme edge of the format. If the sole 
purpose of the storyboard is to develop the 
story, then such technical factors can be com-
pletely ignored. If, however, the storyboard is 
adopted almost unchanged as a layout, or if 
individual storyboard drawings are adopted 
as key frames, then it is safer to consider the 
respective cut-off areas from the beginning.
These two drawings show, 
where important image 
information for 2.35 : 1 (Cine-
maScope) and wide-screen TV 
(16 : 9) should be and where 
they should not be.
Script and Storyboarding
fA}(TIGULA(tl.Y IHPOltiANT 'FOJ( lmES To MAKe 
~vt<E l"t{AT 11t€'f Af1.£ NO\ kc;ar Off"~~ 
TiT~& HU&T 6e 
P~Aca:> 
WIT~lNo 
\1--<fORT?\Nr €L6H6~ OfT-He 
\ MAG6 ~(jJLD Nar ~E flAC6t> 
OUT~ ll::E-rt-.\1-S RANGE. 
tHPorzr-ANT 
FA~cF 
TNE lt-tA(d::. t"t\JS'~ 
&E PLAceD 
lNSits '· 

16
A storyboard translates or develops the story 
for an animated film into the drawn version of 
the individual shots: It is about visual narra-
tion, visual storytelling. Here is an example of 
There is hardly a change in the camera's angle:  
Although the camera changes between long, medium 
and close-up shots, it always remains roughly at eye level 
to the viewer and never "tilts" in perspective. The lighting 
of the scene is also very uniform and lacks dramatic 
accents. Since the stylistic means create an emotionally 
neutral effect, it leaves the viewer with a documenta-
ry-style impression.
Quite differently here:  
Dramatic/extreme lighting (e.g. the classic "horror 
under-lighting") and highly varied camera angles 
(from above/below) are used: this creates the im-
pression of threat (down-shot [1]), suspense (silhou-
ette, lighting [3]) and shock/horror (under-lighting, 
up-shot [4]).
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
how choosing different camera angles for the 
individual shots can create an entirely differ-
ent impression of the same story.
Chapter 1.1

17
Why a Storyboard?
For live-action film, shots are usually repeat-
ed and sometimes covered with multiple 
cameras or camera angles. During the editing 
process, the director can then select the de-
sired versions and continuity from a surplus 
of footage. For animation film, the process is 
very different: The elaborate frame-by-frame 
production process generally does not allow 
for the repeated production of scenes for cost 
reasons alone. Therefore, the film has to be 
planned visually exact in advance, in order 
not to lose time and money during the ac-
tual production process. It is equally import-
ant that an animation film be edited at least 
approximately when still in the storyboard 
format. Continuity and transitions between 
individual scenes can already be defined in 
the storyboard. 
Last but not least, the storyboard is often the 
crucial communication tool between film 
producers/authors and potential investors, on 
the basis of which the approval of financing is 
decided: A script alone is not sufficient to ap-
ply for granting subsidies for animation films, 
the same applies to private and commercial 
investors. The storyboard is a relatively inex-
pensive way to present the visual implemen-
tation of the story the most precise way.
  Create two versions of an identical or similar story, for example a com-
edy and a horror version. Use the above-mentioned stylistic means 
such as camera angles, shot sizes and lighting/light and shadow.
 
 An example for such a story might be:
 
 A man/woman walking with a dog. The man/woman throwing a ball 
and the dog returning it (or something else?).
  You can also experiment by changing place and time: City or nature? 
Night or day?
  But start with those versions, which are set in a similar environment 
and time, and only later try out bolder variations: In this way it 
becomes clear, how much you can greatly change the effect of visual 
storytelling with only limited resources!
Assignment:
Script and Storyboarding

18
Because of this precise planning method, the 
storyboard has also been used in live-action 
filmmaking since the 40s and 50s, mainly for 
visually elaborate productions and those as-
sociated with special effects. The use of sto-
ryboards is now standard in complex feature 
film productions, but it is also being widely 
replaced by so-called previsualization (short: 
previz) when it comes to the planning of 
elaborate effects sequences or hybrid forms 
of CG animation and live-action film.
An animated TV series such as "Star Wars: The 
Clone Wars" (Filoni, 2008-2014) is now exclu-
sively developed using previz - storyboards 
are no longer used. Newer CG animations, on 
the other hand, like Pixar's "Brave" (Andrews, 
Chapman, 2012) still use storyboards: This is 
probably due to the fact that drawings have 
an original expressive power that can present 
the charm of a story in a much more attrac-
tive manner.
Historically, the storyboard has been a medi-
um that was first invented and used for ani-
mated film and later was used increasingly for 
live-action film as well. The name comes from 
the original form, where many small draw-
ings in the format of the film are pinned to a 
board with needles. 
The drawings represented the various shots 
of the film and enabled the production staff 
Chapter 1.1

19
Example: 
Excerpts from the previz version of the student 
film "Daisy" by Renald Taurusdi and Michael King 
Sutanto, School of Art, Design and Media, Nanyang 
Technological University Singapore, 2010.
to examine and exchange them, or to replace 
them quickly with new versions. This allowed 
for a constant evolution of the story process, 
in which the story was continuously evolving 
until, ultimately, a final version of the story in 
drawn form had emerged. 
The Oscar-winning CG animation feature film 
"Rango" (Industrial Light and Magic, 2011) 
was first developed fully as a storyboard to-
gether with director Gore Verbinski. Even 
composition and camera angles were rough-
ly defined in the storyboard. However, both 
were greatly modified and improved in the 
subsequent stage of the 3D layout.
Animatic: Filmed version of a storyboard, which 
frequently already includes key frames, gener-
ally highlighted with provisional sound as well. 
The key is the ability to develop the timing of 
the film.
Leica Reel: Animatic in feature film length. Ini-
tially consisting of only the storyboards, these 
are replaced in the course of production by 
layout images, animation tests, and lastly, the 
final animation. A Leica reel allows everyone 
involved in production to keep in mind the 
structure of the overall film. An absolutely indis-
pensable planning tool.
Previz/3D layout: An animatic, which does not 
use drawings, but very rough computer models 
in a 3D environment. This is where in the work 
process of computer animation, the positions 
of the characters and shot angles are often fi-
nalized.
Script and Storyboarding

20
Fundamentals of Cinematic Design
If you want to tell a linear story through film 
that the audience can understand, it is nec-
essary to speak the same language the au-
dience understands: Since the introduction 
of the film medium, certain conventions of 
visual language have been established that 
the audience can understand. By adhering to 
these conventions with regard to shots and 
editing, the audience can follow the action. 
If these conventions are violated, the under-
standing of the events on the screen is made 
difficult or impossible.
It is an established cinematic convention that 
the close-up of a face is followed by a shot 
that shows what that person sees. 
If you want to tell a traditionally structured 
story, you will stick to these established rules 
and expand/modify them in a playful manner. 
There are, of course, numerous examples, es-
pecially from the recent past and postmod-
ernism, in which these rules were deliberate-
ly broken in order to achieve a certain effect. 
Masters of cinematics are able to integrate this 
in such a way that the story is still - or maybe 
even better - understood. This works, because 
the breaks with convention are used deliber-
ately to support a certain narrative statement.
For beginners, however, it is imperative to 
first familiarize themselves with the estab-
lished rules of the film language before they 
can begin to purposefully override them. 
Starting out, it is difficult enough to combine 
all the skills needed to draw an attractively 
designed and narrated storyboard that is 
clear and comprehensible. You can compare 
this to a jazz musician, who must first mas-
ter all the scales before he can begin to im-
provise at all. If your work is about a purely 
improvisational, i.e. experimental animation 
film, which is not designed to tell a conven-
tionally structured and intelligible story, 
then these rules can be ignored. However, 
many experimental abstract animation films 
by masters such as Oskar Fischinger ("Mo-
tion Painting No.1", 1947) or Michel Gagné 
("Sensology", 2010) have a sequential graph-
ic structure - which can certainly be planned 
in and with storyboards. Graphic contrasts 
and tension and relief through rhythmic 
A classic example is the editing of shot and reverse shot.
Chapter 1.1

21
variations are used to structure a film in a 
storyboard rather than classic rules of nar-
rative film language. Other experimental 
animated artists are completely abandoning 
storyboards for some of their films and are 
improvising: One image follows another, ev-
erything in straight-ahead animation.
Composition
Storyboards are about the appealing and 
functional arrangement of image elements 
in a given format: That is why a good story-
boarder must master the basic rules of com-
position. Students starting out often forget 
that drawing for storyboards is always about 
the composition in a defined frame:
It is important to show exactly, what the viewer 
will later see on a movie or TV screen!
PERFECT SYMMETRY
COMPOSITION BASED ON "THIRDS"
Important image elements are placed on "thirds". Contrast between 
the diagonal lines and the vertical line of the right figure.
Symmetry can 
work very well!
Contrast between symmetry and irregular distribution of objects = 
irritation, draws attention.
Script and Storyboarding

22
If a strong base 
composition forms the 
basis, ...
... then the added visual 
themes will work.
Even when detailed 
texture(s) and color are 
added (= higher demand 
for realism). Color can 
also support the com-
position.
Chapter 1.1

23
line thickness, density of detail and scaling 
are used to achieve this effect. 
This can be seen in the following example: 
In Figure1 ,  objects are placed in the fore-
ground as silhouettes, there is more detail 
at the mid-ground, which decreases with in-
creasing distance. Likewise, the line thickness 
is varied to emphasize the essentials (thick 
lines) and to mark the less important "acces-
sories" (thin lines, gray/blue outlines in the 
background).
In Figure2, none of these sty-
listic means are used; each 
element is treated the same 
way: There is no system, the 
composition appears confus-
ing and not well organized 
- and was therefore not suc-
cessful.
Additional note:
Of course, there may be ar-
tistic reasons to have a shot 
appear "flat" and "one-di-
mensional", perhaps 
even 
confusing - there are excep-
tions to the rule.
Always important: 
The compositional imple-
mentation must meet the 
artistic/content-related 
in-
tention!
Figure 2
Figure 1
It is important to understand that compo-
sition can not be regarded in isolation: The 
idea is to choose the composition of a scene 
so that it supports and highlights the appro-
priate content of the story. The design should 
ultimately benefit visual storytelling. Form 
follows function. If that is achieved, then this 
alone will often result in a good composi-
tion, since it is based on a well thought-out 
concept. Successful compositions are usually 
based on an organized system for optimal 
communication of the image content: Artis-
tic styling means and tools such as lighting, 
Script and Storyboarding

24
Composition for the Purpose of Visual Storytelling
FRAMING
Image elements draw attention to the 
central motif.
POSITIVE AGAINST NEGATIVE:
small positive figure against large nega-
tive surface; also works in reverse:
VARIED SPATIAL LAYOUT:
irregular distribution of parallel 
curves + size contrast.
-  BALANCE OF NEGATIVE SURFACES
-  TRIANGLE AS COMPOSITIONAL 
ELEMENT
VARIATION + CONTRAST OF BASIC SHAPES + SIZE DIFFERENCE:
central figure slightly offset against symmetry: 
 Contrast to diagonals.
Chapter 1.1

25
Drawing attention with fram-
ing and the use of vanishing 
point perspective.
VERTICAL LINE/CURVES 
Repetition of shapes as 
decorative elements.
Convex/Concave
Round/Rectangular
Script and Storyboarding

26
Over time, the character moves through the scene, 
while the camera moves at the same time: For each 
resulting shot, there should be a perfect composition. 
Animated film in particular, offers the possibility of 
absolute control, since each frame is individually 
generated. However, it should be mentioned that 
this control is significantly easier with (digitally or 
traditionally) drawn animated film than with 3D 
computer animated film. This is because, as a rule, 
virtual backgrounds are modeled in computer 
animations in which the characters move - similar 
to a live-action shoot. Changing these backgrounds 
within a scene or adapting them is quite difficult, if 
not impossible.
Animation film is not about static compo-
sitions: A composition can change within a 
scene, be it through tracking shots or, in the 
case of animation film, by metamorphoses. 
Unlike, for example, in a comic, a character 
This "composition" shows how positions of 
characters change within a single, unedited 
shot, and how camera angle and image frame 
adjust. It becomes apparent that the balance 
between the dynamic image elements and 
the background must be taken into account. 
On the following page, the shot is shown in 
three separate sequential storyboard draw-
ings. As you can see, such a complex and 
dynamic shot requires multiple drawings in 
order to illustrate it intelligibly.
Dynamic Composition
moves through a scene, or the camera moves 
horizontally, vertically, or zooms: Ideally, 
there should always be a well-designed im-
age composition at any point within a scene.
Chapter 1.1

27
Script and Storyboarding
'11\IS PAJZT OF f11€ ~~Ol)N t:> 
CT7\1(6LA-6E) iS. t::ELI"EEAAlBL-'1 ON--Y 
1-11~ AI TOJI.VOID o..e<cW.AUirJG 
11-\<0, I MA(B W tT\-1 UNN«6S~AR'/ tsrAIL 
i11AI Hl0f{ICDI'<FUcTWIU-l A 
Tb~N!:> 
cW>"-"1:.1"9'<-. 
I FntE f'l i<Al'E Gee; WillE 80\J 
OFThe Si-li~l\1€ WHAlE CA"-1 
DIV611:) AVOID VNF.AVol<tA"BL€ 
O'JE:t'!L.A~. 'C!EHSNTS CAN 
APFEJ\f>...INTh€. FICT\ii<£ ANP 
11\E.N DISAPR:::A.K A(d?.IN. 
(-=t>)'IW11c c::ot1R£1ifoK) · 
\iiE OIJCP.lAf'O"F"ruE. Ufes 4 IT+-1 
llle; Thi::5L.A<SE: IS. NOT IDE"At. ~ 
l1le: COHF'!J.S.n-ioN18vrnus IS 
A C:.COPIABI.e I A!: IT ONL-Y A.ff'g::r.S. 
l1IE 111AE€ fuf<_ AS/JoPT ~OHS<if. 
Af"ns~ 
.. :Tll€ 
Pi PI'TE kAS. CPASkGD MD 
Tl\t MAST, O"lG WOVL-D PP-ESUHAllLf 
QVICf:l..'-/ cm-(O'ru£ N-GX\ ..Sl!Qf.S-
Oll-I6Pitl ISE: TlJE 12-jQ,!-1"1 f.lAt.FOF" 
T\J£ IHAI'E-WOVLD API"6A.fJ.... "GHPIY". 
T~G DYNAMic <VnRlSm()l'{ 
TA1<15s ~e C\JI\NG€D 
fasm0111s OFI!JE f76ll~ 
W IT-NIN !\-It: :':€TfiNG 
~~~
~.....;
· _____ _, 
Thi-' 8.Efl6N'f OF C0V"'Tl>lt.-NO\t&16NI 
Or A RATe AND f'J\Rfl-01 (N:ReA.SES.TNE 
\)y N I>\'\ I c. AND E>NSUR6S AN APPE:Al-1 NG 
Ci NEHttriC.. Lot1'POSITioN. 

28
A film usually consists of 
single shots, which are con-
nected through film edit-
ing. It is the purpose of the 
storyboard to break down 
the described action of the 
script (if available) into shots. 
Choosing the right shots is 
extremely important in or-
der to achieve the desired 
emotional and narrative ef-
fect on the audience.
Film Takes - How Do I Find the Right Shot?
Cut and Editing
The most important basic 
rule for film editing is: Cuts 
must be motivated! Since 
a cut means changing the 
shot, then there must be a 
reason why a new shot is se-
lected. As a rule, it is about 
communicating 
informa-
tion relevant to the action:
  A new place of action is 
being introduced.
  A detail is shown.
  The relationship between 
two people in a particular 
environment is shown.
  Time has passed.
These are just a few exam-
ples, but an edit should al-
ways be motivated by the 
need for visual storytelling. 
It is of vital importance to 
preserve the narrative con-
tinuity in this process. For 
example, in the storyboard, 
the characters in the draw-
ings must always be recog-
nizable - otherwise the story 
becomes unintelligible.
Break in continuity: 
Different clothing of the 
same character for implied si-
multaneity and for the same 
environment leads to irrita-
tion (= perceived as an error 
by the audience). 
Or: 
Used deliberately by the film-
maker in order to suggest a 
"leap in time" in contrast to 
visual conventions.
The traditionally "correct" version: Edit of 
close-up to medium shot with change of 
camera angle. Continuity through left-
right distribution and unchanged lighting/
colors completely appropriate.
In this edit of a continuous movement  
(= direct continuity) and an unchanged en-
vironment, the viewer perceives the change 
in dress color as a continuity error.
Chapter 1.1

29
An edit can, of course, be graphically/aes-
thetically motivated as well; ideally, the aes-
thetic component connects perfectly with 
the narrative intention.
When there is a complete change in the 
environment, without continuity of move-
ment and a completely different situation, 
then the change in the dress color does not  
constitute an error in continuity: Narrative-
ly speaking, continuity is not intended here.
Simply changing the lighting implies 
the passing of time: A mistake turns into 
an interesting version. Although the 
continuous motion suggests immediate 
continuity, the changed time of day 
creates a new context.
When keeping the same characters, but 
changing the environment, then a differ-
ent version emerges: By using a match 
cut, the situation shown is communicated 
as a temporally continued or a repeated 
dispute.
Script and Storyboarding

30
Below is a description of the most important 
types of shots based on a continuous scene, 
and connected through editing. Shot selec-
The long shot (wide shot or extreme wide shot)
informs the audience about the place of action. 
It is also called the establishing shot. This kind 
of shot is ideal to establish the atmosphere and 
mood about the story's location.
tions are closely linked to the kind of editing 
from one shot to the next. 
An extreme close-up shows details that would oth-
erwise not be recognizable or where the informa-
tion would be lost (here, how the eyes become slits).
Over-the-shoulder shot: This shot, often used for 
dialogues, joins two characters in a foreground-back-
ground combination. Traditionally, these shots are 
edited and combined to alternate for the left and 
right character in dialogue.
The close-up is the best way to show the emotions 
of a character. The viewing direction of the 
character here "meets" the gaze of the character in 
the next shot. This is achieved with the estab-
lished cinematic convention of reverse shot: The 
following shot shows the gaze of the character in 
a close-up that the other character sees.
The medium shot is well suited to highlight the 
relationship between two characters, while the 
surrounding context remains distinguishable. The 
storyboard also highlights the important relation-
ship of the actors in shades of gray. Insignificant 
characters "fade". (In the final film, this can be 
replaced by other means, such as varying focus.)
Chapter 1.1

31
A down shot from the "bird's eye perspective"  
-  a special type of long shot. 
The shooter in the foreground is accentuated by 
position, scale, and harsh contrast.
Over-the-shoulder shot, again combined with a "more 
distanced"medium shot. This grants the audience the 
view, how the cowboy on the left gets hit. At the same 
time, the audience can see the reaction of the character 
in the foreground. Again, the use of light and shadow 
supports the narrative intention. The position of the 
gaze on the 2D picture plane of the image format ... 
... is identical to the 
position of the fleeing 
shooter in the next shot. 
This again communi-
cates that this shot shows what the character from 
the previous shot sees.
An up shot or low-angle shot focuses on the face of the 
wounded, the touching hand and the reaction of the 
other character in the center. From a purely graphic point 
of view, this change of perspective offers an appealing 
option.
The composition takes into account the tracking shot and 
change of position of the character during the course of the 
scene: There are no background details in the direction, in which 
the horseman is moving. In film, this can be achieved by different 
focal planes (few details = out of focus).
This long shot combined with tracking shot is 
action motivated: We are suddenly in a completely 
different scenario, the identity of the isolated 
horseman is deliberately unclear. The shot com-
municates the isolation of the horseman by using 
the contrast of the monumental landscape. The 
cinematic stylistic means of the tracking shot is 
used to show additional information: During the 
course of the scene it is revealed that Indians are 
lurking in the foreground. This creates a complete-
ly new contextual layer of suspense.
Script and Storyboarding

32
For live-action film, the editing process is one 
of the last steps in production. The director 
and cutter create the final product from the 
existing material of the shoot - the film. Each 
scene is shot several times during a live ac-
tion movie, there are several takes, often with 
various camera adjustments, from which the 
selection for the final cut is made.
In animation film, however, it is generally not 
possible to animate shots multiple times: 
That would be far too costly and inefficient. 
This is why edits for animation film are deter-
mined at a much earlier stage: during story-
board and/or animatic (Leica reel) or previz 
for 3D productions. The more detailed and 
comprehensive the planning in the early 
stage, the more smoothly and cost-effective 
the implementation of the actual production 
will be. With elaborate full-length produc-
tions, there is usually a final cut later, and it 
is certainly possible to change a scene for CG 
productions by using different shot angles. 
(As an additional note, it is more sensible to 
determine the shots during the previz or lay-
out stage, in order to create the most efficient 
and suitable background/environment). Film 
editing follows certain rules which have been 
established as viewing conventions with the 
audience: 
It is indispensable for the (animation) film-
maker to know, understand, and apply these 
rules so that the audience understands the 
action shown according to the filmmaker's 
intentions:
Classic examples are the shot/reverse shot 
editing or the avoidance of crossing the line.
These rules are often deliberately violated 
or ignored in postmodern film, in order to 
achieve certain effects. In order to do this 
sensibly and balanced, the filmmaker has to 
know the traditional rules and know how to 
tell his story in a visually intelligible manner. 
However, this seems to be very difficult for 
beginners or students. Therefore, I think it is 
very important to learn first how convention-
al editing rules should be applied before they 
are broken.
Tip: Always show the storyboard or animatic 
of an animation film to someone who is com-
pletely unfamiliar with the story. If this person 
does not understand the story based on the 
storyboard or animatic, then it must be cor-
rected:
  Are the drawings clear enough?
  Did I show all the elements/scenes rele-
vant to the actions?
  Did I choose the correct shots?
  Did I make the right cuts/transitions?
  Do I need more drawings to make a cer-
tain shot more intelligible?
Chapter 1.1

33
Important Editing Rules
Contrast between shots
As a rule, joining together two very similar shots 
should be avoided.
(1) - (2)
Here, it is better to combine them by zooming in.
With regard to composition, a cut should include 
a contrast between shots.
(1) - (3)
A cut should always be justified in terms of 
content: The new shot communicates important 
image information for the narrative:
In this close-up the character looks at the 2D po-
sition of the observer from (3). This makes it clear 
that he has noticed the observer.
A close-up reveals an important detail of the story 
that is otherwise lost (and vice versa: a close-up or 
extreme close-up of a detail automatically imparts 
contextual significance). 
Script and Storyboarding

34
The cut of 1 to 2 works, because of the contrast between 
the opposing diagonals on which the image elements 
are based.
The basic rules of composition work when applied 
to film editing: Composition on the timeline!
Abstract/graphic image transitions: 
Two shots can also be joined by two 
graphically similar themes. This effect 
is reinforced by precise continuity 
editing in the movement.
In animation, you are free to choose, 
since you do not have to rely on 
material from the shoot, and are 
therefore able to plan each edit in 
great detail!
Chapter 1.1

35
Because of the orientation on the 2D 
plane of the movie screen, it is important 
to adhere to the direction of movement 
between cuts                          , if you want 
to give the impression of a continuous 
movement.
A cut becomes even less noticeable, if 
the exact movement is continued after 
the edit.
Changing the character's direction 
immediately following continuity 
has a disorienting effect, and should 
therefore be avoided as a rule.
If a character leaves the image to the 
right, it will return to the image from the 
left in the next shot as the movement 
direction continues.    
Script and Storyboarding

36
One of the "classic"  violations in editing is the 
so-called crossing the line. As a result, the two 
characters exchange their position between shot 
(1) and shot (2).
This has an irritating and disorienting effect on the 
viewer.
Crossing the line occurs, when the camera 
skips an imaginary line at an angle of 180 ° 
- that is, when the next shot comes from an 
angle at which the actors "jump" from left 
to right (or vice versa).
Chapter 1.1
lV!{&c_ CdwercK -See. 
~dY\ right aYid 
womc}n l-e# 0 
-- -1 
~e 
cqmefd~ 
~~~\'MY) ldt 
drd Wotl'dYJ ri~o 
\ 
/ 

37
Crossing the line can be avoided by using a track-
ing shot around  the characters, or by ...
... inserting a neutral shot without a clear right-
left positioning.
Script and Storyboarding

38
CREATIVE TRANSITIONS OF SCENES
By precisely matching the position and the 
exact continuation of the movement after 
the cut, a connection between similar image 
themes can be established: a match cut.
The most famous example: The transition 
from a flying bone to a spaceship from 
Kubrick's "2001 - A Space Odyssey" (1968). In 
addition, a graphically elegant contrast is cre-
ated by switching to the black of the universe.
This accentuates the dominance and 
importance of the new image motif. The 
composition of the new shot follows the 
1/3- to 2/3 rule.
Not a match cut in the strict sense, but another 
famous edit is the cut to blowing out a match 
to a sunset in the desert from David Leans 
"Lawrence of Arabia" (1962).
The warm yellow-orange color of the match 
"jumps" to the right towards the sunrise, 
while all the other image elements are 
replaced by an empty space.
Chapter 1.1

39
Fast, hard cuts between very different shots 
suggest simultaneous events: parallel edit-
ing or cross-cutting.
In addition to hard cuts, shots can be con-
nected by using soft transitions:
Dissolves and fade out/fade in.  These tran-
sitions are often used to suggest the lapse of 
time:
Typically, a scene might fade out in the black 
of night, and in the next shot, fade in to the 
morning of the next day. 
"CLASSIC" FADE IN AND FADE OUT
Example: In close-up, the character tells of his 
dream of emigrating to America.
A cross dissolve indicates that time has passed.
The following shot shows a horseman in long 
shot in an American landscape: The narrative thus 
suggesting that the narrator has made his dream 
come true.
Script and Storyboarding

40
As pointed out in the examples, camera 
movement is another essential means of film 
design with regard to editing: This applies 
as a component within a shot, as well as for 
Camera in Motion
transitions between scenes. Tracking shots 
can be done freely in all directions, particu-
larly in animation film. No real movement, 
but a similar effect is achieved by zooming. In 
addition, there are effects such as rack focus/
partial blurring. 
Chapter 1.1

41
It is interesting to note that in 2D and 3D ani-
mation film real cameras or lenses are no lon-
ger used, but a software that virtually " rep-
licates"  these effects. This has eliminated all 
the "physical" limitations of a real camera, 
thus opening up a world of new possibilities 
for animation film:
Creative transitions for animated film
As opposed to live-action film, animation film pro-
vides unlimited possibilities in creating transitions 
between two shots: 
  Unlimited use of tracking shots, which are not 
limited by physical objects or locations
  Metamorphoses
  Abstract graphic/shape-based opposites or 
matches
In animation film, unconventional and innovative transitions between shots, which differ 
from conventional cutting techniques, are also possible. In fact, the animation filmmaker 
has all the freedom to explore his creativity! The digital revolution and the convergence 
between animated and live-action film have opened many doors for smooth scene tran-
sitions in live-action film as well.
Script and Storyboarding

42
My former Professor Albrecht Ade has repeat-
edly said: "The place where they cut in live-ac-
tion film, is where it gets interesting in anima-
tion film." I fully agree with this observation, 
would like to add, however, that these stylis-
tic means for innovative transitions should 
be implemented in such a way that the story 
remains intelligible. This only applies, if you 
want to tell a traditional and narratively linear 
story; for a strictly experimental animation 
film, the purely visual/aesthetic elements 
may dominate.
This technique has almost become a "trade-
mark" for my own films (here examples from 
the "The Cold Heart", 2013): not only does it 
link extreme perspectives by means of ani-
mated (and hand-drawn) tracking shots, but 
it also implements the changes in perspec-
tive in a way that it supports the story's effect. 
Instead of using a vanishing point perspec-
tive, a perspective of importance is used to 
illustrate the status of the various characters 
as the story unfolds.
Animated transitions can be 
used so that certain aspects of 
the story become more clear 
and obvious: If, for example, you 
don't "split" two shots by editing, 
but join them directly with an 
animated tracking shot, then the 
issue of crossing the line can be 
avoided and you have created a 
visually appealing sequence.
Chapter 1.1

43
Script and Storyboarding

44
A layout or 3D layout goes one step further 
than the storyboard, and precisely specifies 
field of view, tracking shots and angles during 
a shot. Layouts provide the basis for the sub-
sequent animation of the shots. This is not a 
"one-way street", since the animator might 
want to break up the scene differently later 
(e.g. placement of characters/camera an-
gles), which would require changes. A layout 
can therefore be modified later. A 2D layout 
is created in a traditionally or digitally drawn 
form. A 3D layout is created as previsualization: 
generally rendered as low-resolution versions 
of the character models, or even with rough 
geometric shapes as "doubles" of the charac-
ters. This allows for each shot to be planned 
STORYBOARD
What is the Difference Between a Storyboard and a Layout?
Chapter 1.1
~kt!OlY ~IN! 0 NINB" 
&-of2-Yl3()AlQI> f-S; ot< . IT 
1~ ABoorlJHOB2sr;.W>\KG 
or-TI-IBSTOVlY, A~ 
..sREt:>-
,Al'<o Ft€XIBit..rT'( fbK 
CONSfANIC\4AN65 • 
l"rmi~CAS£11\6~ 
[)o6S. NOT &vb6GSI11-16flr-JAL 
1.../\Y()lf\O,e.. 11-IE G XAC1 S>TAbll'h 
-nE ~IV€ 
IS t1C)'ST' lrt-
ft>JZtA~. 
USVAU..l.f lll~ 6Nnf26l..'f SFftc.tENr 
ro12--ru£Srof'2-'(60A.¥2:t> To SK5lOtt 
A ~Vb\-l IDGA OF'll-lt £t;VII20Nt1e-rf-
As. lOI'IS A.S. -r1J8 t>AA~!ef>IC.. 
I 11 R::>lz!ANCC ,A>iD-rnE F<S-6VAl\ll 
A C..TION IS. C()tmUNICAT6t> CI..GAflL'f. 
0 Nt>i Tt-(.e .).A 'VOiff"" f"'<D/IDS.S 'f1NAl-
CLA.e.!1'i J$Jo< T\1-C WAY AcnorJ~ 
AILG~N Fe:> 11-ti<DVC:rlt CAN6i2A. 
Hovs-'6<-ff.S o~ zoot1S W rnH N 
--rt.IE -SA~ St!O\. 

45
so precisely that, during the actual produc-
tion of a computer animation, backgrounds, 
for example, have to be modeled only as far 
as they are visible later in the film due to the 
pre-specified camera positions.
LAYOUT
!
The layout serves as a template and working 
basis for background painters and animators 
using the 2D process. For more complex 
productions, the layout procedure remains 
"negotiable", especially in terms of animation. 
The animator may have a different or better 
idea of how the camera is supposed to "see"the 
character in his scene.
Once the camera movements have been precisely 
defined in the layout, you only need to create 
the background, which can also be "seen" by the 
camera throughout the scene. Accurate layout 
planning can help avoid unnecessary work and 
save money: It just has to be drawn/painted (2D) 
as background or modeled as surroundings (3D), 
which will show up later in the film!
For the storyboard, it is generally sufficient to convey 
a rough idea of the environment, as long as the 
dramaturgical significance and the actual action(s) are 
clearly communicated. A typical 2D layout often sets 
up backgrounds with such details, that the background 
artist can use them as an exact template!
In comparison to the overall picture, here is an 
insertion of the "wrong" vanishing point perspective, 
which works in the tracking shot, since it only 
shows the respective field of view and not the whole 
background as shown here. The exaggerated vanishing 
point perspective supports the sense of "dropping off".
Script and Storyboarding
'BY ~IWG Dlffl$'Nr CO~,,THe 
Dlf'PER.6NT CAH~ P~rTID~ 
W J'TI.ll N A ~or CAN OC Cl.€-At..LY 
MA~t>. 
Of CO.Jes£, (~fECI ALL-Y rN -l;MAU... TCAMC: 
OT<...ON)'OUI'!.. ovr-.! flL~) YoUCMIA~o 
WC!<k W rrti 1\ \4YBl'<lt> fO~M CYF LAYOIJI 
AIIP -sm~yg~. 
z~ 
No 13k<J:;l"cul'<1> t1 U~T "BE. CRCAT6t> 
B£YDND<1l£ 2o;.G-rn.<r IS Pst£VANI 
I ~A-VI£~~) . 
THG LAYooJI AL.So I-\B.PS1t>D6161lt11l'le 
Wl-\€.)'(.5 D€\'Ai~ AI<€ ~l.i;VANI ,AND 
\tJ HGRc TflE.Y CAN 'BE l..€fT (C)I.j\. 
NATVIeALL'1, IF YoV WANr c.otfPlSJE 
1=Z.s<lett.r1Y f'bp.... 0\HG(.'A t1 OV6t1GI'-~1 
You I-lA..€ To~ 
ACcnPlblt:. 
Glwi~NMt.Nr. 

46
LAYOUT AND STAGING
A good layout should also help to avoid any unfavorable overlapping of the 
acting characters with too many details in the background: Backgrounds 
should function as a stage for the actors of the scene and should not com-
pete with them visually. This must be planned for the entire shot and for all 
character placements in the layout!
Correct!
Incorrect!
Chapter 1.1
/oo HAN'-( Sl H li-Al'2- $APe-S 
ANDI5XTVRE;..S AA:: OV6RL..Af'fii.J<O. 
A 1..-t-. ClAl2-tTY If. Losr. 
N D ST7\GE ro P-THE c.HAR .. MTEJe... 
~9rA€.1N<&. 
v.1)t.A"P Z..ONE. u 
w 11140<JifDt-~CTlON.AL.I TY 
""fVR 11\E: S'ft>l2-'1Tbl.LIN(, . 
NO~L..~ =£HPTY. 
-n.tt. STA6e (~~IN&') 
'fOp-me MAIN q.~AMC!BR.. 
A~tJ'TroN 
, \~ DIRc:CfBZ::> 
T0111€ 
HAIN FI6URE. . 

47
Transitions between the storyboard and lay-
out are fluid, depending on technology and 
size of production: For smaller 2D produc-
tions, the storyboard is often planned with 
the precision needed to fulfill the task of the 
layout. The more task-specific the process 
and the larger the studio, the more the 2D 
story production separates visual storytelling 
of the storyboard and refinement later in the 
layout. Large studios like Disney had estab-
lished a specialized work step for this: 
They created a workbook that meticulously 
converts/converted the storyboards into de-
tailed layouts of each shot. Overall, the im-
portance of a layout stage in 2D production 
has somewhat diminished. While predefining 
camera positions is still an indispensable step 
in order to determine, for example, the size 
of a background to be created, new digital 
means of production have made this process 
much more adaptable and flexible:
  Shots can be repeated or varied relatively 
easy.
  Thanks to fast computers and large hard 
drives, high-resolution background files 
can be used for extreme zooming in and 
out without compromising quality. In 3D 
production, a drawn storyboard is often 
created first, followed by a 3D layout in pre-
visualization. This is an essential step, since 
a hand-drawn storyboard can never reflect 
the actual technical circumstances and vir-
tual "reality" of 3D models and backdrops.
Incorrect!
Script and Storyboarding
A V6RY INfoRTA"-11 A.>f'..PTfo\-J OF 
l11e l..AYour IS10fCW~ /10 ftAt--{ 
.S~ tN S\JOH A 1-JAY!Mr ~FU~ 
~fbN 11\6 POSTTI oN ~11le ~ 
AND11+6""&f\Cf<&f/()()Nt> AF8 A~ 
! N 11-\e CO\J~8 OF A ~1401 u 
Ol.lr~IDG 11-\C FAAnt. I 
A{ffi:;f !?An 0 = 
IN\JIS:\131..& 11-l\tle fil-M~ 

48
Simply put, an animatic is a filmed version 
of the storyboard with the approximate tim-
ing of the subsequent movie. Added to this 
are sounds and layout music (temp tracks). 
Where final dialogue has been pre-record-
ed, or the final music exists, they should, of 
course, be included!
An animatic is indispensable in order to 
try out the story as closely as possible to its 
cinematic form with sound: A test audience 
should be able to follow the story in this 
version already, and the appeal of the story 
should come across. The animatic should cer-
tainly be revised and improved throughout, 
until timing combined with storytelling func-
tions well, above all. There are no fixed rules 
on how detailed or precise an animatic must 
be worked out: However, the more it resem-
bles the subsequent key frames (extremes) 
of the animation, the more convincing it is. 
In addition to the storyboard, the animatic 
is also the medium of choice in "selling" an 
animation film without having to go into the 
costly production stage. 
This applies internally to studios, as well as ex-
ternally with potential financial backers. The 
advantage over the storyboard is, that by in-
corporating time and sound, an animatic con-
veys a better idea of the cinematic version to 
come: With a perfect animatic, the viewer can 
simply sit back and understand the presented 
story without any complicated explanations 
(and might even laugh in the right places). A 
Leica reel is an animatic, in which the shots 
throughout the production are replaced step-
by-step with the latest version of the produc-
tion: in 2D, the storyboard drawing is replaced 
with rough animation; rough animation is 
replaced by clean-up, clean-up is replaced by 
the final rendered/colored version. In 3D ac-
cordingly, storyboard is replaced with previz, 
previz with playblast, playblast by the final 
rendered version.
Animatic and Leica Reel
Chapter 1.1

49
This example from my film "The Cold Heart" illus-
trates the principle of an animatic or Leica reel: 
On the left side, you see the fully animated version 
of the drawings (Davide Benvenuti, Tan Wei Keong), 
as they appear later (cleaned up and colored) in the 
film. The right side shows the Leica reel version 
of the film, which is based on my storyboards and 
layouts: A drawing here serves as a placeholder, so 
to speak, for several animation drawings represented 
in the actual length to be inserted later. 
You can also see, how the layout drawings provide 
a working basis for the animation, and how camera 
perspectives have been precisely defined. It is easy 
to see how the animation of extremes (key frames) 
changes as it leads to improved or smoother move-
ments. The Leica reel produces a "pre-version" of the 
film to come, an ever-changing "work in progress", 
which can be used throughout the process to test 
the length of certain shots, showing them within a 
larger context. Another essential tool: It is the only 
way to maintain an overview of the emerging film as 
a whole (!). 
This is so important, because the effect of a single 
shot can only be assessed adequately within the 
given context. I often ask my students to insert a new 
animated scene into the Leica reel, as it is the only 
way to assess an animation correctly and to make 
suitable suggestions for improvement. This helps sig-
nificantly in determining priorities for the production 
process and for improvement of individual shots: 
An animation that raises questions when considered 
in isolation, can work or sometimes only be correctly 
understood when viewed within its given context.
Script and Storyboarding

50
Drawing remains an indispensable means 
of expression for almost everyone who is in-
volved in animation. A quick, simple but ex-
pressive sketch is still the most effective way 
to present visual thinking and use it as a basis 
for discussion: "A picture is worth a thousand 
words." In this instance, it's not about refined 
Figure Drawing 
for Storyboard and Animation
Drawing for storyboard and animation requires a different 
focus in education than the classic academic training: The 
quick grasp and understanding of form and movement 
becomes essential.
"finalized" drawings, but about clarity, which 
communicates an idea in a visually compre-
hensible manner. Practicing your own draw-
ing talents still remains an important aspect 
in the 21st century - whether with a digital 
drawing tablet or the good old pencil does 
not matter much.
Gestural Approach: 
Quick Sketching = The Essence of Movement
Animators and storyboarders must practice 
the skill of fast perception and communica-
tion through drawing. In figure drawing, it 
is crucial to pay attention to the appropriate 
accents: What is important for the animator 
is usually very different from the main focus 
of a painter or other "classically" trained visual 
artist: the animator is interested in the overall 
impression of the body in the pose, expressed 
by line(s) of action. The key is not to get lost 
in details in terms of nuances and detailed 
structures, but to understand the big picture. 
Quick sketching and capturing impressions in 
just a few minutes should become a daily rou-
tine and always be part of the figure drawing 
process. Keeping a sketch book, either digital 
or analog, also helps in training this skill. This 
type of drawing is called gestural drawing. 
Chapter 1.2

51
Quick sketches with brush pen, Hannes Rall, 2013.
This type of drawing is vital to animators, be-
cause it is important to capture the essence 
of the movement, the expression of the pose 
and its change by using only the line, with-
out being distracted by unnecessary details. 
In hand-drawn 2D animation, the animator 
will also accurately apply the extremes or key 
frames, in order to be able to illustrate the vi-
brancy and spontaneity as well as maximum 
expression and the essence of the movement.
Figure Drawing for Storyboard and Animation

52
This is also very useful for 3D animators, who 
learn in this way how to recognize the essentials 
for animation, to see the lines of movement, and 
to block in figures or anatomy in basic shapes. 
This is an important approach for the anima-
tor, since it allows him to carry out complex 
movement sequences in figures by connect-
ing the changes of basic shapes in the figure. 
How do I draw for animation?
Always from rough to refined: If the primary 
changes of the lines of action are correct, the 
changes of the form defined by the lines - in 
the sense of the "bigger picture" - then any 
details added later as part of this concept will 
work as well. 
If, on the other hand, you get lost in minor 
details and your drawings lack expressive 
contrast, the animation will turn out disap-
pointing. The following drawings illustrate 
the different key aspects between rendering 
figurative studies for animation and classical 
academic figure drawing.  In this context: 
Many animators use thumbnails to roughly 
conceive and try out the sequence of a scene, 
Chapter 1.2
fD~ 1\-\C AN\MA\Of....,QOtacLY 
CAf\\1~\ t4 G -n~€ ~cNC€­
ov-ruE ~ 
IS ($Q(\AV 
-- \-\O'vJ IS~ \,.IE\6.«" 
"D 'SIR' ~u~, \rl \\61'£. ues1'l\e 
a~ 
o~ fif.fl.vrN: 
-U\\ld-\ uN€.S coti!iuNicArB 
~E. 'foSE t{a;\ gffC\~M'Y~ 
----w~~ A\<6\l-EI..l~ 
/tft\~1; 
.-11\t ~o~ 
1N"'T\\E-BoDY 
. M.Vs'l 13C Gt1Ptl:A.S.I"Zc'D ~~ 
I~B -v..P..."-11 N6 -
~.,s. A~-r:£1-l~y 
NE~· 

53
since they often possess an incredible vitali-
ty and spontaneity. These thumbnails can 
also be created as fast sketches of complex 
sequences of movements with a model - a 
great way to achieve credible animation by 
using reality as the basis. However, styliza-
tion, simplification and exaggeration should 
be used even when nature sketching! For 2D 
animation, you can simply use the copier to 
"blow up" the sketches in size, then mount 
them to the peg bar and use them directly as 
extremes. Even 3D animators can use thumb-
nails as a reference to check if the 3D anima-
tion has retained the fresh look, strong silhou-
ettes and the essence of the expression!
Expression and silhouette
For the classical academic 
training in the traditional 
visual or fine arts, poses are 
often drawn for hours, if not 
days: It involves the meticu-
lous study of shading and a 
perfect representation of "re-
ality". In contrast, it is more 
important for the future or 
professional animator to 
quickly grasp the expression 
of a pose, reduce it to the es-
sentials and, if necessary, to 
exaggerate it for maximum 
expression. While drawing, 
he will also look for the angle 
that provides the strongest 
silhouette, and prepare sev-
eral versions from different 
perspectives.
Figure Drawing for Storyboard and Animation

54
Figure Drawing 
for Animation and Storyboard - 
Done Right!
In my opinion, figure drawing remains an im-
portant aspect of animation: For 2D anima-
tion, it is vital to be able to draw human (and 
animal) anatomy credibly. But it is helpful for 
3D- and stop-motion animators as well.
An animator's lack of knowledge of how the 
center of gravity in the body can be displaced 
during movement, for example, will result 
in unnatural and incorrect animation. In 3D 
animation, it is noticeable that the figures of 
many hopeful beginners move - as if drawn 
by magic - from a static pose (such as sitting) 
into an upright position with mechanically 
inserted in-betweens.  Again, this is because 
of the lack of knowledge about how weight 
in the body can and must be shifted in order 
to make standing up possible at all: Bearing 
weight on one body part is accompanied by 
the relief of another; an upward movement 
of the body is prepared with a counteraction. 
The anatomy defines which body parts are 
used for this and how it affects the interaction 
of bones, muscles and joints. Frequent figure 
drawing, that is, the sketching with a model, 
helps the animator to develop a repertoire 
of credible poses and stages of movement, 
which he can then "recall" and vary in his an-
imation.
Figure Drawing for Animation
Contrast/counter-rotation of body 
axes communicates displacement of 
weight in the body and displacement 
of position in space.
Parallel curves are rarely 
found in natural anatomy 
and should be avoided as 
a design principle.
Using offset curves as a design element 
allows for a much better "description" of organic shapes.
Negative space helps to define correct propor-
tions and spacing.
Chapter 1.2
~Td""rut lb6AOfMANY 
0061 N~,1tt€ FACE \S A 
PART oFTHc HEAD M A 
3, Dln~ot4At.,.t12~~: 
IT H&PSTO l)NDB'<.SfAND~r.#-
~---­
"We HEAv IS ~U I t:r UP OF 
.Sp~nAl- Pl-A~ AND"Tlie 
SY£S, N o.sc, H cOii{Frr 
A~ ~f M1 ~ L--E L£HE:i'ltS · 
CotfBINATION: 1141$ l)(:%f6N 
PRI·Nc 1 PL£ 1 ~ rovND tN N~1VRE 
Dvs~L> ANAIO'Hf<::AL- STR~ 
A}llD GRAVITY. V\~IBL.-6. ANt> 
Affi.ICA6lt. lN ARttS 1 L£6S,EN6G~ ... 

55
  What is the essence of the pose?
  Where is the center of gravity?
  If the model is in balance, how 
do I draw the figure correctly bal-
anced?
  How does the center of gravity 
shift in movement?
  What are the various body axes I 
can see? (Counter-rotation)
  How can I see negative space cor-
rectly, to properly assess propor-
tions and spacing?
Fingers and toes are often more 
realistic when using an asymmetri-
cal design.
For the animator, it is of primary importance to 
create movement and a three-dimensional illusion 
by using the line as a means of expression.
 
In each drawing, the essence of the pose should be 
clearly identifiable, ideally the pose should be clearly 
distinguishable as a silhouette as well.
The animator has to know how weight is distributed 
in the body.
Details are neglected in favor of the overall impression: 
The animator selects what is essential for his drawing, 
and  "overlooks" anything that distracts from it.
Depicting light and shadow through tonal values in 
hatching and textures is secondary, unlike classical/
academic figure drawing.
A three-dimensional illusion is produced only by 
overlapping, scaling and foreshortening of lines 
connected to the body axes.
Figure Drawing for Storyboard and Animation
lR£ IJ~ or ACT7oN N.e 
GIEI\~Y"l>ef!N€DIH~Tf-tsr' 
~leGANi U~ Awn N$ 
~6/N~. 
~e.Y 1/eMO~MlElTIC 
IENsloN INTN&~Y. 
~ 
AtiP'AN~ 1 Asl.r/&A~ 
ra;r- Ml7-n>e:~ 1 .9-bvl-c:- flRSr&e 
II BLoC.~t>'' A!S. "fSSPEO'IV£ 
"Boxes·~-m~ MA~ IT£ACJeg_-ro 
L>~~~ 
1lJ€ 0\€AALL -Sl-~Af'E:.. 
S~Wf1l.IIH6 'Rour&+f,Al>I> 
~~l::>AAWING At-so 
~AlL- LATtf!..h 
'woY.lk!;FlNeASASU.~-t~. 

56
Common Mistakes and How to Avoid Them
Chapter 1.2
ovfPAU., LAcK or-
P~S7LY~ 
~~1 -\4eAOT00 
SHALL 1 HAw'DS ANt> 
ff€1 TOO~I6. 
U NN6C/C&s.AP-Y (ANt)) ~ 
WRoN<:,t,y) 11.Sl1\Jtx;e:t>'' 
Te<TUtt~ A~ . 
l-\A'"TW lNG~ o 
fARALLt:L. CURVt~ ( ) 
N AK€ Lgs l.(x)tc:. 
UI<E 
11S.AV~~6G l.f·. 
I~OffiGtfNT ~~o~IN6 
IN~€ fAtE,''RN"Il1~6N. 
UNCLEAr<. u ~or 
~oro( : 
T 00 fAA.cTVi26D "'NT) l.~ctq tJG 
A Cotrr1 NU OltS. 'ftoh/ . 
~~~~~raz­
MmcN oF D~tevnot-l 
oF WGt~'l "T"PDU6f.l our 
l"\1.E. 'B'COY \S t\ l ~~ N 6o 
leri'U~lX>~ 
PE>ANcS-tl~ 
W f2e>Ni0 : LACk. oF Ce:::.RAE.c..T 
Ove.RLAPPtNG AND &::At.{ NG 
~e:s;r~y.$ 1\JE. sPftTI At..-
\ LLU~ION
. 11-te "Cu~v'1 \A 
Ll rt A.T 1\.l E. "801lO'J1 ~ 
l'Jol O£HoNSI~.ATE.. .ANY 
wE:\ bffi"' 'rtf .ACr 
~ 'If.c;:rt€(2.. : 'DIT1eN.$10I-I:ALrr'f 
~ 
'A411e'\€.t> :BY fbl2e5l-JO~IN<;.j 
0\16¥2-l..Aff 1 1\iG . ST'RA~l€¥2-.. 
ll NE .,~r~-n,e 'B01T001 S Vbt:e.ST$ 
~E- \,.E ~~~~ I t1 PACT. 

57
For this purpose, it is important to draw 
firmly sweeping and continuous lines that 
are not interrupted in the middle of the 
momentum, thus destroying the definition 
of the shapes. In other words, no "splitting" 
the body into individual parts, but connect-
ing through lines that overlap with one an-
other. This takes into account the concept 
of line of action, that is, expressively curved 
lines, which connect various parts of the 
body.  In order to be able to implement these 
connecting design concepts, it is important 
to avoid drawing exact parallel/symmetrical 
curves, but instead offsetting them: A trick 
that is copied from nature. 
The recurring principle of contrast between 
lines and shapes can also be found when 
drawing anatomy: Straight lines against 
curves appear more graphically appealing 
and realistic, since this stylistic method is 
based on anatomical reality as well. For exam-
ple, the top of a finger is closer to the bone 
(straight), which stabilizes it, while the under-
side is more fleshy and is "pulled down" by 
gravity (curve). This principle is found repeat-
edly in the body and can therefore be used as 
a design principle. Depending on the degree 
of stylization, this can be exaggerated or be 
left to remain relatively close to "reality". 
Figure Drawing for Storyboard and Animation
&e.N AS ASl~OVETre 
N<lf v~~ss,vcJ, 

58
The head is a good example for this: 
Students often draw the head as an isolated 
"round squiggle" floating above the body. 
This usually results in a proportionally incor-
rect head that is not credibly integrated in the 
overall anatomy. But if you understand that 
the head, by being connected to the neck, is 
part and a continuation of the spine, then this 
will help you tremendously:  The head should 
be included in the drawing from the outset as 
an element of the basic line(s) of action. This 
also means that you as the illustrator take 
notice of the frequently existing overlap with 
the shoulder line, integrating the head as a 
perspective projection in the spatial dimen-
sion of the body. Another common mistake 
is the reluctance to depict feet, often for fear 
of getting them wrong. This is awkward, be-
cause the axes of the feet on the floor and 
their spatial positioning to the body's center 
of gravity are decisive for the balance of the 
figure. Therefore, when drawing the main line 
of action of the body, always draw the axes of 
the feet as well: Even in a foreshortened posi-
tion, it is possible to estimate the rough spa-
tial orientation by measuring on the model, 
and: You can always correct it later.
Three-dimensionality
As a rule, figure drawing is 
about creating the illusion 
of three dimensional volume 
on a flat ("2D") sheet of 
paper. Understanding how 
this is done is immensely 
important and very helpful 
for any budding animator: 
Animators, working in 3D 
animations later on will 
also create their animations 
on a flat computer screen. 
Foreshortening and overlap-
ping shapes are examples 
of methods with which this 
illusion can be achieved. The 
correct use of shading (more 
on this later) can strongly 
support the spatial impres-
sion as well.
Chapter 1.2
l•rn:t ,AND SliAP6".( AAE IHPo/2rANr ~1YLJWc. 
t>€'11 CE.S l o CRGAffi THt. I!.LUSION OF 
'3· P•I16NSIONAt.rry IN 1tte: 'J)AAWJ N Go 
TN I~ IS1>VE lo-mE FICI "iliAr INlB€ REA.I-
"S-1::>1116\ISION.AL--C~:::JsC"f" PJ.At.les AND 
su..:.FA~ f>.R& D1r<cac::D lo'-IA~s. oR AWAY 
fkon ""Ttl& W6Hr ~S- 1. t:: .-rney .A~ 
DI~Y 
0~ 1;.o\~LY ll.l.U111NfiJbl>.IN 
"Tll£€Nt>;nu s T16.,..,N-Sil-!,q- A.Stc::ll.FVI.l-Y 
....SAAt>€.t>'DAA-i tNG Cf?.€~ "ThE ILLUsiOt--frnAI 
The DRAWN ~TIS 
ACIVAU .. .''f 'BUICIVF 
IN S f'A.'TIALL'f l/lsrnE\JlO't> su~ 
WHIC:.H-
t>Ef"' Nt. A vowne." 
Hfi*J> I~ NOT FLAT, 
If co~.~:tsm:: Ot= 
'3'011'1fi«<~VO~o 
z 

59
It is particularly important 
for long poses, (but also for 
sketching), not to stare con-
stantly at the sheet, but to 
take time to really see the 
model: Very often what we 
are offered in "reality" in 
terms of directional changes, 
scale differences and fore-
shortening is much more 
extreme than what we are 
willing to accept. This often 
results 
in 
unintentionally 
trying to make the drawings 
more "normal" or "balanced" 
than the pose is in reality. 
This is because we have a 
mental image in our head of 
the human body in particular, 
which makes it harder for us 
to "see" reality, to accept the 
extremes of reality.
The only remedy is by ab-
stracting what we see, i.e., to 
actually look at the model, to 
measure it, and to translate 
and draw what we see into 
lines, tilt angles, and spac-
ing. The much-used "exag-
geration" often is not really 
exaggerated, but a portrayal 
of reality. In addition to rapid 
sketching of expressive 2-to-
3-minute poses, an animator 
should also practice "sequen-
tial figure drawing": the model 
The Mental Image and Reality
We basically seem to be preconditioned to make 
"reality" "more normal" in our perception. Although 
we (could) see extreme foreshortening, differences 
in length and strong distortions, we tend to draw 
everything parallel, similar in size and "straight": 
Paradoxically, this mental disposition results in a 
false picture of "normality".
follows a sequence of move-
ments (i.e., getting up from a 
chair) into several short-held 
poses in succession. This al-
lows the Animator to capture 
and study such sequential 
movements. This, of course, 
increases the understanding 
of how weight shifts during 
movements and how poses 
remain balanced. The draw-
ings also demonstrate very 
well the already mentioned 
principle of bearing and relief 
of weight as well as the con-
stant weight displacement 
during a movement.
Figure Drawing for Storyboard and Animation
....D_O H~ DK.A'-1 11ie cuai IN Yoi!R HEAD ,. 
L.~ AT!llE. f<G,At.- v11-l/NG,v 
I 
&"n<bNGl.:t VA'f..Y IN 6 .\N D 
Ele~IV€ ~INst Of" ~I{. 

60
Gestural Drawing
This refers to the quick, 
sketchy capture of poses 
with only a few lines. For the 
animator, this form of figure 
drawing is very important 
because it allows him to cap-
ture the essence of a pose. A 
good animator must under-
stand how to represent ex-
pressive poses. By constantly 
practicing gestural drawing, 
he acquires the necessary 
insight of such poses and 
develops a repertoire, which 
he then can draw from in 
animation.
This kind of quick drawing 
focused on the overall pose 
uses the very appropriate ex-
pression of gestural drawing, 
a drawing intended to capture 
the gesture(s). A good start-
ing point here is the already 
familiar concept of "lines of 
action": a rapid capturing of 
these "S-curves" and direc-
tional changes in the overall 
figure. This approach also 
prevents you from getting 
stuck in detailed sketching 
and drawing only parts of the 
figure during the short time. 
If you look at bodies in poses, 
all parts of the body are con-
nected, it's not about isolated 
parts, but about their synergy 
within the "overall concept". 
The goal for animation and 
storyboard is usually simplifi-
cation in the interest of clarity 
and enhancement of effect. 
Just how deeply the animator 
wants to dive into the very 
detailed study of muscle struc-
ture depends entirely on his 
aspiration for realism. In my 
opinion, an overly detailed 
concept is a hindrance for ex-
pressive animation, since it 
often prevents a good grasp of 
the "big picture", and at worst, 
the drawings or animations 
can appear stiff or unnatural. 
A 3D animator often uses a 
model predefined through 
rigging, a process that auto-
mates very complex anatom-
ical details. However, this may 
not work for everyone, since 
other important factors should 
be considered, such as artistic 
appearance and production 
technique, as well as expecta-
tions for anatomical realism, 
some of which may need to 
be created by the animator 
alone. Of course, for someone 
who wants to specialize in 3D 
animation modeling, a de-
tailed knowledge of all muscle 
groups in human anatomy is 
essential.
Chapter 1.2

61
Longer Poses
Of course, an animator should also practice 
longer poses, more precisely defined drawings 
than those short 2-to-3-minute poses. Here in 
particular, the focus should be on the essential 
points for animation: Defining shape with the 
line, understanding anatomical structure, cre-
ating a 3D illusion on a 2D drawing plane, and 
the specific sketching of detailed anatomy. For 
this, feet and hands are of great importance: 
Hands lend expression of emotions, while 
both hands serve as supporting elements 
in the body. Proper positioning of the feet in 
space (angled) very often is key to presenting 
a pose in a credible manner. Drawing hands 
and feet is especially difficult for beginners, 
since they first must develop a functioning 
overall design for fingers and toes to prevent 
the disintegration into individual parts.
Figure Drawing for Storyboard and Animation
\ 
\ 
0V£RLI\fPIN6 OF foi<.MJ 
_ 
Crt€~6~ Sr~nAL IH-
PRE$.~IoNo 
fT(:>UR.6~ AND~ A'l$ 
0 FTGN FI<SSE~ AT I l<REGULAR_ 
I NT6RVA.l,s;. w 111-\ IN IH£ L ARG£fZ 
{)-E.$IbN <SlR VCTUI'<to 
Cor<RB=r: flRSJIDE.NTffY A D£.Q6N 
0 F "3--t>IT1€NSI ONAt.,-aAlE&'' IN &PAC£ 
[\ND Ro!JGI.JLY uBLocK"""TIJE CoNNECTING 
HA.\N 5L6~NTI . f1NE£PSAND-m€S 
A'P.£ AI Fl~Ncrr ~trd\ED fNDIVI-
t>UALL'y 13UT W mt I N A CoNTt){f: 
O'NL.'i -fl£v-J You CAN MOV€ ON TO H<#e 
CL.cf:E,i,y G~~\J6D VE:TA I LS o 
_;:;~, (\ I J 
~\~ .J f _,..(/// ~ 
_,, 
''-~ 
Tl-te:- Co"-'CbPTDP SJP.AI~ ANP c.v~ve.s 
l$ f'Ar<TfC..UL.A~y JH~Orz\At-St To 'DJ'<AW -\-tAND.S 
AND f5Gr COT"tVI I\IC.-tN0L~ 
I 

62
Light and Shadow
For the animator in the classical sense, the line 
in particular is the focus in drawing: In essence, 
how do lines define volume, and how do lines 
change in motion? Shading is usually less im-
portant. However, it may well be both helpful 
and stylistically appealing to study through 
drawing, how the skillful use of tonal values 
and shading can define shape and reinforce 
three-dimensional illusion. The extended pro-
fessional field of animation also includes such 
areas as lighting and rendering, where knowl-
edge of light and shadow and surface struc-
tures is crucial, of course. Similarly, the proper 
use of light and shadow can greatly contribute 
to the effects of a storyboard. Anyone who 
works in the field of animation - or any artistic 
field - should understand and be able to ap-
ply the fundamental principles of tonal values, 
lighting and shading. Tonal values and shading 
in animation and storyboard should be used - 
just as the line - to define volume and shapes 
rather than obscuring them or complicating vi-
sual comprehension. 
The key to this is working with adequate con-
trasts to help distinguish different shapes: 
A common beginner's mistake are drawings, 
which are covered extensively with a very simi-
lar shade of gray. It is important avoid drawings, 
where shapes do not clearly stand out against 
one another, and where the illusion of dimen-
sionality is destroyed by incorrect or exaggerat-
ed shading.
In order to achieve sufficient contrast, the il-
lustrator has to select from the overwhelming 
amount of information offered to the artist from 
the real world. For shapes to stand out clearly 
against one another, light must contrast dark - 
an arm will only stand out against an adjacent 
torso, if there is enough difference in their light-
ness. Therefore, more subtle shades often have 
to be neglected in favor of clarity - besides, a 
one-to-one rendition of the entire complexity 
Chapter 1.2
f~IHAI<-Y L..IGI-tf Sou 
UPfER LEfT., 
""HE. S~A'i>ING H~ S~ 
Th ~Aieft-1€ 1/.L(}Sf 0 N OF 
0-DIHcNsiONAL.rl'/ IN -rn 
'2D t1€DIU'M CFl>RA'w'INGo 
~ 
THESt\~D\N~ HELPS TO 
Dcf1NE \He: Posrno 
IN ~PAC€. . 
U$£ OF CoNTPAST-
LltWT ·I>A-.K TD 
~.. 
DEF1 NE; Sf..! APeS . 
~ 
{_~ G'RE. : Sf..l I NBOT\1€)., 
~~ 
J 
W ~a,: GRAY ON 6RAY, 
« 
~D CDNTI2A$T=-NO D6FtNmor-J 
~F FOI"r1&o 
· 

63
of reality would be extremely difficult. A sec-
ond key factor in a drawing is the identification 
and consistent application of light sources. An 
object or a figure is usually illuminated by one 
(sometimes even two) primary light sources, 
often in addition to diffuse ambient lighting. 
These light sources must be taken into account 
at all times and applied and implemented in the 
Here is a comparison between the correct 
(consistent) and incorrect application of light 
source(s) - please note:
  Used with a figure, light sources should be 
clearly structured - wildly changing shad-
ows from left to right is incorrect. 
  There is almost always a "ranking" of light 
sources: One main light source dominates, 
there is often a secondary light source and 
possible rim lighting and reflections.
  It is important to specify the main light 
source(s) and then apply it consistently(!) - 
different materials reflect light in different 
ways. Glass, for example, refracts light and 
reflects it with hard edges on the surface.
  Very important (!!): Always make sure, that 
there is sufficient contrast between each 
image element and simplify and over-em-
phasize, where necessary, in the interest of 
clarity!
  Shading a scene by using contrasts be-
tween each picture plane can also help 
to increase the spatial effect: for example 
very dark foreground, light main picture 
plane (middle ground) and gray/faded 
background (= aerial  perspective).
same way for all objects in the drawing. There-
fore, you can not shade at your own discre-
tion, but must follow a lighting concept. When 
sketching nature, you will identify these light 
sources naturally, but here too, the same rule 
applies: Select, simplify and provide sufficient 
contrast for the sake of effect!
Soft shading resulting from 
diffuse lighting
Hard lighting from directional light 
source(s). Chiaroscuro effect
Main light 
sources 
from top left
Highlight 
or contour 
edge from 
light source 
behind   
   object
Main light source 
top left
 Highlight 
or contour 
edge from 
light source 
behind object
Light source from 
below
Cast shadow,    
         sharp contrasts, 
                no 
                     shades of  
                       gray
Contour edge 
from weaker 
and more 
targeted light 
source be-
hind object
Diffuse
ambient lighting
from right
Strongest light 
source top left
Figure Drawing for Storyboard and Animation

64
Everything works well here:
1.) Careful attention to light source. Light en-
ters clearly from the top right, all shading is 
consistently implemented in the appropriate 
manner: It is all applied in the same direction.
2.) Consistent spatial structure through di-
rectional lighting. High-contrast tonal values 
have been assigned to distinct spatial planes:
  Out-of-focus gray shapes very close to the 
"camera".
  Dark objects in foreground.
  Medium gray tones and lighter tones in 
"mid-ground", the most important picture 
plane.
  Increasingly gray and faded color values 
in the background - gray outlines or the 
omission of outlines and soft edges rein-
force this effect.
  Gray values define shapes and objects and 
provide clarity.
  The silhouettes of trees and dog support 
the composition and frame the main ac-
tors, who are kept in lighter tonal values.
3.) Shading is used to define shapes and to 
accentuate them. All picture elements are eas-
ily "distinguishable", since sufficient contrast 
consistently makes them stand out from one 
another.
CORRECT
Chapter 1.2

65
Picture planes und Staging
A successful storyboard drawing puts 
the characters perfectly in the limelight 
and shows them clearly "distinguish-
able" against the background (if 
available). This "putting in the limelight" 
is called staging. 
It is one of the most important basic 
principles of animation. If you want 
to create a spatial impression as well, 
then you must define distinct picture 
planes by using contrasting tonal val-
ues and density of detail. This can be 
done in different ways, but always in 
such a way that it appears convincing: 
Most importantly, the picture planes 
have to be very distinct, as can be seen 
in the examples on this double page.
INCORRECT
This does not work:
1.) Shadows are placed in opposite directions, 
and there is no clearly identifiable concept for a 
light source. You can not tell from the drawing 
where the light is actually coming from - the di-
rectional lighting in itself is contradictory.
2.) The illusion of three-dimensionality is de-
stroyed, since the different picture planes were 
not assigned any appropriately modified tonal 
values: The pictures flattens.
3.) Contrasts are missing, therefore characters 
and objects lose their distinguishability. This 
takes away considerably from the effect of the 
composition, which is strong in the line drawing.
Figure Drawing for Storyboard and Animation

66
All the above information also applies to the 
drawing of animals. For the animator, that is 
equally important, since the skillful animation 
of animal movements requires the knowledge 
of the relevant anatomy: We need only consid-
er that the hind legs of dogs or horses "fold" in 
opposite directions than their own front legs 
or the legs of people. Many beginners also do 
not know that the leg of an animal is structured 
quite differently than that of humans: The place 
where one would expect the knee actually has 
the ankle or the equivalent of the wrist. When 
it comes to drawing animals credibly and an-
imating them later, even experienced anima-
tors usually need to first analyze the anatomy 
and movements of the relevant animal species 
through intensive studies of nature or reference 
material. The movements in horses, for exam-
ple, are extremely complex. Nature studies can 
be very helpful in getting a feel for the animal's 
character beyond the purely technical analysis 
of movements, all of which can be incorporated 
into the artistic transformation.
These sketches of mine are focused 
on capturing the lines of action of 
these animals without adding any 
shading. This is a good exercise 
for capturing the essence of poses 
and movements - as is necessary 
for animation. Drawing at the zoo 
enables you to discover typical 
and perhaps unusual movement 
patterns and poses, which differ 
from the cliché, yet are typical of 
the animal. Kangaroos or seals are 
ideal for studying lines of action; 
monkeys basically move constant-
ly and are good objects for the 
quick capture of shapes.
In order to animate or draw the movements of animals correctly, 
you have to know the differences with regard to human anatomy: 
For example, cats and dogs walk on the tips of their finger or toe (as 
compared to human anatomy). What we would first believe to be the 
knee of these animals, actually corresponds to the human ankle. As a 
result, the hind legs for the majority of animals "fold in" backwards in 
"folding-chair" fashion.
"Folding" in opposite 
direction.
Horses even walk on what is the equivalent of 
human fingers or toe nails (= hooves).
Animal Drawings
Chapter 1.2

67
Here some quick sketches of 
movement, combined with 
loosely applied shading. Another 
very interesting aspect in addition 
to the elephant's very distinct skull 
structure is the shift in weight in 
the typical elephant's gait.
  Practice quick sketching of 2-to-3-minute poses during figure draw-
ing: Focus on expressive poses and the line(s) of action!
  Draw only lines of action of the figure in 30 seconds!
  Draw quick poses as silhouettes with a brush pencil!
  Draw sequential poses, i.e. a movement (such as getting up, sitting down, 
hitting a golf ball) in several drawings, all as 2-to-3-minute poses
  For longer poses, concentrate on defining the dimensionality of 
shapes through lines!
  Practice sketching hands and feet and develop a design that works!
 
ALWAYS PAY ATTENTION TO: 
 
 lines of action;  the body's center of gravity and balance; angles of the 
body axes; diagonals of the feet on the floor.
  Draw animals in the zoo in quick sketches! 
 
(The "actors" often don't give you a choice).
  Analyze displacement of the body's center of gravity in the motion of 
animals!
TOOLS: Brush pens are a good drawing tool for quick sketching and em-
phasizing action lines and silhouettes. Additionally, HB and 2B pencils, 
also for more detailed/longer poses, plus eraser.
TIP: These exercises should become part of a weekly routine through-
out an artist's entire life - even though time and opportunities may vary 
for each person. If you don't have a way to practice figure drawing (even 
though many colleges and universities offer courses), going to the zoo or 
sketching from daily life are great alternatives. 
Assignment:
Figure Drawing for Storyboard and Animation

68
Drawing for Storyboards
Storyboards require an easy-to-understand 
and quick-to-implement visual language: The 
drawings must communicate quickly and 
clearly content and camera perspective. For 
Visual Storytelling
A storyboard is primarily a 
means of communication: 
Between story artist and di-
rector, between director and 
animator, between student 
and teacher, etc.. That is why 
the story must be intelligible 
through images: You have to 
be able to quickly and clearly 
understand what is shown. 
Figures must be recogniz-
able, the continuity of the 
action must be maintained. 
If it is to be used for internal 
communication within a 
production team, then the 
primary goal is to be able to 
try out different versions of 
a story quickly: The images 
can even be sketchy and 
very informal, as long as they 
communicate the story!
As with comics , characters 
and figures in the story-
board have to be clearly 
and easily recognizable, 
ideally from all perspectives 
and vantage points. This is 
easier with highly stylized 
and caricatured figures than 
with very realistic characters 
in live-action movies, since 
they often even have to 
resemble real persons. 
This is an advantage of 
storyboards in animation: 
Animated characters can 
be drawn less realistic and 
more simplified.
It may be better to stylize and reduce 
the styling in order to accommodate an 
existing complex design. This is espe-
cially true for computer-animated films, 
where a final design/model can be very 
detailed and would only complicate the 
storyboard. (In advertising, however, 
very detailed finish storyboards are 
sometimes required).
In the storyboard, a character 
often does not have to be one-hun-
dred-percent "on model", i.e., it does 
not have to look exactly like the final 
design - but each character must be 
clearly recognizable.
this, detail is less important, while communi-
cating the context of the story, the sequence, 
is crucial!
Chapter 1.2

69
Spatial Representation: Perspective and Shortcuts for Perspective
It is essential to know the basic principles of 
perspective and spatial design: Characters and 
their surroundings must be presented in the 
storyboard across multiple viewing angles and 
the effects of different camera lenses have to be 
simulated. It is important to be able to master 
graphically the separation of foreground, mid-
ground and background. A more in-depth study 
of all aspects of perspective representation is 
highly recommended, for which additional lit-
erature is listed in the appendix. At this point, 
I would like to provide a brief overview of the 
most common methods of perspective repre-
sentation (regarding the understanding of van-
ishing point perspectives):
Objects that are not exactly parallel to the viewing direc-
tion will get a second vanishing point on the same horizon 
line using the central (one-point) perspective!
If you want to "look around the corner", it is better to work with two real different vanishing points: The viewer no 
longer looks at the screen at a rigid 90° angle: The angles of the horizontal line change accordingly.
Figure Drawing for Storyboard and Animation
ThG VA.NI~HIN6 fbrNr f'CR~c.cnvG WITH 
ONL-Y Oli6 VAN~ING FbNT 'VI6WS l1iE 
Wbi<U> fRo11 A AX£D
14 1<1~D'' qc" 
\I lEW IN6 ANbL£.,1lJIS GXAM PL.f U~£.S 1\Jo 
VAN~}41NG f'oiNf~ R>R Dlff£~ 
Ol)l"J~,S(JT~€ A~Gl.G R6HAINS UNCH~ECD 
AT ctDo. 

70
The correct use of light and color can enhance the three-dimensional impression:
- Objects that are close to the camera are dark and contrasted.
-  In the "mid-plane", between foreground and background, colors are distinct and 
contrasted.
-  The further away the objects, the less distinctive the colors. Colors become 
diffuse and bluish/gray = the so-called aerial  perspective (so called, because 
of the effect of the atmosphere with distant objects).
-  Objects in the distance are sketched, only suggested and details omitted - even 
for color. This simulates the decreasing sharpness of more distanced objects or 
figures
Chapter 1.2
IF You WANT TO SGE'~E ~Of<L.t> 
'FROn 1' u f At?o'vEY (oF?.. t\ A<on &£LOW"') 1 
A ltHm:> VAN ~{.liN6 FbrNT t1Usr Sf 
U~-&Dl 
"11{-ESE Ru~ CAt\/ 1 oF cov~ 
1 VA~Y. £. G . 
W rrti 9LVRQSD D'l>l~ Vl~y IN 
~oNT oFTHF- C.AHe~. How6V6K, 
IT tS. IMPO~TANr To Ct2€Aic 
CotJ'TRASr 1:1€TW€EN THE. VA~JOV.S 
\MAG c PLANSS o 

71
Lines already arranged at decreasing intervals, 
which are "trimmed" by imaginary diagonals, sug-
gesting spatial depth as they approach an equally 
imaginary vanishing point. The latter is located on 
the equally imaginary horizon line, which corre-
sponds to the eye level of the viewer.
Spatial effects are enhanced by adding other pic-
ture elements and structuring through various ton-
al values (see gray triangles, contrasted with white 
areas).  Different line thicknesses are assigned to 
the various picture planes as well.
A very dark picture element combined with the 
appropriate scaling suggests an object very close 
to the camera and can be used to intensify depth 
perception. Other objects can go to additional 
vanishing points, but they must be on the same 
horizon line!
Storyboards often have to be developed 
quickly and with tight production deadlines. 
Therefore, a sketching method should be de-
veloped that allows for essential concepts to 
be quickly and easily identified: This presents 
the advantage of quickly creating, discard-
Shortcuts for Perspective
ing and redrawing drawings for story devel-
opment. That's why it is good to know some 
tricks, which you can use to suggest 3-dimen-
sionality and perspective without having to 
construct a vanishing point perspective each 
time.
Figure Drawing for Storyboard and Animation

72
Basic picture layout 
in foreground, mid- and back-
ground through scaling, overlap-
ping, as well as light and shadow.
Aerial perspective in the distance: 
no details, only line silhouette.
Gray tonal value.
Mid-ground picture plane: Plane 
with highest density of detail.
Gray tonal value, details.
Overlap/Scaling: By simply using the 
correct overlapping and scaling of 
figures and background elements you 
can create the impression of spatial 
depth without having to construct a 
perspective.
The deliberate use of tonal values 
increases spatial impression 
and separates the different picture 
planes. The more distant the 
elements should appear, the less 
detailed they are drawn.
Chapter 1.2

73
If you want to use vanishing points for construction, then it is better 
to first sketch out the general idea: This allows you to place vanish-
ing points correctly and results in more powerful designs  without 
appearing stilted.
Figure Drawing for Storyboard and Animation
t>oWN Si'OI:: IT I.S 
~U ,:'F'IC.I-6NT-TO INt>l ~ 
c:ATE. A fle1)UC6t> 
~ACKO~OVNt>: You CArll 
Se6 Tk€ cSttov,...D. 
~ 
, ........ ,.,.,., s==--------------
VAtH.SMCN6 ro '""" 
VP SHCJT": SAME S\fQC.M, 
~EO'n46JI( WAY Po\lf\10. 
(Vousee.'T'Iole.CE.IL.IN~). 
~ 
........ "''"'"· ..._ _______________ ____,_ ........ 
INi'H!: vt-s~,nu: 
SPAc.tN& B~COMES 
s MAu.c~~t. w I"TH 1 t-4-
C.12EAS! NCO DI&TJlNC.£. • 
~c~NGC.~f'C.. 
Tb CAn£ ItA 8ECOI'Ie$ 
8~ 
. T\4£ SAKIS 
f~INC.\PLe, 6Vr VIc£ 
VEll$,4. 
The: ~V€t~e '*'PPt.e$ 
Tbi'HE l)OWNSWdT. 
1\1/ A\)OITION 01F'F9leo'T" 
Ll N6 '1lol ICICN~ CA .... 
SU66SST" ~1M 
ITY 
C"t\U~)o~ DIST'AN'£ 
C'T\ItWto!Ea.) f'~H nt6 
CA~A. 

74
Light and Shadow for  
Storyboarding - Lighting for  
Atmosphere
The correct use of tonal values, i.e. the sug-
gestion of certain lighting of a shot or a set 
is a very important means of expression for 
the storyboard: Appropriate lighting can ef-
fectively communicate the atmosphere as 
the story is told. The emotional and narrative 
effect of a shot in the storyboard can vary 
tremendously, depending on the lighting. 
Directional lighting can emphasize dramati-
cally certain elements or figures of the image 
or make them almost disappear - thus lend-
ing more or less importance to the narrative 
statement as needed. To show a character, as 
is here, only as a silhouette, leaves the audi-
ence in the dark about the appearance of the 
character, implying almost instantly ques-
tions such as: 
  Why is the character shown this way?
  Is something wrong with his/her look? 
Does he/she have shady intentions or a 
disfigured face?
  Or is it just about the gloomy atmosphere?
Lighting can be used deliberately to highlight 
individual characters, or to create a well lit 
"stage" for the characters to perform. Last but 
not least, you can also use alternating lighting 
effects to communicate the passing of time: A 
good example here is the contrast between 
day and night or the change of seasons. There 
are, of course, more subtle examples as well.
Here some examples on the opposite page:
On the upper left you see the use of light 
tones to accentuate the main characters, 
otherwise the scenery is illuminated rela-
tively evenly, which indicates diffused light-
ing from a cloudy sky. The picture below 
Chapter 1.2

75
  Imagine a storyboard when figure drawing: 
  To do this, first create a sufficient number of "blank" sheets with an 
aspect ratio, a TV screen or movie screen format, for example 16:9 or 
1:2.35.
  The model always adopts 10-minute poses.
  In these frames, you now draw the poses of the model one by one,  
(that is, you create a composition) while imagining a story, e.g. a West-
ern, a science fiction story or something similar.
This exercise practices a quick drawing out of the imagination in combi-
nation with the careful observation of a "real" model. If you are unable to 
find a figure drawing class, then finding friends, who are willing to pose 
dressed will work just as well.
Assignment:
could be a sunny autumn afternoon, the 
lighting is quite natural and follows clas-
sical principles, such as the dark elements 
in the foreground. The third drawing could 
be a foggy autumn or winter morning. An 
additional light source (street lamp) accen-
tuates the dog. Background details disap-
pear in the dark and fog. The very bottom 
shows the most extreme lighting: Night, in 
which the characters are visible only as sil-
houettes, hard contrasts are dominating. All 
these examples have in common that they 
can suggest a certain time, as well as evoke 
a mood. A visual narrator can use both in a 
logical correlation, but also contrary to ex-
pectations.
Figure Drawing for Storyboard and Animation

76
Chapter 1.3
Character design is basically the same thing as the casting 
for a live-action movie: It is about finding the appropriate 
actors for a script or concept - for example, for an animat-
ed reinterpretation of a famous detective team.
The process of character de-
sign can have a significantly 
stronger influence on the 
content development of an-
imation film than casting has 
in live-action film. It often 
goes hand in hand with sto-
ry development during the  
storyboarding process: The 
visual development of the 
characters can affect the 
story to the same extent as 
the narrative requirements 
would inform the character 
development vice versa. The 
character 
design 
process 
usually begins with the tra-
ditional or digital sketch pad.
Almost everyone working 
in the field of animation will 
encounter character design: 
Be it to develop characters 
for your own films, or to im-
plement certain aspects of 
a character according to the 
specifications of the under-
lying character design in a 
studio context.
In a large studio production, 
one or more character de-
signers will work closely with 
the director and production 
designer to come up with the 
right look for the characters. 
Or one specific artist may 
be commissioned for his/
Character Design - Virtual Casting Couch 
for Animated Film Stars

77
her individual style in order 
to leave a mark on the pro-
duction. Sometimes precise 
briefings are in place already, 
defining 
certain 
require-
ments for the characters: 
Since character design is one 
aspect of production design, 
the director and production 
designer, in the case of larger 
productions, will work close-
ly with the character design-
Character Design
Storyboarding
In storyboarding, the written 
script is "translated" into 
film shots (long shots, knee 
shots, close-up, etc.) and in 
the case of animation film, 
cuts are often pre-defined. 
Similar to a comic strip in 
appearance, it differs by the 
fact, that the image format is 
uniformly sized.
Briefing
A briefing (supplied either by 
the customer or internally) 
specifies the content of the 
assignment in detail: This can 
include concepts regarding 
graphic styles, animation 
techniques, length and costs, 
etc. The extent of the exact 
details depends largely on 
the interest and knowledge 
of the client.
er(s), so that the character 
design fits into the overall 
concept of the project. The 
briefings are often very spe-
cific and may restrict suitable 
options, particularly in the 
area of advertising and sim-
ilarly commissioned work. 
Such work is dominated by 
the taste and preferences of 
the customer, usually cou-
pled with the ideas of an art 
director from the supervising 
advertising agency.
Illustration: Kathrin Albers, Michael Meier and Hannes Rall

78
Chapter 1.3
For example, a briefing could be defined by 
embedding a historical element of a story 
("animated comedy in Queen Victoria's En-
gland") and a desired graphic implementa-
A pencil scribble was deliberately not cleaned up, 
but scanned in its "raw" shape and slightly edited 
in Adobe Photoshop (contrast enhancement). 
The background is a classic painting, which was 
reworked as well: Modern digital programs allow 
for fast and straightforward experimenting of 
different stylistic combinations.
The production team frequently "looks at 
every angle" to possibly define the tone and 
style of the planned film project first. In an-
imated feature films, the character designer 
often gets involved very early in the process 
and plays an active role in determining the 
actual style of the film in collaboration with 
the production designer and director. Open 
and versatile experimentation during this 
stage is very important, so that all creative 
avenues can be explored.
tion ("references to contemporary copper 
engravings, strong contrast to painted back-
grounds").

79
Contrast is a basic design principle of animated film, which "runs 
through" character design, timing and sound - just think: small/large; 
thick/thin; fast/slow; loud/quiet. Lack of contrast usually leads to bore-
dom or confusion for the audience!
Character Design
NOTtfvli'....ONC61 
GiJRW Of-,4,/111!f 
'().lfi.IC' GN<&' AND 
Co11fi.£1CLY ~IMI1 
11\E: CWIRACR~ 
~='l:::l 

80
Chapter 1.3
It is also interesting to "cast" 
well-known characters "against 
the grain" - thus counteract-
ing the expectations of the 
audience: Or arranging figures 
in an entirely different context. 
An approach that is frequently 
chosen in the "postmodern" 
21st century.
This frequently results in a mutually supportive 
development process of story and character 
design: In contrast to straight live-action film, 
the actual story of animation film is often not 
developed until the storyboarding process - 
sometimes there is no "classic" script at all. In 
any case, a lot can change and a specific char-
acter design can provide inspiration for new 
(or different) gags and storylines.
Public Domain
This term refers to artistic 
works where the copyright 
has expired (time span after 
the author's death varies for 
different territories) and thus 
can be used freely: Film ver-
sions of public domain books 
or characters, for example, 
can be produced without the 
cost of licensing fees.

81
Character Design
In independent animation film production, 
you can often find the roles of author, direc-
tor and character designer all wrapped up in 
one: In that case, the only limit is your own 
artistic intention.
Develop your own versions of a public domain character with the accom-
panying cast of "supporting actors":
  Start by researching the history and interpretation of the characters 
during different time periods and in a contemporary context!
  Research the era of the fictional characters, and draw up pertinent 
visual studies; decide what is important and useful for your own de-
signs!
  Return to your literary or historical sources and develop a concept for 
your own interpretation:
 
 - genuinely true to the original,
 
 - vaguely inspired, or
 
 - a drastic contradiction to the original?
Derive your own briefing from this, setting limitations for stylistic options.
Assignment:

82
Chapter 1.3
Whether in the studio or independently: The 
character design process will usually begin 
with a collection of reference materials (for 
example, regarding fashion and culture of 
the Victorian era): It is helpful to compile so-
called mood boards in order to narrow down 
the desired visual look by using examples or 
by bundling artistic reference material.
Reference Material: Mood Boards and Reference Maps
Character design is rarely created in a vacu-
um. For the most part, it is necessary or re-
quired by the concept to first find historical or 
other reference material and study it in order 
to get inspired. Specific requirements for au-
thenticity in terms of fashion, weapons, hair-
styles, etc., are not uncommon.  Even if you 
aspire a highly stylized version, it is often best 
to seek inspiration from the  archetype first. 
This is especially true for less familiar charac-
ters, such as special animals.
The Internet is an excellent source for reference material. When look-
ing for reference material, you need to distinguish between authentic 
historical image documents and artistic interpretations of an epoch 
or region from today's point of view and determine, which one it is 
you are looking for. Both can be skillfully combined into the design  
- but the composition of the elements must fit and ultimately result in 
a cohesive overall picture of the design.
1h<>t d\te.<>\\'1 \rod<; vs. 
-m so...._of.lfltoro""mphic 
\Jclnalions. ..... 
C~h"""'.:,ze<~ a.;,\s) 

83
Character Design
A reference map compiles stylistic references 
that serve as inspiration for the final design. It 
is important to understand that this is by no 
means about copying styles but about an evo-
lutionary development process: Combined 
with the individual style of the designer, a 
whole new design is to be created - one that is 
quoted at best, but never plagiarized!
A compilation of 
Victorian menswear
  Create reference maps that narrow down the stylistic direction of your 
cast of characters. This can and should be several maps for different 
stylistic directions.
Assignment:
Mood Board
The compilation of different 
image examples that visually 
communicate the desired 
mood of the film.
Reference Map
A collage of sometimes very 
different image references 
showing the graphic influ-
ences that are to be included 
in the film.
You should already have a 
concept in mind and not ran-
domly select "anything you 
like". A thematic breakdown 
into different sections or 
elements of the film is also 
useful (backgrounds, charac-
ters, props).

84
Chapter 1.3
Sketches for Character Development
Sketching Stage
A character designer will also draw as many loose sketches as possible in 
all kinds of stylistic variations in order to get closer to the optimal design.
It is not without reason that drawing is still 
firmly anchored in the curriculum of most 
animation programs: There is no faster and 
more direct form of visually implementing 
one's own artistic vision.
It is only of secondary importance whether 
the drawing is done traditionally, on paper, or 
in digital form (e.g., with a digital drawing tab-
let): The artistic handwriting always remains 
visible through the immediacy of the medi-
um as the individuality of the designer trans-
fers directly into the design. Quick sketching 
also has a spontaneity and expressive power, 
which is hardly attainable with any other me-
dium. Good character designers will usually 
make a lot of fast sketches, presenting many 
variations of a character in different actions 
and moods. 

85
Character Design
The results of the earlier research conducted, 
influence the artistically tried and tested style 
versions. Especially students and beginners 
tend not to make enough drawings for fear 
of producing the "wrong" versions or "bad" 
drawings: This is faulty reasoning, since even 
Thanks to modern digital 
production methods, almost 
every "stroke" can be implement-
ed in the production process 
unchanged. It is very attractive 
not having to "clean up" spon-
taneous scribbles first, but to be 
able to "blow them up" directly 
by copying them and using them 
as a template for the animation 
(works only for 2D animation, of 
course).
unsuitable designs help to find the right path 
and sort through the visual design process.
In addition, designs often emerge as favor-
ites, which are not perceived as such during 
the initial process of rapid sketching.
  Using a pencil or brush pen (or digitally), draw as many scribbles and 
sketches as quickly and loosely as possible, in order to be able to 
select the best versions later. That should be in excess of 100 scribbles.
Assignment:

86
Chapter 1.3
Since the artists assigned to this first stage 
of development and experimentation often 
come from various stylistic backgrounds, 
many of these so-called exploratory designs 
end up in the drawer or will only be incorpo-
rated into certain aspects of the final design. 
The same applies to the individual designer, 
who will ultimately have to select one version 
from the multitude of designs he created.
Although hand-drawing is still the ideal first 
step towards an original character design, 
other means, mostly digital media and tools 
are added, depending on the animation tech-
nique:
Particularly at the beginning of the pre-pro-
duction or visual development stage, it may 
be quite possible, or even preferred, for one 
or more character designers to experiment 
with a wide-ranging variety of styles. The ac-
tual style of the film has yet to be found at 
this time and the open-mindedness of the 
process can lead to artistically extraordinary 
and outstanding results.
The classic detectives here in 
the style of Germany's famous 
pioneer of animated silhou-
ette film, Lotte Reiniger.
Illustration: Michael Meier
Slutooeae;..-lant-
R€.1~1<£~-Sl'{LC
. 

87
Character Design
The more details are used, the more 
distinguishable they have to be in 
order not to overwhelm the viewer 
visually. The "distinguishability" of 
the shapes in motion mustn't get 
lost in the detail. A principle that is 
often not sufficiently heeded, espe-
cially in contemporary computer 
animation.
For example, in Photoshop or similar pro-
grams, a character designed for 3D animation 
can be digitally painted or textured in a way 
that is close to the final "look" in the movie.
A s:lloll_j&r ~li-zQh'on and 
-SiM~iBc.dhol\ of +he. c~idct:r d®9Yl 
d0€S 1'\Ct J'\e~n'l'j MedVI d l~vc-liOvl 
i11~a~k\1c.. 9\ACll\~-itofleVI 
CdVI \e4d -+o *'<. exdul- qro.sik.: 
lhe·(\~W?.S ac~vire Y\10t€. of d. 
4 u\'IA~v-e. ~llin,j poi>*"(mo.e orl~lmllt~ '\ 1 
si~az. +~ ''peisol'tll 1--dlld"-lnl-i~~ of~ 
des\~'M.(' is, 'MOte c..\edt~ rte~tA
. 
't T~lll'licc~ll'j .s;:pet~\::111j+'he..b~l'ldc.tfj~ 
bdweeN\ 2P dv\.j 3 t> d>~l""c'l k'oYl i..d'V€.... 
be~ 
il'ICf«1S\)'\~.>':J .flv',J . fl.ocle>n '20 
O"i'Man\))\ s~ 
also·,~,d~S. 2.t> 
e~ 
~d kd.Se>-=1 be<:0111~ Capable_. 
o{:- i Y'ld Vld.\"~ sb-e.Q.((ap ,j . 
.S:IlDVt.t> IDtAU..Y ANnJ6FZ. To"TTIE ~­
(QV1~Ef'\61'1f~ Of 'Tflt; Scf".il'f/NM:IZAfil/8 
c-orJarr IF A tllbHCR. L€'16/... OF 
128\LJ~H IS.: REQU1~ To MAl::£ Tilt 
V tsVAl.. SfoR..'{f'EU..i~& CREDI8t.S, 
'"TilE CIIMAClCR.1/6!16N MUST 11\K;t:. 
lll~ INiO f\CcOOtrr. 

88
Chapter 1.3
Final Finishing Touches - Model Sheets and Character  
Turnarounds, Comparison Sheets and Character Maquettes
Final design by Michael Meier of the characters intended for a 3D 
computer animation film.
Additional refinements are usually required 
after the preliminary completion of the de-
sign process and the definition of basic char-
acter design: 
  In 2D animation, an optimization of charac-
ter design by the responsible lead animator 
(or character lead) is often used in larger 
productions. Here, very specific require-
ments of the design's "animability" come to 
fruition, and often particular aspects of the 
design are customized. Usually, the anima-
tor himself is an extremely talented design-
er, who can still make vital contributions for 
further improvements. A famous example 
is the legendary animator Milt Kahl who 
provided the finishing touches for charac-
ter designs in many Disney films.
Once the actual design process has been 
completed, the look of the character has to 
be communicated in every detail and from 
very perspective to all parties involved in the 
production.
This is especially true for traditional 2D pro-
duction, where the method used for drawing 
a character must be standardized. Otherwise 
the character would constantly change its ap-
pearance in the course of a film, depending 
on which animator had drawn it.

89
Character Design
For this purpose, the appearance of the char-
acter is stipulated in so-called model sheets, 
which is binding for all those involved in the 
production process: These are drawings of the 
character in different actions and emotional 
states, often with additional explanations of 
how certain details are to be handled. The 
drawings are produced mostly by the lead 
animator of a character, after experimental 
refinement of the character design through 
animation testing has taken place.
Above all, a good model sheet must reveal a 
character's construction of several basic geo-
metric shapes in order to facilitate the anima-
tor's work:
It is easier, for example, to reshape a circle 
and to draw it in perspective, than having to 
deal with the entire complexity of a design all 
at once.
Model sheet of two characters, which primarily il-
lustrate how the design changes to express certain 
moods of the character.
illustrations: Michael Meier
Model Sheet
A figure is presented in 
different poses and moods 
as well as analyzed visually in 
its basic graphic design.
Often, indications are also 
added for certain solutions 
in the animation, i.e. typical 
movement and behavioral 
patterns and their graphi-
cal solution. The intention 
is to ensure a stylistically 
coherent implementation 
of the character throughout 
the film.

90
Chapter 1.3
Character Comparison Sheet
In the character compari-
son sheet, the proportions 
of the individual characters 
to one another are fixed, 
which is particularly import-
ant in traditional 2D pro-
duction in order to provide 
the animators with a bench-
mark at all times. For the 
implementation in 3D, the 
comparison sheet provides 
modeling staff with equally 
important information for 
the scaling of the charac-
ters. In addition, a character 
turnaround is created: Views 
of the characters from differ-
ent angles from the back and 
front, from ¾- and ¼-turns. 
Such a turnaround allows the 
animators to draw the char-
acter correctly from all angles 
and unifies the appearance 
of the character throughout 
the production, which often 
involves the collaboration of 
many different animators.
Character Comparison 
Sheet
Shows the entire cast of a 
movie in size comparison, in 
order to avoid any fluctua-
tions in proportion between 
the characters during 
production.
Character Turnaround
Shows the typical character 
from at least four different 
angles in a full 360° turn. In 
3D computer animation, this 
is equivalent to the  char-
acter turntable, a constant 
full 360° camera movement 
around the 3D model of the 
character.

91
Character Design
lenge of implementing an unusually drawn 
character design in 3D can lead to innovative 
design approaches for computer animation 
that is otherwise often inclined to apply too 
generic solutions.  
It is very helpful and common to draw a char-
acter design for 3D animation as a character 
turnaround from different spatial perspec-
tives. This allows the modeler later to stay 
close to the original ideas of the character 
designer.
Character turnaround of a character design (in this case for a subsequent 3D animation). 
Illustration: Michael Meier
Specific Requirements for 3D Animation
The foregoing also applies to the final de-
sign of characters in 3D computer animation: 
What is generally first a two-dimensional de-
sign, has to be transferred to the third dimen-
sion - a process which is implemented in dig-
ital modeling and poses quite a challenge. 
It requires great skill and ideally the close 
collaboration with the character designer 
and other creative professionals. The goal is 
to retain the vitality and original charm of the 
initial drafts. The earlier a character design 
takes into account the requirements of a sub-
sequent three-dimensional implementation, 
the less complications will arise in the model-
ing that follows. On the other hand, the chal-

92
Chapter 1.3
Additional modifications can take place in the 
CG workflow, when a character is provided 
with a virtual skeleton in rigging after mod-
eling: Generally, a good rigger will of course 
try to adapt his work to the character, and 
not vice versa. Sometimes, however, certain 
aspects after rigging and animation testing 
may prove rather impractical and additional 
adjustments have to be made.
Ultimately, the more technically complex a 
production, the more essential a precise co-
ordination: A good collaboration of all parties 
involved is essential in order to achieve a con-
vincing character design for the final result. 
Just think of photo-realistic characters with 
highly complex simulations, etc.
Still, the principle should always apply that 
the artistic vision determines the technical 
implementation, and not vice versa!
The finished 3D model is often based on the 
drawn character turnaround, which shows 
the character in a complete turnaround. Af-
ter the process of 3D modeling has been 
completed in computer animation, you actu-
ally no longer need a model sheet, since the 
character is a virtual puppet and can only be 
manipulated within its skeletal limitations 
(character rig). Nevertheless, there are usual-
ly instructions and guidelines on how to an-
imate the character, which angles are favor-
able and which to avoid, etc.
Turnaround model sheet of a 3D character from "Spycat 
and the Paper Chase", graduation film by Darren Lim, 
Derwin Silamaya Suhali, Fung Chun Hong and Soh Yu 
Xian, Nanyang Technological University 2011.

93
Character Design
Character Maquettes
In order to enable an illustrator to visualize his 
character in the third dimension, it is helpful to 
create a so-called character maquette: a small 
sculpture of the character that can be turned 
and viewed from all angles. This helps tremen-
dously in rendering the character correctly, if 
you are seeking to produce an illusion of a 
volumetric character in the "flat" medium of 
2D animation. For many decades, the creation 
Character maquette as part of a final project (Wang Rui Fan, Digital Animation, School of Art, Design and 
Media, Nanyang Technological University).
of character maquettes was common practice 
with Disney for most of the full-length ani-
mation films - at times even with a separate 
department to do that job. Similarly, creating 
an "analogous" sculpture can help shape the 
artist's own artistic vision in the third dimen-
sion before a character design in modeling is 
cast into its final shape for CG.
A 3D animated character is mod-
eled as a wireframe. Therefore, 
the character design has to func-
tion in three dimensions from all 
angles. "Honeycat" from "Spycat 
and the Paper Chase", gradua-
tion film by Darren Lim, Derwin 
Silamaya Suhali, Fung Chun 
Hong and Soh Yu Xian, Nanyang 
Technological University 2011.

94
Chapter 1.3
Character Design for Puppet Animation (Stop Motion)
In puppet animation, perhaps the most fa-
mous form of stop-motion animation, a real 
modeled sculpture also becomes the starting 
point for the puppet. This puppet, which is 
later usually equipped with interior workings 
of wire or even an elaborate movable metal 
skeleton, is also used for filming. Of course, 
the same rule applies in its most direct form 
as well: the design of the character must sat-
isfy the requirements of three-dimensionali-
ty: After all, the character is supposed to look 
good from many - if not all - camera angles. 
For this reason, a design stage with drawings 
is only of limited value, when it comes to test-
ing the three-dimensional design later. 
As shown in the example of the main char-
acter as inspector from the puppet film 
"Whodunnit" by the well-known stop motion 
animator and designer Kathrin Albers from 
Hamburg, the design process quickly pro-
ceeded to the third dimension after some rel-
atively rough sketches in the beginning.
On the right you see the complete 
cast of characters from the film 
"Whodunnit". Here you see the 
principle of an interesting mixture 
and good distinguishability of 
the characters: The characters are 
based on interesting combina-
tions of basic geometric shapes, 
which vary significantly in the 
final result.
Illustrations and design: Kathrin Albers

95
Character Design
It represents an interesting new version of 
the famous detective, who is introduced in 
this chapter in so many different incarnations. 
This three-dimensional form of the character 
would also work well as a digital model in 
computer animation - the design principles 
to be applied are basically the same. "Who-
dunnit" is also a film that is shot stereoscop-
ically, so the dimension of spatial depth and 
plasticity is even more important.
According to Kathrin's experience, problems 
as well as options usually don't show up until 
this stage: A character design that is appeal-
ing as a drawing can have an unattractive ef-
fect in  plastic form; just as a drawing, which 
may appear too conventional or boring at 
first, can work surprisingly well when trans-
ferred to a sculpture. These sketches show, 
however, that the construction of simple, 
but highly contrasted combinations of basic 
shapes can contribute to a successful design. 
Kathrin also explores the power of silhouette in her design 
process. As with 2D designs, this is a good test for the "distin-
guishability" of the character.
illustrations: Kathrin Albers
Here is an example of how such combinations can be transferred from the original 
drawing to the third dimension. 
illustrations: Kathrin Albers

96
Chapter 1.3
Principles of Good Character Design - Style and Overall Design 
 - Character Design as Part of Production Design
It is important to understand that character 
design is not just about creating pretty draw-
ings of appealing characters. According to 
the principle of "form follows function", char-
acter design has to function well in the con-
ceptual overall context of the film: The char-
acters have to harmonize stylistically, that is, 
they must come from the same design world. 
At the same time, they must exhibit sufficient 
contrast as a cast, in order to be clearly dis-
tinguishable and to ensure effective and in-
teresting staging during joint appearances in 
the film.
Three well-distinguishable characters 
- yet even here, a common stylistic 
feature: Reduced to simplest graph-
ical shapes, precise basic geometric 
shapes, simple flat 2D approach. A 
high degree of stylization!
S~l;~tic:. Consistenc~: 
Chdra\er!, pvo~drcl bc~d:wo,~rt: 
2ltt Cted¥~ ;~-the., same. s~1e 
Srof~ &. ChMclvler 'Dedg n 
""'He11 &.G~~ 
lt-1-he. vi~Ud\ cte~e)opl1"1Jl!t p1oce~ 
pi.Js ch:licJddS l~+o q fl(\J con~~ 
~Ls ~i~~t-~bo \edcHOVI~w' 
cJe-elormell·h:. fbt~ siof ~o 
VISitNCfll£ QIJ,4~rflc~ O'f" C-llAtlAciEII!-S GbnBtNE17 
W liN A. UN tFYtN(. OE~t~N CDNC€PJ(I-IEI!E'.-~IC..S·IW~S). 

97
Character Design
We can also add more features 
that help to assimilate the 
characters stylistically: Here it is 
the wide brush stroke, with which 
the outlines are drawn, and the 
addition of graphic texture.
Not like this! 
We are sticking with the basic 
geometric shapes, but the guy in 
the middle does not quite fit into 
the overall cast. Its 3D volumet-
ric style comes from a different 
graphic world. Exception: The 
following story could justify this 
kind of design approach. If the 3D 
sphere were defined as an out-
sider and the story were dealing 
with a conflict between 2D and 
3D, then this design too would be 
consistent: form follows function!
-
t10r<€ STYU.snc... sl t11l.Art..ITie~: OvrUNB~ &:... 
TEX"'T\J~eao 
-
PoStN& (\.J rfH STRow<.o 1-lfleS'or Aa'"tOW'I) 
Cor1HVNICAT6.S. A..; Mrlf\JD!;. 
-
Sl'YLJSrJC. I~ISftitkY ·. A CHA11.ACTC-i!-
{n 1 Dt>l6) {26,_.Dtt£D I tJ A '3D- VOLUT1ertl.IC-
S1YLC C~6AiU-'f I.S. A.T ODDS V!rTH 1lH~ 
HotZE Gl2f>.P~ Je- ·CI-I A.l'l,6cr61"!-. D696NS OF 
114€ OT1!£R 196\JRO~o 

98
Chapter 1.3
Character and Environment
It is also important to ensure that the inter-
play between the characters and the environ-
ment of the film, i.e. the background or virtu-
al space, works well. There are basically two 
possible approaches.
Illustration above: 
The style of the characters and surroundings/backgrounds are very similar 
and have the same stylistic features - this unites both as elements of the same 
world. This approach, however, requires careful staging to ensure that the 
characters always remain "distinguishable" against the background. This is 
especially true for 2D production.
-
C-HAMGTEI<. AND --sAC#:::GROU"'D IN llie S,AHE LlXJK : 
CAr<.CFlJt,. P~ANNING OFT~€ SfAbiNG Mv~ Au,o'v./ 
EAr;.y READA'EitnY~ THe CAAAAcreR HA&To StABLE To 
P6~foRvt rr~ Actio~ 1N~E cou~~e CYF-r-HE SC6~6 
'N ~\Jcti A WAY -ntAT rr N.JrJAY~ RE MAlN~ CJ.,EARL¥ 
REc06NlZ,tt31.E-
A(oAIN~ -mE -sAcKG~OVN"Do 

99
Character Design
Illustration below: 
The other approach is the deliberate stylistic contrast between character and 
background. For a long time, this was an economic necessity for 2D film, since 
only static backgrounds could be painstakingly painted. The advantage of this 
method is the good separability and distinguishability of the characters against 
the background. The obvious disadvantage lies in the stylistic discrepancy 
between the acting characters and their surroundings. However, this "breach" 
has been artistically accepted for a long time in the world of traditional 2D 
animation film.  As with all design decisions in a production, a consistent and 
convincing implementation is particularly important.
-
Cl4.AI<AG"$t< AND -sAGKGROUND IN ~oN~L-YDIFFERING 
SlYLG&: EVEN WITH STRONG OV6~LAffiNG OF fiGURE 
AN"'D 131\tk~ROVt\J D ,11-tE. aAf!.ITY ~~ GU~ANTtEDo 
\T l~ ~CCB~A-r<.Y, NEV€:~$~ ,To 6cr-A8LI~tt 
SIN\LA.~JnE.~ INI1t6 DESJGN-S. OF---rt\E Af,U~~ ANt> 
isA.cK<OY<o~~i~S,IN D~06RIO AVOID A~UQ"IC- ~I{EAk
. 
\N TI-llS cAs.~,ITYLJSTIC c~~cy 
'~ ACNI€V6t> 
Sf AffLYit-k5 --ruE ffiNE:PAL CoNCEPT OF ~ol\1(7 
Si'(L.\2ATioN. AN~.Sit11'1-lf1(J(Tl0~ Of c~ 
At-lD 61-NI~OrENTo 

100
Chapter 1.3
This is where the style of the UPA Studio in the 
50s and 60s came in and broke with the com-
mercially established tradition: An overriding 
design concept combined stylized characters 
with equally strongly stylized backgrounds 
and created a stylistic unity.
In commercial 3D films, a mix of the two ap-
proaches is usually used: Using photo-realistic 
rendering, "cartoony" characters are unified 
with   equally detailed and mostly realistical-
ly structured environments. The use of cine-
matographic stylistic devices (depth of field, 
cinematography and lighting), which is more 
closely related to live-action film, facilitates 
effective staging. The character designer's de-
sign must also meet this concept.
The semi-realistic character designs shown here could 
be used both, for implementation in 2D (drawn) as well 
as in stylized 3D computer animation. For a 3D version, 
character designers and modelers would need to work 
together closely.
illustrations: Michael Meier
* UPA was an innovative animation studio in the 
United States with a revolutionary impact in the 40s 
and 50s: It established modern art and graphic de-
sign to be used for commercial animation. This often 
involved the technique of limited animation. 

101
Character Design
Appeal
One of the classic principles 
of animation is that the 
characters of an animation 
film have appeal. Appeal 
should not be understood as 
the drawing of "cute" charac-
ters, (a misconception pop-
ularized by the illustrations 
of cute anthropomorphic 
cartoon animals frequently 
shown in reference books). 
Rather, it is about designing 
appealing characters. If a de-
sign is consistent, even char-
acters commonly regarded 
as "ugly" or threatening, can 
have a lot of appeal. Good 
examples of this are the char-
acters of Tim Burton, which 
-at least initially - ran counter 
to the usual Disney stereo-
type of beauty or aesthetics 
(and thus the established 
mainstream-market). 
How-
ever, they are in themselves 
a graphically completely co-
herent expression of an artis-
tic vision and therefore have 
an enormous "appeal". Iron-
ically in this case, the taste 
of the commercial masses 
changed completely over 
Principles of Animation
The traditional principles of 
animation were first devel-
oped by the animators of 
Disney Studios in the 1930s, 
combining the analysis of 
live-action film and exper-
imental artistic interpreta-
tion. Since then, they have 
been continuously expanded 
and refined, but have re-
mained applicable and valid 
in their original form to this 
day. However, this applies 
primarily to Disney's school 
of "caricatured realism". 
The principals of motion 
dynamics in particular, work 
very well for stylistically very 
different or even experimen-
tal/abstract animations.
Chapter 2 deals with these 
principles in detail.
time, and now the creations 
of Burton are part of the 
mainstream, which is certain-
ly due not least to the graph-
ic consistency, the appeal of 
the characters.

102
Chapter 1.3
How do you Design Characters With Appeal?
Interestingly, deliberate and 
purposeful design is often 
perceived as "appealing" by 
the viewer: Animation re-
quires shapes that can be 
animated in such a way, so 
that their complexity does 
not complicate a convincing 
animation. Thus, an econo-
my of shapes, resulting from 
an economy of production 
means, can lead to a very "ap-
Illustration above: 
In the same way, you should also be able to trace more 
complex and realistic characters to a single basic shape 
or a combination of basic shapes in order to achieve a 
strong design. With this method, you can also achieve the 
desired contrast between the individual cast members of 
an animation film.
The cardinal's design concept  
Richelieu deliberately avoids any detail 
to emphasize his mysterious/menacing 
character.
pealing" design: One might 
visualize 
characters 
com-
posed of simple geometric 
shapes, and combine them in 
an interesting manner.
-
C+!ARACTBI2. DE?.r"IGN 1 WHIC+t IS 
~S:GD ON Ttl€ HI61+L-Y Vf\R\{;[7 
ANt> Co~l-f<.lc+i CoKUINATI0"-1 OF .SIMP~ AND '&UIC-
6 60M~"i"RIG ~HAftS. • 

103
Character Design
Composition and Proportion
For a good design, it is crucial 
to combine basic geometric 
shapes in an artistically con-
vincing manner. In doing so, 
the fundamental rules gov-
erning 
good 
composition 
come into play: Irregularity 
and interesting variation of 
shape and line. Furthermore, 
contrasts between the shapes 
Left an example of a very well-
known cast of characters.
within the characters and fi-
nally, stylistic means, such as 
the line of action, which com-
bine contrasting individual 
elements into a whole.
The relationships of the char-
acters in a cast should also 
be intelligently reflected in 
the design, thereby support-
ing the effects of the story on 
the audience and reinforcing 
narrative clarity.
waR~ w 1TH ..SMAW... AP"JVtrNe"iT-s- EveN FOIZ Moe.c 
REALISTIC. ~£S'l6N~, 

104
Chapter 1.3
Cast of Characters and Design
Combining character traits and 
story with design and composition. 
The following important 
objectives 
are 
achieved 
with this type of construc-
tion and composition :
  Clear distinction of the 
characters (good contrast 
between each individual 
character).
  Concept for an overall de-
sign of a group.
  Statements about char-
acter traits and relation-
ship of the individual 
characters to one anoth-
er through design and 
composition.
  Connecting 
narration 
and design - "form fol-
lows function".
Tilt angles, dynamics and character traits 
(analysis of lines of action):
Group composition: The composition 
divides the ensemble into 3 groups of 3 
primary basic shapes:
1)'AroqnqY\ , +he. 
c\~V\C\W'I ·c 1 yo~.fu.\ 
hero,w~o ~oit\S.-4lle 
fe<JMo 
lk lr id~)e.. of-
l<fd·diev J..ffe 
+ne e~isti~ -tedM of-
~inis\er dVlt-.q 8o~i& 
+V\e 3 rAVsKd-€€f-So 
)Y\+he ~3fovndl) 
Wi~il\ +he. qyovp, 
~ 
ifldlvidud \ ct-cHddeCs: 
di {fef cled r\,j i~ f\'R\ r 
CD'\stnJcn~"' 
-:II 1Av+ cJ~""' d ~ : 
ver~ d~rd'Mic... 
LD~g red-dr"r()le, 
Std-lic o 

105
Character Design
A character designer is creating a virtual actor. 
That's why he can not sit back satisfied after a 
half-way accomplished drawing, but must try 
to figure out through many sketches, how his 
character can express and perform the emo-
tions and actions required for the film. 
Weight and Balance, Personality and Action
A common beginner's mistake 
in character design is to design 
characters in completely neutral 
and nondescript poses. Often the 
figures lack a credible balance 
and representation of the center 
of gravity.
This can and must be avoided 
by understanding the attitude 
and motivation of the character 
prior to drawing - along with the 
physical balance and the line of 
action. In other words: Give your 
character a purpose!
~ 
Arrws. indiCdl€. 
~Cf>!l<ll'Of­
':)<dvi~o 
1 roiR'lO 
MY ~J/IIf(S) 
of'ACfiONb 
-MilcH~ 
!,(J..f;AP-. IIIT6RNAL-HC1TIV,4TJON 1>6TB2-HINCS 
I"« I:; fMESo C61JTE#ZOF 6f!AV 1-r)' ,ANI:> Tile 1...1 N6S OF /'CflcN 
Arl€ CIEA.RL:y DEFl NCl>o 

106
Chapter 1.3
Unknown 
jungle hero 
Captain Ahab 
(Moby Dick)
Decide on several (at least three) basic stylistic versions for your cast of 
characters and develop them completely with:
  Clean-up in different line and color versions
  Digital paintings that illustrate 3D volumes and textures
  Model sheets
  Character comparison sheet
  Character turnarounds
  Character maquettes (optional)
Assignment:
Robin Hood
Some suggestions in different 
stylistic versions:
Don Quijote and 
Sancho Panza

107
Character Design
In this variation exercise of a classical 
barbarian, the basic orientation of the 
character design remains the same: The 
experimentation is carried out through 
variations in line thickness and color 
combinations as well as stylistic options 
for the background.
For a classic 2D design, the 
shapes should be simplified and 
stylized, with outlines in uniform 
line thickness.
Such elaborate textures would 
have been unthinkable in the past, 
but are now possible with 3D and 
2D hybrid techniques (although 
still not the easiest way).
Variation with shadow outlines (2D).
With modern 2D software, 
outlines can be animated with 
variable line thickness as well.
A Barbarian

108
It's about the look, the appearance of the film: If 
a film is set in China or ancient Rome, it should 
also be designed accordingly - to reflect the 
look of place and time. The design must create 
an entire world in which the film is set, thereby 
uniting the characters and their environment as 
a credible whole. This requires clear design rules 
and guidelines, which all parties involved will 
follow during the production process. Character 
design is an integral part of production design 
- since the characters have to fit into the over-
all concept. A good production designer must 
be able to work artistically versatile: His designs 
must construct the film's universe in such a way 
that it adapts to the content requirements of 
the film. It is not a matter of placing your own 
artistic style in the foreground, but of optimally 
adapting the design to the entire vision of the 
film.
Briefing
Production design begins with briefing. The 
director describes his artistic intention for the 
film to the production designer, who then 
makes suggestions and starts with the artis-
tic research.
Research
As with character design, which is only one as-
pect of the entire production design, the de-
signer will conduct visual research based on 
the briefing and create a reference map (also 
referred to as mood board). This reference 
map serves as both, orientation and source 
of inspiration. The collected material should 
only be used as a starting point or reference. 
Together with the designer's own artistic style, 
this evolution should lead to something new 
in the design process - it cannot, under any cir-
cumstances, result in plagiarism or uninspired 
copies!
What is Production Design for Animation?
Here is a mood board for a student project (artist/director: Yew Ee Venn, 
2013/14), which is based on a Chinese tale and is therefore designed 
in the style of Chinese painting. On the right, a design created for the 
project, based on the mood board.
In production design, the goal is to create the worlds in 
which the animated characters move: The surroundings 
and characters must go together to create the impression 
of a believable animated universe.
Chapter 1.4

109
  Is it about authenticity and a high aspira-
tion for realism? Then research is needed 
to document the historical context (archi-
tecture, clothing, weapons, etc.) and land-
scape/geography accurately by means of 
appropriate pictorial material. Depending 
on the time period and availability, this 
may include photos or paintings, draw-
ings and illustrations. With the appropri-
ate budget, this can also lead to on-site 
research - which of course is hard to beat. 
Once this documentation is available, it 
can then serve as the basis for implement-
ing it into different styles - from realistic to 
very stylized.
  A somewhat different approach could 
be to establish a connection between 
the time and place of action and a corre-
sponding contemporary and culture-spe-
cific art:
Depending on the project and briefing, a research can 
have very different objectives. That is why it is so im-
portant to define the project's artistic direction through 
briefing.
Concept illustration by Michael Meier for a 
medieval project with realistic approach: 
Both the castle and landscape are based 
on the research of real objects, which were 
then re-arranged for this image. However, 
the castle is an idealized combination of 
various real existing buildings of the High 
Middle Ages. This style would be suitable 
for a CG film, which also comes close to the 
cinematography, visual effects and lighting 
of a live-action film.
The design of the animated short film "As You Like It" by Hannes 
Rall applies the action of the Shakespeare play to a Southeast Asian 
setting. For this, research was conducted into the tradition of Indo-
nesian shadow puppetry play "Wayang Kulit"and the architecture 
of water temples and palaces in Bali.
Illustration: Lim Wei Ren Darren/Hannes Rall.
What is Production Design for Animation?

110
  In fantasy films, an amalgam of different 
cultures and eras is often used for the de-
velopment of visual design. Since this is 
not about historical accuracy, original de-
signs, documentary photographs, and art 
styles of all time periods and cultures can 
be collected and mixed. It is important, 
however, that it is all based on a method 
- an overall artistic vision.
  A different and very "postmodern" concept 
is the approach to work with "reference to 
pop culture". Examples are researched, of 
how a specific classic genre is turned into 
pop culture of a specific time period or for 
an entire time span. This is usually the case 
with genre parodies or tributes, which 
are largely based on a recognition factor 
of certain elements familiar to the audi-
ence. A good example are parodies of spy 
films of the 60s and the "swinging sixties" 
in London. The research will therefore be 
based on defining typical design elements 
of these films and the visual 
culture of the 1960s.
The very successful student production "Spycat and 
the Paper Chase" (Lim Wei Ren Darren, Fung Chun 
Hong, Derwin Silamaya Suhali and Soh Yu Xian, 
Nanyang Technological University, 2011). 
An agent parody that works with a lot of references 
from pop culture: The design elements and color de-
sign of the Bond films from the 60s and 70s are used 
as well as their countless parodies. Retro-futurism of 
"Steam Punk" is introduced as well: The villain resides 
in a gigantic airship.
The design of weapons and furnishings is reminis-
cent of the vision of the 1950s.
This is not about authenticity and " primary 
sources" , but about the reinterpretation of 
previous artistic adaptations combined with 
the resuscitation of a zeitgeist.
It is not without reason that the production 
design process is also referred to as the visual 
development of a film project 
As a rule, several different versions of this 
visual implementation are tried out - in the 
Chapter 1.4

111
case of large productions, usually with sev-
eral concept artists, who apply their different 
styles in the context of the film project. The 
production designer will "cast" these concept 
artists like actors so that they are a good fit 
artistically for the development approaches 
of the film, i.e. for the briefing. It is always up 
to him, together with the director, to keep 
an overview of the big picture and to cor-
rect and modify any developing design, even 
to intervene creatively. Depending on the 
project, visual development is usually not a 
completely linear process, but a trial-and-er-
ror process, in which the creativity and visual 
ideas of all participants are always in demand. 
It is the task of the production designer, in 
coordination with the director, to specify an  
artistic framework. The artistic intention 
and the requirements of visual storytelling 
determine the design. The desired degree 
of realism in production, on the other hand, 
strongly influences the extent to which the 
production design is required to keep the ac-
tual authenticity or given complete freedom 
of artistic expression.
Designs of landscapes for the 
animation short film "Si Lun-
chai" (2014). Production de-
signer: Cheng Yu Chao, director: 
Hannes Rall.
These designs merged the research 
of authentic Southeast Asian land-
scapes with mythically idealized 
elements. Stylization dominates 
over realism.
What is Production Design for Animation?

112
Ill. top right: 
A photograph of 
Þjóðveldisbærinn in 
Iceland, a reconstruction 
of the Stöng long house 
from the Viking-era. The 
medieval building is said to 
have constituted the center 
of a Viking farm, belonging 
to a Viking princess. The 
design takes elements of 
this building and combines 
it with other contemporary 
references. 
Ill. center right: 
Oscar Wergeland, 1909, 
"Norsemen Landing in Ice-
land". This illustration is no 
longer correct from today's 
historical perspective (for ex-
ample, the winged helmet of 
the leader), and is therefore 
balanced with other sources 
for the final design. However, 
it shows the more realistic 
aspiration in the representa-
tion, which is the basis of the 
overall concept.
Consider the following example:
An animated "Viking film" can look quite different, depending on the specifications 
given for the story and resulting style. 
1.)  A story with high aspirations for realism - 
an exciting adventure film from the Viking 
era. Fixed time and locations: Scandinavia 
(Norway) and England of the 9th century. 
Resulting style: Realism.
Research for the Production Design
Primary references: 
Historical documents, archaeological finds of 
original Viking art and crafts, photographs and 
footage from locations in Norway and England.
Secondary references: 
Depictions of the Viking Age in film and art. In 
order for the story to be communicated credi-
bly, everything must be "correct" or at least ap-
pear sufficiently authentic. The focus here, how-
ever, is on certain aspirations for realism instead 
of "pop-cultural" references.
Ill. left: 
Knob of a Viking sword 
Chapter 1.4

113
2.)  A parody of Viking films with fantasy  
elements. Resulting style: implemented 
as a more stylized animation film - very 
cartoony and semi-funny, also known as 
"caricatured realism".
Research for Production Design 
Primary references:  
Same as 1.) - however, the results can be im-
plemented much more freely and playfully. In 
this case, even the research for facts and real 
scenes of action can be skipped, since it is 
about an exaggeration of stereotypes. On the 
other hand, caricatures and stylizations are 
often most effective when based on reality. 
Secondary references: 
Representations of Viking clichés in anima-
tion, film, contemporary art and illustration, 
folklore and customs.
Ill. left: 
"Vikings" on Shrove Tuesday 
in Weingarten 2013: The 
important factor here is the 
"over the top", deliberately 
caricaturing a character 
from the reference material, 
which corresponds to the 
parody approach of the film.
Realism does not play a key role here - since 
authenticity is not the goal. Nevertheless, 
this style retains a certain sense of realism: 
vanishing point and three-dimensionality 
are still used realistically. While the represen-
tation of the anatomy is exaggerated, it is 
still based on reality. The color design is also 
excessive in comparison to the first example, 
but still implies a certain lighting mood and 
therefore daytime.
What is Production Design for Animation?

114
3.)  A highly stylized artistic animation film 
about Viking legends. References from 
the "real" world are almost non-exis-
tent. Instead, the design is entirely in-
Detail from the Bayeux Tapestry, 
ca. 1070.
A characteristic, for example, is the abandoning of any realis-
tic vanishing point perspective, which did not return to West-
ern art until the Renaissance: Therefore, this style reflects the 
representational forms that were common during the Viking 
era. 
The color scheme and lighting neither define a three-dimen-
sional representation, nor a certain time-related lighting ef-
fect. It acts exclusively as a separation for graphically "flat" 
applied picture planes. This style has the highest abstraction 
factor.
spired by medieval art, for example by 
the Bayeux Tapestry, the ornamentation 
of Viking art and the form language of 
Nordic runes.
Chapter 1.4

115
The need for a consistent design world becomes apparent quickly when the 
characters and surroundings of the most widely differing concepts 1.) and 
3.) are exchanged. 
The character in front becomes 
a foreign body in that particu-
lar environment. It does not 
work, unless it follows a de-
sired narrative concept (as in 
the classic "fish-out-of-water" 
story). In other words, if the 
highly stylized character were 
from a make-believe world, 
it would justify the extremely 
different style. 
That means:
The production design should 
always be implemented in such 
a way that it optimally supports 
the intelligibility of the story 
and its emotional impact on 
the viewer.
This production design by Hans Bacher for the feature film project 
"The Nibelungen" (written and directed by Hannes Rall) achieves 
iconic effect by limiting colors and shapes, and by focusing on a strong 
silhouette of the stylized character.
This meets two key objectives for good production design: The pro-
tagonist is presented concisely and the coloring results in a dramatic 
effect.
What is Production Design for Animation?

116
What does this mean using the specific 
example of a magical world?
The (production) design should reflect the 
character of a figure or a whole culture. This 
should also extend to the environment, home, 
utensils and objects (props) used in the film.
In a film in which two cultures of magicians 
occur, for example, this can be implement-
ed by creating a corresponding environment 
for one character and culture, who lives a 
very austere life according to strict princi-
ples: Buildings are defined by clear geomet-
ric shapes, straightforward and with a "clear 
edge", the architecture reaches for the sky. This 
design sends a message of purity and spiritual-
ity, which is supported by the color scheme for 
this culture: White dominates the scene, clear 
contrasts prevail, there are hardly any  shades 
of gray or intermediate shades. This approach 
continues to be consistently applied in the cos-
tume design and with the appropriate acces-
sories: unadorned, simple robes, clear and pure 
in color. None of the characters wear jewelry. 
If you create a design for computer animation, 
the textures (of fabrics) should suggest the 
most basic materials. 
Chapter 1.4
111!> "6ooo
1~ASC.I:TIC. MA&IC IAWl: : 
TllE STI<Aib+fl R>~WM: D CMMCI'el<. OF 1lte!& 
fRdri\60Nist"-$ IS 111~ 
INTl1€ 1\f(Jp_{)(K\!JC 
PI<.ODVcr10o-l P6$1E."l Fol!-"T!I61R_ WHoLe CUtTv£e:' 
CL€ARLI1'16S 1 W~ITE i)OT11N~S.-NO l'iAYfVL ~~ 
~ur CU..l<-ITY A~D f'\11? ITY iNSffiAP (Pvovsn c.. 
DDSIW l261''12-6S6>ll'S THE: AscSn<UM OF Till'; 
C\'A.YI-"<~-'{"'OI2W)o 
lt!E-CH~~O~Iwt i" ~D 
ON S IHf'l.€ S't.SK- GeonEn!-IC. 
.S\lAf'ES,-1\Ji(, f'PI t.IC-If'l..C IS (Dt'TINUC.l> 
lU i!OV/VIt 11\E. f'~OI-J l:lESI bN AS. 
AWI-i<>LC. 
l(l
l>e&16N i'I'JNc-oPLG 
Hooc.o=<f"i\1, ANt> 
veiZ!l<A 1.- sneA161fl! 
===Ill 
t Ci~tct£' +cU.. I rse! 
=oo 
SYHHETrtYt-
OJilOE"R 
• 

117
Conversely, a protagonist with an obscure, 
shady character, hedonistic, and with a play-
fully scheming demeanor, will find his visual 
counterpart in the design of his surroundings: 
Round, intricate forms dominate, rich orna-
mentation decorates furnishings and build-
ings. Architecture does not have a clear direc-
tion in its form language - parts of the buildings 
reach towards the sky, while others seem to 
grow into the ground. The design therefore de-
fines the visual equivalent for the ambivalence 
of the character(s). The color scheme supports 
this effect as well: Gloomy tones predominate, 
there are more faded nuances and shades of 
gray of all colors. Similar to the counter-design 
of the other culture, this approach is continued 
throughout the costume design and design of 
the props. The robes of the characters are rich-
ly adorned and decorated. Abundant jewelry 
and the penchant for jewels communicates the 
attraction to worldly pleasures and the greed 
for material goods. Textures would suggest 
valuable fabrics such as velvet and silk.
What is Production Design for Animation?
lf!E Gl-OOMY, NOAAI.LY -'HAP>' 'WI~~: 
H&e,lllE ~UCITON 0ESI6N R£flt"C~ T~E CHARACTGR, 
or-11\f. f'~&ONIST-:1: Wnll(T~r1..0V6Hl1Ho lfli'RICAlE, 
PLA'ft\L ~S. OF Tl\€11<. SVI<~Vt<t>i~6S. Ccf>T</t1E-.S. 
AND Acc€~S0Rr6S~ NO"rniN& IS CL&AP..... AND EASH..Y 
R€COGN 
I ZA~I.G ~€ SllM'f, A~ 
'6Al<.~Ut=: All!> 
Al1f}IVA\St<lr IN~R. 
O~I&<T~tl"!-WIIIc.H 
(OHMU>HCA~ lliE 1\JI<N ll\16- "TilW.AAD.S. MA10111Al.-
THIN6S Al'll> -5MJllt..Y 
Di;LI~..C. 
A11!>1NG ~llf'f\:)IIZpt(G ~A~~ 
CAt.J ~VIDe AUDmotJ.AL- I~AAnON 
At~ovr ~ 
"DGI'Ict& CVL.IIJ~i!E. 
ASYHtttllY+GHAo.S: 
ThE SW.f'6S OF AR.c~ I~QiieE ARe 
NDt CLEAA- IN"'rn£1~ OI2.1EN1Al"ION : 
""TilE 'I ~112.1VE "S)~-'fi.JA!ZDS" N. WELI-
f'.'-'TOIHE GllouND. 
(~ r-to.:?AL- A.H-,Ie,urry /co .. A-fcr} 

118
This design method can be extended both 
to the production design for surroundings, 
clothing and accessories of individual charac-
ters, as well as to the design of entire groups 
or cultures - provided that any common char-
acter traits have been defined. This approach 
can be found in the fantasy genre of anima-
tion films, - but applies to other genres as 
well.
As we know from the "real world", larger 
groups almost always share locally defined 
cultural similarities, which can be taken into 
account with the appropriate design. People 
who live in the same place over a longer pe-
riod of time will usually develop behavioral 
and cultural similarities.
Interesting in this context is the approach of 
signaling an outsider status of a single char-
acter within a larger group by using a com-
pletely different design.
Consistent implementation of 
production designs
The preceding examples have illustrated: A 
good production design should ensure that 
an established design principle for a film is 
implemented consistently in all areas of pro-
duction. Good movies have a consistent de-
sign - bad movies are often characterized by 
wild, chaotic styles, which do not follow any 
logical rules. In the worst case, even the same 
characters may look different in different 
scenes, or specified design rules are ignored 
for a particular culture in the film. The follow-
ing applies: Rules can always be broken, but 
there must be a good content-specific and 
design reason to do so! 
Within a film, single or multiple sequences 
can, of course, also be designed in different 
design styles, provided there is a content-re-
lated motivation. Classic examples of this are 
dream sequences, flashbacks or subjective 
narrative perspectives. In this case, changing 
to another design supports the communica-
tion of the story.
Example "The Cold Heart" 
In my film "The Cold Heart", I followed a holis-
tic approach to production design: it is based 
on influences of German expressionism, an 
impression of similar traditional wood and 
linocuts, and the excessive graphic contrast 
of straights against curves.
Hans Bacher elaborated on this in his blog 
(2012):
"Several animators from Asia and Europe have 
worked on the filming of this stylized German 
fairy tale. Written by WILHELM HAUFF in the 
nineteenth century, the story tells of a young 
man whose heart is corrupted by greed. Sounds 
very much like a very contemporary story, noth-
ing that requires an ordinary look. Stylistically, 
Hannes decided on a mixture of elements of 
German expressionism reminiscent of works 
of painters and woodcutters such as ERNST 
LUDWIG KIRCHNER, KARL SCHMIDT-ROTTLUFF, 
EMIL NOLDE, ERNST BARLACH, MAX BECK-
MANN, OTTO DIX, ERICH HECKEL, KAETHE KOLL-
WITZ and MAX PECHSTEIN, as well as films such 
as THE CABINET OF DR. CALIGARI, GOLEM and 
NOSFERATU. 
Chapter 1.4

119
I myself supported the film with my color de-
sign, which was equally inspired by the above 
painters."
A style guide created for the film defined in 
detail, how these design principles were to 
be implemented in all areas of film produc-
tion. The environment with landscapes and 
architecture, the paraphernalia and objects 
(props) used, the details of character design 
in terms of contour style.
Style Guide
A style guide is an indispensable docu-
ment for the consistent implementation 
of production design in all areas of anima-
tion film production.
In general, this is a highly compartmental-
ized process. This is why all artists involved 
have to work from the same information 
base, from which they create their specific 
portion for the overall film.
The style guide explains and illustrates in 
detail and for all areas, what the design 
principle of the film consists of, and how 
it is to be implemented: It describes the 
rules for the design of the film's environ-
ment as derived from character design: 
Landscapes, architecture, props (para-
phernalia/items such as furniture, weap-
ons, cutlery, jewelry, etc.), costumes - all 
the way to visual effects (VFX). The goal is 
that the basic approach of production de-
sign is reflected in every aspect of the film. 
As an example: In "Mulan" (Bancroft/Cook, 
1998), the formal language of Chinese or-
namentation is also reflected in the graph-
ic style of VFX, such as fire, explosions and 
smoke.
Illustrations from the 
style guide for "The Cold Heart" 
by Hannes Rall
Film still from "The Cold 
Heart" by Hannes Rall
What is Production Design for Animation?

120
Illustrations from the 
style guide for "The Cold 
Heart" by Hannes Rall
Chapter 1.4
',@CC'n~VCT'I!Ir-( AKD 
tbl1 !'A,£1 SQJ:!.: 
1'1'<:,pol>no..rs. IN ~liTe;.> 
T\IC\JAGt,.. · 
--be E1'61t'ml1W{, '1"0 
~lltl~rz6. 
->16 CoN Q/oWAwp3lt<NK-
• """'" L«>t<O.-.ca::,&( 
Q.AIIrr'Y 
-A'Vorp f;CQ!Ne. S1;1~cAL-
Pb>6N ~ 
\)ic; '""ml4 
Ai:rdAc:r t-1£. 
NlDOt.E-Ac;.sp 
-,A>nAtT" ,;;;;;,. Sl'fl' '" ... """' 
-. """"'"" 
~-
;~~::-
~""·'"~
""'"' "'·~ lt\ 
F6rGK0 
PsrEl2-s. (UThOALL~J 'oovG6or ~GA>Ci' ~re 
\>TI'b~Gl-j I>GFi..GclJst> 1'11116 fai>lG 
\4G oU~>J<; l"'>ort U6llrl\<;A.:rot> ,lHCO Voi066"'f <b 
A. 
CoWtllOO~G'= Sl " l<nSR._ AN1> 1!ru:JrAJ... t'\AN , 
-13oo~ l-1<>l O>VAb6S.~I6S 
-r~,._L.. 6X~6t'!ION.t 
-
OiFFGilGoiJ a.arn IN 6 Ml;K, !lGc<>n Nb 
- c,.,~ .S.\<IITQ.\ ~on •aw,... ... ~ -ro 
-
-fl'bl61tc.-.a,Ol(T\~ 
..: !3 '.sr 0'1~ 
.S~>APG 
-),ooi:.~.SIMI\.G~il<I'6SIGIJ 
\ 
> 
W&< ~=o-f 
~ 
~~;~s~OI\I 
"'Y'era<.."' 
.Q!:£_1 DVA't..F ' . 
-h-~i(AL-
~GIW!-,.cTU~ 
fi•• Yov~<. owo ~ 
Sourrr<'NS 
\l''irl<Tit;s-f.6e<r~ k111<;; 
-~IZG ~, 
-~::a;r ~ 
f'IUNarfOS 1,.m:cr, 

121
Illustrations from the 
style guide for "The Cold Heart" 
by Hannes Rall
What is Production Design for Animation?
- E""""""OC •o-J ••we .sr:n~ 
- s->6 ~c. 
Qvo~,rn~ 
IQ;mw~ 1>-l~'t 
f'>./0'16< AU.- A£r011!601PI '· 
-"'Boe~K;OI""" 'rC'~ 
-'"'1)\.I:N 
Go;>J~t..- ~Nl~ o,.f 06S'""' '" ~G'At>S~ 
(;y6S lr.I\CO F\;r6f2- ~ 
01116R._ OW.!CJOf-S 
-~ 
t10S" OYi'AWr~ I\IOlCA"fe 4NGS.Tht>6f1N6-
\0'161; AS. ' ClOS6t>' .$\VIR>H"t:"<-. COI-0<21\JG 
-~oi<IVIG-rD P01ft'Gi'l1oM'/Uis."10\;;1,;.\JWN 
~V~ -
' 
~~flli~ 
'lA ' 
'"' 4J 
(! 
HNt<- CAN 
fOR""fH6DI/1tl\'T11C+-lAE:L-
CAllPAL-V~ Wrn.l-- Colt7~ ~ 
~;",;;:~"";:'
'"' 
~J 
(;ji>S CAN \>s~~AWN WrnlOr' f',r<e->, fi><. 
J 
f\Jfl t,.S """fb a3b~Q.AWN fb.,t_ "111616 C' 
,:z_s_ [O ~~ 
I;:\'1.CJ'i'l\1tJ tf.o'P(;lL.'f-
runL-S-
~ 
... rmv 
'"""" 
._,~ 
c~o-m•\>\6 Q.A'i!> "">\ 
\-liS l;Pf'6Ail/>N$ &'IU... CO"'lS3 -rtliiO<.GI; '-<~ 
~ 
NG ~66S:. \tlio(Si t.~v6'11T:o 1 kSI1W6} 1• 

122
Like the mastery of lan-
guage for a writer, a basic 
knowledge of color theory 
is almost indispensable for 
any production designer. A 
comprehensive 
introduc-
tion to color theory would 
go beyond the scope of this 
chapter and book. However, 
recommendations for fur-
ther and in-depth literature 
are listed in the appendix. 
Some helpful principles on 
color composition in general 
and on color design in (ani-
mation) film in particular, will 
be discussed here. 
Good color design is always 
based on a principle, a de-
sign method decision based 
on a concept: A well-done 
color composition will nev-
er use all possible colors in 
equal weighting and com-
position. The color designer 
makes qualified decisions 
on which colors to use and 
which to omit.
Color Design for the 
Purpose of Visual 
Storytelling
Here is the example of a well thought-out 
color design: The colors are well coordinat-
ed, graduated colors dominate in the spec-
trum yellow-red-blue, green does not occur 
at all. Red-yellow dominates the fore- and 
mid-ground; blue for background. Occasion-
al accents of red or blue connect the picture 
planes visually. The only strong primary col-
or is the red of the collar and loincloth: This 
attracts attention to the main character. All 
colors are chosen so that the shapes stand 
out with sufficient contrast. The red of the 
suns is reflected on the surface of the planet 
- the reddish-yellowish tones of the fore- and 
mid-ground stand out clearly from the back-
ground of the night sky. At the same time, the 
color of the sky is blue with a large red com-
ponent, so that it blends well with the fore-
ground in spite of the contrast.
Chapter 1.4

123
This color design version is more prob-
lematic - too many primary colors are 
competing for attention and do not fit to-
gether well. The color of the boots is too 
similar to the ground and does not stand 
out enough. In contrast to the other col-
or scheme, this one also has an unbroken 
green, which makes the illustration look 
more like "candy colors", or very colorful. 
The pistol and rocket on the right are not 
as recognizable, since they blend in with 
the similar color of the night sky. All in all, 
this color scheme is reminiscent of the 
typical bright coloring in comic books of 
the 1970s
It is definitely a less stringent color scheme.
Color drawing of a background from the film project 
"As You Like It" (Hannes Rall/Lim Wei Ren Darren). Again, 
the color design is strongly influenced by a concept, which 
primarily serves the distinguishability of background 
elements. The key principle is to ensure sufficient contrast 
between the picture planes and their respective elements. 
The foreground is dominated by harmonious and warm 
colors in the red-yellow spectrum, contrasted with saturat-
ed green tones. In the background, the principle of aerial 
perspective is used: the colors are less saturated, lighter and 
shifted into blue.
What is Production Design for Animation?

124
The three main variable properties that can 
be used to create color are hue, saturation, 
and tone. Harmony between colors can be 
produced by similarity between these pa-
rameters. Contrast results from differences 
between hue, saturation and tone of colors. 
Sufficient contrast can be produced already 
by strong differences in just one of these fac-
tors. 
The different lightness can be used here as 
an example: If you reduce this illustration to 
its gray values, you can see that the shapes 
stand apart from each other strongly enough 
without any color information. Therefore, as 
in classical painting, one can 
start with the shading, that is, 
the tonal values, in order to 
ensure sufficient contrast.
Hue is defined as the color 
depth in the area of 4-color 
printing by the mixing ra-
tio of the color components 
cyan, magenta, yellow and 
the black component K as 
color depth. In the area of 
video, this corresponds to 
the color system RGB, which 
stands for red, green and 
blue. 
In digital image processing 
programs, the percentage of 
certain color components can 
be entered numerically in a 
very uncomplicated manner: 
In order to obtain a blue with 
a high proportion of red, you 
enter a higher number for ma-
genta; for a yellow with a high 
proportion of red (closer to or-
ange), you enter a higher pro-
portion of magenta, etc. This 
makes creating similarities in 
hue relatively easy: Reddish 
blues will often harmonize 
with reddish yellow tones - 
this can be applied to all color 
groups.  Saturation can easi-
ly be digitally manipulated as 
well: When you reduce satu-
ration, intensity and luminos-
ity of a color decreases. The 
effect of two incompatible 
colors can be reduced or can-
celed by reducing the satura-
tion of one (high contrast) or 
both (low contrast).
Chapter 1.4

125
Shortcuts in Color Design:
  During coloring, change the image re-
peatedly into grayscale to check for suffi-
cient contrast.
  Take digital samples of striking color com-
binations from illustrations and paintings. 
Use this to create a library of color refer-
ences, which can be used repeatedly in 
different combinations
  Digital image processing programs like 
Photoshop allow for numeric input of col-
or values for CMYK or RGB in their mixing 
palette. This makes it easy to determine 
the percentage of a color and to create 
corresponding colors, for example, over 
similar red portions.
  Do not use "all colors of the rainbow" but 
use a deliberate color scheme or color 
concept. A simplified first step: Of the four 
"main colors" blue, green, yellow, red, use 
only three. For example, use only yellow, 
green, and blue tones, instead of a "full" 
green, use only a turquoise (= green with 
high proportion of blue (= cyan)).
Illustration: "Lighttower", 
Hans Bacher, 2013
Example from "As You 
Like It" by Hannes Rall 
and Darren Lim, 2014
Design study of Jochen Rall for the film project "As You Like It" 
(directed by Hannes Rall) It should be noted that overall, only 
graduated, i.e. no "pure" colors are used. That means that the 
hues are related, and contrast is achieved mostly through 
lightness and saturation.
What is Production Design for Animation?

126
Color concepts can be based on:
  Tonal value/light and shadow
  Color harmony 
  Color contrasts
  Complementary contrasts
  Contrasts of warm and cool colors
  Light/dark
  Bright/muted colors
  Dominance of color moods
  Accentuation
An experienced color designer or colorist 
does not use all these design factors in isola-
tion, but in a well thought-out combination. 
Added to this is a personal sense of color, 
which often integrates the above elements 
intuitively. As always in the world of art, it is, 
of course, to some extent a matter of taste 
as well. What may seem too harsh for one 
person, is absolutely acceptable to another. 
However, this "total" artistic freedom is put 
into perspective in the context of any speci-
fications given in a precisely defined briefing, 
such as for an animation film.
Example 1:
This picture uses an almost monochrome col-
or scheme. Only blue tones are used which 
can be varied by the ratio of their red and blue 
parts. Added to this are lightness and satura-
tion as design parameters: This separates the 
picture planes; a dark foreground stands out 
with high contrast from the middle plane of 
the picture. Contrast and saturation decrease 
in the distance. Such a color scheme can be 
used to convey mood (blue usually indicates 
a melancholic mood) or even a time of day 
(night). For a typical night atmosphere, how-
ever, the contrast of the typical city lights (in 
warm colors) would be missing.
Chapter 1.4

127
Example 2:
Here is a classic, frequently used means for col-
or design: Strong contrast between cool (blue) 
and warm colors (yellow). Limiting the only 
warm accent to the window instantly attracts 
the viewer's attention. In order to underline 
this effect and to establish the relationship be-
tween the character in the foreground and the 
person in the window, the couple on the left in 
the picture was omitted.
Example 3:
Color is used primarily as a dramaturgical 
design medium. In this illustration, a realistic 
color scheme was omitted in favor of high-
lighting specific characters. Restricting the 
use of red to the "relationship triangle" be-
tween the man, woman and child, suggests 
the importance of the three persons for the 
plot to the viewer.
What is Production Design for Animation?

128
Example 4:
Finally, a relatively realistic color scheme that 
corresponds to a "real" lighting mood in this 
type of environment. The cool blue separates 
the dark foreground from the mid-plane of 
the picture, which is dominated by warm red 
and yellow tones. This reflects the incident 
light in the mid-ground. Highlights are added 
with the incident light rays, which also con-
veys atmosphere.  The "aerial perspective" in 
the distance lends more depth to the picture. 
This means that the color contrast is reduced, 
colors are desaturated and blurred into blu-
ish-green tones.
These concepts are generally also used to define 
shapes, making them clear and distinguishable: On one 
hand, colors must significantly differ from one another, 
but on the other hand, they 
must also be compatible with 
each other. In short: the skill-
ful combination of contrast 
and harmony. For example, 
you can combine colors har-
moniously according to dif-
ferent shapes (or foreground/
background) across similar 
hues, and provide sufficient 
contrast through varying sat-
uration and lightness. 
Color study by Hannes Rall for the 
film project "As You Like It" , loosely 
based on the play by William 
Shakespeare.  
Chapter 1.4

129
What's more, in film, color cannot be viewed 
in isolation, since it always fulfills a function. 
If the color design fulfills this function/these 
functions, it will automatically result in de-
sign decisions, which are perceived as aes-
thetically pleasing.
Such functions, which are usually defined by 
the narrative intention, are:
  Creating mood
  Time (time of day/year)
  Drawing the viewer's attention
  Representing realism or an emotional 
statement
  Differentiation of picture planes (fore-/
mid-/background)
 
-  Different color moods (red/blue/yellow)
 
-  Contrasts: Complementary; warm/cool; 
light/dark
 
-  Aerial perspective (colors become gray/
bluish, muted, "faded" in the distance)
  Suggesting different narrative levels 
 
 -  Flashbacks in different color schemes: se-
pia, black-white
 
 -  Subjective perspective through vastly 
different color design
 
-  Dream sequence through different (e.g., 
"psychedelic") colors
Color Script
The color script could be 
called the "dramaturgical 
map"  of a film's color de-
sign. Similar to a colored sto-
ryboard of the key scenes, 
the sequence and change of 
color design are represented 
in chronological sequence of 
the film.
Color Script by Hans Bacher 
for the film "The Cold Heart" by 
Hannes Rall 
The Dramaturgical Parameter of Color - Color Design and Color Script
What is Production Design for Animation?

130
The color scheme must correspond to the 
content-related development of the film. 
As is generally the case with production de-
sign, the design is intended to support and 
illustrate the communication of the story. 
Simply put, color is used to support or even 
create moods: Blue for melancholy; red for 
battle, anger, aggression; yellow for warmth 
or comfort.
Color Script by Hans Bacher 
for the film "The Cold Heart" by 
Hannes Rall 
Chapter 1.4

131
The designation of colors as "warm" or "cold" 
implies a relevant connection in terms of con-
tent-related significance. Although successful 
color design for animation film can, of course, 
be much more complex and subtle, reducing 
it to the emotional undertone of a scene, rep-
resented by a basic color, is a frequently used 
starting point by renowned color designers. 
For a feature film, you are able to define many 
more emotionally motivated color changes 
- while for a short animated film of about 10 
minutes, three different color moods are usu-
ally sufficient. The color designer will consult 
with the film director in order to understand 
the content and meaning of the emotional as-
pect of each scene and to be able to assign the 
appropriate color scheme. Also important are 
details regarding time of day and season of the 
film's plot, since the color scheme is probably 
the most important means for communicating 
this information. Ideally, the director's artistic 
and content-related vision and the color de-
signer's composition complement each other 
in an optimal way, in order to maximize the 
emotional impact of the film's story on the 
viewer.
Once the emotional curve of the film has 
been defined in the color script by these 
changing basic colors and moods, individual 
scenes can be designed with more specific 
color detail. Transitions between the various 
color sequences of the film are then designed 
Worksheets of the color script (Hans Bacher).
as follows: Depending on the dramatic inten-
tion, transitions can be abrupt or smooth. In 
order to attract attention or induce terror, a 
drastic change in color following a cut is ideal; 
if it deals with a sequence of flashbacks, then 
gradual color fades work well. 
What is Production Design for Animation?

132
Color script for the opening sequence 
of "The Cold Heart" 
On the right, the 
corresponding development of color 
fades for background elements 
 by Hans Bacher.
Color Script by Hans Bacher for the 
animation "Metamorphoses" by 
Hannes Rall (For the documentary 
film "Lotte Reiniger - The Dance of 
the Shadows", Germany 2012, 
Directors: Susanne Marschall, Rada 
Bieberstein and Kurt Schneider)
The abstract color concept preceding the final version.
Chapter 1.4

133
Design the complete production design for one of the public domain 
characters, which you created in the previous chapter Character Design, 
i.e., for a jungle hero, Sherlock Holmes, Don Quixote, Robin Hood ... what-
ever you designed.
Decide on a content-oriented concept (realism, parody, artistic/abstract) 
and use this as the basis for your research and design decisions.
In the end, you should have a complete "pre-production design package", 
which should include:
  Research and drawing up of mood boards
  Design of the entire cast as character design and as comparison sheet.
  Model sheets (or 3D models for CG)
  Designs for props and environment/architecture of the film
  5 to 10 production paintings, which show the final look of the planned 
production
  Color script of the film 
This, of course, also requires the previous development of a storyboard 
- but you can limit this to an exercise of about 10 to 20 key scenes of the 
film (for short film).
Assignment:
Designs for a cast of "supporting actors" from the 
animated short film "As You Like It" (Hannes Rall) in 
different versions. The basic forms of the characters 
differ greatly, in order to be able to distinguish them 
well. Character design by Hannes Rall and Lim Wei 
Ren Darren.
What is Production Design for Animation?

"I basically treat every design like a  
stage in the theater."
Interview with Hans Bacher
134
Hans Bacher (born in Ulm), 
is one of the world's lead-
ing production designers 
for animation. During his 
many years of collabora-
tion at Walt Disney Feature 
Animation he has contrib-
uted significantly to the 
look of such films as "Beau-
ty and the Beast", "Alad-
din", "The Lion King" and 
above all, "Mulan". He has 
won numerous prestigious 
awards, including the 
"Golden Camera" for the animated series 
"Alfred J. Kwak" (with Harald Siepermann) 
and the "Annie Award" for the produc-
tion design in "Mulan". His book "Dream 
Worlds: Production Design for Animation" 
(2007) is now considered the standard 
reference on the topic and has become 
a worldwide bestseller. Hans is Associate 
Professor at the School of Art, Design 
and Media at the Nanyang Technological 
University of Singapore.
First, a very basic question: What is production 
design for animation? 
What exactly does a production designer do?
It is, as the name implies: You design the 
production, that is, the look and style of the 
film. There are productions, in which the 
production designer works on both, the en-
vironmental design, i.e. landscapes, etc., and 
character design. Then there are produc-
tions, where the production designer is only 
responsible for the environment and where 
a character designer takes care of all the 
character designs. That is the case at Disney. 
There, you usually have two positions.
So in that case, the character designer is actual-
ly separate from the production designer. Or do 
they ever work together?
They definitely work together.
Do they work together all the time?
Yes, it is a very, very close collaboration. And 
at the very beginning, the very first designs 
are usually made only by this specific pro-
duction designer. Anyway, at Disney it is as 
it was in my case: I started working on pro-
ductions where there was only one treatment 
first; a treatment of three, four sentences: This 
is the project, a possible future project, for 
which you then develop designs that include 
rough characters. And only when it's getting 
Chapter 1.4

135
closer to a decision, when the production is 
half-way into pre-production, then a char-
acter designer is hired, who will concentrate 
exclusively on the characters. The production 
designer then focuses on a complete stylistic 
development that takes on one very specific 
direction.
In other words, at the time in the beginning, the 
design should be as diverse as possible. So you 
are likely to try out several directions within one 
specific topic.
At the very beginning, for example, when I 
get a treatment and begin to sketch ideas, 
they actually reflect my view, my interpreta-
tion. As soon as a director adds his ideas to 
the project, it gets more restricting as you get 
told: 'Well, we want to take a specific stylistic 
direction.' Then you have to adapt according-
ly.
Suppose there is a theme that is set in ancient 
China. Would you start out by incorporating a 
lot of different styles, inspired by art and archi-
tecture of this period, in your first draft? How 
would you proceed?
Yes, I did that in "Mulan" (Bancroft/Cook, 
1998). I didn't have a clue about  Chinese art 
at that time. So I first got a few art books and 
looked at Chinese paintings from the last 400, 
500 years. And then, very soon after I was fin-
ished with the books, I sat down that same 
evening and began making the first sketch-
es. Everything was still fresh, I didn't spend a 
lot of time dealing with it. Interestingly, these 
sketches had a big impact on the style.
It is probably important to get started when ev-
erything is still fresh and begin sketching your 
impressions, isn't it?
Exactly, while unaffected. Often, these turn 
out to be the best ideas. It's like making 
thumbnails, those tiny little sketches. When 
you enlarge them manually, they always look 
bad. I load them onto the copier and blow 
them up 400 percent.
Character design sketches 
by Hans Bacher. 
What is Production Design for Animation?

Strong sketches 
(ink with brush on paper) by 
Hans Bacher for the feature 
film project "Die Nibelungen" 
(in preparation), directed by: 
Hannes Rall.
136
Now the important question: What can go 
wrong with a production design or really be 
done wrong? Students or beginners often make 
mistakes. What are some fundamental mis-
takes that can actually lead to the failure of a 
production design?
Of course, there are many things that can 
happen. The worst thing in my experience 
is, when the production designer just gets 
going without understanding the studio's 
background or without knowing which tal-
ents will collaborate with the film; when de-
tached from all this information, he sits down 
and just loosely sketches his ideas on paper. 
When I know, that I will be working with a 
studio where there is little talent and only a 
very small budget, and no time - where the 
film is supposed be ready in six months or 
in a very, very short time - if I get there in a 
case like that, with a production design that 
would require a Pixar or Disney talent pool, 
and where I would need five years and an in-
credible talent like Glen Keane and maybe a 
background stylist and painter to complete 
it as a top-notch production -  then I should 
know that this cannot go well! Many produc-
tion designers present a stylistic look that 
looks great, but where the concept cannot 
be implemented in the production. And then 
you wonder afterwards why the film looks 
so much worse than the most beautiful pro-
duction design. So before I begin with my de-
signs, I should know some things: For whom 
do I work? How big is the budget? Is it worth 
the effort to go into such details? Or should 
I offer a style, which is much more reduced, 
but easier to do. As you said - that's how it is 
with students. They have an animated feature 
film in their head, but only 6 months to get it 
done. This is just as absurd. If I have no means, 
no time, then I must reduce my designs ac-
cordingly.
Chapter 1.4

137
Exactly, so that it can be done. How would you 
describe the correlation between the story or 
theme and the stylistic choices that you make? 
Do you pay close attention to it, or are you more 
interested in an atmosphere or a look? How do 
you define the correlation? 
That all depends on the treatments. I have re-
ceived very few treatments that were written 
well enough for me to be able to visualize the 
film completely. The writing style of some writ-
ers is more difficult to implement than others. 
But if I get a short version of a story that is 
written really well and where you can actually 
see the characters come alive, and where the 
environment is also described really well ... The 
style depends on the time period of the film, 
whether in the past or the future. 
I mean, the story itself can be very, very di-
verse, it often spans across various areas. And 
if those are well described, then I can sit down 
and start immediately. In other words, if there 
Color Sketch by Hans Bacher for the feature film project "Die Nibelungen" (in preparation) 
Director: Hannes Rall. The design concept integrates the influence of expressionist art by paint-
ers such as Ernst Ludwig Kirchner.
are no complicated environments for which 
extensive research is required, you can start 
immediately with thumbnails and the first 
ideas which you can sketch.
What you mentioned, is indeed an interesting 
topic: authenticity compared to artistic free-
dom. After all, sometimes you get a topic that 
has to be treated very realistically. In that case, 
you are probably very limited in how much you 
can contribute from your own artistic vision. 
And it is probably extremely difficult to artisti-
cally move beyond that, because the degree of 
realism limits your options.
Thank God, this never happened to me. I have 
only had stories that were artistically very open, 
except for the specific environment in which 
they were set, and of course, the corresponding 
artistic influence associated with it. I would not 
have been interested in working with realis-
tic stories such as "Atlantis - The Lost Empire" 
(Trousdale/Wise, 2001).
What is Production Design for Animation?

138
There's really not very much interesting artistic 
freedom in this, it really is more about an al-
most naturalistic depiction, in a sense. There's 
not much to invent. That's not very exciting.
I agree.
You mentioned research earlier, and again now. 
This seems to be extremely important to you: If 
you are working on material that is set, for ex-
ample, in Asia, then you will actually research 
Asian art. Later, of course, you will do less re-
search and develop the design, but in any case, 
you research first to get inspired.
Absolutely. Research takes a very long time: 
for at least two or three months, you are look-
ing very intensely for only the best reference 
material, whether photos, illustrations of oth-
er artists who have worked in that direction, 
or art in general, that is, the artistic diversity 
of the last several hundred years. I don't be-
lieve in reinventing the wheel: If the topic was 
presented before, then I should also refer to 
it. And if a story is set in a certain culture, then 
I should become familiar with it.
Anyway, the artists at Disney, who were in-
volved in developing the look or who worked 
with animation, even went on research trips. 
We went to France for "Beauty and the Beast" 
(Trousdale/Wise, 1991) to visit the surround-
ings, the castles. I think we looked at ten or fif-
teen castles. For "Hercules" (Clements/Musker, 
1997), a whole team traveled to Greece, and 
I believe we were there for two weeks. For 
"Kingdom of the Sun" (working title for the lat-
er Disney movie "The Emperor's New Groove", 
director: Mark Dindal, 2000; author's note) 
they were in South America. The research was 
actually done on location and they took their 
own pictures. For "Mulan", a whole team went 
to China. Unfortunately, I was not able to go at 
that time.
 To this province with the famous mountains?
Everywhere. They were on a two week trip 
through China. And I missed out on it. You 
get a completely different impression of the 
surroundings, the colors, the smells, of the 
whole world. There are no books or picture 
and film research that can compare to this. 
Being there is something completely differ-
ent.
First studies of color and form by Hans Bacher for the short 
film project "The Story of the Ghost Ship" (adapted from 
Wilhelm Hauff), which he is currently working on together 
with Kathrin Albers and Hannes Rall. Both the coloring 
and form-based composition draw attention to the most 
important picture element: the ship. The design integrates 
influences from authentic references on Arabian art and 
shipbuilding.
Chapter 1.4

139
You also work a lot with digital means, for ex-
ample with different digital filters and digital 
brushes. What advice can you give to beginners 
and students? As a key thought: Relationship 
between artistic vision and digital tools, how 
does it go together?
I use only tools that are useful. Anyway, I 
would never build a topic around a (digital) 
tool. For example, I use it when I see that I can 
work ten times faster in Photoshop and when 
I know how this technique works. If I am up 
to it, then I am very fast. And the final look is 
quite comparable to the look I would get if I 
were to work with tools like watercolor or felt 
tip pen or any other traditional means. I use 
digital tools only to achieve certain looks or 
to implement them more quickly.
You probably already have sketches or an idea 
about where it should roughly take you. And 
you use the digital tools more to help you get 
there. 
Of course. I still work completely on paper - at 
least in the initial phase and for brush draw-
ings etc. prior to coloring.
Stylistic color sketch on a Chinese 
theme by Hans Bacher. The 
superb color design, which com-
bines a dominant color scheme 
of subtly composed blue tones 
with a singular strong accent in 
orange, stands out in particular. 
At the same time, the red portion 
used in all the blue tones achieves 
overall harmony and stylistic 
unity.
Combination of traditional 
ink drawing with digital coloring. © Copyright 
Hans Bacher
What is Production Design for Animation?

140
If you compare it to how we used to do it, it is 
indeed much easier with Photoshop: Before the 
digital era, for example, it was technically much 
more difficult to create and combine clean color 
gradients and opaque colors.
The best invention is the undo button. When 
I worked with felt pen and made a mistake 
with the airbrush while working, I had to redo 
all of the work. The use of different digital 
layers in one image also simplifies the work 
tremendously.
But there is always the risk that students or 
other inexperienced artists feel lost and over-
whelmed with all these options. That is when 
it is also helpful to know what you want, and 
where the artistic journey should take you.
The vision should be there at the beginning. 
Anyway, you should already have some idea 
in your head, and roughly know where you 
want to go. But I have now found, that be-
cause technology provides me with so many 
options that - although I already have a clear 
picture in my head - I now think, once the de-
sign is finished: Well, let me try first, if it would 
look better to change it to a slightly differ-
ent color mood. And I try out the other color 
mood or combine different filters - there are 
thousands of variations that are possible. It 
has also happened before, that the results 
that emerged were better than what I had in-
tended originally.
But you still need the judgment to be able to rec-
ognize what is good, and then, for example, not 
to use the same lens flare (special lens filter in 
Photoshop, author's note) again. 
Endlessly tinkering with things is, of course 
nonsense too. You should really know when 
a design is completed.
Now on the subject of stylistic decision. Perhaps 
you can say something about the importance 
of balancing details and empty surfaces, that is, 
about the compositional-stylistic unity. And on 
the importance of sufficient contrast.
First on composition. One thing is important 
in the way I approach a design: I basically 
treat every design like a stage in a theater. 
On the stage there is an actor, the actor is in 
a spotlight, and what the actor, that is, the 
animation of the main character, the protag-
onist, does - that is important. My only job is 
to create the background for this actor, for 
this animation. If the background is more im-
portant, or if the variety in my excessive de-
tail appears to be more important than the 
animation of the main character, then I have 
made a mistake. The animation takes center 
stage, and everything I do, I need to build 
around the animation. I do this by placing el-
ements in the spotlight, which are important 
to explain where I am, in what time period 
this takes place, etc. The more information I 
need, the more side spotlights I use. Every-
thing else stays off, remains dark or diffuse, 
unexplained. The best example is "Bambi" 
(Hand et al, 1942). When Gustaf Tenggren 
made the very first forest illustrations, he 
actually painted every single leaf and each 
branch. Then they "squeezed" a drawing of 
this animal figure, this deer, into the back-
ground and soon realized that the figure 
got completely lost in it. The background 
was overloaded with so much detail, that 
you could not see the animal figure! Along 
came Tyrus Wong and delivered incredibly 
atmospheric sketches in pastel, which were 
strongly influenced by his Chinese heritage, 
but also by Impressionist painting. When he 
wanted to depict a meadow, he did not paint 
every blade of grass - as is done today in CG, 
where that is commonplace - he actually 
painted only a green area and two or three 
blades of grass in the foreground, just to in-
dicate that this is a meadow. And the whole 
thing was so open, so atmospheric, so poet-
ic, none of which Tenggren's earlier paintings 
Chapter 1.4

141
Jungle study by Hans Bacher: Individual details 
are very "distinguishable"  against the atmo-
spheric/diffuse background.
 With increasing depth of the picture plane, col-
or contrast and focus are significantly reduced, 
contributing to this effect.
Examples of the successful staging of a charac-
ter that stands out from the background, but 
at the same time is stylistically integrated. © 
Copyright Hans Bacher 
could have ever been. And that's why Bambi 
looks the way it does. It is very minimal in 
detail, only where detail is really needed it is 
added to the backgrounds. Everything else 
is diffused to avoid distraction from the area 
that needs my attention, which is the area 
where all the action takes place.
For you as one of the leading color designers, 
color is a very important topic. In general: What 
defines a good color design in the area of film 
and animation for you? How do you apply color 
in the context of dramaturgy?
Color is comparable to the music in a film, it 
creates atmosphere. Of course, I can go en-
tirely "over the top", I can exaggerate too 
much with my selection of color. Then the 
whole thing looks so awful, as if I had poured 
all the color into one bucket.  That's gaudy or 
distasteful. You can really go too far. A good 
example is "The Lion King" (Allers/Minkoff, 
1994). When I started working there, there 
was a background artist whose work was ex-
tremely colorful. The director told him: Let's 
only work with black and white for two weeks, 
and then we gradually and very carefully in-
troduce color. That's a very good way to ap-
proach it. You should first be able to look at 
the environment or background to be depict-
ed in a reduced version, as if everything were 
desaturated, in other words, as if the colors 
were taken out completely. Then, very careful-
What is Production Design for Animation?

142
ly, you go in with color. Most of the designs I 
see for film are much too colorful. There is way 
too much color in it coming from everywhere. 
That's why you make a color script. A color 
script usually starts like the story: very, very 
calmly, then slowly working up to the dra-
maturgical apex and culminating in extreme 
contrast, in harsh color contrasts, like red, 
black, white - only then to subside again into 
the normal color world, which can appear 
quite desaturated in the end.   This means 
that this entire color development in a col-
or script has to be structured very carefully. 
It has to be adapted to everything that hap-
pens. For example, if I need a romantic color 
scheme, because there is a romantic scene 
sequence in my script, then I'll transform 
the romantic scene with romantic colors; I 
choose only romantic colors, which definite-
ly would not include green.
For an aggressive scene, for example, an at-
tack like our Huns attack in "Mulan", or other 
scenes with very brutal action scenes, I use 
colors that are based less on reality. Such 
colors should reveal what narratively defines 
this scene. Anyway, if I illustrate an attack, 
then I choose colors that represent less the 
environment, in other words, no realistic col-
ors of landscapes, but I may color the entire 
landscape red, for example. I set extremely 
drastic shadows in black and then add white 
highlights within the spaces. The whole thing 
looks like a city going up in flames. With this 
kind of background, I can then really illus-
trate an attack. In "Mulan", we were unable to 
use red because the whole thing took place 
in the snow, but we used quite harsh color 
contrasts in the sequence of the Huns attack.
An example of the subtle, but focused and contrasting 
use of color.
© Copyright Hans Bacher
The color selection corresponds to the romantic/
melancholic mood of the scene. The composition 
directs the viewer's attention by means of "interpre-
tive" shapes and shadows to the couple ascending 
the stairs. The horizontal structure of the gray stairs 
calms the background in order not to disturb this 
attention. 
© Copyright Hans Bacher
Chapter 1.4

143
In this color study by Hans Bacher for an animation 
film project that is not yet completed, the concept 
of local color is completely abandoned in favor of a 
predominant, here almost monochrome-modulated, 
color composition. This lends atmosphere to the 
scene, since there are no diverging color details to 
interfere with the overall mood.
For such scenes, the concept of local color is also 
omitted. Thus, the skin color is no longer a local 
skin color, but rather the dominant color mood 
is applied to all the components in the scene.
Yes, of course. As if the entire scene had been 
stained. I just add a filter.
I have one last question : Can you name some 
examples of successful production design in 
animation, and perhaps also from live-action 
film?
In the area of animation, I would say: "Bambi". 
That is an absolute top example. Another very 
good example is "101 Dalmatians" (Geronimi/
Lusk/Reitherman, 1961), where everything is 
superbly done, not just the color, but style 
as well. The background style is adapted to 
the style of the animation in front. Otherwise 
"Sleeping Beauty" (Clark/Geronimi/Larson/
Reitherman, 1959). At first, the background 
looks a little bit overloaded, but Eyvind Earle, 
the production designer of "Sleeping Beau-
ty", solved this problem brilliantly. He chose 
an entirely different approach for the color 
mood, the color design of the environments 
conpared to the colors he used for the fore-
ground characters. So each character can be 
perfectly distinguished from the background, 
absolutely perfect. In live-action: Every movie 
that Ridley Scott has ever made thus far, each 
one is a masterpiece. My absolute favorites, 
apart from Ridley Scott, are all Orson Welles 
films. There are not many films that I consid-
er fantastic, but those are definitely some of 
them!
Thanks.
What is Production Design for Animation?

144
This chapter provides an overview of the various animation 
techniques. It introduces the principles of animation, which 
can be applied to all techniques.
Film consists of single imag-
es (frames), which are played 
in rapid succession one after 
the other, creating the illu-
sion of continuous motion 
for the viewer. In film, the 
world standard is 24 frames 
per 
second, 
but 
experi-
ments with a frame rate of 48 
frames per second are being 
conducted, in order to pro-
duce an even more life-like 
illusion of movement ("The 
Hobbit" trilogy, directed by 
Peter Jackson, 2012-2014 ). 
Animation refers to the art 
The Principles of Animation 
and their Application
form that is produced by this 
cinematic illusion through 
the sequential exposure of 
single frames. In this process, 
the illusion for the anima-
tion of non-living objects is 
achieved through incremen-
tal changes of each single 
frame shot. The objects to 
be animated are usually "cre-
ated" by the animator him-
self (or a team): This can be 
through drawings (tradition-
al or digital), 2D animation, 
puppets or objects (stop 
motion), or digitally modeled 
characters (3D computer an-
imation).
For the animator, it is both 
appealing and challenging 
to have absolute control over 
the look of each individual 
frame, as well as over rhythm 
and speed of the frame se-
quence, similar to a virtual 
puppeteer. 
In virtual 3D animation on the 
computer, each single frame is 
created as a modified version of 
the 3D model and can be played 
back immediately as a test.
Single frame exposure  of 
each small change to the 
character for stop motion 
or puppet animation.
In traditional 2D 
animation, animation 
is done on paper in 
sequences, using a light 
box, and the successive 
drawings are then 
scanned and played 
back as a line test.
An animator has absolute control over 
every single image in the film, each 
frame.
Chapter 2.1

145
Some techniques:
For hand-drawn 2D animation (traditionally 
on paper or with digital tablet), incrementally 
modified drawings are sequentially shot. This 
technique offers the greatest artistic freedom 
for animation itself, since it does not impose 
limitations due to any physically or virtually 
defined object. These rest, however, in the 
drawing ability of the animator: Some tasks 
(such as perspective animation of an ex-
tremely detailed texture) exceed the capabili-
ties of even the most talented animator.
Since traditional 2D animation was the dom-
inant technology in mainstream animation 
until the onset of the digital age, the number 
of outstanding examples here is numerous, 
first and foremost in the area of mainstream, 
all Disney feature films, such as "Snow White 
and the Seven Dwarfs" (Hand, 1937) or 
"Sleeping Beauty" (Clark/Geronimi/Larson/
Reithermann, 1959). In artistic short film, 
some outstanding examples are "Moonbird" 
by John and Faith Hubley (1959) and "Hill 
Farm" (1989) by Mark Baker.
Example for hand-drawn 2D animation from "The Cold Heart" by Hannes Rall
The Principles of Animation and their Application

146
In stop motion, real objects (e.g., movable 
puppets) are animated, in other words, they 
are changed little by little by the animator 
and filmed with a camera after each change. 
The use of this technique, although identical 
in principle, can result in stylistically  com-
pletely different films:  The "Wallace & Gromit" 
films (Park, 1990-2008), are based on a co-
medic caricature approach and use puppets 
with a flexible rig. "Dimensions of Dialogue" 
(Švankmajer, 1982) uses clay animation to 
express visually disturbing political and phil-
osophical allegories in experimental form.
Example from the student's work "Dr. Avis' 
Dream" by Wang Rui Fan, School of Art, 
Design and Media, Nanyang Technological 
University, 2010: "Classic" stop motion, here 
puppet animation in a carefully and very 
detailed physically constructed set.
Cutout animation uses the same technique 
as stop motion, however, the animated ob-
jects are flat and are moved on a flat plane. 
This is possible both with real objects (similar 
to traditional stop motion) and with digital/
virtual objects. Stop motion techniques of-
ten achieve a look that is more related to the 
drawn 2D animation, since it is graphical and 
"flat" in appearance. However, the conceptu-
al approach resembles more traditional stop 
motion than 3D computer animation, re-
gardless of the means of production. A well-
known classic example is "The Adventures of 
Prince Achmed" (1926) by the German ani-
mation pioneer Lotte Reiniger.
One of today's masters of digital cutout anima-
tion is the Swiss animator Isabelle Favez ("Heart 
of Winter", 2011).
Chapter 2.1

147
Image from "Si Lunchai" (2013), 
Director: Hannes Rall, digital cut-
out, animation: Darren Lim, 
character design: Cheng Yu Chao. 
This film combines Lotte Reiniger's 
tradition of silhouette film with 
influences of modernism and 
Southeast Asian shadow puppetry 
"Wayang Kulit".
Construction scheme of a digital cut-out animation puppet from "Si 
Lunchai" , design: Cheng Yu Chao.
A digital or physical cut-out animation puppet must be constructed 
with movable joints so that it can be changed to match the movements: 
The more complex and versatile these movements are, the more of these 
joints have to be inserted.
The Principles of Animation and their Application

148
Hybrid forms between drawn animation, tra-
ditional painting, cut-out animation and stop 
motion: 
  Sand animation uses sand as a medium 
for animation, which is filmed on a glass 
plate lit from underneath. The freedom of 
manipulation in this medium makes this 
technique the most comparable to drawn 
animation. Ferenc Cakó from Hungary 
("Ab Ovo", 1987) and Caroline Leaf from 
Canada ("The Metamorphosis of Mr. Sam-
sa", 1977) are masters of this technique.
  In a similar manner, plasticine on a light 
box can also be shot in various colors. 
However, this medium is more difficult 
to manipulate and therefore often uses a 
cross-dissolve technique and three- to six-
frame animation. A master and pioneer 
of this technique is Ishu Patel from India/
Canada. ( "Afterlife", 1978).
  Animated painting is the animation of 
painting on glass, which is related to the 
above-mentioned techniques and an ex-
tremely difficult and elaborate technique, 
if you want to achieve a certain degree of 
realism. An outstanding artist in this style 
is Aleksandr Petrov ("The Old Man and the 
Sea", 1999).
Painting and Drawing as a Process:
Other animators are less interested in the 
creation of an imaginary, yet credible world, 
but instead integrate the artificiality of their 
process as a conscious stylistic device by film-
ing the incremental development of their 
large-format drawings or paintings during 
the development process. William Kentridge 
from South Africa ("Ubu Tells the Truth", 1996-
97) and Jochen Kuhn from Germany ("Neu-
lich 1", 1998) should be mentioned. They 
intentionally cross over into the field of "clas-
sical" fine art and exhibit their works also in 
the traditional settings of galleries.
In the case of 3D computer animation, a 
virtual puppet is usually created on the 
computer (= modeling), equipped with an 
animatable virtual skeleton (= rigging) and 
then animated like in the other techniques. 
Since the animator manipulates a virtual 
puppet step by step, this technique is actu-
ally more related to stop motion than drawn 
animation. All the more so, since, as a rule, his 
creative freedom is restricted by the limita-
tions of his character, which are defined by 
modeling and, above all, rigging. The Pixar 
Studios, headed by John Lasseter, are inextri-
cably linked to the rise of this technique as 
the world's dominating mainstream anima-
tion technology. Two of the most outstand-
ing examples of this technique are "The In-
credibles" (Bird, 2004) and the short film "The 
Lost Thing" (Ruhemann/Tan, 2010).
Example of a 3D computer animation: "Color Theory" 
(2011) by Davier Yoon, School of Art, Design and Me-
dia, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Chapter 2.1

149
Pixilation presents an exceptional situation, a 
special form of stop motion: Here, the actions 
of real actors are not simply filmed, but as in 
stop motion, single frame shots are manipu-
lated. This creates interesting alienation ef-
fects (such as time lapse shots), resulting in a 
surreal and artistically appealing atmosphere.  
Pixilation also allows a simple form of visual ef-
fects, for example, by directly linking time sep-
arated images or omitting certain drawings of 
a movement. 
Example of pixilation from 
"Big Bio" by Eileen Reynolds (2011).
Live-action film has to rely 
much more on the circum-
stances of live-action sets, 
looks, the abilities of "live" ac-
tors and so forth. In animation 
film, everything is controlled 
by the creative power of the 
director and his team: He cre-
ates his own world, which has 
to submit completely to the 
rhythm of the director as the 
leading conductor!
The Principles of Animation and their Application

150
"The Hunt": Combination of hand-drawn 2D ani-
mation and digital compositing with After Effects, 
student work by Jegannath, M. Sufjan and Eunice 
Ong (Singapore 2012).
While the visual language in the early and de-
veloping years of digital animation was pre-
dominantly aimed at completely replacing 
traditional aesthetics with a new hyper-per-
fect and hyper-realistic visual language, an 
alternative trend has now emerged:
The integration of the organic quality of tra-
ditional animation techniques in 3D com-
puter animation. This includes, for example, 
the element of human "imperfection" as an 
intentional means of artistic expression. Con-
versely, the computer is increasingly used 
as a means of preserving and supporting 
the aesthetics of formerly purely traditional 
forms of animation: Good examples are the 
calculation of inbetweens for extremely com-
plex painting, or the computer-assisted plan-
ning of inbetweens for stop motion, which 
was previously not possible. 
Formal eclecticism of a new era
It is particularly the new young generation of 
animators that combines traditional and dig-
ital techniques in a completely unbiased and 
unconventional manner.
 This often results in artistically very exciting 
and attractive films: For example, a 3D com-
puter-animated character is placed in a tradi-
tionally drawn environment, a stop-motion 
character interacts with real actors in a virtu-
ally modeled environment, traditional hand-
drawn animation is digitally edited and com-
bined with digitally painted backgrounds. 
The possibilities are almost infinite and will 
certainly increase in the future.
Convergence and Mixed Forms of Traditional and Digital Techniques
"Innocent Memory", student film by Nguyen 
Thi Nam Phuong, drawn animation (paper), 
with camera animation (traditional), Toon 
Boom, After Effects compositing (Singapore 
2012).
Chapter 2.1

151
The "bouncing ball" exercise or: What does 
a bouncing ball have to do with good 
animation?
Almost every textbook about animation, al-
most every course that provides an introduc-
tion into the basics, begins with the "bouncing 
ball". There are good reasons why this exam-
ple is so popular: It is an excellent method 
to understand many principles of animation 
using a simple object: A ball is easy to draw 
and can also be modeled quickly for 3D ani-
mation or downloaded as an existing model. 
The bouncing ball is squashed on the ground 
upon impact, and stretches as it bounc-
es back up. When it reaches the apex of the 
curve it follows, the bouncing ball returns to 
its original shape. It is important that the vol-
ume of the object remains the same. This prin-
ciple can be applied to all kinds of objects and 
when applied properly, it can credibly convey 
the material properties of an object: A poor-
ly inflated soccer ball changes its shape more 
than a golf ball consisting of solid, unyielding 
material (which basically does not change 
shape). This corresponds to the animation 
principle of squash and stretch. 
It is extremely important for students to un-
derstand that the bouncing ball example is 
about the underlying principles of animation 
- not the ball itself. Unfortunately, this exer-
cise is often taught or applied incorrectly. A 
simple copying or just a slight variation of the 
presented method does not lead to a deeper 
understanding. The exercise must therefore 
be executed and explained in such a way that 
the student can comprehend the concept 
and later transfer it to completely different 
objects or characters to be animated. 
So here is the frequently seen bouncing ball, 
presented somewhat differently and its sig-
nificance explained for other applications. 
The point of the matter is, that the bouncing 
ball can be used to explain many basic princi-
ples of animation.
The first step is always the hardest, or: How do I learn to animate?
The Principles of Animation and their Application

152
The aim is therefore to understand the bounc-
ing ball as an easily comprehensible and im-
plementable example, that allows students to 
develop a basic understanding of the major 
animation principles of motion mechanics, as 
well as artistic/aesthetic principles. A simple 
copying and repeating of the model shown 
above may be a good place to start - but then 
the learning process must continue by apply-
ing the acquired knowledge of the principles 
to other examples.
Chapter 2.1
0 
ltlE &O\IriCIN6 l'AU.. 
A.Sinl"tt> M6"1\i01/ To 1)e-Nor>JmeATE- MA~Y 
~Nclfi,6SOFAII•ItllilloN 1\NL> ~ 
ll\~t1. 
0 
0 0~ 
0 
0 
. 
. 
. 
Sqv.M\\ 
ANt> 
~QI 
: 
CHA~GE O!"SHAPG l!l~o\JOH 
f'HYS/CAL. llif'ACI. 
C HtlTIN~ilH€GI!.ouNDj, 
<;"oi..I'DLJM'JtNb : VOWrlt..' 
t1 Vs:f ~tiAI N CON.!.ISTDI"r, 
---:'=• 
AIIIIIGrPATION :nte ~D 
j)~IN(7 
CF 11\E llAU, f'Rt.rA~ ll!e EYE Of= 
11£ V16WER. f"o~ \HE IHHEDIA"Tl::'t...Y 
R>LLOVIIN& ~QVASt\61/ l>AA\.111\16 ' 
VI Si.JAL- C()NT'AAST C€€Al6~ 
ANTIC I!" AnON· 
lliG E'X1tNr Of' §qv.rf A!<!> ~ 
MAKI'S STATct-\&1-<1!;: AlJVT iltc ~(ffH 
OF Fo~GES AcfiNG. 01'1 lllt:lM~ANl> 113: 
MATe~ lAt.. T6Xl~ ' A "EADLY 1/'lflAlED 
\'1)0\"BAL\, DofOII.I'I,S VBR':t~1 FoR. 
e"M~fl£,A Ga~f BAU,OJ(..A CAt-l!i(t.I'BALI.-
\>O~Of D6foRMArAU .. -111EY ~ 
IM PAcr 11+€ GfoUI'<'P -rllGY AP-.f H 11TIN Go 
~~I(ATION: 
\ 
fPCI-1 A Pvli£LY \"H))S!cAI... t'OINTOt= \'lcvJ;The~I.SII!o 
ReA~ON 1t1 IN!:SI"f AN~Jli\&2... \>AAWIN€7 IN ~C~C> 
s~Af'f: sec;;..u~ll1e ""&'A\..L.. ~~ouL:t> NOI eE DEGELE'RAJBP : 
"Bvr tr wo11.~ ~(LI..UAI'Jll... )'As. -A vIS VAL-\'R.tC.K, AN 
fXA~AATIOi'l OF f2€AL!l)' rf IS rz.Am&J't... ~ThAN 
~· 

153
 Make up your own version of the bouncing ball exercise:  
  Try to animate a ball of a certain weight and a certain material, e.g. a 
ping-pong ball, a football/soccer ball or a cannonball.
  Replace the ball with another shape or figure and try to implement the 
acquired principles, e.g. with a leaping frog, a jumping cricket or an an-
imated dice.
  Analyze the animation to see if you can identify the principles of the 
bouncing ball, e.g. the deceleration at the apex of a motion.
Assignment:
The Principles of Animation and their Application
NoU) DG"a5L€f.AnO"-i 
HS~E. : Ct>NllNOOUS 
lJ PW A~ 
l10\S-16Nro 
THE "PArrEo.l'1 OFnteiooN&ING BALL. 
CAN E:ACJW ~ 
TAANSFC~~ TO 
I'!Oite Confl,t'X ~ 
hP fk;IJU( 
TillS CoNUPTVAL, 11ZAI'I.H'ff(. I~ . 
1116 C~VCIAI.- Poii'&T Fo1t ilfe 
ioiiii"N(, '6Al.J... . 
AT THE vsr<:1C><-we: Ho-.eK6NT 
$LOWS" t>oWN (Hol26Dt.AWINGS.J, 
ACLE1£1Uttl 0 N A~t> 
4~ 
Q-,aotJ<o c~~ OF SRAfl: 
\1E?Cl 
Tile GlfNI6EOFlJ.t~ C~Are.S A 
El€U€VA~Le. IUl.)SJON or \rJS!bUTo 

154
Below is an explanation of the terms of the ani-
mation principles as they were first developed 
by Disney Studios in the 1930s. They are based 
on the basic aesthetic idea that animation 
should represent an exaggerated, caricatured 
version of "reality" - an aesthetics and me-
chanics of motion, which renders the acting 
characters believable, thus eliciting the empa-
thy of the audience. They are certainly a good 
start to understanding motion-mechanical 
principles, in order to be able to apply them 
to animation. However, anyone interested in 
implementing very experimental and abstract 
animation may deviate completely from some 
of these principles - since they would not be 
intending to achieve "credibility". But it can 
also be very interesting to apply these classical 
animation rules to free experimental and ab-
stract forms - for this, there are many excellent 
examples as in the films of Oskar Fischinger or 
Michel Gagné ("Sensology", 2010).
These rules were, of course, subject to a con-
tinuous evolutionary process over many de-
cades and have been further refined. Much of 
it, however, has remained valid throughout the 
decades and is still up-to-date. It is interesting 
to notice that these rules, which are mainly 
derived from the tradition of hand-drawn ani-
mation, are now an integral part of the stylistic 
repertoire of modern computer animation. This 
was made possible by the further development 
of software, allowing for such effects like squash 
and stretch to be implemented in computer an-
imation. It is based, for example, on much more 
complex and flexible rigging of models. From 
a technical point of view, we are in a golden 
age for computer animation, which can easily 
handle very cartoony animation as well. (The 
BASIC PRINCIPLES OF ANIMATION
infinite and simple flexibility of drawn anima-
tion still stands unrivaled though.)
The classic "12 Basic Principles of Animation", 
written and published by the famous Disney 
animators Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston 
(1995) are as follows:
  Squash and Stretch
  Anticipation
  Staging
  Straight Ahead Action and Pose to Pose
  Follow Through and Overlapping Action
  Slow In and Slow Out
  Arcs
  Secondary Action
  Timing
  Exaggeration
  Solid Drawing
  Appeal
How can a student or beginner best under-
stand these principles? And more important-
ly: How can he/she implement them sensibly 
for his/her own animations?
Chapter 2.1

155
In general, the following applies: It is import-
ant to learn the rules to be able to break them 
later. Animation is a living art form that must 
be subject to constant change and refine-
ment in order to progress! What works as a 
test and looks convincing is "right", even if it 
violates the rules.
Nevertheless, I believe that particularly be-
ginners (child prodigies and geniuses ex-
cluded) would be well advised to try to learn 
these rules. They are also good guidelines to 
get started. It is important, however, not to 
simply copy examples, but to understand the 
underlying concepts and to implement them 
in one's own work!
As an instructor in the area of classical anima-
tion, I have always looked for ways to make 
basic rules as comprehensible as possible for 
my students and to establish them in a logical 
consistency.
I have also expanded the list of "principles" to 
include new components that I consider es-
sential: for example, the principle of change 
of shape, which was introduced by Richard 
Williams.
1.)   Timing
2.)   Spacing
3.)   Slow In und Slow Out
4.)   Straight Ahead and Pose-to-Pose Ani-
mation
5.)   Overlapping Action, Follow Through 
6.)   Secondary Action 
7.)   Anticipation 
8.)    Squash and Stretch 
9.)   Arcs 
10.) Solid Drawing 
11.) Exaggeration 
Reform and Expansion of the „Basic Principles of Animation":  
Hierarchy of Basic Animation Rules
12.)  Weight 
13.)  Appeal and Strong Poses 
14.)  Staging 
15.)  Change of Shape 
16.)  Counteraction
The individual principles in this chapter are 
explained in this order. In addition, I would 
like to add that there is a sort of hierarchy 
among the important principles of animation 
- simply put: Some are extremely important 
on a general scale, others cover more partial 
aspects of animation. As Grim Natwick once 
put it so aptly: "It is all in the timing and the 
spacing" (in: Williams, 2002). 
Therefore: Timing and spacing makes or 
breaks everything. You can certainly find 
good examples among animated films, in 
which most of the other principles have been 
neglected - and where the animation works 
beautifully nonetheless.
If the timing (and the story) is right, then even 
a movie with (real) coins as protagonists can 
work great - even without any squashing and 
stretching, exaggerated drawing etc.!
The Principles of Animation and their Application

156
All concepts are subse-
quently explained with 
reference to drawings - but 
they can also be applied 
to any other animation 
technique, since the 
principles basically remain 
the same. The individual 
chapters which follow will 
focus on any differences, 
particularities and  relevant 
work process of the various 
animation techniques.
What does that mean? I think that the "classi-
cal" rules, those which have always remained 
relevant, can not be lumped together, but 
should be assigned to different groups ac-
cording to topic, and that they should be 
taught in a certain chronological order. For 
example, animation techniques (e.g., timing), 
which must be mastered first in order to im-
plement certain artistic concepts convincing-
ly (e.g., staging). 
Working Methodology
  Straight Ahead Action and Pose to Pose
Animation techniques:
1.)   Timing and its various aspects
1.1)  Spacing
1.2.)  Slow In and Slow Out
1.3.)  Overlapping Action, Follow Through, im-
portant aspect: Waves
1.4)  Secondary Action 
1.5 ) Anticipation 
2.)   Shaping and Design
2.1)   Squash and Stretch
2.2 ) Arcs
2.3.) Solid Drawing 
2.4.) Change of Shape 
2.5)   Exaggeration - an exception, since here, 
the right timing is an important compo-
nent!
2.6.) Counteraction
3.)   Design/artistic concepts (which can 
only be achieved by combining the 
above-mentioned techniques):
3.1.) Weight 
3.2)   Staging (this also includes knowledge of 
composition and film language, see also 
chapter 1.1 "Script and Storyboarding")
3.3)  Appeal
In my opinion, it is also important to under-
stand that these concepts should not nec-
essarily be treated in isolation, since they 
often have to be used together: Anticipation 
can only be demonstrated convincingly, if 
you use timing and spacing correctly, just as 
squash and stretch or a general change of 
shape.
Chapter 2.1

157
Actually, timing is the most important over-
riding principle, since it affects almost all 
other principles directly, more specifically, 
the other principles are supported or ful-
filled by correct timing. Timing defines, how 
long a motion will last "on screen" based on 
the number of drawings (or frames). 
More drawings 
= longer action
Less drawings 
= shorter action 
Rhythm and contrast in timing
Contrast in timing is critical for good animation. 
As in music, the change between fast and slow, 
intense and subtle, "loud" and "soft" is crucial: 
Never-ending fast actions in sequence are 
tiring, and you lose the viewer's attention - a 
quick extreme action after a slow and subtle 
movement has a much greater impact. A film, 
in which all the characters move at the same 
pace and in the same manner for the entire 
1.) Timing
time, is unspeakably boring.
Stylistic means, such as monotony and unifor-
mity of movement can certainly be introduced 
deliberately to support the story - but of course 
only, if this is intended. Very often, however, 
such uniform movements are created uninten-
tionally, because not enough thought was put 
into the spatial distribution of inbetweens and 
the graphic expression of key frames. For 3D 
computer animation each single frame of film 
is different, that means animation on "ones". 
In other animation techniques, exposing the 
same image twice on film will often suffice to 
create a believable illusion of fluid movement. 
This approach is called animation on "twos". 
For very fast actions, you usually need to ani-
mate each single frame, i.e. on "ones". (even in 
traditionally drawn animation). This is because 
a lot of change takes place in an extremely 
short time span. Therefore, you have to illus-
trate this short period of time as detailed as 
possible, using animation on ones (24 draw-
ings  per second).
The Principles of Animation and their Application
1\JES{:: 5 S&6!-JiiAL... A-\AS&S: O rf1.1Eo Mon6NT WOUL-D 
l7E L;..c~::HJG. CC>t1PL£ffi\..( WNBN ANIHATiNb -rue 
S/'fle ftefloN 0 N TwO.S ~ 

158
  How do I create a contrast between fast 
and slow?
  Are my movements slow, elegant and flow-
ing, or jerky, abrupt and brisk?
  How do I switch?
  Where and how long do I place holds?
How do I figure out the correct timing for 
my animation?
One answer could be: Experience that comes 
with time. This means, to animate, test, cor-
rect, until the length "feels" right. Over time, 
you will be able to estimate the appropriate 
time it takes (measured in frames) for fre-
quently occurring actions as you draw from 
the experiences you have gained.  On the oth-
er hand, I am sometimes very surprised at the 
fact that students in the age of video cameras 
in mobile phones do not quickly "shoot" ref-
erence material of a movement they need, in 
order to get an approximate feeling for more 
complex timing. 
With the help of a friend you can shoot it 
and play it back for your future animation, 
analyzing it later as a digital file. Of course, 
such reference must be dealt with correctly - 
it can only serve as a reference and must be 
exaggerated for the animation in timing and 
expression (see also exaggeration). But: It is 
a good starting point, especially for anatomi-
cally complicated animations!
The work of an animator is often most cre-
ative and interesting without any references 
- in that case, he is able to achieve complete 
creative freedom. The decision also depends 
largely on the required level of realism for an 
animation: The more stylized and abstract an 
animation should be, the less you will work 
with life action references.
A very common mistake for beginners in 
timing is, that too many actions are shown in 
too short a time. Most beginners are not real-
ly aware of the fact that in animation film in 
general, many frames or drawings have to be 
created. This unawareness leaves them think-
ing that an action is already adequately rep-
resented in time, because the inexperienced 
animator has already animated "so many" 
frames (as seen subjectively).
You have to keep in mind that (in the case 
of animation on ones), one frame represents 
only one 24th of a second, and that the view-
er must see an action or a pose for a reason-
able amount of time, in order to perceive it 
at all.
Chapter 2.1

159
A good gauge for a hold is that it should not 
be less than 10 frames in length: Otherwise 
it is perceived as an irritation in a continuous 
movement (jerking) rather than a resting 
point.
The Principles of Animation and their Application
'-----:. __ 
TO ENSvre~NE VITAt..ITY,-rne _/l 
.sTIUl c. MAIN ~Is COI'I'SIN£!) 
w 
1 Tli HoYEJ1CNI oR tot ov n·JG 
ELEMENT-S: .·"TilE HAiti-- f"o~ 
114\eOOdH /!Cft:fS Hov 1 NG, BYeS 
CAN ii>LINk .\til.$ HE:ANS. 
C\'ZEA.IiNb (oN6 F"O!Zt10F) 
A. to\OVIN~ HOI.D o 
1 F TH~ Post IS HE~D FOtz /ES'S THAN 
6 f~AMEi, IT WIL-t.. NoT Be fE)e.CEIVE'D 
A$. A ~Oil/ 
1 . ~ . A f<E-9'1N(7 fDINf;"~Uf 
RAI+it"R.. M A JERK lk ThE Mo'JHlbNT. 
IO A.c+H6VE: IH£ IMf'l<tSSIOl\)OF A 
Tt<Uc \\OU> A PoS£. :S,f.lout.D U~VAu.:t 
~£. H13Lt> FoJe. A ti I NIT1VI\ OF 
/\o FMrte~. 

160
Assignment:
  Use these drawings and add in-betweens to create a convincing anima-
tion. See also instructions for constructing a walk cycle on page 201.
For certain important movement patterns, 
such as walking, there are some good basic 
rules, which can of course be varied accord-
ing to artistic taste. A beginner's mistake, 
which should be avoided at all cost, is a 
"pause" in a continuous movement (such as 
a typical walk), or even to slow down at the 
wrong point: This will always look wrong, 
since it interrupts motion dynamics.
Chapter 2.1
COMPARE WITW"RtB-
'BOu"''N~ fAtlr. 
~ 
NAlWAUl, INBCTW£SNS I ('1&€0 IO 13{;: 
A1:l\>ct> HERE. TO HAl::£ 11-ic KO\f€NYII 
Wi!RK fROf6fl.Y. 1-\ow'GV&R ,fl.!& 
1\Jvli~ (Tit11N6) Al'lDf'OSITloNS 
(~f'~INS ) l'JE51> TO ~e Co'tJ~ID6JlEI> ' 
CA/2.€.FlJU..'-( :wE-'1 V61'bRl11 NE: \l-1€ flNAL-
A:~ 
.. A~ 
OFT!Je WAlXo 

161
The most common timing errors and how 
to avoid them.
Very often beginners are underestimating the 
length of time, in which a particular pose or 
movement has to be shown in order for it to 
be sufficiently understood by the audience. 
They are often tempted to show expressive 
drawings of individual poses only briefly and 
assume that they are nevertheless perceived; 
but you need at least 10 frames, so that a very 
specific posture or expression can actually be 
read properly.
As a first step, the drawings, which are essen-
tial for the understanding of the action (story-
telling drawings) should be tested very rough-
ly with regard to correct timing: How long do 
we have to see a pose, action, or movement, 
so that it can be understood? For this pur-
pose, we film these first drawings, each with 
the appropriate number of frames for length. 
Of course, we still lack the inbetweens, which 
we basically include in the frame number for 
the storytelling drawings. Although this first 
test is still quite inaccurate, it provides us an 
excellent indication for rough timing: From 
this point forward, you can continue working 
and refining, since you have established a sol-
id foundation - provided that the test worked.
The Principles of Animation and their Application
IT I$ AMAZ.I N(7 \-\OW W6U.. ll-1'€ 
U~E- Or EXTR..£HE:[..'y DIFFERENT (/CGY) Po..rE:s oR. 
&''lC'TR61'-16~ ONI.,'f CAN WORk'1W111-bvl ~INE, ANY lt~TWEEN~~ 
-sv-r-rn~ 1/DbS ONL'f 'FDNCTicN Pr<Df512L~ 'wiTH ~€CT'L-'/ AfPLieDT/tvfiNG AND 
fO~ A 110~ cAf::.TbotlY I crtt..I2E.C> Alllltlftr]ON ANt> ~IGN ~L£ 
.. 11-ll.S. HCTHci>~ 
Al-So OFffiN ()-SGDT<:> cr:?:E:AT-E AN ANIHATJc..OR IO t>BTERH lNG "11-IE; 
RDuG H T! H I N6 IN A UN& lcS.I f5xPc-R._I I"\ EiNT.AL j\N I MAT! ONe 

162
We now know how long we have to show the 
particular pose so that it can be properly "read", 
but it seems that another problem has emerged 
now: The pose does not change, it is standing 
still for a certain period of time. Although every-
one can grasp the meaning, the character seems 
lifeless, since no changes take place - an unsolv-
able problem?
The moving hold
At this point, a brilliant discovery from the clas-
sic principles of animation comes into play: 
the moving hold. In short, this basically means 
keeping the main pose (within the timing that 
works), but changing it subtly to avoid the im-
pression of lifelessness. This technique is espe-
cially important for animation in a more realis-
tic style, particularly for computer animation, 
which is actually not very forgiving of a com-
plete standstill of a character (not even for two 
single frames). There are several techniques that 
you can use to achieve a moving hold, the clas-
sic one is as follows: You design a more extreme 
version of the original storytelling frame or key 
frame. In doing so, you remain relatively close 
to the original design, but make the physical 
Chapter 2.1
TO HAKE; TftE AH'TtC.If'ATtoK Arf€AK LON6S~,1lfE corq::.csPONOI/ICG-
I>.fZ4WING CAN Slnf'LY 'GE EXf()SED 'Orrtf. MORe FRA~e.l : 
.~.6.1'1 f'JAnES lA IS IS CAlLeD A Uot..1>. 
~~IS WOPI<:S. \oi£U.. F'o\12. IJI<;.HLY .S'T'YUZE"C> t:>t61T"Al- Of2. T~li l~ 
2.D A\'.IIM./(t"IOW· 
\.Jl\E.N l>OIN6 1'-(0~ conl"t9\. 2D ANi nAflo "l ~ \N ITti A r or<E ICEAUSf"I C [.OOK_ AI\ID 
Gf:;N6 ~ALL-Y Wrrl-l 3 1> Cohl7vT6~ AN11'1AllO!'l S\JCJ.\ A .S.OW'TIO") l.-{lt..L NOT v-/Ot.K BEcAV~ 
A s-r~nG pos£ OF ·nte ¥'16-0fle P.PP6Arl..S. IAP6L£~ WH€rJ 
H6LD Fo~ 
s6 ve;aAL- FI2Ar1o~ ."1116 v IL.t.\410W OF L..lf€ u I~ DSSTRO'f6i'. 
TI-le sowrtor-l It) 'Tr.&ls 
P~o~L6tt t& o$=F&J26t:> BY API"L'flt..s~ il-le 
tt6TW ol> oF- 'T\.16 HOV 1N6 Ho~.ol>. 
'I 
• 
A Mo\1tJ6 H@ cAN &e At:l.lt61J6l> 8 Y rusfJ 1t..16 TKe Po~ oF 
A Sf,A'TIC, f.loi.D W rriJ -A'N ArorrtoNAL. "'P..IM 1N6 C111~ IS St.l~f.ln..Y . 
Moll£ ~ 
1'"f6r vatY CJ.OSe. jstrut.AA.,. lo TIJE. PiCCC~ING t>RAI-ItW6 ,Afolt> 
1'\1£ INS6tTI~ 1~1"-l l)U~ING~ T"~ Dlnt~«Sl{ IN ~PIC-tNG 
lb\.JilllDS. -ate uMioiEI>" t>rz.AWINc& . CTlle SANE. \A'otK;s f'biZ.. ConPcirGl'l. 
~lVI r1A'110N ~'t' (A2.6.(l'\N6 IN86TW66~ { IIVTOrZ.I'oL~f01'(~) fcU-0\./INE, 
llJ6 Si411C Pit! NC. I PtS) . 
1Fl'OU\>114.NTTO CI!6AT'E. A. t!OVIN~ Hoa> wITH 4 'T&Al- i..6NOT!t 
0~ "'t F~A\'1SS. ,'toV .rnl.f!l"11'1 CR6(1'11116 Tile .S"tAIZ=rtiVG ft>S6 
Alllt>'TIIe FIN.Al-
Po~e oF "RRE HoviNt.IJoLt> AND 'TIIe:N 'Tile 
CO~PON!>IN6 1Nl161\.ol6o'-il;: ~ IF ,AIIit!1AT!ON I~ !>oN& 01\1 -1s 
16 ,if-,.4NIMTtN6 ON 2... 
-
' 
-ToTAL.. L..GN6T!f (o-.s 2<) : -'\C A<'AnS~ . 
. 
iaSI{ A2.4n& 6) rhi0{1) AND T IIV86TW~. 
ll 
J-
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I I/ 
<3> 2 
l 
'I s (. -i'<S) 
A SVBT'le C~AN62 IN foST\1~ 
CPUA IBs) 12ESUCT'S IN'TW€ 110VIN&Moiz>. 

163
features more distinct, more extreme or theat-
rically more expressive. Just how drastic such a 
change can or should be, depends again on the 
degree of realism and style of animation.
Next are the inbetweens, which go between 
the two new extremes. The total for your tim-
ing is the same as originally tested - only now 
you have a "living" character instead of a life-
less hold.
The Principles of Animation and their Application
1~11S e.(fe~ CqV\ be~~ 
~hdf\Ced 
Co.flt)...i-he vi~dli+-t\ of.~ pos,e:.i'1\c~J.) 
b~ acliM'Vt!\~or overlaff''":l odiowt 
a~ .fo\1~ ..fh<bu~'h · 
(Ha\r, cl~il\j ill con.&ir\vov~ Mo~.f.) · 
Svd\e~ 
Mv~+ be ~·n"akd aeu>td~ ~ 
-+o ~r 
WQ-\er\c..U-+~ dttd ~~~+- (t:9-H~:M9 
aMd s-poC.~) 4-o aeate.a lleHev~ 
"'tltvs·,CM of"11~v. 
gGHAf.K: 
1\ SttfPU FIE-1> VAttAiiON or A t1oVtNG:, 
Hoa..t:> lEA\6&'1\£ f'toV ~ 
UtGf.IAl-le£1> 
AND A~ 
0 N t.."f S\CJi 6l.SM6Nr.S .IN 
6')Ct"tPrt6 CAS6S (£ .G.~~ ~ 
176ASorvs) Ollie CAN GO AS FA~ AS 
"Ttl Ot>Jt,'"'f use. A 6t.( Wft=t NG oFTNE 
flbVtlO TO C/1541C. ~N 11AN1tt,ATB"£)" 
tt1Przai'l o~ .~W6V6~ 
1WIS&r7ZSM6t..."( 
U 1"11TSD1YAS OF AMNJfl1oN 04N ONLY 
WOY2JC. W ITW St'YU.sl"IC, Co~tJD9!CE 
= 6~~\CAU..'f Si~I\.GL\.( ST'iL.fZ:€1::> 
AtvlMtn'ION At-10 IN 
').I> ONL."f! 

164
There are other methods to achieve a "mov-
ing hold", such as by using a loop, or fol-
low-through and overlapping action. The 
best animation is often achieved by the fact 
that these stylistic devices are synchronized 
and combined very subtly, which is often 
essential for feature quality animation. Any 
good animator will get more sophisticated 
combinations as he gains more experience.
Gap and contrast in lines of action
One of the best ways to achieve a "snappy" 
or lively animation is the combined use of 
frames with strongly contrasting lines of ac-
tion with a gap between the anticipation and 
the execution of a fast action.
For the impact of great dynamics, 
it is important to follow up the 
slow anticipation with a distinctly 
different animation frame (e.g., 
change of action lines from convex 
to concave)! There must be a gap 
between the last anticipation frame 
and the first frame of the actual ac-
tion, in order to achieve the desired 
dynamics, i.e., inbetweens will not 
be used here.
HERE IS THE CLASSIC:
Chapter 2.1
IH88r~E6N'~ for 
~n8pp'j atAtotl.L : 
==PYNAHICS ~'f18.Jioe.CbtWt-t' }PAciNGg 
Aue11t': 

165
If you use an inbetween, it must 
be drawn and placed in such 
a way that the dynamics are 
retained, i.e. show a distinct con-
trast to the anticipation frame. 
It has to be a spatially well-placed 
and well-designed inbetween - a 
purely "mechanical" inbetween 
is not helpful here and would 
destroy the desired effect.
Speed lines are a stylistic device of comics! In ani-
mation, the impression of speed must be achieved 
solely by timing and spacing of the frames. Speed 
lines can be added as an additional graphic stylistic 
device, but must be animated properly and cannot 
"clog up" the gap between the frames, otherwise the 
dynamics will be destroyed!
The Principles of Animation and their Application

166
The more modern (and, of course, more cinematic) equivalent of speed 
lines is the use of motion blur. Here too, the stylistic means should fit the 
design concept of the animation. "Smear" animation (see below) and speed 
lines are used more in stylized 2D animation, motion blur is used more in 3D 
and realistic animation and stop motion.
Fast transition with one inbetween between two key frames, which are held longer 
(2 holds). Works also with "moving holds".
Chapter 2.1
.ADI>ITIOtiAU..~ { AI-T601A1'\VbL'f1416 Sr'1USTJ(.. ~'N.S OF 110TION 8~ 
CAN 
STIL.(.. 66 U-'SD (MOS'r CO\WI NOINCl>fiN COI-rPV'itl( ANtll,IO"IO~ 1 2D \JOIJJ.;J:> 
c:>?"'l"6"-' 126'1/etl" 'TO Cli!CAT& ,.01'1 Al"f'li!OXI h.4n0>.1 : A ''.St16AI2.. .. .As. All) IN~) . 
INA'N~ CASC. '1'+-IIS rtvs1"" 8€ Af'J'!..i6t:> IN .A I-IA'-1 T!.le Colli.Sit16~TIIe 
66~1..-
Arz:r t)lrt£CTioN: Goo'P FOP- I26AU!>TIC. 
:iDANIMA'Io"{ 1 ~6~ 
INARI/2of>ll1A'Te 'FOil V612..'1 5'T'fl-f'US-D 16121-fli/C. '2DAIIflrtATION . (&Elll'612.. TO 
u~6 wi2A9~1CAU..'1 CL6A~ CoMOVIZSl> DltAYIN6~ J. 
Nex-t- PoSe. : 
As kolclMIIIOVi~, 
holcl hc.lcl fci 
CS·~ .7..'t tfdW'. 
~"4!) ~hat\ge. 
Of .S)I.apc. iS iftlpOI 
~Q~~ 
d':))\.MI';C$ ! 
~ 
A TI'&NTION g 
.A SiYL.ISTlC. Toot.. OFT6"" V.SCJ) f"o~ HI6HL.'i s:NI..IZEl:> ANV L.lrti'T6'P ,6111rn,.st'ION 
'"' T115 S\-t6'Not : A 6JZA~ICAU.'f STl2oN6L.'1 01-'~ IN86'TW66"' , W.f41C..~ PIZDVII>&$ 
'T~e ~ 
i'iMrrte>t'-l 1!6"1W66t-.l l.ON<5612.. N6L.O Kel.f F'I?.MteS oft. ~A 1 N fose.s . 
.StNC£~1S '""' ~vL-T IN V61'1L( D'VN-'nac.. ANt) ..S~-A~'1 Aa:6N'T\1Al'Et> A~rn,utol'(, 
~IS.,\I..SO I~ ~N OPTIO~ fOQ. ~16f.t-CON'T!tASI~AP!"f)"TirtiNG £VSN WITf't 
F\IU. ~NII"'KTION • 

167
  Take these drawings and create a full animation (complete with inbe-
tweens)! Vary the extremes and breakdowns to get the best timing.
Assignment:
(4)
(2)
(1)
(3)
(5)
Time to Think, or: Action and Reaction
Apart from certain exceptions, most move-
ments require a certain physical or motivation-
al anticipation time (see also Anticipation). 
If I yell at someone, it usually takes at least a 
fraction of a second of anticipation, before the 
other person responds.
This is because the information has to be 
processed before the person can respond. 
What appears as an immediate reaction in 
the macrocosm of superficial observation, of-
ten turns out to be single-frame delays in the 
microcosm of animation. This principle is also 
consistent with the need not to overwhelm 
the viewer by showing too many actions at 
the same time. As a rule, attention should 
be drawn to a key action. In other words: 
Show them one after the other! (In doing so, 
you have to let actions overlap elegantly - 
see chapter on Overlapping Action/Follow 
Through).
First (1), the "wake-up call" is shown. The sleepy student reacts with delay, 
more specifically, he anticipates (2) his reaction in (3). While the student 
returns from the "fright stage" to a more neutral position (4) - (5), the 
teacher, on the other hand, anticipates (4) his reaction (5) to the outcome 
of the action. 
These are, of course, only the extremes or breakdowns of this animation.
The Principles of Animation and their Application

168
2.) Spacing
Spacing refers to the spatial arrangement of 
inbetweens between the key frames of an 
animation: It helps to define the dynamics 
of movement. "Uneven" spacing of the inbe-
tweens is crucial for a convincing effect. If the 
drawings are evenly spaced, they appear me-
chanical and unnatural. 
Chapter 2.1

169
3.) Slow In und Slow Out (deceleration/acceleration)
This means that movements generally 
accelerate initially (gradual wider spacing 
of drawings) and slow down again (gradual 
narrower spacing of drawings), before they 
come to a standstill or go into a key pose or 
key frame. (Of course there are exceptions to 
the rule.)
The Principles of Animation and their Application
S\...ow IN I Sl.Dw ovr 
t>~C.EL612J(TION I ~"-e-L.SJ2AIION 
Hot..v 
I I I I 1111( 
,ALSO ~NOWN ,..._ C:U£~10Nl~& 
(~r1 
"'OJS~IO#oJ"' = 
PUJ.t:I'W .a CV~ION61> ") ~ 
\-lOL.D 
TRA~/TIO"' T~ 
lliE: NSXr po-se . 
4 Ac.c.GL.Git,(T'IOI\l· Wf.lft.e. 
1111111 
HOIIIN6 AWA\.4 FRl>I1TIIE 
126ST"IN6 PD.S.e 
. IN~NG 
Sfl4ctN6 cF 11'49Es'TW6SNSJ 

170
4.) Straight Ahead and Pose-to-Pose Animation
Straight ahead animation simply means 
"re-inventing" one drawing after the other. 
This ensures great spontaneity during anima-
tion, so that even the animator is "pleasantly 
surprised". In commercial animation, how-
Straight ahead animation leads to a con-
stant flow of movements without coming 
to a real "standstill" - everything changes 
constantly. This results in very flowing move-
ments, since the animation does not move 
"into" and then again "out" of previously set 
extremes. However, if used incorrectly, there 
Pose-to-pose animation primarily defines 
the most expressive key frames or extremes, 
which provide structure to the scene and 
make it predictable. Once the extremes have 
been defined, the inbetweens are inserted. 
ever, the straight ahead method is only pos-
sible as part of a scene made from sketches 
(thumbnails), or one that has been carefully 
planned.
is a risk that the scene will lose its temporal 
structure and that important story points 
will not be communicated, since not enough 
emphasis was placed on the appropriate ex-
pressive key frames.
This method, which allows for extremely good 
planning and structuring of the animation, also 
carries a possible disadvantage, as it lacks spon-
taneity and unexpected developments.
Chapter 2.1
PL..ANNINb WI""TH ICe"''FPAI"\eS 'PI12SI, 
"T-Ae-N INSIEICF'ING 
tNEJ67W~ 
-

171
In my experience, it is much easier for begin-
ners to start with pose-to-pose animation: The 
more spontaneous process of straight-ahead 
animation requires some experience with tim-
ing, spacing, etc. to achieve good results. Once 
the initial success is established, an advanced 
beginner can also experiment with straight-
ahead animation. "The Best of Both Worlds": 
Often, both methods are combined in order to 
achieve optimal results. Extremes, for example, 
which were defined in the first pass, can be 
revised in subsequent passes in order to intro-
duce new ideas and different timing. Or certain 
aspects of a character, which are essential for 
structuring and planning a scene, are animated 
"pose-to-pose" - while other elements are add-
ed in straight ahead animation, as they may be 
more suitable for this.
Certain types of animation are better suited 
for straight ahead animation: When each new 
frame requires a drastic change of shape, such 
as VFX animation. A fire takes on a drastically 
different shape in each new drawing, which 
does not "go" to a certain extreme.  Instead, 
it is a permanently changing continuum of 
movement. The same applies to water, clouds, 
smoke etc.
The Principles of Animation and their Application

172
Comics lack the temporal element: The reader 
himself can decide on the reading duration of each 
panel. Therefore, more details can be displayed 
simultaneously, that is, in one image. A time period 
is condensed into one image. This could work the 
same way in a storyboard!
An animation, on the other hand, runs 
for a specified time: A good animator 
must therefore ensure that important 
actions are seen long enough in order to 
be perceived by the viewer. Therefore, they 
can not compete: This can be achieved by 
showing important actions one at a time. For a life-like and 
credible appearance, you should also work with overlapping 
action and follow through.
A wink directs the viewer's attention to the char-
acter's line of sight ...
... then the light bulb appears. The light bulb appears last and remains 
visible as a loop for at least 18 frames.
5.) Overlapping Action and Follow Through
With the techniques mentioned so far, I can 
now show my character in sufficiently long 
"held" poses, while slow in and slow out al-
lows me to arrive with the correct timing from 
pose A to pose B. But is movement really that 
simple? And what can I do about the problem 
that my character appears absolutely lifeless 
when I show it without any change for several 
drawings? (Note: This can be acceptable with 
highly stylized 2D animation or a desired stylis-
tic device, but it is completely unacceptable for 
3D computer animation.) This is where over-
lapping action and follow through are used to 
achieve the above-described moving hold.
Chapter 2.1
MOVIN&IIOU): (A' ~ 
VA'Ili.CI1CN OF' O~tl.41'1'1>16 
ACfro"): 
-
~lb!JT llo~<t> s:r:>&SOw our 
,---- 10~ . 
.....------___,,.___,,_,.,- -ill6 t1CU~M~ A ~111\.C 
err wrb6( . 
ANrl1otTIOI'4= ON~T!HN6Afl6~11le OTI!e~ . 
r~us O\£fl.I..Af>Pr"b Aalot-f A'>O ~UlN Tiit:Ofi(,U · 
lli&C.V.el- R>U.OW~ i~12CU&tl 
AFTG~ 
Tlle"HE~l> 1\45 AL~ 
IU>A'I>'f AOZ.IUII6P . IT UNRll.O~ 
.M A' WAY~ -I'ID'I61'16111T' IHTI+ 
A D6Q!€,¥rllf(; PAOli.!$ 'o'F 
r1CTI"IOI'i . 

173
5a) Wave Principle
The basic principle of wave action is similarly 
important to animation as the principle of the 
bouncing ball. This principle can and must be 
applied to many different movements of flex-
ible objects, if you want to achieve a credible 
impression. (As always, you can certainly devi-
ate from this as a deliberate artistic measure, 
but it is crucial to understand the possibilities 
of this technique.) At the same time, I have 
learned that it is one of the hardest-to-learn 
basic rules for beginners: We are talking about 
a non-linear movement pattern, which re-
quires out-of-the-box thinking at key points. 
Purely mechanical inbetweens (which should 
basically be avoided) do not work at all here.
Waves have to be used quite often for ele-
ments of a character in follow through and in 
overlapping action, such as a windblown coat, 
or hair, for an animal's tail, etc. It is often best to 
animate "straight ahead" (within a roughly es-
tablished time structure) and to insert waves 
only in a later animation pass, after the move-
ments of the main object (body) have already 
been implemented.
The Principles of Animation and their Application
NoJ GGOALLY f'"U:q~~QVr USe Of Tile 
WAV6 PIZ-IN'-1111£ ~ 14,\II'.,Fl.A~' en .. 
DltlfTING 1111111€: I.JIIIIt>.li£~ 10r:: ~,7116' 
IN~ 
Atle t11"1NE' 10 COI1Pt.E'TE" 
ll\6 Afvlrb\1~ ~{C:Vc.I.S (AFJO~l't fl)Wll.ls1). 
l:>E"l>6NOIN6 OW Th€ ~J/Z6t> ~ 
oP 
t10V61'161o1r CTI" llol6) 111&'( ~TO 
BE 
,o\\Xl6t>WmtTNE ~VISITS SI.DWIN /SJJJt.ICJ.Ii 
"Tt>W"t.DS ~ 
FX_ Al'\61: • 

174
6.)  Secondary Action 
A secondary action supports 
or 
even 
counteracts 
the 
primary action of a charac-
ter. It is important that this 
secondary action does not 
dominate or drown out the 
primary movement: It must 
be noticeable, but must re-
main secondary. This could 
be, for example, wiping away 
a tear with the arm (second-
ary action,) while a character 
Chapter 2.1

175
The illustrations show an example of secondary 
action. This is a loop, where after drawing 8, drawing 
1 begins again.
1.)  Torso, head and legs show the primary move-
ment (main action), namely the running of the 
character.
2.)  The wildly swirling arms are the secondary action: 
This action does not follow the classic balancing 
swinging movement ("arm swing") of a running 
cycle. Instead, this movement follows its own 
movement path and timing.
3.)  Hair and coattails are animated according to the 
follow-through principle. The Animator would 
add this animation after the main animation has 
been defined.
is walking away (main action). 
This secondary action is in-
tended to give more depth to 
the performance through ad-
ditional information, but can 
not dominate or drown out 
the primary movement.
The Principles of Animation and their Application

176
WITHOUT ANTICIPATION
WITH ANTICIPATION
7.) Anticipation - Preparation (Anticipation of Movements)
If you will, this principle is another aspect of 
timing: As a rule, any action or movement is 
preceded by a preparatory smaller action. 
Even this rule was originally discovered while 
observing material from live-action film, and 
then adapted (often intentionally exaggerat-
ed) for animation.
Anticipation of movement is also a helpful 
trick to attract the viewer's attention to ac-
tions that would otherwise be over quickly (in 
very few single frames), making sure that they 
can be perceived at all. The anticipation of 
the action to follow can/must be held longer 
than the actual action (= use more frames as 
spacing narrows). Thus, the viewer will auto-
matically anticipate that "something is about 
to happen" and perceive the actual primary 
action sufficiently, despite its extreme brevity 
(1 or 2 frames). 
On the opposite page an example based on 
Homer's Odyssey: Upon returning home, Od-
ysseus points his famous bow to the not-so-
happy suitors, who are competing for his wife 
Penelope. The anticipation together with the 
reactions, helps to make the arrow shot no-
ticeable - also, keep in mind the importance of 
timing here!
Chapter 2.1
A 'J~~ PlA<:st> 
p~~L'f (!lillie. !'( ll)t)(..E 
IS UNNA~"L. ANt> 
~TIFF. 
w ITii THS CdZ,fZ6q- Pllet'At.(l'!D"l, 
THE 80t>Y Axes Cf.I~NGIS. 
TU!& I~ F\.€){181..& N1JZ.. ~~~~. 
A~I>IIV6 OVGI2LAf'Pit'lf.:, AalO~ 
(I-IA1112.,N~f) ~NHA~CC.S"llii.S 
e FFSCr Fv!Q'Ja~ . 
~ble,"TTI£ AI/IIClfMr!oN 
foS£ A'-'0 COI1MUNIC16l6& 
"'TIJE W61~ Or~ 
~ : 
1ll£ .412.11 C4~"TAI! 
W6161o11"' 1"bSIII",OI2.T 
Tile ST'~III~N6V1. 

177
  Complete the animation by using the extremes to draw inbetweens. 
Pay particular attention to the correct timing (number) and spacing 
(position) of the inbetweens!
Assignment:
Staging through timing and change of shape in this scene: 
The only elements changing are those needed to perceive 
the arrow shot.
The change/reaction of the shooter follows 
later, in order not to divert the attention!
The Principles of Animation and their Application
S~NG I~I>~INQ 
(SLOW IN)), 
111111111 
I 
No IN~&WEieloi.S. 
IIS£E : 6o\fTO ~16'£ 
11'ito114ntcs. 
'TIJIS ANne.. I ~TI0/'4 IS 
SU tWI2.S OF fEIIGLoP6. 
IDEAU.'f ,Sifll€1> lt) 
(~tt8L.r,-.G.J · 
APPLY A HeW/ .. & U0U>. 
MAWV I NB6'TW&sti.S: 
/ 
S"OW IW A~t> ..SC,OW our. 
J-- ~ 
\1t~ IN861W6SN 
(ON //;OR 2..c ') 
-IF NESE>6t> AT AU.. . 
.._... t>~P6NO.S ON SNLE;./ 
T.4.STE/~STIC:.. '-O,Al. • 
TE.$T" tr~ 

178
Additional major anticipa-
tions
The rule is: 
The greater or more intense 
the action, the greater the 
anticipation: 
  If I want to run extremely 
fast, I have to gain a lot of 
momentum!
  If I want to lift a very heavy 
object, I have to "gather" 
my strength and prepare 
the upward motion phys-
ically (possibly mentally 
as well...). Here it becomes 
apparent how the repeat-
ed effort of anticipation 
can contribute to convey-
ing the illusion of weight 
for the animation!
PSYCHOLOGICAL ANTICIPATION
PHYSICAL ANTICIPATION
Chapter 2.1
Ko~An" INT/HIHf,: 
~l.oW ... FAAr 
\ "'Il 
AGIII~.S 1116" ~~fl(c{~ 
C~ 
1lle DYHAITIUo 
T rP .fl"'(,£.6 FRAMe~ FliOitCR.. 
-k(D 60NE -: 

179
Paying close attention to 
stark contrasts in change of 
shape is an essential com-
ponent and absolutely nec-
essary: convex changes to 
concave (in lines of action) 
etc. These opposites are 
enormously important for 
lively animation - the more 
cartoony, the better! 
Subtle Anticipation
Working with very subtle 
anticipation 
can 
greatly 
enrich animation as well: a 
wink, slightly raising/lower-
ing the head, a slight turn of 
the body. The action and its 
preparation should always 
be expressed in a reasonable 
relationship. The same ap-
plies to timing, spacing and 
change of shape!
The Principles of Animation and their Application
W6f64Jr: 
' "C61'J1012.oF 
~ 0121\Vrry~ . 
~ 
OFT5NT&ns.s AMTIC.lPA,ON I.SALSo~s.o Hotze svrm...y ;o PI!EPAi$ 
-n.IE .sn~a.roF A ~~(ab6~ t10v6t16NI Wt'TN A Sl-164-J'I covwn;R.-110\6n61VT'"'. 
T\.HS PJ20V6 S A V-'€Ail-
t1Gn~ot:> To A.,IMATe 0<1i OF .A STA1'1C. POse LNTO 
A 8661 ~ N IN~ tlOV6t16JVI""', 6. .6. Wf..IE:N S04t2:rl W~ A \../AL.t<. T4JIS oFJeN 
STAa:::I'"S 'WIT.._, ~ SV&1€ CouNTG"R.., -MOV6N61Vr .AND A SlJIPr OF \../GI~r 
To" F~" --n.e, STA1Zr1Nb ~ 
ri2Df1 W&G,~ Awo Au..o..l •N~ tT To 
\\0\/6 Fo(2.YJ•~ . 

180
Subtle anticipation of a 
major anticipation
When it comes to introduc-
ing a very pronounced antic-
ipation itself, it is often help-
ful to open it with a smaller 
anticipatory movement.
Accentuating movements 
through anticipation
One rather sophisticated trick 
is to integrate an anticipation 
into a continuous movement 
in order to highlight a certain 
aspect: For this, appropriate 
spacing is combined with 
the principle of overlapping 
action (i.e. different timing 
for different body parts). The 
counteraction of the hand 
within the forward move-
ment of the arm anticipates 
the final "finger pointing": 
The hand anticipates until 
shortly before the final ex-
treme, then reaching the final 
position with only one inbe-
tween.
Chapter 2.1
lib 
1'2. f'J2!4n6.£ AS 
.!J9VI N!ir f!O Ll>. 
lt8 
G) )O'IOftl: 
A6Ait.l ~'( FAtr 
,AF'Tti~ 
(J) Wrf4f Ot~i,\f Jf 
oR. NO IN,eog,.j~ 
oevtoust.~ ,-n.e.iM&GT\ISSNS AlE .tttu. t'fi~~'"'E:t ~Gfe, 
S~O\.\IN A~ 
OtvL."f i\le ICQ\.f f"J?ArtE,(Nvn&e~<l) 
CouLD !4L.nosr B€S"N A' A '&tEA~I>OWN) . 
'T~S' Possrec..e. TIM IN& lS lht>ll~l> IN N\lrt86i.s 111 taet>. 
~et.«<''lle!.).l J...t I'I6AA. 
Uf\1"~ -MOVe.M611r 
Of' +l6At>. 

181
8.)  Squash and Stretch 
Squash and stretch describes the physically 
induced deformations of objects when forces 
act on them: A classic example is the bouncing 
ball. The following rule applies: The more natu-
ralistic an animation should be, the less squash 
and stretch should be applied. 
The Principles of Animation and their Application
ScgvAiH ,4/fP fimrtt 
Aa.so f>I,Ay A~ lt1Ft.CAHI 
I?DI.f IN P lA J..0 6116 ,AN f .... 
~or(: nte ANA'TOMY 
Or1"HE rACO AUOWS 
AMJ.ItiG FIEXlfll~rf'Y. 
1116 Holl€ ~me 
-rAe 
fQm; ~"""' tS, Tfl6 
tfOI!£ ~'1 SQuA.nt 
Ato.'fl ~£\ 
..('~oru~ 
BE ~£afT>. 

182
9.) Arcs
Most movements do not run along (imagi-
nary) straight lines, but along curved or arc-
like paths of movement: the arcs.
The illustration on the left shows the differ-
ent paths of movement of the individual 
body elements:
You can clearly see the arc-shaped character, 
which lends elegance, expression and a cer-
tain genuineness to the animation (with the 
exaggeration typical to animation). These 
movement arcs are achieved by establishing 
a movement hierarchy to obtain flexibility: 
the delayed transfer of movement through 
joints.
Movement along 
a straight line: 
very unusual, e.g. 
for a desired "stiff" 
exercise-type of 
march.
Natural walking movement: Arms and legs 
move along curves (arcs).
Movements along straight lines are stiff/
mechanical/robotic - most naturally organic 
movements follow an arc.
Another good example of this 
principle: The foot follows 
the shinbone's direction of 
movement with delay and 
first moves into the opposite 
direction.
Flexibility by delayed transfer of force through joints: 
In the case of rigid "rods" (i.e., lower arm/upper arm), 
which are connected by joints, a delayed force transfer 
of the primary movement takes place through the joint. 
In other words: When the upper arm moves in one direc-
tion, the forearm first moves into the opposite direction 
before following the direction of the primary movement. 
Flexibility and arcs can be achieved with this delayed 
movement dynamics.
Chapter 2.1

183
10.) Solid Drawing  
Solid drawing refers to the fact that animat-
ed objects should always retain their orig-
inal overall volume when undergoing any 
deformation. For example, what is added 
in length, has to be removed in width. Al-
though it sounds simple in theory, it is ex-
tremely difficult to implement and requires 
the highest level of mastery in drawing. The 
degree of difficulty increases significantly 
with the complexity of the objects/charac-
ters. In computer animation, this is carried 
out by the computer, which calculates the 
necessary deformations based on pre-
defined volumes.
If the drawings are not "solid", then the (un-
intentional) change in volume will domi-
nate the intended change of shape in the 
illustration of movement: This means that in 
extreme cases, the viewer can no longer rec-
ognize the movement, the actual animation, 
but is totally distracted by the sloppy shape 
change of fluctuating volume.
THIS IS CLEARLY SHOWN IN THE FOLLOWING 
ILLUSTRATION:
The Principles of Animation and their Application
w rriJovr cONs,~N6 TNe 
~HGIPLSS OF SQI..II> 
bRNI'IfNG- Tf.II.S caJI-0 1 
fOjL SKJI\111'1£ 1Lootc:. L.t 11::& 
'T\11& : 
, 
• 
Sot..IPl>AAWI~ 
1ltE VOWnE i2EHA1~ THE. 
s.\tte ~ 
5ACtf 
DEFol'c!11 ,4:T 10>1 ~ 
1\lts woua..t> ~9"'91..'1 .srau.. 
'Fii~~Ctl'DN ~ 
A 11W ll.l>l>f Ex-
fi&QIME:NTA&." AMI11JC'Tl01'4-~IR" 
~ 
~ 
CHAI-l6E OF11-Ic 
f4e,vae w rnt Ct-1AN6/N6\b.Urte 
~~ 
""ltEAI.Isnc" 
HOV6'H61'lf" Suf'PoSrTIO~. 

184
A common mistake: 
The shape changes too much, with volume 
and/or line thickness of the outer line varying 
greatly. These changes prevent or interfere 
with the originally intended, clear communi-
cation of the character's  movement: Varying 
the line width of the outlines can be a desired 
artistic effect, but this effect should never be 
so pronounced that it interferes with the ac-
tual animation! 
In an artistic animation, it can be quite attrac-
tive to change the contour lines from one draw-
ing to the next in thickness and expansion, i.e., 
deviating from the very strict rules of solid 
drawing: This is always an artistic judgment 
call. However, this change or deviation should 
never be so drastic that the actual movement 
of the character is no longer recognizable.
For "Bambi" (Hand et al., 1942) a plaster model had to 
be created and filmed. The animators then traced the 
antler from the footage, in the perspective they needed!
Chapter 2.1
OF wurz.c;e I MlwUI +IAV& ~~~~ 
A~'T1.$TIC: Cowcsp; Fo~ WWIC# 
t ..., A'Wr TO DIISJ..I BeR,.4 T61Jf Nt. -
GI.Seri\IE ,tLJ~' OF $or. I~ 
l>llAWit.l& . 
Sur IF I W"r-T TO t'4Y ,41911' 
TIDNTO~ 
1\l6t.li1'!-'l~ 
t'>6fl M~'1TIE WRPt-16 WAY. 
/ 
I • 
COHPl&rliW ~oN & : A 
i't"oHM6fS. OF\If)I.Utf6 CbcfitNEP 
WIT4f HINIIIIA[,. 1-bll6~ .. f". 
nut IIAY An~ oF''AN•I1ATrOI'JW 
at6~66S -rn,tlr IJAC N6r ltlffir41:E'D 
AT AU.-g 
W ITII111E ~ne CA1"16AA f'S~fS:;N\ft: 
-nl6£1fCS tiUST NOT''WAIII06R.'Wmi1N 
"T\\E. INNef&.. $MAlle . 
' 
A "ll'&mON IS ro 8S Q\61-J Tb 
i\IS Wl H6 f'LAP, sur IS Pefl£.ClEJ> 
~ 
1lJ5 S'nrcNcUJNINl&fl'lol'o<At.:) 
.S~.4 I'E C+I.41'4EiC. • 

185
NOT LIKE THIS:
The Principles of Animation and their Application
SOJ.IP' l)RI\VJNG REQUI~E:"():1ltE~~Ei'A~ 
06tf4114PS. TO KE6P 1116 F"t6CJtt5 ON 110DEL..-= 
Cl.E.\Yl.l..'f ~Nr1.Atl.6 AT AU. TJ~ • 
• ----.. .. ,.,...._,S~:~~ImWAIN~'""'v'f'l-. 
THe E:fFfA'S OF 
P~Gn~,~~Jr 
~~:-.. ~ 
;~\F::;~ k~ 
A H012.6 (of1ple,)( I BUT S'TII.j... 
Cot1 P.AAAitV6LY 11A.,IM,CION • fll.I91Dl '111 
c::::::::::::::::::~~'l SSICN. IMPD£TANi A~ 
'"Jl.IS U~-
1.. \fIN (C. ST'RON&lJ-1 PitoN OU NeED 
.Actio~ l...IN£& AND TN£ Wtl'lff SJUFT(s) 
w~1N ~s Fl&u(f:. 
E:~~IA~ ro~ t1A)e OF 
RI&IJ) MA~I"~ CAN 
Naf H~ 11te ~­
~c~~ 
IN vow""e. 
~£. PR.OPoRTlONS 
M\I.ST"Be.COR~lecr At~D 
lit£ CtiAN&e IN S"Co\L.IS 
t'\U51"" Co:PfL&:Tl,'/ ~ 
~E-Q&4W6£ IN f'E"t.SfSC:rl\£ 
NO OEFtl'llflON OF 
FollH 'LAQC: Of" us 1111& 
• S112,A 1 &'-'TS .. AE.A 1 ~ 
i'::~:;"· ~ 
)1 ' 
WEIGHT _f 
A cottlfor-J HtsrAKE ·. 
111./~lfP~IN&" (JQ. 
I .. G~Y 
Pf!OPO£-
llo,.6i) EI£116Nll 
~mull] A t,llte < ) !fer fdfTirJ,./ 
-
~ WRONG! 
NOCON\tlhviN~ SlfiFr 
orr-nte ~/l....OF 
c;'R.AVtfY~ 
·~ 
FL.J:.XtB~&, 
SOFT, C.OMPI..\Htll 
MA1'~1AI.S SUGH AS 
CI..CJll\ CHAN66 TtiEJIQ.. 
S~fe AU. 1\.IE TJrlE. 
~'-I t ·&.£ t-10VJN<:r ~"fi.D~6L.l(. 
1\I-E'111UST' ~~ CoHPELUJIIQ.'f 
~t-41HAl'617 ~cco«DI r-.c; ~ 
'N£ t.ul£s oF 
Fot.a.ow ii-IP4JGH. 
1J ~T101"1VA"TE.t> ~ 
~C:S I 
HA'TCf.ffNG I-lAVE. No 
PLACS I~ Al-IIHioUION. 
A'-1- 1-lti~St\VST DEFII'lE. 
AWD 1U..U&TAATe"nle 
ttovetowr •~JlOuroti 
c:;.HAN&e= or SWA:. · 

186
EXAGGERATION
11.) Exaggeration 
It is a well-known phenomenon that simply 
"tracing" live action images (known as ro-
toscoping) does not work as a foundation 
for animation: The result may seem relatively 
realistic, but completely lacks the desired mo-
mentum and liveliness, especially in cartoony 
animation. The same applies to the digital 
version of rotoscoping - motion capture. For 
this reason, extremes are almost always ed-
ited, even with live-action concepts, and the 
animation is adapted in order to achieve sat-
isfactory results. 
Exaggeration is an overriding artistic con-
cept that must be applied to all animation 
techniques, more specifically, that can only 
be achieved by applying these techniques 
correctly:
  extreme expressive poses,
  more pronounced squash and stretch, 
  stronger contrasts in timing: fast versus 
slow,
   wider spacing versus very closely "placed" 
frames.
Also important to know (applies especially to 
traditional 2D animation): The more complex 
a design, the more difficult it is to create ex-
treme animation, in other words, to be able 
to deform and change the animation freely. 
"Snappy timing": only extremes ("pose-to-pose") no 
or few in-betweens
Version with little exaggeration, relatively close to live-ac-
tion film -  "realistic" design, subtle expression.
Typical cartoon version: high degree of stylization, extreme 
exaggeration, extreme use of squash and stretch - only 
possible like this in cartoons.
Chapter 2.1

187
As a rule, animation must be "larger than life", 
i.e., surpass reality in order to succeed artis-
tically. In general, the following rule applies:
  The more stylized (cartoony) a project is, 
the more exaggeration can be achieved.
  The more "life-like" an animation has to be, 
the less exaggeration (especially for the 
animation of digital characters, which are 
used as visual effects in a live-action mov-
ie, for example, where they interact with 
real actors). 
Exceptions prove the rule:
It may also be artistically attractive to 
apply extreme exaggeration to a realistic 
design. Thanks to digital production 
techniques, this is now also possible 
with real actors (classic example of the 
film "The Mask" [Russell, 1994] with Jim 
Carrey).
This animation uses significantly more exaggeration: The character is very cartoony in 
design. The poses are much more extreme, there are more pronounced changes in shape. 
The lines of action are emphasized, and the upper body of the character shifts heavily to 
the right and left in perspective.
A relatively "normal" or standard walk cycle comparatively similar to "real life". While 
there are typical animation elements present (follow through, overlapping action, squash 
and stretch) - they only exist in moderate form.
The change-of-shape element is not very pronounced and would undermine the impact 
of credibly illustrated shift in weight.
The Principles of Animation and their Application

188
12.) Weight - How do I show weight in animation?
A drawn or virtual character has no real 
weight, of course: Therefore, the credible illu-
sion of weight must be produced when this is 
the artistic intention. This is mainly the case 
with commercial or linear narrative anima-
tion, in order to lend a certain "life-like" aspect 
to the artificial actors. However, this is gener-
ally not about naturalism, but about credibil-
ity, for which - ironically - the stylistic means 
of exaggeration (see previous section) is re-
quired. In order to leave a "weighty impres-
sion", an animator must skillfully combine 
the previously learned techniques of timing, 
spacing, squash and stretch, follow through, 
overlapping action and change of shape.
Fewer drawings with 
decreased spacing 
in "up stage", since 
a heavy character is 
pulled down strongly 
by gravitational force.
More drawings in "down-stage" ("recoil" stage), since a heavy character 
needs more time and strength to overcome gravity.
Fewer drawings here: Building up mo-
mentum requires less time due to the 
lower weight of the character and 
allows for faster "take off".
"UP" AND "DOWN" TIMING AND SPACING FOR:
Chapter 2.1

189
The Principles of Animation and their Application
A ''9Vw+ fi~tne Cd.Y\W.OYe 
.fos~r ~.,.."totes 
~ 
~~d..d effo,t ~ 
~~-'~o'iY''. 
~ 
"l:>v~ ToT'-'~ WEI~\ 
-nte U'NOti1~..l .. l Nc Or 
~e 
FC>o-r \.S. FLA1T6NED 
-T\J~NIN6 l(Al.,M~\ 
, N'TO A. r~.A" J~\b~J=r" 
\-lN6 · 
T~(S D~WIN6 (,OO~ 
A~ '~-rn~e: rs No 
Wfi6{(T" oN 1liG FooT A 'l 
,AU,. 
) 

190
A very important factor for a convincing illu-
sion of weight is also the representation of 
weight shift during movement. This is especial-
ly true for movements that require overcoming 
gravity - for example, getting up from a resting 
position. Having knowledge of the anatomy 
and real movement sequence helps to repre-
sent the process correctly.
The underlying principle is usually a gradual 
shifting of weight: Only when an arm or a leg 
is relieved of its weight, is it free to change po-
sition and then to bear weight on it again (see 
illustrations). The more complex such a move-
ment, the more useful it is to record a reference 
Chapter 2.1
l)VE. To -n+e We16Hr l,oAP A SQOA.tfi 
ef'9=i I~ 0EA'1St> ONT~e UNb6tl.SloC 
OF11lS. F'tNGe~~. 
N~'Jf<At.. 
E FFee"r~ FL.GXI ~/....e MA~ l?ff"001S 
W \TI-l-mE W6ltD&JI AND ~"C¥­
~v~e_e oF A t.IA~~ Svr2~. 
A6AtN: NO LOAl> 6f1=eCr 
CAN '86 Dt:Jtcret:>. 
f"IN66t2S IN VN06F'IN60 
RovNt> ..Sf.\AtsS' . 

191
video of a life action. This should really only 
serve as a reference and must be implement-
ed in the style of the animation. An animator 
should always continue figure drawing: With 
the exercises described in the previous chapter, 
such sequences can always be practiced with a 
live model: This will allow an experienced ani-
mator to have a complete catalog of anatom-
ically correct options of weight shifting in his 
head, which he can retrieve as needed.
The Principles of Animation and their Application
SUBSO:QU~N\~)' 
W•IGH'r .SioliFr 
'TO lfit 1.-HT ~J:G. 
F'!zll'lclf~~ OF SUCct::SSlVS 
W•IGH'r .SioliFr 

192
THIS IS HOW IT'S DONE:
Chapter 2.1
T\Ut VA~IANI IS f€110€lt€D 
e6L I EVA&!;~; .... ~oVE.tt 
11-16 1£161-rr SIIIFT,AL!EIT" 
Nai~AUtliC. • 
® 
CUAIIISCOF~AI'e: 
9EIIr i.._ V~ · 
SrAAibllf 1 

193
13.) Appeal and Strong Poses
Appeal means that the qual-
ity of the animation design 
or character design should 
have a positive effect on the 
audience. 
This is not the same as a 
"sweet" or "cute" look - the 
design must be convincing 
and coherent for the relevant 
style. Depending on the style, 
this can look quite different: 
Lilo from "Lilo and Stitch" 
(DeBlois/Sanders, 2002) and 
Jack Skellington from "Night-
mare Before Christmas" (Se-
lick, 1993) are both examples 
of characters with great ap-
peal. All careful planning of 
timing and spacing can be 
completely destroyed, if the 
shaping,  the design of the 
characters, does not support 
the animation in each draw-
ing. The change of shape  
and the quality of key frames 
or key poses is crucial: 
  Do they have tension, ap-
peal, expressiveness?
  Can I make strong, contin-
uous lines of action?
 
 (Tip: They should always 
be the basis of strong pos-
es.)
  Can my pose be "distin-
guished" as a silhouette?
  How do I get from pose 
A to pose B, does the 
change of shape support 
the timing and accentu-
ate it correctly?
  Is the drawing solid and 
"on model" (match the 
design of the character)?
  Am I choosing the right 
perspective for 3D anima-
tion to show the character 
in the best way possible?
The Principles of Animation and their Application

194
INCORRECT
CORRECT
INCORRECT
CORRECT
Chapter 2.1
RI6NT( 
.., 
# 
RI6NT( 
.., 
# 

195
A common beginner's mistake:  
An animation is not a comic, therefore the 
expression to be communicated should be 
communicated through acting/the action of 
the character- not with the usual comic-style 
means, such as speech- or thought bubbles. 
It conveys a weak animation, which does not 
rely on the movement of the character for ex-
pression!
The Principles of Animation and their Application
t,GFrA~ 
J(IGIIT A01 AA& 
~MerQ.lcAL. ,6vr 
MA\'6 IN~ING 
1\4tlo\16H ,tp,4e1 NC1 
A~t> ovet.JAP-' • 
1..6~ &xfrl6$S.PI6 
St!J.l~ 
~ l£SS 
TfNSION 96CA\46 
U~SAGe. TO 
S\t nl16TQ.I CAL I 
s•ntLA.~. 
1 
'lJ' 
Too EQvAL \.16l"W1 
b'~avnow (vNes-
u EV~8L.S) ~ l£FrAWl> 
IUbUr fi:xlr A fl.£ -r\J6. 
S'AMe. 

196
14.) Staging 
Staging is about using all 
design elements so that the 
action is optimally staged in 
such a way that the viewer 
can understand it! Composi-
tion, poses, appeal and, last 
but not least, timing must be 
designed in such a way, that 
the attention of the audience 
is directed in terms of visual 
storytelling:
  The background must not 
conflict with the acting 
characters in front.
  Important actions may 
not compete for the at-
tention of the audience.
  A distinction must be 
made between primary 
and secondary action.
Most importantly: 
The (animation) filmmaker 
has to decide what should be 
narrated with each shot. It is 
only when he has made that 
decision, that staging can be 
structured coherently.
Composition
- positioning
- strong/clear poses
- can I "distinguish" the silhouette?
- contrast
- scaling
- density of detail
- tonal values/lighting
Timing
- overlapping action, follow through
- secondary action
-  balance of fast and slow movements
One character dominates the scene with its 
action: If both actors were acting with equal 
intensity, it would confuse the viewer. Maximum 
action - minimal action.
Chapter 2.1
,srA&ING '. S.Kil-1'\IU.'f 11 SE1' IN SeEN>", IN 
onoe.R ,.oconnvM£.41€\IIGSIOR.'f 11'1 
ill€ "86&T- \.JAY f=IBI.e. 
e;HI'TY.snl.e.e I'N f'ROWT OF 
IN~IG!-1 111£ Q.l,t.tACIE(. C4N 
/>Vf WnWC>VT"CONI'~IcT 
W ITt\ 1ll E: 11..w<bllOV"I> ji.JIP 
W 1'1111 N "'llE \11191l>el> /1184 . 
15l>Ot> STN7rN(; Dl~ 
TilE Ali'6Nlf0N I tol ~IM~ 
O'F .s1tlRY. 
folt GO<:it>S'IHolf\16o-
WIT\JtNTHe~, 
CD"" 06A.ltlE f'JJN-
C.lf'l.e:OF"~­
~()ti ' AflST' 
~E 'F'I&IKE ~ 
U ... 
AS11'0..-,MNIWE"-
1Nl'l-'e~~ON 
T<E DTH0A Fl"'l'£ 
~$Til0-­
"'e,.Ftft$TONE1S 
A.c:no"S A1le.~'1 
ft6s:t'OA,IM61> . 1)&1~ 
f'fLINC.1Pt.e'A9ft..IES 
VICE; \ISlZSA . 

197
EXAMPLE 
OF POSSIBLE COMPO-
SITION 
(LAYOUT WITH 
BACKGROUND)
Exercise for staging of interaction/action/reaction. 
  Use all characters (Odysseus, Penelope, suitor) and animate the follow-
ing scene: Odysseus standing with a bow, positions himself to shoot, 
then shoots. Penelope reacts, suitors react. 
  Use all the resources at your disposal to produce good timing: compo-
sition, timing, spacing, change of shape.
  Story: Think of something funny - what happens to the suitors?
Assignment:
The Principles of Animation and their Application

198
15.) Change of Shape 
As we have seen in previous examples, it is 
very important for the dynamics and accen-
tuation of animation to work with strong 
shape changes:
  Bent to stretched
  Concave to convex... etc.:
These shape changes can be applied abruptly 
(without inbetweens) in order to emphasize 
features - or gradually as extremes with ap-
propriate inbetweens.
  For example, the moment of bearing or 
relieving weight almost always involves a 
strong change in shape (from stretched 
leg to bent leg and vice versa).
  In order to achieve a very dynamic move-
ment, the first drawing of this movement 
must be very contrasting (such as con-
vex instead of concave) to the preceding 
drawing.
Chapter 2.1
AcesNr 1'\lRO~M- SHAC'IE Ct-IA~& ANe> ~~-t1o~n&Nr: 
;:::::L 

199
16.) Counteraction
While counteraction is not one of the classically 
defined animation principles, it merits a closer 
look. Counteractions are usually perceived by 
the viewer as appealing and should therefore 
be an important design element of sophisticat-
ed animation. Basically, they are derived from 
the other principles: anticipation and overlap-
ping action or follow through, i.e., the time-de-
layed action of connected objects (e.g., head 
and hair). The principle of counteraction is not 
an invention of animators, but can also be ob-
served in nature:
  The right arm moves forward, right leg 
backward to maintain balance. (The coun-
teraction is therefore also an important 
principle to show weight.)
  Before standing up from a sitting position, 
a counteraction in anticipation is first car-
ried out. This is to gain momentum, in oth-
er words, to gather strength in order to be 
able to get up.
   Differences in weight and texture lead to 
counteractions:
The head moves in one direction - the hair is 
first "blown" in the other direction caused by 
wind resistance, before it belatedly follows 
the movement direction of the head (follow 
though). 
From a purely formal point of view, counterac-
tions ensure that the dynamics of movements 
intensify, while the effects of movements in the 
same direction tend to cancel out or weaken. 
For this reason, an animator can also use this 
design element to increase the dynamics or 
effect of his animation - even in abstract form.
The Principles of Animation and their Application
wAve t-~UT1ol\l 
A~l1 t10'V6S 
fJAc.KI.s-•D£\VAV~ . 
COUIIIllSI'2.-rtov~ IS NA""ftt!eAL AND D.f~IV€D F12ot1 
O~.IITION ( F"o12 G¥,411PtE 1'\JE Dct.A"f6t:> ll2Al'ISOI$!Ot-i 
OF -FoJZ.CS ""TheovGH ~OIN~ 10V6U.A"PPIIol6 .Ac:f'IO~ ,'AX.w.JllU?oll&~). 

200
A big challenge for the animator is that these 
animation principles cannot be used in isola-
tion, but they must almost always be applied 
in combination. This is why it is important to 
understand these fundamentals first, so that 
then they can be applied in a constantly re-
fined form. Walking is a very good example to 
demonstrate the application of multiple ani-
mation principles at the same time, but also 
because this rhythmic form of movement can 
be designed as a loop or cycle (with a limited 
number of drawings that can be repeated).
If you observe the walking, running or pacing 
of a person in real life, you quickly realize that 
no two persons in the world have exactly the 
same gait: There are infinite number of ways 
to move on two feet.
Therefore, it is immensely important for an 
animator to avoid any mechanical copying 
of patterns for walk cycles from text books, 
but to seek inspiration by observing and 
exaggerating real life. There are basically no 
limitations to the inventiveness and exag-
geration - just how far you take this depends 
solely on the required degree of realism for 
the animation.
On the other hand, it is essential for the be-
ginner to understand and learn that all walk-
ing movements are based on a system. You 
can explore endless variations within that 
system. If you work without a system, you will 
not be able to obtain a credible impression 
of walking, running and racing, because the 
necessary rhythmic repetition is missing.
Example of use: Walk Cycles 
The following drawings show how you can build 
such a system and then vary it as well. Perhaps this 
could be compared to a jazz musician, who first 
learns the scales and then uses this foundation for 
free improvisations.
Illustration: Hannes Rall
Chapter 2.1

201
CONSTRUCTING A WALK CYCLE:
Up-and-down drawings can be 
seen as applications of stretch 
and squash - to what extent 
this is implemented, depends 
on the desired degree of real-
ism in the animation.
"Inverted " 4 clearly distin-
guishable in the silhouette. 
In the passing drawing, you 
should make sure that the 
drawing remains distinguish-
able, for example, in the form 
of an inverted 4.
In general, the swinging movement 
of the arms is most pronounced in the 
down drawing.
The Principles of Animation and their Application
flf 
,, CoN'T1Gr'~ R 
11-
21 
'Lq 
., DowN'¥< 
,,P~NC:ft,.v,a~~ 
t 
IT MAt:~ ~EN.SE- TO ~~~Sf ~KtR.Hov-r- -me '9~1G .STRUCTlJI'{€ 6F A l..fALk 
WITH TNe Al3<>ve g'ectF\€t> CONTAcr, t>owtJ, PASS1t"~6 AND OP Po~mo~ 
Al'JD 'TJ16N T~'f 11 OV1' rN A Ll~l ~St. If-liS 'v/AY Y<>V CAN .ree: GW ON 
w~er~eR. The ~v6~TIMrN6 WoRKs .TNE lNDrVti>V.AL 
DP-A~tNGS AIJ.€ 
R.Eco~ \tJITN T~E. c:a<RE.S:f'o~DtN~ NUI1B6~ C'F f~E~ 10 
, 
AU\116'1€ I~E 0~1126~ WALK "Thn¥70 ( o~ To --rn.'-f OVT WW ICH SP6et> 
w o ~ ICS S6ST R:>l2. '1 ov ~ PuRPo.s 6-S) . 
E)(M9f.€: \ F You WA'Nf TO ~£T A SI6P GV6R._Lf "'k ~c ."Tlns COR126SPowl>~ 
To --1'2-
FJeArl~ ·. IN -n.u~ ~S:€: vou CAN £XPosE- c•~Ac.l, 00\IN, PAS"N6 
~tvD uP \.Ntl\4 ~ FQAr\6$. roR BOT+-l ~~~ (L.bPT ANDfl.i61--JT L6G.) 
KGGP IN HIND :Tl-JIS IS Ot-.JL"-f TC> D6T6~MINC. Tf..l6TI t11 N6 - L.AffitZ 6N 
l NCON66!o.l~ hv.q'"'a€ AOD6t> ACCO®INGL'-t ~ A \,JAI..K Cl(C..l-C N6V6~ 
loo~ FL..v I D cNO\J6W w IJ6N ~(l)(l..t(;D I ANI n,AI6b ON 3-s. 
2 s At.£11-l€ Ht Nlt1.uf1 -o..-.~s SVSN lStn€~. 
l Ft r'JD rT USl2rliL TO Al..~Al)'f 1>676KT11 Ne nlE ~OV6f.J ~IJQl.Ae.E 
OF 11JE ARM MCVCM'~ AT TlJ I~ STAG€ -~~~ I~ V6~'1 l.JEtPFv L-
TO UND612-~AND lll€ f£NeRAt.. t)(P~c~lON. OFnJEWALt-{. 
~ffiiNN6il.S-S:UcvLC> IS£ rt lNDfVL ll.lOv6H Tb~6JZ.L'1 wo»e.k 
0V1 ThE L66 (HC-L£. f1 ~- Clr.JQ'lw /5;-€ lll6\.f \1 fGI<ll t~ L'f 
b6T ODN'AJ~ . 
T"s Fvw~>N-fStltAL- A~vANTAb€ oF TI-lts M6WoD c~ TO &e AJLC 
TOT6SITl-le BASIC. ~VCT\Jr'l€ Or l'W€ IVALK C'-fGLe ~Fo~-f= 
l-JAVING IO ADl> AU.. TkJe INB61W'6G~..S (TlMe.SAV\NG-AL,T&k 
NAT'tvo.t CAN &€ T&STEDQvld:Llf). IN ADDITION 'TillS Affr<.vACH 
AU.OWS , ... E S'TJ2..UG1'\Jt'Z.OD PL.At"NIN& O'F A ~A~ CVet.C. 

202
Chapter 2.1
IF YOV An£ SATISfleD W ITN l'f..l€ 
~~IC.. STie.ucTlJr2.E Atvt> NAVe 
DEFINSO A tt.oUGH -nn lNG ,l~.s6rt..T The. fNBCTW€~!. THE 
l\€rnOt> OF .At:c.CLEAATION AND DE:C£l6RAIION,AC KNowN 
FRc:>N Tf..lE govNciNG BALL tx.e~c•.ss,CAN &c Fou..o~s1) .. 
A~ AL'({.EAl)Y' S~owf\1, tT IS lnpotl11\f\lT ~o To -s~KE 11\l 
Th€ H•OOI£ oF DowNWA12.t)S oR., UPwAI(.D T1ove.Me~ 
~y USING Too t1ANY IN96TW5€NS.. 
USUAUr'1 (GXC6prloNS CONI="I Rt1-rl-tE. leVLE) ~€ HOV€n6Nr 
S\..OWS DC\NN (-:: Horzs tfJf1t::T\-.JE6~S) AT T~e APeX ANt> 
0VI2.1N6~£ DoWN/126c.oiL-
~AS-€: 1 ~ 
non€N11JT1 Nc€t>S 
Tb '8€ GA~€~€. D To OV~CoT16 6(lAV\'fY. 
F~EQ\16M" B66tNN6R '~ HISTA"BS: 
CoNA.ISIN G LE.PT(~I~\.IT A'(}...n /L6G Dl.Jf.INC:? Tf.le 
~mz.VCflON OF'"NEWAt.Kota£ . 7~VotD 
B~ USING OIFF=E£6NJ G:t.orzs ,:01( L6Pil~l~ 
A¥2-H (LEG. 
VJA\..KS AP-E. ~Y'tlfHIC. HD"V61'16Nr~: WI-IGN WALK.IN ~ O'l. 
~NNtNG ONE: L€6/Ar2.rt RcP€ATS 6'x;Aat,'( TNe 
Ttov6(16Wf"" OF Tl&E. 0"1'N6~ t.E~f.ARN. Orz.. CT VAfllES 
IN A M·~~.,.Ke. HANN~. 
THE. TH11N6 A~SPAcaN& oF Til& u;ffii<J~HT 
L6G/ A"CZ.n lS AvsnurrGt..'1 ID6NT1CAL . IF Yov 
t>o t-{c)l fOU.Ow "'TlJIS lnPom-AI'Ir 12uLc 1Tf..l€ 
WALK Ofc,LE Does NOT Worc?K-'/ov Mlt;\JT GeT 
A LIHP oR AN \~lJLA~ GEAr<. 

203
The Principles of Animation and their Application
IHe Fou.ow~roveft o'F \4Air.? AND CLO~K Sf.lou~..o Be ADD€t>,otv~Y IF 
I"€ ~VCT'tJI2-E Or TNE. A"'\MATION tS 011J€~WISE CoHPU?te. . 
A.SThlt: NAH€ ~6<£~ ,-n.tsre cLSM6Nr...C FolM)W lliE T1CN&1&.rr 
or '1'~€ 'iol>y AND t1\J~'f BE. ADAf'tl!t> Acco'I!..O(t\JGL\.f. INT~ ~ 
CASE ,STIA,.\1'\ A~&A't> ~Nitf,('{IO~ CAN B€ lJ.Sbt>,SJNGE: TA&€ 
L,.oose ~A~ VAP-'t G~6¢TL.'( r'Rort DI2AWIN6 TO VJ!AWtNG 
~TYc"( Fo~o\N 11J€ ft2\1'£'PLt 0~ INc WAVe HO'IE.tiGNl. 
t\o\.l\.6v6~, IN oRDE;R._ T'O CONT(«}L. IJJE ANit1A1"fON t"-1 S'G£vfCE 
o'F ~revtNG A P6~-rtooP•NG tt611oN, rfnA\<:eS SGNSE 
To PLAN Atso Jllrs no v6rt&Jr f'l t2S1 W t-rld- caAilSE: Kt.Y ~ 
. 
Fof?AU.ST6P.S ITISNECC~~ rOTbS\Tf.lt I~ 
At-4 D rn corzrzscr ~eH rF Ne:tSSs'.Af-.'7', u ~,.T tt- -rne WALK 
t\ATCUSS YOIIK OWN IDSA. 
~ 
b 
~ 
1\ 
2.1 

204
What is a Cycle or Loop? 
A cycle or loop makes it possible to animate an endlessly repeatable move-
ment using a limited number of drawings:
  A cycle consists of the drawings 1 to 10, for example.
  The animation is designed so that drawing 10 is followed by drawing 1 
again and can be played indefinitely "in a cycle".
Chapter 2.1
LOOPi ott CYcLE.( = 6NDL..6~{1-'1 Ke"PeAT.A,t.E AN1rli'\110t..f-
~OOP~ ,Stl'iC~ 1'1-lE L.ASI t>r2AI-JJN(,. (OT2. INTERA:)~_,4JIO'lJI'I CGJ 
P~'lNe. f"I~OI'$. 
IN~ 6XAt1 Jll'~ ~WI'-L DAAw IN C":1 AO I~ TO PEi fOUo\JEt:> 
~y ~~/NG-1 .TlUS WofliCS NA"TVRAU.}1 (D6Pe.~l>IN6 
ON 11.1€. t>6SIA.&D t10V6116Nt) WITH Atl'f tl£4vftzSt> 
NVJ1B6~ OF l)f'iAWINGS./I~Poi.KriQII{&. 
llJ£ PIJRA::lSS OP I.-ooPs 012.. C'1CI.6S IS TO GCrA~ 
l"\Vct-1 ANI11A"TtON 'TIM€ A~ Po~~f~l,.e. WITI-1 AS 
r&'W ~~'W 1 N'6S. II NT6RPOlATIONS. f26.Qvl t...e:t> • 
T4.l6 H ol2€ I NTGn6ST't NG T"E ~ 
A~S.At<...~, 
)\ ""E. L6SS l'fOTI~U: T\lE.. l<6f6l"'IT1 V£ S~c:r 
~~ ~ WllLT3E 
5 
6 
~ iO 
lo 

205
REPOSITIONING IN WALK CYCLES
For walk cycles, the illusion of a movement is generated by the fact that 
the character walks virtually in place while the background rolls past in a 
continuous horizontal pan. To make my character actually walk in place, I 
have to reposition the individual drawings of the walk cycle - otherwise my 
character would walk out of frame.
Instead of moving out of the image format, the figure has to walk in place. For this, every step 
has to be repositioned (see below). First, you should (especially as a beginner) animate the 
walk cycle completely and then adjust the position. It is best to perform this repositioning 
between the "down" and "contact" drawings. Apply the same principle for right and left!
The Principles of Animation and their Application
lf4~1\0 OF" (lO'ltNG 
fo~WA~t7,T1t6 
fi6Ufe [11/tr ~LI< 
ON1l!e Sf'O'( 
IN OR06~ TO 114.t£ THG IU.IJ~TIOIV OEAilet( 
I 
T~E f'~sS COI\ITAa"lll6f.IT' ANI> DoWN ~~ 
~ 
H$l& DfAW/\1 APART" FVtni-\5R. it-'AN IT 
\..10111.1:7 ~S. (tJNV6t-Jieflfr IN ~ACfiC6 . 
YOV ..r~ovtD A~eA.rt1 fi.AC£ AFTEE:.. 
'\\_ CO!I4TAc.i ~ 
POWN 
~~16HTJ..Y 
~ 
1(16411" ..Jk fti&Kr J,4CI<WA12P-1' 
TowArtt>S "me W1'". 
TJ.l6't-.l ,AU.ORDII\s6 lOT~ IS S'Cf:.IGH f!: 
R£Posmo/'.l PAS.SINC C.E'Fr ~NO 
\II' a,6Pr. IN"Jl..€EN1> CowrAQ'"LSfl 
$1-lOVI.D 5ND vP IN bX4c:rL'1 '"'ilJ€-
SAne; Posmol\l A~ CONT,c\c;.r f2t61JT. 
R6POSITIOI'Il NG 

206
Correct: Transition to the moment 
of bearing weight ("down" draw-
ing) without many inbetweens and 
with large change of shape (con-
trast/accent). The only inbetween 
already close to "down" drawing.
Weight bears down on sole 
of foot - the shape/line must 
show that!
No slow weight shift as 
shown above.
No curvy shape on the 
bottom of the foot, since it is 
bearing weight!
Chapter 2.1
To A\fofD-nJA'r AfM r70VEM6Nll" ArP6AR.... Sti'FJ:,11iG f~INCIP$0F 
O'letlLAPPIN6AalDN AWD 0£lA'f6l> lllAN.£'11~10~ OS:: 
FoCLe1ll1t>\4tJ ~o•NT~ At(£ ltrFf:E1161\ln51): 
T~eu~A2n,Fb~6A~N 
AW"P WAN"D lt6Acf-4i'N61R 
ourbR Pot m otJ 1> "'l"'N e. tzJ &tJr 
CR.Gt> 1 O~E AfT6~•we DfN61(. 
f \S,Cl91LIT'j (26SUt...IS Fr<ot1 
0 PI'OSl rl6 rtO\Grt6~ • 

207
  Complete and refine the "outline" of a walk cycle shown here with the 
right timing, spacing, (inbetweens) and overlapping action/follow 
through of hair and clothing for the character shown on the left.
Assignment:
Run cycle animated on ones. A run cycle works basically just like a walk cycle. In most cases, 
however, it is essential to animate a run cycle on ones, in order to make the distinct chang-
es of shape visible within a short time. All drawings of the animation are shown; drawing 
16 is followed again by drawing 1.
Student work by Patricia Teo (2014) at the School of Art, Design and Media, 
Nanyang Technological University.
The Principles of Animation and their Application

208
Once you understand the principle of variation within a given system, the real fun begins: 
Inventing innovative and stylized walk cycles. Such walk cycles can be fictitious or even 
exaggerated versions of "real" observed walk cycles.
Posture is extremely important for the expression of a 
walk cycle. It is usually maintained in its basic form and 
only slightly varied. It is defined by physical conditions 
(anatomy, weight) and psychological motivation. 
Emotional states such as aggression, joy, exuberance 
will certainly be expressed in the gait.
Chapter 2.1
~tt~\~1 
o-F covt.se-n.a'" ~.SE oF-r4-\£ &oO'I ~Rov~f.lovT A W~\..k 
I.S A\..iO O&"TcftMirtf,t> 1'o k:E£P tr IN ~l-ANCE· OT'E~Wl.SS 
'"nE C~~"fOVLO 
FA&.-LO~&'Q.. 'WAUC.IN& Cov-..oAa-.'0 
IE t>!1=t"'£1) ~~ "'Co..,.ouco FAU..\No". "'.ZoVGM 1'- CottttN\J-
0 US. S"' 1FT op-' Wet~W"t'; Mo1'\Ef-IT.S' o~ FJtl,&,l f'J 6 AJt At..WA'i.S 
Co~P5W-'A'"T81) Fo"- I"! tlE,A\NIN G ~~~te,. 
F,AU,t~6 
F,AU,t~6 
~ 
i~E A.tl.M~ KEEP'T\Ie 
8ot)Y tw ~IU.w(.E . 
IN 1'H£ GXAttPJ..e SttowN 'B£a..ow T"E "~'..,"'PL€ oF c:ou~TetAc.'TtoN oF A1lnlA .. o l..€'-S t$ I~No'REl): 
-r•e C""~A'-TEJil \~ So F.AT ~AT 1"t-\E A~ ~TO 
t10"£ A\Ot16 Wnt-t TM E Cofl~Pot.~llu LE<D. 

209
An example of a highly stylized run cycle: Jumping/
running featuring all the inbetweens.
Animation: Hannes Rall for the animated short film 
"Turnstunde" (Gym Lesson) (2008).
Summary:
The most common beginner's mistakes and how to avoid them
Timing and reference
The following phrase also applies to an-
imation: "Practice makes perfect". Know-
ing how much time a particular movement 
takes, comes only with time and experience, 
and after much trial and error. On the other 
hand, it is easier than ever before to find ref-
erences for certain movements or to record 
them quickly, to save them as video clips and 
to analyze them in single frames. I am often 
surprised that students continue to get the 
timing totally wrong for a particular action, 
instead of simply recording the action as a 
video to get a sense of timing.
Poses lacking expression
If you work with the pose-to-pose method, it 
is important to find poses that best illustrate 
the momentary expression and the sequence 
of the action. These poses must have appeal, 
line of action and credible balance.
Too many actions are shown in too short a 
time:
Beginners often falsely assume that several ex-
pressive poses can make a great animation, if 
you simply film them one after the other with 
one frame or two frames each. This does not 
work at all, since the individual frame is then 
only visible for a fraction of a second. The key 
frames must be shot with the right timing and 
with the appropriate number of inbetweens. A 
hold or moving hold must be visible for at least 
10 frames, otherwise it will be perceived by the 
viewer as a break in a continuous movement. In 
general, beginners underestimate the amount 
of time it takes for a particular action or posture 
to be understood by the audience.
The Principles of Animation and their Application

210
Lack of Contrast in Timing and Spacing
Animation needs rhythm just as music does 
- fast actions have to alternate with slow ac-
tions. Drawings of frenetic action must be in-
terspersed with resting periods. For this, tim-
ing (how many frames) and spacing (position 
and spacing of frames) must be irregular. To do 
this, the basic rules of animation (e.g. slow in 
and slow out) must be applied skillfully. 
Chapter 2.1
COt<RECf liNIN& (E.G.) 'FoR IH£ fb{...t?~: 
-1 
2 
/lg 
-1L 
/(~ 
--ilf 
-12.. 
-")& 
l'"o-ll<.ANSfDRM ~IS INTO A 1\1\0VI""'- f.lotl> /N'Bf:r>Je£1\/$ 
N€6DTO OC.ADtoD CL.o~E.TO"WP:".fiNAL-i-lotb' ;1.g ~ I 
liHIII/~1/II/1/I 
AiV5NllR6L'1.s:rATIC-\-JOt..D I~ CAANG6i:>lo 1>... V612-"/ 
!lou> 
~vffitC, Mov6[1,6N'f"""":= MOVING> 1-loL-0., 
~ 
hOVIN&\JOI,b 
AFT6R ll<!A~~~NG'T1-Ie ~o .. os 1r-n-o MOVING. woU).S 
ll-1£ ~E:buLA\'2.... 1 N'9Cl"WESI'II.£. cAN 'Be A.~ _ c t N~STVJfGN = 113) . 
+- + b \S.s 
-\' + \B.s 
+ + lR~ 
+- ~ 1~-s 
+it l&~ 
~Ill 
I ' ~ 
~\\ I 
I "' 
~,, I I I Ill 
Ill I I II HI 
II I I I 

211
Film analysis "frame by frame": 
I regularly make the following suggestion in my classes, which results in 
incredulous amazement of my students:  
Analyze animation und live-action film frame by frame. When I see a fas-
cinating animation and a great scene from a live-action film, I try to figure 
out how that is done. I can only do this, if I analyze the relevant sequence 
frame-by-frame. These days it is easier than ever to have access to the ma-
terial and to analyze it using software. This usually works with any film pro-
gram, such as Quicktime or Premiere.
  Choose five outstanding animated or acted (live-action film) sequenc-
es, and analyze them frame-by-frame. Make sketches of key frames and 
relevant notes on how the artistic effect was achieved through the use 
of timing, spacing and staging (composition). 
  Then create your own 10 to 30 second animation sequence, in which 
you apply some of the methods discovered in the analysis to your own 
animation. Write down in detail, which analysis technique you used for 
which part of your own animation.
Assignment:
Some helpful basic rules
In general, the following applies: 
The content of the story and style of anima-
tion must match. Therefore: The style of the 
design and the style of the animation must 
be the same.
For example:
Naturalistic design = full animation, closer to 
reality. 
Stylized design = also works with limited an-
imation. The style of the movements can be 
designed creatively, or be fictitious. Few or no 
references of live-action film necessary.
Staging/Acting/Poses:
  What do I want to communicate?
  Which drawings/poses best tell my story?
  From the overall concept to minute details 
(not vice versa!)
The Principles of Animation and their Application

212
Traditional 2D Animation
What makes hand-drawn 2D animation so special, is that 
each single frame is uniquely created by the animator. This 
applies to both, the traditional mode of production with 
pencil and light box and the modern version with a digital 
drawing tablet. Artistic freedom is therefore virtually infinite 
and is limited only by imagination and/or artistic skills.
Advantages
With hand-drawn animation, the animator 
is completely free in designing each frame 
of the film. In the case of 3D computer ani-
mation and stop motion, predefined virtual 
or real puppets are simply modified frame-
by-frame. However, it is not really possible to 
radically alter the basic form of the virtual or 
real puppets.
General Information
Chapter 2.2
Chapter 2.2

213
With hand-drawn animation, on the other 
hand, the animator can draw a complete-
ly new shape with each frame, or radically 
change a character at his own discretion. He 
is limited only by his own ability to apply this 
graphically in a convincing manner: There are 
no technical obstacles. 
Radical camera movements can be created as 
well as dramatic changes of the background. 
The most extreme squash and stretch of char-
acters can be drawn with only a few strokes 
just as well as interestingly designed transfor-
mations (metamorphoses) of the characters.
The technological threshold for implemen-
tation is extremely low or absent, so that the 
animator's imagination and drawing ability 
are the only prerequisites for a successful 
outcome. 
Traditional 2D Animation
For these reasons, hand-drawn 2D animation 
remains a relevant and completely indepen-
dent art form to this day. In my opinion, this is 
especially true for artistic approaches that dis-
tance themselves from realism and gravitate 
towards more abstracted and experimental 
styles. These days, the field of hyperrealism is 
largely occupied by 3D computer animation. 
Although computer animation is increasing-
ly developing methods to approach the free 
manipulability of characters, it is still far from 
the spontaneous organic expressiveness of 
hand-drawn animation.
Traditional 2D Animation

214
Chapter 2.2
Chapter 2.2
COMPLEX
Which brings us to another important aspect: 
Hand-drawn animation is the most personal 
form of expression for an animator, especially 
when it comes to individual projects or short 
films.  We see the artistic handwriting directly 
on the screen (especially if there is no clean-
up by an assistant). In the case of 3D comput-
er animation, on the other hand, the layer of 
technical implementation, i.e. the modeling 
in the software always interferes with the 
original artistic vision. This can often lead to 
an inorganic "plastic look" that clings to the 
characters, a weakness that it has not been 
able to overcome completely thus far. Which 
is why it can not yet hold a candle to hand-
drawn animation film with regard to organic 
appearance and artistic individuality.
However, it must be added, that there are 
increasingly intelligent hybrid forms of for-
merly separate animation techniques on the 
rise: These hybrids combine the advantages 
of various animation techniques in a skillful 
approach.
Disadvantages and Solutions
The most obvious drawback of the artistical-
ly satisfying technique of traditional hand-
drawn 2D animation is the incredible effort, 
with which it has to be done: Each single 
frame (or every second frame, in the case of 
two-frame animation) has to be completely 
redrawn (full animation) - that is, 24 anima-
tions per second in the case of single frame 
animation; in two-frame animation, it is still 
12 drawings per second.
Depending on the complexity of the char-
acters, this can be very difficult: Any change 
in perspective has to be drawn individually. 
This makes implementing complex patterns, 
textures in characters, etc. incredibly labor-in-
tensive and difficult, at times nearly impossi-
ble: You have to have both - unlimited time 
and perfect drawing skills, in order to achieve 
something satisfying. A design as in the draw-
ing above can only be reproduced in its com-
plexity as a 3D computer animation or stop 
motion. For these techniques, details and tex-
tures are virtually or actually "built", i.e., they 
exist: any perspective change is either simply 
calculated (computer) or physically existent 
(using a puppet in stop motion technique).

215
Traditional 2D Animation
Traditional 2D Animation
  Sketch a character of your choice in an elaborate, detailed design, then re-
duce and stylize the design to adapt it for traditional 2D animation.
Assignment:
STYLIZED
Basically, it is helpful and necessary to stylize 
and simplify the characters (left), in order to 
keep the workload feasible: After all, each in-
dividual additional line must also be drawn! 
While modern digital imaging software allows 
for relatively comfortable additional shading - 
greater simplification still remains an import-
ant rule for hand-drawn 2D animation.
It is precisely this pressure for reduction that 
can also serve as a creative stimulus. Instead 
of sprawling (and often unnecessary) details, 
elegance and purism can be graphically im-
plemented through stylization and abstrac-
tion.

216
Separation of characters and background 
in traditional 2D animation
In the early days of animation film, a meth-
od was developed for drawing backgrounds 
only once and combining them with the 
drawings of characters on transparent "cels" 
on several planes. The reason for this, of 
course, was to save time and labor.  Instead of 
having to redraw the background of a scene 
for each frame, only the drawings of the char-
acters (on the cels) were exchanged. A mov-
ing background was achieved by moving the 
camera on the vertical and horizontal axes - 
camera zooms were also possible, of course. 
Top left: The animation of the character on transparent cels.
Top right: Detailed background with animation punch holes.
Center right: Transparent cel with character against the background.
Bottom right: The background can be "moved" horizontally while the cel remains in 
the same place. This results in the illusion of the character's locomotion during a walk 
cycle - although he actually walks on the spot.
Chapter 2.2

217
This separation between characters and 
background is mainly found in traditional 
commercial animation productions of full-
length feature films and classic Hollywood 
short films. There are also other methods for 
creative short films and increasingly for inde-
pendent feature film productions: In some 
cases (abstracted) backgrounds are always 
redrawn, every animation takes place on "one 
layer" of paper - or the background can also 
be animated when divided into different digi-
tal planes. Nowadays, more and more hybrids 
of all these techniques are possible and are 
being used - the variety is enormous. In my 
own films, for example, the background be-
comes an active part of the animation with 
significant changes in shape and perspective.
Classic animation stand ("rostrum" -camera) 
- today almost completely replaced by digital methods 
(computer). The animation stand could be moved hor-
izontally (by cranking), the camera moved vertically. In 
modern software, there are almost unlimited camera 
movements possible now.
Today, these classic animation stands are ba-
sically obsolete and have been replaced - and 
considerably expanded - with digital pro-
grams. Since the dependence for mechanical 
devices has become non-existent, extreme 
camera movements and zooms for sufficient 
resolution of digital images are now possible 
in an almost unrestricted manner.
Traditional 2D Animation

218
Animation cels and traditional coloring are 
"out"
In production, the original cels for the anima-
tion film were replaced by separate digital 
planes for characters and backgrounds. This 
has the enormous advantage that the cels 
are no longer "dust collectors", which used 
to be a problem in the past, and many planes 
can now be combined without any loss of 
quality. In the same way, there are no more 
physical colored cels, but the clean-ups are 
either scanned or animated directly in the 
program (see section "Digital Traditional"). 
Coloring is always done on the computer, 
since it works much faster and easier than 
physical color: One click is enough to fill 
properly outlined surfaces with color. Some 
modern programs now offer functional au-
tomation options and the possibility to to 
fill areas defined by intermittently broken 
outlines properly with color as well. If the ar-
tistic concept requires the implementation of 
complex ornamentation and countless de-
tails, while at the same time maintaining the 
"flat" 2D appearance, the method of digital 
cutout animation should be chosen instead 
of the traditional 2D animation technology: 
It is basically a two-dimensional form of the 
three-dimensional stop-motion technique. 
"Flat" two-dimensional models of characters 
are created and equipped with a virtual skele-
ton connected by joints. These characters are 
then changed in the shot "frame-by-frame". 
Using this technique drastically reduces the 
possibility of changing the characters, but it 
retains the rich detail of the designs without 
any problem. After all, not every frame needs 
to be redrawn. The animation software Toon 
Boom described later in this chapter is well 
suited for this technique.
Example of 
digital cutout 
technique from 
the film "Si Lun-
chai" by Hannes 
Rall (2014).
Chapter 2.2

219
Old School
Light box
You need a light box to make the drawings 
transparent on several layers of paper: For 
example, you place two key frames on top 
Tools
of each other, and then place a blank sheet 
of paper on top to draw the breakdown be-
tween the key frames. Then you draw the in-
between(s) between the first key frame and 
the breakdown - and so on.
Traditional 2D Animation
MOBILE L16HT r>e.SK 
(~NI.A~(:,6D F'OIII. DS.MON.sTI(ATIOM) 
f'v tl d-1 £1> "'"' J\"1,oUl oN 
V' Af'e:!. I NO C£1- . 
Po we~ 
CABLS 
~RJAATe:t> ;Al\1!1A11oN J 
PAR;lt 1NO C£1., 
• 
TRANmRE:NT o~ 
HIU<'f PL..EXIbL..ASS 
=I£Ts LI~I2D\16H. 

220
Animation peg bar (ACME Pegbar)  
A peg bar is needed to keep your animat-
ed drawings perfectly aligned - the format 
should not move, but remain in place. After 
all, the only movements should be the ones 
drawn by the animator - the paper itself must 
not move. The industry standard here is the 
ACME Pegbar, which should be used. It re-
quires certain punch holes in the paper.
Chapter 2.2
- Pose-To-ross ANI MA110N oN 
THE j...IGJ.friOX 
. 
\(e.~Oil\4.. ® ~'fCQ~OWVI 'f . 
~~~.sw.~((D in CO~ · 
iV\ \.\~ • 
IY\ (-e.d o ~--~-· 
_ fheaY1·11·k;)tfOY1 ctrawt~\~S ate.. C.te.4teol 0(1 
sep4f4k ~~of- pun~~ 
ClVIh"lld~· oV'I 
f'dpe.<" ld.~ect en-l-op of eo~ ol-'he.Co 
""The.~ a~ held ·u,-+Yle eorrec.+ pos.l.fio-n OV\ 
ihe dn-,Mdt~ L '1'~~-t- de!.k ~-the, pe~~ co 
• 
The.. pe~pd.v QMS.~ +Wz.. Co~ 
~l$atiovv"posih'~i~ cf oll 
C:l'l\ iWc1ncsYl d c ~wiY\~.s o 
• 

221
Traditional 2D Animation
g) 
I p()$ih'c:n m~ 
@ 1 of)~ lhno~ ~ 
~ i I .St ftt ~ flltM(. :r 
~ 
CN1.6)) on+tle 
seco 
lte~ hd~ 
r'~ Pdf 0~ +he. 
(@). 
liOj'-lt~.d: . 
-
• 
• 
011+op~~ 
4 
Oo.fha:t ~I 
dfd w 
Jt~ett~p~s._.,.. 
~ 
-f4,e bredi<down 
of r.t'11 I 
drolf',·~ C~it?~potlr;nt-
~~Cltl:~ 
'tttidclli. ~ ln~I'J) -
pJptzr. 
N!k-rtrtcir~~ ~ 
fi.IO ke~ 
-
• 
• 
~"'«~"""·~~h . 
THeN 
-
-
6) 
lledvem~ 
~ 
fit,.}- Kefj 
t1)e 
~ 
i~YJ~ (G)) . 
• 
• 
-
Now lddol 
~(~ 
~+ot 
~ 
pdf)U .. . 
-
• 
~ 
-
•• 
c;}~ Otl#let€ I dfdV JIJ'tf1 
•n bekwon with #Je; 
Mr11bcl ~ • I cltcide ~O'v' 
close •'+ •.s fz> number Lt . 
(.,Q>ACIN&) .It l8tt1 ~ivetl 
a.., l11betwe~t\ ,~-c~r-r, 1 m-.e 
'---------a. to .follblJ l+s itdicdh~~ 
Alf" rooN A"" ~o o 1-l .... ! 
\ , , l 
'&'f TNE WAY.... 
@ z. 3 
(f 
AU I>RAW aJG..t MVtr g; 01\l ~fARA ~ 
SKft1't ee::Avsc TI-IG~ r<GPesel\ll nus 
F'lt.H ~RAn6' IN ~GlUSNce. THit poE-fNO"( 
Wolttc:. ,.4-t ,4N lf1A110N . 
j 
(ALL [)R.4Nlf..l~.t 01\J ~
- _y 
0>4£ JHfef) . 
~:1 
J 
.. 
• 
... 

222
Paper, hole punch and field guides
You can either purchase pre-punched paper 
for the standard ACME Pegbar at (still) exist-
ing suppliers for animation supplies, or you 
can buy a special ACME Pegbar hole punch 
yourself. An animation hole punch of good 
quality is usually quite expensive. The current 
price is approximately 600 US dollars. A very 
important tool for the layout of scenes to be 
animated are so-called field guides (available 
on the Internet at no charge, while physical 
versions are available from a retailer). They 
show the (standardized) distance between 
the animation peg bar and the field of view 
(aspect ratio) for certain paper formats. These 
refer to American size formats (e.g., 11 inch-
es). It is helpful to follow these field guides, 
since most 2D animation software uses them 
as default settings. However, the position 
of the field of view in the software can also 
be adjusted later with relatively little effort. 
What is important though, is that there is 
always sufficient drawing (at a proportional 
ratio) for the selected field size: Therefore you 
should always (!!) draw the field size when 
planning the keys and breakdowns of scenes. 
(Place as a reference under the light box, or 
draw at least the keys directly "with frame" - 
both works.)
Chapter 2.2

223
Pencils etc.
As a rule, the choice of the right drawing tool 
tends to be secondary - after all, it's the result 
that counts. And the final look is determined 
by the cleaned up version anyway. However, 
pencil and eraser are appropriate tools for the 
traditional way of working - since animation 
work is characterized by continuous improve-
ment and revision/redrawing. A pencil that is 
easy to erase and glides smoothly over paper 
is, of course, the tool of choice. I personally 
prefer to draw with HB pencils - but individual 
preferences can certainly vary.
A very common beginner's mistake is confusing the left leg for the right 
leg (or arm) in walk cycles. Using different colors can help avoid this 
mix-up.
Line tester
The main technical tool in traditional 2D an-
imation is the line tester, which is a simple 
system that allows you to scan or shoot the 
drawings on video in order to then experi-
ment with the right timing. 
There is now an infinite variety of easy-to-use, 
fully digital and/or camera-based line test 
Pencils that are too hard are not recommended 
since they are difficult to see (when shooting or 
scanning the drawings) and because they can 
tear the paper when you press down harder.
Using colored pencils can be useful for various 
purposes, especially when it comes to distin-
guishing complex elements in a drawing.
systems on the market. 
Every 2D software (see the following pages) 
has manageable line test systems that can 
test scanned or digitally imported drawings 
very easily during production.
Traditional 2D Animation

224
Digital Traditional: Software for 
Traditional 2D Animation 
There is a rapidly evolving and constantly 
changing market for animation software for 
traditional (or hybrid) 2D animation. Any 
mention of names would only provide a 
snapshot, and it is recommended that you 
always stay up to date in blogs and forums.
At the time of publication of this book there 
are two somewhat differently positioned, but 
each very well-functioning and proven pro-
grams that are worth mentioning:
TV Paint
This software is particularly well-suited for 
the animator, who still draws on paper and 
then scans the drawings. The program's work 
flow is well designed for this, and the scan-
ning feature for importing drawings is su-
perbly integrated. It is a pixel-based program 
that is particularly well-suited for painterly 
styles and refined contour variations.
Toon Boom
Toon Boom consists of a software product 
family, which is available in individual mod-
ules (for example, line test) all the way to 
the relatively expensive professional version 
"Toon Boom Harmony". It is a vector-based 
program that is best suited for flat colors 
and sharply defined outlines (although other 
looks can be achieved as well).
While TV Paint is actually designed for the 
(partially) digitally working traditional (2D) 
animator, the spectrum at Toon Boom is 
much broader: "traditionally" hand-drawn 
animation is only one option at Toon Boom. 
There are also functions for digital cutout an-
imation that work very well and are easy to 
use. Previously created 2D models of charac-
ters are equipped with a movable skeleton 
(rig), which can then be animated frame-by-
frame just as in the stop motion technique.
Importing scanned animation drawings is 
also possible with Toon Boom, but somewhat 
more complicated than with TV Paint. All 
scanned drawings must be vectorized after-
wards. The vectorization module works very 
well indeed, and with some practice, you can 
almost always achieve the desired look of the 
contour line. However, Toon Boom primarily 
relies on a completely paperless workflow 
for "traditional" 2D animation, in which each 
frame (or second frame) is redrawn.
Digital drawing tablet
2D animation software such as Toon Boom or 
TV Paint allows you to draw on a virtual light 
box by using a drawing tablet. The physical 
overlaying of key frames for the purpose of 
drawing inbetweens is replaced by onion 
skinning, in which the two (or more) draw-
ings needed for reference remain translucent. 
The drawings created are imported directly 
into the program and have to be saved.
The work process is basically the same as on 
paper - except that you are drawing on a dig-
ital drawing tablet rather than a traditional 
light box. Paper is also no longer required, of 
course. 
A key advantage is the extensive selection for 
digital line variations. Likewise, the tablet or 
animation software offers many options for 
smoothing the stroke automatically - which 
can be regarded as an advantage or a disad-
vantage, but you definitely have the choice!
Chapter 2.2

225
Working Methods - A System for 2D Animation
Animation is an art form that requires an ex-
ceptionally high degree of planning and con-
trol: After all, it is about creating every single 
frame of the film from scratch. This can be 
both, exciting and challenging: Systematic 
planning is indispensable, a system, in which 
one step builds on the other, A is followed by 
B.
It is particularly important never to loose 
sight - metaphorically speaking - to see the 
forest despite the trees - to have a clear vision 
of the overall concept at all times. In doing so, 
it is crucial to always begin working from a 
basic and rough design to the minute details, 
and never vice versa. A good example of this 
is blocking or rough estimation of timing, 
which is common to all forms of animation 
and is worked up before any movements are 
animated in detail.
The million dollar question: "Ones" or 
"twos"?
It is a matter of conviction among tradition-
al animators whether to (always) animate on 
ones or twos. I already touched on the topic 
in the chapter "The Principles of Animation", 
but here are some additional notes:
While eminent experts insist that animation 
on ones is always better, I would like to qualify 
this point of view: It depends on the circum-
stances. The more "realistic" and "smooth" 
the desired look of the animation, the more 
you will favor ones. If characters are more ab-
stracted and stylized, then a two-frame ani-
mation will work perfectly fine.
In principle it is remains good advice to an-
imate on ones for very fast movements: In 
such movements, the shape changes very 
rapidly in a very short time; if you only ani-
mate every second frame, you may "miss" 
important shape changes in the inbetween 
drawings. 
Let's not forget that many of Disney's classical  
masterpieces were animated "only" on twos 
as well. The audience will hardly perceive the 
difference, at most, they may "sense" it.
However, a clear line of distinction must be 
drawn between two-frame (12 drawings per 
second) and three-frame animation (4 draw-
ings per second): the three-frame animation, 
often used in cheap TV animation or with 
graphically very complex animes (Japanese 
animation), completely destroys the illusion 
of smooth movement. You need to be aware 
of this, if you decide to animate sparingly. It 
will no longer achieve the renowned "illusion 
of life"!
Traditional 2D Animation

226
Example of components of an ani-
mation handout: Layouts showing 
background, and background 
combined with characters, and a 
dialog sheet. From the film "The 
Cold Heart" (2013) by Hannes Rall.
1.) Briefing
In terms of where the animator's work begins 
and what his starting point is, that depends 
entirely on the medium and type of produc-
tion:
In 2D animation, the animator receives the 
storyboard, layout, and dialogue - that is 
called the "animation handout". As a rule, the 
animation director will also brief the anima-
tor on the expectations for the scene. 
For independent productions, such as an ar-
tistic short film, several roles - author, director 
and animator(s) - are often combined in one. 
That means, the animator may have drawn 
the storyboard himself and prepared the 
layout as well. Depending on the size of the 
team, however, task-specific assignments are 
also common. 
Here is an example of the drawings I creat-
ed as the director for an animation handout 
for my film "The Cold Heart": The characters' 
range of movement during the scene is al-
ready precisely defined. This is because the 
movements of the actors in the scene had to 
be combined with the background using a 
continuous tracking shot. 
In addition, the graphic design of the scene 
was an essential part of the emotional ex-
pression for me - so it could not be changed 
too much.
Chapter 2.2

227
2.) Thumbnails and planning with the 
X-sheet (exposure sheet)
Not mandatory (some animators start direct-
ly with the "original size"), but it is often very 
helpful to explore a scene first with thumb-
nails. In doing so, you can quickly and easily 
test variations in the animation, think about 
how you want to create movements in the 
scene. The deliberate sketchiness and spon-
taneity of these fast scribbles often lead to 
great vitality and determination in expres-
sion, which could never be achieved with 
"accurate" drawing. Many of the most famous 
animators were and are known to use this 
method to think through as many variations 
of a scene as possible before selecting one or 
more options in the animation.
The X-sheet, short for exposure sheet, serves 
as an excellent foundation for such visual 
simulation: All shot frames are vertically list-
ed in a table - drawings can then be entered 
in parallel listing on the different levels with 
the appropriate timing.
The X-sheet is absolutely crucial for syncing 
already existing dialogue (always pre-record-
ed for animation) or music: First, the sound 
breakdown must be entered frame-by-frame. 
After all, you have to know exactly where the 
beats are located or when which letter is spo-
ken, in order to be able to animate spot-on 
in sync.
You can use the thumbnails to roughly plan 
your timing as well. The constant revisions 
and improvements are typical for almost ev-
ery form of animation - they are the very first 
steps for approximation, as the final timing 
will be arrived at later in the process.
X-sheet with thumbnails
Traditional 2D Animation
ACTID"/ 
~ J>W.o& A 
~ c. 
t> 
E 
F 
~ 
l~ IJ;;i lS ~ Q..'rtli:KA IW~ . 
u~ 
A 
1. 
· ~ 
~ . ' 
~ 
J.'" 
~ "" 
0 
fl. 
I 
c 
:.{ 
~i
·u 
I 
I 
_.._ 
<HI 
; , 
~' 
_-';.\1. 
If 
1\ cJ-
• 
);JJ_£) 
~ 
1111 
•II? 
"][ '.!. 

228
Numbering drawings
In the classical animation studio method, 
drawings are numbered to reflect timing.
Example: 
1.) In single-frame animation, the first draw-
ing is number 1, the second drawing is num-
ber 2, the third drawing is number 3 etc.
X-sheet for single-frame animation
2.) In two-frame animation, the first drawing 
is number 1, the second drawing is number 3 
(!!), the third drawing is number 5, etc.
X-sheet for two-frame animation
Chapter 2.2
ACTlC>"/ 
~ PWD& A 
" 
..., 
1. 
"2.. 
D 
I 
II 
~ 
I~ 
I 
'L'I 
,.. 
IU 
r-ill 
() 
A e-n r>t.J 
~ J)WDfl A 
" 
"' 
1. 
., 
'1-
9 
D 
I 
I 
n. 
B 
I 
lr 
~ 
10 
'i 
11 
,.. 
1Y 
u 
1.'t" 
d 
I 'In 

229
  Design and animate a scene based on existing music. Use the X-Sheet as the 
basis for working out timing. First, you do a sound breakdown: Count the mu-
sic into frames and add the beats and the dramatic arcs in the music to a col-
umn of the X-sheet, which you label "sound".  (You can either use a software 
program that allows unlimited addition of such columns, or you can use an 
easily accessible template from the Internet, for analog or digital use). Number 
all your drawings accordingly and test the animation repeatedly with the line 
tester.
Assignment:
The major advantage of this method is the 
simple option of combining animation on 
ones and twos, or adding additional (sin-
gle-frame) drawings:
Key frame numbers (and only those!) are cir-
cled (on both, the drawing and the X-sheet).
In the X-sheet, it looks like this
If in example 2.), I want to insert a drawing 
(single-frame) between the second (number 
3) and third drawing (number 5), I simply 
designate the number 4 to the drawing. (In 
this case, drawing number 3 will only be sin-
gle-frame, but this is usually the animator's 
intention.)
Traditional 2D Animation
ACTIDN 
~ J)Wo£, A 
~ 
" 
..., 
t. 
~ 
I) 
I 
I 
n. 
·~ 
l't-
jq 
'lr 
f 
'U 
11.1 
ACTIDN 
~ J>Wo& A 
~ 
" 
t. 
.... 
'!' 
I) 
I 
l!J 
·~ 
I 
I~ 

230
  Think of a scene with two interacting characters and try them out in dif-
ferent versions, using thumbnails. Make sure that it is a scene with strong 
visual communication in the poses: Contrasting poses and characters is im-
portant. For example, a dispute or a fight would work well.
Assignment:
3.) Animation Roughs 
It is never about the single drawing, it is al-
ways about the flow of the drawings in the se-
quence! Always start with very abstract, rough 
shapes (sketchy designs), omitting details. A 
Thumbnails: Thumbnail sketches, 
which can often serve as a starting 
point for rough animation.
good method is to simply "blow up" - either 
digitally or with a copier - the mostly sponta-
neous and expressive thumbnails to the size 
needed, and use them directly as keys.
Always remember concepts, such as line of 
action and change of shape. What works with 
a rough concept will also work after adding 
details - but rarely in reverse!
Chapter 2.2

231
Strong poses alone are not enough: You 
need inbetweens!
A widespread rookie mistake is the assump-
tion that drawing (supposedly) expressive 
key frames is enough: Don't forget that each 
single drawing represents only a fraction of a 
second: 
1/24 of a second for single-frame 
animation ("on ones") 
1/12 of a second for two-frame 
animation ("on twos") 
Therefore, sufficient drawings have to be 
drawn in order to make the action clearly in-
telligible to the viewer. That is, key frames and 
transitions must last long enough to be un-
derstood. This can only be achieved by more 
drawings.
Additional note: 
Here too, exceptions prove the rule: Certain 
"snappy" cartoon actions are characterized 
by the minimal use of inbetweens between 
key frames. See section "The Principles of An-
imation" under "timing", page 157.
For this, moving holds (see section "The Prin-
ciples of Animation") are used for key frames; 
and sufficient inbetweens to make the transi-
tions readable.
Key frames and sufficient inbetweens
Traditional 2D Animation

232
A first test of the key frames and breakdowns 
with the line tester is very helpful. (This meth-
od is also described in more detail in "The 
Principles of Animation", page 161.)
TIP: For beginners, it is helpful to record refer-
ence material (nowadays very easy to do with 
cameras in mobile phones) and to analyze it 
frame-by-frame after converting it to a Quick-
Time Movie, for example. Alternatively, using 
a digital stopwatch is an excellent way to de-
termine the length of a particular action (e.g., 
"standing up from the chair").
With increasing practice, the animator will 
gain the necessary experience that will allow 
him to become less dependent on reference 
material. (Although it may always remain an 
important tool for more complex actions/
acting).
4.) Testing and improving
If there are a very large number of move-
ments, it is advantageous to construct these 
in a modular design, i.e., in multiple passes: 
First, you should be developing an artistic vi-
sion of movement through sketches - such as: 
what overall impression do I want to achieve 
in the physical and emotional expression of 
the character?
These three different approaches for a "glum" 
walk cycle show the general attitude and certain 
movement characteristics that are maintained 
throughout the entire walk cycle. They include, 
for example, the extent of the arm swing, how 
high the legs lift, etc. Of course, animation 
is almost always an experimentally shaped 
development process, so that changes can 
always occur in the course of testing. Some 
seemingly promising idea often does not work 
in animation!
Chapter 2.2

233
  Now, animate the entire scene that you started with thumbnails: Add break-
downs and inbetweens after testing your poses (key frames). If necessary, 
follow the principle of repeated passes. Test as much as necessary after each 
step and continue only, if you think the outcome of the tests was successful!
Assignment:
Afterwards you can imple-
ment the details of the ani-
mation step-by-step during 
several passes: 
First, legs with torso - test to 
see if timing works (and pos-
sibly revise, until it does!)
Then the head and swing-
ing movement of the arms, 
re-testing and correcting.
Finally, overlapping action, 
such as loose clothing, hair 
- here again, testing and 
correcting until everything 
works in unison!
Traditional 2D Animation

234
5.) Styles and clean-up
In the traditional work-sharing process of the 
Disney tradition, it is the task of the assistant 
or specialized department to clean-up the 
exactly timed, but rough drawings of the 
animator. This process uses the rules of solid 
drawing ("The Principles of Animation", page 
183). The goal is to have the character look 
the same and anatomically correct from every 
perspective, as defined in the model sheet.
A thin outline was generally used for this pur-
pose, a style that is still used in traditional Dis-
ney-style productions. The process of clean-
up, i.e., the reinterpretation of the original 
animation drawings, often results in a loss of 
the initial expressiveness of the original draw-
ings. This is because the clean-up assistant 
usually has to make a selection from several 
lines of the animation rough and does not al-
ways understand exactly the artistic intention 
of the animator with each individual drawing.
It is rare that the animator is satisfied with 
the clean-up of his original drawings. The fa-
mous Disney animator Milt Kahl (Jacob 2014) 
was notorious for being extremely dissatis-
fied with the work of his assistants. The Xe-
rox process of the Disney studios, which has 
been used since the film "101 Dalmatians" 
(Geronimi / Luske, 1961) and copies the ani-
mators' drawings directly onto films, has been 
a welcomed feature for animators. (These 
drawings still required a certain minimum 
standard, in order to be used in this form for 
film.) As Andreas Deja explains in his blog 
"Deja View" (2014), Disney films, which were 
made with this process, show a surprising 
number of sketchy and "unfinished" anima-
tion drawings. According to him, this is to the 
animator's benefit. Deja describes this as "see-
ing an animator's personal handwriting mo-
tion". Even if the animator himself performs 
Rough animation (above) and 
clean-up  below.
Drawings by Hannes Rall, from his film 
"The Cold Heart" (2013).
Chapter 2.2

235
  Complete your scene once you are satisfied with the timing of your anima-
tion and after all of the frames have been completed as rough animation. 
Draw the clean-up versions of your roughs (using the desired line style) and 
color the scene.
Assignment:
the entire process from the first sketch to the 
clean-up drawing, it is usually impossible to 
retain the vitality of the animation roughs in 
a "cleaned-up" version. In this respect, the ver-
sion of "Beauty and the Beast" (Kirk/Trousdale 
1991), which showed the original pencil draw-
ings by Glen Keane instead of the cleaned up 
version, became famous. The stylistic spec-
trum for the final look of the lines of hand-
drawn animation film has long-since been 
dramatically expanded through artistic and 
technical development: In addition to the ap-
proach of using more "unfinished" animations 
directly without clean-up, these include out-
lines in different line intensities that "pulsate" 
on the screen, the complete elimination of 
outlines, or experimental/abstract approach-
es that completely abandon any figural rep-
resentation.
Examples of different 2D styles. Clockwise 
from top left:
Picture from the film "The Beach Boy" 
(2016), oil pastel on black cardboard, di-
rected by: Hannes Rall, artist: Turine Tran; 
Picture from the film "The Beach Boy", digi-
tal brush technique with CACANi software, 
artists: Ng Yuwen Yvonne (animation) and 
Low Zi Rong (CACANi clean-up); 
Picture from "Red", animated on paper 
and digitally colored, director and artist:  
Nur Aisyah Binte Suhaimi; 
Frame sequence from the animation for 
the documentary "Lotte Reiniger: The 
Dance of Shadows" (2012), animated 
on paper and digitally colored, artists:  
Hannes Rall and Hans Bacher, directed by: 
Rada Bieberstein, Susanne Marschall and 
Kurt Schneider.
Traditional 2D Animation

"That scene and that character  
- that's me!"
Interview with Andreas Deja
236
Andreas Deja is undoubt-
edly one of the best 
character animators in 
the field of traditional 
2D animation, the hand-
drawn animation. Andreas 
became known for the 
outstanding animation of 
original characters during 
his many years at Walt 
Disney Feature Animation 
(since 1980). These include 
memorable characters 
such as the "villains" Gaston, Jafar and 
Scar from "Beauty and the Beast" (1991), 
"Aladdin" (1992) and "The Lion King" 
(1994), as well as the little girl Lilo from 
"Lilo & Stitch" (2002).
Andreas' strengths include his creative 
skills in the design of animation char-
acters, his acting skills, his ability to 
transform, as well as his knowledge of 
the techniques of the "old masters" - the 
"Nine Old Men" - at Disney. Andreas has 
just written a book about these Disney 
legends and is working on his first inde-
pendent animation short film: "Mushka", 
another traditional 2D animation film - 
what else!
Andreas, in your estimation, what 
makes 2D or hand-drawn animation 
an independent art form to this day 
as compared to computer animation? 
Where do you see the difference or spe-
cial quality?
To put it in a nutshell: In 2D animation 
it's all about drawing, and drawing is 
not only about what to draw, but also 
about what you leave out. A 2D ani-
mator is actually an editor, who says: 
This line is important here, but over 
there, I will leave out a lot. In comput-
er-generated animation you show ev-
erything. It is total realism. You show 
every fold in the fabric, every texture 
and all sorts of things. It's more like "in 
real life", while 2D animation, I believe, 
is more about fantasy, inspiring or 
stimulating your imagination.
And more likely to create a world of its 
own?
Exactly. The worlds created during the 
60 years of the 2D era are so diver-
gent! And when I look at all these 3D 
things, whether feature film or shorts 
Chapter 2.2

237
- sooner or later they all press the "re-
alism button". 
The preparatory work is always beauti-
ful, they are designed graphically and 
with pastel or watercolors, but in the 
end - this button is pressed again and 
somehow everything looks the same. 
And I wonder why? Because with 
3D, you can actually do anything. Of 
course, there are commercial reasons. 
3D movies are all very accessible, most 
look similar to live-action video games 
with which children have grown up.
In 2D animations, the direct transfer of 
the handwriting is an important aspect, 
isn't it? What do you think about that?
You can actually see the artist's hand-
writing on the screen. Even a non-pro-
fessional can see that there are dif-
Sketch by Andreas Deja for his independent animation film project "Mushka", the story of a 
friendship between a girl and a tiger in Siberia. © Copyright Andreas Deja
ferent approaches in Disney films, 
different 
temperaments, 
different 
drawing styles. The artist's expression 
is on the screen. That is not the case 
with CG films. Most CG animators 
move all the characters in a scene, 
they don't specialize in one particular 
character.
Exactly, this has changed quite drasti-
cally to that effect.
I once asked a producer from Pixar 
studios, how they handle character 
design, who is responsible for the de-
velopment of character in the movie, 
the character arc  - I was told that this 
was not the animator, but the direc-
tor who says to the animators: This is 
how the character should act. So with 
regard to CG-animators lending ex-
Traditional 2D Animation

238
Additional sketches for "Mushka", which show 
Andreas' mastery in the drawing of animals.
pression to the character, it is quite re-
stricted. During my time with Disney, 
I was always responsible for my char-
acters like Jafar - good or bad, I am 
responsible, Scar, good or bad, I was 
responsible for the character.
This leads to actually owning the char-
acter! In CG this is less so, because 
there is a "fix-up group", who changes 
your animation again, goes over fol-
low through again and even changes 
some minor things in terms of acting. 
As an artist, I find that a little odd. If my 
character has to be reworked again, 
then I own it and execute the changes. 
In 2D, it looks like this: I do the rough 
animation, the clean-ups are done by 
assistants - but I have always checked 
the work of the clean-up crew. Wheth-
er it was Jafar or Roger Rabbit, I want-
ed to see all the clean-up keys, every 
single key drawing! In the end, I had 
to sign off on the key drawings. I made 
sure that I was able to say in the end: 
That scene and that character - that's 
me!"
Relinquishing any responsibility for the 
character arc is one very distinct differ-
ence.
After all, it is actually a lot of fun to get 
into your own character, to develop it 
during the course of the film - in con-
sultation with the director, of course, 
and with all the story people. If I'm not 
responsible for it, then it's somehow a 
different thing. I have also never un-
derstood that 3D animators are not 
well-known at all. Who are the star an-
imators at Pixar or Dreamworks, Blue 
Sky?
Yes, there are a few that are relatively 
well-known. I can think of Kristof Ser-
rand of Dreamworks, for example, who 
originally started in 2D animation, 
though. But getting back to the develop-
ment of a character: Character design 
for animation is also teamwork. Name-
ly in the sense that a character design-
er does not work in an open space and 
the character is fixed for all times, but 
that the character has to work for the 
animation. I know that you are always 
very interested in developing and refin-
ing your characters so they can work in 
the animation. Maybe you can tell a bit 
about your experiences, or what the ac-
tual process looks like.
Chapter 2.2

239
At Disney, it had been the rule for de-
cades that the animator was not only 
responsible for the character's be-
havior and development, but also for 
the design. However, when I started 
working on a film such as "Aladdin" 
or "The Lion King", there were already 
storyboards that I could look at, but 
the characters were not yet visually 
specified. Graphically speaking, they 
were mostly roughs and lacked refine-
ment. There were visual development 
people who had already worked out 
designs, I could look at those, but I 
had to provide the finishing touches, 
and the other animators had to do the 
same, of course. Tony Bancroft, who 
drew Pumba (the warthog in "The 
Lion King", author's note), studied real 
boars to make his character believ-
able. Glen Keane - with the beast from 
"Beauty and the Beast" - had many 
different ways in which he could have 
developed the beast. In the end it, 
was a "Glen-Keane beast". And Scar 
became an "Andreas-Deja lion" ("The 
Lion King").
In your blog you mention the collabora-
tion with the famous British illustrator 
Gerald Scarfe, in "Hercules" (Clements, 
Musker 1997). This was an extremely 
graphic approach, at first. You describe 
in your blog, how it evolved. But how 
was it in this specific case? Did the de-
velopment take place already in the di-
alogue or how did it happen?
Gerald Scarfe and I were both a bit 
frustrated, because we did not make 
any progress with the character of 
Hercules. All the other characters were 
already graphically defined, like these 
three "Fates" and these monsters, the 
Cyclops. Meg, the female protagonist 
as well. 
It was easier to use Scarfe's style, be-
cause the character was a bit more 
angular, in personality too. When I 
saw Gerald Scarfe's draft for Hercu-
les, I realized that the representation 
was either quite realistic or too car-
toony. Gerald Scarfe could not make 
the character fit in his own style. In 
the end, we sat down in a meeting 
and scribbled until the character was 
reasonably defined and used those 
sketches for the final design.
Do you use any animation tests at that 
point? 
They come in later.
So you would develop the design first, to 
the point where you think that it works 
for you, and then...
... you discuss it with the directors, 
who have to okay it, of course, and 
then you start with test animations. 
First you want to see whether the 
character can be drawn three-dimen-
sionally. If it does not quite work out 
one hundred percent in a few places, 
then this is the time where we can still 
make changes.
But from here on, this is actually more 
fine tuning? 
Exactly.
Getting back to 2D animation: Inter-
estingly, almost all universities or edu-
cational institutions for animation still 
have their students start their education 
with hand-drawn animation. Where do 
Traditional 2D Animation

240
An immensely dynamic study of a 
jumping tiger from "Mushka".
© Copyright Andreas Deja
you see the major advantages, if you 
actually learn how to animate by still 
hand-drawing animation, instead of 
sitting down at the machine right away?
Yes, I agree that it is better to learn an-
imation with 2D, at least initially, be-
cause it is somehow taken up easier. 
You have more light-bulb moments 
than if you immediately start working 
with a CG model: Because when you 
draw something, you have to learn to 
control proportions; observation skills 
are so important when you have to 
draw an animal, a horse, a lion or an 
elephant. It is necessary that you first 
go to the zoo and really take time to 
do studies with this animal - it is all in-
credibly important preparatory work, 
which will then benefit your work lat-
er. I do not know if these 3D artists are 
doing this - observing, constantly tak-
ing in new impressions.
Well, I think this may vary, but I just al-
ways notice that our students really 
enjoy drawing as well. I think this goes 
back to exactly what you said, that this 
experience in drawing is much more im-
mediate as compared to starting out by 
working with a digital puppet. You are 
first confronted with some graphs and 
curves, software and controllers - it lacks 
immediacy and the results are probably 
not as forthcoming.
I agree with that. If I may talk briefly 
about hands, because they represent 
a problem in CG animation. There are 
actually no fantastic CG hands yet. 
There is somehow always something 
strange, for example, there is a bump 
somewhere on the hand that does 
not belong there. This organic, ex-
pressive element a hand has to offer 
- I have not seen it yet in CG. As a 2D 
artist, you also have had lots of prac-
tice with figure drawing, and at some 
point you learned how to draw hands 
as well. You also know the expressive 
power of a hand: Not just how a hand 
works mechanically, but also what 
Chapter 2.2

241
Sketches of human figures
by Andreas
© Copyright Andreas Deja
is emotionally feasible. Because you 
took time to observe that. And you 
also have an informed opinion, about 
what makes for a good hand and a 
bad hand. And I do not see that in 
most 3D hands.
I believe it is also easier to establish 
a totality of impressions in drawings 
rather than in CG; because there, they 
are always adjusting and tweaking 
something. I think this often leads to the 
problem similar to the principle of eas-
ily distinguishable silhouettes, which 
sometimes is overlooked and then it 
does not work very well.   
Since you mentioned figure drawing: 
To what extent is figure drawing for an-
imation actually different from what is 
taught in the traditional, academic fig-
ure drawing?
Traditional academic drawing is re-
ally different, because movement is 
not added, the poses are more stat-
ic. Those who are mainly interested 
in animation will be frustrated with 
these one-to-two-hour positions. In 
that situation, I can only recommend 
starting a new drawing from a differ-
ent perspective. In this way, several 
drawings are made in one day, not 
just one long-drawn-out study. If the 
model only offers long-term poses, it 
is recommended to represent the ex-
pressiveness of the human figure from 
all possible angles and turns. This is in-
credibly important for animation.
There are also the famous studies of 
Walt Stanchfield, the drawing instructor 
at Disney (Walt Stanchfield, "Drawn to 
Life" Vol.1 & 2, 2009).
Walt was a master of his craft. Not nec-
essarily one of the best animators in 
the studio, but he was an incredibly 
good teacher. He could really get you 
to think about what he was saying, 
and he corrected drawings with great 
clarity and empathy.
Was he still working when you were in 
the studio? 
Yes, actually for a very long time. I also 
attended his courses back then. In 
the early 80s. He just died a few years 
ago, perhaps ten or fifteen years ago 
(2000). Walt was teaching unconven-
tional figure drawing courses. Later 
on, I occasionally taught figure draw-
ing in the studio as well, and I used 
some of his methods. It was about 
some ideas, with which he had ex-
perimented back then: For example: 
the model takes a position, everyone 
looks at the pose for two, three min-
utes, but no one begins to draw yet! 
Traditional 2D Animation

242
That's certainly true for 2D animation. 
The medium has evolved in such a 
way that 2D animation has been chal-
lenging the illustrator's acting skills 
for the last 60 years. In live-action film 
there are roles, definite characters. 
The challenge is to express yourself 
through acting. There is also effect 
animation or abstract films, which is a 
different thing.
Which is great, because it elegantly leads 
me to the next question - keyword: act-
ing. I would be very interested to know, 
if there are examples from live-action 
film, where you would say that these 
are exemplary scenes or films, in which 
we really see acting at the highest level? 
This is, of course, a wide-ranging field, 
but maybe you can name a few person-
al favorites? Particularly 
as it relates to animation. 
Roles or films that also 
permit conclusions about 
the acting in animation?
That would usually be 
roles or films, which are 
"character-rich", in which 
the characters are very 
expressive. But I briefly 
want to make reference 
to the drawing ability: 
At one time, I had the 
misconception thinking 
that, if I could ever learn 
to draw well, I would 
be a good animator. Of 
course this is not true at 
all! When I first started 
working at Disney, they 
thought my drawings 
were 
wonderful 
and 
Additional animal studies by Andreas Deja.
© Copyright Andreas Deja
Then the model leaves, and you draw 
what you have seen from memory. 
Figure drawing can be taught in very 
exciting ways. There are many ways 
to challenge the brain somehow. This 
does not always have to be very aca-
demic, old-fashioned or even boring.
We often do this as well, that we actu-
ally study only movement sequences in 
figure drawing or very short poses and 
so on.
It's extremely important.
After all, for the animator it is not a 
priority to deal with textures and light 
studies all the time. Of course, it must be 
part of an artist's overall repertoire. But 
when it comes to animation itself, it is 
actually about the line in motion.
Chapter 2.2

243
said: "We have never seen such a port-
folio, it looks as if you were working 
here for ten, twelve years," I was im-
mediately accepted to the studio. But 
good animation was something I had 
to learn during the years to come.
My single-frame drawings looked 
good at that time. But after they were 
videotaped, I saw that everything was 
moving really badly! It had nothing 
to do with acting. And then, at some 
point I had an epiphany: Okay, now 
that you know how to draw, you can 
focus less on it. Now it's really about 
acting. Then I started studying drama 
students, and analyzing films with 
regard to good roles and expressive 
power. To give you an example of 
something that inspired me, even for 
certain things I did later: In Germany, 
they used to show the movies with 
Margaret Rutherford as "Miss Marple" 
(adapted from Agatha Christie), and I 
thought this woman was fascinating, 
the composition of her face, various 
expressions and grimaces ... There is 
no other person who looks like that.
(Laughing) No, probably not.
She was so fascinating and expressive, 
her body language and her humor as 
well, I was completely fascinated! I al-
ways hoped to create a similar charac-
ter in the future, with a funny, quirky 
personality. And I tried to do that later 
with the character of Mama Odie, in 
"The Princess & the Frog" (Clements, 
Musker 2009).
Which brings me to the following: Very 
often, acting is also about interaction - 
almost always? 
Yes. 
And in "Miss Marple", there is, of course, 
Mr. Stringer, Miss Marple's partner. I be-
lieve that this element of contrast is also 
very important here, and how action 
and reaction are balanced.
And they were both very different. 
They were a team in their "crime fight-
ing", but she was the adventurous one, 
and Mr. Stringer always said: "Miss Mar-
ple, I don't know, are you sure? Please 
don't go there". This is exactly what 
makes such a scene or such a sequence 
or a movie so rich: when characters are 
different. Frank Thomas used to say the 
following: When you have two char-
acters in a scene and both characters 
think alike, then you have a problem.
Yes, exactly, because then you're lacking 
contrast. Then you have nothing that 
stands out, that is interesting or excit-
ing. 
Exactly. That is a very simple state-
ment, but if you seriously think about 
it: It's really true.
You are, of course, one of the great 
masters in that respect. What I find in-
credibly difficult, something I actually 
still have not adequately mastered as 
an animator, is to achieve this subtlety 
in timing: In other words, if it's about 
things like: action, reaction, how do you 
balance that correctly so that it works? 
Do you have a tip for someone who is 
still relatively new to animation, as to 
how he can learn the ropes of this in-
credibly challenging topic? Is it through 
observation, or film analysis, through 
trial and error, or all of it together?
Traditional 2D Animation

244
It's all of it together. Timing was the 
last big problem area for me. I learned 
good drawing through years of in-
tense figure and animal drawing. But 
you actually learn timing by shooting 
a scene and then, if there is something 
wrong, hopefully noticing that certain 
sequences appear either too fast or 
too slow. Then you correct the tim-
ing. But if you are at a loss and don't 
know why the animation seems un-
natural, then you show the scene to 
a colleague, a fresh pair of eyes, who 
can help out with his opinion. You 
learn good timing by doing, redoing, 
re-timing. The good thing is: You can 
just time the same drawings differ-
ently without redrawing or animating 
the scene anew. Sometimes you need 
to make graphical changes that fit 
better with the new timing. Perhaps 
push the action line a bit more, re-
work the rough animation. Overall, 
however, you can work with the first 
roughs from the first pass of the scene. 
If you need a break in the flow, then 
you say, okay, I will hold this drawing 
a little longer now, maybe not four, 
but twelve frames, then I have a small 
break. Over time, you will develop an 
approach to timing, you know when it 
works and when it doesn't.
I think that this has a lot to do with expe-
rience, of course. This fits well with what 
you said about drawing: Something 
that in my experience is one of the typ-
ical beginners' mistakes, is that there is 
always too much action packed in too 
short a time, in other words, a whole 
lot of poses, and somehow there is the 
temptation that, if poses look great, 
then this is going to work somehow; 
then someone videotapes it and then... 
then it ends up looking really awful.
Too much information in a scene can 
complicate the clarity of the anima-
tion. You have to ask yourself: What is 
important about this character, what 
is the essence, what is it all about? Su-
perfluous drawings are omitted, the 
scene is simplified. I experienced this 
once with Eric Larson. Too many pos-
es, too many statements. Then I got 
him to take a look at the scene and he 
said: "Okay, we keep this drawing, we 
omit the other one, and here we need 
a break".  Eric picked out the most im-
portant drawings and gave them new 
timing. My jaw dropped a few times, 
because suddenly the whole thing 
was clear and distinguishable.
Yes, I think this is one of the most im-
portant aspects that is often neglected, 
which many students do not realize: The 
viewer does not know what is in the art-
ist's head, and he is the one who must be 
able to understand it later.
The viewer sees the scene only once, 
there must be clarity, the audience 
needs to know what it is about. If the 
communication from the screen is 
confusing, you will lose the interest of 
the audience.
Something else that's interesting - al-
though it's a bit off the topic, but it also 
has to do with those fundamentals or 
beginnings: When it comes to drawing: 
In think what you said at the begin-
ning was incredibly good, that you as 
an illustrator always make a selection 
from what "reality" has to offer you. You 
Chapter 2.2

245
wrote yourself that even, or especially, 
someone like Milt Kahl - about whose 
drawings so many would say, that they 
look quite "real"  - made an incredible 
number of design decisions.
All the time. With each stroke you 
make a decision. One of the most in-
credible characters, for which details 
were omitted, is Merlin by Milt Kahl 
(from "The Sword in the Stone", 1963, 
directed by Wolfgang Reitherman). 
You could have added a lot of detailed 
folds into the design for Merlin's robe, 
- yet he reduced it to the bare essen-
tial. And it all comes off the screen so 
lightly and smoothly... He has learned 
to reduce it, so that only the essence 
remains. A second character was the 
panther in "Jungle Book" ("The Jun-
gle Book", 1967, directed by Wolfgang 
Reitherman), its design consisting 
of only very, very few lines, almost 
only one outline, though Milt Kahl 
knew exactly where the hip bone, the 
shoulders etc. were in each drawing. 
But then everything was omitted and 
reduced to the essentials. Somehow 
breathtaking.
I believe Milt Kahl himself has said (cited 
in Williams, 2002): "Well, I know where 
the weight is on every drawing" 
Exactly.
How does everything move, and where 
exactly is what now, because weight in 
motion is constantly shifting? I would 
also like to hear your opinion on the 
following: Weight in animation is of-
ten shown or taught like this in books: 
Someone is shown who needs to lift a 
stone, and that is supposed to demon-
strate the animation of weight. But ac-
tually, the topic of weight or gravity in 
animation is so much more comprehen-
sive, isn't it? It is constantly present.
Constantly. This is already the case for 
a normal walk, that's where it starts: 
After the contact drawing, where 
the heel first makes contact with the 
ground and the foot comes down, 
then the knee should also bend. A 
shift in weight must be shown by the 
change in position and shape: The 
knee will bend when bearing weight 
on the leg, and to what extent, de-
pends on how heavy the character is.
I would also like to talk about the correct 
use of live-action reference. For many 
computer animators, it is almost some-
thing like the "holy grail"  always to use a 
reference of a (frequently self-produced) 
live-action film.
Even filming yourself as a reference for 
the scene.
Exactly! Live action reference is, of 
course, something that can make sense. 
But what do you think about that? How 
did you use that in your work? And if you 
use it: How should it be implemented?
I always had my own way of using 
live-action film. I did not use it like 
the old animators. Because back then, 
they had these printed photographs 
of each filmed frame. They picked out 
key frames and traced drawings from 
live-action frames. The animator then 
reinterpreted them, changing pro-
portions and timing as well. I never 
worked with photographs, I found it 
more exciting to watch things on vid-
eo. Studying these individual takes 
Traditional 2D Animation

246
in this manner in order to find out 
whether the actor or actress repre-
sented something, which would have 
never occurred to me. You say to your-
self: 'Okay, the acting is really good, I 
would have never thought of this on 
my own. I can include this in the ani-
mation.' 
Then I would sit down and draw 
sketches, small thumbnail sketches, in 
front of the monitor. This way I avoid 
tracing film frames, which can result 
in lifeless animation. But you can also 
say: 'okay, this part in the real-live 
scene works well, and I can do a better 
job with the other part.' You view the 
live-action film in a discerning man-
ner. Some ideas come from the actor, 
others from the animator.
I believe that Jeremy Irons (in "The Lion 
King") was such an example, wasn't it? 
No, that did not work with Jeremy 
Irons, because he was a lion (in the 
movie). (laughing)
Yes, sure, but let's put it this way: in dis-
position, the little mannerisms? 
In the face, just a little bit. I did not 
necessarily sketch Jeremy Irons in the 
studio, but I studied him in the stu-
dio in front of the microphone, and I 
studied his behavior. With Scar it was 
very much about restraint, because he 
was a very poised evil and not "crazy 
evil". Initially, it was like this with Ja-
far ("Aladdin", 1992) as well: I did not 
know how to interpret the character. 
In some storyboards he was portrayed 
as very active, for example in the des-
ert during the frustrated search for the 
lamp. Then there were other scenes, 
in which he was very subtle and just 
stood there thinking about some-
thing. There was very little happening 
graphically.
But Jafar was already very much - which 
I personally loved - somehow closer to a 
caricature, a strong caricature...
Oh yes! With him I did not need a 
live-action movie, I always had an idea 
how I could implement it. There were 
live-action scenes for realistic charac-
ters like Jasmin and Aladdin. With Ja-
far, I was always able to figure out his 
behavior by myself.
But with Jafar - was he influenced by 
Jaffar, enacted by Conrad Veidt in the 
live-action movie "The Thief of Bagh-
dad"? (Berger, Powell, Whelan 1940)
Not at all. In fact, I am familiar with 
the film, which used to be on German 
television occasionally. The story has 
some similarities. Sabu (main charac-
ter from "The Thief of Baghdad") is a 
bit like Aladdin, and Jaffar (villain from 
the "Thief") has similar characteristics 
to Jafar. Then there was (in the old-
er film) the Sultan with his toys - so 
there are similarities. Although I knew 
the film, I did not study it while I was 
working on Jafar.
I thought it was absolutely insane, be-
cause I have looked at it several times 
now frame-by-frame, at least some 
scenes, and I noticed how little the actor 
actually does. He is almost always verti-
cal in his posture, and hardly moves out 
of this rigidity. Yet, he looks incredibly 
intense and threatening, perhaps be-
cause of that. 
For that reason.
I don't know.
Chapter 2.2

247
It looks much more dangerous when 
you see someone thinking, who has 
evil thoughts. When it comes across 
with subtle eye movements it looks 
much more evil, as if someone were 
dealing out blows right and left.
Too much fidgeting would make it per-
haps even a bit ridiculous. 
That is exactly right. And there are 
some really fantastic actors who can 
do that. The camera shows only the 
eyes, nothing else, and you know what 
they are thinking, you know somehow 
what is going on inside of them. Jere-
my Irons is such an actor, Judi Dench is 
such an actress - she can do so much 
with just one glance.
But how does the animator actually ac-
complish that the viewer can see that 
a character is thinking? What are the 
tools? Is it timing? How do I achieve 
that?
To put it in a nutshell: A thought pro-
cess becomes clear only when a mood 
change occurs on the screen. If the 
character in the scene is only happy, 
in other words, is only showing one 
emotion, then there's no thought 
process in that case. Okay, you have a 
certain mood. But when a character, 
let's say, is writing a love letter and 
really getting into it and smiling, and 
suddenly you hear a loud bang in the 
background, then you can perceive a 
mood change. First, the loving mood, 
then all at once the realization that 
something dangerous is happening. 
By changing the emotions you can 
show a thought process.
This involves timing again, because a 
change or a thought process usually re-
quires a reaction time. That is, if I show 
something, let's say, something hap-
pens, and at the same time I show the 
reaction to it, then it usually does not 
work, right? 
It depends on how the whole thing is 
structured with regard to timing. The 
question that is constantly asked, es-
pecially by young animators: I would 
like to animate a test scene and also 
try to show that I can draw a character 
that really thinks. How can I do that? 
The answer I give each time is: Make 
sure you have an emotional change 
somewhere in the scene, show more 
than just one kind of emotion. You 
won't get there otherwise.
What skills should a student actually 
practice most, or already have, or try to 
obtain during the training, in order to 
become a good animator?
The main thing, even for hand-drawn 
films, is actually not the drawing, but 
the acting ability and a sense of char-
acter, entertainment and character 
development. That is actually more 
important than beautiful drawing. 
There are indeed animators who can 
draw wonderfully, but they are not 
actors. The scenes look very polished, 
the animation works, but somehow it 
does not convey any emotion. That is 
because the acting choices or the act-
ing are flat. It is more important that 
you immerse yourself into the charac-
ter and and try to understand it! If you 
have this ability, then you're on your 
way. Drawing really becomes second-
ary.
Traditional 2D Animation

248
This means that acting abilities are 
of major importance. And each per-
son has his own way of getting there. 
Some people need real acting lessons, 
including theory and analysis of how 
to create distinctive characters. For 
others, this task is easier, they work 
intuitively. For me, it was the constant 
observation of people that provid-
ed me with a foundation for anima-
tion. Just as the study of live-action 
films, not for the entertainment val-
ue, but for the analysis of a character 
throughout the entire film. Learning 
from classic animation films is of equal 
importance. How were these fantas-
tic scenes accomplished technically? 
Why do they look so natural? Together 
with Hans (Bacher), we started the sin-
gle-frame study of many Disney films 
back in Essen.
What he always likes to talk about, are 
the...
...the beer drinking nights we used 
to have, where we looked at all these 
things frame-by-frame. That was in-
credibly helpful! At that time we 
watched Disney 2D animation films 
in movie theaters, on the big screen, 
and we had no idea why these scenes 
looked so good. How they were drawn, 
where the key frames were. But later 
we had movies on Super8 or 16mm, 
which made it possible to view them 
frame-by-frame. Click, click, click - you 
could hear the penny drop, one after 
the other. This was fantastic training. 
Nowadays this type of study is so easy 
to do. You can really get anything that 
has ever been animated.
One click, yes.
You can get everything, and get it 
cheap too.
Yes, it's cheap to get. Ironically, when I 
tell this to my students, they often look 
at me in disbelief: What do you mean? 
They are supposed to sit down at night 
and watch a movie frame-by-frame? 
(laughing)
Yes, exactly! (laughing)
Then they look at me, as if they had just 
encountered a ghost. 
That's called homework.
Yes, of course. I also happen to believe 
that nowadays, everything is a little too 
easy...
That you no longer have to search for 
things yourself anymore.
In the 70s and 80s, on the other hand, 
there was almost no literature or refer-
ence material. 
Nothing, hardly any books.
Back then, it was like a gift when you got 
your hands on something. 
If there was ever an article in the mag-
azine "Die Bunte" about a new release 
of a Walt Disney film - that was worth 
gold, you immediately cut it out and 
almost framed it. And today, we have 
access to everything. This search for 
information is really easy today. If stu-
dents would only realize that the old 
films virtually offer a real school - it's 
all there, you can see everything. And 
if you're curious enough to investigate 
why a scene, an old classic scene looks 
Chapter 2.2

249
good, then you can find out right now! 
At one time, you could not do that, or 
less so.
There is one more thing, something I 
always really liked about the Richard 
Williams books: conveying the impor-
tance of a breakdown, in other words, 
the question of which interesting inter-
mediate position can get me from Key A 
to Key B?
Although, a very important break-
down is actually a key too.
Precisely.
If there is something creative happen-
ing, something new, which can not be 
mechanically filled, then it is actually 
a key. The animator should actually 
be drawing the main breakdowns too. 
For example, if the head moves from 
left to right, then you can not omit the 
center position. This breakdown is ac-
tually the front position. This is not a 
breakdown, this is actually a key.
The question students frequently ask, is: 
Where does a breakdown stop being a 
breakdown, and is actually a key? I think 
it's a bit of an academic discussion, 
Richard Williams also says: Key frames 
are just the storytelling drawings, and 
the others are extremes, the actual pos-
es. But I think somehow, this is probably 
basically secondary. 
You are absolutely right. We can have a 
lot of discussions about the philosoph-
ical interpretation. In the end, each ani-
mator has to find his own style and way 
of working. Whether it's straight ahead 
or pose-to-pose, everyone has to learn 
that for himself. You can study the sys-
tem of the old animators and then take 
parts that work for you, which make 
sense to you. That is how I did it. When I 
started at Disney, we had access to the 
archive. I then checked out key scenes 
from "Bambi" (Hand, 1942) and "Dum-
bo" (Sharpsteen, 1941). I could sort out 
the inbetweens, so I had only the keys 
in front of me. This was relatively easy, 
because most of the artists had circled 
the number to identify a key. If you just 
flip the keys, then the process is very 
smooth. If, on the other hand, you flip 
the inbetweens, then the sequence is 
bumpy, since the strong extremes are 
missing. Milt Kahl's mode of thinking 
appealed to me most. He drew only 
the most important keys. All drawings 
that did not require creative decisions 
were done by the inbetweener. That's 
how he constructed his scene. He often 
drew only a partial drawing, e.g. mouth 
changes during a dialogue scene. The 
rest of the face was finished by the in-
betweener. And that somehow made 
sense to me. Why should I draw head 
and eyes each time, when an inbe-
tweener can actually do this much 
more carefully?
It was quite different with Frank Thom-
as. He hardly had any keys or inbe-
tweens in his animation, for him, all 
drawings were important. Frank basi-
cally created all the drawings of a scene. 
And then clean-up people had prob-
lems with his scenes in trying to make 
out any kind of structure at all. It was 
difficult to use a conventional clean-up 
procedure, because each drawing had 
the same degree of importance.
This means that they are probably very 
close together...
Traditional 2D Animation

250
Exactly. Frank Thomas was a fantastic 
actor, but in his animation he rarely 
focused on one important pose to be 
seen for any certain length of time. 
His characters are constantly moving, 
often very subtly. But the end result is 
always fantastic.
A constant flow.
A constant flow.
Then it gets slower or comes much clos-
er together, becomes much more subtle 
in change. 
But somehow something keeps mov-
ing. When Mogli yawns at the begin-
ning of the movie ("The Jungle Book", 
Reitherman 1967), and says to the pan-
ther, 'ah, I'm tired now', and he stretch-
es - nothing comes to a standstill. 
Milt Kahl would have found a certain 
inbetween to lead in the movement, 
and then to lead out of it again. With 
Frank Thomas, everything is designed 
in such a way that it always continues 
to flow smoothly, and it looks fantas-
tic. The effect is not blurry or soft. It 
works and looks very natural. I knew 
Frank very well and I believe that he 
adapted this technique, because he 
never quite trusted his own drawing. 
He never saw himself as a top illustra-
tor and never actually came to a point 
where he said, 'okay, this exactly is the 
drawing, which says it all' - it's more 
like a group of drawings.
This is also related to the difference be-
tween straight ahead and pose-to-pose. 
For me, this is always something that is 
difficult to explain. It is my personal ex-
perience that a beginner usually cannot 
really animate straight ahead, unless 
he is an absolute natural talent. So for 
me, the question always arises: What 
is the definition of 'straight ahead'? Be-
cause in a way, the animator would al-
ready know about where he wants to 
go. Straight ahead without any idea of 
where it should go, actually does not 
work at all.
But you create the idea beforehand 
with your thumbnail sketches. These 
acting patterns, the kind of acting, are 
created before the animation in the 
form of small drawings. Because when 
you start with the big drawings, then 
you know roughly where it's all going. 
You are still free to make small chang-
es during the drawing. You think, 'okay, 
I will do this a little different than with 
the thumbnails', but overall, you al-
ready have a concept that you now 
just draw larger. It doesn't really work 
without thumbnails. You're wasting 
time with these large drawings and 
throw them away if they don't work. 
You have to specify everything first on 
a small scale.
And often these drawings have already 
turned out well and look surprisingly 
good!
Because they were drawn very intui-
tively, not with the intention of fram-
ing them at some point, but only for 
the purpose of clarifying any move-
ments and thoughts.
Finally, I would like to go back to the fact 
that analyzing great examples from the 
history of animation is a way to learn 
things. In closing, could you just name 
a few names or examples? Some names 
Chapter 2.2

251
have been mentioned already, but are 
there other scenes from movies that 
come to mind, along with great anima-
tions?
The interesting characters are of 
course the eccentric ones. The princ-
es and princesses in "Sleeping Beau-
ty" (Clark, Larson, Reitherman 1959) 
and "Cinderella" (Geronimi, Jackson, 
Luske 1950), who rely heavily on 
live-action, are less interesting to 
study. The graphics are excellent, and 
the design of this "Sleeping Beauty" 
head, the graphic construction of it, 
and how they were able to maintain 
it throughout, so that every single 
drawing was really graphic and beau-
tiful every time. That makes it inter-
esting. But Cruella (de Ville) from "101 
Dalmatians" (Geronimi, Luske, Reit-
herman 1961) is a fantastic character 
because of her heavy, really heavy 
coat, this fur coat she wears. And 
when she turns around, the character 
turns first, and the coat takes much 
more time, swaying backwards first, 
and then forward. Follow-through 
and weight, with respect to this 
fur coat, are fabulous to study. Ma-
dame Medusa (from "The Rescuers"/
Lounsberry, 
Reitherman, 
Stevens 
1977) is quite wonderful in terms 
of bizarre expressive power and di-
alogue scenes. Milt Kahl animated 
her lips extraordinarily. When Medu-
sa says "you", then the lips move all 
the way forward. There are very wide 
mouth openings when she screams. I 
was able to learn a lot from this char-
acter, as far as dialogue is concerned. 
The dialogue of the Indian chief from 
"Peter Pan" (Geronimi, Jackson, Luske 
1953) is just as interesting and cra-
zy. This Ward Kimball character has 
a very strange configuration of nose 
and mouth, and a strange, but very 
fascinating way to speak. And that 
inspired me for the character of Jafar, 
because I wanted to invent mouth 
positions and not just rely on the 
fact that an "M" can only look like 
this, and an "O" just looks like that. It 
is fun to design specific mouth posi-
tions for a character. But characters 
from other studios were influential 
as well. When we produced "Roger 
Rabbit" (Zemeckis 1988), it was more 
about Warner Brothers animation. At 
that time, I researched about Chuck 
Jones, of course, although he was a 
bit more subtle than the old Warner 
Brothers cartoons. There are anima-
tors like Rod Scribner or Ken Har-
ris, who worked more with extreme 
poses and wilder animations too. 
But their work is still clear, never con-
fusing. It is very educational to try to 
maintain clarity in very crazy, surreal 
animation scenes.
Oh, what would perhaps be nice, if you 
could talk about it, for the very last con-
clusion (laughing) - that would be really 
great - how the art form of hand-drawn 
animation continues to live on in your 
own project of "Mushka" . I mean, there 
is still an incredible amount of 2D pro-
duced worldwide.
Exactly.
It has disappeared from the focus of the 
absolute box office of Hollywood main-
stream, for now.
For now, it's gone from there. But the 
love is still there, definitely.
Traditional 2D Animation

252
The love is still there! Perhaps you can 
say a little more about what your mo-
tivation was, what you want to achieve 
with the film, and where your main fo-
cus is, what it is that takes center stage 
for you?
When I left Disney two and a half years 
ago, I knew quite well that I had to 
continue working to challenge myself 
creatively, somehow. You can not shut 
it down and say 'okay, I'm retired now'. 
That doesn't work. I am also much 
too young to retire. And then I just 
thought about what I would enjoy do-
ing most. I really like drawing animals 
- okay, but what kind of animals? Big 
cats have always fascinated me since 
"Lion King", all these studies we did in 
zoos and of live-action nature films. 
Finally I said to myself, tigers are re-
ally beautiful animals. Maybe I could 
develop a friendship between a tiger 
and a human being. A person, okay, 
maybe a boy? But we've already seen 
that in "Jungle Book" with Mogli and 
the panther. Maybe a girl. A young girl, 
so that the contrast is greater between 
this monstrosity, this huge dangerous 
animal and this innocent girl. Okay, so 
I knew the two main characters were 
already set. And then I got together 
with a friend who expresses himself 
in a variety of ways. He deals with ar-
chitecture, but also writes poems, po-
etry and is an all-around artist. I told 
him that I would like to have certain 
story elements in the film, and asked 
him if he could write a script based on 
it. Four versions /outlines later, it was 
time to start storyboarding. I finished 
the storyboard version about two 
weeks ago, of course, there are still all 
sorts of improvements and new ideas, 
but overall, the story is complete. This 
is very exciting. Stylistically I'd like 
to try something new, the popular 
Hollywood 2D animation has indeed 
changed very little over the years. 
For decades now, the characters have 
clear outlines, either in black, as in the 
60s and 70s, or a colored outline, and 
two-dimensional colors. I don't want 
that this time, instead, the film is going 
to look like one of my sketchbooks. So 
the whole thing is more intuitive, no 
clean-ups, only sketchy animation. 
And ever since Hans (Bacher) started 
posting works by the German illustra-
tor Wilhelm M. Busch on his blog a few 
years ago, I have had a few aha-mo-
ments. His illustrative style is a fan-
tastic inspiration for the design of my 
film. I have ordered many of his illus-
trated books from Germany. I would 
also like to base my background de-
sign a little on these very subtle, but 
masterly drawn book illustrations. 
Busch created different styles, some 
of them in color, others in black and 
white with shades of gray. I prefer his 
very reduced illustrations, which are 
really all about lines that have a spatial 
effect. That is how I see the aesthetics 
of my film.
Has it made a big difference since you 
have realized that you are now really re-
sponsible for everything, from directing 
to the story, making all the visual deci-
sions ... your own master, so to speak?
A little. I mean, it feels good, but it's 
a bit risky. I believe, that you have to 
realize somehow where your inexperi-
ence lies, where you need help. I know 
Chapter 2.2

253
Additional sketches for "Mushka". © Copyright Andreas Deja
very well that I need help with layouts, 
I need help with the story, because 
I've never really done story in all these 
years. You then ask people who can 
help you somehow, because you can 
not be good in all areas.
Yes, of course, it is also about feedback 
... that you simply keep the lines of com-
munication open with others. 
Exactly. Once I finish the story in may-
be two months or so, then I'll have 
screenings and invite people and ask 
them what they think, if it is clear or 
boring. I would not make the mistake 
of producing my film tucked away all 
alone in a cubbyhole, and then to re-
lease it.
But the beauty is that the decisions are 
always artistically motivated. In other 
words, these are not decisions that have 
to be made for reasons other than artis-
tic motivation. Basically, you can really 
decide to make the movie the way you 
think is best with all the feedback you 
have received. 
Exactly. I will make the final decisions.
Great, excellent, that was it - thank you 
for the conversation!
Traditional 2D Animation

254
Stop Motion
Stop motion is an umbrella term for several techniques, 
which are all based on the fact that mostly real-built objects 
are manipulated frame by frame. Of all the animation tech-
niques, stop motion is the one most similar to a live-action 
film shoot, especially in the version of puppet animation. 
Physical sets must be built, painted and illuminated. The 
animation is filmed with real cameras with single frame 
release. Stop motion, unlike any other technique, requires 
very complex expertise by the animator or/and must be 
implemented with a multi-talented team.
Of course, "stop motion" is a strange term. 
There is no movement here that is stopped 
and then continues. On the contrary, it is a 
long series of still images with rigid figures 
that are minimally moved frame-by-frame. 
Just as in traditional 2D animation, only with 
real built sets and characters. The illusion of 
the movement is created when a series of 
frames is played as a fast sequence. The more 
single frames of a movement are used per 
second, the smoother, softer, and more life-
like the animation. The less frames are used, 
the coarser and more "jerky" the movement. 
If the frame rate is so low that the brain can 
perceive the individual frames as such, the 
illusion is no longer successful. Starting at 
about 4 frames, a strongly jerky animation re-
sults; at 6 or 7 frames, each frame can clearly 
be perceived as a still image. Generally, this 
is of course no reason to animate on fours, 
sixes or on tens. As mentioned in the intro-
1) What is stop motion?
ductory chapter, however, two-dimensional 
images are perceived at a different speed 
than three-dimensional images. The brain 
comprehends a flat drawing more easily and 
faster than a three-dimensional image with 
depth and many details. 
The decision about shooting at a certain 
frame rate ("on ones", "twos", "threes" etc.) 
should be made during the conceptual phase 
of each film according to aesthetic and artis-
tic aspects. This certainly applies to all anima-
tion techniques, not just stop motion.
Stop motion is not just referring to the ani-
mation with puppets à la Wallace and Gromit. 
It is the general term for any frame-by-frame 
animation of everything you can place and 
move in front of a camera. This can be done, 
for example, with flat or three-dimensional 
paper objects, but also with real people, fur-
niture, cars or household items. The bound-
ary to 2D animation can be fluid, since you 
Guest author: Kathrin Albers
Chapter 2.3

255
can also cut out a drawn 2D animation from 
paper and animate it in a stop motion proce-
dure as a constructed layer in space or lying 
flat. In general, there are no limitations to the 
adventure of experimenting and combining. 
This makes it the most diverse and creative 
form of animation.
The digital age was a kind of revolution for 
puppet animation. With the advent of digital 
cameras and the development of correspond-
ing software, it was possible to see your cur-
rent, not yet photographed image ("live im-
age") and match it up to the previously shot 
frames until the continuity works. The days of 
blind animation with movie cameras are over, 
and animators finally have options for more 
complex movements and more precise con-
trol of individual frames. 
This has strongly increased awareness of the 
entire post-production industry, if not to say: 
It only emerged in this form and concept in 
the first place, and has since then played an 
enormous part in film production, both in 
live-action and in animation film. Because 
of it, puppet animation filmmakers can plan 
their scenes more freely and realize the kind 
of animations, camera angles and set build-
ings that make production not only consider-
ably easier, but also make certain ideas pos-
sible at all.
A clear division into traditional 2D animation, 
3D or stop motion has therefore become more 
difficult since then. As already described in the 
introductory chapter, 3D software in particular 
has enormous influence on all techniques, in-
cluding stop motion. In addition to camera and 
post-production, the use of objects modeled 
in 3D software, including their individual ani-
mated poses, has been particularly far-reach-
ing. For dimensions, where the human finger 
and real tools cannot reach or where a form is 
simply too detailed and complex, a 3D print-
er can be used to visualize, print, and in this 
way, integrate almost anything beforehand 
into a stop motion film. However, it is worth 
discussing whether this is still stop motion 
in the traditional sense, since, in the case of 
thousands of printed animated frames, it 
has actually turned into an incarnate digital 
3D animation. In the face of these new digi-
tal influences, the question is how we define 
stop motion in general, and what the future 
of the true spirit of this form of animation will 
look like in in the future. Is it only about how 
something looks afterwards, no matter how 
it came about, or is it also about making the 
manufacturing process visible for the viewer? 
What fascinates people about animation and 
stop motion in particular?
Stop Motion

256
Puppet Animation
This technique is the "classic" among stop-mo-
tion films with a long and rich tradition. Puppets 
made of different materials such as plasticine, 
silicone or foam are given a skeleton of wire or 
metal joints, called "armature" in technical jar-
gon, with which they can be moved frame-by-
frame. The scale is generally between 1:10 and 
ca. 1:6. But, of course, all sizes and shapes are 
possible.
 
A brief historical overview
The very first stop-motion animations were 
made around 1900, after George Méliès acci-
dentally (due to a jammed camera) shot the 
illusion of a transformation from a car into a 
hearse. During the time of the malfunction, 
one car drove off and the other took its place. 
This effect, coupled with the knowledge that 
one can manipulate things in front of a cam-
era between each frame, form the basis for the 
stop motion technique.
Early works with animated figures are, for ex-
ample, those of Ladislav Starevich (such as 
"The Beautiful Lukanida", 1912), from Russia 
/ France, who often used insects and other 
prepared real animals as figures, creating as-
tounding realism through life-like animations. 
For many years, the former Eastern Bloc coun-
tries produced puppet animation films at the 
highest artistic level. Notably often without 
the label "children's film", since many artists 
used stop motion (as well as all kinds of ani-
mations) as an art form for different subjects, 
sometimes surreal, but also satirical and ex-
plicitly not for children. Well-known artists 
worth studying are Jiri Trnka, Yuri Norstein 
and Jan Svankmajer.
An Overview of the Various Stop Motion Techniques
The stop motion scene grew, particularly in En-
gland, with the founding and success of Aard-
man Studios in Bristol in 1970 and, like hardly 
any other studio, it shaped the aesthetics as 
well as the humor and content of the younger 
generation of puppet animation film makers. 
There were many stop motion films from 
North America, such as Rankin/Bass Produc-
tions ("Rudolph, the Red-Nosed Reindeer", Na-
gashima/Roemer, 1964. Produced entirely in 
Japan) or George Pal, who created a wonderful 
series of puppet animations with his "Puppe-
toons", which worked mainly with so-called 
replacements instead of jointed puppets (see 
section animation,  page 269). 
Laika Entertainment (formerly Will Vinton 
Studio) is regarded technically as the most 
ambitious studio at this time with its means 
of 3D-printing and detailed, previsualized very 
smooth animation (plus a lot of money), thus 
virtually blurring the dividing line of digital 3D 
to become an almost androgynous version 
of the two techniques. For the layperson, it is 
nearly impossible to tell whether for instance 
"The Boxtrolls" is a 3D computer animation or 
a stop motion film.
Chapter 2.3

257
Pixilation
Pixilation refers to the technique in which 
people act as puppets. Instead of moving 
forward in a continuous and fluid motion, 
an actor moves through the set in spatial 
intervals in a frame-by-frame process and re-
mains in the individual poses, which are shot 
in sequence. The resulting effects are most-
ly weird, amazing and surreal. The found-
ing fathers of this style are, among others, 
Grant Munro, after whom this technique was 
named, or Norman McLaren ("Neighbors", "A 
Chairy Tale").
The surrealist Jan Svankmajer (including 
"Food", "Conspirators of Pleasure") uses this 
technique in almost all of his films and has 
influenced a whole generation of animation 
artists with his work to this day.
Pixilation short film "I Love Story" by Kimberly Siy Huang, 
developed at the School of Art, Design and Media, 
Nanyang Technological University Singapore. 
Cutout
The word says it all: In the cutout, the figures 
are cut out of paper, cardboard, felt or other 
flat materials, placed under the camera and 
animated frame-by-frame. 
There are two very different ways of working. 
If the character is put together in individual 
parts and animated as a jointed puppet, you 
achieve an effect similar to (shadow) pup-
petry, in which the objects and characters 
move mostly sideways. Popular representa-
tives are mainly the artists of Monty Python, 
who cut the drawings into parts and delib-
erately placed little emphasis on concealing 
their technique, which largely contributed to 
the humor in the first place. The same applies 
More recently, we have seen pixilation in play-
ful music videos and short films. ("Human 
Skateboard", Pes, "Her Morning Elegance", 
Oren Lavie, "Strawberry Swing", for Coldplay, 
by Shynola, "Sledgehammer", for Peter Gabri-
el, by Stephen R. Johnson). 
to the series "South Park", which was contin-
ued to be created in digital cutout soon after 
the initial release.
The worldwide "mother" of all cutout ani-
mation is undoubtedly Lotte Reiniger, who 
mainly used paper cutting in her films, lending 
her characters complex flexibility by break-
ing them down to finger joints and individual 
strands of hair. Reiniger was heavily influenced 
by Arabian and Asian shadow puppetry.  Some 
titles of her works: "The Adventures of Prince 
Achmed", "Kalif Storch", "Papageno" and many 
fairy tales of the Brothers Grimm.
Another type of cutout, as already indicated 
above, is the blending of 2D animation and 
cutout animation, in which the individual 
Stop Motion

258
frames are defined and tested in advance, and 
only then cutout of paper and placed under 
the camera. After a previously defined frame-
by-frame timing, they then "only" have to be 
shot in sequence.  This is where traditional 2D 
Cut-out animation with paper, from "The Animals" (2014) by Mark Wee Nai De 
Sand and Plasticine Animation Techniques
Instead of rigid objects and characters, sand or 
plasticine are placed flat on a glass plate and 
animated by moving and reshaping, using the 
same camera set-up. The surface is usually illu-
animation and stop motion merge equally. 
You could just as well use, say, the After Ef-
fects software to digitally animate cutout and 
scanned characters in the manner of cutout 
animation. 
minated from below, giving the material a spe-
cial depth and rich color. Particularly with sand, 
some life-like impressions of architecture and 
natural representations can be achieved.
Clay animation from "Afterlife" (1978) by Ishu Patel 
Chapter 2.3

259
The story, even if it is visually abstract, should 
fit the nature of stop motion. For the initial 
ideas it may not matter which kind of anima-
tion you favor, but soon you should ask your-
self the important question, whether stop 
motion is primarily stylistically, and secondly 
from a practical point of view, the right choice 
for the respective idea. 
This book is primarily aimed at newcomers 
and those who want to realize their own proj-
ects on their own or in small teams, and as 
such it is advisable to set limits when starting. 
Of course, in a professional studio environ-
ment, even the most complex scenes can be 
implemented in stop motion, so I would like 
to contradict the general prevailing opinion 
that only simple ideas with few sets and char-
acters would be suitable for this technique. 
This is certainly not true. Everything is possi-
ble. All stories can be told with some expe-
rience and creativity, it just depends on how 
you do it.  
Start small.
At the beginning, and especially with little 
experience, it is in fact advisable to keep the 
story small and to limit yourself to one or two 
sets and puppets. Since stop motion is with-
out question very technical even in its sim-
plest form, I recommend a simple story that 
leaves enough room to get acquainted with 
the physical properties, the production pro-
cess and, above all, the unfamiliar straight-
ahead animation. A kind of finger exercise to 
warm up.
For starters, camera movements should 
be excluded and special effects should be 
planned - if at all - only in simple form. The 
2) Concept and Pre-production
same applies to talking characters. For all 
these topics, there are additional sections in 
this chapter.
As with all film projects and as already de-
scribed here in the book, you first need a 
treatment that summarizes the idea. Then 
comes the storyboard stage, in which the 
idea is broken down into individual scenes. 
Unlike 2D animation, in stop motion you 
cannot go into too much detail of layout or 
camera set-up, since the live-action aspect of 
the various focal lengths, the size of the set 
and the corresponding space surrounding it 
will only roughly match the planned field of 
view and perspectives of the sketches. The 
storyboard should initially function only as 
story development. The so-called shooting 
board may later provide more details on the 
final implementation. This is where the se-
quence of the film shoot, all the focal lengths, 
required props and aids are set up, which 
considerably facilitate the shooting schedule.
As soon as the first structures of the set have 
been set-up, it is recommended to shoot the 
planned scenes with a camera in order to test 
whether the scenes can be implemented as 
expected. Roughly cut cardboard figures in-
stead of puppets help to recreate the scenes.
These images are then imported into the so-
called animatic, where the film is previsualized 
in terms of timing and editing. A tip for simpli-
fying shooting is to pay attention while work-
ing in the storyboard, as to how the character 
will be visible in the image. Does it always have 
to be visible in full-length while walking? 
Or can I cut it so that it will not be seen from 
the hip down? This would simplify the anima-
tion considerably, since, instead of a full-body 
Stop Motion

260
Character Design for 
Stop Motion
Since everything has to be 
built in a stop-motion film, 
there are of course some 
requirements regarding de-
sign, which are ultimately 
subject to feasibility. On the 
other hand, materials and 
tools can be a particular 
source of inspiration for sur-
faces and shapes. 
The initial approach is the 
same as in 2D or 3D. Sketches 
and silhouettes of all kinds 
come first. Starting out, you 
should not let any material 
feasibility restrict your cre-
ativity, but let your artistic in-
3) From Character and Production Design to Puppet and Prop Building
tuition guide you to develop 
your own interesting charac-
ters that point you to the ini-
tial general direction. 
While drawings are certainly 
indispensable, my advice is 
not to "fuss" over a 2D design 
for too long, since it will ul-
timately become a three-di-
mensional object made of 
real materials. As in 3D, the 
material selected will always 
affect the appearance, which 
is why it helps to get familiar 
with the available means as 
soon as possible and not to 
become too attached to the 
design drawing. 
At this point, I deliberately 
Illustration: Kathrin Albers
exclude the technology of 
3D-printing, which does not 
know any technical limita-
tions, such as the size of a 
tool or a modeling finger, but 
I am focusing one hundred 
percent on the puppet to be 
made by hand. Depending 
on the talents of the puppet 
maker, his/her own artistic 
style will have more or less of 
an influence on the design. 
You should change quickly 
into the three-dimensional 
world of clay or plasticine, 
in order to roughly test the 
favorite designs. It is not un-
common for a snazzy 2D-de-
sign to turn out boring in 
animation, it can simply be placed on a block 
that sits below the field of view, and is thus 
invisible. Moving the block up and down to 
simulate walking is much easier and faster as 
well.
Chapter 2.3

261
three 
dimensions. 
These 
three-dimensional 
"sketch-
es" are a much quicker way 
to the final design. The tools 
used for modeling should be 
adapted to the final style of 
the puppet. If, for example, 
you are aiming for a coarse 
plasticine look, you should 
not 
use 
small 
modeling 
wood sticks because such 
fine details will not survive, 
but will be pushed out of 
place during the animation 
process. Inversely, fine tools 
for previsualization of details 
should be used, if the puppet 
later gets sewn clothing. It is 
also helpful to procure fabrics 
Design process of a stop motion puppet. 
The first sketches are kept relatively simple, the plasticine version gives a much 
more accurate impression of the final design. The picture in the middle shows 
the armature with finished legs and a hard core made of rigid foam. The upper 
body was cut from soft foam and covered with fabric. The role for this puppet 
was limited to exclusive standing with little movement in the upper body. 
Design/illustration: Kathrin Albers
and other craft materials early 
on in the process in order to 
see what is actually available, 
so that you do not get used 
to the thought of something 
that does not exist in real 
life and for which you have 
to look for alternatives later. 
You can use all kinds of tools, 
cutlery, pottery accessories 
or discarded dentist tools for 
modeling, which you can of-
ten buy at flea markets. 
Modeling wood sticks can 
also be cut and filed down 
according to your own needs. 
For fabrics and other materi-
als, the scale of the puppet 
world should be considered. 
The checks in a shirt fabric will 
be magnified accordingly on 
a puppet, the same applies to 
stitches of a knit sweater, the 
wool for hair, buttons, buckles 
or the wood grain for furni-
ture. If this "size-reducing" ef-
fect is not desired, you should 
look for appropriate materials 
and patterns true to scale. 
Stop Motion

262
Design Planning
One special aspect is, of 
course, the animability of the 
character. In puppet anima-
tion films, everything always 
looks very elastic, flexible, 
fluttering, or wobbling. In 
reality, all objects are made 
of stiffened yet bendable 
materials in order to get ev-
erything in its position and 
keep it there. This is a special 
challenge for puppet and 
prop-builders and requires 
a high level of knowledge 
from the fields of precision 
mechanics, plastics process-
ing, tailoring and carpentry. 
Specialists in Stop Motion
In stop motion productions, collaboration between designer 
and puppet maker must be very close to ensure practicabil-
ity, especially at the start of production. Sometimes you can 
find some rather unusual specialists working in puppet an-
imation studios, who are utilized for specific purposes. One 
example would be Althea Crome, who is a knitting specialist 
and who knitted the tiny finger gloves for the film "Coraline", 
among other things.
Any novice who does not 
have an exceptional pen-
chant for such techniques 
should use materials that do 
not require too much special 
knowledge, as this can only 
lead to unnecessary frus-
tration. Multi-part shapes 
for silicone puppets should 
not be considered as a first 
project, rather, puppets with 
fabric dresses and a foam fill-
ing (foam like the one from a 
mattress) or made from good 
old plasticine. 
You have defined in the sto-
ryboard what your character 
should do in the movie. Ask 
yourself when constructing 
the puppet, how it should 
best be built, so that you can 
implement all the scenes as 
planned. The purpose here 
is to find the most effective 
construction possible. 
Example
  A puppet does not need 
to be finished on the back, 
if it will never be seen 
from behind. 
  Is the puppet walking 
around a lot or is it just 
sitting down? In that case, 
it does not make sense to 
build a standing puppet, 
which then must be bent 
into a sitting pose. Build it 
in a sitting position right 
away and you will have 
more design options.
  Are you planning a long 
shot, in which the charac-
ter is seen tiny in the set, 
and close-ups of the pup-
pet's face? Then it is easier 
to build two puppets: a 
very small one, matching 
the large set of the long 
shot, and another one 
that is both suitable for 
whole-body and close-up 
shots. The small puppet 
does not need any de-
tails like the big one, but 
it should resemble her in 
stature, color, etc.
Suspension of a stop motion 
puppet on a rig. Illustration: 
Kathrin Albers
Chapter 2.3

263
Armature Design
If you do not have an armature made of 
ball-and-socket joints - which is usually the 
case with beginners - you can build a simpli-
fied version made of wire. 
All you need is aluminum wire. It is light and 
has great bending properties. It is available 
in different sizes at craft supply stores or at 
merchants for bonsai trees (usually less ex-
pensive on the Internet). In addition, you 
will need wood pieces in the size of the 
trunk and hips of your puppet, or alterna-
tively two-component plasticine. With the 
two-component adhesive you affix the 
wire to the solid parts of the body. Do not 
use any other adhesive, because the fusion 
between wire and wooden parts must be as 
stable as possible.
For drilling holes in wooden parts, you need 
a small handheld or bench drill, and suitable 
pliers for bending, cutting and twisting the 
wire.
To keep the plasticine from sliding off the 
smooth wire later, it is advisable to wrap 
certain places with one layer of skin-colored 
textile adhesive tape (such as adhesive ban-
dage). This tape sticks very well and allows 
you to push the plasticine tightly into the 
fabric and keep it in place.
Interior Workings
The rigging for a 3D animator is equivalent to 
the "armature", the skeleton for the puppet 
animation filmmaker. 
There are various versions made of ball-and-
socket joints, or more simple ones made of 
wire and wood. Both have their advantages 
and disadvantages: While ball-and-socket 
joints have good bending properties, wire 
armatures can usually perform more extreme 
movements. It is important that the armature 
is constructed as stable as possible. Howev-
er, you must also realize: No armature will 
last forever, it will weaken somewhere in the 
course of the animation process, and then 
possibly break; the question is only when and 
how to to figure out the right time to repair it.
Top left: Armature with ball-and-socket joints and 
metal arms. The hands have a clamping device, 
into which thin wires for individual fingers can be 
clamped.
Top right: Simple wire armature with wooden 
blocks and twisted wires. The arms are made of five 
thin twisted wires, which, bent apart at the lower 
end, produce a hand. 
Below: The palm of the hand on the left is made 
of two-component plasticine, which cures very 
quickly.
 The hand on the right is wrapped with adhesive 
bandage, which makes the plasticine cling better. 
Design: Kathrin Albers
Stop Motion

264
Head and Feet
The feet need to be able to 
be anchored to the floor. If 
the puppet stays in one spot 
and does not move away, 
you can simply glue it down. 
If it walks back and forth, 
however, the feet must be 
able to be screwed to the 
floor. You can also use mag-
nets that hold the feet down 
through the floor of the 
stage. For the first option you 
need a floor through which 
you can drill holes - prefera-
bly wood; for option two, you 
need a floor thin enough to 
transmit magnetism. 
Option one requires feet with 
a small thread into which a 
screw can be screwed from 
below. For option two you 
need small iron pieces as 
"soles" that are responsive to 
the magnet. 
For the head, you will need to 
consider whether your char-
acter is going to speak. If so, 
see page 272 for details on 
this technique. Even without 
speech, the character is likely 
to get eyes and different fa-
cial expressions.
In order to let a character 
look back and forth, it is eas-
iest to integrate the eyeballs 
into the head, and then place 
the pupils and eyelids on 
top later. Even for a purely 
plasticine figure, the eye-
balls should consist of a solid 
wooden or "Fimo" pearl - by 
no means of plasticine, since 
the small balls would de-
form due to frequent touch-
ing. This for one, would look 
quite unattractive during the 
movement later, and it would 
also make correcting the 
form during the animation 
very annoying and time-con-
suming.
Since the head is subject 
to frequent back and forth 
bending, it should be an-
chored firmly onto the neck 
and have a solid core. In case 
of a plasticine head the core 
must extend to just below 
the surface. If it does not, you 
again run the risk of crushing 
the shape during animation. 
aluminum wire
Plasticine
Hard core (wood or 
rigid foam)
Illustrations: Kathrin Albers
Chapter 2.3

265
Replacement Animation
Replacements are a great 
opportunity for circumvent-
ing the latent solidness and 
flexibility constraints that are 
inherent in a puppet. Instead 
of bending or modeling the 
character into a desired po-
sition, it is sometimes more 
effective and, above all, more 
expressive to build this new 
pose as a new figure and re-
place the previous one with 
the new one. It may sound 
like an exaggerated effort 
to build a whole new pup-
pet for just one single frame 
of the animation. While this 
is true, it is still very useful 
when it comes to repetitive 
frames, for example, walk 
cycles, which simply look 
more interesting and lend 
more expressiveness to the 
animation. In addition, the 
3D Printing
The modern form of replacement technolo-
gy is 3D printing, which is now used in every 
major studio. The abundance of which can 
be seen in the feature films of Laika Studios, 
where mass scenes are produced with one 
and the same character printed hundreds 
of times (see e.g. circus scene with mice in 
"Coraline"), or where walk cycles are print-
ed for one single character in order to get 
a more expressive animation on one hand, 
but also to create a design that could not 
have been implemented otherwise on this 
small scale (e.g. the black cat in "Coraline").
However, this technique takes facial anima-
tion to extreme levels. Thanks to this pro-
cess, a main character in "The Boxtrolls" or 
"ParaNorman" can have up to a whopping 
1.4 million facial expressions. This enor-
mous sum is calculated from the many 
combinations that result from dividing the 
face into multiple areas.
Materials
Where will a puppet be handled most 
during animation and how vigorously will 
it be handled? Especially with a plasticine 
puppet it pays to cheat, and not really build 
everything with plasticine. A modeling 
compound that can be cured in the oven 
is great to combine the appearance of plas-
ticine with stability. In the end, you cannot 
tell which parts are solid and which are soft.
popular squash and stretch 
can not be implemented 
with one single puppet. In 
larger productions, especial-
ly for series, replacements 
are also used for reasons of 
efficiency and saving time. 
In this way, part of the ani-
mation is moved, as it were, 
into the process of puppet 
making. This happens inevi-
tably in dialogue animation, 
where a set of mouth piec-
es is built earlier and then 
placed on the puppet's face 
in sync with the recorded 
text. The same principle can 
be applied to the entire head 
or body.
The master and inventor of 
this technique was without 
doubt George Pal, who at-
tracted worldwide attention 
in the 40s and 50s with his 
"Puppetoons". It is worth-
while to study these films.
Replacements in plasticine 
can be done just as well and 
even easier. The series "Pur-
ple and Brown" is a classic 
example.
Stop Motion

266
A puppet animation film is not much differ-
ent than a live-action film, when it comes to 
camera and lighting set-up  - it is only on a 
smaller scale. This is why, at the beginning of 
the set-up and during the production design 
stage of the animation, it is important to look 
for references from films showing perspec-
tives, lighting moods and compositions that 
could fit into your own production.   
A number of digital DSLR cameras are being 
used now, especially the Canon EOS-series 
and Nikon cameras. All these cameras work 
very well with current stop-motion software 
such as "Dragonframe" or "Stop Motion Pro". 
They are not just for animators, but are ideal 
for camera work as well. You can use them to 
stipulate aperture, exposure and many pre-
sets, thus setting up the entire scene.
When comparing it with a live-action set, it 
is important to understand that the camera 
in the puppet scale would be about the size 
of a dining table, which is therefore much 
larger than it would be in real life. This can 
inadvertently lead to opting for top view per-
spectives, which in turn makes the characters 
appear smaller and more "doll-like", thus cre-
ating a kind of human distance. There is noth-
ing wrong with this, but the appearance of a 
character is often more convincing when you 
are "at eye level", or even below. The viewer 
becomes part of this world and does not re-
main an outside observer.
Different focal lengths also have the effect of 
making things appear smaller or larger. The 
wider the angle of the lens, the more you get 
into the picture. Beyond a certain size, the 
image becomes "bug-eyed", which may not 
be to everyone's taste. Nevertheless, focal 
lengths are somewhat different, somewhat 
4) Camera and Lighting
less extreme, on smaller scales. I recommend 
experimenting a bit. 
In lighting, a puppet is treated in the same 
way as an actor in live-action film, where 
there is a key light that defines the main 
lighting situation of the set, and a so-called 
backlight. This light is used only to make this 
figure stand out from the background, high-
lighting its silhouette.
For an average general light that does not cast 
strong shadows or create a certain mood, but 
one that provides a very soft and subtle light-
ing of the set, the use of so-called soft boxes 
is recommended. If you do not have access to 
a professional one, you can build one your-
self. However, you should know beforehand 
the size of the area which is to be illuminated. 
Sometimes it is sufficient to throw a spotlight 
onto a white ceiling or wall and to use only 
the reflection for this purpose. This kind of 
indirect light is often used to fill in shadows, 
when one side of the character is not suffi-
ciently illuminated. White cardboard is then 
positioned to reflect light on this dark side, 
brightening it in a subtle way.
For atmospheric enhancement of a particu-
lar mood you can also use light projections, 
such as projecting the outline of a window, 
through which moonlight shines, onto a wall. 
Or reflections of sunlight falling through trees 
onto the set.
Such effects are extremely helpful and rel-
atively easy to build with metal foil stencils, 
through which a strong light shines. Some 
lamp manufacturers offer projection props 
which are placed directly in front of the lamp 
so that the sharpness of the outline can be 
adjusted with the help of adjustable lamps.
Chapter 2.3

267
In addition, there are lighting gel filters in dif-
ferent colors which are clipped in front of the 
lamps and can provide a strong color mood. 
As with all visual media, the same color theo-
ries also apply here (color contrasts and color 
moods) that help to create the appropriate 
atmosphere through the use of colored light.
In lighting, the use of very long and consis-
tently illuminating lamps is most important. 
The inconsistency of a light might not be 
visible with the naked eye, but a faulty lamp 
would create a strong flicker over an entire 
day of 8 or more hours, due to the few sec-
onds created in the animation during that 
time. If a lamp does not provide constant 
light, it can be due to its quality or (lack of) 
consistent electricity in the respective shoot-
ing space. If you want to check out the quality 
of your lighting beforehand, you can do a test 
by simulating a shooting situation and taking 
pictures of the set lit with the lamp for two or 
three hours.  After that, you can assess more 
safely whether the lamp is suitable or not.
The more advanced among you may be 
thinking about camera movements. This is 
basically a great idea, but it complicates the 
film shoot significantly, since it requires much 
more accurate planning. Technically speak-
ing, you need a so-called motion control unit 
or something more simple, a camera tripod, 
which is moved step-by-step by cranking. 
This is a very tedious process and requires a 
lot of discipline during animation. 
When working with a motion control crane, 
a software is used to program the camera 
movement, which then follows the move-
ment frame-by-frame during the actual film 
shoot. The real highlight of this technique 
is in its use with live-action film shoots. Be-
cause programmed camera movements can 
be repeated indefinitely, many effects can be 
implemented that you normally could not do 
in a single take. Particularly in synchronizing 
multiple passes, where different scales, tech-
niques, and frame rates (frames per second) 
can be combined. Also, the coordinates of 
these camera movements can be imported 
into 3D software and then mixed with digital 
worlds or creatures. The use of this technol-
ogy is incredibly diverse, and stop motion is 
just one of many.
Recommended examples: the music vid-
eo "Come Into My World", by Kylie Minogue 
(Director: Michel Gondry), advertising for 
Ford "Zeitgeist" (directed by Noah Harris) or 
many of the opening sequences of stop-mo-
tion feature films like " The Nightmare Before 
Christmas "," Coraline ", or many major shots in 
feature stop motion movies of the last years.
Stop Motion

268
Set Building
It is very useful to bring the camera to the 
set as early as possible, so that size and scale 
of the stage can be planned properly. If there 
are different takes on the same set, it may be 
necessary to split it so that the camera and 
the animator can reach the respective place. 
You can even reach areas further in the back 
where the camera or animator's hands could 
normally not reach. After all, the animator 
needs sufficient arm maneuverability to work. 
This is particularly true with short focal lengths, 
since the camera then has to be placed closer 
to the character. All additional parapherna-
lia such as computers, small tools, notes and 
other support materials should be on a small 
table located as close as possible to the set. 
Long distances between the character and re-
cording computer, showing the live image, are 
extremely annoying and distracting. 
The stage on which the set is to be built, must 
be very sturdy. It is important to have a good 
wood construction that does not wobble and 
for which the board does not sag. You can also 
use a sturdy desk, but it should be possible to 
paint it, drill in holes, affix things with hot glue, 
Fill light 
(e.g., a piece of white 
cardboard) that slightly 
brighten the side of the 
puppet with shadows.
Backlight
makes the puppet stand out 
more from the background.
Soft box
which produces very 
soft light.
Key light
defines the main lighting.
Table with calcula-
tor and tools
which should be 
easily accessible 
during the film 
shoot.
Chapter 2.3

269
etc. You should pay attention to the correct 
height of the table, because you spend most 
of your time standing during animation, and 
working at a stage that is so low that you have 
to bend down, is very exhausting.
I cannot stress enough: Everything on a pup-
pet set must be fastened or completely glued 
down. You may not realize beforehand, how of-
ten you have to reach into the set.  You are also 
completely focused on the puppet and may not 
even notice that you accidentally bumped into 
a small prop. Therefore, this applies to every-
thing: fasten securely. Even objects that will be 
moved later by the puppet should be securely 
fastened until they are used. This also applies 
to lamps and the camera. Heavy sandbags can 
be placed on the base of tripods to prevent an 
inadvertently shifted lamp from creating major 
flickering of light. 
Basically the principle of animation with pup-
pets or objects does not differ from that of 
a traditional 2D animation. Here, too, there 
are 25 single frames per second, there are 
key frames, breakdowns and inbetweens. 
However, the production process and the re-
quirements for stop motion are significantly 
different. 
Just as there are no key frame animators or 
inbetweeners in puppet animation, there 
there are also no multiple animation passes, 
where arms or heads are animated separately 
at a later time or only focusing on an up-and-
down moving body for a walk cycle, then add-
ing the swinging arms, corresponding head 
movement and spacing etc. later. No, here 
everything has to happen at once, and it must 
happen frame-by-frame. This makes stop mo-
tion a very complex and "advanced" form of 
animation, as some animation experience is 
needed. Previous excursions into the world 
of 2D animation are highly recommended in 
order to have a grasp of the general principle 
of animation.
5) Animation
This is also why there are usually not several 
animators animating in one animation. On 
the contrary: It is worthwhile making sure that 
the puppets are "cast" with the same anima-
tors to maintain consistent and homogenous 
characteristics of the puppet throughout 
the entire film and not to develop a "schizo-
phrenic" character, which acts differently from 
scene to scene. Many animators, like all artists, 
have their own styles, special preferences and 
strengths, which should be taken into account 
when assigning specific animations. 
In a studio environment, the final stage of an-
imation is preceded by extensive testing, in 
which the animation director together with 
the animators focus on the style of the move-
ments. The director is the one who defines 
(together with the script writer in advance) 
the nature and personality of the various 
characters. Together with him, the animators, 
like actors before a film or theater produc-
tion, get time to become acquainted with 
their characters, testing them and internaliz-
ing the style. It is also about practical aspects, 
Stop Motion

270
If a character is to jump, for example, thus leaving the secure floor, you 
can not avoid having to attach it to a support, which will be visible in 
the image. Sometimes you may be able hide the support. In the second 
picture you can see a thick wire leading from the back of the character 
to the rear wall. Viewed from the front, this support would not be visible. 
Actually, you can frequently find a solution to hide these rigs, thus keep-
ing any retouching work to a minimum in the end.
Illustration: Kathrin Albers
such as the mobility of the skeleton and the 
nature of the materials. This step is particu-
larly important in order to avoid unpleasant 
surprises during the animation stage and to 
keep from exceeding the production dead-
line (and above all, the budget).
Before the final animation can be execut-
ed, precise preparations must be made. The 
scene has to be meticulously planned in all 
respects. For the animator this means - in ad-
dition to preparing the puppet with the nec-
essary support system - the planning of the 
animation by always making a rough dry run, 
called blocking. Here you animate the puppet 
in steps of 10 or 15 key frames through the 
scene, thereby determining the timing and 
other general aspects. In large projects, this is 
done at the beginning of the whole produc-
tion and incorporated together with the voice 
recordings as part in the animatic to get as ac-
curate an idea as possible of the film. 
Blocking is often preceded by a video shot 
of the animator himself, in which he acts 
out the movement in order to analyze 
timing and sequence of the movement. 
With today's popular stop motion soft-
ware (such as Dragon Frame), it is possi-
ble to import reference films and to place 
the blocked scene or video shot under 
the final animation, using it as a reference.  
I highly recommend that every animator ob-
serve dancers and mimes as a means for ana-
lyzing and studying movements. The control 
and precision that these artists exercise over 
their bodies is a great source of inspiration 
for every animator. The same applies to silent 
movies, of course. Actors of this genre had 
only their body and face to tell a story and to 
represent the character as clearly as possible 
with regard to personality and expression. 
Strictly speaking, an animator is not an actor, 
of course, since he does not give a direct per-
formance in front of the audience, but only 
the illusion of one. That is a big difference, 
both in terms of approach and an under-
standing of the two professions. Neverthe-
less, both art forms can strongly inspire each 
other.
No matter how perfect the preparation, with 
every beginning of a scene, the animator 
starts at zero - even with re-shoot - no scene 
will be just like the previous one. You have to 
be aware of this and approach it with a cer-
tain openness. In my opinion, however, it is 
precisely this little bit of uncertainty that also 
makes this form so unique and exciting. 
Chapter 2.3

271
Animation Process
A novice in puppet animation should not start 
with overly complicated movements. You can 
move simple objects through the image as a 
small warm-up exercise in order to get a feel 
for general timing. 
If you want to start with a puppet, then let the 
character stand or sit in one place in the be-
ginning, and concentrate on the characteristic 
expression, the acting. Make sure to anchor the 
puppet as firmly as possible to the floor in or-
der to avoid unwanted and unnoticed "sliding 
around". As already mentioned, this applies to 
all things on the set: Props, walls, furniture etc. 
- always attach everything well before getting 
started.
It is easy for the animator to lose track of a 
movement, if he is focused too much on de-
tails. A good trick in taking a step back and 
reviewing the general timing of a movement 
is to look at the scene with slightly squinted 
eyes. The blurred view of the puppet filters out 
virtually all the small details and allows for a 
more simplified analysis of the movement per-
formed.
Production process in stop 
motion. Of course, the process is 
similar for all types of animation 
films. In the case of stop motion, 
however, the individual steps are 
much more closely related to one 
another and are interdependent. 
You can clearly see a parallel to 
live-action film.
Illustrations: Kathrin Albers
Stop Motion

272
Giving the puppet a voice and speaking abil-
ity in the film is an essential character en-
hancement and clearly opens up other pos-
sibilities in the story as well as the animation. 
However, it not only makes puppet building 
more complicated, but also forces a certain 
timing on the animation through the previ-
ously recorded text. It is recommended that 
you meet with the selected actor in advance 
to discuss with him the character and its per-
sonality. Actors often have good ideas that 
can lend different nuances to the character, 
many of which you would not think of your-
6) Speech and Lip Syncing in Stop Motion
self when masterminding the story or devel-
oping the character. In addition, the anima-
tion can already develop naturally during the 
recording since the intonation and acting 
of the speaker determine specific gestures 
or movements. But it is important that the 
speaker understands that everything he says 
is animated later and that the physical acting 
is added later. This is why every animator is 
certainly grateful for clear intonation and 
somewhat exaggerated acting. Often the 
exaggeration in the voice recording seems 
much less extreme afterwards in the film.
Different ways to build replace-
ment mouth pieces. In this 
character, the head was split. The 
dividing line runs below the nose 
and is covered by the mustache. 
This type of design requires a mas-
ter mold to serve as the basis for 
all mouth pieces. I used the most 
open-mouthed one to build all the 
others. The difficult aspect of this 
design is to get all parts to fit as 
precisely as possible. When casting 
the head parts, a pin guide has to 
be placed from the outside into the 
silicone mold which will reflect the 
position on the body later, making 
sure the head always remains in 
the same place.  
The material of the mouths is 
dental plaster.
Design: Kathrin Albers
Chapter 2.3

273
For a synchronous animation of body and 
mouth, the voice is recorded prior to filming 
and later imported into the animation soft-
ware, so that the various mouth frames can 
be adapted to the voice recording, matching 
its timeline. Experienced animators are able 
to do this during animation. However, you 
must be very familiar with the expressiveness 
of the various mouth frames and their related 
facial expressions.
The number of mouth frames is a matter of 
style and can be achieved through the de-
sign. In general, my experience is that much 
less is needed than initially assumed. For a 
synchronous perception, it is important that 
key frames, such as "i", "o", "a", "m" match per-
fectly. Depending on the speed and expres-
siveness of the recording, you have to build 
elegant in-betweens that bridge the keys. It 
helps to observe yourself in the mirror while 
speaking and to analyze exactly how the 
mouth moves when speaking at different 
speeds. 
A tip for the design: If you have the chance 
to make voice recordings prior to developing 
the final design, you can adopt the distinct di-
alogue, such as a dialect, into the appearance 
of the mouth pieces, and in doing so, develop 
a more convincing personality. 
An easier method are mouths 
that are simply placed on top of 
the face. 
In this character you can see clear-
ly that the lips were placed on 
the face. For this, I had previously 
bent wires so that they approx-
imately define the shape of the 
lips. The two ends were bent at 
right angles like small pins, which 
were then inserted into matching 
holes in the head. In order to build 
them as tightly as possible, I made 
a cast of the lower part of the 
face, and modeled the lips on top 
by using oven baked clay.
Design: Kathrin Albers
The final head is this one.
Design: Kathrin Albers
If building the molds is too complicated, and superimposed mouths are not 
to be used either, then interchangeable mouths can be produced just as well 
from plasticine. The transitional spaces between the head and the mouth 
part can be filled by simply using the same color plasticine.
Illustrations: Kathrin Albers
Stop Motion

274
Thanks to digital image post-production, you 
can use tools during animation that can be 
removed later by retouching. The most com-
mon ones are rigs. This is a support system 
to which the wires or articulated arms are at-
tached that hold the puppet. They may also 
be small spacers which are placed under the 
feet during walk cycles, or retainers for ob-
jects flying through the scene. These rigs usu-
ally cannot be hidden and must be removed 
later by retouching. 
For this purpose, a single frame of the set has 
to be shot without the rig and without the 
puppet in it right at the beginning (and for 
good measure, also after the animation). This 
so-called clean plate is placed behind the an-
imated frame in post-production using a soft-
ware such as After Effects or Nuke and fills in 
the gaps created by retouching.
The same principle can be used in compos-
iting, where for example, portions of the set 
had to be shot separately and are then put 
together with the filmed animation pass. A 
missing wall, ceiling or piece of furniture is put 
into the set and photographed immediately 
following the film shoot.
This is a particularly good way to add special 
effects to an animation. For example, you can 
shoot the smoke of a cigarette on an "extra 
pass", preferably under the same lighting con-
ditions and directly in the final set, and later 
composite it into the animation.
In general, the options in post-production 
(short: post) are far reaching, but nevertheless 
my advice, and also the advice of all post-pro-
duction people, is to shoot as much as pos-
sible "in camera", i.e. in one take in order to 
ensure uniformity and to avoid extra work. 
The person who will do this work later must 
be involved in the planning of the scenes on 
7) Post-production
the set, in order to estimate the camera set-up 
and the film shoot with regard to post-pro-
duction. 
This is also true of the typical post work task, 
for which everyone is grateful: all the mis-
haps that take place during the shoot, such 
as dirt spots, torn places on the puppet or a 
small piece of plasticine or tools left acciden-
tally in the image. In this regard, you have to 
train yourself to be very disciplined, because 
any forgetfulness generates more work in 
post-production. Therefore, depending on 
the proportion and weight of the "severity 
of the accident", you should possibly favor a 
retake to post work.
Even if the post can handle a lot, the out-
dated phrase "fix it in the post" is clearly the 
wrong approach. After all, the post is not just 
for correcting some planning errors or minor 
sloppiness of a shoot, but for expanding the 
overall creative possibilities. 
Reducing its broad capabilities to the mere 
function of rescuer for poorly planned and 
executed film shoots is the wrong approach. 
On the contrary, its deliberate and purpose-
ful application enriches film projects in a cre-
ative way, making many things even possible 
in the first place. 
Chapter 2.3

275
Get a stop motion software of your choice. You can buy it on the Internet or 
use the free scaled-down trial version. In addition, you need a camera that is 
supported by it. You can find out what these are on their website.
1) First warm-up exercise: 
Take small objects (dice, marbles, etc.) and move them through the frame at 
different speeds. Play with spacing and timing by imagining certain actions. 
For example:
  A marble comes speeding into the frame and bounces against an imagi-
nary wall.
  A dice skids into the frame and slowly comes to a halt.
Always have an idea of how heavy your object is, and animate accordingly.
2) Select a brief clip from a silent movie or make a video recording of your-
self. Use a very simple movement. This can be simply clapping your hands or 
scratching your head, leave off any running or walking for now. Now analyze 
the timing and transfer it to your puppet. 
3) Develop and build a character design for a stop motion puppet. For this, 
it is helpful to write up a design idea in simple, striking phrases. For example:
"My characters are roughly modeled, expressive plasticine figures that do not 
obscure the material. With many fingerprints on it, giving the animation a lively, 
casual, deliberately unfinished look."
or
"The design follows a 50's advertising mascot to simulate its look with smooth, 
plastic-like surfaces."
or
"I want a found footage character consisting of cables, cutlery and buttons. I will 
not use elastic or manipulable materials."
or
"I will only use cotton and cardboard." 
or...
Assignment:
Stop Motion

276
Guest author: Melanie Beisswenger
In less than 40 years, 3D computer animation 
has evolved from a gimmick of early comput-
er pioneers to a stand-alone creative medium 
that has spread not only across our entertain-
ment industry, but is also used in industries 
such as automotive, medicine, architecture, 
and many more.
The dominant and generally most visible 
application of 3D animation is in the field of 
entertainment: from animated feature films, 
commercials,  film and TV productions with 
digital characters and visual effects (VFX) all 
the way to games for computers, consoles 
and mobile devices, augmented and virtual 
reality (AR/VR). 
Since the first rudimentary computer-gen-
erated 3D wireframe animations in the late 
1970s in the films "Futureworld" (1976) and 
"Star Wars" (1977), the artists and technicians 
of computer animation have provided us with 
fantastic imagery, such as Cyborg in "Termi-
nator 2" (1993), the photo-realistic dinosaurs 
in "Jurassic Park" (1993) and the talking toy 
heroes Woody and Buzz Lightyear in the first 
fully computer animated movie "Toy Story" 
(1995) by Pixar Studios. No doubt, the rapid 
development of 3D computer animation is 
closely linked to the equally rapid technolog-
ical development of hardware and software. 
Computing performance, data transfers, stor-
age capacities and software have been - and 
still are - challenged and brought to the brink 
of their performance by the increasingly com-
plex visual aspirations of computer graphics 
experts. Milestones in photo-realism were 
reached in films like "Final Fantasy" (1991), 
the digital character Gollum in "The Lord of 
the Rings - The Two Towers" (2002) and the 
aging of Brad Pitt in "The Curious Case of Ben-
Insight into 3D Computer Animation
Image of the stylized 3D animated short film "The 
Saga of Biorn" (2010) by Frederik Valentin Bjerre-
Poulsen, Daniel Dion Christensen, Jonas Doctor, Jo-
nas Georgakakis, Jesper Aagaard Jensen, Benjamin 
Juel Kousholt, Mads Lundgård, Steffen 
Lyhne, Pernille Ørum-Nielsen; The Animation Work-
shop, Denmark.
New visual design possibilities have opened up: from styl-
ized cartoons to photo-realistic creatures and worlds, all the 
way to interactive games and immersive VR - everything is 
possible now by means of 3D computer animation. 
Chapter 2.4

277
jamin Button" (2008). There are now no limits 
to the imagination, and computer graphics art-
ists are increasingly turning to non-photo-real-
istic rendering (NPR), which invoke the visual 
worlds of traditional arts and 2D animation.
Detailed characters and worlds are created for the open-source 3D short film "Big Buck Bunny" 
(2008); Blender Foundation | www.blender.org 
3D animation in a 2D look - toon shading makes it 
possible. Poster for the film "Space Stallions" (2012) by 
Arna Rut Diego, Ágúst Freyr Kristinsson, Esben Jespersen, 
Jonatan Bruch, Polina Bokhan, Thorvaldur Gunnarsson, 
Touraj Khosravi; The Animation Workshop, Denmark.
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

278
Soft shapes and pastel colors in the 3D graduation film "Drawing 
Memories" (2010) by Jerly Chang, Thom Chang, Yeo Bixia, Dionisuis 
Kartalaksana; School of Art, Design and Media, Nanyang Technological 
University, Singapore.
Strong lines and structures in 
the 3D animation film "The 
Backwater Gospel" (2011) by 
Bo Mathorne, Arthur Gil Lars-
en, Mads Simonsen, Thomas 
Grønlund, Rie Nymand, Esben 
Sloth, Martin Holm-Grevy, Tue 
Toft Sørensen; The Animation 
Workshop, Denmark.
Chapter 2.4
3D animation is basically a continuation of 2D 
animation with other (technological) tools: 
the computer and pertinent animation soft-
ware. The artistic fundamentals and design 
techniques are mostly the same as with tradi-
tional 2D animation, but 3D animation differs 
in working methods and production stages 
as well as the technical implementation on 
the computer. 
Differences Between 2D and 3D Animation 
As we have learned in the previous chapters, 
2D animation is created primarily by drawing 
12 frames (on twos) or 24 frames (on ones) per 
second. The following steps are clean-up and 
coloring. 
In puppet animation or stop motion, a mod-
el is first created, painted and dressed, then 
positioned in a scene relative to the camera, 
illuminated and photographed. A process 
similar to puppet animation takes place with 
3D animation: A three-dimensional model of 
a character or object and a scene is created 
on the computer. These models are given col-
ors and textures, are animated, illuminated 
by virtual lights and finally photographed by 
a virtual camera. The big difference to tradi-
tional 2D animation is that the object does 
not need to be redrawn for each frame, but 
once created, can be viewed and presented 
from all sides. This is, of course, only a very 
simplified explanation of the development 
process of a 3D animation. We will look at the 
production steps in more detail below.

279
3D, CG, CGI - so, which one?
All these terms are used for computer ani-
mation, but what exactly do they mean?
  3D refers to three-dimensional repre-
sentation on the computer. Similar to 
the stop motion technique or puppet 
animation, it is easy to depict the volume 
of a body and the perspective of a scene 
using animation software. 
 
 However, this is all on the computer and 
of course, only virtual.
  CG is an abbreviation for "computer gen-
erated". 
  CGI stands for "computer generated im-
agery". The term CGI is often used as a 
generic term for digital effects in film and 
entertainment.
  Stereoscopic film presentations in mov-
ie theaters are often referred to as "3D". 
This has nothing to do with animation; 
it is the description of the type of projec-
tion on the big screen, i.e. 2D (without 
glasses) or 3D (with glasses and depth 
experience).
Character pose from the short film "Load" (2011) by 
David Rene Christensen, Lasse Smith, Jeppe Broo 
Døcker, Mark Kjærgaard, Kristoffer W. Mikkelsen, Blake 
Overgaard and Malte Burup; The Animation Workshop, 
Denmark.
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

280
Storyboard panels for "Big Buck Bunny" (2008); 
Blender Foundation | www.blender.org 
Chapter 2.4
This section is intended to provide an intro-
duction to the work techniques and process-
es involved in creating 3D animation. Due to 
the complexity of the subject, however, it is 
only possible for this purpose to provide an 
overview of the various work areas. In order 
to be able to transfer the acquired knowl-
edge, work techniques are explained in their 
basic software principles, without taking into 
account specific software functions. 
All of the work steps and their sequence are 
called production pipeline; it becomes all 
the more important as more animators work 
together on one project, such as a short film, 
a movie or a game. The individual tasks are 
often in very specialized areas, which makes 
precise planning and the knowledge of how 
individual work steps are mutually interde-
pendent and intertwined, even more import-
ant.  
Production Work Stages in 3D Animation 
In keeping with the focus of this book in the 
development process of a short film, we will 
also orient ourselves on the creative and 
technical sequence for this format with re-
gard to 3D animation.
Idea, Story and Design - Pre-production
Ideas, stories and concepts are developed for 
3D animation according to the same criteria 
and design steps as for 2D animation - in the 
early stages, the kind of technical implemen-
tation, i.e. whether 2D, 3D or stop motion 
animation, does not play a very important 
role yet. At the beginning of the design stage, 
however, it is sensible to think about the op-
tions of work techniques, since the design of 
the characters, sets and props can be opti-
mized to the animation technique. Essential 
criteria when choosing a type of animation 
are often the familiarity with the medium of 
those involved, or questions about feasibility 
and possibilities within a technique: While a 
photo-realistic creature in a live-action film 
would not be implemented convincingly as 
a 2D animation or stop motion, this could be 
achieved with 3D animation - thus making 
this technique the ideal choice.
Before starting to work in the 3D software, 
one should have a precise idea about what 
wants to be achieved artistically. The Pre-pro-
duction stage includes collecting reference 
images, creating design work such as sketch-
es, drawings, sculptures, and color studies, as 
well as work on the storytelling in the form of 
storyboards and an animatic. 

281
Character design sketches for the short film "Rob 'n Ron" (2013) 
by Magnus Igland Møller and Peter Smith; Tumblehead Anima-
tion Studio, Denmark.
Color script for the graduation film "Burger Burger" 
(2010) by Gavin Tan and Shicong Huang; School 
of Art, Design and Media, Nanyang Technological 
University, Singapore.
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

282
Color script by Goh Hui Ying for the short film 
"The Narcoleptic Boy" (2010) by Jessica Kesuma 
Winata, Nguyen Hieu Hanh, Pan Hui Ting, Hans 
Christian Sulistio, Stefani Irwan, School of Art, 
Design and Media, Nanyang Technological 
University, Singapore. 
Chapter 2.4

283
Perfect round NURBS (inside colored) compared to the square polygons (outside gray) 
using the example of the SIGGRAPH Asia 2009 mascot model by Yuko Oda, Brian Cannady, 
Leo Hourvitz (2009).
Hard-surface prop-models for "The Narcoleptic Boy" 
(2010) by Jessica Kesuma Winata, Nguyen Hieu 
Hanh, Pan Hui Ting, Hans Christian Sulistio, Stefani 
Irwan, School of Art, Design and Media, Nanyang 
Technological University, Singapore. 
Organic forms of the two characters in the anima-
tion film "Burger Burger" (2010) by Shicong Huang 
and Gavin Tan; School of Art, Design and Media, 
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Modeling
3D modeling is one of the 
most fundamental tasks in 3D 
animation and the first step in 
the production pipeline, no 
matter what target medium, 
whether for film, advertising 
or games.
Virtual characters, landscapes, 
scenes and props are created 
on the computer, similar to 
modeling with clay. For this, 
three different types of geom-
etry are used: polygons, sub-
division surfaces and NURBS. 
NURBS are very suitable for 
organic forms, but are diffi-
cult to manipulate. Over the 
years, this has made them 
less popular in the film indus-
try and you actually cannot 
find them at all in the game 
industry. Today, NURBS are 
mainly used in virtual pro-
totyping and product devel-
opment in automotive and 
industrial design.
Polygons are the simplest 
and most commonly used 
type of geometry. The mesh 
consists of vertices (corner 
points), edges, and polygons. 
Subdivision surfaces usual-
ly have a polygon object as 
their basis. They have the 
advantage that very efficient 
partial details may be added, 
without driving up the over-
all polygon count and thus 
the render times too much.  
This makes them ideal for 
smooth and organic surfaces.
In modeling of objects, a 
distinction is often made be-
tween hard surface and or-
ganic forms. 
Hard surface objects are 
defined primarily by hard 
edges and corners, such as 
machines, robots, mechani-
cal objects and cars. Organic 
objects have soft curves and 
gentler forms, such as land-
scapes, plants, and above all 
characters, such as humans 
and animals.
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

284
3D model of sets with 
different color variations by Goh 
Hui Ying for the animation film 
"The Narcoleptic Boy" (2010) by 
Jessica Kesuma Winata, Nguyen 
Hieu Hanh, Pan Hui Ting, Hans 
Christian Sulistio, Stefani Irwan, 
School of Art, Design and Media, 
Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore. 
Textures for the 3D dog and 
finished shading: "The Narcoleptic 
Boy" (2010) by Jessica Kesuma 
Winata, Nguyen Hieu Hanh, Pan 
Hui Ting, Hans Christian Sulistio, 
Stefani Irwan, School of Art, Design 
and Media, Nanyang Technologi-
cal University, Singapore.   
Materials and Textures
In the next step, properties are applied to the 
model that describe the material and surface 
in greater detail, such as color, luminosity, 
reflective properties, transparency and oth-
er surface details. Various settings of these 
parameters allows us to perceive materials 
as plastic, glass or metal, for example. This 
process is called shading. In order to create 
more complexity and details into the surfac-
es, textures can be applied. These are images 
or procedural structures and patterns that are 
placed on the surface of the object. 
Photographs of material surfaces from the real 
world are used for textures in order to create 
a particularly high degree of realism, such as 
Chapter 2.4

285
3D animation in a 2D look for the 
short film "Umbrella" (2014) by 
Brandon Chua, Tan Yin, Khoo Siew 
May, Sharry Kwan; School of Art, 
Design and Media, Nanyang Tech-
nological University, Singapore. 
Diagram for generating the stylized look and white outlines in "Um-
brella" (2014) by Brandon Chua, Tan Yin, Khoo Siew May, Sharry Kwan; 
School of Art, Design and Media, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore. 
Development test for the look of "Where Do All the Lost Things Go" 
(2011): Color pass with outline strokes (left), ambient occlusion pass 
(center), final composite (right). Animation film by Hafizah Abdul 
Wahid, Joan Hsu Sze Yun, Kanan Abdul Kader Mohammad Ali, Bernard 
Su Guo Hao; School of Art, Design and Media, Nanyang Technological 
University, Singapore.
wood, marble, stone, fabric structures, pores, 
etc., but also photographs of hair and entire 
faces can be projected onto geometries.
For a non-realistic and artistic look of the 
surfaces, real or digital brushes and pencil 
strokes can be used as texture as well. 
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

286
The Agony of Choice - Which Software is 
Best for me?
The various software packages differ not 
only in performance, features and special-
ization, but also in price. Before deciding 
on a package, you should consider what 
you want to create, what complexity it 
requires, how much know-how you can 
contribute and how big the budget is for 
software. Most 3D animation software for 
animated features, VFX and TV are also 
available as trial versions or inexpensive or 
free student versions, which is a good way 
to try them out.
 
The Dream of a 1-Click-Does-Everything-Real-
ly-Great Software
Well, that would be nice! But I have to take this oppor-
tunity and point out that those who expect 3D anima-
tion software to rapidly implement their animation 
ideas "at the touch of a button", so to speak, will be 
bitterly disappointed. Because the computer and soft-
ware - no matter how professional and complex - are 
just tools that have to be used in the same laborious 
and time-consuming manner (similar to the "tradition-
al" animation techniques) in order to achieve the de-
sired artistic result. Compared to 2D animation, some 
work steps are eliminated, while others are added.
Autodesk Maya is the most popular and 
widely used professional animation soft-
ware for animation, VFX and TV produc-
tions. www.autodesk.com
Autodesk 3ds Max is also used by many 
studios for film and TV productions and is 
widely used in the games industry. 
www.autodesk.com 
Autodesk Softimage is another 3D pro-
gram that is used for film and TV post-pro-
duction as well as game development. 
However, Autodesk discontinued the de-
velopment of new versions in 2014. www.
softimage.com
Cinema 4D is a 3D graphics program, 
mainly used in advertising and motion 
graphics. 
www.maxon.net/en/
ZBrush is a specialized digital modeling 
and painting program that allows you to 
intuitively create sculptures and models 
similar to clay or plasticine in virtual space. 
www.pixologic.com
Houdini is a procedural, node-based soft-
ware, which is mainly used for high-end 
visual effects and simulations. www.sidefx.
com
Blender is an open source (and free!) 3D 
program that contains all the functions 
for creating 3D animations. Extras include 
built-in video editing as well as a game 
engine. 
Modo is another graphics program that 
mainly specializes in modeling and paint-
ing. 
www.thefoundry.co.uk/products/modo
Insect character from the short 
film "Load" (2011) by David Rene 
Christensen, Lasse Smith, Jeppe 
Broo Døcker, Mark Kjærgaard, 
Kristoffer W. Mikkelsen, Blake 
Overgaard and Malte Burup; The 
Animation Workshop, Denmark.
Chapter 2.4

287
Stylized look for the 3D character in "The Backwater 
Gospel" (2011) by Bo Mathorne, Arthur Gil Larsen, 
Mads Simonsen, Thomas Grønlund, Rie Nymand, 
Esben Sloth, Martin Holm-Grevy, Tue Toft Sørensen; 
The Animation Workshop, Denmark.
Image from the short film "Hooked" (2010) by Yi Zhi Ang, Ying Herng Chia, 
Hazel Phyu Hnin Kyi and Jerome Siew Zhi Zhong; School of Art, Design and 
Media, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

288
 Layout and Cameras
In the layout process, the previously creat-
ed storyboards are transferred to the third 
dimension and a virtual camera is placed in 
the scene. 3D animation makes it possible 
to animate every conceivable movement of 
the camera, but it is advisable to use virtual 
tracking shots conservatively, more along our 
sense of viewing habits and aesthetics devel-
oped from live-action film. Excessively wild 
tracking shots can otherwise appear confus-
ing, while very precisely planned cinematog-
raphy can advance the narrative of the story. 
Studying the cinematography of live-action 
films is very good preparation for the virtual 
camera work. 
Not only are image composition, camera po-
sition and animation defined in the layout, 
but rough movement of the characters with-
in the scene are developed as well. Individual 
scenes are combined into sequences, thus 
forming the first more complex three-dimen-
sional visualization of the film. 
The 3D layout is an effective means to refine 
storytelling and check for continuity. 
The layout process, which is an important 
step in the development of animated films, 
is also increasingly called previsualization 
- in short: previz - to plan VFX or action se-
quences or to prepare the shoot of complete 
live-action films.
Screenshot of the 3D layout for "Drawing Memories" (2010) by Yeo Bixia, 
Jerly Chang, Thom Chang, Dionisuis Kartalaksana; School of Art, Design 
and Media, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Screenshot of layout with character poses for "The Saga of Biôrn" (2010) 
by Frederik Valentin Bjerre-Poulsen, Daniel Dion Christensen, Jonas Doc-
tor, Jonas Georgakakis, Jesper Aagaard Jensen, Benjamin Juel Kousholt, 
Mads Lundgård, Steffen Lyhne, Pernille Ørum-Nielsen; The Animation 
Workshop, Denmark.
Image composition for the short film "The Saga of 
Biôrn" (2010) by Frederik Valentin Bjerre-Poulsen, 
Daniel Dion Christensen, Jonas Doctor, Jonas Georga-
kakis, Jesper Aagaard Jensen, Benjamin Juel Kousholt, 
Mads Lundgård, Steffen Lyhne, Pernille Ørum-Nielsen ; 
The Animation Workshop, Denmark.
Chapter 2.4

289
Character Rigging
Rigging creates bones, joints, and animation 
control objects in and around the objects and 
characters to be animated. The complexity of 
the rig depends on the character's mobility 
requirements within the scenes to be animat-
ed later. The scope ranges from a simple ball 
with only one animation control to characters 
and creatures with hundreds of them. 
The blueprint for rigs is usually inspired by 
nature: Similar to the anatomy of humans 
and animals, virtual skeletons are integrat-
ed into the digital models, linked to the ge-
ometry surface by means of skinning and 
equipped with the relevant control objects 
for the animation. Depending on the realism 
or desired complexity, muscle systems can 
be incorporated as well as hair and clothing 
simulations. Another important area of rig-
ging is equipping facial features with flexible 
articulation options for a wide range of facial 
expressions later.
Character rig with animation controls for Ron 
in the short film "Rob 'n Ron" (2013) by Magnus Ig-
land Møller and Peter Smith; Tumblehead Animation 
Studio, Denmark.
Character rigging is one of the most technical 
areas of 3D computer animation and script-
ing skills are very useful. Creating a well-func-
tioning and intuitive rig is an essential step 
in preparing for the animation and it is best 
done in close communication and coordina-
tion between the animators and riggers. 
Model, rig and animation control 
picker for Xemerius, the 3D 
character in the film
"Sapphire Blue". (2014); 
© Copyright mem-film, Lieblingsfilm, 
ARRI Film & TV, GFF, Tele München 
Gruppe.
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

290
Blend shapes for different 
movements of the facial muscles 
form the basis for the animation 
rig for the facial expressions of a 
character in the open-source short 
film "Sintel" (2010); 
© Copyright Blender Foundation | www.
sintel.org.
Character Animation 
While the animation process breathes life into 
the character, it is not just about the purely 
physical movement, but also about the act-
ing of the digital character. The animator has 
achieved his goal when the public perceives 
the character as thinking and feeling. The cre-
ative planning process in 3D animation is very 
similar to that of 2D animation, however, tools 
for 3D animation also differ considerably: Us-
ing the animation control objects, the 3D an-
imator brings the character in various frames 
into key poses and can then play back this first 
rough animation - almost in real time - in or-
der to rework and refine it in the next step.
Although the artistic principles of 3D ani-
mation are based on 2D animation, there 
are some clear differences between the two 
techniques:
  In 2D animation, the animator must be able 
to draw very well so that the character al-
ways looks the same and always maintains 
the same volume. Drawing talents, on the 
other hand, do not play an important role 
in 3D animation (similar to puppet anima-
tion); instead, the focus is placed on acting 
skills as well as a good understanding of 
movements.
  The advantage of 3D animation of hav-
ing a character with constant volume can 
also have a disadvantageous effect when 
extreme shape changes and even meta-
morphoses are desired. These are relatively 
difficult to implement in 3D, since special 
modelling and rigging is required.
  In 2D animation, only every second frame is 
drawn (i.e. on 2's) to work efficiently, where-
as in 3D animation, each frame is rendered 
(on 1's). This allows for smoother move-
ments and more details and corresponds 
to our viewing habits of live-action film. 
Although the computer interpolates be-
tween the poses defined by the animator, 
a  mechanically linear computer interpola-
tion is artistically unacceptable for natural 
movements, so that the animator must 
constantly "correct" the computer and de-
fine the movements of the character down 
to the smallest detail.
  Animations created in 3D can be changed 
constantly and can quickly be rendered in 
Chapter 2.4

291
preview quality. This allows for a very iter-
ative work process, from the rough to the 
details of the animation, without having to 
wait a long time for scan or line test pro-
cesses.
  When animating to music or dialogue, it 
can be played back in sync in 3D animation 
software. Therefore, X-sheets used in 2D 
animation are no longer needed.
  In 2D animation, details on the face are usu-
ally displayed in a very simplified manner. 
In 3D animation, however, a very high de-
gree of detail can be rendered in pixel pre-
cision. This also means that a very detailed 
and realistic animation of the facial expres-
sions as well as the lip sync can be created. 
In this case, realism refers to the credibility 
of facial expressions, whether in a photo-re-
alistic or stylized and cartoony character 
design.
The typical work process of character anima-
tion starts with the idea and planning through 
sketches, self-acting of the scene and record-
ing of video references. Afterwards, key poses 
for storytelling and description of movement 
are created in 3D software. In additional steps, 
more and more breakdown poses are inserted 
and other details are animated, including final 
secondary movements, such as hair and cloth-
ing (provided they are not simulated).
Images from an animation sequence of the 3D short film "Burger Burger" (2010) by Shicong Huang and Gavin Tan; 
School of Art, Design and Media, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Six key frame poses for the run cycle of the dog in "The Narcoleptic Boy" 
(2010) by Jessica Kesuma Winata, Nguyen Hieu Hanh, Pan Hui Ting, 
Hans Christian Sulistio, Stefani Irwan, School of Art, Design and Media, 
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. 
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

292
Lighting
Lighting draws attention to the action in the 
film and considerably influences mood and 
atmosphere. Similar to photography, live-ac-
tion film or puppet animation, the image 
is further modeled with light and the view-
er's gaze is purposefully directed within the 
scene. 
Virtual lights in 3D animation software are 
based on those in our environment, such 
as natural daylight from the sun and artifi-
cial light sources, such as lamps and lights. 
However, since the calculation of absolute-
ly realistic light effects is very complex and 
time-consuming - or is sometimes not de-
sired for artistic reasons - light parameters 
such as intensity, color, casting of shadows, 
bouncing light, reflections, and more are indi-
vidually adjusted lighting artist or TD (Techni-
cal Director). Since light interacts closely with 
the shading of the objects, color and surface 
properties are continually adapted through 
the lighting and compositing stage. 
When creating textures for interactive games 
with real-time rendering, but without inte-
grated lighting systems, lighting effects are 
often painted into surface textures, such as 
faking lamplight and shadow effects on a 
wall.
Classic lighting and shading set-up for "Do The Robot" SIGGRAPH Asia 
2009 Mascot animation by Melanie Beisswenger (2009), model by Yuko 
Oda, Brian Cannady, Leo Hourvitz.
Chapter 2.4

293
Lighting tests for the animation film "Sintel" (2010). © 
Copyright Blender Foundation | www.sintel.org.
Rendered robot with wire frames for "Do The Robot" 
SIGGRAPH Asia 2009 Mascot animation by Melanie 
Beisswenger (2009).
Light directs the viewer's gaze in the image from the animated 
film "Color Theory" (2010) by Davier Yoon, School of Art, Design 
and Media, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Light test for "The Narcoleptic Boy" (2010) by Hoang Long, Jessica Kesuma Winata, Nguyen Hieu Hanh, Pan Hui Ting, Hans Chris-
tian Sulistio, Stefani Irwan, School of Art, Design and Media, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.  
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

294
Cloth systems make it possible to depict dif-
ferent textile properties in virtual clothing 
and to calculate the movements of fabrics in 
a realistic manner. 
Hair and skin systems are mostly used in con-
junction with characters and respond to their 
movements. However, a fur or hair system 
can also be used for a meadow of grass. 
All of these effects and simulations calculate 
physically correct the influence of natural 
forces such as wind and gravity on them, or 
even the collision of an entire group of ob-
jects with each other. 
In 2D animation, partial effects are hand-
drawn and animated with precise artistic con-
trol, whereas in 3D animation, they are usually 
simulated. While 3D software allows to obtain 
a first result quickly, the precise artistic design 
and art direction of the simulation is some-
times difficult to control and requires many 
repetitive steps. 
CG smoke effects in "Load" (2011) by David Rene Christensen, Lasse Smith, 
Jeppe Broo Døcker, Mark Kjærgaard, Kristoffer W. Mikkelsen, Blake Over-
gaard and Malte Burup; The Animation Workshop, Denmark. 
Detailed hair simulation in the 3D short film "Sintel" (2010). © Copyright Blender Foundation | www.sintel.org
Effects and Simulations
Effects and simulations are widely used in 3D 
animation and VFX projects. Due to their un-
derlying physical laws, they can be created 
more complex and realistic by means of in-
creased computer performance and software. 
Particle effects produce natural phenomena 
such as fog, rain, water and snow, even fire and 
explosions. 
Chapter 2.4

295
Rendering
Rendering is the final step in 
the 3D animation pipeline, 
bringing together models, 
sets, 
shading, 
animation, 
lighting, and effects. Pixel im-
ages are now generated from 
the 3D elements and scenes, 
which in turn result in com-
plete film sequences. 
During the lighting process, 
the image is normally ren-
dered entirely as a preview 
in just one pass. For the final 
rendering, however, several 
rendering passes with various 
image information are often 
created, in order to be able to 
change them later during the 
compositing process. A render 
pass includes individual vary-
ing attributes, such as color, 
shadow, and highlight, in ad-
dition, masks for transparency 
of individual elements are cal-
culated, as well as channels for 
depth information.
Another important step be-
fore rendering is optimizing 
the scene with regard to 
rendering times. No matter 
how fast the performance 
for hardware and computing 
grows, the visual demands 
on computer graphics imag-
ery increase at least as fast 
and therewith the complexi-
ty of the scenes as well. One 
single frame, which is one 
24th of a second, may take 
Final image from "Where Do All the 
Lost Things Go" (2011) by Hafizah 
Abdul Wahid, Joan Hsu Sze Yun, 
Kanan Abdul Kader Mohammad 
Ali, Bernard Su Guo Hao; School of 
Art, Design and Media, Nanyang 
Technological University, Singa-
pore.
Various surface structures in the 
3D short film "Ride Of Passage" 
(2011) by Christian Bøving 
Andersen, Casper Michelsen, 
Tina Lykke Thorn, Søren Nørbæk, 
Allan Vadskær Lønskov, Eva Lee 
Wallberg, Jochen Kousholt, David 
Frylund Otzen; The Animation 
Workshop, Denmark.
Various render layers and passes 
for the short film "Color Theory" 
(2010) by Davier Yoon, School of 
Art, Design and Media, Nanyang 
Technological University, Singa-
pore.
several hours of rendering 
time, and with increasing 
complexity it can even take 
longer. The calculation of 
images is usually transferred 
to computer networks opti-
mized for this purpose, so-
called render farms.
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

296
The following areas and disciplines comple-
ment the 3D animation pipeline or are closely 
linked with it. 
Motion and Performance Capture 
Motion Capture is the process of capturing 
the motions of actors and converting this 
data into three-dimensional information, 
which is entered into 3D animation software. 
The movement information is then adapted 
to the 3D characters by motion editors and 
further refined by animators. This process 
is mainly used for realistic movements of 
humanoid digital characters in action and 
sports games as well as in VFX productions. 
The term performance capture is used when 
facial expressions and countenance are cap-
tured in addition to body movements, thus 
placing the emphasis on theatrical presenta-
tion. This approach was used in films such as 
"Avatar" (2009) and the remakes of the "Plan-
et of the Apes" series 2011, 2014 and 2017.
Stereoscopy - „3D" in the movie theater
Each of our two eyes perceives a slightly dis-
placed image from which the brain calculates 
spatial information. In the movie theater, the 
stereoscopic projection simulates depth, al-
though the screen displays only two-dimen-
sional images. We are actually shown two 
superimposed images, which are assigned to 
each eye with the help of glasses.
This means that when filming for "stereo" all 
images will have to be shot twice (2 cameras 
mounted next to each other), as for example 
A Look Beyond the Core Steps of the 3D Pipeline
in "Avatar" (2009), "Hugo" (2011) and "The 
Young and Prodigious T.S. Spivet" (2013). 
However, since stereoscopic film shoots are 
still very demanding, a simpler method is 
chosen for many films: 3D conversion. The 
film is shot in "2D" with only one camera, i.e., 
only a "flat" image is created, then separated 
into depth layers and processed in post-pro-
duction to be projected for two eyes. This 
process, however, does not always lead to 
convincing results, as in the films "Clash of 
the Titans" (2010) and "Alice in Wonderland" 
(2010), which were criticized for their 3D ste-
reo conversion.
3D animation has a clear advantage in creat-
ing stereoscopic films: The work steps of the 
animation production allow for clear plan-
ning of the sequences and a coordination of 
the very important depth information from 
scene to scene. Even in the layout process, a 
virtual stereo camera can be created, which 
runs alongside and is tested in the subse-
quent stages. At the end of the pipeline, two 
separate images for each eye are rendered 
instead of one. The success of stereoscopic 
animation can be measured in the fact that 
for some years now, all major 3D animation 
film productions are created in stereo.
Characters from "Ride Of Pas-
sage" (2011) by Christian Bøving 
Andersen, Casper Michelsen, 
Tina Lykke Thorn, Søren Nørbæk, 
Allan Vadskær Lønskov, Eva 
Lee Wallberg, Jochen Kousholt, 
David Frylund Otzen; The Ani-
mation Workshop, Denmark.
Chapter 2.4

297
Image from the animated film "Load" (2011) by David Rene Christensen, Lasse Smith, Jeppe 
Broo Døcker, Mark Kjærgaard, Kristoffer W. Mikkelsen, Blake Overgaard and Malte Burup; 
The Animation Workshop, Denmark.
Games and Interactive Applications
The creation of 3D models, textures and an-
imations for real-time applications takes 
place with the same tools and principles as 
for pre-rendered films, however, their opti-
mization to the respective game engine and 
a representation with a high frame rate takes 
top priority. Factors influencing the frame 
rate are, for example, the number of polygons 
and lights, the size of the textures, as well as 
the complexity of animations, effects, simu-
lations, etc., in short: everything that loads 
onto the console or computer memory. For 
the game artist, it is also important to work 
closely with the designers and programmers 
of the game to ensure that the graphics are 
prepared to meet the requirements of the in-
teractions and game logic.
Set made of cardboard and "real" hand-crafted ma-
terials (top left), 3D characters and 3D props for the 
foreground (upper right) and final composited image 
(bottom) from "Rob 'n Ron" (2013) by Magnus Igland 
Møller and Peter Smith; Tumblehead Animation 
Studio, Denmark.
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

298
Compositing
Although compositing is one of the 2D dig-
ital disciplines, it is an important step at the 
end of the animation and VFX pipeline, since 
this is where the results of the individual work 
steps merge into one image. The previously 
separately rendered elements of the 3D work-
flow are further processed in compositing and 
Live-action film and CG character elements for the movie "Sapphire Blue" (2014); 
© Copyright mem-film, Lieblingsfilm, ARRI Film & TV, GFF, Tele München Gruppe.
Chapter 2.4

299
merged into the final image. The image com-
ponents or objects, which are separated by 
alpha channels (transparency masks), can be 
composited with one another and changed 
individually or together in color, brightness, 
contrast, etc.
Key aspects in VFX projects are the seamless 
integration of image sequences from live-ac-
tion film shoots (often shot with a green or 
blue screen) with its digital elements such as 
set extensions and effects all the way to 3D 
characters. 
In the next chapter we will learn more about 
the importance of 3D animation for visual 
effects productions in an interview with VFX 
supervisor Volker Engel.
Create a short animation with a ball jumping through a small  
obstacle course.
  Use tutorials to familiarize yourself with the basic features of the 
animation software of your choice.
  Develop your idea for the animation and visualize it in sketches.
  Now make a ball and a simple set with floor, wall and a box as an 
obstacle.
  Put materials and textures on the objects.
  Where is the camera, is it moving? Define the scene layout. 
  Animate the movements of the ball. Refer to the 12 principles of 
animation from the earlier chapters.
  Think about a lighting situation and how the animation can best be 
accentuated.
  Now it's time to render everything!
Assignment:
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

"For me, animation is the ultimate 
fundamental training for the elementary 
understanding of motion."
Interview with Volker Engel
300
The German Oscar winner 
Volker Engel is certainly 
one of the most renowned 
visual effects experts 
worldwide: While still 
attending the animation 
film class with Professor 
Ade at the Kunstakade-
mie Stuttgart (Stuttgart 
State Academy of Art 
and Design), he formed 
an artistic partnership 
with the German director 
Roland Emmerich, which 
continues to this day. Milestones of this 
partnership include the Academy Award 
winning VFX "Independence Day" (1996), 
followed by "Godzilla" (1998), "2012" 
(2009), "Anonymous" (2011), "White 
House Down" (2013) and "Independence 
Day: Resurgence" (2016).
To start with, a basic question about the con-
nection between animation in general and 
visual effects (abbreviated as VFX below) in 
particular: If you think about the principles 
of animation: What are the areas where a 
fundamental knowledge of the principles of 
animation for VFX is important? And how im-
portant is it, or where does it become import-
ant? VFX is actually an umbrella term, which 
includes many different disciplines.
Of course, even computer animation is al-
ready an umbrella term, because almost 
everything we do today - actually 100 per-
cent now - is completely digital. With each 
project I get the question whether we also 
worked with miniature models. But unfor-
tunately, this is usually not feasible due to 
high costs. In this respect, the digital do-
main predominates today. But everything 
that is done in this area can be called ani-
mation, strictly speaking. And this is where 
the animation principles come into play 
as well. This area includes, for example, 
computer-animated creatures, such as the 
animation of animals. The films we have 
recently made, such as "2012" (Emmerich 
2012), "Anonymous" (Emmerich 2011) and 
"White House Down" (Emmerich 2013) 
again show different examples of anima-
tion. In each film, it was always about the 
fact that everything was photo-realistic. 
Chapter 2.4

301
These were all films by Roland Emmerich 
and they include more animations of ob-
jects, such as helicopters and airplanes. 
With "Independence Day: Resurgence" I 
recently finished another project with him. 
This is the continuation to the original "In-
dependence Day" (Emmerich 1996). There 
are, of course, aliens, and they are comput-
er-animated. And here we are already in 
the field of creature animation (= mythical, 
fictional creatures; author's note), because 
only a part was solved with motion capture, 
and a large part was still animated by hand. 
And even motion capture is always par-
tially animated by hand. Therefore, a large 
part of the animation in the film will come 
from various areas. This is where I work as a 
supervisor with artists who need an under-
standing of the various areas of animation 
"White House Down" is a good example of 
a movie where you would never think that 
an animation supervisor was needed. My 
colleague Marc Weigert and I hired twelve 
different visual effects companies for the 
film, and our company "Uncharted Territo-
ry" was the hub. Everything came togeth-
er at our place and we did the complete 
quality control and supervision. We had a 
modeling supervisor who checked all the 
CG models, rendering and shading the 
companies delivered. Our CG supervisor 
then discussed with the companies, which 
methods to use to improve these models. 
We also had an animation supervisor, Con-
rad Murrey, from Cape Town, with whom 
we have been working for a very long time.
Volker Engel in a miniature cave built by New Deal 
Studios in Los Angeles for the adventure film "Coronado" 
(2003), directed by: Claudio Fäh. The film was written 
by Volker Engel with his artistic partner Marc Weigert, 
co-produced and supervised as a VFX supervisor team.
Miniature of a bridge, built by New Deal 
Studios in Los Angeles for "Coronado".  
Photographs: Bruno Arnold
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

302
Conrad already started working on the 
pre-visualization. We did the previz (abbre-
viation for previsualization; author's note) 
for "White House Down" in our company.  
A good example is the car chase, where 
two SUVs chase the presidential limousine 
around the White House. We put together 
an interesting mix. We used a video game 
engine and linked it to the "Motion Builder" 
software. For this, I needed somebody who 
was familiar with animation. We tried to au-
tomate as much as possible, and in doing 
so, we were able to sit there with a steering 
wheel of a videogame and simulate this 
car chase. But that was only the basis and 
it had to be worked out later. During this 
process, I constantly worked with the ani-
mation supervisor. And that was also very 
important for the animated shots delivered 
by the other companies. For example, we 
have a lot of helicopter sequences. You may 
think: Oh well, a helicopter flies from right 
to left, what's the big deal - but we were 
showing incredibly difficult maneuvers 
in the film: A helicopter is shot, begins to 
swerve, while another one just outside the 
White House flies upwards, is almost hit by 
the first one, swaying to the side. And then 
we received the first animation tests from 
very well established companies, which 
were by far not as good as we needed 
them to be. They also have their animators, 
of course. We then realized:  Unfortunately, 
they don't have as good an animator like 
our Conrad Murrey in their company. And 
Conrad is the one with us who is working 
on these shots and finally delivers the bet-
ter version, after these companies were not 
able to deliver good quality all the way to 
the end.
In other words, the previz already goes so far 
as to give an impression of the movement 
dynamics?
Yes. The important thing in such an action 
movie is, above all, that our previz is used 
for editing. Because editing runs parallel 
to the film shoot. Think of the aerial photo-
graphs in which you see the White House: 
These are all shots that we can not actually 
make because the airspace above the White 
House in Washington is a no-fly zone. So 
we had to produce most of the large out-
side shots of the White House completely 
digitally. They include not only Washington 
and the White House, but also these excit-
ing helicopter flights and movements. In 
the example which I have just mentioned, 
there were three helicopters in the air. It 
was planned like a martial choreography. 
Conrad completely animated this one time 
from A to Z. We then go through it togeth-
er with the director and he comments on it. 
For example: Yes, I know that this one has 
to get away now, because the other one 
is coming towards him. But that looks too 
much like a miniature model, which is much 
too fast, it has to be heavier and so on. This 
results in completely new aspects: Okay, 
then we have to keep one helicopter here 
just a little longer and it can turn away to 
the side later. But then, suddenly your close-
up shot on the second helicopter does not 
work anymore, because it would be covered 
up by the first helicopter the entire time. 
And then you discuss it again with the di-
rector, because that has an effect on the ed-
iting he has planned for this sequence. We 
completely run through the animation once 
from a neutral angle with these hard-sur-
face objects - in this case the helicopters 
- for about one minute of the film. Then 
the director goes over his cameras with us 
and comments: This is where I can envision 
the following, over there I would like to see 
the helicopter from this angle,  back here I 
want to see it from there - in the end, exactly 
how you actually shoot a live-action mov-
ie. At one time, this was not done in previz, 
Chapter 2.4

303
because it was time-consuming to render, 
they only did shot-by-shot previz. Today we 
do it differently: We design the action once 
completely - in previz - and then place three 
or four different cameras. From this we can 
then select the appropriate shots and, of 
course, change other things as well.
And this animation, how exactly is it created? 
You had already mentioned that it was based 
in part on a game engine.
We only did this for the car chase.
That means, the other is animated with key 
frames? 
Exactly, one hundred percent.
Then, of course, for the previz stage, you defi-
nitely need someone who knows something 
about animation, otherwise it does not work 
at all.
Exactly. And previz transitions very smooth-
ly into post-viz. Post-viz differs from previz 
in that the material, which was shot with 
the actors on the set with the blue screen, 
goes back to our artists. Let's take our pro-
tagonist, Channing Tatum. He runs on top 
of the roof because the terrorists are shoot-
ing at the helicopters with rocket launchers 
from the roof of the White House. He has 
a gun with him and tries to eliminate the 
terrorists, to prevent them from following 
through with their plan. With Channing we 
shot in a studio in front of a blue screen - we 
had a complete replica of the White House 
roof. But we did not have the animated he-
licopters in the background yet. In putting 
it all together, we worked with an interest-
ing technique called Ncam - the letter N 
and cam for camera. With this technology, 
we can combine the blue screen shot live 
with our previz backgrounds created on 
the computer. The director was able to re-
view during the film shoot on the set, what 
the background image would later look like 
instead of the blue screen. This was tracked 
live the entire time, a fantastic system. We 
are not yet able to use a previously animat-
ed version of a helicopter together with the 
animated backgrounds. But I feel that this 
will be possible soon. To summarize it: The 
scene is shot in the studio against a blue 
screen, Channing comes running onto the 
rooftop, and he now thankfully has build-
ings and landscape in the background in-
stead of a blue wall, which should not be too 
detailed, so that they can be calculated live. 
The filmed shot is immediately returned to 
our artists in post-viz. And we are working 
closely with the editor, who already uses 
our material for film editing. So the director 
can see immediately if the scene is working. 
After the film shoot, we continue to work 
in Los Angeles. Our animation supervisor, 
who himself is animating on the computer 
as well, is already building the helicopters 
into the shots. This raw form of the shot is 
immediately given to the editor, who then 
incorporates it into the cut, otherwise you 
would see only one actor now looking into 
the blue sky. Instead, the editor has to be 
able to apply the cut to Conrad's helicop-
ters. And Conrad would now certainly add 
that he had to make 15 different versions 
of the shot, before everything was working 
100%, because there were always correc-
tions being made.
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

304
Getting back to something I think is import-
ant with regard to motion capture: What is 
your position or experience with regard to 
the extent to which motion capture has to be 
post-processed nowadays? It seems logical 
to me that you need an experienced anima-
tor, but how is it balanced? What is the re-
lationship between what you receive as raw 
data that still requires clean-up, and what 
still needs to be manipulated with regard to 
key frames?
It always depends on the task and what you 
are doing, how much, for example, the ani-
mated character differs from a human body. 
If you are dealing with a creature, for exam-
ple, you will certainly have to change a lot of 
things: For example, if the character has six 
arms and looks completely different than a 
human being. If you just have a motion cap-
ture scene with a person moving normally, 
it looks different. We also made our own 
motion capture for "White House Down". 
(Although everyone always tells us that 
there are giant archives for motion capture 
data available. But for some reason, you can 
never find what you need). And you actually 
do not have to change very much. 
It probably really depends on the shot, on 
how well the actor can be seen in the image 
and so on. 
Yes.
If you now think of the training, how much 
should the knowledge of animation prin-
ciples in itself be a component of the visual 
effects training? 
Development of a scene from "Coronado" (2003). 
Above and center are individual elements of the shot that were generat-
ed on the computer.
 At the bottom is the final film image created by compositing (the virtual 
"putting together") of the elements.
Chapter 2.4

305
For me, animation is the ultimate funda-
mental training for the elementary under-
standing of motion. We encounter it in all 
visual effects areas. As a supervisor, I have 
been in charge of many films where a lot of 
destruction had to be animated. For exam-
ple, in "2012", we had an aircraft carrier that 
comes rolling toward you, as the jetfight-
ers on it are tearing away from fastening 
chains. The complete shot was animated 
by hand. Of course, the water in which the 
aircraft carrier floats is created by procedur-
al animation. The White House is mowed 
down by the aircraft carrier, and anyone 
who worked on this shot has an incredible 
understanding of animation. And even the 
earthquake sequences, which we made at 
our company "Uncharted Territory" (a total 
of 400 shots for the film) use animation: For 
the part where the limo drives through Los 
Angeles, while everything to the left and 
right of it is collapsing, we used a software 
for procedural animation. However, it also 
caused some problems. While everything 
collapsed as it would happen in live-action, 
it happened either too fast or too slow for 
the scene. So we had to intervene and an-
imate everything around it. That might not 
sound like a big challenge for an animator 
who wants nothing more than to animate 
Image left und below: Computer ani-
mation compared to film image from 
"Coronado" (2003).
characters, for example. But continents that 
are breaking away, collapsing billboards 
and crashing freeways with cars sliding and 
rolling over - these are just different types of 
challenges! Much of this had to be animated 
by hand. And I worked on it with a lot of art-
ists. Of course, not everyone has the same 
talents, and we certainly had our superstars 
for the animation. We naturally gave them 
the coolest shots. During this work, we also 
had to develop completely new skills and 
we virtually reinvented ourselves and our 
way of working.
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

306
Regarding procedural techniques or sim-
ulation: Does the use of such techniques 
shift the discipline to engineering or pro-
gramming? Where do you see the future 
trend? Will it increase, in other words, will 
the simulation process be somehow more 
artistically controllable? And will the pro-
gramming become part of the training for 
artists working in that field? In essence, the 
balance between a basically digital, but still 
"handmade" key frame animation and that, 
which takes place more in processes or in 
simulations.
I have observed that many young peo-
ple with an animation background who 
began working a lot with simulations, 
had a natural fear of the software they 
were working with. (laughing). My point 
is, that there is good news, namely, that 
it is getting easier for the animator to be 
able to use his skills - and I don't want to 
make it sound too easy now - in the end, 
by moving the correct control. He can 
rely on his creative instincts and does not 
suddenly have to encode and program  a 
lot of things.
In other words, the trend is that the software 
itself is becoming a bit more intuitive and 
thus more user-friendly for the artist.
Exactly.
... and that the knowledge of programming 
per se is not a must, but a purely technical 
aspect that takes place more behind the 
user interface so that the artist can concen-
trate on the implementation of the artistic 
vision.
A computer-generated Osprey helicopter flying through a real waterfall 
in "Coronado" (2003). The Mayan statues on both sides were digital stills 
of miniatures, the sea spray was achieved by using particle effects.
Chapter 2.4

307
Yes, as with many other computer pro-
grams. They are becoming more us-
er-friendly. You can get an artist to create 
something, rather than a mathematician! 
Because the mathematician will only pro-
vide you with something that looks abso-
lutely terrible and has nothing to do with 
reality. And he will also explain to you that 
the computer calculated it exactly this way. 
It is best to have someone who basically 
has two heads on his shoulders, the artistic 
one and the mathematical one. That is how 
it used to be. But this is moving increasing-
ly into the artistic world. And these are the 
good news.
When talking with people from the industry 
sector, it is apparent that they are looking 
for graduates who can also write their own 
code, their own small plug-ins for programs. 
I mean, ok, one does not have to exclude 
the other, but as an instructor you are faced 
with the question: Should we really push 
for this hybrid of artist and programmer so 
that someone can really, as you said, "basi-
cally have two heads on their shoulders"... in 
order to really merge these two things well 
and be equipped with both qualifications. 
Or could it be that the software will evolve 
in such a way that it becomes easier and 
more intuitive to use, and in turn benefit the 
artistic vision as well?
I think it is a slowly ascending curve. The 
purely technical aspect will become less 
important. And we continue to have peo-
ple on the team (mostly in leading posi-
tions), who also write a plug-in, if needed. 
They write the plug-ins in such a way that it 
is usable for all those who can not program 
it. In a group of, say, seven animators, you 
have two who can help out and find a short-
cut for something that is currently not real-
ly possible. We've seen something like this 
for "2012" with one of the big companies 
here in Los Angeles: They were working a 
lot with so-called "proprietary software", 
i.e. an in-house development, rather than 
a software that was readily available off the 
shelf. We realized that one scene was not 
working very well with the in-house soft-
ware: If a ship was thrown a bit to the right, 
for example, you completely lost the scale, 
and that had to be adapted somehow. To 
do this, the artist sat down on his keyboard 
and began to write. And then we thought 
of course: This can't be for real! He really 
has to program the numerical code (laugh-
ing) somehow, just to change a movement 
from right to left. After a while we figured 
out that the company was working with a 
dinosaur (with regard to software) at that 
time. But that was eight years ago. There 
have been so many changes since then. 
Sometimes these giant companies really 
lag behind.
Because they are just not as flexible.
Exactly, because they have developed their 
own products that were very expensive. 
An upgrade costs a lot of money again and 
has to be approved, because there will be 
700 artists working with it in the end. You 
can't just say, hey, let's just quickly get this 
software. 
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

308
And perhaps as a final question. I fondly re-
member your own film, your student film at 
the time, about the principles of animation. 
And in that respect you have always been 
very familiar with the classic principles of 
animation and have been very interested 
in the topic. The question would be: With all 
these classic principles - squash and stretch, 
anticipation, and everything that goes with 
that - do you think that new things have now 
been added by CG, computer animation as a 
whole, or things that might have to be looked 
at differently today, or extended terms, as far 
as that is concerned? Or do you believe that 
much of it has remained valid. Has it expand-
ed, broadened or changed in any way?
The animation and all the classic rules of 
animation are certainly made easier with 
today's software packages. But I still have 
to work with people who learned all these 
basics. They need to know that these ba-
sics are important, and they must know 
the software very well to fully benefit from 
it. But there are hosts of untrained "anima-
tors" who may have purchased a software 
to try. After three weeks, these "animators" 
sometimes call themselves "visual effects 
supervisor" of their own company, because 
they made one small film.  Something else 
that's very popular, is when they come to us 
and expect to be lead animator on a scene, 
and then it turns out that even working as 
an assistant for the animation, as third ani-
mator in the background, so to speak, they 
are clueless about the subject matter. That's 
the old story of a basic training, and as our 
distinguished professor Grau used to say 
at the State Academy of the Arts Stuttgart 
at the time: Before you start with abstract 
painting, you should have learned the basic 
A film image from Volker Engel's 
student short film "Re-Creation" 
(1993), about a mechanical 
"Circle of Life", animated to waltz 
music. 
Produced at the Film Academy 
Baden Württemberg.
It took Volker Engel eight weeks to animate seven 
robots on rotating platforms for his four-minute 
short film.
Chapter 2.4

309
The "conductor" robot from "Re-Creation".
Volker Engel working on the 
"showdown scene": the 35mm 
Crass camera on the left and the 
video tab with Betacam SP deck on 
the right.
rules of painting. (Laughing) And then you 
can move away from it. And in my view, this 
is exactly the same thing for animation. This 
basic knowledge as part of this training is 
so incredibly important for developing 
an understanding of movement patterns, 
rhythms and movement in nature. Other-
wise, people animate things that just look 
completely wrong. Then you ask them: Why 
do you think that this would move this way 
in nature? And that's simply because they 
have never developed an eye for it and ba-
sically walked through life with blinders, or 
perhaps because they just played too many 
videogames.
And of course, my question certainly lumped 
everything together, but all these different 
principles have to be applied in very differ-
ent ways, depending on the style which is 
required later. The ideal goal of visual effects 
is, that it actually remains "invisible" itself in 
most cases. The rendered images must be 
credibly inserted into live-action happen-
ings. A very high degree of credibility must be 
achieved, and there is certainly a very broad 
spectrum. But much of what established the 
principles of animation comes from the ob-
servation of reality and is then only exagger-
ated or inflated.
Yes.
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

310
There is probably a big difference whether 
you're integrating a mythical creature into 
a real-world environment, where you might 
have more freedom as an animator - relative-
ly speaking, although it must be credible - as 
compared to a purely physical-mechanical 
effect, which has to be incorporated into a 
real event.
Yes, it certainly requires more creativity 
when you are moving around this "creature 
terrain". But you'd be surprised how many 
artists don't manage to get a heavy vehi-
cle driving around a fountain very quickly 
while swerving, due to a lack of basic train-
ing and a lack of basic knowledge. And we 
in turn - getting back to the example - are 
very fortunate to have an artist who was 
born to do that. We don't have to worry 
about whether or not he can do it.  Anoth-
er example on this topic is the knowledge 
of cinematography when working in a 
completely virtual space. Unless we pre-set 
everything precisely in previz, we often get 
to see camera movements that look like 
motion control, but in a way as if they had 
actually been programmed by a robot. Our 
catchphrase in those instances is always: 
This has to be more organic - which really 
means nothing more than: There have to 
be small mistakes in it! They must corre-
spond to the movement of the helicopter, 
inside of which the camera is located. And 
this is something that no one in the audi-
ence would notice afterwards, but if it is 
done right, it leads to the fact that every-
one thinks that it was filmed "100% real".
This goes back to the basics, that you have 
someone paying attention to such funda-
mental matters as timing and spacing. You 
simply have to make sure that there are also 
breaks in it and that irregularities are inte-
grated, simply to avoid this "mechanical" im-
pression so that it does not look so uniformly.
You have to place your key frames correctly, 
and this is done 100% manually. And I tell 
Conrad to imagine this with a small camera 
shake, which has to be integrated some-
how, and that can't be done with the push 
of a button, which brings us back to the 
subject organic/real. Conrad has the appro-
priate knowledge and thus he has a sense 
of how far he has to go with it, so that it 
does not turn out ten times too strong and 
looking artificial again.
Okay, and as a real conclusion now, maybe 
a few words about what you think some-
one should focus on during their training, 
who wants to work in the field of VFX.  It is, 
of course, impossible to answer this entirely 
across the board. VFX is the umbrella term 
for a very broad and diverse field, including 
compositing, digital matte painting, particle 
systems, match move and previz, which is a 
very big topic, of course. But if you were to try 
to simplify this for someone who is interest-
ed in the field of VFX as a newcomer: What 
would be the training areas that you would 
recommend as a good basis for future em-
ployment?
You should know early on, which direc-
tion you want to take. Due to their diverse 
nature, the requirements are becoming 
increasingly specialized. And the key dis-
tinction for us in the visual effects area are 
still computer animations on one hand, 
and compositing on the other. And even 
if you study to become a 2D artist, wheth-
er it is in the field of matte painting or as 
a pure compositor - and there are incred-
ibly talented people in this area - you will 
still need to have a basic knowledge in the 
area of 3D computer animation. Simply 
because you're constantly working with 
people from that field. Your items are de-
livered to you by 3D artists and you have to 
at least understand their language, even if 
Chapter 2.4

311
you yourself can not work in 3D. The same 
is true the other way around as well. During 
the intensive specialization, which you 
should pursue relatively early in order not 
to work or train for four years in the wrong 
area, you should still keep 30 percent of 
your studies for the other topic in mind.
Okay, a very small addition to this one: For 
many of these areas there are very clear ideas 
about what skills someone could or should 
bring to the job. An area where, in my experi-
ence, this is rather diversified or where it can 
vary is, for example, digital matte painting. 
From my conversations with industry, I know 
this: For this area, for example, they like to 
hire great photographers, they also like to 
take people who are very talented digital 
illustrators - the training background often 
varies greatly. This seems to be an area where 
a big pool of talent must come together or 
one very unique talent with an expandable 
skill set for certain additional knowledge, 
which can then be acquired. In other words, 
if someone is a tremendous photographer, 
he can certainly qualify for this area just as 
much as a great digital illustrator.
You can come from another area and still fit 
in 100%. In addition, we always make sure 
that we get artists who have good com-
mon sense, and as strange as it may sound 
- a sense of reality. Especially when hiring 
young people directly after graduating, we 
have made the experience that they tend 
to lose sight of the time factor during work. 
They don't understand that three days can 
not turn into three weeks. There are dead-
lines and budgets that must be met. It is 
not very easy to find someone who can ex-
press himself artistically, and is neverthe-
less able to commit to a time frame.
Great, I believe this is a good conclusion. 
(laughing)
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

"There will be a different model of doing things" 
Interview with Isaac Kerlow
Isaac Kerlow is an inde-
pendent filmmaker, artist 
and author. The main 
focus of his work is best 
described by the terms 
"changes" and "nature of 
man". He is developing 
creative projects at the 
Earth Observatory of Sin-
gapore which are inspired 
by geological science and 
the prevention of natural 
disasters. Isaac was one 
of the leading pioneers 
of digital art and animation in the initial 
phase of the video game industry. He 
worked for the Walt Disney Company for 
a decade and was the founding chair of 
the legendary Department of Computer 
Graphics and Interactive Media at the 
Pratt Institute in New York City. Isaac was 
also the founding Dean at the School 
of Art, Design and Media at Nanyang 
Technological University in Singapore. 
His filmography includes the anima-
tion and live action films "The Tsunami 
of New Dreams" (2015), "SHADOWS" 
(2014), "Genesis" (2012), "Sudden Na-
ture" (2011) and "Mayon: The Volcano 
Princess" (2010). His current work, "Earth 
Girl 2: Preparing for the Tsunami" (2014), 
is available as a free download. The 
animated short "CHANGE" followed in 
October 2016.
You have written a very well-known book about 
computer animation, namely...
The Art of 3D Computer Animation And Ef-
fects.
Exactly, and in this book, you have expanded 
the traditional principles of animation to addi-
tional rules, specifically for 3D computer anima-
tion. Can you tell us more about this?
Yes, in fact, it started when I was working at 
Disney Interactive and we were developing 
the first 3D computer game for Disney. We had 
a lot of discussions about how to transfer the 
traditional principles of animation to these rel-
atively simple 3D characters - that was still in 
the early days of 3D games. We had some ad-
visors from the traditional Feature Animation 
Department who said, of course: This is exactly 
the way you have to do it! Twelve principles - 
end of story. This prompted me to think about 
how we can modify and extend these tradi-
tional principles for 3D animation to incorpo-
rate these new art forms that did not yet exist 
in the 1930s and 1940s. These new artforms 
are quite different from the purely traditional 
character animation. They are similar in cer-
tain ways, but are also very different in others! 
312
Chapter 2.4

One of these additional points is limited an-
imation. In the context of traditional hand-
drawn character animation, frame-by-frame 
animation is one of the most obvious and 
fastest ways to achieve the classic Disney-style 
"illusion of life". Draw as much detail as pos-
sible, achieve as much subtlety as possible. 
This would already account for 30% of your 
"illusion of life", if you know how to do it. But 
then, at a 180 degree turn, there is the kind of 
animation for anime that for long was consid-
ered sort of an inferior standard: The anime 
style was simple partly to achieve faster and 
cheaper productions, but also had a different 
aesthetic feeling. Then, after several decades 
of anime study, some were beginning to real-
ize that a whole new style had indeed devel-
oped for acting and expression that was based 
on a very economical way of drawing and 
painting. That is when I realized that limited 
animation had traditionally been considered a 
lesser style, but on the other hand there were 
many examples of limited animation that pre-
sented a unique style that creates emotion in 
a convincing manner. You watch these movies 
with limited animation, where there are 3, 4 or 
even 10 seconds of hold with maybe one very 
minimal movement at most, like the hair being 
moved by the wind. But anime is definitely a 
style, and Japanese animators finally came to 
the conclusion that they were able to build a 
powerful artistic style from their production 
limitations. And they have continued to devel-
op this style over the past 30 years. Anime was 
exported from Japan and as you know, we are 
now all keenly aware of anime and Japanese 
animators. In Europe, the United States, Latin 
America, everywhere! And animators world-
wide began developing this supposed limita-
tion as a style: long holds; slow motion; partial 
animation of body parts, while others remain 
still; all things that would be considered mis-
takes in traditional animation, but which can 
actually be used to express emotion.
So I thought: 'why not introduce a new principle 
of animation that draws attention to it'? You can 
use stylistic means that use limited animation 
in a way that would not have been approved 
by the traditional Disney style of the 1940s. 
But this is 2014, we have a completely different 
world, and animation audiences too are quite 
different. This is the interesting thing about life 
in general - an absolute truth of the 50's, 60's 
or 70's, 40 years later, no longer holds true, be-
cause people and methods have evolved. 
313
The Little Goddess in SHADOWS, directed by Isaac Kerlow, uses her 
superpowers to help the villagers defeat the villains who want to destroy 
the forest. http://shadows-film.com.
© Isaac Kerlow
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

The world has changed. So I thought of 
the young people who grew up with video 
games, watched TV cartoons, most of which 
is done with limited animation. They have not 
even seen the early Pixar films, only the last, 
most recent ones. And for that generation, 
limited animation is quite normal. That's how 
it is. I believe that limited animation is a legit-
imate technique that can be used to enhance 
the expression of your animation.
Another aspect that I thought was worth 
mentioning is cinematography, particular-
ly camera work. In the old days, there was 
a real and rigid separation between layout, 
camera and animation. These were very dif-
ferent stages, which took place at different 
times throughout the process. But today cin-
ematography is considered at the very begin-
ning of a production, and it changes during 
the course of production as you animate 
the character(s). That's why I thought it was 
important to bring together the artistic lan-
guage of film and animation. That's why I felt 
that it was important to teach young people 
that it was not only about the performance 
of the character, which is, of course, the most 
important thing, but just as much about cine-
matography, about how you shoot and show 
the performance. Today, these two aspects 
are integral parts of the process, and I felt that 
there should be a principle that highlighted 
this concept not just as an after-thought. 
Facial animation is just one aspect of act-
ing, but the traditional Disney perspective 
is more focused on the body's poses and 
silhouettes, and facial animation was not 
discussed very explicitly. Today we have 
the option of animating extreme close-ups 
of the face with enormous precision. In 3D 
animation we have software that allows us 
to literally control every single muscle in 
the face, and that is why facial animation 
became an extremely important way to tell 
a story. And I felt that it should be raised to 
the level of another principle of animation, 
because today, so much is communicated in 
films through facial expressions. When you 
compare today's films with those of 60 years 
ago there is a considerable difference in the 
number of close-ups and facial expressions 
that are crucial to acting. Emotions and fa-
cial micro-expressions, minimal changes in 
expression, are very popular in today's com-
puter animation. It is important that young 
animators are at least aware of these things, 
that they know what options are available 
to them, and that they use them if they 
want. 
314
Perpetual Motion is an animated short directed by 
Isaac Kerlow about the dynamic nature of planet 
Earth and human societies. This rendering test of 
orbiting trash is based on concept art by Victor 
Kerlow, modeling by Batrisya Nurul, and visual 
development by Mark Cheung.
© Isaac Kerlow
Chapter 2.4

Blending Motion is a concept that did not 
exist before 2005. Motion capture has been 
around for 20 years, but for many years it 
was an imperfect, awkward and mechani-
cal-looking technology. After two decades 
of motion capture, someone had the idea of 
the blending motion process, and today you 
can work with blending motion in a very so-
phisticated and controlled manner. So much 
so, that one can use the presentation of an 
actor to move a digital character, compara-
ble to a puppeteer, and combine or refine it 
with key frame animation. This unique blend 
is so sophisticated that it has to be regard-
ed as a separate technology. When I wrote 
about this ten years ago, it was on the verge 
of becoming reality.  Blending motion still has 
limitations but today this technique is a real-
ity, and widely used in computer games that 
incorporate a huge amount of character in-
formation. This animation does not look like 
classic Disney character animation but many 
of the characters in the top games have now 
reached a very acceptable level of acting, es-
pecially when you consider the number and 
range of genres and styles. And the only way 
to produce these games within schedule and 
with so many characters and such subtlety of 
animation is by using blended motion, and 
combining it with key frame animation and 
some motion capture. This has already be-
come a specialized craft in itself. 
This ties in nicely with the question about mo-
tion capture and how this technology is gain-
ing importance. Do you think that in the future 
there will be a point, where basically the art of 
animation is replaced by the performance of an 
actor and the resulting actions that are trans-
ferred to digital characters?
I do not believe that the performance of an 
actor will fully replace the art of hand-drawn 
animation because they are two entirely  dif-
ferent things. But it can certainly support or 
complement it. For me, this is like the differ-
ence between playing an acoustic guitar or 
an electric guitar. Both are guitars, but they 
sound different and you have to play them 
differently. I believe that the traditional key 
frame animation will always remain its own 
domain and that it will continue to evolve. 
But motion capture has also advanced enor-
mously over the past 30 years and since then 
we have actually been able to implement 
things that we would never have thought 
possible. But I don't believe that motion cap-
ture can ever replace key frame animation, 
they are simply different approaches to ani-
mation. However, for certain projects motion 
capture offers a straightforward and feasible 
way to animate a large sets of characters for 
computer games - no question! For example, 
at Disney we produced baseball and football 
games for the ESPN brand. Producing those 
sport games with key frame animation was 
out of the question, because of the expense 
and effort involved. So you shoot the move-
ments of the live-action baseball players 
on a soundstage and a few months later 
you have a game with appropriate motion. 
In other words, performance capture also 
serves the purpose of efficient production.
315
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

You mentioned one more additional princi-
ple? 
Yes, visual styling. Today you can use, for 
example, all kinds of shaders and rendering 
techniques to achieve very unique and very 
expressive and artistic visual styles that con-
tribute to the expressiveness of the medium. 
Unlike decades ago you can visualize the 
"look" of the finished animation before the 
animation is completed. This contributes to 
the power of your production at a basic level. 
We now have the ability to combine multi-
ple visual elements with digital compositing, 
even on a laptop using commercial software 
such as Photoshop. That opened doors for 
many young people to try out complete-
ly new visual styles. This would have been 
impossible in the past, too much work, you 
would have needed a whole studio to get 
that done. I think that digital technology has 
brought all the production stages of anima-
tion closer together in time, you no longer 
have to wait 16 months between storyboard-
ing and final rendering. You can storyboard 
and render in paralell. It's a different way of 
working. That is why I believe that we need 
the new principle of visual styling to reflect 
this changed reality.
There is not very much stylized, non-photoreal-
istic rendering. What are the trends, how will it 
develop? What do you think about the current 
visual styles in CG-animated mainstream fea-
ture films?
In less than 30 years, rendering has been 
transformed from a cumbersome and barely 
controllable technology into an extremely so-
phisticated field. Today, you can render almost 
anything you want. It may require a complex 
production pipeline, but once in place, you 
can render almost anything convincingly, 
if you know how. Just think of mainstream 
studios like DreamWorks, Pixar, Disney, ILM, 
where you'll find highly sophisticated render-
ing solutions that combine stylized realism 
with painterly techniques. For example, I find 
"Rango" (Verbinski 2011), very interesting, 
because this film represents a kind of exper-
iment. It combines realistic aspects with styl-
ized painterly solutions. It is also unique as an 
animation, since it is not comparable to any-
thing else in terms of story and animation. In 
"Kung Fu Panda" (Osborne/Stevenson 2008), 
for example, there are parts that are rendered 
realistically, in a classical and traditional way, 
and then there are small details, where that 
is not the case. If you look at the world of in-
dependent CG productions, you'll find even 
more adventurous rendering techniques.  But 
the studios are very sophisticated and they 
316
An isolated boy playing 
computer games is used to rep-
resent human alienation from 
nature in CHANGE, a short film 
by Isaac Kerlow about climate 
and anthropogenic change. 
https://art-science-media.com/
change
© Isaac Kerlow
Chapter 2.4

have some incredible solutions that combine 
the realistic with the painterly. This aspect of 
CG is technically complex, and it takes quite 
an effort to develop this type of software. 
Many of the small independent productions 
opt for more modest rendering solutions, but 
that is beginning to change. There are student 
projects, from Germany for example, with in-
credibly complex and highly sophisticated 
rendering techniques. When I see a group of 
25-year-olds coming up with these solutions, 
whether realistic or stylized, it tells me that the 
next generation of animators will be different 
from the previous one. These young people 
will be able to do more and more on their lap-
tops. I think that's great. This opens up com-
pletely new perspectives.
What do you think a young animator should 
focus on nowadays? What remains important, 
what has changed?
I think the most important thing is and re-
mains being familiar with the masterpieces 
of art, design, film and animation. This means 
getting acquainted with painters of the 19th 
or 20th century, for example, or reading liter-
ature from all over the world, from different 
centuries, whether from Europe, China or 
whatever. This is a great challenge and op-
portunity. Today, for example, I asked a gifted 
illustrator in my team whether she knew the 
German expressionists. She looked at me and 
said 'no'. I said, 'really? Have you ever heard of 
George Grosz?' 'No.' 'Do you know the work of 
Käthe Kollwitz?' 'No.' This conversation was in-
spired by a story in which a mother protects 
her child, and I thought of the classic draw-
ings by Käthe Kollwitz. And when she said 
'no', I thought, gee whiz, I really have an edge 
over her, just because I spent hours of my life 
looking at these drawings and thinking about 
them. Her drawing skills are excellent, but she 
is not aware of important works of art that can 
make her work better. The most important 
thing young animators can do, is to gain ac-
cess to the work of artists from all ages from 
all over the world, no matter where they come 
from, both in visual art and literature, since 
animation is about both. That is why it is very 
important to read poems, short stories, novels, 
the classics! The craft is also very important, 
but as a director you must know and under-
stand the major themes of human existence. 
It is good to begin with it in your twenties, be-
cause sometimes it takes time to understand 
these topics and to master them. Otherwise, if 
you do not pay attention to those deep artistic 
literature issues, you are going to be limited 
to be a craftsman, and that is okay, but is not 
what most young people aspire to be. Most 
young people aspire to have the craft under 
their belt but also be able to tell their stories 
and represent their generation. So I would say, 
go to museums and read books. Even if you 
end up reading books on the iPad or look at 
the virtual collection of the Metropolitan Mu-
seum online - that's fine too. But you literally 
have to devote hours, days, weeks to it. I hope 
today young animators of today understand 
how important this really is.
317
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

On to a very different topic: Convergence be-
tween live action and animation:  We are very 
close to the point where the dividing line be-
tween these fields is barely distinguishable 
anymore, so it  has disappeared in a way.  Many 
Hollywood blockbusters do combine virtual 
sets and "real" actors" or integrate digitally cre-
ated and animated characters into live action.It 
would be great to hear some of your thoughts 
about this: an outlook toward the future, how 
this can possibly further develop and what is 
happening now, what are the trends and where 
is that going? 
That's a good question. I can think of several 
things. For one thing, I love watching block-
busters, because many of them are very en-
tertaining. But also with regard to the artistic 
craftsmanship, the quality of the animation 
is sometimes really breathtaking. I love and 
admire good craftsmanship. And viewed 
from this perspective, I think that some of 
these accomplishments are wonderful. With 
the help of visual effects, you can now more 
than ever blur the boundaries between re-
ality and fiction, create original worlds, and 
that is remarkable. Studios in Hollywood and 
elsewhere realize this and that is why they 
continue this approach. I think visual effects 
have developed so strongly over the last de-
cade because studios realize that thanks to 
them they can earn billions of dollars within a 
few years. That is unlikely to change anytime 
soon. But this kind of work was not always 
interesting to me from the creative point of 
view. These big-budget blockbuster movies 
jam-packed with effects were in fact one of 
the reasons why I loved working at Disney, 
precisely because I could contribute to the 
process. But this was not always a challenge 
in the artistic sense. I always wondered how, 
for example, an independent film would look 
with this level of technology. I recently saw 
"Guardians of the Galaxy" (Gunn 2014).
Animated with a contemporary digital version of 
Indonesian cutout puppets, the Old Leader of the 
villains fights the Little Goddess in SHADOWS, a short 
by Isaac Kerlow. http://shadows-film.com.
© Isaac Kerlow
The bittersweet ending of CHANGE brings up the 
need to balance thriving human communities with 
a healthy natural environment. Artwork and anima-
tion by Nguyen Thi Nam Phuong and Jenevieve Ho, 
directed by Isaac Kerlow. https://art-science-media.
com/change
© Isaac Kerlow
318
Chapter 2.4

Which is a pretty funny movie. 
Yes, it's very amusing and the characters 
are unique, especially for this type of film. 
This Hollywood studio film is admirable, and 
many of my friends earn their livelihood with 
productions like this. But what if a young 
director wanted to shoot a film with a small 
team that blurred or completely eliminated 
the boundaries between reality and illusion? 
This seems impossible at the moment. I look 
forward to the time in a few decades when 
a truly independent filmmaker can fully re-
alize the benefits of these technologies in a 
true independent production. Because oth-
erwise, we will keep watching the same kind 
of film. These films are fun and nice to watch, 
but they represent only a small portion of the 
films we should actually be making. I would 
love to see what independent filmmak-
ers would do with advanced high-end VFX 
technologies, once they are adapted to their 
means. This is not quite happening yet, even 
though we have excellent small "indie" pro-
ductions today with great but scaled down 
visual effects. 
I am also certain that big studios will try new 
stylistic approaches on a large scale. I can 
not predict exactly when this will happen, 
but something similar already happened 
with American cinema in the 60s and 70s. 
Suddenly big Hollywood studios were tak-
ing big stylistic risks to seize on the changes 
in technology and the viewing habits of the 
new audiences. I believe that what studios 
like DreamWorks, Pixar, Disney, Sony and Fox 
are doing now, is like milking a cow: Stylis-
tically, the expectations of the audience are 
met and this works commercially. The look 
and sentiment of these films are similar, they 
are funny, there is some melodrama, a lot 
of comedy and large audiences love these 
films. Well. This reminds me of the Holly-
wood of the 30s and 40s, the Hollywood 
that collapsed because the old styles were 
not able to reflect the new realities. And 
films like "Easy Rider" and other films in the 
1960s, and the French New Wave, all helped 
Hollywood to reinvent itself entirely. I cannot 
wait to see that. I imagine it will happen in 
many different types of ways, and I think it 
is going to happen in the most unexpected 
way. And that is exactly what I would like to 
see soon. I believe that this will happen in 
many different forms, and I also believe that 
it can happen in very unexpected ways. I 
would be excited to see this, because for me 
it would use all the technology developed 
since the 80s to end the first artistic chapter 
of 3D computer animation and then create 
something completely new, something that 
no one expected when it all started. You can 
already feel some of it happening in some of 
the games today. Today's high-end games 
are very interesting. It is impressive what 
they can achieve in a short production time. 
I believe this is proof that there will be a new 
way of doing things, for example, like using 
mobile phones for filming. Making a film 
with one tenth of the team, with one tenth 
of the budget and reach an audience com-
parable to today's blockbusters. I'm eagerly 
waiting for that to happen. It will be very ex-
citing. And this will be implemented by the 
generation of today's 20-year-old "kids". We 
can help develop this "new something", and I 
am curious to see what the outcome will be.
319
Insight into 3D Computer Animation

320
Glossary
Animatic
A filmed version of the 
storyboard that combines 
storyboard drawings with 
limited animation and camera 
movements to get an impression 
of the final film. For this purpose, 
a preliminary version of the 
soundtrack and sound effects are 
added as well.
More in chapter 1.1) Script and 
Storyboarding.
Animation Handout 
In traditional animation, it refers 
to a "package" consisting of 
storyboard, layout, dialog sheet 
and directional instructions, 
which the animator receives 
from the director. 
More in chapter 2.2) Animated 
Cartoon.
Animation Pass 
Repeated trials to improve 
animation. Each time a better 
version should emerge, building 
from the results of the previous 
one.
Animatronic
Puppets equipped with 
electronic interior life, which can 
be moved via motors in real time 
(in contrast to the single-frame 
technique used with animated 
stop-motion puppets).
Anticipation
Most movements are preceded 
by a preparatory movement 
(anticipation); good example: 
The golfer's backswing prior to 
hitting the ball. The extent of 
this anticipation must be scaled 
according to the intensity of the 
movement that follows.
Appeal
The quality of the animation 
design and/or the design of a 
character should have a positive 
effect on the audience. The 
design must be convincing and 
coherent for the relevant style.
Arcs
Movements follow the pattern of 
a curved arc line:
Each movement follows its own 
arc, which must be checked in 
animation: "Watch your arcs!"
Armature
Physical "skeleton" of a puppet in 
puppet animation. May consist 
of metal rods connected with 
joints.
More in chapter 2.3) Stop Motion.
Aspect Ratio 
Refers to the screen format. 
More in chapter 1.1) Script and 
Storyboarding.
Augmented Reality 
Changing the perception of 
reality by using computer-
generated techniques, e.g., by 
integrating virtual objects into 
live-action environments. 
Blending Motion
A special technique of character 
animation widely used in games 
and interactive applications, 
whereby movements, which are 
based on key frame animation 
or motion capture can be 
combined, and its main features 
can be identified and controlled. 
More in chapter 2.4) Interview with 
Isaac Kerlow.
Blocking
Rough work up of timing, 
using just a few key frames. 
The term is mainly used for 3D 
computer animation and for stop 
motion. More information in the 
respective chapters.
Breakdown 
The important or crucial in-
between, which defines the path 
from key frame A to key frame B. 
More in chapter 2.1) The Principles of 
Animation and their Application.
Briefing 
Specific artistic and/or technical 
definition of the task.
Cartoony 
Highly exaggerated and 
stylized form of animation and 
character design: The characters 
are heavily caricatured, and 
movements usually appear very 
"snappy".
Change of Shape 
Shape change as a principle of 
animation. 
More in chapter 2.1) The Principles of 
Animation and their Application.
Character Animation
Animation, which aims to 
produce an emotionally 
convincing theatrical 
performance of sketched, 
constructed or virtual characters.

321
Glossary
Claymation
Stop Motion using plasticine as 
a material.
More in chapter 2.3) Stop Motion.
Clean Plate
A "clean" shot of a background 
setting for VFX, that is, without 
the character, which is later to be 
added in as an animated figure 
or  live-action actor.
Clean-Up
Refers to the finalized drawing 
created from the previous 
rough animation in traditional 
2D animation, which is most 
commonly reduced to a simple 
black outline of lead or color 
pencil.
More in chapter 2.2) Traditional 2D 
Animation.
Close-Up
A shot is placing the camera near 
to a character or object, making 
it appear big on the screen. The 
shot of choice to show emotion 
(by focusing on details in a 
face) or to direct attention (by 
showcasing a specific detail).
Color Script 
Depicts the dramatically 
motivated color sequence across 
the entire movie. Resembles a 
colored storyboard, but has a 
different function. 
More in chapter 1.4)What is Production 
Design for Animation?
Comparison Sheet
Depicts the character design in 
size comparison.
More in chapter 1.3) Character Design
Compositing
Combining different image 
elements (e.g., live action 
background with 3D character) 
into a visually convincing and 
uniform frame.
More in chapter 2.4)  Interview with 
Volker Engel.
Creature Animation
Realistic animation of real or 
mythical creatures in the area 
of VFX.
Digital creatures must be 
credibly inserted into a live-
action filmed environment.
More in chapter 2.4) Interview with 
Volker Engel.
Cross Cutting 
Back and forth cutting between 
two scenes or plot threads. 
More in chapter 2.2) Traditional 2D 
Animation.
Cutout
Flat, two-dimensionally cutout 
character in traditional or digital 
animation.
Dialogue Sheet
A tabular analysis that 
breaks down the dialogue to 
correspond with the single-
frame numbers in the film.
Down Shot
Camera shot from above, e.g. 
from an aerial perspective. Also 
often referred to as "high-angle 
shot".
Exaggeration 
Animation should exaggerate: 
Merely copying the forms 
and timing of live-action films 
produces unsatisfactory results.
Exposure Sheet/X-Sheet  
Spreadsheet of frames (counted 
as single frames) and animation 
drawings. 
More in chapter 2.2) Traditional 2D 
Animation.
Extremes 
The extreme key, anchor or 
turning points of a movement. 
Often used interchangeably 
with the term key frame. Some 
animation experts disagree (see 
key frames). 
More in chapter 2.1) The Principles of 
Animation and their Application.
Fade Out/Fade In 
Means gradually decreasing or 
increasing the visibility of the 
image over time.
Field Guide 
Refers to a tool of the traditional 
2D animation layout, which lets 
you specify the camera view 
in relation to specific paper 
formats. It also defines the 
distance between the peg bar 
and the respective camera field. 
More in chapter 2.2) Traditional 2D 
Animation.
Finish Storyboards 
A highly detailed storyboard, 
which is very similar to the final 
"look" of a film, often in color 
as well.
Follow Through
A special form of overlapping 
action (listed there as well), 
which refers to the continuous 
movement of flexible and loosely 
connected objects. In character 
animation, it pertains mostly to 
hair, cloaks, tails, etc.

322
Frame by Frame 
Describes the filming technique 
for animation and is often 
considered a defining criterion 
for animation.
Gestural Drawing 
Fast, sketchy drawing, which 
reduces the character to the 
essence of its pose. Hence, an 
ideal training tool for animation. 
More in chapter 1.2) Figure Drawing for 
Storyboard and Animation.
Green Screen
A green screen in front of which, 
for example, stop-motion 
characters or actors may be 
filmed. The green background 
screen can be replaced later by 
keying with a virtual or live-
action filmed background in 
compositing.
More in chapter 2.4) Interview with 
Volker Engel.
Hard-Surface Modeling
Modeling of objects with hard, 
smooth, non-organic surface 
structures: i.e. predominantly 
technical objects such as 
machines, spaceships, buildings.
More in chapter 2.4) Insight into 3D 
Computer Animation.
Hold/Moving Hold
Standstill of animation as key 
frame/minimally animated key 
frame. 
More in chapter 2.1) The Principles of 
Animation and their Application.
Inbetweens 
The drawings or generated 
frames that connect the key 
frames with each other. 
More in chapter 2.1) The Principles of 
Animation and their Application.
Key Frame 
A key parameter of a movement 
in which a movement either 
ends in a pose or carries out 
defining directional changes. 
Used to structure timing of the 
animation as well as a scene, 
and (in traditional 2D animation) 
to ensure the consistency 
of character representation. 
Richard Williams strictly limits 
the term key frame to a step 
of the animation that is critical 
to understanding the story 
(storytelling drawing). In this 
book, however, we use the term 
largely interchangeable with 
the term extreme. "Extreme" 
and "key frame" are often used 
congruently in other animation 
reference books as well. See also 
the interview with Andreas Deja 
for a deeper discussion of this 
topic.
More in chapter 2.1) The Principles of 
Animation and their Application.
Keying 
Isolating image portions, e.g. 
background for certain visual 
features, such as chromaticity or 
luminance. This allows for these 
image portions to be replaced by 
other image elements.
Layout
A layout or 3D layout goes one 
step further than the storyboard, 
and precisely specifies field of 
view, camera movements and 
camera angles during a shot. 
Layouts provide the basis for the 
subsequent animation of the 
shots. 
The 2D layout is created in a 
traditionally or digitally drawn 
form.
The 3D layout is created as 
previsualization: generally 
rendered as low-resolution 
versions of the character models 
or even with rough geometric 
shapes as "stand ins" of the 
characters.
More in chapters 1.1) Script and 
Storyboarding and 2.4) Insight into 3D 
Computer Animation.
Leica Reel
A Leica Reel is a type of animatic, 
in which the shots throughout 
the production are replaced 
step-by-step by the latest version 
of the production: in 2D, the 
storyboard drawing is replaced 
by rough animation; rough 
animation is replaced by clean-
up, clean-up is replaced by the 
final rendered/colored version. 
In 3D accordingly, storyboard 
is replaced by previz, previz by 
playblast, playblast by the final 
rendered version.
More in chapter 1.1) Script and 
Storyboarding.
Lighting 
Virtual lighting in 3D computer 
animation.
More in chapter 2.4) Insight into 3D 
Computer Animation.
Ligne Claire 
Comic style, the best known 
example: 
"Tintin" by Hergé.
Caricatured representation of 
characters with uniform black 
outlines is combined with 
detailed realistic backgrounds.
Limited Animation 
A concept that is mostly used 
for 2D animation. It uses three 
or more exposures per single 
drawing. For example, each 
drawing is held for six frames. 
It is also used for animation, in 

323
Glossary
which characters are only partly 
animated (e.g., where only the 
mouth moves).
Line of Action 
Representation of one or several 
main directions of movement 
wthin a pose.
It helps to define the essence of 
movement(s) within the body. 
More in chapter 1.2) Figure Drawing for 
Storyboard and Animation.
Line Test
Filmed version of rough 
animation in traditional 
2D animation to assess any 
improvements needed for the 
animation.
More in chapter 2.2) Traditional 2D 
Animation.
Look 
The appearance of a character or 
a virtual world. 
More in chapter 1.4) What is Production 
Design for Animation?
Loop
An animation that works with a 
limited number of frames that 
can be repeated endlessly: After 
the last frame, the first one is 
repeated.
More in chapter 2.1) The Principles of 
Animation and their Application.
Match Cut
A cut that continues a 
movement precisely and without 
a break. 
More in chapter 1.1) Script and 
Storyboarding.
Matte Painting
Today, mostly digitally created 
painting that creates the illusion 
of a live-action setting.
Can be implemented in 2D and 
3D versions. In the 3D version, 
the painting is often projected 
onto three-dimensional 
geometric shapes.
More in chapter 2.4) Interview with 
Volker Engel.
Miniatures
Reduced in size and true to 
scale physical models used in 
live-action scenes, which were 
mainly used in VFX shots, but 
are now increasingly replaced by 
virtual sets.
More in chapter 2.4) Interview with 
Volker Engel.
Modeling
The modeling of digital objects 
and characters in 3D computer 
animation.
Virtual sculpture, for organic 
objects such as characters 
increasingly carried out with 
more intuitive software (e.g. 
ZBrush).
More in chapter 2.4) Insight into 3D 
Computer Animation.
Model Sheet
Particularly used in traditional 
2D animation for depicting 
a character from different 
perspectives and in different 
actions and moods.
Helps the animator to 
understand the vision of the 
character designer correctly and 
to implement it accordingly - the 
character stays "on model".
Essential, in order to ensure 
consistency of character 
representation, even with 
different animators.
More in chapter 1.3) Character Design.
Momentum 
Dynamics of movement.
Mood Board 
Compilation of visual reference 
materials to narrow down 
the look of a project in visual 
development.
Motion Blur 
Rendering out of focus to create 
the illusion of fast movement.
Motion Capture
The modern form of rotoscoping: 
The movements of real actors 
tagged with motion markers 
are filmed and transferred to 
digital characters, using special 
software.
More in chapter 2.4) Interview with 
Volker Engel.
Motion Control 
Allows for programmed 
execution and exact repetition of 
camera movement, for example, 
to combine different image 
elements. Hence, an important 
technique for visual effects. 
Also used to enable camera 
movements in single-frame takes 
for stop-motion shoots.
More in chapters 2.3) Stop Motion and 
2.4) Interview with Volker Engel.
Non-Photorealistic Rendering 
(NPR)
Rendering techniques, which 
are not concerned with 
photo-realism, but with the 
representation of artistically 
imaginative textures. An 
example would be the digital 
conversion of watercolor or oil 
painting.

324
Outlines 
The outlines of a character 
in traditional and digital 2D 
animation. 
More in chapter 2.2) Traditional 2D 
Animation.
Overlapping Action and Follow 
Through
Because of their weight and 
physical nature, the stomach 
and arms, for example, move 
in different rhythms, thus 
overlapping in time. The same 
applies to loose appendages 
of the character's body: the 
blowing coat, hair or the tail 
of the squirrel etc. The bounce 
of these loose pieces is called 
follow through.
Pass 
see Animation Pass 
Peg Bar 
A bar for animated films that is 
used to keep the stacked sheets 
of drawings in register. 
More in chapter 2.2) Animated 
Cartoon.
Pipeline also Production 
Pipeline
The structured production 
flow of all forms of digital 
animation. Since combinations 
and hybridization of animation 
techniques have become 
increasingly complex, it has 
become an essential part of 
animation and it is widely used 
far beyond the conventional 3D 
computer animation.
More in chapter 2.4) Insight into 3D 
Computer Animation.
Pixilation
Special stop-motion technique, 
in which live-action actors are 
animated frame-by-frame.
More in chapter 2.3) Stop Motion.
Playblast
It is a preview film version of a 
computer-generated animation, 
which is accurate to frame but 
lacks the final shading and 
rendering. Effectively the digital 
version of line tests in traditional 
2D animation, which enables the 
assessment of animation quality 
and any necessary corrections.
Pose
Posture of an animation 
character. Usually the key or end 
point of a movement and often 
exaggerated.
Post-Visualization, also Post-Viz
Analogous to previz, it is the 
post-processing of scenes shot 
with VFX, thus the combination 
of all the image elements in 
a uniformly appearing film 
sequence.
More in chapter 2.4) Interview with 
Volker Engel.
Pre-Production
Everything that precedes the 
actual production stage, i.e. for 
the most part script, storyboard, 
character design, production 
design and layout. There may also 
be some overlap with the actual 
production process.
Previsualization, also Previz
Basically another name for 3D 
layout that is used in the area 
of VFX in order to plan and 
simulate the subsequent shoot 
of elaborate and (sometimes) 
live-action scenes with special 
effects. By now an indispensable 
part of all complex VFX-based 
film productions. 
More in chapter 2.4)  and the interview 
with Volker Engel.
Principles of Animation
The original 12 principles of 
animation, as defined by Frank 
Thomas and Ollie Johnson in 
their book "Illusion of Life" (1995) 
and slightly expanded and 
modified for this manual.
More in chapter 2.1) The Principles of 
Animation and their Application.
1.)  Timing
2.)  Spacing
3.)   Slow In und Slow Out 
(deceleration/acceleration)
4.)   Straight Ahead and Pose-
to-Pose Animation
5.)   Overlapping Action, Follow-
Through 
6.)    Secondary Action 
7.)   Anticipation 
8.)    Squash and Stretch 
9.)   Arcs 
10.)  Solid Drawing 
11.)  Exaggeration 
12.) Weight 
13.) Appeal and Strong Poses 
14.) Staging 
15.)  Change of Shape 
16.)  Counter-Action 
Procedural Animation
Computer animations generated 
by simulation.
More in chapter 2.4) Interview with 
Volker Engel.
Prop 
Object that is part of the 
animated film world or 
something characters use.

325
Glossary
Public Domain 
Term for freely available artistic 
works where the copyright has 
expired.
Puppet Animation
Stop-motion technique, which 
uses built puppets, mostly 
combined with live-action built 
and illuminated miniature sets.
More in chapter 2.3) Stop Motion.
Reference Map 
Compilation of visual references 
that influence the visual 
development of a project.
Rendering 
The elaborate calculation of 
the final surface structures and 
textures with the final lighting 
settings - required for all forms of 
digital animation.
Rigging
Technology in 3D computer 
animation: Bones, joints, 
and objects controlling the 
animation are created in 
and around the objects and 
characters to be animated. The 
complexity of the rig depends 
on the character's mobility 
requirements within the scenes 
to be animated later. 
More in chapter 2.4) Insight into 3D 
Computer Animation.
Rotoscoping
The once frequently used 
process in 2D animation for 
realistic characters is based on 
frame-by-frame tracing of live-
action sequences. These must 
be adapted to the respective 
animation characters. Not unlike 
the motion capture process, an 
experienced animator has to 
thoroughly adapt and modify 
the information of movement in 
order to obtain the desired results 
(masters of this craft were Disney 
animators Milt Kahl and Marc 
Davis).
Rough Animation
Not yet finalized version of 
the animation used for all 
techniques except stop motion. 
It is refined up to a final version 
prior to clean-up in traditional 
2D animation, and prior to the 
final rendering and compositing 
in 3D computer animation.
Scripting
Special form of programming 
using scripts. For example, 
the software "Python", which 
is frequently used for 3D 
animation, can be used for 
scripting.
Secondary Action 
A "secondary action" that 
supports or even counteracts 
the primary action of a 
character. It is important that 
this secondary action does not 
dominate or drown out the 
primary movement: It must be 
noticeable, but must remain 
secondary.
Shading
Properties applied to the 
digital model in 3D computer 
animation that describe 
the material and surface in 
greater detail, such as color, 
luminosity, reflective properties, 
transparency and other surface 
details. Various settings of these 
parameters allows us to perceive 
materials as plastic, glass or 
metal, for example. 
More in chapter 2.4) Insight into 3D 
Computer Animation.
Shooting Board 
A refined version of a storyboard 
that contains additional 
information about the position, 
angle, and movement of the 
camera. Used primarily for 
accurate production planning in 
live-action and stop motion.
More in chapter 2.3) Stop Motion
Shortcut 
Key combinations on the 
computer keyboard.
Simulation
The animation of complex 
effects, such as water, storms, 
fire, etc., which are created with 
computer simulation. In contrast 
to key frame based animation, 
the animator has very limited 
control of the simulation.
More in chapter 2.4) Insight into 3D 
Computer Animation.
Sketch 
Another name for scribble.
Skribble 
Sketchy drawing, often very 
lively due to its intuitive nature.
Slow In und Slow Out 
(Cushioning)
Movements generally accelerate 
initially (gradual wider spacing of 
drawings) and slow down again 
(gradual narrower spacing of 
drawings) before they come to a 
standstill or go into a key pose.

326
Smear 
Distorted drawing in traditional 
2D animation, simulating motion 
blur.
More in chapter 2.1) The Principles of 
Animation and their Application.
Snappy Action 
Animation, which is highly 
dynamic. This is achieved by 
strong contrast in timing and 
spacing. 
More in chapter 2.1) The Principles of 
Animation and their Application.
Solid Drawing
Animated objects should always 
retain their original overall 
volume when undergoing 
any deformation. In computer 
animation, this step is 
performed by the computer, 
which calculates any relevant 
deformations on the basis of 
preconfigured volumes.
More in chapter 2.1) The Principles of 
Animation and their Application.
Spacing
Spatial arrangement of frames 
(inbetweens) between the key 
frames of an animation.
Special Effects
Practical effects that are 
produced directly on the set 
or in the camera: This includes 
traditional matte paintings, or 
animatronics.
Speed Lines 
An abstract graphic suggestion 
of fast movement, primarily 
found in comics, but with only 
limited justified use in animation.
Squash and Stretch 
Physically induced deformations 
of objects when forces act on 
them: 
Squashing and stretching. 
Staging
An action or movement 
is staged, so that it can be 
communicated best to the 
viewer. Here, almost all other 
principles of animation come 
into play, including the layout in 
relation to the specified image 
format.
Stereoscopy
3D technology that creates 
the illusion of spatial depth in 
projection and requires the 
audience to wear special glasses. 
The term "stereoscopic" avoids 
being confused with the term 3D 
computer animation: 
The general term for computer 
animation that is created 
in virtual 3D space on the 
computer, but often projected 
two-dimensionally.
Since every 3D computer 
animation basically has all the 
necessary spatial information, 
it is relatively easy to create 
stereoscopic versions.
More in chapter 2.4) Insight into 3D 
Computer Animation.
Stop Motion 
Frame-by-frame exposure 
of two-or three-dimensional 
(mostly physical) objects. For 
each exposure, the objects are 
gradually changed, in order to 
create the illusion of movement. 
More in chapter 2.3) Stop Motion.
Storyboard
Converting the script into 
cinematic shots in the form of 
drawings.
At first glance very similar to 
a comic, but with a constant 
aspect ratio.
More in chapter 1.1) Script and 
Storyboarding.
Straights/Curves
The graphically attractive 
contrast of straights and curves 
in contouring.
Straight Ahead and Pose-to-
Pose Animation
Two methods of animation that 
are usually combined:
In straight ahead, the animator 
works straight ahead from 
the first drawing in the scene, 
without planning the detailed 
movement in advance. In pose-
to-pose, the animator plans the 
scene on the basis of defined key 
poses or key frames, which are 
connected by inbetweens.
 More in chapters 2.1) The Principles of 
Animation and their Application. and 
2.2) Interview with Andreas Deja.
Strong Poses
Expressive poses.
Style Guide 
Visual guideline in the form of 
illustrations and text to ensure 
consistency of the production 
design for the animation film. 
More in chapter 1.4) Production Design.
Thumbnail 
Thumbnail sketch. Ideal for 
planning animation sequences.

327
Glossary
Time Lapse 
A single-frame technique for 
takes, in which time elapses 
between each exposure. Often 
used in pixilation.
Timing
The number of drawings/frames 
defines how long a movement 
will last "on screen".
Title Safe Area 
The area within  the framing, 
which does not overlap with a 
possible cut-off area when using 
different projections. Titles in 
this area are therefore not cut or 
blocked.
Toon Shader
Special 3D shading technique 
that creates the impression 
of a traditional 2D cartoon 
animation.
More in chapter 2.4) Insight into 3D 
Computer Animation.
Up Shot
Camera shot from below, e.g., 
the frog's eye view. Also often 
referred to as "low-angle shot".
Visual Development 
Development process of 
the visual style during the 
production design and character 
design of a film.
More in chapter 1.4) What is Production 
Design for Animation?
Visual Effects (VFX) 
Digitally generated effects - as 
opposed to practical effects, 
which are produced directly 
on the film set or in the camera 
and are correctly called special 
effects.
More in chapter 2.4) Interview with 
Volker Engel.
Visual Storytelling 
The telling of a story with 
images, or in combination of text 
and images (comics) or dialogue/
sound /music and images (film).
Walk Cycle
A special form of loop, where 
a character can walk "in 
place". In combination with 
a (mostly) horizontal pan of 
the background, it creates 
the illusion of a character in 
locomotion.
More in chapter 2.1) The Principles of 
Animation and their Application.
Waves 
Wavy movements in animation. 
More in chapter 2.1) The Principles of 
Animation and their Application.
Weight
The animation character, which 
is actually weightless, needs to 
be "given weight" convincingly: 
To achieve this, timing, spacing, 
squash and stretch, overlapping 
action, anticipation, etc. all must 
be combined skillfully.
Wireframe 
3-dimensional definition of a 
character in computer animation 
in the form of a virtual "wire 
frame"

328
Chapter 1.1
Andrews, Mark; Chapman, Brenda (di-
rector): "Brave" (2011), animated fea-
ture film, 93 min., Walt Disney Pictures, 
Burbank/Pixar Animation Studios, 
Emeryville (production), Walt Disney 
Pictures (distribution), Burbank. 
Baker, Cordell (director): "The Cat 
Came Back" (1988), animated short 
film, 7:40 min., National Film Board of 
Canada (production), Montreal.
Baker, Mark (director): "The Hill Farm" 
(1988), animated short film, 18 min.
National Film and Television School 
(production), Beaconsfield.
Cochran, Robert; Surnow, Jon (creator 
of series): „24" (2001-2010),
TV series, 8 seasons with a total of 192 
episodes, Imagine Television, Universal 
City/20th Century Fox Television, 
Los Angeles/Realtime Productions, 
Chatsworth/Teakwood Lane Produc-
tions, Los Angeles (production), 20th 
Television (broadcast/distribution), 
Los Angeles. 
Dudok de Wit, Michael (director): "The 
Monk and the Fish" ( "Le Moine et le 
Poisson") (1994), animated short film, 
6 min., Folimage (production), Valence.
Filoni, Dave (director (supervision/
direction)): "Star Wars: The Clone Wars" 
(2008-2014), animated TV series, 6 sea-
sons with a total of 121 episodes, Lu-
casfilm, San Francisco and Singapore 
(production), Trifecta Entertainment 
and Media, Los Angeles / New York 
City; Disney-ABC Domestic Television, 
Los Angeles; Netflix (broadcast/distri-
bution), Los Gatos.
Fischinger, Oskar (director): "Motion 
Painting No. 1" (1947), animated short 
film, 11 min.
Gagné, Michel (director): "Sensology" 
(2010), animated short film, 6 min.
Kubrick, Stanley (director): "2001: 
A Space Odyssey" (1968), feature 
film, 161 min. (release version), Met-
ro-Goldwyn-Mayer (production and 
distribution), Los Angeles.
Lauenstein, Christoph and Wolfgang 
(director): "Balance" (1989), animated 
short film, 7 min., Kunsthochschule 
Kassel, Hochschule für Bildende Kün-
ste Hamburg (production).
Lean, David (director): "Lawrence 
of Arabia" (1962), feature film, 222 
min, Horizon Pictures (production). 
Columbia Pictures (distribution), Los 
Angeles.
Lee, Ang (director): "Hulk" (2003), fea-
ture film, 138 min., Universal Pictures, 
Universal City/Marvel Enterprises, New 
York City/Valhalla Motion Pictures, Los 
Angeles/Good Machine (Production), 
Universal Pictures (distribution), 
Universal City. 
Rall, Hannes (director): "Das kalte 
Herz" (2013), animated short film, 
29 min.
Verbinski, Gore (director): "Rango" 
(2011), animated feature film, 107 min, 
Nickelodeon Movies, Los Angeles/
Blind Wink, Pasadena/GK Films, Santa 
Monica/Industrial Light & Magic, San 
Francisco (production); Paramount 
Pictures (distribution), Los Angeles.
Chapter 1.2
Mattesi, Mike (2009), "Force: Dynamic 
Life Drawing for Animators (Force 
Drawing Series)", 2nd Edition, Focal 
Press, Burlington, Massachusetts.
Stanchfield, Walt (2009), "Drawn to 
Life: 20 Golden Years of Disney Master 
Classes Volume 1 + 2: The Walt Stanch-
field Lectures", Focal Press, Burlington, 
Massachusetts.
Chapter 1.3
"British fashion plate, mostly men and 
boys" (1885). Public Domain. P.83, 
bottom left.
Image source (Download):
http://theathertonian.com/?attach-
ment_id=545
H.A. Thomas & Wylie Litho. Co.: „Tuxe-
do & bowler hat" (ca. 1896), 
New York City. Public Domain. P.83, 
top right.
Image source (Download):
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Tuxedo_%26_bowler_hat_1896.jpg
"Overcoat (left) and topcoat (right)" 
(1872) from "The Gazette of Fashion".
Public Domain. P.83, bottom right. 
Image source (Download):
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Mens_Coats_1872_Fashion_Plate.
jpg,
"Punch, or the London Charivari" 
(Magazine), Vol. 158, February 18th, 
1920. Various illustrators.
Public Domain. P.83, top left and 
center left.
Image source (Download):
http://www.gutenberg.org/
files/16401/16401-h/16401-h.htm
"Street Costumes" (excerpt) from 
"Antique Wanamaker's Catalog" (no 
date). Public Domain. P.83, right edge 
of image. 
Image source (Download):
http://thegraphicsfairy.com/fa-
thers-day-clip-art-victorian-family-dad/
„Victorian Gentleman". 
Public Domain. P.83, far bottom right. 
Image source (Download):
http://thegraphicsfairy.com/victori-
an-gentleman/
Chapter 1.4
Illustration of Bayeux Tapestry. Public 
Domain. P.114, bottom left.
Bibliography/Picture Credits

329
Bibliography/Picture Credits
Image source (Download):
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Bayeux_Tapestry,_scene_40.png
Bacher, Hans (2013), "Light Tower" 
Illustration.
P.114, image 2 from top.
https://one1more2time3.wordpress.
com/?s=lighttower
Bacher, Hans (2012), Color Script 
for "Das kalte Herz" (2013, director: 
Hannes
Rall). All images pp.129-130.
Chen, Minglou (2008), "A trip to Hills 
and Lakes in Spring".
Public Domain. P.108, bottom left.
Image source (Download):
http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/
commons/thumb/8/81/A_part_of_Gi-
ant_Traditional_
Chinese_Painting.JPG/1280px-A_part_
of_Giant_Traditional_Chinese_Painting.
JPG?uselang=de
Emitchan (2008), "Sanqingshan".
Public Domain. P.108, center bottom.
Image source (Download):
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:SanQingShan10.jpg?uselang=de
Fang, Congyi (1365), "Sacred Moun-
tains and Precious Groves". 
Public Domain. P.108, top, image 2 
from left.
Image source (Download):
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Fang_Congyi_Divine_Mountains.
jpg?uselang=de
Keeshu (1/3/2004), "Knob of a Viking 
Sword from the Haithabu Museum in 
Germany".
GNU Free Documentation License. 
P.112, bottom.
Image source (Download):
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Viking_sword_pommel.jpg
Lim Wei Ren Darren; Rall, Hannes 
(2014), Concept illustration for the film 
"As You Like It". P.109, bottom left.
Ma Yuan (1200-1230), "Scholar with 
servants on a terrace".
Public Domain. P.108, center top.
Image source (Download):
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Ma_Lin_Painting.jpg?uselang=de
McKay Savage (3/1/2006), "China 
Yangshuo 1- beautiful landscape".
Creative Commons License. P.108, 
top left.
Image source (Download):
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:China_-_Yangshuo_1_-_beauti-
ful_landscape_(140903344).jpg?use-
lang=de
Meier, Michael (2008), Concept illustra-
tion for film project.
P.109, top left.
Ormston, Thomas (9/28/2007), 
"Photography of Viking Longhouse 
from Þjóðveldisbærinn in Iceland". 
GNU license for free documentation. 
P.112, top.
Image source (Download):
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Stöng_Viking_Longhouse.jpg?use-
lang=de
Praefcke, Andreas (2/10/2013), "Fool's 
Jump in Weingarten on Carnival Sun-
day, 2013, Narrenverein Wikinger 1977 
e.V. (Weingarten)". Creative Commons 
License. P. 113, right.
Image source (Download):
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Weingarten_Narrensprung_2013_
Wikinger_01.jpg?uselang=de
Wergeland, Oscar (1909), "Norsemen 
Landing in Iceland" Illustration in: 
Guerber, H. A. (Hélène Adeline) (1909). 
Myths of the Norsemen from the 
Eddas and Sagas. London : Harrap. This 
illustration constitutes the endpaper. 
Public Domain. P.112, center.
Digitized by the Internet archive and 
available on:
http://www.archive.org/details/
mythsofthenorsem00gueruoft
Image source (Download):
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File%3ANorsemen_Landing_in_
Iceland.jpg
Rall, Jochen (2013), Design study for 
the film project "As You Like It" (direct-
ed by Hannes Rall)
P.114, image 4 from top.
Yew Ee Venn (2013/14), "Wang Liui-
ang". P.108, far right.
Illustrations for URECA (Undergradu-
ate Research on Campus) project at 
the Nanyang Technological University 
Singapore.
Interview Hans Bacher
Allers, Roger; Minkoff, Rob (Director):
"The Lion King" (1994), animated 
feature film, 88 min., Walt Disney
Feature Animation (Studio), Buena
Vista Pictures Distribution (distribu-
tion)
Burbank.
Bacher, Hans (2007), "Dreamworlds 
Production Design for Animation" 
(2007), Focal Press, Burlington, Mas-
sachusetts.
Bancroft, Tony; Cook, Barry (director):
"Mulan" (1998), animated feature film, 
87 min., Walt Disney Feature Anima-
tion (studio), Buena Vista Pictures 
Distribution (distribution), Burbank.
Clark, Les; Geronimi, Clyde; Larson,
Eric; Reitherman, Wolfgang (director):
"Sleeping Beauty" (1959), animated 
feature film, 79 min., Walt Disney Fea-
ture Animation (studio), Buena Vista
Distribution (distribution), Burbank.

330
Dindal, Mark (Director): "The Emperor's 
New Groove" (2000), animated feature 
film, 78 min., Walt Disney Feature An-
imation (studio), Buena Vista Pictures 
Distribution (distribution), Burbank.
Geronimi, Clyde; Luske, Hamilton;
Reitherman, Wolfgang (director): "101 
Dalmatians" (1961), animated feature 
film, 75 min., Walt Disney Feature 
Animation (studio), Buena Vista Distri-
bution (distribution), Burbank.
Hand, David (director): "Bambi" (1942), 
animated feature film, 70 min., Walt 
Disney Feature Animation (studio), 
RKO Radio Pictures (distribution), 
Burbank.
Trousdale, Gary; Wise, Kirk (director):
"Beauty and the Beast" (1991), animat-
ed feature film, 90 min., Walt Disney 
Feature Animation (studio), Buena 
Vista Pictures Distribution (distribu-
tion), Burbank.
Trousdale, Gary; Wise, Kirk (director):
"Atlantis - The Lost Empire". (2001), an-
imated feature film, 95 minutes, Walt 
Disney Feature Animation (studio), 
(distribution), Burbank.
Chapter 2.1
Baker, Mark (director): "The Hill Farm" 
(1989), animated short film, 18 min. 
National Film and Television School 
(production), Beaconsfield.
Bird, Brad (director): "The Incredibles" 
(2004), animated feature film, 115 min, 
Pixar Animation Studios, Emeryville 
(production); Buena Vista Pictures 
(distribution), Burbank.
Cakó, Ferenc (director): "Ab Ovo" 
(1987), animated short film, 7 min.
Hubley, Faith; Hubley, John (director): 
"Moon Bird"
(1959), animated short film, 10 min.
Jackson, Peter (director): "The Hobbit" 
(trilogy): 
1.) "An Unexpected Journey" (2012), 
feature film, 169 min.
2.) "The Desolation of Smaug" (2013), 
feature film, 161 min.
3.) "The Battle of the 5 Armies" (2014), 
feature film, 144 min.
New Line Cinema, Los Angeles/Met-
ro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Beverly Hills/Wing-
Nut Films, Wellington (production), 
Warner Bros Pictures (distribution), 
Burbank.
Kentridge, William (director): "Ubu 
Tells the Truth"
(1996-97), animated short film, 8 min.
Kuhn, Jochen (director): "Neulich 1"
(1998), animated short film, 4 min.
Leaf, Caroline (director): "The Meta-
morphosis of Mr. Samsa"
(1977), animated short film, 10 min.
National Film Board of Canada (pro-
duction), Montreal.
Park, Nick (director): "Wallace and Gro-
mit" (series of animated short films):
1) "A Grand Day Out" (1990), 24 min., 
The National Film and Television 
School, Beaconsfield/Aardman Stu-
dios, Bristol (production), BBC Channel 
4 (broadcast), London.
2.) "The Wrong Trousers" (1993), 30 
min, Aardman Studios (production), 
Bristol; BBC (broadcast), London.
3.) "A Close Shave" (1995), 31 min, 
Aardman Studios (production), Bristol; 
BBC (broadcast), London.
4.) "A Matter of Loaf and Death" (2008), 
29 min, Aardman Studios (produc-
tion), Bristol; BBC (broadcast), London.
Patel, Ishu (director): "Afterlife"
(1978), animated short film, 7:16 min.,
National Film Board of Canada (pro-
duction), Montreal.
Petrov, Aleksandr (director): "The Old 
Man and the Sea" (1999), animated 
short film, 20 min.
Reiniger, Lotte (director): "The Adven-
tures of Prince Achmed" (1926),
animated feature film, 65 min .; Hagen, 
Louis (production), Berlin.
Ruhemann, Andrew ; Tan, Shaun 
(director): "The Lost Thing" (2010), 
animated short film, 10 min., Passion 
Pictures (production), Melbourne.
Russell, Chuck (director): "The Mask" 
(1994), feature film (hybrid of live 
action and animation), 97 min, Dark 
Horse Entertainment (production), 
Studio City; New Line Film Produc-
tions. Inc. (distribution), Los Angeles.
Švankmajer, Jan (director): "Dimensions 
of Dialogue" (1982), animated short 
film, 14 min., Kratky film (distribution), 
Prague.
Thomas, Frank; Johnston, Ollie, (1995), 
"The Principles of Illusion" in: The Illu-
sion of Life: Disney Animation, Disney 
Edition, New York 1995, pp. 47-69
Williams, Richard (2002), "The
Animator's Survival Kit", 2nd Edition: 
pp 35, 320, 323, Faber & Faber, 
London.
Chapter 2.2
Deja, Andreas (May 20, 2014), "Xerox"
http://andreasdeja.blogspot.de 
Geronimi, Clyde; Luske, Hamilton; 
Reitherman, Wolfgang (director): "101 
Dalmatians" (1961), animated feature 
film, 103 min, Walt Disney Feature 
Animation (studio), Burbank; Buena 
Vista Distribution Company Inc. (distri-
bution), Burbank.
Jacob (March 30, 2014), „Milt Kahl - 
Animator - The AristoCats", http://
adreamer49.wordpress.com/2014/03/
30/milt-kahl-animator-the-aristocats/
Trousdale, Gary; Wise, Kirk (director):

331
Bibliography/Picture Credits
"Beauty and the Beast" (1991),
animated feature film, 90 min., Walt
Disney Feature Animation (studio),
Vista Pictures Distribution
(distribution), Burbank.
Interview Andreas Deja
Allers, Roger; Minkoff, Rob (director): 
"The Lion King" (1994), animated 
feature film, 88 min., Walt Disney Fea-
ture Animation (studio), Buena Vista 
Pictures Distribution (distribution), 
Burbank.
Bacher, Hans: "Dreamworlds Produc-
tion Design for Animation" (2007), 
Focal Press, Burlington, Massachusetts.
Bancroft, Tony; Cook, Barry (director): 
"Mulan" (1998), animated feature 
film, 87 min., Walt Disney Feature 
Animation (studio), Buena Vista 
Pictures Distribution (distribution), Los 
Angeles. 
Berger, Ludwig; Powell, Michael; 
Whelan, Tim (director): "The Thief of 
Bagdad" (1940), feature film, 106 min, 
London Films (production), London; 
United Artists (distribution), Burbank.
Clark, Les; Geronimi, Clyde; Larson, 
Eric; Reitherman, Wolfgang director): 
„Sleeping Beauty" (1959), animated 
feature film, 79 min., Walt Disney Fea-
ture Animation (studio), Buena Vista 
Distribution (distribution), Burbank.
Clements, Ron; Musker, John (director): 
"Aladdin" (1992), animated feature 
film, 90 min., Walt Disney Feature An-
imation (studio), Buena Vista Pictures 
Distribution (distribution), Burbank. 
Clements, Ron; Musker, John (director): 
"Hercules" (1997), animated feature 
film, 93 min., Walt Disney Feature An-
imation (studio), Buena Vista Pictures 
Distribution (distribution), Burbank. 
Clements, Ron; Musker, John (director): 
"The Princess and the Frog" (2009), 
animated feature film, 97 min., Walt 
Disney Feature Animation (studio), 
Walt Disney Studio Motion Pictures 
(distribution), Burbank.
DeBlois, Dean; Sanders, Chris (direc-
tor): "Lilo and Stitch" (2002), animated 
feature film, 85 min., Walt Disney 
Feature Animation (studio), Buena 
Vista Pictures Distribution (distribu-
tion), Burbank. 
Dindal, Mark (Director): "The Emperor's 
New Groove" (2000), animated feature 
film, 78 min., Walt Disney Feature An-
imation (studio), Buena Vista Pictures 
Distribution (distribution), Burbank.
Geronimi, Clyde; Jackson, Wilfred; 
Luske, Hamilton (director): "Cinderella" 
(1950), animated feature film, 74 min-
utes, Walt Disney Feature Animation 
(studio), Burbank; RKO Radio Pictures 
(distribution), Los Angeles.
Geronimi, Clyde; Jackson, Wilfred; 
Luske, Hamilton (director): "Peter Pan" 
(1953), animated feature film, 76 min-
utes, Walt Disney Feature Animation 
(studio), Burbank; RKO Radio Pictures 
(distribution), Los Angeles.
Geronimi, Clyde; Luske, Hamilton; 
Reitherman, Wolfgang (director): "101 
Dalmatians" (1961), animated feature 
film, 103 min, Walt Disney Feature 
Animation (studio), Burbank; Buena 
Vista Distribution Company Inc. (distri-
bution), Burbank.
Hand, David (director): "Bambi" (1942), 
animated feature film, 70 minutes, 
Walt Disney Feature Animation 
(studio), Burbank; RKO Radio Pictures 
(distribution), Los Angeles. 
Lounsberry, John; Reitherman, 
Wolfgang; Stevens, Art (director): "The 
Rescuers" (1977), animated feature 
film, 77 min., Walt Disney Feature 
Animation (studio), Buena Vista Distri-
bution (distribution), Burbank.
Pollock, George (director): "Murder, 
She Said" (1961), feature film, 
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Beverly Hills, 
George H. Brown Productions (produc-
tion), Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Beverly 
Hills (distribution), Los Angeles.
Reitherman, Wolfgang (director): "The 
Sword in the Stone" (1963), animated 
feature film, 79 min., Walt Disney Fea-
ture Animation (studio), Buena Vista 
Distribution (distribution), Burbank.
Reitherman, Wolfgang (director): "The 
Jungle Book" (1967), animated feature 
film, 78 min., Walt Disney Feature 
Animation (studio), Buena Vista Distri-
bution (distribution), Burbank. 
Sharpsteen, Ben (director): "Dumbo" 
(1941), animated feature film, 64 min-
utes, Walt Disney Feature Animation 
(studio), Burbank; RKO Radio Pictures 
(distribution), Los Angeles.
Stanchfield, Walt (2009), "Drawn to 
Life: 20 Golden Years of Disney Master 
Classes Volume 1 + 2: The Walt Stanch-
field Lectures" (2009), Focal Press, 
Burlington, Massachusetts.
Trousdale, Gary; Wise, Kirk (director): 
"Beauty and the Beast" (1991), animat-
ed feature film, 90 min., Walt Disney 
Feature Animation (studio), Buena 
Vista Pictures Distribution (distribu-
tion), Burbank.
Williams, Richard (2002), "The
Animator's Survival Kit", 2nd Edition: P 
256, Faber & Faber, London.
Zemeckis, Robert (director): "Who 
Framed Roger Rabbit" (1988), feature 
film (hybrid of live action and anima-
tion), 104 min., Amblin Entertainment, 
Silver Screen Partners III, Touchstone 
Pictures (studio), Buena Vista Pictures 
Distribution (distribution), Los 
Angeles. 

332
Chapter 2.3
Stop Motion
Anable, Graham; Stacchi, Anthony 
(director): "The Boxtrolls" (2014),
animated feature film, 96 min. Laika 
Entertainment (production), Hillsboro; 
Focus Features (distribution), Universal 
City.
Butler, Chris; Fell, Sam (director): "Para-
Norman" (2012), animated feature 
film, 92 min. Laika Entertainment 
(production), Hillsboro; Focus Features 
(distribution), Universal City.
Gondry, Michel (director): "Come Into 
My World" (2002), animated music 
video 4.12 min.
Harris, Noah (director): "Ford Fiesta 
Zeitgeist" (2011), animated commer-
cial, 1 min.
Haskin, Byron (director): "The War of 
the Worlds" (1953), feature film, 85 
min., Paramount Pictures (production 
and distribution), Los Angeles.
Johnson, Stephen R. (director): 
"Sledgehammer" (1986), animated 
music video, 5:01 min.
Jutra, Claude; McLaren, Norman 
(director): "A Chairy Tale" (1957), 
animated short film, 12 min., National 
Film Board of Canada (production and 
distribution), Montreal.
Laven, Orie; Nathan, Merav and Yuval 
(director): "Her Morning Elegance" 
(2009), animated music video, 3:36 min.
McLaren, Norman (director): "Neigh-
bours" (1952), animated short film, 
8:06 min., National Film Board of 
Canada (production and distribution), 
Montreal.
Nagashima, Kizo; Roemer, Larry (direc-
tor): "Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer" 
(1964), TV Special, Rankin / Bass Produc-
tions (production), New York City.
Pal, George (director): "Puppetoons" 
(1932-1947), series of animated short 
films.
Parker, Trey; Stone, Matt (creation of 
series): "South Park" (1997 - ongoing)
TV animation series, 18 seasons with a 
total of 257 episodes, Comedy Central 
(production and distribution), New 
York City.
PES(director): "Human Skateboard" 
(2008), animated short film, 0:31 min.
Reiniger, Lotte (director): "The 
Adventures of Prince Achmed" (1926), 
animated feature film, 65 min., Hagen, 
Louis (production), Berlin.
Reiniger, Lotte (director): "Kalif Storch" 
(1935), animated short film, 9:24 min.
Reiniger, Lotte (director): "Papageno" 
(1935), animated short film, 10:40 min.
Selick, Henry (director): "Coraline" 
(2009), animated feature film, 100 min, 
Laika Entertainment (production), Hill-
sboro; Focus Features (distribution), 
Universal City.
Selick, Henry (director): "The 
Nightmare Before Christmas" (1993), 
animated feature film, 76 min., 
Touchstone Pictures/Skellington 
Productions (production), Buena Vista 
Pictures (distribution), Burbank.
Shynola (director): "Strawberry Swing" 
(2009), animated music video, 4:13 min. 
Starevitch, Ladislas: "The Beautiful 
Lukanida" (1910), animated short film.
Švankmajer, Jan (director): "Food" 
(1992), animated short film, 17 min.; 
Kallista, Jaromir (production), Zeitgeist 
Films (distribution), New York City.
Švankmajer, Jan (director): "Conspir-
ators of Pleasure" (1996), animated 
feature film, 85 min.; Kallista, Jaromir 
(production), Zeitgeist Films (distribu-
tion), New York City.
Webber, Rich (director): "Purple and 
Brown" (2006), animated film series, 
13 episodes, Aardman Animation 
(production), Bristol; Nickelodeon (TV 
broadcast), New York City.
Chapter 2.4
Insight into 3D Computer Animation
Burton, Tim (director): "Alice in 
Wonderland" (2010), feature film, 108 
min., Walt Disney Pictures, Burbank/
Roth Films, Santa Monica/The Zanuck 
Company, Los Angeles/Team Todd, 
Burbank (production), Walt Disney 
Studios Motion Pictures (distribution), 
Burbank.
Cameron, James (director): "Avatar" 
(2009), feature film, 161 min.,
Lightstorm Entertainment, Manhattan 
Beac/Dune Entertainment, Los 
Angeles/Ingenious Film Partners, 
London (production); 20th Century 
Fox (distribution), Los Angeles.
Cameron, James (director): "Termina-
tor 2: Judgment Day" (1991), feature 
film, 136 min, Carolco Pictures/Pacific 
Western/Lightstorm Entertainment, 
Manhattan Beach/Le Studio Canal + 
SA, Paris (production); TriStar Pictures 
(distribution), Los Angeles.
Fincher, David (director): "The Curious 
Case of Benjamin Button" (2008), 
feature film, 166 min, The Kennedy/
Marshall Company (production), 
Santa Monica; Paramount Pictures (US 
distribution, Hollywood; Warner Bros. 
Pictures (global distribution), Burbank.
Fuchssteiner, Felix; Schöde, Katharina 
(director): "Sapphire Blue" (2014), 
feature film, 116 min., Tele München 
Fernseh Produktionsgesellschaft 
(TMG) (production), Munich, Concorde 
Filmverleih (distribution), Grünwald.

333
Bibliography/Picture Credits
Goedegebure, Sascha (director): "Big 
Buck Bunny" (2008), animated short 
film, 10 min., Blender Foundation (pro-
duction), Amsterdam, The Geeworld 
Studios (distribution), Los Angeles.
Heffron, Richard T. (director): "Future 
World" (1976), feature film, 104 min., 
Aubrey Company/Paul N. Lazarus III 
(production), American International 
(distribution), Los Angeles.
Jackson, Peter (director): "The Lord 
of the Rings: The Two Towers" (2002), 
feature film, 179 min, WingNut Films, 
Wellington/The Saul Zaentz Company, 
Passaic (production); New Line Cinema 
(distribution), Los Angeles.
Lasseter, John (director): "Toy Story" 
(1995), animated feature film, 81 min, 
Pixar Animation Studios, San Fran-
cisco. Walt Disney Pictures, Burbank 
(production); Buena Vista Pictures 
(distribution), Los Angeles.
Leterrier, Louis (director): "Clash of 
the Titans" (2010), feature film, 96 
min., Legendary Pictures, Burbank/
The Zanuck Company, Los Angeles/
Thunder Road Pictures, Santa Monica 
(production), Warner Bros. Pictures 
(distribution), Burbank.
Lucas, George (director): "Star Wars" 
(1977), feature film, 121 min, Lucasfilm 
(production), San Francisco; 20th Cen-
tury Fox (distribution), Los Angeles.
Reeves, Matt (director): "Dawn of the 
Planet of the Apes" (2014), feature 
film, 130 min, Chernin Entertainment, 
Santa Monica/TSG Entertainment, Las 
Vegas (production); 20th Century Fox 
(distribution), Los Angeles.
Sakaguchi, Hironobu (director): "Final 
Fantasy: The Spirits Within" (2001), 
animated feature film, 108 min, Square 
Pictures (production), Tokyo; Columbia 
Pictures (distribution), Culver City.
Scorsese, Martin (director): "Hugo" 
(2011), feature film, 126 min., GK 
Films/Infinitum Nihil, Los Angeles 
(production), Paramount Pictures 
(distribution), Los Angeles.
Spielberg, Steven (director): "Jurassic 
Park" (1993), feature film, 127 min, 
Amblin Entertainment (production), 
Universal City; Universal Pictures 
(distribution), Universal City.
Tykwer, Tom; Wachowski, Andy; 
Wachowski, Lana (director): "Cloud 
Atlas" (2013), feature film, 171 min., 
Anarchos Productions/Cloud Atlas 
Productions/X-Filme Creative Pool 
(production), Warner Bros. Pictures 
(distribution), Burbank.
Wyatt, Rupert (director): "Rise of the 
Planet of the Apes" (2011), feature 
film, 105 min, Chernin Entertainment, 
Santa Monica/Dune Entertainment, 
Los Angeles/Big Screen Productions/
Ingenious Film Partners, London 
(production); 20th Century Fox (distri-
bution), Los Angeles.
Interview Volker Engel
Emmerich, Roland (director): "Inde-
pendence Day" (1996), feature film, 
145 min., Centropolis Entertainment 
(production), 20th Century Fox (distri-
bution), Los Angeles. 
Emmerich, Roland (director): "2012" 
(2009), feature film, 158 min., 
Columbia Pictures (production), Sony 
Pictures Releasing (distribution), Los 
Angeles. 
Emmerich, Roland (director): "Anon-
ymous" (2011), feature film, 130 min., 
Anonymous Pictures/Centropolis 
Entertainment/Relativity Media Stu-
dio, Los Angeles/Babelsberg Motion 
Pictures, Berlin (production), Columbia 
Pictures (distribution), Los Angeles.
Emmerich, Roland (director): "White 
House Down" (2013), feature film, 131 
min., Centropolis Entertainment, My-
thology Entertainment (production), 
Columbia Pictures (distribution), Los 
Angeles. 
Interview Isaac Kerlow
Gunn, James (director): "Guardians of 
the Galaxy" (2014), feature film, 122 
min, Marvel Studios (production), New 
York City; Walt Disney Studios Motion 
Pictures (distribution), Los Angeles.
Kerlow, Isaac (2009), "The Art of 3D 
Computer Animation And Effects", 4th 
edition, Wiley, Hoboken, New Jersey.
Osborne, Mark; Stevenson John 
(director): (2008) "Kung Fu Panda" 
(2008), animated feature film, 92 min., 
DreamWorks Animation (production), 
Paramount Pictures (distribution), Los 
Angeles.
Verbinski, Gore (director): "Rango" 
(2011), animated feature film, 107 min, 
Nickelodeon Movies, Los Angeles/
Blind Wink, Pasadena/GK Films, Santa 
Monica/Industrial Light & Magic, San 
Francisco (production); Paramount 
Pictures (distribution), Los Angeles.
All internet sources were accessed on 
06/01/2015.

334
Some preliminary remarks: The 
following list represents only 
a limited selection of what we 
believe to be some of the most 
important and most useful 
books on their respective topics. 
Waging into the decision was, 
of course, the extent, to which 
this literature constitutes a 
meaningful addition to the book 
at hand. Fortunately, the number 
of interesting publications 
on animation has increased 
exponentially in recent years, 
and with so many good books 
on the market now, it is simply 
impossible to buy them all.
An animator, of course, can 
never have enough books, 
particularly when considering 
the very beautiful art books on 
special films, which are published 
with almost every major film 
production. 
The Internet offers endless 
resources as well, often free of 
charge. Prompt and valuable 
information is available for 
almost every aspect of animation, 
including blogs and websites 
with artistic examples on all 
those topics discussed here. 
Almost any film imaginable is 
available for purchase online, and 
many others are available free of 
charge. This is especially true for 
many artistic short films, which 
are otherwise only shown at film 
festivals. Therefore, we can only 
encourage you to continue your 
study, particularly in the detailed 
(frame by frame!) analysis of 
these resources. And - more 
important than ever - keep an 
open mind! Animation designers 
should think outside the box 
and seek inspiration from areas 
other than animation, such 
as live-action movies, theater, 
ballet, modern and classical fine 
arts, graphic design as well as 
interactive applications. It's the 
only path to innovation and to 
leaving the worn paths behind!
1.1) Script and Storyboarding
Top Tip: Alexander, Kate; Besen, 
Ellen; Mintz, Aubry; Sullivan, 
Karen (2013): "Ideas for the 
Animated Short: Finding and 
Building Stories", second 
extended Edition, Focal Press, 
Burlington, Massachusetts. 
One of the very few books on the 
market that specifically deals with 
the development of stories for 
animated short films, providing 
useful details with many examples.
Bacher, Hans (2015), "Sketchbook: 
Composition Studies for Film" 
Laurence King Publishing, 
London.
Top Tip: Beiman, Nancy (2012), 
"Prepare to Board! Creating Story 
and Characters for Animated 
Features and Shorts: 2nd 
Edition ", Focal Press, Burlington, 
Massachusetts.
If you want to invest only in one 
book on the subject, then Beiman's 
work is perfect: It successfully 
combines story development with 
character design and storyboard. 
Easy to understand, funny and 
superbly illustrated.
Top Tip: Brown, Blain (2011), 
"Cinematography: Theory and 
Practice: Image Making for 
Cinematographers and Directors", 
2nd Edition, Focal Press, 
Burlington, Massachusetts. 
An outstanding book, which 
uses a very comprehensive and 
effective combination of image 
and text to introduce the basics 
of cinematography and visual 
storytelling for film.
Eisner, Will Graphic (2008), 
"Graphic Storytelling and 
Visual Narrative", WW Norton & 
Company, New York City.
Building on that:
Eisner, Will, (2008), "Comics and 
Sequential Art: Principles and 
Practices from the Legendary 
Cartoonist" (Will Eisner 
Instructional Books), W.W. Norton 
& Company, New York City.
Glebas, Francis (2008): "Directing 
the Story: Professional 
Storytelling and Storyboarding 
Techniques for Live Action 
and Animation", Focal Press, 
Burlington, Massachusetts.
Glebas, Francis (2012) : "The 
Animator's Eye: Adding Life to 
Animation with Timing, Layout, 
Design, Color and Sound", Focal 
Press, Burlington, Massachusetts.
Hart, John (2007), "The Art of 
the Storyboard: A Filmmaker's 
Introduction, Second Edition", 
Focal Press, Burlington, 
Massachusetts.
Katz, Jason; Lasseter, John (2015): 
"Funny!: Twenty-Five Years in 
the Pixar Story Room", Chronicle 
Books, San Francisco.
Top Tip: Mateu-Mestre, Marcos 
(2010): "Framed Ink: Drawing 
and Composition for Visual 
Storytellers", Design Studio Press, 
Culver City.
In my opinion, simply the best book 
Recommendations for Additional Reading
Hannes Rall, Kathrin Albers (Stop Motion) and Melanie Beisswenger (3D Computer Animation).

335
Recommendations for additional reading
when it comes to the concepts of 
composition, cinematography, 
lighting, lenses and film editing 
in the storyboard. Add to this 
the brilliant drawings which 
beautifully explain the concepts. 
The reader will be able to learn 
so much just by studying these 
illustrations.
Top Tip: McCloud, Scott (1994), 
"Understanding Comics", William 
Morrow Paperbacks, New York 
City.
Building on that:
McCloud, Scott (2006), "Making 
Comics: Storytelling Secrets of 
Comics, Manga and Graphic 
Novels", Harper Paperbacks, New 
York City.
Yes - this is about comics. And there 
are differences between comics 
and animation. Nevertheless, there 
are a lot of similarities in terms of 
visual storytelling, and animators 
can learn a tremendous amount 
here. The stroke of genius is the 
fact that McCloud explains the 
principles of visual storytelling 
in comic form - virtually 
demonstrating the relevance of 
his theory/theories in a practical 
example.
Wright, Jean Ann (2005), 
"Animation Writing and 
Development: From Script 
Development to Pitch", Focal 
Press, Burlington, Massachusetts.
Websites:
Top Tip: Kennedy, Mark: "Temple 
of the Seven Golden Camels",
sevencamels.blogspot.com
The blog of a storyboard expert 
who offers an incredibly broad 
and valuable selection of posts 
on visual storytelling for (mainly) 
animation and comics. The best 
site I have found so far on these 
specific topics!
1.2) Figure Drawing for 
Storyboard and Animation
Top Tip: Chelsea, David (1997): 
"Perspective! for Comic Book 
Artists: How to Achieve a 
Professional Look in your 
Artwork", Watson-Guptill, New 
York City.
Building on that:
Chelsea, David (2011): "Extreme 
Perspective! For Artists: Learn the 
Secrets of Curvilinear, Cylindrical, 
Fisheye, Isometric, and Other 
Amazing Systems that Will Make 
Your Drawings Pop Off the Page", 
Watson-Guptill, New York City.
Chelsea, not unlike McCloud, 
congenially uses the comic 
medium to explain the concepts 
of perspective drawing in an 
easy-to-understand and pragmatic 
manner.
Top Tip: Hultgren, Ken 
(1993): "The Art of Animal 
Drawing: Construction, Action 
Analysis, Caricature (Dover Art 
Instruction)", Dover Publications, 
Mineola.
Little text, but the wonderful 
illustrations are virtually self-
explanatory. Probably the best 
drawings that successfully 
combine high realism and 
anatomical precision in animal 
representation with the stylization, 
exaggeration and simplification 
needed for animation. A master of 
his craft.
Top Tip: Mattesi, Mike (2009): 
"Force: Dynamic Life Drawing 
for Animators (Force Drawing 
Series)", 2nd Edition, Focal Press, 
Burlington, Massachusetts.
Building on that:
Mattesi, Mike (2011): "Force: 
Animal Drawing: Animal 
Locomotion and Design 
Concepts for Animators (Force 
Drawing Series)", Focal Press, 
Burlington, Massachusetts.
Mattesi also sets a standard by 
showing animators with his wealth 
of illustrations, how to best utilize 
and implement drawing according 
to model. He then applies the same 
basic concepts to the drawing of 
animals in the second book. There 
is an accompanying website below.
Top Tip: Stanchfield, Walt (2009), 
"Drawn to Life: 20 Golden Years of 
Disney Master Classes Volume 1 + 
2: The Walt Stanchfield Lectures", 
Burlington, Massachusetts.
These two volumes based on the 
sketchbooks and notes of the 
longtime drawing instructor at 
Disney Feature Animation, Walt 
Stanchfield, are an absolute 
must. The perfect addition and 
expansion to Mattesi's books 
- much more focused on the 
specific connection between the 
requirements of animation and the 
practice of figure drawing.
Websites
Mattesi, Mike, "Drawingforce.
com"
http://www.drawingforce.com
The website of Mike Mattesi.
1.3) Character Design - Virtual 
Casting Couch for Animated 
Film Stars
Amid, Amidi (2006), "Cartoon 
Modern", Chronicle Books, San 
Francisco.

336
Bancroft, Tom (2006), "Creating 
Characters with Personality: For 
Film, TV, Animation, Video Games, 
and Graphic Novels", Watson-
Guptill, New York City.
Building on that:
Bancroft, Tom (2012), "Character 
Mentor: Learn by Example to 
Use Expressions, Poses, and 
Staging to Bring Your Characters 
to Life", Focal Press, Burlington, 
Massachusetts.
Denicke, Lars; Thaler, Peter (2012), 
"Pictoplasma - The Character 
Compendium", Pictoplasma 
Publishing, Berlin.
Kato, Bob (2014), "The Drawing 
Club: Master the Art of Drawing 
Characters from Life", Quarry 
Books, Beverly, Massachusetts.
Top Tip: Mattesi, Mike (2008), 
"Force: Character Design from 
Life Drawing (Drawing Force 
Series)", Focal Press, Burlington, 
Massachusetts.
This is another book, where Mattesi 
pursues a very interesting and 
unusual concept: What does the 
drawing of real people bring to 
character design? 
1.4) What is Production Design 
for Animation?
Top Tip: Bacher, Hans (2007), 
"Dreamworlds Production Design 
for Animation", Focal Press, 
Burlington, Massachusetts.
Established as the standard 
reference on the topic, it explains 
extensively the concepts for 
production design in animation, 
using beautiful illustrations 
throughout.
Canemaker, John (2014), "The Art 
and Flair of Mary Blair (Updated 
Edition): An Appreciation (Disney 
Editions Deluxe)" Disney Editions, 
Glendale.
Top Tip: Ghez, Didier 
(2015-ongoing), "They Drew as 
They Pleased: The Hidden Art of 
Disney's Golden Age Vol. 1-3", 
Chronicle Books, San Francisco.
A book series about the (hidden) 
art of the Disney Concept Artists 
of the 1930s into the 1990s. So 
relevant, because these concept 
studies were often much more 
daring, elaborate and more radical 
than what was later - in part due 
to technical reasons - seen in the 
completed movies. An ideal source 
of inspiration for designers in the 
digital age, who after all, have a 
whole new world of technological 
possibilities available to them. 
Of course, it's best to acquire all 
(yet to be published) volumes of 
this series, in order to see the full 
stylistic range of that period.
Polson, Tod (2013), "The Noble 
Approach: Maurice Noble and 
the Zen of Animation Design", 
Chronicle Books, San Francisco.
Websites:
Top Tip: Amidi, Amid, "Cartoon 
Brew"
http://www.cartoonbrew.com
Very important website, always 
with up-to-date reports about 
artistic developments in the 
mainstream and independent 
sector! Worth checking out daily.
Top Tip: Bacher, Hans: 
"One1more2three3's Weblog", 
https://one1more2time3.wordpress.
com
An inexhaustible and constantly 
updated treasure trove for 
inspiration with a stylistically open 
perspective. Visually very analytical 
and always in good taste in the 
selection of outstanding examples 
of animation, film, comics, 
illustration and visual art.
2.1) The Principles of Animation 
and their Application
Top Tip: Blair, Preston (1994), 
"Cartoon Animation", Walter 
Foster Publishing, Irvine.
This book, designed in 1947 by 
animation veteran Blair (among 
others Disney, MGM), remains a 
stroke of genius for me: In an easy-
to-grasp manner, he explains the 
12 basic principles of animation 
with unsurpassed simplicity and 
clarity. 
Top Tip: Goldberg, Eric (2008), 
"Character Animation Crash 
Course!" Silman-James Press, Los 
Angeles.
Disney Animator Goldberg 
(responsible, among others, for 
the Genie in "Aladdin") provides 
a comprehensive, systematic and 
easy-to-understand introduction to 
the basic principles of animation. 
Like Blair's book, it is an excellent 
introduction "from the ground 
up", but also of great interest 
for advanced animators, if only 
because of the excellent drawings. 
With accompanying DVD, where 
you can view the examples from 
the book in motion.
Hooks, Ed (2011), "Acting 
for Animators", 3rd edition, 
Routledge, London.
Top Tip: Williams, Richard (2002), 
"The Animator's Survival Kit," 

337
Recommendations for additional reading
second edition, Faber and Faber, 
London.
The "Bible" -the undisputed 
standard reference, unmatched 
level of detail and author's 
wealth of knowledge. Minor 
limitation: Can be overwhelming 
for beginners and, in my opinion, 
focuses too much on walk cycles.
Builds on this book and is therefore 
a great addition! Excellent DVD 
and iPad editions are available 
as well.
2.2) Animated Cartoon 
(traditional 2D animation)
Top Tip: Deja, Andreas (2015), 
"The Nine Old Men: Lessons, 
Techniques, and Inspiration from 
Disney's Great Animators", Focal 
Press, Burlington, Massachusetts.
Top animator Deja about the 
legendary "Nine Old Men", the 
(early) golden era at Disney. It is 
interesting that these masters 
of traditional 2D animation had 
fundamentally different artistic 
personalities. Contrary to what one 
might think, this work also offers 
great information on diverse and 
very different concepts.
Top Tip: Halas, John; Whitaker, 
Harold (2009), "Timing for 
Animation", Sito, Tom (Editor), 
Focal Press, Burlington, 
Massachusetts.
Another classic, which could 
also be listed under the heading 
"Principles of Animation".
Websites:
Top Tip: Deja, Andreas, "Deja 
View".
http://andreasdeja.blogspot.de
Excellent addition to the interview 
in this book. On his blog, Andreas 
shows countless examples of 
beautifully drawn character 
animation. He usually combines 
clips with images of original 
drawings. Ideal for analyzing and 
learning!
2.3) Stop Motion
Top Tip: Lord, Peter; Sibley, Brian 
(2010) "Cracking Animation- The 
Aardman Book of 3-D Animation", 
Thames & Hudson, London.
Not only for fans of the long-
standing Aardman Studio in Bristol. 
It provides insight into the world of 
"Wallace and Gromit", "Gumpy" and 
"Shawn, the Sheep", but unlike many 
other making-of books (which are 
often nothing more than a self-
promotion of studios), it is a very 
easy-to-read and straightforward 
manual. The many pictures help 
the reader to understand the 
individual production steps and 
to get introduced to the subject 
matter. Very suitable for beginners 
and especially those readers, who 
are interested in clay animation 
technique.
Top Tip: Priebe, Ken (2010), "The 
Advanced Art of Stop-Motion 
Animation", Cengage Learning, 
Boston.
This book provides a very 
comprehensive insight into the 
professional work of stop motion. 
And while it does not take a distinct 
look at the animation form itself, it 
provides highly practical, detailed 
reports on all areas of puppet 
animation production.
Top Tip: Purves, Barry (2007), 
"Stop Motion: Passion, Process 
and Performance", Focal Press, 
Burlington, Massachusetts.
A "bible" for any stop-motion 
filmmaker, which will never be 
outdated. Purvis, a renowned 
animation filmmaker, provides 
deep insight into the complex 
world of puppet animation, 
including practical tips and precise 
production processes. However, 
this book goes beyond the status 
of a simple "how-to-do" book and 
offers an intellectually engaging 
discussion on the subject, enriched 
by entertaining interviews and 
reports from professionals in 
the industry. Purvis talks about 
his personal experiences, which 
lends credence to his sincerity and 
enthusiasm for puppet animation 
in each chapter, making this an 
inspiring reference book! Suitable 
for anyone interested in animation 
and for every student at any level.
Top Tip: Purves, Barry (2014), 
"Stop Motion Animation: Frame 
by Frame Film-making with 
Puppets and Models (Basics 
Animation)" (2nd Edition), 
Fairchild Books, London.
Less extensive than the above 
mentioned work, and instead 
focusing only on production. It 
is based on stop-motion films by 
renowned filmmakers and explains 
various techniques and processes 
in an easy-to-understand and 
practical manner. It adequately 
covers every production step, 
but is mainly focused on 
character animation. Best suited 
for advanced beginners and 
animation enthusiasts in general.
Websites:
Top Tip: www.dragonframe.com
Website of Dragonframe, the 
currently most popular and 

338
professional stop motion software. 
It provides many good (especially 
technical) tips and many links to 
current productions from which 
you can learn a lot. Professionals 
and beginners alike love and use 
this software.
2.4) Insight into 3D Computer 
Animation
Amin, Jahirul (2015), "Beginner's 
Guide to Character Creation 
in Maya", 3dtotal Publishing, 
Worcester, UK.
Top Tip: Birn, Jeremy (2013), 
"Digital Lighting and Rendering" 
Third Edition, New Riders, 
Berkeley.
This book not only elaborates on 
the software-independent practical 
implementation of lighting and 
rendering, but it also deals with 
the broader-reaching artistic 
fundamentals, in order to achieve 
effective image design and staging 
through lighting. Principles of 
photography, cinematography and 
visual arts are covered as well as 
the specific types of lighting used in 
3D animation application.
Cantor, Jeremy (2013), "Secrets of 
CG Short Filmmakers", Cengage 
Learning, Boston.
Dunlop, Renee (2014), 
"Production Pipeline 
Fundamentals for Film and 
Game", Focal Press, Burlington, 
Massachusetts.
Gress, Jon (2014), "Visual Effects 
and Compositing", New Riders, 
Berkeley.
Top Tip: Jones, Angie. Oliff, Jamie 
(2006), "Thinking Animation: 
Bridging the Gap Between 
2D and CG", Thomson Course 
Technology, Boston
The focus of this book is on 
character animation and is aimed 
at both 3D and 2D animators who 
want to transfer to and/or improve 
their skills with 3D animation. 
The authors cover special features 
and challenges in 3D animation 
and deepen the basics of 
animation and acting.
Top Tip: Kerlow, Isaac (2009), "The 
Art of 3D Computer Animation 
and Effects", 4th expanded and 
revised edition, Wiley, New York 
City.
Isaac Kerlow provides a 
comprehensive insight into 
the various aspects of modern 
computer animation and shows 
the historical development of 
techniques and their applications. 
This book is a good introduction 
into the subject matter, but is not 
primarily a guide for practical 
application.
Top Tip: Osipa, Jason (2010), 
"Stop Staring: Facial Modeling 
and Animation Done Right", Wiley 
Publishing, Indianapolis.
The animation of faces in 3D is 
a special artistic and technical 
challenge that Jason Osipa 
presents with this classic for 
3D setup of faces. He presents 
complex facts and processes in an 
easy-to-understand manner, thus 
providing a solid introduction to a 
complex topic. 
Roy, Kenny (2014), "Finish 
Your Film! Tips and Tricks for 
Making an Animated Short in 
Maya", Focal Press, Burlington, 
Massachusetts.
Spencer, Scott (2010), "ZBrush 
Digital Sculpting Human 
Anatomy", Wiley, Indianapolis.
Vaughan, William (2011), "Digital 
Modeling", New Riders, Berkeley.
Websites:
IT'S ART 
www.itsartmag.com
CGSociety 
www.cgsociety.org 
fxphd 
www.fxphd.com
3DTotal 
www.3dtotal.com

339
New Animation Projects by Hannes Rall
New Animation Projects by Hannes Rall
Visual development for the animated short films "All the World's a 
Stage" and "As You Like It" 
(being developed) - based on William Shakespeare.
Director: Hannes Rall. Script: Daniel Keith Jernigan.
Visual Development: Hannes Rall, Jochen Rall and Lim Wei Ren Darren.
Character Designs by Hannes Rall (roughs) and Lim Wei 
Ren Darren (clean-up). These designs show the design 
influences of traditional art, the silhouette films by Lotte 
Reiniger and the minimalistic/puristic design style by 
designers like Saul Bass.
Design sketches for the 
film "All the World's a 
Stage" (2016), directed by 
Hannes Rall.
Production Painting for the film "All the World's a Stage" by 
Hannes Rall. The film has been screened at over 100 interna-
tional festivals and won 4 awards.

340
Design study for the prologue 
sequence of "As You Like It" by 
Hannes Rall.
Additional design studies for the 
prologue sequence by Hannes Rall.
Prop designs by Hannes Rall 
(design/roughs) and 
Lim Wei Ren Darren (clean-up and 
color design).

341
Future Animation Projects by Hannes Rall
Visual Development for the animated feature film "Die Nibelungen"
(being developed)
Director and script writer (with dialogue co-author Simon Rost): Hannes Rall. 
Script Advisor: Alex Buresch.
Visual Development: Hans Bacher and Hannes Rall.
Expressionist study. 
© Copyright Hans Bacher.
Character design of Siegfried. 
© Copyright Hans Bacher.
Production Painting: Siegfried in the forest
© Copyright Hans Bacher.
Production Painting: 
Brunhilde confronting 
King Gunther. 
© Copyright Hannes Rall.

