 
 
Dragon Harper is a work of fiction. Names, places, and incidents either are products of the authors’
imagination or are used fictitiously.
Copyright © 2007 by Anne McCaffrey and Todd J. McCaffrey
Published in the United States by Del Rey Books, an imprint of The Random House Publishing Group, a
division of Random House, Inc., New York.
DEL REY is a registered trademark and the Del Rey colophon is a trademark of Random House, Inc.
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA 
McCaffrey, Anne.
Dragon Harper / Anne McCaffrey & Todd McCaffrey.
p.   cm.
eISBN: 978-0-345-50252-0
1. Pern (Imaginary place)—Fiction. 2. Life on other planets—Fiction. 3. Space colonies—Fiction. 4.
Dragons—Fiction. I. McCaffrey, Todd, 1956– II. Title.
PS3563.A255D73 2007
813'.54—dc22         2007027611
www.delreybooks.com 
v1.0
 
BY ANNE MCCAFFREY
Published by Ballantine Books
Decision at Doona 
Dinosaur Planet 
Dinosaur Planet Survivors 

The Mystery of Ireta 
Get Off the Unicorn 
The Lady 
Pegasus in Flight 
Restoree 
The Ship Who Sang 
To Ride Pegasus 
Nimisha’s Ship 
Pegasus in Space 
Black Horses for the King 
THE CRYSTAL SINGER BOOKS
Crystal Singer 
Killashandra 
Crystal Line 
THE DRAGONRIDERS OF PERN
Dragonflight 
Dragonquest 
The White Dragon 
Moreta: Dragonlady of Pern 
Nerilka’s Story 
Dragonsdawn 
The Renegades of Pern 
All the Weyrs of Pern 
The Chronicles of Pern: First Fall 
The Dolphins of Pern 
Dragonseye 
The Masterharper of Pern 
The Skies of Pern 
A Gift of Dragons 
On Dragonwings 
BY TODD MCCAFFREY
Dragonsblood 
BY ANNE MCCAFFREY AND TODD MCCAFFREY
Dragon’s Kin 

Dragon’s Fire 
Dragon Harper 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
ANNE MCCAFFREY, the Hugo Award–winning author of the bestselling Dragonriders of Pern®
novels, is  one  of  science  fiction’s  most  popular  authors.  With  Elizabeth  Ann  Scarborough,  she
co-authored Changelings and Maelstrom, Book One and Book Two of The Twins of Petaybee.
McCaffrey lives in a house of her own design, Dragonhold-Underhill, in County Wicklow, Ireland.
Visit the author’s website at www.annemccaffrey.net.
TODD  MCCAFFREY  is  the  bestselling  author  of  the  Pern  novel  Dragonsblood,  as  well  as
Dragon’s  Kin  and  Dragon’s  Fire,  which  he  co-wrote  with  his  mother,  Anne  McCaffrey.  A
computer engineer, he currently lives in Los Angeles.
Having grown up in Ireland with the epic of the Dragonriders of Pern, he is bursting with ideas for
new  stories  of  that  world,  its  people,  and  its  dragons.  Visit  the  author’s  website  at
www.toddmccaffrey.org.
 
To Alec A. Johnson
Son, Brother, Father, Patriot 
 
CONTENTS 
TITLE PAGE 
DEDICATION 
DRAMATIS PERSONAE 
PROLOGUE 
ISTA WEYR, AFTER LANDING (AL) 495.4 
CHAPTER 1
HIGH REACHES WEYR, AL 495.8 
CHAPTER 2

HIGH REACHES WEYR 
CHAPTER 3
ALEESA’S WHERHOLD 
CHAPTER 4
HARPER HALL 
CHAPTER 5
HARPER HALL, AL 496.11 
CHAPTER 6
HARPER HALL 
CHAPTER 7
HARPER HALL 
CHAPTER 8
BENDEN WEYR 
CHAPTER 9
HARPER HALL 
CHAPTER 10
HARPER HALL 
CHAPTER 11
FORT HOLD 
CHAPTER 12
FORT HOLD 
CHAPTER 13
HARPER HALL 
CHAPTER 14
FORT HOLD 
CHAPTER 15
RED BUTTE 
CHAPTER 16
IGEN WEYR STAR STONES 
EPILOGUE
BENDEN WEYR, AL 497.1 
AUTHORS’ NOTES 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 

ALSO BY ANNE MCCAFFREY 
COPYRIGHT 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank Shelly Shapiro, our longtime editor at Del Rey, for all her hard work in making
this book great. She was aided by Judith Welsh, our editor at Transworld, and we’d like to  thank  her,
too.
Once again, the redoubtable Martha Trachtenburg did a sterling job of copyediting the book, catching
many things that we’d missed and making suggestions for the improvement of our verse. Thanks, Martha.
We’re sorry about all the handkerchiefs.
Georgeanne  “Gigi”  Kennedy,  daughter  and  sister,  respectively,  provided  her  moral  support,
encouragement, and occasional keen insight as with all other Pern books.
Finally, we’d like to thank our agents, Diana Tyler of MBA Literary Agency,  and  Donald  Maass  of
the Donald Maass Literary Agency for their support, cheer, and great feedback on the rough draft.
Any mistakes, errors, or omissions are, as always, strictly our own.
 
DRAMATIS PERSONAE 
AT THE HARPER HALL
Murenny, Masterharper of Pern
Biddle, Voicemaster
Caldazon, Instrument Master
Lenner, Masterhealer of Pern
Selora, head cook
Journeymen:
Issak, Tenelin, Gerrin
Apprentices:
Kindan, Nonala, Kelsa, Verilan, Vaxoram

AT FORT HOLD
Bemin, Lord Holder
Sannora, Lady Holder
Semin, Bannor, their sons
Koriana, Fiona, their daughters
AT THE WHERHOLD
Aleesa, Whermaster, queen Aleesk
Mikal, ex-dragonrider
Arella, Aleesa’s daughter
Jaythen, wherman
AT BENDEN WEYR
M’tal, Weyrleader of Benden Weyr, bronze dragon Gaminth
Salina, Weyrwoman, queen dragon Breth
AT ISTA WEYR
C’rion, Weyrleader
J’lantir, Wingleader, bronze Lolanth
J’trel, blue rider, Talith
 
PROLOGUE 
Dragon’s heart, 
Dragon’s fire, 
Rider true, 
Fly higher. 

ISTA WEYR,
AFTER LANDING (AL) 495.4
J ’lantir’s brows were thick,  gathered  like thunderclouds  as  he glowered  at  his wing riders.  He  had
called them to his quarters  and  met them in Lolanth’s weyr.  The presence  of his bronze  dragon,  eyes
whirling menacingly red, left his wing riders in no doubt as to his mood.
“A sevenday!” he bellowed. “You’ve been missing for a whole sevenday.”
He glared at each one in turn, ending with J’trel and his partner, K’nad. J’trel, J’lantir guessed, would
say nothing, but K’nad looked both too nervous and too—amused?
Every rider  had  bags  under  his eyes  as  though he had  been  without sleep  for the whole sevenday.
Young J’lian was leaning against V’sog, who himself looked only barely able to stand. M’jial and B’zim
surreptitiously supported the other two.
L’cal’s frown was severe and directed toward the rest of the wing, but beneath his bushy eyebrows,
the eldest rider maintained a stoic silence.
Cavorting and carrying on, no doubt, J’lantir thought sourly. Their dragons  looked  even worse,  pale
and exhausted. J’lantir had never heard of dragons becoming exhausted because  of their riders’  antics.
He narrowed his eyes as he looked more carefully at K’nad. The man had a tan!
“Where were you all this time?” J’lantir growled. K’nad dropped his head, shaking it slowly. J’lantir
pursed  his lips sourly and  peered  along the  rest  of  the  line  of  men  that  comprised  his  missing  wing.
“Where were all of you?”
He scanned the line, looking for someone who might answer.
“We were on an important mission,” J’trel said finally. The others looked at him and nodded in relief.
“Very important,” K’nad added with a confirming nod.
“So important that I didn’t know about it?” J’lantir asked in scathing tones.
K’nad gave him a confused look and was about to answer when J’trel nudged him, shaking his head.
“He said he wouldn’t believe us, remember?” J’trel whispered to K’nad in a  voice not so  quiet that
J’lantir didn’t hear him.
K’nad drew strength from his partner’s words and looked J’lantir in the eye. “You said not to tell until
the time was right.”
“I said?” J’lantir bellowed back, causing K’nad to wilt once more.
“I don’t recall saying anything of the sort,” J’lantir continued when it was obvious that K’nad had gone
back into his shell. “I’ll tell you what I think,” he said to his riders. “I think you’ve all gone off someplace
and had far too much to drink and can’t tell yesterday from today.”
Half his riders gave him startled looks as though he’d been reading their minds.

“And so, to sort this out,” he continued, “we’ll be drilling today.”
“Could we do recognition points?” K’nad piped up suddenly.  The rest  of the wing glanced  his way
and then murmured in agreement.
J’lantir couldn’t believe it. He could never get his wing to drill on recognition points.
“From all around Pern?” J’trel added. “We’d like that.”
“You would, would you?” J’lantir said sourly. That was exactly what he’d planned to do with his wing
to teach  them a  lesson.  Well, several  lessons.  Drilling in  recognition  points  was  tiring,  dull  work  that
dragonriders usually preferred to avoid. He was surprised that his riders were so eager for the work and
a little suspicious. But, as he had no other plans sufficiently punitive in mind, he could only assent.
“All around Pern, eh?” he repeated. “Just remember that you asked for it.”
“Could we feed the dragons first?” K’nad asked. “They’re very hungry.”
“Hmmm,” J’lantir murmured. The dragons  had  been  fed the day  before.  Dragons  typically ate  only
once a week. He glanced again at his wing riders and noticed how tired they were. He glared at  J’trel,
but the blue rider merely shrugged. There was no sense in punishing the dragons for their riders’ lapses,
J’lantir decided. “Very well, you can feed your dragons and rest for the remainder of today.”
His riders gave him astonished and grateful looks.
“Tomorrow,” he continued, “before first light, we’ll start drilling on recognition points.”
J’lantir turned  and  stalked  off, already  anticipating  a  grilling  from  Weyrleader  C’rion—wingleaders
were not supposed to lose their wings for a  sevenday.  As  it was,  he didn’t bother  to  turn back  again
when one of his riders murmured, “He said he’d be like this.”
And another answered, “But it was worth it.”
 
CHAPTER I 
White robe, high hopes
Hatching Grounds, tight throats
Sands heat, eggs move
Shells crack, hearts prove. 
HIGH REACHES WEYR,
AL 495.8

P ut this on,” D’vin said to Cristov as they rushed to the Hatching Grounds. The white robe was  the
traditional garb for candidates, as every child on Pern knew from the Teaching Ballads.
Cristov  suddenly realized that his heart  was  racing, his throat  dry.  In not much longer  than  it  took
D’vin’s bronze dragon to go between—no more time than it took  to  cough three  times—Cristov  went
from being a miner recovering from an injury to being a candidate for a Hatching.
This can’t be happening, he thought. It should have been Pellar.
Pellar was the mute Harper who had rescued Cristov when his mine had collapsed, had saved Cristov
when  Tenim  had  purposely  exploded  the  old  firestone  mine,  and  who  had  had  a  fire-lizard  before
Tenim’s hunting bird had killed it—and had nearly killed Pellar, as well.
Pellar deserved to be a candidate…but Pellar had  insisted upon  remaining at  the newly named Fire
Hold to help the young holdless girl, Halla, manage the Shunned of Pern to redeem their honor by mining
the firestone of Pern.
“Cristov!” The voice, close by his ear, startled him. “You’re here! Excellent!”
Cristov’s  eyes  widened  as  he recognized  Kindan.  Turns  back,  he  and  Kindan  had  been  enemies.
Back then, Cristov had despised watch-whers,  just as  he’d  been  taught by his father.  Kindan’s  father
had been  a  wherhandler,  a  person  bonded  to  the  ugly  night-loving  creatures  who  were  only  distant
cousins to the great dragons that protected Pern. Infected by his father’s attitudes, Cristov had despised
Kindan, and they’d fought many times as youngsters.  In the end,  however,  Cristov  had  realized that  it
was Kindan who had been right and his father who had been wrong—and Cristov had found himself, at
an early age,  making a  grown man’s choice  and  doing what was  right instead  of what was  expected.
He’d even come to regard the ugly watch-whers with respect bordering  on awe.  And now he greeted
Kindan with a huge grin.
Kindan saw  the robe  clasped  in Cristov’s  hand and  his eyebrows  rose.  He  held  up  his  hand  and
showed Cristov that he, too, had the white robe of a candidate.
“Great, we can go together,” he said to Cristov, as he pulled his robe over his head and tied it with the
white belt.
“I thought you wanted to be a harper,” Cristov said in surprise.
“Harpers can be dragonriders, too,” Kindan replied with a big grin.
“You’ll be certain to Impress, after your watch-wher,” Cristov said. “Probably a bronze, too!”
Kindan shook his head. “I’ll just be happy to Impress,” he replied. “I’ll leave the bronzes to you.”
“Cristov, Kindan, hurry!”
They both turned and saw Sonia, the healer’s daughter, also dressed in white robes. “Oh, I do hope
that egg’s a queen!”
Cristov knew that Sonia had been eyeing the funnily marked egg on the Hatching Grounds  for some
time. Traditionally, though, the queen dragon would carefully push aside  any queen  eggs,  and  Jessala’s
Garirth hadn’t done so.
In fact,  the egg looked  so  odd  that  the  Weyr’s  Healer,  Sonia’s  father  S’son,  had  been  asked  to

examine it to be sure it was whole.
Garirth was so old that her gold hide was a mere pale yellow, and Jessala, her rider,  was  so  pained
with age that she rarely moved from her quarters. It was entirely possible that age had caused this egg to
have come out wrong somehow. But S’son had declared it fine.
D’vin gestured for them to go forward, saying, “I’ll watch from the stands!”
Together the three moved to join the other candidates on the Hatching Grounds.
There were  only twenty-three  eggs on the Grounds.  Cristov  had  learned  that  traditionally  a  queen
would lay as few as thirty and as many as forty or more eggs. That Garirth had lain so few was a further
indication of her extreme age.
Sonia,  who  had  been  examining  the  other  candidates  carefully,  groaned.  “There  aren’t  enough
candidates! There are only twenty boys and twenty-two eggs. And there are no other girls, either.”
A rush of cold air from dragon wings startled them and they turned to  see  a  smattering of boys  and
girls rush forward, dressed in white robes.
“Those are Benden colors,” Sonia said, pointing to a dragonrider waving in the distance. “B’ralar must
have sent for them.”
“It’s M’tal!” Kindan exclaimed, waving excitedly to the Benden Weyrleader. M’tal waved back  and
gave him a thumbs-up for good luck.
“What if one of the Benden girls Impresses the queen?” Cristov asked.
“She’ll stay here,” Sonia said. “But I wouldn’t be  surprised  if she  found herself Weyrwoman  at  the
moment of Hatching.” She  cast  a  worried  look  at  Garirth,  whose  head  lolled  listlessly  on  the  ground
beyond  them. “I think Garirth and  Jessala  are  only waiting for the hatchlings before  they go between
forever; they’re both so tired with age.”
The humming noise of the dragons rose louder. Cristov felt the sound in his very bones, reverberating.
The noise was so loud it should have been deafening, yet Cristov felt no fear.
“Over here!” Sonia called to the other girls, waving toward the strange egg. They gave her a surprised
look before joining her. To herself she muttered, “Whew! I was afraid the queen wouldn’t have a decent
choice!”
“We’re supposed to be over there,” Kindan said to Cristov, gesturing to the other  boys  clustered  in
the distance.
“I shouldn’t be here,” Cristov said. “I’m a miner.”
Kindan shook his head and told him feelingly, “More than anyone you should be  here,  Cristov.  You
earned the right and you were Searched.”
Cristov started to explain that D’vin had come for Pellar, not him, but Kindan shushed him. “Look!”
Cristov saw that the eggs were now rocking from side  to  side.  One  of them had  a  crack  in it, then
another, then a third. Cristov thought like a miner, imagining the blows  required  to  break  the shell. But
suddenly  he  squinted,  perplexed—the  shells  were  cracking  far  more  than  he  thought  natural.  He’d
rapped one of the shells himself on the Hatching Grounds, and he’d held an old bit of shell in his hands,

so he knew its strength.
And yet now the shells were shattering rapidly, and, strangely, Cristov started to get the feel for which
shell would crack next. Something about the dragons’ humming. It was as if their humming was  helping
the  hatchlings.  As  if,  Cristov  realized  suddenly,  the  dragons’  humming  resonated  with  the  shells
themselves.
The dragons’ pitch increased just before one hatchling broke his shell in half and burst  forth.  Cristov
started to take a nervous step backward but found Kindan’s hand on his arm.
“They’re scared,” Kindan said. “They’re just little and they’re frightened.”
Cristov could see that it was true. Even though the brown  hatchling towered  over  Cristov,  he could
see that it was frightened. It creeled sharply as it searched among the candidates and then—it found its
mate. Cristov saw the look of glowing astonishment on the youngster’s  face,  the look  of fear  breaking
into a huge grin as boy and dragon were united in a bond that only death could break.
“You are the most beautiful dragon on all Pern, Finderth,” the youngster cried aloud as he grabbed the
wobbly brown dragonet in a great hug.
Kindan waved  at  the boy,  calling, “Well done,  Jander!”  Then he blushed  and  corrected  himself: “I
mean, J’der.”
But not everything went well. Some of the Benden lads were too frightened and didn’t move out of the
way of a  creeling green.  One  youth was  brutally trampled  and  tossed  aside  by the  green’s  awkward
stumbling to lie in a bloody heap nearly a dragonlength away.
“Look out!” Kindan called, prodding Cristov as a baby bronze came their way, searching among the
candidates for its mate. It tore past them and then stopped, crying piteously.
Cristov remembered what D’vin had said would happen if there was no candidate for a  hatchling: It
will go between forever.
“Come on,” he said, tugging at Kindan. They couldn’t let the bronze hatchling get away. But Kindan
was gazing across the Hatching Grounds, saying, “Look, Sonia’s egg is hatching!”
Urgently, Cristov sidestepped around Kindan and raced up to the forlorn bronze. He grabbed its tail
and yanked. “Back here,” he shouted desperately. “We’re back here!”
There you are! a voice said suddenly. The dragon’s whirling eyes were looking right at him. I’ve been
looking for you.
“It’s a queen,”  Kindan  shouted  over  his shoulder,  unaware  of the drama  that  was  unfolding behind
him. “And it looks—yes, Sonia has Impressed the queen. Cristov—” And then Kindan finally turned to
look over his shoulder.
The grin on his face slipped as his mind was flooded with memories of Kisk, the green watch-wher he
had once shared a bond with. He swallowed hard and squared his shoulders. I gave her up, he reminded
himself, wondering if perhaps that rendered him undesirable to the hatchlings.
Briefly  Cristov  recalled  Nuella’s  brilliant  smile  as  Kindan  encouraged  her  to  ride  the  watch-wher
between to the cave-in that had trapped her father, brother,  and  eight other  miners. Only blind Nuella
could have visualized the image needed to guide the heat-seeing watch-wher safely. So giving Kisk to her
had been a good decision, everyone had agreed. And it meant that Kindan wasn’t trapped forever in the

mines with a  watch-wher.  He  was  free  to  become  a  harper,  maybe even a  dragonrider…but  not this
time. He shook himself out of his reverie.
“C’tov?” he asked, using the honorific contraction for the first time. “What’s your dragon’s name?”
The other lad’s eyes shone with a brilliance that Kindan had never seen before.
“My dragon?”  Cristov  repeated  in surprise.  He  turned  to  the bronze  hatchling in silent communion.
“His name is Sereth.”
“Congratulations, dragonrider,” Kindan said firmly, reaching forward to slap C’tov on the shoulder.
A hideous sound erupted behind them and they all turned. Garirth was upright, her multifaceted eyes
whirling in a frantic red. She let out one more despairing wail and then was gone forever, between.
Kindan bowed his head. Jessala was no more, or her dragon wouldn’t have departed so dramatically.
The two had survived long enough to see the hatchlings Impressed. Whether it was the joy or the burden
of extreme  age  that finally overwhelmed  the  queen’s  rider  did  not  matter—the  Weyrwoman  of  High
Reaches  Weyr  was  dead.  When he raised  his head  again,  he  turned  to  Sonia  and  her  young  queen
dragon. Sonia was now the Weyrwoman.
All the eggs had hatched. There were none left for him.
“Forgive me, C’tov,” Kindan said, bowing to his friend, “but I think I’d best get my gear. There will be
much harpering tonight, and Master Murenny will want to be informed of the news.”
C’tov nodded absently, his attention focused exclusively on the most amazing, marvelous, and brilliant
creature beside him.
M’tal sent  for  Benden’s  Weyrwoman,  Salina,  as  soon  as  Garirth  went  between.  The  events  of  the
evening would have been a trial to anyone, and the new High Reaches Weyrwoman  was  a  young lass.
He made  his way down  the stands  into the  Hatching  Grounds,  where  he  could  see  B’ralar  slumped
against a  wall. Before  he could  reach  him, however,  he saw  a  lad in white robes  running  toward  the
bereft High Reaches Weyrleader, carrying a flask of wine and several glasses precariously in his hands.
M’tal recognized Kindan. With a bow and flourish, the lad poured B’ralar a hefty glass of wine.
M’tal nodded approvingly as he headed over to join them; the lad obviously had a good head on his
shoulders.  It  was  a  pity he hadn’t  Impressed  at  this Hatching, M’tal  thought, but it  was  obvious  that
Kindan  was  more  than  suitable—surely  it  would  only  be  a  matter  of  time  before  he  met  the  right
hatchling.
Kindan smiled when he saw M’tal and brandished a glass in his direction.
“No,” M’tal said, waving aside the proffered glass. “It will be a long night, I’m afraid.” To B’ralar he
said, “I grieve for your loss. May I offer my arm and my aid to you and your Weyr?”
B’ralar forced his eyes to focus long enough to recognize M’tal and then he nodded silently, reaching
out a feeble hand to the Benden Weyrleader. “She was everything to me.”
A rush of cold air disturbed them and  then Salina, newly arrived  from Benden,  rushed  forward  and

grabbed B’ralar’s other hand.
“She was a gracious lady,” Salina told him. “Let me escort you to your quarters.”
“But—”
M’tal raised a hand to deflect anything that B’ralar might say. “Rest easy tonight.” He grinned toward
Kindan. “Between harper and weyr, we’ll see to High Reaches’ comfort.”
A fleeting smile crossed B’ralar’s lips and then he bowed his head, letting Salina lead him away.
M’tal was busy for the rest of the evening. And every time he had a chance to pause in his consolation
of the distraught High Reaches riders, he heard the voice of Kindan singing a soothing song or playing a
spritely melody on the pipes. Wine flowed freely and M’tal was not surprised to see the Benden mark on
many of the casks  that littered  the tables,  nor  was  he  surprised  to  learn  from  a  chance  remark  that
Kindan had requested it.
It was very late when the last of the wearied and wined dragonriders faded off to sleep, the weyrlings
all in their quarters, and the community of High Reaches Weyr ready to recover from the loss of its only
adult queen dragon.
It was so late that M’tal was quite surprised, as he stifled a yawn, to recognize the sound of Kindan’s
voice singing a slightly off-color lullaby. M’tal remembered the look on Kindan’s face earlier that evening
and sought him out.
“There  will  be  other  Hatchings,”  M’tal  told  him,  grabbing  the  lad’s  shoulder  and  shaking  it
affectionately.
Kindan was too tired not to answer honestly. “I’m an apprentice at the Harper Hall; I doubt  I’ll see
many.”
“Weyrs have harpers, too,” M’tal reminded him.
“Journeymen, not apprentices, my lord,” Kindan said resignedly.
“If you’re willing, then,” M’tal declared, “when you become a journeyman harper, I’ll ask for you at
Benden Weyr.”
 
CHAPTER 2 
They waited for their hatchlings
Lined up on the sand
They waited for the younglings
To leave hand in hand. 

HIGH REACHES WEYR
W ith his small roll of clothes  packed  tightly into his carisak,  Kindan  waited  anxiously in the High
Reaches  Weyr  Bowl the next morning while Weyrleader  M’tal  and  D’vin, the  bronze  rider  who  had
flown for High Reaches in the All-Weyr Games, conversed animatedly nearby.
Kindan knew that they were arguing over which one  should bring him back  to  the Harper  Hall. He
was hoping that it would be M’tal, because then Kindan could believe that the Benden Weyrleader had
remembered and not regretted his promise from the night before. Surely, if M’tal accompanied him, the
Weyrleader would mention his intentions to Master Murenny. What would it be like, Kindan wondered,
to be a harper for a Weyr? In all his wildest imaginings, he had never hoped for more than to return to a
small hold like Camp Natalon or a smaller holding. But a Weyr!
A  creeling  sound  distracted  him;  it  was  immediately  amplified  by  the  noise  of  other  disturbed
hatchlings, and he turned his gaze to the weyrling barracks.  He  caught flashes of movement and  found
himself stifling a sigh along with another thought: What would it have been like to wake up in the weyrling
quarters?
Kindan  frowned  and  turned  his  eyes  back  to  the  dragonriders.  The  thought  of  waking  up  in  the
weyrling quarters had scared him and he wanted to distract himself from that. Why would Impressing a
dragon scare him?
It seemed that his gaze was felt by M’tal and D’vin, for they turned to look at him.
“I’ll take  my farewells, Kindan,”  M’tal  said.  “I’ve work  to  attend  to.  D’vin  will  return  you  to  the
Harper Hall.”
Kindan drew himself up and bowed. “Weyrleader.”
M’tal growled and rushed toward Kindan, grabbing him in a great hug. “Don’t think you’ll get away
with that!” he said and held Kindan tightly. For a moment Kindan tensed, then relaxed, realizing in a burst
of clarity that M’tal truly appreciated him. Kindan also realized how much he missed the rare hugs that his
father, Danil, had given him. M’tal was taller and more lithe than his father but, still…
“If you’re ready,” D’vin said drolly. But there was a twinkle in his eyes.
M’tal stepped back, looked Kindan in the eyes, and raised a hand to point at him. “Don’t forget what
I said.”
Kindan couldn’t help keep the surprise out of his voice as he asked, “You meant it?”
“Of course,”  M’tal  said.  “A dragonrider  lives by  his  word.”  He  stepped  close  again  and  clapped
Kindan on the shoulder. “Rather like a harper.”
Kindan was  so  thrilled he could  barely  nod.  M’tal  gave  him  one  final  measuring  look  and  turned,
striding over to his bronze Gaminth.
“Don’t take  too  long!” M’tal  called as  the bronze  dragon  leapt  into the skies  above  High Reaches
Weyr. Then, in a blink, dragon and rider were gone, between.

“Let’s go,” D’vin said brusquely to Kindan.
“Yes, my lord,” Kindan replied, tightening his hold on his sak and following the impatient Wingleader.
It seemed only a moment before they, too, were hovering high over the Weyr. Kindan dared himself to
peer down over the dragon’s neck, and saw the small dots that were weyrfolk starting their daily chores
and the larger dragons, looking smaller than fire-lizards, moving to  the Weyr’s  lake.  And then,  without
warning, Kindan  found himself engulfed in an oppressive  darkness.  His whole body  was  cold  and  he
could hear nothing, feel nothing but the beating of his heart.
Between. The black nothingness that dragons—and watch-whers—could traverse from one place to
another in the time it took to cough three times.
Light burst  upon him, assaulting his eyes  at  the same  time  that  his  ears  were  filled  with  reassuring
sound.  Before  he could  even adjust  from the change,  Kindan  felt himself falling as  the bronze  dragon
dropped down swiftly to the ground below.
A jolt informed him that they had landed.
“I cannot tarry,” D’vin said, craning his neck around to peer at Kindan. “Sonia will need  help.  I will
trust you to enlighten the Masterharper.”
Kindan nodded hastily, still grappling with D’vin’s interesting choice of words.
“Fly well,” D’vin said, extending a hand.
Kindan took it and nearly fell as D’vin urged him over the dragon’s neck.
“Fly high, my lord,”  Kindan  called back  formally. D’vin gaped  at  him for  a  moment  in  surprise  at
Kindan’s  eloquence,  then shook  the expression  off his face  and  gave Kindan  a  curt  nod  and  a  slight
wave.
The  bronze  dragon  leapt  into  the  air  and  was  between  once  more  before  it  had  climbed  a  full
dragonlength.
It was only when D’vin and his bronze had departed that Kindan took in the morning around him. The
sun was above the horizon, but there was still dew on the grass.  The noises  of Fort  were  muffled and
sleepy, while those of the Harper Hall were—
“Get out of the way!” a  voice called to  him.  Kindan  looked  up  and  jumped  aside  as  a  group  of
apprentices  barreled  past  him. They were  on their morning run. The voice belonged  to  Vaxoram,  the
senior apprentice.
Kindan hadn’t liked Vaxoram when they first met and the feeling was mutual. Vaxoram had made it a
project to torment Verilan, the youngest apprentice.
Verilan was extraordinarily talented at scribing and  researching  in the Records.  Kindan  knew  that  it
was only the boy’s young age that held him back from walking the tables and becoming a  journeyman.
Even the prickly Master Archivist, Resler, had a soft spot for Verilan, and Kindan suspected that Verilan
felt the same affection, the two being kindred spirits.
That respect irked Vaxoram even more, as his own handwriting was a  point of shame for the entire
hall.

When Kindan first found out about the bullying that Vaxoram had condoned or even initiated against
Verilan, he took action. He was careful not to be caught, but soon those  who were  tormenting Verilan
found themselves tormented—with extra chores and duties. Kindan had even managed to get Vaxoram
caught and given a week’s extra duties.
Of course, while the bullies were never certain who was getting them back, trapping them in their traps
and arranging for their pranks to be discovered, they suspected Kindan and unleashed their full wrath on
him.
For the next three months, Kindan had felt every day that he should just leave the Harper Hall. But he
hadn’t, because he was certain that if he did, Verilan would be the next to suffer.
Things changed for the worse with the arrival of Nonala, the second girl apprentice in twenty Turns.
The first girl apprentice  had  been  Kelsa,  a  talented  songwriter  who  had  arrived  nearly  a  full  Turn
before and had quickly become Kindan’s second-best friend after Verilan. Kelsa was prickly, blunt, and
gawky, but those traits were overshadowed by her honesty and her kindness.
She was also shy, at least initially. So when she first arrived at the Harper Hall, she had been only too
willing to accept the suggestion that she sleep with the kitchen staff.
“After all,” she had said reasonably to Kindan when he’d questioned her, “it’s not like there are other
girl harpers.”
“I don’t know,” Kindan said mulishly. “It seems to me if you’re an apprentice,  you should be  in the
apprentice dormitory.”
“Vaxoram wouldn’t like that, I’m sure,” Kelsa had replied, grimacing. “And I don’t need to upset him
any more than I already have.”
Kindan had nodded in reluctant agreement. Kelsa’s ability to write songs had been met with praise by
everyone—except Vaxoram, who had no ability in that  area.  If Kelsa  were  any less  talented  or  more
arrogant,  Kindan  might  have  agreed  with  the  senior  apprentice  that  a  girl  didn’t  belong  among
harpers…but her songs were just too good.
“What will you do if another girl is apprenticed?” Kindan had asked.
“Well,” Kelsa had replied thoughtfully, “that will be different.”
Nonala  came  from Southern  Boll, recommended  by the harper  there  for her amazing voice and  its
range. Nonala was not much older than Verilan, having nearly twelve Turns to his ten.
“There’s a new apprentice,” Kindan had called to Kelsa as they entered the second class of the day. If
there was one thing Kindan was good at, it was knowing what was going on in the Harper Hall.
“Great!” Kelsa replied. Then she took in Kindan’s expression and gave him a probing look. “What’s
so funny?”
“She’s a girl,” Kindan said, grinning at her. “I imagine it’ll get rather cramped in with the cooks.”
Kelsa snorted. “She won’t be staying with the cooks.”
“Really?”
“Really,” Kelsa told him. She beckoned for him to come closer as the other  apprentices  rushed  into

the classroom.
“Here’s  what you’ll do,”  she  said,  then  pulled  his  head  close  to  her  mouth.  Kindan  listened  with
growing astonishment.
“By the First Egg, no!” he exclaimed when she finished.
Kelsa gave him a knowing look. “Oh, you’ll do it.”
“And what makes  you say  so?”  Kindan  wondered.  “Vaxoram will having me chasing  down  tunnel
snakes—”
“You’ll do  it,” Kelsa  repeated  firmly. “You’ll do  it because  you  know  it’s  right.”  She  pushed  him
toward their classroom. “Don’t say anything now, we’re late.”
“I can’t do it all on my own,” Kindan complained.
“Of  course  not.”  Kelsa’s  response  was  in  such  an  agreeable  tone  that  Kindan’s  further  protests
faltered in shock. “Get Verilan to help,” she added with a grin. When Kindan  drew  breath  for another
protest, Kelsa continued, “And I’ll help.” She glanced toward the kitchen quarters and shivered. “I’ll be
glad to get out of there—all they talk about is cooking!”
By evening everything was ready. With Verilan’s help, Kindan and Kelsa had put up a sturdy canvas
partition separating the back corner of the large apprentice dormitory from the rest.  Inside  they placed
one of the bunk beds and a chest of drawers.
The  older  apprentices  were  at  first  wary,  then  irate  that  they  had  to  change  their  lifestyle  to
accommodate girls.
“The cook’s quarters were enough for one, why not two?” the senior apprentices had grumbled.
“We’re harpers,” Kelsa said, throwing her arm around a confused and reluctant Nonala. “We should
be with the other apprentices.”
“We can’t have girls here!” Vaxoram, the senior apprentice, declared when he learned the purpose of
the canvas partition.
“I suppose we could get one of the spare journeyman’s rooms,” Kelsa said judiciously, knowing full
well  that  Vaxoram  was  hoping  to  make  journeyman  soon  and  had  been  eyeing  the  vacant  rooms
proprietarily.
“Hrrmph!” Vaxoram replied, storming out of the dormitory.
“Where are you going?” Kelsa called after him.
“To talk to the Masters!”
Vaxoram,  failing to  convince the Masters  to  provide  the  girls  with  separate  quarters,  had  tried  to
shame and scare them into demanding it on their own—or better, to ask to leave the Harper Hall.
It started  with silly pranks,  water  left on the  floor  just  outside  the  canvas  partition.  When  Nonala
tripped and banged her head in the middle of the night, Kindan moved his bunk close by and kept a wary
eye out for further pranksters.
It soon escalated to outright harassment, with the older apprentices actively preventing both girls from

attending classes. Kelsa bore up well under the strain—tough and wiry, she merely elbowed or pinched
her way past the offenders. But Nonala  was  a  milder sort,  and  the glares and  jeers  of the older  boys
were hard on her.
Kindan had only to hear her sobbing  softly in her bed  one  night to  decide  that  he would no longer
tolerate the behavior of the other apprentices. Stealthily he left his bunk in the night, crossed over to hers,
and grabbed  her hand.  Seeing that he’d  startled  her,  he  smiled  and  patted  her  hand  in  reassurance.
Nonala smiled back, sat up, and hugged him. Kindan held her tightly until he felt her relax, then let her go.
Nonala lay back down in her bed, still holding his hand. He remained there until she fell back asleep, then
silently returned to his bed. As he did, he caught sight of Kelsa, smiling at him in approval.
The next day, Nonala had shown remarkable skill in defending herself when another prankster tried to
trip her, and her would-be assailant found himself sprawled on the ground.
“I’ve three older brothers,” Nonala told the older boy as she looked down on him. “They taught me
how to fight.”
The older apprentice pulled himself up and  looked  menacingly down  at  Nonala,  his hands  clenched
tightly to his sides. Things might have gotten ugly if first Kindan and then Verilan hadn’t taken a stand on
either side of her.
“Don’t you need to be in class, Merol?” Verilan had asked.
“You owe her an apology,” Kindan had added, glaring up at the older boy. He and Merol had tangled
once already and since then, Merol had shied away from him. The incident had occurred not long after
Kindan had first been assigned to the Harper Hall and, oddly, it had involved Merol tripping him, as well.
Unfortunately for Merol, it had been just after  Kindan’s  first lesson  with the Detallor,  the Master  who
taught both dance and defense. Kindan found himself merely pivoting over the offending foot, catching it
with  his  own,  and  tugging—with  the  net  result  that  Kindan  remained  standing  and  Merol  was  sent
sprawling. Merol’s eyes had flashed angrily, but he had  just murmured, “Sorry,”  and  rushed  off to  his
class.
Faced again with an angry Kindan,  Merol  had  muttered  “Sorry”  again, this time to  Nonala,  before
slinking off.
Since then, no one bothered Nonala. But it was clear to Kindan that Vaxoram, always the ringleader,
hadn’t changed his attitude one bit.
Now  here  was  the  entire  apprentice  class  returning  from  the  morning  run  up  to  Fort  Hold  with
Vaxoram in the lead. They couldn’t have failed to notice the arrival of D’vin’s bronze dragon, so it was
obvious that Vaxoram had guided the runners this way on purpose.
“Wow, Kindan, you get to ride dragons a lot!” Verilan called breathlessly as he and Nonala passed,
last in the long line. Kindan smiled and, with a shrug, joined them as they trotted back toward the Harper
Hall. Seeing him, Kelsa circled back from her position near the front of the group.
“How did it go?” she asked.
“I was a candidate,” Kindan replied.
“You were?” Verilan asked, eyes wide. “For a dragon?”
Kindan nodded. The realization that, had things gone differently, he wouldn’t be here now but at High
Reaches Weyr with a baby dragon all of his own suddenly burst upon him. The other day he had  been

too busy helping with the tragedy of Weyrwoman Jessala’s loss to consider his own situation fully.
“I’m not sorry you didn’t Impress,” Nonala said slowly. “I would have missed you.”
“I would have missed you, too,”  Kindan  confessed.  He  looked  at  the backs  of  the  other  runners.
“Come on, you’d better catch up or you’ll get extra chores.”
Kindan knew  that Masterharper  Murenny would expect  a  full report  as  soon  as  he  returned.  With  a
wave, he parted from his friends as they headed for the apprentice dormitories and made his way up to
the Masterharper’s quarters. It was only when he was outside that he considered that the Masterharper
might still be asleep. His desire to “leave sleeping Masters lie” warred with his conviction that  Murenny
would want to know as soon as possible.
He had just raised his hand to knock on the door when he heard Master Murenny’s voice call through
it: “Go to the kitchen, Kindan, and bring up some breakfast.”
“Yes, Master,” Kindan replied in astonishment. How had the Masterharper known he was outside the
door?  Kindan  could  guess  that  Masterharper  Murenny  would  be  expecting  his  report  but  even
so…Kindan had  been  quiet on his way up the stairs.  Somehow,  the Masterharper  always seemed  to
know.
Shaking his head ruefully, Kindan rushed back down the stairs and into the kitchen.
“Back from the Weyr?” Selora, the head cook, asked as soon as  she  saw  him. She  quickly piled a
pitcher of klah, several mugs, and a plate of morning rolls onto a tray and thrust it into his arms.
“Thanks, Selora!” Kindan said, grinning at her.
She smiled back. “Get going! You know well enough not to keep harpers waiting for their food.”
Moving  more  slowly  to  avoid  spilling  or  dropping  anything,  Kindan  hustled  back  up  to  the
Masterharper’s quarters. Overburdened, he balanced on one foot and  used  the other  to  knock  on the
door.
“Put it over  there,”  the Masterharper  said,  gesturing to  a  table  even as  he closed  the  door  behind
Kindan.  Masterharper  Murenny’s  face  was  outlined  with  white  stubble  and  his  hair  was  still
sleep-mussed.
Kindan placed  the tray  down  carefully, then immediately opened  his mouth to  start  his  report,  but
Murenny restrained him with an upraised hand.
“Eat,” Murenny ordered. He poured two mugs of klah and handed one to Kindan. “Drink.”
Kindan  complied  and  was  surprised  to  discover  how  hungry  and  thirsty  he  really  was.  The
Masterharper observed him silently throughout their meal with a kindly expression. When at last Kindan
had leaned back from the tray, Master Murenny said, “Now, are you ready to report?”
Kindan nodded.
“First  let  me  say  that  while  I’m  glad  you’re  here,  I  would  have  hoped  that  perhaps  you  hadn’t

returned,” Master Murenny said.
Kindan shrugged; Master Murenny wasn’t saying anything he hadn’t already heard.
“I’m happy to be a harper,” Kindan said.
Master Murenny smiled. “You could still be a harper and ride a dragon, you know.”
“Only if I finish my training.” Kindan had been at the Harper Hall over a Turn and a half. Apprentices
normally didn’t “walk the tables”  to  become  journeymen until they been  at  the  hall  for  at  least  three
Turns, and more often, four.
Murenny nodded and motioned for Kindan to continue.
“I was present at the Hatching,” Kindan began and leaned back into his chair, getting comfortable. As
he got deeper and deeper into the report, he found himself wondering how to set it to song and altered
his sentences to be more melodic. In moments, all of Kindan’s fears and worries had faded away to be
replaced only by the spoken song he was relaying.
“Well  done,  well  done,”  the  Masterharper  said  when  Kindan  had  finished.  He  sat  briefly,  lost  in
thought. When he looked up again, he murmured, “Well, Jessala has her rest at last. I imagine it won’t be
long before B’ralar seeks his.”
“Why, Master?” Kindan asked, surprised that any dragonrider would consider such an act.
“Sometimes  the  heart  gets  so  heavy  that  living  is  impossible,”  Murenny  told  him.  “Unless  there’s
something to replace a loss, a person just gives up.”
He leaned forward, looking Kindan in the eye. “‘Without hope, there is no future.’”
Kindan had heard that before. “Can’t we give him hope?”
Murenny shook his head. “We can only give him choices. Hope is something you find for yourself.”
Kindan nodded bleakly. Master Murenny noted his expression and smiled wryly. He leaned back, his
eyes drifting to the ceiling. When he spoke again, his words were distant but heartfelt. “I hope you never
feel that way.”
There was a moment’s silence finally broken  by the Masterharper,  who jumped  up out of his chair
decisively. “But now there’s work to be done, a tray to go back to the kitchen, and you to get to your
classes.”
“Yes, Master,” Kindan agreed, glad to see the end of gloomy musings.
But it turned out, as the days rolled into seven, and the sevendays into months, that Kindan found himself
lost in  gloomy  musings.  He  was  distracted,  wondering  about  Kisk—called  Nuelsk,  now—the  green
watch-wher he’d bonded with and then had released  into Nuella’s  care.  At the time, his bonding with
Kisk  had  seemed  like  imprisonment,  but  from  the  distance  of  memory,  Kindan  found  himself
remembering how kind the awkward, ugly green watch-wher had been, and how brave she had been at
the end, to take Nuella on a never-before-attempted ride between to rescue the trapped miners. And he

found himself wondering again what it would have been like to Impress a dragon, to have a pair of great,
faceted  eyes  whirling anxiously for his well-being, to  ride  a  dragon,  to  feed  it  firestone  and  watch  it
breathe flame.
His days  were  filled with feeling overwhelmed  by his classes  and  his  various  inadequacies;  he  had
neither Nonala’s  skill at  crafting song,  nor  the fierce dedication  to  the  dry,  dusty  Records  that  made
Verilan’s eyes bright with excitement. Oh,  he could  thwart  silly pranks  from older  apprentices  and  he
gave as good as he got, but that was hardly a harperly calling, and beyond that, Kindan could think of no
talent in which he had a gift.
Except perhaps the drums. Drums on Pern were more than a way to keep a beat; they were the vital
lifeblood of news between Holds and Crafts. Only a dragonrider could travel more swiftly than a  drum
message and, as drum messages were available to all, only the drums carried the full news of Pern.
Kindan took to drumming like he’d taken to the coal caves where he’d grown up. He would listen to
the “First Call” of morning and the “Last Call” of night; he loved being the first one to decipher the codes;
he loved  wagering how long it  would  take  Vaxoram  who,  like  Kindan,  seemed  particularly  good  at
nothing, to decipher the latest messages; and he loved how the words from distant places gave him the
feel of a world-traveler, of someone connected with all the people of Pern.
He was worse at making drums than drumming on them. In fact, he couldn’t imagine how he could be
worse at making things.
“You’ll  get  the  hang  of  it,  just  keep  trying,”  Nonala  had  told  him  staunchly  the  day  Kindan  had
mentioned it.
“You will,” Verilan had agreed, although Kindan felt that his agreement had been more out of loyalty
than conviction. “And you’re so good at the codes.” Verilan had frowned; the drum codes were simply
beyond him. He was built slightly and didn’t have the strength to make the big drums rebound  with the
volume needed to  traverse  outside  of Fort  Hold’s  main valley, and  his slow methodical ways  made  it
difficult for him to decipher the multi-beat codes. By the time he’d deciphered the first beat, the second
beat had already come and gone, lost forever.
Vaxoram took great pains to taunt Kindan on his failures. Kindan  sometimes wondered  if Vaxoram
didn’t  gloat  over  the  lackings  of  others  to  distract  himself  from  his  own  weaknesses,  but  the  older
apprentice’s relentless ways never gave much time to consider the ramifications.
The  one  thing  that  Vaxoram  was  good  at  was  fencing.  Finesse,  naturally,  was  not  the  older
apprentice’s forte, but his reach, endurance, and sheer brutality usually ensured his victory.
“You’ve no subtlety,” Master Detallor said to him at one  of their practice  sessions.  He  motioned to
Kindan. “You should learn from this youngster. He seems to understand what I’m saying.”
Almost immediately Kindan wished that the Master hadn’t singled him out so; Vaxoram chose Kindan
as his opponent  for the next bout.  It  started  well  enough.  Kindan  got  first  touch,  but  then  Vaxoram
charged  forward  and—to  Kindan’s  utter  astonishment—changed  hands  mid-strike,  feinting  with  an
empty right hand and striking a telling blow with the foil now in his left hand.
“Better,” Detallor said as Kindan staggered and grunted in pain.  “But fighting left-handed  won’t  win
against another left-hander,” Detallor warned, grabbing up a foil himself. “Here, let me show you.”
And he proceeded to administer a left-handed drubbing to Vaxoram that was so ferocious that Kindan
forgot the bruise Vaxoram had made on his own chest.

Still, if it weren’t that Kindan wouldn’t give up on his dream of being a harper, and a Weyr harper at
that, he would have left the Harper Hall to free himself from Vaxoram’s incessant prodding.
The autumn weather  at  Fort  Hold was  not as  bitter  as  the  biting  cold  Kindan  had  experienced  at
Camp Natalon in Crom Hold, but the rains seemed to last longer, the fogs of the morning were  thicker
and colder—sometimes lasting all day—and the miserable weather matched his miserable mood.
Two months after his return from High Reaches Weyr, Kindan found himself at the tail end  of a  wet
morning run accompanied,  as  usual, by Verilan and  Nonala.  Verilan was  coughing more  than usual, a
sure sign that he would be in the infirmary with a nasty cough before the end of the sevenday.
The rain had turned the path beside the road to brown mush, but the packed surface of the road was
too hard on their feet so they stuck with the slick and  muddy path.  A noise from behind them startled
them all, with Verilan losing his footing and  Kindan  plowing into him. Both went down  and  came  up
covered in muck and mud. Kelsa took one look at their bedraggled appearance and burst into giggles.
“You two!” she said, still giggling. “You look like you’ve been out making mud pies.”
Nonala said nothing, but she couldn’t keep a smile from her lips.
Verilan scowled at them. Kindan, meanwhile, had  turned  around  to  spot  the source  of the noise.  It
was difficult in the fog and rain. Finally he made out a huge dark shape in the distance.
“A dragon!”
“What will we do?” Nonala moaned. “We’re not fit to greet him.”
“Well, we can’t just turn away,” Verilan said, his last word breaking into a cough.
Kindan nodded and started walking toward  the dragon,  searching for its rider.  The others  followed
reluctantly, Nonala occasionally making small distressed noises to herself.
As they approached, the figure of a tall man carrying a heavy object resolved itself out of the rain.
“Kindan!” the rider exclaimed. It was M’tal, Benden’s Weyrleader. “Just who I was  looking for—”
He  stopped  as  he  took  in  the  sight  of  their  mud-covered  bodies.  His  mouth  quirked  into  a  grin.
“Slipped?”
Kindan grunted and smiled back. “Yes, my lord.”
“It’s M’tal to you,” the Weyrleader replied firmly. He nodded to the three figures huddling behind him.
“Who are your friends?”
Kindan turned to introduce them. “This is Nonala, that’s Kelsa, and this—” He was interrupted briefly
when Verilan erupted into another coughing fit. “—is Verilan.”
“You should see the healer, immediately,” M’tal said,  his voice suddenly full of concern.  He  moved
toward Verilan, then suddenly remembered his burden and thrust it toward Kindan. “Carry this, while I
carry him,” he instructed.
“No, no, I’m all right,” Verilan protested, horrified at the thought of the dragonrider getting covered in
mud.
“No, you’re  not,”  Nonala  told  him. M’tal  nodded  in agreement,  grabbing Verilan by the waist and
hoisting him off the ground. He carried the boy like a small child.

“You’re lighter than a sack of firestone,” he assured the horror-stricken young harper.  With a  smile,
M’tal said to Kindan, “And, thanks to your friend, firestone can get as wet as you are now.”
Verilan glanced in surprise at Kindan.
Somewhat guiltily, Kindan realized that he hadn’t had time since his return to the Harper Hall to fill his
friends in on the discovery that there were two types of firestone: the traditional firestone, which exploded
on contact with water, and the newly rediscovered firestone, which didn’t explode when in contact with
water—the firestone that had given the fire-lizards their name.
“Firestone explodes when wet,” Verilan declared stubbornly.
“Not anymore,” M’tal assured him as they trudged under the arches of the Harper Hall.
“Wow, Kindan!” Verilan called over the dragonrider’s shoulder.
“Yes, wow, Kindan, why didn’t you tell your friends?” Kelsa repeated sourly, glaring at him. Kindan
made a helpless, apologetic gesture, which only earned him a further glare.
“Kindan, you’ll need to get your bundle to a hearth,” M’tal said, “and I’ll need one of you others  to
guide me to the infirmary.”
“A hearth?”  Nonala  asked,  glancing closely at  the bundle Kindan  was  carrying.  For  the  first  time,
Kindan noticed  the  bundle  in  his  arms;  he’d  been  more  concerned  with  Verilan.  It  was  heavy,  and
wrapped well in thick wher-hide. There was some sort of bucket inside the wrapping—he could feel the
shape pressing through the fabric.
“They need to be kept warm,” M’tal said. “I’m afraid I could only get two for the Harper Hall; the rest
are for Lord Holder Bemin.”
“Fire-lizard eggs?” Kindan asked, his voice rising, his eyes going wide.
“Not the same as dragon, I know,” M’tal  called over  his shoulder  as  he followed after  Kelsa,  “nor
even a watch-wher. Master Murenny agreed that one would be for you.”
“Thank you!” Kindan shouted as M’tal headed up the stairs. Holding his bundle tighter, he increased
his pace as he veered toward the kitchen. Nonala tagged along after him.
“Fire-lizard eggs!” she repeated, her step changing almost to the sort of bounce that Kelsa most often
preferred. “I wonder who will get the other one?”
Kindan shook his head. As exciting as the fire-lizard eggs were, his thoughts had already turned back
to  Verilan.  The  younger  boy  was  always  getting  sick,  especially  in  winter.  Kindan  was  particularly
alarmed  that  M’tal  had  decided  to  bring  him  to  the  infirmary  immediately,  even  before  seeing  the
Masterharper.
“What are you doing here?” Selora demanded as  she  spied  them. “You’re  all wet  and  mucked  up!
Don’t you know—” She spied the bundle Kindan had in his arms. “What’s that?”
“Fire-lizard eggs,” Kindan told her quickly. “I’m sorry,  Selora,  but Weyrleader  M’tal  said  that  they
needed to get to the hearth immediately.”
“Of  course  they  do,”  Selora  snapped,  grabbing  the  wher-hide  bundle  out  of  Kindan’s  arms  and
placing it on the stone-covered floor near the hearth. Deftly, she unwrapped it while Kindan bent down

beside her and Nonala hovered anxiously nearby.
“You’re shivering!” Selora declared as she glanced first at Kindan and then at Nonala. “You need  a
warm bath, both of you.” Her eyes narrowed. “And where are the other two, your accomplices?”
“M’tal took Verilan up to the infirmary,” Kindan began.
“The infirmary?” Selora exclaimed. “He’s not hurt, is he?”
“He’s coughing again,” Nonala said in her mother-hen voice. Kindan  could  never  understand  how a
girl with three older brothers could be so motherly, but that was how Nonala was.
“You, then,” Selora snapped to Nonala peremptorily, “up to the baths. Throw the boys out—they’ve
been in too long if they’re still there.”
Nonala froze, her eyes going to Kindan, and Kindan started to rise, torn between the fire-lizards and
protecting his friend from the older apprentices.
The interplay was  not lost on Selora.  “So,  it’s that  way,  is it?” she  asked,  nodding sagely. Neither
Kindan nor Nonala was able to get a half-formed protest spoken out loud as Selora barreled over them.
“I’d thought so, but I wasn’t certain.” She glanced at Kindan. “You follow her up, then, and make sure
she’s  not  harassed.”  As  Kindan  made  to  protest,  Selora  shushed  him  with  a  hand,  her  expression
softening. “I’ve looked after fire-lizard eggs before, you know,” she told them. With a wave of her hand,
she said, “Now, go! Both of you, and both of you in the baths.”  Her  waved  hand turned  to  a  pointed
finger as she continued, “And mind you, not the same one, either!”
Nonala and Kindan, both too red with embarrassment to respond, hustled mutely out of the room.
“I’ll send someone up with more  coals,”  Selora  called after  them, searching the kitchen for a  likely
candidate. Not surprisingly, she had no lack of volunteers, all hoping that the fire-lizard eggs would hatch
in their presence.
There were still several apprentices up in the dormitory, including Vaxoram.
“Where were you?” he demanded as they entered. “And where are the other two?”
“Infirmary,” Kindan replied tersely. “Selora sent us up for baths.”
“Are you going to  wash  her back?”  Vaxoram  asked,  smirking  vulgarly.  He  was  rewarded  with  a
scattering of chuckles. “Mind you, she’s still a bit young, but so are—”
“Shut up!” Kindan shouted, his eyes narrowed, fists clenched at his side.
“Kindan…” Nonala said soothingly at his side, as though encouraging him to drop it.
“No,” Kindan told her firmly. He turned back to Vaxoram, raising his head to stare at the taller boy.
“You apologize.”
“To her?” Vaxoram demanded, a sneer on his face.
“To both of us,” Kindan replied, stepping toward the older apprentice. Kindan was shivering, and he

realized that not all of it was with rage; some of it was from the cold, wet clothing he wore.
Vaxoram peered down at him consideringly. He shook his head. “I don’t think so.”
Kindan’s temper snapped. In a move that  surprised  him, he swung his arm swiftly, palm open,  and
slapped Vaxoram hard on the cheek.
“I challenge you,” he declared.
“Kindan, no!” Nonala cried.
But a hot, burning anger had overcome Kindan and her words didn’t even register.
“Challenge  me?  Do  you  think  the  Masters  will  permit  it?”  Vaxoram  snorted.  He  bore  down  on
Kindan. “No, I’ll beat you to a pulp here and now, and you’ll not tell anyone,  or  I’ll do  it to  you and
your friends.”
Some of the other apprentices looked at one another apprehensively.
“Kindan,” Nonala  pleaded.  Kindan  heard  her  worry  for  him,  but  he  also  felt  her  concern  for  the
long-term repercussions. She knew as well as he did that  if he gave in now,  Vaxoram  would not only
torment him more  but would also  see  it as  permission to  harass  both  Nonala  and  Kelsa.  He  couldn’t
allow that, no matter what.
“No, you won’t,” he said. “And if you beat me, I’ll still be here and I won’t give in.”
“Let’s see,” Vaxoram said, slamming a fist down into Kindan’s nose and lips, pulping them.
Kindan felt his teeth rip into his lips and swallowed the hot blood that spewed from the tattered inside
of his mouth. It only made him angrier. He swung, but Vaxoram had stepped back, smirking, admiring his
handiwork. Then Vaxoram bore in again for another blow to Kindan’s jaw, but before he connected, a
voice rang out. “Hold!”
Everyone in the room froze as Weyrleader M’tal stormed into the room.
“What  is  going  on  here?”  the  dragonrider  demanded,  turning  from  Kindan  to  Vaxoram,  his  eyes
narrowing as he took in Nonala’s distraught, teary-eyed face.
“I challenge Vaxoram,” Kindan said, his words slurred with blood and pain. “I call him a coward and
a bully and a man who would use his strength to have a woman.”
There were  gasps  from the entire room,  including M’tal  and  Nonala.  Eyes locked  onto  Kindan.  In
front of him, Vaxoram’s anger was a palpable thing; the older lad’s breathing was ragged and outraged.
Kindan had  issued  the harshest  condemnation  possible  of  a  man  on  Pern—that  he  would  use  his
strength to overpower a woman.
“I demand the right of cold steel,” Vaxoram responded through clenched teeth, his eyes tight, beady,
and glaring angrily down at Kindan’s bloody face.
“You shall have it,” Kindan replied, matching the taller lad’s glare. He caught the look  of surprise  in
Vaxoram’s eyes and, deeper under it, a flash of fear.
“Kindan!” Nonala shouted. “No! He’ll kill you.”

“Are you certain of this, Kindan?” M’tal asked intently.
“Yes,” Kindan said.
“And if you prove your claim?” M’tal asked. In a duel such as  this, if Kindan  prevailed,  he had  the
right to exact whatever penalty he desired, given the severity of the claim.
Kindan  stared  up  coldly  into  Vaxoram’s  eyes  and  saw  the  fear  grow  there.  Kindan  could  have
Vaxoram banished from the Harper Hall. Kindan knew that before coming to the Harper Hall, Vaxoram
had been the son of a minor holder. If banished, Vaxoram would certainly not be accepted back by his
family,  particularly  under  such  shame.  Banishing  Vaxoram  would  be  worse  than  Shunning  him,  and
Kindan had seen enough of Shunning. His thoughts turned to C’tov and his Shunned father.
“He’ll serve me,” he said.
“Never!” Vaxoram roared.
“Heard and witnessed,” M’tal declared, overriding Vaxoram. He looked at the older apprentice. “And
what is your penalty?”
Kindan met Vaxoram’s eyes. He could see clearly that the older apprentice intended  to  kill him. He
was pretty sure that if Vaxoram succeeded, he’d  be  asked  to  leave the Harper  Hall anyway—no  one
would tolerate a killer in their midst. Something else flickered in Vaxoram’s eyes, then he said, “He’s to
be banished.” He gave Kindan a gloating look. “For lying.”
“Very well,” M’tal said. “I’ve heard and witnessed both claims.” He turned to Vaxoram. “You are to
report this to the Masterharper.” He glanced at Kindan and Nonala. “Selora told me that she sent you to
the baths. Get going now.”
Kindan nodded and, numbly, trotted over to the bath rooms. He was inside and peeling off his clothes
before he heard the rustle of the curtain and felt Nonala enter beside him.
The bath room was laid out with four large baths in the middle and a row of showers along each wall.
When Kindan and the others bathed, by unspoken agreement they turned away from each other as they
undressed and got into their baths,  respecting  each  other’s  privacy.  They never  spoke  until they were
safely in their baths,  usually covered  by bubbles.  When they showered,  they followed the same  rules,
keeping their eyes on the wall in front of them and being respectful.
Now, however, Nonala spoke while she was disrobing. “I could have taken care of myself,” she told
him, her anger barely masking her concern.
He pointed to his mangled lips. “But could you have sung afterward?”
She sloughed off the last of her clothes  and  hopped  into  her  bath,  churning  up  bubbles  with  both
hands.
“No,” she admitted after a moment.
Kindan stepped into his own bath and sank down quickly into the water. The water was only warm,
not hot enough to  reach  the cold  that had  settled  deep  into his bones.  He  heard  a  happy  groan  from
Nonala and looked over at her.
“It feels so good to stop shivering,” she told him.

A moment later, two apprentices called from the outside of the room, “Can we come in? We’ve got
coals.”
“Come in,” Nonala told them.
They hustled in and placed the coals under the baths, then scurried out again, one of them calling as he
left, “Selora says she’ll have others up with hot water in a moment.”
“Thank you!” Nonala and Kindan chorused. As the two apprentices hurried away, one whispered to
the other in a voice that carried, “Did you see his face?”
“I heard Vaxoram plans to kill him,” came the other’s reply.
Nonala turned anxiously to look at Kindan, her eyes welling with tears.
“No, he won’t,” Kindan declared.
“Kindan…” Nonala began worriedly, only to be interrupted by another voice from the outside.
“Are you decent?” It was Kelsa.
“Come on in,” Nonala called. “You can steal some of my coals, the water’s not that warm yet.”
“Selora  said  she’ll  send  someone  up  with  hot  water,”  Kindan  added  as  Kelsa  pushed  aside  the
curtains and entered the room.
Shivering worse than Kindan and Nonala had, Kelsa had trouble undoing the fastenings on her clothes.
It didn’t help that her eyes were locked on Kindan’s face.
“Shards,  Kindan,  you’re  a  mess,”  she  declared  as  she  peeled  off  her  outer  clothes,  her  eyes  still
locked on his.
“And, uh,” Kindan said in embarrassment, “you’re not in your bath.”
Kelsa glanced down and back up at him. “So?” she asked absently.
“Kelsa!” Nonala growled. “You’re embarrassing him!”
“I am?” Kelsa asked in surprise. She looked back to Kindan. “Well, I suppose if you’re going to let
Vaxoram kill you—”
“I’m  not  going  to  die,”  Kindan  declared.  Kelsa  smiled  at  his  fierceness  and  rushed  over  to  him,
kneeled down beside him, and planted a swift kiss on his cheek before he could even flinch away.
“Of  course,  you  aren’t,”  she  agreed,  wrapping  her  arms  around  his  neck  and  kissing  him  again.
Huskily, she repeated, “Of course you aren’t.”
Then, without another word, she sprang up, shucked off her undergarments, and settled down into the
next bath over.
Nonala glanced back and forth between the two, her look somewhat wistful.
Kelsa caught her look. She turned to Kindan. “Kindan?”
“Yes?” Kindan said, turning to look at Kelsa. He saw that tears spangled her eyes.

“Kindan, I don’t want you to die!” Nonala blurted suddenly.
“What Nonala meant to say, Kindan, is that she loves you,” Kelsa told him. She nodded slowly. “And
so do I.”
Kindan didn’t know what to say. He liked Nonala, he knew that. In fact,  he loved  her like a  sister.
Kelsa was different…sometimes he found himself thinking of her in ways  that  made  his throat  go tight.
And then he realized—“I love you, too,” he said, glancing at both of them. He smiled, even though it hurt
his lips. “You’re the best friends anyone could have.”
With a splash, Nonala sprang from her bath grabbing a towel from a nearby hook and quickly tying it
around her. She rushed over to Kindan, wrapping two wet arms around his neck  and  planting a  warm
kiss on his cheek before hopping back just as quickly into her bath.
“You know your face  is really yucky,” Kelsa  spoke  into the silence that  followed.  “You should try
washing that blood off.”
“You should see the Masterhealer, too,” Nonala added.
“Kindan,” Masterharper Murenny called from outside the curtain.
“Sir?” Kindan replied, glancing at the two girls to be sure that they weren’t concerned.
“M’tal  told  me  what  happened,”  the  Masterharper  said.  “I’d  like  to  speak  with  you  as  soon  as
possible.”
“He should see the Masterhealer first, sir,” Nonala spoke up.
“I quite understand,” Murenny replied. “In the meantime, I’ve posted Master Detallor outside.”
Master  Detallor  was  the  dance  and  defense  master,  a  short,  wiry  man  who  moved  with  a
limp—except when he was dancing or fighting, and then he moved like liquid fire.
“Thank you,” Kelsa called back.
Something about  the Masterharper’s  tone  alerted  Kindan,  who said,  “Did you  want  to  talk  to  me
about relinquishing the duel, sir?”
“No,”  Murenny  replied.  There  was  a  moment’s  silence  before  he  continued.  “Who  will  be  your
second?”
“I will,” Kelsa  and  Nonala  said  in chorus.  They glanced  at  each  other,  then  Nonala  said,  “You’re
taller, maybe you should go first.”
“All  right,”  Kelsa  said.  She  turned  to  Kindan.  “If  you  don’t  win,  I’ll  kill  him,”  she  told  him
matter-of-factly.
“I’m going to win,” Kindan repeated.
“Well,” Master  Murenny  called  from  outside  the  bath  curtain,  “I’ll  see  you  after  you’ve  seen  the
Masterhealer.”
“Yes, sir,” Kindan replied. Murenny’s steps echoed to the dormitory door and faded away.
“You’d  better  hurry  up,  then,”  Kelsa  ordered  him.  “You  don’t  want  to  keep  the  Masterharper

waiting.”
As this was obviously true, Kindan made no response.
“The  Masterharper  says  you  challenged  Vaxoram,”  Masterhealer  Lenner  remarked  as  he  carefully
dabbed at Kindan’s split lip.
Kindan nodded.
“I can’t  approve  of dueling,” Lenner said,  shaking his head.  “You’d  think,  with  these  injuries,  that
you’d not want it.”
“I want it,” Kindan replied. “He’s a bully.”
“A bully?”
“He threatened Nonala,” Kindan said. The Masterhealer’s quick intake of breath was all that Kindan
needed to hear.
With one  final, gentle dab,  Lenner released  him. “I’ve done  all I  could  for  now,”  he  told  Kindan,
handing him a small glass vial. “Use this daily both on the wound and with your food.”
“Arnica?” Kindan asked.
“Of course,” the Masterhealer replied, his tone approving of Kindan’s knowledge of herbs.
Not five minutes later, Kindan stood outside the Masterharper’s door. He paused for a moment, then
knocked.
“Come,” Master Murenny’s deep voice carried clearly through the thick door.
Kindan entered  the Masterharper’s  quarters.  Murenny smiled at  him and  gestured  to  a  chair  by  a
small, round table. Weyrleader M’tal was already in another seat. From his position, Kindan guessed that
the Masterharper had been pacing—never a good sign.
“There’s some herbal tea,” Murenny said, gesturing to a pot. “Selora sent it up along with word  that
the eggs are warm and settled.”
Kindan took  his seat  and  gratefully poured  himself a  cup  of the pungent herbal  mix. He  knew  that
Selora would have laced it with restoratives and not sent it up so hot that it might inflame his cuts.
The sound of the rain that had been lashing down earlier had dissipated somewhat, but it still could be
heard falling softly around the Harper Hall.
The Masterharper took another turn around his dayroom, glanced at M’tal, and settled himself into the
third seat, nearly opposite Kindan.
“Kindan—”
“Masterharper, I will not yield the challenge,” Kindan interrupted softly but firmly.

“I know,” Murenny said, nodding firmly. “I did not intend to ask that of you.”
Kindan  gave  the  Masterharper  his  full  attention,  setting  his  cup  back  carefully  in  its  saucer.
Masterharper  Murenny  looked  chagrined,  even  apologetic  as  he  continued,  “I  wished,  instead,  to
apologize to you.”
“Master?”
Murenny let out a long, heavy sigh. “When Vaxoram  arrived  here,  he was  young and  had  the most
beautiful voice,” the Masterharper explained, half closing his eyes in memory. “But it broke wrong and he
lost it. I had hoped that he would find some other talent, but none seemed to come to him and it turned
him bitter.” He met Kindan’s eyes frankly. “I made a mistake: I should have released Vaxoram back to
his hold Turns. I’d  heard  enough rumors of his behavior  to  know  that  he was  a  problem  and  a  bad
influence on several others, as well.” He frowned in thought a moment, his head bowed, then looked up
at Kindan once more, determinedly. “In fact, until you arrived, I’d made up my mind to do just that.”
“Me?” Kindan couldn’t keep the surprise out of his voice.
“When you stood up for Verilan, I thought that perhaps Vaxoram would learn his lesson and mend his
ways,” the Masterharper confessed. “Even more so when Kelsa and Nonala appeared, especially as his
behavior meant that releasing him of his apprenticeship would be seen as prejudiced.”
“I’m sorry, Murenny,” M’tal interrupted, “but I don’t follow that.”
“Consider for a moment,” Murenny replied, “what would be the effect on your wings if you had female
riders.” As M’tal made ready to reply, Master Murenny added, “Women riders in your fighting wings.”
“Oh,” M’tal said after a moment. “That would be awkward, wouldn’t it?”
“But I do not believe that talent should be subservient to sex,” Murenny said. “Our survival depends
upon our children and it always will, but it should not be at the expense of the lives of the women holders
and crafters.”
M’tal regarded him carefully for a long moment. “You’ve been thinking about this for a long while,” he
decided.
“Yes,” Murenny agreed. He looked over to Kindan. “Your friend Nuella is an excellent example.”
“So are Kelsa and Nonala,” Kindan added loyally.
“Indeed,” Murenny agreed. “And perhaps even more so as they will influence many others when they
walk the tables and move on to mastery.”
Kindan tried for a moment to imagine Kelsa as a masterharper and found the image difficult to merge
with  the  ever-moving,  hyperkinetic,  graceful,  and  gawky  girl  he  called  his  friend.  Although,  Kindan
remarked to himself, if she wanted it, nothing and no one could stop her.
“But there are too many hidebound holders and crafters,” M’tal objected. “They’ll never permit—”
“Given the way that the holders and crafters are so loath to yield apprentices to the Harper Hall, the
time might be sooner than you think,” Murenny replied.  He  turned  to  Kindan.  “And women won’t  be
respected as harpers in hold and crafthall if they’re not respected in the Harper Hall.”
“Then I must fight him,” Kindan declared. The Masterharper glanced at him quizzically. “Not just for

Kelsa, or Nonala, but for Verilan and other people who bullies hate for their talents.”
“Spoken like a true harper,” Murenny said approvingly. “But—”
“What, Master?” Kindan asked, his tone verging on a challenge.
“If you lose…”
“I won’t lose,” Kindan declared.
“If you kill him, it won’t be much better,” M’tal observed.
Murenny nodded, saying in agreement, “That will only open the door for the next bully or retaliation.”
“I won’t kill him,” Kindan said.
“But he means to kill you,” M’tal said.
Kindan let out a long, slow sigh and nodded. “I know.”
“Vaxoram has demanded the earliest possible date,” the Masterharper said.
“I would prefer that also.”
Murenny nodded understandingly. “I have set the date for a sevenday after your wounds have healed.”
“Thank you.”
“He’s larger than you, heavier than you, and has the greater reach,” M’tal declared. Kindan turned to
him and nodded bleakly. “What can I do to help?” the Weyrleader asked.
“Take me to Mikal.” Mikal was a legend at the Harper Hall: the ex-dragonrider who had found himself
a home in a natural cave in the hills beyond the Harper Hall, the man who could track anyone across bare
rock,  who used  crystals  and  meditation to  effect healing in ways  that  not even  the  Masterhealer  fully
understood.  He  was  a  better  swordsman  than Master  Detallor,  himself a  master  of  the  blade.  When
Kindan  had  last  seen  Mikal,  the  man  had  been  at  Master  Aleesa’s  camp,  tending  to  the  sick
Whermaster.
“When?” M’tal asked.
“Now,” Kindan replied.
“I’ve set Menengar and Detallor to keep an eye on Vaxoram,” Murenny said. “He’s been posted to
the infirmary.”
“What about Verilan?” Kindan asked, concerned.
“He’s  in  the  isolation  room,”  the  Masterharper  replied.  “Vaxoram  would  have  to  get  past  the
Masterhealer before he could harm him. And there are guards beyond that.”
Kindan nodded but his fears  were  still not quite relieved.  “Someone  might try to  harm Nonala  and
Kelsa.”
For the first time since the interview started, Master Murenny smiled. “They’re Verilan’s guards.”
“What about the fire-lizard eggs?” M’tal asked.

“I will send them up to the Hold,” Murenny decided. “Most of them will go to Bemin and his folk.” He
glanced at Kindan. “You should be able to get to a hatching in ample time.”
“Better,” M’tal suggested, “assign him up there.” Kindan started to protest, but M’tal held up a hand.
“For now.”
“What about Mikal?”
“When he’s ready, I’ll come for you,” M’tal promised.
“Thank you, Weyrleader,” Kindan said, feeling honored.
“I feel partly to blame,” M’tal said. “If I’d been a bit quicker, I would have heard him myself.”
Kindan furrowed his brow in confusion.
“And then he would have fought me,” M’tal explained.
“But  you’re  a  dragonrider!”  Kindan  exclaimed,  appalled  at  the  thought  of  Vaxoram  striking  the
Weyrleader with a sword.
“Which would have given me the right of weapons,” M’tal said with a grin. He held up his hands in a
fighter’s style. “I wouldn’t have killed him, but he would feel it for the rest of his Turns.”
Kindan grinned back at him, imagining the look of horror on Vaxoram’s face as he squared off against
the older, stronger, taller, and fiercer dragonrider.
 
CHAPTER 3 
Be sparing with your wrath
Take not the angry path
Lest harsh words create harsh deeds
And fill your heart with bitter seeds. 
ALEESA’S WHERHOLD
I hear you let your green  go to  a  girl,” Master  Aleesa  said  when  Kindan  and  M’tal  arrived  at  the
wherhold two days later.
“Yes, Master,” Kindan replied.
“I hear she did good,” Aleesa added.  “Flew between  just like a  proper  dragonrider  and  saved  her
father.”

“Yes,” he agreed, “I was there.”
Aleesa stared deep into his eyes before nodding. “You did a good thing.”
“Thank you.”
“And now you’re here to take Mikal?”
“Not unless he wants to go,” Kindan replied.
Aleesa glanced beyond him to M’tal, then back. “This dragonrider says you’re here to  learn how to
fight someone.”
“Yes,” Kindan agreed.
“Over a girl,” Aleesa said.
“No,” Kindan corrected, shaking his head. “For women harpers.”
“Women harpers?” Aleesa repeated, chortling. “Women harpers,” she said again, more softly, shaking
her head. “What next?”
“I’ve met many strong women in my time,” M’tal remarked.
“Anything is possible,” Kindan said, meeting Aleesa’s eyes squarely. “When women harpers become
respected, all women will be more respected.”
Aleesa mulled this over for a silent moment. Finally, she said, her expression hardening, “You be sure
you win.”
“Yes, Master,” Kindan agreed.
“Mikal!” Aleesa called, turning back to the cave the wherholders inhabited. “Your youngster is here!”
“How is Aleesk, Master?” Kindan asked.
“You can see her tonight,” Aleesa replied, turning away from him and retreating slowly into the dark
cave. “She’ll be awake then, as you should well know.”
Kindan remembered  how the nocturnal behavior  of  his  watch-wher  had  driven  him  to  distraction.
Aleesa’s  irritability was  mostly fatigue, he guessed—although  he’d  never  heard  of  her  being  anything
other than grouchy.
A silver-haired man met her at the entrance and waved to Kindan.
“Aleesk  will  send  word  when  we’re  done,”  Mikal  told  M’tal  as  they  got  within  earshot.  The
ex-dragonrider eyed Kindan critically, then said, “Are you prepared to get hurt?”
“Yes, sir,” Kindan replied.
“And you’ve brought blades?”
Kindan nodded, indicating the long bundle on his back.
“Good,”  Mikal said.  “Start  now with fifty push-ups.”  He  walked  over  to  a  rock.  “I’ll  watch  from
here.”

“I just want to learn to fight left-handed,” Kindan reminded the older man.
“And I want to see you live through it,” Mikal told  him, gesturing for Kindan  to  get on the ground.
“Start with those push-ups.”
“I’ll leave him in your hands, Mikal,” M’tal called.
Mikal merely grunted in response, not quite meeting the bronze rider’s eyes. M’tal nodded and strode
quickly out of sight. Kindan knew that M’tal had carefully landed his Gaminth out of Mikal’s sight, just as
Mikal had steadfastly remained in the wherhold until the last possible moment; even the sight of a dragon
was torment to a man who had lost his own.
“Stop thinking and start working,” Mikal growled at Kindan. “You’ve only a sevenday at best.”
Kindan got into a  prone  position,  then,  putting all his weight  on  his  arms,  lifted  up  and  began  the
push-ups.
By the end of the day, Kindan nearly wished he were dead. He didn’t know  which exercise  proved
the greatest torment, although arguably the worst was running with a heavy rock clenched in each of his
outstretched arms.
On the second day, Mikal began fencing with him in earnest.
“We’ll start right-handed,” the ex-dragonrider informed him, tossing a blade to Kindan and sweeping a
blade up for himself. He made a quick salute, then took the en garde position.
“But I already know how to fight right-handed,” Kindan grumbled.
“Then show me,” Mikal said, lunging suddenly. Caught off guard, Kindan was struck on the shoulder.
By evening, Kindan was a mass of scratches and  bruises,  even though the padded  practice  leathers
had deflected the worst of the blows.
Kindan spent the first part of the next day learning how to bruise tomatoes.
“You’ve got to have control of your blade,” Mikal had told him, showing him how to lunge and twist in
such a way that the ripe tomatoes  showed  only the slightest of scratches  on their surface.  By midday,
Kindan was covered in tomato juice, much to the amusement of the wherholders.
In the evening, Mikal insisted that Kindan sing or play around the warm coal fire that the wherholders
kept inside their quarters.
“Murenny’s supposed to send us a harper,” Mikal remarked that night, eyeing Kindan  consideringly.
“But while I’m here they don’t need it.”
Kindan cocked an eyebrow. The ex-dragonrider was well known at the Harper Hall: He had originally
settled into a cave in the hills not far from the Hall, where even the Masterhealer was not above seeking
him out for his amazing ability to heal others with herbs and crystals. It was only recently that Mikal had
moved from the Harper Hall to Aleesa’s wherhold.
“They’re afraid I’ll leave,” Mikal added with a bark of a laugh and a shake of his head. He jerked his
head toward the others. “Stand up and sing them the Hold song.”
Kindan groaned and almost protested but instead stood up, thinking of Nonala’s  beautiful voice.  He
put his sore hands to his side, ignored his aching chest as he filled his lungs and began the long, slow song

that named all the Holds,  major  and  minor,  the  Lord  and  Lady  Holders,  and  their  relative  locations
throughout Pern.
He went to bed late that night and woke up early the next morning, kicked none too gently by Jaythen.
“Arrows today,” the irascible wherman told him. “Mikal says you’re to hunt with me.”
Kindan’s protests  died  on his lips. He  forced  himself up and  nodded  in acceptance.  In three  more
days he would be fighting for his life and his friends, and while he couldn’t  see  what hunting had  to  do
with fighting Vaxoram, he trusted that Mikal had a good reason.
By the end of the day, Jaythen and Kindan had scored two wild-hens and a smallbeast. It was not a
great haul, but they had lost none of their arrows, Jaythen insisting that Kindan race after every shot.
Again that evening, sorer  and  more  tired  than he’d  ever  felt,  Kindan  found  himself  in  front  of  the
wherholders, singing songs and teaching ballads. He practically crawled into his bed that night.
“Up!” Mikal barked into his ear early the next morning. When Kindan  rolled over,  trying to  find his
energy, Mikal doused him with a bucket of cold water. “Up—now!”
Then Mikal forced a soaked Kindan out into the cold morning air. “Run until you’re dry,” he ordered.
Kindan obeyed, and when he returned,  his clothes  fully dry,  he was  surprised  to  realize that  he felt
better than he’d ever felt before.
“Come with me,” Mikal ordered then, hiking a carisak to his shoulder and taking off at a brisk pace.
They  were  far  beyond  the  wherhold  by  the  time  he  stopped—evidently  at  a  spot  that  suited  him
specifically,  though  Kindan  could  see  no  distinction  between  it  and  any  other  place—and  ordered,
“Close your eyes.”
Kindan obliged and felt Mikal roughly tie a strip of cloth over his eyes.
“Now fight me,” Mikal ordered, thrusting a practice blade into Kindan’s right hand.
“Uh…” Kindan began uncertainly. A sharp pain struck him on his left chest.
“Parry,” Mikal ordered.  Kindan  blindly twisted  his blade  and  was  surprised  to  feel it connect  with
another blade. “And again.”
Again and again Kindan parried, then thrust, then probed.
“Stop,”  Mikal  ordered  after  several  minutes.  “Listen.  What  do  you  hear?  Smell.  Where  are  the
scents?”
Kindan listened carefully. He  heard  the few noises  of mid-autumn, the soft  rushing of a  stream,  the
gentle hissing of leaves in the wind. Then he heard it—the faintest of crunches as Mikal moved forward.
He parried  and  connected.  He  heard  Mikal move away,  then  nothing.  He  waited  tensely  for  several
moments. Then, from his right side he smelled it—the faintest odor of sweat with a hint of smoke. Kindan
wheeled and raised his blade. He connected again.
“Better,” Mikal told him. “Now, I’ll stop being so easy on you.”
The pace increased, the time between decreased. The sounds and the telltale smells of an impending
attack grew harder to detect—masked, Kindan guessed, by leaves,  flowers,  or  other  greenery.  Blows
landed on him and he whirled around defensively, only to connect with nothing. He started sweating, his

breath became ragged, his nerves flared.
“Stop,” Mikal ordered. Kindan stopped. “Rest. You can’t win when you’re winded.”
Kindan was about to protest that he couldn’t win when he was blind, either, but stopped as he realized
that not only could  he win, but that he already  had.  He  calmed himself, took  several  deep,  steadying
breaths,  and  listened carefully. He  heard  the merest  of noises,  smelled  the  faintest  of  smells,  then  he
whirled and connected, hard, with Mikal’s blade.
“Better,”  Mikal  said,  his  voice  full  of  approval.  “Now,  take  your  blindfold  off  and  fight  me
left-handed.”
By the end of the day, Mikal had Kindan parrying alternate blows with either hand.
“Tomorrow,” Mikal told him as they trudged back to the wherhold, “I’ll teach you how to go for the
eyes.”
“I don’t want to blind him,” Kindan said, aghast.
“But he wants to kill you,” Mikal replied. “Think what you’re going to do about that.”
All  through  his  dinner  and  singing,  Kindan  mulled  over  the  ex-dragonrider’s  words.  Even  as  he
crawled into his bed, he thought them over.
Kindan slept fitfully that night.
“No  one  fights well when they’re  worried  about  their eyes,”  Mikal  told  Kindan  as  they  started  their
practice the next morning. “And, as you’ve seen, it’s nearly impossible to fight when blinded.”
Kindan could only nod, appalled at the thought of blinding someone. His friend Nuella was blind, and
though she coped with it very well, Kindan knew from first-hand experience—walking through the dark,
dust-laden mines just after a cave-in—what that meant to her.
He knew that Vaxoram was bigger, heavier, older, and had the greater reach.
“A person’s reaction to a thrust to the head is instinctual,” Mikal went on. “They will always parry the
blow.”
In a quick series of exchanges, Mikal demonstrated this on Kindan. Kindan felt sweat  and  cold  fear
running down his back—and he knew that Mikal would not hit him.
“Now, I want you to attack my head every third strike,” Mikal said.
“But I might hit you!” Kindan protested.
Mikal looked around the practice area he’d chosen. “There are no rocks or holes here,” he said. “If
you get me within a  sword’s  length of the edge,  we’ll break.  Otherwise,  I’ll be  able  to  take  care  of
myself.” He raised his sword, one of the heavy wooden practice blades they’d been working with. “And
this is more likely to give me a black eye than a permanent injury.” And with that, Mikal thrust forward,
sword raised toward Kindan, giving him the choice of fighting or being hit. Kindan fought.

They  continued  for  two  hours,  breaking  only  four  times.  Once,  Kindan  nearly  landed  a  blow  on
Mikal’s cheek, just below the left eye. Mikal, on the other hand, landed a solid blow on Kindan’s right
cheek; Kindan knew that it would be black and blue in the morning.
“Good,” Mikal said as  he lowered  his blade  after  their last bout.  “We’ll get some  water  and  food.
When we start back, we’ll use a dummy.”
After a quick bite to eat and a gulp of water, Mikal brought Kindan over to a hastily built figure. It was
dressed  in Mikal’s  old clothes,  a  stick  forced  into the ground with a  crosspiece  tied  to  it at  shoulder
height representing arms. The clothes were filled out with old straw, so that the overall effect was that of
a scarecrow.  However,  Mikal had  rigged ropes  to  the “hands” so  that  he could  pivot  the  scarecrow
around the upright pole. The scarecrow’s head was a gourd with two large holes in it where eyes would
be. In the holes Mikal had placed two ripe tomatoes.
He handed Kindan a steel blade and walked back to grab the ropes behind the scarecrow.
“Now go for the eyes,” he ordered. Kindan  lunged, but Mikal pulled the scarecrow  around  so  that
Kindan’s stroke hit the side of the gourd. He pulled his blade free and prepared to strike again.
In twenty minutes he scored ten times, none of them on the eyes.
“We should take a break,” Mikal said.
“No,” Kindan replied, his sides heaving, “let’s continue.”
Again he thrust and missed. And again. And then—“Excellent!” One of the tomatoes  was  skewered
and remained stuck on the end of Kindan’s blade. Kindan looked at it and his triumphant smile died on
his lips as he grew pale and turned away from one-eyed scarecrow. He pivoted  swiftly and  moved  his
blade just enough to get it out of the way as he heaved his guts.
Some time later, Mikal handed him a flask of water and Kindan realized that the ex-dragonrider had
dropped his ropes and was kneeling behind him, gently rubbing his shoulders.
“Drink and spit it out—it’ll clear out the aftertaste,” Mikal told him softly. Kindan obeyed, his insides
still shaking. After a while, he felt better. “Are you able to stand?”
Kindan nodded  and  stood  up.  He  was  glad to  get away  from the stench  of his own vomit. As  he
stood, he caught sight of his blade once more, with the tomato neatly skewered at the end. It was just a
tomato.
“Kindan,” Mikal called softly. Kindan turned to him. “Now you understand what you’re doing, don’t
you?”
Kindan nodded mutely.
“And you understand what Vaxoram will do?”
“He’ll kill me,” Kindan answered. “But that’s stupid.”
A trace of a smile crossed the old man’s lips. “So don’t let him.” He gestured for Kindan to pick up
his blade and return to the exercise.
Gingerly, Kindan  retrieved  the blade,  flicked it so  that  the tomato  flew off, and  moved  toward  the
dummy. He noticed that it once more had two tomato eyes.

Mikal moved behind the dummy and grabbed the control ropes once more.
“Now,” he called, “go for the eyes!”
They  practiced  for  another  three  hours,  by  which  time  Kindan  had  exhausted  Mikal’s  store  of
tomatoes.
“Maybe we should stop,” the ex-dragonrider suggested.
Kindan shook his head. “No, I’ve an idea. Let’s see if I can score just below the eye.”
“Why?”
“I  want  to  convince  Vaxoram  that  I  can  have  his  eyes  anytime  I  want,”  Kindan  replied.  “If  he
understands that, perhaps he’ll surrender.”
“And if he doesn’t?”
“Then he’ll lose an eye,” Kindan replied staunchly, his stomach in a tight knot.
“And if he doesn’t stop then?” Mikal persisted.
Kindan heaved a deep sigh. “Then I’ll blind him and leave him fighting his own shadows.”
Mikal  locked  eyes  with  him  over  the  distance  and  then  nodded  in  acknowledgment  of  Kindan’s
conviction. “If he knows that you won’t stop, he’ll surrender.” He tugged on the ropes once more. “Very
well, let’s begin.”
Kindan worked for two more hours, fighting with both his natural right and his newly trained left hand.
As the sun set, Mikal called a halt.
“Tomorrow you’ll practice with Jaythen, then Aleesa,” Mikal told him.
Kindan looked surprised at his mention of the elderly wherhandler.
“She fights dirty,” Mikal told him with a wink.
Kindan was just as tired that night, but instead  of going to  bed  exhausted,  he found himself led to  his
quarters by Arella, Aleesa’s daughter.
“Strip, and lie down  there  on your stomach,”  she  ordered,  pointing to  a  raised  platform. “Put your
head in the hole.”
All feeble concerns Kindan had over nudity were completely banished by her next words: “Mikal has
asked me to give you a massage.”
As with all harpers, Kindan had received some training in healing and  so,  from that,  he already  had
some training in massage and understood its benefits to not only muscle tone and skeletal alignment but
also just peace of mind. His nostrils pricked as he recognized the smell of warmed, scented oil.
The head  hole was  well padded  with furs and  let Kindan  relax completely on his  stomach  without

tilting his head to one side or the other. He let out a deep sigh as he settled in, aware only of the cold air
on his back. That was soon relieved by a soft fur bundled over his butt and legs. The sounds  of Arella
pouring and rubbing oil on her hands alerted Kindan to the start of the massage.  She  first got his back
well covered  with the oil, then  started  on  his  muscles,  massaging  shoulders  and  neck  first,  and  then
moving down to the base of his spine. In moments Kindan was lost in the luxurious feeling of having the
kinks in his muscles all worked out.
Kindan awoke on his sixth day at the wherhold to the smell of fresh klah. He looked up to see Mikal
holding a mug nearby.
“Bathe and then join us,” the old ex-dragonrider instructed him.
After a  quick—and  welcome—bath,  Kindan  dressed  carefully, aware  of the parts  of his body  that
were still sore. Outside the wherhold he found Master Aleesa, Jaythen, and Mikal waiting for him. Arella
hovered nearby.
“What sort of fighter is Vaxoram?” Aleesa asked as he approached.
“Answer her now,” Mikal barked.
“Don’t think!” Jaythen yelled.
“He likes to overwhelm,” Kindan shot back.
Mikal nodded. “Good, then what must you do?”
Kindan started to think, but Jaythen barked at him, “Answer!”
“Talk!” Aleesa added.
“Overwhelm!” Kindan shouted in frustration.
“Good,” Mikal said. He smiled at Kindan. “You spoke  from your gut, which is the best  judge  of a
fighter’s character. Why?”
This time they gave him the time to think through his response. “Because fighters fight from their gut,”
he said at last.
Mikal nodded.
“So  this  morning  we  will  practice  overwhelming,”  Mikal  told  him.  “The  three  of  us  will  try  to
overwhelm you.”
Kindan swallowed hard. Three? How could he fight three at once?
“Not with swords, just with glances,” Mikal told him. “You must make us look away, all three.”
“How do I do that?” Kindan asked despairingly. “You’re all older than I am. And bigger.”
“So is your opponent,” Mikal replied. “He will be expecting to see you afraid, to see you glance away
from him, to see you admit your defeat before he ever raises his blade.”
“If you keep your eyes on his, meet his willpower, then he will be afraid,” Jaythen added.
“It is the test of wills that decides the fight,” Aleesa said.

“You must make us back down,” Mikal said. “Use your mind, your willpower.”
“When you get it, when you use your willpower, we’ll feel it and back down,” Jaythen added.
“Arella will help,” Mikal added,  nodding toward  the  younger  wherhandler.  “She’ll  be  your  coach,
shouting encouragement from behind you.” He paused a moment. Then: “Ready? Begin!”
Arella put her hands soothingly on Kindan’s shoulders and told him, “You can do it, Kindan. You can
do it.”
Mikal darted toward Kindan, his brows furrowed, an angry look on his face. Beside him, Aleesa and
Jaythen also rushed forward, their gazes intent, focused, angry.
“Go on, Kindan, you can do it,” Arella’s voice sounded in his ear, but he didn’t notice it, didn’t feel
her hands. Instead, he locked eyes with Aleesa, then looked away, frightened by the expression on the
tough old woman’s face. He glanced to Jaythen and saw the fighter’s strength and raw power. He turned
his gaze almost imploringly to Mikal, but he knew the old dragonrider had far too much strength for him.
He almost broke down, almost backed away, but then he thought of Nonala and Kelsa.
“You  can  do  it,  Kindan,”  Arella’s  voice  sounded  in  his  ear,  her  hands  kneading  his  shoulders
encouragingly.
I will not lose, he swore to himself. He raised his eyes to Jaythen and locked onto him. Jaythen’s age
and fierceness melted out of Kindan’s sight. He felt his own heart leap, his breath coming in slow deep
lungfuls, and  he remembered  his bond  with Kisk,  his watch-wher.  If  he  could  manage  her,  he  could
manage this man. His eyes  widened,  not in fear  but in release  of power.  And then—Jaythen  blinked,
looked away.
“Go on, Kindan, you can do it!”
Kindan immediately changed  his focus to  Mikal. He  locked  eyes  on him. I will  win,  he thought to
himself. Again he felt the strength within himself, the support  and  power  of Kelsa  and  Nonala,  and  he
realized that no matter  how old,  how skilled Mikal was,  he would never  win against Kindan  because
Kindan was supported by so many friends. Mikal’s eyes widened, then broke off.
“One more, Kindan, and she’s just an old hag!” Arella shouted behind him.
When Kindan turned his attention to Aleesa, she had already lost.
“Such power!” she exclaimed, glancing to Mikal. “Did you expect this?”
“Yes,” Mikal responded.  “He wants  to  win.” He  smiled at  Kindan.  “Now,  we’re  going  to  up  the
stakes. We’re  going to  shout at  you, try to  defeat  you with our  voices.  You have to  shout back  and
defeat us with yours. If you can defeat the three of us, you’ll have no trouble overpowering Vaxoram.”
“And you won’t have me to help this time,” Arella added, taking a step away from him.
Kindan nodded and beckoned for them to begin.
It was much harder this time, with the roar of three voices coming at  him, but he never  doubted  the
outcome for an instant. First Mikal, then Aleesa, then Jaythen were all subdued, dropping their eyes from
Kindan’s stare. Kindan’s throat was raw and hoarse, but he was exhilarated, feeling he could fly without
even a dragon. He had done it!

“Now it is time to  rest  and  reflect,”  Mikal told  him, his own voice raspy  from overuse.  “Don’t say
another word today. Make certain that you have everything you need without using your voice.”
Kindan nodded. Suddenly Aleesa, Jaythen, and Mikal rushed forward and sandwiched him in a giant
hug. When they finally broke  up,  Aleesa  leaned  down  and  hugged him to  her.  “I am glad you  had  a
watch-wher: you are worthy.”
Kindan nodded in thanks, his eyes bright with tears. At the side, Arella stood, smiling at him.
“You fight well,” Jaythen said, hugging him in a tight bear hug that reminded Kindan of his dead father,
Danil. “You will win.”
Mikal hugged him last. “Remember that you have friends here now. You earned them.”
Tears rolled down Kindan’s cheeks. He stood for a long moment while the others departed. After a
while, realizing that he was alone, Kindan sat down on the grass.
His glance dropped to the soil beside him. He saw the blades of grass, the dark, rich soil, small rocks
on the surface  and  finer grains of dirt.  He  drew  a  deep,  full  breath  and  exhaled  slowly.  One  pebble
caught his eye and he reached for it. It was smooth, rounded, and black. He rolled it between his thumb
and forefinger, savoring the sense of the smooth and cool stone.
Stone. Kindan remembered his earlier conversations with Mikal about stones, rocks, and crystals. He
recalled that Mikal had decided to stay in the wherhold because he liked the stones  and  crystals  to  be
found in the area. Kindan knew that crystals had healing powers, and could also be used for meditation,
to focus thoughts. Perhaps if he could find the right crystal, he could use its steadying influence in his fight
with Vaxoram.
Kindan stood up resolutely. The best place to look for crystals would be in Aleesk’s cave; he recalled
that from his foray Turns earlier to get his green  watch-wher  egg. He  wondered  if watch-whers  found
crystals as  soothing as  some  humans did.  He  walked  back  to  the  wherhold’s  entrance  and  searched
inside for a glowbasket. He took one small glow-covered rock and headed toward Aleesk’s cave.
It was daytime, so he knew the watch-wher would be sleeping. He walked in as quietly as he could,
so as not to disturb her slumber. Holding the dim glow close, he turned to the nearest  wall and  ran his
hands slowly over it.
He felt it before he saw it—a small stone half-buried in the wall. It came out of the wall easily and he
held it in his hand. It felt special, full of power. Satisfied, he went out of the room, returned the glow to its
basket, and left the wherhold, heading toward the nearby stream.
In the stream he bathed his find and carefully chipped out a small piece of quartz crystal from the main
mass. It was just big enough to hold, but it seemed to vibrate with power as he pinched  it between  his
thumb and forefinger. This will be me, he thought to himself, small and powerful.
Intrigued now, Kindan scanned the streambed and the banks looking for any other rock or pebble that
called to him. He was not surprised to find a nice sliver of yellow citrine, which he cleaned and pocketed.
He had learned from Mikal during one of the ex-dragonrider’s days at the Harper Hall that citrine helped
to  keep  one  cheerful  and  manifest  goals,  just  as  white  quartz  was  good  at  manifesting  power  and
concentrating intentions. Armed with these, Kindan felt he could not lose.
He walked slowly back to the camp, pausing to touch the bark of a tree, check for the sign of animals,
inhale deeply  of the scents  on the air,  feeling more  at  peace  and  focused  than he had  since he’d  first

arrived at the Harper Hall over a Turn before.
He could do this. He could meet Vaxoram and  win. But his good  feelings faded  as  he realized one
thing: He  could  not blind the older  apprentice  to  win, any more  than he could  kill him. It  wasn’t  that
Kindan didn’t believe he had the ability now, nor that he wasn’t willing to do either deed if there was no
other way—it was that he realized that winning by those means would be a hollow victory, would leave
Vaxoram so utterly defeated that the older boy would have no chance to redeem his honor.
Kindan had to find another way.
He spent the rest of the day in an uneasy, thoughtful silence.
He returned to the wherhold that evening and was grateful to be offered his meal in silence. Even the
youngsters were  quiet,  their chattering voices  stilled. Kindan  felt guilty about  that  for  a  moment,  then
caught the eyes  of one  of the smaller girls and  saw  that  she  was  regarding  him  solemnly,  sharing  his
silence in a kind and compassionate way. He smiled at her and she smiled back, her eyes shining brightly.
Then, as though that were too loud, she schooled her expression to be serious and brought a finger to her
lips. Kindan nodded. He held her eyes for a long while. She looked away first, toward her mother, and
Kindan found himself following her gaze, to her mother’s eyes. He continued, wordlessly expressing his
gratitude to every member of the small hold. When the meal was complete, Arella led him once more to
the massage table and, in silence, massaged his muscles until he fell into a deep, dreamless sleep.
“Kindan,” Mikal’s soft voice roused him slowly into consciousness.
Kindan opened his eyes.
“This is the seventh day,” Mikal said, his tone neutral.
“I’m ready.”
“You only think you are,” Mikal told him. “You have one more thing to do.”
Kindan sat up and looked at the ex-dragonrider expectantly.
“You must discover ten things to live for,” Mikal told him quietly. Kindan opened his mouth, but Mikal
silenced him with an upraised hand. “First, we will eat.”
It seemed  that  the  whole  of  the  wherhold  had  gathered  for  breakfast.  The  children,  including  the
solemn girl of the previous night, were bright-eyed and loud in the way of all children. The adults were
also animated,  and  even sometimes  coarse  in  their  language.  They  laughed  frequently;  Kindan  found
himself smiling a lot.
When they finished, Mikal led him off to their practice area and indicated that Kindan should sit.
“Well, what have you discovered so far?” Mikal asked.
“To live for?” Kindan repeated, partly to buy time. Mikal nodded.  “I want to  live for my fire-lizard
egg.”
Mikal nodded and held up a finger.

“I want to live for Nonala and Kelsa,” Kindan said.
“What does that mean?” Mikal asked.
“I want to protect them,” Kindan replied.
“Why?” Mikal pressed.
This is getting harder, Kindan thought as he grappled with the question.
“Because they’re my friends,” he said out loud.
“You could  get other  friends—that  doesn’t  sound  like a  reason,”  Mikal  replied  dismissively.  “Find
another.”
“Because I love them!” Kindan blurted out, surprised at his words and the heat of his reaction. All his
half-formed dreams of kissing Kelsa, of dancing through the night with her, maybe even of partnering with
her, vanished as he absorbed that. He loved them both, equally, and neither of them as a mate. Kelsa and
Nonala were special to him because he knew they loved and trusted him; he would do  nothing to  alter
that—he loved them too much.
Mikal stared  at  him for a  long, tense  moment, then nodded  and  held up  two  more  fingers.  “What
else?”
“For M’tal,” Kindan said.
“The Weyrleader?” Mikal repeated. “You want to live for the Weyrleader?”
Kindan frowned. “No, I want to go to Benden, become the Weyr harper.”
Mikal held up a fourth finger.
And now Kindan  faltered,  groping for a  fifth reason.  What  if he couldn’t  find five reasons  to  live?
What did that say about his life, he wondered.
“I want to live for my father and my brothers,” he said after a moment. “To honor their memory.”
Mikal held up his fifth finger and waved the other clenched fist in the air. Kindan took in a deep breath
and let it out slowly.
“I want to live for you,” he said. “I want to live so that you’ll know that your training helped and that
you are needed and—” He faltered, nibbling his lip for a moment before he added, “—loved.”
Mikal’s eyes glistened as he held up the first finger on his left hand.
“I want to live for all that I can learn,” Kindan said. Another finger. “For all that I can give.” Another
finger. “For all that I have yet to see.” Another finger—he was up to nine. “I want to live for me and what
I can offer.”
Mikal put up his hands, fingers spread wide. “Now, do you know what you have discovered?” the old
man asked slowly.
Kindan nodded slowly. “I’ve discovered my strength.”
“How many reasons does Vaxoram have to live?”

Kindan shook his head. “Maybe one.”
“That’s right,” Mikal agreed. “You have at least nine more reasons to live than he does.” He stood up
slowly, stretching, and gestured for Kindan to lead the way back to the wherhold. “Are you ready to fight
now?”
“Yes,” Kindan replied.
“And do you know what you’ll do?”
“I’ll win.”
 
CHAPTER 4 
Fight only in direst need
Not for lust or petty greed
Honor those that do give birth
Respect them well for their full worth. 
HARPER HALL
I t was only as Kindan felt the last of the cold of between seep out of his bones  as  the great  bronze
dragon, Gaminth, spiraled on down to the landing meadow outside the Harper Hall that he finally realized
how he could win the upcoming fight on his own terms.  A fierce smile animated his lips and  remained
there all the way back through the archway and into the courtyard of the Harper Hall.
“Are you ready, Kindan?” Master Murenny asked as he approached.
“Could I have some time to practice?” Kindan asked. The courtyard was full of harpers except for the
large center expanse that was reserved for the upcoming duel. He saw no sign of Vaxoram but he wasn’t
looking for him. Winning was no longer an issue in Kindan’s  mind. All he wanted  was  to  win without
bloodshed.
“How long do you need?”
“Ten minutes will be enough,” Kindan replied.  “And can  I get some  green  tomatoes?  Maybe  half a
dozen?”
“I’ll see if Selora  can  provide  them,” Murenny replied,  his eyes  dancing in anticipation. Selora  was
happy to provide eight green tomatoes.
“What are you going to do?” Kelsa asked as she brought him the tomatoes.

“Practice,”  Kindan  replied  enigmatically.  He  stepped  into  the  vacant  center  of  the  courtyard,
beckoning for Kelsa to follow him. “Throw up one of the tomatoes whenever you’re ready.”
“Toward you?”
“No, just close enough to lunge at,” Kindan replied, grabbing his blade in his left hand.
“Kindan, you’re not left-handed,” Kelsa said in surprise.
Kindan smiled and nodded, flicking his blade  at  her encouragingly. Kelsa  swallowed  hard,  grabbed
one tomato, and threw it up into the air. Kindan lunged, flicking his wrist as  he did so,  and  the tomato
landed, unharmed on the ground.  Kelsa’s  eyes  grew  wider,  nervously. Kindan  gestured  for her to  try
again. Again she threw, again Kindan flicked and again the tomato reached the ground whole.
“Excellent,” Kindan said over the growing hubbub of surprised apprentices. He knew that  to  them it
looked  as  though  he  had  missed  twice,  but  he  didn’t  care.  He  had  seen  what  he  wanted  with  the
tomatoes: on each he had left a thin scar. Now it was time for Vaxoram to be scared.
“Throw up two at once, please,” Kindan said, loud enough to carry over the murmurings. The noise
fell  immediately.  Kelsa  pleaded  with  her  eyes,  but  Kindan  merely  nodded  to  her.  She  threw  two
tomatoes into the air,  unable to  control  their arcs,  and  they separated.  Kindan  lunged twice and  both
tomatoes fell to the ground—neatly cut in half. Around him the crowd gasped.
“And again,” Kindan instructed Kelsa. She looked at him with unmasked  surprise  and  grabbed  two
more tomatoes. Kindan lunged twice more and severed both tomatoes before they hit the ground.
“One more time,” Kindan said, his voice carrying clearly in the silent courtyard.
Eagerly Kelsa threw the tomatoes in the air, their courses diverging far more energetically, but it didn’t
matter: Kindan lunged toward one, recovered, twisted, and  lunged toward  the second  before  it hit the
ground. Both were severed.
“I’m done  my practice,  Masterharper  Murenny,” Kindan  called loudly. He  pivoted  on  one  foot  to
view the whole courtyard, seeking out Vaxoram. He spotted him and stopped,  gesturing with his other
hand for Kelsa to rejoin the crowd.
“Good luck,” she called softly to him.
“Vaxoram!” Kindan  shouted  loudly,  his  voice  echoing  off  the  walls  of  the  Harper  Hall.  Vaxoram
looked up at him, his blade held loosely at his side. “Do you yield?”
“Hah!” Vaxoram shouted back, tromping into the center of the courtyard.
Masterharper Murenny and Master Detallor strode after him.
“Are  you  determined  to  do  this?”  Murenny  asked  Kindan  and  Vaxoram  in  turn.  Each  nodded,
although  Kindan  noticed  that  Vaxoram  was  swallowing  nervously,  his  eyes  wide  with  fear.  Kindan
locked onto  Vaxoram’s  eyes  until the other  glanced  away.  Kindan  kept  his eyes  on Vaxoram’s  face,
meeting his eyes  every  time the older  boy  glanced  nervously in his direction.  Kindan  was  certain  that
Vaxoram had seen the tomato demonstration, just as he was equally certain  that  Vaxoram  thought that
Kindan had missed the first two tomatoes.
“Very well,” Detallor said. “If that’s the case, I shall check your blades.” Both Kindan and Vaxoram
reversed  their blades,  proferring the hilts to  the Defense  Master.  This  was  a  mere  formality,  as  both

blades belonged to the Harper Hall. Still, in all solemnity, Detallor took Vaxoram’s first and examined it
carefully before flexing it and handing it back. He repeated the same inspection with Kindan’s blade and
returned it in the same manner.
Kindan was  glad to  get  his  blade  back  in  his  left  hand,  and  managed  not  to  smile  when  he  saw
Detallor’s  look  of surprise—at  least  the Defense  Master  had  paid  attention.  Kindan  had  counted  on
Vaxoram not to care which hand Kindan fought with.
Detallor stepped back, his own sword at his side.
“Salute each other,” Detallor said.
Vaxoram and Kindan raised their blades in the salute, then lowered them again.
“You may begin,” Murenny called loudly.
As expected, Vaxoram charged instantly. Kindan, who had been watching him carefully, waited  until
the last moment and sidestepped, pivoting around to whack Vaxoram hard with the side of his thin blade.
He knew that the blow would at best leave a welt but would probably  anger  Vaxoram  more.  He  was
counting on that.
Vaxoram  stopped  and  turned,  eyeing  Kindan,  who  waited  for  him  impassively.  Vaxoram  started
forward  slowly, advancing in proper  fencing style. When he was  near  enough to  lunge at  Kindan,  he
stopped.  Kindan  eyed  him,  waiting.  Vaxoram’s  lunge  was  telegraphed  by  the  flaring  of  his  nostrils.
Kindan beat it aside and jabbed  in return into Vaxoram’s  right shoulder.  He  heard  Vaxoram’s  hiss of
pain, but withdrew quickly and  stepped  back.  Vaxoram  retreated  as  well, his expression  a  mixture of
surprise, fear, and anger.
“Do you yield?” Kindan called.
Vaxoram answered him with an angry growl and  charged.  Kindan  parried  and  thrust again, but his
blade slid off Vaxoram’s shoulder. Kindan retreated.
“Running away?” Vaxoram sneered.
Kindan said nothing, locking his eyes once more on Vaxoram’s. He was ready again for Vaxoram’s
lunge, parried once more, but this time in his riposte he raised his blade higher and threatened Vaxoram’s
face. The older apprentice jerked his head aside.
Kindan stepped back, to his right. Vaxoram stood en garde, eyeing Kindan carefully. The older boy’s
sides were heaving, but Kindan thought it was from fear rather than breathlessness.
“Did  you  see  what  I  did  to  those  tomatoes?”  Kindan  asked.  He  saw  a  flicker  of  curiosity  in
Vaxoram’s eyes. “I can split your eyes just like that.” He saw a look  of horror  creep  over  Vaxoram’s
face.  The large apprentice  charged  blindly with  a  loud  yell,  but  Kindan  was  ready  and  sidestepped,
turning around to keep his blade pointed at Vaxoram.
Vaxoram stopped  uncertainly. It  was  a  moment before  he turned  to  face  Kindan.  In  that  moment,
Kindan knew that the fight was over, that Vaxoram was looking for a way out, an honorable surrender.
And Kindan would give it to him.
He rushed toward the larger apprentice. Vaxoram took a step back, then held his ground, his sword in
guard position.  When Kindan  struck,  he beat  Vaxoram’s  blade  to  the  side  and  curved  back  across
Vaxoram’s exposed face—just below the right eyeball, leaving a thin, red welt.

Vaxoram bellowed in pain and horror. He charged, but Kindan was ready; he sidestepped once more,
but this time held out a foot, tripping Vaxoram. He whirled around and stood over the fallen lad, his point
coming to Vaxoram’s throat.
“Yield,” Kindan called loudly. He flicked his point up toward Vaxoram’s other eye, then back down
to Vaxoram’s throat. “Do you yield?”
Vaxoram licked his lips, his eyes huge, his heart racing, his Adam’s apple wobbling, but he voiced no
words.
“I  won’t  kill  you,”  Kindan  declared,  his  eyes  locked  on  the  other  apprentice’s.  Vaxoram’s  eyes
narrowed  in  surprise.  “If  you  don’t  yield,  though,  I  will  blind  you.”  Kindan  flicked  his  point  up  to
Vaxoram’s left eye. “Think about that,” he said very carefully. “Think about it and yield.” He gestured to
Vaxoram’s sword, still held in the apprentice’s hand. “Throw your blade away,” he ordered.
With a slight heave, Vaxoram threw his blade away. It landed not far from him.
“Now yield.”
Vaxoram didn’t move, his whole being clearly conveying defeat.
Kindan backed away and gestured with his blade. “Get on your knees in front of me and yield yourself
to me,” he said, using the formal words he’d been taught by Detallor, words he’d never thought to hear
spoken for real, let alone utter himself.
Slowly, Vaxoram rolled over onto his knees. As he did, one hand lunged toward his blade, but Kindan
saw the motion and, with a flick of his own blade,  sent  the other  flying through the air.  He  flicked his
blade back toward Vaxoram once more, this time with the point resting hard  on the top  of the other’s
back just over the left lung.
“Say you yield now,” he said, his voice rasping in anger. “Say it loud so everyone can hear, or I’ll pop
your lung.”
“I yield,” Vaxoram said softly, flopping face down onto the ground.
“Get up,” Kindan ordered, nudging him with the point of his blade. “On your knees.”
Vaxoram pushed himself to his knees.
“Yield.”
“I yield,” Vaxoram said more loudly.
“Say it all,” Kindan commanded.
“I yield to  Kindan,  apprentice  of the Harper  Hall,” Vaxoram  said,  his  voice  rising  loud  enough  to
carry. “I yield his judgment on my body and I acknowledge forfeit to him.”
“What forfeit?” Master Murenny’s voice called from the crowd.
“He’s to serve me,” Kindan called back.
“For how long?”
“Until I release him,” Kindan replied.

“Vaxoram, do you forfeit?” Murenny called formally.
“I do,” Vaxoram replied, tears streaming from his eyes. He looked up at Kindan. “I forfeit. I will serve
you until you release me.”
Kindan kept his eyes on the older boy who had just agreed to become his personal drudge. And he
was surprised to see a sense of relief in Vaxoram’s  eyes.  The bully had  found his place  in the Harper
Hall—at Kindan’s side.
“He’s not going to  sleep  with us,  is he?”  Nonala  spoke  quietly  into  Kindan’s  ear  as  she  and  Kelsa
congratulated him on his victory.
Kindan glanced over at Vaxoram who was staring steadily ahead, his eyes dull, his bleak  expression
marred only by the tracks of tears that had cleared paths through the grime that encrusted his face.
“Yes,” Kindan declared at once. “There’s a spare bunk nearby.”
“But—” Nonala cut herself off as she caught Kindan’s set look. “Okay.”
“Kindan!” Master Murenny’s voice cut through the noise of the massed harpers.
“Master?” Kindan called back, glancing toward the sound of the harper’s voice.
“Meet me in my quarters.”
“Immediately,” Kindan replied. He glanced toward Vaxoram. On impulse, he handed his blade to him.
“Clean up the blades, then clean yourself up.”
Vaxoram  took  the  blade  and  hefted  it  consideringly.  Kindan  could  tell  that  the  older  lad  was
wondering what he could do to Kindan armed with two swords against his none. Kindan shook his head
just fractionally and Vaxoram nodded in acquiescence—sword  or  no,  Kindan  would win, and  Kindan
knew that Vaxoram could see it in his eyes.
“Yes, sir,” Vaxoram said.
“No, call me harper,” Kindan ordered. Vaxoram nodded and started  off on his chores,  ignoring the
sympathetic calls from his former cronies.
“Come!” Masterharper  Murenny called immediately upon  Kindan’s  knock.  Kindan  entered  the  room
and was not surprised to see that Master Detallor and Weyrleader M’tal were already present.
“You could have killed him,” M’tal said with no preamble.
“That would have not been a good idea,” Kindan replied.
“Explain,” Murenny said, waving his hand to turn the terse word into an invitation.

“If I had killed him, the rest of the apprentices would have decided that perhaps Vaxoram was right,
that there should be no girl apprentices because they caused trouble,” Kindan said. Murenny nodded in
agreement. “And they might also decide someday that I deserved retribution.”
“What will you do with him now?” M’tal asked.
“Can he still take classes?” Kindan said, turning to the Masterharper.
“Certainly.”
“Then, in his free time he’ll serve me,” Kindan replied. “I’ll have him do any chores Selora needs, help
guard the bath, and make sure that the other apprentices behave themselves.”
“Do you trust him with the girls?” M’tal asked Murenny.
“Do you?” Murenny asked, turning the question over to Kindan.
Kindan frowned in thought before nodding. “Yes,” he said. “I think that he will be trustworthy. In time
he’ll realize that if he wants a mate, he’ll need to seem appealing to women, and that his good behavior is
his only chance to do that.”
Murenny nodded.
“I think he has seen the error of his ways,” Detallor agreed, his face set in a wry smile.
“We shall keep an eye on him, all the same,” Murenny said. Kindan noticed the way the Masterharper
regarded him and felt that there was something that remained unspoken.
“I had three older brothers,” Kindan said. “I won’t treat him badly.”
“Good,” Murenny said. “Let me know if you need any help.”
“I won’t need it,” Kindan told him. The Masterharper raised an eyebrow in curiosity.
Kindan explained, “Vaxoram lost, fair and square. He won’t cause trouble now.”
“You seem quite certain,” M’tal observed.
“He’s acknowledged his loss in front of the whole hall,” Kindan said.
“But he tried to attack you again!” M’tal protested.
“I’d be worried if he hadn’t,” Kindan  replied.  “Now,  he knows  for certain  that  I’ll beat  him, so  he
won’t try.”
“You’re  saying  that  now  that  he  knows  his  place,  he  won’t  cause  any  more  trouble?”  Murenny
suggested.
“Yes,” Kindan replied.
Murenny pursed his lips, his eyes half-closed in thought. Finally he looked up at Kindan and nodded.
“I think you have a  good  understanding of his  character,”  he  said.  He  wagged  a  finger  warningly  at
Kindan as he added, “Make sure you don’t forget.”
“I won’t, Master,” Kindan said. Taking the Masterharper’s  nod  for a  dismissal, he turned  to  M’tal.
“Thank you for helping me.”

M’tal snorted. “Do you think you were the only one I was helping?”
Kindan shook his head. “Thank you for helping my friends, and Vaxoram.”
M’tal nodded. “You’re welcome.”
With a  final nod,  Kindan  left the  room.  Just  after  he  closed  the  door,  he  heard  Murenny’s  voice
carrying clearly: “Zist will want to know.”
Master Zist had been the harper at Kindan’s mining home, and the one who had recommended him to
the  Harper  Hall.  Since  he  had  been  at  the  Harper  Hall,  Kindan  had  learned  that  Master  Zist  was
respected by all the Masters, this information usually being relayed  in the form of a  groaning question,
“And you are sure that Master Zist recommended you, Kindan?”
“Verilan’s much better,” Kelsa filled Kindan in at lunchtime. “He’ll be so disappointed that he didn’t get
to  watch  the  fight.”  She  cast  her  eyes  toward  Vaxoram,  who  sat  at  the  end  of  their  table,  eating
distractedly. She glanced over to Kindan, her expression making it plain that she wished he hadn’t invited
Vaxoram to sit with them. Kindan gave her the merest frown in reply and  gestured  for her to  continue
with her story.
“He’s still coughing a bit,” Nonala said, not missing any of their exchange of expressions. Her glance
toward  Vaxoram  was  thoughtful,  almost  pitying.  “But  Master  Lenner  says  he’ll  be  released  later  on
today.”
“What herbals did he get?” Kindan asked, mentally developing his own list of herbals. At the beginning
of his second  year  at  the Harper  Hall, Kindan  had  been  offered  the chance  to  become  a  healer  and
declined, feeling that he wasn’t suited for the duties. He’d meant it when he’d said that he didn’t want to
be a healer, but he also knew that harpers had to know some healing: They were  often called upon  to
assist the local healer or expected to provide remedies when no healer was available.
As Nonala recited the list in a singsong fashion, Kindan could see Kelsa nodding approvingly and only
once frowning, as though she would have ordered the words more melodically. Kindan wondered when
“Herbs for Colds” would be sung around the Harper Hall.
“That sounds like ‘Minor Green Dragon,’” Vaxoram murmured.
“Pardon?” Nonala asked, turning to him in surprise.
“It’s a song I learned,” Vaxoram said, looking at her uncomfortably. “It talks about different herbs and
what they treat. One decoction is Minor Green Dragon—it’s used for minor colds and coughs.”
“Could you sing it to me?” Kelsa asked. Vaxoram started to answer, then turned to Kindan.
“Later, maybe,” Kindan said. “We’ve got to get to our classes.”
“And me?” Vaxoram asked.
“You, too,” Kindan told him. “You’re to keep to your standard schedule.”
Vaxoram nodded, but Kindan could see that he looked troubled.

“You still want to be a harper, don’t you?” Kindan asked him.
“But I’m not good enough,” Vaxoram protested.
“You are if you say you are,” Kelsa snapped at him. “But at least you don’t have people saying you
can’t be a harper because you’re a girl.”
Vaxoram paled. “You could be a harper,” he told her. “I was wrong.”
“You’re  not  the  only  one  who  thinks  I  shouldn’t  be  a  harper,”  Kelsa  snapped  back  hotly.  She
gestured to Nonala. “Nor Nonala.”
“But you can sing!” Vaxoram said to Nonala, then turned back to Kelsa. “And you can write songs I
only dream of!”
“Keep saying that,” Kindan told him. “Keep telling them and anyone you meet. Maybe the others will
get it.”
Vaxoram closed his mouth suddenly, his lips thin. Kindan got up from his place  and  walked  over  to
Vaxoram. He leaned close by his ear, groping for the right words.
“We can all help each other here,” Kindan said at last. Judging by the twitch of Vaxoram’s shoulders,
he hadn’t made his point. He sighed to himself. Maybe the next time he would figure out a better way to
express himself. “Let’s get to our classes.”
That evening, Vaxoram joined them for dinner. He ate silently.
As they prepared for bed  that night, Vaxoram  came  over  to  Kindan  with an expectant  look  on his
face. Kindan pointed to an empty bunk.
“You’re  to  sleep  there,”  he  said.  Vaxoram  nodded  tersely,  and  Kindan  could  tell  that  the  older
apprentice was still adjusting to his new position. “The four of us—me, Verilan, Kelsa, and Nonala—are
from different years; there’s no shame in joining us.”
“Another outcast,” Vaxoram muttered resignedly, going over to his old bunk and retrieving his chest.
“You’re still the senior apprentice,” Kindan reminded him.
Vaxoram shook his head. “How can I be? I take orders from you.”
Kindan had nothing to say to that. As Vaxoram was arranging his bed, Kelsa came over  to  Kindan.
“Does he really have to sleep with us?”
“Yes,” Kindan said. “Unless you want me to move.”
“No,” Kelsa replied hastily, shaking her head in emphasis. “It’s just that—”
“He serves me; he needs to be near me,” Kindan told her, his face set. “If that’s a problem for you,
we can move, or you can move.”
“You’d better be right,” Kelsa snapped. She stomped off, casting angry glances in his direction  until
she finally climbed into her bunk.
Kindan settled into his bed not much later, then crawled out to turn out the glows.

“I can do that,” Vaxoram said from behind him. Kindan started to protest, then stopped  himself and
nodded. Turning out the glows was, after all, the duty of the senior apprentice.
“Thanks,” Kindan said when he’d finished.
“Glows over,” Vaxoram called loudly to the rest of the room.  Scurrying noises  showed  that  he was
obeyed.
Kindan settled into his bunk, reviewing all the amazing events of the day and realizing with a shiver that
had things gone differently, he would have been dead.
He drifted slowly off to sleep, considering all the ramifications of his actions and trying to imagine the
future. He was startled awake suddenly by the one thing he hadn’t counted on: Vaxoram snored.
The  next  issue  occurred  after  their  run  next  morning,  as  Kelsa  and  Nonala  cast  concerned  glances
between  Kindan  and  the  bath  room,  clearly  asking  him  what  he  intended  to  do  about  the  bathing
situation. Vaxoram, however, had an answer, rousting out the remaining laggards and handing out large
fluffy towels  to  the  four  of  them.  Kindan  kept  a  smile  to  himself  as  he  reflected  that  in  most  ways
Vaxoram was still a bully—just his bully.
“He’s not bathing with us, is he?” Nonala hissed worriedly toward Kindan. Vaxoram stiffened, but he
continued on his journey into the bath  room  with them. Inside,  he pulled another  set  of towels  off his
shoulder and hung them lengthwise between the front and back rows of baths.
Kindan understood at once.
“An excellent idea,” he told the older apprentice. Vaxoram gave him the faintest of grins that vanished
before Kindan could reciprocate.
“The girls are getting too old for us not to respect their privacy,” Vaxoram said. He glanced at Kindan
and Verilan. “And so are you.”
“But  we  like  talking  when  we’re  in  the  baths!”  Kelsa  complained  from  the  far  side  of  the  towel
partition.
“You can pull them down when everyone’s in their bath,” Vaxoram replied. “And when you’re ready
to get out, let us know and we’ll look away while you wrap yourself in your towel.”
“That’s no fun,” Nonala protested.
“But he’s right,” Kelsa said. “We are getting older.”
Kindan was surprised to see Vaxoram interrupt his last class of the day, Archiving with Master  Resler.
He thought perhaps that Vaxoram had misunderstood,  but instead  of approaching  him, Vaxoram  went
directly to the Master and spoke quickly, pointing at Kindan.

“Kindan, you’re  excused,”  Resler  called.  “You’re  to  go  up  to  the  Hold—the  eggs  are  hatching.”
Kindan started to put away his work, as Master Resler was known for his fastidiousness.
“I’ll get that,” Vaxoram said, rushing to Kindan’s side.
“Meet me up there,” Kindan replied, scuttling out of the Archive Room.
Outside,  in  the  Harper  Hall  courtyard,  Kindan  broke  into  a  slow,  steady  trot.  He  and  the  other
apprentices made the kilometer run every morning, so he was used to it, but he paced  himself now,  so
that he’d arrive ready for anything. As he ran, he tried to recall everything that he knew about the clutch
of fire-lizard eggs. M’tal had  said  that the eggs were  actually the combination of two  finds, that  some
might hatch before the others but that he was pretty certain that there would not be more than two days
between the first and last hatching.
Of the seven eggs, only two were marked for the Harper Hall, his and one other. Kindan had  heard
that  the  second  was  to  go  to  Issak,  one  of  the  younger  journeyman  harpers.  Tenelin,  the  senior
journeyman at  the  Harper  Hall,  had  already  had  a  chance  and  had  failed  to  Impress  his  fire-lizard.
Kindan  had  been  surprised  to  hear  that,  as  Tenelin  had  always  struck  him  as  a  kind,  considerate
individual. But sometimes,  Kindan  reflected  with growing unease,  that  wasn’t  enough for a  fire-lizard.
Certainly it wasn’t enough on its own to Impress a dragon.
The rising slope slowed him down only a little and soon he was under the great arches of Fort  Hold
and sprinting into the courtyard proper, heading for the huge doors that opened into Fort’s Great Hall.
“The fire-lizard eggs, where are they?” Kindan called to one of the guards as he sped past.
“You’d better hurry,” the guard replied, gesturing to the far end of the hall, “they’re in the kitchen.”
Kindan increased his pace to a full run, his breath now coming in gasps and his sides aching with effort.
Kindan had no sooner entered Fort’s huge kitchen, a room nearly three times the size of the Harper
Hall’s,  when  Issak’s  voice  called  out,  “Come  on,  Kindan,  they’re  hatching!  One’s  already  gone
between.”
Unless immediately fed—stuffed senseless, in fact—a fire-lizard would go between in search of food
on its own, which meant that it would go wild and never be Impressed.
Kindan raced over to the hearth and took in the scene: there were several young men, Issak, and a girl
somewhat older than Kindan. At that very instant, the egg nearest her burst open and a beautiful golden
queen fire-lizard emerged, creeling with fear and hunger.
“Feed it,” Issak shouted, thrusting a bowl of scraps toward the girl.
But the girl did nothing, her eyes only on the gold fire-lizard, wide with both fear and  amazement. In
that instant, Kindan fell in love.
“Koriana!” An older  woman’s  voice  called.  Kindan  turned  to  follow  the  voice  and  saw  an  older
version of the girl, dressed all in finery—Lady Sannora, Fort’s Lady Holder.
Kindan dropped to the girl’s side, grabbed the bowl of scraps, and pulled one out of it. He thrust the
wet bit of meat into one of the girl’s limp hands.
“You must feed her,” he said. “Feed her and make her come to you.”

Koriana jerked at his words and looked down to the piece of meat in her hand. Kindan put his hand
over her forearm and guided it forward to the mouth of the fire-lizard. The little queen saw the meat and
pounced,  gobbling it down.  Kindan  grabbed  another  piece  with his free  hand and  put it in  Koriana’s
hand, drawing it back slightly toward her lap.
“Kindan!” Issak called. “The other eggs, you need to pick one!”
“You said one had gone already,” Kindan protested.
“That was mine,” one of the Lord Holder’s sons declared. He gestured to Kindan. “You should have
a chance. After all, you seem to have brought us luck, for Koriana at the very least.”
Kindan continued to pass scraps to Koriana, leaning so close that he could smell the fresh scent of her
hair, the warmth  of  her  trembling  body.  Her  hair  was  honey  blond  and  her  eyes  a  brilliant  blue.  A
smattering of freckles showed on her arms and Kindan guessed that she also had some on her face. She
was breathing raggedly.
“Calm down, it’ll be all right,” Kindan told her soothingly. “You’re doing fine. Just feed her and have
her come to you. You want her in your lap. Then feed her until she falls asleep.”
Kindan started to move but Koriana made a terrified sound and grabbed at him.
A figure came  from around  behind him. It  was  Vaxoram.  He  looked  over  at  the rocking eggs and
back to Kindan.
“Which one?” he asked Kindan. For a moment all eyes were on Kindan.  He  pointed  to  a  brownish
egg and Vaxoram retrieved it, bringing it and some warm sand close to Kindan, then he retreated silently.
Lady Sannora  frowned  as  she  noticed  the raw,  red  scar  under  Vaxoram’s  right eye  and  turned  to
scrutinize Kindan with a tight expression that Kindan didn’t see.
“Keep  feeding  her,”  Kindan  instructed  Koriana,  leaning  back  now  a  little  from  the  intoxicating
closeness of her.
In front of him, the brownish shell rocked  hard  and  cracked.  Kindan  tensed,  grabbed  a  handful of
scraps with his other hand, and held it above the shell. In a moment a head emerged and creeled. Kindan
fed it a scrap. The fire-lizard hatchling shook its egg and burst it still further, reaching for the next scrap.
Kindan fed it, then pulled his hand back.
“Come on,” he called soothingly. “There’s plenty here. You can have it all, come on.”
The hatchling burst  out of its egg and  took  an awkward  step  toward  Kindan  and  another  scrap  of
food.
Beside him, Kindan heard Koriana speak in imitation, “Come on, you beauty, have another.”
“Come on,” Kindan said. He was surprised to see that his fire-lizard was bronze. He’d thought he’d
picked a brown. “Oh, you’re such a pretty  one,  aren’t  you?” he murmured encouragingly. “You’re  so
clever, too! Come on, come a little closer.”
“Come on, my beauty, come closer,” Koriana cooed. Kindan glanced at her long enough to grin and
was rewarded with the most beautiful smile he’d ever seen. It was with an effort that he turned back to
his fire-lizard.

It took only a few more minutes to get his fire-lizard perched  in his lap,  stuffed with scraps.  Beside
him, Koriana’s gold had found her way into her lap also and had curled up, fast asleep.
“What do I do now?” Koriana murmured fearfully to Kindan.
“Stroke her,” he told her. “Stay with her while she sleeps. Feed her when she wakes up.”
He looked  down  to  his  own  fire-lizard  and  stroked  the  bronze  beauty  softly.  Soon  the  miniature
dragon had also curled up comfortably and, with a final shiver of abandon, fallen asleep. He turned back
to Koriana, still oblivious to the others. “What are you going to name her?”
Koriana’s lips tightened into a frown as she thought. “Koriss,” she said finally. “She shall be Koriss.”
She looked at Kindan and his heart leapt as she smiled and asked, “And yours?”
“Valla.” The name seemed right the moment he said it.
Two eggs remained unhatched and unmoving.
“M’tal said that there were two different clutches,” Kindan announced when he noted Lord Bemin and
his Lady Sannora exchange concerned looks.
“But when will we know that they’re hatching?” Lord Bemin asked.
“M’tal said that they should hatch within two days of each other,” Kindan replied.
Lord Bemin looked relieved. He glanced at Kindan with his bronze  fire-lizard in his lap and  then at
Koriana with her gold fire-lizard. A frown crossed  his face  as  he noticed  how closely the harper  was
seated to his eldest daughter.
“Could you stay here tonight?” Lady Sannora asked Kindan. “I’ll send word to the Hall—”
“I could go,” Vaxoram offered.
“Could you?” Lady  Sannora  asked,  her  face  brightening  with  relief.  Vaxoram  glanced  at  Kindan,
asking, “Is that all right?”
“Certainly,” Kindan replied. “I’ll be back in the morning.”
“You’d trust me on my own?” Vaxoram asked with just a hint of surprise in his tone.
Kindan turned his head and probingly locked eyes with Vaxoram for a long moment before nodding.
“Go carefully, the roads can get slick at this time of night,” Issak advised. Vaxoram nodded, bowed to
Lord Bemin and Lady Sannora, then left swiftly.
“That boy!” Lady Sannora exclaimed to her husband. “Did you see the scar under his eye?”
“He was fighting,” Lord Bemin replied, turning his head to eye Kindan thoughtfully. “There was a duel.
He lost.”
“I don’t approve of duels,” Lady Sannora pronounced, her face set in a grimace. “What overmuscled
cretin picked a fight with him?”
Lord Bemin raised an eyebrow in Kindan’s direction.
“I did,” Kindan said, meeting the Lord’s and Lady’s outraged looks steadily, though he felt the heat in

his cheeks. “He had threatened to use his strength over a woman,” he explained. With a shrug, he added,
“Several women, actually.”
“Why didn’t you kill him?” Bemin’s eldest son, Semin, demanded.
“Because, my lord,” Kindan replied, “I believe in second chances.”
Semin was surprised at Kindan’s response.
“And because it would have done  more  harm than good,”  Issak  chimed in from the other  side.  He
inclined his head toward Kindan. “Master Murenny recounted your thinking to me.”
Was there a hint of respect in the journeyman’s eyes?
“Well!” Lady Sannora said in surprise.
“Well,” Lord Bemin agreed, “we have offered our hospitality for the night; please  do  not hesitate  to
ask for anything you need.”
“Thank you, my lord,” Kindan replied,  fully aware  of the emphasis the Lord  Holder  had  placed  on
“the night”—and the implication that Kindan was expected to leave in the morning.
Koriana had listened to the exchange through half-lidded eyes  as  though drowsing,  but Kindan  had
noticed that she had opened them once or  twice with such haste  that  he wondered  if she  hadn’t  been
feigning her fatigue. Now she spoke up. “Father, could you have pillows and blankets brought to us?”
“Us?” Lady Sannora repeated in surprise.
“I don’t want to disturb Koriss,” Koriana said, bending her head toward the fire-lizard sleeping in her
lap. “And I might need help if she wakes in the night. I’m sure  Issak  and”—here  Kindan  felt her eyes
upon him—“Kindan will keep me company.”
“Of  course,”  Issak  declared  instantly,  flicking  a  half-wink  toward  Kindan.  Kindan,  wisely,  said
nothing.
“Very well,” Bemin agreed, although he had a hard time veiling an uneasy glance in Kindan’s direction.
He signaled the hearth drudge to comply with Koriana’s request. Once another drudge was dispatched
for the requisite sleeping gear, the hearth drudge returned to her task of carefully banking the kitchen’s
great fire. Issak, Kindan, and Koriana arranged themselves comfortably when the blankets  and  pillows
arrived.
“Good night then,” Sannora called from the entranceway as the last of the glows were turned.
“Good night, Mother,” Koriana called sleepily over her shoulder and curled her body around her gold
fire-lizard. Kindan emulated her in the same direction so that they looked like a large pair of Cs shielding
small fire-lizard dots.
“Good night, my lady,” Issak said formally.
“Sleep peacefully, my lady,” Kindan said.
After a moment the last of the footsteps dwindled into silence and they were left with the crackle of the
coal fire,  the  smell  of  smoke,  warm  scraps,  and  scented  pillows.  Just  before  he  dozed  off,  Kindan
thought he detected the faintest smell of Koriana’s hair.

He woke much later in the middle of the night and turned quickly to see Koriana staring at him.
“She’s up, what do I do?” the girl whispered frantically.
“Feed her, soothe her, get her back to sleep,” Kindan replied softly, groping for and pushing a bowl of
scraps  her way.  He  examined the belly of his bronze  fire-lizard  carefully  but  Valla  made  no  motions
toward wakefulness.
“Help me,” Koriana whispered in despair. Kindan rolled over, carefully rolling Valla into his lap, and
turned around to face Koriana. He passed her scraps that she fed her fire-lizard until, finally, the hungry
gold’s eyes slowly faded in the firelight as she fell back to sleep. Kindan watched Koriana for a moment
more. He was surprised when the girl reached out and grabbed his hand, clasping it with hers.
“Thank you,” she said.
Kindan nodded. Very carefully, he stretched  himself out,  still facing her,  and  rolled over,  depositing
Valla in the center of a bundle of blankets. Reaching behind him, he pulled another blanket over himself.
Koriana followed suit, but being taller than Kindan, she had trouble getting her blanket to cover her. In
moments she  was  shivering. Kindan  raised  a  finger to  his lips to  caution her  to  silence,  then  reached
further  over  his  shoulder  and  pulled  more  blanket  over  himself  and  on  top  of  her.  Koriana  smiled
gratefully at  him  and  then  snuggled  closer,  so  close  that  their  two  fire-lizards  were  almost  touching.
Koriana leaned forward, her head resting lightly against his. Her knees brushed his. In moments she was
asleep.
Kindan did not fall asleep until much later.
“Kindan!” a  voice spoke  urgently in his ear,  rousing him. “Kindan,  get  up,  now!  The  other  eggs  are
hatching, the Lord and Lady are on their way.” It was Vaxoram.
Kindan sat up slowly, remembering his charge, then looked down  at  Koriana  who was  still sleeping
peacefully, her fire-lizard half-clutched in her hands.
“If they see you like this…” Vaxoram  said,  shaking his head.  “You can’t  think that  they’ll accept  a
harper for her!”
“No!” Kindan  said,  looking at  Vaxoram  in surprise.  “It’s  not  like  that.”  But  Kindan  wondered  to
himself, what would it be like to wake up to such a peaceful sight every day?
“Check the eggs,” Issak ordered from the other side of the hearth. “And get some distance, muss up
those pillows and blankets.”
Vaxoram jumped in with a will, ignoring Kindan’s protests for quiet.
“You  don’t  want  to  upset  the  Lord  Holder,”  Vaxoram  told  him.  Kindan  sensed  that  the  older
apprentice was talking from some past experience, but he had no time to ask more.
The remaining two eggs were rocking.
“Come quickly, the eggs are hatching!” Issak called,  cradling his fire-lizard in the crook  of one  arm

and rushing to the kitchen’s entrance.
“What’s up?” Koriana asked muzzily as the noise roused her.
“The other eggs are hatching,” Kindan told her. “Be sure to feed yours if she wakes.”
Koriana nodded, then looked around. She glanced at the pillows and blankets spread about her, then
at Kindan, her eyes intent and mouth open, but before she  could  say  anything, her mother,  father,  and
two older brothers strode into the room.
“They’re hatching?” Semin asked, glancing toward the hearth.
“Yes,” Kindan said.
“Sit down  close  by and  grab  some  scraps,”  Issak  said,  gesturing  toward  the  ground  close  to  the
rocking eggs.
“Bannor, come  on!” Semin  called,  gesturing  for  his  younger  brother  to  follow  him.  “We  can’t  let
Koriana be the only one of us with a fire-lizard!”
Bannor laughed as he strode into the room. “No, indeed we can’t, little sister.”
Koriana waved groggily at him, then angrily as the motion disturbed her queen.
“If you wake her—”
“Perhaps  you  should  go  to  another  room?”  Lady  Sannora  suggested,  not  quite  glancing  toward
Kindan. It was clear that Lady Sannora was unhappy with the thought that Koriana had spent the night in
his presence.
Koriana  noticed  the glance and  smiled back  at  her mother.  “And have a  chance  to  miss  my  sibs’
triumph? Oh, no, Mother, I must be here for every moment!”
Was the girl deliberately trying to goad her mother, Kindan wondered.
“Well,” Lady Sannora said consideringly, regrouping her thoughts, “perhaps the harpers would prefer
to return to their hall.”
“We are at your service, my lady,” Issak replied with a carefully choreographed bow that managed to
keep his fire-lizard level throughout.
“Keep the lucky one here,” Semin said, indicating Kindan. “The others can go.”
“We could help,” Issak suggested. Vaxoram nodded mutely. Kindan couldn’t tell if the older boy was
more interested in the spectacle of Impression or in fulfilling his duty to Kindan. Or perhaps he wanted to
watch Kindan’s growing discomfiture in the presence of both Koriana and her mother.
“I’m hungry,” Koriana said. “I’m sure the others are, too.”
“Indeed,”  Lady  Sannora  agreed  drily.  She  started  to  say  something  more  but  caught  herself  and
instead nodded to  the harpers.  “Pardon  me, I’m forgetting my manners in all the excitement. I’ll have
someone bring you klah and rolls.”
“It is a hectic time for all of us,” Issak said, nodding politely. “No apologies are necessary, my lady.”

Lady Sannora nodded graciously but cast  a  cold  look  toward  her daughter.  Koriana  merely smiled
back.
Kindan thought that Koriana was playing a dangerous game, goading her mother so. He realized that
the tensions between the two  were  long-standing but felt that  somehow  his presence  had  exacerbated
them.
But the two remaining eggs were now clearly hatching, so he put his thoughts on hold.
“What should we do?” Bannor asked, looking to Issak, then Kindan, then Koriana in desperation.
“Don’t panic,” Koriana told him sternly. “Just stuff its face full of scraps and talk soothingly.”
“Tell him you love him,” Issak added, looking down fondly at the brown still sleeping serenely  in the
crook of his arm.
“What if it’s a green?” Bannor asked worriedly.
“Then tell her,” Semin answered with a disgusted look, adding snidely, “Though why you would want
a green…”
Kindan glanced at Bannor, wondering if the younger holder was hoping for a green. Gold  and  green
fire-lizards were female, just like gold and green dragons…or watch-whers.
“You can’t  be  certain  from  the  size  or  color  of  the  egg,”  Kindan  said  suddenly.  “Nor  from  past
experience,” he added as he noticed  both  older  lads  looking at  him expectantly.  “I impressed  a  green
watch-wher, and now I have a bronze fire-lizard.”
“Forsk is green,” Bannor said, glancing toward the kitchen entrance. “Forsk is bound to Father.”
Ah,  so  it  wasn’t  a  question  of  preferences,  Kindan  thought  to  himself.  Perhaps  it  was  jealousy.
Perhaps Bemin’s sons envied their father his bond with the watch-wher. Clearly from the number of his
offspring, there was no question of Bemin’s virility. The knowledge that Fort’s Lord Holder was bonded
to  a  green  watch-wher  eased  some  of  Kindan’s  unconscious  worries  about  himself  and  his  prior
acquaintance with a watch-wher.
“It’s cracking!” Koriana shouted, raising one arm to point at the egg nearest Bannor. “Feed it, feed it!”
“You’d best feed yours,” Kindan told her calmly, noting that the noise had disturbed the queen.
“It’s a  bronze!”  Bannor  exclaimed.  “Oh,  you  great  beauty,  you!”  He  started  to  feed  the  creeling
fire-lizard scraps from his hand.  But before  the fire-lizard had  stepped  more  than twice from its shell,
Kindan’s Valla had woken up and chirped questioningly.
Suddenly Koriss  hissed  loudly, her voice  warbling  in  a  horrible  noise  and  the  little  newly  hatched
fire-lizard gave one terrified squawk and went between.
“She scared it!” Bannor cried, pointing a finger at the gold. “She scared it away!”
“No, she didn’t,” Koriana protested hotly, grasping the gold tightly in her hands. “She was scared and
she cried out.”
“She scared it away,” Bannor persisted, his tone both bereaved and outraged. “And now I won’t have
one.”

Semin’s egg cracked at that moment and Bannor turned toward it. “Let me have yours, Semin.”
Semin  saw  the  look  of  longing  in  his  younger  brother’s  eyes  and  was  startled,  caught  between
acquiescing and taking the fire-lizard himself. The hatchling squawked hungrily.
“Feed it,” Kindan urged.
But Koriss squawked again peremptorily before the little brown had even emerged from its shell and,
with a horrified yelp, the little brown went between.
“Oh, no! Now look what you’ve done!” Bannor exclaimed angrily to his brother.  “You should have
given him to me, you oaf.” He turned toward Lady Sannora. “Mother, I want a fire-lizard.” He gestured
toward Kindan and Issak. “Make them give me theirs.”
“It doesn’t work that way, Bannor,” Koriana told him heatedly. “And how dare you say such a thing?
Call yourself a Holder’s son?”
“Mother!” Bannor complained, turning back to his mother.
“Koriana, really!” Lady Sannora cried, wringing her hands. “Your brother has had a trying time here,
at least you could be sympathetic.”
But Koriana looked like the last thing she wanted to be was sympathetic.
Issak stirred and asked Kindan, “Have you ever heard of such an occurance before?”
“No,” Kindan replied, surprised that the journeyman would ask his opinion.
“Nor have I,” Issak said. He turned to Lady Sannora. “My lady, if it pleases you, we will report this
sad affair to the Masterharper. Perhaps he has some suggestions that would help in the future.”
“Yes, yes,” Lady Sannora said hastily as she crossed toward the distraught Bannor. “That sounds like
an excellent suggestion.”
“But I still don’t  know  what  to  do  with  my  fire-lizard,”  Koriana  protested,  glancing  pleadingly  at
Kindan.
“For  the  time  being,  just  feed  her,”  Kindan  replied.  “And  oil  any  patchy  skin,  just  like  the
watch-wher.”
“You’re  the  one  who  had  a  watch-wher?”  Lady  Sannora  asked,  turning  suddenly  back  toward
Kindan. “And you gave her to that blind girl who saved her father?”
“She’s not blind, not really,” Kindan said. “But that’s about the gist of it, yes, my lady.”
“You must have been very sad,” Koriana said, looking at Kindan with renewed interest.
“Or very stupid,” Bannor snapped, glancing sulkily at his mother.
“Perhaps both,” Kindan agreed, not letting the Holder’s middle child upset him. Koriana rewarded him
with an impish grin, quickly hidden from her mother.
“My lady,” Issak prompted, “with your leave…”
“Oh, do!” Lady Sannora assented, waving her hand and turning her attention  solely toward  Bannor.

“We’ll send a messenger if we need anything.”
“We could use the drums,” Semin suggested.
“We’ll send a messenger,” Lady Sannora repeated in a tone that brooked no argument.
Issak nodded, again not jostling his fire-lizard. “As you wish.”
And with that, he signaled Kindan and Vaxoram to follow him as he led the way out of the kitchen,
through Fort’s Great Hall, and down toward the Harper Hall.
Kindan had much to think about on the journey.
Nothing was said until they were once more under the arches of the Harper Hall.
“You two go to your classes,” Issak instructed. “I’ll report to the Masterharper.”
“Valla is getting hungry,” Kindan said.
Issak nodded in understanding. “By all means feed him whenever he wants,” he responded. “We don’t
need to perpetuate the tragedy of today.”
Kindan  said  nothing  but  Vaxoram  snickered.  Issak  raised  an  eyebrow  in  inquiry  of  the  older
apprentice.
“It wasn’t us and you know it,” Vaxoram replied. “It’s that spoiled Bannor and his airs.” He glanced
toward Kindan. “And don’t be too certain his sister is any better.”
Kindan bristled.
“It  doesn’t  matter,”  Issak  told  him,  holding  out  a  placating  hand.  “You’re  not  a  Lord  Holder
candidate, and Lord Bemin will trade his daughter to his advantage.”
“Trade?” Kindan repeated in outrage.
“She’ll go willingly, when the time comes,” Issak said to cool Kindan’s anger.
“It’s  for  the  good  of  the  Hold,”  Vaxoram  added,  gloating  over  Kindan’s  outburst.  “You  must
understand, you’re a harper.”
“And harpers aren’t good enough?” Kindan demanded.
“Not for Lord Holders,” Issak agreed with a sad shake of his head. He said to Vaxoram, “Help him to
understand.”
Vaxoram sighed and  nodded,  his gleeful mood  subsiding. He  gave Kindan  a  look  that  was  almost
sympathetic, then told Issak, “I’ll tell him while we feed his fire-lizard.”
Issak smiled and strode off, calling back with a finger pointed at the fire-lizard, “Don’t forget to show
him off, as well!”
Guided  by  Vaxoram,  Kindan  and  Valla  entered  the  kitchen  and  found  Selora  bustling  about,
overseeing several drudges as they prepared the day’s meals.
“Kindan’s Impressed a bronze,” Vaxoram declared as they entered. “Just last night, a real beauty.”

Kindan was surprised at the pride in Vaxoram’s voice.
“He would,” Selora  agreed  heartily, peering down  to  the  small  figure  nestled  in  Kindan’s  crossed
arms. The little fire-lizard yawned and looked up sleepily at Selora. “He’ll be hungry in a moment,” she
declared, kicking a stool nearer to the hearth. “Sit down and I’ll get him some scraps.”
“A strange thing happened, Selora,” Vaxoram continued as Kindan sat down, too lost in concentration
on Valla to speak, “Koriana’s little fire-lizard—”
“Koriss,” Kindan interjected suddenly.
“—Koriss,” Vaxoram agreed with a playful smile, “frightened off the two hatchlings that came to  her
brothers.”
“Males, were they?” Selora asked, cocking her head shrewdly.
“Yes,” Kindan agreed, his eyes narrowing. “How did you know?”
“She  frightened  them  away  on  purpose,”  Selora  said.  “Didn’t  want  her  siblings  paired  with  her
mistress’s siblings.”
“Why?” Kindan asked in confusion.
Selora started to reply but had a coughing fit instead. “You’ll find out in time, I’ve no doubt,” she said,
a grin spreading across her face. She pushed more scraps toward Kindan. “Be sure  to  stuff him good,
they don’t like being moved much in the first sevenday.”
Hastily Kindan complied, fearful of losing his beautiful fire-lizard.
“Did  you  know,  Selora,”  Vaxoram  continued  conversationally,  “when  the  two  fire-lizards  were
frightened away, Bannor demanded that Issak or Kindan give up theirs?”
“Oh, he would,” Selora declared, throwing up her hands in disgust. “Just like his father, that one.”
The next two sevendays passed in a blur for Kindan, who felt that he spent all his waking hours feeding
or oiling Valla, despite all the help he had from Verilan, Kelsa, Nonala and, most of all, Vaxoram.
Somewhere in that time Vaxoram moved from being a brooding, vanquished opponent to being truly
dedicated to Kindan. Kindan could never point to the exact moment nor quite understand why, but there
it was.
“He’s changed,”  Nonala  remarked  one  evening. Kindan  glanced  at  her  and  she  corrected  herself,
speaking directly to Vaxoram, “You’ve changed.”
Vaxoram grunted in surprise, then nodded in agreement.
“But why, though?” Kelsa wondered later when she  was  alone with Kindan,  helping him oil Valla’s
patchy skin. “Why has he changed?”
Kindan thought for a moment. “Master Murenny said that Vaxoram had come to the Harper Hall with
a great voice as a child. When it broke wrong, he couldn’t  find any new talent to  replace  it. He  came

from a small hold, Master Murenny said.”
“So he was  afraid,” Kelsa  guessed,  nodding sagely. “And now he’s  got something to  do,  guarding
you.”
“Maybe,” Kindan agreed.  Kelsa  cocked  her head  at  him questioningly. “Maybe  there’s  more  to  it.
Perhaps because the worst has happened to him, he’s realized that he has nothing to be scared of.”
“Maybe,” Kelsa  replied,  but she  didn’t sound  convinced.  She  changed  the topic.  “What about  this
girl?”
“What girl?” Kindan asked innocently.
“The holder girl who impressed the gold, Kindan,” Kelsa responded tetchily.
“Who told you about her?” Kindan demanded. “Vaxoram?”
Kelsa shook her head. “This is a harper hall, news travels, silly.”
“Does everyone know?”
“Yes, everyone,” Kelsa replied with a wave of her hand to include the whole Harper Hall. “So what
about it? Are the rumors true?”
“I haven’t heard the rumors,” Kindan returned heatedly, “so I can’t say.”
“The rumors are that you and she were all sparks together, that her fire-lizard scared any other suitors
away, that she pines for you every night, and  that  her evil mother and  father won’t  let her see  you no
matter what she says.”
Kindan rolled his eyes in disgust. “The trouble with rumors is that they’re mostly wrong,” he declared.
“Mostly?” Kelsa pounced. “What’s right about them, then?”
“Kelsa,” Kindan growled warningly.
“Oh, Kindan, come on,” she pleaded, making big eyes back at him and looking pitiful. “You can  tell
me.”
“There’s nothing to tell,” Kindan said. “It’s true that the other fire-lizards were frightened between and
it may be that Koriss did it. Koriana was upset and her brother demanded that Issak or I give him our
fire-lizards—”
“The brat!” Kelsa interjected.
“And I don’t think Lady Sannora likes me very much,” Kindan finished lamely.
“She doesn’t like harpers, you mean,” Kelsa corrected him.
Kindan glanced at her in surprise.
“Rumor has it,” Kelsa told him excitedly, “that she fell in love with a harper when she was younger but
he spurned her.”
“Which harper?” Kindan demanded. He’d never heard such a rumor.

“Isn’t it obvious?”  Kelsa  asked  him, shaking her head  at  his obtuseness.  “Why do  you think  Lord
Bemin never visits?”
Kindan thought about that for a moment. “Not…Master Murenny?”
Kelsa nodded approvingly. “Right the first time.” She patted his arm condescendingly. “You’ll make a
harper yet.”
 
CHAPTER 5 
Harper, treat your words with care
For they may cause joy or despair
Sing your songs of health and love
Of dragons flaming from above. 
HARPER HALL,
AL 496.11
I t seemed to Kindan at the start of his third year at the Harper  Hall that  everything went wrong.  He
blamed it on the food at first. If they hadn’t fed him so well, he wouldn’t have grown so quickly.
If he hadn’t grown so quickly he wouldn’t have been moving so awkwardly, nor, come to think of it,
having to beg for new clothes so frequently. If he didn’t move so awkwardly  he wouldn’t be  knocking
over everything in his path. If he hadn’t outgrown his clothes so quickly, he wouldn’t have found himself
in oversized clothes—“with room to grow in, you’ll need that”—which exacerbated his awkwardness by
making it hard to find the ends of things, like sleeves.
If there was an accident  waiting to  happen  in the Harper  Hall it only needed  Kindan’s  presence  to
complete it. It wasn’t his fault that he couldn’t see the latest stock of dyes as he blundered  through the
Archive room overladen with Records. Someone else, it was admitted later, shouldn’t have placed them
there. But, miraculously, it was his fault that he tumbled over them, breaking the dyes all over the newer
Records and rendering so many permanently illegible.
“You’re to work with the instrument maker, Kindan,” Master Resler said. He sighed as  he retrieved
and classified the last of the legible Records.
“Just  because  you’re  now  taller  than  me  doesn’t  mean  I  can’t  handle  you,”  Caldazon  grumbled  in
warning the moment Kindan presented himself to the small instrument maker.

“You duck  your  head  and  don’t  knock  any  of  the  woods  that  are  curing  above  you,”  Caldazon
continued, pointing to the various lumps of wood hanging down from the cavernous instrument maker’s
room.
“Of course, Master,” Kindan replied, bobbing his head—and accidentally bumping it against a  stout
beam of wood when he straightened.
Caldazon wheezed a dry laugh. “Maybe the wood’ll knock some sense into you.”
Kindan certainly hoped so, particularly as the days  went by.  He  worked  with the other  apprentices
and made a passable drum, but he’d been making those Turns before he’d left Camp Natalon to become
a harper. He had less luck with pipes—the spacing of his holes made them awkward to play.
“A  waste  of  wood,  that,”  Caldazon  grumbled,  tossing  Kindan’s  first  effort  onto  the  scrapheap.
“Luckily it’s bamboo; the stuff grows like crazy down Boll way.”
Kindan knew that until he could master the making of pipes, he’d never be allowed to use the precious
wood required to make a guitar. Still, he showed a skill at sanding and polishing.
“Those big muscles of yours are good for something,” Caldazon  opined,  assigning all the sanding to
Kindan. Kindan didn’t grumble—he knew better—but he went to  bed  with sore  shoulders  every  night
for two sevendays.
Even so, he was learning and he knew it. By sanding the work of others, Kindan started to get a feel
for the wood and how to work it.
“You’re to help make glue and polish today,” Caldazon barked at him one morning not long after. As
he made to leave, he added, “And be certain you don’t confuse the two.”
It was as though the Master’s words were a prophecy. The light in the room was not the best,  even
though Kindan had brought in extra glows, and—he could never figure it out—he somehow managed to
mix the wrong ingredients into both mixtures.
“This is not glue!” Caldazon swore when he examined the bubbling pot after lunch. He turned  to  the
pot that was supposed to contain finish and found that he couldn’t even lift the spoon. “And this! This has
hardened! Whatever it is, it’s ruined now.”
He glared at Kindan, who hung his head.
“I guess I got muddled,” Kindan explained. “The light was—”
“It wasn’t the light,” Caldazon broke in. He pulled the first pot off the heat and gestured to the second
pot.  “You’ll clean this one  out first, and  mind you don’t  damage  the  surface  or  the  pot’ll  be  useless
forever. When you’re done, you can find someplace to empty that”—he jerked his thumb to  the other
pot—“and clean it out as well.” With a final glare, Caldazon stalked off.
“Master?” Kindan called after him, not trusting himself alone with his disasters.
“I need  to  talk with  Harper  Murenny,”  Caldazon  replied  grumpily.  “And  maybe  take  a  nap.”  He
glanced again at Kindan and amended, “A long nap.”
“I could  clean it,” Vaxoram  offered  quietly. Kindan  was  surprised  to  see  him; he must  have  come
straight from his last class and, Kindan guessed, had caught the last of Caldazon’s railings.

In  the  past  ten  months,  the  relationship  between  Vaxoram  and  Kindan  had  grown  deeper,  more
complex,  yet  still  no  less  perplexing  to  both  of  them.  It  was  as  though  the  older  apprentice  was
sometimes Kindan’s older brother, other times his apprentice. Yet it worked, and Vaxoram was now an
accepted member of the “outcasts,” as he had once named Kindan and his friends.
“No,” Kindan replied, shaking his head. “I made this mess, I should clean it up.”
Vaxoram nodded. Kindan hid a grin and turned to his messes.
Cleaning the failed glue out of its pot was easy and, to bolster his spirits, Kindan did that first. It was
probably just as well because, try as he might, Kindan could not clean out the hardened  polish without
chipping Master Caldazon’s prized pot. In the end, just short of tears, Kindan returned the two pots to
the instrument maker’s  room  only to  find it empty; the Master  was  obviously still ensconced  with the
Masterharper.
Somewhat relieved, Kindan decided to honor the old adage of “leave sleeping Masters lie” and made
his way to his afternoon voice lesson with Master Biddle.
Twenty minutes into his lesson, Master Biddle lowered his baton and looked straight over the heads of
the other apprentices to Kindan.
“I’d say, Kindan, that today is not a good day for you to be using your voice,” Biddle told him politely.
Red-faced, Kindan could only nod. It was not just a bad day, it was a horrible day, and it was clear
that it was going to be the first of many more—for Kindan’s voice seemed determined to settle at neither
bass nor tenor, but merely to crack indeterminately whenever he tried even the slightest range.
“Perhaps,” Biddle suggested kindly, “you’d care to conduct?”
Kindan’s  eyes  widened  with excitement.  If  there  was  one  thing  that  Kindan  truly  enjoyed,  it  was
conducting others in the making of music. At Biddle’s insistent gestures, Kindan made his way down to
the front of the class and, with a nod of thanks, took the baton from the Voice Master.
Perhaps the day would get better.
He had just raised it to start the choir singing when a voice barked out, “Kindan!”
It was Master Caldazon. The color drained out of Kindan’s face and he reluctantly turned the baton
back over to Master Biddle.
Perhaps the day would get worse.
“It’s only because you’re growing,” Nonala consoled him at the evening meal. At thirteen Turns she was
still half a head taller than Kindan, but that was far less than the full head’s difference between them only
a Turn before.
“You’ll find your height,” Verilan added staunchly. Kindan smiled at him but couldn’t help feeling a bit
jealous—Verilan was assured a place in the Harper Hall; his skill at copying alone would guarantee it.
“Just try to  stay  out of trouble,”  Kelsa  added  sagely, looking up from the slate  on  which  she  was

writing.
“Eat, Kelsa,” Kindan and Nonala said in unison. The others all shared a private smile as  Kelsa  gave
them a startled look and wistfully pushed her slate away. Kelsa was always writing. The dark-haired girl
was  another  who  Kindan  was  certain  would  find  a  place  in  the  Harper  Hall,  even  if  the  Hall  was
traditionally a man’s world; Kelsa’s songs were so original that none could forget them, and she herself
had a perfect memory for not only words but notes as well.
Play her a song once and she’d know it forever; start a melody and  she’d  write a  whole new piece
from  it.  It  was  dangerous  to  whistle  near  Kelsa,  for  she’d  often  lurch  to  a  sudden  stop—to  the
consternation of all behind her—and start writing.
Kelsa and Pellar had an amazing affinity for each other whenever the mute Harper visited from his Fire
Hold; she seemed able to take his merest notions and put them to music. Surprisingly to Kindan, Halla,
Pellar’s mate,  never  seemed  to  mind the way Kelsa  and  Pellar acted  around  each  other.  In fact,  she
seemed to encourage it, when Kindan would have preferred that she  be  jealous  and  keep  Pellar away
from  Kelsa.  Despite  his  recent  understanding  that  he  didn’t  feel  that  way  about  Kelsa,  Kindan  still
wanted the hope that if he ever did, he’d stand some chance.
He shook  his head  self-deprecatingly  and,  noticing that  Kelsa  had  once  again dropped  her  fork  in
favor of her stylus, cocked  his head  at  her warningly.  Nonala  noticed  his  movement  and  growled  at
Kelsa.
“Shards!” Kelsa groaned. “It’s only food.”
“But you need to eat,” Verilan told her. “Not even you can tune on an empty stomach.”
“I’m not a workbeast,” Kelsa snarled, glancing at Kindan. “I don’t need so much food that I blunder
about all day.”
“Kelsa!” Nonala said in admonishment and the others all looked at Kelsa angrily.
Kindan’s face drained of all color; there was no way he could pretend that the remark hadn’t hurt.
“Well,” Kelsa said in a lame defense of her words, “maybe if you didn’t eat so much—”
Kindan rose stormily and loudly pushed his plate across the table in front of Kelsa.
“You eat my portion then,” he snarled as he rushed out of the dining hall.
It wouldn’t have mattered so much except that Nonala, Kelsa, and Verilan were his only friends at  the
Harper Hall—except also perhaps Vaxoram, but that relationship was so odd Kindan didn’t know quite
what to call it.
When he had arrived at the Harper Hall three Turns back, Kindan had joined a group of apprentices
who had already been together for half a Turn, some as much as a full Turn, and all his attempts to fit in
with the others had failed. Out  of the other  forty apprentices  at  the time, only Verilan had  shown any
signs of friendliness. Eventually, Kelsa and then Nonala had joined their ranks, and now striding into the
large courtyard in the center of the Harper Hall, Kindan realized that  he had  become  the leader  of the
group. Perhaps it was because he was older, or perhaps  it was  because  of his defeat  of Vaxoram,  or

perhaps it was because he wasn’t as intensely focused as  the other  three,  he couldn’t  say,  but there  it
was. Or perhaps—
A noise from above  him caused  Kindan  to  look  up and  raise  an arm—not  for protection  but as  a
perch. With a contented cry, the small bronze fire-lizard alighted on Kindan’s arm.
“I haven’t got anything for you, Valla,” Kindan  said  as  he reached  with his other  arm to  stroke  the
fire-lizard’s cheek. Valla chirped in understanding and Kindan’s foul mood evaporated.
Perhaps that was the other thing that marked Kindan apart from the rest of the apprentices, even his
own small group of friends; he was on intimate terms with two Weyrleaders and countless dragonriders.
There had  been  a  time when that would have been  enough for Kindan: To  be  a  harper  and  to  be
friendly with the Weyrleaders of Pern had seemed an impossible goal when he was Turns younger.
Well, Kindan mused, that’s what I thought I wanted.
Valla, alert to Kindan’s feelings, cocked his head and crooned inquiringly.
“It’s all right,” Kindan said  soothingly, his lips turning up affectionately at  the fire-lizard. “I was  just
woolgathering.”
The sound of footsteps behind him indicated the approach of Vaxoram. Kindan turned and nodded at
him and the older apprentice nodded in turn, then Kindan looked forward again feeling oddly reassured
that Vaxoram was nearby.
Valla cocked his head suddenly, peering upward and then, with a happy cry, launched himself into the
air above  the courtyard,  climbing swiftly over  the top  of the Harper  Hall. Craning his  neck  to  follow
Valla’s flight, Kindan was not surprised to see the dragon burst into view in front of the Harper Hall from
between.
Kindan raced across the courtyard and under the arches out of the Harper Hall to the clearing beyond.
A bronze dragon was just settling on the ground, his head canted up toward Valla hovering close by.
Kindan paused at the end of the archway, squinting. The dragonrider leapt down from his dragon and
reached up to help another smaller person down.
A new apprentice?  Kindan  mused.  He  hadn’t  heard  anything about  a  new apprentice.  Nor  had  he
heard any drum messages recently, nor was there any gossip about a new arrival.
“Kindan!” the dragonrider called, gesturing for Kindan to come over, still bundled up in riding gear, his
face obscured by a warming scarf.
“M’tal?” Kindan murmured to himself in surprise, trotting over immediately.
“I see that Valla is doing well,” the Benden Weyrleader said affably once Kindan got close. M’tal gave
Kindan a scrutinizing look and said, “And harpers’ food seems to agree with you!”
Kindan smiled and nodded, but his attention was on M’tal’s passenger, a young boy who looked  to
have no more  than ten Turns at  best.  The  boy  had  pale  hair  and  a  sickly  complexion,  but  perhaps,
Kindan reflected, that was from the cold of between.
“This  is  Conar,”  M’tal  said,  resting  a  hand  on  the  boy’s  shoulder.  “He’s  the  youngest  of  Lord
Ibraton.”

Kindan nodded  to  the youngster quickly, then looked  back  to  M’tal.  The  dragonrider’s  tone  was
disturbing and Kindan noticed that M’tal looked weary.
“Valla,” Kindan called, “tell Master Murenny we’ve got guests.”
The little fire-lizard chirped  once  regretfully toward  Gaminth,  the  bronze  dragon,  then  disappeared
between.
M’tal shook  his head  in wonder.  “You’ve trained  him  that  well?  Master  Murenny  will  know  that
we’re coming?”
Kindan smiled. “Well, he’ll know that something’s up.”
Kindan noticed a large bag beside Conar and reached for it. “Let me carry that for you.”
Vaxoram grabbed  the bag  before  Kindan  could  get  a  hand  on  it  and  hefted  it  up  easily.  Kindan
nodded in thanks.
By the time the three  of them arrived  in the  Harper  Hall’s  courtyard,  the  area  was  thronged  with
curious students.
“M’tal!” Masterharper Murenny called as he spied the Benden Weyrleader. “Good to see you.”
“And you,” M’tal said. He closed the distance between them and whispered urgently, “I need to talk
with you in private.”
Murenny nodded, then raised an eyebrow toward Conar.
“He’s Ibraton’s youngest,” M’tal explained. “I’d like him to stay here.”
“Of course,”  Murenny said,  as  though  the  request  were  not  at  all  unusual.  He  waved  to  Kindan,
asking, “Can you get him settled in?”
The duty of welcoming a new apprentice to the Harper Hall should, by long tradition, have fallen to the
newest apprentice, which would have been Kelsa. However, Kindan had noticed that Master Murenny
had disregarded that tradition with the last two newcomers, assigning the duty to Kindan instead. Kindan
had noticed the change but had not commented on it because, after dealing with the first newcomer, he
understood the Masterharper’s reasoning: that most apprentices would be affronted and embarrassed to
be introduced to the Harper Hall by a girl.
“I’ll see right to it,” Kindan said, gesturing with his free hand toward  the entrance  to  the Apprentice
Dormitory and telling Conar, “We’re heading that way.”
“And make sure he gets fed!” Murenny called after him.
Kindan nodded in acknowledgment as he veered  right to  the stairway  leading up to  the Apprentice
Dormitory, Vaxoram trailing steadily behind them. The dormitory was a huge room, split lengthways by a
wall and further subdivided by thick curtains hung strategically throughout.
“Usually the apprentices are grouped by Turn,” Kindan explained as  they walked  past  several  bunk
beds. “But as long as the Masters don’t mind, we can move around as much as we like.”
“I don’t know if I’m going to be an apprentice,” Conar said, speaking for the first time. His voice was
piping and his accent was soft, different from the standard speech of Fort Hold or the muted tones that all
harpers learned. It reminded Kindan more of a High Reacher than of M’tal’s Benden sound.

Kindan turned and grinned at him. “If you weren’t, Master Murenny wouldn’t have sent you with me.”
“I think Father sent me just to get me out of the way,” Conar said with a frown.
“But surely your harper recommended you?”
“Our harper is dead,” Conar said. “That’s why Father wanted to send me away.”
“What?”
Conar nodded. “We heard just this morning, he was away in the southern part of the Hold.”
“Was he very old?” Kindan asked. “How’d he die?”
“They say it was the flu,” Conar said. “But I had the flu months back—”
“So did I.”
“And so did Harper Alagar,” Conar said, looking bleak. “Mother didn’t want me to go because I’m
the youngest, but Father insisted, saying that our bloodline must survive.” His lips trembled as he asked,
“Do you think they’re going to die?”
“No,” Kindan said, shaking his head firmly. “No one dies from the flu, they just wish they could.”
“But what about Harper Alagar?”
“It might have been something else,” Kindan told him, shrugging, and adding with a smile, “I think you
might have misjudged your father’s intentions, maybe he just wants a good harper in the family!”
“But  I’m  not  good  at  anything,”  Conar  protested.  Then  he  added  reflectively,  “Except  drawing,
perhaps.”
“Drawing?”
“Well, doodling, I suppose,” Conar corrected himself self-deprecatingly.  “Father  always complained
that I was always drawing on something, but Harper Alagar said that I showed promise.”
“Well, if Harper Alagar said so—”
“But harpers don’t draw.”
“Harpers do many things,” Kindan told him. “And sometimes we add new skills.” He gestured to one
of the cloth partitions and pulled up a corner. “This is where my friends and I sleep,” he said, dropping
Conar’s bag. “We’ll leave your stuff here until they decide where to put you.”
“Your friends?”
“Verilan, Nonala, and Kelsa,” Kindan said, pointing in turn to the bottom bed of the nearest bunk, and
then to the bottom and top beds of the farther bunk.
“Who sleeps there?” Conar asked, pointing to the top bed of the nearest bunk.
Kindan smiled and  pointed  at  himself.  “But  if  you  wanted  to  sleep  with  us,  you  could  bunk  with
Vaxoram here.” Kindan winked at the older harper as he said to Conar, “But he snores.”
“My brothers snored,” Conar said, eyeing Vaxoram thoughtfully. “Is he your servant?”

“Yes,” Vaxoram said quickly.
“He lost a duel,” Kindan explained. “And he’s an apprentice like the rest of us here.”
“A duel?” Conar repeated, his curiosity piqued. He saw the scar under Vaxoram’s eye. “What for?”
“He insulted a girl,” Kindan said, unwilling to dredge up all the details.
“Nonala and Kelsa sound like girls’ names,” Conar said, looking questioningly at Kindan.
“They are.”
“You sleep with girls?” Conar asked in astonishment.
“Yes,”  Kindan  replied.  “We  treat  each  other  with  respect  and  don’t  peek,  if  that’s  what  you’re
wondering.”
Kindan was surprised to see how Vaxoram accepted this statement. It underlined how much the older
apprentice had changed in the past ten months.
Conar blushed and shook his head hastily. “I just—I slept in my own room.”
“That must have made cleaning it awfully difficult,” Kindan said.
“I never cleaned it, the help did.”
“Well here, at the Harper Hall, there is no help,” Kindan told him. “We do everything ourselves.” He
walked over to a cabinet and opened  it, pulling out a  broom  and  handing it to  Conar  who grabbed  it
awkwardly. “In fact, I made this broom myself. It’s my second-best broom.”
“Harpers make brooms?” Conar repeated in shock, looking down at the example in his hands.
“Harpers have to know what other people do, and the best way to learn is to do,” Kindan told him.
“So we make a broom, clean our own quarters, mend our own clothes.”
Conar looked at him with eyes wide in surprise. “Was it hard, making a broom?”
Kindan smiled and nodded. “That’s why I made two.” He pointed to the bristles of the broom. “See
how tightly I’ve woven the string through the bristles?” he asked. “That keeps them from falling out.”
“I don’t know where we get our brooms,” Conar confessed to Kindan.  Kindan  smiled, delighted to
see that the young son of Benden’s Lord Holder would consider such an issue; many Lord Holders’ sons
considered themselves above any work. Kindan smiled also because he’d been told countless times by
Kelsa and Nonala that going on about making brooms was, as Kelsa had said, “Boring, Kindan, I don’t
know why you always blather on about it.” Even Verilan, who was often willing to appear interested  in
Kindan’s latest fancies, had trouble feigning interest in broom making.
“Are you hungry?” Kindan asked Conar. “It’s lunchtime here.”
“It was nearly dinnertime when I left,” Conar replied, looking confused.
“That’s because Fort Hold is on the other side of the continent and sees the sun six hours  later  than
you do  at  Benden,”  Kindan  explained.  He  lengthened his stride,  calling over  his shoulder,  “Hurry  up,
lunch will be over soon.”

But Conar didn’t catch up. Turning back to see what was keeping him, Kindan saw that Conar  was
doubled over, gasping for breath. Kindan raced back to him. “Are you okay?” he asked, bending down
to peer at the pale boy.
“Can’t keep my breath,” Conar said as he gulped for air. “’Never could, really, but it’s been  worse
since the flu.”
“Shards, I wish you’d’ve told me.”
Conar shook his head. “Didn’t want to be a bother.”
Kindan nodded, understanding the boy’s feelings all too well. “I could carry you.”
Conar gave him a look of horror.
“Okay, catch your breath,” Kindan said, silently hoping that there would still be something to eat when
they got to the Dining Hall.
They were  still waiting when Murenny and  M’tal  appeared,  heading  back  to  the  landing  meadow
beyond the Harper Hall.
“Kindan,” Murenny called, “just the lad we wanted to see!” He paused as he caught sight of Conar.
“You’re not trying to race him to death?”
“No, Master,” Kindan replied. “I didn’t realize Conar had short breath.”
“He should see the Masterhealer,” Murenny said, gazing thoughtfully at the small boy, then turning his
gaze toward  M’tal  with a  questioning look.  M’tal  nodded  in  reply.  Murenny  frowned  for  a  moment
before saying to Kindan, “We’ve got another project for you.”
“It doesn’t involve the Records, does it?” Kindan asked fearfully.
“I’m afraid it does,”  M’tal  told  him, smiling sympathetically at  Kindan’s  apparent  discomfort.  “But
you’ve done so well—”
“By now,” Murenny cut in with a twinkle in his eyes, “I suspect Kindan understands the reward for a
job well done.”
Conar, who had recovered his breath, looked up curiously at Kindan.
“Another job,” Kindan said, his tone just short of a groan.
“Do you want to wait while I explain your fears to Kindan?” Murenny asked the Benden Weyrleader.
M’tal frowned thoughtfully, then nodded.
“And I suppose  you  haven’t  eaten  yet?”  the  Masterharper  said  to  Kindan,  who  nodded.  “Well,”
Murenny said, turning back to the Dining Hall, “why don’t we eat and talk there.”
Kindan’s  eyes  widened  for  an  instant  before  he  could  school  his  expression.  Eating  with  the
Masterharper was certain to be noticed and resented by the older apprentices, but he couldn’t see  any
way to avoid the invitation.
As they walked, Murenny fell in beside Conar, asking the smaller boy, “Did Kindan tell you about his
broom?”

Kindan turned bright red, to the accompanying chuckles of the Masterharper and Weyrleader. M’tal
clapped him on the shoulder, saying, “You have a right to be proud of your accomplishments.”
“It’s only a broom,” Kindan groaned.
“Dragonriders at Benden make their own harnesses,” M’tal told him. Kindan  gave him an interested
look, so the Weyrleader continued, “Our lives depend on them, we have to trust them.”
“Well, my life doesn’t depend on a broom,” Kindan murmured.
“Best not let Selora hear you say that,” Murenny warned him. “Or she’ll prove you wrong.”
“Selora does the cooking,” Kindan explained to Conar.
“She does much more than that,” Murenny corrected.
“She keeps this whole Hall running,” Vaxoram said in agreement. Murenny smiled in agreement.
As they entered the hall, Kindan noticed that Kelsa stopped mid-sentence when she saw him, with a
what-have-you-done-now expression on her face. Kindan smiled and shrugged.
“Can we  find some  space  for the Weyrleader  and  my guests?”  Murenny asked  the  other  Masters
politely when they arrived at the large round Masters’ table. It was obvious from Resler’s expression that
he would rather  not have Kindan  at  the table.  He  slowly rose,  but Murenny gestured  him to  sit back
down. “You’ll want to hear this, Resler.”
Resler’s  look  made  it  clear  that  the  Master  Archivist  thought  otherwise,  but  he  sat  down  again
anyway.
“I’ve  got  classes  to  prepare  for,”  Master  Biddle  said,  rising  and  nodding  to  Kindan  and  the
Weyrleader.
“Oh, I’m sorry,” Murenny said to Master Biddle. He gestured to Conar. “This is Conar, the youngest
of Lord Ibraton of Benden. Alagar recommended him as an apprentice.”
Biddle nodded an acknowledgment to Conar before leaving.
“I’ll talk with you later,” Murenny called after him, “and fill you in.”
The Voicemaster waved a hand in response as he walked out the door toward his classroom.
“Alagar, really?” Resler  asked  with interest,  ignoring the byplay  with  Master  Biddle.  He  examined
Conar  curiously. “And what talent led  Master  Alagar  to  recommend  you  to  the  Harper  Hall,  young
Conar?”
Conar dropped his eyes. “I don’t know.”
“Well,” Resler continued crisply, “I’m sure Alagar will tell us in his own good time.”
“I’m afraid not,” Murenny said shaking his head. “Master Alagar succumbed to the flu.”
Masterhealer Lenner sat back in his chair. “I suppose I should stay as well, then.”
“Yes, you should,” Murenny agreed. He said to the other Masters, “I’ll give the rest of you the news
later.”

He gestured to M’tal. “For now, though, we are imposing on the Weyrleader’s time.”
The  other  Masters  hastily  rose,  nodding  respectfully  to  M’tal.  “Weyrleader,”  they  said  in  chorus
before departing with pointed looks  at  the apprentices  and  journeymen still seated  at  the other  tables.
Immediately, the students finished their conversations, took their last bites of lunch, and rose to bring their
trays down to the kitchen.
“I hadn’t intended to empty the place,” Murenny remarked drolly as he scanned the departing bodies.
“But perhaps it’s just as well.”
“What happened to Alagar?” Lenner asked as the noise of the departures faded away.
“We have no  idea,”  M’tal  said.  “Ibraton  received  Alagar’s  fire-lizard  late  one  night  and  had  just
retrieved the note it bore when the fire-lizard screamed and went between.” Before the others could say
anything, he continued, “Neither my Gaminth nor Selina’s Breth could contact her.”
“What did the note say?” Lenner asked, leaning forward intently.
“One word: flu,” M’tal replied. He leaned back in his chair, and closed his eyes wearily. With his eyes
still closed, he continued, “Alagar had gone down to one of the smaller holds, no more than three or four
families but a holding that Lord Ibraton had deemed ‘promising.’ Gaminth and I flew over  the hold the
next day. We saw no one.”
“What about the cattle?” Lenner asked.
“I saw a few cattle,” M’tal said, leaning forward and opening his eyes again. “Why?”
“Sometimes  cattle  can  spread  an  illness  to  people,”  Lenner  said.  He  gestured  to  Master  Resler,
adding, “At least so the Records tell us.”
“Would Alagar know that?” M’tal asked attentively.
“I don’t know,” Lenner replied after a moment’s thought.
“I doubt it,” Resler said. “He was never much of a healer.”
“Benden Hold is without a healer,” Lenner remarked, shaking his head. “And I’m afraid that there  is
no likely replacement soon,” he added, glancing at Conar.
“Which is why all harpers are taught some healing,” Murenny said, “like poor Alagar.”
“And just as healers learn some harpering,” Lenner agreed.
Murenny snorted.  “They’d have to  learn some,  just because  of  their  duties.”  When  Conar  looked
confused, Murenny explained, “They learn tact, at the very least, and something about record-keeping.”
“I wish they were taught more,” Lenner said, glancing challengingly at Master Resler.
“They have the worst  handwriting,”  Resler  complained,  casting  a  meaningful  look  toward  Kindan.
“And they keep sloppy Records at best.”
The Masterhealer looked ready to argue but shook himself, and gave M’tal an apologetic look. “I’m
sorry, you were saying?”
M’tal dismissed the apology with a wave of his fingers. “As I said, I saw no one,” M’tal continued. “I

didn’t land but returned to Lord Ibraton and told him my news.” Here M’tal paused and glanced toward
Conar consideringly before continuing, “Lord Ibraton told me that Alagar had just recently recommended
Conar for a harper but that he had decided against it, particularly given the wishes of Conar’s mother.”
Kindan and the other harpers were surprised.
“She wanted to keep the boy with her?” Lenner guessed. M’tal nodded.
“And Ibraton was willing to go along with her to avoid discord,” Murenny surmised.
“Now he feels that the suggestion has merit,” M’tal continued.
“Why?” Murenny asked.
“Because this minor hold wasn’t  the only one  of his that  had  suddenly gone silent,” M’tal  said.  He
nodded toward Conar. “So Ibraton now thinks it best to send this one away just in case.”
“How many holds went silent?” Lenner inquired.
“Was there a pattern?” Kindan added. Resler shot him a quelling look,  reminding Kindan  firmly that
“apprentices should be seen, not heard.”
“Good question,” Lenner murmured encouragingly to Kindan.
“I don’t know,” M’tal said with a grin and a nod to Kindan. He turned to Lenner, saying, “Three other
minor holds had gone silent in the last fortnight.”
“Three in a fortnight?” Lenner murmured. “And no one has gone to check on them?”
“Alagar was supposed to, according to Ibraton,” M’tal replied.
“Didn’t we  just have the flu come  through here  not six months back?”  Resler  asked  Lenner.  “And
doesn’t that mean that we’re immune?”
“Benden Hold had the flu about eight months back,” Conar piped up.
“Did it?” Lenner said. “I recall no report.”
“But—oh!” Conar  turned  bright red.  “Master  Alagar  had  asked  me  to  write  it  up,”  he  confessed
miserably.
“No matter,” Lenner told him kindly. “I’d had reports from Lemos and Bitra and, of course, we had it
here ourselves.” He shook his head mournfully. “Several oldsters succumbed.”
“And  some  babies,”  M’tal  added  somberly.  Lenner  shot  him  an  inquiring  look,  to  which  the
Weyrleader replied, “The flu affected the Weyr, too.”
“My Records show that dragonriders are immune from normal disease,” Resler commented, glancing
sharply—nearly challengingly—at M’tal.
“Yes, dragonriders are immune,” M’tal agreed. “But not all our weyrfolk are.” He sat back in his chair
and glanced up thoughtfully. “We lost seven babies, including a newborn.”
“Out of how many?” Lenner asked quietly.
“Not more than fifty,” M’tal replied. “Didn’t K’tan send a report?”

“He might have,” Lenner replied vaguely. “But I know  your Weyr  is without a  harper  and  it would
usually fall to him to make the report.”
M’tal glanced at Kindan suggestively. “The Weyr is willing to wait until there is a suitable candidate.”
“Tenelin  and  Issak  are  available,”  Resler  suggested,  not  catching  M’tal’s  look.  “Both  have  quite
acceptable writing.”
“It’s important that the Weyrleader have a good rapport with his harper,” Murenny remarked. “And I
suspect that while both your recommendations are suitably skilled, they lack a certain—flexibility.”
“You and your flexibility,” Resler responded sourly. “A harper’s job is well known—”
“That is neither here nor there,” Murenny cut across him, turning back to M’tal. He looked at Lenner.
“Alagar’s note said ‘flu’—could he be right?”
“To incapacitate so many minor holds,” Lenner began, shaking his head  doubtfully, “I would expect
some more deadly disease.”
“I recall,” M’tal said, speaking carefully, “a time in my youth when we had a flu that was quite nasty.”
He grimaced. “My mother and younger sister died from it. But while I was recovering, our Weyr Healer
at the time—”
“That would have been Selessekt, I believe,” Resler murmured. M’tal nodded and continued.
“—said that there had been a much worse  flu when he  was  young; a  flu that  had  killed many.” He
turned to Lenner, “Do you recall that?”
Lenner shook his head. “My hall is besieged with so many requests every day that it is very hard  to
research into the past, except when immediate needs drive us.” He glanced at the Masterharper. “There
are fewer healer apprentices than I’d like.”
“I quite agree with you,” Murenny responded. “However, as you and I have discussed, finding suitable
healer candidates remains a problem.”
“Why is that?” M’tal asked.
Lenner made to brush the question aside but Murenny gave him a  restraining gesture,  and  turning to
M’tal, said, “Since the end of the Second Pass, we Pernese have been expanding all over our continent.
“Now that we’re nearing the next Pass, holders and crafters are eager to expand as much as they can,
growing spare crops and setting aside materials in preparation.”
M’tal nodded; none of this was news to him.
“So holders and crafters want to keep their best and ablest with them, not caring to lose them to the
Harper Hall or even the Healer Hall,” Murenny continued. “Particularly the Healer Hall, as training to be
a healer takes longer than the training for a harper.”
“So  there’s  a  dearth  of  suitable  healer  candidates,”  M’tal  surmised.  “But  surely  the  holders  and
crafters must realize…?”
“So one would think,” Murenny agreed. “However, in practice each holder  and  craftmaster  believes
that the needs for new healers should be met out of some hold or craft other than their own.”

“Perhaps the Weyrs could help,” M’tal suggested and then immediately shook his head ruefully. “I see
your problem, just thinking about our weyrfolk. We’ve barely enough youngsters coming along to  meet
our needs for new dragonriders and weyrfolk.”
“We’ve managed  to  survive because  we  insist on training our  harpers  in some  of the healing arts,”
Murenny noted. “But if there were any disaster—”
“Thread will be enough of a disaster, and less than twelve Turns away,” M’tal said. He glanced down
at his hands, his eyes narrowed thoughtfully, then looked up at Murenny. “Have you thought to bring it to
the Conclave?”
“I have,” Murenny replied. “And I have.”
M’tal cocked an eyebrow questioningly.
“And the Lord Holders have suggested that I ask the Weyrs or the Crafts,” Murenny responded, his
tone just short of bitter.
“I could become a healer,” a small voice piped up hesitantly. The others turned to Conar in surprise.
“But I don’t know if I would be very good. My writing is not the best.”
“There are some,” the Masterhealer replied with a pointed glance at the Master  Archivist, “who feel
that’s a failing among most healers.”
“Didn’t you say you could draw?” Kindan added, trying to bolster  both  Conar’s  credentials  and  his
spirits. When the boy nodded, Kindan turned to Lenner. “Wouldn’t drawing be useful for a healer?”
“Well,” Lenner temporized,  “traditionally  there  hasn’t  been  much  call  for  it,  but  that  may  only  be
because we haven’t had anyone with the ability.”
“While this is all very interesting, we are off the issue at hand,” Murenny said.
“I think I was responsible,” M’tal said spreading his hands in apology. “My question stands, however:
Do we know if there ever was such a plague of a flu?”
Lenner  shook  his  head  and  glanced  at  the  Records  Master.  “I  don’t  recall  any,  perhaps  Master
Resler…?”
Resler sighed. “I can only do so much with the staff I have. I, too,  must deal  with current  demands,
many of which have to do with our current expansion.” He glanced at Conar thoughtfully. “I have many
requests for copies of maps, for example—I suppose they’re much like drawing.”
M’tal nodded in acceptance of Resler’s answer, then said to Murenny, “Could I ask that the Records
be searched for any such references?”
“My lord,”  Resler  protested,  suddenly all formal, “perhaps  you didn’t hear  me, my staff  is  already
overworked.” He shook his head regretfully. “Besides, such a search is highly technical and I doubt my
apprentices would be suited—”
“I can think of one apprentice up to the task,” M’tal interrupted gently.
“Who?” Resler demanded in surprise.
“Someone who’s already demonstrated an ability to ferret through the Records for forgotten tidbits,”
M’tal said, his eye falling on Kindan.

Kindan  sat  bolt  upright,  his  face  flushed  with  surprise  at  the  same  time  as  Resler  noticed  the
Weyrleader’s glance and exclaimed, “Oh, no! You can’t mean him!”
 
CHAPTER 6 
Records to keep, Records to learn
Knowledge gained from Turn to Turn
Harper keep the truth alive
Thus will all on Pern survive. 
HARPER HALL
A nd so it was settled, over Resler’s objections and to Kindan’s surprise, that Kindan would search
the Records for any mention of a plague or “super-flu,” as the Masterharper dubbed it.
Master Resler was more upset, if possible, than Kindan himself, who was overwhelmed both with the
sheer  size of the task  and  its importance—not  to  mention that  he also  had  all his normal  classes  and
duties.
“And you’re not to disturb Verilan, he’s  got an important job  and  doesn’t  need  distracting,” Resler
warned Kindan tetchily.
“Yes, Master,” Kindan replied tactfully.
“You understand the importance of this task, don’t you?” the Masterharper cautioned Kindan.
“We have to know what to expect and any suggestions to counter it,” M’tal told him.
“The flu won’t be the same,” Lenner said, “but this at least will give us some idea of what to  expect
and might suggest approaches for remedies.”
And now Kindan,  at  the end  of  his  usual  studies,  found  himself  late  at  night  in  the  Archives  Hall
surrounded by as many glows as he could acquire and stacks of ancient, musty Records.
At the next table over, Conar blinked and tried to stifle a yawn. He failed and  Kindan  found himself
yawning sympathetically. At the table in front of Kindan, Vaxoram yawned, too.
“You don’t have to be here,” Kindan said to Conar. “You should go and get some sleep.”
“So should you,” Conar shot back. In the sevenday  since his arrival at  the Harper  Hall, Conar  had
proven to be shy and reserved around everyone—except Kindan. Kindan had hopes that Conar would
soon  thaw around  Verilan, too,  but Conar’s  relationship with Nonala  and  Kelsa  was  marred  by their
repeated insistences that “He’s so cute!”

However,  strangely enough, it was  probably  Vaxoram  for whom Conar  had  the  greatest  affection.
Neither spoke of it, and Kindan didn’t understand it; he just sensed that the two  felt more  comfortable
with each other than either did with anyone else.
That was why Conar was here tonight: more to keep Vaxoram company than Kindan. Kindan glanced
up at Vaxoram’s back. The older apprentice hadn’t turned the first page of his Record since they’d sat
down over an hour ago. Intrigued, Kindan left his chair and walked around to Vaxoram.
“Find something?” he asked, surprised to startle the older apprentice.
Vaxoram was bent low over the old Record, a glow held just above it, hovering over the very first line.
“No,” Vaxoram replied brusquely, almost belligerently.
“You’ve been reading the same Record for an hour now,” Kindan observed.
“It’s the light,” Vaxoram told him. “It’s so dim, it’s hard to read with.”
“Why don’t you get some rest, then?” Kindan asked.
“Because you’re here,” Vaxoram said.
Kindan cut off his reply as the sound of footsteps could be heard coming up the corridor. Both turned
to the entrance expectantly.
“What are you three doing up?” Lenner asked them, carrying a glow basket in one hand.
“Still working,” Kindan said, pointing at the stack of Records.
Lenner came in and glanced down at the Record in front of Kindan.
“It’s  hard  to  read  these  old  Records  in  this  light,”  Lenner  murmured,  bringing  his  glow  closer,
“especially at night.”
“See?” Vaxoram said triumphantly.
“That’s the only free time I have,” Kindan said.
“Hmmph,” Lenner grunted. “We’ll have to see about that.” He wagged a finger at the two  boys.  “In
the meantime, go to sleep, I’ll get this sorted out in the morning.”
“But it’s important!” Conar objected.
“Yes,” Lenner agreed, “it is. Very  important,  which is why I don’t  want to  leave the job  to  sleepy
eyes.”
Reluctantly, with Conar still grumbling, the three apprentices went to the dorm.
But things didn’t go as they’d hoped when they got there. Kindan had rolled his glow over so that  it
provided only the barest bit of light and, as they navigated their way to their beds, Conar stubbed his toe
on a bunk and tripped loudly.
“Quiet!” a voice shouted irritably from the darkness.
“Sorry,” Conar whispered, hopping around and grabbing his toe in both hands.

“Shut up!” another voice shouted in response.
“What’s going on?” a third voice added. “Who’s making that noise?”
“The new lad,” a voice grumbled from the dark.
“He stubbed his toe,” Kindan said in explanation. “We were working in the Archives.”
Kindan was  surprised  to  be  shoved  awake  the next morning, for he usually woke  up at  the crack  of
dawn.
“Kindan! Kindan, get up!” Kelsa shouted in his ear.
“What?” Kindan asked groggily.
“We’re going to be late!” Nonala urged him.
“Get Conar,” Kindan said as he rose from his bunk. Hastily, he pulled on his morning clothes.
Nearby, Conar was roused by Nonala. “What is it?” Conar asked as he rubbed the sleep out of his
eyes.
“It’s time to get up,” Nonala told him calmly. “We start our day with a morning exercise and a run.”
“A run?”
“Yes, every day,” Nonala answered, with a stern glance toward Kindan. “I suppose he’s been letting
you sleep in this past sevenday!”
Kindan frowned, worried that Conar with his shortness of breath might have a difficult time completing
the run from the Harper Hall up to Fort Hold and back. He opened his mouth to make the comment but
Kelsa shushed him.
“Don’t talk, just move!” Kelsa urged, dragging Kindan by the arm.
As Kindan  got out of his bunk,  he  realized  that  the  rest  of  the  apprentice  dormitory  was  already
empty.
As they stumbled out of the apprentice dormitory into the courtyard, Kindan explained to Conar, “We
do exercises every morning. At the end of our exercises, we run up to Fort Hold and back again. After
that, we get ready for the start of the day and breakfast.”
“We usually eat before we do anything,” Conar replied.
Kindan could not help but notice Vaxoram eyeing him as he exited the apprentice dormitory.
“We’ll start with stretching exercises,” Vaxoram called to the massed apprentices.
Kindan always found the stretching exercises relaxing. He glanced around and noticed that Conar was
following along with some difficulty. Kindan recalled how difficult it had been for him at first to learn the
stretching exercises. He smiled encouragingly at the young holder boy. Conar caught his grin and smiled

in return.
As they started their regular calisthenics, Kindan flashed a  look  at  Kelsa,  who grinned back  at  him.
Kelsa  and  Kindan  had  often  joked  that  girls  did  stretching  exercises  better  than  boys  but  boys  did
calisthenics better than girls. It had become something of a competition between the two of them to see
who could outdo the other at their “best” ability.
After the calisthenics, they began their morning run up to the main gates of Fort Hold and back to the
Harper Hall. Conar fell out of the run just as they were turning back from Fort Hold.
“He has trouble breathing,” called Vaxoram who had fallen out beside him, his own sides heaving from
exertion.
“Bend over, Conar, get the blood back in your head,” Kindan told the youngster.
“You go on,” Conar said between gasps, waving feebly after the formation.
“No, I’ll stay with you,” Kindan told him. “Harpers stick together.”
“I’m not a harper,” Conar replied, still slowly recovering his breath. “I doubt I’ll ever be.”
“Don’t say that,” Vaxoram told him fiercely. “It’s just your first day’s run. You’ll get used to it.”
“Sure you will, Conar,” Nonala added in agreement, glancing toward  Vaxoram  quizzically, surprised
that he had been so vehement with the young boy. Kindan looked up and saw that not only Nonala but
also Kelsa, and Verilan, had stayed behind.
“You should catch up,” Kindan told the others, waving them on.
“Harpers  stick  together,”  Kelsa  repeated  to  him, putting her  hands  on  her  hips  and  daring  him  to
contradict her.
Nonala knelt down beside Conar and rubbed his back soothingly.
“I could carry you,” Vaxoram offered.
“Are you all right now, Conar?” Kindan asked. “We can start walking back.”
“We should run,” Conar protested.
“Not your first day,” Nonala told him, shaking her head. “Vaxoram should have allowed for that.”
“Why do harpers run, anyway?” Conar asked as he stood up and started to walk slowly back toward
the Harper Hall.
“Because they can,” Nonala said, grinning.
“To keep in shape,” Vaxoram said.
“I think it’s because harpers have to be ready for anything,” Kindan said thoughtfully. “One minute a
harper’s strumming on a guitar, the next he’s—”
A chittering sound  burst  from  the  air  abruptly  above  them.  Kindan  laughed  as  he  looked  up  and
spotted two fire-lizards cavorting.
“The next minute he’s paying respects to the Lord Holder’s eldest daughter,” Kindan finished, turning

around and looking expectantly back toward Fort Hold. He  saw  a  group  of people  approaching  them
and his throat tightened.
“It looks like Lord Holder Bemin,” Kelsa remarked, straightening up quickly and brushing the dirt off
her knees.
“Oh, no,” Verilan muttered. “He’s going to ask about those Records!”
“What Records?” Nonala asked but Kindan waved a  hand peremptorily  at  the others,  commanding
silence. The others obeyed, glad to have someone take charge.
The group approaching quickly resolved  itself into four: Lord  Bemin, his lady,  Sannora,  their eldest
daughter,  Koriana,  and  a  toddler  whom Lady  Sannora  scooped  up just before  they met the  harpers.
Kindan saw that the toddler was the Lord Holder’s youngest and last child, Fiona.
“My lord, good day,” Kindan said as they drew near. He bowed low.
“Kindan, good to see you,” Koriana called out in surprise. “I see that your Valla and my Koriss have
already made their greetings.”
“My  apologies,  my  lord,”  Kindan  said  obsequiously  to  the  Lord  Holder,  remembering  Kelsa’s
comments about why the Lord Holder never visited the Harper Hall. The last thing he wanted to do was
give the Lord Holder a reason to chide the Masterharper and  yet,  here  they were,  halfway up to  Fort
Hold. “My friends and I stopped to rest during our run.”
Bemin regarded Kindan silently for a long moment before replying, “So we saw.”
“Father!” Koriana whispered chidingly.
“I’m sorry, my lord, I’m not used to the exercise,” Conar said on his own, his words  punctuated  by
another long bout of coughing.
“This is Conar’s first day with us,” Kindan explained. “His father sent him here from Benden Hold.”
“Your father?” Bemin repeated, scrutinizing Conar carefully. “Are you a son of Ibraton?”
“I am, my lord,” Conar replied, sketching a shorter bow than Kindan had, as was proper from a Lord
Holder’s child to a Lord Holder.
“Well, Conar,  what skills bring you to  the Harper  Hall?”  Lady  Sannora  asked  kindly,  moving  her
squirming toddler from one hip to the other.
“I’m not certain I have any, my lady,” Conar replied, flushing.
“He draws,” Kindan declared stolidly in his defense.
“And is drawing valued at the Harper Hall?” Lord Bemin asked,  glancing first at  Conar  and  then at
Kindan.
“I  can’t  say  for  certain,  my  lord,”  Kindan  replied  after  an  agonizingly  long  silence,  “but  Master
Murenny was pleased enough to take him on.”
“But that was because Father asked him,” Conar murmured to Kindan.
“Well,” Lord Bemin said, “I agree that a Lord Holder’s request is good enough for a harper.” He cast

a sideways glance at Kindan and there was no warmth in his eyes.
“As you say, my lord,”  Kindan  replied  nonchalantly. He  ignored the curious looks  that  Nonala  and
Kelsa sent his way. “We were just returning to the Harper Hall, my lord.”
“Well, then,  we  can  walk  together,  can’t  we,  Father?”  Koriana  said  quickly,  closing  the  distance
between her and Kindan. “Father has some questions for Master Murenny and I have some questions for
you.”
“I’ll be pleased to help in any way I can,” Kindan said. Bemin shot him a measuring look. “Would it
have anything to do with fire-lizards?”
“Yes, it does,” Koriana said, looking surprised.
“I would be happy to answer your questions—but later, if that would be acceptable,” Kindan told her,
trying to hide his pleasure. “My friends and I should be hurrying back; we’ve got chores to do before the
start of the day.” He turned to Lord Bemin. “Would you mind if we left you, my lord?”
“I wouldn’t want you to get into any trouble,” Lord Bemin replied with a wave of his hand. “I’m sure
that Koriana will be able to find you later.”
“Thank you, my lord,” Kindan replied with a half-nod. To the others he said, “We’d best hurry back
as quick as we can.” He looked at Conar. “Are you all right or  would it be  better  if you escorted  the
Lord Holder?”
“I’m all right,” Conar declared stoutly. “As long as we don’t run.”
Kindan snorted. “Don’t be so sure, just see the way Kelsa’s long legs eat up the distance!”
Kindan’s  warning  was  prophetic;  soon  Conar  was  huffing  and  puffing  to  keep  up  with  the
longer-legged girl.
“Slow down, Kelsa, or you’ll leave Conar behind,” Kindan cautioned her.
“I just want to get back in time to do the chores and get a shower, that’s all,” Kelsa grumbled.
“I hope you like cold water,” Nonala muttered.
“Oh, Shards!” Kelsa exclaimed, stamping her foot. “You’re right, all the warm water will be gone!”
“You could go ahead and we’ll catch up,” Kindan said in an echo of his earlier suggestion. Kelsa and
Nonala merely glared at him. Kindan glanced at Vaxoram, who,  as  senior  apprentice,  was  responsible
for assigning the apprentices’ chores. Then he said, “You’d best run ahead and catch up with the others.”
Vaxoram looked torn between his duty and his desire to stick with Conar and the others. In the end,
he nodded at Kindan’s order and raced away.
As they finally passed under the archway into the courtyard,  Kindan  saw  the last of the apprentices
dispersing. Vaxoram was waiting for them.
“Finally,” he called. “I’ve got your assignments.”
“Lord Bemin is on his way,” Kindan reminded him. “The Masterharper will want to know.”
“I’ll tell him,” Vaxoram said. “You and the others are to replace the glows.”

“Now?” Kelsa groaned.
“While the sun is shining, yes,” Vaxoram returned tartly.
“But we won’t have time to eat!” Verilan objected.
“Or at least get a shower,” Kelsa cried.
“I  can’t  play  favorites,”  Vaxoram  muttered,  his  eyes  looking  troubled.  “And  I  must  go  tell  the
Masterharper.”
“It’s his job, as senior apprentice,” Kindan agreed, waving Vaxoram away.
“Shards!” Nonala groaned as Vaxoram ran out of sight. “We’ll never get it done.”
“Here’s what we do,” Kindan said. “Kelsa, you get your shower—but hurry. When you’re done, grab
some rolls and butter from the dining hall.”
Kelsa nodded and sped off.
“Nonala, you get the glows out of the east side, and take Conar with you. Verilan, you and I will get
the west.” Verilan and Nonala nodded in agreement. “Meet back here and we’ll take turns setting out the
glows while the others  shower  and  get dressed.”  He  grabbed  Verilan’s arm and  started  to  move off,
calling over his shoulder, “And hurry!”
Kindan’s plan almost worked.  He,  Verilan, and  Conar  had  just gotten  in the shower  when Kindan
heard the Masterharper shout, “Kindan!”
With a groan, Kindan jumped out of the shower and hastily pulled on his clothes,  rushing out of the
dormitory just as the Masterharper shouted once again. “Kin—Oh, there you are!”
“Sorry, Master,” Kindan called up to the Masterharper who was peering out of the upstairs window.
“Can you join us?”
“Immediately,” Kindan replied, rushing toward the stairs that led up to the Masterharper’s quarters. At
the door he knocked.
“Come in,” the Masterharper called back. Kindan opened the door carefully, not entirely sure  of his
reception. Murenny beamed at him as he entered, and Kindan hid a sigh of relief.
“I hear that young Conar has a problem with his breath,” the Masterharper said.
“Yes, sir,” Kindan replied.
“Make sure that he sees Lenner later on today, if you would,” the Masterharper said. Kindan nodded.
“I should have thought of it yesterday and warned Vaxoram.”
Kindan caught sight of Vaxoram standing off to one side of the room, looking chagrined.
“I  couldn’t  imagine  that  Ibraton  would  want  his  youngest  dead  from  overexertion,”  Lord  Bemin
remarked. “Let alone on his first run.”
Kindan wondered  if Fort’s  Lord  Holder  was  upset  that  Ibraton  hadn’t  asked  him to  foster  Conar.
That was usually what was done with Holders’ sons and daughters. Lord Bemin’s tone reminded Kindan

of someone,  and  it took  him a  moment to  recall: Tarik,  C’tov’s  father.  Kindan  gave  himself  a  quick
mental shake.  Lord  Bemin was  not at  all like Tarik,  who had  turned  out  to  be  a  murderer  and  was
ultimately given the worst punishment ever handed out on Pern, being Shunned by all, including his wife
and son.  No,  Lord  Bemin  merely  sounded  like  Tarik  had  when  he’d  been  particularly  pompous  or
patronizing. Kindan glanced at the Masterharper, wondering if Master Murenny felt as  nettled  by Lord
Bemin as Kindan had on occasion by Tarik.
Master Murenny turned to Kindan. “Lord Bemin was wondering what you knew about fire-lizards.”
“I can’t say that I know all that much about fire-lizards,” Kindan replied. “However, I will be glad to
share what knowledge I have. And I may be able to find more in the Archives.”
Master Murenny blinked at him. “I’m not sure that you will find all that much in the Archives, actually.”
“Anything you can discover will help a lot,” Koriana added, giving Kindan a smile.
Kindan felt his cheeks grow hot. Vaxoram glowered.
“I was particularly anxious to know when we might expect my queen to rise to mate,” Koriana  said,
her cheeks also glowing.
“Koriana, really!” Fort’s Lady Holder scolded.
There was an awkward silence.
“Is there anything else we can help you with, my Lord Holder?” Master Murenny asked to fill the gap.
Lord Bemin turned his attention from scolding his daughter toward the Masterharper of Pern, but his
features remained set. It was a moment before he replied.
“We were also wondering if perhaps Koriana here could learn your drum codes,”  Lord  Bemin said.
“It would be useful to have another pair of ears at the Hold to listen to the drum conversations.”
Kindan wondered whether the Lord Bemin was being deliberately  insulting to  the harpers  or  merely
did not trust Fort’s aging harper. A glance at Masterharper Murenny showed him that the same thoughts
had crossed his mind, as well.
“We would be glad of her company,” Master Murenny said, smiling at the young holder  girl. “When
would be convenient for you, Lady Koriana?”
Koriana ducked her head in acknowledgment of the Master’s question and replied demurely, “I would
like to start as soon as I could.”
“Kindan’s  actually  very  good  with  drums,”  Master  Murenny  said,  nodding  toward  the  young
apprentice. “We could perhaps combine the two tasks into one.”
Lord  Bemin glanced  sharply at  the Masterharper  before  turning an inquiring look  to  his  own  lady.
Lady Sannora locked eyes with him for a moment before nodding in acquiescence.
“Well, I’m glad that’s settled,” said Master Murenny. He looked politely toward Fort’s Lord Holder.
“Is there anything else I can help you with?”
“Well, actually,” Fort’s Lady  Holder  said,  “if there’s  any way you could  help Koriana  improve her
writing…”

“Mother!” Koriana protested.
“Well, dear, you really should work on it some more,” Sannora replied.
Koriana’s cheeks dimpled in embarrassment. Kindan smiled reassuringly at her.
“Actually, there is one other issue I would like to discuss with you,” Lord Bemin said to Murenny.
The Masterharper made a motion for him to continue.
“I was rather curious as to why Lord Ibraton thought to send his youngest son to the Harper Hall.”
“I’m  not  entirely  certain  myself,”  Master  Murenny  replied.  “I  have  not  heard  from  him  directly.
However, Weyrleader M’tal led me to believe that perhaps Lord Holder Ibraton had hopes that his son,
Conar, might one day become a healer.”
“I see,”  Lord  Bemin replied.  His eyes  darted  over  to  his wife, who made  no  response.  The  Lord
Holder turned his gaze back to Master Murenny. “Well…”
Beside him, the Lady Holder cleared her throat loudly. Lord Bemin glanced quickly at her.
“Ah…yes,” Lord Bemin said suddenly. “And there is one other thing, if you could.”
“I am at your service,” Master Murenny replied.
“Would it be possible to get a list of those holders and crafters who have bronze fire-lizards?”
“Father!” Koriana shouted in protest.
Lord Bemin held up his hand consolingly, shaking his head at his eldest daughter. “Now dear, we’ve
discussed this already and you know that it makes sense.”
“Really, you must at least know what the possibilities are,” Lady Bemin added.
Kindan glanced nervously around the room, wishing he were elsewhere.
“I am not sure we have that information either,” Masterharper Murenny confessed to the Lord Holder.
“However,”  he said  with a  glance toward  Kindan,  “I feel certain  that  we  can  add  that  to  our  list  of
inquiries.”
Lord Bemin nodded, but the glance that he cast at Kindan was not a happy one.
Master Murenny realized that the conversation was over and stood up. “If there’s any other way that I
can help you, my Lord Holder, please let me know immediately.” He gestured them toward the door.
At the entrance,  however,  he turned  to  Koriana  and  said,  “Perhaps  you  would  like  to  begin  your
studies today?”
Koriana  looked  inquiringly between  her two  parents.  Lord  and  Lady  Bemin exchanged  looks,  and
finally Lady Bemin nodded.
“Of course, dear,” said Fort’s Lady Holder. “When shall we expect you back?”
By now, the toddler, whom Lady Sannora had been shifting from hip to hip, had grown impatient and
was starting to make irritated noises.

“I should probably  be  back  in time for lunch,” Koriana  said,  looking at  Kindan  and  Masterharper
Murenny for approval.
“Of course,” the Master said, “you could always eat with us.”
“Oh, no!” Lady Sannora said hastily. “You really must come back and eat with us, Koriana.”
Koriana fought successfully to keep a triumphant grin from her face as she nodded in acquiescence to
her mother; she had succeeded in maneuvering her parents into letting her stay till lunchtime without them
even realizing.
Masterharper Murenny looked back at Vaxoram, who was following the rear of the party. “Vaxoram,
would you please lead Lady Koriana down to Master Archivist Resler?”
Vaxoram nodded and gestured for Koriana to precede him.
“Kindan,” Murenny said, “please remain here, while I escort the Lord and Lady Holder.”
Kindan  nodded,  somewhat  perplexed.  He  raised  his  hand  in  a  partial  wave  toward  Koriana  but
dropped it again quickly as he noticed Fort’s Lady Holder glaring at him. Waiting in the room by himself,
he walked to the large windows and looked down to see Master Murenny guiding the Lord  and  Lady
Holders through the archway of the Harper Hall.
If things hadn’t  seemed  so  odd,  Kindan  would have thought that  this was  the  best  day  of  his  life.
However,  the  undercurrents  of  the  conversation  between  the  Masterharper  and  the  Lord  and  Lady
Holder disturbed Kindan. Did the Holders really not trust their own harper?
Could it be that Lord Holder Bemin did not trust harpers at all?
Kindan’s stomach grumbled. Kindan looked around the Masterharper’s quarters and noticed the tray
of dainties that had been brought up—probably, he guessed, for the Lord and Lady of Fort Hold. They
won’t miss this, he thought as he helped himself to a dainty. He quickly gulped it down and helped himself
to another, listening carefully for the sound of returning footsteps.
They came after Kindan’s third dainty. The door opened and Masterharper Murenny stepped inside,
glancing over at Kindan as he did so.
“Well, what did you think of that?” Murenny asked  Kindan.  He  glanced  at  the tray  of dainties and
smiled. “Ah, I see that you have used your time profitably!”
Kindan felt his cheeks reddening, but could only nod.
“Have another,” the Masterharper said.
Gratefully, Kindan obeyed, then glanced nervously at the Masterharper, remembering that he had been
asked his opinion and feeling torn between filling his stomach and answering the Master. Murenny smiled
and waved him on.
“No, no! Eat first,” the Master told him firmly. “It’s always important to think on a full stomach.” He
leaned across and helped himself to a dainty. “I think I shall take my own advice.”
Chewing, he reached  over  to  the pitcher  of klah  and  poured  two  cups.  He  passed  one  to  Kindan
courteously and then drank deeply from the other. For  several  moments they ate  together,  in a  slightly
awkward but companionable silence.

“Now,”  the Masterharper  said  as  he finished the last of his klah.  “Are  you  ready  to  tell  me  your
thoughts?”
Kindan could only shrug.
“Well then, just tell me your impressions.”
Kindan thought for a moment, then blurted out, “Does he not trust the Fort harper?”
The Masterharper motioned for him to continue.
“Well…,” Kindan said consideringly, “it seemed rather odd that he would ask to have someone  else
trained in the drum codes.”
“Ah, you thought so, too,” Murenny said.
“And why would he want to know about bronze fire-lizards?”
“Why do you think, Kindan?” the Masterharper asked softly.
Kindan  frowned  sourly.  He  was  afraid  he  knew  exactly  why.  He  remembered  with  a  mixture  of
fondness and anger the Impression of Valla and Koriss nearly half a Turn back.
He remembered  the looks  of outrage  and  horror  when Koriana’s  newly hatched  Koriss  frightened
away the two last hatchlings—both males—that her brothers would have Impressed, as though the little
queen had not wanted to mate with bronzes owned by her own owner’s brothers. Kindan was amazed
by the fire-lizard’s actions, but not entirely surprised at her reasoning: The intense emotions of fire-lizards
mating were shared by their human partners just as dragons shared their mating lust with their riders.
Kindan’s own reaction to the beautiful Koriana had been enough to cause him many sleepless nights.
Even now he sometimes woke with the smell of her hair or  shards  of her half-wistful, half-joking smile
lingering from his dreams.
“Is Lord Bemin afraid that Koriss might mate with Valla?” Kindan asked anxiously.
“Koriana is of an age to be married,” Murenny agreed indirectly. “It would not do for there to be any
indiscretions on her part.”
“That’s  not  fair!”  Kindan  shouted.  “I  fought  Vaxoram  because  it’s  wrong  for  a  woman  to  be
judged—”
“Kindan,”  Murenny’s  voice  was  so  soft  it  demanded  Kindan’s  instant  attention.  “Consider  her
choices.”
“She could do anything,” Kindan said. “She’s good at making beads, she made a harness for Koriss
and one for Valla here,” he said, pointing to Valla’s brilliant bead harness marking him as belonging to an
apprentice  of the Harper  Hall. He’d  been  thrilled and  a  little apprehensive  when  she’d  presented  the
pretty harness to him during their fire-lizard training together—he hoped he would fulfill her expectations
of him. Everyone had assumed that Kindan would know all about fire-lizard training, seeing as he’d had a
watch-wher.
“Do you think that she would be content, who has known servants and finery, to exist on the income
of a simple harper?” Murenny asked him seriously.
Kindan sat in silence, mulling over the question. Finally he asked in despair, “Are you saying that she

has no choice?”
Murenny shook his head. “No, not at all. I am merely pointing out that for her some  choices  will be
easier than others.”
“Don’t her parents want her to be happy?”
“I think they do,” Murenny said. “And I think that she would be happiest living the life to which she has
grown accustomed.”
“A broodmare  for Holders?”  Kindan  snapped,  shaking his head  and  all the while wondering at  his
outraged words to the Masterharper. He’d never felt so angry and so out of control before.
“A Lady Holder, a  symbol of grace,  beauty,  and  kindness,”  Murenny replied  calmly. “Her children
would be only a part of her legacy, though possibly the most enduring.”
“But there has to be more for a woman!” Kindan protested.
“Perhaps you are mistaken about what you believe a mother should be,” Murenny replied. “I think that
being a parent is the greatest challenge and greatest joy of all occupations.”
“I—” Kindan cut himself off, thinking. Wasn’t  he something of a  big brother  to  Kelsa  and  Nonala?
And even Verilan. Their well-being meant a lot to him. He could never imagine himself as a  father,  that
prospect was Turns away and more, but perhaps he could see…
“It just seems so unfair,” Kindan ended lamely.
“I understand,” the Masterharper said. Kindan glanced up at him sharply. Was the rumor true?  Had
the Master once been in love with Sannora?
“Why doesn’t Lord Bemin trust harpers?” Kindan asked, feeling emboldened.
Murenny took a deep breath and let it out in a slow sigh. “Let us just say that Lord Bemin wishes he
had more control over the Harper Hall and leave it at that.”
Kindan nodded, not feeling any more enlightened than he’d been before he asked his question.
“Now,” Murenny said, changing the subject, “what I need you to do is keep an eye on young Conar;
teach  Koriana  the drum codes  without”—he wagged  a  finger at  Kindan  and  raised  a  bushy eyebrow
warningly—“upsetting her mother; and help her with her writing.”
Kindan nodded. Fortunately, Koriss and Valla were probably still too young for a  mating flight; that
would  certainly  qualify  as  “upsetting  her  mother.”  Then  a  thought  struck  him,  sparked  by  Master
Murenny’s mention of writing. “What would make it difficult for people to read in dim light?”
Murenny cocked  his  head  thoughtfully  and  frowned  for  a  moment  before  responding,  “There  are
several things  that  could  do  that.  The  person  could  have  poor  eyesight—not  as  bad  as  your  friend
Nuella’s, obviously, but poor all the same.” Kindan nodded in understanding. “Or the person could have
difficulty in reading altogether,” Murenny continued. He glanced up at Kindan. “Do you know this person
well?”
Kindan nodded. Murenny glanced at him for a moment longer, giving Kindan a chance to supply him
with a name, but when it was not forthcoming, the Masterharper continued, “One way to check on this is
to see if the person has trouble distinguishing between b’s and d’s or u’s and n’s, m’s and w’s. Another

way is to see if the person has difficulty with the same word on a different Record.
“Such a difficulty is not uncommon and often indicates a great degree of intelligence and  ability,” the
Masterharper  said.  “People  who  have  difficulty  reading  often  find  it  difficult  to  remember  tables  of
multiplication and addition but find it easy  to  remember  songs,  particularly those  with catchy  tunes,  no
matter how difficult the words.”  He  pursed  his  lips  as  he  trolled  his  memory,  then  brightened  as  he
recalled, “Some of these people are great song-writers or artists.”
“Conar brought some colored pencils with him,” Kindan offered suddenly.
“Did he?” Murenny replied. “Perhaps we should encourage him in drawing.”
“But I thought harpers were supposed to sing, teach, and write,” Kindan protested.
“‘Harpers master many instruments,’” Murenny reminded him with another  wagging finger. “We  are
not above  adding more  to  our  cache.  Who  knows  when a  drawing might prove  vital to  the safety of
Pern.”
Kindan  gave  the  harper  a  look  of  incredulity,  quickly  erased  as  he  recalled  to  whom  he  was
speaking—if anyone could,  the Masterharper  would be  the one  to  dictate  what  was  acceptable  in  a
harper.
“But most of all, Kindan,” the harper said, returning to the original topic, “you must discover what you
can in the Records.”
Kindan nodded emphatically in agreement, then frowned. Murenny gestured for him to speak. “What
about my classes?”
“I think we can safely excuse you from song and instrument making for the moment,” the Masterharper
said with a slight grin. Kindan looked crestfallen and Murenny held up a hand. “Not forever, mind you!
Sometimes a change is all that’s needed for a fresh perspective.”
Murenny’s  words  must  have  provoked  some  new  thought,  for  the  Masterharper  frowned  for  a
moment before continuing.
“Indeed, I think I’ll ask that you spend time with Healer Lenner as well.” Before Kindan could protest,
Murenny continued, “I know you’ve learned a lot from Mikal and I think it wouldn’t hurt at your level of
experience to learn some more traditional lore.”
“I don’t want to be a healer,” Kindan said.
“And you don’t have to be,” Murenny replied. “But all harpers know a bit of healing and you already
know more than most. It would be foolish not to add to your store, especially as it may aid you in your
search of the Records.”
“Yes, Master,” Kindan agreed, accepting the Masterharper’s points. “And what if this flu spreads?”
“That’s why your search of the Records is vital,” Murenny replied. “We must know what to expect.”
 
CHAPTER 7 

When sickness comes to craft and hold
It is the healer, oh so bold
Who spends his hours in endless toil
Working for illness and death to foil. 
HARPER HALL
I t’s just a lot of useless old Records!” Conar complained, sniffling mightily as he flounced around in the
small room designated as their work area. “Honestly, Kindan, I’ll fall asleep going over them.”
“Don’t,” Kindan told him. “Master Resler has a quick hand for those he finds slouching.”
“He does,” Vaxoram agreed, stretching in his chair and bending back to his Record. Kindan noticed
that once again, Vaxoram’s eyes hadn’t moved from the top of the Record. He made it a point every day
to surreptitiously check on the older apprentice’s work, not having figured out yet what to  do  with his
knowledge of Vaxoram’s problem. But that was for later, Kindan reminded himself.
Kindan bent more closely over  his Record,  ignoring the older  boy.  Resler  had  already  berated  him
twice for slackness  and  Kindan  could  think of no way to  tell the  Master  that  he  had  been  working,
particularly  when  half  his  time  had  been  spent  either  listening  to  Conar  moan  or  cajoling  the  older
Vaxoram to work.
“You’ll want to take slices from each of the various Hold Records,” Verilan had told him when they’d
started. Verilan had stayed only long enough to get them properly started before Resler had put him onto
the  task  of  recopying  the  Records  that  had  been  so  inauspiciously  destroyed  by  Kindan’s  earlier
accident.
The Archive Room was a huge cavern dug into the base of the cliff that overlooked the Harper Hall,
crammed full of Records. Glows provided  light for the room,  although it seemed  to  Kindan  that  there
were never enough to clear out the darkest shadows. Even as huge as the room was, Kindan had been
surprised that the Harper Hall had so many of the Holds’ Records.
“Of course we do!” Verilan had snorted in surprise when Kindan had mentioned it. “Harpers usually
make copies and send them to us as a matter of course,” Verilan had explained, surprised that he even
needed to explain the procedure. “Holders rarely keep Records for more than fifty Turns, so they send
us those, too,” Verilan had continued, adding with a shake of his head, “when they remember.” Kindan
gave him a quizzical look and Verilan explained in a horrified tone, “Sometimes they actually destroy their
old Records.”
“Why wouldn’t they?” Conar had asked sourly, punctuated with another cough. “They’re nothing but
useless old relics.”
“They’re Records,” Verilan had replied, offended to the very depth of his being. “How would anyone
know what had happened in previous Turns without them?”

Conar had given Verilan a scornful look and turned away.
Now,  a  sevenday  after  they’d  been  given  the  assignment,  Kindan  could  partly  agree  with
Verilan—and partly with Conar. The Records were a collection of the most boring things he’d ever read
coupled  with tantalizing sections  that made  Kindan  wish for more.  Why, for example,  when the Lord
Holder of Igen had first discovered  that his wells were  running dry,  hadn’t  he started  planting hardier,
more drought-resistant crops instead  of foolishly reducing his acreage  and  ultimately starving his entire
Hold? What had happened that caused the traders to start charging Bitra Hold—and only Bitra Hold—a
surtax on all goods delivered?
Neither of those questions had come from a strict reading of the Records but from Kindan’s memory
and interpolation. He remembered reading about the lowered  water  levels and  then about  the reduced
plantings; he noticed  suddenly that there  were  entries  in the Bitra  Hold  Records  regarding  the  trader
surtax and noticed that there was no mention of them in the Records of Lemos nor Benden.
“Well, how do  you know  that Lemos  and  Benden  hadn’t  been  paying the tax for  Turns  already?”
Conar objected when Kindan had mentioned his findings. “And why wouldn’t the Lord Holder  of Igen
keep planting his best crops? How could he know that they were in a drought?”
Kindan,  torn  between  astonishment  at  Conar’s  obtuseness  and  his  desire  to  press  on  with  their
work—and avoid Resler’s complaints—replied noncommittally, turning to a new Record.
Conar set aside the Record he’d been perusing and began noisily to examine the next.
“Huh!  Someone  left  a  scribble,  here!”  Conar  exclaimed.  “And  here!  Neither  look  like  proper
Records.” He turned to Kindan. “I can’t see how you expect  to  find anything from Records  when the
Harper Hall keeps the works of children.”
Kindan’s initial angry look dissolved into a frown as he recalled that Conar was going through the old
Benden Hold Records. He got up from his workdesk and strode over to Conar’s.
“We’ll switch off,” he said, gesturing for Conar to change seats with him.
Conar rose eagerly, happily seating himself in front of Kindan’s much smaller pile. With a  frown, he
warned, “You’ll want to catch up before Master Resler returns.”
Kindan nodded in agreement, turning to the Records. Conar was right, the writing of the Records was
very poor. He turned back two Records and saw that the writing was far more legible: a fairly large print
that Kindan could read easily by the light of the glows surrounding his new desk.
He looked  at  the  top  of  the  page  for  the  author’s  marks:  Harper  Bellam,  Benden  Hold,  Second
Month, year 389 After Landing.
The next page had no marks. Kindan frowned and turned to the page after it. It had author’s marks:
Lord Kenex, Benden Hold, AL390.5.
Lord Kenex? Kindan thought.
“Conar,  look  at  this,” he called.  Conar  jumped  up and  stood  behind Kindan,  peering down  at  the
Record.
“Could you imagine a Lord Holder with such poor handwriting?” Kindan asked. He knew already that
Conar’s writing was not very good, but even it was far better than the scrawling on the page in front of
him.

“That is odd,” Conar agreed. He traced some of the writing with his finger. “It looks  like either the
person had a bad stylus or they weren’t very used to it.” He cocked his head to one side. “A child?”
“That doesn’t make sense,” Vaxoram chimed in from his stack. “That’s written on paper, right? That’s
too expensive to let a child have.” There was an awkward silence; Conar had been allowed to use paper
for his drawings. Vaxoram noticed it and added, “I mean for writing, of course.”
“What does it mean?” Conar asked.
Kindan shrugged. “I’ll see what it says,” he replied, peering down at the Record.
Conar  returned  to  his  own  table,  but  a  moment  later  he  let  out  an  exclamation.  “There’s  bad
handwriting here, too!”
“What year?” Kindan asked.
“Year?” Conar repeated blankly, then looked down. Once again, he snorted. “There isn’t a year.”
“What about the Record before?”
Conar  gave  him  a  dirty  look  but  turned  back  to  the  previous  page,  scanning  the  top  quickly.
“Journeyman Metalar,  Bitra Hold,  Third Month,  year  389  After Landing,” he read.  He  looked  up  at
Kindan and shrugged. “So?”
But Kindan was already moving to the desk that Verilan had abandoned when called away by Master
Resler. Piled on the desk were the records from Lemos  Hold.  Kindan  turned  quickly until he came  to
entries from the year 389 After Landing.
“What are you doing?” Conar demanded, craning his neck around to watch Kindan. “Master  Resler
will know which stack you were working on.”
“It’s not working,” Kindan returned tetchily, “it’s researching.”
“‘It’s makework, best left to unemployed drudges,’” Vaxoram said, quoting Resler’s sour opinion.
Kindan ignored him, turning through the Records carefully. Harper Lorkin had  good  handwriting; his
marks were clear and easily read. Kindan scanned the pages—389, 389, 389, 389, 390—what?
Kindan peered down at the entry in surprise. The author’s marks read: Harper Lorkin, Lemos Hold,
AL  390.5.  Frowning  he  turned  back  to  the  previous  Record:  Harper  Lorkin,  Lemos  Hold,  Fourth
Month, year 389 After Landing. What had caused the harper to so change his style? And why did he not
leave any Records for a whole Turn? Kindan peered down to the contents of the Record itself.
“I write this with great regret: We are a sadly reduced Hold,” read the first line. “Fields lie fallow, huts
are still empty, or, worse, home to carrion that feed on unburied bones.”
Kindan tore his eyes from the Record and sat back, stunned.
“Kindan!” Master Resler’s voice called from the entrance. “What are you doing? You’re supposed to
be reading the Benden Records!”
“I think I’ve found the plague,” Kindan replied, his voice sounding loud and irreverent to his ears. He
gestured to the Records. “I think I know when it started and maybe where.”
“You were supposed to be reading the Benden Records,” Master Resler repeated angrily, advancing

into the Archive Room, grabbing Kindan by the ear  and  lifting him out of his seat.  “Can’t  you just do
what you’re told?”
“Sorry,  Master,”  Kindan  apologized,  ducking out of Resler’s  grasp  and  turning to  face  him, “but  I
thought I was told to find any Records of a plague.”
“In the Benden Records!” Resler growled in response, gesticulating wildly to the stack beside Conar.
“I found it there, too,” Kindan said. He gestured over to the Bitra Records. “And in Bitra, too, but the
Lemos Records seem the best so far.” He turned and snagged the Record from his table. “Listen to this:
‘Fields lie fallow, huts are still empty—’”
“That’s a  Record  of a  plague?” Resler  snorted  angrily. “A  proper  Record  would  have  dates,  and
times, and—”
“I don’t  think they had  the  time,”  Kindan  interrupted  as  politely  as  he  could.  He  gestured  to  the
Record in his hand. “I think they were so shorthanded afterward that they could only press on with their
lives.”
“That’s not the way of a harper!” Resler exclaimed. He glanced down angrily at Kindan.  “Have you
learned nothing since you left your mine?”
Kindan could feel his cheeks burning. “The Records of Benden were kept by the Lord  Holder  after
the plague,” he said. “I think that shows that the times were such that—”
“Lord Holders don’t keep Records!” Resler chided prissily, his jaw jutting and eyes glaring.
“The Record was marked—”
“Such impudence!” Resler roared. “Go! Get out of my sight!”
“Does that include me?” Conar asked, rising to his feet.
“Yes,” Resler replied, “it includes you. It’s time for lunch.”
Conar left but waited at the entrance for Kindan who was followed, as always, by Vaxoram.
“You aren’t much of a harper, you know,” he said as he fell in step with Kindan. “You’d think you’d
know how to handle a Master by now.” He cocked his head at the silent boy. “However do you think
you’ll manage a Lord Holder?”
“Maybe I won’t,”  Kindan  replied  sourly, brushing past  Conar  and  racing to  catch  up with Verilan,
whom he spied at the entrance to the Dining Hall.
Catching sight of Kindan’s morose look, Verilan asked, “What’s wrong?”
“I think I found the plague,” Kindan told him, “but Master Resler doesn’t believe me.”
As if he was listening, Master Resler,  who had  been  following behind them, called out,  “Verilan! A
word with you, please.”
Verilan gave Kindan an apologetic look, then headed back to his Master.
“Something  bothers  me,”  Vaxoram  said  as  he  finished  chewing  on  a  roll.  Kindan  gave  him  a
questioning look.  “Well, perhaps  Bitra,  Lemos,  and  Benden  were  hit  by  this  plague,  but  what  about

Benden Weyr? Why didn’t the weyrfolk help?”
“That’s a good question,” Conar said, frowning thoughtfully.
“We’ll look at their Records next,” Kindan declared.
“What about  Master  Resler?”  Conar  asked,  glancing  in  the  direction  of  the  irritable  Archivist.  “It
sounds like he never wants you near him or his precious Records again.”
“He’s not the Masterharper,” Vaxoram said, glancing at Kindan to see his reaction.
“But Conar’s  right,” Kindan  objected,  “I have to  learn how to  work  with him as  well as  the other
Masters.”
“Maybe you could—” Vaxoram began, but a faint booming sound silenced him, as it did everyone in
the Harper Hall. It was a drum message.
Emergency! Sickness in Keroon. Please help. 
“It’s spreading,” Conar declared in a flat voice. No one contradicted him.
“Kindan!” Koriana called as he exited the dining hall. Kindan stopped and turned back to her, unable to
keep a smile off his face. “Did I hear the drums right?”
“Depends  upon what you heard,”  Kelsa  snipped  from  behind  her;  because  she  knew  about  Lord
Bemin’s ill will toward the Masterharper, Kelsa wasn’t sure she liked Koriana’s interests in harpers—at
the very least, it could mean trouble all around. Koriana’s smile faded and she moved out of the young
harper’s way.
“Emergency. Sickness in Keroon,”  Koriana  said.  She  screwed  up her eyes  trying to  remember  the
last. “Please help.”
“Yes,” Kindan agreed, “that’s what it said.”
“Is it the same as at Benden?” Koriana asked nervously. “Is it spreading?”
Kindan shook his head. “No one knows,” he said. “We only know what we hear with the drums.”
“Won’t the Weyrs go examine?” Koriana asked.
“Keroon would be beholden to Ista now that Igen’s gone,” Vaxoram remarked.
“We’ll just have to wait and see,” Kindan said. He gestured to the others. “We should get back to the
Records.”
“Records?” Koriana repeated. “What are you looking at them for?”
“Signs of the plague,” Conar blurted out. Both Kindan and Vaxoram glared at him, Kindan shaking his
head at the young boy’s  rashness:  There  was  no need  to  add  to  the fears  already  at  Fort  Hold.  “But
Master Resler—”

“Kindan!” Masterharper Murenny’s voice called down from his second-floor study.
Kindan turned and glanced up. “Yes, Master?”
Master Murenny said nothing, merely beckoning for Kindan to come up to him. Vaxoram and Conar
fell in behind. A moment later, so did Koriana.
When Kindan knocked on Murenny’s door—and one always knocked on the Masterharper’s door,
because no one could ever tell when he might be in the middle of something, even if he’d called for you
just  moments  before—he  expected  the  others  to  leave  him  alone.  However,  Conar  pressed  himself
against Kindan’s back, Vaxoram drew closer, and Koriana peered around him into the Masterharper’s
study.
“I see you have some companions,” Murenny remarked  as  he noted  the three  additional heads.  He
said apologetically to the others, “My request was only meant for Kindan.”
“Please,” Koriana said, “if it has anything to do with this illness, I’d like to hear.”
“Me, too,” Conar added quickly. Vaxoram stood in stalwart silence.
“It may,” Murenny said, pursing his lips in consideration. After a moment he nodded. “Very well, you
may come in. But remember,” he cautioned, looking directly at Koriana, “this is a harper matter.”
“Surely it’s a Pern matter, Master,” Koriana replied demurely.
Murenny smiled in response.
“Harper matters are always Pern matters,” Vaxoram remarked.
“Too true!” Murenny agreed with a snort. He focused his attention on Koriana. “My point being, my
lady, that it is sometimes better not to  spread  news  that  might cause  panic without first determining its
truth.”
“And some remedy,” Koriana said in agreement. “That is true of a Holder, too.”
“Indeed,” Murenny agreed. He turned to Kindan. “Have you made any progress in the Records?”
“Yes,” Conar said at once.
“Maybe,” Kindan temporized, glancing at Conar quellingly. “We have some indication that there was a
major incident that affected Lemos, Bitra, and Benden Holds around Turn 389.”
“Mmm,” Murenny said his eyes focused on some distant point.  “I see  what you mean.” He  glanced
back to Kindan. “What do you plan to do now?”
Kindan frowned. “I, uh,—”
“Master  Resler  thinks  we’re  mussing  his  Records,”  Vaxoram  interjected.  Kindan  gave  him  a
fulminating look, but the older apprentice merely shrugged.
“I am not concerned with Master  Resler’s  feelings in this matter,”  Murenny said  firmly. “Although I
would caution you not to ‘muss’ his Records as you may find yourself needing them later.”
“I think we can work with him,” Kindan said.

“Don’t let his concerns stop your work,” Murenny instructed. Kindan nodded in understanding. “But
you haven’t told me what you plan next.”
“I want to look at the Benden Weyr Records,” Kindan  said.  “I’ll have to  ask  Master  Resler  where
they are; I looked but couldn’t find them.”
“I suspect that’s because they are at the Weyr itself,” Murenny replied.
“What about copies?” Conar protested.
“The duties of a  Weyr  harper  often preclude  time to  make  copies,”  Murenny replied  smoothly. He
sent a darting glance to Kindan, his eyes twinkling. “For some reason, Weyr harpers seem less inclined to
make copies, possibly because their Records are so extensive.”
“But I still need to see those Records,” Kindan persisted.
“Yes,” Murenny agreed. “Do you suppose your fire-lizard is up to sending a message?”
Kindan’s eyes widened at the notion. Slowly he nodded.
“Go  to  M’tal,  Valla,  to  M’tal  at  Benden  Weyr,”  Kindan  said,  concentrating  on  the  image  of  the
dragonrider and his bronze Gaminth. Valla chirped in surprise and preened himself.
“Perhaps he’s too young,” Koriana suggested anxiously, stroking her own Koriss as the queen peered
intently at Valla from her perch on the girl’s shoulder.
“We’ve been training for a while now,” Kindan said. He was nervous and he knew it. He and Koriana
had practiced sending the two fire-lizards between to each other with much success; they had even sent
notes  to  each  other.  Kindan  had  kept  the  first  note  from  her—“Kindan,  this  is  great!  Love,
Koriana”—because  she’d  used  the word  “love” in it. Their other  notes  had  been  more  succinct,  but
Kindan still felt that there  was  a  special  warmth  in  Koriana’s  and  he  knew  that  there  was  a  special
warmth in his responses.
“Valla, go to M’tal, make sure he gets your message,” he said again, concentrating on an image of the
Weyrleader carefully removing the message from Valla’s harness.
Valla chirped once happily and disappeared, between.
“How soon until he comes back?” Conar asked curiously.
“If he comes back,” Vaxoram murmured darkly. Kindan glared at him; the elder boy returned his gaze
impassively, but Kindan could still imagine how Vaxoram would have liked to have his own fire-lizard.
“Come on,” Kindan said, jerking his head toward the Archive Room. “Let’s get back to work.”
They worked until dinner, adding Keroon, Igen, and Telgar to their list.
“It spread fast,” Koriana observed as she looked over Vaxoram’s shoulder. Going over the Records
from  Telgar  was  his  responsibility,  but  Kindan  knew  that  reading  was  difficult  for  Vaxoram,  so  he
surreptitiously helped or had Koriana “read over his shoulder.” Now she observed, “Less than a month
to get from one Hold to the next.”

She had grown more and more pale as the day  had  progressed  and  Kindan,  Conar,  Vaxoram,  and
she had unearthed more grim records of the plague over a hundred Turns past.
“No mention of a cure,” Conar added morosely. “They tried  the Minor Green  Dragon  decoction  at
Igen, but it didn’t work.”
“They tried Major Blue Green Dragon decoction at Telgar,” Kindan added, setting the Record to one
side silently.
“All those deaths,” Koriana said softly, as if just to herself. “Where were the dragonriders? Why didn’t
they help?”
“I don’t know,” Kindan said, shaking his head. “Perhaps there is just no mention in the Records here.”
“How come no one tried Bronze Dragon?” Vaxoram asked. “Or Gold?”
Kindan shook his head condescendingly. “The names are ancient. Some  say  they came  from before
Landing and have nothing to do with the dragons of Pern.”
“If they’re so ancient, why don’t we look in the ancient Records?” Koriana asked. “Perhaps there are
remedies that have been forgotten.”
“I doubt it,” Vaxoram replied.
“Most things that work are remembered,” Kindan agreed.
“But what if they only work against a plague?” Koriana  persisted.  “Wouldn’t they then be  forgotten
until someone looks in the ancient Records?”
“Master Resler—,” Conar began cautiously.
“I can handle him,” Koriana declared, turning toward the oldest stacks of Records determinedly. The
others glanced at Kindan expectantly. He stood still for a thoughtful moment then shrugged; she probably
 could handle Master Resler.
She pulled out a stack and brought them to an empty table. As she sat herself down, she looked over
to Kindan. “I’m sorry if this will slow down your other work,” she told him. “But—”
“That’s all right,” Kindan said. “Vaxoram will keep working.”
“But he can’t read,” Koriana declared, brows furrowed quizzically. “Didn’t you know?”
Conar gave a grunt of surprise and Vaxoram turned bright red, looking anxiously at Kindan.
“I meant to talk to you about it,” Kindan said slowly. For some time he’d guessed, which is why he’d
asked the Masterharper about reading in dim light over a sevenday before. “Some people have trouble
with letters.  That doesn’t  mean they’re  dumb,  some  of the smartest  people  have  this  problem—”  he
didn’t get any further, Vaxoram ran out of the room.
“I’d better go after him,” Kindan said after a moment. He glanced consideringly at Koriana, thinking of
his duties and  his responsibility to  avoid  making trouble  for  the  Masterharper.  “Your  parents  will  be
worried about you—”
“I’ve sent a message to them,” Koriana replied peremptorily. “And shouldn’t you let Nonala or Kelsa
deal with him?”

Kindan slapped his head in surprise. “Nonala and Kelsa! I hadn’t thought of them.”
Conar looked at him questioningly, his expression making clear that  he couldn’t  see  how they could
help with Vaxoram.
“They could help us search,”  Kindan  declared  excitedly. He  glanced  toward  the doorway  and  then
back to Koriana, a sudden question on his mind. “Where will you sleep?”
“I was hoping to find a place near you,” Koriana replied. Across the distance  Kindan  could  see  her
dimples stand  out.  He  felt  a  flush  of  excitement  roar  through  his  veins.  It  was  a  moment  before  he
recovered his senses. “I’d better go after Vaxoram and see if Nonala and Kelsa will help.”
Kindan found Vaxoram standing outside in the courtyard. The night air was  chilly and  Kindan  found
himself shivering as he approached the older apprentice. Vaxoram’s head was craned up to the brilliant
night sky. The Dawn Sisters could just be seen and there, still faint but pulsing menacingly, was the Red
Star. In less than a dozen Turns it would approach  close  enough to  send  Thread  crashing down  upon
Pern; the only protection was the flaming breath of dragons and the courage of their riders.
“Who else knows?” Vaxoram asked after they shared a long moment of silence.
“No one,” Kindan said. “I’d noticed only recently—with the Records—but I wanted to find a way to
talk with you about it.”
“Why?” Vaxoram asked bitterly. “I’m stupid, I can’t read. There’s no way I can be a harper.”
“You’re not stupid,” Kindan replied. “Master Murenny says that many people who have this problem
are very smart—”
“Murenny knows?” Vaxoram asked accusingly. “I thought you told no one.”
“I didn’t,” Kindan  repeated.  “I only asked  the Masterharper  about  the symptoms,  I didn’t mention
you.”
“He must suspect, then,” Vaxoram replied bitterly.
“He could think that it’s Conar,”  Kindan  said.  “Lots  of people  with this problem  are  great  artists.”
Vaxoram cast a sidelong glance at him. “Others are great with lyrics, particularly long ballads.”
Vaxoram snorted; he was most skilled with the longer ballads.
“Master Murenny says that people can learn to work around this,” Kindan told  him. “We  can  teach
you.”
“Why would you?” Vaxoram demanded, his voice full of pain. “Why would he?”
“I  think  he  would  teach  you  because  anyone  with  your  problem  is  very  smart  and  he  values
intelligence,” Kindan  said  slowly. “I want to  teach  you so  that  you  can  be  a  harper  and  stop  hating
yourself.”
Vaxoram turned to face him, his eyes picking out Kindan’s in the darkness. Kindan found no words to
say but he could feel Vaxoram’s emotions. After a moment, he clapped the older boy on the arm. “Come
on, we’re going to wake Nonala and Kelsa.”
Vaxoram put up a restraining arm. “No,”  he said,  “let’s leave them until morning. If we  wake  them
now, they’ll just be crabby.”

“But Koriana—”
“She’s your problem,” Vaxoram declared.
“What do you mean?” Kindan asked.
“You know what I mean,” Vaxoram replied. “The two of you practically burn the air with your stares.”
“But—”
“She likes you, Kindan,”  Vaxoram  told  him frankly. “Perhaps  more.”  He  smiled. “And it’s obvious
that you love her,  too.”  His smile faded  as  he added  with a  shake  of his head,  “It’s  a  pity  she’s  the
Holder’s daughter. It’ll never work.” Before Kindan could respond, Vaxoram’s mouth opened in a great
yawn. “If you’ll let me,” Vaxoram said, “I’m going to bed. I’m no good to you the way I am.”
“Sure,” Kindan agreed.
“And send  Conar  up,  too,”  Vaxoram  said  in a  tone  that  was  half-order,  half-suggestion.  “He’ll  be
useless without some rest.”
“But that will just leave me and Koriana,” Kindan protested.
Vaxoram nodded, his teeth gleaming in the dim light. “Yes, it will, won’t it?”
“I spoke with him,” Kindan called as he reentered the Archive room. “He’ll be all right.”
Conar glanced up at him and nodded, then yawned in exhaustion. Koriana smiled at the younger boy,
then surprised herself with a yawn. Sure enough, just as she finished, Kindan yawned himself.
“Conar, you should go to sleep,” Kindan ordered.
Conar blinked at him then shrugged and started to tidy his pile of Records.
“Leave them, just get some rest,” Kindan added.
As the young boy left, Kindan glanced over at Koriana.
“I’m staying,” she declared resolutely.
“You should get some sleep, too,” he said.
“So should you,” she replied, turning over another ancient Record.
“I will if you do,” Kindan declared. “Otherwise, I feel duty-bound to keep you company.”
Koriana didn’t respond, her attention fixed on the gleaming Record in her hands.
“This is odd,” she said. She gestured for Kindan to come over. Kindan approached slowly, his eyelids
feeling heavy. “Have you ever seen a Record like this?”
As she turned to hand him the Record, their hands touched briefly. It was as though sparks had flowed
between them. Kindan found himself looking not at the Record but at Koriana’s  brilliant blue eyes.  He

reached for her other  hand,  pulling her up out of her seat.  Koriana  rose  and  let him take  it, her eyes
locked on his. Her lips parted and he felt her breath gently on his face. He placed the Record  carefully
back on the table and drew her toward him. She came willingly, her eyes level with his.
Koriana closed her eyes and their lips met and Kindan wrapped his arms around her shoulders, pulling
her into a tight embrace. Then he closed his eyes and felt only the touch of her tongue and the softness of
her lips. He heard only her breathing, heard when it altered to a faster pace, felt when her arms squeezed
him against her, felt his hands in her hair, her hands in his, the supple warmth of her body against his.
“Oh, Kindan,”  she  cried  when they finally broke  the kiss.  She  buried  her  head  against  his  and  he
turned and kissed the soft folds of her neck. Her breath coming faster, she pushed him back and looked
at him with tear-spangled eyes, “What are we going to do?”
Kindan hugged her tight to him again and she responded willingly. “I don’t know,” he whispered into
her ear. “All I know is that I love you, Koriana.”
She pressed herself tightly against him, then pulled back and kissed him gently on the forehead. “I love
you, too,  always and  forever,”  she  told  him fervently. They kissed  again, long and  slow,  savoring the
sweetness of each other, hands moving tenderly over each other’s body.
Emotions swelled up in Kindan that he’d never had before. Immense tenderness, overwhelming desire,
deep passion. They amazed him as much as they frightened him. At long last, his body still quivering with
passion,  Kindan  pulled back  from Koriana,  who murmured in protest,  then  nuzzled  against  him  once
more.
“We need  rest,”  Kindan  said,  pulling back  and  tracing the  line  of  her  cheekbones  with  his  hands.
Koriana opened her eyes and smiled at him.
“It’s too long to walk back to the Hold,” she said. “Where shall I sleep?”
“You can sleep with me,” Kindan said impulsively.
Koriana  lowered  her hands  to  his waist and  pulled him  tightly  against  her  body.  “I  like  that!”  she
declared with a devilish look in her eyes.
Kindan  turned,  holding  on  to  one  of  her  hands,  and  led  her  from  the  Archive  Room,  glows  still
unturned.
In the cold night in the courtyard, Koriana draped herself on him for warmth. Kindan had to shush her
as  they  entered  the  apprentice  dormitory;  she  was  giddy  with  emotion  and  Kindan  was  afraid  that
everyone would hear them, but he finally got her into his bunk and pulled himself in alongside.
“I’ll  get  too  hot  with  these  clothes  on,”  Koriana  declared,  pulling  off  her  trousers.  Kindan  was
scandalized,  he’d  never  been  in bed  with a  woman before,  let alone in the apprentice  dormitory.  But
Koriana was right and Kindan found himself pulling off his trousers, also. Koriana nuzzled against him and
Kindan thought to kiss her once more, but he spied a gleam in the dark—Vaxoram was looking at him
impassively. Kindan froze for a moment, then nodded toward Vaxoram in understanding. Vaxoram held
his eyes for a moment longer, then nodded himself and rolled over.
“We must go to sleep, Koriana,” Kindan whispered to her.
“If you say so,” Koriana replied drowsily, throwing her arm over him. Kindan found himself cuddling
her head with one arm, stroking it softly while her breathing grew shallower and shallower as she drifted
off to sleep. If anything, Kindan mused as he looked at her sleeping face, she was more beautiful asleep

than awake.
“Come on, get up!” Vaxoram said urgently in Kindan’s ear the next morning. Kindan rolled over  away
from the noise but found his arm trapped. “Get up, Kindan!” Vaxoram said again, then disappeared.
Kindan opened his eyes and found himself looking at Koriana’s sleeping face. His left arm was asleep,
trapped under her shoulder.
“Koriana,” he called softly. She jerked and then was still. “Koriana, wake up!”
She jerked again and Kindan leaned back to look at her. Her eyes were open and wide with fear.
“We’ve got to get up before the others wake up,” he told her. She nodded in understanding. Kindan
looked  around  for  their  trousers  and  found  them  folded  neatly  on  the  end  of  the  bed.  He  handed
Koriana’s to her and she took them gratefully, trying to slide the trousers on under the blankets. Kindan
motioned her to stop, grabbed his trousers, and quietly left the bed dragging them on. Koriana followed
suit, the noise of her exertions masked by Kindan’s.
Dressed, Kindan motioned for her to precede him toward the door.
Outside, Koriana giggled with delight as she sprinted forward, dragging Kindan along behind her with
a tightly clasped  hand.  She  whirled around  to  face  him and  pulled him against her like a  dancer.  She
kissed him fiercely and declared, “I’ve never felt so alive!”
They  kissed  again  for  a  long  moment.  The  dark  night  turned  gray  and  they  shivered  in  the
early-morning air.
Koriana pulled away from Kindan,  her expression  suddenly concerned.  “What will we  do?  Mother
will know that I stayed here.”
“And Master Murenny will know that you weren’t in the journeymen’s quarters,” Kindan added with a
grimace. He  thought for  a  moment,  leading  Koriana  aimlessly  across  the  courtyard.  Then  inspiration
struck. “How about if we say you fell asleep in the Archives?”
“But why didn’t you wake me?” Koriana asked, her face a mixture of curiosity and mock-outrage.
“I tried, but I couldn’t,” Kindan suggested. “You were too tired.”
“You’d fallen asleep,  too,”  Koriana  retorted.  “At your table  and  you  didn’t  notice  that  I  was  still
there.”
“If that’s the case,”  Kindan  said,  “then when we  woke  up we’d  be  heading to  the night hearth  for
some klah.”
“Excellent,” Koriana agreed. “I could do with some klah.”
Giddily, they traipsed down  the steps  to  the kitchen only to  freeze  in fright as  they heard  footsteps
following behind.
“Kindan?” the Masterharper called as he caught sight of him. “Are you—?”

Murenny spotted Koriana and his face went inscrutable, although Kindan wondered if for a  moment
the Masterharper’s eyes weren’t twinkling with some diffused delight.
“Lady Koriana, I thought you had returned to your Hold,” Murenny said stiffly.
“I—”
“We fell asleep,” Kindan finished. “In the Archives.”
“I see,” Murenny said in a dry voice. He glanced back up the stairs. “And is Vaxoram still there?”
Kindan thought fast before shaking his head. “I think I sent him off to bed and then—”
“I interrupted him,” Koriana interjected. “And then we went back to the Records and—”
“Well, fell asleep,” Kindan finished, doing his very best to look chagrined.
“And now?” Murenny asked with a slight nod of his head.
“We woke up and thought to get some klah before we went back to work,” Kindan said.
“And perhaps breakfast?” Murenny suggested, gesturing for them to continue. He glanced around and
asked Koriana, “Where is that marvelous gold fire-lizard of yours?”
Koriana gave him a startled look and was only saved by a triumphant squawk as Koriss appeared at
the top of the stairs and flew down to perch on Koriana’s shoulder.
“Ow!” Koriana exclaimed, quickly reaching for Koriss and moving her to the crook of her arm. “Your
nails are just too sharp, dear.”
Koriss looked up at Koriana, faceted eyes whirling red with growing hunger.
“We’d better feed her right now,” Murenny said, chuckling. “Then perhaps she could bear a message
to your parents?”
Koriana  looked  skeptical.  “She’s  not  yet  quite  as  adept  as  Kindan’s  Valla,  Masterharper,”  she
temporized, looking down fondly at the small gold. “But I can try.”
“Well, I’d  hate  for you to  lose  her,”  Murenny responded.  A fire-lizard given poor  directions  could
easily get lost or, worse, lost forever between.
“We’ve been neglecting her training,” Kindan said, grimacing.
“Perhaps later in the day, then, or tomorrow,” Murenny suggested.
“Oh, no!” Koriana  protested.  “We’ve  got to  keep  searching the Records.”  Kindan  understood  her
concern: while it would only take a moment to send Koriss on her journey, their worry about her safety
would completely distract Koriana—and Kindan—until they received news of her arrival.
They entered  the darkened  kitchen and  made  their way to  the night hearth.  Kindan  grabbed  some
tongs, filled a kettle, and hung it over the glowing coals. He then went back toward the kitchen ovens and
glanced inside, surprised to see bread already rising.
“What are you—” Selora’s voice bellowed from the back room as she raced out, only to stop as she
spotted Murenny. “Oh, Masterharper, I didn’t see you.”

“No problem,” Murenny said dismissively. “Kindan, Koriana, and I were just trying to steal  an early
breakfast.”
“The rolls are almost done,” Selora informed him. She glanced sharply at Kindan. “With a bit of help,”
she added, “I could have them glazed with sugar and ready to eat, if a bit hot.”
“That sounds marvelous!” Koriana exclaimed.
Kindan nodded and moved to follow Selora. “What do I need to do?” he asked as he headed toward
the back room only to find the Masterharper following him.
“Many hands make short work,” Murenny called cheerfully, pushing up his sleeves.
“Too many cooks  spoil the broth,”  Selora  responded  sourly, holding up her hand.  “No  disrespect,
Masterharper, but you’ve been banned from the kitchens for the duration.”
“Duration?” Koriana asked, brows raised.
“Of my life,” Murenny confessed unhappily.
“Burnt a sevenday’s worth of cooking,” Selora added, shaking her head in sad acknowledgment.
“Well, I can help,” Koriana offered.
“You’d be  better  off helping the Masterharper,”  Selora  said,  pointing toward  the hearth.  “He’s  the
only man I know who can burn water.”
Reluctantly,  Koriana  accepted  this  suggestion  and  followed  the  Masterharper  back  to  the  hearth.
Murenny contented himself with puttering around the large room, turning over the glows.
In the back room, out of earshot, Selora shot Kindan a sharp look and asked pointedly, “And where
did he find you two?”
“On the way downstairs,” Kindan replied, carefully pouring some  confectioner’s  sugar into a  cup  of
cold water, stirring all the while.
“And where were you before that?” Selora demanded.
“We fell asleep in the Archive Room,” Kindan said, hoping to sound convincing.
Selora snorted. “You’d better be a better harper than you are a liar.”
Kindan turned bright red.
“Let’s eat up in my study,” Murenny suggested several minutes later when Selora announced that the rolls
were ready and Koriana had the klah made. With a wink, he explained to Kindan, “I wouldn’t want the
other apprentices to feel that I’ve picked a favorite.”
While Kindan examined the awesome possibility that perhaps the Masterharper had picked a favorite,
he and Selora quickly set out a tray and filled it with a selection of rolls, a pitcher of still-steaming klah,
and several mugs.

They made their way to Murenny’s study and, at his gesture, seated themselves around the breakfast
table. Kindan sat facing the window. As he was pouring his mug of klah, he spotted  Vaxoram  exit the
apprentice dormitory, looking furtively around the courtyard in the growing dawn.
Masterharper Murenny noticed Kindan’s  look,  got up,  and  peered  out the window himself. With a
speculative glance toward Kindan, Murenny leaned out of the window and shouted to Vaxoram, “Why
don’t you come up and join us?”
A few moments later, Vaxoram knocked on the door and Murenny invited him inside.
“Come in, come in,” the Masterharper said, gesturing cheerfully for Vaxoram  to  join them. He  rose
and pulled a free chair from his worktable over to the breakfast table, indicating that Vaxoram should sit
with them. “I see that Kindan remembered to set a spare mug, so pour yourself some klah and grab one
of those delicious rolls before they’re all gone.”
Vaxoram glanced nervously at Kindan before filling his mug and grabbing a roll. Then, deciding that he
was safe, the older apprentice carefully began to slowly chew his roll.
Murenny  waited  in  a  genial  silence  until  Vaxoram  finished  his  roll  and  had  a  sip  of  klah  before
continuing, “Vaxoram, how well do you know the codes regarding dueling?”
The older  apprentice  gave the Masterharper  a  startled  look.  “I  remember  all  that  Master  Detallor
taught me,” he replied defensively.
“I’m sure you do,” Murenny agreed. “Do you remember the rules of dishonor?”
Vaxoram flushed and bowed his head. “Yes.”
Murenny shook his head. “I don’t think you’re following me, Vaxoram.”
The older apprentice glanced up, first at Kindan, then at Murenny.
“Do you remember the rules for a re-challenge?”
Vaxoram creased his brow in thought, then in slowly dawning surprise. Kindan gasped as he realized
what the Masterharper was aiming at and Vaxoram turned his attention to him, consideringly.
“If the victor dishonors the cause of the challenge, the vanquished can  demand  a  rematch,”  Koriana
said slowly. She glanced at Kindan, biting her lower lip nervously.
“Yes,” Murenny said, his voice completely serious. He looked  long and  hard  at  Vaxoram.  “Is there
reason for you to demand a rematch?”
“No,”  Vaxoram  declared  immediately,  his  eyes  locked  with  Kindan’s.  He  glanced  back  to  the
Masterharper. “No, Masterharper, there is not.”
Murenny nodded, then turned steely eyes on Kindan.
“Where were you last night?”
“I was in my bunk,” Kindan replied in a small voice. “Koriana was with me.”
“By my choice,” Koriana declared, reaching out to grab Kindan’s hand. Her strong grip felt feeble and
distant compared against the huge hole in the pit of Kindan’s stomach.

Murenny did not so much as glance toward her, asking Kindan directly, “Did you break your word?”
Kindan’s mouth was dry and he swallowed hard, not knowing what to  say.  More  than anything, he
wished he were somewhere else, that events were different, that he wasn’t pinned under the terrible glare
of the Masterharper’s wrath.
Murenny’s lips tightened in Kindan’s silence. “Were you hoping to convince us of a lie?”
“Yes, Master,” Kindan answered feebly, feeling totally ashamed.
“Then how can you hope to be a harper?” the Masterharper asked, his voice challenging.
Kindan could only shake his head mutely. “I don’t know,” he confessed finally. He felt torn between
getting up then and there, packing his things and leaving the Harper Hall, or just leaving. He had never felt
so dejected.
Murenny turned his attention to Vaxoram.
“Why did you permit this?” Murenny asked. The older apprentice shook his head mutely and Murenny
pressed him, “Who woke them in the morning?”
“I did,” Vaxoram confessed.
“Why?” Murenny asked  him, his face  full of curiosity. “Why did you not report  this? With Kindan
dishonored, your honor would be restored.”
“He was not dishonorable,” Vaxoram said, meeting the Masterharper’s  eyes  frankly. He  glanced  to
Kindan. “I will not betray you.”
Kindan could only nod glumly, too numb to appreciate the depth of Vaxoram’s admission.
“Masterharper Murenny,” Koriana interjected, “I love Kindan. I would never let him do anything that
would cause him dishonor.”
“Yet you have,” Murenny snapped. He gestured at the hand clasping Kindan’s and Koriana dropped
it  as  though  stung.  “You  have  dishonored  him,  your  father,  me,  your  Hold,  and  the  Harper  Hall.”
Murenny shifted his gaze to include Kindan. “Both of you.”
“I love her,” Kindan responded, reaching out to regain Koriana’s hand with his own.
“More than your honor?” Murenny asked  relentlessly. “More  than her honor?”  He  did not wait for
their response before continuing, “What sort of love is it that demands dishonor and lies to even exist?
“How,” and his voice filled the room  with its strength,  “can any of you think for an instant that  this
stained emotion can last?”
“But I love him!” Koriana protested, breaking down into tears and burying her face in her hands.
Murenny shook his head, with a sad expression on his face. “I see only need, not love.”
Koriana looked up at him in silent shock and outrage.
“And  betrayal,”  Murenny  continued,  his  voice  quiet  but  firm.  Kindan  glanced  hotly  at  the
Masterharper, furious that he should cause Koriana so much pain, but Murenny met his eyes sternly, as
he continued, “Betrayal of your honor, betrayal of your family, betrayal of yourself.”

“But Father would never—” Koriana began in protest.
“Not now!” Murenny cut her off. “Now you will never know how he would have behaved  had  you
come to him honestly, with your heart open, and told him your true feelings.” He glanced toward Kindan.
“Nor will you ever know how I would have responded,  how I might have helped  you.” He  shook  his
head. “The two of you have betrayed each other as surely as if you’d fought a duel to the death.”
The horrible silence that fell lasted only for an instant and  was  shattered  as  a  brilliant splash  of gold
burst into the room. Koriss entered from between, bringing a crisp air into the room and filling it with her
loud, raucous  cries,  her eyes  whirling  red  in  anger  and  confusion.  Koriana  grabbed  for  her,  missed,
grabbed again, cradling the agitated fire-lizard tight against her body. It was a number of minutes before
Koriss’s  red  faceted  eyes  changed  to  a  calmer  green  and  the  fire-lizard  nuzzled  against  her  partner,
chirping concernedly.
Kindan watched the proceedings with a growing sense of unease.
“Koriana,” he asked tensely, “does Koriss have an image for you?”
Koriana gave him a puzzled look. Kindan told her, “Close your eyes and concentrate on her.”
Koriana did so, her expression still quizzical, but only for a moment as  her eyes  popped  open  again
and she told them in alarm, “Father’s coming and he’s got guards with him!”
“Yes,” Murenny murmured, glancing at Kindan and Vaxoram, “just as I’d feared.”
Under the Masterharper’s direction, the four of them met Lord Holder Bemin just outside  the archway
into the Harper Hall.
“Lord Holder,” Murenny called in greeting, bowing low. Bemin regarded him coldly, flanked on either
side by two burly guards and trailed by four more, all carrying swords. “We were just about to come to
you.”
“I see,” Bemin said. He gestured curtly to his daughter. “Koriana.”
“Father,” Koriana replied, ducking her head obediently.
“Your mother was most worried,” Bemin said. Kindan thought that that was a lie; it seemed  that  the
Lord  Holder  was  most  agitated,  which  made  more  sense  if  he’d  ever  heard  rumors  of  Murenny’s
involvement with Sannora.
“I was fine, honestly,” Koriana replied. “We were late going through the Records—we think we might
have found something vital—”
“If  it  were  so  vital,  why  didn’t  the  Masterharper  send  us  a  messenger?”  Bemin  interjected,  a
foreboding look on his face. “Why didn’t he drum a message?”
As if in answer  to  his question,  the faint sound  of distant  drums echoed  into Fort’s  valley. Kindan,
Vaxoram, Murenny, and Koriana all strained to hear the faint throbbing notes.
“Emergency,” Koriana repeated as she deciphered the first code. She and Kindan locked eyes, much

to Bemin’s anger. “Emergency,” she added, her eyes going wider. “Emergency.”
The noise faded and everyone strained for any new notes.
But there were none.
“Three, not four,” Vaxoram remarked in relief, only to himself.
“A major Hold emergency,” Koriana said, sounding a bit unsure. “Not a minor Hold emergency.”
“But from where?” Murenny asked, turning as if for an answer toward the repeater tower lost in the
distance.
Bemin glanced nervously at each of them in turn, ending with his daughter.
“What  does  it  mean?”  he  asked  Koriana.  Behind  him,  Kindan  noticed  that  the  Fort  guards  had
unconsciously shifted toward each other as if for protection.
“It could be Telgar,” Vaxoram suggested.
“Or Igen or Ista,” Kindan responded.
“Even if it were two, that wouldn’t be a Pern-wide emergency,” Bemin protested. “There’d have to be
something involving more than half of the major Holds for that.”
Murenny nodded  but his words  were  not reassuring.  “True, but the illness was  in Keroon,  so  why
couldn’t it spread to Igen or any of the seaward minor Holds, and then how long would it be before Ista
was infected?”
Bemin responded with a sour look. “If that were so, how come we haven’t heard  anything from the
Weyrs?”
“A good question,” Murenny replied, rubbing his chin thoughtfully.
“Well, it’s neither here nor there,” Bemin said after a moment spent fulminating. He glanced toward his
daughter. “Koriana, your mother is most anxious for you.”
“My duty is here, Father,” Koriana replied resolutely.
“Your duty is where I say it is,” Bemin replied, his eyes narrowing in anger.
“Yes, my lord,” Koriana agreed with a nod of her head. “And you instructed me to be here, searching
the Records, learning the drum codes, and how to control my fire-lizard.” She paused for just a moment.
“So I am here, doing my duty to you and Pern.”
“Pern?” Bemin repeated, one brow arched in surprise.
Koriana nodded. “I believe, Father, that anything that we can learn about previous plagues like this will
save many lives on Pern,” she replied.
“Saving lives is a job for healers,” Bemin snapped.
“And Holders,” Koriana retorted, her blue eyes flashing.
“Who told you that?” Bemin demanded in surprise.

“You did.”
“I never—”
“You said that a Holder is responsible for all the lives in the Hold,” Koriana reminded him. The Lord
Holder closed his mouth with an audible click, glaring at Masterharper Murenny accusingly.
When Murenny made no reaction, Bemin turned back to his wayward daughter. “That’s correct,” he
told her. “And the holders owe their lord service, even including his own children.”
Koriana  opened  her  mouth  for  another  retort,  but  before  she  could  speak,  the  air  above  them
suddenly darkened as a large bronze dragon appeared from between.
Moments later, Valla plummeted down to Kindan, pulling up just in time to land—hard—on Kindan’s
shoulder.
“It would seem that Benden has gotten your message,” Murenny said, nodding to Kindan.
The Fort Hold guards, having bunched up close to their lord, now sidled discreetly around him so as
to put him between them and the bronze dragon that settled in the meadow beyond the Harper Hall, his
hide gleaming bright in the full morning sun.
Not a moment after M’tal alighted from Gaminth did the sky darken again. Kindan craned his neck up
to see a lithe blue dragon  with three  riders  descend  to  land beside  the Benden  Weyr  dragon.  Kindan
spotted the rider’s Ista Weyr colors and instantly recognized the rider as J’trel.
“What’s Ista doing here?” Bemin asked as the blue dragon landed.
“That would be Talith,” Murenny responded. “J’trel is his rider. He’s been here to the Healer  Hall a
number of times with—”
“Ki’da’!” a young boy cried, rushing across the field.
“Druri!” Kindan  called  back  enthusiastically.  He  waved  toward  the  blue  rider  and  nodded  at  the
woman who trailed along behind. “J’trel, Jalenna!”
When J’trel  waved  back,  Kindan  felt that  something was  wrong; the older  rider  was  usually  much
more enthusiastic in his greeting. Jalenna, Kindan saw, was carrying a small bundle in a sling. The bundle
squirmed awkwardly; it was not usual for Jalenna to bring young Jassi  with her.  Kindan  felt dread  and
urgency emanating from both adults as they approached.
“Kindan, stand away, please,” M’tal called urgently as Druri approached.
Murenny moved to intercept the young man, diverting him from Kindan, Koriana, and Vaxoram.
“Is the plague in Ista?” M’tal said to J’trel.
“Not yet,” J’trel replied. “It may be only a matter of days, however.” He turned to the Masterharper.
“I’ve come to beg a favor, Murenny.”
“What’s going on?” Bemin demanded, surprised and nervous at the sudden change in the situation.
“I’ve come for Kindan,”  M’tal  said.  “His Valla requested  that  he come  to  Benden.”  M’tal  glanced
down at Kindan as he added, “Though I’ve no idea why.”

“We were  hoping to  examine your Records,”  Kindan  explained with a  nod  toward  M’tal.  Bemin’s
reaction  made  it clear  to  everyone  that he thought Kindan  was  being overly familiar with  the  Benden
Weyrleader.
“Of course,” M’tal said willingly. “If it weren’t  for you,  our  dragons  would still be  chewing that  hot
firestone and we’d never know anything about the abilities of watch-whers.”
Bemin’s expression changed; he glanced at Kindan with a look of appraisal on his face.
“I’ve come to ask sanctuary for Druri, Jalenna, and Jassi,” J’trel said to Murenny.
“I see,” Murenny replied noncommittally, still keeping a hand on the restless Druri.
The story of Druri’s debility was  well known  at  the Harper  Hall, where  the dim but kindly lad had
been  a  regular  visitor  for  several  Turns,  working  with  the  Healers  as  they  strove  to  retrain  a  brain
tragically damaged in a near-drowning nearly five Turns ago.
The rumors in the apprentice dormitory—always rampant if not always accurate—were that J’trel had
been performing aerobatics when Druri and  some  other  boys  had  been  out of Ista  Harbor  sailing in a
small skiff. Their amazement with blue Talith’s antics had caused them to neglect their navigation and the
skiff hit a reef, the mast fell on Druri, cracking his skull and many precious minutes were lost before  he
was brought out of the water, drowned and dead. At Jalenna’s request, J’trel had taken quick action to
revive the boy, but it had been too late to prevent Druri’s brain from being severely  damaged.  Rumors
went on,  wildly, to  assert  that J’trel  had  had  a  romantic liaison with Jalenna resulting in Jassi.  Kindan
tended to discount such rumors as everyone knew that blue riders preferred to partner with green riders,
and that both riders were usually male.
“We should leave now,” M’tal said to Kindan, nodding apologetically to J’trel as he added, “I don’t
want to risk the chance of Kindan catching the illness.”
“There’s a risk of the illness from these?” Bemin demanded, waving at the three Ista holders and the
blue rider.
“I don’t think so,” J’trel replied, “or I wouldn’t have brought them here.”
“But you don’t know,” Bemin persisted.
“No, Lord Holder,” J’trel answered, his voice going stiff.
“I can’t permit it,” Bemin said. “I can’t let my Hold—”
“I make this request of the Healer Hall, not Fort Hold,” J’trel interjected.
“All the same,” Bemin retorted hotly. “I won’t let—”
“Lord Holder, I don’t know if you really have a choice,” Murenny interrupted in a soft voice.
Bemin shot him an angry look and Murenny contined quickly, “How many ships have docked at Fort
Sea Hold since we received the first word of the illness?”
“But—”
“And how many have offloaded fish?” J’trel asked, guessing the train of Murenny’s reasoning.  “And
how many fished off Ista or Keroon? How many set in to one of those Holds or minor Holds or merely
put a boat ashore to gather water?”

“But—but—we don’t know—” Bemin spluttered.
“You are absolutely correct, my Lord Holder,” Murenny agreed with a  nod  of his head.  “We  don’t
know.” He frowned. “In fact, with that last drum message we don’t know if the emergency was in Igen,
Telgar, or even Southern Boll Holds.” He glanced toward M’tal. “We need more information.”
The Benden Weyrleader nodded in understanding.
“We  think  the  last  plague  started  on  the  east  coast,”  Kindan  said,  inserting  himself  into  the
conversation despite the knot in his stomach. “That’s why I’ve asked to review the Records at Benden
Weyr.”
“But what about the Harper Hall Records?” Bemin demanded.
“Fragments, scattered reports, nothing to give us a decent picture of what to  expect,”  Koriana  said,
meeting her father’s angry eyes  with her concerned  ones.  “Let me go with him, Father,”  she  pleaded.
“For our Hold, for our people.”
“Why do you have to go?” Bemin asked, his tone less belligerent than worried.
“Because I know what to look for,” Koriana replied. “And because we need to know as soon as we
can.” She gestured to Kindan, Vaxoram, and herself. “We three are best at that.” She gave Vaxoram a
sympathetic look before she continued, “Vaxoram has a hard time reading, Father. It takes him twice as
long as  it does  me. If I don’t  go,  it will take  nearly twice as  long to  get our  answers—and  what will
happen in the meantime?”
“Your mother—”
“Mother would say, ‘Go, do what you must,’” Koriana predicted.
Bemin let out a long fuming sigh and nodded reluctantly. Then he turned to  Kindan.  “And you,  have
you been honorable?”
“No, my lord,” Kindan admitted. “I have not.”
M’tal gave him a startled look, a look which Kindan would have given anything never to have earned.
“We slept in the same bed,” Koriana said. “We  kissed  but nothing more.”  She  reached  out toward
Kindan as she told her father, “I love him.”
Bemin turned furiously toward Murenny. “No,” he said hoarsely. “This cannot be. I will not permit it.”
Before anyone could respond, another drum message rumbled through the valley.
“Emergency,” Kindan and Koriana translated in unison, their eyes locking in a rush of fear and dread.
“Emergency. Emergency. Telgar Hold. Send help. Please.”
Even before the words had registered, the drums started again.
“Plague in Nabol, please help,” Kindan translated, his heart pounding heavily in his chest.
“Plague in Crom,” Koriana added, turning to her father pleadingly.
Bemin looked at her for one moment more before nodding decisively. “Go!” he told her. He turned to
M’tal and gestured to Kindan, “You will guard her honor?”

“My word as a dragonrider,” M’tal responded in leaden tones.
“You have my word, also, Lord Holder,” Kindan added in a small voice.
“Your word has no value to me,” Bemin responded harshly. He gestured to Vaxoram. “He’ll go with
you, too, won’t he?” Kindan nodded and Bemin told Vaxoram, “You will sleep in the same  room  with
him; never leave without him.”
“My lord,” Vaxoram agreed with a stiff bow.
“Go then,” Bemin said, waving his hand angrily. He turned to Murenny. “You and I will discuss these
other matters now.”
“Come on,” M’tal said gruffly to Kindan and the others, turning on his heel and speeding his way back
to his bronze dragon. He arranged for Koriana to  be  sandwiched  between  himself and  Vaxoram,  with
Kindan seated behind the older apprentice.
Gaminth rose into the air with an urgency that seemed almost angry to Kindan, as though the dragon
were  reflecting the rider’s  mood.  As  they  went  between,  Kindan  reached  a  hand  forward  to  touch
Koriana but dropped it as he remembered his promise.
He felt as doomed as all Pern.
 
CHAPTER 8 
Harper to your word be true
Holder, crafter you also hew
To honesty, integrity, and respect
All others without regard to intellect. 
BENDEN WEYR
T he cold  of between  remained in Kindan’s  bones  as  they burst  out into the waning  daylight  of  a
Benden Weyr experiencing a midwinter freeze. The crest of the Weyr was snow-covered as were all the
mountains in the distance.
The cold of between was also in the air they brought  with them from the Harper  Hall, the moisture
frozen out into  a  rainbow  of  ice  crystals  that  surrounded  Gaminth  and  his  riders  until  they  dropped
through it when the bronze dragon dove steeply into the Weyr Bowl.
Gaminth landed deftly, but Kindan was still so numb physically and emotionally that he nearly fell from
his perch on the dragon, slamming awkwardly against Vaxoram  and  managing to  stay  on the dragon’s

back only with the help of Vaxoram’s steadying hand.
Mortified, he swiftly clambered off the dragon. After he helped Vaxoram  down,  he stood  in to  help
Koriana only to be elbowed aside by the older harper.
“My job’s to serve you, and you’re likely to drop her,” Vaxoram told him curtly.
Hurt, Kindan stood back and watched enviously as Vaxoram gently caught Koriana in his strong arms
and lowered her to the Weyr Bowl.
“Come on,  I’ll show  you the Records  room,”  M’tal  called  as  soon  as  he  hopped  down  from  his
dragon.  He  led a  brisk  pace  up two  flights  of  stone  stairs  and  turned  right,  leading  through  the  first
doorway.
The room  was  stacked  full of Records,  with many more  stacked  awkwardly  in dark  alcoves.  Dim
morning light from the Bowl shone in from a window cut in the far side of the room.
“Kindan,” M’tal ordered, “come with me and we’ll get some klah and glows.”
Out of breath, Kindan turned immediately and started to follow M’tal only to be stopped by Vaxoram,
who said to the Weyrleader, “I am under vow to be with him at all times.”
M’tal pursed his lips, then nodded quickly. “Very well, you may come.” He glanced toward Koriana.
“Will you get started?”
“Of course,” Koriana replied, her gaze reaching out to  Kindan  for a  moment before  she  turned  her
head quickly away and began to search through the first stack of Records.
“By the Shell of Faranth!” M’tal swore to Kindan  as  they trotted  down  the stairs  toward  the Weyr
Bowl. “What ever could you have been thinking of, Kindan?”
“I—”
“And you,” M’tal  rounded  on Vaxoram.  “Didn’t you duel him for much the same  reason?”  Before
Vaxoram could respond, he continued, “Don’t you know you can re-challenge him and win your honor?”
“He did nothing dishonorable,” Vaxoram declared hotly. “They were never out of my sight.”
Kindan looked at Vaxoram in surprise and then realized that the older harper had spoken the truth.
“Then why—?” Kindan  began  questioningly only to  be  cut off  by  M’tal  who  spoke  with  dawning
comprehension, “Forsworn, you could not provide witness to Lord Bemin.”
“Yes, my lord,” Vaxoram agreed, glancing apologetically to Kindan.
“Thanks,” Kindan told Vaxoram feelingly.
“What for?” M’tal  demanded.  “With your honor  in question,  there’s  no hope  of  having  you  come
here.”
No hope? Kindan thought to himself. He had no chance of being posted to the Weyr? His heart could
sink no further; he felt like it had frozen, stuck forever between.
They  entered  the  Weyr’s  large  Kitchen  Cavern.  M’tal  pointed  peremptorily  in  one  direction  and
moved in another, toward the hearth. “Kindan, get the glows while Vaxoram and I get a tray of food and

a pitcher of klah.”
A number of dragonriders  and  weyrfolk looked  up excitedly as  the Weyrleader  strode  by,  but  he
waved them back to their work.
A kindly weyrboy piled him up with fresh glows and  Kindan  moved  much more  slowly to  catch  up
with the Benden Weyrleader and Vaxoram, who was carrying a tray of food, while M’tal carried a large
pitcher of klah and several mugs.
The two harpers arrived out of breath outside the Records Room.
“Set up the glows,” M’tal instructed Kindan as he gestured  to  Vaxoram  to  place  the tray  on a  free
table to which he added the klah and mugs. He turned his attention to Koriana.
“You’ll sleep in our quarters just beyond the stairs if you need to,” M’tal told her. “You can  use  the
necessary there, too.” He looked at the two boys. “You’ll sleep in the weyrling quarters, they’re empty
now, and you can use the necessary there—that’s across the Bowl, so don’t wait if you need it.”
Vaxoram and Kindan nodded glumly, daunted at the prospect of crossing the Weyr  Bowl so  late at
night, and when they were so tired. M’tal slapped his hands together briskly and stood up. “Very well, is
there anything else you need?”
The three youths shook their heads.
“Then I’ll get on with my duties,” he told them. “I’ll be back soon.”
Koriana  had  already  pulled several  large stacks  of  Records  and  arranged  them  in  front  of  chairs.
Silently, she, Kindan, and Vaxoram took their places in front of the stacks.
“Three eighty-nine, right?” Koriana murmured as she turned over a Record.
“And three ninety,” Kindan agreed. “The third month.”
Koriana shook her head. “The Records I’ve pulled go back to the first month, just in case.”
“That’s a lot of reading,” Vaxoram grumbled.
“So let’s get to work,” Kindan replied, nudging him on the arm. Vaxoram gave him a look that, while
obedient, reminded Kindan exactly how much “work” reading Records was for the older lad. But before
Kindan could respond, Vaxoram bent over his Record, bringing a thin glow as close as he could.
Silence  fell  and  stretched,  disturbed  only  by  the  occasional  rustle  of  a  turned  Record,  or  a
disappointed grunt or irritated grumble.
“I thought that Weyr Records would be better than Hold Records,” Koriana murmured at one point.
“But, except for notes about dragons and flaming, they’re not all that much different.”
“Here’s  one  about  an exploding bag  of  firestone,”  Vaxoram  said,  casting  a  glance  at  Kindan.  “A
weyrling and his rider went between. Another rider was badly burnt but survived.”
“Sounds like C’tov,” Kindan muttered to himself.
“Who?” Koriana asked, glancing up from her reading.
“C’tov,” Kindan said, looking back at her and  shifting nervously in his chair.  “He was  the one  who

found the proper firestone.”
“He Impressed a dragon?” Vaxoram  asked,  giving Kindan  a  hurt look  for not spreading  such juicy
gossip sooner. “Thanks for sharing.”
“I thought everyone knew,” Kindan said. “It happened such a long time ago.”
Vaxoram grunted and looked  back  down  at  his Record.  Koriana  gave Kindan  a  sympathetic smile
which he returned in full. They held their gaze for a few moments more before, by mutual consent, they
turned back to their work and silence descended once more.
The silence stretched on endlessly, became a companionable thing punctuated by the turning of musty
Records and the creaks as they moved in their chairs or changed the way they rested their elbows on the
table. At some point the silence became seductive, warm and enveloping, begging for rest and sleep.
A noise startled Kindan and he looked up to see Koriana’s head resting on the table, her blond  hair
covering her face. One of her hands had slid off the table, sliding a stack of Records with it. It was their
rustling fall that Kindan had heard. He looked over to Vaxoram to find the older apprentice regarding him
through sleep-lidded eyes.
“What do we do?” he asked Kindan.
“We can’t leave her here,” Kindan said. “We’ve got nothing to put over her to keep her warm.” He
looked  toward  the Holder  girl and  called softly, “Koriana.”  She  made  no  motion.  Louder  he  called,
“Koriana.” She stirred, then settled once more. “Koriana!”
“Huh?” Koriana lifted her head blearily, then leaned back in her chair, a chagrined look on her face.
“I’m all right, I must have dozed—”
“You should go to sleep,” Kindan told her.
“But the Records!” Koriana protested, bending down bleary-eyed in a feeble attempt to read.
“They’ll  keep  until  the  morning,”  a  voice  called  from  the  door.  Koriana,  Kindan,  and  Vaxoram
whipped their heads  around  in surprise  to  see  a  woman in a  nightgown standing in the doorway.  She
gestured toward Koriana. “I’m Salina. M’tal sent me to bring you to bed.”
Kindan rose instantly, and gesturing for Vaxoram to follow suit, bowed  respectfully. “Weyrwoman,”
he said hastily, “I had no idea—”
Salina cut him off with a smile and a shake of her head. “It’s  far too  late in the night for formalities,
harper.” She gestured again to Koriana. “Come along, dear, you must be exhausted. “It’s nearly dawn.”
“Dawn?” Koriana repeated in surprise. “It doesn’t feel like it, my lady.”
“That’s because your body  is still thinking it’s back  at  Fort  Hold  where  the hour is only midnight,”
Salina said. “Though that’s still late enough for all of you.”
As Koriana joined her, Salina told  the other  two,  “Be careful going down  the stairs  and  across  the
Bowl. It’s darkest before the dawn here, with the Bowl still in shadow.”
Kindan nodded.
“There are glows laid out in the weyrling quarters,” she told them. “Fresh-made beds, too.”

“Thank you, my lady,” Kindan replied, bowing once more. Salina smiled at him and, clasping Koriana
by the hand, led the holder girl off to bed.
Kindan and Vaxoram followed them out of the Records Room and headed  down  the stairs,  moving
slowly with the aches from sitting too long in the same position. The air was cold in the Weyr Bowl and,
as much as Kindan wanted to see more, he felt too tired to do more than muzzily register the notion.
“Weyrling quarters,”  Vaxoram  murmured to  himself as  they spotted  the  faint  glow  in  the  distance.
“What would it be like to live there?”
Kindan could only shake his head in response.
Kindan woke early, when the weyrling barracks were just receiving the first rays of morning. He was still
tired, but the new and different sounds of the Weyr had disturbed his sleep and piqued his curiosity. In
the bunk nearest him, he could see the gleam of Vaxoram’s eyes, showing that he was also awake.
Valla was nestled  up against Kindan’s  back  but rose  into the air eagerly when he moved.  With an
inquisitive chirp, the fire-lizard flew out of the barracks. Off in search of food, Kindan guessed. As if in
sympathy with the fire-lizard, Kindan’s stomach grumbled.
Across  the way,  Vaxoram  rose  from his bunk.  They found the necessary  and  had  quick  showers,
grateful that towels had been laid out for them in the otherwise empty weyrling quarters. They were even
more surprised to see that clothes—slightly oversized—were hanging on hangers just below the towels.
Kindan, for one, was glad that he wouldn’t be wearing the same clothes two days in a row. He was also
glad to find some sweetgrass, which he rubbed on as antiperspirant.
Vaxoram, with a smug look, shaved.
They were quick enough, all the same, to exit the weyrling quarters with the sun only just a little further
in the sky. As they crossed the Bowl to the Kitchen Cavern, Kindan spotted a strange shadow high up
on the west side of the Bowl and turned to the east to determine its source.
“Star Stones,” Vaxoram said, following Kindan’s gaze. He pointed to a place high on the top  of the
western wall of the Weyr.
“I’ll bet that’s where they put the drums, too,” Kindan said.
“They’ll reverberate loudly in this Bowl,” Vaxoram agreed.
Kindan’s  stomach  grumbled again,  as  if  in  response  to  the  larger  Bowl’s  emptiness,  and  the  two
harpers exchanged amused looks. Kindan lengthened his stride,  eager  to  appease  his stomach  and  get
back to work.
They  were  almost  there  when  Vaxoram  spoke  again,  voicing  something  that  had  been  obviously
bothering him all across the Weyr Bowl. “What are you going to do?”
“About what?”
“You and Koriana,” Vaxoram replied.

“I don’t know,” Kindan told him.
“But you love her, right?” Vaxoram persisted. Kindan raised an eyebrow at him inquisitively. “I mean,
I really think you love her or I would never have—”
Kindan smiled and bumped his fist on Vaxoram’s shoulder in recognition. “I never did thank you for
that.”
“It was my duty,” Vaxoram answered stiffly.
“No,” Kindan corrected. “It wasn’t really.” He was silent for a moment. “So why did you do it?”
“I thought you loved her,” Vaxoram repeated.
“I do,” Kindan said, his heart fluttering. He regarded Vaxoram shrewdly and slowed almost to a stop.
“So why did you do it?”
Vaxoram stifled an abrupt response, his face taking on a suffused look.
“Is there somebody you love?” Kindan asked softly, comprehension slowly dawning. “Is that why you
did it?”
“That’s not why I did it,” Vaxoram said tensely.
“But there is someone,” Kindan said. He realized that that would explain much of Vaxoram’s behavior:
He was trying to impress someone.
“It doesn’t matter,” Vaxoram snapped, abruptly stepping forward. “I’m as good as Shunned.”
“No, you’re not.”
“The best I’ll ever be is a bad apprentice,” Vaxoram declared despairingly. “I can hardly even read.”
“We’ll work on that,” Kindan promised.
“Why?” Vaxoram demanded. “And how?”
“There  are  Records  in  the  Harper  Hall  or  the  Healer  Hall,”  Kindan  replied.  “Some  of  them  will
describe treatments.”
“Why?” Vaxoram persisted, shaking his head mulishly.
“Well, at the very least, so that you can help more with these Records,” Kindan replied.
Vaxoram snorted  but his  expression  was  wistful,  not  angry.  He  clapped  Kindan  on  the  shoulder.
Startled, Kindan turned to face him.
“Thanks.”
Kindan shrugged and they entered the Kitchen Cavern.
Koriana was already  there,  seated  with Salina and  M’tal.  She  waved  at  them and  gestured  to  two
nearby chairs.
“Good morning, Weyrleader,  Weyrwoman,”  Kindan  called as  he approached.  Vaxoram  nodded  in
silent greeting.

“Did you sleep well?” Salina asked. Koriana poured two mugs of klah and  pushed  them across  the
table to the boys.
“Very well, thank you, my lady,” Kindan responded.
“Ready for another day’s work?” M’tal inquired.
“Yes, my lord,” Kindan told him.
Salina and M’tal exchanged amused glances.
“You have such excellent manners,” Salina remarked in response to Kindan’s worried look.
“If only our weyrlings had as much,” M’tal groaned.
“We’ve no harper to teach them, you see,” Salina explained to Koriana. Kindan dropped his head to
hide his shame.
“There are some good journeymen at the Harper Hall,” Vaxoram  suggested.  “And one  apprentice  I
know, Merol, should walk the tables soon.”
“Walk the tables?” Koriana repeated.
“When an apprentice makes journeyman or a journeyman makes master, they walk the tables  in the
Harper Hall,” Vaxoram explained.
“They walk around the tables to their new table,” Kindan expanded, seeing Koriana’s confused look.
He grinned at her, sensing that she had an image of harpers jumping up on tables and kicking food and
plates everywhere with gay abandon.
“It’s a special day,” Vaxoram said wistfully. “Every apprentice dreams of the day.”
“I’d like to see it,” Koriana said, glancing toward Kindan with eager eyes.
“Merol will walk soon,” Kindan told her in a tone that  said  that  he didn’t expect  to  walk the tables
himself.
Salina and M’tal looked at each other in a way that Kindan couldn’t quite fathom; the sort  of looks
that parents and elderly people exchanged when dealing with younger people.
“Have some rolls,” M’tal said, passing a covered basket to Kindan.
After  breakfast  they  began  their  second  day  in  the  Records  Room.  They  broke  for  lunch
disconsolately, all three overwhelmed by the sheer volume of Records. Dinner came  and  went and  still
they found nothing.
“Why did she start so far back?” Vaxoram  grumbled as  they made  their way back  down  the stairs
toward the weyrling barracks for the night.
“I didn’t want us to miss anything,” Koriana replied from the top of the stairs.
“At this rate it’ll be a sevenday before we find anything,” Vaxoram grumbled.
“No,” Kindan replied firmly. “Less. We don’t have much more time.”
“What do you mean?” Koriana called down, alarmed.

“From what we’ve seen, the illness is spreading from hold to hold in a  sevenday,”  Kindan  reminded
her. “If we don’t find something soon, it may be too late.”
“So let’s go back,” Koriana called, turning back toward the Records Room.
“No,” Vaxoram said.
“We’re too tired,” Kindan agreed. “There’s not enough light with just the glows and  we  might miss
something vital.”
His response quelled Koriana’s protests and they all went off to sleep fitfully.
And so they continued for another two days, growing more anxious, and more weary.
They awoke again early on the fifth day and were back to work before the sun had lifted high enough
to light the whole Bowl. Less than an hour later, Kindan turned to a new Record, then suddenly looked
up. “That’s odd.”
The others stopped and looked at him.
“The last Record was for the twenty-fourth day of the third month of 389,” Kindan said. He held up
the new Record. “This is dated the eleventh of the second month of 408.”
“There must be some missing Records,” Vaxoram said unconcernedly.
“I don’t think so,” Koriana replied, turning her head back to the stacks  of old Records.  “I checked
pretty thoroughly.” She looked over at Kindan. “What’s that last Record say?”
“I  read  something  near  there,”  Vaxoram  said.  “The  illness  had  come  and  the  dragonriders  were
helping.”
“In this one, there’s mention of the Weyrleader ordering the dragonriders to stay in the Weyr,” Kindan
said, glancing back at the old Record. “That’s why I wanted to see what the next Record said.”
“They stayed behind?” Koriana asked with a horrified look. “Why would they stay in the Weyr when
there were people dying of this illness?”
“I don’t know,” Kindan replied, scanning the newer entry quickly. With a sigh, he picked up the next
Record and the next and then—“Wait!”
Vaxoram and Koriana jumped, startled.
“Right here it says: ‘The weyrfolk are  not yet recovered  from their losses.  Thank the First  Egg that
Thread is not due any time soon or the dragonriders would be reduced to tending their own injuries.’”
“But  that’s  nearly  twenty  Turns  after  the  illness!”  Vaxoram  protested,  shaking  his  head  violently.
“Something else must have happened, something in the lost Records.”
“And why weren’t the dragonriders affected?” Koriana wondered skeptically.
Kindan shrugged.
“If the Records are incomplete, we won’t find anything useful here,” Koriana noted sadly.
Nodding  absently,  Kindan  continued  to  scan  the  new  Records,  one  after  the  other.  Suddenly  he

shouted in surprise. “Listen to this: ‘It’s been five months since my arrival and the Weyr is showing its first
signs of elation since the illness nineteen Turns ago. The Hatching and the birth of several new babies has
cheered everyone, even those who were sent from the Holds to live in the Weyr. I am now beginning to
feel that Benden Weyr might recover.’”
“Recover?” Koriana repeated, shocked at this deeper revelation.
“We’ve got to tell M’tal,” Kindan said, rising from his seat hastily.
“Tell him what?” Vaxoram asked.
“That the Weyrs can’t help the Holds fight this illness,” Kindan answered. His face drained of all color
as the full impact of his words registered. He didn’t know if the illness of today  was  the same  or  even
similar to that described in the Records. But just as he didn’t know, he also  didn’t know  if the current
illness might be even more virulent than that mentioned in the Records. In less than twelve Turns, Thread
would fall again on Pern—and there had to be dragonriders ready to fight it. “We can’t let the weyrfolk
catch it, or the Weyrs won’t be able to fight Thread when it comes.”
“That’s awful!” Koriana protested. “What will the holders do? How will they survive?”
“They can’t survive Thread if there are no dragonriders able to fight it,” Kindan declared.
“It’s not enough to tell M’tal,” Vaxoram said heavily. “We must tell all the Weyrs of Pern.”
All  the  Weyrs?  Kindan  thought  bleakly.  This  sort  of  decision  was  properly  the  work  of  the
Masterharper. But time was of the essence: If any weyrfolk were exposed, they might spread the illness
throughout their Weyr. This wasn’t the time to talk, to ask permission—this was the time to act. Kindan
pursed his lips for a moment, then said, “The drums.”
Vaxoram sprang out of his seat and gestured for Kindan to precede him. “Do you know where they
are?”
“Up,” Kindan said, turning to the stairs just outside the Records Room.
“Kindan!” Koriana called urgently, trailing after them.
“What?”
“Don’t  get  near  any  weyrfolk  or  dragonriders,”  Koriana  said.  “Remember,  the  dragonriders  are
immune, but they could pass it on to the weyrfolk.”
“Too late,” Kindan replied.
“Any more weyrfolk, then,” Koriana corrected. “If we’ve caught the illness already, we must limit their
contact with us.”
“Right,” Vaxoram agreed, pressing close behind Kindan.
“Tell M’tal!” Kindan called back, increasing his pace up the stairs.
Six floors up, they reached the end of the stairway.
“This way!” Kindan  said,  pointing left, to  the east.  Vaxoram  trotted  after  him steadily.  Kindan  was
breathless  from the climb but he didn’t slow down.  The sooner  the Weyrs  knew,  the better.  It  might
already be too late for some.

He spotted a set of stairs set off the corridor and took them up into the brilliant light of midday. He and
Vaxoram trotted past the awesome Star Stones, in search of the enclosed  space  where  they knew  the
Weyr’s drum would be stored.
“Help me with this,” Kindan  said  as  he came  upon  the doors.  Vaxoram  grunted in  agreement  and
grabbed the handle of one of the two double doors and yanked while Kindan yanked on the other.
Quickly they grabbed the huge drum, larger than that up in the Harper Hall drumheights, and rolled it
out into the open air. They had no trouble spotting the drum’s proper location, for there was a depression
in the stone from hundreds of Turns of previous usage. Together they set up the drum and Kindan tapped
a quick test.
He looked at Vaxoram. “Are we doing the right thing?”
“Easier to be wrong and apologize than right and see Thread,” Vaxoram assured him. Koriana crested
the stairs as he finished.
“He’s right,” Koriana agreed bleakly. “We’ll know soon enough if this illness is like the other. If it isn’t,
the dragonriders will be able to help.” She paused, thinking of her father, her family, and her Hold. “But
for now, we must protect the dragonriders.”
With a final frown, Kindan nodded and balled his fists together. With all his might he tapped  out the
message as it formed in his mind:
Emergency. Emergency. Emergency. Emergency. Weyrs must not aid Holders. Danger to weyrfolk.
The great booming of the drum echoed in Kindan’s ears, limbs, and chest. He could see the vibrations
shake Vaxoram’s hair, and even set the older apprentice off balance.
As the last of the message died out, Kindan was surprised to see a huge brown dragon appear beside
them.
“Stay away!” Kindan shouted. “We might be contagious!”
“I’m K’tan, Weyr Healer,” the dragonrider replied. “What do you think you’re doing?”
“Spreading the warning,” Kindan said. “The Weyrs must be warned.”
“Banging a drum won’t do that,” K’tan replied sourly. Kindan gave him a shocked look. “Think, lad!
Who’s alive to relay the message?” He gestured toward the distant drums. “We haven’t had a message in
a fortnight.”
Kindan  was  staggered.  No  drummers  to  pass  on  messages?  This  flu  was  that  bad?  Then  he
remembered the last interrupted message that had come to the Harper Hall. People were dying on Pern,
even drummers.
“The Weyrs must be warned!” he cried. “The weyrfolk are in danger.”
“The  Weyrs  have  been  warned,”  K’tan  assured  him,  patting  the  side  of  his  great  brown  dragon
affectionately. “My dragon has told Salina’s Breth and Benden’s queen dragon  has  told  the rest  of the
Weyrs. They all know about the danger now.”
Kindan sighed in relief.
“The question now is: What can we do?” K’tan asked.

“We can return to the Harper Hall,” M’tal announced, emerging from the stairway down to the Weyr.
A movement near  K’tan’s  brown  caught Kindan’s  attention—it  was  M’tal’s  bronze  Gaminth.  The
dragon settled carefully near the Star Stones.
“I’m going back with them,” M’tal informed K’tan. “Salina knows; she’s in our Weyr. She’ll stay there
in quarantine until we can be certain she’s not contagious. Make arrangements to feed her, but let no one
come close.”
“And if she gets ill?” K’tan asked anxiously.
“She shouldn’t,” Kindan said, “she’s dragonfolk.”
“But we don’t know yet for certain if that is enough,” K’tan replied, his expression grim.
M’tal shook his head. “Do your best for her but don’t risk yourself.”
K’tan gave him a startled, then rebellious look.
M’tal looked to Kindan, who turned to the Weyr Healer and said, “The Records say it took the Weyr
nearly twenty Turns to recover from the last illness—”
“And we  can’t  risk  that  when  we’ve  less  than  twelve  Turns  before  the  Red  Star  returns,”  M’tal
finished for him.
“The Records spoke only of weyrfolk, not riders,” Koriana protested.
“The Records  weren’t  very accurate,”  M’tal  said.  He  turned  back  to  K’tan.  “The  Records  Room
should also be quarantined. We believe this illness does not affect dragonriders, but we can’t be certain.”
“How long does it last?” K’tan asked.
“We don’t know,” Kindan replied. “It seems to incubate in two to three sevendays.”
“Then wait a month, at least, to be safe,” K’tan said.
M’tal nodded. “I’ll see you in a month!”
He gestured for the others to precede him to bronze Gaminth.
“We’ll be waiting,” K’tan replied, bowing over his dragon’s neck.
 
CHAPTER 9 
With yellow and black over hall and hold 
Perils and pains do then unfold 
Harper, crafter, holder pray 

That you may live another day. 
HARPER HALL
A s Gaminth burst from between into the early morning over Fort Hold and the Harper Hall, Kindan
leaned out over the dragon’s neck to peer down below looking for any signs of life. He saw  none.  His
throat tightened as he turned his attention to Fort Hold’s main walls, searching for any sign of guards on
the  parapets.  His  grunt  of  relief  was  echoed  by  the  others  as  they  all  spotted  a  tiny  guard  moving
purposefully along the walls. But their relief was short-lived.
“Look!” Koriana called as the first hints of morning wind flickered through the valley, blowing on the
Hold’s tall flagstaff. A small yellow pennant with a black dot fluttered in the breeze.
“Quarantine,”  Kindan  said,  his  shoulders  slumping.  The  illness  was  in  Fort  Hold.  He  turned  his
attention to the Harper Hall’s flagpole—it, too, had a yellow pennant fluttering from it and,  although he
couldn’t see it, he was sure that it also bore the black dot of quarantine.
A bellow from the meadow greeted them, and as Gaminth circled back toward the Landing Meadow,
Kindan spotted a small blue dragon rearing up.
“J’trel is still here,” Kindan said.
“I wonder why?” Koriana said, her voice carrying over Vaxoram to Kindan’s ears.
“We’ll know soon enough,” Vaxoram said.
In a moment Gaminth was  on the ground.  M’tal  handed  Vaxoram  down,  who aided  him in helping
Koriana, then Kindan dismount. Finally M’tal leapt down himself.
They started off toward the Harper Hall but hadn’t gone a few steps before J’trel’s blue, Talith, bugled
warningly at them. Seconds later, they heard J’trel shouting, “Stay there!”
M’tal glanced toward the blue rider who was running out from under the archway of the Harper Hall,
carrying something in a carisak cradled against his chest with one hand. With the free hand, J’trel urged
them to stand still.
“I’m going to drop the drum out of the sak,” J’trel called. “You can use it to communicate.”
“Very well,” M’tal said. He turned to his dragon. “Gaminth, ask Talith what is going on?”
A moment later M’tal seemed to stagger, then catch himself as Vaxoram rushed to his aid.
“The sickness has reached both  the Harper  Hall and  Fort,”  M’tal  said.  As  they already  knew  that,
Kindan waited for the other strand. “Three people in the Harper Hall have died.”
“Died?” Koriana cried.
“Many more are ill,” M’tal continued. “The Masterharper is coughing, which is the first sign.”
J’trel stopped a good dragonlength from them, knelt, and gently upended  his carisak  so  that  a  small
drum fell out. He then backed away.

Kindan and the others moved forward. When they reached the drum, Vaxoram gestured  to  Kindan,
saying simply, “You’re better.”
Kindan picked the drum up and was surprised to see that it was one of his own making, the second
he’d ever made. It wasn’t perfect but was sturdy and serviceable.
Harper  ready,  Kindan  rapped  out with one  hand.  Then,  thinking  better  of  how  long  he  might  be
drumming, he sat down on the cool, damp ground with his legs crossed and the drum cradled just above
the ground so that its sound would carry better.
Do any of you have fever? A message boomed back. Kindan could tell by the other’s style that the
drummer was Masterharper Murenny himself.
No, Kindan responded, as he relayed to the others, “Master Murenny asks if any of us have fever.”
Do any of you have a cough? Murenny asked.
“None of us have been coughing recently, have we?” Kindan asked, turning to glance up at the other
three, standing behind him.
“No,” M’tal said. “And no one at the Weyr, either.”
No, and none at the Weyr, Kindan rapped back.
You  are  probably  free  from  infection,  Murenny  responded.  Kindan  thought  that  his  drumming
sounded a bit weaker than before.
“He says we probably don’t have the infection,” Kindan relayed. He turned to M’tal. “You should go
to back to the Weyr.”
M’tal bristled. “I don’t take orders from a—” he cut himself short and shook his head apologetically.
“You’re right, I apologize for snapping at you.” He gestured toward the Harper Hall. “Ask him what the
Weyrs can do.”
Kindan beat the message out and waited. Then he frowned and added  a  longer message,  explaining
about the dangers to the Weyr.
They can do nothing, Murenny responded after a long silence. We cannot risk the Weyrs.
“Master Murenny says for you to do nothing,” Kindan said.
“You told him about the Records at Benden,” Koriana remarked.
“Of course.”
M’tal pursed his lips, clearly not liking the answer.
“If your riders come into contact with the contagion, there’s no way they can avoid bringing it back to
the Weyr,” Kindan reminded him.
“I know  that,”  M’tal  said  with a  touch  of acerbity  in his voice.  He  looked  away,  back  toward  his
dragon for a moment and then said, “J’trel suggests that perhaps we could drop food.”
“Where  would  you  get  the  food?”  Koriana  asked.  “It’s  nearly  winter.  The  livestock  may  starve
because there’s no one to tend them.”

“I hadn’t thought of that,” Kindan said, the color draining from his face.
“We hadn’t seen anything in the Records,” Vaxoram remarked.
“That may be because they all starved,” Koriana pointed out.
“We hadn’t looked all that far before we went to Benden,” Kindan reminded them.
“What will happen if we lose the livestock?” M’tal asked Koriana.
“The Weyrs have some herds of their own, don’t they?” Kindan asked.
“Yes,” M’tal replied. “But they’re  for feeding dragons  and  they get replenished  by Holder  herds  at
regular intervals. We couldn’t grow back all the herds of Pern from those of the Weyrs.”
“Then we’re doomed,” Vaxoram said.
Kindan nodded solemnly. “We can save the Weyrs, maybe save some holders, but they’ll just starve
later.”
“No,” M’tal replied firmly. “There has to be another way.”
“Some livestock  will survive,” Koriana  declared.  “Not  everyone  will catch  this illness and  some  of
those are bound to be in the small herdholds.”
“But will enough survive to feed the survivors?” Kindan countered.
“Murenny must have thought of this,” M’tal said, glancing toward the Harper Hall. He looked back to
Kindan, noting the bronze  fire-lizard hovering over  him. “You can  have your Valla send  us messages,
have her drop them on the Star Stones.”
“I can do that as long as I don’t have a fever or cough,” Kindan corrected him.
“Then let’s hope you don’t get one,” M’tal replied with a ghost of a smile.
“My Koriss can learn, too,” Koriana offered, then her face fell and she glanced over to Kindan. “But
Kindan still has to teach me.”
“Your father may have something to  say  about  that,”  M’tal  replied.  He  glanced  toward  Fort  Hold.
“And I think I’d best return you to him now.”
Kindan understood M’tal’s motivation—Koriana might not be a danger to the weyrfolk, but that was
not certain, and as she was a Lord Holder’s daughter, she would want to be with her family.
Koriana looked torn, clearly wanting to stay with Kindan, yet also worried about her Hold and family.
After a moment she nodded glumly. “But can I ask you and Vaxoram to turn your backs for a moment?”
M’tal raised an eyebrow at her questioningly, but she  met his gaze steadily.  The Weyrleader’s  eyes
softened and he turned away, gesturing for Vaxoram to do the same.
Koriana stared at them for a moment, then turned to Kindan and gestured for him to stand up. He did
so reluctantly, worried about the Harper Hall, the deaths, and whatever was happening on Pern.
Koriana closed the gap between them and wrapped her arms around him, burying her head against his
shoulder. He felt her body shake with sobs before he heard them from her throat. He hugged her tightly,

and then she moved her head and her lips latched onto his and she was kissing him, deeply, passionately,
despairingly.
“What about your honor?” Kindan asked as they finally broke apart, staring deeply into each other’s
eyes.
“What is honor without love?” Koriana replied, raising a hand and brushing it gently against his cheek.
“We may never see each other again.”
“I know,” Kindan replied, the words tearing his heart. “I love you.”
“I love you,” Koriana said, leaning forward and parting her lips once  more.  Their kiss  this time was
less frantic, more sensual and intimate. When at last they finally broke  apart  it was  because  their lungs
were  protesting  and  their  hearts  beating  too  rapidly  to  survive  another  moment  in  such  an  intense
embrace.
“I’ll see you again,” Kindan declared. “And then we’ll get your father to agree.”
Koriana smiled, but Kindan could tell that she couldn’t quite believe him.
“Until then,” she said, stepping back and releasing his hand.
“I’m ready,” Koriana declared loudly to M’tal. M’tal looked back then, as did Vaxoram.
“Then let me escort you to the gates,” M’tal said, gesturing for her to precede him.
Kindan  bent  over  and  picked  up  his  drum.  He  turned  to  Vaxoram.  The  Harper  Hall  was  his
home—there was no place he would rather be. “Let’s go.”
“Masterharper Murenny is ill,” Master  Archivist Resler  said,  approaching  them just as  they exited  the
archway into the Harper Hall. “You’re to go help Master Lenner.”
“But Master Murenny drummed to us,” Kindan protested.
“And that sapped all his strength,” Resler replied testily. “You are to follow my instructions.”
Kindan looked questioningly at Resler.
“Who is the senior harper, Master?” Vaxoram asked politely.
“I am,” Resler replied, clearly irritated at such impudent questions.
“But—Master Detallor?” Kindan asked, aghast. Detallor was the next senior harper to Murenny, after
Master Zist.
“Master Gennel?” Vaxoram asked, naming the third-most senior.
“Master Detallor died this morning,” Resler replied, glancing down at the ground to hide his emotions.
“Master Gennel is sick in his rooms and can’t be moved.” It was clear from his tone that Resler felt that
Gennel would soon follow Detallor.

“There were three,” Kindan said, waiting for the final shard to crack.
“Journeyman  Issak  died  while  attending  the  others,”  Resler  said,  grimacing.  “No  one  knew  he’d
caught the illness, he kept  it from Master  Lenner.” He  glanced  up at  them. “He was  a  good  man, he
would have been  a  good  Master.”  High  praise  indeed  from  the  crotchety  Resler.  Apparently  Resler
thought so, too, for his voice was full of bark as he roared, “Now, go!”
Kindan needed no further urging. Vaxoram stuck at his side, only falling back when they entered  the
cramped corridor to the Healer Hall.
“I don’t know much about healing,” Vaxoram confided as they walked in silence.
“We’re both going to learn fast,” Kindan replied. He was surprised when Vaxoram clasped  his right
shoulder from behind and clenched it in firm agreement.
When they arrived at the Healer Hall they were turned around again.
“What are you doing here?” Lenner demanded, looking up from one of the many crowded beds in his
infirmary. “You’re supposed to be in the Archives.”
“Master Resler sent us here,” Kindan told him.
Lenner sighed and straightened, running a weary hand through his hair.
“You won’t do as much good here as you will in the Archives,” Lenner declared.
“What about Verilan?” Kindan asked.
Lenner pointed off into the distance. “He’s in the Harper Hall infirmary.”
“So, he’s not too sick then,” Kindan said hoping to reassure himself.
“He can’t be moved,” Lenner corrected him, his eyes full of sorrow.
“What about Conar?” Kindan asked, glancing around the beds.
“He’s all right,” Lenner said. “He’s been helping here, no sign of a  cough yet,  though.” He  whistled
loudly and called, “Conar! Report!”
A small figure scurried toward them. He brightened when he spotted Kindan and Vaxoram. “You’re
back,” he said, his face splitting with a smile. “And you’re alive!”
Kindan grinned back  and  nodded,  but he couldn’t  help noticing the dark  circles  under  the younger
boy’s  eyes.  He  turned  toward  Vaxoram,  still  grinning,  expecting  the  older  apprentice  to  share  his
happiness but was surprised by the grim look on Vaxoram’s face. In an instant he recognized the cause
and asked, “Nonala and Kelsa, are they all right?”
“Yes,”  Lenner  replied  quickly.  “They’re  helping  in  the  kitchens.  We’re  keeping  most  everyone
quarantined to prevent the spread.”
“It didn’t work,” Conar said quickly, glancing at the Healer apologetically. “In the Records, they said

that it didn’t work.”
“Find  out  why,”  Lenner  ordered  Kindan.  “Go  look  in  the  earliest  Records,  see  if  they  have
suggestions, ideas from back before Landing.” He turned away from them, distracted by another hacking
cough in the distance.  “Don’t come  back  until you’ve got an answer,”  he called gruffly back  over  his
shoulder.
“Come on,” Kindan said, turning back to the corridor leading toward the Harper Hall and the Archive
Room.
“What about Resler?” Vaxoram asked. “He’s senior. And you know how he frets about his Records.”
“Are you going to let people die?” Kindan replied, not caring whether Vaxoram followed or not.
“It’ll be on your head,” Vaxoram’s voice carried to his ears a moment later.
“So be it,” Kindan replied fiercely.
“We’ll need glows,” Kindan said as they entered the dark confines of the Archive Room, knowing that
Master Resler was too busy managing the Hall to come back to his beloved Records.
“There’s light now,” Vaxoram said, waving at the lighter patches in the room.
Kindan shook his head. “We’ll need  more  light soon,”  he replied.  “And we’re  working through the
night. Get some klah too.”
He waved dismissively at Vaxoram. Vaxoram’s nostrils flared in irritation; then the older harper shook
himself and turned on his heel.
Kindan didn’t notice his departure, the sounds concealed by the noise of his rooting through the stacks
of ancient Records. Some were so old and dusty that he could  see  them disintegrating right in front of
him; brittle documents  that cracked  and  flaked  as  he  moved  them.  And  then  there  were  others,  still
supple and pliant, nearly as fresh as when they were first drawn. Kindan set them aside at first, assuming
that they were new Records misfiled. It was only when he got to the oldest Records, Records drawn on
some material that seemed like a strange combination of thin metal and living flesh, silky, soothing to the
touch, that Kindan thought to look back at the stack of “new” Records.
“There are no glows,” Vaxoram’s  voice boomed  from the far end  of the Archive Room.  “None  to
spare, at least. They’re all being used in the infirmaries. I set some up to recharge but they’re clamoring
for them, so they’ll take them before I get back.”
“We need light!” Kindan shouted. “Find some!”
Vaxoram glared  at  Kindan’s  back  angrily  but  the  young  harper  never  noticed.  With  a  deep  sigh,
Vaxoram calmed himself and  turned  away  once  more,  leaving the Archive  Room  to  follow  Kindan’s
orders.
Kindan pulled the stack of “new” Records over to a table and started to go through them. They were
written from just after Crossing. The writing was small, much smaller than he was accustomed to. In the
dim light, they were hard to read. He leaned close, his nose almost touching the Record as he read.

“Contents of Shipment #345-B, offloaded from gravsled  #5,3.10.8  at  22:45,”  the document  began.
What was a gravsled? Kindan wondered. And the date, was that the third day of the tenth month in the
eighth Turn after Landing? And that number, 22:45—what was that?
Kindan turned through several more Records and then he stopped, grunting in surprise as he read the
first line of a poem or a song:
“A thousand voices keen at night, 
A thousand voices wail, 
A thousand voices cry in fright, 
A thousand voices fail.” 
Maybe this will help, Kindan thought to himself, peering down to the next verse:
“You followed them, young healer lass,” 
—young healer lass? Kindan wondered to himself. He knew of no healer  lass  at  the Harper  Hall or
anywhere on Pern. With a sinking feeling he continued to read:
“Till they could not be seen; 
A thousand dragons made their loss 
A bridge ’tween you and me.” 
Kindan shook his head, grimacing. This must just be another harper song, nothing important,  Kindan
thought to himself, recalling the countless drinking songs harpers wrote and sang for the entertainment of
holder and  crafter  alike.  He  could  imagine  the  tone  of  the  piece,  however,  dour  with  minor  chords
throughout, a proper dirge—that didn’t seem right for a drinking song.
The next stanza seemed to confirm his suspicion:
“And in the cold and darkest night, 
A single voice is heard, 
A single voice both clear and bright, 
It says a single word.” 
A single word? Help? Kindan mused. Could Nonala, whose voice was “clear and bright,” somehow
sing a word that would help save all of Pern? Maybe she was training to be a healer and hadn’t told him.
He peered down to the next verse and read:

“That word is what you now must say 
To—” 
“I’ve got a torch!” Vaxoram called excitedly, breaking Kindan’s concentration.
“A torch?” Kindan cried, turning around and seeing the blazing light that Vaxoram was holding in his
hand. “Are you mad? The Records are mostly paper!”
“You said to get light,” Vaxoram snapped. He waved the torch. “This is light. It’s even brighter than
glows.”
Kindan had to admit that even from the great distance of the door to  his table,  the torch’s  light was
having an effect.
“Bring it here, let’s see how good it is,” Kindan said.
As Vaxoram approached, Kindan could see more and more of the Record. He noticed  small marks
which he hadn’t seen in the dimmer light and saw that they were chord markings. Yes, it was a song—a
song written in a minor key, just as he had thought. The tune started playing in his mind and he realized
that, sour as it was, it was quite catchy. Whoever had written this song had meant it to be remembered
for a long time.
It was important.
“That word is what you now must say, 
To open up the door, 
In Benden Weyr, to find the way 
To all my healing lore.” 
“What’s this—”
“Shh!” Kindan ordered.
“It’s all that I can give to you, 
To save both Weyr and Hold. 
It’s little I can offer you, 
Who paid with dragon gold.” 
Yes, the tune was definitely catchy. But, “paid with dragon gold”? Kindan could think of no one who
had lost a gold dragon. Could the song refer to Koriana? But they’d been to Benden already, and found
nothing. And—
“This is just some nonsense song,” Vaxoram declared, shaking his head, grabbing the Record with his

free hand and easily reading it in the torch’s bright light. “You’re wasting your time.”
Kindan shook his head. “I don’t know, it looks important.”
“Only to the person who wrote it,” Vaxoram  declared.  “A waste  of paper  or  whatever  this is.” He
dropped the Record back to the table dismissively. “But the light helps, doesn’t it?”
“Yes,” Kindan  replied  absently,  picking up the Record  and  rereading  it closely.  “There could  be  a
thousand deaths from this—”
“More,” Vaxoram said, peering down at the Record. “You’re wasting time, Kindan.” He grabbed for
the Record again, yanking it out of Kindan’s hands.
Before Kindan could react, a drum message boomed out, echoing across  the valley from Fort  Hold
and reverberating in the confines of the Archive Room.
“Master Kilti ill, please help,” the message said. Kindan recognized the drummer—Koriana.
Angrily, Kindan dived for the Record to snatch it back. He caught Vaxoram off guard and as the older
lad fought to retain possession, he lost hold of the torch.
“No!” Vaxoram cried, diving for the dropped torch and loosing his hold on the Record  at  the same
time.
“The  Records!”  Kindan  yelled,  watching  in  horror  as  first  one,  then  another  Record  caught  fire.
“We’ve got to get water!”
“We’ve got to get help!” Vaxoram added.
In an instant, Valla was there, hovering over Kindan’s head and chittering shrilly. Then the bronze was
gone again, only to be heard loudly in the courtyard beyond.
“Run!” Kindan shouted. “To the well!”
“To the kitchen!” Vaxoram said, and then both burst into action, Vaxoram retrieving the torch, Kindan
darting to separate the precious Records. Vaxoram bumped into Kindan in his haste and Kindan tripped,
pushing the ancient Record  toward  the fire. Before  he could  do  anything, the Record  was  a  burst  of
flame—and a pile of ashes.
“What is it? What  is it?” Harried  voices  could  be  heard  shouting  in  the  courtyard.  “It’s  Kindan’s
fire-lizard! Something’s wrong!”
Then Vaxoram’s voice drowned all others as he burst into the courtyard. “Fire! Fire in the Archives!”
The flames rose around Kindan and he found himself being forced backward by the heat of the rising
flames, his attempts to salvage Records  thwarted.  Despairing, he turned  to  the exit only to  be  met by
Resler.
“What have you done? What have you done?” Resler shouted, striking at Kindan furiously.
“I’m sorry! I’m sorry!” Kindan cried, trying to dodge the enraged Archivist’s blows and get into the
courtyard. “We’ll put it out.”
“Step aside, we’ve got water,” a new voice called. It was Vaxoram. He shouldered Resler brusquely
aside, handed Kindan a sloshing bucket, and entered the room, throwing his bucket indiscriminately and

racing back for more.
“Form a line!” Kindan heard Kelsa shout. “Form a bucket line! Pass them along!”
Kindan threw  his bucket  on the flames, found another  in his hand,  then another,  then another,  and
another—
And then,  after  an eternity,  the flames were  out.  The  Archive  Room  was  a  mixture  of  ash,  damp
Records, and rising smoke.
“It’s out,” Kindan called hoarsely. His message carried backward through the bucket line to those at
the well. “The fire’s out.”
Behind him, Resler peered in at the mess that had been made of his precious Records, livid with fury.
 
CHAPTER 10 
Dark rewards 
Do dark deeds pay; 
Harsh words 
Do harsh wounds flay. 
HARPER HALL
K indan didn’t pause as he cleared the archways of the Harper Hall. He didn’t glance back. He didn’t
cry, although that took an extreme effort of will.
Gone. All his dreams were gone.
Banished. “And never come back!” Resler had shouted, still hoarse with rage.
Doomed. “You’re to go to the Hold, help as you may,” Resler had said, pointing toward the Harper
Hall’s arching entrance.
“But Master Lenner—”
“Doesn’t  need  your  sort  of  help,”  Resler  replied.  He  shook  his  head  furiously.  “For  almost  five
hundred Turns we’ve  preserved  the Records  and  in ten minutes you’ve destroyed  a  quarter  of  them.
Never in the history of Pern has there been greater treachery.”
Any words of protest died on Kindan’s lips. He could not tell if, among the lost Records, there was a
remedy for the illness that now affected all of Pern. His mistake could have cost the lives of millions.

“You’ve got to keep going,” Vaxoram said quietly, nudging Kindan  in the shoulders.  Kindan  turned
back angrily, but Vaxoram ignored his look, nodding toward the ramp up to Fort Hold. “Keep going.”
“How?” Kindan asked in misery.
“One foot after the other, one day after the next,” the older apprentice replied. “It will get better.”
Kindan stopped, turning to face Vaxoram bitterly, demanding, “How do you know?”
“Because  you taught me.” The answer  was  so  simple, so  sincere,  that  Kindan  could  not  doubt  it.
Vaxoram bent his head and added, “That fire was my fault, not yours.”
“I could have stopped you,” Kindan said.
“Then it was our fault,” Vaxoram replied. He  nudged  Kindan  gently, turning him toward  Fort  Hold.
“And that’s our destiny.”
“To die in Fort Hold?”
“Maybe,” Vaxoram answered. “But at least your girlfriend’s there.”
Kindan said nothing, he could think of no response. But, unconsciously, he picked up his pace. Behind
him, Vaxoram’s face lit with a brief smile.
“What are you doing here?” the Fort Hold guard demanded suspiciously as  he looked  out through the
speaking port in the great doors. “There’s quarantine.”
“We were sent by Master Resler, to help Master Kilti,” Kindan explained.
“Are you healers?” the guard asked hopefully.
“Harpers,” Kindan confessed.
“All that can be spared,” Vaxoram added.
The guard nodded, closed the speaking port. A moment later, one  of the double  doors  opened  just
enough to admit the two of them and closed again. Kindan glanced around, surprised that only one door
was used, only to discover that there was only the one guard at the gate.
The guard turned away hastily, coughing, then turned back to them. “Had this cough for a  sevenday
now,” he told them. “One of the younger lads didn’t last that long.”
“Younger, you say?” Kindan asked, in surprise.
“Not twenty Turns yet,” the guard agreed. “And I’ve nearly forty.” He shrugged. “I thought the young
ones were sturdier.”
“Me too,” Vaxoram agreed, glancing warily at the guard and then at Kindan.
“The Lord Holder will be pleased to see you,” the guard said, waving them on to the entrance to the
Great Hall. “You’ll have to go on your own, I’m the only one still here.”

“Out of how many?” Kindan asked.
“Twenty,” the guard answered quickly. He  turned  away  again to  cough,  then back  to  them, adding
bleakly, “Seven are already dead.”
The doors to the Great Hall stood slightly ajar. Before Kindan approached them, Valla darted  forward
and through, returning a moment later with an encouraging chirp. Vaxoram gave Kindan a quizzical look,
gesturing for him to go first.
Inside, Kindan was shocked to see that the floor of the Great Hall was filled with cots. And the cots,
crammed so close together that it was difficult to navigate through them, were filled with people.
“Must be hundreds here,” Vaxoram remarked as they proceeded toward the great hearth at the top of
the Hall.
Kindan gazed at the listless bodies and nodded in bleak agreement. But Fort Hold was home to over
ten thousand; where were the rest?
He glanced around, looking for anyone upright in the filled room. It was a moment before he spotted
movement,  a  white-haired,  balding  man  who  looked  like  a  scarecrow  and—Kindan  drew  a  sharp
breath—Koriana. They rose from one bed and went quickly to another.
With a jerk of his head, Kindan caught Vaxoram’s attention and they moved toward the two.
“Master Kilti?” Kindan guessed as they approached.
“Kindan,” Koriana said, her voice subdued but her eyes still bright when she spotted him. “What are
you doing here?”
“I was sent to help,” Kindan said. “By Master Resler.”
“Resler’s an idiot,” the white-haired man muttered before turning his attention to  the body  in the cot
below him. He felt the man’s forehead, bent forward, grabbed a wrist, and stood up again, shaking his
head. “This one’s dead,” he said sadly. He glanced up to Vaxoram. “Take his body.”
Vaxoram paled.
“Where?” Kindan asked, dropping down to the dead man’s cot.
“Ask the guard,” Kilti replied dismissively. “You stay, your friend goes.”
“He’s not big enough—” Kindan began in protest.
“You’re to clear the cot and find another to fill it,” Kilti ordered. He jerked his head toward Koriana.
“Next bed,” he told her.
Kindan had just a moment to shake his head in apology to Vaxoram.
“It’s all right,” the older lad said, bending down to pick up the body.
“I’ll help,” Kindan offered.

“No,” Vaxoram replied, going down to his knees. He grabbed the body at the waist and rolled it onto
his shoulder. With a grunt he stood up, staggered for a moment, and began to hobble off slowly toward
the front door.
Kindan eyed the mess left behind. The sheets were  soiled,  they’d  have to  be  replaced.  He  bundled
them up and looked for some place to put them.
“Soiled sheets?” Kindan called toward Kilti. The old healer didn’t look up.
“Dump them out in the necessary,”  Koriana  called back.  “Then  drop  them  in  the  great  tub  in  the
laundry.” She made a face. “There should be someone there.”
She sounded like she wasn’t sure if there still was. Kindan nodded mutely and headed off on his task,
partly familiar with the layout of the Hold from the several events he had attended in the past as a harper.
A small girl met him at the laundry. He dropped the dirtied sheets into the great tub and  she  tamped
them down into the boiling water with a long stick.
“Clean sheets?” he asked. She gestured outside. Kindan found long lines of sheets drying in the cold
air. He felt for the driest and pulled them off, returning to the Great Hall through the laundry.
“Are you all right?” he asked the girl as he went back.
She shook her head wordlessly, stamping the boiling clothes down into the tub angrily.
How could anyone be all right, Kindan wondered.
Back in the Great Hall he made the bed carefully, then looked around for another patient. At the far
end of the Great Hall, he spied Vaxoram and  Bemin carrying two  small people  over  their backs.  One
was a young woman, the other was a young man.
“Over here,” Kindan called, gesturing for Vaxoram to put one of them on his cot. To Bemin he said, “I
don’t see any others free.”
“This one!” Kilti called, looking up mournfully from another full cot.
Kindan helped Vaxoram position the fevered young woman on the cot. As they did, the woman broke
into a coughing fit, spraying them in an ugly greenish-yellow mist.
“Now you’ve caught it,” Bemin told them, his voice dead. “Just like Semin.” He gestured to the young
man on his shoulders.
“Your son?” Kindan asked in surprise. He glanced to the fevered woman, now covered in a fine mist
of sputum. “And she is?”
“I don’t know,” Bemin said, shaking his head. “A holder of mine.” His face softened as  he implored
Kindan bleakly, “Do what you can for her, please?”
“Of course, my lord,” Kindan replied, covering the woman’s body with a sheet  and  the blanket.  He
felt her forehead—it was blistering hot. “I should get her some water.”
“No time!” Kilti shouted. “Get this corpse out of here!”
Kindan shook his head and started to obey, but Bemin blocked him. “You get the water, you’re  the
smallest,” he said to Kindan. “Just hurry back.”

Kindan nodded and raced out of the room. He went back  in the kitchen and  found a  large bucket.
While it was filling, he had time to check on the laundry girl. She had collapsed beside the tub. He pulled
her away hurriedly and  felt her forehead—boiling.  His throat  choked  up in sorrow  and  his eyes  were
spangled with tears as he hauled her up and  lifted her in the crook  of his arm,  staggering back  to  the
kitchen to grab the bucket in the other.
He staggered back to the Great Hall.
“What about cups?” Kilti croaked. “And who’s she?”
“She was boiling the sheets,” Kindan explained, anxiously looking around for a spare cot.
“Alerilla,” Bemin said. “She’s barely turned ten.”
“Fever?”  Kilti  asked,  rising  unsteadily  to  his  feet  and  slowly  moving  toward  Kindan  and  the  girl.
Behind him, Vaxoram was lifting the dead body off the cot and Koriana was rolling up the soiled sheets.
“Like a fire,” Kindan replied.
“Good,” Kilti said, much to Kindan’s surprise. The healer noticed his look and explained, “Fever’s a
body’s way of fighting.”
Kindan gestured helplessly around the room at all the fevered people lying in cots.
“The worst seems to be the cough,” Kilti said.  “Fever  without cough seems  to  survive.” He  put his
hand gently around  the underside  of the girl’s jaw  and  felt. “Glands are  swollen, that  can  be  good  or
bad.”
He nodded toward Kindan. “If she starts coughing in the next day or two…”
Kindan nodded. “How long after that?”
“It varies,” Kilti said with a shrug. “Sometimes a day, sometimes four. Never more than four.”
“After four?”
“I don’t know,” Kilti said. “Some recover, some get worse and die.” The healer shook his head sadly.
“I’ve never seen the like.” He glanced up at Kindan. “Have they found anything in the Records?”
“Hints,” Kindan  said.  “Fragments.  The Records  just stop  and  don’t  start  until months later,  usually
written by someone else.”
“Harper?”
Kindan shook his head. “No.”
“They died trying, then,” Kilti guessed, his voice a mix of scorn and praise. He glanced to Kindan once
more. “So are they still looking in the Records?”
“No,” Kindan confessed.
“They’ve stopped?” Kilti barked in surprise. “They can’t! That’s our only hope.”
“There was a fire,” Kindan told him with a sinking feeling in his gut.
“A fire?” Kilti repeated, aghast. “The Records, how are they?”

“We lost as much as a quarter, no less than a tenth,” Kindan told him.
“A quarter?” Kilti gasped. “What happened? Who started it?”
“I did,” Kindan said.
Without warning, the healer took two quick steps and slapped Kindan hard across the face. “Do you
know how many you’ve killed?” Kilti roared at him.
“It was not his fault,” Vaxoram called from his position nearby. “I started the fire.”
“So they sent you here,” Bemin said sourly.
Kindan hung his head in shame.
Kilti started to say  something more  in his anger,  his hand still poised  for another  blow,  but then he
shook himself and lowered his hand. “I’m sorry,” he said. “That was uncalled for.”
“I don’t think so,” Kindan said. “Millions will die because of me.”
“Millions will die,” Kilti agreed. “But you don’t own all the blame by yourself.” He shook his head. “I
shouldn’t have hit you, it was wrong.”
“I deserved it.”
“No,” Kilti said with a sigh. “No, you didn’t. You made a mistake, right?” Kindan nodded. “Mistakes
shouldn’t be punished, shouldn’t be condemned.”
“But there’s nothing I can do that will make up for it,” Kindan protested.
“Yes, there is,” Kilti corrected him. “You can  live.” He  gestured  to  the listless holders  in their cots.
“You can live and save them.”
“We need more spaces,” Bemin announced, carefully not looking at  Kindan.  Kindan  glanced  briefly
toward Koriana, but she was not looking at him.
“At once, my lord,” Kindan said, bowing his head.
At some point the day turned to  night, but Kindan  never  knew  it. At some  point he had  food,  but he
didn’t taste it; water, but he wasn’t thirsty. At some point he found himself lying against a cot; he pushed
himself upright, checked the forehead of the occupant, found it cold, and worked with Vaxoram to haul
the body away and find a new occupant.
As the night grew darkest and then lightened with the first light of morning, Kindan realized that there
were other people amongst the ill, more people than just himself, Kilti, Koriana,  and  Lord  Bemin. But
their numbers were few, maybe four or six more.
Death was all around him. Coughing filled the air, masking the moaning and other sounds of pain as the
fevered sick slowly lost their battle with death.
The living fought on. Whenever Kindan’s energy flagged, Kilti or Vaxoram or, once, Koriana, would

seem to appear and give him a brief nod or a ghost smile, and then Kindan would find the strength to go
on.
Valla and Koriss were a strong presence throughout. The two fire-lizards seemed to quickly learn how
to check on the ill, how to get attention when it was needed. Their company seemed to cheer all but the
most fevered.
But by morning, their energy had lagged and Kindan had sternly ordered his bronze fire-lizard to rest.
Valla made it plain by his reaction that he felt Kindan should do the same.
“I can’t,” Kindan explained. He gestured to the cots. “They need me.”
He looked around for the others and, in one panicked moment, found himself totally alone.  Had  the
plague taken everyone? Was he the only healthy person in a room full of the desperately ill?
He spotted a slumped body leaning against a cot. It  was  Vaxoram.  Kindan  trotted  over  to  him, the
closest he could come to a run. He knelt down, felt the other’s forehead, and was thrilled to discover that
it was neither stone cold nor boiling.
“Vaxoram,” Kindan called gently but urgently. “Come on, you’ve got to get up, you’ll get all cramped
like this.”
Blearily, Vaxoram opened his eyes. “What happened?”
“You fell asleep.”
“I’m sorry.” The older harper rose unsteadily on his feet.
“You need rest,” Kindan told him.
“Can’t stop,” Vaxoram muttered in response. His eyes grew more focused as  he looked  at  Kindan.
“Any more’n you.” He looked around the Great Hall. “Where are the others?”
Kindan shook his head. “I’ll look in the kitchen,” he said. “Are you hungry?”
“No,”  Vaxoram  replied  glumly. Kindan  understood,  it was  hard  to  be  hungry in such a  depressing
place. “I’ll check on the patients.”
Kindan nodded.
“It’d  help  if  we  could  know  their  temperature  without  touching  them,”  Vaxoram  grumbled  as  he
moved off.
Kindan nodded once more and shambled off to the kitchen and  the laundry. He  paused  at  the exit,
looking back to the bed where they’d put the little girl who’d been stirring the boiling sheets. With relief
he saw that she was still there.
There was fresh klah in the kitchen and the smell of baking bread, which surprised Kindan as he saw
no other signs of activity. In the laundry, he found that someone had stoked the fires under the boiling tub
and a few sheets were roiling desultorily. Remembering the little girl, he grabbed the stick and poked the
sheets further down into the pot. He went to the laundry line, found the driest sheets, quickly folded them,
then brought them back with him to the Great Hall and laid them on one of the huge tables that had been
pushed against the wall to make room for the cots.
His thoughts came back to Vaxoram’s idea. Could there be some way to  measure  temperature?  Of

course! he thought, remembering some remark of Conar’s in what seemed an age ago: moodstone.
The thin flaky crystal changed color with temperature. But where to get it? And how to get it to stick
to people’s foreheads, even when they were sweating?
“Moodstone!” Kindan called to Vaxoram across the hall. “And glue!”
“What?” Vaxoram asked, looking up from the patient he was checking.
“What do  you want with moodstone?”  another  voice,  Kilti’s, called from the other  end  of the hall.
Kindan was both surprised and relieved to hear the healer’s voice; he guessed now that the healer  had
been off tending the sick in other parts of the Hold.
“We could use moodstone to measure temperature,” Kindan replied.
“How’d you get it to stick?”
“Use glue,” Kindan replied. “Soft glue, not hard.”
“Might work,” Kilti agreed. “But we’ve no time to try,” he said, gesturing to all the sick patients  laid
out around them.
Kindan  dropped  his  head  in  acknowledgment  and  despair.  Then  he  raised  it  again  triumphantly.
“We’ve no time, but the dragonriders do!”
“How would you get a message to them?” Vaxoram asked.
“Valla,” Kindan replied, sending a mental summons to  the sleeping fire-lizard. The bronze  fire-lizard
must have been only dozing, for he looked up from his place  among a  bundle of blankets  and  chirped
inquiringly. In a moment he was hovering in front of Kindan.
Kindan held out his arm so that Valla could land.
“I’ve got a message for you to take,” he said. He looked around and called to Kilti, “Where can I find
a stylus and paper?”
“My office,” Kilti replied, gesturing vaguely toward the farther of the two Great Hall exits. “Down the
circular staircase  to  the landing, then over  to  the broad  stair  and  my dispensary.  Take  some  glows, I
haven’t been there in days.”
“Should I bring anything else back?” Kindan asked.
“Anything you think of,” Kilti said. “More fellis, although I don’t know when we can make more juice.
Numbweed, if you see it.”
“Numbweed?” Kindan asked in surprise. Numbweed was great in numbing the pain of cuts or bruises
but he couldn’t imagine how it would be useful for fever.
“Just get it,” Kilti barked.
Kindan shrugged and took off, following Kilti’s instructions. He could  only find one  dim glow in the
kitchen, so he collected a bunch of others and put them out with the drying linen. The sunlight, even the
feeble light of early winter, would recharge them by nightfall.
He took his dim glow and retraced his steps to the large circular stairway. He moved cautiously down

it, came to the landing and stopped—was he supposed to turn left or right? He went left and walked for
a long while before he decided that he’d gone the wrong way and retraced  his steps.  The passageway
widened and he spotted the broad stairs just before he stepped down on them. Moments later he was in
Kilti’s office. He found stylus and  paper,  searched  through the cupboards  and  found some  dried  fellis
leaves—he took the whole drawer and put the stylus and paper on top. He found a bottle of ink, sealed
it tightly, and laid it on top  of the bundle.  Then he looked  around  and  found a  jar  of numbweed.  Still
confused as to why Kilti would want it, he grouped it with the other things, took one last look around the
dimly lit room, and left.
Back in the Great Hall, Kindan wrote his message carefully in tiny, neat block letters. He didn’t want
to overburden his tired fire-lizard—Valla had been his constant companion and had slept no more  than
Kindan—but he also needed to be sure that the message was understood. Satisfied, he put the message
in the little holder that was attached to Valla’s bead harness.
“Take this to the Star Stones at Benden,” Kindan said, staring into Valla’s softly whirling faceted eyes.
“Drop it at the Star Stones and let the dragons know.”
Valla chirped and bobbed his head.
“Come back as soon as you can,” Kindan told the fire-lizard affectionately.
Valla chirped once, rubbed his head against Kindan’s jaw, jumped up, and vanished between.
Just as Kindan had collected  himself to  go back  to  his patrolling of the sick,  the sounds  of a  drum
reverberated through the Great Hall.
Report, the message said.
“You handle it,” Kilti said, looking up from the bedside of a feverish young holder girl.
“Where’s a drum?” Kindan asked, glancing around the hall.
“I don’t know,” Kilti snapped, “figure something out. You’re wasting time.”
Stung, Kindan glanced around the hall and then went back to the kitchen. He paused long enough to
find a covered pot, fill it with water, and throw in the fellis leaves he’d collected, setting the pot to warm
near the flames; he knew they’d soon be out of fellis juice.
He went to the laundry, looked around, and then returned to the kitchen. He found the largest pot he
could carry and went back through the laundry to the linen line.
He squatted with the pot cradled upended between his legs and rapped out, Kindan reports.
There was a long moment before a reply came. Status?
Kindan furrowed his brow. What did that mean? Whoever was on the drums wasn’t all that good.
Many ill, many dead, Kindan rapped back.
Kilti, Bemin? 
Alive, Kindan responded only to pause—he hadn’t seen the Lord Holder all morning. So he added,
Healer.
Holder? Came the question.

Unknown, he replied. Sender?
Kelsa, came the reply. Kelsa was the worst on drums, Kindan recalled. The others must all be sick if
she was the only drummer.
Masters? Kindan rapped back.
All sick, came the response. Murenny dead.
“Dead?” Kindan said aloud and was startled to hear his own voice. Tears streaked down his face. The
Masterharper of Pern was dead, what could they do?
Lenner? Kindan rapped out slowly, his heart pounding.
Sick, Kelsa responded. There was a pause. Help?
Was that a request or a question, Kindan wondered.
Coming soon, Kindan replied after a moment’s deliberation. Dragonriders.
Dragonriders must stay away! Kelsa drummed back, her drumming loud in emphasis.
Air drop, Kindan replied.
?? Kelsa responded, using a code Kindan had never heard before. Was she getting sick or just being
brilliant in asking for clarification?
Drop  supplies  by  air,  Kindan  responded.  Wait  a  minute!  Why  hadn’t  he  thought  of  that?  The
dragonriders could drop supplies by air to all the holders. Kindan was elated, a huge grin on his face.
Just as suddenly as his heart soared, it crashed again as Kindan thought: What supplies?  Vaguely he
recalled a similar conversation with M’tal and Koriana…when was it?
The question was driven out of his mind as he heard an anguished cry, “Kindan!”
It was Koriana.
“Kindan, help!” she wailed.
Kindan jumped up and rushed back to the Great Hall.
Kindan found Koriana at the entrance.
“Come with me, it’s Father,” she cried, grabbing his hand and tugging him.
“Hurry back as soon as you can, boy,” Kilti croaked from the far end of the Hall.
Koriana led him out of the Hall and up the great stairs. At the top landing, Kindan stopped, suddenly
nervous.  They were  in the Lord  Holder’s  private  quarters.  The wall-hangings were  opulent,  the  floor
carpeted. Kindan had never seen carpeted floor before.
“Come on,” Koriana urged, pulling him into a bedroom. It had the largest bed he’d ever seen. Nearby

was a crib and in it a small child was crying feebly. It was Fiona.
Kindan rushed to her and picked her up. Her forehead was roasting.
“How  long  since  she’s  eaten  anything?”  Kindan  asked  Koriana.  He  noticed  a  pungent  smell  and
wondered when Fiona’s clothing had last been checked.
“Over here,” Koriana called, ignoring Kindan’s question.
Kindan tucked Fiona in the crook of his arm and trotted over to Koriana.
Lord Bemin was kneeling at the side of the bed, crouched over a hand and weeping.
Wordlessly, Kindan pushed Fiona into Koriana’s arms and sat down beside the Lord Holder. Gently,
he put his hand beside Bemin’s, feeling the cold flesh of the hand that he was holding.
He stood up and looked at the still face of Lady Sannora. It was rigid, waxlike. He reached under her
jaw and felt beside her throat for a pulse. The skin was cold. There hadn’t been a pulse for a very long
time, Kindan decided.
“He won’t move, he won’t listen,” Koriana told him anxiously. With a tone bordering on hysteria, she
added, “He’s the Lord Holder, he’s got to move!”
Kindan noticed  that Koriana’s  eyes  constantly darted  away  from Sannora’s  body,  as  if denying its
existence.
He knelt down beside the Lord Holder, fumbling in his mind for the right words. He draped his arms
over the Lord Holder’s large shoulders and clasped them softly.
“My lord,” Kindan said uncertainly. “You must come away, your holders need you.” Gently he pulled
Bemin away from Sannora’s body. Bemin resisted passively, too bereft to struggle.
“Your daughters need you,” Kindan continued softly, pulling Bemin farther away from his wife’s body.
Koriana took his words for a cue and moved up against her father.
“Take Fiona, Father,” she said, gently pushing the toddler into his arms. Reluctantly, Bemin cradled his
youngest and then with a sob, clenched her tightly against his body and kissed her forehead. He felt the
heat there and looked up in alarm, tears flowing freely, saying to Kindan, “She’s so hot!”
“I know, my lord,” Kindan replied. “We must get her downstairs to Master Kilti.” He gestured toward
the door. “Come on, we must hurry.”
“You will save her?” Bemin asked, looking down at his daughter and back to  Kindan.  A fierce light
burned in his eyes. “Promise me you will save her?”
“I will do what I can,” Kindan said.
“No,” Bemin cried, “I need you to promise me that you’ll save her.”
Kindan locked eyes with the taller man for a long moment. This was  the man who said  that  Kindan
had besmirched his honor, that his word  was  meaningless to  him. And here,  now,  in this moment, the
Lord Holder of Fort Hold was asking for a promise to do the impossible.
“I will save her, my lord,” Kindan promised. “Or die trying.”

“Don’t you dare die!” Koriana cried fiercely. “Don’t you dare!”
“I will save her,” Kindan repeated. He gestured to the door. “But we must get down to Master Kilti.”
Slowly, in a  shambling gait, the Lord  Holder  of Fort  Hold  followed the young harper  down  to  the
Great Hall.
How they made it to the next day, Kindan could never recall. Only willpower kept him moving; he slept
only when he collapsed, ate only when he thought of it, drank only when his throat was parched.
Little Fiona worsened through the night and Kindan was beside her at her merest whimper. He kept a
bucket and a cloth and gently dribbled cool water on her forehead, having been forbidden to touch her
by Master Kilti.
“Touch her and you’ll get it yourself,” Kilti had warned with a wheeze.
“I’ve already touched her,” Kindan replied.
“And maybe you caught it, maybe you didn’t,” Kilti rasped. “Take enough chances, and you’ll get it
for certain.”
Something about the healer’s voice alarmed Kindan but he was too tired to dwell on it.
At Kindan’s urging, they cleared one cot next to Fiona and Bemin, Koriana, Vaxoram, Kilti, and any
others of those still standing took turns catching naps of a half hour, an hour, never more.
Night blurred into day. Kindan carried some dim glows out to the laundry line, brought  fresher  ones
back. He thought once more of the brave little girl who had stirred the boiling pot and looked for her cot
when he returned to the Great Hall. It was empty.
“She died awhile back,” was all Vaxoram could say when Kindan asked him.
Kindan  shook  his  head  sadly  and  was  depressed  to  realize  that  he  could  dredge  up  no  deeper
emotion—his tears had all dried up long ago.
He went back to the kitchen to drain the fellis decoction and let it cool, dragging more  soiled sheets
with him.
He was about to return when Valla appeared in front of him, chittering excitedly.
“What is it?” Kindan  asking,  surprised  at  how  much  the  small  fire-lizard  buoyed  his  spirits.  Valla
chirped again and bobbed his head smugly, then gestured to his harness with his forelimbs. There was a
message: Moodpaste ready. Will drop in courtyard.
Ready? Moodpaste? Kindan thought muzzily. Oh! They had figured out how to make moodstone into
a paste!
Kindan ran out through the Great  Hall, ignoring the cries  of the others,  and  went through the front
doors,  looking for any sign of a  delivery, all  the  while  worrying  that  the  dragonriders  might  come  in
contact with the contagion.

A dark shadow crossed over him and he glanced up in time to see a bronze dragon fly overhead. He
waved and the rider waved back—it was M’tal, he was sure of it. M’tal threw something over Gaminth’s
neck and Kindan stood rooted in horrified fear that the object would break  and  shatter  when it hit the
flagstones of the courtyard. Instead, a piece of fabric sprang open and slowed the object’s fall. Kindan
groped  for the name, he  recalled  reading  about  it  a  long  time  ago—a  parachute.  How  simple,  how
elegant. A piece of cloth tied at its four corners and attached to the bundle.
The bundle drifted down to the courtyard and Kindan raced to retrieve it. The parcel was just bigger
than his two fists. As he untied the parachute, his mind suggested that the shape was somehow significant
but he ignored the thought, his attention directed at the bundle. Inside was a  set  of bottles,  all carefully
cushioned. None were broken.
He stood up and waved to M’tal who was still above. The dragonrider waved back and soared away,
blinking between back to Benden Weyr. Belatedly, Kindan wondered  why he’d  sent  Valla to  Benden
and not to the Fort Weyrleader. Probably it was because he and  M’tal  knew  each  other,  because  the
Benden Weyrleader trusted him.
Kindan tottered back into the Great Hall, pausing to let his eyes adjust to the dimmer light. He opened
one of the bottles  and  peered  at  the paste  inside. He  turned  to  one  of the nearer  patients  and  gently
dabbed a bit on her forehead, careful not to let his fingers touch her directly. She moaned in her sleep but
made no  other  motion.  In  a  moment  the  moodpaste  had  turned  bright  yellow,  indicating  high  fever.
Kindan moved on, pasting all the foreheads he could before the first bottle was empty.
“What have you got there, boy?” Kilti croaked as he passed near the healer.
“Moodpaste,” Kindan replied. “Dab it on a  forehead  and  you’ll know  if they’ve got fever.” He  put
some  on  the  forehead  of  Kilti’s  patient  and  stood  back.  The  paste  turned  from  green  to  blue  and
Kindan’s spirits sank. “I think this one is dead.”
Kilti turned back to the patient, searched for signs of life, found none and  leaned  back  with a  deep
sigh. The old healer closed his eyes for a long moment, dealing with his grief. When he opened his eyes
again, he said to Kindan, “What are the colors, then?”
“Green for healthy,” Kindan told him. “Red for hot, yellow for feverish, blue for—”
“Dead,” Kilti finished. He held out his hand for one of the bottles. “I’ll finish up this row, you get the
next.”
Kindan checked Fiona next: The moodpaste turned an ugly yellow.
“Let me try you,” Koriana  said.  She  dipped  her finger in the paste  and  dabbed  it on Kindan,  who
reciprocated  with  a  dab  on  her  forehead.  But  he  knew,  even  as  he  touched  her,  what  color  the
moodpaste would turn: bright red, verging on orange.
“I’ll be  all right,” Koriana  declared  as  she  caught Kindan’s  changing expression.  “I’ve  been  taking
some fellis juice.”
“It doesn’t help,” Kindan told her. “It just makes you feel better.”
“I’ll be all right,” Koriana repeated firmly. She gestured to the sick people in their cots. “I have to be,
for them.”
“Your mother—” Kindan began worriedly.

“She was  never  very strong,”  Koriana  assured  him. “She had  no  constitution  and  she  was  always
weak  after  Fiona  was  born.”  She  touched  him gently on the forearm  and  smiled shyly. “Don’t  worry
about me, Kindan, I’ll be fine.”
“I need some help over here,” Vaxoram called. Kindan rushed off and shortly found himself lost once
more in a never-ending field of feverish faces, tormented bodies, and cold death.
The days passed on blearily, one into the next.  Kindan  could  no longer imagine what it was  like to
wake refreshed, to not have the constant fatigue-induced itching under his eyes, to see anyone smile.
Slowly, however,  he began  to  detect  some  pattern,  some  noise,  like  a  music  of  bodies,  in  all  the
suffering. He  couldn’t  say  when he  noticed  it  and  it  took  him  a  long  time  to  identify  the  feeling  but
something was nagging at him.
His notion crystallized when he asked sourly about  Bemin’s elder  sons.  “Where  are  they? Why are
they not helping?” Kindan demanded of Koriana after he and Vaxoram had labored to haul a particularly
large holder’s body out of the Great Hall.
“Upstairs,” Koriana said in a choked voice. “They died before Mother.”
“Both of them?” Kindan asked in surprise.
Koriana nodded, turning back to her little sister and gently dripping some water on her forehead. The
moodpaste was still bright yellow. Kindan had lost hope for Fiona the day  before.  Somewhere  around
the Great Hall was Bemin, tending to one of the many feverish.
Bannor and Semin had been in the prime of youth, some of the healthiest men in all Fort Hold, and yet
they had been among the first to fall victim to this plague. Why?
Kindan looked at Fiona. The child should have succumbed two days ago, or at best a day ago and yet
she was still hanging on, hot, fevered, unable to eat, yet still clinging to life. Why?
This flu seemed to attack the healthiest, the strongest, harder than it did the older and infirm. It made
no sense.
A cough distracted him. It came from one of the helpers. He followed the noise as it continued and his
eyes locked on Vaxoram. The older apprentice looked up and nodded his head slightly before returning
to the bed where he knelt, rolled a corpse over his shoulders, and staggered once more upright to carry
the body out of the Great Hall.
Vaxoram had the flu. Vaxoram was nearly Bannor’s age—and just a little older than Koriana. Would
he be the next to die?
 
CHAPTER 11 
For fever, take you feverfew 

For pains, take you fellis too 
For vomiting, keep your stomach free 
For flu, let your eating be. 
FORT HOLD
I n the  next  several  days,  Vaxoram’s  symptoms  grew  worse.  Kindan  kept  an  eye  on  the  older
apprentice as best he could, but it was hard to keep track of anyone—they were  all constantly rushing
from crisis to  crisis,  death  to  death.  Once  Kindan  remembered  drumming to  Kelsa  and  he knew  she
responded but he couldn’t remember either his message or what she drummed in response.
They had expanded their rounds from the Great Hall to all the lesser rooms in Fort Hold, collecting the
seriously ill, organizing more help.  Somehow  they managed  to  keep  the fires in the kitchen going, and
another small girl was found to stir the huge pot that boiled the dirty sheets.
It was in the middle of the night on the fourth day since they’d brought Fiona into the Hall that Kindan
came across Vaxoram, sprawled on the floor beside a cot, a corpse half-burying him.
“Get  help!”  Kindan  ordered  Valla  and  the  little  bronze  disappeared  between.  Kindan  couldn’t
remember how many times he’d now sent the fire-lizard for help; he couldn’t imagine life without Valla.
He knelt slowly, his joints aching, and  rolled the  corpse  off  of  Vaxoram.  He  reached  to  Vaxoram’s
throat, feeling for the artery, afraid of what he would discover.
Vaxoram’s body was a furnace; he had a pulse, faint but steady.
“Kindan!” Koriana called trailed by the chittering noise of two fire-lizards.
“Over here,” Kindan called back. “Vaxoram’s ill.”
Together they raised him up onto a cot. His skin was on fire, his face waxlike.
“We’ll have to move the body,” Kindan said, gesturing for Koriana to get the feet  while he reached
under the corpse’s  arms.  Together  they managed  to  drag  the deadweight  out to  the courtyard  before
their strength gave out. It was several minutes before Kindan had breath  and  strength enough to  return
into the Great Hall, he and Koriana leaning against each other for support.
“Get some fellis and a cloth,” Kindan told her. “I’ll go look for Master Kilti.”
Koriana nodded, not much more than a jerk of her exhausted head, and shambled off to the kitchen
while Kindan headed in the other direction, toward the apartments in the rear  of the Hold.  He  spotted
Valla flying toward him.
“Where’s Kilti, Valla?” Kindan said to the fire-lizard. “Take me there.”
The fire-lizard had  to  loop  back  several  times, Kindan  moved  so  slowly. He  found Kilti in a  room
crowded with cots, lit only by the dimmest of glows. Fuzzy-brained, he made  a  mental note  to  set  out
more glows to charge as soon as he had the chance.
“Vaxoram,” Kindan said, jerking his head in the direction of the Great Hall.
“Red or yellow?” Kilti asked, referring to the color of the moodpaste.

“Orange,” Kindan replied, dredging up the memory. “He was burning up.”
“I’ll come as soon as I can,” the old healer replied. As he turned back to his patients,  his body  was
wracked  by a  long, throbbing cough.  “Unless we  can  figure out a  way to  stop  spreading  this blasted
thing, we’ll reinfect everyone.”
Kindan nodded dully and staggered back to the Great Hall. There he spotted Bemin and  one  of the
Fort guards.
“Where’s Koriana?” Bemin rasped hoarsely.
“Kitchen,” Kindan told him. “Vaxoram’s ill.”
“Giller here and two others are well enough to dig in the rose garden,” Bemin said. “How deep?”
“Two meters, one and a half at least,” Kindan said. Bemin’s words  registered  and  he took  a  longer
look at the Lord Holder. “The ancestor garden?”
Fort Hold had a special garden reserved for the dead ancestors of the Lord Holder. In the past it had
been tended under the direction of Lady Sannora and grew the most magnificent roses.
“We’ve set the roses aside,” Giller said hoarsely with a respectful nod toward Bemin. “I figure we can
plant them again, after, if your lordship—”
“That would be splendid,” Bemin said, straightening up with a hint of his normal lordly manner.
“Use lime to line the grave,” Kindan suggested.
“There’d be more than one grave needed,” Giller said, eyeing Kindan judiciously.
“One big grave,” Kindan corrected. “You’ve no time for individual ones.”
“But Lady Sannora—” Giller began in protest.
“Let all our dead be mingled,” Bemin ordered. “It is fitting; we’ve all suffered together.”
Giller drew himself up to his full height, his eyes filled with tears and respect. “As you wish, my lord.”
Bemin found the strength to clap Giller firmly on the back and send him on his way. As the man faded
from sight, Bemin’s shoulders hunched once more and his chin fell. “Let’s see your friend.”
Koriana was already there beside Vaxoram when they arrived.
“He’s very hot,” she said, shaking her head  as  she  met Kindan’s  eyes.  “Feverish.  I gave him some
fellis juice and cooled his head.”
Vaxoram  rolled  over  and  coughed  at  that  moment,  expelling  a  visible  mist  of  sputum  in  the  air,
covering  Koriana  who  leaned  back  too  slowly  to  avoid  it.  His  eyes  opened  for  a  moment  and  he
murmured, “Sorry.” He tried to move. “Got to get up.”
“Lie down,” Kindan ordered. “You’re feverish.”
“Must help,” Vaxoram protested muzzily.
“Just lie still for a moment,” Kindan told him. “You can get up when you feel better.”

“Alrigh’,” Vaxoram muttered. “Tired.” His eyes closed again and his head  lolled as  he drifted  into a
daze.
“Master  Kilti  said  he’ll  check  on  him,”  Kindan  said,  rising  and  extending  a  helping  hand  toward
Koriana, who took it gratefully. She slid into his embrace for a warm moment, then pushed back, aware
of her father glaring at them.
Then, with a determined “No,” Koriana wrapped her arms around Kindan once more and hugged him
tightly. She gestured with her free hand toward her father and Kindan was surprised a  moment later  to
feel the Lord Holder embrace him and Koriana both.
“We must get back to work,” Kindan said shortly. Bemin and  Koriana  broke  the embrace.  Kindan
turned to see the Lord Holder  looking at  him uncertainly. Kindan  turned  away,  unsure of himself, and
noted that some of the cots were empty.
“We must get more people in here,” Kindan said, gesturing toward the cots.
“There’s no one else,” Bemin said. “We could carry some from the cots upstairs but that’s about all.”
“No one else?” Kindan asked in surprise. “Where are they, then?”
“Dead,” Fort’s Lord Holder responded somberly.
A cough distracted them and Kindan turned, nearly swooning as he tried to locate it. Bemin caught his
shoulder, steadying him, and felt Kindan’s forehead. He looked grave.
“You’ve got the fever,” the Lord Holder said.
“I’m just tired,” Kindan argued.
“Get some rest,” Bemin ordered, pointing to an empty cot. “You can  check  on Vaxoram  when you
wake up.”
“No,” Kindan muttered, trying to keep the room from spinning away around him, “too much to do.”
“Rest, Kindan,” a girl’s voice urged him. Koriana? Here? Or was it Bemin and he misheard?
The room spun out of control and Kindan remembered no more.
The images in his head spun all around and Kindan groaned in hoarse agony. He was fire, burning bright.
He couldn’t  breathe,  couldn’t  swallow,  couldn’t  feel anything but pain.  And the images—a  parachute
falling from the sky, its four straps wrapping around his head, covering his mouth and nose, Vaxoram on
the  ground,  corpses  everywhere,  Lady  Sannora  on  her  bed,  then  Koriana  on  the  same  bed,
then…darkness.
“Here, drink this,” a voice said in the darkness.  Kindan  felt his head  being lifted, felt the room  spin
more horribly, feebly tried to bat away the coolness touching his lips, choked  on a  liquid, choked,  and
choked, and choked…darkness.
“Come on, Kindan, another sip,” the voice was kindly but not Koriana. Bemin? The Lord Holder was
feeding him? Kindan gulped down the liquid as  best  he could  and  then his head  was  lying, peacefully,

once more on the cot. He fell asleep.
“Kindan?”  The  same  voice,  urgent,  called  his  name.  Kindan  opened  his  eyes.  The  room  wasn’t
spinning. “Kindan, are you awake? Your fever’s broken.” Lord Bemin sounded near  to  tears.  “You’re
going to be all right, Kindan, you’re going to be all right.”
Something hot splashed on his face. Tears? Was the Lord Holder crying for him?
“Kindan, you’ve got to wake up,” Bemin’s voice was  insistent. Kindan  felt Bemin’s hand under  his
neck, lifting him up. “Kindan?”
“Yes?” Kindan said, opening his eyes. He hardly recognized Bemin’s face swimming in front of him.
The Lord Holder’s cheeks were bristly, his eyes  sunken,  skeletal.  Kindan  made  himself move,  felt the
pain in every  one  of his joints but willed  the  pain  away  as  he  sat  up.  Beside  him,  Valla  stirred  and
chirruped encouragingly, nuzzling against his chest.
“That tickles, stop,” Kindan murmured to the fire-lizard.
“Tickles?” Bemin repeated.
“Valla, on my chest,” Kindan explained. He was ravenous, nearly faint with hunger. “I’m hungry.”
“Here,” Bemin said, extending a cup toward him. “Soup. Drink slowly.”
Kindan started to gulp the warm broth down, but Bemin held on to the cup and tilted it away from him
so that Kindan wouldn’t choke.
When the glass was empty, Kindan looked up at Bemin. “How long?”
“Three days,” the Lord Holder told him.
Kindan threw his legs over the side of the cot and forced himself upright. He was wobbly, and Bemin
steadied him. He glanced around—slowly. More cots were empty. He gestured to the cots. “Dead?”
Bemin nodded sadly. “Most. Some live.” He turned back to Kindan, his eyes despairing.
“What?”
“Kilti is dead,” Bemin said.
Kindan gasped.
“You’re the healer now,” the Lord Holder went on.
Kindan fell back onto the cot. “Me? I can’t—”
“You can,” a  voice murmured beside  him. He  turned  and  saw  Vaxoram,  his face  pallid with fever.
“You will. Remember—”
“Moment by moment,” Kindan completed for him. “Shh, rest, you’ll be well soon, too.”
As  if  in  answer,  Vaxoram’s  chest  was  torn  by  a  wracking  cough  that  seemed  to  never  subside.
Helpless, Kindan took his eyes off the older harper and looked to the cot beyond—
“Koriana!”  Kindan  cried,  pushing  himself  to  his  feet  once  more  and  racing  around  the  head  of
Vaxoram’s cot.

“She collapsed  yesterday,”  Bemin said.  Kindan  looked  back  at  the Lord  Holder,  guessing his next
words. “She was tending you.”
Kindan looked wildly around the Great Hall. “Where’s Fiona? Where’s your youngest?”
Bemin had a momentary look of panic. “By the First Egg, Bemin, where’d you put your child?” The
Lord Holder berated himself, pounding on his own chest with his fists, sobbing in dry heaves, “What sort
of father are you?”
Kindan spotted a small child in dirty clothes and moved back to the Lord Holder. Gently he grabbed
the distraught man’s hands and held them, turning Bemin around. “She’s there, she’s all right.”
With a wordless sob, Bemin staggered over to Fiona and grabbed her, cradling her in his arms. “She’s
alive!”
Fiona was  alive and  seemed  well enough, although in shock  and  hungry.  She  returned  Bemin’s  hugs
listlessly, but something sparked again in her eyes, some hint of life that had been missing.
“Take her to the kitchen, get her some food,” Kindan ordered. “And get some for yourself.”
Bemin started off, then turned back to Kindan questioningly.
“I’ll be all right,” Kindan told him with a weary wave of his hand. He turned to survey the long line of
cots, certain that he was Fort Hold’s youngest healer ever.
“Step  by  step,”  Vaxoram’s  words  rang  in  his  head.  Slowly,  deliberately,  Kindan  put  Vaxoram’s
advice into practice as, step by step, he moved from one cot to another, checking temperatures, uttering
useless soothing words, and finding the will to heal.
He  was  aided  by  Valla,  who  seemed  to  approve  entirely  of  his  recovery  and  actions,  chirping
cheerfully at one patient, crooning softly for another, and keeping pace with his movements. Only once
did Kindan  catch  the fire-lizard eyeing  him  carefully—when  Kindan  staggered  at  the  side  of  the  cot
occupied by the new little girl who had stirred the boiling pot.
“How do you feel?” Kindan asked her softly.
She squirmed,  trying to  turn away  from him. “My head  hurts,” she  moaned,  too  exhausted  to  cry.
Kindan nodded and looked around. The fellis juice was all the way back with Vaxoram,  it would take
forever to get it—
A sudden noise and then the same noise again and Valla dropped the bottle of fellis juice into Kindan’s
hands.
“Here,” Kindan said, unstoppering the bottle and pouring a small amount into the child’s mouth, “this
will help.”
Moments later, she sighed and closed her eyes again. Kindan rose from her cot and turned to Valla.
“Thanks.”
The fire-lizard chirped softly, landed on Kindan’s shoulder just long enough to stroke his head against

Kindan’s cheek, and then went airborne again, leading the way to the next patient.
Behind him, a patient coughed loud and long. Kindan turned and identified the patient by the thin cloud
of sputum that drifted in the air nearby. The coughing spread the disease, Kindan was certain. Whether it
spread other ways also, Kindan did not know. But how could he prevent coughing?
His dream surfaced again, the parachute descending over his face. Not a parachute—a mask!
“Valla, can you get a message to M’tal?” Kindan asked, turning to his fire-lizard. He could tell, now
that he was  alert  enough to  look  closely at  the fire-lizard, that  Valla was  thin  and  nearly  brown  with
fatigue. But Valla chirped willingly, diving toward a table at the end of the Great Hall near the exit to the
kitchens. Kindan followed, brightening when he noticed a chair and a stylus and some scraps of paper.
There was the ink bottle he’d used so many days before.
As he seated himself, he saw some crumpled cloth and dried greenish sputum on the table.  Perhaps
Kilti had lain here before he died. Kindan stared at the spot for a moment, then gently moved the chair
over.
He wrote slowly, using more paper than before, but his instructions had to be clear.
“What are you doing?” Bemin’s voice interrupted him brashly.
“Sending a note to M’tal,” Kindan explained, not looking up. “I think if we get some masks—”
“Masks?” Bemin repeated.
“To cover coughs, prevent the spread—”
“—of the illness,” Bemin finished, nodding so  firmly that  he wobbled  little Fiona  in his arms.  “That
could help, yes.” He frowned and Kindan looked up at him expectantly. “But it may be too late, we’re
running out of food.”
“Food?” Kindan repeated blankly. “But the Stores, the grain, the dried fruit—”
“Nothing  we  can  get  to  without  healthy  men,”  Bemin  replied.  “And  nothing  that  sick  people  can
digest.”
“Gruel?”
“Takes a cook and water,” Bemin said with a grimace. “And coal, we’re almost out of that as well.”
“There must be something,” Kindan said.
Bemin shook his head resignedly. “You may save them only to have them starve.”
“I’ll  think  of  something,”  Kindan  promised,  attaching  his  note  to  Valla’s  harness.  “First  this.”  He
looked long into his fire-lizard’s eyes.
“Are you up for this?” he asked finally. Valla dipped his long neck twice.
“Make sure you eat something and get some rest before you come back,” Kindan told his fire-lizard
firmly. “I’ve put that in the note, so don’t forget.”
Valla made a scolding noise but Kindan would have none of it. “Just come back after you’ve eaten!”

With a final chirp, the bronze leaped into the air and between.
“He’ll be all right,” Bemin told Kindan in a kindly voice.
“I hope  so,”  Kindan  replied  fervently. He  pushed  himself out  of  the  chair  and  turned  to  the  Lord
Holder. “Let’s see what we can do.”
Valla had not returned the next morning and Kindan started to fret. What if he’d sent the tired fire-lizard
to his death, lost forever between?
The  notion  got  a  grip  on  him  early  in  the  morning  as  he  and  Bemin  hauled  away  yet  another
corpse—there were still too few able men to help—and continued to gnaw at him as the day brightened.
Finally at noon, Kindan could take it no longer. He went out to the linen line and found his pot. He beat
out a quick staccato: Attention.
He waited a very long time for a response.
Proceed. The drummer was slow and shaky. Not Kelsa.
Kindan closed his eyes in despair, wondering if he’d ever see the gawky harper again, drew in a slow
deep breath and let it out determinedly.
Ask J’trel: Did fire-lizard get to Benden? 
The answer took an agonizingly long time to return.
Yes. Return soon. Kindan closed his eyes again, this time in relief. Status?
Kilti dead, Kindan drummed back. Vaxoram ill.
Bemin? 
Alive. 
Help? 
Kindan closed his eyes again, tight with pain. The Harper Hall was asking for help…and he couldn’t
give it.
Soon. He drummed back in a forlorn promise. Food scarce.
Food gone, the Harper Hall drummer responded.
“No!” the word was flung from Kindan’s lips and he pushed the drum aside in anger and despair. No
food, no help, no hope. He pulled the drum back again.
Lenner? he asked.
Dead, the drummer responded. All Masters dead.
“All  of  them?”  Kindan  said  to  himself.  He  shook  his  head,  feeling  helpless,  feeling  despairing,
feeling…angry. Anger rose up and burned inside him, hotter  than fever.  He  would not let this happen.

The Harper Hall would survive, he swore. Fort Hold would survive.
“My word as harper,” Kindan said aloud with a fury and forcefulness that he’d never used before. He
could feel energy coursing through his veins.
Help will come, he pounded back fiercely in an instant. Hold on.
Soon? 
Hold on, Kindan drummed back. But he had no idea how or when help would come,  and  he knew
that it was the same all over Pern. Those not killed by the plague were dying for lack of food, lack of aid.
He returned slowly to the Great Hall, stopping to grab a drink of cold klah in the kitchen. In the Great
Hall, he spotted Bemin in the distance, near Koriana and Vaxoram.
“I heard the drums,” Bemin said as Kindan approached. “What did you say?”
Kindan  recalled  that  the  Lord  Holder  had  been  suspicious  of  harpers’  drums  before;  times  had
changed.
“I asked if Valla had arrived at Benden,” Kindan told him. “They said yes.”
“How would they know?”
“J’trel, the blue rider, is still with them,” Kindan explained. “He was there when the plague broke out.”
Bemin nodded.
“The Harper Hall is out of food,” Kindan continued. “All the Masters are dead.”
“All? Even Lenner?”
“All,”  Kindan  replied.  “The  drummer  was  young,  unsteady,  an  apprentice,  I  think.”  He  stopped
suddenly as he realized the identity of the drummer. “It was Conar.”
“Conar? From Benden Hold?”
Kindan nodded. “He asked for help.”
“We’ve none to give,” Bemin said, gesturing to his own sorry Hold.
“I know that,” Kindan replied. “But I promised it to them anyway.”
“You promised—”
“At the least they have hope,” Kindan said. “At the best…well…we need food, too.”
“Where would you find enough food to share with the Harper Hall?” Bemin wondered.
“Enough to share with all Pern,” Kindan corrected him, shaking his head. “I don’t know, my lord.” He
glanced up, a hint of a smile on his lips. “I was hoping that perhaps you might have an idea?”

“No,” Bemin said, shaking his head. “If I did, I’d share with anyone who asked for it, not that it would
do much good.”
Kindan cocked his head at the Lord Holder.
“How would we get it to them?” Bemin explained.
“I don’t know,” Kindan confessed. He leaned down to Vaxoram, felt the heat of his fever before he
was even near  enough to  see  the moodpaste,  and  dabbed  the older  apprentice’s  forehead  with some
water. He was so hot that the water quickly evaporated. In his delirium, Vaxoram  shook  his head  and
coughed once more.
“The masks should come soon,” Kindan said pointlessly.
The day slipped into night and another dozen holders slipped into death.
Someone brought hot klah out to them from the kitchen and some food.
“Give it to her,” Kindan said, gesturing to Fiona. When Bemin started to protest, Kindan added, “I’m
not that hungry and she needs nurturing or she’ll not grow strong.”
Bemin shook his head ruefully. “Stubborn harper.”
“I was taught by your daughter, my lord,” Kindan said with lips upturned.
Bemin smiled back at him. “She got it from her mother.”
“Oh, no doubt,” Kindan agreed diplomatically. He gestured to an empty cot.  “You should get some
sleep, my lord.”
“You’ve just recovered, you should sleep first,” Bemin protested.
“You nursed  me back  to  health,” Kindan  replied.  “As  your  healer,  I  demand  it.”  When  the  Lord
Holder looked ready to respond, Kindan added, “Besides, I’ll wake you at half-night.”
“We could  both  sleep,  there’s  almost enough standing for a  watch,”  Bemin offered,  gesturing  to  a
group of exhausted holders.
“No, they’ll need a healer and a leader,” Kindan said, surprised to group himself in either category.
“I suppose  they  will,”  Bemin  agreed  wearily,  lying  down  on  the  cot.  In  seconds,  he  was  snoring
heavily.
Kindan regarded him for a moment, felt the pull of another  empty cot  and  forced  himself to  his feet
again, roaming the dimly lit halls. He saw that the surviving holders  had  put out more  glows, so  it was
easier to spot the needy.
Several times that night, he cooled foreheads, administered fellis juice, renewed dabs of moodpaste, or
called the holders over to carry away another lifeless body.
When he was too weary, he returned to Bemin and roused him with difficulty.

“I’ll take over,” the Lord Holder said as he sat up. “You rest.”
“Wake me at dawn, or before, if you need to,” Kindan said, lying down on the cot nearest Koriana.
“Don’t think to snuggle with her,” Bemin said, shaking a finger warningly at him. Kindan looked at him
in tired  outrage.  Bemin’s lips lifted as  he said,  “We  can’t  afford  you getting  ill  again;  wait  until  she’s
recovered.”
Kindan fell asleep with the first grin on his lips in over a fortnight.
It was still dark when Kindan awoke. Something had startled him, some noise—there!
It was  a  gurgling, rasping sound.  Kindan  had  heard  it before:  It  was  the sound  of death.  His  eyes
popped open. In alarm, he looked over toward Koriana. She slept feverishly, tossing and turning, but her
breathing wasn’t the labored breathing that had woken him. He looked beyond her. Vaxoram.
Kindan rolled out of his cot and onto his feet, his joints aching, his breathing sore, his head  spinning,
and dragged himself over to Vaxoram’s bed.
The  older  apprentice’s  wheezing  was  unmistakable.  Every  breath  was  arduous,  every  exhalation
ending with a wet cough.
“Vaxoram,” Kindan called, shaking the older lad. “Wake up.”
Vaxoram’s eyelids slid up, then down. Kindan shook him harder. “Wake up!”
Vaxoram’s  eyelids slid open,  focused  briefly  before  his  body  spasmed  in  a  long  wracking  cough.
Kindan covered his face with his hand. For a moment it seemed as though Vaxoram could not draw in a
new breath but then, with a hoarse wheezing noise, the apprentice’s lungs filled once more.
“I’m dying,” Vaxoram declared on this exhalation. His words were faint but clear, and his eyes blazed.
“No, you’re not,” Kindan lied stoutly. “You’ll get better.”
“No,” Vaxoram said with another labored, hoarse breath. “Dead by morning.”
Kindan knew he was right.
“Tell—tell Nonala,” Vaxoram whispered hoarsely.
“I will,” Kindan promised. “I’ll tell her that you love her.”
“Wish I were journeyman,” Vaxoram wheezed. “Might have a chance then.”
Kindan’s throat closed in anguish. “You will be,” he promised, tears filling his eyes from some newly
tapped wellspring.
Vaxoram shook his head. “Gotta walk the tables,” he said. “I can’t walk the tables.”
“You will!” Kindan declared, his voice rising. He stood up, grabbing Vaxoram’s hand and pulled the
larger apprentice up out of his cot. “Bemin!”

“Kindan, what is it?” the Lord Holder called back, rushing over.
“Help me,” Kindan cried, staggering to keep Vaxoram upright. “Help me with him.”
“We could carry him,” Bemin suggested, his eyes wide with concern.
“No, he has to walk,” Kindan snapped. “He has to walk the tables.” He spoke to Vaxoram, “You can
do it, you can do it now.”
He turned to the startled holders. “Pull a table out from the wall.”
“Do as he says,” Bemin called firmly. The holders obeyed. Bemin turned to Kindan. “He’s dying, you
know.”
“Not until he walks the tables,” Kindan declared fiercely. “Then he’ll be a journeyman.”
Beside him, Bemin grabbed Vaxoram tighter, rising to his full height.
The table seemed  forever  away.  “We’re  nearly there,  Vaxoram,”  Kindan  said  encouragingly. “Stay
with us, we’re nearly there. You’re going to walk the tables.”
“You’re not a Master,” Vaxoram slurred slowly.
“Yes, yes, he is,” Bemin declared firmly. “My word as Lord Holder, he is.” Together, he and Kindan
lengthened their stride, supporting Vaxoram.
Finally, they reached the edge of the table.
“See? We’re here, Vaxoram, we’re here,” Kindan said. “You’re going to walk the tables now, do you
understand?”
“Come on, harper, walk,” Bemin added sternly, his face crumpled with emotion.
“I can’,” Vaxoram protested.
“You can,” Kindan swore. “You will. One step at a time, moment by moment.”
And, one step at a time, moment by moment, Vaxoram walked around the Great Hall table, supported
by Kindan and the Lord Holder of Fort Hold.
“See,  Vaxoram?”  Kindan  cried  as  they  reached  their  starting  point.  “See,  you  did  it!  You’re  a
journeyman now. See, Vaxoram?”
“Kindan,” Bemin said softly, his voice torn with sorrow. “I think he’s dead.”
 
CHAPTER 12 
Harper mourn, 

Holder cry, 
Every Turn 
Till tears run dry. 
FORT HOLD
W e’ll take him from here,” one of the holders said as Kindan and Bemin stood in shock  and  grief,
still holding Vaxoram’s dead body between them.
“Let us carry him now,” said the other.
“Thank you, Jelir,” Bemin said, shifting his grip with the holder. “Let go, Kindan, you’ve done all you
can for him.”
“For him,” Kindan agreed, looking at the long line of cots in the Great Hall. He started back toward
Koriana, but his legs buckled  under  him and  only Bemin’s quick  movements kept  him from slamming
against the floor.
“You should get some rest,” Bemin said, guiding him back toward the cots.
Kindan saw the two holders carrying Vaxoram’s body and shook his head.
“No, I should see to him,” Kindan protested, trying to alter their course.
“Kindan,” Bemin said slowly, looking down at the young harper, “our duty is to the living. How would
that serve them?”
“I need to say good-bye,” Kindan pleaded.
Bemin started to argue but changed his mind. “Very well, then you’ll get some rest.”
“My watch should start any moment,” Kindan argued.
“‘Should’ isn’t what matters,” Bemin replied. “I’ll wake you when we need you, you sleep until then.”
“Only if you sleep the same amount after, Lord Holder,” Kindan replied.
“I’m older, I don’t need that much sleep,” Bemin objected.
“I’m younger, I don’t need that much sleep,” Kindan retorted.
“Let’s pay our last respects to your—our”—Bemin corrected himself—“friend.”
Supported by Bemin, Kindan followed the slow march of the holders as they bore Vaxoram to the far
side of Fort Hold and the great ditch that had once been the Lord Holder’s ancestral gardens.
Kindan stifled a gasp as the two holders unceremoniously threw Vaxoram’s body into the ground to
rest on top of countless other bodies. Jelir staggered from the toss and nearly toppled down into the mass
grave himself, but Bemin reached out just in time and caught him.
“You should get some rest, too,” Bemin said to the holder.
“I’m sorry, my lord,” Jelir apologized. “He was the heaviest we’ve carried tonight, I won’t fall again.”

“Get some rest, we’ll call you if we need you,” Bemin reiterated.
“Night’s  over,  anyway,”  the  other  older  remarked,  nodding  toward  the  lightening  east.  As  if  in
agreement, Valla sprang from Kindan’s shoulder and flew a slow, mournful arc over the grave site.
They had just started back to the Great Hall when the loud noise of a dragon arriving from between
startled them. Kindan had time only to realize that it was M’tal once again before the rider threw down
four large parcels and disappeared once more between. The parachutes of the parcels opened and they
floated down to the ground.
“Catch them!” Bemin ordered,  rushing after  the farthest  bundle.  Kindan  staggered  after  him, as  did
Jelir and the other holder.
“What are they?” Jelir asked as he caught his parcel. “Food?”
“Masks,” Kindan said, snagging his parcel out of the air and opening it excitedly. He took one mask
off the top of the bundle—there were easily fifty in his bundle alone, he could tell by the thickness—and
wrapped it around his face, tying the straps at the back. “They’ll protect against the plague,” he shouted,
his voice muffled.
“How?” Jelir asked.
“It’ll prevent spreading by containing our coughs and protecting us from others’ coughs,” Bemin said,
walking back to Kindan with his bundle and holding out his free hand for one of Kindan’s masks.
“Let’s get these on everyone immediately,” Kindan said.
“Even the sick?” Jelir asked, daunted at the size of the task.
“Especially the sick,” Kindan said. “They’re the ones who can spread the disease to us.”
“But you were sick already,” Bemin said. “Doesn’t that protect you from reinfection?”
“I don’t know,” Kindan told him. “Maybe.”
“No point in finding out,” Jelir said, grabbing a mask from Kindan’s pile and fitting it over his nose and
mouth hastily.
“But it’s no cure,” complained the other holder.
“It might be,” Kindan said. The others looked at him challengingly. “If the infection can’t spread, then
there’ll be no new patients. Once the others have recovered—”
“Or died,” Jelir added despondently.
“—the cycle will be broken,” Kindan finished.
“But how long before the last of the infection is gone?” Bemin asked.
“I don’t know,” Kindan replied. “It seems like it takes a sevenday for the worst of the symptoms to
show.” He paused in thought. “Some recover in four days, others take longer.”
“Anyone who was sick died in a sevenday,” Jelir remarked.
“Yes,” Kindan agreed. “That might be right.”

“Might?” Bemin queried.
“It seems that the healthiest suffer the most from this illness,” Kindan said.
“No, Stennel was healthy as a workbeast and he’s right here,” Jelir said, jerking his head toward the
other holder.
“The worst hit were those in their prime,” Bemin said in agreement. “Like my sons.”
“And Vaxoram,” Kindan added. “Those between seventeen and twenty-one Turns or so.”
“Maybe younger,” Bemin said, turning bleakly toward the Great Hall.
“We’re getting nothing done jawing here,”  Stennel said,  stepping  out briskly toward  the Great  Hall,
unwrapping his bundle as he walked.
“Let’s keep the other two wrapped up until we need them,” Kindan said to Bemin and Jelir. The Lord
Holder nodded and looked to the other holder for acknowledgment.
Inside the Great Hall, they separated, each one taking a line of cots and a handful of masks. Koriana
was the first in Kindan’s  line. She  was  sweating freely and  tossing in a  fevered  sleep;  Kindan  got the
mask on her with difficulty and she shook it off before he could tie it. It took him several more minutes to
get it back on her.
The next patient was little better, the third was dead. After that, Kindan moved slowly from cot to cot,
growing weaker  each  time. He  ran out of masks  and  began  opening a  second  bundle just as  Stennel
reached him.
“I’m out,” the older man said, reaching for a handful of the new masks.
“How many are in the Hall?” Kindan asked. “There are fifty masks in each bundle.”
“There might be that many here,” Stennel said, running his gaze over the Hall. “But there’s thousands
more in the rest of the Hold.”
“But the sickest are here, aren’t they?”
Bemin joined them then, having run out of his stack of masks.
“Only those we could find,” Bemin said sadly. “I can’t say how many are still in their quarters…and
how many are dead.”
“We’ll have to start moving the dead, or we’ll have worse than this plague to deal with,” Kindan said.
“There are things that feed on dead bodies and spread to the living.”
“Bring the living here,” Bemin said, “where we can care for them.”
“Which is more important?” Stennel asked, glancing toward  the far end  of the Great  Hall and  back
toward the doors into the courtyard with its surrounding quarters.
“Both,” Bemin and Kindan said in unison. They shared a brief grin.
“Here, first,” Bemin said after a moment. “But fill the beds again.”
“As we empty a bed, find someone to fill it, my lord?” Jelir asked. Bemin nodded.

“Your garden will soon be filled, my lord,” Stennel remarked. “Then what?”
“Maybe help will come by then,” Bemin said hopefully.
“If it would’ve come, wouldn’t it have come sooner?” Stennel asked hopelessly.
“One day at a time,” Kindan said, turning to his cot. “My lord, I shall rest as you demanded.”
“Stennel, Jelir, one of you rest, the other come with me,” Bemin said.
Kindan checked on Koriana, who had rolled over on her mask in her delirium. He rolled her back to
prevent her from suffocating in her own spit.
“Check  that they haven’t rolled over,”  Kindan  called  hoarsely  to  Bemin  as  he  collapsed  onto  the
nearest cot. Bemin waved in acknowledgment and bent over the nearest cot.
Sometime later Kindan was shaken awake. He rose slowly, exhausted, to see Bemin looking down at
him bleary-eyed.
“Rest, my lord,” Kindan said, rising with feigned alacrity.
“The masks are all gone,” Bemin said. “We’ve got two hundred in the cots and many more in the rest
of the Hold. The dead…I don’t know if we’ll ever be rid of the smell.”
“A  good  cleaning,  a  good  airing,  and  only  memories  will  remain,”  Kindan  told  the  Lord  Holder
cheerfully, but Bemin’s eyes were  already  closed  and  he was  breathing lightly, on the edge  of a  deep
sleep.
Kindan checked first on Koriana, who had once more rolled over with her face in her pillow. Kindan
bundled up some pillows and blankets and propped her firmly on her side.
A sound distracted him and he saw Fiona sitting up in a farther bunk looking around anxiously.
“Hi, Fiona,” Kindan called, forcing himself to  smile at  her.  Shyly, the blond-haired  youngster smiled
back. Kindan’s heart skipped a beat as he saw the beginnings of the same  beauty  Koriana  possessed.
“Are you hungry?”
Silent, Fiona nodded.
“Let’s see what we can find in the kitchens, shall we?” Kindan asked, reaching down to pick her up.
“I walk,” the toddler  replied,  hopping off the cot  and  tottering  over  to  him,  holding  out  her  hand.
Kindan took it and was surprised to note that it wasn’t burning with heat as it had been—just a day ago?
He bent down and felt her forehead: cool. Had she recovered?
“I’m hungry,” Fiona complained. Kindan stood up, still holding her hand and  led her to  the kitchen,
stopping every so often to check on a patient.
In the kitchen, Kindan was surprised to find four women all working industriously.
“Why it’s Miss Fiona!” one of the women exclaimed, clapping her cheeks in surprise. “I’d no hope of
seeing you again.”
“I’m hungry,” Fiona said.

“Well, then,” the woman replied brusquely, “we’ll have to feed you, won’t we?” She turned her gaze
on Kindan and bowed her head, “You’re the boy that’s been healing us.”
“I—”
“You mustn’t remember me,” the woman interrupted. “I was sick as could be two days ago and you
came by and  wiped  my forehead  and  dripped  some  fellis in my mouth. Tasted  bitter  but stopped  the
pain.” The woman nodded to herself. “I’ll never forget that, healer.”
“He’s the healer?” another woman called from back by the ovens. She came out, wiping her hands on
her apron before holding one out. “I just want to shake your hand, sir, for all the kindness you’ve done.”
“But—” Kindan said, shaking his head.
“There’s them that gave up all hope, until you came,”  the second  woman said.  “I was  one  of them.
Then I saw you and—” She stopped to dab her tears out of her eyes.
“—you spoke so kindly and I could see it in your eyes that you wanted me to live. So I said, ‘Right,
then, I’m going to live. I’m going to live and make that lad some bubbly pies.’” She nodded toward the
oven. “There’s no fruit, but we’ve got some sweet buns cooking for you and everyone.”
Kindan could only shake his head mutely.
“You’ve gone and embarrassed him,” the first cook  said  scoldingly, but Kindan  knew  she  was  just
covering for him.
“Thank you,” Kindan managed to say at last.
“How about we take the miss off your hands, then?” the second cook offered. She  peered  down  at
Fiona. “Would you like to help Neesa and me in the baking?” Fiona nodded, wide-eyed at the prospect.
The first cook, Neesa, beckoned Kindan in closer. “I’ve no wish to add to your troubles, but bread’s
all we can make just now,” she told him. “And that for not much longer, certainly not enough to feed the
whole Hold, or what’s left of it.”
“I know,” Kindan replied. “The sick won’t be able to swallow it, it’ll be too hard for them.”
“I’d guessed,” Neesa replied. “They’ll be weak as lambs if they recover.”
“When they recover,” Kindan corrected. Neesa didn’t contradict him. “What about the stores?”
“Too heavy to move without a team of ten at least,” Neesa replied. “Even a barrel of fish and that’d be
awful eating.”
“Better than nothing,” the second cook noted.
Neesa made a face, so Kindan asked, “What would be best, then?
“Fruit’d be best, but it’s the wrong time of year,” Neesa told him. She frowned.  “There’s  many that
will recover only to starve from all this.”
“If they recover, I won’t let them starve,” Kindan swore.
Neesa nodded in fierce agreement. “As you say, healer.” She smiled bleakly at  him. “We  won’t  fail
you, that’s for sure.”

“I’m counting on it,” Kindan said, smiling at the older woman, too exhausted to be more than vaguely
amused at his commanding tone.
“I’ll let you get back to work,” Neesa said. “Sallit or Fiona will be out with those rolls soon.”
“And klah?” Kindan asked hopefully.
Neesa shook her head dolefully. “We’ve no bark left worth brewing.”
“Make a list of what we need, then, and add klah to it,” Kindan told her.
“Might as well add the fruits of summer,” Neesa grumbled, but she turned toward her chopping table,
slapping the sides of her apron in search of a pencil.
Nothing was  better—in  fact,  with the beds  refilled  and  Vaxoram  and  Kilti  dead,  things  were  clearly
worse—but somehow Kindan’s spirits lifted. Perhaps it was the warm rolls delivered  to  those  standing
by a wide-eyed, solemn Fiona, perhaps  it was  her shy kiss  when Kindan  bent  down  to  thank  her,  or
maybe it was the masks keeping the air so much cleaner.
More people were up and about. As he saw them, Kindan was struck again by the uneasy knowledge
that the plague killed those in their prime; the survivors were either much older or much younger.
Again and  again, Kindan  found himself returning to  Koriana,  checking her  temperature,  wiping  her
forehead, changing her soiled sheets, clearing her soiled mask.
“Time to rest,” Bemin told him later that evening, handing him another roll. Kindan bit into it but in the
course of the day it had hardened and was tough to chew.
“Call me if you’ve need, my lord,” he said, checking once more on Koriana before lying down on the
cot beside her.
“Where’s Fiona?” Bemin asked, looking nervously around the room.
“Probably asleep in the kitchen,” Kindan guessed. “She’s been helping the cooks.”
A faint smile crossed Bemin’s lips. “Her mother liked to help in the kitchens, too.”
Kindan drifted off to a fitful sleep.
Bemin woke him up for his shift and settled down into the same cot, too weary to talk.
Kindan checked on Koriana and was not surprised to see that she had clawed off her mask. Gently he
pushed it back up over her mouth and  nose.  He  stopped  when he noticed  that  it was  covered  with a
sticky, red substance. He removed it and brought the mask with him while he searched out Stennel who
was helping another man carry yet another body to the grave site.
“Have  you  seen  this?”  Kindan  asked,  waving  the  mask  at  Stennel.  Stennel  recoiled  and  nearly
dropped the body.
“Keep back,” Stennel cried. “I’ve seen that on every dead body we’ve taken since we put the masks
on them.” He shook his head. “It’s like they’re coughing up their innards.”

Kindan took the mask through the kitchen, rinsed it in the sink in the necessary, and threw it into the
boiling pot. He was surprised to see several others there.
“We’re reusing them,” Neesa told him when he asked back in the kitchen. “You said they’d help.”
“To keep the illness from spreading, yes,” Kindan said. “To save those too sick to—” he cut himself
off abruptly.
“Whose  mask  was  that?” Neesa  asked.  Her  eyes  went  round  as  she  added  fearfully,  “Not  Lord
Bemin’s?”
“No,” Kindan told her. “Koriana’s.”
“I’d heard you were sweet on her,” Neesa said, shaking her head sadly. “Seems you’ve time to  say
good-bye.”
Kindan nodded bleakly and hobbled out of the kitchen as fast as his weary legs would carry him back
to Koriana. He found her sprawled beside her cot. Gently he lifted her back into it, ignoring her feeble
movements.
“Help,” Koriana murmured deliriously, sitting up.
“I’m helping you,” Kindan said, brushing her lips with a cup of fellis juice. Koriana raised a hand and
pushed it away.
“Me help,” Koriana said irritably. “No juice.”
“It’ll help you get better,” Kindan said.
“Hurt too much,” Koriana replied, her eyes opening painfully. “Too bright,” she murmured, closing her
eyes again.
Kindan could barely see in the dim light.
“’M dying,” she said, wobbling in the cot. “Get Father.”
“No,  drink this,” Kindan  insisted,  holding the cup  back  to  her  lips.  This  time  her  hand  connected
solidly and knocked the cup out of his.
“Get my father,” Koriana  said,  sounding quite lucid. “Must say  good-bye.”  She  coughed,  long and
hard, and the force of it caused her to double  up in pain.  When she  looked  up again, the front of her
dress was covered in bloodred sputum. “Don’t let him see me like this,” she pleaded.
Kindan grabbed the sheets and laid them around her, covering the stain.
“Must say good-bye,” she repeated.
Kindan got up and walked around her cot to the next one, where Bemin lay sleeping fitfully.
“My lord,” Kindan called softly, shaking Bemin’s shoulder. “My lord, your daughter  needs  to  speak
with you.” Tears started down his face, surprising him—he hadn’t thought he had any more.
“What?” Bemin startled out of sleep, eyes not quite focused on Kindan.
“Koriana,” Kindan replied, gesturing. “She wants to talk with you.”

“She needs rest,” Bemin said, laying his head back down on the pillow. “Take care of her.”
“Bemin, she’s not going to make it,” Kindan said, his tears flowing freely now.
The Lord Holder of Fort Hold sat up slowly, took in Kindan’s tears, and  looked  over  to  Koriana’s
back.  He  got up and  beckoned  for Kindan  to  follow  him  as  they  went  around  to  the  other  side  of
Koriana’s cot.
“I’m here,”  Bemin said  as  he crouched  down  in front of Koriana.  She  was  bent  double  again  and
when she rose, she looked abashed at the new red stain on the sheets.
“Father,” she said slowly, her words slurred with pain and mucus, “I’m sorry.”
“Sorry for what?”
“I’m sorry I let you down,” she replied. Her eyes drifted longingly toward  Kindan.  “I’m sorry  that  I
couldn’t do as you asked.”
“Don’t worry,” Bemin said soothingly. “There’s nothing to worry about.”
Another cough wracked  Koriana  and  she  threw  her hands  out at  the same  time that  Bemin  pulled
himself and Kindan back, avoiding the bloodred mist that erupted from her mouth. It seemed to Kindan
that the coughing went on forever and that Koriana was coughing her very lungs out. Finally, she let out a
hideous, gurgling wheeze and collapsed, bent over double. With a harsh cry, Koriss leaped from the end
of the bed and went between.
“Koriana?”  Kindan  asked,  crouching  back  down  and  examining  her  chest  carefully  for  signs  of
breathing. He stayed there for a long time, until he was certain that Koriana was no longer in pain. But he
knew he was  only fooling himself, delaying the inevitable admission that  Koriana  was  dead—only  her
death would have caused Koriss to go between like that, forever.
At some  point,  Kindan  felt one  of  Bemin’s  hands  clasp  his  shoulder  tremulously.  Long  after  that,
Kindan leaned forward to give Koriana one last kiss, only to have Bemin pull him back.
“To kiss her is to die,” the Lord Holder told him, his voice devoid of all emotion. “Even through your
mask.”
Kindan nodded slowly, wishing at that moment that his heart would stop, it hurt so badly.
“Will you—” Bemin’s voice broke. “Will you help me carry her?”
Unable to speak, Kindan nodded and rose, gesturing for the Lord Holder to take her shoulders while
he carried her feet.
As they walked slowly out of the Great Hall, Kindan looked on the face of the girl he loved and saw
that Koriana was at peace.
Bemin wouldn’t sleep that night, nor did Kindan. They spent  the hours  walking fitfully among the sick,
only paying attention when Jelir or one of the other holders called to them.
Sometime, maybe nearer morning, Neesa came out of the kitchen, bringing some old buns and water.

“We’re nearing the end of the coal,” she said to Bemin. The Lord Holder regarded her blankly for a
moment, then looked away.
“And there’s only the one pitcher of fellis juice,” Neesa said to Kindan. Kindan shrugged in response.
Neesa turned away, scuttling back to her kitchen.
Sometime later she returned with Fiona.
“She wants her father,” Neesa said, pushing the girl toward Bemin’s arms.
Automatically, Bemin reached out and cradled the small child against his chest,  one  hand supporting
her bottom, the other her shoulders. Slowly, Bemin started shaking. Kindan  thought for a  moment that
the Lord  Holder  was  trying to  lull his daughter  back  to  sleep,  but  then  realized  that  the  motion  was
wrong—Bemin was shaking noiselessly with grief. Kindan circled behind him and reached up, soothingly
rubbing the older man’s shoulders with his hands.
“We can’t survive,” Bemin murmured over his daughter’s head. “We’re all going to die.”
Neesa gasped in fright and fled.
“No, my lord, we’re not,” Kindan told him firmly. “We’ll survive. This Hold will survive, your daughter
will survive.”
“How?” Bemin demanded, turning to face Kindan. “How do you know? Your word as a harper?”
“Yes,” Kindan said. “My word as a harper.” He responded without tone, without hope, only with the
certainty that he would not let Fort’s Lord Holder, Koriana’s father, down. He would find a way to feed
them, to save the survivors.
“May as well wish for fruit from the sky,” Bemin snapped irritably. “Your word’s no good.”
Fruit from the sky! Kindan’s eyes lit with hope.
“My word, my lord,” he repeated. “My word. You shall have your fruit from the sky.” He rushed out
to the kitchen and beyond to the linen line, searching for his makeshift drum.
 
CHAPTER 13 
Healer with your craft so sure 
Sickness we can all endure 
Use your skill and healing notions 
To save us with your salves and potions. 
HARPER HALL

Y ou look so thin, Conar,” Kelsa said as she looked up at the young holder boy gently dabbing at her
head with a cloth. “Are you sure you’ve had enough to eat?”
Conar nodded.
“You  eat  this,”  he  told  her,  sitting  her  up  and  spooning  some  porridge  into  her  mouth.  He  had
scrounged it from the kitchen, unable to find anything else not moldy.
“But—”
“It’s only fair,” Conar replied, “you brought me back to health, now it’s my turn.”
Kelsa saw that it was useless to argue, especially as Conar placed the spoon on her tongue.
“It’s awful!” she groaned as she swallowed. Her throat was so raw from coughing that swallowing the
porridge felt like swallowing hot coals. Now she knew how dragons must have felt with that old firestone.
Conar—dragons sing his praise—had a cup of cool water to  her lips in an instant. But the cool  water
was almost as much torment on her throat as the porridge.
“Another  mouthful,”  Conar  said,  filling  another  spoon.  Kelsa  twisted  her  head  away  rebelliously.
Conar opened his mouth to utter another encouragement when they heard the sound of drums.
“Kindan?” Kelsa said in wonder. Conar nodded, listening.
“Fruit?” Kelsa muttered as the drum message beat out. “Where can we find fruit?”
“Did he say, ‘J’trel?’” Conar asked.
“He did,” Kelsa agreed. “Get him, tell him Kindan’s message.”
“He’s busy with Druri and the baby,” Conar said. The blue dragonrider  had  been  working tirelessly
with Jalenna’s children ever since she had succumbed to the plague four days earlier. Before that, it had
been only the efforts of Jalenna, J’trel, and Conar that had kept the others alive. Kelsa didn’t know how
many had died; Conar refused to tell her.
“Go get him, tell him it’s important,” Kelsa said, ignoring the pain of her tortured throat.
Conar scuttled off, moving more slowly than Kelsa liked. He looked thin, too. She wondered, had he
been skimping on his meals?
Conar slowed down once he was out of the makeshift infirmary, stopping to gasp for breath and get
rid of the spots that darted before his eyes. He hadn’t eaten in days. He was smaller than the rest, he told
himself, he could do without for longer.
“J’trel, Kindan sent a message,” Conar said as he caught sight of the blue rider.
J’trel looked up at him, his face gaunt and cheeks full of days-old beard.
“He said for you to get fruit,” Conar told him.
“Fruit?” J’trel repeated wearily. “Was that all?”
“Fresh fruit,” Conar said, remembering the message and wishing he was much better with drums.

“There’s no fruit this time of year,” J’trel exclaimed, shaking his head angrily.
Conar screwed up his face, trying to remember the exact message. “He said: ‘J’trel, fresh fruit, south
of Ista.’”
“South of—?” J’trel repeated, dumbfounded. “There’s no land south of—” He stopped suddenly, his
eyes going wide. He looked outward, beyond the room to  the meadow  where  his blue dragon  rested.
“Talith…”
“What is it, J’lantir?” C’rion, Ista’s Weyrleader, asked  as  the bronze  rider  caught up with him. C’rion
had  returned  from  a  patrol  over  the  infected  Holds  and  was  not  happy.  He  had  followed  M’tal’s
suggestion because it made  too  much sense—if the weyrfolk were  as  decimated  by the plague as  the
holders, the Weyrs would be incapable of fighting Thread  when it came.  But that  didn’t stop  C’rion’s
stomach from knotting every time he flew over empty fields or saw people waving helplessly at him from
below.
They did what they could, guiding unwatched herdbeasts to makeshift corrals, dropping the masks that
M’tal had mentioned, but it was too little and too late.
C’rion was itching to do something.
“I just had word from J’trel,” J’lantir said.
“How is the Harper Hall?”
“He didn’t say,” J’lantir replied. “He said that the holders need fruit, fresh fruit—”
“It’s the middle of winter, there’s none to be had,” C’rion objected.
“South of Ista,” J’lantir finished.
“South?” C’rion repeated his eyes going wide. “The Southern Continent?”
“The seasons would be reversed there, it’s summer,” J’lantir observed.
“Then there’s no hope there, either, the fruit wouldn’t be ripe,” C’rion objected.
“Do you remember Turns back, before we met young Kindan and the watch-whers, how I once lost
my wing for a sevenday?” J’lantir said.
C’rion nodded slowly, uncertain about the sudden change of topic.
“I think I know where they went,” J’lantir told him. “If not precisely when they went.”
“To feed all the holds—”
“We could drop the fruit, if we found the right sort, just as we’re dropping those masks,” J’lantir cut in
quickly.
C’rion mulled the notion over only for an instant before he said briskly, “Do it.”

“You approve?”
“I was about to send a flight of dragons out to help, only I had not the slightest notion what we could
do,” C’rion told him. “Now, there’s a chance.”
J’lantir smiled broadly and turned to go.
“J’lantir,” C’rion called after him. The bronze wingleader turned back. “Have your men pile the fruit by
Red Butte, we’ll handle it from there.”
“How much?” J’lantir replied.
“All of it,” C’rion said. “I’ll let the other Weyrs know.” J’lantir’s brows rose in surprise. “You’re to get
enough to feed all Pern.”
“For how long?”
“Until we  tell you to  stop,”  C’rion  replied,  waving the bronze  rider  away.  “Now  go and  get  those
miscreants.”
“I promised I’d work them like wherries,” J’lantir said with a smile. He shook his head in admiration,
as he added, “And you know, they never told me what they did.”
“You still have to see if you’re right,” C’rion told him.
“Oh, no,” J’lantir called back, crossing the Bowl toward his Lolanth and jumping up onto the bronze’s
neck. “I know I’m right, Talith seemed too smug.”
And with that, the bronze dragon and rider leaped  into the air above  the Bowl. Lolanth stroked  his
wings once, twice, and was gone between.
J’lantir timed his jump carefully, arriving just at the last time he’d seen his wing before they’d disappeared
so  abruptly  after  five  Turns  ago.  He’d  been  off,  he  recalled,  talking  with  C’rion  about  something,
probably complaining once more about the firestone. He snorted at the memory.
“J’lantir!” J’trel called as Lolanth landed in the Bowl.
“J’trel, get the rest of the wing and meet me at Red Butte immediately,” J’lantir ordered briskly.
“But—”
“No  time,  just  do  it,”  J’lantir  replied,  urging  Lolanth  airborne  once  more.  In  an  instant  he  was
between, hovering over the strange  landmark that  had  been  a  rendezvous  for hundreds  of Turns and,
hopefully, would be for hundreds more to come.
The wing arrived almost immediately after he did.
“J’lantir,” V’sog called as he dismounted, “when J’trel said to meet you here, I thought he was joking.”
“Weren’t you meeting with C’rion?” J’lian asked. “I thought I just saw you—”

“You did,” J’lantir interjected. He gestured for them to gather ’round. “Now listen up, I’ve come back
in time—”
“Back in time!” V’sog exclaimed in surprise. “But dragons can’t—we’re not—”
“V’sog, listen up,” J’lantir bellowed. “I went back in time and brought you forward in time. You have
to go to the Southern Continent, you have to find the best fruit, fruit that sick people can eat, and collect
it all.”
“How much?” J’trel asked.
“Enough to feed all Pern,” J’lantir replied.
“For how long?” V’sog asked, looking at J’lantir anxiously.
“Until I tell you to stop,” J’lantir replied. “Bring it here. Bring it to this same spot one hour from now
and keep bringing it.”
“But—timing it?” J’lian said, peering around nervously at the rest of the wing.
“Where will you be?” V’sog asked.
“I’ll be coordinating with the rest of the Weyrs,” J’lantir said. “We’ve got to distribute the fruit.”
“To whom?” V’sog demanded.
“I can’t tell you,” J’lantir replied. “When the right time comes, you’ll know.”
“And until then?” J’trel asked.
“Until then, I know nothing,” J’lantir told them. “And you’re not to tell me.”
“Time paradox,” V’sog guessed.
“Exactly,” J’lantir agreed. He looked at B’zim and L’cal. “I want you two to take charge.”
The two senior riders exchanged glances and then nodded in agreement.
“When you’re all done, I’ll know nothing,” J’lantir told them. “I’ll be very angry, but you’re to tell me
nothing.”
“Tell you nothing?” J’lian asked, clearly confused. “Why?”
“Why are we doing all this, anyway?” K’nad demanded.
“Trust me,” J’lantir replied, catching each of their eyes in turn, “it’s worth it.”
“All right,” K’nad replied, “if you say so.”
“The Southern Continent!” J’lian exclaimed.
“Timing it!” J’trel added.
“Don’t get hurt,” J’lantir admonished  them, then climbed back  on his bronze  dragon.  “I’ll  see  you
soon.”

And, leaving his wing behind, J’lantir and Lolanth vanished between. When he came out of between
once more, the sun had moved an hour further into the sky and the top of the Butte was  covered  with
nets full of fruit.
“Best fruit we could find,” B’zim called as Lolanth settled in the remaining clear spot. The brown rider
tossed J’lantir a large redfruit. The bronze rider caught it deftly and sniffed it; its odor was tantalizing.
“You can eat it, seeds and all,” J’trel told him. “Even the rind.”
“Excellent!” J’lantir replied. A rustle of noise and wind behind him alerted  him and  he turned  to  see
C’rion hovering nearby on bronze  Nidanth.  Surrounding him were  the rest  of the Weyr,  less  J’lantir’s
wing. A moment later the sky darkened as riders from Benden, Fort, and High Reaches arrived.
“Attach parachutes  to  those  and  we’ll  drop  them  directly,”  M’tal  called  as  he  jumped  off  bronze
Gaminth and strode over to J’lantir.
“Parachutes?” J’lantir asked. He turned to his wing. “Come back in another hour.”
“That’s timing it tight, J’lantir,” B’zim noted.
“We’ve no time here,” J’lantir told him. B’zim nodded and waved to the other  wing riders  to  mount
their dragons.
“Where are they going?” M’tal asked, peering after the rising wing.
“Back in time to get more fruit,” C’rion told him.
“They’re timing it?” M’tal asked in horror.
“There’s no choice, fruit isn’t ripe in Southern this time of year,” C’rion replied.
“They’ll be all right,” J’lantir assured the Benden Weyrleader.
“How do you know?” M’tal asked challengingly.
“Because they’re the wing I lost for a sevenday,” J’lantir replied with a grin.
M’tal’s eyes widened as  he recalled  the story.  “So  now we  know  where  they went and  who took
them.”
“Indeed,” C’rion agreed. He turned back to the task at hand. “How many parachutes for these nets,
do you think?”
M’tal turned his attention to the large cargo nets and gestured for one of his riders to approach him.
“We must hurry,” the Benden Weyrleader said. “We don’t have time on our side here and now.”
He turned to another group of descending dragons, frowning. “What are they doing here,” he groaned,
“they could be dropping the fellis leaves now. Gaminth, tell them to spread out to the Holds and drop the
bundles they’ve got; they don’t need parachutes, the leaves will do fine!”
As if hearing his bellow, the four wings of dragons winked between to fulfill their mission.

“That’s the last of the fellis, there,” Neesa told Kindan as she handed him a pitcher.  “And the rolls are
gone, too.”
The sun was not yet at midday.
“Thanks,” Kindan  told  her.  He  left the pitcher  on the counter  and  went out to  the linen  line  again.
Perhaps he could figure out a way to get some from the Harper Hall.
He drummed his message  quickly, calling for attention.  Then he  waited.  And  waited.  And  waited.
There was no response.
“Conar?” Kindan called out softly, thinking of the young holder  boy  who had  never  thought himself
worth much.
Valla appeared at his shoulder, crooning anxiously and  preening against Kindan’s  neck,  but Kindan
ignored him, staring down at the dull pot in despair.
Bemin was right. They were all going to die.
A shadow dulled the pot. Then another.  Kindan  looked  around  and  saw  more  shadows.  He  gazed
upward  and  started  as  a  bundle  landed  with  a  thump  not  a  meter  from  him.  Incredulously,  Kindan
reached for the bundle.
Leaves. Only leaves. Was this some—wait! They were fellis leaves.
“Neesa!” Kindan cried, scooping up two  bundles  and  racing to  the kitchen.  “Neesa,  I’ve  got more
fellis leaves!”
“What? How did you find them?” Neesa asked as Kindan thrust the bundles into her arms.
“They’re in the linen area,” Kindan told her. “They fell from the sky.”
“Fell from the sky,” Neesa repeated, looking at Kindan as though he’d lost his mind. Then his meaning
registered and she clapped her hands to her mouth, tears leaking from her eyes.  “Dragonriders!  We’re
saved!”
“What is this?” Bemin demanded, attracted by Neesa’s loud bellowing.
“Fellis,” Kindan said, thrusting a leaf at Bemin. “The dragonriders dropped fellis.”
For a moment, Bemin had a look of hope on his face. Then it drained away.
“Fellis will only help the dying,” he said, and turned back to the Great Hall.
C’rion and M’tal conferred when the first bundles of fruit were ready to drop.
“The Harper Hall?” C’rion asked.
“No, J’trel says there are only a few there,” M’tal replied. “Send them to Fort Hold.”

“You think your friend is still alive?” C’rion asked.
M’tal shook his head. “I can’t say,” he said. “But it was his idea, and B’ralar says there are still people
moving at Fort Hold, so we owe it to him to try first.”
C’rion nodded and gestured to the laden wing. “Fort Hold!” he called. In an instant they were airborne
and gone, between.
“Let’s hope we’re not too late,” C’rion murmured. Beside him, M’tal  nodded  glumly, his eyes  filled
with sorrow.
Kindan did not follow Bemin. Instead, he waited until Neesa had brewed a fresh decoction of fellis juice,
then he took the bottle.  In the Great  Hall, he worked  his way around  the room,  administering a  drop
here, two drops there, depending upon the amount of fever indicated by the moodpaste.
He had just finished the first line of cots when Bemin and Jelir walked back into the Hall, clearly having
borne another body to the grave site.
“It’s almost full, my lord,” Jelir said. “Overfull, if we don’t want scavengers digging among the dead.”
“Then leave the bodies here,” Bemin replied disconsolately, throwing himself onto a cot and sitting with
his head and shoulders hunched over in despair.
“My lord?”  Jelir said  in surprise.  Fort’s  Lord  Holder  made  no response.  Desperately,  Jelir  looked
over to Kindan.
Kindan sighed and straightened his shoulders. He glanced around for Fiona, but she wasn’t in sight; he
vaguely recalled a toddler sprawled in the kitchen.
He dropped to his knees in front of the Lord Holder.
“You cannot stop now,” he said, peering up to meet Bemin’s eyes.
“I can’t go on,” Bemin said. “We’ve got no food, only fellis.” He barked a laugh. “We could all drink
it and feel no pain.” He raised his head enough to meet Kindan’s eyes. “Mix it with the wine and we’ll all
feel no pain!”
“No,” Kindan said. “This is not the time for wine, my lord. Save it for later.”
“Later?”  Bemin  snorted.  “When  I  mourn  my  wife,  my  sons,  my  daughter?  Will  you  drown  your
sorrows over your lover then? Will the pain ever go away?”
“I don’t know,” Kindan told him honestly. “I was hoping you would tell me.”
Bemin grimaced and shook his head. “I have nothing to tell you, harper.” He snorted and said with a
lopsided grin, “You’ve dishonored your word once more, you know.”
“My lord?”
“Only fellis fell from the sky,” Bemin told him. “You were  half right, though, I’ll grant you that.”  He
snorted again in faint humor. “You keep half your word, harper.”

“I  promised  you  food  from  the  sky,  my  lord,”  Kindan  told  him  firmly,  his  voice  rising  to  carry
throughout the Great Hall. “On my word as harper.”
“Harper!” Bemin exclaimed, rising from the cot angrily. “I need no harpers, I need healers!”
“Lord Bemin, Lord Bemin, come quick!” Neesa shouted from the far end of the hall.
Bemin’s brows creased in pain.
“Fiona?” he called, then raced past Kindan toward the kitchen. Kindan followed an instant later.
But it wasn’t Fiona. Neesa raced past her, shouting, “Come quick, you’ve got to see! You’ve got to
see it!”
They raced out into the linen yard and Neesa pointed into the sky.
“Dragonriders!” she shouted. “Look at them! They’ve come!”
“More fellis,” Bemin guessed sourly. Just then, a dragon swooped low and a great bundle fell from the
sky, to be slowed an instant later by many large billowing parachutes.
“They dropped the fellis,” Kindan said in wonder, glancing at the slowly falling bundle. He turned and
saw that more bundles were falling in the courtyard outside the Great Hall. He  saw  yet another  bundle
dropping toward the cotholds outside Fort Hold.
“It’s food,”  Neesa  said,  rushing toward  the  first  bundle  that  crashed  onto  the  ground.  “It’s  food!
Fruit!” She reached through the netting and pulled out a large fruit. “I’ve never seen the like!” She took a
huge bite and juices dribbled down her chin. “It’s fresh! And it’s marvelous.” She turned to Bemin. “My
lord, you’ve got to try it!”
Bemin didn’t move. His eyes were on Kindan.
Slowly the Lord Holder of Fort Hold, the oldest Hold on Pern, knelt before the youngest harper  on
Pern.
“You kept your word, harper,” Bemin said, bowing low before him.
“Have a fruit, my lord,” Kindan said, taking one of the fruits proffered by Neesa. Bemin looked up at
him and slowly took the fruit.
“Then we’ll get back to work,” Kindan added with a grin.
The Lord Holder of Fort Hold rose slowly, redfruit in one hand, took a bite, then another, and smiled
back at Kindan.
“Fruit from the sky,” Bemin murmured in amazement.
“We’ve more work to do now, my lord,” Kindan said with a renewed sense of urgency. He gestured
to a bundle. “There’s many that will need these, they need them now.”
Bemin nodded in vigorous agreement, a new light in his eyes—a light of hope.
 

CHAPTER 14 
What is this I see 
I cannot believe my eyes 
Fresh fruit and new hope 
Floating in the skies. 
FORT HOLD
W hile Bemin  distributed  the  fruits  first  to  the  standing  able-bodied  and  then  sent  out  patrols  to
distribute them to the rest of the Hold, Kindan returned to tending the ill in the Great Hall.
As he had half guessed, the arrival of fresh food meant the arrival of more patients, newly freed from
the back rooms of the Hold by the roving parties that Bemin had sent out.
Kindan worked tirelessly through the rest of the day and the night. At some point he drifted off, falling
asleep half over a cot.
A hand shook him gently awake much later.
“Healer,” a woman’s voice called. “Healer Kindan, are you all right?”
Kindan stirred and pulled himself upright.
“I’m Merila,” the woman said. “I’m sometimes midwife,” she explained. “Lord Bemin sent me to help
you.”
“The illness?” Kindan asked her.
“I was way back in the apartments,” Merila said. “The others all died and I was near the same until the
men brought me that fruit.”
“What do you know about the illness?” Kindan asked, pushing himself to  his feet.  He  wobbled  and
Merila deftly inserted a hand under his shoulder, helping him up.
“Nothing much,” Merila said. “I had it and I got well, others died.”
“Those in their prime,” Kindan told her.
Merila’s brow creased in thought, then she nodded. “That was the way of it,” she agreed. “Couldn’t
see it until now.” She looked at him. “Do you know why?”
“Their lungs were coughed up,” Kindan said. “From the inside. Like their bodies fought so hard, they
coughed up their own lungs.”

“People’ve two lungs, did you try putting them on one side?”
Kindan nodded. “I tried that with”—he found his throat tightening—“with”—he couldn’t say her name,
it hurt too much—“with the Lord Holder’s daughter. It didn’t work.”
“It was worth trying, all the same,” Merila replied judiciously. She gave Kindan a probing glance and
looked ready to ask him another question, but changed her mind. “What can I do to help?”
“Have they got everyone from the back rooms?” Kindan asked.
“Not all,” Merila replied. “They’re just starting.”
A group of holders marched by, carrying a woman; they were trailed by a small group of children.
“There’s many a mother who’ll die of starvation,” Merila said, shaking her head. “They gave their food
to their children.”
“We’ve got fruit,” Kindan said.
“But for how long?” Merila wondered.
“The dragonriders won’t let us down,” Kindan assured her.
Merila snorted and waved her hand around the Hall. “I don’t see any dragonriders here, harper.”
“If they catch the plague, they’ll infect their weyrfolk,” Kindan explained. “The last time a plague like
this spread over Pern they did just that and it took nearly twenty Turns for the Weyrs to recover.”
“Twenty Turns?” Merila repeated in surprise. “But Thread’s coming—”
“Exactly,” Kindan said with a firm nod. “If the weyrfolk were  to  die from this illness, there’d  be  no
support for the Weyrs, and not enough dragonriders fighting Thread.”
“And when the illness passes, what then?” Merila asked. “Will they come then?”
“Who can say when the illness has passed?” Kindan asked her.
“That would be you,” she  told  him. Kindan  gave her a  startled  look.  “You’re  the only healer  I see
here.”
“And when you’re  done  there,  check  the stables,”  Bemin called to  a  workgroup  as  he entered  the
Great Hall from the courtyard. “If we can hitch up a wagon, we can bring food down below and the ill
back up.”
“Aye, my lord,” Jelir called, gesturing to the group of four men behind him as they turned to head back
outside.
Bemin saw Kindan and walked stiffly over to him.
“I can’t be here, there’s too much work to do in the Hold,” the Lord Holder said. “Can you manage
on your own?”
“I’ll help,” Merila declared.
“And Neesa will keep the food going,” Bemin added.

“If only we had some klah,” Merila murmured.
Bemin cocked an eyebrow at her. “I’ll bet we can find some bark down in the village.”
“That would be great, my lord,” Kindan said, thinking wistfully of the brew’s restorative powers.
“We’ll make it our second priority,” Bemin declared. “Right after tending the sick.”
Kindan nodded in agreement. Bemin turned but seemed reluctant to leave.
“Go, my lord,” Kindan told him with a wave of his hand. “We’ll manage.”
As the day progressed, Kindan found it harder and harder to  “manage.” Even with the fruit and  the
fellis, there  were  over  two  hundred  patients  and  only two  carers,  himself and  Merila.  Merila watched
over his shoulder while he dealt with the first three patients, marveled at the usefulness of the moodpaste,
then took off on her own.
Sometime after lunch, Kindan staggered and fell to his knees. Attracted by the motion, Merila rushed
to his side.
“Lie down,” Merila told him.
“There are more patients,” Kindan protested.
“You’re no help to them the way you are,” she replied, gesturing to an empty cot. “Lie down. Rest.”
“Wake me by dinner,” Kindan told her, sitting down on the cot. He was asleep before she answered.
“Kindan,”  Bemin’s  voice  called  to  him  gently.  Kindan’s  nose  twitched,  some  distant  memory,
some—“I’ve got klah.”
Kindan’s eyes snapped open and he looked up at the Lord Holder, who was clutching Fiona with one
hand and proffering a mug with the other.
Kindan sat up and took the mug eagerly. It was warm, it was tasty, it was great.
“We didn’t find much,” Bemin explained, eyeing the mug sadly. “Only enough for a pot or  two.”  He
bent down and kissed Fiona on the head to give Kindan a moment to finish his klah. “Merila and Neesa
have made  a  playroom  out of the laundry room,”  Bemin said,  adding wryly, “I nearly had  to  pry  her
away.”
Kindan downed the last of his klah  and  looked  up at  the Lord  Holder,  smiling. “That’s great!”  He
stretched, ignoring sore muscles, and said, “I haven’t felt this awake in…”
“A fortnight or so,” Bemin finished with a shrug. “I’ve lost track of time, myself.”
“Time,” Kindan repeated, his thoughts still muzzy and distracted. The klah was marvelous, but not a
complete cure for weeks of sleepless toil. What was so important about time? Merila had said it, Kindan
thought to himself, something about time.
“I must go to the Harper Hall,” Kindan said suddenly.
Bemin gave him a blank look.
“No one could answer the drums,” Kindan explained. “They must be even worse off than we are.” He

tried to stand up but his legs wouldn’t move. He looked up at Fort’s Lord Holder. “Could you give me a
hand up, my lord?”
Bemin drew a ragged breath. “No,” he said wearily. “You need to rest.”
“But they need me there!” Kindan protested, again trying to push himself up. Feebly  he grabbed  for
the edges of the cot he’d knelt by, trying to lever himself off the floor, but his arms were no better than his
legs.
Bemin waved a hand at him. “You can’t even stand on your own, lad—what help can you be?”
Kindan shook his head. “It’s my duty,” he whispered, eyes too drained to cry.
“Kindan,” Merila called from the far end of the Great Hall. “Rialla has passed on.”
“Her children,” Bemin groaned softly, clutching Fiona tightly against his chest.
“I’ll talk to them,” Kindan said. Again he raised a hand to Bemin. “Can you help me up?”
With a sigh, Bemin reached  down  and  helped  the lad up from the floor.  He’s  nothing but skin and
bones, the Lord Holder mused. He found a sick humor in the thought that all of Fort Hold was reliant on
the wits of a tall, thin waif of a lad. “Once you’re  done  with them, you’ll lie back  down  and  get more
rest,” he ordered.
“I can’t,” Kindan replied. “I’ve got to go to the Harper Hall.”
“You can only walk holding on to my arm,” Bemin reminded him.
“And no one there can answer the drums,” Kindan told him.
“Lad,” Bemin began slowly, dreading the question, “what if there is no one to answer to drums?”
“Then we must know,” Kindan replied firmly. “We must tell the others, the Weyrleaders—”
Bemin interrupted with a disdainful snort. “The weyrfolk of Pern are safe enough, high up in their lofty
homes. But they can’t come and till our fields, harvest our grains, tend our sick.”
Kindan shifted his weight, leaning more on Bemin as he used his free hand to wipe his face.
“If they can’t come, we’ll survive,” he declared feverishly.
“If we survive here, at this Hold and the Hall, it will be only because of you,” Bemin said. He glanced
down, seeing the top of Kindan’s head. “Survive and you can have anything you ask for.”
Surprised, Kindan glanced up at the Lord Holder. “You know what I wanted most on Pern.”
A ghost of a smile crossed Bemin’s lips. “No man would have been prouder than I to  have you call
him ‘Father.’”
Bolstered by those words, Kindan found the strength to stand on his own and even lengthen his stride.
As he knelt down beside the two youngsters who looked uncomprehendingly at their mother’s body,
Kindan turned to Merila and said, “Prepare some supplies, we’ll be going to the Harper Hall after this.”
He glanced up at Bemin and said by way of apology, “I can’t rest until I know.”
Bemin sighed heavily, but dropped a hand on Kindan’s shoulder and clenched it. “I’ll go with you.”

Kindan nodded in gratitude, then turned his attention to Rialla’s children. He  took  a  deep,  steadying
breath before he caught the eyes of Ernin, the youngest, and Erila.
“Your mother didn’t want to leave you,” he told them softly, reaching out and  grabbing their hands.
“She was very brave and she fought for days as hard as she could.”
“She did?” Ernin asked, looking at the still form of his mother. “She fought the plague?”
“She did,” Kindan affirmed. “But she was very weak and it was very strong.”
“It beat her?” Ernin asked, his eyes watering. Kindan nodded sadly. Ernin pursed his lips in desperate
thought. “Can she play again?”
“No, lad, I’m afraid she can’t,” Bemin said. “She’s gone, like my Lady Sannora.”
“She’s dead?” Erila asked, shifting her gaze from Kindan up to Bemin.
“She is,” Kindan told her softly. “But she asked us to look after you, and we promised her we would.”
He found it hard to speak and it was a moment before he continued, “Lord Bemin and I, we’ll keep care
of you.”
“But I want to go with Momma!” Ernin wailed.
“That would be the easy way,” Bemin told the boy chidingly. “You seem stronger than that. Are you
up to the challenge?”
Ernin looked up wide-eyed at the Lord Holder until his sister  nudged  him, and  hissed,  “Answer the
Lord Holder!”
“Yes, my lord,” Ernin told him.
“I knew you were!” Bemin replied with a firm nod of his head. “I’ll need you two to find your way to
the playroom, you’ll find it by the noise. There are others there who are ready for the challenge.” Bemin
gestured to the door. “Off you go!”
As the youngsters scurried away toward the kitchen, Bemin shook his head sadly. He waited until they
were out of sight, then signaled to two holders to come and take Rialla’s body.
He turned to Kindan, his features set. “Very well, harper, let’s go to your Hall.”
He drew Kindan to his side and together they walked out of the Fort  Hold’s  Great  Hall toward  the
ramp that led down into the valley below and onto the road that forked to the Harper Hall.
Kindan’s first sight of the Harper Hall in nearly three weeks set his heart plunging into despair. The whole
place had a disused, abandoned appearance, looking nothing at all like the purposeful bustling center of
learning and arts on Pern.
Worse, he could see a huge mound of dirt and a bigger ditch just outside the entrance to  the Healer
Hall set in the cliffs far to the right of the Harper Hall. A blue dragon was working busily nearby. It took
Kindan a  moment to  see  what the dragon  was  doing, and  then his heart  nearly stopped.  J’trel’s  blue
Talith was gently carrying bodies in his front claws and lowering them into the ditch. He could see where

another ditch nearby had already been filled in.
He picked up his pace, startling Bemin.
“Valla, go ahead, tell them we’re coming!” Kindan called to his fire-lizard. The little bronze did a quick
circle in the sky then sped off, chirping loudly at the blue dragon and then disappearing through the doors
of the Healer Hall.
“There’s a bundle of fruit over there,” Kindan called, veering off the paved road.
“Let the dragon get it,” Bemin replied, steering them back. “We can also send down a cart later. First
we must see…” he let his words trail off, unwilling to complete his sentence.
As they passed near the outside of the Harper Hall, a fresh breeze  blew in from the valley, carrying
with it the distinct odor of death and decay.
“We’ll send a party in as soon as we can,” Bemin promised.
“No, we’ll do it, our duty as harpers,” Kindan replied.
“No, as Lord Holder, I am telling you that Fort will do it,” Bemin told him forcefully. In a softer voice
he added, “It’s my choice and our honor.”
“I thought you didn’t trust  harpers,”  Kindan  snapped  back  before  he  thought  about  what  he  was
saying. He instantly regretted it but Bemin laughed and waved it aside.
“You’re right: I didn’t  trust  harpers,”  Bemin agreed.  He  nodded  down  to  Kindan.  “But  now  that
you’ve produced fruit from the sky, I’ve had to revise my thinking.” He paused  for a  moment. “Let us
clean up the Harper Hall,” he repeated. “You shouldn’t have to deal with that horror.”
“Very well,” Kindan said. He cocked his head up to meet Bemin’s eyes squarely. “Thank you, Lord
Holder.”
Bemin started to reply,  but halted  abruptly  as  Valla flittered out of the entrance  to  the Healer  Hall,
chittering in distress, eyes whirling red.
Together Kindan and Fort’s Lord Holder entered.
It was  a  moment before  their eyes  adjusted  to  the dim light.  During  that  moment,  their  nostrils  were
assailed with the smells of death and dying, and the sick.
Kindan walked through the entrance, turning toward the infirmary.
“Valla,” he called softly, “find J’trel.”
The rows of beds in the infirmary were full of bodies. Kindan’s heart sank.
“Something moved over there,” Bemin said, turning to the left, near a window.
Kindan rushed past him.

“Kinda’?” a young voice asked. Kindan saw Druri sitting on the floor, cradling little Jassi between his
knees.
“Druri?” Kindan called. The young Istan looked tired, underfed, but no worse.
“Kinda’!” Druri exclaimed, his face breaking into a smile.
“Shh!” Bemin said urgently. “I hear something.”
The noise came from the end  of the room.  It  was  a  rustling. Kindan  turned  to  locate  it, but Bemin
found the source first.
“Over here,” he called softly, standing over a bed. He knelt down and pulled out a hand. “She’s still
alive,” he said after a moment.
It was Kelsa. Her cheeks were so gaunt, she looked like a stick figure.
“I heard the drums,” Kelsa said. “Conar, where is he?”
A noise distracted them and a well-built haggard-looking man walked into the room and quickly took
in the scene.
“J’trel, rider of blue Talith,” the dragonrider said with a quick nod to Bemin.
“You managed all this by yourself?” Bemin asked in surprise and awe.
“No,” J’trel said, shaking his head sadly. “A youngster, one of the apprentices,  was  helping me until
yesterday.”  He  jerked  his head  toward  the outside  and  the dirt mound. “Talith  just  laid  him  with  the
others.”
“Conar?” Kindan asked. “The drummer?”
“That was him,” J’trel agreed dully. He leaned closer to them and continued in a voice that only they
could hear, “He skimped on his food to save the others.”
“How many are there?” Kindan asked, so numb with grief that he couldn’t imagine feeling worse.
“Five or six in this room, maybe twice that in the next,” J’trel said. He glanced sadly around the room.
“I was coming in here to take the others out.”
“We’ll help,” Bemin said.
“First, the living,” Kindan told them. He leaned over to Kelsa. “It’s all right, we’re here, we’re taking
you back to the Hold; we’ve got food, you’ll be fine.”
“Kindan, you’re alive!” Kelsa sobbed, grabbing his hand fiercely.
“Nonala? Verilan?” Kindan asked her hopefully.
“Over there,” Kelsa said, pointing first to the bed beside her and then to the one opposite.
Kindan felt his spirits lift—at least some of his friends were alive.
He heard a noise from Nonala’s bed and saw her looking at  him entreatingly. He  turned  to  her and
grabbed her hand.

“It’s all right, help’s here,” he told her.
Her lips were dry and her throat parched. She beckoned him close enough to whisper, “Vaxoram?”
“Journeyman Vaxoram didn’t make it,” Kindan told her with a shake of his head, tears filling his eyes.
Nonala  closed  her  eyes  and  turned  away.  Then  she  turned  back  and  opened  them  again.
“Journeyman?”
“He  walked  the  tables,”  Kindan  told  her.  Her  eyes  widened.  “He  said  that  then  maybe  he’d  be
worthy. He said he loved you.”
Nonala moaned and turned away again.
“The air is better  in the Great  Hall,” Bemin said,  looking at  J’trel.  “And we’ve  a  playroom  for the
children. Can your Talith carry some of the ill?”
“In shifts, he can carry them all,” J’trel declared stoutly.
“Good,  let’s  start  now,”  Bemin  replied  nodding  to  the  dragonrider.  “We’ve  food  and  everything
except klah.”
“There’ll be some in the stores,” Kindan said. “I’ll get them.” He turned to Kelsa. “We’re getting you
out of here.”  He  went over  to  Verilan’s bed  and  repeated  the message,  but  the  young  archivist  was
sleeping fitfully.
As Bemin and J’trel started moving the patients out of the infirmary, first moving Druri and  Jassi  into
the fresh air and sunlight, Kindan steeled himself for one more, difficult task.
“Did you bury Master Lenner?” Kindan asked the blue rider.
“Yes,” J’trel replied, grimacing. “He caught the flu eight days on, and survived another three.”
“He would have made notes,” Kindan said hopefully.
“If he did, they weren’t on him,” J’trel replied. “I checked.”
Kindan nodded, relieved of the worst of his fears—that the notes were buried with the Masterhealer.
“What do you need them for?” Bemin asked.
“Lenner would have taken  careful notes,  they might help us understand  this illness and  how long  it
lasts,” Kindan said, heading off to the Master’s study. It was in the back, in a room too dark to see much
more than shadows. He tried the desk but found nothing. Had Lenner succumbed too quickly to  make
any notes? Kindan shook his head, recalling how the Masterhealer had talked  about  the importance  of
good notes whenever he visited the Archives.
The Archives! Kindan thought to himself. Verilan!
Kindan left the study quickly, returning to  the infirmary just as  Bemin was  hauling Verilan on to  his
back.
“Did he have anything with him, my lord?” Kindan asked as Bemin trudged by.
“A sack full of notes,” Bemin said. “But we can always get them later.”

Kindan continued back to the infirmary and found the sack. He brought it out into the light and pulled a
note out at random—he recognized Lenner’s handwriting. The Masterhealer must have guessed his own
fate, to stash the Records with Verilan.
Further, Kindan realized, Lenner must have figured out that youngsters were more likely than others to
survive the plague. Perhaps Lenner had uncovered other secrets before the illness took him.
“We’ll take the first lot,” Bemin said, as he climbed up on Talith behind Nonala, Kelsa, and  Verilan.
“I’ll want to alert Jelir and get them settled. Then we’ll come back for you and the others.”
Kindan nodded, smiling at Druri as the youngster stared raptly at the great blue dragon. At Kindan’s
voiceless request, Valla approached and entertained both Druri and Jassi with antics and aerobatics while
Talith rose into the air and flew the short distance to Fort Hold’s great courtyard.
The blue dragon  returned  soon  enough  with  Stennel  and  another  holder  Kindan  didn’t  recognize.
Between the three men, they loaded Kindan, his notes, Jassi and Druri in no time.
“I’ll be back in a moment,” J’trel promised Stennel.
“We’ll get started in the meantime,” Stennel replied, turning to his fellow and muttering, “Did you hear
that? A dragonrider’s helping us!”
“If only there were more,” the other replied mournfully.
In front of Kindan, J’trel snorted in what seemed to be agreement.
“You know why they can’t help,” Kindan said to J’trel.
“I do, lad,” J’trel replied, calling over his shoulder.  “That doesn’t  mean I don’t  understand  how the
holders feel.”
Kindan nodded in agreement.  The worst  plague ever  seemed  to  be  ravaging the planet,  and  all the
Weyrs of Pern appeared to be idle. But the Weyrs were duty-bound to fight an even greater menace.
“They’ll understand when Thread comes,” Kindan reassured the rider.
“If they’re still alive,” the blue rider replied sourly.
 
CHAPTER 15 
Rider, dragon, tried and true 
All life’s hope now lives with you 
Dragon, rider, work and toil 
Save the earth, save the soil. 

RED BUTTE
N o sign of life at  Benden  Hold,  Valley Hold,  Brum, or  Bay Head,”  Wingleader L’tor  reported  to
M’tal. “Something’s been eating the fruit at Fork, Keroon, and Plains Holds. We’ve seen signs of life at
Lemos and Bitra Holds.”
“Very good,” M’tal said with a sigh. “There are  probably  many small cotholds,  but we  don’t  know
how to find them.”
C’rion, the Istan Weyrleader, had been listening in on the conversation.
“I think I know a way to help,” he said. He had his dragon call for J’lantir and the bronze rider quickly
appeared. L’tor and M’tal  exchanged  surprised  looks,  wondering what the Istan  wingleader could  do
about Benden Hold.
“Didn’t you make your wing drill on all the recognition points  on Pern  when they wouldn’t tell you
where they’d gone?” C’rion asked J’lantir.
“Well, yes,” J’lantir replied. He gave C’rion a strange look. “And, oddly, they seemed pleased.”
“I think we know why,” C’rion told him. “They’re doing nothing now, aren’t they?”
“It would be unwise to have them here,” J’lantir agreed, pointing to the members of his wing who had
arrived between times with yet another vital load of fresh fruit from the Southern Continent.
“Can you send them, with our compliments, to Benden, Telgar, Fort, and High Reaches Weyrs to act
as guides?”
“I could,” J’lantir replied dubiously, “but I’m not sure D’gan would want—”
“Forget Telgar,” M’tal said, shaking his head. “D’gan’s made it plain that he’ll handle this by himself.”
“Which means that you’re sneaking in food with your wings,” C’rion guessed shrewdly.
M’tal smiled. “As is B’ralar from the west.”
C’rion shook his head angrily, a bitter look on his face. “What that dragon ever saw in that particular
rider…”
“He’s just as scared as the rest of us,” M’tal said. “I can’t agree with his actions, but I can understand
his reasoning.”
“We’ll see how things are when it comes time to collect the tithe,” C’rion replied, thinking that D’gan’s
holders  would  acknowledge  his  lack  of  help  with  a  lack  of  goods  in  tithe.  He  turned  to  J’lantir.
“Regardless, get those layabouts of yours into action.”
“At once, Weyrleader,” J’lantir said with a nod, lack of sleep and timing making his step falter.
“He’ll be all right,” C’rion said in response to M’tal’s worried look.
“But will his wing?”

“Well,” C’rion said consideringly, “they must be because they’re still here.”  M’tal  did a  double  take
and the Istan Weyrleader chuckled. “If they’d had any problems between back in time, they wouldn’t be
here now, would they?”
“You mean they wouldn’t exist in the present if they’d died in the past, don’t you?” M’tal said after a
long moment.
“Precisely,” C’rion agreed.
“Another reason I don’t like timing it,” M’tal muttered to himself. “It’s impossible to explain.”
C’rion chuckled sympathetically.
“All the same,” M’tal went on, “there is a limit on how much fruit we can get from Southern.”
“And on how long we can work like this,” C’rion agreed as another wing of dragonriders burst from
between to load up with another cargo of fruit.
“Two days?” M’tal wondered. “Maybe three?”
Beside him, C’rion nodded in glum agreement.
Neesa took Druri and Jassi out of Kindan’s arms nearly the moment he returned.
“Yanira will look after them,” Neesa said. “She’s got the whole playroom under control.”
Kindan paused,  looking around  the Great  Hall. Something was  different. It  looked  lighter. He  saw
groups of people moving up and down the lines of cots purposefully.
“I figured out how to juice that fruit,” Neesa told him. “We’re feeding that to the worst off, dribbling it
down their throats.” She wrung her hands nervously and grimaced. Then she brightened. “But the others,
the ones getting better, we’re feeding them a mixture of the juice and the pulp.”
She gave Kindan a frank, worried look. “How long do you think the dragonriders can keep bringing
us food?”
Kindan shook his head.
“Not that it’ll help if we don’t get people to tend to the herds soon,” Neesa said. “Or check that the
grain silos aren’t infested.”
“We’ll think of something,” Kindan said.
“Well, I think you should get some rest,” Neesa told him firmly. “I’ve said the same thing to the Lord
Holder as well.” She shook her head grimly. “I know I’m exhausted and I’ve heard that it was only the
two of you tending the whole Hold for days on end—you must be beyond beyond.”
“There’s still work to be done,” Kindan replied, clutching the sack against his chest.
“And how do you plan to do that?” Neesa demanded tartly.

“Step by step, moment by moment,” Kindan told her, making a silent salutation to  Vaxoram’s  spirit.
“Right now, I need a place to read.”
“You’d want to go upstairs then, to the Lord Holder’s quarters,” Neesa told him. “Jelir said  they’ve
cleared it out, it’s fit to live in. Lord Bemin himself said you’re to take the first room on the right.” She
directed him to the end of the Great Hall and pointed to the stairs as she returned to the kitchen.  “You
get off your feet while you’re reading and don’t worry if you fall asleep.”
“No time for that,” Kindan told her as he began his way up the long winding stairs.
“No time!” Neesa swore, shaking her head as he vanished out of sight. “Just like the Lord Holder.”
The moment Kindan  set  foot  on  the  rich  carpeting  of  the  corridor  leading  down  the  Lord  Holder’s
quarters, he felt an eerie presence. It wasn’t just the essence  of Lady  Sannora,  or  that  of Bannor  and
Semin; it felt more like he was in the presence of hundreds of Turns of Lord and Lady Holders. Over the
Turns how many lives had been lived here, how many laughs laughed, how many tears  shed?  It  was  a
palpable thing, not quite a weight, certainly not oppressive, but there all the same.
The first door on the right was open, inviting. Kindan stepped through the doorway and stopped dead.
It was her room.
Decorated in floral pinks and golds, the room showed signs of Lady Sannora’s touch, as well as small
pebbles  and  polished  stones  that were  obviously Koriana’s.  There  was  a  large  workdesk.  Sheets  of
paper lay on it, many with barely legible writing—Koriana had been sent to the Harper Hall to improve
her writing, among other things.
He pulled back the padded chair, suddenly uncomfortable in his worn and  dirty clothing. He  looked
around and found a small hand towel near a freshly filled washbasin and set it on the padded seat before
settling into the chair.
Slowly, carefully, gently, reverently, he set Koriana’s papers to one side. With equal care, he opened
the sack and retrieved Lenner’s notes.
The light in the room was good, reflected cleverly through from the hallway and from the ceiling above.
A glowbasket lay near to hand, the glows turned over to preserve their energy, ready to use when night
came.
Kindan organized Lenner’s  notes  in chronological order  and  began  to  read.  At  first  they  were  the
common everyday notes of a healer working his craft, notes on cuts and prescriptions, decoctions. Then
worried references to the various flu decoctions that had worked in the past, and finally the first mention
of deaths.
Kindan never knew when he started crying, only that the tears were smearing the ink on the page and
he couldn’t have that. He wiped his eyes with his hands, and turned back to work only to discover that
his eyes wouldn’t focus. He tried again, focused, and began once more.
He wasn’t aware of falling asleep. He never heard Bemin enter the room and never woke as the Lord
Holder changed his clothes and slipped him into the bed.
He dreamed of Koriana, the scent of her hair in his nostrils. He thought that they were once again lying

together in the apprentice dormitory at the Harper Hall. He would wake up in a moment—
His eyes opened. It was night. Koriana was not at his side. He was in a bed much larger and  softer
than he’d ever been in. And then he remembered. Koriana was dead, he was in her room, the scent of
her hair must have come from her pillows.
Nervously he shifted, tensed, ready to spring out of the bed. How had he gotten  here?  What  would
Lord Bemin say?
“The sheets can be cleaned,” Bemin’s voice called from the doorway. Kindan saw him illuminated by
a dim glow. “Go back to sleep.”
“But—”
“It’s little and poor hospitality for all you’ve done,” Bemin told him. His voice softened  as  he added
wistfully, “Besides, it reminded me of putting Bannor in bed when he’d been up late.” He started to leave,
then turned back. “So please humor me.”
Kindan nodded and turned over in the bed. It was a long while before  he drifted  back  to  sleep  but
when he did, he dreamed of Koriana laughing and dancing in a summer field.
Koriana’s laughter faded and the scent of her hair was replaced by a  sharper,  more  pungent odor  that
woke Kindan up. Klah.
“It’s midday,” Bemin called from the door,  a  tray  in his hands.  “I’d  prefer  to  let you sleep  longer,
but—” he cut himself off, placed the tray on a bedside table, and dragged up a chair for himself.
“What, my lord?” Kindan asked, sitting up and feeling strange to be in a bed when the Lord  Holder
had clearly been awake for hours, and also feeling strange that he felt no discomfort  lying in Koriana’s
bed in Bemin’s presence. It wasn’t just that the Lord Holder had put him there; it was  that  Kindan  felt
Bemin welcomed him there.
“Drink and eat, while I talk,” Bemin said, handing Kindan a mug of klah. Kindan  took  the mug and
nodded  in  thanks.  Bemin  took  a  breath  before  continuing,  “Fort  Hold  was  home  to  more  than  ten
thousand holders before this plague.” He gestured toward the grave below. “I figure we’ve buried over a
thousand and there are probably as many bodies we haven’t yet discovered.”  Kindan  nodded  gravely.
“That means that we’ll have about six thousand left—”
“My lord? Surely you mean eight. Two from ten leaves eight,” Kindan said respectfully.
“There are easily two thousand who will starve or die from illness resulting from the plague,” Bemin
replied. “We need at least three thousand healthy people to supply our basic needs  and  we  need  them
every day. More than half the hold is still recovering from this illness—there aren’t enough hands to keep
things running until the rest recover.”
Kindan paled; he hadn’t realized the peril that remained. He didn’t question Bemin’s numbers; he had
only a vague understanding of the workings of a major Hold, Bemin had Turns of practical experience.
“The fruit?”

“Enough for a few days yet,” Bemin agreed. Bleakly he continued,  “But not enough to  get our  coal
brought down, get the infested apartments cleaned, set up the kitchen, bring up the stored  meats,  clear
the silos, check on the livestock.”
“If not, what will happen?”
Bemin shook his head. “I’m certain that the Hold  will survive, I just can’t  be  certain  that  thousands
more won’t die before winter’s end.” He paused before adding, “And this is not just Fort  Hold;  every
Hold on Pern must be in about the same state.”
The Lord Holder rose up irritably and started pacing the room. “I’m sorry I told you,” he apologized
to Kindan. “It’s just that, after we’ve come so far, I felt you had to know.”
“I understand, my lord,” Kindan replied. “And thank you.”
“For what?” Bemin asked, surprised.
“For treating me like a son.”
The Lord Holder stopped in his tracks, turned to Kindan, flushed, and nodded mutely. For a moment,
they needed no words: Kindan understanding Bemin’s trust and faith in him; Bemin knowing that Kindan
accepted both the privileges and responsibilities of his offer.
After a moment, Kindan rose from the bed,  gently smoothing the covers  and  looked  around  for his
clothing.
“I’ve sent it to be washed,” Bemin said. “Although you might want to have your clothes  destroyed.”
He glanced at a bundle laid out at the end of the bed. “Bannor was much bigger than you, but Koriana
liked  to  dress  man-style  whenever  she  could,  so  I  thought  you  might  fit  in  her  clothes.”  His  mouth
twitched. “Only Fort Hold colors, I’m afraid, not harper blue.”
Kindan ran his hand reverently over the fabric. “I’d be honored,” he told the Lord Holder. He glanced
around. “But I would soil the clothes.”
“There’s a  bath  beyond  there,”  Bemin  told  him,  waving  at  a  doorway.  “The  water’s  only  warm,
however.”
“Warm will be  enough,” Kindan  said  cheerfully, carefully picking up the clothes  and  heading to  the
bathroom.
It took him longer than he would have liked to get clean and, as the water soon ran colder,  he took
less time than he would have hoped for the first shower in many sevendays. In the end, however, he was
clean and  refreshed  in a  way that only a  person  who has  been  so  long without bathing could  be.  He
finished his toilet and was pleased to discover that Koriana’s old clothes were nearly a good fit on him.
Lord Bemin was still waiting for him when he returned, only now he was seated once more and eating
a roll. He  invited Kindan  to  sit with him and  they ate  and  drank  in a  companionable  silence.  At  last,
Bemin gestured to the Records on the table and raised an eyebrow inquiringly.
“I fell asleep before I could finish them,” Kindan explained ruefully.
“Do you think there’s  any point?” Bemin asked  politely, although his body  language made  his own
view clear.

“I won’t know until I’m done, my lord,” Kindan replied.
“Very well,” Bemin said with a nod. “Please don’t be too long, they’re clamoring for you downstairs.”
He smiled. “It seems most of my Hold believes that I can’t operate without your presence.”
“A vile lie, I assure you,” Kindan answered with a grin of his own.
Bemin surprised him with a hearty guffaw. He rose and strode to the door, turning back to  say,  “All
the same, don’t be too long, if you can. All vile lies aside, I appreciate your wisdom and your company.”
“I’ll be there as soon as I’ve finished,” Kindan promised.
Bemin nodded, serious again, and strode away briskly down the hall. His steps  on the great  circular
staircase died away slowly, leaving Kindan alone with the eerie presence once more.
He returned  to  the writing desk  and  bent  to  his reading,  intent on catching every  word  of  the  late
Masterhealer’s writings.
Two hours later he had more questions than answers. He rooted around the table, looking for a scrap
of paper and finally, in desperation, turned over one of Koriana’s old scratch pieces and began to make
notes.
The first symptoms. The first illness. The first death. The second patient. The third patient. He filled in
names and dates, brows furrowed as he tried to discern a pattern.
“Must establish incubation period,” Lenner had scrawled on one Record.
“Yes, I know that,” Kindan murmured. “But what is it?”
He dredged  his memory, trying to  recall what Lenner had  said  about  diseases.  First  there  was  the
latent period when there were no symptoms, then the infectious period when the illness could be spread,
and finally, the—Kindan  couldn’t  remember  what it was  called—it was  the  time  after  between  being
infectious and either recovering or dying.
People  who were  infected and  recovered  had  immunity from the disease,  Kindan  was  certain.  But
some vague memory from  his  conversations  with  Mikal  led  him  to  believe  that  sometimes  the  same
disease could reinfect a recovered person. If that were the case, however, then Kindan would certainly
have been infected again. But he could still be in the latent period, not yet infectious himself.
“No, once I know the latent period, I can tell if I might still be infected and not infectious,” he said out
loud,  hoping  that  hearing  the  words  would  help  him  remember  them.  They  certainly  sounded  like
something he’d heard once from either Mikal or Lenner.
First, figure out the latent period, Kindan told himself. He remembered his trip to  Benden  Weyr.  He
and the others had been gone nearly a sevenday. When they’d come back everyone was falling ill.
A sevenday. He looked back over his notes. That seemed right. Maybe  less,  maybe only five days.
But a sevenday, not more. Kindan realized with a sense of relief that it had been more than a sevenday
since he’d felt ill. He probably hadn’t been reinfected. He couldn’t be sure, couldn’t be  certain  until he
remained free of infection for the life span of the disease: the total of the latent,  infectious, and  terminal
phases.
His instinct told him that the disease lasted no more than three sevendays, that the infectious phase was
four to six days, maybe a sevenday but no more, and that the final phase was probably about the same,

less than seven days before a person was clear of infection.
So if a person showed no symptoms for three sevendays, they were unlikely to be contagious, unlikely
to have this killer flu.
He got up from the writing desk, bringing his scrap  paper  with him, and  headed  down  to  the Great
Hall.
“Kindan!” Merila called as she saw him. “Great, can you take over? I’m exhausted.”
“Yes,” Kindan said, seeing in one  glance the extent  of the midwife’s fatigue, her stumbling gait, the
dark rings under her eyes, the way she more jittered than moved. “Don’t get up until you wake  up on
your own.”
“Morning, then,” Merila said.  She  gestured  to  a  group  of cots  set  off by themselves.  “Maybe  your
friends will feel better by then.”
Kindan nodded, but his eyes lingered on the cots in the distance. He headed for them first.
“Kindan,” Verilan exclaimed when he caught sight of him, “I thought you were dead.”
“I’m  not,”  Kindan  told  him  cheerfully.  “It’s  good  to  see  you,  too.”  He  examined  the  moodpaste
dabbed on Verilan’s head and was relieved to note that it was nearly green, only a hint of red showing.
“Can I get you anything?”
“A bedpan would be nice,” Kelsa chimed from the other cot. “Or permission to use the necessary.”
“No,” Kindan said immediately, waving down  one  of the holders  and  signing for a  bedpan  with his
hands. The holder nodded in understanding and sped off. “Wait a bit, we’ve got one coming.”
“I never thought I’d pee again,” Kelsa said. “And now I’ve got to go.”
Kindan,  who  had  heard  and  dealt  with  much  more  horrific  bodily  functions  in  the  past  several
sevendays, had no reaction to this admission, except to tell her acerbically, “Hold it.”
He checked her forehead and wasn’t surprised to see that the moodpaste was a comforting green: He
had already  guessed  that Kelsa  was  well on  her  way  to  recovery  by  the  tone  of  her  voice  and  the
directness of her speech.
“Verilan,” Kindan began, remembering his notes, “do you know if Lenner had determined the illness’s
duration?”
“It seemed like forever,” Nonala murmured from her cot. “But I guess it wasn’t that long.”
“We all got fevers  within a  sevenday  of your leaving,” Verilan informed him. He  made  a  thoughtful
face. “It seemed like the fever lasted a sevenday, maybe less.”
“Mmm,” Kindan murmured, wishing he had more evidence for his theory. Not that it mattered much. If
he was right, the holders who survived wouldn’t spread the illness or get infected again but, according to
Bemin, another quarter of them or more would die of starvation before winter’s end.

There had to be something he could do. Some way to get more help. But everyone on Pern was too
sick—and suddenly Kindan had the answer. All that was required was to risk the dragons and riders of
Pern.
“Valla!” he called, sending his thoughts to the bronze fire-lizard. He had images of writing a long note,
describing his theories, and then he had a better idea. “Get J’trel, Valla, get the blue rider!”
 
CHAPTER 16 
Step by step 
Moment by moment 
We live through 
Another day. 
IGEN WEYR
STAR STONES
A dry, warm wind—warm even in winter—blew across the top of the abandoned Weyr. Drought had
ruined Igen Hold and deprived Igen Weyr of tithe. Disaster had finished the Weyr off. The dragonriders
were  all gone now,  having moved  north to  merge with Telgar Weyr.  Once  proud  and  bold,  the  Igen
riders  had  instilled  their  values  into  the  hardy  Telgar  folk,  and  an  Igen  rider  was  now  Telgar’s
Weyrleader.
But the old Weyr  remained,  colored  slightly by wind-borne  dust  from the desert,  deserted  but  not
forgotten, a relic of better days, glories of past Turns.
A bronze dragon burst from between over Igen’s mighty Star Stones. Shortly thereafter a blue dragon
with  two  riders  appeared  a  short  way  off.  The  dragons  landed  long  enough  to  disembark  their
passengers, then found perches in the high warm walls of Igen Bowl.
The  riders  arranged  themselves  so  that  the  bronze  rider  was  upwind  of  the  blue  rider  and  his
passenger, so that the steady winds of Igen kept any possible infection from the bronze rider.
Those same  winds made  it difficult to  talk,  so  that  the down-wind  portion  of the conversation  was
conducted at just below a yell.
“Kindan, it’s good to see  you,” M’tal  began,  grinning broadly  at  the young harper.  The lad looked
much aged, but M’tal was not surprised; the plague had made old men out of boys well before their time.
“And you,” Kindan called back.
“You wanted to speak with me,” M’tal said.

“With all the Weyrleaders, actually,” Kindan replied. “But I’ll settle for you at first.”
M’tal could  not bear  to  tell  the  youngster  that  none  of  the  other  Weyrleaders  had  agreed  to  this
meeting.
“How are things at Fort?”
“Better,” Kindan called back. “But not for long.”
M’tal took the news gravely.
“Bemin figures that two  thousand  died,  and  another  two  thousand  or  more  will  starve  unless  help
comes.”
“What sort of help?” M’tal asked. “We can only keep the fruit supplies going for another day or two
at the best.”
“Help setting the Holds  back  up,” Kindan  told  him. “Bemin says  that  normally  three  thousand  are
needed to keep the Hold going.”
“Three thousand?” M’tal repeated in surprise. The Weyrs operated  with far fewer  people  than that.
Then again, he reflected, the population of Benden Weyr was much smaller than ten thousand.
“They don’t have dragons to help,” Kindan called back.
The lad had a point, M’tal admitted to himself. “What are you proposing?”
“Station a wing of dragons at every major Hold, get them to help the Holds get going again,” Kindan
replied.
“But the plague!”
“I think it’s over,” Kindan said. “If not, it doesn’t last more than three weeks. Keep the wings in the
Holds for three weeks after the last infection and they should be safe returning to the Weyr. There won’t
be any infection to bring.”
“But a wing is only thirty dragons and riders at best,” M’tal replied. “What can they do?”
“They’re healthy,” Kindan said. “They can help haul coal, set up carts, round up livestock,  transport
holders quickly from one place to the other.”
“And if one wing’s not enough, Weyrleader, then we could send two,” J’trel chimed in. “I’m proof that
dragonriders can survive this illness.”
“Weyrleader C’rion said you’re too stubborn to die,” M’tal answered, grinning to take the sting out of
his comments.
“I’ve got people to live for,” J’trel said diffidently. “Some of them are holders.”
“We all live for holders and crafters, I believe,” M’tal commented drolly. He leaned back and closed
his eyes in thought. When he opened them again, he nodded firmly toward Kindan. “Very well, I’ll take
your suggestion back to the Weyrleaders.”
“And you?”

“I’ve already ordered Gaminth to dispatch wings to Bitra, Lemos, Benden, and all the holds minor,”
M’tal said. He wagged a finger at Kindan. “For all Pern, you’d better be right.”
Kindan nodded, feeling a huge weight in his stomach.
“We’ll know in three weeks,” J’trel said. Of M’tal, he asked, “Do you think B’ralar will send help?”
“Yes, he will,” M’tal said. “It may be the worst mistake we ever make, and the last, but it has torn us
apart to sit idly by while the rest of Pern dies.”
“Then we must get back,” Kindan said. “Bemin will have preparations to make.”
“Did you tell him?” M’tal asked in surprise.
“No, he doesn’t even know I’ve gone,” Kindan replied.
Bemin might not have known that Kindan had gone, but he certainly was aware when Kindan returned.
“Where  were  you?”  the  Lord  Holder  shouted  when  he  spotted  Kindan  entering  the  Great  Hall.
“We’ve looked everywhere!”
“Is there a problem?” Kindan asked, looking around  the Great  Hall nervously. Could  he have been
wrong, could the plague still be infectious?
“No, but Merila woke up and went looking for you and when we couldn’t find you, I—” Bemin broke
off, his hands clenched into fists at his side.
“I went looking for more fruit,” Kindan said, touched by the unspoken depth of Bemin’s affection.
“Fruit?” Bemin repeated in surprise. “There’s enough of that, it’s men we need.”
J’trel, who had been watching the exchange with growing amusement from the sidelines, murmured,
“He got them, too. A right proper harper, he is.”
Kindan looked questioningly at him.
“Can’t help but speak in riddles,” J’trel explained. He turned as, suddenly, outside there were excited
cries.
“What’s happening?” Bemin asked, rushing toward the doors.
“More  fruit,”  J’trel  said,  grinning.  He  and  Kindan  reached  the  courtyard  just  as  the  first  wing  of
dragons landed.
“J’lantir!” J’trel called excitedly to the bronze rider in the front. “What are you doing here?”
“Keeping an eye  on you,” the bronze  rider  growled.  J’trel  had  the sense  to  look  abashed.  J’lantir
turned  to  Bemin  and  bowed.  “My  Lord  Holder,  I  present  greetings  from  the  Weyrleaders  of  Ista,
Benden, and Fort Weyrs.”
“Three?” Kindan said in surprise.

“There was some discussion about the Harper Hall deserving all four,” J’lantir said lightly, “but we felt
that D’vin would best serve as reserve.” He turned back to Bemin. “At your harper’s request”—and he
nodded at Kindan, who looked thoroughly nonplussed—“we are pleased to provide you with the better
part of three wings of dragons to aid you and the harpers in their recovery.” He bowed low. “What do
you desire?”
Bemin turned to Kindan, lunged, and grabbed him in a great bear hug.
“It’s over now,” Kindan said finally, staring hollow-eyed at the dragonriders. It had been nearly a month
since the dragons had landed outside Fort Hold’s Great Hall. There had been no new case of the fever in
a fortnight.
The days  that followed had  been  no  less  wearying  than  the  days  of  the  plague,  particularly  when
Kindan succeeded in convincing Bemin and J’lantir that it was time to reinhabit the Harper Hall. J’trel and
J’lantir had gone there alone the first day and after that had refused to let any of the harpers near the Hall
until they had completed all their work, clearing and cleaning up the Harper Hall.
Three large mounds outside the Healer Hall were covered with fresh earth, waiting for spring to cover
them with green.
Kindan had been overjoyed to discover that Selora was among the survivors of the Harper  Hall. In
fact,  apart  from  the  younger  apprentices,  Selora  was  the  only  survivor  of  the  Harper  Hall—all  the
journeymen, Masters, and older apprentices had succumbed to the plague. Kindan couldn’t imagine how
the Harper Hall would ever recover.
“There are harpers and healers in the holds,” Selora had assured him. “Some of them will come back.”
J’lantir’s pronouncement that the Harper Hall was once again fit for habitation was met by a combination
of jubilation and sorrow.
Kelsa,  Nonala,  and  Verilan  were  anxious  to  return  to  their  quarters.  Selora  had  gone  ahead,
accompanied by Neesa—who’d  overridden  Bemin’s worried  protests  with a  simple, “Oh,  Yanira will
handle it all, you’ll see!”—to prepare a welcoming feast.
Kindan was surprised when, just outside the Harper Hall’s archway, a large bronze dragon appeared
overhead and settled quickly onto the landing field. When he saw M’tal jump down, his face lit with joy.
“I wanted to be here when you returned to your Hall,” M’tal told him. “Salina wanted to come as well,
but we decided not to risk that.”
“The danger’s past,” Kindan assured him.
“Not that,” M’tal replied with a grin. “The danger of leaving a whole Weyr unsupervised.”
Selora and Neesa had laid on a great feast in the Harper Hall’s dining room. Bemin was there, as were
Jelir and many of the other Fort Holders, and the dragonriders.

Even so, the great dining room was only partly filled with everyone sitting at the apprentice tables. The
Masters’ table and the journeymen’s tables remained empty,  and  Kindan  realized that  the Harper  Hall
would never seem the same to him again, that it had gotten smaller and yet somehow less  intimate than
before.
He looked at Benden’s Weyrleader. “Could you send for Master Zist? He’ll be needed here.”
M’tal gave him a  worried  look.  “Kindan,” he began,  but the harper  stopped  him with  an  upraised
hand.
“I  sent  Valla  this  morning,”  Kindan  assured  him.  “Master  Zist  is  alive.  As  the  senior  Master,  he
becomes the next Masterharper.”
“Of course,” M’tal agreed. “I’ll have him here tomorrow.”
Kindan wanted to protest, but contained himself.
“The dragons are tired,” M’tal explained. “And so are the riders.”
Kindan smiled wanly. “It seems I heard you say those words not so long ago, at High Reaches Weyr.”
When at  last the feast  was  over,  Kindan,  Kelsa,  Nonala,  and  Verilan made  their way back  to  the
apprentice dormitory and their old beds.
“So what are we going to do?” Kelsa asked as she turned over the last glow and darkness filled the
room.
“I think we should get up early,” Kindan replied.
“Why?”
“M’tal will bring Master Zist tomorrow,” Kindan told them.
“Master Zist?” Verilan repeated in dread tones. “I’ve heard stories about him.”
“All true,” Kindan replied, smiling in the dark.
Sleep came slowly to him; he was unused to the dormitory and also the night noises of the Harper Hall
after so long in the Great Hall of Fort Hold. When it did come, he dreamt that Koriana was lying beside
him.
When he awoke  the next morning, he realized that  the lump he’d  felt lying by him was  Valla, who
chirped and chattered cheerfully to him as he got up and headed into the showers.
“You can start on clearing up the Archive Room,” Selora  told  them as  they finished breakfast.  She
spread her gaze to include the rest of the apprentices. “All of you.”
“You take charge, Verilan,” Kindan said as they entered the large hall that was the Archive Room.
“No one ever sorted through all the damp stuff,” Verilan sniffed. “I think the dragonriders  must have
thrown it all out,”  he added  mournfully. Idly he picked  up a  Record  that  had  fallen  to  the  floor  and
reverently set it on one of the reading tables. He glanced at Kindan, as if looking for instruction. Kindan
shrugged and looked back at him expectantly.
“Right,” Verilan said, hitching up his shoulders  and  pointing to  a  group  of the youngest apprentices.

“Pick  up  every  Record  on  the  floor  and  pile  it  here.”  He  pointed  to  another  group.  “You  lot  start
checking the stacks nearest where the fire was. I want you to look  for fire damage  and  water  damage
first. Bring any damaged  Records  over  to  that  table,  there.  Sort  through the rest  of the  Records  and
rearrange them into chronological order.”
When  the  apprentices  started  discovering  damaged  Records,  Verilan  made  a  third  group  of
trustworthy scribes and set  them to  work  transcribing the damaged  Records  onto  new paper.  Kindan
noticed that Verilan sent a younger apprentice to retrieve the supplies from Master Resler’s old quarters;
Kindan couldn’t blame him for not wanting to go there himself, he knew that Verilan thought highly of the
late Master.
The apprentices threw themselves into the task with relish and were all thoroughly absorbed as midday
approached. Kindan was so engrossed himself that at first he didn’t notice the sound of a drum.
“Kindan,” Kelsa whispered urgently, “the drums.”
Report, the message said.
“That’s Zist,” Kindan told her excitedly.
“But he just said ‘report,’” Nonala complained. “He didn’t say who.”
“You’d better get going,” Verilan said to Kindan, looking up from his table. “It’s never good to keep a
Master waiting.”
Verilan was right; Zist was tapping his thigh irritably as Kindan entered the Masterharper’s quarters.
“It took you long enough,” Zist grumbled irritably, gesturing for Kindan to take a seat. “Where’s your
report?”
“Master?”
“I knew  Murenny better  than that,”  Zist growled,  “he’d  expect  a  full report  by now.” He  jerked  a
thumb toward his workdesk. “There’s materials there, get started. And don’t leave out any details.”
Kindan was surprised at Zist’s gruff manner; he’d expected at least a polite hello before being set to
writing.
“Mind you that it’s legible,” Zist warned, fingering the drum that he’d laid on the breakfast table beside
him.
That was the last word the Master said for the next several hours as Kindan wrote first a rough draft
and then a proper copy. Somewhere along the way—he couldn’t quite remember when—Kindan found
tears starting in his eyes. He tried blinking them away, but they persisted. He paused for a moment, not
wanting to mar his Record. He looked back at the Record; he had just been writing about Vaxoram.
A hand reached over him and grabbed the page from the table.
“You’re done with this one, aren’t you?” Zist asked in a soft, kind voice. Kindan nodded, he hadn’t
realized that Master Zist had been reading the pages as soon as he finished them.

He was surprised a moment later when behind him Master Zist snorted and exclaimed, “You’ve a long
ways to go before you’re a Master, what do you mean making Vaxoram a journeyman?”
Kindan turned to respond hotly, “Vaxoram earned the right. For all I knew, I was the last harper on
Pern.” His voice cooled as tears filled his eyes once more. “It was all he wanted.”
“‘Want’ is not all that makes a journeyman,” Zist replied acerbically. In a softer tone, he added, “But
Journeyman Vaxoram  had  earned  the right.” He  gave Kindan  a  firm nod.  “And so  the Records  will
show.”
Kindan gave him a grateful look. Zist sighed, then picked up his drum.
Songmaster  report,  he  rapped  out.  With  a  smile  to  Kindan,  he  asked,  “Who  do  you  think  will
come?”
“Kelsa,” Kindan replied instantly. “If she doesn’t die of fright.”
“Is she good?”
“She’s the best,” Kindan told him fervently.
“Are you speaking as a friend or a harper?” Zist asked him, his bushy white eyebrows  low over  his
eyes in a frown.
“First as a harper, second as a friend,” Kindan told him honestly.
“Well, we’ll see,” Zist said as they heard footsteps coming up the stairway. He raised a  finger to  his
lips and motioned with his other hand that Kindan should get back  to  work.  “Listen carefully, and  see
what you can learn.”
When the knock came on the door, Zist drawled out a long, deep “Yes?”
“You sent for me?” Kelsa replied through the door.
“I sent for the Songmaster,” Zist replied. “But you may come in.”
Kelsa opened the door and peered around hesitantly.
“Come in,” Zist ordered, his finger pointing to a spot right in front of him. Kelsa walked nervously to
the indicated spot and stood, her fingers moving anxiously at her side. “And you are?”
“Kelsa, Master,” she replied with a squeaky voice.
Zist cast an amused glance toward Kindan, but as he was busy writing his Records and had his back
to the proceedings, he didn’t see it. Valla, who had entered the room  when Kindan  had  started  crying
and had found a perch on a bookshelf overlooking the worktable,  saw  the Master’s  look  and  chirped
amusedly at Kindan.
“I sent for the Songmaster,” Zist said. “Why did you come?”
“The Master is dead,” Kelsa told him. “I thought I could help.”
“You did, did you?” Zist asked. He gave her a thoughtful look. “I need a song.”
“Master?”

“I need a song about the events of the plague,” Zist told her. “I need a song that is uplifting but honest,
a song that tells everyone why the Weyrs stood aloof and how they came to help when they could.
“Can you write that song?”
“I can try,” Kelsa temporized.
“I did not ask if you could ‘try,’” Zist responded harshly. “This song will be sung by all the harpers on
Pern. I need it by this evening.” He  held up the pages  of Kindan’s  Records.  “You can  use  these,”  he
said, handing her the papers. “Can you do it?”
Kelsa  glanced  at  Kindan’s  back,  straightened  her  own,  and  declared  with  chin  held  high,  “Yes,
Master, I can.”
“Good,” Zist said approvingly. He gestured toward the sleeping quarters. “You’ll find instruments and
a  writing  table  in  there.  Get  started  now.  I’ll  bring  you  more  Records  as  he”—he  nodded  toward
Kindan—“finishes them.”
Zist waited until he could hear Kelsa’s tuning in the room next door, then stood up and went over to
the desk where Kindan was working.
“Be quick,” Zist urged him, taking another completed Record from the table and sitting back down at
his table to read it. A moment later he walked it through to  Kelsa.  Kindan  could  hear  them conferring
indistinctly and then Zist said clearly at the doorway, “Yes, yes, that’s a good choice. Keep working.”
Zist returned to his desk and sat for a while in thoughtful silence. When he moved again, it was to pick
up the drum.
Voicemaster, report. 
“Who will that be?” he asked.
“Nonala,” Kindan replied at once. “She’s the best.”
“Did she work with you?”
“Not as much as I’d like,” Kindan answered honestly. “My voice has been a mess since it cracked.”
“Good,” Zist replied. “If you’d told me that she had worked with you, I would have sent her packing.”
Despite himself, Kindan smiled at the Master’s remark.
“Your fire-lizard is still young, is he up to  taking a  message?”  Zist asked  from behind him. Kindan
glanced up at Valla, then turned to face Master Zist.
“Sometimes,” he replied. “He learns quicker than most.”
“Well,” Zist said, “hard times speed things up.” His glance remained on Kindan for a moment longer,
unfathomable. “Can you have him take a message to Jofri? I want him to come here as my second and
handle defense, dance, and civics.”
“He’d be good at that,” Kindan said, gesturing for Valla to hop down to him.
“I don’t recall asking for an apprentice’s opinion,” Zist said severely.

“Sorry,  Master,”  Kindan  replied,  extending a  hand  for  the  Master’s  note.  “Where  is  Master  Jofri
now?”
“Fort Weyr,” Zist replied. In a softer voice he added, “At least he was safe.”
“How was it in the mines?” Kindan said, asking the question he’d been dreading for a while.
Zist sighed. “It was bad, but not as bad as here,” he said. “Dalor is in charge now.”
“Dalor?” Kindan repeated in surprise.
“Master  Natalon  and  his  wife  did  not  survive,”  Zist  responded.  “Nuella  and  Zenor  are  all  right,
although it was touch and go with her, as is Renna—she’s  acting as  healer  for the moment. While this
plague affected people of all ages, all the miners between seventeen and  twenty-one  succumbed,  much
the same  as  here.”  He  turned  his head  toward  the stairway  as  they  heard  footsteps.  “Let’s  see  who
showed up,” he said to Kindan as someone knocked on the door.
It was Nonala. She entered without permission and stood close to Zist. “You sent for me?”
“Are you the Voicemaster?”
“I’m the best in the Hall,” Nonala replied firmly.
“Good,” Zist said  approvingly. He  nodded  his head  toward  the sleeping quarters.  “Young Kelsa  is
composing a song in there. I want it sung tonight at the evening meal.”
Nonala’s eyes widened for just an instant. Then she glanced at Kindan’s back and nodded firmly. “I’ll
need my own choice of singers.”
“Everyone except him and her,” Zist replied, pointing at Kindan and the doorway to the other room.
“He’s not very good,” Nonala told Zist frankly.
“His voice just cracked,” Zist replied, much to Kindan’s surprise.  He  remembered  Master  Zist as  a
perfectionist, not given to taking second best.
“It was never all that good to start with,” Nonala responded.
“Passable at best.”
“Ah,” Zist said approvingly, “I see that you really are a Voice-master.”
Nonala stood a bit taller, elated.
“Very well,” Zist concluded, “wait here while Kelsa finishes the song, then get to work.”
“Finishes?” Nonala asked, showing her first signs of fear—to take a song, one written by Kelsa  and
not yet finished, to its first performance in less than a day was more than a bit daunting.
“Not up to the challenge?” Zist asked with a hint of a smile.
“Have  you  seen  the  stuff  she  writes?”  Nonala  demanded,  suddenly  all  in  motion.  “It’s  nearly
impossible!”
“If it’s nearly impossible, then it’s clearly possible,” Zist told her, smiling. Nonala started to give him an
angry reply, then snorted and smiled back. Zist waved toward a  spare  chair,  but Nonala  demurred.  “I

think I’ll go listen in, if I may.”
With a nod, Zist waved her off to the far room. He rose again silently, and retrieved another finished
Record from Kindan.
“Last one,”  Zist said  enigmatically when he’d  finished reading  Kindan’s  writing.  He  picked  up  the
drum and rapped: Archivist, report.
“That’ll be Verilan,” Kindan predicted confidently. “He should have been made journeyman long ago,
but he’s too young.”
“Age is not my concern,” Zist replied. “Experience and maturity are what counts.”
This time the steps came earlier, and were rushed; the knock  on the door  was  perfunctory,  and  the
door was thrown open before Zist could speak.
“Verilan reports,” the youngster said soberly. One hand was stained with ink, but he did not look at all
abashed by it, rather treating it as part of his apparel. “The Archives will be restored by this evening.”
“Verilan, is it?” Zist asked, lazily pushing the drum out of his lap and back onto the table. “I sent  for
the Archivist.”
“I am the Archivist,” Verilan replied. “Master Resler is dead.”
“But you’re just an apprentice,” Zist said scornfully.
“I’m the Archivist,” Verilan persisted staunchly.
“Prove it,” Zist said. He turned to Kindan. “Aren’t you done yet?”
“Yes, Master,” Kindan said, printing out the last line of his Record.  He  turned  with the page  in his
hand and passed it over to the Master.
“About time,” Zist murmured. He glanced at the Record and handed it over to Verilan. “Kelsa is in the
other room writing a song using this Record,” he told him. “You are to make a copy and then have your
scribes make copies for every hold, major and minor.
“When they are done with that,” Zist continued, “Kelsa will have a  song for you to  copy  also.  You
must have both completed by dusk, ready to send.”
Verilan nodded  curtly and  marched  into  the  other  room.  He  was  back  a  moment  later,  retrieving
stylus, ink, and paper from the workdesk, unperturbed by Zist’s ominous gaze.
As Verilan retreated to the back room, Zist said to Kindan, “Go tell Selora that we will have a  new
song tonight.”
Kindan desperately wanted to stay with his friends, but he knew Zist too well to argue, so he nodded
and left.
“Let me know when your fire-lizard returns!” Zist called at his retreating back.

“A new song, eh?” Selora said, her look inscrutable. “Hmm, well, we’ll need help in the kitchens, then,
because new songs mean lots of food.” She threw an apron  to  Kindan.  “You can  get started  with the
dessert.”
Kindan suppressed a groan. Perhaps things were getting back to normal after all.
In fact,  Selora  was  hard-pressed  for help and  feeding even thirty  harpers  meant  a  lot  of  cooking.
Kindan was hot and sweaty by the time the soup was set to simmering, the shepherd’s pies were cooking
in the oven, the bread was set to cooling, the fires were stoked, and the greens washed.
Selora  consulted  some  internal  clock  that  only  cooks  seemed  to  possess  and  told  Kindan
consideringly, “You’d best go change, Master Zist would have your hide if you came to  dinner looking
like that.”
Kindan was still wearing Koriana’s clothes and was  reluctant  to  part  with them. Besides,  he wasn’t
sure if he had any clean clothes left.
Seeing his concern, Selora told him, “Lord  Bemin sent  you down  some  clothes.  I had  someone  lay
them on your bunk.”
Kindan took the time to wash and brush his teeth before returning to his bunk. He was astonished to
see not one but three sets  of clothes  on a  hanger—all in harper’s  blue.  He  eyed  the finish critically; it
appeared that the apprentice stripes were merely tacked on. Well, there was nothing for it, he could fix
them later.
The fresh clean cloth felt good against his skin. There was just a hint of a special fragrance, the smell
that Kindan  would always  associate  with  Koriana’s  hair.  He  was  just  ready  to  leave  when  Verilan,
Nonala, and Kelsa came rushing in.
“He sent us to change!” Kelsa wailed.
“You should gripe,  we’ve  only had  one  practice,  and  I’m going to  have to  sing  soprano,”  Nonala
replied, heading toward the restroom.
“Hey, who put these clothes here?” Verilan complained as  he approached  his bunk.  Kindan  looked
over and saw that Verilan, too, had a new set of harper’s blue.
“Maybe Lord Bemin,” Kindan said. “He sent some down for me.”
“For all of us,” Kelsa exclaimed, glancing appreciatively at the finery. “But they must have rushed, the
sewing’s not all that good.”
When he returned to the kitchen, Selora sent him out peremptorily. “You’re to go to the Dining Hall!”
Kindan came up to the Dining Hall just as it was filling. Something was bothering him, but he couldn’t
identify it. From the Masters’ table, Master Jofri waved at him and Kindan waved back, his face splitting
into a grin.
Something…about  the clothes.  But before  Kindan  could  figure  it  out,  Verilan,  Nonala,  and  Kelsa
came rushing into the hall along with the rest of the apprentices.  Kindan  turned  to  Kelsa,  mouth open,
ready to ask a question when Master Zist entered the room, dressed in a fine new Masterharper’s outfit.
He was flanked, Kindan noted with surprise, by Lord Holder Bemin, Weyrleader B’ralar, and—best
of all—M’tal. Behind them came Jelir, Neesa, Melira, Stennel, and Yanira, carrying baby Fiona. Behind

them came the High Reaches Weyrleader, D’vin, and C’tov! In back of them was a last group—Dalor
and Nuella, Kindan’s friends from his youth in the mines. They were dressed in their finest clothes and the
twin brother and sister waved cheerfully at Kindan.
The dignitaries were seated at the journeymen’s table which surprised Kindan greatly, but not nearly
as much as it did Verilan, who looked completely nonplussed.
“Do you know—” Verilan began in an excited whisper, only to be cut off by Master Zist’s resounding
voice.
“We are honored tonight by hold, craft, and weyr,” Zist told the group.
“Something’s up,” Kelsa declared, glancing around the room suspiciously.
“I know,” Verilan agreed fervently.
“We have all been through many perils and much pain,” Zist continued. “Now that they are past, it is
time to begin again.
“Tonight marks a new beginning for Pern,”  he said.  “And tonight we  celebrate  it.” He  took  a  deep
breath and turned to the apprentices. “You have survived great pain and loss, you have been called upon
to meet the sternest of challenges, and you did not fail. Your childhood ended abruptly and far too early.”
He nodded sorrowfully toward them, then paused for a moment.
“Songmaster Kelsa, please rise,” Zist said.
Kelsa rose to her feet, her face white.
At she did, Jofri rose beside Master Zist, and so did all the dignitaries at the journeymen’s table.
“You’re going to walk the tables, Kelsa!” Nonala declared in sudden comprehension.
“Apprentices, please rise and escort Kelsa to her new table,” Zist said, his voice no longer somber, his
eyes twinkling.
“I don’t think I can move!” Kelsa moaned.
“Of course you can,” Kindan declared, pushing her with his hand.
Slowly, steadily, Kelsa walked around the apprentice table and over to the journeymen’s table, to be
greeted enthusiastically by the Lord Holders, Crafters, and Weyrleaders.
“Congratulations, Journeyman Kelsa,” Zist said to her. The hall burst with the noise of clapping hands
and stomping feet.
Zist waited until everyone was seated once more. “We’re not done yet,” he told the apprentices with a
wink.
“Oh, no!” Nonala exclaimed.
“Voicemaster Nonala, please rise,” Zist said, smiling at her.
“Come on, Nonala,” Verilan urged.
“You earned  it,”  Kindan  agreed  fervently.  Kelsa  rushed  back  over  to  help  and  together  the  four

walked the tables to deposit a shocked Nonala at the journeymen’s table.
“One more,” Zist said after the tumult died down. “And then we can eat.”
Kindan nodded toward Verilan.
“No, it’s you,” Verilan said, shaking his head. “After all you’ve done, it has to be you.”
“I was banished, remember?” Kindan told him. “I’m lucky to be here at all.”
“But—”
“Archivist Verilan, please rise,” Zist’s voice boomed out, dispelling any doubt.
Verilan sat, rebellious, until Kindan rose and grabbed him under the elbow.
“You’ve earned this,” Kindan told him forcefully. “By all rights you should be Master now.”
Reluctantly, Verilan stood. When Nonala and Kelsa came eagerly to him, he couldn’t  help but smile
back  at  them.  He  completed  his  circuit  around  the  tables  and  sat  at  the  journeymen’s  table  but  he
continued to look back at Kindan, his expression mirroring the injustice he felt.
The food came out and Kindan ate heartily, glad to realize that he and Selora had made such a great
feast for such illustrious company. Still, he couldn’t help from time to  time glancing wistfully toward  his
friends, wishing not so much that he were there with them as that he had their company.
The meal was finished and dessert served before Zist rose again.
“It is a rule of the Harper Hall that a person cannot be promoted until they’ve eaten one meal in their
present  rank,”  Zist said.  There  was  a  gasp  from  all  the  apprentices  and  journeymen  as  these  words
registered amongst them.
Jofri rose beside Zist and they walked over to the journeymen’s table.
“Journeyman Verilan,” Jofri said soberly, “please rise.”
“Me?” Verilan squeaked. “No, it should be Kindan.”
“Get up, Verilan,” Kelsa commanded him. “Get up, or we’ll lift you.”
Reluctantly Verilan rose.
“Only once before has an apprentice been elevated to Master in the same day,” Zist told the gathering
as he and Jofri escorted Verilan over to the Masters’ table. “And that was Master Murenny.
“But you are the youngest Master on record,” Zist said to Verilan. “As you might well know.”
Verilan could only nod mutely.
Kindan roared  his approval  along with the rest  of the room.  When the noise died  down,  Zist rose
again, gesturing to Nonala.
“Journeyman Kelsa has written a song to mark the events of these past sad months and  Journeyman
Nonala has kindly agreed to sing it,” Zist said. He nodded  to  Verilan and  addressed  the Weyrleaders,
Holders, and Crafters. “And Master Verilan will provide copies of the Records for your harpers as well
as copies of this song.”

Nonala assembled her chorus and with a firm nod prepared them to sing.
“This is called ‘Kindan’s Song,’” Nonala said, her voice reverberating through the room.
 
Step by step 
Moment by moment 
We live through 
Another day. 
 
Fever consumes us 
Death surrounds us 
Still we succeed through 
Another day. 
 
Tears trickled down Kindan’s face as they did down all the faces in the Harper Hall and he recalled
the faces of those who had died, countless, in the plague.
The  song  was  over  and  there  was  a  silence  in  the  hall  before  Kindan  realized  that  people  were
standing behind him. He felt arms on his, urging him upward.
M’tal and Bemin were at his side, lifting him.
“Rise, Kindan,” Zist’s voice boomed through the hall, filling every corner.
Step by step, moment by moment, Kindan walked the tables.
 
EPILOGUE 
Harper in your garments blue 
Sing a song of tales quite true 
Harper with your drum so loud 
You make us all feel quite proud. 

BENDEN WEYR,
AL 497.1
T he sun was setting in the evening sky when the great bronze dragon erupted from between over the
Star Stones. The watchdragon bugled a query and then a greeting.
Wheeling sharply, Gaminth began a steep descent into the Weyr Bowl.
“Are you ready, Harper?” M’tal called over his shoulder.
“Yes.”
 
AUTHORS’ NOTES 
According to the Merck Manual, Eighteenth Edition, (Copyright 2006 by Merck & Co, Inc.) influenza
A epidemics occur in the United States every two to three years. “Pandemics caused by new influenza A
serotypes  may cause  particularly severe  disease.”  Influenza B viruses can  cause  epidemics  in three-to
five-year cycles.
The Great Influenza of 1918 was a pandemic of grimmer proportions than either the usual influenza A
or  B  epidemic/pandemic  cycles.  It  was  particularly  devastating  among  the  eighteen-to
twenty-one-year-old  population  because,  sadly,  people  at  those  ages  had  the  most  well-developed
immune systems. In combating the influenza, the matured immune systems would attack the lining of the
lungs and, tragically, the victim’s lungs would fill with liquid, causing death by drowning (more specifically,
Acute Respiratory Disease Syndrome or ARDS—SARS is a variant of this).
For more information on major influenza pandemics,  we  recommend  The  Great  Influenza  by John
M. Barry, published by Penguin Books, 2005 (with a new afterword).

