Anonymous RAT setup for dummies 
As you all know, the major hazard of reverse-connecting RATs is they have to connect right 
back to you. And you won't always stay under the radar of system administrators. So use a 
VPN you say! VEry good. Except that most VPNs do not permit port forwarding of your 
external IP in a way that can be reliably used for reverse connecting backdoors. So what is an 
aspiring hacker to do? Get a VPS.
A VPS is a Virtual Private Server. A virtual server rented out to you that YOU control. You 
can turn it into a proxy, a VPN gateway, or simply just have it forward RAT connections to 
your computer. Obviously you will want an off-shore VPS that accepts anonymous payment 
methods like Bitcoins. You will set the dynamic dns of your RAT slaves to your VPS server, so 
all your RATs connect to the VPS server, thus only exposing its address and not your home IP. 
That way, if LEA comes looking for you, they'll hopefully hit a dead end at your VPS hoster. 
The paranoid shield themselves with a VPN while having RAT connections forwarded to them 
by the VPS. But not everyone has the money.... 
YOu don't have to be picky about the VPS's features, so long as it can run a barebones linux 
command line, that should be enough. The magic lies in SSH port forwarding, a seriously 
underused technique. Now Putty is a nice lightweight SSH client, so let's use that. After 
connecting to your VPS via SSH, in Putty, open up the menu, and click "change settings". In 
the window that opens, find the Connections, SSH, Tunnels. We will set up SSH Port 
Tunneling with the VPS so it forwards connections it receives to your computer inside the 
encrypted SSH connection. Don't forget to set GatewayPorts to 'yes' in sshd_config file on 
your VPS. This configures the SSH daemon on the VPS to bind to the proper interface and 
forward connections on those ports back to you when you SSH into the box. Without that, you 
won't be getting any connections. 
So, in the Putty options for SSH port forwarding, you want a remote port forward. Source 
port is whatever your RAT communication port is. Destination port will be localhost:N, where 
N is your RAT communication port. Click add, then apply. (Note: it is assumed that future 
versions of Putty will work more or less in this manner. IF confused, just google SSH remote 
port forward.) For example, if we use port 53, you should see R53 localhost:53 somewhere on 
that window.
And that's it. Any RAT slaves connecting to your VPS is forwarded to your computer where 
your client is running, and you can hack away, safely knowing that should any authorities 
decide to raid "you", they will have come halfway around the world for nothing. I don't know 
about you, but that sure puts a smile on my face XD.
So in essence, pick any VPS you like and SSH port forward. That is pretty much the easiest 
way to run a RAT with an anonymous setup.
Spread this guide as far and wide as you can. Too many hackers being caught for stupidity 
these days. Learn to be Anonymous, or you will all die. 

