
Antenna Design 
for Cognitive Radio

For a complete listing of titles in the 
Antennas and Electromagnetics Analysis Library,
turn to the back of this book.

Antenna Design 
for Cognitive Radio
Youssef Tawk
Joseph Costantine
Christos Christodoulou

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.S. Library of Congress.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Cover design by John Gomes
ISBN 13: 978-1-60807-953-7
© 2016 ARTECH HOUSE
685 Canton Street
Norwood, MA 02062
All rights reserved. Printed and bound in the United States of America. No part of this book 
may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission 
in writing from the publisher.
  All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or service marks have been 
appropriately capitalized. Artech House cannot attest to the accuracy of this information. Use of 
a term in this book should not be regarded as affecting the validity of any trademark or service 
mark.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

v
Contents
	
Preface 	
xi
1	
Introduction to Cognitive Radio	
1
1.1	
Why Cognitive Radio?	
1
1.2	
Towards a Cognitive Radio	
2
1.3	
Spectrum Interweave and Underlay	
4
1.4	
The Cognitive Radio Cycle of Actions (ODAL)	
8
1.5	
The Observe Part of a Cognitive Radio Cycle	
9
1.5.1	
Interweave Mode	
9
1.5.2	
Underlay Mode	
10
1.6	
The Decide Part of a Cognitive Radio Cycle	
11
1.6.1	
Interweave Mode	
12
1.6.2	
Underlay Mode	
12
1.7	
The Act Part of a Cognitive Radio Cycle	
12
1.7.1	
Interweave Mode	
14
1.7.2	
Underlay Mode	
14
1.8	
The Learn Part of a Cognitive Radio Cycle	
14

vi 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
1.8.1	
Interweave Mode	
15
1.8.2	
Underlay Mode	
15
1.9	
Discussion	
15
	
References	
16
2	
Software-Defined Radio and Cognitive Radio: 
	
A Systems Overview	
21
2.1	
Introduction	
21
2.2	
What Is Software-Defined Radio?	
22
2.3	
Wireless Transceiver Architectures	
24
2.3.1	
Single-Band Architectures	
24
2.3.2	
Multiband Architectures	
26
2.3.3	
Software-Defined Radio Architectures	
28
2.4	
Cognitive Radio Architectures	
31
2.5	
Tunable Analog RF Components	
34
2.5.1	
Tunable Bandpass Filters	
35
2.5.2	
Tunable Power Amplifiers	
36
2.6	
Discussion	
38
	
References	
38
3	
Antenna Design Requirements for Cognitive Radio	
43
3.1	
Introduction	
43
3.2	
Antenna Parameters	
44
3.2.1	
Reflection Coefficient	
44
3.2.2	
Realized Gain	
46
3.2.3	
Radiation Pattern	
46
3.2.4	
Quality Factor	
47
3.3	
Antenna Design Limitations	
48
3.4	
Antenna Design Specifications for Cognitive Radio	
51
3.4.1	
Mobile Terminals	
52
3.4.2	
Spectrum Interweave Cognitive Radio	
53
3.4.3	
Spectrum Underlay Cognitive Radio	
56

 
Contents 
 vii
3.5	
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio Antenna Systems 
	
Using Reconfigurable Filters	
57
3.6 	
Comparison Between the Antenna Design 
	
Requirements for the Spectrum Interweave and 
	
Underlay Cognitive Radio 	
59
3.7	
Antenna Design Limitations for Cognitive Radio 
	
Interweave and Underlay	
60
3.8	
Discussion	
61
	
References	
62
4	
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio	
65
4.1	
Introduction	
65
4.2	
History of UWB Antennas	
66
4.3	
Categories of UWB Antennas	
67
4.4	
Frequency-Independent Antennas	
69
4.4.1	
Printed Spiral Antenna	
70
4.5 	
Nonplanar UWB Antennas	
73
4.6	
Planar UWB Antennas	
75
4.6.1	
Miniaturized Triangular Sheet Antenna	
77
4.6.2	
Planar UWB Monopole	
78
4.7	
Printed UWB Antennas	
84
4.8	
Printed UWB Slot Antennas	
88
4.9	
Printed UWB Horn Antennas	
89
4.9.1	
Coplanar Vivaldi Antenna	
90
4.9.2	
Antipodal Vivaldi Antenna	
91
4.10	
Printed UWB Antenna with Notches	
93
4.10.1	
Printed UWB Antenna with Fixed Notches	
93
4.10.2	
Printed UWB Antenna with Reconfigurable Notches	
96
4.11	
Discussion	
99
	
References	
100

viii 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
5	
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for 
	
Cognitive Radio	
107
5.1	
Introduction	
107
5.2	
Overview of Reconfigurable Antennas	
108
5.3 	
Antenna Reconfiguration Using RF MEMS	
113
5.4 	
Antenna Reconfiguration Using PIN Diodes	
117
5.5	
Antenna Reconfiguration Using Varactors	
123
5.6	
Antenna Reconfiguration Using Thermal-Switching 
	
Components	
129
5.7	
Antenna Reconfiguration Using Optical 
	
Photoconductive Switches	
131
5.8 	
Graph Modeling Switch-Reconfigurable Antennas for 
	
Redundancy Reduction	
135
5.9	
Antenna Reconfiguration Using Mechanical Actuators	
137
5.10	
Antenna Reconfiguration Using Material Change	
140
5.11	
Implementation of Reconfigurable Antennas in 
	
Spectrum Interweave Cognitive Radio	
145
5.12	
Analysis of Reconfigurable Antennas in Cognitive Radio	 154
5.13	
Discussion	
154
	
References	
155
6	
Reconfigurable Filtennas for Cognitive Radio	
163
6.1	
Introduction	
163
6.2	
Design of Microwave Filters	
164
6.3	
Printed Transmission Line Characteristics	
170
6.4	
Bandpass Filter Designs	
172
6.5	
Bandstop Filter Designs	
174
6.6	
Ultrawideband Filter Designs	
176

 
Contents 
 ix
6.7	
Reconfigurable Filters	
179
6.8	
Reconfigurable Filtennas	
185
6.9	
Discussion	
187
	
References	
189
7	
Implementation of MIMO Antennas on Cognitive Radio	193
7.1	
Introduction	
193
7.2	
Modeling the Propagation Effects	
194
7.3	
MIMO Antenna Basics	
196
7.4	
Isolation Improvement in MIMO Antenna Systems	
201
7.5	
Reconfigurable MIMO Antenna Structures	
205
7.6	
MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radio	
212
7.7	
Discussion	
217
	
References	
218
8	
Machine-Learning Implementation in Cognitive Radio	 221
8.1	
Introduction	
221
8.2	
Categories of Machine-Learning Algorithms	
222
8.3	
Basic Review of Neural Networks	
223
8.3.1	
Neural Network Concepts	
223
8.3.2	
Neural Network Learning Connections’ Weights 	
224
8.3.3	
Back-Propagation Learning	
225
8.3.4	
Mathematical Model of a Neural Network	
225
8.4	
Neural Network FPGA Controller Design	
227
8.4.1	
Neural Network Modeling Procedure 	
228
8.5	
Neural Network Implementation	
229
8.5.1	
Neural Network Modeling of a Reconfigurable 
	
Antenna Based on PIN Diodes	
230
8.5.2	
Neural Network Modeling of a Varactor-Based 
	
Reconfigurable Filtenna	
232

x 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
8.5.3	
Neural Network Modeling of a Mechanically 
	
Reconfigurable Antenna	
236
8.6	
Switch-Failure Correction in Frequency-Reconfigurable
	
Antenna Arrays Using Neural Networks	
236
8.7	
FPGA Selection and the Cognitive Radio Processor	
239
8.8	
Discussion	
240
	
References	
240
9	
Cognitive Radio for Radar and Space Applications	
243
9.1	
Introduction	
243
9.2	
The Concept of Cognitive Radar	
244
9.3	
Cognitive Radar Analysis	
246
9.4	
Cognitive Radar Versus Adaptive Radar Architectures	
247
9.5	
Cognitive Radar Networks	
250
9.6	
Possible Difficulties in Cognitive Radar	
250
9.7	
Cognitive Radio in Space Communications	
251
9.8	
Cognitive Radio Communication Between Satellites 
	
and Terrestrial Stations	
252
9.9	
Cognitive Radio Communication Between Satellites	
256
9.10	
Challenges in Cognitive Radio for Space 
	
Communication	
258
9.11	
Discussion	
259
	
References	
260
10	
The Future of Cognitive Radio	
263
	
About the Authors	
267
	
Index	
269

xi
Preface 
This book introduces the topic of cognitive radio from an antenna design per­
spective. The book is the first of its kind on the design of antennas and RF front 
ends for cognitive radio. It targets antenna, RF design engineers and researchers, 
university professors, academics, and graduate and undergraduate students in 
the area of applied electromagnetism and communication systems. This book 
first introduces the concept of cognitive radio as a protocol that is designed to 
benefit from underutilized regions of the spectrum. The purpose of this new 
protocol, built on software-defined radio, is to achieve a dynamic spectrum 
access, thus allowing a more balanced and efficient communication. The cogni­
tive radio protocol is based on sharing the spectrum with primary users whether 
by monitoring the channel for an idle opportunity or by broadcasting through­
out a wide bandwidth at a low-power level. Therefore, antenna researchers aim 
at designing intelligent antenna systems that are aware of their surroundings, 
are reconfigurable, and are able to react and adjust to sudden changes. The typi­
cal antenna system in a cognitive radio environment must observe, decide, act, 
and learn from past experiences in a given communication platform. This book 
also clarifies the difference between cognitive radio and software-defined radio 
where a clear distinction is made between the different schemes from a practi­
cal point of view. It discusses the use of reconfigurable antennas, reconfigurable 
filtennas, and multiple input, multiple output (MIMO) antennas for cognitive 
radio. The analysis and design of these different antenna systems are presented, 
compared, and evaluated. Cognitive radio systems, whether in a terrestrial or 
space environment, are expected to use machine learning techniques to soft­
ware-control not only the antenna structure but also the entire radio system to 
sense the channel activity over a wide range of frequencies as well as to tune the 
radiation and communication characteristics accordingly. 

xii 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
The book covers 10 chapters and tackles three main topics that govern the 
operation of a cognitive radio. Part I introduces the basic concept of cognitive 
radio and discusses the difference between cognitive radio and software defined 
radio from the RF system’s perspective. Chapter 1 addresses the need to intro­
duce cognitive radio, and it covers the U.S. Federal Communications Com­
mission’s (FCC) proposed solution to improve the spectrum usage efficiency, 
divides the spectrum into two categories of interweave and underlay, and intro­
duces the cognitive radio Observe-Decide-Act-Learn (ODAL) cycle. Chapter 
2 compares the RF architectures of software-defined radio with cognitive radio 
and defines software-defined radio and dissects its transceiver’s architecture. It 
also introduces the RF system of a cognitive radio that is built on top of a soft­
ware-defined radio platform with tunable analog RF components. Chapter 2 
concludes with the realization that a cognitive radio is a software-defined radio 
with learning capabilities.
Part II discusses the main antenna design requirements, procedures, and 
challenges for cognitive radio. Chapter 3 presents the various antenna param­
eters to take into consideration during the design process such as reflection 
coefficient, gain, radiation pattern, and quality factor. Chapter 3 also discusses 
the antenna design limitations and specifications in a cognitive radio system. 
It covers the design of such antennas on mobile terminals in a cognitive radio 
and discusses the logistics of using reconfigurable filters in the design process of 
such antennas. Chapter 3 then concludes with a comparison between antenna 
design requirements and limitations in a spectrum interweave and spectrum 
underlay cognitive radio environments. Chapter 4 debuts with a historical over­
view of ultrawideband (UWB) antennas and their use for sensing activities in 
a cognitive radio. It also discusses the use of frequency independent antennas 
in addition to the various types of printed, planar, and nonplanar wideband 
antennas along with their implementation for sensing in any type of a cogni­
tive radio platform. Chapter 5 discusses the use of reconfigurable antennas for 
the communicating part of a cognitive radio system. It starts with an overview 
of reconfigurable antennas and then discusses the various types of reconfigu­
ration techniques that are implemented on reconfigurable antennas. Chapter 
5 concludes with a discussion about the implementation of communicating 
reconfigurable antennas in spectrum interweave cognitive radio, along with an 
analysis of their operation. Chapter 6 has a detailed discussion on the merging 
of reconfigurable filters in the structure of wideband antennas. The merging be­
tween reconfigurable filters and antennas results in reconfigurable filtennas that 
can achieve bandpass tuning of operational frequencies or band notch tuning 
of rejected bands. Chapter 6 starts with a presentation of design methodologies 
of microwave filters and then it discusses the various types of printed filters’ 
designs from bandpass to bandstop and UWB filters. It also details the design 

 
Preface  
xiii
of reconfigurable filters and their integration into the wideband antennas to 
generate reconfigurable filtennas.
Part III introduces new trends in cognitive radio implementation such 
as the implementation of multiple input multiple output (MIMO) antennas 
on cognitive radio, the use of machine learning techniques to optimize the 
performance of a cognitive radio environment, and the implementation of cog­
nitive radar and cognitive radio in space. Chapter 7 discusses the modeling of 
propagation effects in a wireless communication channel; it then introduces 
the basics of MIMO antenna design along with a discussion on isolation im­
provements in MIMO antenna systems. Chapter 7 also presents reconfigurable 
MIMO antenna structures and concludes with a discussion on the implemen­
tation of such antennas in a cognitive radio environment. Chapter 8 debuts 
with a presentation on the various algorithms of machine learning. Next, it 
discusses the implementation of neural networks on field programmable gate 
array (FPGA)-controlled cognitive radio antennas. Chapter 8 also discusses 
the correction of switch failures in reconfigurable antenna arrays using neural 
networks and presents a methodology for an FPGA selection procedure and a 
discussion on the cognitive radio processor. Chapter 9 introduces the concept 
of cognitive radar along with its system analysis. It also discusses the difference 
between cognitive radar and adaptive radar, the networks of cognitive radar 
along with the implementation difficulties. Chapter 9 then moves to the topic 
of implementing cognitive radio for space communication. It covers the various 
schemes of satellite-to-Earth and satellite-to-satellite communications in addi­
tion to the challenges of cognitive radio in space communication. Chapter 10 is 
a discussion on the future of cognitive radio and its possible application venues.
This book is for individuals who wish to learn about cognitive radio. It is 
written as a tutorial that introduces the new communication protocol and pro­
poses methods and techniques to efficiently design a successful antenna system 
for such applications. It takes the reader through an antenna design process that 
allows constant spectrum monitoring with dynamic access. It emphasizes the 
practical aspects and implementations while preserving a theoretical framework.


1
1
Introduction to Cognitive Radio
1.1  Why Cognitive Radio?
The advancement in wireless communication applications and the rise in de­
mand on new protocols have created an unbalance in the spectrum allocation. 
The scarcity in the frequency distribution among various wireless applications 
is due to the spectrum management policies and not the lack of available fre­
quencies [1–3]. It is determined that there is a need for a communication pro­
tocol that can detect the various white spaces that exist in the spectrum, as well 
as communicate over these white spaces. This need is inspired by a recent report 
filed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) that identifies 70% 
of the spectrum as underutilized and widely idle [4]. These idle gaps in the 
spectrum are also called white spaces.
The identification of white spaces and the dynamic communication over 
evolving idle gaps requires a communication device to be able to continuous­
ly monitor the spectrum, identify idle frequencies, process such information, 
communicate over these discovered white spaces and adapt for future use. The 
new communication protocol requires a device that is able to monitor, process, 
communicate and learn from experience. This device is then required to pos­
sess processing potential and cognition ability. Such a device was proposed by 
Mitola in [5] and was called a cognitive radio device. 
A cognitive radio is built on a software-defined radio platform with an 
additional learning capability. The cognitive radio device needs to adapt to 
the operational parameters of a certain communication channel such as the 
transmit power, carrier frequency, modulation strategy, and transmission data 
rate [6–8]. Thus, cognitive radios appear to be the solution to the spectrum 

2 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
usage unbalance as we will discuss in the following chapters. In this chapter, the 
various fundamental properties of a cognitive radio communication system are 
introduced. 
1.2  Towards a Cognitive Radio
The FCC clearly identified the problem of spectrum underutilization. It flagged 
the unused frequencies at various time spans as wasteful spectrum allocation. 
Based on this, several solutions have been proposed to improve the spectrum 
usage issue. These solutions are divided into three main categories: spectrum 
reallocation, spectrum leasing, and spectrum sharing, as shown in Figure 1.1 
[8, 9].
The first solution, spectrum reallocation, can be considered as a long-
term solution. This solution has pushed the FCC to reallocate several frequency 
bands previously reserved for terrestrial wireless communication applications, 
such as the 700-MHz TV band, to the cognitive radio protocol [8]. The IEEE 
802.22 standard has been created to benefit from the TV unused idle frequen­
cies and to provide wireless broadband access to rural homes. Some of the main 
functions of this standard include managing channel selection, scheduling spec­
trum sensing, and updating users’ geolocations [10].
The second solution, based on spectrum leasing, allows the possibility of 
selling or leasing channels between various users [8]. The third solution, which 
seems to carry a lot of promise and potential, is based on dynamic spectrum 
Figure 1.1  The proposed FCC solutions to the spectrum underutilization. (­©2011, IET, reprint­
ed with permission from [8].)

 
Introduction to Cognitive Radio 
3
sharing [1, 11, 12]. A dynamic spectrum-sharing approach allows dynamic ac­
cess of the spectrum and provides the user with the ability to dynamically select 
frequencies for broadcasting. 
A dynamic spectrum-sharing process can operate in three modes. The first 
mode, open sharing, is used in the unlicensed Industrial, Scientific and Medical 
(ISM) radio bands where, for example, IEEE 802.11 (WiFi) and Bluetooth co­
exist [13, 14]. In this mode of open sharing, all users can simultaneously access 
the spectrum while satisfying the transmit signal constraints. 
Another mode identified as hierarchical sharing allocates the spectrum 
band to primary users. The primary users own the various frequency bands but 
do not fully utilize their channels. These channels can be granted or leased to 
unlicensed users that can be identified as secondary users. The leasing of such 
channels to secondary users is only feasible if the quality of service (QoS) is not 
compromised in any way [8].
The final operational mode in dynamic spectrum sharing is the dynamic 
spectrum allocation mode. This mode was first considered in a European proj­
ect, DRiVE, in which the frequency bands were dynamically assigned to wire­
less services depending on their spatial and temporal traffic statistics [1]. The 
dynamic assignment permits a wireless system to exclusively utilize the spec­
trum in a given region and for a specific time duration. However, this approach 
does not completely eliminate the temporal white spaces caused by the bursts 
in the traffic of wireless services [8].
The implementation of dynamic spectrum allocation requires the exis­
tence of new licensing schemes. Based on this fact, both the European Union 
and the United States are attempting to update their regulatory process to in­
clude new forms of licensing [15]. For example, the U.S. PCAST (President’s 
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology) issued a report on July 20, 
2012, that discussed the licensing model in a spectrum-sharing environment. 
As shown in Figure 1.2, this report divided the access system into three different 
groups [16]: federal primary access, secondary access, and general authorized 
access.
The end-users in the federal primary access have the highest priority in 
accessing the channel and they should not suffer from any interference induced 
by the end-users of the other two types of federal access. In the secondary ac­
cess, the end-users are active whenever a federal primary access user is idle and 
not using the channel. They must also register with a database and may or may 
not pay for access depending on public policy. The end-users adopting the gen­
eral authorized access have the lowest priority and are allowed only to transmit 
at low-power levels [16].
In this book, the focus is on the hierarchical access of the dynamic spec­
trum sharing. The various aspects of such a communication system and how 
it forms what is now known as a cognitive radio is presented. The antenna 

4 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
design requirements and their challenges, reconfiguration techniques, and vari­
ous modes of operation are detailed. The basic antenna architecture of such a 
system comprises a sensing antenna that continuously monitors the wireless 
channel and searches for unused frequency channels (white spaces) and a re­
configurable transmit/receive antenna to perform the required communication 
within these unused frequency channels [17]. A top-level logic workflow for 
one possible implementation of a cognitive radio communication scheme is 
shown in Figure 1.3 [18]. The sensing antenna is generally an ultrawideband 
(UWB) antenna and would communicate with the spectrum sensing module 
of the cognitive radio processor. The purpose of this module is to continuously 
search for unused frequency channels within the operating band of the sensing 
antenna. The information acquired by the spectrum-sensing module is fed to 
the spectrum decision module, which determines the appropriate frequency 
band for communication. The switch controller module then tunes the operat­
ing frequency of the reconfigurable antenna [8]. 
1.3  Spectrum Interweave and Underlay
As part of the dynamic hierarchal spectrum sharing solution proposed by the 
FCC, a cognitive radio device operates in either the interweave mode or the un­
derlay mode for better spectrum efficiency [17, 19]. In both types of operation, 
Figure 1.2  The licensing model in the PCAST report (July 2012) [16].

 
Introduction to Cognitive Radio 
5
the unoccupied parts of the spectrum white spaces are always inspected. The 
primary and secondary users, once identified, are allocated dynamically to the 
different parts of the spectrum. The secondary users are mainly assigned to the 
white spaces of the channel. Figure 1.4 shows the allocation of the primary users 
over the different bands of the channel at different time instances and various 
transmit power levels. 
In the interweave mode of operation, the cognitive radio device’s main 
function is to search for white spaces and decide which one to allocate for 
secondary users under specific rules. The secondary users transmit in this case 
without any power constraint. Figure 1.5(a) displays the coexistence of the pri­
mary and secondary users in an interweave environment at a given time instant. 
The channel is sensed constantly to avoid collisions (interference) with primary 
users and other potential secondary users. 
In the underlay mode of operation, the cognitive radio also searches for 
white spaces. This is achieved by transmitting UWB signals below the allowed 
interference level of primary users. Figure 1.5(b) summarizes the mode of op­
eration of underlay cognitive radio environment where both primary and sec­
ondary users can share the same channel bands. For this case, there should be 
a constraint on the transmitted power by the secondary users since both types 
of users can coexist at the same frequency bands. However, if under certain cir­
cumstances primary users cannot tolerate any level of secondary users’ interfer­
ence, the secondary users are forced to transmit over the entire frequency band 
except at the restricted channels occupied by the primary users. 
Figure 1.3  The generic cognitive radio workflow diagram.

6 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
The main objective of a cognitive radio device is to scavenge the wide-
frequency spectrum for white spaces, self-reconfigure its communication mode 
to match the sensed RF environment, and optimally achieve the required mode 
of communication. Therefore, the cognitive radio antenna system in an inter­
weave mode of operation consists of either one or two antennas. The use of one 
antenna forces the cognitive radio device to operate in a slotted time scheme by 
switching alternatively between sensing and communication [20, 21].
Since constant monitoring of the channel is required in the interweave 
mode, it is preferred to use a dedicated antenna for channel sensing and a sepa­
rate reconfigurable antenna for communicating over the allocated white spaces. 
The job of the sensing antenna is to detect the white spaces in the channel, 
and correspondingly, the reconfigurable narrowband antenna tunes its operat­
ing frequency within these spaces. The reconfigurable antenna should allow the 
secondary users to transmit at full power. The use of reconfigurable antennas 
is essential since they avoid any interference with licensed primary users. More 
importantly, the two antennas should be well isolated to avoid the induced 
RF interference that can affect the quality of performance of a cognitive radio 
device [21]. 
For the underlay case, a cognitive radio antenna system consists of only 
one wideband antenna. The antenna should transmit UWB signals with 
Figure 1.4  The spread of primary users over the whole cognitive radio channel.

 
Introduction to Cognitive Radio 
7
reconfigurable notch frequencies (frequencies to be avoided). The UWB trans­
mission allows secondary users to occupy the whole parts of the spectrum while 
minimizing interference with already active primary users. The reconfigurabil­
ity in the notch frequency depends on the presence of primary users in the 
channel. This reconfigurability should be present in any underlay scenario in 
case a given primary user does not allow sharing of its spectrum resources with 
other secondary users. It should be noted that once a cognitive radio identifies 
the allowed interference levels of primary users, it can transmit UWB signals 
without having to periodically sense the spectrum [21].
Figure 1.5  The existence of primary and secondary users in a cognitive radio environment 
at a given time instance for the (a) interweave and (b) underlay scenarios. (© 2014, IEEE. From 
[21].)

8 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
1.4  The Cognitive Radio Cycle of Actions (ODAL)
A cognitive radio device should follow a cycle of actions, which are summarized 
in Figure 1.6. This Observe-Decide-Act-Learn (ODAL) cognitive cycle is based 
on: 
1.	 Observing the channel activity;
2.	 Deciding which part of the spectrum is suitable for communication;
3.	 Acting appropriately to achieve the required mode of communication;
4.	 Learning from previous channel activity.
Following this cycle, a cognitive radio device self-decides and optimally 
self-reconfigures its hardware to achieve the identified modes of communica­
tion. This cycle allows the cognitive radio device to be identified as an intel­
ligent wireless communication device [21].
A cognitive radio processor (sometimes called cognitive engine) that is 
integrated with the antenna system is responsible for performing the appropri­
ate functions of the four different parts of the cognitive radio cycle. It is the job 
of the processor to link all the cognitive radio cycles together in order to ensure 
an appropriate functioning of the cognitive radio device. Therefore, the main 
functionalities of the cognitive radio processor are to:
1.	 Organize the sensing procedure in the Observe section.
2.	 Analyze the sensing data and perform the necessary decisions in the 
Decide section.
3.	 Control the required hardware reconfigurability in the Act module.
4.	 Achieve the learning feature in the Learn phase.
Figure 1.6  The cognitive radio cycle of actions (ODAL). (© 2014, IEEE. From [21].)

 
Introduction to Cognitive Radio 
9
The main features that should be supported by a cognitive radio processor 
are summarized in Figure 1.7 and are detailed for both interweave and underlay 
scenarios in the upcoming sections.
1.5  The Observe Part of a Cognitive Radio Cycle
The cognitive radio ODAL cycle allows the search for white spaces to iden­
tify the eligible communication gaps. The continuous monitoring of the spec­
trum is achieved by the Observe part that is divided into two distinct scenarios 
whether an interweave or underlay mode of operation is adopted.
1.5.1  Interweave Mode
The Observe part is identified by the ability of a cognitive radio device to sense 
the available spectrum. This cycle is essential to the operation of a cognitive 
radio device since it allows the detection and identification of the available RF 
signals used by the primary and secondary users. The results of this part are 
then used in the Decide part of the cognitive radio cycle [21]. The cognitive 
radio device looks for possible white spaces in any of the frequency bands being 
sensed. The two main types of spectrum sensing techniques that can be used in 
the interweave mode are discussed next.
1.5.1.1  Wideband Sensing
Wideband sensing scans the entire spectrum band of interest once at a time. 
One of the main challenges of this sensing approach is the high sampling rate 
required to sample and analyze the RF signals. Satisfying the Nyquist criterion 
requires the use of high-rate analog-to-digital converters (ADCs). This leads to 
an increase in costs and in the processing power of cognitive radio devices. One 
possible solution is the implementation of compressive sampling which samples 
Figure 1.7  The different functionalities of a cognitive radio processor based on the closed 
cycle in a cognitive radio environment. (© 2014, IEEE. From [21].)

10 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
wideband/UWB signals at sub-Nyquist rates. Compressive sensing should be 
used whenever the analyzed signal is sparse at a certain space. This is valid 
for most of the RF signals [22–24]. A wideband/UWB antenna is needed to 
achieve the sensing job of the Observe part in the interweave mode.
1.5.1.2  Narrowband Sensing
In this case, the sensing is done consecutively for the different parts of the chan­
nel. A spectrum-sensing policy is required for narrowband sensing in order to 
determine which channel is to be sensed at each time instant. The sliding-win­
dow energy/power detection technique can be used to implement the wideband 
spectrum sensing [21, 25–29]. A frequency reconfigurable antenna is required 
to perform the narrowband sensing job. The different antenna system options 
for the Observe part in interweave mode are summarized in Figure 1.8.
1.5.2  Underlay Mode
The Observe part in underlay mode must be performed by sensing the chan­
nel over a large frequency band. The main purpose of the Observe part in the 
underlay case is not to locate the white spaces rather than identifying the maxi­
mum interference levels that can be caused by the secondary users when pres­
ent. The interference levels should preserve a good quality of service for the 
active primary users. Thus, the underlay mode of operation is adopted when the 
primary users are active most of the time and are able to tolerate a certain level 
of secondary users’ interference [30, 31]. 
The coexistence of both primary and secondary users at the same frequen­
cy bands definitely leads to a more efficient utilization of the spectrum in com­
parison to the interweave case. However, under certain circumstances, some 
primary users cannot tolerate any level of secondary users’ interference. For this 
case, the channel sensing in underlay is based on determining the interference 
Figure 1.8  The different types of the antenna system that should be adopted for the Observe 
part in the interweave mode of operation.

 
Introduction to Cognitive Radio 
11
levels and, most importantly, identifying the sensitive users in order to com­
pletely avoid them during communication. 
If all the primary users of the channel are able to tolerate the interference 
levels of the secondary users then the sensing antenna is not required to exhibit 
notched frequencies’ behavior. However, if sensitive primary users are identified, 
then the sensing antenna should have notch frequencies that are reconfigurable. 
The reconfiguration of the notch frequencies depends on the activity of the sen­
sitive primary users in order to avoid interfering with them. The assignment of 
these notch frequencies is achieved during the Decide part. The antenna system 
for the Observe part of the underlay mode, shown in Figure 1.9, consists of ei­
ther a wideband or UWB antenna with a reconfigurable notch frequency [21]. 
The time required to achieve sensing, for both interweave and underlay, is 
essential in analyzing the performance of a cognitive radio network. The sensing 
duration affects directly the cognitive radio throughput. A typical frame struc­
ture in a cognitive radio environment consists of a sensing time slot τ and a trans­
mission time slot T − τ. Increasing the sensing time shortens the time required 
for transmission and thus reduces the throughput of a cognitive radio network. 
1.6  The Decide Part of a Cognitive Radio Cycle
The Decide section is the next step to be performed in the closed-loop cogni­
tive radio cycle. This section is based on analyzing the data obtained from the 
Observe part. The objective is to decide on the corresponding optimal mode 
of operation. The cognitive radio processor is responsible for performing the 
appropriate steps in this part. The processor must support and process all the 
algorithms that include sensing, RF signal classification, switch activation in 
reconfigurable antennas, and also power management. 
Figure 1.9  The different types of the RF front end for the Observe part in the underlay mode 
of operation.

12 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
1.6.1  Interweave Mode
The operation of the Decide part in the interweave case is the same whether 
wideband or narrowband sensing is adopted. For either case, the cognitive ra­
dio processor must identify/classify the RF signals sensed in the Observe cycle. 
This can be achieved by analyzing the RF signals in order to determine their 
corresponding periodic properties such as the signal symbol/coding rates, car­
rier frequency as well as other characteristics [21]. For example, cyclostationary 
detection can be used to identify the different types of signals that are observed 
at a particular frequency band in the Observe part. The advantage of this detec­
tion technique is that it can perform well at low signal-to-noise ratios [32].
Based on the analysis of the RF signals, the cognitive radio processor takes 
the corresponding decisions that are optimal to the operation of the cognitive 
radio device. The appropriate decisions are drawn based on reasoning algo­
rithms that lie within the cognitive radio processor. Examples of such algo­
rithms that are used for decision taking are game-theory, support vector ma­
chines, and neural networks [33]. It is essential to note that in order for the 
cognitive radio processor to select the most appropriate reasoning algorithm in 
real applications, it should be trained with a wide range of expected scenarios 
that may occur. Such training can be achieved using techniques appropriate to 
each particular algorithm [21].
1.6.2  Underlay Mode
In the underlay mode, signal classification of the RF signals obtained from the 
Observe section should also be performed. It is essential at this point to iden­
tify the different types of primary users. This identification is only achieved by 
the analysis and study of each signal observed from the previous action of the 
cognitive radio cycle. The objective of the classification of the primary users is 
to flag the ones that cannot tolerate any interference level from active secondary 
users. Also at this point, the cognitive radio processor determines the allowed 
transmit power level for all secondary users. This level should not violate the 
interference margin of the already existing primary users at the same frequency 
band. Game theory, for example, can be used to optimally allocate the allowed 
transmit power by secondary users [34].
1.7  The Act Part of a Cognitive Radio Cycle
At this stage, the operation of the cognitive radio cycle depends on the data 
acquired and analyzed by the cognitive radio processor from the two previous 
Observe and Decide parts. Therefore, the main purpose of the cognitive radio 

 
Introduction to Cognitive Radio 
13
processor is to make sure that the cognitive radio device is able to change its 
mode of operation based on the specifications drawn from the Decide part 
[21]. The change in the cognitive radio device behavior is accounted for by a 
change in its allowed transmit power, operating bandwidth, adopted modu­
lation scheme, and operating frequency. This forces the transmit/receive RF 
chain of the cognitive radio device to change its functionality accordingly. 
Figure 1.10 shows how the cognitive radio processor controls the differ­
ent parts of the cognitive radio device transmit/receive RF chain to allow the 
corresponding change in its physical behavior, that is, change for example the 
reconfiguration of the front-end antenna [21]. 
The reconfigurable digital radio, shown in Figure 1.10, is mainly respon­
sible for generating the appropriate waveforms to be transmitted, performing 
the required processing for the received/transmitted signals, and controlling 
the optimization algorithms for the analog radio and antenna units. The digi­
tal radio can be implemented using specific digital signal processors or field-
programmable gate arrays [21]. The software reconfigurable analog radio, also 
shown in Figure 1.10, is designed to be able to transmit the corresponding 
waveform specified in the Decide part or receive the various RF signals acquired 
during the Observe part. Therefore, the mode of operation of the different parts 
of the cognitive radio RF chain cannot be fixed but instead they must be re­
configurable in order to keep track of the changing conditions of the transmit/
receive channel [35]. Also, the different tasks performed in the Act phase can be 
divided, whether in the interweave or underlay mode, as detailed next.
Figure 1.10  The different parts of the TX/RX RF chain of a cognitive radio device controlled 
by the cognitive radio processor to achieve the Act part.

14 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
1.7.1  Interweave Mode
In the interweave mode of operation, the cognitive radio processor takes the ap­
propriate steps to allow the secondary users to occupy the different bands of the 
spectrum that are not used by any primary users. Therefore, a communicating 
antenna should be included to allow the secondary users to achieve the required 
mode of communication. The communicating antenna must be able to change 
its operating frequency according to the location of the inactive primary users 
in the channel [21]. 
Thus, one concludes that in the interweave case; two sets of antennas are 
required. One antenna is dedicated for either wideband or narrowband sensing 
in the Observe part. The second antenna is a frequency reconfigurable antenna 
that is required to fulfill the Act functions [35–39]. One important character­
istic of the antenna system for interweave mode is that both the sensing and 
communicating antennas are placed next to each other. Thus, careful attention 
is taken to minimize the amount of crosstalk level between these two radiating 
structures. 
1.7.2  Underlay Mode
The Act section in this case is focused on avoiding the different primary users 
that are identified during the Decide section. These primary users do not allow 
any secondary users to transmit within their operating frequency bands. There­
fore, the communicating antenna for the underlay mode consists of a wide­
band antenna with reconfigurable notches. The reconfigurabilty in the antenna 
notch frequencies is maintained through a switching circuit controlled by the 
cognitive radio processor. Notches at certain frequencies are intended to avoid 
the interference with any restrictive primary users during communication [21]. 
1.8  The Learn Part of a Cognitive Radio Cycle
The most important feature in a cognitive radio environment is the ability to 
learn from previous channel activity in order to predict and adapt to future 
outcomes. The operation of the cognitive radio platform is based on the im­
plementation of learning algorithms. The ability of a cognitive radio to learn 
and adapt based on previous knowledge differentiates such a device from any 
software-defined radio device. It is this feature that grants it its superiority. 
In this phase, the cognitive radio processor learns new operating modes 
from past and current decisions by accounting for the impact of these past deci­
sions on the operation of the cognitive RF environment [40–43]. The learning 
process becomes simpler, faster, and easier with optimal antenna structures that 
present no redundant configurations. Thus, it is always important to design 

 
Introduction to Cognitive Radio 
15
such antennas to allow better cognitive radio implementation as well as a faster 
and swifter cognitive cycle [44, 45].
1.8.1  Interweave Mode
Learning in the interweave mode is related to the sensing policy and signal clas­
sification [21]. The sensing policy is implemented during the Observe part in 
order to determine the appropriate channels to be sensed. Learning algorithms 
can be implemented to obtain the optimal sensing policy for a cognitive radio 
device. The learning action of a cognitive radio device is based on different 
parameters such as the previous sensing measurement of the Observe part, the 
current and past decisions made during the Decide part and the present/past 
behavior of the cognitive device during the Act part. 
The signal classification is the second learning task that is performed by 
the cognitive radio processor during the Act cycle. The classification algorithms 
are used to identify/classify both the number and types of signals present in a 
wireless environment. Similar to the sensing policy, the learning here is based 
on present and past acquired data during the Observe section and the various 
decisions taken accordingly [21].
1.8.2  Underlay Mode
The Learning action in the underlay mode is similar to the one in the inter­
weave with the exception of the channel sensing policy. In this case, the channel 
access is reduced to a power allocation problem without any sensing or access 
policy. Some learning algorithms can be used to control the transmit power of 
primary users. As for the signal classification, the cognitive engine adopts the 
same learning behavior as the one used in the interweave case [21]. 
1.9  Discussion
In this chapter, the various operational steps and fundamental properties of a 
cognitive radio device were discussed. The cognitive radio device observes the 
spectrum and analyzes the RF signals that are being monitored. Based on the 
observation process, the cognitive radio decides to take an action. This action 
reconfigures the cognitive radio antenna to dynamically access and share the 
available spectrum. The cognitive radio device then learns its behavior for fu­
ture reference and optimizes its response and cognition ability. Machine-learn­
ing algorithms (neural networks, support vector machines, and so forth) can 
also be used to improve the learning process of a cognitive radio device. Even 
though a cognitive radio is built on a software-defined radio platform, its ability 

16 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
to learn and adapt based on past experiences allows it to become superior to any 
software-defined radio device.
In the following chapters, the difference between cognitive radio and soft­
ware-defined radio as well as the various aspects of antenna design in a cognitive 
radio environment will be detailed. The requirements for cognitive radio anten­
na systems, reconfigurable antenna specifications, wideband and narrowband 
sensing will be discussed. The various properties of cognitive radio platforms, 
software-controlled environments, and practical implementations will be de­
scribed and studied in detail. Techniques for improving the channel capacity 
and optimizing the learning process will also be presented. Furthermore, the 
implementation of multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) on cognitive ra­
dio environments will be presented and analyzed. 
Finally, it is important to note that the design of antenna systems for 
cognitive radio environments requires the design of antennas that adapt with 
their controlling processor and implement the learning conclusions as dictated 
by the “brain” of the cognitive radio system. Thus, efficient and innovative an­
tenna designs are needed for an important application such as cognitive radio 
that constitutes the future of wireless communications. 
References
[1]	 Zhao, Q., and B. M. Sadler, “A Survey of Dynamic Spectrum Access,” IEEE Signal Process­
ing Magazine, Vol. 24, No. 3, May 2007, pp. 79–89.
[2]	 FCC, Report of the Spectrum Efficiency Working Group, FCC Spectrum Policy Task Force, 
Tech. Rep., November 2002.
[3]	 FCC, ET Docket no 03-322 Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and Order, Tech. Rep., Decem­
ber 2003.
[4]	 Yau, K. -L., P. Komisarczuk, and P. Teal, “A Context-Aware and Intelligent Dynamic 
Channel Selection Scheme for Cognitive Radio Networks,” 4th International Conference 
on Cognitive Radio Oriented Wireless Networks and Communications, Hannover, Germany, 
June 2009, pp. 1–6.
[5]	 Mitola, J., “Cognitive Radio: An Integrated Agent Architecture for Software Defined Ra­
dio,” Ph.D. dissertation, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden, May 
2000.
[6]	 Haykin, S., “Cognitive Radio: Brain-Empowered Wireless Communications,” IEEE Jour­
nal on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 23, No. 2, February 2005, pp. 201–220.
[7]	 Mitola, J., and G. Q. Maguire, “Cognitive Radio: Making Software Radios More Per­
sonal,” IEEE Personal Communications, Vol. 6, No. 4, August 1999, pp. 13–18.
[8]	 Tawk, Y., et al., “Reconfigurable Front-End Antennas for Cognitive Radio Applications,” 
IET Microwaves, Antennas and Propagation (Special Issue on RF/Microwave Communi­
cation Subsystems for Emerging Wireless Technologies), Vol. 5, No. 8, June 2011, pp. 
985–992. 

 
Introduction to Cognitive Radio 
17
[9]	 Zhu, K., et al., “Dynamic Spectrum Leasing and Service Selection in Spectrum Secondary 
Market of Cognitive Radio Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 
Vol. 11, No. 3, March 2012, pp. 1136–1145.
[10]	 IEEE Standard for Information Technology – Local and Metropolitan Area Networks – Specific 
Requirements – Part 22: Cognitive Wireless RAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical 
Layer (PHY) Specifications: Policies and Procedures for Operation in the TV Bands, IEEE Std. 
802.22-2011, 2011, pp. 1–680.
[11]	 Jayaweera, S., and C. Mosquera, “A Dynamic Spectrum Leasing (DSL) Framework for 
Spectrum Sharing in Cognitive Radio Networks,” Conference Record of the 43rd Asilomar 
Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, 2009, Pacific Grove, CA, November 2009, 
pp. 1819–1823.
[12]	 Molisch, A., L. Greenstein, and M. Shafi, “Propagation Issues for Cognitive Radio,” 
Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 97, No. 5, May 2009, pp. 787–804.
[13]	 Lehr, W., and J. Crowcroft, “Managing Shared Access to a Spectrum Commons,” First 
IEEE International Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks 
(DySPAN’05)., Baltimore, MD, November 2005, pp. 420–444.
[14]	 Etkin, R., A. Parekh, and D. Tse, “Spectrum Sharing for Unlicensed Bands,” IEEE Journal 
on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 25, No. 3, April 2007, pp. 517–528.
[15]	 Dudley, S. M., et al., “Practical Issues for Spectrum Management with Cognitive Radios,” 
Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 102, No. 3, March 2014, pp. 242–264.
[16]	 President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, Report to the President Realizing 
the Full Potential of Government-Held Spectrum to Spur Economic Growth, July 2012.
[17]	 Tawk, Y., et al., “A Comparison Between Different Cognitive Radio Antenna Systems,” 
International Symposium on Intelligent Signal Processing and Communication Systems, 
December 2011, pp. 1–5.
[18]	 Tawk, Y., J. Costantine, and C. G. Christodoulou, “A Rotatable Reconfigurable Antenna 
for Cognitive Radio Applications,” IEEE Radio and Wireless Symposium, Phoenix, AZ, 
January 16–19, 2011, pp. 158–161.
[19]	 Goldsmith, A., et al., “Breaking Spectrum Gridlock with Cognitive Radios: An Information 
Theoretic Perspective,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 97, No. 5, May 2009, pp. 894–914.
[20]	 Bkassiny, M., S. K. Jayaweera, and K. A. Avery, “Distributed Reinforcement Learning 
Based MAC Protocols for Autonomous Cognitive Secondary Users,” 20th Annual Wireless 
and Optical Communications Conference, April 2011, pp. 1–6.
[21]	 Tawk, Y., J. Costantine, and C. G. Christodoulou, “Cognitive Radio and Antenna 
Functionalities: A Tutorial,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, Vol. 56, No. 1, 
February 2014, pp. 231–243.
[22]	 Jayaweera, S. K., and C. G. Christodoulou, Radiobots: Architecture, Algorithms and Real-
Time Reconfigurable Antenna Designs for Autonomous, Self-Learning Future Cognitive 
Radios, University of New Mexico, Technical Report EECE-TR-11-0001, March 2011. 
[23]	 Candes, J. E., and W. B. Wakin, “An Introduction to Compressive Sampling,” IEEE 
Signal Processing Magazine, Vol. 25, No. 2, March 2008, pp. 21–30.

18 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
[24]	 Tian, Z., and G. Giannakis, “Compressed Sensing for Wideband Cognitive Radio,” IEEE 
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, April 2007, pp. 1357–
1360.
[25]	 Yucek, T., and H. Arslan, “A Survey of Spectrum Sensing Algorithms for Cognitive Radio 
Applications,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, Vol. 11, No. 1, 2009, pp. 116–
130.
[26]	 Ganesen, G., and G. Y. Li, “Cooperative Spectrum Sensing in Cognitive Radio-Part I: 
Two User Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, Vol. 6, No. 6, June 
2007, pp. 2204–2213.
[27]	 Zeng, Y., Y. -C. Liang, and R. Zhang, “Blindly Combined Energy Detection for Spectrum 
Sensing In Cognitive Radio,” IEEE Signal Processing Letters, Vol. 15, 2008, pp. 649–652.
[28]	 Chen, H. -S., W. Gao, and D. G. Daut, “Spectrum Sensing Using Cyclostationary 
Properties and Application to IEEE 802.22 WRAN,” IEEE Global Telecommunications 
Conference, November 2007, pp. 3133–3138.
[29]	 Sutton, P. D., K. E. Nolan, and L. E. Doyle, “Cyclostationary Signatures in Practical 
Cognitive Radio Applications,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 
26, No. 1, January 2008, pp. 13–24.
[30]	 Masri, M. A., et al., “Common Control Channel Allocation in Cognitive Radio Networks 
Through UWB Communication,” IEEE Journal of Communications and Networks, Vol. 
14, No. 6, December 2012, pp. 710–718.
[31]	 Honggang, Z., et al., “Multiple Signal Waveforms Adaptation in Cognitive Ultra-
Wideband Radio Evolution,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 24, 
No. 4, April 2006, pp. 878–884.
[32]	 Gardner, W., “Measurement of Spectral Correlation,” IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, 
Speech Signal Processing, Vol. 34, No. 5, October 1986, pp. 1111–1123.
[33]	 Wu, C., Q. Yu, and K. Yi, “Least-Squares Support Vector Machine-Based Learning and 
Decision Making on Cognitive Radio,” IET Communications, Vol. 6, No. 17, 2012, pp. 
2855–2863.
[34]	 Feng, L., T. Xuezhi, and L. Wang, “A New Game Algorithm for Power Control in 
Cognitive Radio Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 60, No. 9, 
November 2011, pp. 4384–4391.
[35]	 Arslan, H., Cognitive Radio, Software Defined Radio, and Adaptive Wireless Systems, New 
York: Springer, 2007.
[36]	 Bernhard, J. T., Reconfigurable Antennas, San Rafael, CA: Morgan and Claypool Publishers, 
2007.
[37]	 Yang, S., et al., “Frequency Reconfigurable Antennas for Multiradio Wireless Platforms,” 
IEEE Microwave Magazine, Vol. 10, No. 1, February 2009, pp. 66–83.
[38]	 Christodoulou, C. G., et al., “Reconfigurable Antennas for Wireless and Space 
Applications,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 100, No. 7, July 2012, pp. 2250–2261.
[39]	 Jalali Mazlouman, S., et al., “Pattern Reconfigurable Square Ring Patch Antenna Actuated 
by Hemispherical Dielectric Elastomer,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 47, No. 3, February 2011, 
pp. 164–165.

 
Introduction to Cognitive Radio 
19
[40]	 Thomas, R. W., et al., “Cognitive Networks: Adaptation and Learning to Achieve End-
to-End Performance Objectives,” IEEE Communication Magazine, Vol. 44, No. 12, 
December 2006, pp. 51–57.
[41]	 Niyato, D., and E. Hossain, “Competitive Spectrum Sharing in Cognitive Radio 
Networks: A Dynamic Game Approach,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 
Vol. 7, No. 7, July 2008, pp. 2651–2660.
[42]	 He, A., et al., “A Survey of Artificial Intelligence for Cognitive Radios,” IEEE Transactions 
on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 59, No. 4, May 2010, pp. 1578–1592.
[43]	 Ji, Z., and K. J. R. Liu, “Dynamic Spectrum Sharing: A Game Theoretical Overview,” 
IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 45, No. 5, May 2007, pp. 88–94.
[44]	 Costantine, J., et al., “Reducing Redundancies in Reconfigurable Antenna Structures 
Using Graph Models,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 59, No. 3, 
2011, pp. 793–801.
[45]	 Costantine, J., et al., “Applying Graph Models and Neural Networks on Reconfigurable 
Antennas for Cognitive Radio Applications,” IEEE-APS Topical Conference on Antennas 
and Propagation in Wireless Communications, September 2011, pp. 909–912.


21
2
Software-Defined Radio and Cognitive 
Radio: A Systems Overview
2.1  Introduction
Software-defined radio accommodates systems that can support multiple stan­
dards. Such systems are based on software-controlled digital signal processing 
along with software-tunable analog RF components. However, the cognitive 
radio technology promises to introduce cognition capabilities to a software-
defined radio device. Thus, a cognitive radio system is perceived as an improve­
ment over a software-defined radio system [1]. 
Figure 2.1 shows the relationship among fixed radio, software-defined 
radio, and cognitive radio. A fixed radio that is able to change its mode of op­
eration is considered to be software-defined radio. The ability to learn from the 
observed radio frequency (RF) environment and self-decide how to reconfigure 
the analog and digital hardware accordingly allows for the achievement of a 
fully functional cognitive radio system. At the end, the purpose of a cognitive 
radio system is to always ensure that the optimal mode of communication for 
any given channel is maintained [2].
The objectives of this chapter are to analyze the characteristics of soft­
ware-defined radio and cognitive radio systems and to compare both standards. 
It is shown that software-defined radio plays an important role in the imple­
mentation of a cognitive radio device. A detailed discussion about the various 
software-defined radio architectures is presented. The design of multiband and 
multimode transceivers is also discussed. The implementation of cognitive ra­
dio transceivers based on software-defined radio technology is detailed next. 

22 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
Finally, the need for software tunable analog components such as low-noise 
amplifiers, power amplifiers, filters, and synthesizers is highlighted. 
2.2  What Is Software-Defined Radio?
The software-defined radio technology represents mainly a flexible radio plat­
form that is able to operate over a wide range of frequencies and able to support 
multiple modulation schemes and waveforms of various bandwidths [1]. Such 
radio is also able to support multiple access technologies such as time division 
multiple access (TDMA), code division multiple access (CDMA), orthogo­
nal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM), space division multiple access 
(SDMA), and various wireless standards as summarized in Figure 2.2. 
The first concept of a software-defined radio architecture is proposed 
by Mitola where all radio functions are achieved via a software programmable 
digital signal processor as summarized in Figure 2.3 [3, 4]. This architecture, 
which is reduced to only a pair of an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) and 
a digital-to-analog converter (DAC), provides the flexibility and the ease of 
software control through the digital signal processing unit. However, Mitola’s 
architecture is ideal and suffers from various challenges related mainly to the 
ADC/DAC power consumption, dynamic range, and their effect on the noise 
figure of the entire software defined radio system.
The first constraint in Mitola’s architecture is based on the fact that the 
converters must achieve specifications which are not feasible within current 
technology and in the foreseeable future. For example, most of the current 
wireless standards operate from 800 MHz to 5.5 GHz. From the receiver side, 
the digitization of this frequency band necessitates a 12-bit, 11-Gsamples/sec 
Figure 2.1  The relation between software-defined radio and cognitive radio.

 
Software-Defined Radio and Cognitive Radio: A Systems Overview 
23
ADC, thus requiring hundreds of watts for power dissipation [5]. Also, the dy­
namic range of the ADC is constrained by the system noise floor requirement 
which is an important parameter in any wireless device [6]. Another limitation 
of Mitola’s software-defined radio architecture is its poor tolerance to interfer­
ers [7]. The lack of filtering in this architecture entails a huge and impractical 
dynamic range on the ADC. For example, in some scenarios an interferer power 
level can be 100 dB larger than the desirable received signal. This requires a dy­
namic range of about 100 dB on the ADC, resulting to an estimated power dis­
sipation of 2 KW [8]. This power level is, for example, three times higher than 
the current level for cellular power amplifier consumption [7]. Based on these 
facts, more practical transceiver architectures must be adopted to minimize all 
the limitations and constraints set by Mitola’s proposed architecture. Therefore, 
Figure 2.2  A software-defined radio (SDR) platform.
Figure 2.3  Software-defined radio as proposed by Mitola.

24 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
a feasible software-defined radio should be built around software-based signal 
processing in addition to software-tunable RF components to perform the 
corresponding downconversion and upconversion [1]. In the next section, a 
discussion about the various transceiver architectures used in current wireless 
standards is presented. Then the adoption of these architectures in a software-
defined environment is detailed. 
2.3  Wireless Transceiver Architectures
Current wireless devices operate over multiple frequency bands to support the 
different evolving wireless standards. This has led to the design of separate mod­
ules for each standard to achieve the corresponding filtering, amplification, and 
multiplexing of the high-frequency signals [9]. Each wireless standard has its 
own transmit/receive chain. Each individual receive chain can adopt either the 
superheterodyne, image reject, zero-IF, or low-IF architecture. As for the trans­
mitter chain, it follows either the superheterodyne, direct-up or two-step-up 
architecture. The structure of these different architectures that operate over a 
single frequency is detailed next.
2.3.1  Single-Band Architectures
Figure 2.4 shows the superheterodyne architecture, which was the dominant 
choice for many decades [10, 11]. A band-selection filter before the low-noise 
amplifier (LNA) is used to reject the out-of-band interferers. The low-noise 
amplifier is crucial in the operation of the wireless device as it settles the whole 
receiver noise figure. The conversion from analog to digital is completed in two 
steps. In the first step, a high-Q image reject filter is adopted to prevent the im­
age channel from being superimposed into the desired channel during the RF 
to intermediate frequency (IF) downconversion. At this stage, the downconver­
sion process necessitates a voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO) driven by an RF 
synthesizer and a channel selection filter. The second step consists of going from 
Figure 2.4  A superheterodyne receiver architecture.

 
Software-Defined Radio and Cognitive Radio: A Systems Overview 
25
IF to baseband and it requires first adjusting the signal level via a programma­
ble-gain amplifier (PGA), another phase-locked loop, and a quadrature VCO 
(QVCO) to generate the in-phase (I) and quadrature-phase (Q) components. 
In the final stage, two programmable-gain amplifiers are employed to adjust the 
signals swings that are fed to the analog-to-digital converters and to relax the 
dynamic range of the converters [12].
In the image reject receiver architecture shown in Figure 2.5, two matched 
mixers, a QVCO, and an RF synthesizer are used to directly split the RF signal 
into I and Q components. These two components are then filtered through a 
lowpass filter (LPF). A 90° phase shifter is added to the Q channel so that the 
image is canceled after adding both I and Q outputs [12]. As for the zero-IF 
receiver, the desired channel is transformed directly to DC through the I and Q 
channels [13]. Also similar to the image reject receiver, there is no need for any 
high-Q filters components in a zero-IF receiver. Finally, for the low-IF receiver 
architecture, the desired channel is downconverted to a very low frequency in 
the range of half to few channel spacings [14]. This type of receiver can follow 
more than one possible topology [12]. 
The superheterodyne transmitter shown in Figure 2.6 performs the inverse 
operation of the receiver one. A digital-to-analog converter should be employed 
and the programmable gain amplifier are omitted because the power amplifier 
(PA) can achieve the required transmit power levels. It is worth mentioning that 
the power amplifier plays an important role in identifying the linearity of the 
whole transmitter chain. 
The direct-up transmitter is shown in Figure 2.7. Even though the vari­
ous blocks of this transmitter are identical to the zero-IF receiver, their design 
requirements are very different. For example, in the receiver architecture the 
lowpass filter must achieve a high out-of-band level of linearity due to the coex­
istence of adjacent channels. As for the transmitter architecture, this constraint 
is not essential during the design process. Finally, similar to the low IF receiver, 
the two-step-up transmitter can be built using more than one possible configu­
ration [12].
Figure 2.5  The image-rejection receiver architecture.

26 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
2.3.2  Multiband Architectures
After discussing the various transmit/receive architectures that operate over a 
single frequency, the implementation of multiband transceivers is highlighted 
in this section. Several multiband transceiver architectures have been proposed 
and implemented [15–18]. Some of these architectures are based on integrat­
ing a bank of surface acoustic wave (SAW) filters and accordingly designing 
separate transmit/receive chains by adopting one of the structures discussed 
above. An example of a quad-band global system for mobile communications 
(GSM)/general packet radio service (GPRS)/enhanced data for GSM evolution 
(EDGE) cellular system implemented in a 65-nm CMOS is presented in [16]. 
The proposed design is integrated in a multimedia system-on-chip (SoC) with 
Bluetooth (BT) and frequency modulation (FM). The low IF receive archi­
tecture is adopted for a better noise figure performance. Figure 2.8 shows the 
system block diagram of the proposed design [16]. The cellular receive chain 
consists of four parallel low-noise amplifiers, IQ path mixers, local oscillators 
dividers, and a common IF baseband circuit for the quad-band applications 
[16]. The total chip area of the proposed design is 32 mm2 in 65-nm CMOS 
technology where the EDGE, BT, and FM RF core occupies 4.62 mm2, 2.66 
mm2, and 0.9 mm2, respectively [16].
Figure 2.6  The superheterodyne transmitter architecture.
Figure 2.7  The direct-up transmitter architecture.

 
Software-Defined Radio and Cognitive Radio: A Systems Overview 
27
Other transceivers’ architectures are based on implementing one single 
transmit/receive chain that operates over multiple frequency bands [19–22]. 
Figure 2.9 depicts the level of simplification that can be achieved by using a 
single dual-band receiver design instead of designing two separate heterodyne 
receive chains [19]. The adoption of one transmit/receive chain has the effect 
of reducing the complexity of the transceiver architecture, lowering the power 
requirement and minimizing the space to accommodate the integrated circuit. 
For example, a dual-band receiver architecture that uses only one six-port 
correlator circuit is shown in Figure 2.10. The proposed design is able to down­
convert two signals in two different bands concurrently [19]. A dual-band sig­
nal at different carrier frequencies (2.5 GHz and 3 GHz) using two different 
modulation techniques (64 QAM and 16 QAM) are used to test the validity 
of the proposed design by adopting two different wireless standards (WCDMA 
and LTE). The error vector magnitude (EVM) of the proposed design is shown 
to be less than 2% with an excellent linearity performance [19].
Figure 2.8  The proposed multiband transceiver architecture. (© 2013, IEEE. From [16].)

28 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
2.3.3  Software-Defined Radio Architectures
The implementation of a software-defined radio requires that both the trans­
mitter and receiver chains are able to operate over any frequency band. This has 
the effect of increasing the complexity of the device front end if the transmit/
receive architectures discussed above were adopted. For example, in a zero-IF 
software-defined radio front end, the generation of all required carrier frequen­
cies is a difficult challenge. This is due to the fact that the frequency range to be 
covered by the frequency synthesizer must be very wide in order to support the 
full range of the various wireless standards. 
Figure 2.9  Dual-band receiver architectures. (© 2013, IEEE. From [19].)
Figure 2.10  The dual-band receiver architecture. (© 2013, IEEE. From [19].)

 
Software-Defined Radio and Cognitive Radio: A Systems Overview 
29
Also for a software-defined radio receiver, there are important parameters 
that must be maintained below a certain level over all the operating frequency 
bands. These parameters include the thermal noise, the noise figure, and the 
nonlinearities effects from the third-order intercept point (IIP3), second-order 
distortion, and the leakage of the transmitter noise in the receive band [23]. For 
example, in a system that supports (2G/3G/4G), Bluetooth, and WLAN, the 
overall system noise figure should be maintained below 5 dB and the IIP3 speci­
fication should be below –6 dBm [24]. As for a software-defined radio transmit­
ter, the frequency synthesizer phase noise over all the frequency bands should 
be low enough in order not to disrupt the receiver frequency bands. A typical 
phase noise must be below −160 dBc/Hz [23]. Additional parameters include 
the EVM and the adjacent channel power ratio (ACPR). The EVM should be as 
low as few percent and the ACPR should be around −40 dBc [23, 25].
The ability of a software-defined radio device to support all the various 
standards at different transmit/receive frequencies necessitates the presence of 
some kind of reconfigurability in its operation. However, this reconfigurability 
represents a challenge during the design process of the software-defined radio 
transmit/receive chains. This challenge is mainly manifested by the necessity to 
remove the dedicated fixed-frequency SAW filters from the interface between 
the antenna and the transmit/receive chains. This removal guarantees that the 
reconfigurability feature over any frequency band is achieved since the tuning 
range of SAW filters is very limited [26]. 
The elimination of SAW filters at the antenna interface of a software-
defined radio device imposes that the receiver provides harmonic rejection in 
order to satisfy the blocker requirements that are set by the different supported 
wireless standards. The main purpose of the SAW filter in the receiver chain 
is to remove any present large out-of-band interferers that can desensitize the 
receiver and degrade the device’s operation [27]. The challenge in the design of 
a SAW-less software-defined receiver revolves around achieving a high level of 
linearity as well as good immunity against any out-of-band interferer in com­
parison to any wireless standard in the receive mode [28].
In a software-defined radio transmitter, the isolation between the trans­
mitter and the receiver is not infinite and some of the transmit out-of-band 
noise can leak to the input of the receiver [27]. Usually, this noise is eliminated 
by the presence of an interstage SAW filter between the power amplifier and 
the antenna in the transmit chain. The absence of this filter enforces tough 
constraints on the out-of-band noise specifications of a software-defined radio 
transmitter [29, 30]. 
The design of a software-defined radio front end should rely on the inte­
gration of a tunable passive filter in the transmit/receive chains. The proposed 
approach ensures that the effect of any strong interferer operating near the main 
operating signal can be minimized. This will guarantee that the RF circuits 

30 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
such as low-noise amplifiers and mixers will not go into saturation. A software-
defined radio receiver based on zero-IF architecture is shown in Figure 2.11. 
One can notice that the operation of this architecture is based on integrating a 
tunable band-select filter, a tunable low-noise amplifier, and definitely a tunable 
local oscillator. The tunability feature allows the presented receiver architecture 
to operate over any given frequency [31]. This architecture has desirable fea­
tures such as flexibility, low cost, and low power [32]. As for the transmitter 
architecture, mainly a tunable power amplifier should replace the tunable low-
noise amplifier.
Also, RF bandpass filtering can be adopted in the design of a software-
defined radio transceiver [31, 32]. The corresponding receiver architecture 
is summarized in Figure 2.12. One notices that the RF sampling substitutes 
the downconversion stage. The main motivation behind this architecture is to 
move the ADC closer to the antenna as proposed by Mitola. This allows the 
digital signal processing unit to perform all the required functionalities in terms 
of frequency conversion and demodulation. 
The proposed architecture is able to process multiple channels simultane­
ously. The ADC sampling rate can go from several tens of megahertz to hun­
dreds of megahertz, since the minimum sampling rate should be equal to the 
sum of the bandwidths where the power spectral density of the sampled signal 
is nonzero [32]. Even though the ADC clock frequency is much lower than the 
Figure 2.11  A zero-IF software-defined radio receiver.
Figure 2.12  RF bandpass sampling software-defined radio receiver architecture.

 
Software-Defined Radio and Cognitive Radio: A Systems Overview 
31
RF, this architecture suffers from the problem that the analog bandwidth of the 
sample-and-hold must be greater than the highest input RF. This has the effect 
of increasing the power consumption of the receiver chain in addition to the 
challenging requirements on the ADC dynamic range and sample rate. Thus, 
the approach of using tunable front-end filters with tunable RF components 
such as a power amplifier, low-noise amplifier, and local oscillator represents the 
most power efficient approach and produces the highest level of versatility. This 
approach ensures that the software-defined radio device optimally reconfigures 
itself to any wireless frequency band. 
An example of a commercially available software defined radio transceiver 
is the Universal Software Radio Peripheral (USRP). For example, the USRP 
N2932 model is shown in Figure 2.13 [33]. This model can be programmed us­
ing LabVIEW and has a tunable center frequency from 400 MHz to 4.4 GHz, 
covering mostly FM radio, GPS, GSM, radar, and ISM bands. The transmit 
power and receiver gain are adjustable. The design of these radio devices is 
based on Xilinx FPGA boards. USRP is mainly used in commercial applica­
tions, defense and homeland security, wireless communication research, and 
education [33].
2.4  Cognitive Radio Architectures
A cognitive radio device can be defined as “software defined radio that is aware 
of its environment, internal state, location, and can autonomously adjust its 
operations to achieve a number of designated objectives” [1]. Thus, software-
defined radio constitutes a key enabling technology necessary to realize a cog­
nitive radio. Figure 2.14 shows the general layout of a cognitive radio system 
where the software-defined radio platform constitutes one of its major build­
ing blocks. The cognitive radio processor where the Observe, Decide, Act and 
Lean (ODAL) cycle resides must have the capability of controlling the software-
defined radio platform. This control allows the cognitive radio device to adapt 
instantly when the radio parameters such as frequency, power, modulation, or 
Figure 2.13  The Universal Software Radio Platform (USRP) N200 device [33].

32 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
bandwidth need to be changed based on the environment where the cogni­
tive radio device is operating [1]. Thus, the major component in a cognitive 
radio environment is the cognitive radio processor that allows such an environ­
ment to analyze the observed signals, reconfigure its operation accordingly, and 
learn from its successes and failures. The addition of a cognitive processor to a 
software-defined radio transforms the software-defined radio device into a cog­
nitive one. The software-defined radio platform shown in Figure 2.14 is built 
around software-based signal processing and software-tunable RF components 
as discussed in Section 2.3.3.
A software-defined radio platform can adapt its operation only through 
a limited set of options. However, a cognitive radio device resorts to learn­
ing algorithms such as neural networks, support vector machines, or genetic 
algorithms to adapt and optimize its operation to an undefined and evolving 
set of forms and possibilities. In fact, a cognitive radio can be considered as a 
manifestation of machine learning tools. It has to learn from past experiences 
and improve its operation to better satisfy for new categories of signals. It pro­
cesses the effect of every individual event occurring in the operational spectrum 
in order to learn from it for future operations handling. The cognitive radio 
device continuously improves its operation by learning and self-adapting. It can 
be considered as “second generation” software-defined radio that autonomously 
adapts itself for more efficient future communication [1, 2].
The design of a cognitive radio device is more challenging compared to a 
software-defined radio transceiver’s design [34, 35]. In a cognitive radio envi­
ronment, the sensing and detection of unoccupied channels are necessary for its 
appropriate operation. This imposes several constraints on the RF and analog 
functions of a cognitive radio device for continuous awareness of the surround­
ing environment. Also, in software-defined radio there is a priori knowledge 
Figure 2.14  The software-defined radio platform within the cognitive radio system.

 
Software-Defined Radio and Cognitive Radio: A Systems Overview 
33
about the interfering frequency signal. For example, when a software-defined 
radio device is operating in the 900-MHz GSM band, one should expect that 
the device is able to tolerate any interferers in the 2-GHz WCDMA [34]. How­
ever, in a cognitive radio environment, the interferers can be placed at any fre­
quency with any given bandwidth. This will force the cognitive radio designer 
to impose severe bounds on the linearity parameters (IIP3 and IIP2) as well 
as the mixing spurs [35]. The cognitive radio transceiver architecture should 
be able to produce relatively a flat noise figure and gain across a huge span of 
frequency bands and accordingly monitor the nonlinearity and the harmonics 
of the transceiver local oscillator.
The software-defined radio platform shown in Figure 2.14 constitutes 
the cognitive radio transceiver architecture. The components of this platform 
in the transmit mode must be able to achieve tunability in the operation of the 
digital-to-analog converter, local oscillator, and the power amplifier. The receive 
chain should exhibit a reconfigurable feature in the operation of the band-select 
filter, low noise amplifier, and the local oscillator. The software-defined radio 
platform should be able to support any transmission and reception process such 
as time division duplex (TDD) or frequency division duplex (FDD). Thus, a 
reconfigurable duplexing device is included as well. One notices that the recon­
figurability is present both in the digital and analog domains. It is important to 
mention that with the advancement in the reconfigurable hardware technology, 
software-tunable analog functionalities will be implemented in reconfigurable 
digital radio [1, 36]. 
The operation mechanisms of a cognitive radio device are summarized in 
Figure 2.15 [1]. The reconfigurable digital radio functionalities include the gen­
eration of different waveforms in terms of modulation, bandwidth, and power 
level. Its job is to also control the different components of the analog radio 
and optimize their performance to meet the system requirements in terms of 
gain, noise figure, and linearity. The optimization process is based on the feed­
back information that the reconfigurable digital radio receives from the various 
blocks of the analog radio. The reconfiguration of the various components of 
Figure 2.15  The operation of a cognitive radio device.

34 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
the analog radio is controlled and managed through the digital radio. The re­
configurable digital radio also monitors the performance of both the ADC and 
DAC. The ADC performance is maintained by controlling its sampling rate, 
resolution, and signal to noise and distortion (SINAD) [1]. As for the DAC, the 
reconfigurable digital radio should be able to control its resolution, maximum 
sampling rate, dynamic range, and phase distortion. Mainly a reconfigurable 
digital radio is implemented using a field programmable gate array (FPGA) that 
is composed of an array of simple and configurable logic blocks and switches [1].
However, the cognitive radio processor that resides within the reconfigu­
rable digital radio performs the ODAL cognitive radio cycle. This cycle ensures 
that the cognitive radio processor provides the required parameters to the re­
configurable digital radio for the appropriate functioning of the cognitive radio 
device. These parameters include the waveforms types, the bandwidth, the op­
erating frequency for communication, and the power spectrum specifications. 
The learning phase of the ODAL cycle allows the cognitive radio device to take 
the optimal outcome based on previous and current decisions. This learning 
feature permits the reconfigurable digital radio to optimize the control process 
of the tunable analog radio. 
2.5  Tunable Analog RF Components
The operation of a cognitive radio device depends on the performance of the 
analog RF components (bandpass filters, power amplifiers, low-noise amplifi­
ers, and local oscillators) that constitute the transmit and receive chains. These 
components are designed to exhibit a tunability feature in their response in 
order to allow the cognitive radio device to reconfigure its behavior. This recon­
figurability is essential because it allows the cognitive radio system to be aware 
of its environment and to cope accordingly to the ever-changing conditions of 
the wireless channel. 
The reconfigurability in the performance of the various analog RF mod­
ules is based on the integration of the appropriate number of switches. Mainly 
switches can be either varactors, PIN diodes, or RF micorelectromechanical 
systems (MEMS). The choice of the appropriate switch depends on the design 
specifications in terms of linearity, isolation, loss, and power requirements. For 
example, PIN diodes exhibit good isolation and low-power consumption, but 
they suffer from low linearity [37]. It is essential to note that the activation of 
these switches is achieved through the reconfigurable digital radio. This is done 
by supplying the suitable voltage and current levels to the appropriate switch­
ing components in order to achieve the required tuning in the device opera­
tion. Such activation allows the cognitive radio device to automatically change 
its behavior and thus achieve a dynamic surrounding-aware analog hardware. 

 
Software-Defined Radio and Cognitive Radio: A Systems Overview 
35
Examples of a tunable bandpass filter and a tunable power amplifier are pre­
sented next.
2.5.1  Tunable Bandpass Filters
The key point in achieving a reconfigurable analog radio is to integrate a tun­
able bandpass filter. The operation of this filter allows the cognitive radio device 
to choose the appropriate channel within the large frequency range of interest. 
The integration of a tunable bandpass feature solves the scalability problem 
in existing multistandard transceivers that rely on a bank of static SAW filters. 
Tunable bandpass filters have been studied extensively in literature [38–
43]. Figure 2.16 shows a tunable bandpass filter that relies on a third-order cou­
pled resonator [38]. The presented filter achieves frequency coverage from 600 
MHz to 1 GHz, an insertion loss of less than 4 dB, and an out-of-band rejec­
tion of more than 40 dB. The tuning speed of the filter is less than 100 μs with 
an IIP3 better than 20 dBm. The tuning of the filter, shown in Figure 2.17, is 
achieved using three tunable capacitor banks. Each bank consists of one fixed 
capacitor, one continuously tunable capacitor, and three capacitive switches 
[38] as detailed in Figure 2.18. The frequency tuning is done by changing first 
the capacitance of the tunable capacitor until it reaches its maximum value. At 
this stage, a capacitive switch is turned on and the value of the tunable capaci­
tor is reset. To further tune the frequency, the tunable capacitor is tuned again 
to its maximum value and then the second capacitive switch is turned on. The 
same process is repeated for the third capacitive switch. This process allows each 
capacitor bank to tune its capacitance from 2.3 pF to 6.8 pF [38].
Figure 2.16  The tunable bandpass filter. (© 2012, IEEE. From [38].)

36 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
2.5.2  Tunable Power Amplifiers
The design of tunable power amplifiers is a challenging process because they 
are the most power-consuming analog components in the transmitter chain 
[43–47]. When reconfiguring the operating band of a power amplifier, its ef­
ficiency must be maintained in order to decrease the DC power consumption of 
a cognitive radio device. An example of a power amplifier that achieves tuning 
between 2.1 GHz and 3.1 GHz with a very narrow bandwidth of almost 2% 
is shown in Figure 2.19 [43]. The tunable power amplifier preserves a 50% to 
60% measured efficiency in the entire band. An input matching network con­
sisting of two-stage, broadband, lowpass transmission lines is implemented to 
match the input of the transistor across the operating bandwidth of the power 
amplifier. The tuning in the operation of the power amplifier is done by design­
ing a tunable evanescent resonator as the output matching network. As shown 
in Figure 2.19, the cavity resonator shares the same substrate with the rest of the 
power amplifier circuit including the transistor, input matching network, and 
biasing circuit. The tuning of the resonant frequency of the output matching 
network is done by changing the distance between the cavity wall and the cavity 
Figure 2.17  The change in the filter-operating bandwidth. (© 2012, IEEE. From [38].)
Figure 2.18  The structure of the tunable capacitor bank. (© 2012, IEEE. From [38].)

 
Software-Defined Radio and Cognitive Radio: A Systems Overview 
37
post. This is achieved by using a piezoelectric actuator. This process forces the 
power amplifier to change its operating frequency as shown in the large-signal 
frequency response plot in Figure 2.20 [43].
In the design of tunable low-noise amplifiers for a cognitive radio device, 
it is essential to satisfy the gain stability and noise figure requirements that 
are set by the various operating wireless standards [48, 49]. A tunable synthe­
sizer that provides two varying local oscillator signals for the I and Q chan­
nels is necessary for the downconversion and upconversion operations. When 
reconfiguring its operation, the tunable synthesizer should be able to produce 
high-frequency resolution, fast settling time, and low phase noise across all the 
various wireless bands [50]. It is essential to note that the performance of the 
Figure 2.19  A tunable power amplifier. (© 2012, IEEE. From [43].)
Figure 2.20  The change in the gain of the power amplifier discussed in. (© 2012, IEEE. From 
[43].)

38 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
tunable analog radio in a cognitive radio device is also highly dependent on the 
dynamic range, resolution, and linearity of both ADCs and DACs [51].
2.6  Discussion
In this chapter, a detailed discussion about the various transceiver architectures 
for a software-defined radio device is presented. It was shown that the imple­
mentation of a cognitive radio relies on the software-defined radio platform. 
Mainly a cognitive radio device is a software-defined radio device with learn­
ing capabilities. These capabilities revolve around the cognitive radio ODAL 
cycle. The reconfigurable digital radio controls the operation of the various 
parts of this cycle. The digital radio also monitors the cognitive radio transmit 
and receive chains. These chains are composed of software-controlled tunable 
analog components. The operation of a cognitive radio mainly depends on the 
antenna structure that should be connected to the analog radio. Therefore, in 
Chapter 3, the antenna design requirements in a cognitive radio environment 
are highlighted and discussed for both underlay and interweave cognitive radio.
References
[1]	 Arslan, H., Cognitive Radio, Software Defined Radio, and Adaptive Wireless System, New 
York: Springer, 2007.
[2]	 Tawk, Y., J. Costantine, and C. G. Christodoulou, “Cognitive Radio and Antenna Func­
tionalities: A Tutorial,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, Vol. 56, No. 1, Febru­
ary 2014, pp. 231–243.
[3]	 Mitola, J., “The Software Radio Architecture,” IEEE Communication Magazine, Vol. 33, 
No. 5, May 1995, pp. 26–38.
[4]	 Mitola, J., “Software Radio Architecture: A Mathematical Perspective,” IEEE Journal on 
Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 17, No. 4, April 1999, pp. 514–538.
[5]	 Abidi, A. A., “The Path to the Software-Defined Radio Receiver,” IEEE Journal of Solid-
State Circuits, Vol. 42, No. 5, May 2007, pp. 954–966. 
[6]	 Bagheri, R., et al., “Architecture and Clock Programmable Baseband of an 800 MHz-
6GHz Software Defined Wireless Receiver,” 20th International Conference on VLSI Design, 
January 6–10, 2007, pp. 135–140.
[7]	 Darabi, H., A. Mirzaei, and M. Mikhemar, “Highly Integrated and Tunable RF Front 
Ends for Reconfigurable Multiband Transceivers: A Tutorial,” IEEE Transactions on Cir­
cuits and Systems, Vol. 58, No. 9, September 2011, pp. 2038–2050.
[8]	 Murmann, B., “ADC Performance Survey 1997–2008,” http://www.stanford.
edu/~murmann/adcsurvey.html.

 
Software-Defined Radio and Cognitive Radio: A Systems Overview 
39
[9]	 “Smartphone Using Discrete Switches or Antenna Switch Modules (ASMs),” Skyworks 
2013, http://www.skyworksinc.com/downloads/block_diagrams/Smartphone_TOP.pdf.
[10]	 Baschirotto, A., et al., “Baseband Analog Front-End and Digital Back-End for 
Reconfigurable Multi-Standard Terminals,” IEEE Circuits and Systems Magazine, Vol. 6, 
First Quarter 2006, pp. 8–28.
[11]	 Agnelli, F., et al., “Wireless Multi-Standard Terminals: System Analysis and Design of a 
Reconfigurable RF Front-End,” IEEE Circuits and Systems Magazine, Vol. 6, First Quarter, 
2006, pp. 38–59.
[12]	 Mak, P. -I., and R. P. Martins, “Transceiver Architecture Selection: Review, State-of-the-
Art Survey and Case Study,” IEEE Circuits and Systems Magazine, Vol. 7, Second Quarter, 
2007, pp. 6–25.
[13]	 Razavi, B., RF Microelectronics, 2nd ed., Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2011.
[14]	 Pozar, D. M., Microwave and RF Design of Wireless Systems, New York: John Wiley & Sons, 
2000. 
[15]	 Rawat, K., M. S. Hashmi, and F. M. Ghannouchi, “Dual-Band RF Circuits and 
Components for Multi-Standard Software Defined Radios,” IEEE Circuits and Systems 
Magazine, Vol. 12, First Quarter 2012, pp. 12–32.
[16]	 Wu, T. -H., et al., “A 65 nm GSM/GPRS/EDGE SoC with Integrated BT/FM,” IEEE 
Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 48, No. 5, May 2013, pp. 1161–1173.
[17]	 Bachmann, C., et al., “A 0.74 V 200 μW Multi-Standard Transceiver Digital Baseband in 
40 nm LP-CMOS for 2.4 GHz Bluetooth Smart / ZigBee / IEEE 802.15.6 Personal Area 
Networks,” IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference, February 9–13, 2014, pp. 
186–187.
[18]	 Hashemi, H., and A. Hajimiri, “Concurrent Multiband Low-Noise Amplifiers-Theory, 
Design, and Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 
50, No. 1, January 2002, pp. 288–301.
[19]	 Olapade, A. O., A. Hasan, and M. Helaoui, “Concurrent Dual-Band Six-Port Receiver 
for Multi-Standard and Software Defined Radio Applications,” IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 61, No. 12, December 2013, pp. 4252–4261.
[20]	 Chang, S. -F. R., et al., “A Dual-Band RF Transceiver for Multistandard WLAN 
Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 53, No. 3, 
March 2005, pp. 1048–1055.
[21]	 Zhang, X. Y., and Q. Xue, “Novel Dual-Mode Dual-Band Filters Using Coplanar 
Waveguide-Fed Ring Resonators,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 
Vol. 55, No. 10, October 2007, pp. 2183–2190.
[22]	 Li, Y., and N. M. Neihart, “Mathematical Analysis of Inter-Band Inter-Modulation for 
Concurrent Dual-Band Mixers,” IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, 
May 19–23, 2013, pp. 829–832.
[23]	 Craninckx, J., “CMOS Software-Defined Radio Transceivers: Analog Design in Digital 
Technology,” IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 50, No. 4, April 2012, pp. 136–144.

40 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
[24]	 Giannini, V., et al., “A 2-mm2 0.1-5 GHz Software Defined Radio Receiver in 45-nm 
Digital CMOS,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 44, No. 12, December 2009, 
pp. 3486–3498.
[25]	 Heinen, S., and E. Wunderlich, “High Dynamic Range RF Frontends from Multiband 
Multistandard to Cognitive Radio,” Semiconductor Conference, September 27–28, 2011, 
pp. 1–8.
[26]	 Liempd, B. V., et al., “A 0.9 V 0.4-6 GHz Harmonic Recombination SDR Receiver in 28 
nm CMOS with HR3/HR5 and IIP2 Calibration,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 
Vol. 49, No. 8, August 2014, pp. 1815–1825.
[27]	 Craninckx, J., J. Borremans, and M. Ingels, “SAW-Less Software-Defined Radio 
Transceivers in 40 nm CMOS,” IEEE Custom Integrated Circuits Conference, September 
19–21, 2011, pp. 1–8.
[28]	 Soer, M., et al., “A 0.2-to-2.0 GHz 65 nm CMOS Receiver Without LNA Achieving > 
11 dBm IIP3 and <6.5 dB NF,” IEEE International Conference on Solid-State Circuits, 
February 8–12, 2009, pp. 222–223a.
[29]	 Cassia, M., et al., “A Low-Power CMOS SAW-Less Quad Band WCDMA/HSPA/
HSPA+/1X/EGPRS Transmitter,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 44, No. 7, July 
2009, pp. 1897–1906.
[30]	 He, X., J. V. Sinderen, and R. Rutten, “A 45 nm WCDMA Transmitter Using Direct 
Quadrature Voltage Modulator with High Oversampling Digital Front-End,” IEEE 
International Conference on Solid-State Circuits, February 7–11, 2010, pp. 62–63.
[31]	 Mackenzie, A. B., “Cognitive Radio and Networking Research at Virginia Tech,” 
Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 97, No. 4, April 2009, pp. 660–688.
[32]	 Bourdoux, A., et al., “Receiver Architectures for Software-Defined Radios in Mobile 
Terminals: The Path to Cognitive Radio,” IEEE Radio and Wireless Symposium, January 
9–11, 2007, pp. 535–538.
[33]	 Universal Service Radio Peripheral, http://www.ni.com/pdf/manuals/375988a.pdf.
[34]	 Razavi, B., “Challenges in the Design of Cognitive Radios,” IEEE Custom Integrated 
Circuits Conference, September 13–16, 2009, pp. 391–398.
[35]	 Razavi, B., “Cognitive Radio Design Challenges and Techniques,” IEEE Journal of Solid-
State Circuits, Vol. 45, No. 8, August 2010, pp. 1542–1553.
[36]	 Harada, H., “A Feasibility Study on Software Defined Cognitive Radio Equipment,” 3rd 
IEEE Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks, October 14–17, 
2008, pp. 1–12.
[37]	 Christodoulou, C. G., et al., “Reconfigurable Antennas for Wireless and Space 
Applications,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 100, No. 7, July 2012, pp. 2250–2261.
[38]	 Shim, Y., Z. Wu, and M. Rais-Zadeh, “A High-Performance Continuously Tunable MEMS 
Bandpass Filter at 1 GHz,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 
60, No. 8, August 2012, pp. 2439–2447.
[39]	 Fouladi, S., et al., “High-Q Narrowband Tunable Combline Bandpass Filters Using 
MEMS Capacitor Banks and Piezomotors,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, Vol. 61, No. 1, January 2013, pp. 393–402.

 
Software-Defined Radio and Cognitive Radio: A Systems Overview 
41
[40]	 Wang, X. -G., Y. -H. Cho, and S. -W. Yun, “A Tunable Combline Bandpass Filter Loaded 
with Series Resonator,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 60, 
No. 6, June 2012, pp. 1569–1576.
[41]	 Sekar, V., M. Armendariz, and K. Entesari, “A 1.2-1.6 GHz Substrate-Integrated-
Waveguide RF MEMS Tunable Filter,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, Vol. 59, No. 4, April 2011, pp. 866–876.
[42]  Lee, J., and K. Sarabandi, “An Analytic Design Method for Microstrip Tunable Filters,” 
IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 56, No. 7, July 2008, pp. 
1699–1706.
[43]	 Chen, K., X. Liu, and D. Peroulis, “Widely Tunable High-Efficiency Power Amplifier 
with Ultra-Narrow Instantaneous Bandwidth,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory 
and Techniques, Vol. 60, No. 12, December 2012, pp. 3787–3797.
[44]	 Mahamed, A., S. Boumaiza, R. R. Mansour, “Electronically Tunable Doherty Power 
Amplifier for Multi-Mode Multi-Band Base Stations,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and 
Systems, Vol. 61, No. 4, April 2014, pp. 1229–1240.
[45]	 Aref, A. F., and Renato Negra, “A Fully Integrated Adaptive Multiband Multimode 
Switching-Mode CMOS Power Amplifier,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, Vol. 60, No. 8, August 2012, pp. 2549–2561.
[46]	 Fu, J. -S., and A, Mortazawi, “Improving Power Amplifier Efficiency and Linearity Using 
a Dynamically Controlled Tunable Matching Network,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave 
Theory and Techniques, Vol. 56, No. 12, December 2008, pp. 3239–3244.
[47]	 Yoon, Y., et al., “A Dual-Mode CMOS RF Power Amplifier with Integrated Tunable 
Matching Network,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 60, No. 
1, January 2012, pp. 77–88.
[48]	 Ru, Z., et al., “A 300-800 MHz Tunable Filter and Linearized LNA Applied in a Low-
Noise Harmonic-Rejection RF-Sampling Receiver,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 
Vol. 45, No. 5, May 2010, pp. 967–978.
[49]	 Saputra, N., and J. R. Long, “A Fully Integrated Wideband FM Transceiver for Low Data 
Rate Autonomous Systems,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 50, No. 5, May 
2015, pp. 1–11.
[50]	 Mayer, A., et al., “RF Front-End Architecture for Cognitive Radios,” 18th IEEE 
International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, September 
3–7, 2007, pp. 1–5.
[51]	 Gielen, G., and E. Goris, “Reconfigurable Front-End Architectures and A/D Converters 
for Flexible Wireless Transceivers for 4G Radio,” 7th IEEE Symposium on Emerging 
Technologies: Circuits and Systems for 4G Mobile Wireless Communications, June 23–24, 
2005, pp. 13–18.


43
3
Antenna Design Requirements for 
Cognitive Radio
3.1  Introduction
Cognitive radio imposes various constraints on the design of its antenna sys­
tems. The antenna systems designed for cognitive radio are required to monitor 
the channel, search for white spaces (idle frequencies), identify the white spaces 
through software, and communicate over these idle frequencies. 
As we have discussed in Chapter 2, the difference between a cognitive 
radio and a software-defined radio is the learning process that is integrated in 
the cognitive radio cycle. Such a learning process improves both spectral and 
power efficiency of the channel. It also improves the dynamic spectrum access 
and allows the antenna system to communicate on demand when such com­
munication is necessary.
The operation of a cognitive radio system is divided mainly into two tasks. 
In the first task, a cognitive radio device searches and identifies any part of the 
spectrum that is idle. The second task consists of achieving an optimal mode of 
communication by allocating the appropriate channel to be used.
Antenna systems designed for cognitive radio are required to be intel­
ligent, aware of their environment, possess a good gain and couple construc­
tively. These intelligent antenna systems are software-defined by a controlling 
processor such as a field programmable gate array (FPGA). They use various 
algorithms to optimize their performance, such as genetic algorithms or neural 
networks to learn from the channel activity and generate multiple operating 
modes based on previous communication decisions.

44 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
Based on the fact that the occupancy in the communication spectrum is 
non-uniform, the design of antennas that cater for a cognitive radio system that 
targets such intermittent spectrum is challenging. The cognitive radio antenna 
systems must maneuver around the heavily congested spectrum and broadcast 
over underutilized bands to access various wireless standards. Therefore, cogni­
tive radio systems are considered a good solution for unbalanced spectrum oc­
cupancies and constitute the future of efficient wireless communication systems.
The monitoring of the channel and the identification of a primary user 
is achieved by a sensing antenna. The sensing antenna identifies the required 
information and transfers the data to the communicating antenna through a 
cognitive radio processor. The communicating antenna reconfigures its opera­
tion in order to be able to broadcast over the desired channels. Thus, a cognitive 
radio antenna system has access to the software-controlling processor of a cog­
nitive radio device and reconfigures its operation based on observations made 
by the sensing antenna. Interweaving or underlaying the spectrum occupancy 
is the main objective of such an antenna system. 
In this chapter, the antenna design requirements for a cognitive radio 
system are analyzed. Such requirements are necessary to ensure the appropriate 
functioning of a cognitive radio system. First, a general discussion about the 
various antenna parameters is presented. The antenna design limitations in a 
wireless environment are then formulated. The implementation of an antenna 
for mobile devices is also presented in addition to the specifications for an an­
tenna design for either interweave or underlay cognitive radio. Finally, a discus­
sion about the limitations of both interweave and underlay antenna systems is 
highlighted. 
3.2  Antenna Parameters
Any antenna structure is characterized by a unique set of parameters that de­
scribe its electrical performance [1]. These parameters are analyzed during the 
design process to assess the radiation mechanism of the antenna structure. The 
discussion of these parameters in this section is based on a dipole antenna of 
total length λ/2 at a frequency f = 2.4 GHz. The dipole antenna structure is 
shown in Figure 3.1. It is made of two wires separated by a given gap and con­
nected to the voltage source through a transmission line. The transmission line 
has a characteristic impedance Z0 and the voltage source has an internal imped­
ance Zg.
3.2.1  Reflection Coefficient
The voltage source that is connected to the transmission line launches an inci­
dent power Pin to the input terminals of the antenna. The mismatch between the 

 
Antenna Design Requirements for Cognitive Radio 
45
input impedance of the antenna Zin and the characteristics impedance Z0 of the 
transmission line allows some of the incident power to be reflected back (Pref) to 
the source [1, 2]. The remaining part of the incident power is delivered to the 
antenna for radiation. The antenna’s reflection coefficient is calculated as [2]:
	
0
0
in
in
Z
Z
Z
Z
−
Γ =
+
	
(3.1)
The plot of the λ/2 dipole antenna reflection coefficient (20log10|Γ|) 
[dB] is shown in Figure 3.2(a). This plot allows the assessment of the operat­
ing bandwidth for any antenna structure. The antenna operating bandwidth is 
defined as the span of frequency where the reflection coefficient is below −10 
Figure 3.1  A dipole antenna connected to the voltage source through a transmission line.
Figure 3.2  The dipole antenna: (a) operating bandwidth and (b) input impedance.

46 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
dB for most antennas [2]. The threshold of (–10 dB) is changed to (−6 dB) 
for antennas that are incorporated on mobile terminals or for those that need 
to operate in proximity to the human body as in wearable technology [3]. A 
higher threshold that can reach up to (−30 dB) can be used to determine the 
operating bandwidth for space applications. The (−10 dB) level corresponds to 
having an almost 30% or less reflection of the incident power at the antenna 
input terminals. 
The resonant frequency of the antenna can be determined by calculating 
the antenna input impedance. A plot of the real and imaginary parts of the 
input impedance reveals that the reactive part of the input impedance is null 
at the antenna’s resonant frequency. Figure 3.2(b) shows the antenna input im­
pedance for the λ/2 dipole antenna. At the resonant frequency of 2.4 GHz, the 
antenna input impedance is purely resistive.
3.2.2  Realized Gain
The gain of an antenna takes into account its directional property as well its ef­
ficiency [1]. The directional property is related to the antenna directivity (D (θ, 
f)), which is a measure of the level of concentration of the radiated electric and 
magnetic field at a specific location in the far-field region. As for the antenna 
efficiency, it is dependent on two main parameters. The first parameter is re­
lated to the loss at the input terminals of an antenna. This loss (er) is associated 
with the amount of reflection at the input of the antenna due to the mismatch 
between the antenna and the transmission line. The efficiency is also associated 
to the conduction and dielectric losses (ecd) inside the antenna structure. Thus, 
the antenna gain can be calculated as [1]:
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
,
,
1
r cd
r
G
e e D
e
θ f
θ f
=
=
−Γ
	
(3.2)
3.2.3  Radiation Pattern
The antenna radiation pattern is mainly assessed in its far-field region using 
the spherical coordinate system. The far-field region is defined by r > 2D2/λ 
where D is the largest dimension of the antenna [1]. In the far-field region, the 
radiation pattern is mainly represented as a function of the θ and f directional 
coordinates and independent of the r variation. The radiation pattern can be 
plotted as a 2-D or three-dimensional (3-D) distribution of the antenna gain 
or as the level of received electric field at a constant radius r. The radiation pat­
tern can also be plotted as normalized with respect to its maximum value. For 

 
Antenna Design Requirements for Cognitive Radio 
47
example, the simulated 2-D gain pattern of the λ/2 dipole along f = 00 is shown 
in Figure 3.3. The dipole is aligned along the z-axis and the simulation is done 
using an electromagnetic simulator [4]. It is worth mentioning that an antenna 
structure can generate either an omnidirectional gain pattern or a directive one. 
For the omnidirectional pattern, the measured radiation levels are very close in 
all directions for a given cut plane. As for the directional pattern, the radiation 
is focused at a specific span of the θ and φ angles. For example, the λ/2 dipole 
antenna produces an omnidirectional radiation pattern.
3.2.4  Quality Factor
An antenna’s quality factor is the time average of the stored energy around the 
antenna divided by its radiated power. It can be mathematically represented 
as [5]:
	
2
2
e
e
m
rad
m
m
e
rad
W
W
W
P
Q
W
W
W
P
ω
ω

>

= 

>

	
(3.3)
where We and Wm are the time averaged stored electric and magnetic energy 
around the antenna and Prad is the radiated power of the antenna structure. The 
Figure 3.3  The two-dimensional (2-D) gain pattern of the dipole antenna along the f = 0° 
plane.

48 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
quality factor can also be expressed as the inverse of the antenna bandwidth. In 
general, the quality factor indicates how the energy inside an oscillating system 
is dissipating. The smaller the quality factor, the faster the oscillation energy 
is dissipated. Thus, an antenna with a low-quality factor is desired because it 
allows a fast radiation of the energy. A low-quality factor also indicates accept­
able antenna efficiency [6]. It will be shown in the following section that the 
physical size of the antenna is mainly bounded by its minimum quality factor, 
maximum gain, and bandwidth. 
3.3  Antenna Design Limitations
The design of an antenna system for cognitive radio communication is subject 
to the fundamental limits that affect its behavior. In a cognitive radio environ­
ment, the antenna structure must be able to operate sequentially over multiple 
frequency bands that are not occupied by any primary user at given instants of 
time. Such a constraint imposed on the antenna design provides the antenna 
system with the ability to operate over several wireless standards that cover dif­
ferent frequency bands. Acceptable radiation characteristics with a stable radia­
tion pattern and a constant gain constitute other constraints that a cognitive 
radio antenna engineer has to maintain, especially since the cognitive radio 
operation spans over a very large bandwidth [7]. Small dimensions, low weight, 
and robustness are additional constraints that must be added to cognitive radio 
antennas that are to be incorporated on mobile terminals to enable their toler­
ance to changes in the environment [8].
In addition to the constraints discussed above, a cognitive radio antenna 
structure is bounded by two parameters. The first parameter is the landscape 
dedicated to integrate the antenna structure. This space is affected by the overall 
size of the cognitive radio platform. The second parameter is the lowest operat­
ing frequency that the cognitive radio is able to support. As the operating fre­
quency decreases, the antenna size needs to be reduced in order to allow its easy 
integration on a cognitive radio platform [6]. The need to reduce the antenna’s 
physical size pushes antenna designers to resort to electrically small antennas 
that exhibit different antenna radiation behaviors than what is needed. Hence, 
during the design stage, the limit of minimizing the antenna size needs to be 
taken into consideration in order not to jeopardize the cognitive radio-desired 
radiation characteristics. The reduction in the antenna physical size is mainly 
limited by three different electrical parameters: the antenna gain, quality fac­
tor, and bandwidth. These parameters represent the physical limitations of an 
electrically small antenna [9–16].
The understanding of the physical limitations of an antenna structure is 
based on enclosing the complete antenna structure inside a sphere of radius a, as 

 
Antenna Design Requirements for Cognitive Radio 
49
shown in Figure 3.4. The fields outside the sphere propagate radially outward. 
By using the spherical wave function theory, these fields can be expressed using 
a complete set of orthogonal transverse electric (TE) and transverse magnetic 
(TM) spherical modes [12]. The excitation of a specific mode as well as the 
electrical size of the sphere (ka where k = 2π/λ) limits the antenna quality factor, 
directivity, and bandwidth.
The antenna quality factor was related to its physical limitation for the 
first time by Wheeler in [9]. The analysis in [9] is based on extremely small an­
tennas (ka << 1) and also on the modeling of the antenna structure as a lumped 
capacitor or an inductor connected to a resistor that represents the radiation 
resistor. It is shown in [9] that the electrical size (ka) of the antenna sets an up­
per bound on the ratio between the radiated and dissipated energy as well as the 
stored energy. A lower bound on the quality factor of an antenna of arbitrary 
shape is then determined by Chu in [10]. The analysis in [10] is based on the 
concept of replacing the space outside the sphere that encloses the antenna 
structure by a finite number of independent equivalent circuits. Each equiva­
lent circuit represents either a TE or a TM spherical mode. A second-order RLC 
circuit is used to model each spherical mode separately [10]. This analysis has 
led to the conclusion that the lowest quality factor is obtained only if either of 
the lowest-order spherical modes (TE01 and TM01) are excited [10]. It was later 
proven by Harrington in [11] that the lowest quality factor can be achieved by 
the simultaneous and equal excitation of the TE01 and TM01 modes. Finally, 
the minimum quality factor for an arbitrary number of modes is provided by 
Fante in [12], where the minimum antenna quality factor is related to its elec­
trical size (ka). For example, when only the lowest-order spherical modes (TE01 
and TM01) are present, the minimum quality factor is given by [13]:
	
(
)
min
3
1
1
M
Q
M
ka
ka


=
+






	
(3.4)
Figure 3.4  The antenna structure enclosed inside a sphere of radius a.

50 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
where M = 1: either TE01 or TM01 mode is excited and M = 2: equal and simul­
taneous excitation of the TE01 and TM01 modes.
The design of an antenna structure for cognitive radio also depends on 
achieving a maximum gain at the operating frequency. The maximum achiev­
able gain is shown by Harrington to be Gmax= N (N + 2) where N is the order 
of the spherical-wave modes [11]. This equation enables the gain to be un­
bounded irrespective of the antenna physical size. However, the spherical-mode 
coefficients required to maximize the antenna gain do not guarantee a minimal 
quality factor as demonstrated by Chu in [10]. The ratio of the gain to the qual­
ity factor (G/Q) can be maximized as discussed in [10], which allows the an­
tenna designer to understand the trade-off that exists between the antenna gain 
and its corresponding quality factor. It is important to note that the analysis in 
[10] is only based on the omnidirectional linearly polarized antenna. The work 
in [10] is later extended to include both TE and TM modes [14]. For a small 
antenna (ka << 1), the maximum ratio of the gain to the quality factor can be 
written for both omnidirectional and directional antennas as [15]: 
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
3
2
3
2
6
max
directional
2
1
3
max
omni-directional
2
1
ka
G
Q
ka
ka
G
Q
ka
≈
+
≈
+
	
(3.5)
The minimum quality factor and the maximum ratio of the gain to the 
quality factor can be used to determine the smallest possible antenna size once 
the required antenna bandwidth is given. This is achieved by designing an an­
tenna structure that occupies the whole volume of the radian sphere, ensuring 
that there is no stored energy inside the sphere and by allowing only the lowest-
order spherical modes to exist outside the radian sphere. 
Another approach can be to miniaturize an existing antenna structure 
in order to make it electrically small at the desired frequency. This allows the 
miniaturized antenna to satisfy the space constraints that are set by the size of 
the cognitive radio platform. 
The miniaturization of an antenna can be achieved by reducing the phase 
velocity of the wave that is guided by the antenna structure in order to produce 
resonance. The antenna engineer must understand and quantify the reduction 
value of the phase velocity while minimizing the antenna quality factor at a 
given electrical size (ka). The phase velocity vp of a guided wave can be written 
as [16]:

 
Antenna Design Requirements for Cognitive Radio 
51
	
1
1
p
v
LC
με
=
=
	
(3.6)
From (3.6), one notices that the series inductance (L) and the shunt ca­
pacitance (C) per unit length of the antenna set the phase velocity of the guided 
wave. Thus, the control of these two values allows the antenna engineer to con­
trol the miniaturization process. The change in the values of L and C is done 
by using either material or reactive loading within the antenna structure [17]. 
The material loading process is related to the addition of materials that have 
εr > 1 and/or μr > 1. The reactive loading depends on the change in the self-
inductance and/or shunt capacitance of the antenna structure [6]. An example 
of an inductive loading is the meandering process of a dipole or a microstrip 
antenna [18]. 
As a summary, it is important to indicate that the design stage of an an­
tenna structure for a cognitive radio environment must take into consideration 
the antenna’s fundamental limitations. More specifically, an antenna designer 
needs to correlate the bandwidth and gain of an antenna with its physical vol­
ume. Such volume is defined by the radian sphere that encloses the overall 
antenna structure. Thus, the antenna engineer must understand that as the size 
of the antenna with respect to the operating wavelength decreases; both the 
antenna gain and operating bandwidth are going to decrease as well. To achieve 
an efficient cognitive radio antenna structure that is able to operate over a large 
span of frequencies while maintaining good radiation characteristics in terms 
of the quality factor and gain is challenging. This job becomes more challeng­
ing when the physical space dedicated for the cognitive radio antenna structure 
integration is limited. 
3.4  Antenna Design Specifications for Cognitive Radio
The specifications and design guidelines that an antenna designer follows in or­
der to achieve an antenna system for cognitive radio vary based on the cognitive 
radio mode. A cognitive radio can be either interweave or underlay. The adop­
tion of a specific cognitive radio scenario determines the mode of integration of 
the antenna system in the cognitive radio device. Moreover, the future of wire­
less communication is foreseen to have the cognitive radio feature integrated 
within the users’ mobile terminals or personal devices. Therefore, for both cog­
nitive radio scenarios, the antenna structures need to satisfy the constraints and 
requirements that are already defined for the integration of antennas on mobile 
devices. In this section, the antenna specifications for mobile devices are first 
detailed and then a discussion about the requirements for designing an antenna 
structure for spectrum interweave and underlay cognitive radio is highlighted, 

52 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
while taking into consideration the antenna physical limitations discussed in 
Section 3.3. Thus, it can be deduced that an antenna design is always the result 
of a trade-off analysis between the antenna’s physical dimensions and its cor­
responding quality factor, gain, and bandwidth.
3.4.1  Mobile Terminals
A mobile terminal must be able to support several wireless standards including, 
for example, Long Term Evolution (LTE), fourth generation (4G), third gen­
eration (3G), Wi-Fi, or near-field communication (NFC). Such standards span 
a large number of frequency bands. The appropriate functioning of a mobile 
terminal is highly dependent on the operation of the various integrated antenna 
structures. Each antenna structure should ensure that the required service is de­
livered to the end users with an acceptable quality of service. The integration of 
the various antenna structures to accommodate the different wireless standards 
is a challenging job. In general, the antenna structures of a mobile terminal 
must feature small size, low weight, low cost, and high efficiency and, most 
importantly, have the ability to handle multiple frequency bands [8].
An important parameter that should be monitored during the design pro­
cess of an antenna structure for a mobile terminal is the specific absorption rate 
(SAR). The SAR is a measure of how much power is absorbed in a biological 
tissue when the body is exposed to the radiation from the antenna of a given 
mobile terminal. In Europe, the SAR limit is set by the International Commis­
sion on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP). It is required not to 
exceed 2 W/kg over a 10-g cube of biological tissue. As for the United States, 
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has limited the SAR to the 
value of 1.6 W/Kg over a 1-g cube [19]. The antenna position, phone style, 
and the material grounding are the main parameters that affect the SAR value. 
The most common technique to reduce the SAR level in a mobile terminal is 
to place the ground-free antenna at the bottom of the mobile phone while the 
on-ground antenna to be placed at the back of the mobile terminal [20]. Such 
placement ensures that a minimum radiation from the antenna structure is 
oriented towards the human head.
In general, mobile terminal antennas can be divided into two categories: 
external antennas and internal antennas. External antennas are the ones used in 
the first commercial mobile phones. An example of an external antenna is the 
quarter-wavelength monopole (whip antenna) that can be retracted into the 
handset and extended when in talk mode [21]. An external antenna features an 
excellent bandwidth and efficiency at the expense of a high SAR. The SAR for 
this type of antennas exceeds the limits set by the ICNIRP and the FCC. 
However, the internal mobile terminal antennas can be divided into two 
main categories. The first category is based on the Planar Inverted-F Antenna 

 
Antenna Design Requirements for Cognitive Radio 
53
(PIFA), and the second one is based on the ungrounded monopole [3]. The 
PIFA is considered as a microstrip antenna over a ground plane of finite size. A 
shorting pin is included at a specific location to make a connection between the 
radiating surface and the ground plane. In general, the main parameters that 
affect the design process of a mobile phone antenna are the physical dimen­
sions of the antenna (length, width, height above the ground) in addition to 
other factors such as the feeding structure, the handset material, the battery, and 
speaker placement [19]. 
The coverage of the multiple frequency bands that span over a wide band­
width necessitates that the mobile phone antennas feature multiple resonant 
modes. This can be achieved by designing, for example, a multiband PIFA [3]. 
Another design method relies on the mobile phone printed circuit board to ex­
cite the antenna resonant modes. The mobile phone antennas that are designed 
using this technique are called chassis antennas [22, 23]. For example, in order 
to be able to cover the 800–900-MHz cellular bands inside a mobile phone 
terminal, one can benefit from the handset dimensions to excite substantial RF 
current on the terminal chassis and allow the antenna to achieve the appropriate 
resonant mode [7]. Chassis antennas represent an efficient solution that allows 
a mobile phone terminal to operate at the lower-frequency bands. 
The design of a cognitive radio antenna for a mobile terminal should 
satisfy all the constraints and the requirements outlined above. The mobile ter­
minal can adopt either the spectrum interweave or underlay cognitive radio. In 
a mobile device, without any cognitive feature, the various antenna structures 
are designed to accommodate specific frequency bands. These bands are prede­
termined before reaching the antenna design stage. However, the addition of 
the cognitive functionality to the operation of a mobile terminal necessitates 
that the various antenna structures operate over various frequency bands. These 
bands correspond to the various parts of the channel that are not occupied by 
any active user. This additional feature represents an important constraint dur­
ing the design stage of the cognitive radio mobile terminal’s antenna.
3.4.2  Spectrum Interweave Cognitive Radio
A spectrum interweave cognitive radio antenna system has to be able to con­
tinuously monitor the white spaces in the finite frequency spectrum occupied 
by other wireless systems, and then dynamically alter its transmit/receive char­
acteristics to operate within these unused frequency bands. This will ensure that 
the interference with other wireless systems is minimized and thus the cognitive 
radio channel throughput is maximized [17].
In order to continuously monitor the channel in the lookout for white 
spaces, a wideband/ultrawideband (UWB) sensing antenna or a reconfigurable 
narrowband sensing antenna is required to monitor the channel. The sensing 

54 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
antenna must operate over a large bandwidth in order to keep track of the 
activity of the primary and secondary users within the cognitive radio environ­
ment. The sensing mechanism using a reconfigurable narrowband antenna is 
based on performing consecutive analysis of the various bands of the cogni­
tive radio channel. This is done by changing the operating frequency of the 
reconfigurable antenna. However, the sensing mechanism using a wideband/
ultrawideband antenna is done by analyzing at the same time instance the entire 
cognitive radio channel spectrum. The reconfigurable transmit/receive antenna 
is required to perform the data transfer [24]. A general view of a cognitive radio 
antenna system for the spectrum interweave is shown in Figure 3.5.
In addition to the sensing antenna, a spectrum interweave cognitive radio 
antenna system requires a communicating antenna. Two scenarios have been 
proposed. The first scenario revolves around using the same sensing antenna 
for both communication and sensing. In this case, the use of a single antenna 
imposes a strain on the functions required for sensing and communication. 
One antenna forces the cognitive radio to slice time and access the spectrum at 
various time slots while switching between sensing and communication. This 
is not a preferred scenario because a dedication of one antenna for sensing and 
another antenna for communication alleviates the device’s processor and allows 
for swifter response to evolving white spaces [25].
The second scenario, which is also a preferred scenario, requires the dedi­
cation of a sensing antenna that accomplishes continuous channel monitor­
ing and identifies the idle spectrum gaps efficiently. The sensing antenna then 
transfers the identified spectrum white spaces into the cognitive radio processor 
which relates this information to the reconfigurable antenna that is dedicated 
for communication over these idle gaps. Reconfigurable antennas are consid­
ered essential components in a cognitive radio environment. First, they enable 
Figure 3.5  The spectrum interweave cognitive radio antenna system.

 
Antenna Design Requirements for Cognitive Radio 
55
the cognitive radio device to operate over any frequency band. They also allow 
full power transmission of secondary users’ data and avoid any interference with 
the licensed primary users. 
Any cognitive radio device is based on a cycle that is called the Observe-
Decide-Act-Learn (ODAL) cycle, which basically asks the device to observe 
the channel, decide on an action, act on the decision made by the processor, 
and learn from previous activities. The correlation between the cognitive radio’s 
ODAL cycle and the interweave antenna system is represented in Figure 3.6. 
The sensing antenna mainly interacts with the observe part of the cognitive 
radio cycle while the reconfigurable communicating antenna interacts with the 
act part of this cycle.
A cognitive radio antenna designer has to consider three key parameters 
(constraints) during the design process of a spectrum interweave cognitive radio 
system: 
1.	 The isolation between the two ports of the sensing and the reconfigu­
rable antennas: The operation of one antenna should not affect the 
other. It is a norm to consider an acceptable coupling between the 
sensing and reconfigurable antenna to be any value that has a magni­
tude lower than −15 dB (i.e., |S21| ≤ –15 dB).
2.	 The dimension of the cognitive radio antenna system: The antenna 
structure of the spectrum interweave cognitive radio consists prefer­
ably of two radiating structures. Therefore, the antenna designer has 
to minimize the space required to accommodate both the sensing and 
Figure 3.6  The correlation between the cognitive radio cycle and the antenna system for the 
interweave case.

56 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
communicating antennas. This step is essential especially if there is 
a constraint on the allocated space that is required to integrate the 
cognitive radio antenna system. It is important to keep in mind that 
the reduction in space must not come at the expense of increasing the 
mutual coupling between the two elements as well as deteriorating 
the antenna’s radiation characteristics such as gain, quality factor, and 
bandwidth.
3.	 Omnidirectional/reconfigurable radiation pattern: Both the sensing 
and the communicating antenna should provide an omnidirectional 
radiation pattern. The main objective of a cognitive radio device is 
to detect the white spaces at any given location and communicate 
accordingly. This is mainly achieved by allowing both antennas to 
produce equal radiation in all directions. Also, for the case where an 
interferer is present, the spectrum interweave cognitive radio antenna 
system should be able to produce reconfigurable nulls in their radia­
tion pattern. The direction of the null is determined by the location of 
the interferer in the channel.
3.4.3  Spectrum Underlay Cognitive Radio
The design of an antenna system for spectrum underlay cognitive radio is based 
on the design of a wideband antenna with a tunable notch frequency across its 
operating bandwidth. The underlay concept relies on the simultaneous trans­
mission between the primary and secondary users with a low power as well as 
short distance communication constraints imposed on the secondary users [24]. 
The wideband antenna which is preferably recommended to be a UWB 
antenna allows secondary users to continuously transmit with low power in 
short-distance communication. However, the elimination of the interference 
between the primary and the secondary users is done by allowing the wideband 
antenna to produce notches in its operating band. The notches that are pro­
duced in the wideband operating bandwidth of the antenna are reconfigured 
based on the activity of the primary users. The wideband antenna should also 
be able to remove or cancel its notch frequency in the case when full scanning 
of the cognitive radio channel spectrum is required [24]. A general view of a 
cognitive radio antenna system for the spectrum underlay scenario is shown in 
Figure 3.7.
A cognitive radio antenna designer needs to satisfy the following three 
constraints during the design process of a spectrum underlay cognitive radio 
system:

 
Antenna Design Requirements for Cognitive Radio 
57
1.	  The reflection coefficient of the wideband antenna at the notch fre­
quency: The antenna’s reflection coefficient has to exhibit a magnitude 
as close as possible to 0 dB at the notch frequency. This requirement is 
essential to minimize the interference between the primary users and 
the secondary users during simultaneous transmission. The primary 
users should operate at the notch frequency.
2.	 The gain of the wideband antenna: The wideband antenna is required 
to maintain a minimal fluctuation level in its realized gain’s magni­
tude. This requirement imposes a constant level of radiation through­
out the targeted directions.
3.	 The radiation pattern of the wideband antenna: The wideband anten­
na is also required to exhibit and preserve an omnidirectional pattern 
over the whole operating band.
3.5  Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio Antenna Systems Using 
Reconfigurable Filters
The constraints imposed by the two cognitive radio protocols (Interweave/Un­
derlay) can also be met by the integration of tunable filters into the antenna 
structures. Antennas should be able to produce wideband behavior before the 
integration of the filter. The filters can be incorporated within the antenna’s 
feeding networks. This technique allows antennas to tune their operating fre­
quencies without the integration of reconfiguring elements such as switches 
Figure 3.7  A layout for an antenna system for the spectrum underlay cognitive radio environ­
ment.

58 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
into the radiating parts of the antennas [26–28]. Figure 3.8 summarizes the 
various options for the incorporation of tunable filters in both the spectrum 
interweave and underlay cognitive radio antenna structures.
For the interweave cognitive radio, a bandpass filter is required to allow 
the communicating antenna to tune its operating frequency according to the 
spectrum holes [29]. Thus, a reconfigurable bandpass filter can be integrated 
into the feeding line of the antenna allowing its band tuning. The design process 
of this kind of antenna should take into consideration two important factors. 
First, the bandpass filter needs to be carefully matched to the antenna’s feeding 
line in order to allow maximum transmission of the signal from input of the 
filter to the remaining part of the antenna. Second, the input of the antenna has 
to also be matched to the output of the bandpass filter for optimal operation.
As for the underlay cognitive radio antenna system, a bandstop filter must 
be implemented so that the antenna tunes its notch frequency according to the 
primary user’s activities [30]. Similar to the spectrum interweave scenario, the 
bandstop filter can be integrated in the antenna’s feeding line with the appro­
priate matching. Reconfigurable bandstop filters can also be integrated within 
the antenna’s ground plane. Integrating the bandstop filter into the antenna’s 
ground plane allows the antenna designer to incorporate both bandpass and 
bandstop filters inside the same antenna structure [31]. This fact enables the 
antenna engineer to design one antenna structure that can be used either for 
the spectrum interweave mode or for the spectrum underlay scenario. For ex­
ample, a reconfigurable bandstop filter can be integrated into the ground plane 
of a cognitive radio antenna that has also a reconfigurable bandpass filter in its 
feeding line [31]. This simultaneous integration provides the user with an abil­
ity to switch between underlay and interweave functionalities. An important 
Figure 3.8  A block diagram summarizing the integration of filters in a cognitive radio plat­
form.

 
Antenna Design Requirements for Cognitive Radio 
59
parameter that an antenna engineer needs to account for during the design 
process is that for both underlay and interweave cognitive radio scenarios, the 
integrated filters (bandpass/bandstop) should be able to turn off and thus pro­
viding an all-pass response on demand. This step is important because it allows 
the antenna to scan the entire wideband spectrum. 
3.6   Comparison Between the Antenna Design Requirements for 
the Spectrum Interweave and Underlay Cognitive Radio 
After detailing the requirements of the antenna design process in both the spec­
trum interweave and underlay cognitive radio, a discussion about the major 
differences between these two scenarios must be elaborated. This is an essential 
step for any antenna designer that enables him/her to gain a solid understand­
ing about the operation of both scenarios. For the interweave spectrum sharing 
case, secondary users are only present whenever primary users are idle as op­
posite to the underlay case where primary and secondary users can be active si­
multaneously. This fact puts some constraints on the operation of the secondary 
users in the spectrum underlay case. For this case, the secondary users are only 
allowed to transmit low power communication signal over a short distance. 
Thus, a typical communication scheme for the underlay spectrum sharing pro­
tocol is based on the impulse radio-based UWB technology (IR-UWB) or the 
orthogonal frequency division multiplexing-based UWB (UWB-OFDM) [32]. 
From the antenna perspective, the spectrum interweave sharing case re­
quires two antennas. One antenna continuously senses the channel and searches 
for unused frequency bands. The second antenna performs the required com­
munication by tuning its operating frequency based on the activity of the pri­
mary users. The design process for this kind of cognitive radio has different 
challenges. First, the integration of two radiating structures within a limited 
space is an extensive task. Second, the implementation of the reconfigurability 
feature in the operation of the communicating antenna requires careful design 
to ensure that the desired functionality is achieved. However, for the spectrum 
underlay case, a single antenna is only required. This antenna should be able 
to perform UWB transmission with the additional ability to tune its notch 
frequencies. Such tunability is essential to minimize the interference between 
the primary and secondary users that operate simultaneously. The main limita­
tion of this kind of cognitive radio is that short-range communication must be 
maintained with a strict restriction on the level of the transmitted power by the 
active secondary users [24]. 
Antenna systems for both cognitive radio scenarios can also be imple­
mented by integrating reconfigurable filters within the antenna structures. The 
filter and its switching circuitry lie within either the feeding line or the ground 

60 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
plane of the antenna structure. This constitutes the main advantage of adopting 
such topology since no switching components are incorporated into the radiat­
ing surface of the antenna. Such incorporation minimizes the negative effects of 
the biasing lines on the antenna radiation mechanism. 
It is important to indicate that, for both cognitive radio scenarios, the 
antenna structures must be capable of changing their operating or notch fre­
quencies. This is achieved by resorting to reconfigurable antenna structures or 
antenna structures with reconfigurable bandpass/bandstop filters. The decision 
on which type of scenario of a cognitive radio platform to be used mainly de­
pends on the communication system and its design requirements. 
3.7  Antenna Design Limitations for Cognitive Radio Interweave 
and Underlay
An antenna system designed for spectrum interweave cognitive radio is com­
posed of a sensing antenna and a reconfigurable communicating antenna. The 
sensing function of a spectrum interweave cognitive radio system can be either 
wideband sensing or narrowband sensing. The wideband sensing function is 
achieved by a wideband/UWB antenna. This antenna is required to commu­
nicate over a large bandwidth with a constant gain and an omnidirectional 
pattern. Achieving a wide bandwidth range is a challenge that imposes a limit 
on the constant gain requirement of the antenna. The antenna bandwidth also 
increases the sensitivity of the cognitive radio system to a wider noise floor. The 
omnidirectional pattern constitutes another challenging factor because main­
taining such a pattern without fluctuations or disturbances is very difficult and 
requires careful design techniques. In order to achieve a wideband operation, an 
antenna designer is required to excite higher-order modes of operation that may 
cause significant deterioration in the radiation pattern in some radiation direc­
tions. Another major challenge for wideband antennas is the high sampling 
rates required to sample and analyze their received signals. 
The narrowband sensing function is achieved by a reconfigurable narrow­
band antenna. This reconfigurable antenna is required to achieve a wide range 
of tuning potential while maintaining a swift ability to hop from one frequency 
into another without any disturbance in the antenna gain level.
The limitations of reconfigurable antennas extend beyond the usual chal­
lenges of antenna design because reconfigurable antennas are based on the in­
tegration of active components within their structures. In reality, the addition 
of reconfiguring components such as switches or other active elements into the 
antenna structure introduces several undesired effects that can impose a chal­
lenge on the designer. The integration of active components into the antenna 

 
Antenna Design Requirements for Cognitive Radio 
61
structure requires biasing lines that are needed for the activation of such active 
components. These biasing lines can interfere with the antenna radiation char­
acteristics. The nonlinearity effects of the integrated active components and 
their losses can affect the antenna design process and can add limitations to the 
antenna performance. The integration of reconfigurable antennas into a cogni­
tive radio environment enforces a speed reconfiguration constraint. The ability 
of a reconfigurable antenna to promptly tune to a different frequency is of high 
importance, which limits the designer’s choice of reconfiguring components 
and forces the consideration of such a parameter into the early design process 
[25]. 
Designing an antenna system for underlay cognitive radio environment is 
based on the design of a wideband antenna with the addition of notch-tuning 
ability. Thus, in reality, a spectrum underlay antenna structure is a reconfigu­
rable notch wideband antenna. The limitations of both wideband and recon­
figurable antennas discussed above apply simultaneously for this type of cogni­
tive radio.
The integration of reconfigurable bandpass or bandstop filters into the 
cognitive radio antenna structures in both interweave and underlay environ­
ments produces other constraints and limitations. The bandwidth of the inte­
grated filter is of extreme importance as well as its insertion loss. It is important 
that the integrated filter exhibits tuning in the desired bandwidth while being 
well matched to the antenna system. 
3.8  Discussion
In this chapter, the fundamental limits that govern the design process of an 
antenna system are presented. The effect of the electrical size of the antenna 
on the quality factor, gain, and bandwidth is detailed. The design requirements 
for mobile terminals are highlighted and the antenna specifications for both 
spectrum interweave and underlay cognitive radio systems are discussed. The 
spectrum interweave cognitive radio requires a sensing component (wideband 
or reconfigurable narrowband) and a communicating component. The spec­
trum underlay cognitive radio requires the use of a wideband antenna with 
reconfigurable notches. Reconfigurable filters can also be integrated into the 
antenna structures as alternatives to the integration of active components onto 
the antennas’ radiating surfaces. They reduce the undesired effects of such ac­
tive components on the radiation mechanism of the radiating surface.
Several limitations and constraints govern the design of antenna systems 
for any type of cognitive radio. These limitations are mostly based on meeting 
the requirements imposed by the system and on exhibiting a strong fidelity in 

62 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
the antenna performance. In the next chapter, a detailed discussion about the 
operation and the design methodologies of the wideband-sensing antenna is 
presented.
References
[1]	 Balanis, C. A., Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design, 3rd ed., New York: John Wiley & 
Sons, 2005.
[2]	 Pozar, D. M., Microwave Engineering, 4th ed., New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
[3]	 Balanis, C. A., Modern Antenna Handbook, New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2008.
[4]	 Ansys HFSS, Release 15.0.
[5]	 Balanis, C. A., Advanced Engineering Electromagnetics, New York: John Wiley & Sons, 
2012.
[6]	 Kramer, B. A., et al., “Fundamental Limits and Design Guidelines for Miniaturizing 
Ultra-Wideband Antennas,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, Vol. 51, No. 4, 
August 2009, pp. 57–69.
[7]	 Hall, P. S., P. Gardner, and A. Faraone, “Antenna Requirements for Software Defined and 
Cognitive Radios,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 100, No. 7, July 2012, pp. 2262–2270.
[8]	 Skrivervik, A. K., and J. R. Mosig, “Small Terminal Antennas: Analysis, Design and Per­
formance Limitations,” IEEE International Conference on Electromagnetics in Advanced Ap­
plications, September 14–18, 2009, pp. 319–322.
[9]	 Wheeler, H. A., “The Radian Sphere Around a Small Antenna,” Proceedings of the I.R.E., 
Vol. 35, August 1959, pp. 1325–1331.
[10]	 Chu, J. L., “Physical Limitations of Antenna Q,” Journal of Applied Physics, Vol. 19, 
December 1948, pp. 1163–1175.
[11]	 Harrington, R. F., “Effect of Antenna Size on Gain, Bandwidth and Efficiency,” Journal 
of Research of the National Bureau of Standards-D. Radio Propagation, Vol. 64D, No. 1, 
January 1960, pp. 1–12.
[12]	 Fante, R. L., “Quality Factor of General Ideal Antennas,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas 
and Propagation, Vol. AP-17, No. 2, March 1969, pp. 151–155.
[13]	 McLean, J. S., “A Re-Examination of the Fundamental Limits of the Radiation Q of 
Electrically Small Antennas,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. AP-44, 
No. 5, May 1996, pp. 672–676.
[14]	 Fante, R. L., “Maximum Possible Gain for an Arbitrary Ideal Antenna with Specified 
Quality Factor,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 40, No. 12, 
December 1992, pp. 1586–1588.
[15]	 Geyi, W., “Physical Limitations of Antenna,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. 51, No. 8, August 2003, pp. 2116–2123.

 
Antenna Design Requirements for Cognitive Radio 
63
[16]	 Ulaby, F. T., E. Michielssen, and U. Ravaioli, Fundamentals of Applied Electromagnetics, 6th 
ed., Boston, MA: Pearson, 2010.
[17]	 Kramer, B. A., C. -C. Chen, and J. L. Volakis, “Size Reduction of a Low-Profile Spiral 
Antenna Using Inductive and Dielectric Loading,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation 
Letters, Vol. 7, 2008, pp. 22–25.
[18]	 Wonbin, H., and K. Sarabandi, “Low-Profile, Multi-Element, Miniaturized Monopole 
Antenna,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 57, No. 1, January 2009, 
pp. 72–80.
[19]	 Fujimoto, K., Mobile Antenna Systems Handbook, 3rd ed., Norwood, MA: Artech House, 
2008.
[20]	 Ying, Z., “Antennas in Cellular Phones for Mobile Communications,” Proceedings of the 
IEEE, Vol. 100, No. 7, July 2012, pp. 2286–2296.
[21]	 Rowell, C., and E. Y. Lam, “Mobile-Phone Antenna Design,” IEEE Antennas and 
Propagation Magazine, Vol. 54, No. 4, August 2012, pp. 14–34.
[22]	 Di Nallo, C., and A, Faraone, “Multiband Internal Antenna for Mobile Phones,” 
Electronics Letters, Vol. 41, No. 9, 2005, pp. 514–515.
[23]	 Manteuffel, D., and R. Martens, “Multiple Antenna Integration in Small Terminals,” 
IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation, October 29–November 2, 
2012, pp. 211–214.
[24]	 Christodoulou, C. G., et al., “Reconfigurable Antennas for Wireless and Space 
Applications,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 100, No. 7, July 2012, pp. 2250–2261.
[25]	 Tawk, Y., J. Costantine, and C. G. Christodoulou, “Cognitive Radio and Antenna 
Functionalities: A Tutorial,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, Vol. 56, No. 1, 
February 2014, pp. 231–243.
[26]	 Hamid, M. R., et al., “Vivaldi Antenna with Switchable Band Pass Resonator,” IEEE 
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 59, No. 11, November 2011, pp. 4008–
4015.
[27]	 Perruisseau-Carrier, J., P. Pardo-Carrera, and P. Miskovsky, “Modeling, Design and 
Characterization of a Very Wideband Slot Antenna with Reconfigurable Band Rejection,” 
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 58, No. 7, July 2010, pp. 2218–
2226.
[28]	 Dussopt, L., and G. M. Rebeiz, “Intermodulation Distortion and Power Handling in 
RF MEMS Switches, Varactors, and Tunable Filters,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. 51, No. 4, April 2003, pp. 1247–1256.
[29]	 Zamudio, M. E., et al., “Integrated Cognitive Radio Antenna Using Reconfigurable Band 
Pass Filter,” 5th European Conference on Antennas and Propagation, Rome, Italy, April 11–
15, 2011, pp. 2108–2212.
[30]	 Zamudio, M. E., et al., “Reconfigurable Filter Embedded into an Antenna for a Cognitive 
Radio Environment,” IEEE-APS Topical Conference on Antennas and Propagation in 
Wireless Communication, Torino, Italy, September 12–16, 2011, pp. 714–717.

64 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
[31]	 Zamudio, M. E., et al., “Embedding a Reconfigurable Band-Pass/Band-Stop Filter into an 
Antenna,” IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation, Chicago, IL, July 
8–14, 2012.
[32]	 Arslan, H., Cognitive Radio, Software Defined Radio, and Adaptive Wireless System, New 
York: Springer, 2007.

65
4
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for 
Cognitive Radio
4.1  Introduction
Sensing the cognitive radio’s operating environment is essential for channel 
monitoring and continuous scanning of the spectrum activity. The cognitive 
radio device must be able to communicate over any frequency band that is 
idle within a channel. Hence, the sensing activity of the channel needs to be 
executed over a large bandwidth. In such an environment, wideband antennas 
that can exhibit ultrawideband (UWB) frequency response are required to per­
form the sensing activity. The wideband feature of the cognitive radio’s sensing 
antenna guarantees that the optimal mode of communication is maintained for 
all the active users and maximizes the channel spectrum usage efficiency. 
Wideband sensing differs for interweave and underlay cognitive radio sys­
tems. For interweave cognitive radio, channel monitoring is achieved by a wide­
band antenna that covers the entire operating bandwidth and identifies white 
spaces. As for the underlay cognitive radio, the wideband antenna can be used 
for sensing the channel and also for communication over the identified white 
spaces. This fact imposes a constraint on the secondary users to operate below 
the primary user’s channel noise floor. In order to achieve such a low power level 
of communication, UWB technology must be adopted in underlay cognitive 
radio. The adoption of the UWB technology necessitates a frequency operation 
that spans from 3.1 to 10.6 GHz. It is important to note that primary users’ 
sensitivity varies and thus, UWB sensing adopted for underlay cognitive radio 
must exhibit reconfigurable frequency notches to reject communication over 

66 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
certain frequencies or in particular directions. This frequency rejection process 
depends on the location and the sensitivity of such primary users [1].
A wideband antenna can be defined as an antenna structure that exhibits 
a −10-dB bandwidth of at least 500 MHz with a minimal fractional bandwidth 
of 20% [2]. Increasing the antenna bandwidth and achieving a wideband be­
havior can be achieved by many techniques [3, 4]. An extreme expansion of the 
bandwidth results in the realization of UWB antenna. Thus, a UWB antenna 
is considered as a wideband antenna with an operating bandwidth that extends 
over 7 GHz, typically from 3.1 to 10.6 GHz as specified by the commercial 
UWB technology. An important feature of UWB antenna structure is its abil­
ity to coexist with other types of narrowband and wideband radio systems [2]. 
Thus, UWB antennas are suitable candidates for cognitive radio applications. 
The most widely used UWB antennas are the printed planar structures. A 
typical printed planar UWB structure is the monopole antenna. The popular­
ity of this type of UWB antenna structures is attributed mainly to their design, 
feeding technique, and ease of fabrication, in addition to their compactness and 
ability to be integrated with commercial handheld devices. For example, the 
UWB printed monopole antenna can be composed of a circular patch on top 
of a partial ground plane that is usually optimized to cover the UWB band [5]. 
The UWB printed monopole can, for example, be fed using a microstrip trans­
mission line or a coplanar waveguide (CPW) structure. This kind of printed 
antennas also exhibits several modes of operation, thus tapering its performance 
using trapezoidal feeding networks and fractals is a common practice [6]. Print­
ed spiral antennas as well as other wideband antenna structures (conical, log-
periodic, tapered slot) can also be proposed to achieve wideband sensing [7, 8].
In this chapter, the different categories of wideband sensing antennas for 
the two cognitive radio protocols are detailed. The history of UWB antennas 
as well as the techniques for their design is first discussed. Various examples 
of UWB antennas that can be used for sensing in interweave cognitive radio 
are then illustrated. UWB antennas with notches in their operating frequency 
bands are presented for sensing in underlay scenario.
4.2  History of UWB Antennas
The first UWB antenna presented in literature was in 1898 in a patent by Sir 
Oliver Lodge. The patent discussed some of the first UWB antennas for tuned 
radio systems [9, 10]. In the first decade of the 1900s, UWB antennas started to 
lose importance and appeared to be unnecessary as more narrowband antenna 
designs became abundant [9].
In the 1930s and with the advancement of radio for applications beyond 
30 MHz, broadband antennas became of a high interest for antenna designers, 

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
67
especially with the rise of short-wave communication and TV applications [9]. 
The biconical antenna first introduced by Lodge in 1898 was later on redis­
covered by Carter [11, 12]. However, the addition of a broadband transition 
between the feed and the antenna element contributed to the improvement of 
the original biconical antenna. The discone was later introduced by Kandoian 
as an improvement to the early biconical antenna [13, 14]. The analysis of the 
biconical antenna and the principle of thicker antennas to enhance the band­
width have triggered Schelkunoff to introduce the spherical dipole [15]. 
Horn antennas are also a major component in the history of UWB tech­
nology. Horn antennas date back to the 1930s [16, 17]. One of the most suc­
cessful horn designs of the era was the horn reflector antenna designed by A. C. 
Beck and H. Friis [18, 19]. Their horn reflector antenna was the foundation for 
AT&T’s nationwide long-distance telephone microwave network [9]. 
A thin wire bowtie antenna was introduced in a patent by Carter in 1939 
[20]. Then the bowtie array TV antenna was developed by Henry in 1952 
[21]. The behavior of such an antenna was later on characterized by Wood­
ward [9, 22]. 
Ultrahigh frequency- (UHF-) inverted triangular antennas for TV receiv­
ers appeared in the 1940s [9, 23]. Marconi’s square plate elements were revived 
by Lamberty to create a compact, easy-to-build, inexpensive UWB monopole 
in 1957 [24]. Sheet antennas appeared in the 1980s [25], in addition to the 
notch half-circle planar antennas [26]. In 1994, a planar circular dipole was 
introduced by Thomas and Wolfson [27].
Slot antennas, planar spirals, conical spirals, and log-periodic antennas 
constitute major contributors to the advancement of UWB antennas as well. 
The recent developments in planar and printed antennas, as well as the addition 
of fractal structures to improve the wideband operation of an antenna, have ad­
vanced UWB technology with the introduction of concepts such as frequency 
notching and passband tuning [7–9].
4.3  Categories of UWB Antennas
In general, UWB antennas can be grouped into five major categories based on 
their structure’s topology and their ability to allow UWB radiation [27]. These 
five categories are:
• Category 1, Frequency-independent antennas: First introduced in the 
1960s by Rumsey [28], the principle of frequency-independent antenna 
is based on the observation that a scaled version of a radiating structure 
must exhibit the same characteristics as the original one, when fed with a 
signal whose wavelength is scaled by the same factor [7]. Thus, the radia­

68 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
tion of an antenna is independent of frequency if its shape is invariant 
with respect to physical scaling [27]. A typical example of a frequency-
independent antenna is the printed spiral antenna.
• Category 2, Small-element electric antennas: Small-element antennas 
constitute suitable candidates for UWB sensing in a cognitive radio en­
vironment. These antennas exhibit compact size and omnidirectional 
pattern. Such features are essential for the operation of cognitive radio 
handheld devices. Typical examples of small-element electric antennas 
include the spherical dipole antenna, as well as the planar and printed 
circular-shaped monopole over a ground plane [27].
• Category 3, Self-complementary or small-element magnetic antennas: 
Self-complementary antennas are based on Babinet’s principle and can 
be characterized by a self-complementary metallization. Metal in a self-
complimentary antenna can be replaced by a dielectric and vice versa 
without changing the antenna’s structure [29, 30]. Figure 4.1 shows the 
complementary pair of a triangular-shaped dipole antenna. This con­
cept results in invariant input impedance but not necessarily frequen­
cy independent constant radiation characteristics. Typical examples of 
self-complimentary antennas are the 90° bowtie antenna, the sinuous 
or logarithmic spiral antenna [30], and some fractal-shaped printed an­
tennas [31]. It is essential to note that many frequency-independent an­
tennas exploit the self-complementarity feature to produce a wideband 
behavior. For example, the log-periodic antenna is able to produce a 
wide bandwidth due to its log-periodicity in addition to its self-comple­
mentarity feature. UWB slot antennas such as the annular or bowtie slot 
structures are also considered as UWB self-complementary or magnetic 
radiating elements.
• Category 4, Traveling wave antennas: A traveling wave antenna offers a 
smooth transition to enable the fields to be accelerated into free-space 
radiation [30]. A typical traveling wave antenna is a tapered waveguide 
Figure 4.1  The self-complementarity of a triangular-shaped dipole antenna.

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
69
[32]. Other examples of traveling wave antennas include the horn an­
tenna and the printed tapered slot antenna that is called the Vivaldi 
antenna. The Vivaldi antenna has triggered a lot of interest because it is 
well suited for planar integration and for UWB antenna arrays that can 
be proposed for radar applications [27].
• Category 5, Multiple resonance antennas: UWB operation can also be 
achieved by resorting to multiple resonance antennas. These antennas 
are combinations or grouping of multiple marrowband antennas or ra­
diating elements. Each antenna element covers a limited bandwidth. A 
typical example is the log-periodic dipole antenna array with each dipole 
covering 20% of the total UWB bandwidth. The planar log-periodic an­
tenna also falls within the same category. Another example of a multiple 
resonance antenna is a fractal antenna [27, 33].
The design of sensing antennas for a cognitive radio environment should 
rely on one of the five categories that define the operation of UWB antennas. 
The decision on which sensing antenna to adopt highly depends on the system 
constraints and design specifications as well as the space requirements that are 
set to accommodate the various cognitive radio antenna components. 
The design of the various UWB antennas that belong to the five different 
categories is presented in the upcoming sections. The purpose of such presenta­
tion is to promote a complete image about the different sensing antennas that 
can be used for either interweave or underlay cognitive radio. 
4.4  Frequency-Independent Antennas
An antenna whose shape is only defined by angles is considered as a frequency-
independent antenna where its electrical performance is independent of fre­
quency [27, 30]. Such antennas are primarily used within the 10–10,000-MHz 
range in applications such as TV and point-to-point communications [30]. If 
a frequency-independent antenna’s physical size is scaled by a factor k, the cor­
responding structure maintains the same radiation characteristics but at a fre­
quency that is scaled by the factor 1/k. For example, if the size of the antenna 
is doubled, its radiation characteristics are the same; however, its frequency of 
operation is half the original antenna structure’s operating frequency. The re­
duction of the antenna size into half compared to the original antenna structure 
allows the new antenna to operate at a frequency that is double that of the 
original one while maintaining the same radiation characteristics. Hence, when 
scaling a frequency-independent antenna, its electrical characteristics such as 

70 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
impedance, radiation pattern, gain, and polarization remain unchanged. The 
only change happens in the operating frequency. 
One key feature of frequency-independent antennas is based on the fact 
that the current density decreases as it goes farther away from the antenna in­
put terminals. Thus, the antenna’s current becomes negligible after a certain 
point and the structure beyond that point to infinity can be truncated without 
any behavioral change in the antenna operation [34]. The point where the an­
tenna can be truncated without affecting its electrical performance defines the 
antenna’s lower operating frequency. Based on this fact, the radiation from a 
frequency-independent antenna at a particular frequency is not related to the 
overall dimension of the antenna structure. It is only dependent on a particular 
localized area within the overall antenna’s physical shape [27]. This behavior in 
the operation of frequency-independent antennas introduces the problem of 
dispersion, which is one of the main limitations of this kind of antennas [30]. 
Another feature of frequency-independent antennas is their operating 
bandwidth. This bandwidth is defined by the range of scaling the antenna’s 
physical structure is able to support. For example, if the smallest geometry in 
the antenna structure can be defined to a precision of 1 mm, then a 10-cm 
antenna can exhibit as much as 100:1 bandwidth (i.e., the highest operating 
frequency is 100 bigger than the lowest operating frequency) [27].
The physical structure of a frequency-independent antenna is described 
by (4.1) [30, 34]. The basic antenna geometries that satisfy this equation are the 
equiangular geometries of planar and conical spiral [31] and the logarithmically 
periodic structures [35].
	
(
)
( )
,
1
where 
a
r
F
e
f
dK
a
K dC
f
θ f
θ
=
=
=
	
(4.1)
where r represents the distance along the antenna surface or edge, K is the scal­
ing factor, and C is the angle of rotation between the original and the scaled 
version of the antenna. It only depends on K, but neither depends on θ or f.
4.4.1  Printed Spiral Antenna
An example of a frequency-independent antenna is the printed spiral antenna. 
In general, this antenna can take many shapes such as the logarithmic or the 
Archimedean configurations. For the logarithmic case, the two arms of the spi­
ral antenna are fed in the center with a balun. By proper dimensioning, the 
antenna can be made broadband over a wide frequency [27]. The logarithmic 
spiral is also a directional circularly polarized antenna with two main beams 

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
71
orthogonal to the spiral plane. However, the Archimedean spiral antenna has 
constant line width and spacing. It exhibits similar radiation characteristics as 
the logarithmic one [7, 8].
An example of a printed spiral antenna is shown in Figure 4.2(a) [36]. 
The antenna structure is composed of 1.5 turns of a spiral-shaped radiator 
printed on the bottom layer of the RT/Duroid 5880 substrate with a thickness 
of 0.787 mm and a dielectric constant of 2.2. The feeding network is realized by 
a tapered microstrip line that is printed on the top side of the substrate as shown 
in Figure 4.2(a). The tapered microstrip line acts as a balun to provide the 50Ω 
to 130Ω transformation. The ground plane of the tapered microstrip line is 
located on the bottom side of the substrate and integrated into one spiral arm 
Figure 4.2  (a) The printed spiral antenna structure, (b) the measured antenna return loss, 
and (c) the measured axial ratio and circularly polarized gain. (© 2009, IEEE. From [36].)

72 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
of the proposed antenna. One of the main advantages of the proposed design 
is that the current flow on the ground plane is mostly concentrated underneath 
the tapered microstrip line and on the center of the spiral arm. Such a current 
concentration eliminates radiation distortion from the edges of the spiral arms 
[36].
The antenna’s return loss is shown in Figure 4.2(b). The antenna covers 
the operating bandwidth that spans from 3.75 GHz to 18.5 GHz. The large 
bandwidth allows this antenna to sense the channel activity in a cognitive radio 
environment. The antenna is also able to maintain circular polarization of its 
radiated fields. This is verified by the measured axial ratio that is shown to be 
Figure 4.2  (continued)

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
73
below 3 dB for frequencies up to 14.5 GHz as summarized in Figure 4.2(c). 
The measured circularly polarized gain varies from 3.5 to 7 dBic as also shown 
in Figure 4.2(c) [36].
The time-domain measurements show that the presented antenna is less 
dispersive than the Archimedean spiral antenna [37] or the conical spiral an­
tenna [38]. The time-domain measurements are performed by measuring the 
S-parameters for the case when two samples of the presented spiral antenna are 
connected to the two ports of a network analyzer. The two antennas are sepa­
rated by a line-of-sight distance D. An inverse Fourier transform (IFT) is then 
applied to the S-parameter’s measurement to obtain the time-domain response 
of the spiral antenna [37, 39]. Figure 4.3 shows the measured impulse response 
for three different values of the line-of-sight distance D = 25, 50, and 75 cm. 
This plot is generated for a transmitting signal with a pulse width of 400 ps 
[37]. One notices that the received signal has a temporal extent which is almost 
equal to the one of the transmitting pulsed signal. 
4.5   Nonplanar UWB Antennas
Nonplanar UWB antennas mainly belong to the conical antenna family. Coni­
cal antennas are considered part of the oldest types of UWB antennas. The 
conical antennas family includes biconical dipoles, monocone monopoles, and 
discone antennas [27, 30]. Figure 4.4 shows the physical structure of a biconi­
cal antenna and a monocone antenna. The biconical antenna is made of two 
identical conical elements with a half-angle θhc. The half-angle sets up the an­
tenna input impedance. The monocone antenna consists of a single cone over 
a ground plane with a finite size. When the size of the ground plane becomes 
small and comparable to the cone length, the monocone antenna reduces to a 
Figure 4.3  The measured impulse response of the presented printed spiral antenna. (© 2009, 
IEEE. From [36].)

74 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
discone antenna. For example, a typical diameter for the ground of a discone 
antenna is 0.18λ at the lowest antenna frequency, while the length of the cone 
element is around 0.25λ [27].
The shape of the conical UWB antennas family can be completely speci­
fied by angles. However, the various conical antenna structures cannot be con­
sidered as frequency-independent antennas because the current on their radiat­
ing surface does not decrease while moving away from the input terminal [40]. 
For example, the current distribution on the surface of a biconical antenna can 
be expressed as [30]:
	
( )
2
0
0
sin
2
jkr
I r
H r
d
H e
π
f
θ f
π
−
=
=
∫
	
(4.2)
where r is the radial distance from the origin to any point along the surface of 
the antenna structure. From this equation, it is noticed that there are no ampli­
tude variations with the radial distance r. However, the phase of the biconical 
antenna surface current is not kept the same while varying r. This leads to the 
conclusion that the various conical antennas cannot be truncated at a given 
distance away from the input terminals without affecting their electrical perfor­
mance. This fact differentiates conical antennas from frequency-independent 
ones [30]. Thus, the input impedance of an infinitely long biconical antenna 
can be expressed as [41]: 
Figure 4.4   (a) The biconical antenna structure, and (b) the monocone over a circular ground 
plane.

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
75
	
,
120ln cot
2
hc
in
Z
θ
∞




=







	
(4.3)
However, for a finite-length biconical antenna, the input impedance re­
duces to [41]:
	
,
1
1
in
in
Z
Z
β α
β α
∞
−
=
+
	
(4.4)
where β/α is the ratio of reflected and outwardly propagating TEM waves. The 
detailed expression of this ratio can be found in [41, 42].
The main challenge during the design process of a conical antenna struc­
ture is the termination of the radiating elements. An abrupt termination cre­
ates an undesirable reflection. It is found that the gradual taper and rounded 
terminations on the ends of the biconical antenna elements can reduce reflec­
tions and improve matching [27]. Thus, the low operating frequency is mainly 
affected by the overall length of the antenna, while the high-frequency is gov­
erned by the mechanical precision of the feed. 
The bulkiness and volumetric structure of these types of antennas con­
stitute their main drawback. Such antennas impose a size constraint on the 
antenna designer for cognitive radio integration. Thus, it is essential to design 
compact nonplanar UWB antennas for cognitive radio sensing while at the 
same time being able to preserve their wideband behavior and achieve desired 
radiation performance over the whole bandwidth. 
An example of a compact UWB monocone antenna over a ground plane 
is shown in Figure 4.5(a) [43]. In order to reduce the height of the antenna, 
a top hat-shaped cover is added. To further reduce the height and increase the 
bandwidth, shorting pins are inserted between the top hat and the antenna 
ground plane as highlighted in Figure 4.5(a). The antenna has a 3:1 bandwidth 
covering the band from 800 MHz to 2.3 GHz as summarized in Figure 4.5(b). 
At 800 MHz, the antenna is λ/14.7 tall and at 2.3 GHz it is λ/5 [43]. The addi­
tion of the shorting pins has the effect of adding slight scalloping to the antenna 
radiation pattern.
4.6  Planar UWB Antennas
Conical antennas exhibit excellent radiation characteristics and wide band­
width. However, they are not easy to fabricate and their form factor imposes 
problems in their integration in handheld devices for cognitive radio. One can 
benefit from the fact that for every good surface-of-revolution UWB antenna 

76 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
such as the biconical antenna, there is a corresponding planar cross-section an­
tenna [27]. Figure 4.6 shows how the nonplanar biconical antenna can be trans­
formed to a bowtie antenna while the monocone antenna reduces to a triangu­
lar sheet antenna over the same ground plane. Other examples of planar UWB 
antennas include the diamond-shaped dipole and the monopole antenna over 
a ground plane with a circular, elliptical, or trapezoidal shape. These various 
Figure 4.5  (a) The shorted top-hat monocone antenna, and (b) the antenna operating band­
width. (© 2012, IEEE. From [43].)

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
77
types of antennas provide the same bandwidth and radiation performances as 
the nonplanar UWB antennas but with much smaller volumes and thus easier 
integration in a cognitive radio device [30].
4.6.1  Miniaturized Triangular Sheet Antenna
A triangular sheet antenna is a planar cross-section equivalent of a monocone 
antenna. An example of an electrically small, low-profile planar UWB antenna 
is shown in Figure 4.7(a) [44]. The antenna structure is made of a triangular 
sheet over a circular ground. The triangular sheet has a height of 33.3 mm and 
width of 66.7 mm. The first resonance of the triangular sheet antenna usu­
ally occurs when the antenna height is approximately λ/4. Thus, to further 
reduce the lowest operating frequency of the triangular sheet antenna without 
increasing its physical dimension, a reactive load with a series resonance at a 
frequency of flow and a parallel resonance at a frequency of fhigh must be used. 
The key point is to make these two resonances close enough to each other and 
below the lowest frequency of the triangular sheet antenna in order to increase 
its operating bandwidth [44]. The reactive load should consist of a parallel LC 
circuit in series with a capacitor C2. The value of the capacitance in the paral­
lel LC circuit is controlled by terminating the triangular sheet antenna by two 
Figure 4.6  The correspondence between a surface-of-revolution antenna and a planar 
cross-section antenna: (a) biconical case, and (b) monocone case.

78 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
square hats of side length D = 66.7 mm. The two hats are connected together 
through two shorting pins. To minimize the dimension of the antenna struc­
ture, the diagonal of the first top hat is aligned with the plane of the triangular 
sheet antenna. The inductance L of the LC circuit is obtained by including 
two shorting pins between the bottom top hat and the antenna ground plane. 
The series capacitance is obtained by introducing a ring slot of width W4 = 2.3 
mm within the antenna ground plane as shown in Figure 4.7(a). The antenna’s 
VSWR remains below 2.2 for the span of frequency from 0.6 GHz to at least 
4 GHz as summarized in Figure 4.7(b). The antenna features a compact size 
of 0.085λmin × 0.189λmin × 0.189λmin where λmin corresponds to the lowest 
operating frequency with an omnidirectional radiation pattern over the whole 
operating bandwidth [44]. 
4.6.2  Planar UWB Monopole
Planar UWB monopoles are realized by replacing a wire monopole with a pla­
nar structure that can take circular, elliptical, or other forms. The basic idea 
behind the design of a planar monopole antenna is that “fatter” is better for 
broadband antennas [27]. The bandwidth can be increased extensively by using 
Figure 4.7   (a) Electrically small triangular sheet antenna, and (b) the corresponding antenna 
VSWR. (© 2014, IEEE. From [44].)

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
79
a flat metal structure rather than a thin wire structure [30]. Thus, by expand­
ing the fill volume closest to the feeding point, the planar monopole is able to 
exclude the reactive energy that can narrow the antenna’s bandwidth [27]. The 
planar UWB monopole must be located above a ground plane and fed using a 
coaxial probe [45].
4.6.2.1  Square UWB Monopole
The square planar monopole is one of the simplest planar antenna structures. 
The main characteristic of this kind of antennas is that its radiation pattern is 
less degraded within the impedance bandwidth [45]. However, one of the main 
limitations of a square planar monopole is that its bandwidth ratio does not ex­
ceed 2:1. For example, a square monopole with a side length of 55 mm above a 
ground plane can cover only the frequency band from 1.08 GHz to 2.09 GHz. 
Various techniques have been implemented to improve the bandwidth of this 
type of planar antennas [46–49]. Examples of such techniques include cutting 
a pair of notches at the lower corners of the square monopole, tapering the edge 
near the ground plane, shorting the square monopole, double feeding the an­
tenna structure, or designing a trident-shaped feeding strip structure. One can 
also implement a combination of these techniques [45]. 
In general, the operating bandwidth of a planar square monopole can 
be increased by reducing the capacitance of the structure. This can be imple­
mented, for example, by altering the geometry of the planar square monopole 
and transforming it to a trapezoidal shape [46]. A trapezoidal UWB monopole 
above a ground plane is shown in Figure 4.8. It is found that if W1 is reduced 
from 55 mm to 30 mm while W2 and L are kept at 55 mm, the upper-edge 
frequency moves from 2.09 GHz to 2.94 GHz while the lowest operating fre­
quency remains at 1.08 GHz [46]. In general, the lowest frequency for a trap­
ezoidal monopole antenna above a ground can be related to its physical dimen­
sions by [46]:
	
(
)
(
)
1
2
904
4
Lf
GHz
L
W
W
π
=
+
+
	
(4.5)
Figure 4.8  The trapezoidal UWB planar monopole.

80 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
The taper of the trapezoid near the ground plane further increases the fre­
quency upper limit. The new antenna structure takes the shape of a pentagon. 
If the lower edge of the trapezoidal antenna is trimmed with a 30° taper, the 
corresponding antenna structure produces a bandwidth ratio of 12:1. Nomi­
nally, the covered bandwidth is from 1.07 GHz to 12.2 GHz [46]. 
The operating bandwidth of a square planar monopole can be improved 
by using a trident-shaped feeding strip [47]. This technique aims to increase 
the vertical current distribution and to suppress the horizontal current in the 
square planar monopole. The corresponding antenna structure is shown in Fig­
ure 4.9(a). The square monopole has a side length L = 40 mm and is excited at 
three feeding points A, B, and C. Points A and C are symmetrically located on 
two sides of point B and the width of the trident-shaped feeding strip is set to 
2 mm.
Figure 4.9   (a) The square monopole with a trident-shaped feeding network, and (b) the cor­
responding operating bandwidth. (© 2005, IEEE. From [47].)

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
81
Figure 4.9(b) shows that the proposed antenna structure is able to cover 
an operating bandwidth from 1.376 GHz to 11.448 GHz. This bandwidth is 
obtained for the values of d = 1 mm, h = 3.5 mm, and t = 15 mm. These di­
mensions suggest that points A and C are located at positions with a distance 
of about one-third the side length L to the left or right side edge of the square 
planar monopole [47]. This technique produces a bandwidth ratio of 8.3:1.
4.6.2.2  Circular and Elliptical Planar Monopoles
The circular-shaped monopole antenna above a ground plane as the one that 
is shown in Figure 4.10(a) produces a UWB behavior. For example, a circu­
lar monopole with a radius a = 12.5 mm, made of 0.5-mm-thick brass plate 
mounted at a height h = 0.7 mm above the ground plane yields an operating 
bandwidth from 2.25 to 17.25 GHz. The radiation pattern begins to degrade 
above 12 GHz [50]. An elliptical monopole can take two different forms as 
summarized in Figure 4.10(b, c). The ellipticity ratio (a/b) determines the cor­
responding operating bandwidth. As this ratio increases, the antenna band­
width decreases [50]. For example, a ratio of 1.1 (i.e., a = 2.6 cm and b = 
2.4 cm) allows the elliptical monopole to cover the bandwidth from 1.2 GHz 
Figure 4.10  A planar UWB monopole: (a) circular shape, (b) elliptical shape, and (c) rotated 
elliptical shape.

82 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
to 13 GHz. This corresponds to a bandwidth ratio of 10.8:1. The elliptical 
monopole’s lower edge frequency can be determined by setting the area of the 
ellipse (πab) to be equal to the area of a cylindrical wire of length L and radius 
r (2πrL). It is known that a cylindrical wire monopole has its first resonance 
related to the length L as shown in (4.6) [30]. Thus, the lowest operating fre­
quency of the elliptical monopole can be calculated as expressed in (4.7) [50]. 
	
(
)
0.24
 where 
1
L r
L
F
F
L r
λ


=
×
×
= 

+


	
(4.6)
	
30
0.24
Low
f
L
r
×


= 



+
	
(4.7)
The circular and elliptical planar monopoles suffer from pattern degra­
dation at the high end of their impedance bandwidth. Modified versions of 
this type of antennas have been introduced to solve this problem [51, 52]. An 
example of a modified planar circular monopole is the planar inverted cone 
antenna shown in Figure 4.11(a). The top part of the circular monopole is 
trimmed to the shape of a planar inverted cone [51]. The height of the an­
tenna is about λ/4 at the lowest operating frequency. The antenna is placed 
at a distance of 0.64 mm above a ground plane of size 60.96 cm × 60.96 cm. 
The proposed antenna produces an impedance ratio of 10:1 and generates a 
Figure 4.11   (a) The planar inverted cone antenna, and (b) the addition of two circular holes. 
(© 2004, IEEE. From [45, 51].)

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
83
monopole type omnidirectional pattern over 4:1 bandwidth. The change in the 
current flow on the circular disk produces a better omnidirectional pattern at 
the high-frequency bands. For example, adding two circular slots as shown in 
Figure 4.11(b) extends the high end of the operating bandwidth and improves 
the omnidirectional pattern from 4:1 to 7:1 [51]. 
Another example of a modified planar circular monopole is shown in 
Figure 4.12 [52]. The antenna structure is composed of self-contained scaled 
circular rings. Each circular ring’s diameter is half the one of the previous ring. 
The five rings are superimposed together to form a single antenna unit. In 
comparison to the planar circular monopole, this antenna features improved 
radiation pattern control at higher operating bands due to the discrete structure 
of the multiple rings. The antenna operation is based on the fact that each cir­
cular ring provides a discrete current path. Thus, by adjusting each ring size and 
thickness individually, the corresponding operating band and its bandwidth can 
be designed separately [52]. 
The antenna structure shows periodic resonant frequencies where each 
resonance is related to one circular ring. The antenna’s center frequencies are 
0.69 GHz (f1), 1.565 GHz (f2), 3.5 GHz (f3), and 6.925 GHz (f4). Above 12.5 
GHz (f5), the antenna can be considered wideband since it corresponds only to 
the smallest circular monopole with a height h5 = 5.5 mm. Each resonant fre­
quency (fn) can be related to the height (hn) and radius (rn) of the corresponding 
ring by [52]: 
	
1
0.24
0.875
1
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
h
r
h
c
f
h
h
h
r
+






×


=
×
×








+










	
(4.8)
Figure 4.12  The multiple circular ring monopole above a ground plane. (© 2003, IEEE. From 
[52].)

84 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
4.7  Printed UWB Antennas
Printed antennas are etched on dielectric substrates. Usually, printed anten­
nas are composed of three layers. The top layer is the radiating patch, and the 
middle layer is the dielectric substrate that usually has a dielectric constant that 
varies between 2 and 12 (2 < εr < 12). The bottom layer is the ground plane 
that covers the entire substrate layer or only a certain section of the dielectric. 
Printed antennas, also known as patch or microstrip antennas, have usually a 
narrowband operation with low gain. Their operating bandwidth mainly de­
pends on the patch shape, resonant frequency, and thickness of the substrate 
[30, 53]. Thus, a wider bandwidth is usually obtained by resorting to thick 
substrates with low dielectric constants [30]. 
Some problems that may also arise with the use of printed wideband an­
tennas can be due to the surface-wave radiation and the unwanted mode gen­
eration. These problems can impose several constraints that include possible 
large antenna thickness that eliminate surface waves as well as additional mode’s 
excitation. The effect of unwanted modes of operation can also be reduced by 
lowering the Q-factor of the microstrip antenna during the design process [54].
Printed antennas offer various advantages compared to the frequency-
independent, nonplanar, and planar UWB antennas that are discussed in the 
previous sections. One of their major advantages is that they do not require the 
use of a balun. A balun provides a balanced to an unbalanced transformation 
for any two arms’ antennas such as the frequency-independent biconical an­
tenna structure or the various nonplanar UWB antennas that do not possess a 
perpendicular ground plane in their structure [30]. Another main advantage of 
printed UWB antennas is their ease of integration in cognitive radio mobile de­
vices. The majority of planar UWB monopoles require a perpendicular ground 
plane to operate appropriately which imposes serious constraints on their in­
tegration in a cognitive radio device. This problem is eliminated for printed 
UWB antennas because the ground plane resides on either side of the substrate 
based on the feeding technique. Thus, the use of printed UWB antennas for 
wireless communication applications allows the designer to benefit from their 
conformal aspect and compact topology. It advances technology in the direc­
tion that allows portability and ease of integration.
The most common types of printed wideband antennas that are pro­
posed in the literature for various wireless communication applications such 
as cognitive radio are the printed monopoles with square, circular, or ellipti­
cal shapes [55–59]. Also, printed UWB monopole antennas allow the integra­
tion of printed reconfigurable filters into their feeding structure. This poses the 
antenna designer with additional possibilities that will facilitate the design of 
UWB antennas with reconfigurable passband or bandstop abilities. These func­

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
85
tions can also be merged together to create an antenna that can accommodate 
both interweave and underlay cognitive radio [60, 61].
The planar and printed UWB monopole antenna structures are equivalent 
since the ground plane of the planar monopole can be replaced with a coplanar 
structure. The ground plane for the printed monopole can lie on the same side 
of the substrate as the monopole element. This is achieved if the coplanar wave­
guide (CPW) feeding is adopted. Figure 4.13(a) shows a comparison between a 
planar square monopole over a ground plane and the corresponding CPW-fed 
printed monopole. The ground plane can also lie on the opposite side of the 
antenna substrate if the printed antenna is fed by a microstrip line as summa­
rized in Figure 4.13(b). The length of the ground plane should be the same as 
the microstrip feeding line. 
The UWB behavior of a printed antenna can be explained by the over­
lapping of closely distributed minima in the reflection coefficient as shown in 
Figure 4.14. These minima are due to the existence of resonant modes that are 
related to either having standing waves or traveling waves within the antenna 
structure [57]. At low frequencies, a standing wave dominates while at high 
frequencies, a traveling wave becomes more significant. Near the first resonance 
(f1), the current oscillates along the edge of the radiating structure and a pure 
standing wave is created. At the second resonance (f2), the current travels along 
the lower edge but oscillates at the top edge. With the increase in frequency, the 
printed monopole begins to operate in a hybrid mode of standing and traveling 
Figure 4.13  (a) The planar and CPW-fed printed square monopole, and (b) the planar and 
microstrip-fed printed circular monopole.

86 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
waves. At the high-frequency end, the traveling wave becomes more important 
to the antenna operation since the wave must travel down to the antenna struc­
ture. The importance of the CPW feeding technique is based on the fact that it 
supports very well traveling waves due to the existence of the slots between the 
feeding line and the ground plane. As for the microstrip line feeding technique, 
the antenna’s ground on the bottom layer of the substrate cannot form a good 
slot with the circular monopole. Thus, this feeding technique does not support 
a traveling wave as well as the CPW-fed antenna [57]. However, for both feed­
ing techniques, the UWB behavior is obtained within the first three resonances 
where standing waves dominate. This will also allow printed monopole anten­
nas that are either microstrip or CPW-fed to have an almost omnidirectional 
pattern within the entire UWB. Such feature is essential to achieve sensing in a 
cognitive radio environment.
The limited space in mobile devices has pushed antenna researchers to 
propose techniques to benefit from the total physical space of the UWB an­
tenna substrate. One of the proposed techniques is based on utilizing the back 
of the antenna substrate to integrate another antenna structure that can be used, 
for example, as a reconfigurable communicating antenna in a cognitive radio 
environment. Such a technique is mainly valid if the UWB printed antenna has 
a CPW feeding scheme. The antenna structure shown in Figure 4.15 is a print­
ed UWB radiating monopole that acts as a ground plane for the communicat­
ing antenna that is printed on the reverse side of the antenna substrate. The 
top layer shown in Figure 4.15(a) is the combination of a circular and square 
printed monopoles. On the bottom of the substrate, a printed narrowband 
shorted inverted F patch antenna is integrated as highlighted in Figure 4.15(b). 
A shorting pin is used to connect the patch to the wideband antenna. The 
antenna’s reflection coefficient exhibits coverage over the band 3.1 to 11 GHz 
[62]. It is important to note that placing two antennas in proximity changes 
the antenna surface current distributions, which affect the far-field radiation 
patterns. However, fitting multiple antennas in a small space is a necessity in a 
Figure 4.14  The UWB behavior of a circular printed monopole antenna.

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
87
cognitive radio environment in order to cater for the various frequency bands 
that span over a huge bandwidth. Thus, the key challenge for the cognitive ra­
dio antenna engineer is to minimize the impact of one antenna element on the 
radiation pattern of other integrated antenna elements.
The shape of the UWB printed monopole’s ground plane has an impor­
tant effect in determining the antenna’s operating bandwidth. For example, cut­
ting a slot with a suitable size and position from the ground plane of an antenna 
can enhance the UWB bandwidth. Other techniques such as cutting triangular-
shaped slots from the side edge of the ground plane or having a truncated or 
rounded ground plane are shown to improve the antenna bandwidth [45]. It is 
also found that having a symmetrical saw-tooth ground plane allows the printed 
square monopole to produce an impedance bandwidth ratio of 5.5:1. The pro­
posed antenna is able to cover the bandwidth from 2.9 GHz to 16 GHz [63].
The need to minimize the printed UWB monopole footprint has pushed 
designers to miniaturize the structure of this type of antennas while preserv­
ing the same operating bandwidth and the omnidirectional radiation pattern. 
The miniaturization process is essential for ease of integration of the antenna 
structure in a cognitive radio device. One of the miniaturization techniques 
is based on the fact that a printed UWB monopole antenna possesses a sym­
metrical structure. Thus, its half-topology has all the features that are necessary 
Figure 4.15  (a) The UWB printed monopole on the top layer, and (b) the communicating an­
tenna integrated on the bottom layer of the substrate. (© 2011, IEEE. From [62].)

88 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
to produce the required resonant frequencies. For example, in [64], it is shown 
that a half-sized, beveled, square-printed monopole can provide the same radia­
tion characteristics as the original antenna structure.
4.8  Printed UWB Slot Antennas
Slot antennas constitute other suitable options for wideband sensing in both 
interweave and underlay cognitive radio scenarios. Printed UWB slot anten­
nas provide a directional pattern with a higher gain compared to other printed 
monopole structures. Such antennas are considered magnetic antenna struc­
tures. Their radiation pattern mainly consists of two main lobes aligned along 
the normal plane to the antenna structure. Thus, the principal shortcoming of 
these antennas is their lack of an omnidirectional pattern. UWB slot antennas 
are mainly used in a cognitive radio environment whenever the sensing of the 
channel is required at specific directions [27, 30].
This type of UWB antennas consists of a slot with a rectangular, circular, 
elliptical, or hexagonal shape printed on one side of the substrate. The antenna 
structure also contains a tuning stub connected with a microstrip or CPW feed­
line. The stub is printed on the same layer as the slot if the antenna is CPW-fed. 
For a microstrip line-fed antenna, the stub must be printed on the bottom layer 
of the antenna substrate. An example of a printed UWB slot antenna is shown 
in Figure 4.16(a). The slot is printed on one side of the substrate and has a 
rectangular shape. On the reverse side of the substrate, a fan-shaped microstrip 
stub with a strip is included. Such an antenna structure produces an impedance 
bandwidth ratio of 3.6:1 by covering the frequency band from 0.5 GHz to 5.7 
GHz [65]. 
Figure 4.16   (a) A rectangular slot with a fan-shaped T-stub, and (b) an elliptical slot and stub 
UWB antenna.

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
89
The antenna bandwidth of UWB printed slot antenna is more affected 
by the shape of the slot than by the shape of the tuning stub. For example, an 
impedance ratio of 15.4:1 can be achieved if the antenna structure has both 
an elliptical-shaped slot with an elliptical-shaped tuning stub that is CPW-fed. 
The antenna layout is summarized in Figure 4.16(b) and covers the impedance 
bandwidth from 1.3 GHz to 20 GHz [66].
The design of a printed UWB slot antenna is directly related to finding 
the suitable slot and stub shape in order to enable operation at the required 
bandwidth. An investigation of the effect of the UWB slot and stub shape on 
the operating bandwidth of a CPW-fed printed binomial curved slot antenna 
is executed in [67]. The slot outline size is taken to be l × w and the slot edge 
is formed by a binomial curve function of order N. The tuning stub is taken 
to have the same shape as the slot but with a smaller size and with an offset 
distance from the bottom edge of the slot. The order N controls the antenna 
structure. For example, for N = 1, both the slot and the tuning stub have a 
triangular shape. Letting N goes to infinity transforms the slot and the tun­
ing stubs to a rectangular shape. It is found that as the order N increases, the 
antenna bandwidth improves. Thus, by choosing the appropriate (w, l, and N), 
one can control the antenna operating bandwidth [67].
4.9  Printed UWB Horn Antennas
Horn antennas have directional patterns with relatively high gains and wide 
bandwidth. A horn antenna’s structure is composed of a hollow pipe with dif­
ferent cross-sections [30]. This type of antennas is tapered leading to a larger 
aperture. The electrical radiation characteristics of a horn antenna are strongly 
affected by the type, direction, and amount of taper [30]. The termination of 
a horn antenna is crucial to its proper operation. An abrupt discontinuity at 
the end of a horn antenna can lead to undesired reflections. The structure of 
a horn antenna structure is mainly complicated and difficult to build. As dis­
cussed previously for the case of nonplanar UWB conical antenna structures, a 
planar cross-section of a surface-of-revolution UWB antenna produces a planar 
UWB antenna with almost the same radiation characteristics. Thus, a planar or 
printed horn antenna, also called a tapered slot antenna, can be implemented 
with the same characteristics as a 3-D horn antenna. This kind of UWB an­
tenna can be considered as a good candidate for sensing the environment in 
both interweave and underlay cognitive radio scenarios as they can cover a large 
operating bandwidth with an acceptable gain, low profile, and light weight. 
The main limitation of these types of sensing antennas is that they produce an 
end-fire directional pattern that restricts their sensing capabilities in specific 
directions [68–71].

90 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
A tapered slot antenna falls under the end-fire traveling antenna category 
[30]. Its main operation is based on guiding the wave from the feed in a slotline 
to the wideband taper. Because the tapered slot antenna is a balanced structure, 
it requires a balun to allow its appropriate feeding. The widely adopted feeding 
technique for such an antenna is based on a microstrip-to-slot transition [72]. 
One special type of a tapered slot antenna with an exponential curve is known 
as the Vivaldi antenna. The Vivaldi antenna can be made coplanar or antipodal 
[73]. Both versions of the Vivaldi antenna produce a reasonable directive high 
gain between 6 and 10 dB, with a wide bandwidth and low sidelobe levels.
4.9.1  Coplanar Vivaldi Antenna
The structure of a coplanar printed Vivaldi antenna is shown in Figure 4.17(a). 
A microstrip feeding network that is terminated by a radial stub lies on the bot­
tom layer of the substrate while the tapered metalized surface is incorporated on 
the top layer. Many factors affect the operating bandwidth of a coplanar Vivaldi 
antenna such as the microstrip feed network, the transition to stripline and the 
circular cavity termination [74, 75]. The radial stub sets the upper frequency 
limit and the circular cavity mainly determines the behavior of the feed. It is 
Figure 4.17   (a) A general layout of the printed coplanar Vivaldi antenna structure and (b) a 
dual-polarized, two-element, cross-shaped Vivaldi antenna. (© 2015, IEEE. From [76].)

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
91
shown that a cavity and a radial stub offer the best impedance match over the 
desired frequency range [76]. 
The overall substrate size and the slot taper play a role in determining the 
antenna bandwidth. The length of the antenna structure also determines the 
level of the back-lobe radiation. If the antenna is relatively long, the backward 
traveling wave does not contribute to the front lobe. Thus, if the length of the 
printed Vivaldi is greater than 3λ0, the backward wave can be ignored [75]. It is 
essential to note that the coplanar Vivaldi antenna is mainly a linearly polarized 
antenna. The radiated electric field is linearly polarized and parallel to the plane 
of the slot. Hence, the electric field can be considered as oriented between the 
two tapered slots. A dual-polarization antenna operation can be achieved by 
inserting two orthogonal Vivaldi antennas in a crossed manner with quadrature 
feeding. A contact between the two antenna elements is avoided by a small 
longitudinal gap [76]. Figure 4.17(b) shows a dual-polarized Vivaldi antenna 
structure. The two Vivaldi antennas are overlapping over each other with Viv­
aldi 2 being 2 mm ahead of Vivaldi 1. In order to compensate for the 2 mm 
displacement on the phase center between the two antennas, the microstrip line 
of Vivaldi 1 is designed to be 1.1 mm shorter.
4.9.2  Antipodal Vivaldi Antenna
The operating bandwidth of a coplanar Vivaldi antenna is mainly limited by the 
microstrip-to-slotline feeding network that works as a balanced feeding balun. 
Another limitation of the coplanar Vivaldi antenna is the microstrip fan-shaped 
stub. Such a stub produces high radiation loss and distorts the radiation pat­
tern at very high frequencies. These problems are minimized in the antipodal 
Vivaldi antenna as a microstrip-to-parallel stripline feeding technique is usually 
adopted. Such a technique allows the antenna to produce a much wider band­
width with less distortion in the radiation pattern as compared to the coplanar 
Vivaldi antenna [71]. 
The structure of a printed antipodal Vivaldi antenna is shown in Figure 
4.18(a). The antenna consists of two arms located on either side of the sub­
strate and flared in opposite directions to form a tapered slot. To achieve the 
microstrip to parallel stripline feeding mechanism, a circular taper of radius r0 
is applied to the antenna structure as shown in Figure 4.18(a). To further im­
prove the antenna operating bandwidth, one can load each arm of the printed 
antipodal Vivaldi antenna by a circular shape. The corresponding top layer of 
the structure printed on a substrate of dielectric constant 2.3 is highlighted in 
Figure 4.18 (b) [71]. 
The antenna impedance bandwidth at low frequencies can be further im­
proved by proposing a slot loaded printed antipodal Vivaldi antenna as shown in 
Figure 4.18(c). This antenna is designed by introducing slots into the optimized 

92 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
Figure 4.18  (a) The conventional antipodal Vivaldi antenna, (b) the top layer of the circular 
shape loaded Vivaldi antenna, and (c) the bottom layer of the slot loaded antipodal Vivaldi 
antenna. (© 2011, IEEE. From [71].)

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
93
circularly shaped load. The slot-loaded antenna has a more directive beam than 
the antenna loaded with a circular shape since the current is distributed along 
the slots instead of the circular edge. In addition to the above mentioned advan­
tages, one notices a wider reflection coefficient is obtained in comparison with 
the conventional and the circular shape-loaded Vivaldi antennas. This is due to 
the fact that the circular shape load is mainly characterized by a resistor, whereas 
the slot load acts like an RLC resonator. Thus, multiple slots with varied lengths 
are used to merge these resonances and increase the antenna wideband perfor­
mance, especially at the low-frequency band [71]. 
4.10  Printed UWB Antenna with Notches
In a spectrum underlay cognitive radio, wideband sensing is required to moni­
tor the channel activity and to communicate below the primary users’ noise 
floor level. Underlay cognitive radio differs from interweave in the fact that it 
allows the coexistence of both primary and secondary users on the same channel 
under the constraint that the primary user is able to tolerate the communicating 
signal originating from the secondary users. In the case where the primary user 
cannot tolerate the coexistence of the secondary users, reconfigurable notches 
are used to block communication over the channel owned by the “sensitive” 
primary users. 
The antennas designed for underlay cognitive radio have to cover a 7-GHz 
bandwidth, operating between 3.1 GHz and 10.6 GHz. They should also allow 
the reconfiguration of notch frequencies over the whole spectrum. The notch 
frequency depends on the location of sensitive primary users. In this section, 
the concept of allowing notches in the impedance bandwidth of several printed 
UWB antennas is considered. Then examples on the reconfiguration of the 
frequency notches are highlighted. Mainly, UWB antennas with reconfigurable 
notches are considered as potential antenna candidates to achieve a dual opera­
tion of sensing and communication in underlay cognitive radio.
4.10.1  Printed UWB Antenna with Fixed Notches
Creating notches in the operating bandwidth of an antenna eliminates the need 
for an external filter. Such elimination decreases the cost and size of the system. 
Various UWB antennas with notch frequencies have been investigated [77–80]. 
The most common techniques include the integration of a slot within the an­
tenna structure, embedding a parasitic stub, or adding a bandstop transmission 
[45]. Hybrid techniques have been shown to produce multiple notches in the 
impedance bandwidth of a UWB antenna. 
An example of a printed UWB log-periodic dipole antenna with multiple 
notched bands is shown in Figure 4.19 [77]. The notched bands are generated 

94 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
by integrating U-shaped slots either on the top or bottom layer of the anten­
na substrate. Four different cases are considered. Each case corresponds to the 
Figure 4.19  (a) The top layer of the printed log periodic dipole antenna array with one, two, 
three, and four slots, (b) the corresponding bottom layer, and (c) the measured group delay of 
the antenna structure with one U-shaped slot. (© 2011, IEEE. From [77].)

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
95
integration of one, two, three, or four U-shaped slots. Figure 4.19(a) presents 
the integration of the U-shaped slot on the antenna top layer, while Figure 
4.19(b) depicts the bottom layer of the antenna structure with the U-shaped 
slots. For the case of three (or four) U-shaped slots, two (or three) are etched 
from the top surface and one (or two) are removed from the bottom. Each U-
shaped slot is responsible for the creation of a notch frequency in the bandwidth 
of the antenna. The physical length of the U-shaped slot is taken to be a quar­
ter-wavelength at the corresponding notch frequency. Around the U-shaped 
slot, the current at the notched frequency is concentrated. This creates a stand­
ing wave around the slot which reflects the signal power back to the excitation 
port. Thus, the UWB printed log-periodic dipole antenna creates a notch in its 
impedance bandwidth. It is also shown that the antenna structure also preserves 
its linear phase response, which is essential in the operation of the pulsed UWB 
systems. Figure 4.19(c) shows the measured group time delay with two different 
distances between two printed log-periodic dipole antennas with one U-shaped 
slot. A flat response is achieved within the antenna bandwidth. This ensures 
that the antenna structure exhibits good linear phase response [77].
Another approach that has been adopted to generate notches in the opera­
tion of UWB antennas is based on placing split ring resonators (SRR) or ca­
pacitively loaded loop (CLL) resonators within the antenna’s radiating structure 
or in proximity to the microstrip feeding line [79, 80]. Both SRRs and CLLs 
are self-resonant structures. Their resonant frequency is primarily related to the 
loop inductance and the capacitance that is resulting from the openings in the 
corresponding loops. At the resonant frequency, such resonators capture and 
store all of the input energy. This allows the antenna to create a band notch 
frequency. An example of a tri-band notched UWB antenna is shown in Fig­
ure 4.20 with its corresponding simulated and measured voltage standing wave 
Figure 4.20  The tri-band notched antenna structure based on capacitively loaded loop (CLL) 
and its corresponding VSWR. (© 2012, IEEE. From [80].)

96 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
ratio (VSWR) [80]. One CLL resonator is integrated in the top surface of a mi­
crostrip line fed printed UWB monopole. Two additional CLLs are also placed 
on the opposite side of the antenna’s feeding line. Each CLL is responsible for 
producing one notch frequency at a specific band. The total length and width 
of the CLL determine the corresponding notch frequency. The antenna pro­
duces notches in the following three bands: 3.29–3.72 GHz, 5.07–5.4 GHz, 
and 5.62–5.93 GHz. 
4.10.2  Printed UWB Antenna with Reconfigurable Notches
In underlay cognitive radio, the UWB sensing antenna must be able to exhibit 
tunable notch frequencies in its impedance bandwidth. Fixed notches are not 
useful in this case, because the locations of sensitive primary users along the 
cognitive radio channel are dynamic. Thus, it is essential to change the notch 
frequencies while at the same time preserving a UWB behavior with stable 
radiation characteristics in order to maintain good quality of service for all the 
cognitive radio users [81–84].
An example of a CPW-fed UWB elliptical monopole that creates a recon­
figurable notch in the 5 GHz band is shown in Figure 4.21(a). The presence 
of the notch is based on the activation of an integrated radio frequency mi­
croelectromechanical systems (RF MEMS) switch [81]. Two configurations of 
the antenna are studied to allow reconfigurable band notch between 5.2 and 6 
GHz. The first configuration resorts to a U-shaped slot engraved on the radiat­
ing element, while the second one resorts to L-shaped open stubs [81]. For the 
two configurations, the reconfigurability is based on the concept of removing or 
adding a resonating structure based on the activation of the RF MEMS switch. 
The U-shaped slot consists of two vertical slots and a horizontal slot. The hori­
zontal slot is positioned at 2.6 mm from the nearest ground edge. In the middle 
of the horizontal slot and along the symmetry plane of the antenna a single RF 
MEMS switch is positioned. Another horizontal slot parallel to the first one 
and at a distance of 0.7 mm from it is created to form a rectangular floating DC 
ground [81]. The total length of the U-shaped slot is λ/2 at the notch frequency 
when the RF MEMS switch is not activated. Upon its activation, the slot is 
shorted at its center point and the slot is no longer able to support the resonat­
ing currents. This forces the antenna to lose its notch frequency since the slot 
no longer has an effect in the antenna operation.
The second configuration resorts to two inverted L-shaped open stubs 
with widths of 200 μm and a length of 10.41 mm to create the band notch­
es. Both stubs are positioned at 1.8 mm from the top of the ellipse. Two RF 
MEMS switches are used to electrically connect and disconnect the two stubs 
to the elliptical radiator. The switches are positioned at a distance of 0.4 mm 
from the ellipse. The two L-shaped open stubs have each a length of almost λ/4 

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
97
at the notch frequency. When the two switches are not connected to the UWB 
antenna, no currents flow through the stub and thus the antenna is not able to 
produce a notch frequency. Once the RF MEMS are activated, the directions 
of the currents on the L-shaped stubs and along the nearby edge of the UWB 
elliptical monopole are opposite. This forces the currents to cancel each other 
and the antenna can no longer radiate. The antenna produces a notch at the 
resonant frequency of the L-shaped stubs. The antenna’s reflection coefficients 
in both configurations are shown in Figure 4.21(b) [81]. 
In the previous example, the reconfigurability of the antenna’s notched 
frequency is achieved at a single frequency band. However, in a cognitive radio 
channel the reconfigurability in the notch must be performed over a very large 
bandwidth. An example of an antenna structure that operates from 2.5 GHz 
Figure 4.21  (a) The antenna topology with reconfigurable notches by using either U- or L-
shaped stubs, and (b) the corresponding change in the notch frequency based on the activa­
tion of the RF MEMS switches for both U- and L-shaped slots (© 2009, IEEE. From [81].)

98 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
to 10 GHz and exhibits notch reconfigurability from 1.8 to 5.8 GHz is shown 
in Figure 4.22(a). The antenna’s physical structure is composed of a halved 
Vivaldi antenna placed perpendicular to a ground plane [68]. The antenna ex­
hibits maximum radiation level at the horizon with a vertically polarized field. 
The halved Vivaldi can be fed directly with a coaxial probe, avoiding the clas­
sical microstrip-to-slotline transition that is discussed previously. From image 
theory, the fields radiated by the halved Vivaldi over an infinite ground plane 
are equivalent to the ones radiated by the complete antenna [30], whereas the 
antenna’s input impedance is half that of the complete Vivaldi. 
The band rejection is achieved by integrating a second-order bandstop 
filter within the antenna structure. The filter is formed by two microstrip line 
resonators placed across the slot in the antenna back plane. Two varactors con­
nect the end of the microstrip lines to the ground plane and the band-rejection 
Figure 4.21  (continued)

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
99
is then tuned by varying the biasing voltage levels supplied to the varactors. The 
effective length of the resonators mainly sets up the notch frequency. Thus, by 
increasing the bias voltage that is supplied to the varactor, the notch frequency 
is increased due to the decrease in the varactor’s capacitance. Only at the notch 
frequency do strong currents excite the microstrip line resonators. For all oth­
er frequencies, the resonators are not excited and thus the antenna radiation 
characteristics are not affected. The antenna’s reflection coefficient is shown in 
Figure 4.22. The proposed antenna is able to exhibit a UWB response while at 
the same time achieving reconfigurability in the notch frequency over a large 
frequency span [68].
4.11  Discussion
In this chapter, the different wideband sensing antennas that can be used in a 
cognitive radio environment are detailed. The history and operation of wide­
Figure 4.22  (a) The halved Vivaldi printed antenna with notch reconfigurability, and (b) the 
change in the antenna reflection coefficient for various biasing voltages. (© 2011, IEEE. From 
[68].)

100 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
band/UWB antennas are discussed with direct implication on cognitive radio 
applications. Frequency-independent, nonplanar, planar, and printed UWB 
antennas constitute the majority of antennas that can be developed for sensing 
purposes on any type of a cognitive radio platform. 
Several examples of wideband antennas are detailed. Most of these ex­
amples can be proposed for sensing in interweave cognitive radio. UWB an­
tennas with fixed and reconfigurable notched frequencies are also discussed. 
Such antennas represent potential candidates for sensing and communication 
in underlay cognitive radio. 
In the next chapter, the design guidelines for the communicating anten­
nas in interweave cognitive radio are highlighted. In this type of cognitive radio, 
the communicating antennas must be able to change their operating frequency 
based on the activity of the primary and secondary users in the channel. The 
effect of the changes in the antenna’s radiation pattern or polarization on the 
performance of a cognitive radio device are also studied and discussed. 
References
[1]	 FCC, “Revision of Part 15 of the Commission’s Rules Regarding Ultra-Wideband Trans­
mission Systems,” ET Docket 98-153, FCC 02-48, February 14, 2002.
[2]	 Kaiser, T., and F. Zheng, Ultrawideband Systems with MIMO, New York: John Wiley & 
Sons, 2010.
[3]	 Latif, S. I., L. Shafai, L, and S. K. Sharma, “Bandwidth Enhancement and Size Reduction 
of Microstrip Slot Antennas,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 53, 
No. 3, March 2005, pp. 994–1003.
[4]	 Khalily, M., M. K. A. Rahim, and A. A. Kishk, “Bandwidth Enhancement and Radiation 
Characteristics Improvement of Rectangular Dielectric Resonator Antenna,” IEEE Anten­
nas and Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol. 10, 2011, pp. 393–395.
[5]	 Weng, F. Y., S. W. Cheung, and T. I. Yuk, “Design of Multi-Band Notch Using Meander 
Lines For Compact Ultra-Wideband Antennas,” IET Microwaves, Antennas and Propaga­
tion, Vol. 6, No. 8, 2012, pp. 908–914.
[6]	 Maza, A. R., et al., “Paper Based Inkjet Printed Ultra-Wideband Fractal Antennas,” IET 
Microwaves, Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 6, No. 12, 2012, pp. 1366–1373.
[7]	 Balanis, C. A., Modern Antenna Handbook, New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2008.
[8]	 Volakis, J. L., Antenna Engineering Handbook, 4th ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008.
[9]	 Schantz, H. G., “Three Centuries of UWB Antenna Development,” IEEE International 
Conference on Ultra-Wideband (ICUWB), September 17–20, 2012, pp. 506–512.
[10]	 Lodge, O. J., “Electric Telegraphy,” U.S. Patent 609,154, August 16, 1898.
[11]	 Wheeler, H. A., The Early Days of Wheeler and Hazeltine Corporation: Profiles in Radio and 
Electronics, Poughkeepsie, NY: Hamilton Reproductions, 1982, p. 272.

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
101
[12]	 Carter, P. S., “Shortwave Antenna,” U.S. Patent 2,175,252, October 10, 1939.
[13]	 Kandoian, A. G., “Three New Antenna Types And Their Applications,” Proceedings of the 
IRE, February 1946, pp. 70W–75W.
[14]	 Kandoian, A. G., “Broadband Antenna,” U.S. Patent 2,368,663, 1945.
[15]	 Schelkunoff, S., “Ultra Shortwave Radio System,” U.S. Patent 2,235,506, 1941.
[16]	 Southworth, G. C., “Short Wave Radio System,” U.S. Patent 2,206,923, July 9, 1940.
[17]	 Barrow, W. L., “Electromagnetic Horn,” U.S. Patent 2,307,011, January 5, 1943.
[18]	 Beck, A. C., and H. T. Friis, “Horn Antenna System,” U.S. Patent 2,416,675, March 4, 
1947.
[19]	 Carter, P. S., “Short Wave Antenna,” U.S. Patent 2,175,253, October 10, 1939.
[20]	 White, H. A., “Television Antenna,” U.S. Patent 2,615,005, October 21, 1952.
[21]	 Brown, G. H., and O. M. Woodward, “Experimentally Determined Radiation 
Characteristics of Conical and Triangular Antennas,” RCA Review, Vol. 13, December 
1952, pp. 425–452.
[22]	 Masters, R. W., “Antenna,” U.S. Patent 2,430,353, November 4, 1947.
[23]	 Lamberty, B. J., “A Class of Low Gain Broadband Antennas,” 1958 IRE Wescon Convention 
Record, August 1958, pp. 251–259.
[24]	 Harmuth, H., “Frequency-Independent Shielded Loop Antenna,” U.S. Patent 4,506,267, 
March 19, 1985.
[25]	 Lalezari, F., C. G. Gilbert, and J. M. Rogers, “Broadband Notch Antenna,” U.S. Patent 
4,843,403, June 27, 1989.
[26]	 Thomas, M., and R. I. Wolfson, “Wideband Arrayable Planar Radiator,” U.S. Patent 
5,319,377, June 7, 1994.
[27]	 Schantz, H. G., The Art and Science of Ultrawideband Antennas, 2nd ed., Norwood, MA: 
Artech House, 2015.
[28]	 Rumsey, V. H., Frequency-Independent Antennas, New York: Academic Press, 1966.
[29]	 Werner, D. H., R. L. Haupt, and P. L. Werner, “Fractal Antenna Engineering: The Theory 
and Design of Fractal Antenna Arrays,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, Vol. 
41, October 1999, pp. 37–58.
[30]	 Balanis, C. A., Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design, 3rd ed., New York: John Wiley & 
Sons, 2005.
[31]	 Dyson, J., “The Equiangular Spiral Antenna,” IRE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. AP-7, April 1959, pp. 181–187.
[32]	 Schaubert, D., et al., “Endfire Tapered Slot Antennas on Dielectric Substrates,” IEEE 
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. AP-33, December 1985, pp. 1392–1400.
[33]	 Pantoja, R., A. Sapienza, and F. M. Filho, “A Microwave Printed Planar Log-Periodic 
Dipole Array Antenna,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. AP-35, 
October 1987, pp. 1176–1178.

102 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
[34]	 Rumsey, V. H., “Frequency Independent Antennas,” 1957 RE National Convention Record, 
pt. 1, 1957, pp. 114–118.
[35]	 Isbell, D. E., “Log Periodic Dipole Arrays,” IRE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, 
Vol. AP-8, May 1960, pp. 260–267. 
[36]	 Mao, S. -G., J. -C. Yeh, and S. -L. Chen, “Ultra Wideband Circularly Polarized Spiral 
Antenna Using Integrated Balun with Application to Time-Domain Target Detection,” 
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 57, No. 7, July 2009, pp. 1914–
1920.
[37]	 McKinney, J. D., D. Peroulis, and A. M. Weiner, “Time-Domain Measurement of the 
Frequency-Dependent Delay of Broadband Antennas,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. 56, January 2008, pp. 39–47.
[38]	 Hertel, T. W.  and G. S. Smith, “On the Dispersive Properties of the Conical Spiral Antenna 
and Its Use for Pulsed Radiation,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 51, 
July 2003, pp. 1426–1433.
[39]	 Chen, S. Y., P. H. Wan, and P. Hsu, “Unipolar Log-Periodic Slot Antenna Fed by a CPW 
for UWB Application,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol. 5, 2006, pp. 
256–259.
[40]	 Volakis, J., Antenna Engineering Handbook, 4th ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007.
[41]	 Papas, C. H., and R. King, “Input Impedance of Wide-Angle Conical Antennas Fed by a 
Coaxial Line,” Proceedings of the IRE, Vol. 37, No. 11, November 1949, pp. 1269–1271.
[42]	 Black, D. N., and T. A. Brunasso, “An Ultra-Wideband Bicone Antenna,” IEEE 
International Conference on Ultra-Wideband, September 24–27, 2006, pp. 327–332.
[43]	 Aten, D. W., and R. L. Haupt, “A Wideband, Low Profile, Shorted Top Hat Monocone 
Antenna,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 60, No. 10, October 
2012, pp. 4485–4491.
[44]	 Abadi, S. M., and N. Behdad, “An Electrically Small, Vertically Polarized Ultra-Wideband 
Antenna with Monopole-Like Radiation Characteristics,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless 
Propagation Letters, Vol. 13, 2014, pp. 742–745.
[45]	 Liang, X. L., “Ultra-Wideband Antenna and Design,” in Ultra Wideband: Current Status 
and Future Trends, M. A. Matin, (ed.), Croatia: InTech, 2012, http://www.intechopen.
com/books/ultra-wideband-current-status-and-future-trends/ultra-wideband-antenna-
and-design.
[46]	 Evans, J. A., and M. J. Amunann, “Planar Trapezoidal and Pentagonal Monopoles with 
Impedance Bandwidths in Excess of 10:1,” IEEE International Symposium on Antennas 
and Propagation Society, Vol. 3, July 11–16, 1999, pp. 1558, 1561.
[47]	 Wong, K. -L., C. -H. Wu, and S. -W. Su, “Ultrawide-Band Square Planar Metal-Plate 
Monopole Antenna with a Trident-Shaped Feeding Strip,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas 
and Propagation, Vol. 53, No. 4, April 2005, pp. 1262–1269.
[48]	 Thomas, K. G., N. Lenin, and R. Sivaramakrishnan, “Ultrawideband Planar Disc 
Monopole,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 54, No. 4, April 2006, 
pp. 1339–1341.

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
103
[49]	 Ammann, M. J., and Z. N. Chen, “A Wide-Band Shorted Planar Monopole with Bevel,” 
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 51, No. 4, April 2003, pp. 901–903.
[50]	 Agrawall, N. P., G. Kumar, and K. P. Ray, “Wide-Band Planar Monopole Antennas,” 
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 46, No. 2, February 1998, pp. 294–
295.
[51]	 Suh, S. -Y., W. L. Stutzman, and W. A. Davis, “A New Ultrawideband Printed Monopole 
Antenna: The Planar Inverted Cone Antenna (PICA),” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004, pp. 1361–1364.
[52]	 Song, C. T. P., P. S. Hall, and H. Ghafouri-Shiraz, “Multiband Multiple Ring Monopole 
Antennas,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 51, No. 4, April 2003, 
pp. 722–729.
[53]	 Stutzman, W. L., and G. A. Thiele, Antenna Theory and Design, 3rd ed., New York: John 
Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[54]	 James, J. R., and P. S. Hall, Handbook of Microstrip Antennas, New York: IET, 1989. 
[55]	 Srifi, M. N., et al., “Compact Disc Monopole Antennas for Current and Future 
Ultrawideband (UWB) Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, 
Vol. 59, No. 12, December 2011, pp. 4470–4480.
[56]	 Jianjun, L., et al., “Effects of Printed UWB Antenna Miniaturization on Pulse Fidelity and 
Pattern Stability,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 62, No. 8, August 
2014, pp. 3903–3910.
[57]	 Chen, X., and P. J. Massey, “Operating Principles and Features of UWB Monopoles 
and Dipoles,” The Institution of Engineering and Technology Seminar on Ultra Wideband 
Systems, Technologies and Applications, April 20, 2006, pp. 131–152.
[58]	 Sun, M., U. P. Zhang, and Y. L. Lu, “Miniaturization of Planar Monopole Antenna For 
Ultrawideband Radios,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagations, Vol. 58, No. 7, 
2010, pp. 2420–2425. 
[59]	 Augustin, G., and T. A. Denidni, “An Integrated Ultra-Wideband/Narrow Band Antenna 
in Uniplanar Configuration for Cognitive Radio Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas 
and Propagation, Vol. 60, No. 11, November 2012, pp. 5479–5484. 
[60]	 Zamudio, M. E., et al., “Embedding a Reconfigurable Band-Pass/Band-Stop Filter into an 
Antenna,” IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation, Chicago, IL, July 
8–14, 2012, pp. 1–2.
[61]	 Tawk, Y., J. Costantine, and C. G. Christodoulou, “A Varactor Based Reconfigurable 
Filtenna,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol. 11, 2012, pp. 716–719.
[62]	 E. Ebrahimi, J. R. Kelly, and P. S. Hall, “Integrated Wide-Narrowband Antenna for Multi-
Standard Radio,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 59, No. 7, July 
2011, pp. 2628–2635.
[63]	 Zhang, X., et al., “Design of CPW-Fed Monopole UWB Antenna with a Novel Ground,” 
Microwave and Optical Technology Letters, Vol. 51, No. 1, 2009, pp. 88–91.

104 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
[64]	 Mei, S., P. Z. Yue, and Y. Lu, “Miniaturization of Planar Monopole Antenna for 
Ultrawideband Radios,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 58, No. 7, 
July 2010, pp. 2420–2425.
[65]	 Yao, F. W., S. S. Zhong, and X. L. Liang, “Wideband Slot Antenna with a Novel Microstrip 
Feed,” Microwave and Optical Technology Letters, Vol. 46, No. 3, 2005, pp. 275–278. 
[66]	 Evangelos, S. A., et al., “Circular and Elliptical CPW-Fed Slot and Microstrip-Fed 
Antennas for Ultrawideband Applications,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation 
Letters, Vol. 5, 2006, pp. 294–297.
[67]	 Liang, X. L., et al., “Printed Binomial-Curved Slot Antennas for Various Wideband 
Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 59, No. 4, 
2011, pp. 1058–1065.
[68]	 Artiga, X., et al., “Halved Vivaldi Antenna with Reconfigurable Band Rejection,” IEEE 
Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol. 10, 2011, pp. 56–58.
[69]	 de Lera Acedo, E., et al., “Study and Design of a Differentially-Fed Tapered Slot Antenna 
Array,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 58, No. 1, January 2010, pp. 
68–78.
[70]	 Hamid, M. R., et al., “Switched-Band Vivaldi Antenna,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas 
and Propagation, Vol. 59, No. 5, May 2011, pp. 1472–1480.
[71]	 Jian, B., S. Shouyuan, and D. W. Prather, “Modified Compact Antipodal Vivaldi 
Antenna for 4–50-GHz UWB Application,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, Vol. 59, No. 4, April 2011, pp. 1051–1057.
[72]	 Knorr, J. B., “Slot-Line Transitions,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, Vol. 22, No. 5, May 1974, pp. 548–554.
[73]	 Gibson, P. J., “The Vivaldi Aerial,” 9th European Microwave Conference, 1979, pp. 101–
105. 
[74]	 Ebnabbasi, K., et al., “Taper Design of Vivaldi and Co-Planar Tapered Slot Antenna 
(TSA) by Chebyshev Transformer,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 
60, No. 5, May 2012, pp. 2252–2259.
[75]	 Janaswamy, R., and D. H. Schaubert, “Analysis of the Tapered Slot Antenna,” IEEE 
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 35, No. 9, September 1987, pp. 1058–
1065.
[76]	 Sonkki, M., et al., “Wideband Dual-Polarized Cross-Shaped Vivaldi Antenna,” IEEE 
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 63, No. 6, June 2015, pp. 2813–2819.
[77]	 Chao, Y., et al. “Ultrawideband Printed Log-Periodic Dipole Antenna with Multiple 
Notched Bands,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 59, No. 3, March 
2011, pp. 725–732.
[78]	 Zhu, F., et al., “Multiple Band-Notched UWB Antenna with Band-Rejected Elements 
Integrated in the Feed Line,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 61, No. 
8, August 2013, pp. 3952–3960.
[79]	 Siddiqui, J. Y., C. Saha, and Y. M. M. Antar, “Compact SRR Loaded UWB Circular 
Monopole Antenna with Frequency Notch Characteristics,” IEEE Transactions on 
Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 62, No. 8, August 2014, pp. 4015–4020.

 
Wideband-Sensing Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
105
[80]	 Lin, C. -C., P. Jin, and R. W. Ziolkowski, “Single, Dual and Tri-Band-Notched 
Ultrawideband (UWB) Antennas Using Capacitively Loaded Loop (CLL) Resonators,” 
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 60, No. 1, January 2012, pp. 102–
109.
[81]	 Nikolaou, S., et al., “UWB Elliptical Monopoles with a Reconfigurable Band Notch 
Using MEMS Switches Actuated Without Bias Lines,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. 57, No. 8, August 2009, pp. 2242–2251.
[82]	 Aghdam, S. A., “Reconfigurable Antenna with a Diversity Filtering Band Feature 
Utilizing Active Devices for Communication Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas 
and Propagation, Vol. 61, No. 10, October 2013, pp. 5223–5228.
[83]	 Badamchi, B., et al., “Design of Compact Reconfigurable Ultra-Wideband Slot Antenna 
with Switchable Single/Dual Band Notch Functions,” IET Microwaves, Antennas & 
Propagation, Vol. 8, No. 8, June 4, 2014, pp. 541–548.
[84]	 Loizeau, S., and A. Sibille, “Reconfigurable Ultra-Wide Band Monopole Antenna with a 
Continuously Tunable Band Notch,” IET Microwaves, Antennas & Propagation, Vol. 8, 
No. 5, April 8, 2014, pp. 346–350.


107
5
Communicating Reconfigurable 
Antennas for Cognitive Radio
5.1  Introduction
The role of a reconfigurable antenna in a cognitive radio environment is criti­
cal for the successful operation of any cognitive radio device. A reconfigurable 
antenna is expected to respond promptly to the orders from the cognitive radio 
processor. After the order is received, the reconfigurable antenna tunes its op­
eration to cover a desired unutilized band. In some cases, the antenna may be 
required not only to cover an idle frequency in a channel but to also communi­
cate in a certain direction or with a particular polarization.
A spectrum interweave cognitive radio antenna system requires the pres­
ence of a sensing antenna for channel monitoring and a reconfigurable antenna 
for communication purposes. As mentioned previously, the sensing antenna 
identifies the white spaces in the spectrum while the reconfigurable antenna 
achieves communication over these white spaces. 
Spectrum interweave cognitive radio resorts to reconfigurable antennas 
and necessitates their agile operation for its performance. However, spectrum 
underlay cognitive radio does not require the presence of a dedicated reconfigu­
rable antenna but demands that the sensing antenna achieves a reconfigurable 
notch operation. Thus, it is important to be aware of the various reconfigura­
tion techniques and architectures employed today in reconfigurable antennas.
The design of a reconfigurable antenna requires the understanding of 
the antenna’s fundamental properties such as gain, impedance matching, and 
radiation characteristics. In addition, a reconfigurable antenna must preserve 

108 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
acceptable levels of these properties for the various reconfigurable states that it 
is trying to achieve. Thus, the radiation characteristics of such antennas must 
be predictable and reliable for every state of reconfiguration. Reconfiguring an 
antenna is achieved by rearranging the antenna currents or reconfiguring its 
radiating edges [1–4]. 
The ability of a reconfigurable antenna to change its operation in order to 
satisfy the requirements of the cognitive radio processor depends heavily on the 
reconfiguration techniques that are incorporated within its structure. The re­
configuration time, the biasing lines, and the circuits that are needed to activate 
the reconfiguration tools can be factors that affect the appropriate functioning 
of the reconfigurable antenna.
Various reconfiguration techniques have been proposed for the design of 
reconfigurable antennas. Reconfiguration techniques resort to switches, me­
chanical actuators, or a change in material properties. Patch antennas constitute 
the major reconfigured antenna type due to the ease of integration of recon­
figuring components into their antenna structures. Typically, a reconfigurable 
patch antenna consists of a number of separate metalized regions that lie on a 
plane and are connected together using tuning components [4]. By dynamically 
controlling the states of the tuning components, the different metalized sec­
tions can be activated in a selective way, thus altering the radiation performance 
of the total antenna.
Reconfigurable antennas can be designed to target certain properties. 
Examples of such properties can be frequency of operation, radiation pattern, 
and/or polarization. The integration of reconfigurable antennas into a spectrum 
interweave cognitive radio requires mostly tuning in the antenna’s operating 
frequencies. However, in some scenarios, a cognitive radio device may require, 
in addition to the frequency-tuning behavior, an ability to reconfigure the an­
tenna’s radiation pattern as well as its polarization schemes. Once the targeted 
reconfigurable property has been identified, the antenna designer achieves the 
design objective by selecting the appropriate rearrangement of the different an­
tenna components.
This chapter starts with an overview of reconfigurable antennas. The re­
configuration of antennas using the various types of switches and mechanical 
actuators is detailed. The implementation of reconfigurable antennas in a spec­
trum interweave cognitive radio setting is discussed. A comparison between the 
different reconfiguration techniques as well their limitations are also presented. 
5.2  Overview of Reconfigurable Antennas
A reconfigurable antenna design is based on the integration of reconfiguring 
components to connect or disconnect different parts of the antenna topology 

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
109
or to redistribute the antenna currents as well as its radiating edges. The re­
distribution of antenna currents and radiating edges result in several antenna 
reconfigurable properties. Thus, reconfigurable antennas can be divided into 
four different groups [4]:
• Frequency reconfigurable antennas: This first group consists of recon­
figurable antennas that exhibit frequency reconfiguration for different 
states of the reconfiguring components. Such antennas are most popular 
in a cognitive radio setting as the entire concept of cognitive radio is 
based on the ability of a communicating antenna to radiate on demand 
at a specific idle frequency in the spectrum.
• Radiation pattern reconfigurable antennas: This group encompasses an­
tennas that can change their radiation patterns while maintaining a fixed 
frequency of operation. The reshaping of radiation properties exhibited 
by these types of antennas can be used to communicate not only over an 
idle frequency but also in a specific preselected direction. In this case the 
cognitive radio processor identifies the direction of propagation where a 
particular frequency is idle, while it may not be idle in other directions 
of communication.
• Polarization reconfigurable antennas: This group of antennas reconfig­
ures their polarizations in order to communicate over an idle frequency 
in a particular polarization. At this stage, the cognitive radio proces­
sor activates the communicating antenna to reconfigure its polarization. 
Such antennas are required to reshape their radiation characteristics to 
exhibit multiple polarization schemes.
• Antennas with hybrid reconfigurable properties: Antennas under this 
category are required to exhibit simultaneously multiple radiation char­
acteristics. For example, such antennas are required to change their fre­
quency of operation to communicate over an idle frequency band while 
at the same time reconfiguring their polarization to be able to communi­
cate over multiple frequencies with diverse polarization schemes. 
It is important to indicate that, in a cognitive radio setting, the first group 
of reconfigurable antennas is the most widely adopted in a simple communi­
cation scenario; however, hybrid reconfiguration can also be a desired feature 
especially in a complex channel where the spectrum is congested with multiple 
users over various frequencies communicating in various directions and over 
diverse polarization schemes. Figure 5.1 summarizes the categorization of re­
configurable antennas [4].

110 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
In order to achieve the appropriate functioning of reconfigurable anten­
nas, a careful selection of the reconfiguration technique is required. The proper 
reconfiguration technique guarantees the correct antenna operation and func­
tionality. An antenna designer is always faced with three fundamental questions 
as well as multiple constraints that need to be satisfied. The fundamental ques­
tions that an antenna designer needs to answer are:
1.	 Which reconfigurable property (e.g., frequency, radiation pattern, or 
polarization) needs to be achieved?
2.	 How is the reconfigurable antenna’s topology reconfigured to satisfy 
constraint 1?
3.	 Which reconfiguration technique satisfies constraints 1 and 2 and 
minimizes the negative effects on the antenna radiation characteris­
tics? 
Multiple reconfiguration techniques can be incorporated into the antenna 
design in order to achieve the suitable current redistribution. Reconfiguration 
techniques can also be grouped into multiple categories as shown in Figure 5.2 
[3, 4].
Switches are the most common reconfiguration techniques that have been 
incorporated onto an antenna structure. Switches can be electrical, optical, or 
thermal. Switches can be used to connect and disconnect antenna parts as well 
as to redistribute antenna currents. For example, radio frequency microelec­
tromechanical systems (RF MEMS) have been proposed for integration into 
reconfigurable antennas since 1998 [5]. 
The rise of RF MEMS after 1998 has prompted many antenna designers 
and researchers to incorporate such switching mechanisms into their designs 
Figure 5.1  Categorization of reconfigurable antennas.

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
111
[6–12]. The mechanical movement of RF MEMS constitutes the basis of their 
operation and, thus, the basis of the reconfigurable function. RF MEMS exhib­
it very high isolation and require minimum power consumption. The switching 
speed of RF MEMS is in the range of 1 to 200 µs [3], which may be considered 
low for some cognitive radio scenarios where a speedy reconfiguration may be 
necessary in order to guarantee the communication over the designated idle 
frequency. 
PIN diodes and varactors present faster and more compact alternatives 
to RF MEMS. The switching speed of a PIN diode is in the range of 1 to 100 
ns [3]. PIN diodes offer reconfigurable antennas that utilize such technology 
[13–23] a more dynamic reconfiguration capability. However, reconfigurable 
antennas that rely on varactors [24–32] change their operation based on the 
change in the varactor’s capacitance. Such a capacitance tuning can only occur 
once the varactor’s biasing voltage is changed. In general, varactor reconfigured 
antennas exhibit a wide tuning capability. One of the main benefits of electri­
cal switching reconfiguration is their efficient and fast reconfiguration ability. 
Their main drawback is the fact that they require an appropriate design of their 
biasing networks, which constitutes another constraint an antenna designer has 
to satisfy. The biasing of RF MEMS requires a constant DC voltage source with 
no necessary supplied current. However, the biasing of PIN diodes requires a 
constant current source, while varactors need a variable DC voltage source. In 
the next sections, the biasing of various electrical switches based on examples 
from the literature is discussed.
Optical switches are based on photoconductive materials that can be in­
tegrated into antenna structures to allow switching by optical mechanisms. A 
photoconductive switch becomes conductive once it is subjected to a laser beam 
that can be generated from a laser diode. The integration of photoconductive 
Figure 5.2  Different reconfiguration techniques.

112 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
switches into antenna structures at strategic locations allows the reconfiguration 
of these antennas [33–38]. Laser diodes can also be integrated within the an­
tenna structure [35] to allow a more compact optically pumped reconfigurable 
antenna topology. Power consumption is a major drawback of this reconfigura­
tion technique and needs to be taken into consideration especially when the 
purpose is to deliver compact reconfigurable antennas that can change their 
operation as reliably as possible.
Switches that are activated by a change in temperature, also known as 
thermal switches, can also be proposed as candidates for antenna reconfigura­
tion [39]. The integration of these switches with a heat sensor into the antenna 
structure constitutes one of the major constraints of this technique. Other re­
configuration techniques are based on graphene plasmonics [40], liquid crystals 
[41], and mechanical actuators [42–45]. 
A reconfiguration technique can be applied to any antenna structure in 
order to reconfigure its operation. It transforms a typical antenna topology into 
a reconfigurable antenna structure that can be software-controlled, maneuvered, 
and optimized for better communication. The use of an appropriate reconfigu­
ration technique facilitates the integration of the reconfigurable antenna into a 
cognitive radio setup. However, there is a cost to such integration; such a cost 
can be determined as a function of multiple factors [3, 46] as discussed here:
1.	 A complexity is added to the antenna structure due to the presence of 
biasing networks that are required to control the state of the reconfig­
uration components. Even with the use of reconfiguring components 
that do not require biasing, such a complexity exists as these compo­
nents will require another activation mechanism that allows them to 
function properly.
2.	 The incorporation of active components results in increased power 
consumption, especially when high-power-consuming components 
are used such as photoconductive switches. Such power consumption 
limits the use of optically pumped antennas on platforms where power 
availability is a major constraint.
3.	 Undesired effects such as generation of harmonics due to the addi­
tion of nonlinear active components. These harmonics need to be ac­
counted for in the original stages of antenna design and they must be 
eliminated by appropriate matching networks.
4.	 The speed of reconfiguration to the required functionality constrains 
the user with specific reconfiguration tools that can achieve current 
redistribution faster than other reconfiguration techniques. For exam­
ple, PIN diodes can be considered the fastest reconfiguration compo­
nents that have ever been incorporated into an antenna structure.

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
113
5.3   Antenna Reconfiguration Using RF MEMS
MEMS are microelectromechanical devices that use a mechanical movement to 
achieve a short or an open connection. They are designed to operate from RF to 
millimeter-wave frequencies. RF MEMS can be divided into four main groups 
based on their topology [47, 48]. These groups are: (1) the metal contact switch 
[49], (2) the capacitive switching [50, 51], (3) the switched capacitor [52], and 
(4) the analog varactor [53]. 
Figure 5.3(a) highlights the structure of the metal contact switch while 
Figure 5.3(b) presents capacitive switching RF MEMS. 
Figure 5.3  (a) The metal-contact switch [49], and (b) RF MEMS capacitive switch. (© 2015, 
IEEE. From [51].)

114 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
The metal contact RF MEMS switch, also known as the resistive RF 
MEMS, is the most popular one among the antenna community and it is wide­
ly used by industry as an off-the-shelf chip component [54]. In general, RF 
MEMS switches can be represented as three terminal devices that are actuated 
electrostatically. They operate similarly to a field effect transistor (FET). Thus, 
the RF MEMS terminals are also labeled as source, gate, and drain as shown in 
Figure 5.4(a) [54]. When a DC actuation voltage is applied between the gate 
and source, an electrostatic force appears and results in pulling the free end 
of the beam into contact with the drain. When the voltage ceases to exist, the 
beam springs back, generating a sufficient force that allows the breaking of the 
connection between the source and drain.
The single-pole, single-throw (SPST) RF MEMS has the simplest form 
and its layout is represented in Figure 5.4(b) [54]. It mainly consists of one can­
tilever beam. The operation of the SPST RF MEMS using electrostatic actua­
tion can be modeled using a parallel plate capacitor as shown in Figure 5.4(c). 
The electrostatic force that is generated between the two terminals (electrodes) 
of the parallel plate capacitor enables the actuation of the RF MEMS switch. 
The electrostatic force can be calculated as shown here [55]:
Figure 5.4  (a) The three terminals of the RF MEMS switch, (b) the layout of the SPST RF 
MEMS switch, (c) the parallel plate capacitor model of an SPST RF MEMS, and (d) proper 
integration of the RF MEMS chip switch.

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
115
	
2
0
2
2
rSV
F
d
ε ε
=
	
(5.1)
where ε0 and εr are the dielectric constants for vacuum and gas, S is the area of 
the electrode, V is the applied voltage, and d is the average gap between the two 
electrodes.
The actuation of the RF MEMS can also be achieved using magneto-stat­
ic, piezoelectric, or thermal design; however, electrostatic type switches present 
the highest reliability [49]. RF MEMS can also be designed using multithrows 
where each throw is considered as an independently actuated cantilever beam 
[54].
RF MEMS have low losses, very high isolation up to millimeter-wave 
frequencies and near-zero power consumption. They are highly linear, present 
very high Q, and can be designed to handle large RF voltage swings. RF MEMS 
also present high-power handling of 1–10W for both metal-contact and ca­
pacitive switches [48]. However, RF-MEMS require hermetic packaging which 
tends to increase cost. They also necessitate a high-voltage drive that varies from 
25–90V, which can be interpreted as imposing a requirement on voltage sup­
ply circuits [48]. The question about the reliability of RF MEMS still remains 
under investigation, especially when much research is still needed on dielectric 
materials, metal-contact actuator design, and packaging criteria.
A DC voltage of up to 90V is required for the activation of RF MEMS 
switches. The voltage level varies depending on the type of the switch that is 
used. During the activation of the RF MEMS switch, the gate terminal can 
be at a positive or a negative voltage level with respect to the source terminal. 
However, when varying the voltage VS at the source, the gate voltage VG must 
also be varied to keep VGS constant [54].
Many antenna researchers have resorted to RF MEMS chips to recon­
figure their antenna operation for cognitive radio applications. An example of 
such RF MEMS is the one presented in [54] by Radant MEMS corporation 
and integrated into a reconfigurable E-shaped antenna that is discussed in [56]. 
However, before the antenna design and its reconfiguration mechanism are de­
tailed, some important parameters must be pointed out. In addition to pro­
viding the sufficient amount of DC voltage to actuate the switch, resistors RS 
and RD (40–100KΩ) or inductors LS and LD must be integrated in the circuit 
in order to provide a path to DC ground from the source and drain terminals 
of the switch. The voltage VG applied at the gate of the device can be of either 
polarity and must have a rise time of at least 10 µs for optimal lifetime of the 
switch [54]. A schematic showing the proposed circuit topology for RF MEMS 
chip activation is shown in Figure 5.4(d) [54].

116 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
An example of a frequency reconfigurable E-shaped patch antenna that 
is proposed for integration into a cognitive radio platform is shown in Figure 
5.5(a) [56]. The E-shape of the patch antenna presents several advantages to the 
full system integration. Most importantly, the accessibility that is provided by 
the slots of the E-shaped patch for running biasing lines in order to provide the 
appropriate voltage levels to the RF MEMS chips [56]. 
The E-shaped patch antenna exhibits dual-band operation due to the slots 
that are part of the patch structure. Mainly, the two slots allow a second mode to 
operate at a lower frequency relative to the typical patch mode. Altering the slot 
dimensions through the incorporation of RF MEMS changes the impedance 
Figure 5.5   (a) The E-shaped patch with integrated RF MEMS and biasing lines, and (b) the 
comparison between the measured and simulated reflection coefficient for the two states of 
the RF MEMS for the antenna in [56]. (© 2014, IEEE.)

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
117
matching and enables the surface current to redistribute in a way that allows 
for frequency reconfiguration. The presented E-shaped patch is etched on top 
of a Rogers RT Duroid 5880 substrate that has a 1.574-mm thickness and a 
dielectric constant of around 2.2. The total structure is then placed on top of 
another foam substrate that has a thickness of 10 mm and a dielectric constant 
of around 1. The bottom layer of this microstrip antenna is a ground plane. The 
Rogers Duroid layer of the substrate is used to allow more accurate fabrication 
results, while the foam substrate is utilized for bandwidth improvement and to 
result in an overall substrate efficiency that is close to 1 [56]. 
The antenna dimensions and design are optimized using the particle 
swarm optimization (PSO) technique. The RF MEMS switches that are incor­
porated into the antenna design to achieve frequency reconfiguration are the 
Radant RMSW100HP switches [54]. The antenna changes operation between 
2 GHz and 2.6 GHz for the off state of the switches and 2.6 GHz and 3.2 GHz 
for the on state of the switches. The RF MEMS biasing requires the extension 
of biasing lines from the slots of the E-shaped patch. However, in order to avoid 
the strong fringing fields that this antenna exhibits within the slots, conductive 
adhesives are used as an effective solution to provide the appropriate voltage 
(90V) from the voltage driver to the RF MEMS switches. The measured reflec­
tion coefficient shows good agreement with the simulated ones as shown in 
Figure 5.5(b) for the different states of the switches. It is important to indicate 
that both switches are turned on and off simultaneously [56].
Some antenna designers prefer to fabricate their own RF MEMS switches 
and integrate them as part of their antenna structures. An example of such de­
signs is the one discussed in [57] where chemical fabrication techniques are used 
to etch RF MEMS as well as their biasing lines into a ultrawideband (UWB) 
antenna. The RF MEMS are used to infuse band rejection properties into the 
normally wideband antenna operation [57]. As a summary, RF MEMS whether 
commercial or custom built constitute a suitable reconfiguration tool for inte­
gration onto antenna structures for cognitive radio applications; however, their 
high-voltage requirements and switching speed may constitute a drawback. 
Next PIN diodes will be discussed and presented as possible tools for antenna 
reconfiguration.
5.4   Antenna Reconfiguration Using PIN Diodes
PIN diodes present an alternative to RF MEMS. They can be easily integrated 
into an antenna structure to reconfigure its currents and radiating edges. PIN 
diodes offer a faster switching mechanism than any other electrical switch. A 
PIN diode can be considered as a current-controlled resistor at microwave fre­
quencies [58]. It is a silicon semiconductor diode in which a high-resistivity, 

118 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
intrinsic I region is sandwiched between a p-type and n-type region. The appro­
priate forward biasing of the PIN diode results in injecting the I region of the 
semiconductor with holes and electrons. The charges injected into the I region 
persist for a certain amount of time called the carrier lifetime, τ. This phenom­
enon results in an average stored charge, Q. Zero or reverse biasing of the PIN 
diode results in lack of charges in the I region forcing the diode to appear as a 
capacitor in shunt with a resistance [58].
In the forward-biasing scenario, a PIN diode must be biased with only a 
constant current. A current driver that supplies constant DC regardless of the 
load needs to be used to appropriately forward bias a PIN diode. In this case, 
the diode stored charge (Qd) is constant and equal to [59]:
	
d
d
Q
I τ
=
	
(5.2)
where Id is the diode current and τ is the carrier lifetime 
In the case where the biasing signal consists of both a constant current 
and a low frequency RF signal, the DC component of the stored charge is 
modulated by the presence of an AC component [59]. The modulation degree 
depends on the frequency of the RF signal in addition to the charge. The fre­
quency dependence can be shown by resorting to the Laplace transform [59]:
	
( )
( )
(
)
(
)
1
d
d
d
i t j
Q
L Q
t
j
t
ω
ω
ω
=
=
+
	
(5.3)
where ω=2πf.
The frequency dependence plotted in Figure 5.6(a) shows that the RF 
signal has the same effect as the DC bias at frequencies below fc=1/(2πωτ). 
Above fc, the modulation effect decreases by about 6 dB/octave [59]. Therefore, 
when the PIN diode is forward biased, the stored charge must be much greater 
than the incremental stored charge added or removed by the RF current, IRF. To 
ensure this, the inequality shown in (5.4) must always hold [58]:
	
2
RF
c
I
Q
f
π

	
(5.4)
The modeling of a PIN diode for forward and reverse bias can be executed 
using equivalent RLC circuits. For example, in commercially available diodes, 
the parasitic resistance of the diode package and contacts determine the lowest 
value of the diode resistance (Rs). Also, the parasitic inductance (L), which is 
generally less than 1 nH, plays a role in determining the diode impedance in the 

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
119
forward bias region [58]. Thus, the modeling of the PIN diode when forward 
biased is summarized in Figure 5.6(b) [58]. 
The PIN diode resistance RS in the forward bias region depends on several 
parameters as shown in (5.5) [58].
	
(
)
(
)
( )
2
I
S
n
p
W
R
Q
μ
μ
=
Ω
+
×
	
(5.5)
where WI is the I region width, µn is the electron mobility, and µp is the hole 
mobility.
In reverse bias, the PIN diode should not be biased beyond its DC voltage 
rating. For this case, the diode acts as a capacitor (CT) in shunt with a resistor 
(Rp) as shown in Figure 5.6(c) [58]. The parasitic inductance (L) is also present 
Figure 5.6  (a) The PIN behavior in function of frequency, (b) the equivalent circuit of the PIN 
diode in forward bias, and (c) the circuit model of the PIN diode in the reverse bias mode.

120 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
when the PIN diode is reverse-biased. The capacitor modeling of the diode is 
presented in (5.6) [58].
	
T
I
A
C
W
ε
=
	
(5.6)
where ε is the dielectric constant of the silicon, A is the area of the diode junc­
tion, and WI is the I region width.
The switching speed of a PIN diode depends heavily on its current driver 
as well as the physical structure of the PIN diode itself. Mainly, a PIN diode 
has two switching speeds: one from forward bias to reverse bias and the second 
from reverse bias to forward bias. The diode characteristic that affects the for­
ward-to-reverse bias switching speed is the carrier lifetime, while the switching 
from reverse-to-forward bias depends on the I region width, WI [58].
PIN diodes used as switches to connect and disconnect antenna parts or 
to redistribute antenna currents or radiating edges, have been widely proposed 
in literature for the design of reconfigurable antennas. For example, a wide-
narrowband antenna is reconfigured in [60] using PIN diodes. The antenna 
proposed is shown in Figure 5.7(a). It is composed of a folded bowtie dipole, 
a length-reconfigurable thin dipole, a vertically oriented balun, a rectangular 
cavity and vertically oriented DC biasing lines. There are five types of switches 
that are incorporated into the antenna structure, some of these switches are 
implemented to control the state of the wideband antenna, and others are used 
to control the length of the thin dipole. A wideband mode and four narrow­
band modes can be achieved by choosing different states of the switches. The 
bowtie antenna is fragmented into several parts by placing switches at its center. 
DC lines are added in order to bias the various switches that are incorporated 
within the antenna structure. The DC lines connect the antenna to the biasing 
sources through the slots in the ground plane. They are printed on a vertically 
oriented substrate that lies perpendicular to the horizontal substrate where the 
truncated bowtie antenna is etched. The detailed structure of the antenna top 
layer is summarized in Figure 5.7(b). The frequency response of the antenna is 
shown in Figure 5.7(c) for five different states of the switches [60].
Another reconfigurable antenna makes use of PIN diodes to indepen­
dently reconfigure its operating frequency, radiation pattern and polarization 
as discussed in [61]. The proposed antenna structure, shown in Figure 5.8, 
is composed of a switched grid of small metallic patches that form a parasitic 
pixel surface. This parasitic layer provides reconfiguration capabilities to the 
antenna structure. The reconfiguration mechanism is based on the pixelated 
antenna concept; however, the pixilation is used in a parasitic manner and not 
within the active radiating region of the antenna. A separate antenna that is 

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
121
Figure 5.7  (a) The antenna structure as proposed in [60], (b) the detailed structure of the top 
layer of the antenna, and (c) the comparison between the measured and simulated reflection 
coefficients for five different states of the PIN diodes. (© 2014, IEEE. From [60].)

122 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
kept without any alterations is used for the actual radiation and is designated 
as the driven antenna component. The parasitic layer is located in the reactive 
Figure 5.7  (continued)
Figure 5.8  The pixel antenna prototype. (© 2014, IEEE. From [61].)

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
123
field region of the driven antenna which produces impedance loading that can 
modify the resonance frequency of the antenna. In addition to the loading ef­
fect, the strong coupling between the driven antenna and the parasitic pixel 
surface induces currents over the pixel layer, therefore affecting the antenna 
radiation pattern and polarization [61].
The driven element is chosen to be a simple microstrip patch due mainly 
to its structure and radiation characteristics. The driven patch lies underneath 
the parasitic layer by an optimized distance d. The reconfiguration process is 
achieved by connecting and disconnecting parts of the pixel layer using PIN 
diodes as highlighted in Figure 5.8 [61].
Antenna designers have developed many design concepts and several PIN 
diode integration techniques to achieve reconfiguration of the antenna func­
tionality. In reality, agility in antenna operation is an important requirement 
and that agility is required in several applications and in particular in cognitive 
radio scenarios. The transformation of a wideband antenna into multinarrow­
band reconfigurable antenna seems to be a popular reconfiguration choice for 
many designers. For example, the antenna presented in [62] uses PIN diodes 
to transform the operation of a wideband Archimedean spiral antenna into a 
narrowband antenna and vice versa. Another wideband frequency reconfigu­
rable antenna is presented in [63] where PIN diodes connect different parts of 
its Spirograph topology. The antenna exhibits frequency tuning over multiple 
frequency bands in the spectrum [63].
Antenna designers who utilize PIN diodes to reconfigure their antennas 
have to handle multiple factors that impact their design, such as the nonlinear­
ity of PIN diodes which is an important aspect of the design. Another aspect is 
the biasing which needs to take into consideration the presence of a constant 
current that should activate the PIN diode. The speed of a PIN diode is defi­
nitely an important aspect and a great advantage but it also comes with some 
reliability concerns that must still be addressed and researched. Next, the design 
of reconfigurable antennas using varactors is presented. 
5.5  Antenna Reconfiguration Using Varactors
Varactors are also integrated into antenna structures and can be used as recon­
figuring components that allow the redistribution of antenna currents by tun­
ing their capacitances. In reality, a varactor diode is a P-N junction diode that 
changes its capacitance and the series resistance as the bias applied to the diode 
is varied. When integrated into antennas, the tuning in the capacitances of 
varactors results in frequency tuning of the antenna operation. A simple model 
of a commercially available varactor surface mountable component is shown in 
Figure 5.9(a) [64].

124 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
Several key parameters need to be considered before selecting the appro­
priate varactor to be incorporated into an antenna structure:
1.	 The frequency operation and the frequency sweep within which the 
varactor will be operating;
2.	 The reverse breakdown voltage and the reverse leakage current;
3.	 The capacitance value of the varactor and how it changes with the ap­
plied voltage;
4.	 The quality factor (Q) of the varactor.
The capacitance of the varactor is a function of the doping structure that 
is introduced within the semiconductor during the wafer fabrication process 
[64]. The change in the capacitance of a varactor diode mainly depends on the 
applied reverse bias voltage. This change can generally be represented as in Fig­
ure 5.9(b) [64]. The slope of the curve is around 0.5; however, a slope of 0.47 
is more representative of a practical abrupt varactor diode. The capacitance of a 
varactor at a given reverse bias voltage V can be expressed as in (5.7) [64]:
Figure 5.9   (a) Circuit model of a varactor, and (b) the rate of change of the capacitance in 
function of the potential.

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
125
	
0
0.47
1
C
C
V
=


+




Φ
	
(5.7)
The value of the built in potential Φ is 0.7V for silicon and 1.3V for gal­
lium arsenide [64].
The quality factor is an important parameter of a varactor diode because it 
determines the frequency limit for the diode. The quality factor is defined as the 
rate between the energy stored and the energy dissipated. The varactor quality 
factor Q can be expressed as described in (5.8) [64].
	
1
2
V
V
Q
fR C
π
=
	
(5.8)
where f is the operating frequency, CV is the junction capacitance, and RV is the 
sum of the resistance of the depleted region and the fixed contact resistance.
It is important to indicate that the quality factor is highly dependent on 
the operating frequency. An extrapolation of Q as a function of frequency other 
than the operating one can be expressed using (5.9) [64] as:
	
( )
(
)
2
1
2
1
f
Q f
Q f
f
=
	
(5.9)
The higher the Q factor of the varactor diode, the lower the energy dis­
sipation and the higher the operating frequency limit is in the circuit in which 
it is incorporated [64].
Antenna designers using varactors to tune their antenna elements for cog­
nitive radio applications or any other wireless communication applications have 
to take the varactor’s properties into consideration. In order to bias a varactor 
diode, DC bias lines are needed and a variable voltage source is required to be 
able to tune the capacitance of the varactors. Varying the supplied reverse bias 
voltage enables the capacitance tuning of the varactor. It is important to indi­
cate that in any switch reconfiguration topology, the biasing lines that connect 
the switch to the ground need to include RF chokes (inductors) to prevent the 
passage of the RF signal into the ground. DC blockers (capacitors) need to also 
be included to prevent the leakage of the DC signal into the actual antenna 
structure.

126 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
Eight varactors are incorporated in [65] to connect a center fed circu­
lar patch to four sector shaped patches as shown in Figure 5.10(a). By vary­
ing the reverse bias voltage of the varactor, the antenna can tune its operating 
Figure 5.10  (a) The antenna topology presented in [65], and (b) the frequency response for 
different capacitance values of the varactors. (© 2014, IEEE. From [65].)

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
127
frequency. The antenna is printed on a 6.34-mm-thick Rogers Duroid substrate 
with a dielectric constant of 2.33. A circular ground plane with a radius of 97 
mm constitutes the bottom layer of the antenna. The varactors implemented on 
the antenna structure are placed along the edges of the sector shaped patches, 
with capacitances that vary from 2.22 pF to 0.3 pF as the reverse bias voltage 
increases from 0V to 20V. A shorting pin is introduced into the circular patch 
to ground the DC signal. Four DC lines of width 1 mm each are used to bias 
the different varactors. The bias lines and the shorting pin are isolated from the 
RF signal by 47-nH inductors [65]. 
Tuning the capacitance of the varactors allows the redistribution of the 
antenna currents as described in [65]. When the capacitance of the varactors is 
2.22 pF, the antenna acts as a large circular patch with a TM01 mode of opera­
tion at a frequency of 1.64 GHz. For a capacitance of 0.3 pF, the antenna acts as 
a small circular patch with a frequency of operation at 2.12 GHz. The varactors 
are not controlled individually nor independently but rather they are controlled 
collectively. The tuning of the operating frequencies is shown in Figure 5.10(b) 
for various capacitance values of the different varactors [65].
As with the integration of PIN diodes, the integration of varactors can 
also be used to reconfigure the operation of a wideband antenna into a tunable 
narrowband antenna that can be implemented on various cognitive radio plat­
forms [66, 67]. There has been a high interest within the antenna community 
to propose antennas that can act as both wideband and reconfigurable nar­
rowband in order to optimize the number of antennas that can be used and to 
improve the system’s efficiency. For example, an elliptical disc monopole patch 
antenna that acts as a UWB radiator which operates over the frequency bands 
from 3 GHz to 11 GHz is merged with a reconfigurable narrow slot resonator 
that can operate within the 5–6-GHz range [66]. The narrowband antenna is 
introduced into the center part of the UWB disc as shown in Figure 5.11. Due 
to the low current density at the center part of the disc, the narrowband anten­
na incorporation does not degrade the antenna sensing capability. The disc is 
fed by a stepped microstrip line, on the top layer of the patch antenna system. A 
partial ellipse with major and minor radii of 17 mm and 9.5 mm, respectively, 
constitutes the ground plane at the bottom layer of the antenna. The narrow­
band slot antenna is designed for the first slot dominant mode by resorting to 
a stub-loaded microstrip feed line. A symmetric stub is also introduced inside 
the slot to reduce the effective length of the resonant slot by folding the slot 
current distribution. A varactor is incorporated across the slot to reconfigure 
its operating frequency. Varying the biasing reverse voltage allows the variation 
of the capacitance value, which by itself tunes the frequency operation of the 
narrowband slot antenna. The feeding of the slot antenna is executed using 
coupling from a microstrip line that is etched at the bottom layer as shown in 
Figure 5.11(b) [66].

128 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
The reconfiguration of the antenna radiation properties can also be 
achieved through the antenna feeding networks. For example, a tunable power 
divider introduced in [68] is used to reconfigure the radiation pattern of a dual 
stacked patch antennas. The outputs of the power divider excites two stacked 
microstrip antennas as shown in Figure 5.12(a). The power divider is com­
posed of quasi lumped coupler and two varactor diodes. By tuning the varactors 
through the variation of the DC biasing voltage, the ratio of the two outputs of 
the power divider is varied and thus the radiation patterns of the two antennas 
are reconfigured [68]. The structure of the power divider is shown in Figure 
5.12(b).
Figure 5.11  The UWB and varactor reconfigurable narrowband antenna as described in [66]: 
(a) top layer, and (b) bottom layer. (© 2012, IEEE.)

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
129
Reconfigurable antenna arrays can also be reconfigured using varactors 
and proposed for cognitive radio applications. For example, a frequency recon­
figurable printed Yagi-Uda antenna is proposed for cognitive radio by loading 
the driver dipole arms and four directors with varactor diodes. Such a configura­
tion allows a high gain with an almost constant end-fire radiation pattern [69].
Antenna designers resorting to varactor diodes benefit from their switch­
ing speed and tuning agility; however, they suffer from nonlinearity effects that 
need to be taken into consideration. The variation of capacitances allows the 
tuning of operation of antennas without complete reconfiguration. Such opera­
tion that tunes over a band of frequencies, for example, is highly desirable in 
applications such as cognitive radio. Next, reconfigurable antennas that resort 
to thermal and optical switching components to change their operation are 
discussed. 
5.6  Antenna Reconfiguration Using Thermal-Switching 
Components
Thermal switches have appeared to be an option considered recently by some 
researchers, especially for application in wireless sensor networks [39, 70]. 
Figure 5.12   (a) The reconfigurable antenna system as discussed in [68], and (b) the struc­
ture of the power divider. (© 2015, IEEE. From [68].)

130 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
For example, the patch antenna that is discussed in [70] and shown in Figure 
5.13(a) resorts to a thermal switch to reconfigure its frequency operation. The 
antenna is based on a slotted patch structure and achieves a wireless tempera­
ture monitoring function through the integration of a thermal switch within 
the antenna patch [70]. The slotted patch antenna is proposed for implementa­
tion with a radio frequency identification (RFID) tag. 
Another antenna that resorts to thermal switches and also proposed 
for integration with RFID tags is discussed in [39] and presented in Figure 
5.13(b). The antenna is a conventional printed dipole with a T-matching 
network. The antenna’s impedance is conjugately matched with the RFID 
integrated chip (IC). The antenna system is printed on an FR4 substrate. 
The realized gain of the antenna and the sensitivity of the integrated chip 
determine the read range of the antenna. The RFID microchip is a nonlin­
ear load in which the complex impedance varies with the frequency and the 
input power. The reconfigurable antenna monitors the temperature of the 
surrounding environment through the integration of thermal switches into its 
structure. When the temperature exceeds the specific threshold, the switch is 
activated and the antenna extends in length, which is interpreted in its func­
tion as a shift to a lower frequency [39]. 
Figure 5.13  (a) The slotted patch antenna structure with thermal switches [70], and (b) the 
printed dipole antenna with thermal switches. (© 2013, IEEE. From [39].)

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
131
5.7  Antenna Reconfiguration Using Optical Photoconductive 
Switches
Another reconfiguration technique that shows great promise is optical switch­
ing. Silicon-based photoconductive elements become conductive once they are 
illuminated by the light of a suitable wavelength. The properties of these ele­
ments change from semiconductor to fully conductive materials, allowing them 
to act as switching components that can be integrated into antenna structures 
for reconfiguration purposes. 
The operation of optical switches is based on the fact that, under illumi­
nation by the light of a suitable wavelength, the mobility of charges in a semi­
conductor decreases; however, their density increases. This results in a general 
increase in the conductivity of the semiconductor switch [71, 72]. The depen­
dence of the mobility m of electrons and holes in silicon is shown in (5.10):
	
max
min
min
1
ref
N
N
α
μ
μ
μ
μ
−
=
+


+ 



	
(5.10)
where µ is the electrons or holes mobility (cm2/V.s), and µmin, µmax, Nref (cm−3), 
and α are the fitted coefficients that are detailed in Table 5.1 [34].
The increase in the total carrier concentration of the silicon photoconduc­
tive switch allows a change in the dielectric constant as shown in (5.11) [73]:
	
2
2
0
r
L
ne
m
w
j
ε
ε
ω
ε
τ
=
+


∗
−
+




	
(5.11)
where n is the electrons or holes concentration( cm−3); q is the electron charge 
(1.602 × 10–19 C); m* is the charge effective mass (Kg); ω is the operating fre­
Table 5.1 
Mobility Parameters for Silicon
Parameter
Electrons
Holes
µmin
52.2
44.9
µmax
1,417
471
Nref
9.68 × 1016
2.23 × 1017
α
0.68
0.719
Source: [34].

132 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
quency (Hz); τ is the collision time (10−3 s); and εL is the dielectric constant of 
the silicon.
It should be mentioned that as the carrier concentration increases, the 
conductivity of the silicon increases, and its dielectric constant decreases. How­
ever, the silicon becomes lossier due to the increase in the dielectric loss tangent 
[34]. 
There are different categories of the photoconductive switches that can be 
integrated on an antenna structure. For example, the silicon photoconductive 
switches that are used in [34] to reconfigure a patch antenna, are composed of 
a doped n-type material with an initial concentration of 1015 cm–3 and have the 
dimension of 1 × 1 mm2 and thicknesses of 0.28 mm. The two silicon switches 
are used to connect a circular patch into an outer annular ring through a 1-mm 
gap as shown in Figure 5.14 [34]. The antenna is printed on a Rogers Du­
roid 5880 substrate with a dielectric constant of 2.2, and a height of 1.6 mm. 
The main challenge in the optically reconfigurable antenna is the light delivery 
method that is used to activate the silicon switches. In [34], the authors intro­
duced a new technique that is based on light delivery through coupling across 
apertures that are drilled into the antenna substrate. Two holes of 1-mm radius 
each are drilled into the substrate and deliver the light emitted from an 808-
nm laser diode to the silicon switches. The optical fiber cable holding the laser 
diode is placed underneath the substrate, fixated by a plastic fixture. When the 
two silicon switches are not illuminated, only the circular ring (Region 1) is fed, 
which results in a resonance between 18 GHz and 19 GHz. When the silicon 
switches are activated a resonance appears at 12 GHz.
Another antenna structure that empolys two silicon diodes to achieve re­
configuration is shown in Figure 5.15(a) [74]. The light delivery method differs 
from the one described in [34]. For this case, two 980-nm lasers operating at 
200 mW are coupled to two glass fiber optic cables, which are then angled over 
Figure 5.14  The top and bottom layers of the optically reconfigurable antenna in [34]. (© 
2010, IEEE.)

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
133
the silicon wafers using plastic clamps. The antenna is printed on 1.17-mm-
thick TLY-5 substrate with a dielectric constant that is equal to 2.2. A circular 
balun is integrated with the CPW-fed dipole antenna to insure that balanced 
feeding is provided. The dipole resorts to two silicon switches with the dimen­
sions of the dice being 1 mm × 1 mm × 0.3 mm. Silver epoxy is used to fix 
the silicon switches to the copper lines of the printed dipole [74]. For the case 
when both switches are off, the dipole antenna resonates at a higher frequency. 
When both lasers are on and operating at 200 mW, the silicon conducts and the 
antenna switches to a lower-frequency operation. The change in frequency of 
Figure 5.15  (a) The printed optically switched dipole antenna [74], and (b) the change in the 
antenna’s operating frequency for different power levels of the laser. (© 2006, IEEE. From [74].)

134 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
operation based on the states of the silicon switches is shown in Figure 5.15(b) 
for different power levels [74]. 
Two silicon switches are also used to reconfigure the operation of a UWB 
antenna and transform its operation into a reconfigurable narrowband. The 
antenna structure that is shown in Figure 5.16 [75] is composed of two inde­
pendent narrowband complementary split-ring resonators that are etched in the 
radiation structure of the planar UWB antenna. The resulting antenna system 
can switch its operation from UWB to three notched bands for the detection 
of white spaces in the spectrum. Both switches are made of 2 mm × 1 mm × 
0.28 mm high-resistivity silicon dice with a dark resistivity of 3,000Ω and a 
relative permittivity of 11.9. The switches are illuminated by a fiber coupled 
semiconductor laser that is centered at 980 nm. The activation fiber is placed 
above the switches with a transparent plexiglass holder of a dielectric constant 
that is equal to 3. The corresponding measurement setup is also highlighted in 
Figure 5.16 [75].
Optical reconfiguration seems to offer a good alternative to devices that 
require DC biasing networks; however, their illumination power requirements 
as well as required hardware such as optical fiber cables, laser diodes, and other 
fixtures may constitute drawbacks to such a promising technique. 
In reality, antenna designers have several switching components that they 
can implement to achieve reconfiguration. The decision on which one is more 
appropriate to use is based on imposed constraints that all researchers aim to 
satisfy. In the next section, the use of graph models to remove redundant com­
ponents from a reconfigurable antenna structure is detailed. Other reconfigura­
tion techniques such as mechanical reconfiguration and material change and 
their integration in an antenna structure are also discussed in later sections.
Figure 5.16  The optically controlled reconfigurable UWB antenna with its corresponding 
measurement setup. (© 2014, IEEE. From [75].)

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
135
5.8   Graph Modeling Switch-Reconfigurable Antennas for 
Redundancy Reduction
The popularity of reconfigurable antennas is based on the fact that these anten­
nas can be software controlled and easily automated. The modeling of switch 
reconfigurable antennas using a graph allows the transformation of these an­
tennas from hardware into a matrix that can be manipulated and optimized 
mathematically. Graphs are symbolic representations of relationships between 
different points in a system. Thus, a graph can accurately represent the evolving 
state of a reconfigurable antenna [4, 76–81]. 
A graph is composed of vertices that represent the end points of a switch 
and edges that represent the activation and deactivation of that switch. Several 
rules are introduced to model switch-reconfigurable antennas. These rules allow 
the designer to relate each possible topology to a corresponding electromagnetic 
performance. Once a graph is drawn, an adjacency matrix can be formed based 
on this graph. Such a transformation allows the implementation of various al­
gorithms to further smooth and optimize the reconfigurable antenna operation 
[4].
At first an antenna designer models the switch reconfigurable antenna 
design as a graph in order to investigate the presence of redundant components 
in the antenna structure. An element or a switch is defined as redundant if its 
presence gives the antenna more functions than required and its removal does 
not affect the antenna’s performance. Removing redundant components from 
an antenna structure reduces its complexity and allows for a more efficient an­
tenna reconfiguration. For example, reducing the number of switches used to 
reconfigure an antenna reduces the nonlinearity effects and the interference 
from the corresponding switching components’ biasing lines [4]. 
For example, a planar antenna that is presented in [81] resorts to six 
switches to reconfigure the connection of a main part of its patch to six periph­
eral parts. The various activation and deactivation of these switches reconfigure 
the antenna’s operating frequencies. Applying the graph-based redundancy re­
duction approach to such an antenna structure reduces the number of switches 
to be used from six to only two. The functioning of the antenna is preserved 
and an optimal response that matches the original one from the redundant 
configuration is achieved. The redundancy reduction approach is tested on an­
tennas with a larger number of switches, and as a result, more efficient designs 
are created for an easier system control and integration with fewer nonlinearity 
effects [4, 81].
When reducing redundant components and eliminating unwanted 
switches, the general complexity is also reduced and the number of equivalent 
configurations can be affected. The problem arises when a switch failure is in 
question and, in that case, how the antenna’s reliability is affected. It is shown 

136 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
that while the physical antenna redundancy is reduced, the equivalent configu­
rations are sufficient to maintain acceptable antenna reliability [4, 82].
The reliability of a reconfigurable antenna mainly depends on the number 
of antenna configurations at a certain frequency and the probability to achieve 
them. However, it is inversely proportional to the number of edges needed. The 
solution is to design reconfigurable antennas with several equivalent configura­
tions but only with a small number of connections. Thus, the reliability of a 
reconfigurable antenna at a particular frequency f can be calculated as in (5.12) 
[4, 82].
	
( )
(
)
( )
( )
( )
( )
1
1
1
100
i
NC f
NE
f
ij
i
j
NC f
i
i
P E
R f
NE
f
=
=
=
=
×
∑
∑
∑
	
(5.12)
where NC(f  ) is the number of configurations achieving the frequency f, NE(f  ) 
is the number of edges for different configurations at the frequency f, and P(E) 
is the probability of achieving the edge E.
However, an antenna’s general complexity C is represented by the total 
number of edges in a graph, as shown in (5.13):
	
C
NE
=
	
(5.13)
where NE represents the total number of edges in a graph for all possible 
connections.
The antenna’s frequency-dependent complexity C(f  ) is the measure of the 
maximum number of edges in a particular configuration as defined in (5.14):
	
( )
( )
( )
(
)
1,max
i
i
NC f
C f
NE
f
=
=
	
(5.14)
where NC(f  ) represents the number of equivalent configurations at a frequency 
f and NEi(f  ) represents the number of edges at the configuration i for a fre­
quency f.
It can be deduced from these equations that the reliability of a reconfigu­
rable antenna is inversely proportional to its frequency-dependent complexity. 
This conclusion affects the design process of an antenna researcher that looks 
to maximize the reliability of the design while reducing its complexity [4, 82].
Reconfigurable antenna arrays can also benefit from the graph modeling 
analysis, especially to monitor their complexity, reliability, and switch failures. 

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
137
In general, graph modeling reconfigurable antennas and the reduction of their 
redundant switching components contributes to a more efficient cognitive ra­
dio communication platform where faster switching of modes, less failures, and 
erroneous attempts can be expected. Graph models facilitate the application of 
software control into antenna platforms; thus, they allow an efficient integra­
tion of the cognitive radio processor and swifter command transfer from the 
processor into the communication front end of the cognitive radio device.
5.9  Antenna Reconfiguration Using Mechanical Actuators
Mechanical reconfiguration techniques can also be used in place of switch­
ing components of any type. Antenna designers have used actuators, motors, 
stretchable materials, electroactive polymers, or shape memory alloys to recon­
figure antenna structures and achieve tuning in frequency, redirection of radia­
tion pattern, or change in polarization.
Electroactive polymers are proposed as reconfiguration tools to be imple­
mented on antennas for reconfiguration purposes. Electroactive polymers can 
provide electrically induced deformations and can be implemented in many 
applications that require contraction. Electroactive polymers suffer from cer­
tain issues especially in regards to reliability concerns; however, they also pres­
ent many advantages such as high power-to-volume ratios [83]. They are used 
for pattern reconfiguration by moving parasitic elements around radiating ele­
ments as discussed in [84]. 
There are two different types of electroactive polymer actuators: ionic 
and dielectric. Ionic actuators are activated by electrically induced displacement 
of ions or molecules inside the polymer. Dielectric actuators are activated by 
applying an external electric field to the elastomer sandwiched between two 
conductive electrodes. The ionic electroactive polymers actuators require less 
activation voltage in comparison with the dielectric ones that require activation 
fields in the order of kilovolts per millimeter. Electroactive polymers can be 
modeled as capacitors. They also can remain in their shape after activation for 
some limited amount of time. Their dielectric properties are similar to plastic 
with a relative permittivity between 3 and 4 and a loss tangent about 0.025. The 
type and shape of the actuators depend on the structure of the reconfigurable 
antenna where they are implemented [83].
A hemispherical dielectric elastomer actuator is used in [85] to reconfig­
ure the radiation pattern of a square ring patch antenna. The antenna structure 
shown in Figure 5.17(a) [85] is composed of a parasitic plane that is moved 
vertically in the middle of a ring patch antenna using a hemispherical dielec­
tric elastomer actuator. The parasitic plane moves below and above the ring 
patch antenna plane as highlighted in Figure 5.17(b, c). Such movement of 

138 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
Figure 5.17  (a) The representation of the antenna system in [85], (b) before and (c) after 
reconfiguration, and (d) the antenna radiation pattern reconfiguration as shown in [85]. (© 
2011, IET.)

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
139
the parasitic plane results in reconfiguration of the antenna’s radiation pattern. 
Figure 5.17(d) presents the change in the radiation pattern for different heights 
of the parasitic elements [85]. Mainly, the pattern cuts for the parasitic plate 
located below, above, and at the level of the ring patch antenna plane are shown 
[85].
Stretchable conductors can also be considered for the reconfiguration of 
various antenna systems as a cost-effective reconfiguration technique. Stretch­
able conductors can be realized on polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) substrate by 
a single or double copper layers that can be deposited around a commercially 
available conductive rubber. The material can be stretched up to 25% with 
22.5 times of larger conductivity as compared to the standalone conductive 
rubber [86].
A reconfigurable aperture coupled patch antenna is designed using the 
PDMS substrate as shown in Figure 5.18. The aperture coupled feeding tech­
nique is employed in order to isolate the feeding network from the PDMS 
substrate. The antenna is designed over a 2-mm-thick PDMS substrate, fed by 
1.2 × 15.05 mm2 slot centered at the bottom of the patch footprint. A 50Ω 
microstrip feedline is printed over a 0.75-mm-thick Rogers RO3003 substrate. 
The results of the triple-layer stretchable conductor show the best agreement 
with simulations. In fact, the lower conductivity of the single-layer and double-
layer stretchable conductors results in a significantly lower realized gain to that 
of a conventional copper-based patch antenna. The flexible antenna structure 
is constructed with the triple-layer stretchable conductors by patterning the 
ground plane and feedline on the flexible substrate as well. The frequency re­
configuration of the antenna can be achieved by stretching along its length [86].
Another mechanical reconfiguration mechanism that is based on the dis­
placement of liquid metal sections can be implemented for antenna reconfigu­
ration purposes. The moving parts of the antenna are liquid-based, which helps 
Figure 5.18  Stretchable reconfigurable antenna as discussed in [86]. (© 2013, IEEE.)

140 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
avoiding any possible failures of the mechanical actuators. Continuous flow 
pumping or electrowetting can be used to facilitate the displacement of the 
liquid elements. Such a technique is used in the design and development of a 
radiation pattern reconfigurable circular printed Yagi-Uda array as discussed in 
[87]. The antenna operates at a single frequency with a beam steering capability 
over a 360° range with fine tuning. The movable parasitic director and reflector 
elements can be implemented by resorting to liquid metal mercury. The para­
sitic elements are placed and rotated in a circular microfluidic channel around 
a driven element by means of a flow generated and controlled by a piezoelectric 
micropump [87].
Beam steering can also be achieved through bending parasitic elements 
that can be controlled by bending fluidic actuators as described in [88]. An­
other reconfiguration technique that is proposed in literature is based on shape 
memory alloy materials. Such materials can go back to their original configura­
tions by heating after they are deformed at another temperature. An axial mode 
pattern reconfigurable helix antenna is designed using this type of material. The 
antenna is composed of a copper helix that is positioned in parallel with a heli­
cal shape memory alloy spring. The copper helix and the spring are connected 
together at one end. The other end of the radiating helix is connected to the 
feed on the ground plane, while the other end of the shape memory alloy spring 
is fixed underneath the ground plane where it is connected to a DC control 
circuitry. When a DC is applied, the shape memory alloy spring shrinks and 
thus, the height and pitch angle of the radiating helix change. As a result, the 
radiation pattern of the helical antenna is altered [83].
5.10  Antenna Reconfiguration Using Material Change
Different materials such as liquid crystals or graphene have recently been pro­
posed in literature as novel reconfiguration means. Such materials constitute 
the substrates of antenna systems and, based on their changing properties, an­
tennas are able to reconfigure their functions.
Liquid crystal materials can be used as a tunable substrate in an antenna 
structure. Investigations of their properties revealed important characteristics 
that benefit the design and fabrication of reconfigurable antennas. One of the 
major properties of liquid crystals is their ability to change their dielectric prop­
erties with the use of DC bias voltage. Some drawbacks of liquid crystals can 
be the inherent loss that is larger at microwave frequencies as compared to 
optical frequencies. Another disadvantage of liquid crystals is their relatively 
long response time to any sudden change in the externally applied field. Often 
designers resort to liquid crystal substrates to design and implement delay lines, 
filters, and also patch antennas [89]. 

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
141
A liquid crystal material is composed of elongated rod-like molecules with 
electrical characteristics that vary based on an incident field. The orientation of 
a liquid crystal bulk can be altered by an external electric or magnetic field or 
by surface anchoring [90]. Thus, liquid crystals can be considered as tunable 
substrates. They possess meso-phases between solid and liquid states. 
The rod-like molecules that compose liquid crystals are generally oriented 
with their moments of inertia aligned along an axis called the director of the 
liquid crystal. In order to model and understand the liquid crystals’ behavior, 
one needs to numerically model the directors’ tilt angles under certain bias 
conditions. Such modeling contributes to the determination of the constitutive 
parameters of the liquid crystal material. The resulting material characteristics’ 
tensor can then be inserted into a full-wave electromagnetic solver to solve for 
the radiation characteristics of an antenna structure that is built on top of a liq­
uid crystal substrate. The tensor representing the permittivity of a liquid crystal 
can be expressed as in (5.15) [89].
	
(
)
0
,
0
0
0
xx
xy
yx
yy
zz
x y
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε




= 





	
(5.15)
The entries of the dielectric tensor that are dependent on the x and y co­
ordinates, are defined as in (5.16) [89]:
	
2
2
cos
sin
0.5
sin2
xx
yy
zz
xy
yx
ε
ε
ε
f
ε
ε
ε
f
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
f
⊥
⊥
⊥
=
+ ∆
=
+ ∆
=
=
=
∆
	
(5.16)
where ε
ε
ε⊥
∆=
−

 represents the dielectric anisotropy of the material, ε and 
ε⊥ are the bias field relative permittivities of the crystal in the directions paral­
lel and perpendicular to the director, respectively, and φ represents the angle 
between the biasing field and the director [89].
Liquid crystals can find a large application area in designing reconfigu­
rable antennas and arrays. For example, an antenna composed of: (1) a liquid 
crystal based upper reflector, (2) a static lower reflector, and (3) a circular wave­
guide feed horn at the center of the lower reflector is able to produce beam 
steering. The antenna structure is shown in Figure 5.19(a) [90]. The beam-
steering capability is achieved by using the continuous tuning of the liquid 

142 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
crystals. The variations of the properties of the liquid crystals with respect to 
the biasing fields allow the antenna reconfiguration. Thus, this antenna can be 
considered as a reconfigurable reflect array [90].
Liquid crystals have also been implemented in the design of polarization 
agile planar antennas. The antenna shown in Figure 5.19(b) [91] is composed 
Figure 5.19  (a) Liquid crystal-based reconfigurable reflectarray (© 2015, IEEE. From [90]), (b) 
the top layer of a liquid crystal polarization agile antenna [91], and (c) the corresponding feed­
ing network of the polarization agile antenna (© 2013, IEEE. From [91]).

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
143
of 2 × 2 dual fed microstrip patch array with two separate feeding networks. 
The state of the antenna can be continuously switched between dual linear and 
dual circularly polarization. The switching depends on the differential phase 
shift between the different antenna feedings. The feeding networks are imple­
mented by resorting to the inverted microstrip line topology with the liquid 
crystals material being a tunable dielectric as highlighted in Figure 5.19(c) [91]. 
The differential phase shift is obtained between the feeding networks by tun­
ing the liquid crystal material. The antenna designed is proposed to operate at 
13.75 GHz [91].
Reconfigurable antenna designers have recently extended their design fre­
quencies from typical microwave frequencies into the terahertz range. The in­
creasing interest in communication at terahertz frequencies is accompanied by 
the rise of graphene as an antenna design material. Graphene can support slow 
surface plasmonic modes at terahertz, and thus, it allows the miniaturization of 
various communication devices especially for sensing purposes. The behavior of 
the surface conductivity of graphene in the terahertz region enables the creation 
of plasmonic modes in radiating structures [92]. 
The efficiency, matching, miniaturization, and inherent reconfiguration 
capabilities constitute the major advantages behind using graphene in the de­
sign of antennas. The antenna structures take advantage of resonant plasmonic 
modes propagating on graphene sheets to implement actual radiators that are 
able to couple electromagnetic energy from small terahertz sources to free space 
[92]. 
Graphene can be considered as a two-dimensional material that is com­
posed of carbon atoms bonded in a hexagonal structure. The conductivity of 
graphene can be described as in (5.17) [93].
	
(
)
2
2
2ln
1
2
c
B
K T
e
B
c
B
q K T
j
e
K T
j
μ
μ
σ
π
ω
−






= −
+
+






−
Γ





	
(5.17)
where KB is the Boltzmann’s constant, h is the reduced Planck constant, qe is the 
electron charge, T is temperature, µc is graphene chemical potential, Γ = 1/(2τ) 
is the electron scattering rate, and τ is the electron relaxation time.
The tuning of graphene conductivity occurs by resorting to a transverse 
electric field through a DC-biased gating structure. If the graphene is not chem­
ically doped, the graphene carrier density can be directly changed by varying 
the applied DC bias field [93]. The antenna shown in Figure 5.20 is designed to 
operate at terahertz frequencies. The antenna is composed of a graphene sheet 
that is transferred onto a back metallized substrate and a set of polysilicon DC 
gating pads that are located beneath it. The antenna is designed to be a leaky 

144 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
wave antenna, and thus, in order to create the leaky mode, the graphene surface 
reactance is sinusoidally modulated through graphene’s field effect. The process 
is executed by applying the appropriate DC bias voltages to the different gating 
pads. The antenna exhibits beam-scanning capabilities since the pointing angle 
and the leakage rate can be dynamically controlled [93].
Another leaky wave antenna is reconfigured using graphene as described 
in [94]. In the proposed antenna, a graphene sheet is used for tuning the high 
impedance surface that acts as a ground plane for a leaky wave patch antenna. 
Tuning the graphene’s conductivity results in tuning the reflection phase of the 
high-impedance surface, which alters the resonant frequency. The tuning of the 
graphene can also result in flexible adjustment of the antenna’s pointing direc­
tion for a fixed frequency [94].
Antenna designers can utilize a wide range of reconfiguration techniques 
to achieve their goal. However, if the objective was to serve a cognitive radio 
platform, then many additional constraints must be added to the system de­
sign procedure. In the next section we present antenna systems that are specifi­
cally designed to be implemented onto a spectrum interweave cognitive radio 
platform.
Figure 5.20  The proposed graphene based reconfigurable leaky wave antenna. (© 2015, 
IEEE. From [93].)

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
145
5.11  Implementation of Reconfigurable Antennas in Spectrum 
Interweave Cognitive Radio
As described previously, numerous reconfiguration techniques exist and can 
be incorporated into a cognitive radio antenna system. In this section, four 
examples of antenna systems that are successfully designed for implementation 
on a cognitive radio platform are detailed. The four examples presented here do 
not cover all reconfiguration techniques but rather focus on the incorporation 
of PIN diodes, optical switches, and mechanical actuators as examples. The 
remaining reconfiguration techniques constitute also valid options.
An electrically reconfigurable antenna is mostly based on the integration 
of PIN diodes, varactors, or RF MEMS to achieve reconfiguration and to ac­
complish the role of a communicating antenna in a cognitive radio platform. 
An example of a cognitive radio antenna system based on electrical reconfigu­
ration techniques is the one shown in Figure 5.21(a) and discussed in [95]. 
The antenna achieves both frequency and radiation pattern reconfiguration by 
resorting to PIN diodes. The concept of this antenna is based on the ability to 
direct the radiated beam in various directions as well as to tune the antenna’s 
operating frequency in each particular direction, thus achieving cognition in 
multiple directions of the communication channel. The antenna consists of two 
printed monopoles that are tilted by an angle of 30° from the vertical axis. The 
antenna is stripline fed and has a partial ground. The feeding line has a tapered 
form with an opening width of 4 mm and an ending width of 2 mm. The an­
tenna is printed on Rogers Duroid 5880 substrate with a thickness of 1.6 mm 
and a dielectric constant of 2.2. Each monopole arm has an initial length and 
a constant width. Two PIN diode switches {S1, Left, S1, Right} are used to connect 
the two printed monopole arms to the antenna tapered feeding line structure. 
Because both arms have an equal length, they will produce the same reso­
nant frequency when either switch is activated. A second pair of switches {S2, 
Left, S2, Right} is also incorporated into the antenna structure as shown in Figure 
5.21(a). The function of these two additional switches is to increase the length 
of each arm of the monopole antenna. Once activated, the antenna shifts its 
operating frequency to a lower band. Biasing lines are used to activate the PIN 
diodes and the antenna is fed with a bias tee to provide the corresponding RF 
and DC signals for the full operation of the antenna. 
The tilting of the printed monopoles and the addition of a curve shaped 
nonradiating patch between the monopole arms allows the radiation pattern 
reconfiguration of the antenna system. The purpose of this nonradiating patch 
section is to direct the radiated pattern to the left or to the right when either 
the left or right side switches are activated. Thus, based on the status of the 
four integrated PIN diode switches, the proposed antenna tunes its operating 
frequency and radiation pattern accordingly.

146 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
A comparison between the simulated and measured antenna reflection 
coefficient is shown in Figure 5.21(b). This plot corresponds to the case when 
either {S1, Left} or {S1, Right} are on or when {S1, Left and S2, Left} or {S1, Right and 
S2, Right} are on. For the first case, the antenna’s center frequency is 3.24 GHz. 
In the second case, the antenna shifts its center frequency to 2.98 GHz. The 
change in the antenna’s operating frequency is related to the increase in the 
length of the monopole arms when activating the switches S2, Left or S2, Right.
Figure 5.21  (a) The frequency and radiation pattern reconfigurable antenna structure and 
(b) the change in the antenna operating frequency.

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
147
The four integrated PIN diodes allow the antenna to also reconfigure its 
radiation pattern. Therefore, the following three cases can be considered.
• Case 1: When S1, Left is on, the antenna’s radiated beam is directed 
to the left side. The maximum radiation occurs to the left side and at a 
tilted angle by following the tilt angle of the arm of the left monopole 
antenna.
• Case 2: When S1, Right is on, the same pattern is obtained as for case 
1, but the maximum beam is directed to the right side of the antenna.
• Case 3: When both switches {S1, Left, S1, Right} are on, the radiation 
pattern is the summation of the pattern radiated by the left and the right 
monopole arms. 
It is important to note that an identical pattern is obtained when the 
length of each arm of the monopole is increased by activating the second pair 
of switches.
The reconfigurable antenna is then placed in conjunction with a sens­
ing wideband antenna as shown in Figure 5.22(a). The wideband antenna is 
a printed monopole UWB antenna that is fed by a stripline. The wideband 
antenna senses the cognitive radio channel. The reflection coefficient of the 
sensing (Port 1) and the reconfigurable antenna (Port 2) are summarized in 
Figure 5.22(b). The coupling between the two antenna ports, shown in Figure 
5.22(b), is kept below −15 dB [96].
Optical switching techniques have also attracted a lot of attention in the 
integration of reconfigurable antennas for cognitive radio platforms. For ex­
ample, a UWB antenna and an optically reconfigurable antenna are placed next 
to each other to form a system that is proposed for spectrum interweave cogni­
tive radio applications. The antenna structure in its top and bottom views is 
shown in Figure 5.23(a, b) [35]. The cognitive radio antenna system is printed 
on a Taconic TLY substrate with a dielectric constant of 2.2 and a height of 1.6 
mm. Both the sensing and the reconfigurable antennas are fed by a stripline 
and have a partial ground plane. The UWB sensing antenna is a modified el­
liptical shaped monopole that covers the band from 3 GHz to 11 GHz. The 
reconfigurable antenna is a modified printed monopole. It has an elliptical slot 
that contains a triangular arm. The arm is connected to the main patch via a 
silicon switch (S1). At the end of the modified monopole, a hexagonal patch is 
attached to the main patch via a second silicon switch (S2). 
Laser diodes are integrated into the antenna structure through the bottom 
layer of the ground plane of the reconfigurable antenna as highlighted in Figure 
5.23(c). To couple the light emitted by the laser diodes correctly, two holes, 
each of a diameter of 1 mm, are drilled through the substrate. A copper piece is 

148 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
used to integrate the laser diode within the antenna structure. The copper piece 
includes two holes that encapsulate the two laser diodes.
The change in the reconfigurable antenna reflection coefficient is shown 
in Figure 5.24(a) where tuning is clear for different switch configurations. The 
coupling between the wideband and the reconfigurable antenna is summarized 
Figure 5.22  (a) The reconfigurable and the sensing antenna integrated together, and (b) the 
cognitive radio antenna reflection coefficient.

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
149
in Figure 5.24(b). A low coupling level is maintained throughout the whole 
bandwidth; thus ensuring that the two antennas are well isolated.
Actuator-based reconfigurable antennas have also been proposed for in­
tegration on spectrum interweave cognitive radio platforms as mechanically re­
configurable communication antenna systems. The antennas are reconfigured 
using actuators or stepper motors to achieve redistribution of the currents or 
radiating edges. 
Figure 5.23  The cognitive radio antenna system based on optical switching elements (a) top 
view, (b) bottom view (© 2012, IEEE. From [35]), and (c) the integration of the laser diode into 
the antenna structure.

150 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
Figure 5.24  (a) The reflection coefficient of the reconfigurable antenna for different switch 
configurations, and (b) the simulated and measured coupling for the case when both switches 
are off and when S1 is off and S2 is on [35] (© 2012, IEEE).

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
151
A cognitive radio antenna system that is composed of a wideband sens­
ing antenna and a reconfigurable antenna that has rotatable parts is presented 
in [97]. The antenna is printed on a 70 mm × 50 mm Rogers Duroid 5880 
substrate with a dielectric constant of 2.2 and a height of 1.6 mm. The corre­
sponding antenna structure is shown in Figure 5.25(a). The left module is the 
sensing antenna, while the right part is the mechanically reconfigurable section. 
The sensing antenna is a wideband printed monopole that has a partial 
ground and a tapered stripline feeding for better impedance match over the 
entire bandwidth of interest. This antenna is able to scan the spectrum from 
2 to 10 GHz with an omnidirectional pattern [97]. The frequency tuning of 
the reconfigurable antenna is achieved by physically altering the patch shape. A 
circular substrate section holding five different antenna patches is rotated via a 
stepper motor. A 50Ω stripline overflows the rotating section in order to guar­
antee contact between the rotating circular patch and the feeding line. At each 
rotation stage, the stripline excites a different patch and a different frequency is 
achieved. The rotation mechanism is described briefly in Figure 5.25(b) [97]. 
The five different patches cover collectively the whole band (2–10 GHz). 
Another mechanically reconfigurable cognitive radio antenna system re­
sorts to a change in the height and position of the communicating antenna’s 
ground plane to tune its operating frequency [45]. The moving ground plane is 
controlled by two actuators that allow its vertical movement as well as its titling 
position. The actuators are pulse width modulated with software control by an 
arduino board. The whole cognitive radio antenna system with its controlling 
circuit is shown in Figure 5.26(a). The antenna system is equipped with a paral­
lax 5-position switch. The switch is used to control and drive the ground plane’s 
movement through the arduino microcontroller. A guide rail links the moving 
ground to the actuators. This rail is made of nylon with a dielectric constant of 
3.2 and the hooks connecting the actuators to the rail are made of delrin mate­
rial with a dielectric constant of 3.7. An ultradense foam chassis with a dielec­
tric constant of around 1 is chosen to constitute the solid frame that encloses all 
these different system components. 
The sensing antenna is positioned out of the plane of the reconfigurable 
antenna at a height 4 cm below the surface of the communicating patch. A 
slit is cut into the hardened foam wall that is supporting the whole antenna 
system and the sensing antenna is optimally positioned inside the slit as shown 
in Figure 5.26(a). The position of the sensing antenna is optimized for better 
isolation with the communicating antenna. The isolation between the commu­
nicating and sensing antenna remains constant for any position of the ground 
plane [45].

152 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
The reconfigurable antenna structure top layer is a rectangular patch with 
two rectangular slots rotated at 90° from each other. The reconfigurable anten­
na’s ground plane is composed of three sections: two stationary ground planes 
and a moving ground plane where the actuators are attached. The frequency 
reconfiguration of the communicating antenna is shown in Figure 5.26(b) for 
different ground plane elevations (h) and tilt angles (α). Five different cases are 
plotted: Position 1: h = 0 mm, α = 0°, Position 2: h = −0.75 mm, α = 0°, Posi­
tion 3: h = −3 mm, α = 0°, Position 4: h = 0 mm, α = 7.5°, and Position 5: h 
= −1 mm, α = 5° [45].
Figure 5.25  (a) A cognitive radio antenna system based on a rotatable reconfigurable com­
municating antenna, and (b) the antenna reconfiguration process. (© 2011, IEEE. From [97].)

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
153
Figure 5.26  (a) The cognitive radio antenna system with a reconfigurable antenna based on 
a moving ground plane [45], and (b) the tuning of the communicating antenna reflection coef­
ficient. (© 2014, IET. From [45].)

154 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
5.12  Analysis of Reconfigurable Antennas in Cognitive Radio
One of the major advantages of using electrical switching components (RF 
MEMS, PIN diodes, and varactors) is their good isolation and low-loss prop­
erty. While RF MEMS represent an innovative switching mechanism, their re­
sponse is slower than PIN diodes and varactors, which have a response on the 
order of nanoseconds. Moreover, the activation of such switches requires bias­
ing lines that may negatively affect the antenna radiation pattern. 
Even though optical switches are less popular, they definitely present a 
reliable reconfiguration mechanism. The activation or deactivation of the pho­
toconductive switch by shining light from the laser diode does not produce har­
monics and intermodulation distortion due to their linear behavior. Moreover, 
these switches are integrated into the antenna structure without any complicat­
ed biasing lines, which eliminate unwanted interference, losses, and radiation 
pattern distortion. Despite all these advantages, optical switches exhibit lossy 
behavior and require a complex activation mechanism [3].
The advantages of using mechanical reconfiguration techniques lie in the 
fact that they do not require bias lines nor resort to laser diodes or optical fibers. 
However, their disadvantages include slow response, cost, size, power source 
requirements, and the complex integration of the reconfiguring element into 
the antenna structure [3]. 
The best reconfiguration technique to be used for cognitive radio is al­
ways the one that satisfies the constraints of the operating system. Mainly, any 
reconfiguration technique is a potential candidate for a cognitive radio system. 
However, the required speed of operation and the overall system requirements 
should be taken into consideration.
Reconfigurable antennas provide an agile and adaptive tool that can be 
implemented on a cognitive radio platform to communicate over white spaces. 
Such communication ability needs to be accompanied by software control and 
automation. In that sense, reconfigurable antennas need to present appropriate 
fast adaptation capability that is required to respond swiftly to the constraints 
imposed by the activity in a given channel. 
5.13  Discussion
In this chapter, several aspects of the design and implementation of reconfig­
urable antennas are discussed. The different classes and categories of recon­
figurable antennas are presented. It is shown that there are several methods to 
reconfigure an antenna structure, and each method possesses advantages and 
drawbacks. An antenna designer always chooses the method that satisfies the 
system’s constraints with disregard to any technique preference. A reconfigu­
rable antenna is designed with a sufficient and necessary number of switches or 

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
155
reconfiguration components. Redundancy must be optimized while preserving 
the reliability of reconfigurable antennas. Finally, it is important to note that 
reconfigurable antennas need to reconfigure their structures as swiftly as pos­
sible to be able to respond to the ever-changing spectrum that their systems 
are cognitively trying to tune into. In Chapter 6, the design and integration of 
reconfigurable filters into antenna structures are detailed.
References
[1]	 Bernhard, J. T., Reconfigurable Antennas, San Rafael, CA: Morgan and Claypool Publish­
ers, 2007.
[2]	 Costantine, J., et al., “Reconfiugrable Antennas: Design and Applications,” Proceedings of 
the IEEE, Vol. 103, No. 3, March 2015, pp. 424–437.
[3]	 Christodoulou, C. G., et al., “Reconfigurable Antennas for Wireless and Space Applica­
tions,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 100, No. 7, July 2012, pp. 2250–2261.
[4]	 Costantine, J., Y. Tawk, and C. G. Christodoulou, Design of Reconfigurable Antennas Using 
Graph Models, San Rafael, CA: Morgan and Claypool Publishers, 2013.
[5]	 Brown, E. R., “ RF–MEMS Switches for Reconfigurable Integrated Circuits,” IEEE Trans­
actions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 46, No. 11, Part 2, November 1998, pp. 
1868–1880.
[6]	 Yang, X. -S., et al., “Circularly Polarized Reconfigurable Crossed-Yagi Patch Antenna,” 
IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, Vol. 53, No. 5, October 2011, pp. 65–80.
[7]	 Zohur, A., et al., “ RF-MEMS Reconfigurable Two-Band Antenna,” IEEE Antennas and 
Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol. 12, January 2013, pp. 72–75.
[8]	 Huff, G. H., and J. T. Bernhard, “Integration of Packaged RF-MEMS Switches with Ra­
diation Pattern Reconfigurable Square Spiral Microstrip Antennas,” IEEE Transactions on 
Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 54, No. 2, February 2006, pp. 464–469.
[9]	 Cetiner, B. A., et al., “RF MEMS Integrated Frequency Reconfigurable Annular Slot An­
tenna,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 58, No. 3, March 2010, pp. 
626–632.
[10]	 Grau, A., et al., “A Dual Linearly Polarized MEMS-Reconfigurable Antenna for 
Narrowband MIMO Communication Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. 58, No. 1, January 2010, pp. 4–16.
[11]	 Nikolaou, S., et al., “UWB Elliptical Monopoles with a Reconfigurable Band Notch 
Using MEMS Switches Actuated Without Bias Lines,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. 57, No. 8, August 2009, pp. 2242–2251.
[12]	 Erdil, E., et al., “Frequency Tunable Patch Antenna Using RF-MEMS Technology,” IEEE 
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 55, No. 4, April 2007, pp. 1193–1196.
[13]	 Piazza, D., et al., “Experimental Analysis of Pattern and Polarization Reconfigurable 
Circular Patch Antennas for MIMO Antennas, ” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. 59, No. 5, February 2010, pp. 2352–2362.

156 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
[14]	 Quin, P., et al., “A Pattern Reconfigurable U-Slot Antenna and Its Applications in MIMO 
Systems, ” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 60, No. 2, Part 1, February 
2012, pp. 516–528.
[15]	 Hinsz, L., and B. D. Braaten, “ A Frequency Reconfigurable Transmitter Antenna with 
Autonomous Switching Capabilities,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas an Propagation, Vol. 
62, No. 7, July 2014, pp. 3809–3813.
[16]	 S. Shelley, et al., “FPGA-controlled switch-reconfigured antenna,” IEEE Antennas and 
Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol. 9, pp. 355–358, 2010
[17]	 Chen, S. -H., J. -S. Row, and K. -L. Wong, “Reconfigurable Square-Ring Patch Antenna 
with Pattern Diversity,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 55, No. 2, 
February 2007, pp. 472–475.
[18]	 Wu, S. J., and T. -G. Ma, “A Wideband Slotted Bow-Tie Antenna with Reconfigurable 
CPW to Slotline Transition for Pattern Diversity,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. 56, No. 2, February 2008, pp. 327–334.
[19]	 Kim, B., et al., “A Novel Single-Feed Circular Microstrip Antenna with Reconfigurable 
Polarization Capability,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 56, No. 3, 
March 2008, pp. 630–638.
[20]	 Chen, R. H., and J. S. Row, “Single-Fed Microstrip Patch Antenna with Switchable 
Polarization,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 56, No. 4, April 2008, 
pp. 922–926.
[21]	 Sarrazin, J., et al., “Pattern Reconfigurable Cubic Antenna,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas 
and Propagation, Vol. 57, No. 2, February 2009, pp. 310–317.
[22]	 Perruisseau-Carrier, J., P. Pardo-Carrera, and P. Miskovsky, “Modeling, Design and 
Characterization of a Very Wideband Slot Antenna with Reconfigurable Band Rejection,” 
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 58, No. 7, July 2010, pp. 2218–
2226.
[23]	 Qin, P. Y., et al., “Frequency Reconfigurable Quasi-Yagi Folded Dipole Antenna,” IEEE 
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 58, N o. 8, August 2010, pp. 2742–2747.
[24]	 Bai, Y., et al., “Design of Pattern Reconfigurable Antennas Based on a Two-Element 
Dipole Array Model,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 61, No. 9, 
September 2013, pp. 4867–4871.
[25]	 Onodera, S., et al., “Multi-Band Reconfigurable Antennas Embedded with Lumped-
Element Passive Components and Varactors,” Proceedings of the 2013 Asia-Pacific 
Microwave Conference, November 2013, pp. 137–139.
[26]	 Ramadan, A. H., et al., “Tunable Filter-Antennas for Cognitive Radio Applications,” 
Progress in Electromagnetics Research B, Vol. 57, 2014, pp. 253–265.
[27]	 Daviu, E. A., et al., “Active UWB Antenna with Tunable Band-Notched Behavior,” IET 
Electronics Letters, Vol. 43, No. 18, August 2007, pp. 959–960.
[28]	 Jeong, W. S., et al., “Tunable Band-Notched Ultra Wideband (UWB) Planar Monopole 
Antennas Using Varactor,” 38th European Microwave Conference, October 2008, pp. 266–
268.

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
157
[29]	 Jiang, H., et al., “Frequency Tunable Microstrip Patch Antenna Using Ferroelectric Thin 
Film Varactor,” IEEE National Aerospace & Electronics Conference, July 2009, pp. 248–
250.
[30]	 Oh, S. S., et al., “Frequency-Tunable Open Ring Microstrip Antenna Using Varactor,” 
International Conference on Electromagnetics in Advanced Applications, September 2010, 
pp. 624–626.
[31]	 Yang, S. L S., A. A. Kishk, and L. Kai-Fong, “ Frequency Reconfigurable U-Slot Microstrip 
Patch Antenna, ” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol. 7, January 2008, pp. 
127–129.
[32]	 Tawk, Y., J. Costantine, and C. G. Christodoulou, “A Varactor Based Reconfigurable 
Filtenna,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation, Vol. 11, July 2012, pp. 716–719.
[33]	 Jin, G. P., D. L. Zhang, and R. L. Li, “ Optically Controlled Reconfigurable Antenna For 
Cognitive Radio Applications,” IET Electronic Letters, Vol. 47, No. 17, August 2011, pp. 
948–950. 
[34]	 Tawk, Y., et al., “Optically Pumped Frequency Reconfigurable Antenna Design,” IEEE 
Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol. 9, March 2010, pp. 280–283.
[35]	 Tawk, Y., et al., “Demonstration of a Cognitive Radio Front End Using an Optically 
Pumped Reconfigurable Antenna System (OPRAS),” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. 60, No. 2, Part 2, February 2012, pp. 1075–1083.
[36]	 Sathi, V., N. Ehtheshami, and J. Nourinia, “ Optically Tuned Frequency Reconfigurable 
Microstrip Antenna,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol. 11, September 
2012, pp. 1018–1020.
[37]	 Pendharker, S., R. K. Shevgaonkar, and A. N. Chandorkar, “Optically Controlled 
Frequency-Reconfigurable Microstrip Antenna with Low Photoconductivity,” IEEE 
Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol. 13, January 2014, pp. 99–102.
[38]	 Patron, D., A. S. Daryoush, and K. R. Dandekar, “Optical Control of Reconfigurable 
Antennas and Application to a Novel Pattern-Reconfigurable Planar Design,” IEEE 
Journal of Lightwave Technology, Vol. 32, No. 20, October 2014, pp. 3394–3402.
[39]	 Jiang, Z., and F. Yang, “Reconfigurable Sensing Antennas Integrated with Thermal 
Switches for Wireless Temperature Monitoring,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation 
Letters, Vol. 12, August 2013, pp. 914–917.
[40]	 Perruisseau-Carrier, J., et al., “Resonant and Leaky-Wave Reconfigurable Antennas Based 
on Graphene Plasmonics,” Proceedings of the 2013 International Symposium on Antennas 
and Propagation, July 2013, pp. 136–137.
[41]	 Liu, L., and R. J. Langley, “Liquid Crystal Tunable Microstrip Patch Antenna,” IET 
Electronic Letters, Vol. 44, No. 20, September 2008, pp. 1179–1180.
[42]	 Rodrigo, D., L. Jofre and, B. Cetiner, “Circular Beam-Steering Reconfigurable Antenna 
with Liquid Metal Parasitics,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 60, 
No. 4, April 2012, pp. 1796–1802.
[43]	 Mehdipour, A., et al., “Mehcanically Reconfigurable Antennas Using an Anisotropic 
Carbon-Fibre Composite Ground,” IET Microwaves, Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 7, 
No. 13, October 2013, pp. 1055–1063.

158 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
[44]	 Liyakath, R. A., A. Takshi, and G. Mumcu, “Multilayer Stretchable Conductors on 
Polymer Substrates for Conformal And Reconfigurable Antennas,” IEEE Antennas and 
Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol. 12, May 2013, pp. 603–606.
[45]	 Costantine, J., et al., “Reconfigurable Antenna System with a Movable Ground Plane for 
Cognitive Radio,” IET Microwaves, Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 8, No. 11, August 
2014, pp. 858–863.
[46]	 Chen, Z. N., Handbook of Antenna Technologies, New York: Springer Reference, 2015.
[47]	 Rebeiz, G. M., RF MEMS: Theory, Design and Technology, New York: John Wiley & Sons, 
2004.
[48]	 Rebeiz, G. M., et al., “Tuning in to RF MEMS,” IEEE Microwave Magazine, Vol. 10, No. 
6, October 2009, pp. 55–72.
[49]	 Rebeiz, G. M., “RF MEMS Switches: Status of the Technology,” 12th International 
Conference on Transducers, Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems, Vol. 2, June 
2003, pp. 1726–1729.
[50]	 Goldsmith, C., et al., “Lifetime Characterization of Capacitive RF MEMS Switches,” 
IEEE MTT International microwave Symposium Digest, Vol. 1, May 2001, pp. 227–230.
[51]	 Hyun-Ho, Y., H. Zareie, and G. M. Rebeiz, “A High Power Stress-Gradient Resilient RF 
MEMS Capacitive Switch,” IEEE Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, Vol. 24, No. 
3, June 2015, pp. 599–607.
[52]	 Fall, M., et al., “High Capacitance Ratio RF MEMS Dielectric-Less Switched Capacitor,” 
European Microwave Conference, October 2013, pp. 1327–1330.
[53]	 Tamjo, I., et al., “A Robust RF MEMS Variable Capacitor with Piezoelectric and 
Electrostatic Actuation,” IEEE MTT-S International Symposium Digest, June 2006, pp. 
39–42.
[54]	 “Application Note for Test and Handling of SPST RF-MEMS Switches,” Radant 
MEMS 2014, http://www.radantmems.com/radantmems.data/library/test%20and%20
handling%20of%20rf%20mems%20switches.pdf.
[55]	 “White Paper: RF MEMS Switching: What You Need to Know. Structure and Usage of 
OMRON MEMS Switch 2SMES-01,” Omron elctronic components, 2013, http://www.
mouser.com/pdfdocs/Omron_RFMEMSSwitch_Whitepaper_finalsm-3.pdf.
[56]	 Rajagopalan, H., J. M. Kovitz, and Y. Rahmat-Samii, “MEMS Reconfigurable Optimized 
E-Shaped Patch Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. 62, No. 3, March 2014, pp. 1056–1064.
[57]	 Anagnostrou, D., et al., “Reconfigurable UWB Antenna with RF-MEMS for On-
Demand WLAN Rejection,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 62, No. 
2, February 2014, pp. 602–608.
[58]	 “Application Note: Design with PIN Diodes,” Skyworks Solutions Inc., 2012, http://
www.skyworksinc.com/uploads/documents/Design_With_PIN_Diodes_200312D.pdf.
[59]	 “Applications of PIN Diodes, Application Note 922,” Avago Technologies, 2010, http://
www.avagotech.com/docs/5965-8666E.

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
159
[60]	 Ge, L., and K. Luk, “A Band-Reconfigurable Antenna Based on Directed Dipole,” IEEE 
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 62, No. 1, January 2014, pp. 64–71.
[61]	 Rodrigo, D., B. A. Cetiner, and L. Jofre, “Frequency, Radiation Pattern And Polarization 
Reconfigurable Antenna Using a Parasitic Pixel Layer,” IEEE Transactions on Antennass and 
Propagtion, Vol. 62, No. 6, June 2014, pp. 3422–3427.
[62]	 Dahalan, F. D., et al., “Frequency-Reconfigurable Archimedean Spiral Antenna,” IEEE 
Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol. 12, November 2013, pp. 1504–1507.
[63]	 Rayno, J. T., and S. K. Sharma, “Wideband Frequency-Reconfigurable Spirograph Planar 
Monopole Antenna (SPMA) Operating in the UHF Band,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless 
Propagation letters, Vol. 11, December 2012, pp. 1537–1540.
[64]	 “Application Note Varactor Diodes,” Skyworks Solutions Inc. 2008, http://www.
skyworksinc.com/uploads/documents/200824A.pdf.
[65]	 Ge, L., and K. Luk, “Frequency-Reconfigurable Low-Profile Circular Monopolar Patch 
Antenna,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 62, No. 7, July 2014, pp. 
3443–3449.
[66]	 Erfani, E., et al., “Design and Implementation of an Integrated UWB/Reconfigurable-
Slot Antenna for Cognitive Radio Applications,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation 
Letters, Vol. 11, March 2012, pp. 77–80.
[67]	 Abubakar, T., and H. Ghafouri-Shiraz, “Frequency-Reconfigurable Monopole Antennas,” 
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 60, No. 1, January 2012, pp. 44–50.
[68]	 Yang-Shun, L., and J. Row, “Back to Back Microstrip Antenna Fed with Tunable Power 
Divider,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 63, No. 5, May 2015, pp. 
2348–2353.
[69]	 Cai, Y., Y. Jay Guo, and T. S. Bird, “A Frequency Reconfigurable Printed Yagi-Uda 
Dipole Antenna for Cognitive Radio Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. 60, No. 6, June 2012, pp. 2905–2912.
[70]	 Fu, Z., and F. Yang, “A Slotted Patch Antenna Integrated with Thermal Switch for High-
Sensitivity Temperature Monitoring,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol. 
14, April 2015, pp. 998–1001.
[71]	 Balanis, C. A., Advanced Engineering Electromagnetics, 2nd ed., New York: John Wiley & 
Sons, 2012.
[72]	 Muller, R. S., T. I. Kamins, and M. Chan, Device Electronics for Integrated Circuits, 3rd ed., 
New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2003.
[73]	 Lee, C. H., P. S. Mak, and A. P. DeFonzo, “Optical Control of Millimeter-Wave 
Propagation in Dielectric Waveguides,” IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics, Vol. 16, No. 
3, March 1980, pp. 277–288.
[74]	 Panagamuwa, C. J., A. Chauraya, and J. C. Vardaxoglou, “Frequency and Beam 
Reconfigurable Antenna Using Photo-Conducting Switches,” IEEE Transactions on 
Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 54, No. 2, February 2006, pp. 449–454.
[75]	 Zhao, D., et al., “Optically Controlled Reconfigurable Band-Notched UWB Antenna 
for Cognitive Radio Applications,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, Vol. 26, No. 21, 
November 2014, pp. 2173–2176.

160 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
[76]	 Patron, D., A. S. Daryoush, and K. R. Dandekar, “Optical Control of Reconfigurable 
Antennas and Application to a Novel Pattern Reconfigurable Planar Design,” IEEE 
Journal of Light wave Technology, Vol. 32, No. 20, October 2014, pp. 3394–3402.
[77]	 Cormen, T. H., et al., Introduction to Algorithms, 2nd ed., Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2001.
[78]	 Klavins, E., “Programmable Self Assembly,” IEEE Control Systems Magazine, Vol. 27, No. 
4, August 2007, pp. 43–56.
[79]	 Klavins, E., R. Ghrist, and D. Lipsky, “Graph Grammars for Self Assembling Robotic 
Systems,” IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, Vol. 5, April 2004, 
pp. 5293–5300.
[80]	 Napp, N., S. Burden, and E. Klavins, “The Statistical Dynamics of Programmed 
Assembly,” IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, May 2006, pp. 
1469–1476.
[81]	 Costantine, J., et al., “Reducing Redundancies in Reconfigurable Antenna Structures 
Using Graph Models,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 59, No. 3, 
March 2011, pp. 793–801.
[82]	 Costantine, J., et al., “Analyzing the Complexity and Reliability of Switch-Frequency-
Reconfigurable Antennas Using Graph Models,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. 60, No. 2, Part 2, February 2012, pp. 811–820.
[83]	 Mazlouman, S. J., et al., “A Review of Mechanically Reconfigurable Antennas Using 
Smart Material Actuators,” IEEE Proceedings of the 5th European Conference on Antennas 
and Propagation, April 2011, pp. 1076–1079.
[84]	 Mazlouman, S. J., et al., “Pattern Reconfiguration by Rotating Parasitic Structure Using 
Electro-Active Polymer (EAP) Actuator,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, 
Vol. 63, No. 3, March 2014, pp. 1046–1055.
[85]	 Mazlouman, S. J., et al., “Pattern Reconfigurable Square Ring Patch Antenna Actuated 
by Hemispherical Dielectric Elastomer,” IET Electronics Letters, Vol. 47, No. 3, February 
2011, pp. 164–165.
[86]	 Liyakath, R. A., A. Takshi, and G. Mumcu, “Multilayer Stretachable Conductors on 
Polymer Substrates for Conformal and Reconfigurable Antennas,” IEEE Antennas and 
Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol. 12, May 2013, pp. 603–606.
[87]	 Rodrigo, D., L. Jofre, and B. Cetiner, “Circular Beam Steering Reconfigurable Antenna 
with Liquid Metal Parasitics,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 60, 
No. 4, April 2012, pp. 1796–1802.
[88]	 Mazlouman, S. J., et al., “Beam Steering Antenna Using Bending Fluidic Actuators,” 
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 61, No. 10, October 2013, pp. 
5287–5290.
[89]	 Polycarpou, A. C., M. A. Christou, and N. C. Papanicolaou, “Tunable Patch Antenna 
Printed on a Biased Nematic Liquid Crystal Cell,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. 62, No. 10, October 2014, pp. 4980–4987.

 
Communicating Reconfigurable Antennas for Cognitive Radio 
161
[90]	 Bildik, S., et al., “Reconfigurable Folded Reflectarray Antenna Based upon Liquid Crystal 
Technology,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 63, No. 1, January 
2015, pp. 122–132.
[91]	 Karabey, O. H., et al., “Continuously Polarization Agile Antenna by Using Liquid Crystal 
Based Tunable Variable Delay Lines,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 
61, No. 1, January 2013, pp. 70–76.
[92]	 Tamagnone, M., et al., “High Impedance Frequency Agile THz Dipole Antennas Using 
Graphene,” 7th European Conference on Antennas and Propagation, April 2013, pp. 533–
536.
[93]	 Esquius-Morote, M., J. S. Gomez-Diaz, and J. Perruisseau-Carrier, “Sinusoidally 
Modulated Graphene Leaky-Wave Antenna for Electronic Beamscanning at THz,” IEEE 
Transactions on Terahertz Science and Technology, Vol. 4, No. 1, January 2014, pp. 116–
122.
[94]	 Wang, X. C., et al., “Reconfigurable Terahertz Leaky Wave Antenna Using Graphene 
Based High Impedance Surface,” IEEE Transactions on Nanotechnology, Vol. 14, No. 1, 
January 2015, pp. 62–69.
[95]	 Tawk, Y., C. G. Christodoulou, and J. Costantine, “Radiation and Frequency 
Reconfiguration Using Tilted Printed Monopoles,” IEEE International Symposium on 
Antennas and Propagation, July 2013, pp. 1442–1443.
[96]	 Tawk, Y., et al., “A Frequency And Radiation Pattern Reconfigurable Antenna System with 
Sensing Capabilities for Cognitive Radio,” IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and 
Propagation, July 2012, pp. 1–2.
[97]	 Tawk, Y., et al., “Implementation of a Cognitive Radio Front End Using Rotatable 
Controlled Reconfigurable Antennas,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, 
Vol. 59, No. 5, May 2011, pp. 1773–1778.


163
6
Reconfigurable Filtennas for Cognitive 
Radio
6.1  Introduction
A filtenna is the combination of a filter and a wideband antenna structure. In 
a filtenna, a filter is integrated within the feeding line of an antenna or on its 
ground plane. Once reconfiguration is added to the integrated filter, the result­
ing structure (reconfigurable filter and antenna) constitutes a reconfigurable 
filtenna. Such structures present an advantage in the sense that the antenna’s 
radiating surface is not disrupted by the reconfiguring components as in the 
case of a typical reconfigurable antenna. The major advantage is based on the 
fact that the biasing network of reconfiguring components is laid out inside the 
filter’s structure and not on the radiating patch. Such a topology guarantees a 
minimal interference to the filtenna radiation characteristics. 
Reconfigurable filtennas can also be considered as a subcategory of recon­
figurable antenna topologies. In this chapter, the focus is on their role as part of 
the whole cognitive radio platform. It is true that the operation of a cognitive 
radio device depends mainly on the performance of the integrated frequency 
reconfigurable antenna structure [1]. However, for different types of cognitive 
radio, different protocols apply. For example, in the interweave cognitive radio 
a frequency reconfigurable antenna is necessary to achieve a reliable communi­
cation for secondary users as well as sequential narrowband sensing. However, 
the underlay cognitive radio necessitates the implementation of wideband an­
tennas with reconfigurable notches to reduce the interference levels between 
primary and secondary users. Reconfigurable filtennas have been introduced 

164 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
as an alternative solution that provides the same functionality as reconfigurable 
antennas without incorporating any switching component or its respective bias­
ing network on the active radiating structure.
The integration of a reconfigurable filter within an antenna structure 
forces the antenna to follow the respective mode of operation of the reconfigu­
rable filter [1]. It also preserves the same radiation properties over the different 
operation frequency bands. In this chapter, the design guidelines of printed 
microwave filters are detailed first. Various examples of the different types of 
microwave filters are then discussed with emphasis on the implementation of 
reconfigurable filters. The integration of multiple reconfigurable filters within 
an antenna structure is then presented in order to achieve reconfigurable filten­
nas that are able to tune their operating or notch frequencies.
6.2  Design of Microwave Filters
Any filter design must take into consideration the passband behavior, the stop­
band amplitude and the phase characteristics simultaneously. The design pro­
cess has to be completed as a compromise between the insertion loss in the 
passband, the level of attenuation in the stopband, and the linearity of the phase 
response. The trade-off between these three characteristics enables the appropri­
ate functioning of a filter and prevents the signal’s distortion to occur within its 
operating bandwidth [2, 3]. 
A filter can be designed to exhibit one of the following responses: lowpass, 
bandpass, highpass, bandstop, and ultrawideband. The process of designing a 
filter of any kind starts with first setting up the filter’s desired specifications, and 
then a corresponding lowpass filter prototype is designed. The lowpass filter 
prototype can later be transformed into any other type of desired filters. The 
lowpass filter prototype is designed by normalizing the designed frequency and 
impedance. More specifically, a lowpass filter prototype is first designed to force 
the source resistance or conductance to be equal to 1 (g0 = 1) and the cutoff 
angular frequency to be unity (ωc =1 rad/sec) [4]. Figure 6.1 shows the ladder 
circuit for the lowpass filter prototype where the different components of the 
circuit alternate between series and shunt elements. Two different implemen­
tations can be achieved where the first one corresponds to the case when the 
filter begins with a shunt element while in the second implementation a series 
element becomes the first component of the lowpass filter prototype. Once 
the ladder circuit of the lowpass filter prototype is implemented, scaling the 
designed lowpass filter prototype to the desired frequency and impedance con­
stitutes the next step. The last step is focused on replacing the lumped-element 
components with the appropriate distributed circuit elements. 

 
Reconfigurable Filtennas for Cognitive Radio 
165
The implementation of the lowpass filter prototype depends on the power 
loss ratio (PLR), as defined in (6.1) [3]. 
	
( )
2
Power available from source
1
Power delivered to load
1
inc
LR
load
P
P
P
ω
=
=
=
−Γ
	
(6.1)
If a maximally flat response is desired, the power loss ratio must satisfy a 
Butterworth response as summarized in (6.2) [3].
	
2
2
1
N
LR
c
P
k
ω
ω


= +




	
(6.2)
where N is the order of the filter, k is a constant, and ωc is the cutoff frequency 
(1 rad/sec). In this case, the order of the filter is mainly determined by the 
specification of the attenuation level at a given frequency in the stopband of 
the filter. For example, a maximally flat lowpass filter of order N = 4 has the 
following values of the ladder circuit elements: g1 = 0.7654, g2 = 1.8478, g3 = 
1.8478, g4 = 0.7654 with the load resistance or conductance equal to g5 = 1 [5].
A Chebyshev polynomial for the power loss ratio, as defined in (6.3), 
produces a sharper cutoff but with ripples in the filter passband. In this case, 
the response in the passband is no longer flat but it has ripples of amplitude 
1+K 
 1652 [3].
	
2
2
1
LR
N
c
P
k T
ω
ω


= +



	
(6.3)
Figure 6.1  The two ladder circuits for the lowpass filter prototype.

166 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
where TN(x) is the Chebyshev polynomial of order N and N is the order of the 
filter. For a filter of this type, the stopband attenuation and the level of ripples 
within the passband are the key factors that are needed to identify the order of 
the filter. For example, the values of the ladder circuit elements for the equal-
ripple lowpass filter with an order N = 5 and a ripple level of 0.5 dB are as fol­
lows: g1 = 1.6703, g2 = 1.1926, g3 = 2.3661, g4 = 0.8419, and g5 = 1.7058 with 
the load resistance or conductance equal to g6 = 1 [5]. 
Lowpass filter prototypes can also be implemented to achieve maximally 
flat time delay or linear phase response in order to avoid signal distortion. For 
this type of filters, a sharp cutoff response with good phase linearity is not fea­
sible. This fact results in an inferior attenuation in comparison with the maxi­
mally flat and equal ripple lowpass filter responses. The analysis of this kind of 
filters is more complicated because the phase of the voltage transfer function is 
not as easily expressed as its amplitude. The corresponding phase of the filter’s 
transfer function should satisfy the equation summarized here [3]:
	
( )
2
1
N
c
A
p
ω
f ω
ω
ω






=
+








	
(6.4)
where p is a constant. The different values of the series and shunt elements of 
the ladder circuit can be derived for the maximally flat time delay for various 
order levels of the lowpass filter [5]. For example, for N = 3, the corresponding 
values of the ladder circuit elements are: g1 = 1.255, g2 = 0.5528, and g3=0.1922 
with the load resistance or conductance equal to g4 = 1 [5]. 
A trade-off analysis determines which lowpass filter response to adopt. 
For example, the maximally flat lowpass filter prototype achieves the flattest at­
tenuation rate in the passband but at a lower cutoff rate. As for the equal ripple 
filter response, it produces the sharpest cutoff but with the worst group delay. 
The linear phase maximally flat time delay lowpass prototype features very good 
delay characteristics but at the expense of the cutoff rate [3]. 
It is essential to achieve the appropriate transformation of the ladder 
circuit lowpass filter prototype to provide the required highpass, bandpass, or 
bandstop response of the designed microwave filter. The filter transformation 
should include both impedance and frequency scaling. The impedance scaling 
is achieved by multiplying all the elements of the lowpass filter prototype by 
the actual source resistance. As for the frequency scaling, Figure 6.2 summa­
rizes the transformation process of the lowpass filter prototype at ωc = 1 rad/
sec to the various types of a microwave filter. The lowpass filter prototype can 
be transformed to a filter with a (1) lowpass response at a specific frequency 
ωc, (2) highpass, (3) bandpass, or (4) bandstop response. The accomplishment 
of one of the four responses is mainly achieved by performing the appropriate 

 
Reconfigurable Filtennas for Cognitive Radio 
167
transformation of the inductive (Lk) and capacitive elements (CK) of the low­
pass filter ladder circuit prototype into new circuit elements denoted by Lk′ and 
CK′ [3].
To achieve a lowpass filter transformation, the series inductive elements 
Lk of the lowpass filter prototype with normalized source impedance and cutoff 
frequency are transformed to a series inductive element Lk′. However, to achieve 
a highpass filter transformation the series inductive elements Lk are transformed 
to shunt capacitive elements CK′. The corresponding values for the new ladder 
circuit elements are summarized in (6.5) [3]. For the bandpass transformation, 
each inductive element in the ladder circuit is replaced by a series combination 
of an inductor and a capacitor. As for the bandstop combination, the inductive 
elements are substituted by a shunt combination of an inductor and a capacitor 
[5].
The transformation of the shunt capacitor in the ladder circuit of the 
lowpass filter prototype is also summarized in (6.5) for the case of lowpass and 
highpass filters. For the bandpass and bandstop filters, the transformation is 
opposite to the case of the series inductive elements in the ladder circuit of the 
lowpass filter prototype. 
Figure 6.2  The transformation of a lowpass filter prototype into the different types of a mi­
crowave filter.

168 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
0
0
0
0
Lowpass
Lowpass Prototype
1
Highpass
Lowpass
Lowpass Prototype
Highpass
k
k
c
k
k
c
k
k
k
c
k
k
c
k
R L
L
L
C
R
L
C
C
R
C
R
L
C
ω
ω
ω
ω

=
′

⇒

=
′


=
′

⇒

=
′

	
(6.5)
In the design of a microwave filter, it is always preferred to use only series 
or shunt elements. This enables easier filter implementation with microwave 
structures [6]. One possible solution is to design appropriate impedance (K ) 
or admittance (J  ) inverters. As shown in Figure 6.3(a), a shunt capacitance is 
equivalent to a series inductance with an impedance inverter (K ) on each side 
while a series inductance corresponds to a shunt capacitance with an admit­
tance inverter (J  ) on both sides [5]. Each inverter can be considered as a two-
port network that if terminated by an impedance Z2 or admittance Y2 on one 
port, the corresponding impedance Z1 or admittance Y1 on the other port is 
given by (6.6) [5]:
	
2
2
1
1
2
2
;
K
J
Z
Y
Z
Y
=
=
	
(6.6)
Both inverters can be implemented using more than one technique. One 
practical realization using lumped elements is summarized in Figure 6.3(b, c). 
The negative elements of the inverters are usually absorbed into adjacent ele­
ments in practical filters. Other types of K and J inverters can be implemented 
as a combination of various lumped elements with transmission line sections of 
finite length [5]. It is important to note that all the different implementations 
of the K and J inverters should produce the same ABCD matrix that is shown 
in (6.7) [5].
	
Inverter
Inverter
0
1
0
1
0
0
K
J
jk
jk
A
B
C
D
jJ
jJ






±







= 







±









m
m
	
(6.7)

 
Reconfigurable Filtennas for Cognitive Radio 
169
By using the impedance inverter K, the first ladder circuit shown in Figure 
6.1 can be converted into the form shown in Figure 6.3(d). The various values 
of the admittance inverters can be calculated as summarized in (6.8) [5].The 
admittance inverter J can also be applied to the second ladder circuit shown in 
Figure 6.1. 
	
(
)1
0
1
1
0,1
,
1
,
1
0 1
1
1
1to
1
;
;
ai
a i
a
an
n
i i
n n
i
i
n
n
i
n
L L
Z L
L Z
K
K
K
g g
g g
g g
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
−
=
=
=
	 (6.8)
where Z0, Zn+1, and Lai are chosen arbitrarily.
Figure 6.3  (a) The impedance and admittance inverters, (b) the lumped elements represen­
tation of the impedance inverter, (c) the admittance inverter representation, and (d) the trans­
formation of the ladder circuit using the impedance inverter.

170 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
The inductive and capacitive elements at microwave frequencies are diffi­
cult to implement and their corresponding values are limited to a specific range. 
Thus, open-circuit and short-circuit transmission line stubs constitute the key 
solution in the implementation of microwave filters [3, 5]. Richard’s transfor­
mation enables the conversion of the lumped elements into transmission line 
sections [7]. Mainly, an inductor in the ladder circuit can be substituted with 
a stub of length βl  having a characteristic impedance L and terminated by a 
short-circuit. As for the capacitive element, it can be replaced with an open-cir­
cuited stub of length βl and characteristic impedance 1/C. The lengths of both 
stubs are chosen to be λ/8, where λ is the wavelength at the cutoff frequency ωc 
of the designed filter [7].
6.3  Printed Transmission Line Characteristics
The implementation of microwave filters is highly dependent on the design of 
the appropriate transmission lines such as microstrip, coupled microstrip and 
coplanar waveguide (CPW) sections [6–11]. Figure 6.4 shows the physical con­
figuration of these three types of transmission lines. The microstrip transmission 
line consists of a conducting strip of width W and thickness t on the top of a 
dielectric substrate that has a thickness h and a relative dielectric constant εr. In 
a microstrip transmission line, some of the electric field lines lie in the dielectric 
region between the strip conductor and the ground plane while the remaining 
Figure 6.4  The various printed transmission lines.

 
Reconfigurable Filtennas for Cognitive Radio 
171
parts of the field are concentrated in the air region above the substrate [8]. This 
physical behavior allows the microstrip lines to support only quasi-TEM wave 
propagation since the phase-matching condition at the boundary between the 
dielectric substrate and the air medium is impossible to achieve. In the design 
process of a microstrip line, an effective dielectric constant (εreff) is considered 
in order to account for the existence of the fields in both the dielectric and 
air regions. Such effective dielectric constant depends mainly on the dielectric 
constant of the substrate, the substrate thickness, the conductor width, and 
the design operating frequency. The characteristic impedance of any microstrip 
transmission line takes into effect the physical dimensions of the structure in ad­
dition to the computed effective dielectric constant as summarized in (6.9) [3].
	
0
60
8
ln
for 
1
4
120
for 
1
1.393
0.667ln
1.444
reff
reff
h
W
W
W
h
h
Z
W
h
W
W
h
h
ε
π
ε



+
≤






= 
≥






+
+
+










	 (6.9)
Coupled transmission lines consist of a pair of microstrip lines separated 
by a distance d. Each microstrip line has a width W and printed on the top layer 
of a substrate of thickness h. This type of transmission lines supports two quasi-
TEM modes (even and odd modes) that are excited simultaneously. Each mode 
propagates with a different velocity, which means that both the even and odd 
modes experience different permittivities [9]. Thus, a characteristic impedance 
(Z0e, Z0o) and an effective dielectric constant (
,
e
o
reff
reff
ε
ε
) should be identified for 
each mode as shown in (6.10) [9]. It is essential to note that for the even-mode 
excitation, the two microstrip lines carry charges with the same polarity, while 
for the odd mode the two microstrip lines carry charges of opposite polarities 
[5].
	
(
)
(
)
1
0
1
0
;
;
a
e
e
e
e
e
reff
a
e
a
o
o
o
o
o
reff
a
o
C
Z
c C C
C
C
Z
c C C
C
ε
ε
−
−
=
=
=
=
	
(6.10)
where Ce and Co are the even and odd mode capacitances. They mainly depend 
on the parallel-plate capacitance between each microstrip line and the ground 
plane as well as the fringe capacitance for each microstrip line alone. For the 
even mode, the presence of the other transmission line is also taken into account 

172 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
while calculating Ce, which naturally depends also on the fringe capacitance of a 
single line. For the odd mode, the air and dielectric regions that occupy the gap 
between the two microstrip lines are major factors in the calculation of Co. As 
for 
 and 
,
a
a
e
o
C
C
 they correspond to the even-mode and odd-mode capacitances 
by considering air as the dielectric media [9]. 
Microwave filters also rely on the design of coplanar waveguide (CPW) 
transmission lines. A microwave coplanar waveguide transmission line consists 
of a thin slot in the ground plane on one side of the dielectric substrate. A metal 
strip of width W is centered within the slot and separated by a distance d from 
each side of the ground plane. In a CPW transmission line, the ground plane lies 
on the same plane as the feedline, while the other side of the substrate does not 
include any metallic plane. This offers huge advantage since no via holes ground­
ing is required when connecting a shunt active or passive element. This type of 
transmission lines support even and odd quasi-TEM wave propagation [10].
6.4  Bandpass Filter Designs
Microwave bandpass filters are based on passive elements that act as series or 
shunt resonant circuits. The most commonly used bandpass filters are based 
on parallel-coupled half-wavelength resonators, combline structures or open-
circuited/short-circuited transmission line stubs. 
Figure 6.5(a) shows the structure of a parallel-coupled bandpass filter. 
Each resonator consists of a half-wavelength printed microstrip transmission 
line. The various resonators are placed parallel to each other and are separated 
by a given distance Si. Such physical arrangement provides large coupling be­
tween the filter transmission lines, which allows the filter to produce a wide 
operating bandwidth. The design equations for this type of bandpass filter are 
summarized in (6.11) [4].
	
01
0
0 1
,
1
0
1
,
1
0
1
2
1
1 to 
1
2
2
j j
j
j
n n
n
n
J
FBW
Y
g g
J
FBW
j
n
Y
g g
J
FBW
Y
g g
π
π
π
+
+
+
+
=
=
=
−
=
	
(6.11)
where g0, g1 … gn are the elements values of the lowpass filter prototype with 
a unity source conductance and cutoff frequency. FBW is the fractional band­

 
Reconfigurable Filtennas for Cognitive Radio 
173
width of the bandpass filter, Ji,i+1 are the characteristic admittance of the J in­
verters, and Y0 is the characteristic admittance of the input and output termi­
nating lines. The J inverters set up the even-mode and odd-mode characteristic 
impedance of each coupled microstrip line resonator. The resultant characteris­
tic impedance can be used to calculate the width (Wi) of each coupled line and 
the corresponding distance of separation (Si). The parallel-coupled transmission 
Figure 6.5  (a) The parallel coupled bandpass filter, (b) the combline filter structure, and (c) 
the short-circuit stub bandpass filter.

174 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
line resonators can be folded into a “U” shape in order to produce a more com­
pact bandpass filter. These types of filters are called hairpin-line resonators [11]. 
Their design are executed using full-wave EM simulators in order to take into 
account the coupling between the different U-shaped resonators as well as the 
coupling between the two arms of each resonator alone [5].
The combline filter shown in Figure 6.5(b) constitutes another type of 
microwave bandpass filters. It mainly consists of an array of coupled resona­
tors with an electrical length θi. Each resonator line is terminated by a lumped 
capacitance Ci from one end and short-circuited at the other end. The lumped 
capacitor allows the resonator lines to be shorter than λg/4 at the resonant fre­
quency and thus ensures that the filter can produce a bandpass response [5]. 
The lumped capacitors also allow the control of the length of each resonator 
line. The larger the values of the various capacitances, the shorter the resonator 
lines are and thus a more compact filter structure can be implemented. The 
input and output transmission lines of the filter are not considered resonators 
and both have a characteristic admittance Y0. The lumped capacitances of the 
bandpass filter can be calculated as summarized in (6.12) [4].
	
0
0
cot
ai
i
A
a
Y
C
Y
Y
θ
ω


=




	
(6.12)
where Yai is the admittance of the resonator line i with the adjacent lines i – 1 
and i + 1 being grounded and ω0 is the angular frequency at the mid-band of 
the bandpass filter.
Series or parallel resonant circuits can also be implemented using open-
circuited or short-circuited transmission stubs. Figure 6.5(c) shows the physical 
structure of a bandpass filter that is comprised of shunt short-circuited λg/4 
long stubs. The stubs are separated by microstrip lines that are λg/4 long where 
λg is the guide wavelength at the mid-band frequency [4]. The short-circuited 
stubs can also be connected to each other with series capacitors. The various 
stubs of this type of bandpass filters can be rendered very compact by resorting 
to coaxial lines with a very high dielectric constant and low loss [12]. The band­
pass feature can also be achieved by replacing the λg/4 short-circuited stubs with 
λg/2 open-circuited ones. The new filter mainly produces the same passband 
behavior but with different stopband characteristics [5]. 
6.5  Bandstop Filter Designs
Bandstop microwave filters can also be implemented using either series or shunt 
resonant elements. For example, a printed microstrip transmission line can be 
electrically coupled to a λg/2 resonator in order to produce a bandstop response. 

 
Reconfigurable Filtennas for Cognitive Radio 
175
Each resonator is terminated by an open-circuit. The corresponding physical 
structure of the bandstop filter is summarized in Figure 6.6(a). The different 
resonator elements are separated by λg/4 where λg corresponds to the mid-band 
frequency of the filter stopband bandwidth [5]. The stopband feature can 
also be achieved by replacing the open-circuit resonators by λg/4 short-circuit 
resonators. 
A hairpin shape resonator, separated by a distance of λg/4, can also be 
magnetically coupled to a microstrip transmission line in order to produce a 
bandstop response. The filter structure is highlighted in Figure 6.6(b). L-shape 
resonators can be used to generate a bandstop response. For this case, each 
resonator is both electrically and magnetically coupled to the main transmis­
sion line. The length of each L-shape resonator corresponds to λg/2 [5]. Wide­
band bandstop filters can be realized by using shunt λg/4 open-circuited stubs. 
Similar to the bandpass filter, the distance of separation between the elements 
should be taken to be λg/4 at the mid-stopband frequency. The filtering charac­
teristic of the bandstop filter highly depends on the characteristic impedance of 
the shunt stubs and the connecting transmission lines as well as the source and 
load impedances [5].
Bandstop filters are also designed to serve as RF chokes in order to allow 
the DC signal into RF components without affecting the RF behavior of the 
overall structure. Such structures are essential during the design of reconfigu­
rable antennas in order to supply the appropriate DC activating signal to the 
switching elements. A quarter-wavelength transmission line terminated by a 
radial stub is used to short out the RF transmission [5]. The corresponding 
Figure 6.6  The bandstop filter using (a) open-circuit stubs and (b) U-shaped stubs.

176 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
filter structure is highlighted in Figure 6.7. The outer radius r0 of the radial stub 
identifies the attenuation pole frequency, while the angle α sets up the stopband 
bandwidth [13]. 
6.6  Ultrawideband Filter Designs
Microwave filters can also be designed to provide the ultrawideband passband 
response. These types of filters are usually implemented using more than one 
technique [14–18]. Short-circuit quarter-wavelength resonating stubs, capaci­
tive loaded transmission line resonators, multimode resonators with stepped 
impedance, quasi-lumped elements, and a cascade of highpass/bandpass and 
lowpass/bandstop filters are different techniques that can be adopted during the 
design process of an ultrawideband bandpass filter. All these techniques must 
guarantee that the designed filter features wide fractional bandwidth of up to 
100%, low insertion loss, and flat group delay [5].
An example of an ultrawideband bandpass filter is presented in Figure 
6.8(a, b) [17]. It consists of three layers that are implemented using a multilayer 
organic liquid crystal polymer. Five capacitive loaded transmission line resona­
tors constitute the top [Figure 6.8(a)] and middle [Figure 6.8(b)] layers of the 
ultrawideband filter. The filter’s top layer also includes 50Ω transmission lines 
that constitute the input and output ports. The thickness between the top and 
middle layers is taken to be 50 μm, which ensures a tight coupling between the 
resonators’ elements. The overlap between these elements is carefully adjusted 
in order to achieve the desired coupling level. A bigger overlap produces a tight­
er coupling, which guarantees a wider operating bandwidth for the designed 
ultrawideband filter. The simulated and measured filter’s S-parameters as well as 
the U.S. Federal Communications Commission (FCC)-defined ultrawideband 
indoor limit are shown in Figure 6.8(c). The measured 3-dB bandwidth is from 
3.9 GHz with an insertion loss of 0.58 dB at the center frequency [17]. The 
presented filter also produces good stopband behavior where the rejection level 
is better than 35 dB from 11 GHz to 18 GHz. 
Figure 6.7  The bandstop filter using radial stub.

 
Reconfigurable Filtennas for Cognitive Radio 
177
Short-circuited stubs can also be used to implement bandpass ultra­
wideband filters [15]. Figure 6.8(d) shows the structure of an ultrawideband 
filter utilizing four short-circuited stubs connected by transmission lines. A 
Figure 6.8   (a) The top layer of the ultrawideband (UWB) filer, (b) its middle layer, (c) the cor­
responding S-parameters and the group delay, (d) the UWB filter using short-circuited stubs, 
and (e) the filter’s S-parameters of the filter with stubs. (© 2014, IEEE. From [15]. © 2009, IEEE. 
From [17].)

178 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
cross-coupling between the first and last stub is realized in order to achieve a 
compact filter structure while at the same time ensuring an excellent selectiv­
ity without increasing the number of the stubs [15]. The coupling between 
the stubs sets the position of the transmission zeros for the designed filter. The 
different transmission lines and short-circuit stubs are also folded in order to 
produce a miniaturized filter structure where the overall physical dimension 
of the ultrawideband filter is 19 mm × 14 mm. The comparison between the 
Figure 6.8   (continued)

 
Reconfigurable Filtennas for Cognitive Radio 
179
simulated and measured S-parameters of the filter is shown in Figure 6.8(e). 
The measured filter’s response produces a 7-GHz bandwidth with two trans­
mission zeros at 2.3 GHz and 11.1 GHz. An insertion loss below 3 dB is ob­
tained within the passband of the presented filter. 
6.7  Reconfigurable Filters
The need for tunable and reconfigurable filters is necessary to the operation of 
a cognitive radio device. Such filters should be designed to support all the vari­
ous wireless applications that span over different frequency bands. The design 
process of reconfigurable filters is challenging because one should take into ac­
count the filter’s insertion loss at the various reconfigurable frequency bands in 
addition to the tuning range and speed. The power consumption, linearity, and 
power-handling capabilities are additional parameters that affect the operation 
of tunable and reconfigurable filters [19–22].
The operation of a microwave filter can be changed by integrating switch­
ing components such as radio frequency microelectromechanical systems (RF 
MEMS), PIN diodes, or varactors within the filter’s physical structure. The 
selection of the appropriate switching component mainly depends on the fil­
ter’s design specification as well as the tuning range. For example, RF MEMS 
switches provide excellent tuning performance because of their high-quality fac­
tors. However, PIN diodes feature low-tuning voltage and high-tuning range. 
The major drawbacks of using PIN diodes and varactors are their nonlinear 
performance at high RF power and their low-quality factor [19].
Various reconfigurable filters have been implemented using different 
reconfiguration techniques [23–30]. For example, a dual-band bandpass fil­
ter with tunable lower passband and fixed upper passband is shown in Figure 
6.9(a) [23]. The filter is printed on a substrate with a dielectric constant of 
3.38, a thickness of 0.81 mm, and a loss tangent of 0.0027. The filter’s structure 
is composed of multistub resonators. The overall dimension of the filter is 14.8 
mm × 13.5 mm. The stubs are loaded by two varactors in order to control the 
two lower-frequency resonance modes of the filter. Hook-shape lines are used 
to feed the resonators and also to create transmission zeros. For the filter’s upper 
passband, the center frequency is mainly determined by L3 + L7 + L8, while the 
bandwidth is controlled by the coupling strength between the feeding lines and 
the resonators as well as the coupling between the inner resonator with length 
L7 and the gap G4. For the lower passband, the center frequency is controlled 
by L3 + L7 + L8, L5, and L6 while the bandwidth is controlled by tuning L6. Two 
varactors are used to replace parts of the transmission line L4, thus allowing the 
change in the lower passband of the filter by supplying different biasing voltages 
[23]. The comparison between the simulated and measured insertion loss of the 

180 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
filter is shown in Figure 6.9(b). For the upper passband, the center frequency is 
at 3.5 GHz with a minimum insertion loss of 0.9 dB and two transmission ze­
ros at 3.1 GHz and 4.4 GHz. The lower passband changes its center frequency 
Figure 6.9   (a) The dual bandpass filter topology, and (b) the change in the filter insertion 
loss. (© 2014, IEEE. From [23].)

 
Reconfigurable Filtennas for Cognitive Radio 
181
from 1.75 GHz to 2.35 GHz. This is achieved by varying the varactor’s biasing 
voltage from 1V to 4V. The insertion loss for the different lower passbands 
ranges between 2.2 dB and 2.6 dB. It is higher than the upper passband due 
to the loss of the integrated varactors. The bandwidth of each passband is kept 
nearly constant with a value of 7.5% [23].
An example of a tunable bandpass to bandstop filter is shown in Figure 
6.10(a) [30]. The filter can switch its operation from bandpass to bandstop by 
changing the status of the RF MEMS switch SW1 from the off state to the on 
state. However, the tuning of the center frequency within the filter’s passband 
or stopband is achieved by supplying different biasing voltages to the integrated 
varactor diodes. The filter structure is composed of coupled lines with asym­
metrical loading. When the switch SW1 is open and the bias voltage for D01 and 
D23 is less than 1.5V, a bandpass response is realized. The center frequency of 
the filter changes from 0.78 GHz to 1.1 GHz by supplying a bias voltage from 
0V to 12 V for the four varactor diodes (D1–D4). The change in the measured 
insertion loss of the filter is shown in Figure 6.10(b). The activation of the 
switch SW1 and the supply of a bias voltage greater than 3.5V for D01 and D23 
allow the filter to achieve a bandstop response. The bandstop center frequency 
can be tuned from 0.77 GHz to 1.1 GHz by changing the biasing voltage of 
the integrated varactors. The change in the filter’s insertion loss is highlighted 
in Figure 6.10(c) where a rejection level higher than 30 dB is achieved [30]. 
A microwave filter can also be designed to tune its operating passband 
or stopband bandwidth in addition to changing its center frequency [31–33]. 
For example, the filter shown in Figure 6.11(a) achieves a continuous tuning 
for both the center frequency and bandwidth within the 470–862-MHz range 
[33]. The filter structure consists of a third-order combline configuration. The 
passband tuning is achieved by integrating two variable coupling reducers be­
tween the filter combline resonators. The coupling reducers are made out of 
line segments terminated by a variable capacitor that provides a 7–40-pF ca­
pacitance variation for a bias voltage from 0V to 20V. The coupling reduc­
ers operate as detuned resonators to control the operating bandwidth of each 
passband of the filter by varying the inter-resonator couplings. This is achieved 
by changing the capacitance value of the variable capacitor in the coupling 
reducers. At the end of the three resonator lines, a variable reactance is con­
nected to tune the center frequency of the filter. These reactance elements are 
made of high-Q mechanical variable capacitors with a capacitance that varies 
from 1 pF to 20 pF. Two coupled lines that operate as an impedance inverter 
network constitute the input and output of the filter. The comparison between 
the simulated and measured bandwidth tuning for the lower part of the filter 
passband is shown in Figure 6.11(b). This behavior is obtained by varying the 
biasing voltage of the coupling reducer’s varactors. It is essential to note that as 
the operating bandwidth of the filter is reduced, the transmission losses within 

182 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
Figure 6.10   (a) A tunable bandpass to bandstop filter, (b) the tunability in the bandpass re­
sponse, and (c) the tunability the bandstop response. (© 2014, IEEE. From [30].)

 
Reconfigurable Filtennas for Cognitive Radio 
183
the filter’s passband become more significant. This is mainly influenced by the 
increase in the mismatch at the filter ports and can be counteracted by the 
design of variable coupling reducers at the input and output of the filter [33].
Figure 6.11  (a) A tunable combline filter structure, and (b) the change in the filter’s operating 
bandwidth. (© 2005, IEEE. From [33].)

184 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
The tuning of the filter’s notch frequency is also an important feature 
especially for cognitive radio devices adopting the underlay mode of opera­
tion. Various designs are implemented that achieve such feature [34–37]. The 
layout of a four-pole ultrawideband bandpass filter with a reconfigurable notch 
bands using terminated cross-shaped resonators is shown in Figure 6.12(a) [34]. 
The capacitive terminations of the presented filter control the reconfigurable 
notches. It is found that for fixed lc3 and lc4, the notch band is located at the 
highest frequency when a small terminating capacitance is used. The notch 
frequency band decreases from 7.9 GHz to 5.8 GHz as the capacitance value 
Figure 6.12   (a) UWB bandpass filter with reconfigurable notch bands, and (b) the change in 
the filter’s notch bands. (© 2014, IEEE. From [34].)

 
Reconfigurable Filtennas for Cognitive Radio 
185
of CL1 increases from 0.1 pF to 1.9 pF while CL2 also increases from 0.1 pF to 
0.3 pF. The change in the notch bands for various terminating capacitances is 
shown in Figure 6.12(b), which corresponds to the case where CL1 = 0.3, 0.6, 
and 0.8 pF while CL2 is taken to be 0.1 pF. Based on the these values for the 
terminating capacitances, the filter is able to change its notch band from 4.6 
GHz to 6.5 GHz while the bandwidth is kept around 0.4 GHz for each notch 
band. The passband response of the filter spans from 4 GHz to 9.6 GHz with 
two zeros located at 2.9 GHz and 11.3 GHz [34].
6.8  Reconfigurable Filtennas
A wideband antenna structure can change its operating or notch frequency by 
integrating either a reconfigurable bandpass or bandstop filter within its feeding 
network or ground plane [38–43]. The combination of the reconfigurable filter 
and the wideband antenna is named reconfigurable filtenna [38]. Such antenna 
reconfiguration technique has several advantages over traditional reconfigura­
tion methods. The biasing lines no longer reside on the radiating surface of the 
antenna while the antenna is able to maintain the same radiation characteris­
tics over the various frequency bands. This is mainly due to the fact that the 
antenna surface current distributions are not disrupted with the change in the 
filter operating bandwidth. 
An example of a filtenna structure that consists of a dual sided Vivaldi 
antenna and a reconfigurable bandpass filter is shown in Figure 6.13(a). The 
Vivaldi antenna is usually a wideband structure; however with the integration 
of a bandpass filter within the feeding line the corresponding antenna response 
is changed to narrowband. A detailed structure of the integrated filter is sum­
marized in Figure 6.13(b). The total dimensions of the filter are 30 × 30 mm2. 
The filter is made of three coupled microstrip lines where a hexagonal slot is 
etched in the middle section. A varactor is incorporated inside the hexagonal 
slot to achieve a variable capacitance connection between the two terminals of 
the middle section transmission line. Capacitance tuning is achieved by sup­
plying different biasing voltage to the varactor. The width of the gaps between 
the coupled microstrip lines ensures a bandpass response in the operation of the 
filter. The supply of the appropriate biasing voltage is accomplished through 
two biasing lines. The filter tunes its operation from 6.16 GHz to 6.6 GHz 
with an operating bandwidth of 20 MHz for each biasing voltage. The recon­
figurable filter is integrated in the top layer of the dual-sided Vivaldi antenna. 
The top layer constitutes the first side of the filtenna radiating surface as well as 
the feeding line where the reconfigurable filter is located. On the bottom layer 
of the filtenna resides the ground plane of the filter connected to the second 
part of the Vivaldi antenna. The inner and outer contours for the two sides 

186 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
Figure 6.13  (a) The filtenna structure with the integrated bandpass filter, (b) the physical 
structure of the filter, and (c) the change in the measured antenna reflection coefficient. (© 
2012, IEEE. From [38].)

 
Reconfigurable Filtennas for Cognitive Radio 
187
of the filtenna structure are based on an exponential function. Figure 6.13(c) 
shows the change in the measured reflection coefficient of the filtenna structure 
for various biasing voltages. From this plot, it is obvious that the variation in 
the biasing voltage allows the varactor to change its capacitance, and thus, as 
a response, the filtenna tunes its operating bandwidth based on the mode of 
operation of the integrated bandpass filter [38]. 
A bandstop filter can also be integrated with a wideband antenna to 
achieve reconfigurabilty in the filtenna’s notch frequency. An example of a 
bandstop filter that changes its bandstop bandwidth is shown in Figure 6.14(a) 
[41]. The filter consists of a 50Ω microstrip transmission line in the top layer 
and a full ground plane in the bottom layer. Two U-slots are removed from the 
filter’s feeding line and the ground plane. The inner length of the U-slot cor­
responds approximately to a quarter-wavelength resonator. This length controls 
the filter’s notch frequency. The U-slot in the filter’s feeding line has an outer 
length of 20.425 mm and an inner length of 15.475 mm. This slot enables the 
filter to produce a notch at 3.6 GHz. For the U-slot in the ground plane, it has 
the same outer length as the one in the feeding line; however, its inner length 
is shorter (8.175 mm). This slot ensures that the filter produces a second band­
stop response at a higher center frequency. The inner length of the U-slot in the 
ground plane is changed through the use of a PIN diode switch. The switch al­
lows the increase of the inner length of the U-slot by 2 mm and thus allows the 
filter to change the center frequency of the second bandstop bandwidth. The 
integration of this filter with a wideband antenna is shown in Figure 6.14(b). 
The change in the antenna’s simulated and measured reflection coefficient for 
the two modes of operation of the PIN diode is summarized in Figure 6.14(c). 
The filtenna structure is able to cover a wide bandwidth from 2 GHz to 10 
GHz. Also, a dual notch frequency is achieved due to the integration of the 
bandstop filter. The upper notch frequency is changed based on the status of 
the PIN diode switch. The lower notch frequency is not changed since the inner 
length of the U-slot on the antenna feeding line is maintained the same. It is 
essential to note that a filtenna structure can be designed with reconfigurability 
in both its operating and notch frequencies. Such an antenna structure can be 
used for both interweave and underlay cognitive radio. One possible implemen­
tation is to integrate, for example, the bandpass filter in the antenna’s top layer, 
while the bandstop filter in the filtenna ground plane as discussed in [42]. 
6.9  Discussion
In this chapter, the design of printed microwave filters is discussed. Various 
examples of the different types of microwave filters are analyzed. The imple­
mentation of reconfigurable filters, reconfigurable filtennas, and the integration 

188 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
Figure 6.14  (a) The top and bottom layers of the bandstop filter, (b) the corresponding filten­
na structure with dual notches, and (c) the simulated and measured filtenna’s reflection coef­
ficient. (© 2014, IEEE. From [41].)

 
Reconfigurable Filtennas for Cognitive Radio 
189
of different reconfigurable bandpass and bandstop filters within one antenna 
structure is presented. Such integration allows the filtenna to tune its operat­
ing or notch frequency accordingly. In the next chapter, the design of MIMO 
antenna structures for a cognitive radio environment is detailed.
References
[1]	 Christodoulou, C. G., et al., “Reconfigurable Antennas for Wireless and Space Applica­
tions,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 100, No. 7, July 2012, pp. 2250–2261.
[2]	 Levy, R., R. V. Snyder, and G. Matthaei, “Design of Microwave Filters,” IEEE Transactions 
on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 50, No. 3, March 2002, pp. 783–793.
[3]	 Pozar, D. M., Microwave Engineering, 4th ed., New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
[4]	 Matthaei, G., L. Young, and E. M. T. Jones, Microwave Filters, Impedance-Matching Net­
works, and Coupling Structures, Dedham, MA: Artech House, 1980. 
[5]	 Hong, J. -S., Microstrip Filters for RF/Microwave Applications, 2nd ed., New York: John 
Wiley & Sons, 2011.
[6]	 Cohn, S. B., “Parallel-Coupled Transmission-Line-Resonator Filters,” IRE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol MTT-6, April 1958, pp. 223–231.
[7]	 Richards, P. I., “Resistor-Transmission Line Circuits,” Proceeding of the IRE, Vol. 36, Feb­
ruary 1948, pp. 217–220.
[8]	 Hammerstard, E. O., “Equations for Microwave Circuit Design,” 5th European Micro­
wave Conference, Hamburg, Germany, September 1–4, 1975, pp. 268–272.
[9]	 Garg, R., and I. J. Bahl, “Characteristics of Coupled Microstrip Lines,” IEEE Transactions 
on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 27, No. 7, July 1979, pp. 700–705.
[10]	 Wen, C. P., “Coplanar Waveguide: A Surface Strip Transmission Line Suitable for 
Nonreciprocal Gyromagnetic Device Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave 
Theory and Techniques, Vol. 17, No. 12, December 1969, pp. 1087–1090.
[11]	 Cristal, E. G., and S. Frankel, “Design of Hairpin-Line and Hybrid Hairpin-Parallel 
Coupled Line Filters,” IEEE Microwave Symposium, May 16–19, 1971, pp. 12–13.
[12]	 Sagawa, M., M. Makimoto, and S. Yamashita, “A Design Method of Bandpass Filters 
Using Dielectric-Filled Coaxial Resonators,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, Vol MTT-33, February 1985, pp. 152–157.
[13]	 Giannini, F., R. Sorrentino, and J. Vrba, “Planar Circuit Analysis of Microstrip Radial 
Stubs,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 32, No. 12, December 
1984, pp. 1652–1655.
[14]	 Zhu, H., and Q. -X. Chu, “Compact Ultra-Wideband (UWB) Bandpass Filter Using 
Dual-Stub-Loaded Resonator (DSLR),” IEEE Microwave and Wireless Components Letters, 
Vol. 23, No. 10, October 2013, pp. 527–529.

190 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
[15]	 Li, X., and X. Ji, “Novel Compact UWB Bandpass Filters Design with Cross-Coupling 
Betweeen λ/4 Short-Circuited Stubs,” IEEE Microwave and Wireless Components Letters, 
Vol 24, No. 1, January 2014, pp. 23–25.
[16]	 Hao, Z. -C., and J. -S. Hong, “UWB Bandpass Filter Using Cascaded Miniature High-
Pass and Low-Pass Filters with Multilayer Liquid Crystal Polymer Technology,” IEEE 
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 58, No. 4, April 2010, pp. 941–
948.
[17]	 Hao, Z. -C., and J. S. Hong, “Compact Wide Stopband Ultra Wideband Bandpass Filter 
Using Multilayer Liquid Crystal Polymer Technology,” IEEE Microwave and Wireless 
Components Letters, Vol. 19, No. 5, May 2009, pp. 290–292.
[18]	 Chiou, Y. -C., J. T. Kuo, and E. Cheng, “Broadband Quasi-Chebyshev Bandpass Filters 
with Multimode Stepped-Impedance Resonators (SIRs),” IEEE Transactions on Microwave 
Theory and Techniques, Vol 54, No. 8, August 2006, pp. 3352–3358.
[19]	 Lin, F., and M. R. Zadeh, “Tunable RF MEMS Filters: A Review,” Encyclopedia of 
Nanotechnology, 2015, pp. 1–12.
[20]	 Hong, J. S., “Reconfigurable Planar Filters,” IEEE Microwave Magazines, Vol. 10, No. 6, 
October 2009, pp. 73–83.
[21]	 Garcia, R. G., et al., “Flexible Filters: Reconfigurable-Bandwidth Bandpass Planar Filters 
with Ultralarge Tuning Ratio,” IEEE Microwave Magazines, Vol 15, No. 5, August 2014, 
pp. 43–54.
[22]	 Blondy, P., and D. Peroulis, “Handling RF Power: The Latest Advances in RF-MEMS 
Tunable Filters,” IEEE Microwave Magazines, Vol. 14, No. 1, January 2013, pp. 23–38.
[23]	 Gao, L., et al., “Novel Multi-Stub Loaded Resonators and Their Applications to Various 
Bandpass Filters,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 62, No. 5, 
May 2014, pp. 1162–1172.
[24]	 Huang, X., et al., “Tunable Bandpass Filter with Independently Controllable Dual 
Passbands,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 61, No. 9, April 
2010, pp. 3200–3208.
[25]	 Fouladi, S., et al., “High-Q Narrowband Tunable Combline Bandpass Filters Using 
MEMS Capacitor Banks and Piezomotors,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, Vol. 61, No. 1, January 2013, pp. 393–402.
[26]	 You, B., et al., “A High Selectivity Tunable Dual-Band Bandpass Filter Using Stub-Loaded 
Stepped Impedance Resonators,” IEEE Microwave and Wireless Components Letters, Vol. 
24, No. 11, November 2014, pp. 736–738.
[27]	 Garcia, R. G., and A. Guyette, “Reconfigurable Multi-Band Microwave Filters,” IEEE 
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 63, No. 4, April 2015, pp. 1294–
1307.
[28]	 Lugo Jr., C., and J. Papapolymerou, “Electronic Switchable Bandpass Filter Using PIN 
Diodes for Wireless Low Cost System-on-a-Package Applications,” IEE Proceedings in 
Microwave, Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 151, No. 6, December 2004, pp. 497–502.

 
Reconfigurable Filtennas for Cognitive Radio 
191
[29]	 Liu, B., F. Wei, and X. Shi, “Reconfigurable Bandpass Filter Based on Net-Type Stepped 
Impedance Resonator,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 46, No. 22, October 2010, pp. 1506–
1507.
[30]	 Ch, Y. -H., and G. M. Rebeiz, “Two- and Four-Pole Tunable 0.7-1.1 GHz Bandpass-to-
Bandstop Filters with Bandwidth Control,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, Vol. 62, No. 3, March 2014, pp. 457–463.
[31]	 Chaudhary, G., Y. Jeong, and J. Lim, “Dual-Band Bandpass Filter with Independently 
Tunable Center Frequencies and Bandwidths,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory 
and Techniques, Vol. 61, No. 1, January 2013, pp. 107–116.
[32]	 Tsai, H. -J., N. -W. Chen, and S. -K. Jeng, “Center Frequency and Bandwidth Controllable 
Microstrip Bandpass Filter Design Using Loop-Shaped Dual-Mode Resonator,” IEEE 
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 61, No. 10, October 2013, pp. 
3590–3600.
[33]	 Renedo, M. S., et al., “Tunable Combline Filter with Continuous Control of Center 
Frequency and Bandwidth,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 
53, No. 1, January 2005, pp. 191–199.
[34]	 Wang, H., et al., “Design of Ultra-Wideband Bandpass Filters with Fixed and 
Reconfigurable Notch Bands Using Terminated Cross-Shaped Resonators,” IEEE 
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, Vol. 62, No. 2, February 2014, pp. 
252–265.
[35]	 Safwat, A. M. E., et al., “Tunable Bandstop Defected Ground Structure Resonator Using 
Reconfigurable Dumbbell-Shaped Coplanar Waveguide,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave 
Theory and Techniques, Vol. 54, No. 9, September 2006, pp. 3559–3564.
[36]	 Cho, Y. -H., and G. M. Rebeiz, “Tunable 4-Pole Dual-Notch Filters for Cognitive Radios 
and Carrier Aggregation Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 
Vol. 63, No. 4, April 2015, pp. 1308–1314.
[37]	 Kurra, L., et al., “Switchable and Tunable Notch in Ultra-Wideband Filter Using 
Electromagnetic Bandgap Structure,” IEEE Microwave and Wireless Components Letters, 
Vol. 24, No. 12, December 2014, pp. 839–841.
[38]	 Tawk, Y., J. Costantine, and C. G. Christodoulou, “A Varactor-Based Reconfigurable 
Filtenna,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol. 11, 2012, pp. 716–719.
[39]	 Hamid, M. R., et al., “Vivaldi Antenna with Integrated Switchable Bandpass Resonator,” 
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 59, No. 11, November 2011, pp. 
4008–4015.
[40]	 Ramadan, A. H., et al., “Tunable Filter-Antennas for Cognitive Radio Applications,” 
Progress in Electromagnetics Research B, Vol. 57, 2014, pp. 253–265.
[41]	 Tawk, Y., J. Costantine, and C. G. Christodoulou, “Reconfigurable Filtennas and MIMO 
in Cognitive Radio Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 
62, No. 3, March 2014, pp. 1074–1083.
[42]	 Zamudio, M. E., et al., “Embedding a Reconfigurable Bandpass/Bandstop Filter into an 
Antenna,” IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation, Chicago, IL, July 
8–14, 2012, pp. 1–2.

192 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
[43]	 Tawk, Y., J. Costantine, and C. G. Christodoulou, “Cognitive Radio and Antenna 
Functionalities: A Tutorial,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, Vol. 56, No. 1, 
February 2014, pp. 231–243.

193
7
Implementation of MIMO Antennas on 
Cognitive Radio
7.1  Introduction
The main purpose of adopting cognitive radio technology is to improve the 
spectrum usage efficiency by monitoring the channel activity. This is accom­
plished by searching for unoccupied parts of the spectrum and communicat­
ing accordingly. The searching process is achieved by designing the appropriate 
wideband-sensing antennas. As for the communication process, it is imple­
mented by changing the radiation characteristics of the reconfigurable antenna 
structures. Such communication protocol improves the spectrum usage effi­
ciency by ensuring that the unoccupied parts of the spectrum are always dy­
namically assigned to various users.
The spectral efficiency improvement provided by a cognitive radio system 
is usually degraded by the various propagation effects that are encountered in a 
given wireless channel. These effects change over time in an unpredictable fash­
ion because the various cognitive radio users are not fixed in a given geographical 
location. The constant physical movement of the users forces the environment 
dynamics to change as well. Therefore, it is essential to adopt multiple-input 
multiple-output (MIMO)-based diversity techniques in cognitive radio systems 
in order to combat all the different multipath scenarios encountered within the 
wireless channel. The implementation of MIMO-based cognitive radio devices 
ensures that a reliable communication link between the end-users is maintained 
while at the same time a good spectrum efficiency is guaranteed.

194 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
The objective of this chapter is to highlight the importance and necessity 
of enabling the integration of MIMO antenna structures into cognitive radio 
devices. Such integration ensures that a good quality of service is provided to 
various cognitive radio end-users during communication. To understand all the 
propagation effects in a given cognitive radio environment, a brief review about 
the variations of the received signal power over distance is introduced. The 
operation of MIMO antenna structures as well as the various parameters used 
to electrically characterize their operations is then highlighted. The techniques 
that are commonly used to improve the performance of MIMO antenna struc­
tures are also discussed. The implementations of reconfigurable MIMO anten­
na structures for different wireless applications are presented next. The design 
of MIMO antenna structures dedicated specifically to satisfy the requirements 
of a cognitive radio environment are finally detailed. Such MIMO structures 
must achieve wideband sensing and produce reconfigurabilty in their operating 
or notch frequencies.
7.2  Modeling the Propagation Effects
The design of a reliable wireless communication channel takes into account the 
variation of the received signal power during propagation. Such propagation 
effects can be divided into three different categories: path loss, shadowing, and 
multipath. The variations due to path loss and shadowing are normally called 
large-scale propagation effects. This designation is due to the fact that they oc­
cur over large distances. The variations due to the constructive and destructive 
addition of the multipath transmitted signals occur over very short distances 
and thus they are usually referred to as small-scale propagation effects [1]. It is 
essential to mention that the purpose of MIMO antenna systems is to combat 
the multipath that is present in any wireless cognitive radio channel [2, 3]. 
A number of empirical path loss models have been implemented to pre­
dict the path loss in a given wireless channel. These models are applied to large 
urban macrocells and microcells and are also applied inside buildings [4]. The 
complexity of these models makes it difficult to obtain a single model that ac­
curately characterizes path loss in various environments, especially in different 
indoor scenarios. Thus, a simplified model for path loss as a function of dis­
tance is generally used as shown in (7.1) [1]. Such model is an approximation 
to the real channel. 
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
10
0
10 log
r
t
d
P dBm
P dBm
K dB
d
γ


=
+
−



	
(7.1)

 
Implementation of MIMO Antennas on Cognitive Radio 
195
where Pr/Pt is the received/transmitted power, K is a unitless constant that de­
pends on the antenna characteristics and the average channel attenuation, d0 is 
a reference distance for the antenna far field, and γ is the path loss exponent. 
The value of γ is generally obtained via a minimum mean-square error fit to the 
empirical measurements. For example, the values of γ range between 3.7 and 
6.5 in urban macrocells and between 2.7 and 3.5 in urban microcells [1]. For 
indoor environments, the value of γ varies between 1.6 and 3.5 for same floor 
conditions, while γ ranges between 2 and 6 for multiple-floor cases.
The shadowing effect is related to the random variations in the received 
signal power. These variations are encountered in a given wireless channel due 
to the blockage from objects in the transmitted signal path as well as due to 
the changes in the reflecting surfaces and scattering objects [1]. A statistical 
model is generally required to model the shadowing effect since the location, 
size, and dielectric properties of the blocking objects as well as the changes 
in the reflecting surfaces and scattering objects are generally unknown. The 
log-normal shadowing model accurately predicts the variations in the received 
power for both indoor and outdoor environments [5]. For this model, the ratio 
of transmit-to-receive power ψ is assumed to be random with a log-normal 
distribution as shown in (7.2) [1]:
	
( )
(
)
2
2
exp
2
2
dB
dB
dB
dB
p
ψ
ψ
ψ
ψ
μ
ξ
ψ
πσ
ψ
σ


−


=
−




	
(7.2)
where ζ = 10/ln10, 
dB
ψ
μ
 is the mean of ψdB [dB] = 10log10ψ, and 
dB
ψ
σ
 is the 
standard deviation of ψdB. 
The constructive and destructive addition of the different multipath com­
ponents introduced in a given wireless channel must be characterized statisti­
cally as well. The rapid phase change in each multipath component causes rapid 
variation in the received signal strength. Such phenomenon is usually called 
fading [1]. To account for this multipath fading, the channel is usually modeled 
by a time-varying impulse response. In such a channel, the received signal is a 
combination of the line-of-sight components in addition to the various com­
ponents that are associated with the scatterers present in the channel between 
the transmitter and the receiver. Such a multipath effect produces a time delay 
spread between the reception of the first signal component and the last one. In 
the case where this time is relatively large in comparison with the inverse of the 
signal bandwidth, a significant time spreading in the received signal is noticed. 
This is usually known as fast fading and substantially leads to distortion in the 
received signal. For this case, the line-of-sight and all multipath components 
are typically resolvable into some number of discrete components leading to 

196 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
the wideband fading model. However, a slow fading is produced if there is little 
time spreading in the received signal [1]. Under this scenario, the line-of-sight 
and all multipath components are nonresolvable leading to the narrowband 
fading model.
A Nakagami fading distribution is developed to fit the various empirical 
measurements in a narrowband fading channel. The distribution of the signal 
envelope is given by (7.3) [1].
	
( )
( )
2
1
2
2
exp
,
0.5
m
m
z
m
r
r
m z
mz
p
z
m
P
m P
−


=
−
≥


Γ


	
(7.3)
where z is the ratio of the power in the line-of-sight component to the power 
in the multipath components, P  is the average received power, and Γ(.) is the 
Gamma function. The signal envelope distribution is parameterized by rP  and 
the fading parameter m. Thus, it can be used to model both the Rayleigh fading 
model (m = 1) and the Rician fading one 
(
)
(
)
2
1
2
1
K
m
K


+
=


+


 [1]. 
In a wideband fading channel, the received signal cannot be only char­
acterized by the amplitude and phase random processes as with the case of the 
narrowband fading channels. For this scenario, the multipath delay spread and 
the time variations associated with the channel must be taken into account in 
order to have a full characterization of the channel properties [6]. 
7.3  MIMO Antenna Basics
Any wireless channel suffers from multipath fading that affects the quality of 
transmission and forces cognitive radio end-users to lose connectivity. MIMO 
technology tackles fading by allowing data to be sent over multiple antennas 
at the transmitter. The various data are also received by multiple antennas at 
the receiver side. By adopting such technique, the chance of receiving a good 
representation of all the data that go through the different paths within the fad­
ing channel is improved. Another advantage of a MIMO-based wireless chan­
nel is that a better data rate is achieved because the streams of data are sent 
simultaneously from each transmitting antenna [7]. This increase in the data 
rate provides cognitive radio end-users with more data transfer capabilities and 
high-quality, real-time connectivity.
The assessment of the performance of a MIMO antenna system is usually 
done by characterizing and evaluating a set of parameters. These parameters 
include: (1) the total active reflection coefficient, (2) the isolation and mutual 

 
Implementation of MIMO Antennas on Cognitive Radio 
197
coupling, (3) the correlation coefficient, (4) the mean effective and diversity 
gain, and finally (5) the MIMO system’s capacity. 
1.	 Total active reflection coefficient: The MIMO antenna’s S-parameters 
are not sufficient to accurately characterize the corresponding radia­
tion efficiency as well as the operating bandwidth. The total active 
reflection coefficient (TARC) must be monitored because it accounts 
for the coupling between the MIMO antenna elements as well as the 
random signal combination. The TARC of a MIMO antenna system 
is defined as the ratio of the square root of the total reflected power di­
vided by the square root of the total incident power. For an N-element 
MIMO antenna system, the TARC can be calculated as shown in (7.4) 
[8].
	
2
1
2
1
 and 
N
i
i
t
a
N
i
i
b
a
=
=
Γ =
=
∑
∑
b
Sa
	
(7.4)
	
where ai and bi are the incident and reflected signals at each MIMO 
antenna port. These signals can be computed from the measured N 
× N S-parameter matrix of the N-port MIMO antenna system as 
presented in (7.4). The TARC has a value between zero and one. A 
zero value of TARC indicates that all the incident power is radiated, 
whereas a TARC of unity indicates that all the incident power is re­
flected without any resulting radiation. The importance of resorting to 
the TARC is based on the fact that it converts all of the S-parameters 
curves for an N-port MIMO system into a single curve while tak­
ing into account the effect of the feeding phase between the different 
MIMO ports. For example, the TARC for a two-port MIMO antenna 
system can be calculated as shown in (7.5) [9].
	
2
2
11
12
21
22
2
j
j
t
a
S
S e
S
S e
θ
θ
+
+
+
Γ =
	
(7.5)
	
where θ is the input feeding phase and Sij are the S-parameters for 
element (i = 1, 2) and (j = 1, 2) of the MIMO system. For a MIMO 
antenna system with more than two ports, the TARC is calculated by 
relying on (7.4) and exciting port 1 of the MIMO system with a signal 

198 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
that has unity amplitude and a zero phase while the other ports are 
excited with the same amplitude but different phases. 
2.	 Isolation and mutual coupling: In a MIMO antenna system, the iso­
lation between any two ports is related to the amount of power that 
is being transmitted between these two ports. It is usually measured 
using the S-parameters as shown in (7.6) [10]. 
	
[
]
2
10
Isolation 
10log
ij
dB
S
= −
	
(7.6)
	
where Sij is the transmission coefficient between the ports i and j of the 
MIMO antenna system.
	
Also in a MIMO antenna system, the signals transmitted by the vari­
ous elements are not independent. There is a mutual coupling be­
tween the different antenna elements. This coupling is mainly due to 
the fact that the current that is induced on one of the MIMO ports 
is going to produce a voltage at the terminals of the remaining nearby 
elements [11]. A MIMO antenna should always display a good isola­
tion between the various input ports with low-coupling levels. It is 
essential to note that good isolation does not always guarantee low 
mutual coupling in a MIMO antenna configuration. For example, the 
various antenna ports can be isolated and at the same time there may 
exist a large induced current in the neighboring elements, which defi­
nitely deteriorates the corresponding radiation pattern [11]. Thus, it 
is essential to monitor simultaneously the S-parameters of the MIMO 
antenna structure as well as the surface current distributions that are 
present on the various elements. 
3.	 The Correlation Coefficient: It is a measure that quantifies the simi­
larity between the received signals that are captured by the various 
elements of a MIMO antenna system. To maintain a good MIMO 
performance, these signals must feature a low correlation coefficient in 
order to ensure that the communication channels are isolated. A low 
correlation coefficient implies that the radiation patterns of the vari­
ous MIMO elements when operated simultaneously are not affected 
by each other. The square of the correlation coefficient is known as 
the envelope correlation coefficient (ρe) that can be calculated from 
the three-dimensional (3-D) radiation patterns of the corresponding 
MIMO elements as shown in (7.7) [7]. 

 
Implementation of MIMO Antennas on Cognitive Radio 
199
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
1
2
4
2
2
1
2
4
4
,
,
,
,
e
F
F
d
F
d
F
d
π
π
π
θ f
θ f
ρ
θ f
θ f


∗
Ω


=
Ω
Ω
∫∫
∫∫
∫∫




	
(7.7)
	
where Ω is the solid angle and ( , )
iF θ f

 is the 3-D radiation pattern of 
the ith element in a MIMO antenna system. It is a generally tedious 
task to compute ρe from the pattern measurements; thus, it can be cal­
culated from the S-parameters between elements i and j of the MIMO 
antenna structure as shown in (7.8) [7].
	
(
)(
)
2
*
*
1 2
2
2
2
2
1
1
ii ij
ji
jj
e
ii
ji
jj
ij
S S
S S
S
S
S
S
ρ
+
=
−
−
−
−
	
(7.8)
	
It is essential to note that the computation of ρe from the S-parameters 
measurements is valid only under the assumption that the MIMO an­
tenna elements have high efficiency and the antenna system is placed 
in a uniform multipath environment, which is not the case in real en­
vironments. However, it is shown that the computation of ρe for dif­
ferent real environments based on the measured S-parameters produce 
no major differences [11]. Thus, such calculations can be considered 
as good approximations to assess the diversity behavior of a MIMO 
channel. It is important to note that a high isolation level does not 
guarantee a low envelope correlation coefficient. That is why during 
the design process of a MIMO antenna system; these two parameters 
are monitored simultaneously while maintaining ρe below 0.5. 
4.	 The Mean effective and diversity gain: The mean effective gain (MEG) 
is an important parameter since it accounts for the effect of the envi­
ronment on the MIMO antenna’s gain performance. The numerical 
calculation of the MEG is usually performed by first formulating a 
probabilistic model for the environment where the MIMO antenna 
structure is operating. Second, the 3-D gain radiation pattern of the 
MIMO antenna structure in an ideal environment is computed. These 
two quantities are combined together to calculate the MEG as shown 
in (7.9) [12]:

200 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
0 0
2
0 0
2
2
0 0
0 0
,
,
1
MEG
sin
1
,
,
1
where :
,
,
sin
4
,
sin
,
sin
1
XPR
G
P
XPR
d d
G
P
XPR
G
G
d d
P
d d
P
d d
π π
θ
θ
f
f
π π
θ
f
π π
π π
θ
f
θ f
θ f
θ θ f
θ f
θ f
θ f
θ f
θ θ f
π
θ f
θ θ f
θ f
θ θ f


+


+
=






+




+
=


=
=
∫∫
∫∫
∫∫
∫∫
	
(7.9)
	
XPR stands for cross-polarization power ratio that is the ratio between 
the vertical mean incident power to the horizontal one, Gθ(θ, φ) and 
Gφ(θ, φ) are the antenna gain components, while Pθ(θ, φ) and Pφ(θ, 
φ) are the representation for the channel model. A number of chan­
nel models are implemented in literature for MIMO analysis. One 
example is the Rayleigh fading channel where a uniform distribution 
for the signals in the azimuthal plane is taken while the ones in the 
elevation plane are assigned to a Gaussian distribution [7].
	
  The diversity gain is another measure that provides an insight 
about the effect of the diversity on the MIMO system. Diversity is 
achieved because each antenna element receives multiple versions of 
the transmitted data through different channel paths from the various 
transmitting antenna elements. The diversity gain can be calculated by 
taking the difference between the time-averaged signal-to-noise ratio 
(SNR) of the combined signals and that of a single antenna system. 
It is important to note that the combination scheme at the receiver 
side plays an important role in identifying the corresponding diversity 
gain. The diversity gain for different combination schemes can be cal­
culated as shown in (7.10) [13]. 
	
For the selecting combining scheme:
	
(
)
5.71exp
0.87
0.16
e
DG
ρ
=
−
−
∆	
(7.10a)
	
For the equal gain combining scheme:
	
(
)
8.98
15.22exp
0.2
0.04
e
DG
ρ
= −
+
−
−
∆	
(7.10b)
	
For the maximal ratio combining scheme:

 
Implementation of MIMO Antennas on Cognitive Radio 
201
	
(
)
7.14exp
0.59
0.11
e
DG
ρ
=
−
−
∆	
(7.10c)
	
where ∆ is the mean signal level difference between the various 
branches of the MIMO antenna structure. Based on these empirical 
equations, one can notice that, for any combination scheme, the di­
versity gain and the envelope correlation coefficient are related where 
a lower ρe yields a higher diversity gain. 
5.	 The MIMO capacity: One of the main motivations in adopting a 
MIMO antenna system is that the channel capacity is increased in a 
multipath environment in comparison to the case where one antenna 
element is only used. The channel matrix is monitored in order to as­
sess the capacity provided in a multipath cognitive radio environment. 
Such a matrix contains information about the correlation between the 
various multipath channels in addition to the propagation effects en­
countered during communication. The channel-sounding technique 
is one of the most commonly used techniques to experimentally com­
pute the channel coefficient matrix [7]. The channel capacity provided 
by an N-element MIMO antenna structure is summarized in (7.11). 
This equation is derived for the case where the channel conditions are 
not known to the transmitter and an equal power is allocated to each 
element of the MIMO structure. 
	
2
log
det
T
N
C
I
HH
N
ρ




=
+







	
(7.11)
	
where IN is the identity matrix, ρ is the average signal-to-noise ratio, N 
is the number of antenna elements at both the receiver and transmitter 
sides, and H is the channel coefficient matrix. 
7.4  Isolation Improvement in MIMO Antenna Systems
All the parameters that characterize the operation of a MIMO antenna system 
highly depend on how well the various elements are isolated. It is essential to 
ensure that a minimum correlation exists between the various radiation pat­
terns in order to maintain an acceptable MIMO performance. A variety of 
techniques (antenna placement/orientation, decoupling networks, neutraliza­
tion lines, parasitic elements) have been implemented to enhance the isolation 
between the MIMO antenna elements. The adoption of these techniques dur­

202 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
ing the MIMO antenna design process is essential in order to guarantee a good 
quality of service for the various users that operate in a rich multipath cognitive 
radio environment [14–17]. 
An example of an antenna structure that incorporates a printed curved 
reflector within its structure is presented in Figure 7.1 [18]. The printed reflec­
tor acts as a parasitic element that enhances the isolation between the differ­
ent elements of the MIMO antenna structure. The proposed antenna structure 
consists of two MIMO antenna systems that are integrated on the top layer of 
a Rogers Duroid 5880 substrate. Such integration produces a more compact 
MIMO system that can operate over two different channels. 
The first MIMO system is composed of four printed straight dipoles 
while the second one includes four printed curved dipoles. The dimensions 
of the entire antenna substrate are 110 × 75 mm2. Each MIMO system cov­
ers a separate operating bandwidth. For each MIMO system, two elements are 
placed horizontally while the other two are placed vertically. This enables each 
MIMO system to receive both horizontally and vertically polarized waves.
The excitation mechanisms of the straight and curved dipoles rely on 
surface mounted baluns in order to feed the two arms of each dipole [19]. The 
balun provides the appropriate transition from the dipole’s balanced structure 
to the unbalanced antenna feeding point. It also guarantees a phase difference 
of 180o between the two arms of each dipole. An appropriate transformation 
from an input impedance of 50Ω to a differential impedance of 50Ω between 
the dipole arms is also provided. The surface mounted device (SMD) balun has 
six pins: two pins are connected to the two arms of the dipoles, two pins are 
connected to the ground through six vias, one pin is connected to the antenna’s 
SMA connector, and the last pin is left disconnected. 
Each straight dipole has a length of 23.325 mm and a width of 1.2 mm. 
The length of each curved dipole is 65.4 mm with a width of 3.279 mm. Each 
curved dipole acts as a director for the corresponding straight dipole. Mainly, 
each curved dipole changes the radiation of its neighboring straight dipole from 
Figure 7.1  A MIMO-based antenna structure using curved and straight dipoles.

 
Implementation of MIMO Antennas on Cognitive Radio 
203
being almost omnidirectional to being directive. This change in the radiation 
pattern enables the improvement in the isolation between the straight dipole 
elements.
The printed reflector that is placed between the antenna elements is com­
posed of four curved edges with almost the same length as the curved dipoles. 
These edges force the orthogonal behavior of the radiation pattern among the 
various elements of the two MIMO structures. Such integration in the middle 
of the top layer of the antenna structure enhances essentially the directional 
property of the various curved dipole elements of the MIMO structure. Its 
presence increases the gain of each curved dipole in a given direction while at 
the same time minimizes the back-lobe gain pattern. This effect ensures that the 
radiation patterns of the various curved dipole MIMO elements are orthogonal 
to each other. However, the combination of the printed reflector and the curved 
dipole elements enhances the directional features of the various printed straight 
dipole elements. 
The comparison between the simulated and measured antenna’s reflection 
coefficient when one curved dipole is fed while all the other elements of the 
MIMO system are loaded by 50Ω terminations is shown in Figure 7.2. Any 
curved dipole element covers a measured band from 5.3 to 5.85 GHz. The 
same mechanism is repeated by feeding only one straight dipole and terminat­
ing the remaining seven elements with 50Ω loads. The comparison between 
the simulated and measured data for this scenario is also summarized in Figure 
7.2. Each of the straight dipole elements covers the frequency band from 4.6 
to 5 GHz. 
The comparison between the simulated and measured normalized an­
tenna radiation pattern in the F = 0o plane is plotted in Figure 7.3. The first 
plot corresponds to the case where a straight dipole is fed while the second plot 
corresponds to the pattern of a curved dipole. It is essential to note that the 
patterns for the other elements (either straight or curved dipoles) are similar 
but with the main beams directed into different directions. The measured peak 
gain for the straight dipole is 3.9 dB, while for the curved dipole it is 7.89 dB.
The fabricated MIMO structure is able to maintain low isolation levels 
between the different dipole elements due to the orthogonality in the radiated 
gain patterns. The measured envelope correlation coefficient between the two 
straight dipoles that are aligned along the y-axis is highlighted in Figure 7.4(a). 
The envelope correlation coefficient for the corresponding neighboring curved 
dipoles is also included in the same plot. A very low value is maintained within 
the operating bandwidth of the curved or straight dipole elements and thus this 
is an indication of the appropriate functioning of the presented MIMO system.
To confirm and verify that the MIMO system is functioning well and it 
is efficient, the TARC must also be analyzed. Such an analysis provides a better 
characterization of the MIMO structure. As mentioned in the previous section, 

204 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
Figure 7.2  The reflection coefficient for any curved and straight dipole elements.

 
Implementation of MIMO Antennas on Cognitive Radio 
205
the TARC is a measure that indicates how well the power delivered to each di­
pole element of the proposed MIMO structure is being radiated. It depends on 
the phase excitation between the MIMO antenna elements as well as their isola­
tion and the level of matching at each port. The TARC determines the resonant 
frequency and the impedance bandwidth of the MIMO structure as a function 
of the phase excitation between the various elements. The TARC (dB) between 
the two straight dipole elements (aligned along y-axis) is shown in Figure 7.4(b) 
for four different values of the phase difference between the two MIMO ele­
ments. The TARC for the corresponding neighboring curved dipoles is also 
included in the same plot for the same values of the phase difference. Based on 
these two plots, it is apparent that the proposed structure preserves its operating 
bandwidth despite the difference in the phase between the received signals by 
the different MIMO elements.
7.5  Reconfigurable MIMO Antenna Structures
The operation of a cognitive radio device relies on the capability of tuning the 
operating mode of the communicating antennas. Thus, it is essential to be able 
to achieve frequency reconfigurability in the operation of the MIMO antenna 
structure if integrated in a cognitive radio device. Also, the ability of a MIMO 
antenna to change its radiation pattern and achieve pattern diversity constitutes 
an added feature that improves the performance of the system.
The implementation of frequency and pattern reconfigurable MIMO 
antenna structures has received much attention in recent years [20–31]. For 
example, Figure 7.5(a) shows the layout of a two-port frequency reconfigurable 
Figure 7.3  The simulated and measured normalized radiation pattern in the the F = 0° plane 
for the the straight dipole at f = 4.8 GHz (left plot) and curved dipole at f = 5.6 GHz (right plot).

206 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
Figure 7.4   (a) The computed envelope correlation ceofficient between the two straight dipoles and between the two curved dipole that are aligned along 
the y-axis, and (b) the corresponding TARC for various phase difference.

 
Implementation of MIMO Antennas on Cognitive Radio 
207
MIMO dielectric resonator antenna [26]. The MIMO feature is obtained by 
exciting simultaneously the transverse electric (TE) and hybrid electric (HE)
modes of the resonator. The frequency reconfigurability is achieved by the addi­
tion of parasitic slots in proximity to the dielectric resonator block. The overall 
measured tuning range for the HE and TE mode is from 615 to 800 MHz and 
from 628 to 836 MHz, respectively. 
Figure 7.5   (a) The MIMO dielectric resonator antenna structure, (b) the tuning for the HE 
mode, and (c) the change in the TE mode ground plane. (© 2013, IEEE. From [26].)

208 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
For the HE mode, a parasitic slot is placed on the ground plane as shown 
in Figure 7.5(b). The frequency reconfigurability of this mode is obtained by 
changing the electrical length of the slot using four PIN diode switches and one 
varactor. The locations of the four switches {SWA1, SWA2, SWA3, SWA4} is also 
highighted in Figure 7.5(b). As for the varactor CHE, it is placed at the center 
of the slot. The positions of these switches are optimized in order to produce 
a continuous matching over the frequency range of reconfiguration. When the 
switch SWA4 is off, the length of the slot can be varied electronically based on 
the status of the remaining three PIN diode switches. The activation of SWA4 
enables the slot length to be extended by using the variable capactive effect of 
the varactor diode CHE. 
For the TE mode, an alternative approach is adopted because the place­
ment of a parasitic slot in proximity to the excitation slot impacts the field sym­
metry. Thus, the frequency reconfiguration of the TE mode is achieved by ad­
justing the input matching of the excitation slot as shown in Figure 7.5(c) [26]. 
More specifically, two PIN diodes {SWB1, SWB2} and two varactors {CETE1, 
CETE2} are integrated within the excitation slot of the TE mode. The frequency 
reconfigurablity for this case is achieved by activating one PIN diode at a time 
and tuning the corresponding varactor diode.
The MIMO operation of the fabricated antenna prototype that is present­
ed in Figure 7.6(a) is tested at three different frequencies (622 MHz, 700 MHz, 
and 780 MHz). This is achieved by supplying the appropriate baising voltages 
to the various switching components for both the HE and TE modes. Figure 
7.6(b) shows the corresponding measured S-parameters for the three different 
configurations. It is essential to note that the worst mutual coupling between 
the two modes for all three configurations is −14.4 dB. This coupling can be 
maintained below −15 dB while changing the antenna frequency of operation 
from 622 to 800 MHz.
The design and evaluation of a pattern reconfigurable antenna in a 
MIMO environment are examined in [22]. The proposed antenna structure 
consists of two electronically steerable passive array radiators (ESPAR). The 
physical structure of one ESPAR is shown in Figure 7.7(a). It consists of one 
driven monopole located at the center and surrounded by six uniformly spaced 
parasitic monopoles. The length of each monopole is taken to be 0.238λ0 and 
the distance of separation between the parasitic monopoles is 0.25λ0. Here λ0 
corresponds to the free-space wavelength at the design frequency of 2.28 GHz. 
The radius of the circular ground plane is 0.75λ0. 
The beam-steering capability of the proposed antenna structure is ob­
tained by loading each parasitic monopole by a PIN diode and a 0.3-nH induc­
tor. More specifically, the monopole acts as a director when it is inductive and 
as a reflector when it is capacitive. This is achieved by changing the status of 
the individual PIN diodes across each parasitic dipole element. The proposed 

 
Implementation of MIMO Antennas on Cognitive Radio 
209
ESPAR can generate a directive pattern by configuring three adjacent passive el­
ements as directors while the remaining three as reflectors. In total, the antenna 
structure produces six patterns in order to cover the entire 360°. 
A pair of ESPAR is fabricated on one single 1.5-mm FR-4 substrate in 
order to produce a MIMO antenna structure. The fabricated antenna prototype 
is shown in Figure 7.7(b). Such a MIMO configuration can produce 36 pattern 
combinations. This is achieved by configuring the parasitic elements of both 
ESPARs to become either reflective or directive. The far-field radiation patterns 
for nine different configurations are displayed in Figure 7.8(a). The measure­
ment is done by terminating the second ESPAR’s driven element by 50Ω. It is 
Figure 7.6   (a) The different views of the fabricated structure, and (b) the S-parameters of 
the MIMO antenna for three different configurations. (© 2013, IEEE. From [26].)

210 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
essential to note that the mutual coupling between the two driven elements is 
kept below −15 dB for the various pattern combinations. 
The performance of the MIMO ESPAR structure is measured in a test 
environment depicted in Figure 7.8(b). The MIMO structure is mounted 
on a positioner that can move freely in a predefined vertical plane of 1.6m in 
width and height. For different positions, it is shown that the ESPAR MIMO 
Figure 7.7   (a) One-element ESPAR, and (b) the MIMO configuration (© 2014, IEEE. From 
[22].)

 
Implementation of MIMO Antennas on Cognitive Radio 
211
Figure 7.8   (a) The change in the MIMO ESPAR radiated pattern for nine different configura­
tions, and (b) the testing environment. (© 2014, IEEE. From [22].)

212 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
structure is able the reduce the bit error rate and improve the channel capacity 
for certain pattern combinations. The spatially averaged channel capacity is 
increased by as much as 37% for a transmit signal-to-noise ratio of 10 dB. Also, 
an additional 1 bit/sec/Hz is achievable in the peak capacity for a 10-dB receive 
signal-to-noise ratio. Based on these findings, one concludes that any MIMO 
antenna structure that is capable to steer its radiated pattern can be considered 
a better candidate for MIMO cogntive radio environment. This conclusion is 
taken in comparison to the omnidirectional MIMO antennas. 
7.6  MIMO Antennas for Cognitive Radio
The design process of MIMO antenna systems that are dedicated for cogni­
tive radio depends on whether the underlay or interweave mode of operation 
is adopted. An example of a 2 × 2 MIMO-based antenna system dedicated for 
the spectrum interweave cognitive radio environment is presented in Figure 
7.9(a, b). The antenna system consists of four ports. Two ports are dedicated 
for the two sensing antennas, and the remaining two ports are used for the 
frequency reconfigurable antenna which in this case is taken to be a reconfigu­
rable filtenna. A pair of a sensing antenna and reconfigurable filtenna combina­
tion is located on the top layer of the overall antenna structure [Figure 7.9(a)], 
while the other pair is located on the bottom layer [Figure 7.9(b)]. The total 
dimensions of the MIMO-based interweave antenna system are 80 × 70 mm2. 
The two reconfigurable filtennas consist of a partial ground of dimensions 30 × 
30 mm2. The feeding lines for both filtennas contain a reconfigurable bandpass 
filter [32–34]. 
Each bandpass filter consists of a 50Ω stripline on the top layer. The strip­
line has a width of 5 mm and it is made of three subsections separated by two 
gaps of width 2.5 mm. These gaps allow the filter to exhibit a bandpass behav­
ior. A T-shaped slot of length 9 mm is etched from the middle subsection. Two 
biasing lines of length 12.5 mm connect the middle subsection to the ground 
of the filter. The bandpass filter modifies its operating frequency by changing 
the length of the T-shaped slot in the middle subsection. This can be done by 
incorporating two PIN diodes (S1 and S2) within the T-shaped slot. For suitable 
biasing of the PIN diodes, two DC voltage (+Vcc) pads are included within the 
etched slots as shown in Figure 7.9(c). These pads are important to provide +Vcc 
to the PIN diodes since the middle subsection is connected to the ground of the 
filter through the two biasing lines. At the upper and lower edges of each pad, 
two separate PIN diodes are included to connect these pads to the middle sub­
section. Therefore, each diode S1 or S2 correspond to two sets of diodes {S1_a, 
S1_b} and {S2_a, S2_b} as indicated in Figure 7.9(c) [34]. 

 
Implementation of MIMO Antennas on Cognitive Radio 
213
The radiating patch of the two reconfigurable filtennas consists of a modi­
fied printed monopole of length 20 mm. Each patch is terminated by a circu­
lar shaped contour whose length is 40 mm. The circular shape minimizes the 
length of the substrate for the entire system and allows more landscape to ac­
commodate for the sensing antenna. However, the two sensing antennas have a 
partial ground of dimensions 30 × 6 mm2. They are fed via a stripline of width 
Figure 7.9   (a) The top layer of the MIMO-based interweave cognitive radio antenna, (b) the 
corresponding bottom layer, and (c) the structure of the integrated reconfigurable bandpass 
filter. (© 2014, IEEE. From [34].)

214 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
5 mm. The radiating patch of each sensing antenna consists of two identi­
cal half elliptically shaped conducting patches of length 13.8 mm each. These 
patches are facing each other and connected together to form a common base 
of a width of 24.7 mm. They also have a contour length of 40 mm, which is 
equal to the one of the reconfigurable filtennas. The top layer of the fabricated 
antenna prototype is depicted in Figure 7.10(a). It is essential to note that in 
Figure 7.10   (a) The fabricated interweave MIMO antenna, and (b) the envelope correlation 
coefficient between the two wideband-sensing antennas. (© 2014, IEEE. From [34].)

 
Implementation of MIMO Antennas on Cognitive Radio 
215
order to connect the biasing lines to the ground of the reconfigurable filtenna, 
a rectangular box of dimensions 30 × 10 mm2 is cut from the substrate at the 
location between the individual grounds of the two reconfigurable filtennas as 
presented in Figure 7.10(a). 
Each wideband sensing antenna is able to cover the frequency band from 
3 to 6 GHz, while the two reconfigurable communicating antennas are able to 
cover three subbands from 3.9 GHz up to 4.5 GHz. The changes in the oper­
ating frequencies of the two communicating antennas are based on the modes 
of operation of the integrated bandpass filters. The comparison between the 
simulated and measured envelope correlation coefficient between the two wide­
band-sensing antennas for the case when all the switches in the reconfigurable 
communicating antennas are off is shown in Figure 7.10(b). One notices that 
a low value is maintained throughout the whole operating bandwidth, which 
confirms that the proposed MIMO system is capable of mitigating the fading 
effect in a rich multipath environment [34]. 
Another example of a MIMO antenna structure dedicated for interweave 
cognitive radio is highlighted in Figure 7.11(a) [32]. The proposed structure 
consists of one-port sensing antenna, while the MIMO feature is implemented 
only on the reconfigurable communicating antenna. On the top layer of the 
FR-4 substrate resides the two meander line reconfigurable communicating an­
tennas. The bottom layer contains the UWB sensing antenna with its ground 
plane on the top layer of the substrate. 
One PIN diode and one varactor are integrated within the structure of 
each MIMO communicating antenna element. The PIN diode connects the 
inverted F-shaped antenna to the meander line antenna. This enables the an­
tenna to resonate below 1 GHz. After activating the PIN diode, the varactor 
can be biased to allow the antenna to tune its operating frequency at the lower-
frequency bands. The change in the operating frequency of the communicating 
MIMO antenna for different values of the varactor’s biasing voltage is summa­
rized in Figure 7.11(b). The wideband-sensing antenna covers the bandwidth 
from 720 MHz to 3.44 GHz. The worst isolation between the MIMO antenna 
elements is 11.5 dB, while the measured isolation between the sensing and 
communicating antenna is more than 15.5 dB [32].
A MIMO-based antenna system dedicated for the spectrum underlay 
cognitive radio environment is shown in Figure 7.12. For this type of cognitive 
radio, the antenna system consists of a wideband-sensing antenna that con­
tinuously changes its notch frequency based on the primary users’ activity. The 
proposed antenna structure consists of two MIMO-based identical antennas. 
The distance between the two antennas is optimized to be 10 mm in order to 
achieve the desired performance. The total dimensions of the whole antenna 
system are 70 × 65 mm2. The reconfiguration is achieved by incorporating a 
reconfigurable bandstop filter within the feeding line and the ground plane of 

216 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
Figure 7.11   (a) The interweave antenna system with MIMO feature in the communicating 
antenna (top and bottom layers), and (b) the change in the measured operating frequency for 
various biasing voltages for the varactor. (© 2015, IEEE. From [32].)

 
Implementation of MIMO Antennas on Cognitive Radio 
217
the antenna. The combination of the band-reject filter and the antenna results 
in a bandstop filtenna. The physical dimensions and modes of operation of the 
integrated bandstop filter are detailed in Section 6.8.
The MIMO structure resorts to one PIN diode that is integrated on each 
antenna element. A small slit, of dimensions 5 × 3.5 mm2, is etched from the 
edge of the ground plane for the two antenna elements to provide a better 
impedance match throughout the entire operating bandwidth of the antenna. 
The two radiating parts for both antennas are identical and have the shape of 
a modified printed monopole. They have a length of 20 mm and a width of 
25 mm. The simulated and measured coupling between the two reconfigu­
rable band-reject filtennas is summarized in Figure 7.13 for the case when both 
switches are off. Good coupling values are obtained, which ensure that the two 
radiating structures are well isolated. As expected, a minimum level of coupling 
occurs within the notch bands of the reconfigurable filtenna. 
7.7  Discussion
In this chapter, the operation of MIMO antenna configurations as well as the 
various parameters used to characterize the performance of this type of radiat­
ing structures are investigated. Also, the realization of reconfigurable MIMO 
antenna structures to cater for different wireless applications is presented. The 
design of MIMO antenna structures for both interweave and underlay cogni­
Figure 7.12  The MIMO-based underlay cognitive radio antenna structure. (© 2014, IEEE. 
From [34].)

218 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
tive radio is finally shown. In the next chapter, the machine-learning techniques 
and their incorporation into a cognitive radio system will be discussed.
References
[1]	 Goldsmith, A., Wireless Communications, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 
2005.
[2]	 Parsons, D., The Mobile Radio Propagation Channel, New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1994.
[3]	 Balanis, C. A., Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design, 3rd ed., New York: John Wiley & 
Sons, 2005.
[4]	 Rappaport, T. S., Wireless Communication: Principles and Practice, 2nd ed., Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2001.
[5]	 Erveg, V., et al., “An Empirically Based Path Loss Mode for Wireless Channels in Subur­
band Environments,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, July 1999, pp. 
1205–1211.
[6]	 Aulin, T., “A Modified Model for Fading Signal at the Mobile Radio Channel,” IEEE 
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, August 1979, pp. 182–202.
[7]	 Sharawi, M. S., Printed MIMO Antenna Engineering, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 
2014.
[8]	 Manteghi, M., and Y. Rahmat-Samii, “Multiport Characteristics of a Wideband Cavity 
Backed Annular Patch Antenna for Multipolirization Operations,” IEEE Transactions on 
Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 53, No. 1, 2005, pp. 466–474.
[9]	 Chae, S. H., S. K. Oh, and S. O. Park, “Analysis of Mutual Coupling, Correlations, and 
TARC in WiBro MIMO Array Antenna,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, 
Vol. 6, 2007, pp. 122–125.
Figure 7.13  The simulated and measured coupling between the two elements underlay cog­
nitive radio antenna structure. (© 2014, IEEE. From [34].)

 
Implementation of MIMO Antennas on Cognitive Radio 
219
[10]	 Pozar, D. M., Microwave Engineering, 4th ed., New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
[11]	 Najam, A. I., Y. Duro, and S. Tedjini, Multiple-Input Multiple-Output Antennas for Ultra 
Wideband Communications, Ultra Wideband – Current Status and Future Trends, InTech, 
2012.
[12]	 Toga, T., “Analysis of Mean Effective Gain of Mobile Antennas in Land Mobile Radio 
Environments,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 39, No. 2, 1990, pp. 117–
131.
[13]	 Turkmani, A. M. D., et al., “An Experimentation Evaluation of the Performance of Two-
Branch Space and Polarization Diversity Schemes at 1800 MHz,” IEEE Transactions on 
Vehicular Technology, Vol. 44, No. 2, 1995, pp. 318–326.
[14]	 Pelosi, M., M. B. Knudsen, and G. F. Pedersen, “Multiple Antenna Systems with 
Inherently Decoupled Radiators,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 
60, No. 2, February 2012, pp. 503–515.
[15]	 Diallo, A., et al., “Study and Reduction of the Mutual Coupling Between Two Mobile 
Phone PIFAs Operation in the DCS 1800 and UMTS Bands,” IEEE Transactions on 
Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 54, No. 11, November 2006, pp. 3063–3074.
[16]	 Chen, S. C., Y. S. Wang, and S. J. Chung, “A Decoupling Technique for Increasing the 
Port Isolation Between Two Strongly Coupled Antennas,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas 
and Propagation, Vol. 56, No. 12, December 2008, pp. 3650–3658.
[17]	 Li, J. F., Q. X. Chi, and T. G. Huang, “A Compact Wideband MIMO Antenna with 
Two Novel Bent Slits,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 60, No. 2, 
February 2012, pp. 482–489.
[18]	 Tawk, Y., et al., “Pattern Diversity Using Printed Reflectors for Reconfigurable Antennas 
and MIMO Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, under review.
[19]	 http://www.anarem.com/products/balun-transformers.
[20]	 Kishor, K. K., and S. V. Hum, “A Pattern Reconfigurable Chassis-Mode MIMO Antenna,” 
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 62, No. 6, June 2014, pp. 3290–
3298.
[21]	 Qin, P. Y., et al., “A Pattern Reconfigurable U-Slot Antenna and Its Applications in MIMO 
Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 60, No. 2, February 2012, 
pp. 516–528.
[22]	 Zhou, Y., R. S. Adve, and S. V. Hum, “Design and Evaluation of Pattern Reconfigurable 
Antennas for MIMO Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 
62, No. 3, March 2014, pp. 1084–1092.
[23]	 Kulkarni, A. N., and S. K. Sharma, “Frequency Reconfigurable Microstrip Loop Antenna 
Covering LTE Bands with MIMO Implementation and Wideband Microstrip Slot 
Antenna All for Portable Wireless DTV Media Player,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. 61, No. 2, February 2013, pp. 964–968.
[24]	 Redondo, C., and L. de Haro, “On the Analysis and Design of Reconfigurable Multimode 
MIMO Microstrip Antennas,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 62, 
No. 1, January 2014, pp. 119–129.

220 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
[25]	 Mehmood, R., and J. W. Wallace, “MIMO Capacity Enhancement Using Parasitic 
Reconfigurable Aperture Antennas (RECAPs),” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. 60, No. 2, February 2012, pp. 665–673.
[26]	 Yan, J. B., and J. T. Bernhard, “Implementation of a Frequency-Agile MIMO Dielectric 
Resonator Antenna,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 61, No. 7, July 
2013, pp. 3434–3441.
[27]	 Lim, J. H., et al., “Simultaneous Frequency and Isolation Reconfigurable MIMO PIFA 
Using PIN Diodes,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 60, No. 12, 
December 2012, pp. 5939–5946.
[28]	 Yousefbeiki, M., and J. Perruisseau-Carrier, “Towards Compact and Frequency-Tunable 
Antenna Solutions for MIMO Transmission with a Single RF Chain,” IEEE Transactions 
on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 62, No. 3, March 2014, pp. 1065–1073.
[29]	 Yan, J. B., S. Yong, and J. T. Bernhard, “Intermodulation and Harmonic Distortion 
in Frequency Reconfigurable Slot Antenna Pairs,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and 
Propagation, Vol. 62, No. 3, March 2014, pp. 1138–1146.
[30]	 Sarrazin, J., et al., “Pattern Reconfigurable Cubic Antenna,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas 
and Propagation, Vol. 57, No. 2, February 2009, pp. 310–317.
[31]	 Alrabadi, O. N., J. Perruisseau-Carrier, and A. Kalis, “MIMO Transmission Using a Single 
RF Source: Theory and Antenna Design,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, 
Vol. 60, No. 2, February 2012, pp. 654–664.
[32]	 Hussain, R., and M. S. Sharawi, “A Cognitive Radio Reconfigurable MIMO and Sensing 
Antenna System,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Letters, Vol. 14, 2015, pp. 257–260.
[33]	 Ramadan, A. H., et al., “Tunable Filter-Antennas for Cognitive Radio Applications,” 
Progress in Electromagnetics Research B, Vol. 57, 2014, pp. 253–265.
[34]	 Tawk, Y., J. Costantine, and C. G. Christodoulou, “Reconfigurable Filtennas and MIMO 
in Cognitive Radio Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 
62, No. 3, March 2014, pp. 1074–1083.

221
8
Machine-Learning Implementation in 
Cognitive Radio
8.1  Introduction
The software control of reconfigurable antennas is a fundamental aspect in a 
cognitive radio system. Such antennas must be autonomously tuned with an 
intelligent and purposeful activation of the reconfiguration mechanism. The 
tuning is important to satisfy the requirements of a dynamically changing com­
munication channel in a cognitive radio environment. Antenna designers have 
resorted to machine-learning algorithms [1–7] to control various functions of 
a cognitive radio, including its RF front end. The implementation of machine 
learning has been initiated with smart antennas for beamforming, direction 
of arrival (DOA) estimation, and “smart” arrays that identify element failures 
and allow the graceful performance degradation of the complete array system 
[8–12].
In the context of cognitive radio, machine learning is based on a set of 
algorithms that allow the cognitive radio processor to continuously learn and 
autonomously decide on appropriate actions without user control. The algo­
rithms embedded on the cognitive radio processor allow it to learn from pre­
vious communication patterns and make informed communication decision 
based on these patterns. Such learning ability, once added to the cognitive radio 
processor, enables it to react swiftly to any future changes in the frequency 
spectrum. 
There are several machine-learning algorithms that can be applied on 
a cognitive radio processor. Examples of such algorithms are support vector 

222 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
machines, neural networks, decision trees, and deep learning [13, 14]. How­
ever, the focus in this chapter is on neural networks and their role in a cognitive 
radio platform. Neural networks have been proposed as one of the main algo­
rithms that can be implemented to control reconfigurable antennas through 
field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) [15]. A neural network is trained to 
associate all the different physical configurations of a reconfigurable antenna 
with its different operating frequencies. The different operational frequencies 
can be used for communication in a real-life cognitive radio scenario. 
The different categories of machine learning algorithms that can be ap­
plied on the cognitive radio processor are presented. A basic introduction to 
neural networks and their architecture is then presented. The actual implemen­
tation of a back-propagation algorithm on FPGAs is also detailed. The use of 
neural networks to synthesize different antenna configurations is addressed. 
Several examples with neural networks predicting the antenna performance as 
well as activating the appropriate switches on various reconfigurable antennas 
are discussed. The use of neural networks to overcome failures in reconfigurable 
antenna arrays is also highlighted. The appropriate FPGA selection along with 
the cognitive radio processor and their practical issues are finally discussed.
8.2  Categories of Machine-Learning Algorithms
An optimized machine-learning algorithm can help a cognitive radio system 
to be robust against network disruptions. Such algorithm enables the cognitive 
radio device to adapt to heterogeneous network conditions by autonomously 
finding or avoiding the appropriate radio networks. This capability allows the 
cognitive radio device to satisfy the required performance objectives. Such dy­
namic reconfiguration can be achieved by developing a radio platform that al­
lows real-time reconfiguration. Machine-learning algorithms are divided into 
three main categories: supervised, unsupervised, and semisupervised learning 
algorithms [13]. 
Supervised learning is defined as the case when the machine (computer, 
microprocessor, FPGA, or any other programmable processor) infers a function 
from a set of labeled training data. The training data is presented as a set of 
examples or scenarios consisting of pairs of input objects (input vectors) and de­
sired output values (supervisory signals). Supervised learning is fairly common 
in classification problems where the machine is aware of what classes or catego­
ries to look for and classify the input data that is presented within these fixed 
number of categories. For example, neural networks fall within this category.
Unsupervised learning algorithms are defined as cases when the machine 
deduces information from training sets consisting of input data without labeled 
responses. The most common type of unsupervised learning algorithm is called 

 
Machine-Learning Implementation in Cognitive Radio 
223
clustering where the goal is to find similarities or hidden patterns in the train­
ing data. 
Semisupervised learning algorithms use a mix of both labeled and unla­
beled data. In most practical cases they make use of a small amount of labeled 
data that may be expensive to generate and a larger set of unlabeled data that 
are easily available. 
8.3  Basic Review of Neural Networks
Neural networks are composed of networks that simulate the function of inter­
connected neurons. Neural networks aim at mimicking the connectivity and 
functioning of the human brain. Neural networks can learn from previous ex­
periences and their strengths are in their ability to provide solutions to similar 
situations that may occur in the future without prior exposure. Neural networks 
are nonlinear and can perform functional approximation and signal-filtering 
operations, which are beyond optimal linear techniques [14]. The distinguish­
ing characteristics of neural networks, such as learning from data to generalize 
patterns and to model nonlinear relations, make them good candidates to apply 
for many antenna engineering applications. In a reconfigurable antenna for 
cognitive radio setup, neural networks can learn from communication chan­
nels patterns and autonomously order the reconfigurable antenna to change its 
function to cater for the spectrum changes. 
8.3.1  Neural Network Concepts
The concept of the neural network as a learning algorithm is based on the 
biological neural network. Thus, such a learning algorithm is called the artifi­
cial neural network. A biological neuron is composed of three parts [14]: the 
“soma,” the dendrites, and the axons. The soma represents the main central 
body cell. The dendrites and the axons branch out from the soma to form a 
tree shaped structure. Information from other neurons, in the form of electrical 
impulses, enters the dendrites through connection points called synapses. All 
information carried by dendrites flows to the soma for processing. The output 
signal is later transmitted through the attached axons to the synapses of other 
neurons [14]. 
In an artificial neural network, the artificial neurons are designed to simu­
late a biological neuron in terms of functionality and structure. The main part 
of an artificial neuron is called a node or a unit. The connections between the 
nodes occur through wires that simulate biological connections between neu­
rons [15]. The architecture of an artificial neural network is mainly divided 
into three layers as shown in Figure 8.1. The first layer, called the input layer, 
is responsible for accepting external signals. The input layer transmits signals 

224 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
to the neurons or nodes in the next layer, which is called the hidden layer. The 
hidden layer’s function is to extract all the important features from the received 
signals at the input layer. These features are next forwarded to the final layer of 
the network, which is the output layer.
8.3.2  Neural Network Learning Connections’ Weights 
The connections between nodes in a neural network architecture are assigned 
weights. These weights aim at emulating the biological connections between 
neurons. In a biological neural network, certain axon-dendrite pathways are 
more reinforced than others. This can be reflected by the variation of weights 
assigned to the artificial connections. When signals are received and processed 
by a node, they are multiplied by their respective weights and then the total 
amount of connections are added up as depicted in Figure 8.2 [15]. 
Figure 8.1  Basic neural network architecture [15].
Figure 8.2  An artificial neural network model.

 
Machine-Learning Implementation in Cognitive Radio 
225
8.3.3  Back-Propagation Learning
A well-known scheme for adjusting the connection weights in an artificial neu­
ral network is the back-propagation scheme. Such learning scheme starts at 
the output of the neural network. It first identifies the neural network’s output 
and compares it to a target output. The neural network calculates an error ad­
justment for each of the nodes of the network. It then adjusts the connection 
weights based on the error values assigned to each node. Once the network 
adjusts the set of connections, it calculates the error values for the previous layer 
(going backwards towards the input layer) and makes further adjustments. The 
back-propagation algorithm repeats the same process until it reaches the input 
layer. This is achieved by adjusting all of the connection weights between the 
hidden layers. Once this is completed and the weights are determined, the net­
work is ready to evaluate another output [15].
8.3.4  Mathematical Model of a Neural Network
A neuron i is mainly composed of three main parts as shown in Figure 8.2 
[14, 15]:
1.	 Synaptic links, which are characterized by their synaptic weights (w). 
Each input signal (xj) is weighed (multiplied) by the corresponding 
synaptic weight (wij).
2.	 An adder for summing up the input signals weighed by their synaptic 
weights.
3.	 An activation function for limiting the magnitude of neurons output 
to some finite value.
The neuron’s output is simply the weighted sum of its inputs plus a bias 
term. The sum is then passed through an activation function. Thus, a neuron i 
can be mathematically described as shown in (8.1) [14]: 
	
(
)
1
i
i
i
m
i
ij
j
j
y
v
b
v
w x
ϕ
=
=
+
= ∑
	
(8.1)
where vi is the linear combiner output for the neuron i, bi is the bias, and ϕ(.) 
is the activation function.
In each layer, the neurons calculate the signal at their output and evalu­
ate the gradient vector that is required for the backward pass of the signal. 
That gradient vector determines the change in the weights of each neuron. The 

226 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
calculation of the neuron’s instantaneous error is performed as described by 
(8.2) [14]: 
	
( )
( )
( )
i
i
i
e n
d n
y n
=
−
	
(8.2)
where di(n) is the desired output for the neuron i and yi(n) is the output func­
tion signal of neuron i at the nth iteration as shown in Figure 8.2. 
The total instantaneous error from all neurons is formulated in (8.3) 
	
( )
( )
2
1
1
2
I
i
i
E n
e
n
=
= ∑
	
(8.3)
where I is the total number of neurons in the output layer of the network.
The number of examples used in the training sets varies based on the data 
available and the number of hidden layers. If N is the total number of examples 
contained in the training set, the average squared error energy can be calculated 
as summarized in (8.4):
	
( )
1
1
N
av
n
E
E n
N
=
=
∑
	
(8.4)
The weights of each neuron are updated based on the input-output pair 
patterns. Examples of such patterns when the neural network is applied to an 
antenna structure designed for cognitive radio can be the S-parameters, radia­
tion patterns, input impedance, corresponding resonant frequencies, or any 
other antenna performance characteristic. These patterns are provided to the 
neural network during the training process. Thus, the purpose of the neural 
network is to change the weights of its neurons in such a way that the total net­
work error is minimized. During each iteration, the new weights are calculated 
as summarized in (8.5):
	
(
)
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
1
ij
ij
ij
ij
ij
w
n
w
n
w
n
E n
w
n
w
n
μ
+
=
+ ∆
∂
∆
= −
∂
	
(8.5)
where µ is the learning rate parameter of the back-propagation algorithm [14, 
15]. This parameter determines the amount of variation in the synaptic weights 
of the neural network. Such variations are different in each iteration. A trade-
off usually exists in the way that µ is chosen [16, 17]. A large µ speeds up the 

 
Machine-Learning Implementation in Cognitive Radio 
227
learning rate; however, one must be careful about the changes in the synaptic 
weights in order not to drive the network into an unstable behavior.
The output of a neuron is highly dependent on the activation function ϕ. 
Although there are several activation functions, the most widely used types of 
activation functions are the linear and the sigmoid [14, 15]. The linear activa­
tion function can be written as: 
	
( )
1
if
0
0
if
0
v
v
v
ϕ
≥

= 
<

	
(8.6)
where vi is the induced local field of the neuron i (i.e., 
1
m
i
ij
j
i
j
v
w x
b
=
=
+
∑
). The 
corresponding output of a neuron i, using such an activation function, can be 
expressed as:
	
1
if
0
0
if
0
i
i
i
v
y
v
≥

= 
<

	
(8.7)
As for the sigmoid activation function, it can be written as: 
	
( )
1
1
av
v
e
ϕ
−
=
+
	
(8.8)
where a is the slope parameter of the sigmoid function. 
8.4  Neural Network FPGA Controller Design
In order to control the reconfiguration process of an antenna structure, the 
neural network or any other machine-learning algorithm must be embedded on 
a microprocessor. In a cognitive radio environment, the microprocessor acts as 
the main computer or the brain of the cognitive radio system and can be called 
the cognitive radio engine. One such choice for a microprocessor is the FPGA. 
Basically, FPGAs are configurable arrangements of a large number of logic 
cells, memory blocks, and configurable routing networks, with the overall en­
semble describing a complex digital system. It is this digital system that can be 
used to implement and train a neural network for any reconfigurable antenna 
control. The neural network parameters are mapped into the FPGA to improve 
the performance and efficiency of an antenna, as well as to enable the antenna 
to reconfigure itself autonomously from previous learning patterns in a highly 
dynamic environment such as cognitive radio. 

228 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
The size of the implemented neural network is limited by the block RAM 
capacity of the chosen FPGA board [15]. It also depends on the number of 
neurons and the synaptic weights available. The number of synaptic weight 
connections (NSW) available for the FPGA board is given by [18–20].
	
(
)(
)
FPGA Block RAM Size
# of Block RAMs
Size of Synaptic Weights
SW
N
=
	
(8.9)
8.4.1  Neural Network Modeling Procedure 
There are various steps that must be followed in order to achieve the appro­
priate modeling of the neural network that is going to control the cognitive 
radio reconfigurable antenna. In reality, the reconfigurable antenna is assumed 
to have several reconfiguring components (i.e., PIN diodes, varactors, and so 
forth) that are controlled by the FPGA. The procedure for using neural net­
works on the FPGA to control the functionality of a reconfigurable antenna is 
highlighted in Figure 8.3 and can be summarized as follows [15]: 
1.	 The measured or simulated antenna’s reflection coefficient data are 
first collected, sampled, and normalized. 
2.	 A MATLAB code is written to build and train the neural network.
3.	 A MATLAB Simulink model is built for the neural using Xilinx Sys­
tem Generator (XSG) blocks [21]. Other tools can be used based on 
the type of the FPGA chosen.
Figure 8.3  A neural network-FPGA controller hardware architecture [15].

 
Machine-Learning Implementation in Cognitive Radio 
229
4.	 A VHDL (VHSIC {Very High Speed Integrated Circuit}Hardware 
Description Language) code for the design is generated.
5.	 The VHDL code is sent to Xilinx ISE (Integrated Synthesis Environ­
ment), where it is syntheisized, implemented, and sent to the FPGA 
board.
6.	 The FPGA board output is connected to the various antenna reconfig­
uring elements in order to provide the appropriate biasing.
It is essential to note that the antenna’s reflection coefficient data that are 
collected constitutes the input of the neural network. The output of the neu­
ral network is represented by the appropriate voltage/current levels required to 
generate the corresponding reconfiguring elements configurations. In order to 
generate a valid VHDL code, the Xilinx System Generator requires a MATLAB 
model to be built in MATLAB Simulink using Xilinx blocks. Therefore, the 
MATLAB code is manually built, block by block, in Simulink [15]. 
8.5  Neural Network Implementation
In this section, various examples on the neural network implementation of re­
configurable antennas are presented. The antenna modeling procedure follows 
the following structure: 
• Input layer: The input layer is composed of N neurons, where N is the 
number of points required to reproduce the antenna’s reflection coef­
ficient for every switch configuration.
• Hidden layer: A single hidden layer is used with a sigmoid activation 
function. The number of neurons in this layer is usually determined by 
minimizing the total error.
• Output layer: The number of neurons in this layer is equal to number 
of switches or reconfiguring components employed to reconfigure the 
antenna’s various functionalities.
The neural network model is derived, trained, and tested for accuracy 
for every reconfigurable antenna. During the training cycle, the antenna data 
are randomly divided into three sets. The first set is used for training while the 
other two sets are dedicated for testing and validation of the results. During the 
training phase, the data samples are presented to adjust the network propaga­
tion error. The validation stage ends once the neural network stops exhibiting 
generalization improvement. The following step includes testing the neural net­
work performance to verify its accuracy.

230 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
8.5.1  Neural Network Modeling of a Reconfigurable Antenna Based on PIN 
Diodes
The antenna structure discussed here is a hexagonal shaped reconfigurable 
patch that is composed of six parts connected to a central patch as shown in 
Figure 8.4(a). The connection between the outer parts and the central patch 
occurs through electrical switches. The antenna is built on the top of an FR4 
epoxy substrate and is fed by a coaxial probe as discussed in [22]. Reconfigura­
tion is achieved by redistributing the surface currents through the activation 
and deactivation of the various switches. To predict the performance of this an­
tenna using neural networks, 51 input neurons are required as shown in Figure 
8.4(b). These input neurons correspond to the number of data samples taken 
from the antenna’s reflection coefficient for each switch configuration. Because 
the reconfigurable antenna has 6 switches, the number of output neurons is 
set to 6. The number of neurons in the hidden layer determines how fast and 
accurately the neural network learning is achieved. In general, it is desirable to 
develop the network with the minimum number of neurons in the hidden layer, 
at the same time avoiding overtraining and undertraining. Figure 8.5 depicts 
the performance of the neural network for several neurons in the hidden layer. 
The hidden layer with 11 neurons is chosen as the best performer as it yields 
the best approximation results. For this case, 18 iterations are required for the 
neural network to achieve the required accuracy [15]. 
The performance of the trained neural network is tested by reversing the 
input-output process. The neural network must be able to predict the anten­
na performance resulting for any given combination of switches. The neural 
Figure 8.4  (a) The star antenna configuration, and (b) the neural network model.

 
Machine-Learning Implementation in Cognitive Radio 
231
network predicts the performance of unknown switch combinations by ex­
trapolating from the already “seen” or learned examples. Figure 8.6(a) shows 
a comparison between the neural network output and the measured antenna 
response when switches 1, 2, and 3 are on. Figure 8.6(b) shows the case when 
only switches 1 and 2 are on and the remaining switches are deactivated. The 
comparison illustrates good agreement between both the predicted output of 
the neural network and the corresponding measured data. This proves that the 
training of the neural network guarantees an accurate control for the reconfigu­
rable antenna. 
It should be noted that once the neural network is trained, the optimiza­
tion of the antenna performance depends on the extrapolation between the 
various scenarios that the network has seen before. Hence, a neural network can 
predict the control of the different switching components very fast in a dynami­
cally changing environment such as that of the cognitive radio.
Reconfigurable antennas can also be represented as graph models as dis­
cussed in Chapter 5. Graphs are used to remove redundant components from 
switch reconfigurable antennas, which will result in a faster and smoother tran­
sition from one configuration into another [23, 24]. Graph-modeled recon­
figurable antennas with nonredundant reconfiguring components require less 
Figure 8.5  The effect of the number of neurons in the hidden layer on the neural network 
performance [15].

232 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
training time for neural network implementation and result in a faster action, 
especially on a cognitive radio platform.
8.5.2  Neural Network Modeling of a Varactor-Based Reconfigurable Filtenna
Another example implemented with neural networks is the reconfigurable 
filtenna that is presented in Chapter 6. As discussed before, the operation of the 
reconfigurable filtenna is based on the integrated varactor that allows the struc­
ture to tune its resonant frequency for various biasing voltages. The filtenna 
structure consists of a dual-sided Vivaldi wideband antenna. The filtenna’s top 
and bottom layers are depicted in Figure 8.7(a) [25].
Figure 8.7(b) presents the neural networks model for the filtenna. It re­
quires only one input neuron, one output neuron along with two hidden neu­
rons. The input to the neural network is the desired resonant frequency of the 
filtenna and the output is the voltage bias value that is applied to the varactor 
in order to achieve the desired resonant behavior. 
Figure 8.6  The neural network output versus measured antenna response for the case when 
(a) three switches are activated and (b) two switches are activated [15].

 
Machine-Learning Implementation in Cognitive Radio 
233
Figure 8.8 presents the neural network predictions of the appropriate bi­
asing that has to be applied to the varactor for various resonant frequencies. The 
close similarity between the predicted values by the designed neural network 
and the measured data proves the ability of the neural network to accurately 
predict and generate the required frequency resonances [15].
The validation test of a neural network is important to ensure that it 
has completed its learning successfully off-line and it is ready to predict future 
performance in real time, once it is embedded on an FPGA. A validation test is 
executed on the reconfigurable filtenna’s neural network model discussed above. 
The FPGA board used in this experiment is the ML403 Xilinx Virtex-4 [26]. 
The input of the FPGA board is connected to a 16-bit analog-to-digital (A/D) 
converter, while the output goes through an 8-bit digital-to-analog (D/A) con­
verter. This output is connected to the varactor of the reconfigurable filtenna as 
highlighted in the experimental setup in Figure 8.9. Within the FPGA resides 
the Simulink model of the reconfigurable filtenna. It is important to note that 
this model is first converted to VHDL code and then sent to the FPGA board. 
Figure 8.7   (a) The filtenna geometry, and (b) the corresponding neural network modeling.

234 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
The experiment is divided into four steps as depicted in Figure 8.10. Each 
step should perform the following: 
• Step 1: A random frequency generator (RFG) code is programmed 
within the FPGA to generate a frequency that lies within the operating 
band of the antenna every 2 seconds.
Figure 8.8  The neural network output versus the measured antenna response [15].
Figure 8.9  The experiment setup for the varactor based reconfigurable filtenna neural net­
work FPGA controller.

 
Machine-Learning Implementation in Cognitive Radio 
235
• Step 2: The frequency produced by the RFG is supplied to the input of 
the neural network by converting it to a binary 2s complement 16-bit 
number.
• Step 3: The trained neural network programmed on the FPGA board 
uses the data presented to its input layer to calculate the corresponding 
output voltage. 
• Step 4: The neural network output is an unsigned 8-bit binary number 
that goes through a D/A converter. 
• Step 5: The output of the D/A converter is fed to the varactor to tune 
its capacitance.
For the experiment, a 12-V supply is used for the FPGA board. The maxi­
mum output voltage of the D/A converter is 5V; therefore, a DC voltage supply 
is used to scale the output voltage up to the one needed for the varactor. The 
antenna is connected to a vector network analyzer to verify that the appropriate 
tuning is occurring.
Figure 8.10  The five steps required to test the performance of the neural network on the 
reconfigurable filtenna.

236 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
8.5.3  Neural Network Modeling of a Mechanically Reconfigurable Antenna
A neural network can also be applied to control a mechanically reconfigurable 
antenna such as the one discussed in [27] and shown in Figure 8.11(a). The an­
tenna achieves reconfiguration of its frequency by rotating a circular section in 
its structure using a stepper motor. For each rotation, a different radiating struc­
ture is fed to the microstrip feeding line and, as a result, the antenna changes 
its operating frequency. The neural network model of this antenna is shown in 
Figure 8.11(b). It has 201 input, seven hidden, and four output neurons. The 
number of input neurons corresponds to the number of data samples taken 
from the antenna’s reflection coefficient. As for the number of output neurons, 
it corresponds to the number of rotations performed by the stepper motor. The 
output of the reversed neural network model in comparison with the measured 
antenna response also exhibits a very close agreement. This validates the ability 
of the neural network to predict the antenna reconfigurable performance [15].
8.6  Switch-Failure Correction in Frequency-Reconfigurable 
Antenna Arrays Using Neural Networks
Reconfigurable antennas and reconfigurable antenna arrays once incorporated 
on a cognitive radio platform must be efficient, reliable, and swiftly acting. 
The increased requirements and the highly imposed constraints on the cogni­
tive radio reconfigurable RF front ends enforce the availability of techniques to 
overcome reconfiguration failures. In this section, the use of neural networks 
Figure 8.11  (a) The reconfigurable antenna with rotatable section, and (b) the neural net­
work model of the reconfigurable rotatable antenna. 

 
Machine-Learning Implementation in Cognitive Radio 
237
to overcome failures in a switch reconfigurable antenna array is presented. The 
corresponding antenna array, depicted in Figure 8.12(a), consists of four identi­
cal square patches that are fed via a corporate feeding structure. Eight switches 
are included within the array structure where each square patch contains a 
pair of two switches [28]. To overcome switch failures, identifying the failed 
switches constitutes the first step. Sensing lines are integrated within the array 
structure and the coupling between them is used to identify failures as discussed 
in [29]. From Figure 8.12(a), one can notice that there are two ports for the 
vertical sensing lines and two ports for the horizontal ones. These sensing lines 
are integrated within the array substrate and are used to detect any switch fail­
ure. The detection of the corresponding failed switch is based on measuring 
the coupling between the horizontal and vertical lines. The appropriate sensing 
lines are chosen so that they pass underneath the patch that contains the failed 
switch. Any change in the coupling between the appropriate sensing lines al­
lows the identification of the failed switch.
The switch correction is executed by training a neural network and is 
based on the fact that different switch configurations can result in the same 
frequency of operation without altering the antenna’s radiation and polarization 
characteristics. The neural network is trained to determine at least one of the 
Figure 8.12   (a) The frequency reconfigurable antenna array, and (b) the neural network 
model of the reconfigurable antenna array. (© 2013, IEEE. From [15].)

238 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
equivalent configurations that bypasses the defected switch without affecting 
the overall performance of the array. The input layer of the neural network in 
this case consists of 299 input neurons which represent the minimum number 
of points required to represent the array’s reflection coefficient. The hidden 
neurons are optimized to 11 neurons. The output layer consists of 8 neurons 
which are equivalent to the number of switches integrated within the antenna 
array. The neural network architecture is shown in Figure 8.12(b) [28]. The 
neural network is trained until the mean square error (MSE) at the output 
reaches the stop value of 10−5. This value of the MSE ensures that an appro­
priate weight connection between the different neurons of the neural network 
has been achieved. Figure 8.13 shows the number of iterations needed for the 
training process versus the MSE. This particular reconfigurable antenna array 
requires 11 iterations in order to achieve the required MSE. 
The neural network model developed for the reconfigurable array is em­
bedded into the FPGA using Xilinx System Generator blocks. The process of 
switch correction is divided into two steps [28]:
• Step 1: Determine the failed switch by investigating the coupling be­
tween the different integrated sensing lines of the reconfigurable anten­
na array [29].
Figure 8.13  The minimum square error for the trained neural network of the frequency re­
configurable array. (© 2013, IEEE. From [28].)

 
Machine-Learning Implementation in Cognitive Radio 
239
• Step 2: Once the failed switch has been identified, the neural network 
then determines the appropriate equivalent configuration that can be 
activated to maintain the same overall antenna performance. The FPGA 
will accordingly automate the corresponding switches by providing the 
needed current level to the switches.
8.7  FPGA Selection and the Cognitive Radio Processor
Implementing a neural network onto an appropriately chosen microprocessor 
or FPGA is critical to the success and accuracy of the neural network model. 
One must keep in mind that there are several algorithms that are required to 
run an autonomous cognitive radio. These algorithms are going to reside on the 
chosen FPGA. The various algorithms must be capable to perform the sensing, 
the decision-making, adapting, and the physical layer reasoning in addition to 
the learning from current and past decisions [6]. 
The chosen FPGA should be able to control the reconfigurable RF front 
end and perform the intensive computing algorithms for the cognitive and sens­
ing components of the cognitive radio system. The use of the FPGA to achieve 
all these functionalities faces two main technical challenges. The first challenge 
is related to the optimal physical and temporal partition of the FPGA while the 
second one is associated with the power consumption of the FPGA. To benefit 
from the physical resources of the FPGA, a technique known as dynamic partial 
reconfiguration (DPR) can be used to multiplex in time functional units of the 
system [30, 31]. The idea is to dynamically replace functional units that are not 
being used at a point in time by functional units that are needed. Thus in this 
case, not only the communicating antenna is reconfigurable but the entire cog­
nitive radio processor that resides on the FPGA is reconfigurable as well. This 
will enable the design of a true reconfigurable system.
In general, the physical and temporal partition of the device is addressed 
as a multi-objective optimization problem in which the designer seeks to opti­
mize the usage of resources by means of multiplexing in time functional units. 
The designer is also required to maintain the complexity of the communication 
between functional units simple and compliant with certain performance re­
quirements. The work performed in [32, 33] for highly demanding computing 
applications can be extended and adapted to the specific case of cognitive radio 
to partition the FPGA to accommodate the sensing, classification, antenna con­
trol, and other functionalities.
Power consumption is the second challenge that needs to be addressed 
since FPGAs usually consume significantly more power than application-spe­
cific integrated circuit (ASIC) implementations of the same hardware func­
tions. The FPGA power consumption can be divided into two main aspects: 

240 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
static and dynamic. Static power constitutes between 30% and 60% of the 
overall power consumption [33]. Dynamic power is the power that the device 
consumes when running operations. It is possible to reduce power consump­
tion by simply programming empty or blank bit streams in sections of the 
device. This is similar to disconnecting subsystems that are not used at some 
point in time to save power. The idea is based on partitioning the FPGA with 
the various algorithms and optimizing each functionality for the cognitive radio 
as required. If there is no sensing occurring, for example, then that part of the 
FPGA does not have to be utilized. Thus, a cognitive radio will have the capa­
bility to efficiently activate the machine learning algorithms for sensing, signal 
classification, and RF front-end control when needed. 
8.8  Discussion
In this chapter, neural networks are proposed to be embedded on the FPGA to 
control reconfigurable antenna states for a cognitive radio platform. Different 
examples of reconfigurable antennas are presented along with the procedure of 
building the neural network FPGA controller. Switch failure correction in a re­
configurable antenna array using a neural network is also discussed. The chap­
ter concludes with a brief discussion on practical issues related to FPGAs and 
their power consumption. In the next chapter, the implementation of cognitive 
radio in radar and space applications is detailed.
References
[1]	 Bkassiny, M., Li Yang, and S. K. Jayaweera, “A Survey on Machine-Learning Techniques 
in Cognitive Radios,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, Vol. 15, No. 3, Third 
Quarter 2013, pp. 1136–1159.
[2]	 Mitola III, J., and G. Q. Maguire, “Cognitive Radio: Making Software Radios More Per­
sonal,” IEEE Personal Communications, Vol. 6, No. 4, August 1999, pp. 13–18. 
[3]	 Mitola, J., “Cognitive Radio: An Integrated Agent Architecture for Software Defined 
Radio,” Ph.D. dissertation, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden, 
2000. 
[4]	 Costlow, T., “Cognitive Radios Will Adapt to Users,” IEEE Intelligent Systems, Vol. 18, 
No. 3, May-June 2003, p. 7.
[5]	 Haykin, S., “Cognitive Radio: Brain-Empowered Wireless Communications,” IEEE Jour­
nal on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 23, No. 2, February 2005, pp. 201–220.
[6]	 Jayaweera, S. K., and C. G. Christodoulou, “Radiobots: Architecture, Algorithms and Re­
altime Reconfigurable Antenna Designs for Autonomous, Self-Learning Future Cognitive 
Radios,” University of New Mexico, Technical Report EECE-TR-11-0001, March 2011, 
http://repository.unm.edu/handle/1928/12306.

 
Machine-Learning Implementation in Cognitive Radio 
241
[7]	 Xing, Y., and R. Chandramouli, “Human Behavior Inspired Cognitive Radio Net­
work Design,” IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 46, No. 12, December 2008, pp. 
122–127.
[8]	 Zooghby, A., C. G. Christodoulou, M., Georgiopoulos, “Neural Network-Based Adap­
tive Beamforming for One- and Two-Dimensional Antenna Arrays,” IEEE Transactions on 
Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 46, No. 12, December 1998, pp. 1891–1893.
[9]	 Patnaik, A., et al., “Neurocomputational Analysis of a Multiband Reconfigurable Planar 
Antenna,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 53, No. 11, November 
2005, pp. 3453–3458. 
[10]	 Patnaik, A., et al., “A Frequency Reconfigurable Antenna Design Using Neural Networks,” 
IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 2(A), 2005, pp. 409–
412. 
[11]	 Lagaris, I., A. Likas, and D. Papageorgiou, “Neural-Network Methods for Boundary Value 
Problems with Irregular Boundaries,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, Vol. 11, No. 
5, September 2000, pp. 1041–1049.
[12]	 Christodoulou, C., and M. Georgiopoulos, Applications of Neural Network in 
Electromagnetics, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 2000.
[13]	 Marsland, S., Machine Learning: An Algorithmic Perspective, 2nd ed., London, U.K.: 
Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2015.
[14]	 Haykin, S., Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foundation, 2nd ed., Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998.
[15]	 Al Zuraiqi, E. T., “Neural Network Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) Controllers 
for Reconfigurable Antennas,” Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of New Mexico, May 
2012.
[16]	 Lee, R. Q., and K. F. Lee, “Experimental Study of Two-Layer Electromagnetically Coupled 
Rectangular Patch Antenna,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. AP-38, 
No. 8, August 1990, pp. 1298–1302.
[17]	 Zhang, Q. J., and K. C. Gupta, Neural Networks for RF and Microwave Design, Norwood, 
MA: Artech House, 2000. 
[18]	 Lyke, J., “A Cellular Automata FPGA Architecture That Can Be Trained with Neural 
Networks,” Aerospace Conference Proceedings, Vol. 5, 2002, pp. 2347–2354.
[19]	 Shelley, S., et al., “FPGA Controlled Switch-Reconfigured Antenna,” IEEE Antennas and 
Wireless Propagation Letters, 2010, pp. 355–358.
[20]	 Bastos, J. L., H. P. Figueroa, and A. Monti, “FPGA Implementation of Neural Network-
Based Controllers for Power Electronics Applications,” Applied Power Electronics Conference 
and Exposition, March 2006, pp 1443–1484.
[21]	 “ISE 13.1 User Guides,” http://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/boards_and_
kits/ug752_13_1.pdf.
[22]	 Costantine, J., et al., “A Star Shaped Reconfigurable Patch Antenna,” IEEE MTT-S 
International Microwave Workshop Series on Signal Integrity and High-Speed Interconnects, 
2009, pp. 97–100.

242 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
[23]	 Costantine, J., Y. Tawk, and C. G. Christodoulou, Design of Reconfigurable Antennas Using 
Graph Models, San Rafael, CA: Morgan & Claypool, 2013
[24]	 Costantine, J., et al., “Reducing Redundancies in Reconfigurable Antenna Structures 
Using Graph Models,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 59, No. 3, 
March 2011, pp. 793–801. 
[25]	 Tawk, Y., J. Costantine, and and C. G. Christodoulou, “A Varactor-Based Reconfigurable 
Filtenna,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, Vol. 11, 2012, pp. 716–719.
[26]	 “Virtex-4 FPGA Data Sheet,” http://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/data 
sheets/ds302.pdf. 
[27]	 Tawk, Y., J. Costantine and C. G. Christodoulou, “A Frequency Reconfigurable Rotatable 
Microstrip Antenna Design,” IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation, 
2010, pp. 1–4.
[28]	 Tawk, Y., et al., “Using Neural Networks for Switch Failure Correction in Frequency 
Reconfigurable Antenna Arrays,” IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and 
Propagation, 2013, pp. 1062–1063.
[29]	 Rivera, M. J., et al., “Detection of Failures in Switch Reconfigurable Antenna Arrays Using 
Embedded Sensing Lines,” IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation, 
July 2012, pp. 1–2.
[30]	 Vera, A., et al., “A Dynamically Reconfigurable Computing Model for Video Processing 
Applications,” 2009 Conference Record of the Forty-Third Asilomar Conference on Signals, 
Systems and Computers, November 2009, pp. 327–331.
[31]	 Vera, A., M. S. Pattichis, and J. Lyke, “A Dynamic Dual Fixed-Point Arithmetic 
Architecture for FPGAs,” International Journal of Reconfigurable Computing, Vol. 2011, 
2011, pp. 1–19.
[32]	 Tuan, T., and S. Trimberger, “The Power of FPGA Architectures: The Present and Future 
of Low-Power FPGA Design,” Xcell Journal, Second Quarter 2007, pp. 12–15. 
[33]	 Vera, G. A., “A Dynamic Arithmetic Architecture: Precision, Power and Performance 
Considerations,” Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of New Mexico, 2008.

243
9
Cognitive Radio for Radar and Space 
Applications
9.1  Introduction
The application of cognitive radio is not restricted to typical terrestrial applica­
tions but rather can be extended to radar and space applications. The concept of 
cognitive radar was first introduced in 2006 [1]. Since then, many researchers 
have addressed this topic with the purpose of further developing radar technol­
ogy while introducing cognition concepts into its operation [2–5]. Examples 
of cognitive radar properties can be perceiving, thinking, classifying, problem-
solving, and remembering from previous experience [3]. Traditional noncogni­
tive radar systems lack these properties. 
The main strength of cognitive radar is its capability of identifying several 
classes of targets when operating in a complex environment characterized by 
heterogeneous clutter [3]. Cognitive radar can also provide early protection 
against advanced electronic attacks, handle frequency shortages, and recognize 
nonintentional interference [3]. In addition, the implementation of cognitive 
radio for space and satellite communications offers the opportunity to address 
shortcomings from which traditional satellite communication protocols suffer.
It is important to indicate that currently implemented adaptive satellite 
communication platforms are mainly based on software-defined radio and that 
the actual implementation of a full cognitive radio system in space is destined 
to be the future of satellite communications. The implementation of such radar 
systems is being adopted by the European Space Agency (ESA) and the Na­

244 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), in addition to military 
space programs from around the world.
Military and civil applications of communication that make use of cogni­
tive radio provide a great solution in overcoming obsolescence and implemen­
tation errors [6, 7]. The integration of cognitive satellite and terrestrial com­
munications allows for an easier implementation of cognitive radio, especially 
in the sense of frequency interweaving [8]. In a situation where public mobile 
networks are unavailable or overloaded due to a disastrous event, satellite-based 
cognitive radio can be used to identify the wireless network nodes and their 
transmission parameters to provide uninterrupted service. Such cases rely on 
the integration of terrestrial and satellite communication protocols and can be 
identified as satellite-assisted communication protocols [9].
This chapter discusses the application of cognitive radio into radar tech­
nology, known as cognitive radar and presents the implementation of cognitive 
radio into satellite and space communication. The concept of cognitive radar 
is introduced with a discussion on its implementation. Next, a comparison be­
tween cognitive and adaptive radar is presented. Cognitive radar networks as 
well as the difficulties in cognitive radar are highlighted and discussed. The 
application of cognitive radio in satellite-to-Earth and satellite-to-satellite com­
munication scenarios is introduced. Finally, the challenges in implementing 
cognitive radio for space communications are included.
9.2  The Concept of Cognitive Radar
Radar by definition is a system that is used for remote sensing to survey, track, 
and identify targets for both civilian and military applications. Adding cogni­
tion to a radar system is made possible due to current technological advances. 
Some of these advances are the ability of continuous sensing, the implementa­
tion of phased array technology that enables the radar to scan its surrounding 
very quickly, and the improvement in digital processors. Cognitive radar is ca­
pable of knowing, perceiving, acting, and remembering. 
The operation of a cognitive radar is triggered once the radar is switched 
on. The system that composes a cognitive radar becomes connected to its sur­
rounding through the transmission and reflection of electromagnetic waves. 
Based on multiple transmission and reflections by different targets, the radar 
system creates its knowledge database of the surrounding. The radar system 
does not need to store the entire data but rather update the state vector that 
represents an estimate of the environment in a smart fashion. Thus, the cogni­
tive radar’s operation is based on the following three steps [1]:

 
Cognitive Radio for Radar and Space Applications 
245
1.	 Continuously learning about its environment, through intelligent 
signal processing. The radar learns and builds its database based on 
interactions with its surroundings. It also updates the receiver with the 
information learned.
2.	 Based on the first step, the transmitter adjusts its scanning beam in a 
smart fashion. Thus, a feedback loop is created from the receiver to 
transmitter for continuous updates.
3.	 The entire system that is now created constitutes a dynamic closed 
loop that preserves the information content of the radar returns 
though the Bayesian approach.
A cognitive radar can thus be compared to a bat. The bat relies on echo-
location determination. It changes its transmitted sonar wave in target pursuit 
[1]. The cognitive processing cycle that is followed by a cognitive radar (shown 
in Figure 9.1) starts with the illumination of the environment. The “echoes” of 
the environment are then fed into the radar-scene analyzer and the Bayesian 
target tracker. The tracker continuously identifies the targets based on the infor­
mation provided by the radar-scene analyzer. The transmitter scans the environ­
ment based on the decisions that are made of possible targets and feeds back this 
Figure 9.1  Block diagram of a cognitive radar. (© 2006, IEEE. From [1].)

246 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
information to the receiver. The feedback mechanism in a radar system is easier 
to implement than in a typical communication system since the transmitter and 
receiver are colocated [1–5]. 
One can identify two scenarios for cognitive radars: The inside-out pro­
cess and the outside-in process [1, 2]. The inside-out cognitive radar is defined 
by the fact that the receiver has a prior knowledge of the environment, such 
as the geographical map or kinematics of noncooperative targets [1]. Informa­
tion from the previous knowledge database is retrieved by the Bayesian target 
tracker and is implemented for the improvement of the radar performance. 
The outside-in cognitive radar operation is based on short-term memory that 
is developed by the receiver as the system progresses into its operation. Such 
behavior is initiated by the radar-scene analyzer based on the information col­
lected from the environment by the radar itself or by other sensors that are col­
laborating with the radar system.
9.3  Cognitive Radar Analysis
The decisions made by the receiver on the identification of possible targets are 
based on the information that the receiver gets from the radar scene analyzer. 
Interference caused by the presence of clutter or undesired targets affects the 
radar performance. Thus, the designer requires the availability of information 
that is gathered from the clutter alone and other information that is gathered 
from a specific target in addition to clutter [1–5]. In a situation where a radar 
is surveying a particular area of interest, the radar returns are composed of spe­
cific amplitudes in addition to the Doppler information on that area of terrain. 
Thus, measures need to be taken to increase the detected signal amplitudes of 
the identified target while minimizing the Doppler effect. Another component 
to take into consideration is the cognitive realization of the target motion and 
speed. 
The radar-scene analyzer models a targeted terrain by analyzing first its 
clutter power distribution in addition to the number of neighboring Doppler 
bins over which measurements are averaged. Then the radar-scene analyzer 
identifies the target to clutter power ratio. The target motion and trajectory are 
later modeled using a Gaussian distributed acceleration [1]. The choice of the 
Gaussian distribution depends on the nature of terrain being monitored.
Bayesian target tracking that is used in a cognitive radar is based on a 
direct tracking algorithm that consists of three steps [10].
1.	 Radar returns or echoes are gathered over a limited time for a certain 
predetermined terrain of interest.

 
Cognitive Radio for Radar and Space Applications 
247
2.	 The terrain is divided into cells and the probability that the cell con­
tains a target is computed.
3.	 Recursive computation of the previous step is executed in order to 
identify target tracks that allow future decisions on subsequent targets.
The Bayesian target tracker preserves the information content of the radar 
returns, which follows the principle of information preservation as described by 
Shannon [1, 11]. The Bayesian tracker also allows the radar to track the motion 
of a target by analyzing the Doppler ripples. Such feature resembles a human 
eye in a way [1]. The information contained in a radar image that resorts to 
Bayesian target tracking is different from other approaches in the sense that it 
plots an explicit statistical structure of a terrain.
In general, the performance of a cognitive radar is based on the following 
aspects:
1.	 As any cognitive system, intelligence is a necessary requirement. In 
fact, a cognitive radar resembles a bat by using acquired knowledge of 
the distance from its target to adjust the parameters of its transmitted 
signal bursts. Thus, a radar must learn from continuing interactions 
with the environment and must utilize the information extracted by 
the receiver in a smart manner. All of this learning and analysis occurs 
with a minimum processing time [1]. 
2.	 Intelligent signal processing cannot be executed without precious 
feedback from the receiver to the transmitter.
3.	 Information in radar echoes must be preserved for appropriate func­
tioning of the receiver. Thus, a radar is cognitive only if it is able to 
learn from past communication returns and if it is able to convey the 
learning experience interchangeably between the transmitter and re­
ceiver. Powerful signal processing techniques such as the Bayesian ap­
proach can help in the fast analysis of unknown terrains and the swift 
identification of new targets and their moving speed. 
9.4  Cognitive Radar Versus Adaptive Radar Architectures
A conventional radar is adaptive; however, its adaptability feature is restricted 
to the receiver part, while in a cognitive radar both the transmitter and receiver 
are adaptive [3, 12–14]. Traditional radar systems have no arrangements for 
learning, feedback to the transmitter, or integration of digital terrain maps. 
However, cognitive radar displays multiple advanced features that try to imitate 

248 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
biologically cognitive systems [3]. Figure 9.2 shows a comparison between the 
architectures of a conventional radar system and a cognitive one.
A cognitive radar architecture encompasses the following components 
that distinguish it from a traditional adaptive radar [3]:
1.	 An environmental dynamic database (EDDB) that stores all the ac­
quired information from the environment and targets;
2.	 An adaptive transmitter and receiver that give rise to concepts such as 
multiple input multiple output (MIMO) radars [15].
An adaptive transmitter that is the main feature of a cognitive radar, in 
addition to its learning capability, allows the radar to minimize cochannel inter­
ference by resorting to fast time-wave modulation. Other main features include 
beam shaping of the transmitter’s pattern, Doppler division multiple access, 
Figure 9.2  Block diagram of a (a) conventional radar system and (b) cognitive radar [3]. 

 
Cognitive Radio for Radar and Space Applications 
249
sidelobe target leakage prevention, and illumination adaptability [3]. Another 
main feature of a cognitive radar architecture is the knowledge-aided (KA) pro­
cessing unit that consists of an environmental dynamic database and an embed­
ded computing architecture [3].
It is determined that a cognitive radar learns about the environment with 
a feedback loop between the adaptive transmitter and the receiver. However, 
the crucial point is whether the cognitive radar is able to predict the position 
of the targets few seconds or even more into the future. A noncausal processor, 
working jointly with a causal processor (a cognitive one), can perform future 
predictions to a certain extent to compensate for some memory expectancy. In 
other words, if the radar’s position is known at time t = 0, then the prediction of 
its position a couple of seconds into the future has the same quality of informa­
tion. Such a feature can be accomplished through the use of Kalman predictors 
[3, 16]. A scheduler initiates a deterministic operational plan for a cognitive 
radar that predicts its operation a few seconds into the future [3]. 
Another model of a cognitive radar architecture is based on the Rasmus­
sen model of human cognitive performance [17, 18]. There are three layers in 
this architecture that accompany ascending abstractions as shown in Figure 9.3: 
1.	 The skill-based layer, which includes signal generation at the actuator 
branch and signal processing at the receptor branch;
Figure 9.3  The cognitive radar model as derived from the Rasmussen model. (© 2015, IEEE. 
From [17].)

250 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
2.	 The rule-based layer that performs recognition at the receptor branch 
and task scheduling at the actuator side;
3.	 The knowledge-based layer containing situation awareness and plans 
at the receptor and actuator branches accordingly.
9.5  Cognitive Radar Networks
Several radars that cooperate together with a goal of exceeding the sensing ca­
pability of a single cognitive radar form a cognitive radar network [2, 19]. A 
cognitive radar network can rely on a central base station to perform the combi­
nation of all individual radar outputs. For this case, two scenarios can arise [2]:
1.	 Distributed cognition: In this scenario, the individual radars as well as 
the central base station are all cognitive.
2.	 Centralized cognition: In this scenario, only the central base station 
is cognitive. In fact, the central base station acts as the brain or the 
processor of the entire network.
A preferred scenario is always the distributed cognition scenario where 
each radar resorts to local feedback for the adaptive control of its own transmit­
ted signal [2]. One can assume that a centralized cognition network exhibits 
delays due to the global feedback constraint. Thus, the main function of the 
central base station in a distributed cognitive radar network is only to fuse the 
sensor outputs. In reality, the maps generated by the individual cognitive radars 
overlap and are interrelated; thus, it is the job of the central base station to 
identify those overlaps and produce an integrated map in real time for the entire 
cognitive radar network. The central base station allocates computing resources 
according to the incoming radar maps to maximize the amount of information 
received [2].
9.6  Possible Difficulties in Cognitive Radar
A cognitive radar system must possess the prior knowledge and definitions of 
what constitutes a desired performance. For example, in a terrain that involves 
moving and stationary objects across land and water with potential rain and 
clouds, the cognitive radar needs to be informed if the interest is in fixed targets, 
moving targets, the land or water background, the rain or the clouds, or other 
combination of objects [20]. In addition, the cognitive radar must have the side 
information of important factors that the user would add to specific measure­

 
Cognitive Radio for Radar and Space Applications 
251
ment parameters such as sensitivity or accuracy. Thus, one can conclude that, 
for an appropriate functioning of the cognitive radar, the user must inform 
the cognitive sensors what the parameters of interest in each situation are and 
which parameter precedes another in weight and importance. The cognitive 
radar requires also a memory or a knowledge database for proper cognitive 
operation. In fact, the user needs to determine how this knowledge is formed 
and how it will be populated. In other words, the user must determine whether 
each cognitive system is going to learn from scratch or will it use the experience 
of other previous cognitive radars [20]. 
An important parameter that may cause difficulties in the development 
of cognitive radars is their ability to evolve while selecting from a variety of 
potential responses to avoid shutdown during an expected event in the learned 
environment. The training time of cognitive radars needs to be taken into con­
sideration and minimized by installing devices with prior reliable knowledge. 
Another issue that may arise is the stagnation in learning as installation time of 
the cognitive radar progresses. If a Bayesian criterion is used to combine past 
and present information based on accumulated confidence estimates, the user 
needs to also take into consideration false confidence that may build up in the 
system with time and results with rejection of new information. Other opera­
tional constraints and power struggles constitute major challenges that the user 
needs to address when designing or deploying cognitive radar [20].
Finally, it is important to note that while the cognitive radar presents 
many advantages; its structure is complex and requires careful design consid­
erations. The ability of an adaptive radar to learn and add cognition to its be­
havior is possible, but it comes at the cost of complexity and requires stringent 
design capabilities.
9.7  Cognitive Radio in Space Communications
Cognitive radio in space communication is proposed to follow the same proto­
cols as a typical terrestrial communication. Frequency interweaving and chan­
nel underlay constitute the main framework of space-based cognitive radio. 
The maturity level of cognitive radio in space communication is still at the 
level of software-defined radio and current research is attempting to integrate 
the cognition component into the existing standards. Space agencies worldwide 
are interested in such integration, and thus cognitive radio in space tackles two 
specific areas of applications:
1.	 Satellite-to-Earth communication;
2.	 Satellite-to-satellite communication.

252 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
Applying cognitive radio onto a satellite platform requires the under­
standing of the frequency bands that are utilized in satellite communication. 
Satellite communication can be divided into three different categories [21]:
1.	 Broadcasting satellite services (BSS);
2.	 Fixed satellite services (FSS);
3.	 Mobile satellite services (MSS).
The frequency allocations for each type of satellite services are summa­
rized in Table 9.1 for both downlink and uplink [21]. Satellite-to-Earth com­
munication, especially in spectrum sharing or assisted spectrum communica­
tion, is heavily developed, while the area of satellite-to-satellite communication 
is still under development, especially with the rise of small satellites.
Another boost to cognitive radio for satellite communications is the adop­
tion of rules that allow unlicensed radio transmitters to operate in the broadcast 
television spectrum [22]. The use of TV bands for satellite communication is 
vastly different than traditional terrestrial TV implementation. Satellite foot­
prints, locations of stations, used frequency bands, satellite orbits, and mobility 
of receivers need to be taken into consideration [21]. In the next sections, the 
specific scenarios of cognitive satellite communication protocols are addressed.
9.8  Cognitive Radio Communication Between Satellites and 
Terrestrial Stations
It is important to indicate that cognitive radio communication schemes be­
tween space and terrestrial stations are based on software-defined radio mod­
ules [23]. Cognitive radio offers a reliable solution to arising issues in satellite 
to terrestrial communication links. Much interest in the literature is based on 
satellites operating in the Ka-band, especially that Ka-band antennas are de­
signed to accommodate increasing communication traffic demands [24–27]. In 
reality, spectrum congestion is on the rise and future deployments of efficient 
satellites that can cater to the communication needs are anticipated to be more 
Table 9.1 
Typical Frequency Allocations for FSS, MSS, and BSS
Service Type
Frequency Bands for Uplink/Downlink
Usual Terminology
FSS
6/4 GHz, 8/7 GHz, 14/12 GHz, 30/20 GHz, 
50/40 GHz
C-, X-, Ku-, Ka-, and 
V-bands
MSS
1.6/1.5 GHz, 2/2.2 GHz, 30/20 GHz
L-, S-, and Ka-bands
BSS
2/2.2 GHz, 12 GHz, 2.6/2.5 GHz
S-, Ku-, and S-bands
Source: [21].

 
Cognitive Radio for Radar and Space Applications 
253
difficult. However, spectrum congestion occurs around some channels of high 
interest while scarcity exists in other parts of the spectrum. Satellites existing 
in geostationary orbit have only 500 MHz of incumbent spectrum available 
for download [24, 25]. Cognitive radio is proposed as a solution to allow the 
satellites to benefit from a larger band in the spectrum for both downlink and 
uplink while guaranteeing acceptable levels of interferences between primary 
and secondary users. 
Three scenarios are investigated in the literature based on the recommen­
dation by the United Nations Specialized Agency for Information and Technol­
ogy, also known as ITU. These scenarios, also called A, B, and C, are in line 
with the European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administra­
tions (CEPT) on dynamic spectrum utilization [24–29]. Figure 9.4 shows the 
general layout of these three different scenarios [25].
The first scenario (A) targets the frequency band 17.3–17.7 GHz and 
investigates the spectral coexistence of FSS terminals for downlink, while BSS 
feeder links are for uplink. In this scenario, a cognitive link is established be­
tween the geostationary satellite orbit’s (GSO) satellite to the Earth’s FSS termi­
nal and another link is forced to exist between the BSS feeder link to a different 
GSO satellite that is employed for broadcasting [24, 25]. The second scenario, 
scenario (B), studies the downlink scheme for an FSS. This scenario investigates 
the frequency range 17.7–19.7 GHz where the incumbent users are fixed ser­
vice links. The difference between this scenario and scenario A is that the forced 
link here is from one fixed service terminal to another fixed terminal. The third 
scenario, scenario (C), investigates the band 27.5–29.5 GHz where the FSS 
terminal insures cognitive uplink communication from the FSS Earth terminal 
to the GSO satellite [24, 25]. 
While focus on Ka-band application can be a popular choice in the litera­
ture due to its ability to cater for high throughput, other cases emerge as dis­
cussed in [21, 28, 29]. The cases in [21] are divided based on communication 
services below or above 3 GHz.
• Case 1, Broadcasting services below 3 GHz: In this case, a secondary 
system operates at the same frequency range than a primary digital video 
broadcasting [21]. Satellite must be located at a GEO.
• Case 2, FSS above 3 GHz: In this case, the terrestrial fixed service system 
operates as the primary user of the spectrum and the FSS satellite is the 
secondary user. The FSS satellite is mostly a GSO with a possibility for 
it to be located at a low Earth orbit (LEO) as well [21].
• Case 3, Mobile two-way communication satellite services below 3 GHz: 
In this case, the primary terrestrial system is extended to the underpopu­

254 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
lated areas using a satellite. The MSS can be located in either LEO or 
GEO orbit [21].
It is clear that many advantages exist to the application of cognitive spec­
trum utilization for satellite to terrestrial communications whether in Ka-band 
or other bands. However, one must note that technology that allows the co­
existence of both cognitive satellite and terrestrial systems together need to 
be developed [24, 25]. The CoRaSat project described in [28, 29] appears to 
offer the promise of full implementation of a cognitive satellite communica­
tion scheme for all scenarios discussed herein. It is important to indicate that 
the CoRaSat project aims to implement cognitive radio from below 3 GHz 
Figure 9.4  Cognitive spectrum utilization for (a) scenario A (17.3–17.7 GHz), (b) scenario B 
(17.7–19.7 GHz), and (c) scenario C (27.5–29.5 GHz). (© 2015, IEEE. From [24].)

 
Cognitive Radio for Radar and Space Applications 
255
(S-band) to the Ka-band. In order for such implementation to reliably exist, an 
architecture for the cognitive system that caters for all communication scenarios 
must be defined. Figure 9.5 shows the architecture of a cognitive system [25] 
that is composed of the following units:
1.	 Spectrum awareness: This unit is responsible for gathering informa­
tion about the forced users and it is based on constant interactions 
among the database, the spectrum-sensing unit, and the beamforming 
functions. The database is always connected to a network manage­
ment unit that optimizes the overall resource allocation in the net­
work. What is unique in this case is the creation of a cognitive zone 
block. The cognitive zone is defined as the geographical area around 
an incumbent user where cognitive techniques are employed to mini­
mize interference [24, 25].
2.	 Spectrum exploitation: This unit is responsible for dynamic carrier 
allocation and power control. The dynamic carrier allocation is em­
ployed by the network management unit through two approaches. 
The network management unit can assign the carriers to maximize 
the sum of the throughput and thus the overall system throughput 
or it can maximize the availability through distributing the available 
carriers to as many users as possible according to their requested rate. 
The power control is a concern only in the uplink scenarios, where the 
transmission power must be determined in a way to increase the sys­
tem throughput as well and to minimize the users’ interference levels 
[24, 25].
Figure 9.6 shows an example where the FSS satellite system is considered 
to be the secondary system using the frequencies of the primary fixed service 
Figure 9.5  The cognitive system architecture [24].

256 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
system. The FSS uplink is between 28.8365 and 28.9485 GHz and the down­
link is between 17.5 and 19 GHz. A single satellite spot can cover several fixed 
service links that are within the same frequency band of operation [21]. Ap­
plying the techniques specified in the architecture design of a cognitive system 
allows to calculate the various parameters in terms of power management, path 
loss, location of links, and other factors as well [21]. Another technique that 
can be applied to facilitate cognitive radio implementation on links between 
satellite and terrestrial stations is the incorporation of ultrawideband (UWB) 
satellite communication signals that can be overlaid over existing narrowband 
spectrum in addition to the utilization of terrestrial UWB devices [30].
9.9  Cognitive Radio Communication Between Satellites
Cognitive radio on a platform that is based on a communication from satellite 
to satellite is still limited to the basic software-defined radio (SDR) platform. 
Cognition is still not foreseen for satellite-to-satellite communication; however, 
efforts are now focused on the ability by software control to gather signals from 
multiple sources in space to direct them for another terminal where cognition 
may be possible. The rise in small satellite development and the privatization of 
space have advanced the development of software-defined RF components that 
accommodate multisatellite communications [31, 32]. Several small satellite 
missions [33–36] have been launched and aim to increase the communication 
Figure 9.6  Spectrum sharing in Ka-band: FS service as primary and FSS service as second­
ary. (© 2012, IEEE. From [21].)

 
Cognitive Radio for Radar and Space Applications 
257
window and the amount of data that is sent back to Earth [31, 32]. Such a chal­
lenge requires the ability to support multiple input signals through intersatellite 
links.
Catering for intersatellite links from multiple space terminals requires the 
implementation of a software defined radio architecture. The benefit is the abil­
ity to support reconfiguration after the satellite launch. It also provides flexibil­
ity to support multiple signals from multiple satellites. Software-defined radio 
allows the evolution and upgrade of systems over time and provides affordable 
solutions that promote commercially available computer software and hardware 
products and standards [31]. 
To provide all these services for satellite to satellite communication, a 
multicore software defined radio architecture is required. Such architecture can 
be composed of a baseband (BB) system on chip (SoC) that is paired with an 
RF SoC. The BB SoC is based on FPGA boards and multicore processors [31, 
32]. Expending the software-defined radio multicore architecture into one with 
pipeline configuration allows, through the use of software control, receiving 
signals from multiple sources and thus enables software-defined communica­
tion links between satellites. The implementation of these software-defined 
radio tools into the architecture of satellites constitutes the first step in cogni­
tive technology. In 2012, NASA has launched the space communication and 
navigation (SCAN) software-defined radio testbed into the International Space 
Station [37, 38]. The initiative implements and operates new software-defined 
radio standards in space, and activates NASA’s first Ka-band mission with track­
ing and data relay satellite system (TDRSS). The SCAN testbed also tests net­
working in space between various satellites with routine software-defined radio 
reconfiguration and new software verification. It also allows the development 
of new waveforms for more efficient communication and constitutes a great 
benefit for future missions [37, 38]. 
The future implementation of space cognitive radio must occur on top 
of a reconfigurable physical layer that is the architecture of the satellite itself. 
The idea of plug-and-play satellites is based on the fact that a satellite has to 
be prepared for software control and integration since its conception [39, 40]. 
The technology resorts to same concepts as terrestrial plug and play to assemble 
and launch a satellite or a swarm of small satellites. These satellites can network 
together once in space using software defined radio protocols and communicate 
with cognitive ground stations. The entire concept of plug-and-play satellites 
is illustrated in Figure 9.7 [39]. To build such continuously evolving and cog­
nitive architectures, reconfigurable wiring is introduced [41]. Reconfigurable 
wiring resorts to reconfigurable computing techniques and reconfigurable elec­
tronics to allow the wiring of immediately identifying unknown hardware and 
communicate with it as part of a new networked item. 

258 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
9.10  Challenges in Cognitive Radio for Space Communication
The difficulties that are faced in the satellite-to-satellite cognitive communica­
tion setup arise from the fact that these terminals need the ability to receive 
signals from multiple sources, autonomously process these signals, and then 
decide on how to direct the resulting information. Thus, a more mature and 
tested software-defined radio platform needs to be established first, before a 
cognitive engine can be incorporated on these terminals. In the satellite-to-
Earth communication setting, the implementation of cognitive radio is at a 
more mature stage and thus challenges can be identified in a clearer fashion 
[24, 42, 43]. 
The first challenge that is discussed here is related to the databases becom­
ing outdated with time, which requires constant update from the controlling 
entity. Another problem that may be faced is related to the fact that the primary 
users that own some of the frequency bands may be confidentially assigned and 
Figure 9.7  Concept of a plug-and-play satellite using smart panels. (© 2012, IEEE. From [39].)

 
Cognitive Radio for Radar and Space Applications 
259
thus, in this case, dynamic database techniques along with continuous spec­
trum sensing from field sensors must be utilized to determine the incumbent 
users [24, 44]. Another challenge is related to the spectrum sensing, especially 
in terms of the satellite link conditions. The sensing of the interference level 
constitutes a major challenge that cannot be ignored. An interference problem 
that can be caused by the type of antenna used on satellite terminals results in 
a signal with lower-power spectral density at the satellite level than at the ter­
restrial fixed service link. Such effect can result in a saturation of the front-end 
low-noise amplifier (LNA), which can be solved by a special adaptation of the 
LNA to prevent such saturation [24]. Interference can also be solved by adopt­
ing a multiple antenna system. The interference alleviation can be possible if 
the antenna directivity of the FSS satellite terminal is reconfigurable to achieve 
beamforming capabilities [24, 42, 43]. For the FSS downlink scenarios, the re­
ception quality indicators can be calibrated; however this feature is not possible 
for uplink scenarios. Atmospheric effects, such as rain fading especially on Ka-
band communications, constitute a challenge that needs to be addressed as well. 
These effects can be addressed in the design of the dynamic carrier allocation 
algorithms. However, adaptive modulation and coding can address this issue, if 
it exists on a short-term period [24].
It is important to note that the implementation of such an advanced space 
communication requires the advancement of RF circuitry beyond the currently 
available level. The merging of reconfigurable and deployable RF front end is a 
step in the right direction [45, 46]. 
9.11  Discussion
In this chapter, the application of cognitive radio into radar systems as well as 
its application into space communications is discussed. While these two appli­
cations are very different in nature, they share the state of early maturity of the 
technology. In the case of cognitive radar, the incorporation of a cognitive radio 
system with sensing, learning, and acting capability is tangible and examples 
of cognitive radar already exist. In the case of cognitive radio applied for space 
communication, much effort is required to mature the technology especially 
on a satellite to satellite platform. However, cognitive space communications 
are on the right track, especially with the rising interest and push from NASA, 
ESA, military agencies, and private aerospace companies. 
Finally, one must note that to achieve the progress and the revolution 
in cognitive communication, RF front-end hardware must evolve accordingly 
using plug-and-play technology, reconfigurable deployable structures, or other 
concepts. Both hardware and software layers must form the backbone of cogni­
tive radio technology whether in space or on radar.

260 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
References
[1]	 Haykin, S., “Cognitive Radar: A Way to the Future,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 
Vol. 23, No. 1, 2006, pp. 30–40.À
[2]	 Haykin, S., “Cognitive Radar Networks,” Fourth IEEE Workshop on Sensor Array and Mul­
tichannel Processing, 2006, pp. 1–24.
[3]	 Guerci, J. R., Cognitive Radar: The Knowledge-Aided Fully Adaptive Approach, Norwood, 
MA: Artech House, 2010.
[4]	 Haykin, S., Cognitive Dynamic Systems: Perception, Action Cycle, Radar and Radio, Cam­
bridge, U.K.: Cambridge Press, 2012.
[5]	 Haykin, S., X. Yanbo, and P. Setoodeh, “Cognitive Radar: Step Towards Bridging the Gap 
Between Neuroscience and Engineering,” Proc. of the IEEE, Vol. 100, No. 11, 2012, pp. 
3102–3130.
[6]	 Biglieri, E., “An Overview of Cognitive Radio for Satellite Communications,” IEEE First 
AESS European Conference on Satellite Telecommunications, 2012, pp. 1–3.
[7]	 Perlaza, S. M., E. A. Hoyos, and P. V. Vera, “Reconfigurable Satellite Payload Model Based 
on Software Radio Technologies,” Third IEEE International Congress of the Andean Region, 
2006, pp. 1–6.
[8]	 Kandeepan, S., et al., “ Cognitive Satellite Terrestrial Radios,” IEEE Global Telecommuni­
cations Conference, 2010, pp. 1–6.
[9]	 Uchida, N., et al., “Optimal Route Selection Method with Satellite System for Cognitive 
Wireless Network in Disaster Information Network,” 25th IEEE International Conference 
on Advanced Information Networking and Applications, 2011, pp. 23–39.
[10]	 De Maio, A., A. Farina, and G. Foglia, “Adaptive Radar Detection: A Bayesian Approach,” 
IEEE Radar Conference, 2007, pp. 624–629.
[11]	 Viterbi, A., “Wireless Digital Communication: A View Based on Three Lessons Learned,” 
IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 29, No. 9, pp. 33–36, 1991.
[12]	 Guerci, J. R., Space-Time Adaptive Processing for Radar, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 
2003.
[13]	 Klemm, R., “Principles of Space-Time Adaptive Processing: Principles and Applications,” 
IEEE Journal of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Vol. 11, No. 4, 1999, pp. 
172–172.
[14]	 Ward, J., “Space-Time Adaptive Processing for Airborne Radar,” IEEE Colloquium on 
Space-Time Adaptive Processing, 1998, pp. 2–6.
[15]	 Brookner, E., “MIMO Radars and Their Conventional Equivalents,” IEEE Radar 
Conference, 2015, pp. 918–924.
[16]	 Brookner, E., Tracking and Kalman Filtering Made Easy, New York: John Wiley & Sons, 
1998.
[17]	 Ender, J., and S. Bruggenwirth, “Cognitive Radar-Enabling Techniques for Next 
Generation Radar Systems,” 16th IEEE International Radar Symposium, 2015, pp. 3–12.

 
Cognitive Radio for Radar and Space Applications 
261
[18]	 Rasmussen, J., “Skills, Rules, and Knowledge; Signals, Signs and Symbols, and Other 
Distinctions in Human Performance Models,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics, 1983, pp. 257–266.
[19]	 Romero, R. A., and N. A. Goodman, “Adaptive Beamsteering for Search and Track 
Application with Cognitive Radar Network,” IEEE Radar Conference, 2011, pp. 1091–
1095.
[20]	 Greenspan, M., “Potential Pitfalls of Cognitive Radars,” IEEE Radar Conference, 2014, 
pp. 1288–1290.
[21]	 Hoyhtya, M., et al., “Application of Cognitive Radio Techniques to Satellite 
Communication,” IEEE International Symposium on Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks, 
2012, pp. 540–551.
[22]	 FCC Small Entity Compliance Guide: “Part 15 TV Bands Devices,” DA 11-195, May 
2011.
[23]	 Lurie, H. R., “Modular Software Defined Radios for Space to Earth Communications,” 
28th Annual AIAA/USU Conference on Small Satellites, 2014, pp. 1–5.
[24]	 Maleki, S., et al., “Cognitive Spectrum Utilization in Ka Band Multibeam Satellite 
Communications,” IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 53, No. 3, 2015, pp. 24–29.
[25]	 Maleki, S., et al., “Cognitive Radio for Ka Band Satellite Communications,” 32nd AIAA 
International Communications Satellites Systems, 2014, pp. 1–6.
[26]	 Lagunas, E., et al., “Resource Allocation for Cognitive Satellite Communications with 
Incumbent Terrestrial Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communication and 
Networking, 2015.
[27]	 Sharma, S. K., S. Chatzinotas, and B. Ottersten, “Cognitive Beam Hopping for Spectral 
Coexistence of Multibeam Satellites,” International Journal of Satellite Communications 
and Networking, Vol. 33, No. 1, 2015, pp. 69–91.
[28]	 Liolis, K., et al. , “Cognitive Radio Scenarios for Satellite Communications: The CoRaSat 
Approach,” Future Network and Mobile Summit, 2013, pp. 1–10.
[29]	 Tang, W., P. Thompson, and B. Evans, “Frequency Sharing Between Satellite and 
Terrestrial Systems in the Ka Band: A Database Approach,” IEEE International Conference 
on Communications, 2015, pp. 867–872.
[30]	 Wang, Y., and Y. Hu, “UWB SATCOM Towards Cognitive Radio,” 4th IEEE International 
Conference on Wireless Communications, Networking and Mobile Computing, 2008, pp. 
1–3.
[31]	 Maheshwarappa, M. R., M. Bowyer, and C. P. Bridges, “Software Defined Radio (SDR) 
to Support Multi-Satellite Communications,” IEEE Aerospace Conference, 2015, pp. 1–10.
[32]	 Grayver, E., et al., “Software Defined Radio for Small Satellites,” IEEE Aerospace 
Conference, 2015, pp. 1–9.
[33]	 Bedon, H., et al., “Preliminary Internetworking Simulation of the QB50 Cubesat 
Constellation,” IEEE Latin-American Conference on Communications, 2010, pp. 1–6. 

262 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
[34]	 Underwood, C., et. al., “Autonomous Assembly of a Reconfiguarble Space Telescope 
(AAReST)-A CubeSat/Microsatellite Based Technology Demonstrator,” 27th Annual 
AIAA/USU Conference on Small Satellites, 2013, pp. 1–7.
[35]	 Bridges, C. P., et al., “STRaND-2: Visual Inspection, Proximity Operations and 
Nanosatellite Docking,” IEEE Aerospace Conference, 2013, pp. 1–8.
[36]	 Smith, H. B., S. H. K. Hu, and J. J. Cockrell, “NASA’s EDSN Aims to Overcome the 
Operational Challenges of CubeSat Constellations and Demonstrate an Economical 
Swarm of 8 CubeSats Useful for Space Science Investigations,” 27th Annual AIAA/USU 
Conference on Small Satellites, 2013, p. 1.
[37]	 https://spaceflightsystems.grc.nasa.gov/sopo/scsmo/scan-testbed/.
[38]	 Chelmins, D. T., “Recent Successes and Future Plans for NASA’s Space Communications 
and Navigation Testbed on the International Space Station,” 65th International 
Astronautical Congress, 2014.
[39]	 Lyke, J. C., “Plug and Play Satellites,” IEEE Spectrum, Vol. 49, No. 8, 2012, pp. 36–42.
[40]	 Martin, M., and J. C. Lyke, “Modular Open Network Architecture (MONARCH): 
Transitioning Plug and Play to Aerospace,” IEEE Aerospace Conference, 2013, pp. 1–10.
[41]	 Murray, V., et al., “Field-Programmable Wiring Systems,” IEEE Proceedings, Vol. 103, No. 
7, 2015, pp. 1159–1180.
[42]	 Sharma, S. K., et al., “Implementation Issues of Cognitive Radio Techniques for Ka Band 
(17.7–19.7 GHz) Satcoms,” IEEE 7th Advanced Satellite Multimedia Systems Conference 
and the 13th Signal Processing for Space Communications Workshop, 2014, pp. 241–248.
[43]	 Tarchi, D., et al., “Technical Challenges for Cognitive Radio Application in Satellite 
Communications,” 9th International Conference on Cognitive Radio Oriented Wireless 
Networks and Communications, 2014, pp. 136–142.
[44]	 Bazerque, J., and G. Giannakis, “Distributed Spectrum Sensing for Cognitive Radio 
Networks by Exploiting Sparsity,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, Vol. 58, No. 3, 
2010, pp. 1847–1862.
[45]	 Costantine, J., Y. Tawk, C. G. Christodoulou, “Reconfigurable Deployable Antennas for 
Space Communications,” International Workshop on Antenna Technology, 2014, pp. 151–
154.
[46]	 Costantine, J., et al., “Merging Reconfigurable and Deployable Antennas for Space 
Applications,” SBMO-IEEE/MTT-S International Microwave and Optoelectronics 
Conference, 2011, pp. 905–909.

263
10
The Future of Cognitive Radio
Cognitive radio is the evolution or the next phase of software-defined radio. 
A true cognitive radio should possess features that advance current software-
defined radio technology. This includes cognition, training, tuning, and the 
capability to react based on awareness of the RF environment. A cognitive ra­
dio device analyzes the channel spectrum, studies its patterns, predicts its oc­
cupancy, and acts based on knowledge that is observed and built with time 
and experience. Therefore, to answer the question about the future of cognitive 
radio, one must evaluate the current state of this technology as described in the 
nine previous chapters of this book. 
Based on spectrum monitoring, a cognitive radio acts by reconfiguring 
its RF front end to cater for the required action. The actions taken by a cogni­
tive radio are based on searching for the suitable part of the channel spectrum 
and broadcasting over it any valuable or required information. Then the radio 
dynamically hops from one band into another available one based on real-time 
changes in the environment. Such changes are stored, studied, and analyzed 
as part of a training mechanism for the cognitive radio processor. Machine 
learning algorithms such as neural networks can assist in the training and learn­
ing process to allow an easier regeneration of antenna states in future similar 
conditions. Thus, a cognitive radio requires the presence of RF front ends that 
monitor wide ranges of the spectrum and reconfigure their states to address the 
evolving vacancy in operation. Wideband antennas and reconfigurable anten­
nas are fundamental entities to the successful operation of a cognitive radio de­
vice. The dynamic behavior of these antennas with their RF circuitry and their 
ability to adapt to the controlling cognitive radio processor are crucial features 
that promote the successful implementation of such dynamic communication 
scheme. One can conclude that the backbone of a cognitive radio is composed 

264 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
of the various software-defined radio transceivers that are implemented with 
tunable analog radio components.
The future of cognitive radio is based on integrating learning algorithms 
into devices on which we rely in our daily routine. Mobile devices, laptops, Wi-
Fi terminals, GPS receivers, biomedical devices, implantable sensors for health 
monitoring, drug administration devices, radars, aviation transceivers, and 
space communication constitute the future platforms of implementing cogni­
tive radio. The future of cognitive radio requires the ability to design RF circuits 
that are capable of analyzing ultrawideband banks of data, running complex 
algorithms for learning and predictability, acting swiftly and reliably in multiple 
directions and in multiple modes of operation, in addition to using reconfigu­
rable antennas that can cater to all these requirements. In the future of cognitive 
radio, an action is predicted based on experience in several aspects of daily life. 
One will be able to dynamically communicate over any spectrum in any geo­
graphical location efficiently at any time. The following are some of the areas on 
which we believe cognitive radio will have an important impact in the future.
In the area of communications, future cognitive radio systems will be able 
to incorporate smart antenna technology and reconfigurable mobile ad hoc net­
works (MANETs) and to enable wireless devices to dynamically establish and 
reconfigure networks without the need of using a fixed infrastructure.
A smart grid network is another area where cognitive radio is expected 
to play a major role. A smart grid is used today to address energy sustainabil­
ity, reliability, and resilience issues by transforming the existing power grids 
into smart networks of grids. Any smart grid is comprised of a physical power 
part (generation and distribution), the communication networking part, and 
the applications part (services and grid management). The idea of the ultimate 
smart grid is to change the way power is generated, delivered, consumed, and 
billed. Cognitive radio cannot only add intelligence throughout the smart grid 
network but also can improve its reliability, demand handling, and responsive­
ness. A cognitive smart grid provides a better integration for the renewable/
distributed energy sources by dynamically handling various smart meters and 
heterogeneous wireless devices attached to it. This provides an improved moni­
toring of the power consumption and an increase in the reliability of the grid. 
First response and public safety is another area where cognitive radio can 
play a very important role. Police, the National Guard, fire and emergency 
medical services use wireless services to respond to incidents and national cri­
ses. Emergency and first-response workers today make use of wireless laptops, 
smart phones, mobile cameras, and so forth to respond efficiently in addition to 
collaborating with a central command, their coworkers, and other local, state, 
or national agencies. Telephone, e-mail, Internet access, video, and fast data-
streaming service of a wireless medium is required today for public safety and 
emergency response. With congested frequencies and myriad heterogeneous 

 
The Future of Cognitive Radio 
265
wireless devices used by different rescue and public safety agencies, cognitive 
radio can help with its dynamic reconfigurability and flexible functionality to 
increase coordination across various frequency bands and improve spectrum 
usage efficiency. Cognitive radio can provide emergency and public safety users 
with additional spectrum by: (1) utilizing appropriate spectrum-sharing part­
nerships with available commercial operators or (2) roaming on commercial 
networks in the 700-MHz band or other bands that originally were not de­
signed to be used by emergency and public safety agencies.
Another area that can make use of cognitive radio is patient monitoring 
in hospitals and other places. Low-cost, wireless sensors can be used to moni­
tor changes in a patient’s condition remotely. A cognitive radio processor can 
be embedded in the system to perform a quick diagnosis of all vital signs, at an 
early stage and to recommend an appropriate action. For patients, a wearable 
wideband cognitive radio system can even reduce the use of wires and the as­
sociated risks of infection in the health monitoring of patients. Future research 
in embedding antennas, radio frequency (RF) circuits, and field programmable 
gate arrays (FPGAs) on wearable fabric is required to develop inexpensive wear­
able wideband cognitive radio systems for health monitoring. For example, a 
system from 700 MHz to 5 GHz that includes sensors and RF front ends, all 
in the garment for communication purpose, requires new technologies that can 
miniaturize an entire cognitive radio system in the shape of a garment button.
In the future, cognition will be in our communication devices wherever 
these devices exist and no matter what their purpose is. Thus, cognitive radio 
will expand into all aspects of our life to ensure our continuous and evolving 
communication ability regardless of the changes in our surroundings. It will 
become a reality in space exploration or target identification or even disease 
detection. Step by step, our communicating devices will start relying on their 
own “brain” that is cognitive, know our communication habits, and predict 
some of our actions.


267
About the Authors
Youssef Tawk received a Ph.D. from the University of New Mexico in 2011, 
where he also completed a postdoctoral fellowship in August 2012. He received 
many awards and honors throughout his studies. He has published several jour­
nal and conference papers and has several issued patents. His research interests 
include cognitive radio, reconfigurable antenna systems, deployable antennas, 
and millimeter-wave technology.
Joseph Costantine received a Ph.D. from the University of New Mexico 
in 2009. He is the recipient of many awards, including the Summer Faculty 
Fellowship from the Air Force Space Vehicles Directorate in Albuquerque, New 
Mexico, for three consecutive years. He has published many research papers 
and patents. His major research interests are reconfigurable antennas for wire­
less communication systems, cognitive radio, RF systems for wireless energy 
harvesting, antennas for biomedical applications, and deployable antennas for 
small satellites.
Christos G. Christodoulou received a Ph.D. in electrical engineering 
from North Carolina State University in 1985. He is a Fellow of the IEEE and 
a distinguished professor in electrical and computer engineering at the Univer­
sity of New Mexico. He is the recipient of the 2010 IEEE John Krauss Antenna 
Award for his work on reconfigurable fractal antennas, the Lawton-Ellis Award, 
and the Gardner Zemke Professorship at the University of New Mexico. His 
research interests are in wireless communications, smart antennas, neural net­
works and machine learning applications in electromagnetics, cognitive radio, 
reconfigurable antennas, and high-power microwave antennas.


269
Index
3-D horn antenna, 89
Activation function, 225
Adaptive satellite communication, 243
Adjacency matrix, 135
Adjacent channel power ratio (ACPR), 29
Admittance inverters, 168
All-pass response, 59
Analog-to-digital converter, 22
Antenna Feeding Network, 57
Archimedean spiral antenna, 71
Arduino board, 151
Attenuation, 164
Autonomous cognitive radio, 239
Axial mode, 140
Axial Ratio 72
Back-propagation algorithm, 222
Balanced feeding balun, 91
Balun, 70
Band-reject filter, 217
Band tuning, 58
Bandstop filtenna, 217
Bayesian approach, 245
Bayesian criterion, 251
Bayesian target tracker, 245
Beam shaping, 248
Beam-steering, 140
Beam-steering capability, 208
Beamforming, 221
Biasing lines, 108
Biasing circuit, 36
Biasing voltage, 99
Biconical antenna 67
Biconical dipole 73
Binomial curved slot antenna, 89
Bit error rate, 212
Bit streams, 240
Bowtie Antenna, 67
Bowtie slot antenna, 68
Broadband antennas, 66
Broadband transition, 67
Butterworth response, 165
Capacitively loaded loop resonators, 95
Carrier concentration, 131
Carrier frequency, 1 
Carrier lifetime, 118
Causal processor, 249
Cavity resonator, 36
Centralized cognition, 250
Channel capacity, 212
Channel matrix, 201
Channel monitoring, 65
Channel sensing, 10
Channel underlay, 251
Chassis antennas, 53
Chebyshev polynomial, 165
Circular patch, 66

270 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
Circular polarization, 72
Clustering, 223
Cochannel interference, 248
Cognitive engine, 8
Cognitive processing style, 245
Cognitive radar, 243
Cognitive radio cycle, 8
Cognitive radio engine, 227
Cognitive radio processor, 4, 107
Cognitive sensors, 251
Cognitive zone, 255
Combline structures, 172
Communication link, 193
Complexity, 112
Conduction loss, 46
Conical spirals, 67
Coplanar structure, 85
Coplanar waveguide, 66
Corporate feeding structure, 237
Correlation coefficient, 197
Coupled microstrip, 170
Coupling, 237
Coupling reducers, 181
Cross-coupling, 178
Curved reflector, 202
DC blocks, 125
Decision trees, 222
Decoupling network, 201
Deep learning, 222
Delay lines, 140
Delay spread, 196
Detuned resonators, 181
Diamond-shaped dipole, 76
Dielectric actuators, 137
Dielectric loss, 46
Dielectric resonator antenna, 207
Digital-to-analog converter, 22
Digital processor, 244
Dipole antenna, 44
Direction of arrival, 221
Discone antenna, 67
Dissipated energy, 49
Distributed cognition, 250
Diverse polarization, 109
Diversity behavior, 199
Diversity gain, 199
Diversity techniques, 193
Doping structure 124
Downconversion and upconversion, 24
Dual-polarization antenna, 91
Dual-sided Vivaldi antenna, 185
Dual-stacked patch antennas, 128
Dynamic carrier allocation, 255
Dynamic partial reconfiguration, 239
Dynamic power, 240
Dynamic range, 22
Dynamic reconfiguration, 222
Dynamic spectrum access, 43
Electrical size, 49
Electrically coupled, 174
Electrically small antennas, 48
Elliptical monopole, 82
Elliptical shaped monopole, 147
Envelope correlation coefficient, 198
Environmental dynamic database, 248
Equivalent configuration, 239
Error adjustment, 225
Error vector magnitude, 27
Excitation slot, 208
External Antennas, 52
Fading, 195
Far-field region, 46
Fast radiation, 48
Federal Communications Commission, 1
Field programmable gate arrays (FPGA), 13, 
222
Field symmetry, 208
Fixed radio, 21
Flexible antenna, 139
Flexible radio, 22
Folded bowtie dipole, 120
Fractal shaped printed antennas, 68
Fractional bandwidth, 66, 172
Frequency division duplex (FDD), 33
Frequency independent antennas, 67
Frequency interweaving, 244
Frequency notching, 67
Frequency reconfigurable, 109
Frequency scaling, 166
Frequency shortages, 243
Frequency synthesizer, 28
Fringe capacitance, 171
Functional approximation, 223

 
Index 
271
Game theory, 12
Genetic algorithms, 46
Geostationary orbit, 253
Graph, 135
Graphene, 140
Graphene conductivity, 143
Graphene plasmonics, 112
Group delay, 166
Half elliptically patch, 214
Half-wavelength resonators, 172
Halved Vivaldi antenna, 98
Handheld devices, 66
Harping-line resonators, 174
Harmonic rejection, 29
Harmonics, 112
Hexagonal shaped patch, 230
Hidden layer, 224
High impedance surface, 144
Horn Antenna, 67
Human brain, 223
Hybrid reconfiguration, 109
Idle gaps, 1 
Image Reject Architecture, 24
Image theory, 98
Impedance inverters, 168
Impedance loading, 123
Indoor environment, 195
Inductive loading, 51
Input layer, 223
Insertion loss, 35
Interconnected neurons, 223
Interference level, 5
Interference margin, 12
Interferer, 56
Intermediate frequency conversion, 24
Internal antennas, 52
Inter-resonator couplings, 181
Interweave Mode, 4 
Inverted F-shaped antenna, 215
Isolation, 196
Knowledge-based layer, 250
Knowledge database, 251
L-shaped resonators, 175
Labeled training, 223
Ladder circuit, 164
Laser diode, 111
Leakage rate, 144
Learning ability, 221
Learning algorithms, 14
Light delivery, 132
Linear activation, 227
Linearly polarized antenna, 50
Linearity, 25, 164
Liquid crystals, 112, 140
Liquid metal, 139
Log-periodic antenna, 67
Logarithmic spiral antenna, 68
Logarithmically structures, 70
Low Earth orbit, 253
Low-IF architecture, 24
Low noise amplifier, 24
Machine learning, 218
Machine learning algorithms, 221
Magnetic antenna, 88
Matching networks, 112
Mean effective gain, 197
Mean square error, 238
Meandering process, 51
Mechanical actuators, 108, 112
Mechanical reconfiguration, 137
Microfluidic, 140
Microstrip antenna, 51
Miniaturize, 50, 87
Miniaturized filter, 178
Mobile terminals, 46, 52
Mobility of charges, 131
Monocone monopole, 73
Monopole Antenna, 66
Multiband and multimode transceivers, 21 
Multiband transceivers, 26
Multicore software defined radio 
architecture, 257
Multi-objective optimization, 239
Multipath, 194
Multipath environment, 199
Multipath scenarios, 193
Multiple resonance antennas, 69
Multisatellite communication, 256
Multistub resonators, 179
Mutual coupling, 196, 208
Narrowband sensing, 10

272 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
Network management unit, 255
Network propagation error, 229
Neural network, 12, 46, 222
Neutralization line, 201
Noise floor, 23, 65
Noncausal processor, 249
Nonintentional interference, 243
Nonlinear active components, 112
Nonlinear performance, 179
Nonlinearity, 129
Observe-Decide-Act-Learn, 8
Omnidirectional radiation pattern, 47
Operating bandwidth, 45
Optical fiber, 132
Optical switches, 111
Optically reconfigurable antenna, 112
Organic liquid crystal polymer, 176
Oscillating system, 48
Out-of-band rejection, 35 
Output layer, 224
Parallel couple bandstop filter, 172
Parasitic elements, 201
Parasitic monopoles, 208
Parasitic pixel surface, 120
Parasitic slot, 207
Parasitic stub, 93
Particle swarm optimization, 117
Passband behavior, 164
Passband tuning, 67
Path loss, 194
Pattern diversity, 205
Pattern reconfigurable antenna, 208
Phase characteristics, 164
Phase linearity, 166
Phase-locked loop, 25
Phase velocity, 50
Phased array technology, 244
PIN diodes, 34, 111
Pixelated antenna, 120
Planar Inverted-F antenna, 52
Planar log-periodic antenna, 69
Planar spiral, 67
Plug-and-play satellites, 257
Pointing angle, 144
Polarization schemes, 108
Polarization reconfigurable, 109
Power allocation, 15
Power amplifier, 23 
Power consumption, 112
Power management, 11
Primary users, 3
Printed microwave filter, 164
Printed planar structure, 66
Printed planar UWB, 66
Printed reconfigurable filters, 84
Printed tapered slot antenna, 69
Programmable gain amplifier, 25
Propagation effects, 194
Quality factor, 47
Quality of service, 194
Radar-scene analyzer, 246
Radar technology, 243
Radial stub, 175
Radiated energy, 49
Radiated power, 47
Radiating edges, 108
Radiation distortion, 72
Radiation efficiency, 197
Radiation pattern, 46
Radiation pattern reconfigurable, 109
Radiating surface, 163
Reactive loading, 51
Realized gain, 46
Reasoning algorithm, 12
Receiver noise figure, 24
Reconfigurable antenna, 6, 11, 107
Reconfigurable aperture coupled antenna, 
139
Reconfigurable bandpass filter, 58, 185
Reconfigurable bandstop filter, 58
Reconfigurable computing, 257
Reconfigurable digital radio, 13
Reconfigurable electronics, 257
Reconfigurable filter, 163, 179
Reconfigurable helix antenna, 140
Reconfigurable notch frequencies, 7
Reconfigurable nulls, 56
Reconfigurable reflect array, 142
Reconfigurable wiring, 257
Reconfiguration failures, 236
Reconfiguration techniques, 4, 107
Reconfiguration time, 108
Reflection coefficient, 44
Regeneration of antenna states, 263

 
Index 
273
Rejection level, 176
Reliability, 136
Remote sensing, 244
Resistive RF MEMS, 114
Resonant frequency, 46
Resonant modes, 53
Resource allocation, 255
Reverse breakdown voltage, 124
RF chokes, 125, 175
RF MEMS, 34, 96, 111
RF signal classification, 11
Rich multipath, 202, 215
Richard’s transformation, 170
Ripples, 165
Rule-based layer, 250
Satellite-assisted communication, 244
Satellite-based cognitive radio, 244
Satellite communication, 243
Scanning beam, 245
Scattering objects, 195
Scheduler, 249
Second order RLC circuit, 49
Secondary users, 5
Sector shaped patches, 127
Self-complementary magnetic antennas, 68
Semisupervised learning, 222
Sensing activity, 65
Sensing antenna, 4
Sensing lines, 237
Shadowing, 194
Shorted inverted F-patch antenna, 86
Short-range communication, 59
Short-wave communications, 67
Short-term memory, 246
Shorting pin, 53, 75
Signal classification, 12
Signal envelope, 196
Signal distortion, 166
Signal-filtering, 223
Signal-to-noise-and-distortion (SINAD), 34
Signal-to-noise ratio, 212
Single-pole, single-throw RF MEMS, 114
Skill-based layer, 249
Slot antenna, 67, 88
Slow surface plasmonic, 143
Small satellite, 256
Small-element electric antennas, 68
Small-scale propagation effects, 194
Smart antennas, 221
Software defined radio, 1, 21, 243
Software-defined RF components, 256
Software-tunable analog RF components, 21
Space exploration, 265
Specific absorption rate, 52
Spectral coexistence, 253
Spectrum allocation, 1, 2
Spectrum awareness, 255
Spectrum efficiency, 4
Spectrum congestion, 252
Spectrum monitoring, 263
Spectrum sensing, 2
Spectrum sharing, 2
Spectrum sharing partnership, 265
Spectrum usage, 193
Spherical dipole, 67
Spiral antenna, 66
Split ring resonator, 95
Square planar monopole, 79
Square ring antenna, 137
Standing waves, 85
Static power, 240
Stopband amplitude, 164
Stopband attenuation, 166
Stored energy, 47
Stretchable conductors, 139
Stretchable materials, 137
Stub loaded microstrip, 127
Support vector, 221
Surface acoustic wave filters, 26
Surface current distributions, 86
Superheterodyne architecture, 24
Supervised learning, 222
Support vector machine, 12, 46
Switch activation, 11
Switch failure, 135 
Switches, 108
Switching speed, 111
Synaptic links, 225
Synaptic weight connections, 228
Symmetrical structure, 87
T-matching network, 130
T-shaped slot, 212
Tapered microstrip line, 71
Tapered slot antenna, 89
Tapered waveguide, 68
Target identification 265TEM waves, 75

274 
Antenna Design for Cognitive Radio 
Terrestrial application, 243
Temporal partition, 239
Thermal switches, 112
Third-order intercept point, 29
Time division duplex (TDD), 33
Time spreading, 195
Total active reflection coefficient, 196
Transverse electric, 49
Transverse magnetic, 49
Trapezoidal UWB monopole, 79
Traveling wave antenna, 68
Traveling wave, 85
Tunable dielectric, 143
Tunable filters, 57
Tunable power amplifier, 36
Tunable power divider, 128
Tunable synthesizer, 37
Tuned radio systems, 66
Tuning agility, 129
Tuning stub, 88
U-shaped resonators, 174
Ultrawideband antenna, 4 
Ultrawideband bank of data, 264
Unbalanced spectrum occupancies, 44
Underlay mode, 4
Underutilized bands, 44
Undesired targets, 246
Ungrounded monopole, 53
Universal software radio peripheral 
(USRP), 31
Unsupervised learning, 222
Validation test, 233
Varactors, 34, 99, 111
Vertically oriented balun, 120
Vivaldi antenna, 69, 90
Voltage controlled oscillator, 24
Wearable wideband cognitive radio 
system, 265
Weights, 224
White space, 1, 3
Wideband antenna, 6
Wideband sensing, 9
Wider noise floor, 60
Xilinx FPGA board, 31
Xilinx ISE, 229
Xilinx system generator, 228
Zero-IF architecture, 24

