
Antenna Zoning
Broadcast, Cellular & Mobile Radio, 
Wireless Internet—Laws, Permits & Leases
Professional Edition
Fred Hopengarten
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON
NEW YORK • OXFORD • PARIS • SAN DIEGO
SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Focal Press is an imprint of Elsevier

 Focal Press is an imprint of Elsevier 
 30 Corporate Drive, Suite 400, Burlington, MA 01803, USA 
 Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8DP, UK 
 © 2009 Fred Hopengarten. Published by Elsevier Inc.  All rights reserved. 
 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
 Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science  & Technology Rights 
Department in Oxford, UK: phone: (  44) 1865 843830, fax: (  44) 1865 853333, 
E-mail: permissions@elsevier.com . You may also complete your request 
online via the Elsevier homepage ( http://elsevier.com ), by selecting “ Support  & Contact ” 
then “ Copyright and Permission ” and then  “ Obtaining Permissions. ”
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
 Hopengarten, Fred.
     Antenna zoning : broadcast, cellular & mobile radio, wireless internet—laws, permits & leases / 
Fred Hopengarten.
          p. cm.
     Includes bibliographical references and index.
     ISBN 978-0-240-81112-3 (case bound : alk. paper) 1. Antenna zoning—Law and legislation—
United States. 2. Radio and television towers—Law and legislation—United States. 3. Earth stations 
(Satellite telecommunication)—Law and legislation—United States. 4. Building permits—United 
States. I. Title. 
     KF5700.5.A58H67 2009
     343.730994—dc22
                                                                                                                   2009002970 
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
 A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 
 ISBN: 978-0-240-81112-3 
 Typeset by A Macmillan Publishing Solutions. ( www.macmillansolutions.com ) 
 09 10 11  5 4 3 2 1 
 Printed in the United States of America 
For information on all Focal Press publications 
visit our website at www.elsevier.com

iii
 Table of Contents 
Introduction ...................................................................................................................iv
 Acknowledgments ...........................................................................................................vi 
 About the Author ..........................................................................................................vii
 Chapter 1: Principles That Will Help You Win ...................................................................1 
 Chapter 2: The Process in a Nutshell.................................................................................9 
 Chapter 3: Your Winning Team ......................................................................................25 
 Chapter 4: Basic Preparations........................................................................................43 
 Chapter 5: Getting to Know the Players ..........................................................................57 
 Chapter 6: Selected Applicable Law ................................................................................79 
 Chapter 7: Possible Objections — Safety Issues ...............................................................131 
 Chapter 8: Possible Objections — Aesthetic, Noise, and Nuisance Issues ............................181 
 Chapter 9: Possible Objections — Environmental Issues ...................................................211 
 Chapter 10: Possible Objections — Diversionary Tactics ..................................................231 
 Chapter 11: The Permit Application .............................................................................249 
 Chapter 12: The Public Hearing — Your Big Moment in the Spotlight ................................261 
 Chapter 13: Deliberations and Decisions .......................................................................287 
 Chapter 14: Appeals ...................................................................................................291 
 Chapter 15: Lawsuits ..................................................................................................295 
 Chapter 16: Now Get the Permit and Build Your Antenna System!...................................305 
 Chapter 17: Awkward Post-Permit Situations ................................................................319 
 Chapter 18: Post-Construction Issues ............................................................................347 
 Chapter 19: Lease Issues .............................................................................................355 
 Chapter 20: Drafting or Redrafting a Bylaw, or State Statute .........................................399 
 Bibliography ...............................................................................................................417
 Index .........................................................................................................................425 

iv
 Introduction
Why This Book was Written
 There is a tower across town, or on the next block, or down the street. Perhaps it went up many years ago. 
It may not even have needed a permit. There are several facts you may not have considered — perhaps legal 
facts, perhaps physical facts and demographic facts, perhaps ugly, but nonetheless real, facts. 
 Legal Facts 
 Since that antenna system was erected, the town bylaws or ordinances may have changed. Since the 
passage of the Communications Act of 1996, towns all over the United States have aggressively been 
changing their bylaws or ordinances. 
 Don’t think they’ve changed the bylaws or ordinances? Check out  Kleinhaus  et al.  v. Cortlandt , S.Ct. 
N.Y., County of Westchester, Index No. 19396/95 (Lefkowitz, J.), March 18, 1996. Kleinhaus, an 
amateur radio operator, 
1 contracted to purchase a residence in the Town of Cortlandt in 1993 at a time 
when the town’s Zoning Code had no height restriction applicable to freestanding antennas. After the 
Purchase and Sale Agreement was signed, but prior to completion of the purchase, the town amended 
its zoning laws to provide that in an R-40 (residential-40,000 square feet minimum) zone the maximum 
height allowed for structures is 35 feet. 
 Kleinhaus was eventually successful when the Court found  “ that some of the ZBA’s [Zoning Board of 
Appeals] ﬁ ndings are not supported by the evidence. ” The ZBA’s determination to decline a variance 
was  “ annulled as irrational, arbitrary and capricious. ” The court remanded the matter to the ZBA for 
further proceedings, and the parties were able to work out a compromise. Kleinhaus got permission to 
erect a 100-foot tower. However, this whole process cost the town and the applicant a lot of money — a 
lot of money. The taxpayers of Cortlandt were not well served by the inability of their representatives 
to compromise earlier. 
 The purpose of mentioning this speciﬁ c case is to show that even smart applicants with small projects 
can get caught up in undesirable situations when a town changes the bylaws before they move in. It 
could also happen to you after you’ve completed the purchase or rental of a parcel and before you get 
around to applying for a permit. The details of the process are covered in this book. 
 After I wrote  Antenna Zoning for the Radio Amateur , the wise and encouraging general counsel of the 
Society of Broadcast Engineers, Chris Imlay, Esq., told me that the professionals could use some tips 
too. He too had noticed that the Communications Act of 1996 had resulted in huge changes in local 
zoning for commercial antenna systems, with ever-increasing challenges.  
1  Don’t get excited. This book is not about commercial antenna zoning. The case just proves these things do 
happen.

v
 Physical and Demographic Facts 
 Towns that were once 20 miles from downtown and considered rural may have been built out. Today 
they may be considered suburban. Where once you had a rougher breed of townsman who felt that 
what you do on your land is your own business, you may now have a newer breed who uses phrases 
such as view shed to argue that his or her mere ability to see something you are doing on your land is 
an environmental concern. 
 In my own town we have people who moved into homes at the end of a major runway for an Air Force 
Base and local airport, and now ﬁ nd themselves like Captain Louis Renault in the ﬁ lm  Casablanca , 
who was  “ shocked, shocked ” to discover that there was gambling going on at Rick’s Cafe. These 
folks are surprised to discover that overhead there are airplanes taking off and coming in for landings. 
Imagine that. 
 This new breed favors more government intrusion into property rights. Without venturing a guess as to 
why, it is still possible to observe that such folks are more common in high-income suburbs than rural 
exurbs. So, as a town becomes more developed, expect tougher bylaws or ordinances. 
 Ugly, but Nonetheless Real, Facts 
 It is most saddening to report that America is still not free of pride and prejudice. I was once a lawyer 
in a case where a well-established amateur radio operator, a descendant of President John Quincy 
Adams with an existing 120-foot tower, conﬁ ded that the applicant for a 100-foot tower in the same 
town would never have had as much trouble if the ham newer to the town (in the words of this 
Brahmin) “ had a numeral ” after his name. For this reason, bylaws or ordinances that are designed to 
give a lot of control to neighbors (think of such bylaws as equivalent to a neighborhood veto) are far 
more dangerous to someone who is a minority in town than to someone who represents the majority 
group in town and goes to the  “ right ” church. 
 Similarly, I’ve been involved several times in a city where it appeared that native Spanish speakers 
sometimes got short shrift in that city’s Building Department. You may not like it. I certainly don’t like 
it. But, if you don’t have acres and acres of buffer, with lots of trees to protect neighbors from the sight 
of your antennas, and if your plan calls for going above the tree line, think long and hard about how 
you can approach the town and accomplish your purpose, despite your minority status. If you’ve never 
experienced prejudice, you are lucky. Once you have, you’ll understand more about the intersection of 
law and politics at the town hearing level. 
 So, dear reader, it is not your imagination. It  is more difﬁ cult to get an antenna permit today than it 
was in former times. I have written this book to try to give you a guide on how to navigate the difﬁ cult 
and dangerous shoals of getting an antenna permit in today’s contentious and sometimes litigious 
environment. 
Introduction

 Acknowledgments 
 I thank my clients — the best teachers a lawyer could ever want for learning his craft, because they 
keep asking the hard questions. Sometimes those questions were asked out of fear and sometimes 
out of wisdom. But they were always great questions. Fearing that many clients will feel left out, I 
most especially want to thank Bob Vinikoor (Koor Communications), as well as Bob Hess and Bob 
Yankowitz (both of CBS) for teaching me a lot about the broadcast world. A well-deserved thank 
you as well to each of those who made this book possible: Chris Imlay, Esq., General Counsel to the 
Society of Broadcast Engineers, and to the people who helped assemble the book: Dean Straw N6BV, 
Jim Cain K1TN Christopher C. Ercoli (Union College ‘06), Annie Hopengarten (Colby College ‘06), 
as well as Eric Schumacher-Rasmussen (an editor with an ordered mind). 
 I would be remiss if I did not thank my mother and father, who paid for nine years of higher education 
for which I will forever be grateful. The gift of an education is truly one of those gifts that keeps on 
giving. Thanks, Colby; thanks, Boston College; thanks, Harvard. But, most of all, thanks, Mom and 
Dad.
 And a big thank you to my children, Annie and Steven, of whom I could not be prouder. 
 Finally, here’s the answer to my wife Betty’s question: This book is the product of what I was doing 
in front of my computer all that time! I was not just collecting Internet humor. ;-) See? I was doing 
something useful after all. When the weather gets a little nicer, I’ll get to work on cleaning out the 
garage, as you’ve asked. 

vii
 About the Author 
 Since 1990, Fred Hopengarten has acted as a consultant to venture capital ﬁ rms on communications 
investments and as a lawyer in communications law matters — especially those involving land use for 
dishes and towers. In addition, he founded Strong Signals LLC, a Maine company, to own and operate 
a major communications tower and site near Lewiston-Auburn. 
 From 1978 to 1989, Hopengarten was President of Channel One, based in Newton, MA, a company 
providing equipment and installation services for home and commercial satellite earth stations, as well 
as temporary downlinks for  ad hoc  networks. He installed over 100 downlinks and 15 towers, obtaining 
building and zoning permits, buying hardware, and climbing towers to erect antennas. Beginning as a 
startup, the company grew to operate cable TV systems passing 13,000 homes. The company was sold 
and its cable TV systems are now part of Comcast. 
 Hopengarten has published articles on various aspects of satellite and cable television services, as well 
as antenna zoning matters, in Communications – Engineering Digest ,  ComputerWorld ,  Dealerscope ,  Pay 
Television ,  Inside SPACE ,  Satellite Communications ,  Radio-Electronics ,  Cable Television Business , 
CableVision ,  Cable Marketing ,  Broadcasting ,  Cable Television Business , the  New England Real Estate 
Journal , and  Radio World Engineering Extra . He has published amateur radio antenna articles in  73 , 
CQ ,  National Contest Journal ,  DX Magazine ,  QST (with R. Dean Straw), and  The ARRL Antenna Book
(with Straw). He is the author of  Antenna Zoning for the Radio Amateur, published by the ARRL (the 
national association for amateur radio). 
 A frequent speaker at technical and trade events, Hopengarten has been a guest speaker for the 
Electronic Industries Association, the Satellite Communications Users ’ Conference, Online Systems, 
Payment Systems, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston University Law School, Boston 
College Law School, Resource Management Consultants, the Dayton HamVention, the National 
Association of Broadcasters, the Society of Broadcast Engineers Ennes Workshops, and others. He 
has been interviewed frequently for articles, as well as for TV and radio shows, satellite television, 
mini-cable systems, and satellite teleconferencing. He has worked as a consultant to various companies 
and investors with an interest in the ﬁ eld. Oh yes, he’s a lawyer who actually devotes most of his 
professional time to antenna leasing and zoning matters. 
 Hopengarten is a graduate of Colby College (A.B., economics, Class of  ’ 67), Waterville, ME, where he 
lettered in tennis and was also the chief engineer of the college radio station, WMHB. While creating 
Channel One, he taught, as an Associate Professor, courses in Business Law and Marketing for one 
semester at Colby. He received his J.D. from the Boston College Law School (Class of  ’ 70). He is a 
member of the Bar in the District of Columbia (where he was law clerk to the chairman of the Federal Trade 
Commission) and in Maine. He is also a graduate of the Harvard Business School (M.B.A., Class of  ’ 72). 
 Hopengarten has held an amateur radio Extra Class license since 1975, as K1VR. He received his ﬁ rst 
FCC license in 1956, as WN1NJL. In 1993, he wrote the user’s manual accompanying  CT , a software 
program for ham radio contesting that is the most popular such program in the world (over 30,000 
users). He serves as a volunteer counsel for the American Radio Relay League, working mainly on 
zoning matters, and is a member of the Radio Club of America. 
 Hopengarten is married to Betty E. Herr, M.D., Ph.D., a physician and medical director of a private group 
practice of psychiatry afﬁ liated with St. Elizabeth’s Medical Center, Boston. The Hopengartens live in 
Lincoln, MA. They have a daughter, Annie, and a son, Steven, who are just terriﬁ c. 

This page intentionally left blank

1
 Principles That Will Help You Win 
 You are about to embark on a process that will have its ups and downs. There are, however, some 
certainties. The ﬁ rst certainty is that you will run into some predictable questions, to which there are 
good answers. The second certainty is that your luck will dramatically improve with preparation, but 
you knew that. The third certainty is that you can beneﬁ t from the efforts of those who have gone 
before you, if you choose to pay attention and learn from their mistakes. 
 Remember the aphorism:  Stupid people never learn. Smart people learn from their own mistakes. 
Brilliant people learn from the mistakes of others.
 1.1  Commit Yourself to Win 
 If you are willing to work hard and prepare, learning from the mistakes of others, you will achieve 
several things: 
● 
 You will ﬁ nd that your early steps aren’t as bumpy as you might have feared. 
● 
 You will dramatically reduce the cost of legal assistance, should you choose to retain a lawyer. 
● 
 You will put on a presentation that gives you the greatest chance of achieving the permit for 
the project you propose. 
● 
 Should you be denied after the initial hearing, heaven forbid, you will increase your chances 
of succeeding on appeal. 
● 
 You should understand that it is common for zoning bylaws or ordinances to include a clause 
that prevents you from reapplying for a year, sometimes two, if you are turned down. So, if 
you are not well prepared, you may introduce up to a two-year delay in your project. 
 Some Zoning Boards like to think of themselves as  “ just your neighbors. ” They may encourage you to 
 “ come on down and tell your story. ” Unfortunately, while they may indeed be well-meaning, civic-minded 
volunteers, they may not understand what you intend to do. They may also consider themselves to be 
 “ protectors of the town. ”  
CHAPTER 1 

2 Chapter 1
 Always remember that this is a complex matter and that it involves both technical and legal issues that 
may be new to the Board. Be careful. Here are some thoughts you should banish from your mind: 
● 
 This application process is  silly , and it could take longer to get the permit than it will to erect 
the tower. (Yes, this is true, but depressing. If you dwell on it, you’ll never get going.) 
● 
 This process is expensive and it could cost more than the structure and antennas. (Banish this 
thought from your mind as well, because it could also be true, especially at lower heights, 
and because this thought is also depressing.) Besides, investing in the process may be your 
only way to get that antenna up at all. There have been many examples of people who have 
succeeded in erecting good antenna systems almost exclusively because they conveyed the 
sense that they were committed to winning (and it showed in their preparation). As a result, 
Boards and neighbors decided that working with the applicant was a more fruitful strategy 
than what has become known as the  Nancy Reagan posture :  “ Just say no. ” 
 Here is an example. Let’s say you let it slip during a conversation with the Building Inspector or a 
neighbor that you really want to work something out here because you have only a limited amount of 
money to spend. You are really telegraphing to the Board that they can walk all over you, because you 
can’t afford to take this case to the next level. 
 I’d much rather say:  “ My company is prepared to spend whatever it takes to see this project through to 
completion. ” (Never hesitate to repeat the phrase  “ whatever it takes. ” ) People should understand that 
you are really, really determined. Prepare yourself mentally to win. 
 As you gear up for this challenge, recall the words of Winston Churchill, who said, referring to World 
War I:  “ In war: resolution. In defeat: deﬁ ance. In victory: magnanimity. In peace: goodwill. ” 
 1.2  Build Your Winning Team 
 Not only must you prepare yourself for the project but you must also assemble your team. Depending 
on your situation, you may have to brief your associates, other antenna owners in town, neighbors, 
and a team of “ experts, ” as well. Who are those experts? Before this is over, you may need a lawyer, a 
friend who is really good with a computer word-processing program and a scanner (or a professional 
secretary), a surveyor, a registered professional engineer, an insurance agent, a real estate agent, an 
appraiser, a banker, and — usually at the last minute — a printer. Start thinking about whom you’ll ask to 
be on your team now. It can be difﬁ cult to get those folks organized the night before a public hearing, 
because your emergency is not necessarily their emergency, and sometimes they need clearance from 
senior management to help you — or at least to help you in a hurry. 
 1.3  Always Wear the White Hat 
 Conceptually, you should be thinking about how to wear the  white hat at all times. This reference 
comes from the old cowboy movies. You could always tell the bad guys — they wore black hats. The 
heroes always wore white hats. 

Principles That Will Help You Win 3
 1.3.1  So Who Wears a White Hat? 
● 
 Good citizens who have prepared a permit application that complies with the bylaw or 
ordinance (or meets standards even better than those speciﬁ ed in the bylaw or ordinance) 
● 
 Public-spirited citizens who stand ready in times of natural disaster  
● 
 Businesses that show consideration for the interests and concerns of neighbors  
● 
 Applicants who have consulted with neighbors before showing up at the hearing 
● 
 Careful people who are going to build something that won’t hurt anyone 
 1.3.2  And Who Wears a Black Hat? 
● 
 Applicants who come in shouting,  “ I own this land. I have rights! ” 
● 
 Applicants who haven’t really ﬁ gured out what they are asking of the Board 
● 
 Applicants who haven’t consulted with their neighbors  
● 
 Applicants who haven’t thought their plans through very carefully  
● 
 Applicants who give off the impression that they are haphazard people who are really capable 
of building something dangerous 
 1.4  Commit to a Policy of Full Disclosure 
 When preparing your permit application, you may be tempted to gloss over some detail. Perhaps it is 
a tiny detail. Perhaps you want to skip over something because you really haven’t made up your mind. 
Attempting to hide something at the hearing is a bad idea. It is not what the wearer of the white hat 
would do. 
 Following are two examples of issues that can become an embarrassment during a public hearing if 
they are not disclosed in permit applications. There is no need to fall into this trap. The disclosure may 
not look good, but there is usually a convincing explanation for the issue. There is, however, never 
a good explanation for not disclosing some things in the ﬁ rst place. As your application will likely 
receive close scrutiny, you will get caught. Here’s the basic rule:  Spell it out and then explain it away : 
● 
 Disclose who really owns the property and assure the Board you have permission to build. If, 
for some reason, the land is in the name of your wife, a real estate trust, a relative, a landlord, 
and so forth, include that information, together with some sort of afﬁ rmative statement that 
you are applying with the permission and good wishes of the owner and a letter from the true 
owner that authorizes you to act and appear as an agent of the landlord, wishing you well. 
You are the real party in interest. Don’t let the Board get hung up on who owns the property, 
causing a delay to the next meeting until you show up with that necessary permission. (Yes, 
this book has a sample of such a letter.) 

4 Chapter 1
● 
 Disclose all distances.  All distances . Sooner or later, someone is going to ask. The truth is that 
if you build according to the building code your antenna won’t fall over on top of neighbors 
and injure those neighbors. You are far, far better off if you say:  “ Please refer to Exhibit __, 
on page __, where you’ll see that the distance to the property line is __ feet. ” That is decidedly 
preferable to being asked to come back in two weeks, or next month, with the dimensions 
requested. So, be sure to show the distances from every part of your equipment shed/
transmitter building to the property line, from the proposed tower to various property lines, 
and from the tower to adjacent homes or detached garages! (You can do this on the plot plan 
or on a chart that you insert in the supplement to the application.) Also, measure the distance 
to the overhead electrical power line. I’ve seen many hearings held over until the applicant 
provided a plot plan, with dimensions that made sense. 
 One last tip for situations on small plots (which may be, for this purpose, deﬁ ned as an acre or less): 
Think about and learn the footprint of any tower you’ve thought of erecting. I was once involved in 
erecting a triangular, self-supporting Sabre tower that was 19 feet on a face at the base (and 5 feet on a 
face at the top). The tower was a triangle, but the surrounding fence was a rectangle. So, the orientation 
of the tower on the property made a difference as to the distance between the nearest leg and the fence. 
Although this was a self-supporting tower, the issue is also present for guyed towers.  Figure 1.1  shows 
why a guyed tower requires a triangular area of land;  Figure 1.2 shows what happens when you are 
forced to make the tower’s guying system ﬁ t into a rectangular parcel. Frankly, the best way to orient 
a tower is to draw the parcel on graph paper and move a scaled triangle-shaped piece of paper around 
until everything ﬁ ts. 
 You need to know those things. The applicant should be the master of the facts. 
Why a tower needs a triangle of land area
Guy anchor
Guy wire
Guy wire
Guy wire
Guy anchor
Tower
Guy anchor
 Figure 1.1  Illustration showing why a tower with guys in three directions, 120 ° apart, 
requires a triangular area of land. 

Principles That Will Help You Win 5
 1.5  Preparation is Everything 
 The classic expression is apt:  “ If you don’t know where you’re going, any road will take you there. ” 
This means you must know what you want, know what you need (note the distinction between what 
you want and what you  need , and remember to apply it to a neighbor who objects), and how you 
intend to accomplish it. After you have made those decisions, many of the steps involved fall out 
easily. 
Why tower orientation makes a difference
2
2
2
(A)
2
2
(B)
2
 3  1.732
 3  1.732
A guyed tower presents a land requirement
equal to an equilateral triangle. Guy wires
radiate every 120 (3 guys  360)
Oriented as in (A) — You have a problem
Oriented as in (B) — No problem
Fails setback
requirement
(or required yard)
Passes setback
requirement
(or required yard)
Line designating
setback or
required yard
 Figure 1.2  The orientation of a guyed tower can make the difference between ﬁ tting the 
guy sets and anchors within a zoning setback requirement or required yard and failing 
to meet that dimensional requirement. 

6 Chapter 1
 1.5.1  Know Exactly What You Want 
 If you are vague on your desires, many decisions become difﬁ cult. Here’s what I suggest as an example 
of a level of speciﬁ city for your goal: 
I Want : 130 feet of Rohn model 55G, with Phillystran guys at three levels. 
I Need :  121 feet, comprised of 110 feet of sections (by the way, check for the possibility of overlap 
with the tower you intend to erect — 11 10-foot sections of Rohn model 25G are  not 110 feet; 
they are less) with guys at three levels and 11 feet of FM repeater whip above the top. 
 Now you can create a model of your plot and move the structure around until it ﬁ ts. Discover the 
several places it ﬁ ts, as there may be more than one spot. The manual way to discover the best place 
for the structure is to create a drawing of your plot on graph paper, to scale. Add in the buildings on 
the land (house, garage, shed, etc.). Add the setbacks required by your town. You now have what is 
commonly called the “ building envelope. ” Using the same scale, cut out a triangle equivalent to the 
space occupied by a structure with three directions for guy wires. Now you can move that triangle 
around until you ﬁ nd sites that ﬁ t. 
 The more modern method is to use a computer to do your layout. I’ll talk about that later in the book. 
 1.5.2  Know the Process 
 Before you submit your application, you must learn the process. Now, you may be one of those 
exceptionally lucky individuals who live — or move — someplace that has no regulations on antenna 
structures. Or, you may live in a town where you may  by right put up a system that is, say, less than 
120 feet high. 
 On the other hand, you are probably reading this book because you are not one of those fortunate 
people. You must learn how to navigate through the shoal waters of your own town’s regulations, 
codes, ordinances, or bylaws (and, by the way, learn what to call them!). This can be tricky, because 
every town or city runs things a bit differently. In general, your process will involve some sort of public 
hearing held before a Planning Board, Zoning Board, or perhaps a Zoning Board of Appeals/Board of 
Zoning Appeals/Zoning Board of Adjustment. Different towns have different names for these bodies. 
Whatever the body is called, the hearings you will probably run into are open, public meetings. This is 
true everywhere in the United States. So, even before you’ve begun to assemble your own application, 
ﬁ nd out when your Board meets and attend at least two meetings. 
 If your town is small and only a small number of people are in the room, you may be asked:  “ Is there 
anything we can do for you? ” Don’t be a fool and blurt out:  “ Yeah, I’m here to ﬁ nd out how to put up 
a tower. ” The local reporter could mention this in the weekly newspaper ( “ Tall tower coming! ” ), or 
it could hit the local rumor mill and put the neighbors on alert. Nothing good will come of it. Some 
people who hear the news will immediately assume that what you are going to propose to build is 
commercial, very big, very dangerous, and very ugly. It is somewhat natural to assume the worst and 
fear the unknown. 

Principles That Will Help You Win 7
 Instead, should you be asked why you are there, reply simply with a variation or two of the following: 
  “ It’s kind of you to ask. I’m new in town and I wanted to learn how things work here. ”
 “ Actually, I’ve never been to a meeting of the Board of Appeals, and I’ve always wanted to see one or two. ” 
 It is rare for the Board to pursue the matter after such responses. But, because you may be nervous if 
you are inexperienced in such matters, here is how to handle the next round, should it come: 
 Q:  “ Are you planning to come before us? ”
 A:  “ I haven’t got anything worked up, but if I decide to seek a permit, I’ll certainly be better off for 
having come this evening. ”
 Q:  “ What kind of project did you have in mind? ”
 A:  “ I’m new to this. I don’t have anything speciﬁ c yet. I’ve never attended one of these meetings 
and I was curious. ” 
 Or, for the longer-term resident: 
 A:  “ I’ve never seen one of these meetings. I ﬁ gured that if I ever need to come here, I’d better learn 
what you are interested in hearing from applicants. ” 
 In other words, you don’t have to tell them details at this point. It is unlikely that you will be pressed. And 
don’t be so suspicious. They’re just curious about why you are in the room and are trying to be neighborly. 
They are not mad at you  yet . Don’t give them a reason to be aggravated. Be pleasant, and smile. 
 1.5.3  Know the Law 
 Arrrrgh. I can’t tell you how many times clients have called and said:  “ Well, before I bought the 
property, I went and talked to the Building Inspector, and he told me it would be no problem. So I 
bought the property, and now I have a problem. ”
 So, here’s lesson number one: Don’t get your medical advice from the teenager at the cash register in 
the drug store. And don’t get your legal advice from the Building Inspector or from the sweet lady at 
the counter in the Building Department who says:  “ You don’t have to buy the whole zoning ordinance; 
I could just photocopy the relevant section for you. ”
 Wrong. Buy the bylaw or ordinance — the whole thing. If you are going to retain counsel, buy two copies: 
one for you and one for your lawyer. If you don’t provide your lawyer with a copy of the local bylaw, the 
lawyer is just going to charge you for the time the paralegal spends getting it. While it is true that there are 
services available to lawyers (and anyone else who wants to spend the money) that sell CDs ﬁ lled with the 
zoning bylaws of every municipality in the state, it is difﬁ cult to bring the CD to a planning board meeting 
and pass a relevant section across the table. The typical cost for a bylaw or ordinance is $6 to $24. If it is 
expensive to purchase a copy of the bylaw or ordinance and it is short enough, you may photocopy it for 
your lawyer. Generally, there is no copyright protection for a public law. 
 What could you ﬁ nd in the bylaw or ordinance that you might not get from the Building Inspector or 
Secretary to the Board? Deﬁ nitions, effective dates, cross-references to exceptions, a zoning district 

8 Chapter 1
 map, and so forth. You and your lawyer need the original bylaw. Don’t accept anyone’s word about 
what it says. 
 Don’t even accept the word of another antenna structure owner in the area or town. He may not have 
kept up with changes instituted since he erected his antenna system. He may, heaven forbid, have never 
even applied for a permit. Don’t laugh. I’ve seen both. 
 1.5.4  Know the Players 
 It is not crucial that you know the members of the Board personally. One of the blessings of America 
is that, by and large, we have better government than we deserve. The Board may pay special attention 
to a gray-haired town father or mother with encyclopedic knowledge of town history. The Board might 
rule against you for any number of reasons, but you probably cannot obtain the good will of Board 
members starting now. Spend your limited time on preparing a terriﬁ cally thorough presentation, not 
schmoozing with Board members. 
 You should, however, pay a courtesy call on the Secretary to the Planning Board, the Secretary to the 
Board of Appeals, and the Town Planner (if there is one). And, as mentioned above, you should attend 
meetings of the Planning Board and the Board of Appeals to see what kinds of questions pop up over and 
over again. Here’s a clue: Boards always want setbacks, distances, construction details, scaled drawings, 
the names and addresses of abutters, and so forth. When you make such courtesy calls, do not ask:  “ Can 
I get a permit to erect my radio antenna system? ” Instead, the correct question is:  “ What information 
does the Board need to properly evaluate my application for a radio (or TV or cellular) antenna system? ”
(Hint: If you are constructing a backhaul microwave link, stick with  “ radio antenna system ” as the 
description. The word  “ microwave ” is wrongly, but popularly, associated with frightening thoughts.) 
 1.6  Be Nice —and Flexible 
 After you have paid your courtesy calls, you will return to begin assembling your application. After 
it is assembled, you’ll be back to ask if you’ve included everything necessary for an evaluation. As a 
citizen of the town, and as a decent human being, it is always to your advantage to be nice — even if 
you feel that the town is out to get you. 
 Yes, even those who are paranoid have enemies, and the town may indeed be out to prevent the 
installation of your antenna system. Even so, be nice and show respect. You could be dealing with 
these people for up to two years (if it drags out, and sometimes forever if the town has a renewal of the 
permit process). 
 Remember, most local elected ofﬁ cials try very hard to be reasonable and fair with all applicants. 
Never forget that they are human beings, too. Nobody appreciates someone who swaggers into 
meetings with a know-it-all attitude. 
 Recall the words of Matthew 10:16:  “ Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves. 
Therefore be wise as serpents and harmless as doves. ” 
 Finally, don’t forget that most ofﬁ cials are willing to consider alternatives. So be sure you are willing 
and ﬂ exible, too. 

9
 The Process in a Nutshell 
 Let me warn you now: If you do it right, this is going to be a grueling process. The majority of the 
burden will fall on you, the applicant. In a contested case, a lawyer will probably be a necessity if you 
want the permit to put up your antenna system. 
 2.1  Preparation, Preparation, and Preparation 
 Everyone watches TV programs about lawyers. They always show intense discussions with the client 
and exciting courtroom scenes. TV shows never portray the hours and hours of preparation, poring 
over documents, and creating documents. Nonetheless, the magic to getting a permit lies in  both
preparation — creating your application and appendices —and live action — encounters with planners 
and the code-enforcement ofﬁ cer, as well as decisions made during the public hearing, if a public 
hearing is necessary. Sadly, much of the time in today’s contentious environment, with people up in 
arms about towers of all kinds, a public hearing is indeed necessary. For a commercial tower, it is 
almost impossible to avoid. 
 The best way to promote the cause of winning a permit is to  prepare a terriﬁ c application . Do it right 
and the hearing can be easy. In this chapter, I will assume that you are buying property in a different 
town, but even if you already own the land and are just starting the process of applying for a permit to 
construct an antenna system, read on. 
 2.2  Buying Land 
 2.2.1  Selecting a Real Estate Agent 
 If you are like most people, you will be tempted to select the most common form of real estate agent, 
an agent with listings in the newspaper. You may be making a very simple mistake, but it is certainly 
mistake number 1. What you want is a commercial real estate agent, someone who ﬁ nds sites for 
Burger Kings, real estate developers, Hampton Inns, Dunkin Donuts, etc. Why would you want such a 
person as your real estate agent? 
 ● 
 This agent has learned to keep his or her mouth shut. Tight. You don’t want the purpose you 
have in mind disclosed any sooner than necessary. 
CHAPTER 2 

10 Chapter 2
● 
 This agent may have already learned how to do business through a  “ straw man. ” That’s 
someone who will buy the property but is under an obligation to resell it immediately to you 
without raising the underlying cost. 
● 
 This agent more likely has a sense of the value of raw land (and raw land sells for prices that 
are very different than land in your basic suburb, with different commission rates, too). 
 ● 
 This agent has spent some time reading the town’s zoning bylaws, or is willing to read them, 
before wasting your time to go look at land that you later discover is in the wrong zone — a 
zone where the tower you’d like will simply never be permitted. 
 As you think about selecting a real estate agent, remember some key points: 
● 
 The real estate agent is not  your agent, but rather the agent of the seller. Meaning to you: 
Nothing you conﬁ de to the agent will remain conﬁ dential. So, unless this is really the 
boondocks, don’t talk about your plans to install a really big antenna system. If the agent 
thinks a particular neighborhood could revolt when you announce your plans for an antenna 
system, you may not be shown every possible plot. You may be shown land in areas of town 
that the agent considers more industrial or somehow more  appropriate .
 ● 
 The real estate agent does not know enough — or doesn’t want to learn — about antenna-related 
issues. What am I really saying here? I’m saying that there are a lot of real estate agents 
around. Some are great; some aren’t so great. You have very speciﬁ c requirements that you 
know best. For example, for an AM radio station, you probably do not want to be on the top 
of a rocky hill, where radials will present a huge problem. For an FM radio station or a TV 
station, you may not want to be in a valley, or halfway down the side of a hill, unable to reach 
an audience “ on the other side of the mountain. ” 
 Unless the agent clearly understands the facts you are relating, you could waste a lot of time being 
shown sites that are totally unsuitable for a radio antenna — because the lot is too small; because it is 
located within an industrial park development with covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC & Rs) 
that will prove intolerable; 1 because there is a giant hill nearby; and so forth. Life is too short to deal 
with a real estate agent who won’t listen well. 
 Here’s a test that has proven useful for others: 
● 
 Ask the agent to tell you the compass direction from a site to the local high school. If you get 
a nervous laugh and an answer to the effect that he or she was never much good at science or 
math, forget it. Find another agent. This one can’t read a road map. 
 ● 
 Ask the agent for the distance from the site to the nearest serious hill. This will ﬂ esh out the 
agent who doesn’t own a U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) section map or the agent who can’t 
scale out distances from a map. You don’t want that agent. (I’ve yet to ﬁ nd a real estate agent 
who could actually do the trigonometry to tell you the angle to the hill.) 
1  You didn’t think CC & Rs could be involved in a commercial tower situation? See  http://www.szlawﬁ rm.net/ﬁ les/chambers_v_old_
stone_hill.pdf  for a discussion of  Chambers v. Old Stone Hill , 1       N.Y.3d 424, 806       N.E.2d 979, 774       N.Y.S.2d 866 (2004), preventing 
the erection of a 120-foot monopole in Pound Ridge, NY, because a restrictive covenant limited land use to single family homes.

The Process in a Nutshell 11
 So who do you want as a real estate agent? You might ﬁ nd a really savvy agent, but it is rare for anyone 
to be as good as you are at the process. Begin by arming yourself with the bylaws or ordinances of 
communities you are willing to consider, as well as local maps and local USGS section maps (for 
elevations). Yes, you can always get topographic information online, but you’ll want to spread out a 
map. Try to get a hard copy. 
Never ever trust the word of a real estate agent on the question of what the local bylaw or ordinance 
says. Almost never trust the word of a real estate agent on the question of how close the house is to an 
interfering hill or mountain. Again, you will be your own best agent. 
 There is one possible exception: The commercial buyer’s agent. This person works for you and not the 
person selling the lot, farm, or woods. He or she owes a duty of loyalty to you. But, you may have to 
pay this agent whether or not you buy a lot through him or her. Nonetheless, check it out. If your time 
is just not available, this may be your answer. 
 There is another strategy: Hire a local lawyer experienced in land development, one who has had 
experience with various local towns and bylaws. Let him or her guide you away from trouble and 
toward happiness. Then use a smart real estate agent of any stripe (buyer’s or seller’s). 
 Finally, if you are lucky, you might ﬁ nd a  “ site acquisition consultant. ” This is usually someone who 
has worked for cellular telephone companies and has been down this road before. 
Caution: Real estate rules and regulations change from state to state. What’s the big deal? Just 
ask those living in Pennsylvania. In a ruling that could guarantee millions of dollars in additional 
tax income for Pennsylvania counties, schools, and municipalities, the Commonwealth Court has 
ruled that cell towers can be taxed as real estate. In 2001, one county decided to tax all cellular 
towers and their supporting pads as improvements to real estate, no longer considering them personal 
property. 
 You could also be looking for land in Colorado, where even fairly large tracts of land (up to 35 acres) 
could be subject to the Common Interest Ownership Act (CIOA). This act permits any community 
with “ common area ” — road, frontage, drainage, signs, etc. — to be subject to the Act. Your neighbors 
might be able to band together to create a homeowners ’ association (HOA) to create and enforce 
covenants that might bind your land even after you’ve purchased it for the purpose of a commercial 
tower. 
 Your agent or lawyer will know things like this, right? Let ’ s hope so. 
 2.2.2  What to Tell the Real Estate Agent 
 Tell the real estate agent that you have special land requirements in mind and questions about buildings 
on the land are secondary. It is very hard to improve a piece of land that is unsuitable for radio due to 
interfering hills, lack of an access road, bad association bylaws, and so forth. It is almost impossible to 
enlarge or remodel a piece of land. 
Don’t tell the real estate agent that you want to erect  “ some really big towers. ” This may frighten the 
agent. Although you say  “ 125 feet, ” the agent may somehow end up envisioning  “ 1250 feet. ” The 

12 Chapter 2
 seller’s agent owes you no duty of ﬁ delity or conﬁ dentiality. You would obviously never tell the seller’s 
agent how much you are really willing to pay for a house. That information will ﬁ nd its way to the 
sellers.
 2.3  Evaluating Antenna Sites 
 If you aren’t an engineer, don’t have one on staff, or don’t have a consulting engineer, you could make 
a serious mistake. Get one. But, there is one rule that needs to be expressed in bold, capital letters: 
WALK THE LAND . 
 There are other ways to learn. Recent editions (17th and later) of  The American Radio Relay League 
(ARRL) Antenna Book also contain much valuable information on antenna site selection. See Chapter 23, 
 “ Radio Wave Propagation, ”  and Chapter 3,  “ The Effects of Ground ” in that text. 
 You will need detailed topographic maps for your transmitting location; in the United States, you can get 
information on how to obtain the appropriate topographic map for your area by calling 1-888-ASK-USGS 
or by checking www.usgs.gov/pubprod/ . Free topo maps may be found at  www.topozone.com/ and 
other sites. The smoothness, or seamlessness, when changing from one topo map to an adjacent 
one may not be perfect (but what do you want for free?). As you are about to invest big money, you 
may wish to subscribe to their TopoZone Pro service. Other topo sites include  http://www.acme
.com/mapper/ and  http://mapserver.maptech.com/homepage/index.cfm . Google Maps can also provide 
terrain information: http://maps.google.com/maps?hl en & tab  wl . 
 The DeLorme company, Topo USA, and National Geographic also sell CDs of topographic maps. I’m 
a huge fan of DeLorme, because they easily permit you to draw a radian from the proposed site to a 
target site, perfect for mapping out whether or not there are interfering hills between the antenna tower 
and the studio site for a studio-to-transmitter link (STL) analysis. 
 2.4  The Purchase and Sale Contract 
 2.4.1  Using an Attorney 
 To a layman, the offer or purchase and sale agreement may seem like the easiest portion of the land-
buying effort — a portion the applicant can handle himself. Actually, it is the portion of the effort for 
which you will likely pay  much less than you think is required, but for which you will get  much more
than you realize. One often-overlooked possibility is that once you submit an offer, and it is accepted, 
you have a contract. If you discover a bylaw problem at this point in the discussions, you may have to 
kiss your “ earnest money ” goodbye. 
 Here’s a story combining several recent cases. I don’t do real estate conveyancing, but I have a friend 
who does (and to whom I recommend prospective purchasers of property). I did all the  “ antenna law ” 
work and (as it involved looking at three towns, including meeting the Building Inspector in each town 
to clarify interpretations of tough questions) charged about $2000 (this was a very long time ago). It 

The Process in a Nutshell 13
 was an unusually large amount of work for such a matter, but the applicant couldn’t really do any of 
the footwork himself. 
 The client now has a permit for the tallest antenna-support structure ever erected in his chosen town, 
and we never had to go through hearings of any kind. My lawyer friend, who did the conveyancing 
work, charged $750 (but should have charged about $1250, since it took longer than anticipated). But, 
the client got about $4000 shaved off the purchase price when the conveyancer found some problems 
that the client was willing to ﬁ x himself. 
 So, the client (remember, this is a composite story) paid about $2750 total, saved $4000, and got the 
antenna system of his dreams. Since the client was working with lawyers who know their way around, 
we even introduced the client to a bank that (1) would close sooner than the one he found, and (2) 
would match the very best price (mortgage interest rate) he found. His other bank was giving him a 
hard time on one element of his ﬁ nancial picture, while our recommended bank did not make a fuss 
about that element. For the latter service, there was no charge. All of these expenses, by the way, were 
a tiny, tiny percentage (less than 0.5%) of the purchase price. 
 Note the picture I am painting. Using a lawyer early can save you money, time, and grief. Of course, 
you would expect me, an attorney, to say that. 
 2.4.2  Making an Offer 
 Real estate agents have been known to urge buyers to quickly sign an offer to buy, before you have a 
chance to retain a lawyer to represent you. As explained previously, don’t forget that an  offer , once 
accepted by the seller, is a  contract . 
 Below is some wisdom in the form of documents prepared from the work of Jim O’Connell, W9WU, 
and John Swartz, WA9AQN. McConnell is an ARRL volunteer counsel and former senior litigation 
attorney in the Ofﬁ ce of the Attorney General of Illinois. He is the lawyer who succeeded in getting 
radio hams within a town declared a class, for a class action, in the  Borowski case. 2 John Swartz is a 
real estate, bankruptcy, and commercial lawyer with Gifﬁ n, Winning, Cohen  & Bodewes (Springﬁ eld, 
IL). Both have granted permission to use their ideas, but neither one is your lawyer — so you can’t sue 
them if something goes wrong! 
 These forms below may prove useful for the do-it-yourselfer or for his or her attorney. These additions 
to the purchase-and-sale agreement are designed to give you and your attorney time to research the 
local bylaws or ordinances, time to force the seller (or the seller’s attorney) to hand over relevant 
documents, and time for you (or your attorney) to review them. You are free to negotiate the number of 
days necessary to do this. (These forms are on the CD as ﬁ lename Addenda to Real-Estate Offer.doc. 
In addition to the documents referenced in this book, the CD contains a wealth of information, images, 
and documents pertaining to all of the topics of this book. You’ll ﬁ nd it worthwhile to explore all of the 
topic areas contained on the CD.)
2  Borowski v. Burbank , 101 FRD 59 (ND IL, 1984). 

14 Chapter 2
 For Existing Construction 
 Addendum to offer to purchase between Buyers and Sellers, for the purchase of property at 
 ________________________________________________ 
 This offer is contingent upon there being no limitation imposed by any municipal or local unit 
of government having jurisdiction over the erection by Buyer upon the property of a system of 
antennas and supporting structures not less than ________ feet in height suitable for use by 
Buyer in the XXXX Radio Service. The acceptability of any such limitations shall be at the sole 
discretion of the Buyer. Buyer shall have twenty-one (21) days from the signing of this agreement 
to determine if there are any such limitations imposed which are unacceptable to Buyer, and 
declare this contract void. Seller shall thereupon return any funds deposited hereunder. 
 This offer is further contingent upon inspection by buyer and buyer ’ s attorney of the applicable 
covenants, conditions, restrictions of record, property owners association rules (if any), or 
other documents restricting the use and occupancy of the land and premises in order to 
determine whether such documents contain any restriction which would prohibit buyer from 
erecting and maintaining his radio antennas and supporting structure not less than _____ feet 
in height on the property. Within fourteen (14) days of the signing of this agreement, seller or 
seller’s attorney shall furnish to buyer’s attorney a spotted survey showing all improvements, 
restrictions, and easements and a copy of the existing title policy or other documents showing 
such covenants, conditions, or restrictions of record as well as copies of any property owners 
association rules and regulations affecting the property. Buyer and buyer’s attorney shall have 
fourteen (14) days thereafter to inspect the documents to determine whether the restrictions 
or conditions therein are acceptable to buyer. Should easements, covenants, conditions, 
restrictions of record, property owners association rules, or regulations exist so that buyer’s 
installation of the aforementioned antenna and support structure may, in buyer’s sole opinion, 
be inhibited or precluded, at buyer’s option this contract shall be deemed null and void, and all 
obligations of both parties cancelled and all deposits refunded promptly. 
 ____________________________ 
 ____________________________ 
 Buyers 
 Sellers 
 Date: ______________________, 200_ 
 For New Construction/Subdivision Where the Builder/Developer Still Owns the Lots 
 Addendum to offer to purchase between Buyers and Sellers, for the purchase of property at 
 ________________________________________________ 
 A.  Buyer has informed Seller that Buyer is XXXX, and Seller warrants that no covenants, 
conditions, restrictions of record, homeowner association or property owner association 
rules or requirements presently exist or have been or will be recorded prior to closing, which 
would or which may be construed to restrict or prohibit Buyer, from and after closing and 
delivery of the premises, from installing and maintaining radio antennas and a support 
structure not less than ____ feet in height on the property. Seller further agrees that no such 
covenants, conditions or restrictions of record will be imposed by Seller or his transferees 
or assigns in any plat of subdivision or Planned Unit Development agreement affecting the 
property recorded hereafter. Seller agrees to provide Buyer, within fourteen (14) days of 

The Process in a Nutshell 15
 the signing of this agreement, and again ten (10) days prior to closing, with a copy of the 
recorded plat of subdivision and all other documents showing all covenants, conditions or 
restrictions of record, homeowners ’ or property association rules or regulations running 
with the land or affecting the property. Should such covenants, conditions, restrictions of 
record, homeowners ’ or property owners association rules, or regulations exist on either date 
such that Buyer’s installation of the aforementioned antennas and support structure may be 
inhibited or precluded, then at Buyer’s option this contract may be deemed null and void, all 
obligations of both parties canceled and all deposits refunded promptly. 
 B.  Seller further agrees that, to the extent Seller is the owner of property located within 300 
feet of the subject property, Seller will provide Buyer with a statement that Seller, as owner 
of adjacent properties, has no objection to the granting of a building permit for a radio 
antenna support structure by the local municipality. 
 C.  Seller also agrees that, to the extent that Seller controls any architectural committee, 
homeowners ’ association, property owners ’ association, or similar committee from which 
permission is required for construction of the Buyer’s radio antennas and support structure, 
that Seller will grant or cause to be promptly granted such permission upon application by 
Buyer. 
 D.  Seller further agrees that this offer is contingent upon there being no limitation imposed 
by any municipal or local unit of government having jurisdiction over the erection by Buyer 
upon the property of the system described in paragraph A, above. The acceptability of any 
such limitations shall be in the sole discretion of the Buyer. Buyer shall have twenty-one 
(21) days from the signing of this agreement to determine if there are any such limitations 
imposed which are unacceptable to Buyer. If there is such a limitation, then at Buyer’s 
option this contract may be deemed null and void, all obligations of both parties canceled 
and all deposits refunded promptly. 
 E.  The promises and covenants by the Seller contained in paragraphs A through D hereof shall 
survive the closing of this transaction, notwithstanding the delivery of the deed by the Seller. 
 ____________________________
 ____________________________ 
 Buyers 
 Sellers 
 Date: ______________________, 200_ 
  Caution from James C. O’Connell, Esq.: This document was prepared in consideration of the laws of 
the State of Illinois. Real estate law varies among the states. You should consult an attorney prior 
to entering into any real estate transaction. If you mess it up, you’ll have only yourself to blame. 
 2.5  Fix any TVI/RFI First 
 Radiofrequency interference (RFI) should be irrelevant to your application for a permit to erect and 
maintain a radio antenna system. However, the existence of RFI will color the proceedings and inject 
negativity — against you, the applicant. Of course, the truth is that the higher the antenna, the  less likely, 
not the more likely, there is to be interference, but that’s not the way most neighbors might feel about 
the subject. Remember, you want to wear the white hat here. 

16 Chapter 2
 This is not an engineering text, so see  http://www.arrl.org/tis for some good information sources on 
various aspects of RFI. The  ARRL RFI Book ( http://arrl.org/catalog/6834/ ) is another good source of 
help for all types of RFI problems. For detailed discussions on the use of toroids to rid your world of 
RFI, see www.yccc.org/Articles/W1HIS/CommonModeChokesW1HIS2006Apr06.pdf ,  www.dxzone.
com/catalog/Technical_Reference/Radio_Frequency_Interference/ , or  www.audiosystemsgroup.com/
RFI-Ham.pdf .
 2.6  Building Permits 
 Let me deﬁ ne here some terms you will encounter as you proceed further on this adventure. Your city 
or town will almost certainly require a  Building Permit . Absent some special circumstances, a Building 
Permit can usually be granted by a Building Commissioner or a  Building Inspector . 
 In some municipalities, however, you may also need to seek the grant of a land use permit, which may 
be called a Special Permit ,  Special Use Permit (SUP) ,  Special Exception ,  Conditional Use Approval 
(CUA) , or a  Conditional Use Permit (CUP) . For convenience, let’s group these special types together 
and call them Special Permits . You may also encounter the  Variance . All such grants are not the same 
thing as a straightforward Building Permit. 
 Information on the exact type of permission you must get is contained in either the local ordinance or 
state law, or both. In general, the difference between a Special Permit and a Variance is that a Special 
Permit may be granted if you meet the conditions set out in the ordinance. By contrast, a Variance, 
again governed by the law of your state, may be considerably more difﬁ cult to obtain and will  “ run 
with the land ” (meaning that it applies to your plot of land forevermore). 3
 Normally, before a Variance can be granted, the  Board of Appeals or  Planning and Zoning Commission
(whatever may be the name of your local body) must ﬁ nd that there are special conditions relating 
to the land. What is  “ varied ” (changed) in the circumstances of a radio antenna system application is 
normally a yard, setback, height, or other dimensional regulation. 
 Put simply, if your bylaw or ordinance says that you need a Special Permit to erect a radio antenna 
system over 75 feet high and you must meet certain conditions to get this Special Permit, you are 
seeking a discretionary permit, but the rules are generally clearer. If your bylaw simply forbids what 
you want to do, because it will be too close to a property line or too tall, to name two examples, then 
you need a Variance before a Building Permit may be granted. 
 Even after obtaining the correct grant, however, you will still have to deal with the Building Inspector, 
who can, at his or her discretion, make things easy (read: less expensive) or hard (read: more expensive) 
for you. Be respectful. Get and post the permit. Get the proper inspections along the way. Do things right. 
 It is not weird or unusual for the system to require you to apply for a Building Permit that the Building 
Inspector then denies, before you go to the Board of Appeals. After a win at the Board level and 
subsequently being granted a Special Permit, you return to the Building Inspector for the actual 
Building Permit. 
3  There are jurisdictions that have variances for a term of years, but that’s a level of detail we don’t need to get into now. 

The Process in a Nutshell 17
 One common question I hear is:  “ What if I have an attorney draft a Variance application and represent 
me before the review board? What should I expect to pay the lawyer for these services? ”
 My response is, ﬁ rst, try to avoid a Variance application if at all possible. Conditional Use Permits, Special 
Permits, or Special Use Permits are generally easier to obtain. Construction as a matter of right is best! 
 Always remember that no lawyer can guarantee results. You will be best off if you do your own 
legwork. Meet the neighbors. Charm them. Get a sense of who is going to give your trouble and who 
won’t care. Get letters of support, or at least letters of indifference. Then apply for the permit. Figure 
that each evening meeting of a Planning Board or Board of Appeals that your lawyer attends will cost 
you about 2 to 6 hours, or $500 to $1000 (calculate the hourly rate    hours, and don’t forget that the 
lawyer gets travel time, too). 
 2.7  Your Building Permit Application 
 2.7.1  Retail Politics 
 Once you have your proposal — your permit application — ready, it is time to show it to the neighbors. 
This is retail politics at the “ door-knocking ” level. 
 The former Speaker of the House, the late Thomas P.  “ Tip ” O’Neill (D-Mass.), related this story 
in Man of the House: The Life and Political Memoirs of Speaker Tip O’Neill (with William Novak; 
Random House, 1987, p. 26): 
 The second political lesson I learned from my ﬁ rst campaign came from Mrs. O’Brien, our elocution 
and drama teacher in high school, who lived across the street. The night before the election, she said 
to me,  “ Tom, I’m going to vote for you tomorrow even though you didn’t ask me to. ” 
 I was shocked.  “ Why, Mrs. O’Brien, ” I said,  “ I’ve lived across from you for eighteen years. I cut your 
grass in the summer. I shovel your walk in the winter. I didn’t think I had to ask for your vote. ” 
 “ Tom, ” she replied,  “ let me tell you something: people like to be asked. ” 
 The wisdom of that statement is remarkable. It is paralleled in the old salesman’s maxim:  “ Always ask 
for the order. ” The thought also applies to antennas:  “ Everyone likes to be asked. ” 
 2.7.2  Canvas the Neighborhood 
 How much time do you have to soften up the neighbors? It might take six months to meet all of them 
and then go back on a second occasion to discuss your project. If you don’t have the time, or could 
never generate the nerve to go calling twice, you might be forced to condense the  “ meet and greet ” and 
the “ brieﬁ ng ” into the same meeting. 
 Eventually, though, you will need to put together a good printout of your whole permit application, 
in a nice presentation folder, and pack up preprinted letters for each of the neighbors you are going 
to visit. It is okay to bring around a fat envelope carrying these things, because you want to convey to 
neighbors that you are going to speak with as many in your neighborhood as possible. You want to be 
seen as  “ trying to work with the neighborhood. ”

18 Chapter 2
 You should bring along three separate versions of a letter and let the conversation ﬂ ow. As you head for 
the close (the point where you ask the person what he or she thinks of your proposal), remember that 
you have these three alternatives in your envelope: 
 ● 
 Alternative 1 (for  “ friend of the project ” ) — I have no objection to the granting of a Special 
Permit [Special Exception, Variance] to him, and I encourage the Board to do so. 
● 
 Alternative 2 (for  “ neutral to the project ” ) — I do not object to this project. 
● 
 Alternative 3 (for  “ grumpy to the project ” ) — [Name of applicant] has reviewed the 
alternatives with us. The woodsy site he proposes is the most favorable to us from an 
aesthetics perspective.  (or) The woodsy site he proposes to use offers favorable screening to 
me as an abutter. ( or) The woodsy site he proposes is the least objectionable site. 
 The accompanying CD has full letters ready for your use. When the time comes to reach into the 
envelope and pull out a sheet, pull out the version of the letter that this neighbor is most likely to sign. 
If you have to guess, always choose the version that requires the neighbor to be  less favorable (if in 
doubt between grumpy and neutral, hand over the grumpy version). The most important thing is not 
whether the person signs Alternative 1, 2, or 3 but rather that the person signs something that is not an 
objection.
 It is not necessary to leave a copy of the permit application with each person. If that person turns out to 
be an enemy, you want inertia to be on your side. An enemy can always go to Town Hall and pay for a 
photocopy of any permit application, but it is amazing how seldom that occurs. There’s no need for you 
to educate your enemy on your nickel. 
 Mostly, people just show up and complain on general grounds. The less they appear to know what they 
are talking about, the better off you are. For example, if an opponent really gets the wind in his sails, he 
might give the impression that you are going to erect another Eiffel Tower, when you plan on a support 
structure that never exceeds 18 inches in width. 
 Another mistake opponents make that can make them look bad is to bring in a photograph with a hand-
drawn tower that is way out of scale. Your own scaled photographs, photosimulations, or drawings will 
look much more reasonable in contrast. Don’t be the ﬁ rst to give an enemy all the details to study each 
night and get peptic ulcers over. 
 So, bring the application and try to take away a signed letter. Note, however, that even a presentation 
to an enemy is a good idea, because you will want to represent to the Board that, as best you could try, 
you’ve spoken to each neighbor — “ even the ones who are here tonight to oppose me. ”
 2.7.3  Petitions 
 Instead of asking someone to sign a personalized letter, you may be thinking:  “ Wouldn’t it be easier 
to just ask for a neighbor to sign a petition, with other names above it? ” The answer is:  “ Of course! ” 
The problem is that for the very reason that you think getting a signature on a petition is a good idea, a 
signature on a petition carries less weight. It is always easier to get signatures on a petition than to get 
letters. Because it is easier, there is a tendency for Boards (and elected representatives, too) to consider 

The Process in a Nutshell 19
 petition signatures as less valuable. However, there are ways to make the obtaining of individual letters 
almost as easy as obtaining petition signatures. 
 2.8  How to Obtain Favorable Letters 
 2.8.1  Start with the Easy Ones 
 Contact other antenna structure owners in town. These are the ﬁ rst people to whom you should go. But, 
what do you want from them? 
● 
 Town background 
● 
 G-2 on neighbors (G-2 was originally a World War II term for intelligence  — think of it as 
 “ good gossip ” ) 
● 
 Analysis of your proposal 
● 
 Favorable letters, and 
● 
 Allies 
 2.8.2  Town Background 
 If you are new to the town, discussing your situation and desires with other antenna owners in town 
will elicit information on previous experiences in town involving the erection of antenna systems. For 
example, it can be hard, if not impossible, to ﬁ nd previous applications for antenna systems. The town 
recordkeeping system is just not indexed that way. It is indexed by property. 
 You might discover that a construction company moved in seven years ago, applied for an antenna 
system, received a permit, erected it, and shut down last year just before you moved to town. So, you 
wouldn’t know about the existence of this precedent by driving around town looking for antenna 
structures. Yet, the ﬁ le found under that address in the Planning Board, Board of Appeals, or Building 
Department ofﬁ ce could prove very useful. 
 While previous administrative decisions in land use matters seldom create a legal precedent (because 
each piece of land, and each neighborhood, is different), such a ﬁ le is still useful because it tells a 
story. Here’s an example of a good use to which an old ﬁ le may be put. There are towns that measure 
the structure’s height to the top of the antenna-support structure, not to the top of the mast. There are 
towns that want both. 
 The ﬁ le may show (read the minutes of the hearing, if available) if a previous applicant was represented 
by a lawyer. That lawyer may still be around, and, should you choose to hire that lawyer, you’ll pay for 
less time in bringing a lawyer up to speed. The previous applicant paid for that education! 
 The ﬁ le may tell you what kind of objections seemed to concern the Board, what additional 
information or documentation the Board required, and what kind of restrictions, if any, the Board put 
on the permit. Use previous ﬁ les to be sure that your application covers all of the ground that the Board 
wants covered. 

20 Chapter 2
 Finally, the ﬁ le can provide a basis for arguing that Western Civilization as we know it will not come to 
an end if a radio antenna system is erected! If you want to be really thorough, you could use a previous 
antenna situation to create proof that real estate values do not fall when an antenna is installed. Just 
go to the assessor’s ofﬁ ce and look up the assessments for that house and the neighbors. Enter those 
assessments into a spreadsheet, showing valuations before and after the erection of the antenna system, 
to show that values did not go down. In other words, previous ﬁ les can be very helpful. 
 2.8.3  G-2 on the Neighbors 
 Other antenna owners in town may have some knowledge of who your neighbors are, what causes 
they have been active in, if they have children, and so forth. Use these owners to get a read on your 
neighbors so you’ll know whom to approach ﬁ rst when the time comes to getting letters of support. 
 What you will want is momentum, the  big mo . If you have six letters of support in your pocket, it is 
easier to get the seventh. So, after obtaining a letter from anyone in town who will write one (it 
does not matter if they live on the other side of town, so long as they are residents of your town), it 
becomes part of your arsenal: “ I have several letters of support already and I was hoping that you’d 
sign one too. ”
 Although the Board might give a letter from the owner of an antenna across town less weight, it will 
still show that you’ve been out there trying to sell the project and that you are trying to work with 
the town and the neighbors. Remember, Boards do not like controversies. What they really want is a 
hearing where the proposal is unopposed or where opposition is muted and the applicant seems to have 
done his or her homework. 
 2.8.4  Analysis of your Proposal 
 Of course, your application proposal is a brilliant solution to your antenna problems. You know that. 
However, you’d be amazed at how useful it can be to have another antenna owner, or engineer, look at 
the situation. Is the structure really in the best place? Are your guy wires really oriented to minimize 
visibility? They’ll be less visible against a background of trees. It always helps to have another set of 
trained eyes look over ( “ vet ” ) the proposal. 
 2.8.5  Favorable Letters 
 You deﬁ nitely want the most favorable possible letters from the other antenna owners in town. You may 
ﬁ nd one who is considered a town father and who is well known to the Board. You could get really lucky 
and ﬁ nd one who formerly served on that very Board. You might ﬁ nd one who is in charge of the town’s 
civil defense and who can write a letter for you on town stationery (don’t laugh, it has been done). 
 Generally, however, it does no good for the other owner to identify himself as such in the letter, unless 
he or she can write a letter that says, in effect,  “ You may recall the hue and cry at the time that I 
applied for my permit. It was predicted that Western Civilization as we know it would fall apart. I am 
pleased to report that, since then we, as neighbors, have reconciled and that, despite dire predictions, 
no television interference has occurred — and property values have risen. ”

The Process in a Nutshell 21
 Unless you get a letter from another owner in town that says such things, leave off his afﬁ liation, as it 
will only be used against him, as in “ Well, harrumph, he’s another antenna owner, so you’d expect him 
to be insensitive to the  real issues. ” 
 2.8.6  Allies 
 Courting the other antenna owners in town can also be useful for the purpose of developing allies. The 
best kind of ally is one who reviews your application with you, provides G-2 on the neighbors, and shows 
up at the hearing. But, there is also the question of lobbying. You’d be amazed. It happens. There is going 
to be a period of weeks, sometimes months, between the point where you reveal your plans for the ﬁ rst 
time and the evening of the hearing. You could discover that an antenna owner in town is the brother 
of a member of the Board considering your application. You could discover that he is married to your 
next-door neighbor’s sister. Whatever. The point is that a strategic word put in here or there could prove 
useful. For all of the above reasons, try to ﬁ nd and make friends with the other antenna owners in town. 
 2.8.7  Now go to the Neighbors 
 Again, start with the ones you suspect, based on previous intelligence, will be the most inclined to sign 
favorable letters. This generally means the ones least able to see your antenna system. What you are 
looking for here is the steamroller effect . 
 If your experience with a neighbor has been minimally favorable, as you pack everything up, put your 
application back in your envelope or briefcase, put away the letter that the neighbor just signed, and 
head for the door, pause at the door and ask:  “ Whom do you think I should talk to next? ” Then ask: 
 “ What should I know about them? ”
 You’d be amazed at the responses you’ll get when you are no longer taking notes. It will prove very 
useful when you approach the next neighbor. 
 Now you know what the difﬁ cult questions are going to be and you’ve had a little practice in making 
these presentations. You’ll be better off now handling the nearby neighbors. Remember, if the closest 
neighbors don’t object, few Boards will refuse your permit because some wacko from the other side of 
town stands up and makes irrelevant and possibly illegal noises about electromagnetic ﬁ elds. 
 2.9  Public Hearings 
 It is highly likely that there will be a public hearing, unless you are applying for a permit as a matter of 
right. An example of construction as a matter of right would be applying for a permit to renovate your 
bathroom. If you are applying for a Conditional Use Permit, a Special Use Permit, or a Variance, you will 
be faced with preparing for a public hearing, and this necessitates planning and contact with the neighbors. 
 2.10  The Viewing 
 It is likely that the Board (the permit-granting authority) will want to come by your place to have a 
peek at the situation. This is not trespassing. Clean up your place (get rid of any slash from downed 
trees, pick up loose trash) and welcome the visit. Serving coffee and donuts is unnecessary and will 

22 Chapter 2
 likely be ignored, even on the coldest and ugliest of days. Don ’ t try to lobby the Board. Just point out 
the orange tape which shows the property lines and tell them which way is north. The visit may last 
only 10 to 15 minutes. 
 2.11  Deliberations and Decisions 
 Before the public portion of the meeting is closed, you may submit a proposed decision, which may be 
ignored or may prove useful, depending on whether or not the Board is going to grant your application. 
After that, if your state has an open-meeting law, you may sit in on the deliberations and even take notes, 
but say nothing. In some states, the session where the Board deliberates and votes is open to the public 
(for example, Massachusetts), and in some states it is closed (for example, Vermont). This is solely a 
matter of the wording of your own open-meeting (sometimes called  “ government in the sunshine ” ) law. 
 2.12  Appeals 
 If your town bylaw limits all antennas to 35 feet, or if there is some other reason why the Building 
Commissioner (sometimes called a Building Inspector) cannot issue you the permit you have 
requested, you will appeal to the Board of Appeals, the Planning and Zoning Commission, or whatever 
the group that handles appeals is called. This is another reason to own your own copy of the entire 
zoning bylaw, as the appeal process will be spelled out in the bylaw. 
 Keep your eyes open, however, as the Building Inspector may recommend that you apply for an appeal 
in the form of a request for a Variance, a request that may be difﬁ cult or impossible to obtain, while 
your best action might be simply to appeal a decision of the Building Inspector on the grounds that the 
inspector is wrong or that federal law supersedes. In other words, the exact form of your appeal is a 
legal question, with very real consequences. 
 2.13  Lawsuits 
 Lawsuits take a while, cost serious money, and have an uncertain outcome. Seek advice about all 
of your alternatives short of a lawsuit before commencing one. This is especially true when dealing 
with antenna zoning because the most common outcome of a lawsuit won by an antenna applicant is 
that he or she is returned to the same Board, with instructions from the court. If it becomes necessary to 
ﬁ le a lawsuit, the information on the CD will save you a lot of money. 
 2.14  How Long Will this Take? 
 It will probably take three months to a year to get through the Board level and back to the Building 
Inspector. Add another one to two years for a lawsuit, a win, and a return trip to the Board. Although 
you could be done in six months, it is not unheard of for this time frame to be three years. While you 
are agonizing over the potential time involved, remember this quip: 
Q:  What’s the difference between a GOOD lawyer and a BAD lawyer? 
A:  A BAD lawyer can let a case drag out for several years. A GOOD lawyer can make it last even longer. 

The Process in a Nutshell 23
 2.15  How Much will it Cost? 
 The certain answer to this is: More than you want to pay! You can rely on the fact that few applicants 
like the requirement imposed by local law to go through the hearing process. Fewer still like retaining a 
lawyer for the hearing process. No one likes retaining a lawyer to appeal the matter to a court. 
 Cost is measured in the hours required. Lawyers do not generally take such cases on a ﬁ xed-fee basis. 
I’ve never heard of it happening, unless it is a cellular telephone company offering a big law ﬁ rm a lot 
of tower applications. Of course, if the ﬁ xed-fee were high enough, one supposes that lawyers would 
be more ﬂ exible. 
 Very roughly, the application process through the hearings may take 12 to 60 hours (at  your lawyer’s 
hourly rate). Very roughly, an appeal through the ﬁ rst level of court can run from 25 to 200 hours. The 
problem in making an estimate is the question of what the opposition intends to do. In other words, 
you could be in for a nickel, or in for a dollar. No one knows. How important is your antenna to the 
economic success of your station? 

This page intentionally left blank

25
 Your Winning Team 
 Ultimately, you’re unlikely to achieve your goal without some outside help and will have to recruit 
other people to join your team. Still, you’re the team leader. 
 3.1  Know Your Strengths 
 You are about to embark on a program of assembling a construction proposal, lobbying neighbors, 
assembling applications (which may include a Building Permit, a Land Use Permit, a Wetlands Permit, 
clearance from the State Historic Preservation Ofﬁ ce, and any number of other documents), presenting 
your proposal to a public meeting, and defending yourself against unwarranted attacks. Are you really 
good at all those things? To do it well, you must be part landscape designer, civil engineer, writer, 
photographer, graphic designer, salesman, contractor, lawyer, and humble neighbor. 
 As a landscape designer, you will select the spot on the property for the antenna system. Ask yourself if 
you could move the structure so that it will be less obtrusive. 
 As a civil engineer, you will try to locate the structure so that guy wires go in the right places, and 
you will have to think ahead about such questions as:  “ How will I get the concrete truck in here? ” and 
 “ Where should we run utility lines? ”
 As a writer, you will assemble written proposals that cover all the ground, where each proposal has a 
beginning, middle, and end and asks for what you need. 
 As a photographer, you must be able to take advantage of a digital camera to get good, usable photos 
that will reproduce well and permit you to tell a story. Those photos must also be pictures that show 
what people will recognize and that fairly represent what is going to happen. 
 As a graphic designer, you will assemble a proposal that is a sales document and law brief, all wrapped up 
in one cover. You’ll select photos and edit photos. (How should a photo be cropped? Should it have an arrow 
and label in the picture, or just an arrow, with the label below?). You’ll decide when to put two or four on a 
page and when to simply use a single, larger shot. You’ll ﬁ gure out how to present a map of the surrounding 
area, being sure to show tree lines. You’ll crop and present aerial photography and a topographic map. 
 As a salesman, you’ll argue persuasively for what you intend to do, presenting yourself door-to-door in 
a way that will leave even people who oppose you saying that you dealt with them fairly. 
CHAPTER 3 

26 Chapter 3
 As a legal layman, you will marshal all the federal and state law that beneﬁ ts you, especially any 
federal law on the preemption of local zoning for antenna systems — including radiofrequency 
interference (RFI) (think about possibilities such as interference to pagers, telephones, and TVs and 
what to say about the potential of interference to public safety communications). 
 As a contractor, you’ll have to think about what is practical for fencing, planting a vegetative screen (if 
necessary), preventing weeds and trees from growing up inside the compound fence, crossing a gully 
or stream, and a lot of other details. 
 If you lack any of the professional skills just mentioned, ask for help or hire a professional. If you 
assume that you can submit a messy, disorganized application — missing required information and 
necessary arguments — and the Board will still see the merit of your application anyway, you are 
dreaming. This almost guarantees that you’ll have to retain a lawyer later to straighten out the mess. 
(Go ahead. Make my day! I assure you that straightening out a mess is  much more expensive [read: 
proﬁ table] than a well-presented application put forward in the ﬁ rst place.) So start right now to 
arrange for services that require skills that you lack. 
 3.2  Your Supporters 
 As discussed in Chapter 1,  “ Principles That Will Help You Win, ” make sure your associates are 
prepared so they don’t raise unnecessary red ﬂ ags in casual discussions or during a town or a Zoning 
Board meeting. 
 3.2.1  Other Antenna Owners 
 It will prove useful to know about the owners of other antenna systems in town, whether or not they 
are in use. They may be able to tell you about antenna systems of which you are unaware. They may 
be able to give you tips on dealing with town personnel. Others may be a good source of information 
on how they have fared in this process, what the Board likes to see and hear, and how to get favorable 
letters from such local authorities as the emergency management agency, the Department of Public 
Works, the police chief, and so forth. If you ever needed an excuse to join the Society of Broadcast 
Engineers or a state wireless association, this is it! 
 3.2.2  Your Assembled Experts 
 Before deciding to do it all yourself, take a long hard look at what needs to be done. If you can’t do 
something yourself, bring in someone who can. If you are in a contentious and expensive suburb, 
expect resistance. If your proposed site is deep in the woods, away from historic districts, on a large 
lot, with a bylaw that appears to guarantee the success of your application — and you like to gamble —
 rejoice. Help may not be necessary. 
 On the other hand, since you want to wear the white hat throughout the permit process, experts will 
prevent you from making a mistake that may later be interpreted as an attempt to  “ sneak one by ” the 
relevant Board. Most applicants ﬁ nd it wise to assemble a team. Herewith a discussion about team 
members.

Your Winning Team 27
 3.2.3  Your Attorney 
 3.2.3.1  What to Expect of Your Attorney 
 Selecting an attorney is one of the scariest things you may do. In addition, I send out advice to clients on 
how to deal with specialized counsel (local counsel familiar with a given town, regulatory counsel who 
have unusual familiarity with appearing before a particular agency, and so forth) after the decision to 
hire one has been made. You may ﬁ nd the following document interesting. I ﬁ rst created it when I was 
president of a company in the cable TV industry, and I use it, or a variation on it, whenever I hire another 
law ﬁ rm or lawyer. As a lawyer, I do not mind being held to its terms. Perhaps you will also ﬁ nd it useful. 
See ﬁ lename Attorney Fees Letter of Understanding.doc on the CD.
  To:  Law Firms 
 From:  Fred Hopengarten 
 In re:  Billable Hours, Invoices, and Expenses 
 Hiring a law ﬁ rm is one of the scariest things that I do for myself, my business partners, or my 
investors. It is tantamount to opening one’s pocketbook and saying:  “ Here, how much do you 
want? ”
 Legal services are necessary from time to time, however, and therefore it is important that 
everyone understand the rules of the game. I hope that this document will explain those rules as 
we (my partners and I) see them. 
 Activities Not for the Beneﬁ t of the Client 
 We have a distinct distaste, and decline to pay, for activities that are performed for the beneﬁ t 
of the ﬁ rm and not for the beneﬁ t of the client. One example is a conference of several attorneys 
for the purpose of merely deciding the scheduling of work among them. The client should not be 
paying for time spent while one attorney says to another:  “ No, Alice, you’ll have to attend that 
deposition, as I have a hearing in Oshkosh that day. ” We have seen invoices in which the ﬁ rm 
attempted to bill us for both the speaker and  “ Alice ” for that conference. 
 Another example is a situation in which a second attorney must be involved merely for a 
ceremonial occasion. In our view, the client should not pay for a second attorney to attend 
a court session when his or her attendance is required principally to move the admission of 
the primary attorney. Or, for instance, a loan closing may require the partner in charge of the 
relationship of the bank to be present when the bank-lending ofﬁ cer is present. Yet, the partner’s 
time is really to cement his relationship with the bank and not to do any substantive work. 
That’s a sales expense and does not inure to the beneﬁ t of the party who may be called upon to 
pay the bill from the bank’s law ﬁ rm. 
 Yet another example is the situation in which an attorney simply must take an emergency 
telephone call during a deposition. Such things happen in this life, but we’d be mightily 
distressed to learn that both clients were billed for that time. 
 If an attorney goes to, let us say, a land court to check on several matters in one trip, we expect 
that the trip will be apportioned, both as to time and expenses, not billed to each client separately. 
 We also object to being billed for time spent by an attorney contacting us to suggest work that 
he might do, soliciting approval for such work (we regard such activities as an attorney’s sales 

28 Chapter 3
expense), discussing billing matters (a collection expense), or entertaining us or our employees 
(in general, we’d all be better off at home with our families, thereby lowering the divorce rate). 
 At billing rates of $150 per hour and up, we expect that no lawyer will bill us for time spent 
making photocopies, getting directions, preparing bills, organizing a ﬁ le chronologically, and 
so forth. These matters are properly handled by the lawyer’s secretary, for which no additional 
charge should be made. In this regard, merely moving such matters into the hands of a 
paralegal, despite the fact that the paralegal has a much lower billing rate, does not satisfy the 
criticism. Such functions are properly overhead charges, not client charges. 
 I also get upset about overtime charges for secretarial help when the attorney was simply 
involved in someone else’s matter during the regular business day/week. For that matter, I don’t 
expect to be billed for secretarial time in any event, expecting that it is part of the attorney’s 
hourly rate overhead. If it is secretarial or clerical work, we do not expect to see it on the bill. 
 Quality Control 
 In the course of the past 30 years, I have sometimes been told that certain time was necessary on 
our matter for purposes of quality control. Since I absolutely hate to pay for a lawyer reviewing 
the work of another lawyer, may I suggest the following guidelines? 
● 
 If time is spent reviewing work of a junior attorney, where a principal use of the review is 
to evaluate the quality of the junior attorney’s work with a view toward the question of 
partnership, it is inappropriate to charge the client. 
● 
 If the time is spent with the expectation that something can be improved a scintilla, then the 
beneﬁ t is likely not worthy of the cost. 
● 
 If the reviewing attorney ﬁ nds signiﬁ cant things to change, then the attorney who did the 
work has done an inadequate, perhaps even faulty, job, and it would be inappropriate to 
charge the client for the faulty workmanship of the junior attorney, even at a lower rate. If the 
master plumber must rip out the work of the apprentice, should apprentice time be charged? 
 Presentation of Invoices 
 We will not pay invoices that are nonspeciﬁ c (as in  “ For professional services rendered ” ), unless 
the matter has been taken by the law ﬁ rm on a contingency, in which case, I assume that a very 
speciﬁ c agreement on fees has been made. 
 We require presentation of the invoice in what some call  “ insurance company format. ” This 
means that we want to see the name (or initials in the case of attorneys well known to us) of 
the attorney, the date on which work was performed, the nature of the work (time slip detail is 
adequate), the amount of time, the billing rate for that attorney, and the extension (amount of 
time, times billing rate). 
 For almost all law ﬁ rms, merely correcting the spelling of time slips will permit the immediate 
presentation of a bill, so we do not believe that this requirement is burdensome. 
 Increases in Billing Rates 
 If an attorney has been given a raise, and the billing rate for that attorney has been raised, we 
require that we be notiﬁ ed of that increase in billing rate reasonably  in advance . Furthermore, if it 

Your Winning Team 29
is likely that the billing rate will be raised during the course of a matter, we consider that to be a 
very serious issue, and we might well choose a different attorney to represent us. 
 I hope you will not be offended when I tell you that I was once invited to retain a lawyer whose 
billing rate was $90 per hour (this was a  very long time ago), only to discover that, during the 
course of the matter (only 6 months later), the lawyer’s billing rate was raised to $125, a 38.8% 
increase. Frankly, we considered that to be a  “ bait and switch ” billing tactic, and the resulting 
discussions were distinctly unpleasant for all concerned.  
 Expenses 
 If you’re going to invite someone from our ﬁ rm out to eat and have the meal appear later as an 
expense, please let us pay for it in the ﬁ rst place. If you need lots of photocopies of a document, 
please let us arrange it. If you need printing, we’d like to arrange it. In our experience, law ﬁ rms, 
feeling that such items are on the client’s nickel anyway, are rarely the smartest buyers of such 
services. 
 Which brings up Federal Express. This ﬁ ne company has done a good job of convincing the legal 
profession that it is the only way to go. Not so. We get ﬁ ne service from the U.S. Postal Service 
with Express Mail, at 75% less cost. In addition, ordinary UPS is almost always overnight service 
within our region, at 20% of the cost of FedEx. Furthermore, you might be amazed to learn that 
FedEx has competitors. Please check them out. 
 Faxing does not necessarily solve the FedEx problem, by the way. The most efﬁ cient way to move 
a document from your word processor to us is to send it as a ﬁ le by e-mail. This gives us the 
document in a form that we can immediately edit digitally and return. Oh, yes, please learn to 
use “ Track Changes. ” 
 We’d also like it (assuming that there is no extra expense) if you’d learn to make copies for us on 
two sides of paper, saving ﬁ ling space and shipping costs. 
 Obviously, if we didn’t have conﬁ dence in your ﬁ rm, we would not have asked you to work on 
our behalf. Please see that all attorneys who work on our matters see this memorandum. Thanks 
for helping us out. 
 Thank you. 
 This is the letter I always convey to law ﬁ rms hired for personal or business use. 
 3.2.3.2  The Retainer Letter 
 By contrast, when I’m hired as a lawyer myself, I send out a retainer letter to my client. You should ask 
for one from your lawyer. Some states require that such a letter be presented to all clients. My retainer 
letter and that of Philip M. Kane, another communications attorney, are below. These documents are on 
the CD-ROM as ﬁ lenames Hopengarten Retainer Letter.doc and Kane Retainer Letter.doc.

30 Chapter 3
   Aty. Fred Hopengarten’s Retainer Letter 
 Fred Hopengarten 
 Attorney at Law 
 Six Willarch Road, Lincoln, MA 01773-5105 
 781/259-0088  · FAX 419/858-2421  ·  hopengarten@post.harvard.edu 
 Admitted only in D.C. and Maine 
  
 September 21, 200_ 
 First N. Last 
 xxx Tower Road  
 e-mail: mailto:  WOWOWO@internet.com 
 Tower, PA 11111  
 Tel.: xxx/xxx-xxxx 
 By e-mail. 
 Dear [First Name]: 
 Thank you for having the conﬁ dence to retain me as counsel with respect to various legal issues 
arising in connection with your desire to erect and maintain antenna support structures (the 
 “ Matter ” ). I appreciate the opportunity to serve as counsel to you in this matter, and I look 
forward to working with you on other matters as well. 
This Letter Required. Since 2007, the District of Columbia Rules of Professional Conduct have 
required, at Rule 1.5(b): 
   When the lawyer has not regularly represented the client, the basis or rate of the fee, the scope 
of the lawyer’s representation, and the expenses for which the client will be responsible shall be 
communicated to the client, in writing, before or within a reasonable time after commencing the 
representation. 
 This letter conﬁ rms the terms and conditions of my work for you. 
 Although currently you are retaining me only with respect to the Matter, the following 
description of billing policies and scope of engagement is intended (in the absence of a later 
writing conﬁ rming alternative arrangements) to apply as well to any future service that I may 
provide to you on other matters. 
Invoices. I will establish a separate invoicing account for you and intend to bill you occasionally 
for my fees and expenses. You will be charged for time, generally calculated to the nearest tenth 
of an hour, plus costs incurred on your behalf other than routine ofﬁ ce expenses. Expenses that 
are not routine ofﬁ ce expenses include but are not limited to travel, international long-distance 
phone calls, photocopies of more than a routine number, printing charges, overnight mailing, 
and any recording, ﬁ ling, registration, or professional service fees and court costs. My current 
hourly billing rate is $xxx per hour. These rates are subject to a small annual increase, and I 
would be happy to provide you current rate and fee information at any time upon your request. 
I will make every effort to have all work done in the most cost-effective manner consistent with 
good professional practice. 
Time. Time includes all time in communication with you in person, by e-mail, phone, or 
correspondence, as well as time in communication with others, such as municipal personnel 
(including the code enforcement ofﬁ cer or building inspector), the municipality’s lawyer, 

Your Winning Team 31
your surveyor or real estate agent, and so forth. It involves reading, writing, analysis, and, to 
repeat, telephone calls. Time includes legal research, factual research, preparing letters and 
documents, preparing for a hearing, travel time, and so forth — as well as actual hearing or 
court appearances. If an activity is for your beneﬁ t in this Matter it is charged. Time to repair 
a computer, charge my cell phone, sweep the ﬂ oor, or otherwise maintain the ofﬁ ce is not 
chargeable to a client. 
Retainer. In signing this letter, you agree to pay me a retainer in the amount of $x,xxx, which is 
earned upon receipt. This retainer is nonrefundable and represents your fee for my initial speciﬁ c 
guidance in the ﬁ eld of federal law on antenna support structures, even if I do no further work 
for you. It is highly unlikely that it will cover the entire cost of services. If I do further work for 
you, I will not charge for the early hours of the engagement until all of the retainer has been 
applied, and I begin billing at the full rate of $xxx per hour, plus disbursements. When I notify 
you that I have applied the entire retainer, I may ask you to replenish it within 15 days in an 
amount appropriate at that time. The retainer will be applied to both fees and costs. 
Withdrawal. Bar rules allow a lawyer to withdraw from a case in which the client disregards 
ﬁ nancial obligations to the lawyer. 
Bar Memberships. I want you to be clear as to what I am agreeing to do for you. I am a member 
of the Bar in the State of Maine, as well as the District of Columbia. I am familiar with the 
federal law of preemption with respect to antenna support structures, as well as ancillary related 
law in several jurisdictions. I am not a member of the bar in Pennsylvania. Should local counsel 
be required, we will talk about whom to select for that purpose (although [Name] seems like a 
pretty good choice), as local counsel can often make things happen that no one else can, and, 
as is my standard practice, I would act as a consulting attorney to the local attorney. 
Retention of Records and Files. All records and ﬁ les will be retained and disposed of in 
compliance with a policy in effect from time to time. Subject to future changes, under the 
current policy, records are not retained for more than ﬁ ve years from the date the matter is 
opened. Upon your written request, ﬁ les will be returned to you prior to destruction. However, 
it is not administratively feasible to notify you in advance of destruction. I therefore recommend 
that you maintain your own ﬁ les for reference, or make a written request for your ﬁ les at the 
conclusion of a matter. If you have any questions about the records retention policy, please ask. 
Please sign and return. I hope this letter satisfactorily describes our relationship. If these terms 
are acceptable, please sign this letter and return it to me along with your check for $x,xxx . Your 
signature will acknowledge that you have read the letter carefully and consent to its terms, and 
that you have retained a copy for your ﬁ les. 
 If you have any questions about this letter or my services, please do not hesitate to call me. 
  
 Sincerely, 
  
 Fred Hopengarten 
 Agreed: 
 [Name of Company] 
 by 
 [Name of Ofﬁ cer, Title] 

32 Chapter 3
 Atty. Phil Kane’s Retainer Letter 
 Client: 
 Date: 
 Dear [Name]: 
 It was a pleasure conferring with you [Conference Details]. I have enclosed our standard hourly 
fee agreement that the State Bar requires when legal services are rendered of a possible value of 
$1,000 or more, to protect both the client and the attorney. 
 Please initial each page, sign one copy on Page 2 (as I have done), return one copy in the 
enclosed envelope, and retain the other for your ﬁ les. 
 I would also ask that you sign and return three copies of the  “ Designation of Attorney ” statement. 
At times I have run into other parties and attorneys who require such written designation. 
 I thank you for your consideration in hiring us to do this project, and I look forward to the next 
phases.
 Sincerely, 
 Phil Kane 
 — AGREEMENT — 
 ATTORNEY – CLIENT FEE AND REPRESENTATION AGREEMENT 
 Hourly Fee 
 This document ( “ agreement ” ) is the written fee contract that California law requires lawyers 
to have with their clients. We (Philip M. Kane d/b/a Communications Law Center) will provide 
legal services to you ([Client Name]) on the terms set forth below: 
 1. CONDITIONS. This agreement will not take effect, and we will have no obligation to 
provide legal services, until you return a signed copy of this agreement and pay the initial 
deposit called for in Paragraph 4 below. 
 2. SCOPE OF OUR SERVICES. You are hiring us as your attorneys, to represent you in 
connection with the matters listed on the Schedule of Details attached. We will provide 
those legal services reasonably required to represent you. We will take reasonable steps 
to keep you informed of progress and to respond to your inquiries. Our services will only 
include litigation of any kind, whether in court, in administrative hearings, or before 
government agencies or arbitration tribunals, as speciﬁ ed on the Schedule of Details 
attached. If other litigation is required, a modiﬁ cation of this agreement will be necessary. 
 3. YOUR OBLIGATIONS. You agree to be truthful with us, to cooperate, to keep us informed 
of any developments, to abide by this agreement, to pay our bills on time, and to keep us 
advised of your address, telephone number, and whereabouts. 
 4. DEPOSIT AND FEES. You agree to pay us an initial deposit of $[Initial Deposit] by [Initial 
Deposit Date]. Of the initial deposit, $[Initial Fee] will be our minimum fee, paid in 
exchange of our agreement to represent you. The minimum fee is nonrefundable, but our 
hourly charges will be credited against it. The remainder of the initial deposit, as well as any 
future deposit, will be held in a trust account. You authorize us to use that fund to pay the 
fees and other charges you incur. Whenever your deposit is exhausted, we reserve the right 
to demand further deposits, each up to a maximum of $[Deposit Cap]. You agree to pay all 

Your Winning Team 33
further deposits within [Deposit Days] days of our demand. Except for the minimum fee, 
any unused deposit at the conclusion of our services will be refunded. 
 5. LEGAL FEES AND BILLING PRACTICES. You agree to pay by the hour at our prevailing rates 
for time spent on your matter by our legal personnel. Our current rates for legal personnel 
(and other billing rates) are set forth on the attached Schedule of Details, which also 
provides for periodic increases. 
 6. COSTS AND EXPENSES. In addition to paying legal fees, you agree to reimburse us for all 
costs and expenses including, but not limited to, fees ﬁ xed by law or assessed by public 
agencies, telephone toll calls (including telefax and electronic mail), messenger and other 
delivery service fees, process server fees, postage, in-ofﬁ ce and outside service duplication and 
copying charges, mileage at 25 cents per mile, investigation expenses, consultant fees, and 
other similar items for which we bill you. You authorize us to incur all reasonable costs and to 
hire any investigators or consultants reasonably necessary in our judgment. 
 7. STATEMENTS. We will send you periodic statements for fees and costs incurred. You will 
pay any outstanding balance due within ﬁ fteen (15) days after the date of each statement. 
You may request a statement at intervals of no less than thirty (30) days. Upon your request 
we will provide a statement within ten (10) days of request. 
 8. LIEN. If your matter relates to recovery of money or monetary damages, you hereby grant 
us a lien on any or all claims or causes of action that are the subject of our representation 
of you under this agreement. Our lien will be for any sums due and owing to us at the 
conclusion of our services. The lien will attach to any recovery you may obtain, whether by 
arbitration award, judgment, settlement, or otherwise. 
 9. DISCHARGE AND WITHDRAWAL. You may discharge us at any time. We may withdraw 
with your consent or for good cause. Good cause includes your breach of this agreement, 
your refusal to cooperate with us or to follow our advice on a material matter or any fact or 
circumstance that would render our continuing representation unlawful or unethical. When 
our services conclude, all unpaid charges will immediately become due and payable. After 
our services conclude, we will, upon your request, deliver your ﬁ le to you, along with any 
funds or property of yours in our possession. 
 10. DISCLAIMER OF GUARANTEE. Nothing in this agreement and nothing in our statements 
to you will be construed as a promise or guarantee about the outcome of your matter. We 
make no such promises or guarantees. Our comments about the outcome of your matter 
are expressions of opinion only. 
 11. EFFECTIVE DATE. This agreement will take effect when you have performed the conditions 
stated in Paragraph 1, but its effective date will be retroactive to the date we ﬁ rst performed 
services. The date of this agreement recorded below is for reference only. Even if this 
agreement does not take effect, you will be obligated to pay us the reasonable value of any 
services we may have performed for you. 
 Dated:   Date:    
 _______________________ 
 Philip M. Kane d/b/a  
 [Client Name] 
   Communications Law Center         
 [Client Ofﬁ cer] 
 __________________________

34 Chapter 3
 Schedule of Details 
 A. IDENTIFICATION 
 Client: [Client Name] 
 [Client Address Line1] 
 [Client Address Line2] 
 [Client Telephone] 
 Matter: [Matter Info] 
 Reference: [Number/Matter] 
 Litigation Included: [Litigation Covered] 
 B. HOURLY BILLING RATE FOR LEGAL PERSONNEL 
 Rate Schedule: [Rate Schedule] 
 Attorney: $[Attorney Rate] 
 Paralegal: $[Paralegal Rate] 
 Law Clerk: $[Clerical Rate] 
 C. STANDARD CHARGES 
 We charge in units of one-tenth of an hour (6 minutes). 
 Minimum charge for in-ofﬁ ce consultation is one-half hour (30 minutes). 
 Minimum charge for appearances at depositions, hearings, or trial is three (3) hours. 
 D. RATES SUBJECT TO CHANGE 
 The rates on this Schedule are subject to change upon 30 days’ written notice. If you decline to 
pay any increased rates, we will have the right to withdraw as your lawyers. 
 3.2.3.3  Where Will It Hurt? 
 Believe it or not, lawyers are pretty efﬁ cient writers, but they are horribly inefﬁ cient at travel and 
hearings. On the other hand, there is little they can do about that. It takes what it takes to drive 
somewhere. Upon arrival, the course of the evening is out of the lawyer’s control. It could stretch out 
for more than four hours from time of arrival to the end of the hearing and may even require sitting 
through the decision. Your attorney must then drive home. It is your obligation to pay for all of that 
time. Between driving, waiting, the hearing, and the decision, you could pay for a lawyer’s time from 
5 p.m. to midnight. That’s seven hours. You need to be calibrated (see  Table 3.1  ). 
 Now you need to ask yourself if it is worth it. If you are going to maintain this structure for 10 years, 
and your total legal bill comes to $8,000, that’s $800 per year. Perhaps your time frame is 20 years, 
with a legal bill of $2,000, coming out to only $100 per year. This is before looking at questions such 
as points, closing costs, the fees of real estate brokers, and so forth. 

Your Winning Team 35
 On the other hand, bankers routinely assign what they call  “ stick value ” to your antenna system when 
considering its value as collateral for a loan, and they are not stupid. They understand that it can be 
painful and time consuming to erect an antenna system and that an existing antenna system, in itself, 
has value — especially if you own the tower and someone else might like to come along later and rent 
space on it. 
 Applying for an antenna-support structure in a town where the application is likely to be contested 
is not for the faint-hearted. On the other hand, as you can see from the instructions to clients above, 
dramatic amounts of money (except for the evening of the hearing) can be saved. 
 Finally, please accept this advice: Winning at the hearing level, at almost any price, is less expensive 
than losing, appealing, winning, reapplying, and reappearing for a new hearing. So, what’s the secret? 
Prepare thoroughly and well for the ﬁ rst hearing, and do as much work as possible yourself. 
 3.2.4  Registered Professional Engineers 
 In general, except for towers over 200 feet or situations with tricky soil questions, it should not be 
necessary to hire a registered professional engineer. (It may be required by the Planning or Building 
Department, but that’s another story.) However, if you should be so lucky as to have a PE (the usual 
designation) available to you, there are several elements of the application that might involve such a 
person and the seal might lend credibility to your application. This is not to say that another person, 
perhaps even you, might not produce the right kind of information. 
 It is, however, undeniable that if you show up with a panel of experts, ready to exhaust the evening 
(and the Board) with expertise, you are limiting the battle to areas where opponents will feel that 
they have the most legitimacy in commenting and the greatest likelihood of persuasion — looks, 
radiofrequency (RF) danger, and so forth. 
 What does this mean in real life? It means that if a member of the audience stands up and foolishly 
says that the RF energy from your antenna system is going to make beepers go off or sizzle eyeballs 
for a radius of three miles, you can quite correctly cite the federal statute, 47 U.S.C.  § 302a, as well as 
the cases of Broyde v. Gotham Tower ,  Southwestern Bell v. Johnson County ,  Freeman v. Burlington 
Broadcasters , and others (see Chapter 8), to show that the Board should not even consider the issue of 
interference. See ﬁ lenames Broyde v. Gotham Tower.pdf, SW Bell Wireless.pdf, and Freeman 
 Table 3.1 :  Potential Lawyer’s Fees for the Evening of a Hearing 
 Hours
Rate ($/hour) 
 Bill for the Hearing ($, plus expenses) 
 7 
 130 
 910 
 7 
 150 
 1,050 
 7 
 175 
 1,225 
 7 
 200 
 1,400 
 7 
 250 
 1,750 
 7 
 300 
 2,100 
 7 
 400 
 2,800 
 7 
 500 
 3,500 

36 Chapter 3
v BurlingtonBroadcasters.pdf on the CD. You can also provide your own printout of OET-65 
calculations from ﬁ lenames FCC OET-65.pdf and FCC OET-65 Supplement B.pdf on the CD. 
 Even though you could quite correctly do all of the above, it wouldn’t hurt to introduce your friend, 
the so-and-so Professor of Physics at Local University, who has prepared a study that is signed over his 
name, complete with Ph.D., academic appointment (on academic or consulting ﬁ rm letterhead), and PE 
seal — that nice round seal can be very persuasive. If the PE is prepared to respond to any questions, the 
Board may quickly decide that RFI and EMF issues need not be considered intensively. 
 If you don’t have such a friend, you don’t have such a friend. If you do, however, and that friend owes 
you one, this is the time to take advantage of the friendship. A PE can be used (according to the ﬁ elds 
in which he or she feels comfortable) to: 
● 
 Produce maps showing where the wetlands start and where the buffer zone starts. 
● 
 Produce an exhibit on propagation, showing why the height you have requested is required. 
● 
 Produce an exhibit on RF safety. 
● 
 Produce an exhibit showing a proper grounding plan. 
● 
 Produce an exhibit showing that all of the proposed construction is safe and consistent with 
the state building code. 
 A PE can also answer and dispose of the question:  “ Won’t this structure attract lightning? ” A PE can 
also be especially handy if for some good reason you are not following manufacturer’s installation 
drawings exactly. Note that the Building Inspector often allows construction built without the seal of a 
PE. After all, we’re not talking about a skyscraper here, a building that could endanger thousands. It’s 
just an antenna system! Any Building Inspector, after reviewing the manufacturer’s speciﬁ cations in 
view of the variation you propose, should be able to make the decision without a PE’s seal. But, if the 
Building Inspector insists on a PE stamp, there is probably very little you can do about it. 
 3.2.5  Seals 
 Welcome to the world of PE seals. There are  wet seals , where the seal is applied to your drawing, and 
dry seals , where you submit a copy of a drawing that had a wet seal at one time. Obviously, a dry seal 
is cheaper (the price of a photocopy) and no liability attaches to that copy. 
 Most tower manufacturers can provide you with drawings bearing dry seals. It could be free or there 
might be a charge. The manufacturer’s PE, however, may not be licensed in your state or the seal may 
not show that the PE is licensed in your state. The dry seal will only apply to the standard drawing 
in the catalog and will specify standard conditions (which you may or may not meet). If you can get 
through the process with no seal, or only a dry seal, so much the better. 
 This is a subject for discussion between you and the Building Commissioner, when you go to ask: 
 “ What kind of documentation will I need to get through this process? ” During that conversation, be 
sure to ask: “ If I’m following the manufacturer’s installation instructions; do I need sealed drawings? 

Your Winning Team 37
If yes, will you accept a dry seal? ” The reason you want to proceed with no seal, or a dry seal, is that 
you will save a lot of money. 
 On the other hand, if you are doing something unusual, you may want to hire a local PE, especially 
if you need a good understanding of how to install the base and anchors in your own special 
circumstances (usually circumstances in which  “ normal ” soil conditions do not apply — such as sand or 
swamp). If normal conditions do not apply, the Building Inspector may want your plans to bear a wet 
seal, for your beneﬁ t and to protect the public. For a price, you can always ﬁ nd a PE who will review or 
create drawings, modify them as necessary, and provide a wet seal for your project. That’s the business 
that engineering ﬁ rms are in. Nonetheless (and you certainly won’t welcome this), the Building 
Commissioner could require a wet-stamped geotech report — a report on geotechnical conditions, 
describing the soil, rock and so forth, as well as recommendations as to the foundation required. Then, 
in accordance with the geotech report, the Building Commissioner could require a PE report which 
matches the soil conditions and foundation to the tower. 
 There is an additional question of whether or not your Building Inspector cares to note the specialty 
of the PE, whether the PE’s seal indicates the specialty, and whether the specialty is relevant. Finally, 
there are “ in-state ” and  “ out-of-state ” seals. What does that mean? 
 Let me speak from my experience in Massachusetts. Often, an ordinance is vaguely written; for 
example,  “ Applicant shall submit a sealed drawing showing  … . ” or  “ Applicant shall submit a drawing 
bearing the seal of a registered professional engineer showing  … . ” This clearly means that a stamp 
must be on the drawing. 
 Some engineers have taken and passed the examination to become a registered professional engineer 
in electrical engineering. They are qualiﬁ ed in electrical engineering. They have  not qualiﬁ ed in 
mechanical engineering. But, this doesn’t end the discussion. Assume that the seal notes the specialty. 
In my view, a PE in electrical engineering could easily certify that a certain tower will perform safely 
as a freestanding antenna. To the casual observer, looking only for a seal of any kind, that may be 
enough.
 Many PEs have seals that do not indicate a specialty. Few Building Inspectors, especially those 
looking at an antenna (as opposed, for instance, to a high-rise building) will enquire behind the seal. 
One strategy: The PE could write you a letter saying what he is certifying and seal the drawing. The 
applicant might submit only the drawing. If the applicant is later asked for the meaning of the seal, 
simply produce the letter. 
 Some states have broad laws. A PE may take the exam and practice in one ﬁ eld but have broad 
 “ sealing ” rights. This is akin to the fact that a medical doctor (MD) may theoretically treat any disease, 
even though he or she is qualiﬁ ed only in a specialty. For example, my wife is a board-certiﬁ ed 
and wonderful psychiatrist (MD). She did her residency in the Harvard Medical School’s residency 
program in psychiatry at Massachusetts General Hospital (known locally as MGH, or Man’s Greatest 
Hospital). She has a doctorate from Yale in pharmacology. She is great at working with modern 
psychotropic medications. (Yes, I’m bragging. I married up.) But God help the patient if she were 
ever to perform surgery. Yet, her license does not prevent it. Similarly, lawyers may tackle any legal 

38 Chapter 3
problem, once they have passed the bar exam. I like to think I am a good lawyer, with a reasonable 
understanding of business. But God help the client if I were ever to do any criminal defense work. 
 Thus, broad qualiﬁ cation is not uncommon. The burden is on the professional to limit his or her 
own exposure to risk of malpractice. So, you may ﬁ nd an individual with a seal from your state 
(or from elsewhere) who will seal your drawings and thereby end some nonsensical requirement that 
a town drafted without an understanding of the issues involved in antennas. There is no harm in 
asking.
 Finally, there is the question of whether or not your Building Inspector will require a seal from a PE 
licensed by your own state. It turns out that engineering is way ahead of law and medicine in this 
regard, permitting — in effect — multistate practice. As best I understand the Massachusetts statute, 
professional engineers need only register with Massachusetts if they regularly practice or maintain 
ofﬁ ces there. This is not true of doctors and lawyers, who must be locally licensed ﬁ rst. 
 (Actually, and speaking generally, lawyers can practice anywhere in the United States if the state 
work is ancillary to a project involving federal law, which is why I represent people who wish to erect 
antennas all over the United States, but that’s another story. If you must investigate this angle, see 
Model Rule 5.5 of the American Bar Association’s Rules of Professional Conduct.) 
 Nonetheless, do not lose hope, and stay in touch with your PE. Professional engineers have a national 
organization to which they can pay a small fee and get a current license in  your state, even if it is only 
for the purposes of putting a seal on this one document. The cost for qualifying in a different state is 
very reasonable (approximately $100 in 2008). 
 So, there you have it. Bottom line: Make the Building Inspector your friend. He has within his power 
the ability to make it hard for you to meet the requirements of the building code. How? He could 
require, worst case: (1) a wet seal from (2) an in-state PE who (3) is a specialist in the subject matter of 
concern (e.g., structural, electrical, acoustical). The Building Inspector can also make it easier for you 
to meet those requirements (by accepting, as a best-case example, a dry seal from an out-of-state PE 
who is not necessarily a mechanical engineer). 
 I hope you’ve enjoyed this discourse on seals, the product of some considerable learning in the school 
of hard knocks. 
 3.2.6  Surveyors 
 Many zoning codes require the submission of a scaled drawing showing the boundaries of the property, 
location of all signiﬁ cant structures, setback lines, distances to neighboring structures, at a certain scale 
and on D-size or larger drawings, and so forth. Most lawyers can tell you from hard-won experience 
that neighbors may not agree on where the property line is located. Sometimes, getting out there to do 
the measuring can be a problem. Sometimes it can be really important to know how the land slopes (to 
justify height), or where trees are located (to assure neighbors that their views of your antennas will 
be obscured by these trees). This is exactly the kind of work that surveyors do. Here are a few real - life 
examples. 

Your Winning Team 39
 One tower erector accidentally put a guy anchor a foot or two onto a neighbor’s property. It was totally 
innocent but it happened. Though he later removed the ﬁ rst anchor and installed a new anchor, a few 
feet closer to the structure (this time allowing a margin of safety with respect to the property line), he 
was mercilessly attacked as someone who could not be trusted to do anything right. 
 An applicant hoped to put his antenna support structure as close to the rear right-hand corner of his lot 
as possible. This meant putting one guy anchor as deep into the right-hand corner as possible so the 
two other guy wires, spaced at 120 ° , would stay out of a grass ﬁ eld. Everyone agreed that the really big 
tree in that corner was planted on the corner (many years ago), but no one was sure of the angles for 
the property lines from there. If you make a mistake of 5 ° at the corner, you are way off (as measured 
in feet) when you get to the other side of the property, 200 feet away. A surveyor solved the problem. 
 A broadcaster put a guy anchor within the company’s property but within the required setback, 
so the  “ required yard ” (the space between any construction and the boundary line) did not exist. 
Subsequently, it was necessary to move the guy wire set. 
 While your survey map from the mortgage paperwork may be adequate for drafting the property map, 
it could be very important to hire a surveyor to lay out a valid property line and a valid construction 
envelope. 
 This works the other way, too. A neighbor of mine had an Invisible Fence installed inside my own 
property, and the installer cut 50 buried radials for my ham radio vertical antennas in the process. It 
seems that she thought she knew where the property line was located, and the installer just assumed it 
would do no harm to install the buried wire a few feet further into the woods. Between the two of them, 
the error amounted to 27 feet! 
 Surveyors are a lot less expensive than lawyers. Ask someone in the wood fence business how they 
make sure they are not installing  “ over the line. ” You could get a good tip or two. 
 Eventually, you’ll have to produce a plan for incorporation in your application. Since it can affect 
placement of the antenna, this should be one of your early steps in the planning process. Remember 
that it is far easier to determine property lines before the snow starts to ﬂ y!  
 3.2.7  Environmental/Regulatory Consultants 
 Depending on the piece of property, you may need any of the following: 
● 
 National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) screening 
● 
 NEPA Section 106 report (including the ﬁ ling of FCC forms 620 or 621); see 47 CFR  § 1.1308
● 
 RF exposure (sometimes called an electromagnetic ﬁ eld, or EMF) analysis (see OET-65) 
● 
 Report on Native American (tribe) consultations 
● 
 Wildlife habitat survey 
● 
 State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA) activity 

40 Chapter 3
● 
 City Environmental Quality Review Act (CEQRA) activity 
● 
 Environmental assessment, perhaps including a review of the  “ viewshed ” and a submission to 
a State Historic Preservation Ofﬁ ce (SHPO) 
● 
 Wetland consultation (this is where those hay bales and plastic fences originate) 
● 
 Endangered species consultation 
● 
 Flood zone consultation 
 Thanks to IVI Due Diligence Services, Inc. (White Plains, NY;  http://www.ivi-intl.com/ ) for the list. 
Forgive me if all of this sounds frightening. It should be, which is why you may need a team to help 
out. (Nonetheless, this book can help you manage this team.) 
 Don’t you just love the environmentalist legislators who have caused the need for all these consulting 
services?
 3.2.8  Real Estate Agents 
 As you will see elsewhere in the book, a real estate agent is not necessarily an appraiser; however, 
some real estate agents are also appraisers. Asking a real estate appraiser to perform a study for you 
is going to cost you the appraiser’s fee. In the end, the Board may accept or reject the evidence of 
the appraiser. It may even reject the evidence of the appraiser if it is unopposed. You never know. 
Nonetheless, if you are concerned that the “ real estate values will fall ” argument will come up, and if 
you have a friendly real estate agent upon whom you can call, several strategies become available. 
 3.2.8.1  Testimony 
 You may invite the real estate agent to speak at the hearing. This should be brief. If you assemble all 
the numbers, the agent may also be convinced to say that the study you have assembled from public 
data correctly states the situation, as the agent understands it. 
 3.2.8.2  A Letter 
 Even if the agent has agreed to appear, you can prepare a letter to be printed under the agent’s 
letterhead that succinctly states your position. This serves two purposes: 
 1. 
 If the agent is unable, for whatever reason, to appear the night of your hearing, the testimony is 
still entered. Remember, your hearing could be continued to another night before the agent has an 
opportunity to speak. 
 2. 
 The process of reviewing the letter you have prepared for the agent will keep the agent on-track 
and succinct and will reassure the agent about exactly what is being asked. 
 Here is a sample letter you’d like to receive from the real estate agent. You will ﬁ nd it on the CD as 
ﬁ lename Real Estate Agency Assessment.doc.

Your Winning Team 41
  [On real estate agency letterhead] 
  
 Date 
 Town of Friendlyville 
 Board of Appeals 
 Town Hall 
 Friendlyville, MA 
 To the Board: 
In re: Application of WZZZ-TV 
 I have been asked to comment on the question of whether or not the presence of a visible radio 
antenna system, [xxx] feet tall or less, has an impact on the value, selling price, or speed of sale 
of a neighboring home. 
 I have been a licensed real estate [appraiser/agent/broker/representative] since [year], having 
participated in sales [appraised properties] with values exceeding $[amount]. [Allow the real 
estate person to toot his or her own horn. It’s good for business.] I am familiar with the market 
in Friendlyville. I have examined the spreadsheet of assessor’s values attached, assembled by the 
Applicant, and believe them to fairly and accurately represent town records. 
 There are many elements in any given transaction, and it is possible that an anecdote may be 
produced to show that a particular buyer was discouraged by the nearby presence of an antenna 
system. Yet, it is my experience that the spoken reason and the real reason for deciding against a 
purchase do not always coincide. 
 It is my professional opinion that the existence or nonexistence of a visible radio antenna system 
[xxx] feet tall or less has no impact on the value, selling price, or speed of sale of a neighboring 
home when located [xxx] feet away. 
 Sincerely, 
 [Name] 
 Attachment: [valuation spreadsheet of the kind described in Chapter 8] 
 3.2.9  Contractors 
 Thanks to the folks at  http://www.wirelessestimator.com for much of the following: 
 Licensed General Contractor, Class A General Contractor, Certiﬁ ed General Contractor, Commercial 
Contractor, Structural Steel Erection, Construction Supervisor — the  ad nauseum list by states and 
municipalities to describe the license and requirements to operate as a general or specialty contractor 
has only one commonality: Do not, do not, do not make any licensing requirement similar to another 
state or city that might display a hint of continuity or contractor convenience. 
 Some ofﬁ cials, thankfully, are rejecting popular government lore that attempting to combine 
 “ contractor ” and  “ convenience ” causes head implosion  … and, as we are all aware, head implosion 
expenses do not go toward your deductible with most PPO plans. 

42 Chapter 3
 The nature of wireless construction and broadcast tower projects requires contractors to work in more 
cities and states than most other industries. Attempting to identify licensing requirements is difﬁ cult 
at best. Wireless Estimator ( http://www.wirelessestimator.com/statelic.cfm ) provides a service to 
its registered users detailing available licensing requirements, with links to state licensing boards 
and to each state’s Secretary of State. This is helpful when contractors need to obtain Certiﬁ cates of 
Authority to enable their companies to conduct business in various states. Where required, you will 
also be able to identify whether a contractor is licensed in each state. Many states allow their cities and 
municipalities to set licensing standards. 
 Some states will allow licensing reciprocity. California doesn’t; it’s either their way or the Paciﬁ c Coast 
Highway. Kinder, gentler Louisiana has reciprocity agreements with the licensing boards of Arkansas, 
Mississippi, North Carolina, and Tennessee. You get the idea. Don’t assume a contractor has a license. 
Ask to see a copy, along with your usual request for proof of worker’s compensation insurance, as well 
as liability coverage. 

43
 Basic Preparations 
 “ The will to win is nothing without the will to prepare. ” 
 — Eduardo Alejandro Polon, Boys ’ Varsity Soccer Coach, 
Sandy Spring Friends School, Sandy Spring, MD  
CHAPTER 4 
 Once you’ve assessed your team needs, you can begin evaluating what you’ll need for materials, so that 
you may move forward. 
 4.1  Materials You Will Need 
 4.1.1  Bound Notebook 
 Anyone who has ever done lab experiments will tell you that a bound notebook can be very helpful. On 
the day you decide you want an antenna system, start keeping a notebook. As you learn the names of 
people in the neighborhood of the proposed antenna system (as well as the names of spouses, children, 
dogs, and the  “ cousin who is an engineer ” ) and as you take notes on what those people say to you, 
you could wind up with a lot of pieces of scrap paper. You may forget to date or ﬁ le each scrap. Use 
a bound notebook and paste or tape these miscellaneous pieces of paper into it. This way, even if you 
don’t date a particular entry, it can be placed in time approximately by what comes before or after it. 
 This is the voice of experience talking. Buy an expensive ($5) bound notebook — not a drugstore 99¢ 
notebook. Most good notebooks have a pouch in the front (or the back) where you can temporarily 
store pieces of paper that you intend to ﬁ le or paste into the notebook later on. Even if you are a whiz 
with your Palm Pilot or equivalent personal digital assistant (PDA) or perhaps you have a netbook 
computer, those devices offer no easy way in the ﬁ eld to ﬁ le a business card or a map. 
 This whole process is going to stretch out over a number of months and will involve names of owners, 
tenants, wives, children, competitors, town ofﬁ cials, and members of your own team (discussed in the 
previous chapter), as well as telephone numbers, fax numbers, e-mail addresses, to-do lists, documents 
needed, maps to obtain, and so forth. You will need a good notebook! 

44 Chapter 4
 Furthermore, if you want to draw something out for someone and keep a record of what you showed 
that person, draw it in your notebook and show it to him. You might even ask him to initial the drawing 
once you have ﬁ nished your explanation. This avoids the ugly claim:  “ When the applicant came to 
my house and explained what he was going to do, what he drew out for me was very different than the 
application now in front of you. If I had known then what I know now, I never would have signed that 
letter saying I have no objection. ” (If he doesn’t want to initial a drawing for fear that his initials will 
later be interpreted as agreement, have him write  “ Seen [date] ” and initial that.) 
 4.1.2  Loose-Leaf Binder and Section Dividers 
 A separate three-ring binder for other 8.5     11-inch papers is a good idea, too. Along the way, you’ll 
be collecting a lot of documents that won’t conveniently ﬁ t in your bound notebook. One good way 
to keep them organized is to punch them and tuck them into your three-ring binder. Don’t forget 
that you’ll also need a three-hole punch. While this discussion centers around the concept of hard 
copies, this is a good time to mention that you’ll be collecting digital material, too. When you ﬁ nd 
something useful in digital form (an aerial photograph from your state’s GIS system, for example), 
ﬁ le it electronically. It is a total waste of time, and results in degraded quality, if you print it out and 
try to scan it back into digital form later. For the moment, however, we’re talking about hard copies. 
Following is a list of section dividers you may ﬁ nd useful. 
 4.1.2.1  My Property Documents 
● 
 Topographic, road, or aerial photograph maps — It is no longer necessary to scan a U.S. 
Geological Survey (USGS) map. They are available in digital form (e.g.,  http://www.acme.
com/mapper/ ,  http://maps.live.com ,  http://www.topozone.com ,  www.earth.google.com ). 
USGS topographic maps can be downloaded as PDF ﬁ les from the USGS at their online store 
( http://store.usgs.gov/locator ). The USGS site has maps that are available at various scales, 
and there is a link to an Adobe tool for more features. 
● 
 Plot Plan — The mortgage plot plan is usually good enough. 
● 
 Neighborhood map — Sometimes called an assessor’s map, this map shows every lot in the 
neighborhood and its owner. You’ll want a hard copy to map the neighbors, but the application 
will use an electronic copy. 
● 
 Photos — Actual prints can be useful for discussions in the ﬁ eld.  
● 
 Letters 
● 
 Other 
 4.1.2.2  Local Law 
● 
 Zoning bylaw — may or may not be available in digits ; it depends on the municipality. 
● 
 Building Permit application form — Some communities now post the form online; a few 
permit electronic ﬁ ling (very few). 
● 
 Special Permit application form 

Basic Preparations 45
● 
 Specialty bylaws 
 
  Wetlands 
 
 Protected ridge or steep slope 
 
 Lake area 
 
 Scenic road 
 
  Wireless Overlay District 
● 
 Photocopies of prior antenna applications and decisions involving this tower or others 
 4.1.2.3   State Law 
● 
 Building code (relevant sections only) 
● 
 Special state laws 
 
  Wetlands 
 
 Protection for utilities (sometimes useful for cellular telephone) 
 4.1.2.4   Federal Law 
● 
 Radiofrequency interference (RFI) preemption (preventing someone from claiming that you 
should not receive a permit because of potential interference) 
● 
 Electromagnetic ﬁ eld (EMF) law (governing exposure to electromagnetic ﬁ elds)  
● 
 Zoning preemption for AM radio (47 CFR  § § 97.189 and 97.190) 
● 
 Case law 
 4.1.3  Miscellaneous Issues 
 Reproduced below is a handout for several lectures I have given over the years.
 Documents You May Need 
 Experience has shown that it is useful to collect the following documents before applying for a 
permit for an  “ antenna-support structure and appurtenant antennas. ” Unless it is over 200-feet 
tall, please don’t call it a  tower , since federal (and some state) laws may protect the  antenna-
support structure (the words sometimes found in the law) you hope to erect. The building code is 
also likely to refer to it as an  antenna-support structure. There is no need to muddy the waters by 
using a different description of the project. 
 Include as Background 
● 
 An original, recent copy of your town’s zoning bylaw or ordinance and any amendments 
not included in the printed, compiled text.  Do not — repeat, do not — rely on statements 
by the Zoning Enforcement Ofﬁ cer or his or her secretary as to what it says. The printed 
ordinance is where you will ﬁ nd height and setback rules. Do not settle for a photocopy of 

46 Chapter 4
what someone tells you is the  “ relevant page. ” That is complete nonsense, and dangerous —
dangerous — to your cause. 
● 
 Be absolutely sure, as if your life depended on it, that you know in what zone you are 
located. They don’t call this a  zoning bylaw for nothing. You’ll need to know the minimum 
yard, setback, and height (the  “ dimensional ” ) regulations for your zone. This is, of course, 
another reason why you need a copy of the entire zoning bylaw. (Source: town clerk or 
secretary in the planning, zoning, or building department.) 
● 
 An original, recent copy of your town’s wetlands protection bylaw or ordinance, with a wetlands 
map, and any regulations issued by the Conservation Commission. This is where you will ﬁ nd 
information on jurisdiction and application procedures. (Source: Conservation Commission.) 
● 
 Two copies of any form used by the town to apply for a Building Permit, Special Exception/
Permit or Conservation Commission proceeding. Having two copies allows for the possibility 
of an error requiring you to start again. Then, again, you may be one of those people who 
does everything right the ﬁ rst time. (Do you do crossword puzzles in ink?) (Source: Building 
Department or Conservation Commission; sometimes the town’s website.) 
● 
 If a 110  V or 220  V AC line will be run out to the base of the tower, include two copies of any 
form used by the town to apply for an electrical permit. Again, having two copies allows for 
the possibility of an error requiring you to start again. (Source: Building Department.) 
● 
 The requirements of your state or local building code dealing with  wind load . In other words, 
will the Building Inspector require your proposed structure to withstand 50  mph winds with 
1 inch of radial ice? Or 30 pounds per square foot of wind load (which translates to 83   mph)? 
You need to know the exact requirements so your application will match them. (Source: state 
or local building codes, found at either the Building Department or the town library.) 
● 
 The USGS topographic (7.5-minute) quadrant map showing your location. It may prove 
useful by showing that you need more height to overcome a particular line-of-sight path 
because of a nearby ridge. (Source: local camping, hiking, or bicycling store or Government 
Printing Ofﬁ ce store or 1-888 ASK-USGS; usual cost about $5.) It is no longer necessary 
to scan USGS maps, as they are available in digital form. USGS topographic maps can be 
downloaded as PDF ﬁ les from the USGS at their online store ( http://store.usgs.gov/locator ). 
The USGS site has maps that are available at various scales, and there is a link to an Adobe 
tool for more features. Commercial software is available from DeLorme ( http://www.
delorme.com ) and National Geographic ( http://www.topo.com ). See also  http://www.acme.
com/mapper/ ,  http://maps.live.com ,  http://www.topozone.com , or  www.earth.google.com .
 Include as Exhibits 
● 
 A  neighborhood plan showing the lots and streets in your area — This will orient the Board. It is 
best if this plan also shows where buildings are located on the lots. It may also be helpful to 
add distances to those buildings. This is often called an  assessor’s map or a  tax map . (Source: 
town’s planning and zoning department or the assessor’s ofﬁ ce.)  
● 
 A  plot plan , showing the outline of any buildings on the site of the proposed antenna-support 
structure — Add distances from the antenna-support structure to the lot lines. Normally, 
this would be the distance to each side-lot line and the distance to the rear-lot line (three 
measurements). Be sure that the two distances, from side-lot line to structure and from 

Basic Preparations 47
structure to side-lot line add up to equal the actual distance from side-lot line to side-lot 
line! (Hey, beneﬁ t from my mistakes!) Consider including the  tree line to show where views 
are screened. To add trees, scan the plot plan and use a computer drawing program. Think 
about showing the required yard (the setbacks). (Source: plot plan included with mortgage 
papers, which should be adequate unless you’ve added to your building.) 
  ● 
 A copy of your  FCC license  — Though not required, it would be better if it shows as the address 
the place where you intend to erect your antenna system. If it does not, someone may ask 
about that discrepancy, despite the fact that it may be irrelevant. See if you can get a corrected 
printout of the license address by using the Universal Licensing System (ULS). If you are a 
broadcaster, this can be a  “ chicken and egg ”  problem. Should you seek a major change (or a 
minor change) if you haven’t yet obtained zoning permission? Or, should you seek the change 
and then seek zoning? Ask Federal Communications Commission (FCC) counsel about the 
time frames involved, as you could lose your option on a property before the FCC acts. 
● 
 The  speciﬁ cation sheets from the manufacturer for your brand and model of antenna-support 
structure — If possible, it should specify model number, height, load (weight expressed in 
pounds and maximum wind load in square feet at a certain wind speed, or pounds per 
square foot of air pressure). It is best if the wind speed is expressed in the same units of 
measure that your state building code uses. For these purposes, you’ll need to know if your 
state now uses the International Building Code (IBC), Uniform Building Code (UBC), or 
Telecommunications Industry Association/Electronics Industry Association (TIA/EIA)-222 
(and which version of TIA/EIA-222), or some combination. Exactly which code is in effect in 
your jurisdiction has been a moving target in recent years.  
  ● 
 The  construction plans  for the base and erection of your antenna-support structure (including 
guying, if appropriate) — The more it looks like a draftsman’s or architect’s rendering, the 
more effective it will be. Try to get a version with a dry seal of the manufacturer’s professional 
engineer (PE) printed on it. Your building inspector may be even more demanding, and 
require a geotech report, which addresses the ability of the soil to bear loads. Except for 
small, standard towers, these matters are all likely to be handled by your civil or mechanical 
engineering ﬁ rm or your tower manufacturer. 
● 
 The  speciﬁ cation sheet(s) for any proposed antenna(s) , showing weight (expressed in pounds) and 
wind load (expressed in square feet). 
● 
 The  speciﬁ cation sheets for your rotator , or motorized system within a radome, showing weight 
(expressed in pounds or kg), if you will be rotating anything. Having said that it would be 
good to have a spec sheet for any motorized system, I will admit that I’ve never been asked 
for such sheets. 
● 
 If you are moving the antenna system from a prior site, include  a suitable digital photograph in 
the application — Suitable means a photo that demonstrates that the antenna system doesn’t 
create aesthetic blight! One frequently used view is one taken from the street (public way) in 
front of the plot, at high noon, since it will show less reﬂ ection off any aluminum. 
  ● 
 A  letter of permission to act as an agent for the landlord (if the applicant is not the land owner). 
● 
 A copy of your commercial general liability (CGL) insurance policy, or at least a  cover sheet
from your insurance agent stating your coverage (which may include an  umbrella policy). 
  ● 
 Letters of support , or at least letters that express  “ no opposition to the grant of a permit, ” which 
you have drafted and the neighbors or other tenants (on the lot or on the tower) have signed. 
● 
 A printout for your station, using a worst-case analysis of the RF safety ( RF emissions ) issues. 
This will show compliance with federal regulations in this area. 

48 Chapter 4
 4.1.4  Great Impressions Help Deliver Great Decisions 
 You will never make a great impression with a handwritten scrawl on a town form, nor with an 
application that does not permit the Board to understand what you intend to do. This is major-league 
selling, and all of the modern tools of selling will prove helpful: 
● 
 Including color printing 
● 
 Including a cover page and a table of contents 
● 
 Including an executive summary 
● 
 OCR-scanning forms so they can be ﬁ lled out on your computer 
● 
 Reproducing photographs and labeling them for greater understandability within the 
application, printed in color 
● 
 Creating plot plans with dimensions in different colors 
● 
 Shading in trees on the plot plan 
● 
 Providing spreadsheets, charts, and graphic explanations 
 4.1.5  A Picture is Worth 1,000 Words (or a Word is Worth a Millipicture) 
 A 15-foot whip can be truthfully described as either a 2-inch whip or an antenna more than one story 
tall. When you say that it is but a pencil line against the sky, and nothing more than an overgrown 
chopstick, a photo will support your statements and really help. When your opponents liken your 
proposal for a 100-foot structure to a 10-story building in a residential area, a photo will really help if 
it shows you and a car standing behind, and completely visible through, an antenna-support structure 
of the same make and model that you are proposing. When opponents claim that there will be a 
dramatic contrast between the steel structure and the softer forest background, a photo showing a 
similar structure almost invisible against a forest background will help, especially to forestall a silly 
requirement, such as having to paint your antenna structure (or at least the bottom part) forest green. 
Film is inexpensive! Actually, that’s a joke. You won’t be using ﬁ lm for your photographs, because 
you’ll want to insert photos and photosimulations as, for example, JPEG ﬁ les into the supplement to 
your application. Take a tip from commercial photographers and take  lots of photos. This dramatically 
improves your chances of getting a shot or two that will really prove helpful. Be sure to note the 
camera (and the lens) you use. Later, such data will help to avoid claims that a photograph does not 
fairly represent the situation. Here are a few tips: 
● 
 If possible, take the photos you intend to use during the winter. This eliminates the possible 
complaint at a contested public hearing that you purposely took your photos when all the 
leaves were still on the trees — and that the proposed antenna system will be more visible 
when the leaves have fallen. 
● 
 While you and I might think that antennas are majestic, do not stand to the southwest and take 
the photos at 3 p.m. on a sunny day. This will be the one moment in time when your photo 

Basic Preparations 49
might show a glint. Such a photo does not fairly present an antenna system, which is more 
normally gray against a gray sky, not bright and shiny. 
● 
 As you go around town to take photographs of  “ comparables, ” do not plan to use photographs 
of brand-new antennas or brand-new steel structures. While such pictures might enhance the 
majesty of the antenna system, they do not fairly represent the normal situation. After only a 
few months of exposure to the weather, both aluminum and galvanized steel take on a dull, 
nonreﬂ ective ﬁ nish that is more like the U.S. Navy’s  “ haze gray. ” Try to photograph things 
that have been up more than six months. 
● 
 It is highly likely that your town has a tower for police, ﬁ re, or Department of Public Works 
communications. Find out how high such a structure or such structures may be, for purposes 
of comparison, and take photos. These photos serve several purposes: 
 1.  They will demonstrate that people have been basically ignoring such a structure for years, 
even though it may be in a very visible public place. 
 2.  They will show that the metal does take on a dull ﬁ nish, just as you say. 
 3.  They may provide ready examples of what a VHF ground plane, a corner reﬂ ector, a 
one-meter dish, or a high-gain vertical whip looks like. Emphasize that such antennas are 
especially useful in emergencies. Play up the public safety angle, especially if repeaters on 
your tower have snowplows, construction crews, or public utilities (everyone wants to get 
his power back). If you are a broadcaster, talk about the emergency alert system (EAS). 
 Finally, remember to label any photos submitted with arguments that help you. Make the labels work 
for you — for example:  “ Photo shows antenna system at Applicant’s previous location. Taken on 
February 12, 2009. Note that structure and antennas have a natural, dull-gray ﬁ nish. ”
 4.1.6  Your Camera 
 If you remember nothing else from this section, remember that  ﬁ lm is cheap . Oh, I told that joke 
already. But 1GB of photos can be stored on storage devices (SDs) that cost less than two hot dogs and 
a soda pop. This cost advantage is especially true when you compare the cost of photos to legal costs. 
So, take a lot of pictures. If you haven’t taken 75 pictures (to yield the 5 to 15 you’ll use), you haven’t 
been busy enough with your camera. Your digital camera is virtually essential to produce exhibits in 
your application and JPEG ﬁ les for insertion in your PowerPoint. 
 4.1.6.1  Photo Perspective 
 When you take your photos, always take them horizontally — with the camera’s long length parallel 
to the ground. This is called a  “ landscape view. ” Putting it another way, the ground should always be 
on the bottom, the 6-inch side, of a 4     6-inch photograph. Why? Because this makes the photo a  fair
representation . It puts the shot in context. A normal person standing and looking at an antenna system 
has a wide ﬁ eld of vision. A narrow, tall portrait ﬁ eld of vision is not representative of reality. 
 If you fear that someone may try to cheat and put forward a photograph that is not a fair representation 
of an antenna system, you can prepare for this. You can make it plain to the Board that your opponent is 

50 Chapter 4
cheating by taking just two pictures to show what is fair and what is unfair. Start with a photograph of a 
10-year-old child (or any child about four feet tall) taken while you and the child are both standing. Now 
lie down on the ground so the camera is three feet away from the child and point the camera up. Take 
the picture. When it is developed, the child will look 10 feet tall.  Figure 4.1  and  Figure 4.2 show two 
 Figure 4.1  Sander Idelson, KB1FPU, in normal perspective (landscape view).  
 Figure 4.2  Sander photographed in  “Jolly Green Giant ” mode. (Photographs courtesy of Jim Idelson, K1IR.) 

Basic Preparations 51
perspectives of Sander Idelson, KB1FPU, the son of Jim Idelson, K1IR. Bring these two pictures along 
to the hearing and hold them in reserve or print out and use the  Figure 4.1 and Figure 4.2  photos from the 
CD. If necessary, you can thoroughly discredit an opponent who tries to present an unfair perspective of 
an antenna system. 
 The camera you want has a zoom lens so you can frame the photo you want. Do not start thinking 
about camera techniques that might mislead the Board or a court. Remember, the test of whether or 
not a photo is admissible in court is whether or not it fairly represents the scene. You do not need to 
misrepresent anything. 
 4.1.6.2  A Digital Camera 
 If you have a digital camera, that’s nice, because: (1) you have the chance to see the photo immediately 
after you take it, permitting you to take another if you don’t like the image you’ve captured, and (2) 
it saves the scanning step, should you decide to bring the photos into the document instead of simply 
pasting them onto a page. If the photos are originally digital or have been scanned in, then adding a 
scaled proposed structure or a red dot in a circle showing where the Yagi will be becomes easier. Don’t 
even think about ﬁ lm. 
 4.1.7  Copy of Local Zoning Bylaw 
 Lesson Number One, discussed previously, on dealing with local ofﬁ cials is to get your own copy of 
the local bylaw or ordinance. This is  not the three-volume set on the shelf of the Building Inspector, 
the one that sells for $300. That’s the building code for construction in your state. What you want is the 
zoning ordinance or zoning bylaw. It probably has 7 to 120 pages, depending on how intrusive zoning 
may be in your jurisdiction. In 1999, a copy of the Land Use Ordinance for Oahu, Hawaii, was $8; in 
Kitsap County, Washington, it was $9. Even now they tend to top out at about $30 or so, and are often 
available online. 
 You must have your own copy of the whole bylaw and not just the one page that the clerk tells you 
covers this topic. Why? Among other reasons, you will want to read the  Deﬁ nitions section, sometimes 
in the ﬁ rst section. You will want to read the section on height in your zone (height may be different 
in each of an industrial, rural, farming, residential two-family, or residential single family district — if 
your town has such districts). You do know your zone, don’t you? You will also need to know about the 
required setback from the street on which you front and any  “ required yard ” (distance from a boundary 
to the building envelope). 
 Be sure to read any new section covering  Wireless Communications Facilities . This section may have 
been added after the Communications Act of 1996 came into law. You speciﬁ cally want to see what is 
covered to see if you may be exempt from this section, which ordinarily covers cellular telephone and 
other commercial mobile radio antenna-support structures. It may or may not cover broadcast antennas. 
You will also want to read any special section covering setbacks. (If it is 500 to 1000 feet, consult your 
attorney to see if any cases in your jurisdiction have found such a large setback to be an  “ effective 
prohibition. ” ) That’s to start. 
 If it appears that you will need a Special Use Permit, Special Exception, or Variance, you will want 
to have the section with the criteria covering such grants (to know what you must show in order to 

52 Chapter 4
qualify), as well as the section that tells you how to apply and what to include in the application. 
As you can see, a single-page photocopy of the  “ height ” section simply will not serve you well in 
most cases. 
 4.1.8  Copy of Relevant State Law 
 Should your state be one of those that has a statewide siting system or certain requirements for you 
or the town, you will want to have a printout to include in your application or to hand to a Building 
Inspector or a Board member. This is legal research. Don’t guess. 
 4.1.9  Manufacturer’s Speciﬁ cations and Installation Requirements for Your Tower 
 You don’t have to include the entire instruction manual for your antenna-support structure. The Board 
just wants to be sure that what you propose is made by a reputable manufacturer, one who publishes 
real speciﬁ cation sheets with installation plans that can be reviewed by the Building Inspector. One 
speciﬁ cation that the Building Inspector will probably, and correctly, insist upon seeing is the allowable 
wind loading at the wind-speed requirement for your county and site. 
 If you are contemplating a Heights tower (and you might take a look anyway because it is interesting), 
check out http://www.heightstowers.com/engspecs.htm . For a Rohn tower, see  http://www.rohnnet.
com , and click on  “ Products. ” It won’t take much effort to ﬁ nd comparable data for Nello, U.S. Tower, 
ERI, Valmont, Sabre, Pirod, Fort Worth Tower, and so forth. If you are talking to friends of the author at 
Sabre or ERI, tell them I sent you! (Maybe they’ll send me a sweatshirt or knit cap.) 
 Make your tower salesman your new best friend. He will welcome it, and you need what he can 
provide. 
 4.1.10  Long Tape Measure 
 It will be necessary for you to include the distances from the proposed structure base to the lot lines, to 
your equipment shed, to neighboring houses or buildings of any kind, and to the street (or any public 
way). These can be painful to measure using a 10-foot, or even a 25-foot, tape measure. A 100- or even 
250-foot tape measure sells for $14 to $35 at your local big-box hardware store. Tape measures that are 
300 feet long are also available. Buy one now to use in your application process. 
 4.1.11  Handheld Compass 
 Actually, this is a trick question, as you do not need a compass to prepare an excellent application, but 
you will need it later to construct your system. For the moment, everything you need is on your plot 
plan and the neighborhood assessor’s maps available from Town Hall. Look for the arrow pointing 
north. How to determine true north is a topic that could easily take up an entire lunch hour, or more, 
since there are so many ways to do so. It will become a necessary step in the installation of your 
system, but it is not a necessary step in the preparation of your antenna-system permit application. 
Your plot plan and map will have everything you need, which simply is an arrow indicating the 
direction of north. 

Basic Preparations 53
 4.1.12  Inclinometer 
 An  inclinometer is a device used to determine the angle to the top of a tree. It can be particularly 
helpful if you live in a neighborhood that is not generally level. It will save a lot of math homework, 
not that the math is really difﬁ cult. Any ninth grader should be able to help you with the trigonometry 
necessary for an antenna system application. But, if you want to see if an antenna will be visible from a 
certain spot at a given height, an inclinometer will make it easy. Also, the inclinometer will permit you 
to accurately detail the height of the trees on your lot, as well as the trees in a neighbor’s yard, should 
the question ever arise about whether or not an antenna will be visible from the neighbor’s backyard. 
 You can buy a ready-made inclinometer. The last one I bought from Suunto (a Finnish manufacturer) 
cost about $80 and had a nice liquid-dampening system. Or, you can make your own from a plastic 
compass, a piece of string, and a weight. Sight along the straight edge of the compass toward a treetop. 
Allow the weight to hold the string straight down. Pinch the string and you’ve got the angle to the 
top of the tree. Measure the distance from where you are standing to the tree, using the 100-foot tape 
measure recommended above, and you’ve got all the necessary information to determine, with just a 
little trigonometry, the height of the tree. 
 Add a laser pointer, and you can also prove what hand waving and shouting will not. If you tape 
the laser pointer to the straight edge of your compass and aim it, you can thus dramatically end any 
argument about whether or not you’ve sighted to the top of the tree, above the top, or below the top 
(see  Figure 4.3 ). 
 In the commercial market, you might consider the Suunto PM-5 Clinometer or the Suunto Tandem 
360PC/360R Compass and Clinometer. Each has an accurate sighting mechanism, without using a 
laser. They are available from  Amazon.com and tool suppliers to the logging industry. If money is no 
object, $700 should buy you a LaserTech TruPulse 200, a laser tool that reads both distance (to an 
accuracy of  	 1  ft) and inclination (to an accuracy of  	 0.25 ° ), according to the manufacturer. 
 You haven’t lived until you’ve sat through an argument between a neighbor and an applicant about 
the height of a tree. It is a pretty silly way to spend your time, and an inexpensive laser pointer will 
accomplish what hand waving will not, as both parties can go to the site and look for the red dot. 
 There is no need to irritate the volunteers who sit on Boards with such arguments. The facts are the facts, 
and they should be presented as such to the Board. After that, you can argue about the implications. 
 4.2  A GPS Receiver 
 If it will not be disturbed by the presence of too much RF, a Global Positioning System (GPS) will help 
you quickly discover the exact latitude and longitude — information you will need for your Antenna 
Structure Registration (ASR). 
 4.3  Your Computer 
 You are embarking on a process in which you are asking people who are not familiar with radio to 
approve the erection and maintenance of a structure that they may never have seen. Further, they are 

54 Chapter 4
being asked to approve this construction in the face of what may be vehement opposition. Many zoning 
bylaws or ordinances put the burden on you, the applicant, to demonstrate that the proposal is not 
inconsistent with a single-family residential area, the neighborhood, or some such. 
 Have no fear — you can do it. However, you must be thorough and completely understandable. 
Nowadays, the process of preparation will almost certainly involve a computer. You will need a 
computer and scanner, with word-processing software and enough RAM to handle the scanning of 
documents as well as photographs. In addition, the ability to receive and send a fax through your 
computer would be useful (although a good-quality fax can always be scanned in). You will probably 
receive a fax that you will want to turn into a .tif or .jpg or .pdf ﬁ le for the purpose of inserting it as an 
exhibit in the application. So prepare now to make it happen. 
 You will also need Internet access for visiting FCC websites, the MSN TerraServer website, 
 http://www.topozone.com ,  http://maps.google.com , and so forth. A good-quality inkjet or laser 
How to build an inexpensive angle finder to “measure” the height of trees
Laser pointer to sight
straight line to top
 of tree
Push for ‘ON’ button
Plastic
compass
Piece of string
Weight
Angle of elevation
 Figure 4.3  A simple laser-aided inclinometer to measure tree heights. Measure the angle using the 
inclinometer and measure the distance to the tree using a 100-foot tape measure. The height of the tree 
is calculated from Height    Distance    tan (angle). (Concept for illustration courtesy of American Radio 
Relay League.) 

Basic Preparations 55
printer will be necessary, along with good-quality paper. A color printer will be useful for maps, 
your license (the document may look more ofﬁ cial in color), and photographs that you have scanned 
or taken with a digital camera (documenting a balloon test, an anticlimbing device, and so forth). 
 If you are a computerphobe, get used to the idea that this application is going to have several drafts. It 
will be a better application, with a higher chance of success, if you make it a professional presentation. 
You are going to need a word processor with a spell checker and, if the document is long, a  “ Table 
of Contents ” function, as well as a  “ Track Changes ” function if you are passing around copies of the 
application within your organization, as well as back and forth to your lawyer. It is quite normal for 
the Supplement to the Application, with all the background and data, to go through 13 to 16 drafts. Be 
vigilant in controlling version numbers. 
 Since it is highly likely that you already own a computer with a word processor of some sort, boot it 
up right now and create a document called TIMELINE.doc. From now on, whenever you send a letter, 
receive a letter, make a phone call, receive a phone call, ﬁ le anything, or whatever, enter it as a short note 
in your notebook and in your TIMELINE document. Trust me. Someday this could make your life a 
whole lot easier. It becomes especially relevant as the paper piles up. It becomes crucial if you must ﬁ nd 
documents or prove dates. Some states have statutory time limits by which time a Building Inspector 
must make a decision. You should keep track of dates. Make those entries simple. For example: 
 6/2/2009 (or, as I prefer, 090602): Filed building permit application. 
 Note: I prefer 090602 because: (1) if you begin ﬁ les with such a number, they will appear in the correct 
chronological order when you try to ﬁ nd them using your computer’s  “ Explore ” function. In addition, 
if you are using a spreadsheet, your spreadsheet program has an automatic function for listing things 
in numeric order. If you use  “ old fashioned ” dates, 6/2/2009 will appear immediately after 6/2/2008, 
despite the fact that the two are a year apart. 
 6/3/2009: Filed map that I failed to include yesterday. 
 Oh, yes, it is always a good time to remind you that any papers ﬁ led in Town Hall should be ﬁ led in 
duplicate and time-stamped there. File one, keep one. You should keep a copy of the stamped version — to 
prove the date on which something was ﬁ led. This becomes important if they try to change the bylaw on 
you, once it becomes obvious that you intend to go forward with your plan. It could also be important if 
the town takes no action at all, and you must later prove the passage of time. Don’t feel nervous about 
asking anyone to time-stamp something. The administrative staff at your Town Hall does it every day, for 
no charge. It is routine. 
 4.3.1  Word Processing Software 
 Many word processors include templates for various types of formal reports. Such templates can help 
make your presentation look more professional. One of the most professional things you can do is to 
include a table of contents and an executive summary. Ideally, you will have a word processor that is 
capable of inserting scanned images into a document. If not, you can simply use any word processor 
and put all the exhibits at the end, numbered. Be sure to include a page that lists all the exhibits at the 
beginning of the exhibits section to reduce repetitive thumbing through the document in search of the 

56 Chapter 4
proper exhibit. But, you are better off if the exhibits are right in there with the text. Where possible, 
create your proposal and send it as an e-mail attachment to trustworthy friends who will not forward it 
to  “ parties unknown. ” Gather comments and incorporate improvements suggested. 
 4.3.2  Images and Image Editing 
 A document scanner will be very helpful. It will be helpful if you can add comments, arrows, 
dimensions, and so forth electronically when you incorporate scanned images into your presentation. 
Learn how to do this! 
 4.3.3  Working with Numbers (Spreadsheets) 
 To perform an analysis demonstrating, for example, the lack of impact on house values due to the 
presence of existing radio antennas, you will need spreadsheet software. The CD accompanying this 
book has several such spreadsheets in Excel (.xls) format. A great deal of thought went into the study 
design. See if one of them works for you. 
 4.3.4  Drafting Software 
 If you are going to create your own plot plan or if you intend to demonstrate how a neighbor’s view 
will actually be screened by nearby trees or an existing house, you may need software that allows you 
to draw and keep things in perspective. See  http://www.imsisoft.com/ to check out TurboCad. I’m 
sure there are other landscape software programs. If you ﬁ nd a good one in freeware, please notify the 
author for mention in the next edition! 
 4.3.5  Showing Your Antennas on Photographs 
 You may discover that mathematically you cannot fairly represent an antenna or support structure 
because 1/4-inch tubing, or Z-bracing, is simply too small and even 1-pixel-wide lines would be too 
fat. This may require you to exercise some judgment about whether or not you wish to attempt to insert 
a steel tower or aluminum antenna in a photograph. One alternative is to simply use a red dot to show 
the height of the proposed antenna and to explain the situation with a footnote. 
 It is also possible, perhaps likely, that your antenna may not even be visible because trees will block it. In 
such a case, the use of a red dot on the photo to show the height of the proposed system, where the dot is 
plunked down on a tree, will show the Board that the proposed system will be blocked from view. 
 In any event, this is an example of a situation where you may wish to have a scanned photo and insert 
the dot (with a circle around it or an arrow pointing toward it to help the reader spot it). Fortunately 
even the simplest scanning software today allows you to produce such an exhibit. A copy of a useful 
article on this subject is reproduced on the CD with the ﬁ lename Photo Simulation.pdf. 
 One thing may surprise you. Scan in your FCC license and reproduce it in  color . It is unlikely that anyone 
will comment on it, but it is very effective at reinforcing the idea that you have an ofﬁ cial FCC license. 

57
 Getting to Know the Players 
 Now that you’ve familiarized yourself with your team and the tools you’ll need to go forward, it’s time 
to examine the other players you will encounter. They’re not on the opposing team, necessarily (though 
sometimes it will feel that way). Still, you need to be aware of them and what their motives are. 
 5.1  Types of Players 
 As you proceed down the road to applying for a permit for your antenna-support structure, you 
may encounter opposition. It is tempting to regard this opposition with hostility and suspicion. It is 
particularly easy to suspect a conspiracy against the application. Some suspicion may be justiﬁ ed; 
some may not be justiﬁ ed. Nonetheless, in no event will hostility help you. 
 Rethink the situation. Don’t be so ready to believe that opposition to you represents a conspiracy. 
There’s usually a far more innocent explanation — usually related to a  lack of knowledge . If you 
experience opposition, it is most likely to be based either on a fear of the unknown or on a conviction 
that there will be a negative impact. 
 A fear of the unknown is often expressed as a negative impact. It is not uncommon to see opposition to 
antenna systems that will be visible neither from the neighbor’s house nor from the street. So, the ﬁ rst 
line of defense is always to explain what you are going to do. 
 5.1.1  Objector Type A: Fearing the Unknown 
 These opponents are basically fearful of your system. They may never have actually looked at your 
plans and are probably best characterized as fearing the unknown . These opponents are against it 
because they don’t know what it is. 
 Today, when people hear the word  tower , they think a heavy steel cellular or microwave lattice tower —
 18 (30?) feet wide at the base, 4 (10?) feet wide at the top — with a crow’s nest at the top and dishes up 
and down the tower. This may, or may not, be what you have in mind. If you contemplate a camouﬂ aged 
antenna support structure, it is important to get that fact out there right away. If you are putting up 
something small, perhaps whip antennas no bigger than 2 inches in diameter for two-way radio or a 
commercial repeater, a wireless Internet service provider (WISP) system, or a dish antenna of perhaps 1 
meter in diameter, your opposition is likely not thinking about a support that is only 12 to 22 inches on a 
face, constructed as a lattice ( “ see-through ” ), with guy wires no bigger than 1/4 to 1/2 inch in diameter. 
CHAPTER 5 

58 Chapter 5
If you’d like to keep legal expenses low or avoid them entirely, it’s your job to talk to your neighbors 
about what you propose. If you don’t talk to them, they’ll assume the worst about your  project . If you 
don’t talk to them, they’ll assume the worst about  you . 
 Many an applicant has had bitter remarks addressed against him at a public hearing that began with: 
 “ Mr. Chairman, the ﬁ rst I ever heard about this proposal was when I received the registered letter 
telling me about the hearing this evening. ”
 Boom. You are off to a bad start with the Board. Why? Boards [Boards of Appeals], or Planning 
Boards, are made up of volunteers — people who like to think of themselves as community-oriented 
folks who just want to keep their town a nice place to live. They like to think of the public hearing as 
 “ just an opportunity to discuss the proposed project with your neighbors. ”
 This is often a delusion, since a Board of Appeals is a quasi-judicial body working with vague, 
sometimes impossible to discern standards (such as “ shall not have a negative impact on the 
neighborhood ” — note the double negative). These vague standards mean that it is impossible for you to 
put together a package of presentation materials that is ever a 100% guaranteed, slam-dunk winner. 
 In addition to being uninformed about your speciﬁ c project, your opposition may be uninformed about 
radio, wireless, or TV in general. The opposition may be uninformed about engineering in general. I 
once faced a neighbor opposing a project on safety grounds who simply claimed,  “ You can’t predict 
what Mother Nature will do. ” If that claim were entirely true, you could never build an acceptably safe 
bridge, house or ofﬁ ce building, never mind an antenna system. 
 In other words, until you’ve met with them, you don’t know how well informed neighbors may be nor 
how intelligent. You just don’t know, one way or another. 
 5.1.1.1  Effective Strategies 
 The only effective strategy with uninformed neighbors is to  inform them. This gives you a chance to 
clear up any misconceptions. Sometimes you can do that. On the other hand, after being informed, you 
may discover that the neighbor is no longer uninformed and negative. The neighbor may now just be 
plain old negative. 
 At this point, readers who are in the  “ site acquisition ” ( “ site acq ” ) business are smiling. Generally, they 
have an entirely different viewpoint on seeking cooperation from neighbors. They get paid to get permits 
for sites. Thus, it is in their best interest to go after the  “ low hanging fruit, ” or the sites for which it is 
easiest to get a permit. Much of the strategy in this chapter assumes that you have no choice — you are 
already committed to a particular site and you are not ready to go off and seek permission for another 
site half a mile away. Let’s assume, for example, that you are a broadcaster seeking to add a tenant to an 
existing tower or you are a landowner who wants to build a tower for business use behind your commercial 
building. In these cases, you have little choice as to where a proposed antenna system is going to go. 
 5.1.2  Objector Type B: Convinced of Negative Impact 
 Sooner or later you will meet people who are opposed to what you intend to do. You may become 
convinced that the neighbors will never listen to reason .  .  . and you may be right. Nonetheless, you 
must always treat each person you encounter with  respect , and keep your promises to these neighbors. 

Getting to Know the Players 59
Putting it another way, never make a promise you can’t keep. For example, you may not be able to 
promise that your neighbor will never be able to see your antennas. You may not be able to promise 
that your neighbor will never have television (TVI) or radiofrequency (RFI) interference. Yet you still 
can do something positive in the face of such opposition. 
 Some neighbors just need to vent the frustration that they cannot completely control the neighborhood 
and what other people do on their own properties. These are people who would be happy to tell you, if 
it weren’t impolite, that you’ve chosen the wrong color to stain your house or that you routinely leave 
your garage door open and it makes the neighborhood look unkempt. With a business or commercial 
proposal, they don’t feel held back by any feelings that it might be  “ impolite, ” because they feel it is 
a heaven-sent right to prevent you from using land you own for economic reasons. Even worse, they 
may feel that they have a duty to preserve the land  you own so they can preserve  their views. 
 On the subject of preserving aesthetics, by the way, do not assume that there are simple answers. The 
court decisions go both ways. They are fact dependant and depend on the ordinance in question, as 
well. This will be more fully discussed in the chapter on objections. 
 Some neighbors hate radio, TV, cell phones, you name it. I remember one such old man who no doubt 
had a bad experience with TVI in 1953 or so, when shielding on both the TV and transmitter was not 
yet what it would later become. He died, of natural causes I hasten to add, still harboring that hatred 
of radio caused by the interference he had suffered on his TV almost 50 years before his death. 
 Fortunately, both radio transmitters and television receiving systems (including cable TV, cellular 
telephone, paging systems, and so forth) are getting better. Printed circuit boards with good ground 
planes, toroids, shielding, and ﬁ ltering have helped TV sets. Commercial manufacturing, shielded 
enclosures, coax, single-point grounds, more toroids, shielding, and ﬁ ltering have helped transmitters. 
 Sadly, some hatred may never be overcome. There are neighbors who hate you. This is hard to talk 
about in modern society, but I have personally seen bias against several Hispanic applicants and bias 
against a radio ham who was Jewish. It happens. If your management or programming may incur 
such outrageous discrimination, think hard about hiding behind someone else’s skirt. While some may 
counsel facing discrimination head on, others will advise that you get on the air ﬁ rst and worry about 
the discrimination later — when you are rich. 
 Some neighbors truly believe that your transmissions may cause cataracts, or cancer, or headaches, 
or whatever. In that camp, even the most moderate may mistakenly believe that we really don’t have 
enough research to know whether or not radio transmissions are safe. (For those people, even if you 
get someone to agree that Marconi started transmitting over a century ago, it will be forever impossible 
to escape their claim that  “ we still don’t have enough experience. ” ) And then there are neighbors who 
truly believe all manner of other objections, such as  “ It will lower property values. ” Such beliefs may 
be routine nonsense, but there can be no doubt that they are ﬁ rmly held. For this reason, in the absence 
of the ability to build  “ as of right, ” you should rejoice if you have a forum where the Board must obey 
a reasonably favorable law that may well disappoint some neighbors. 
 Fortunately, you are not at the mercy of a requirement that you get permission from all of your 
neighbors. There are societies like that, societies that virtually grant a blackball to the neighbors: 
Bermuda and England may come close, and Canada insists on neighborhood consultations. But, 
despite the decline, Americans have not lost all property rights yet. 

60 Chapter 5
 5.1.2.1  Effective Strategies 
● 
 Vote for candidates who believe in property rights. Well, that’s a good long-term goal, 
anyway! 
● 
 Talk to all the neighbors you can, whether or not you believe that you can convert them. Even 
if a neighbor is unalterably opposed to your proposal or won’t commit one way or another (and 
you should treat every  “ maybe ”  as a  “ no ” ), you may still learn the basis for the opposition by 
simply asking: “ What is it that bothers you about this proposal? ” Thus, you can better prepare 
for the public hearing, if there is one, or the next cocktail party, if that’s the only forum. 
● 
 Prepare, prepare, and prepare your presentation and exhibits some more. Make your 
presentation thorough, correct, and neat. 
● 
 Prepare your company, relevant family members (if appropriate), your experts, yourself. 
Gather the documents you may need; learn what the law says and what it does not say; 
assemble your exhibits; take your photographs; practice your answers. Pretend you are about 
to embark on a political campaign and you know that you are going to be interviewed by 
tough reporters. 
 Think about the questions and practice your answers. For example, preemption for Commercial Mobile 
Radio Services in the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (the TCA of  ’ 96) may not be an absolute 
and complete preemption for you, but neither is it a  “ balancing test. ” It requires of the town that you 
cannot be left with a “ signiﬁ cant gap ” in coverage. So be prepared to say why you need to do what you 
propose to do. Work those questions and answers until you could answer each of the hard questions 
during a 20-second elevator ride without mumbling. 
 With good preparation, you’ll be OK. 
 5.2  Informal Discussions 
 At some point you must settle on a plan and begin to shop it around, or else this idea you treasure 
is never going to happen. Before you submit the plan and start the time clock (when notice must go 
out, the Board must meet within so many days, a decision made within so many more days, an appeal 
ﬁ led within so many days of a decision, and so forth), you should take your ideas out for an informal 
test drive . 
 5.2.1  Talk Within Your Company 
 You are about to embark on a multi-month process. In the end, an offhand remark, an accidental slight, 
or some other small matter could have a substantial inﬂ uence on the outcome. He who is careful will 
more likely succeed than he who is careless. 
 It may be important to brief coworkers and, if you are a broadcaster, on-the-road sales people before 
anyone else. It may be politically incorrect to say but, to be brutally upfront, if you are a small 
broadcaster this most often means brieﬁ ng your wife . 

Getting to Know the Players 61
 There is one principal goal: Make no quotable statements that might come back to haunt you. For 
example, your wife or sales rep obviously must not say:  “ Oh, yes, I know the station is applying to put 
up a really big ugly tower, but we need it for more coverage. ”
 Such a quotation could be incredibly damaging. It will be shoved in your face at some point and 
that point will probably be during the public hearing. It will happen something like this:  “ Finally, 
Mr. Chairman, I’ve spoken to the applicant’s wife [sales rep]. Even  she doesn’t believe that the 
applicant’s proposed tower is benign. She once described it to me as big and ugly. ” 
 So here are some lines that your spouse and sales reps must memorize. 
● 
 “ Well, actually, I’ve seen many of these installations and they are benign. After a while, you 
won’t even notice it is there. People just don’t look up. If they did, most likely they’d see all 
those big telephone poles. ”
● 
 “ I know that anyone can dream up horrible scenarios, but they are only imaginary. ” 
● 
 “ I have no concern whatsoever about interference to TVs, beepers, and so forth. We don’t 
have any of those problems at our ofﬁ ce, where we have lots of computers and business 
machines. Besides, if they ever did pop up, we would do most anything we could to eliminate 
a problem. But, more importantly, the higher the antenna, the less likely is interference. If you 
don’t have any problems now, while the antenna is closer to the ground, there’s no reason 
to believe that problems will arise when it is higher. ” If you can argue that other stations, 
cellular carriers, paging systems, WISPs, etc., don’t interfere and neither will you, so much 
the better. 
 And so forth. You absolutely must practice these, and other, responses, since the subject will certainly 
come up at the supermarket, chance meetings, and so forth. It is inevitable. 
 By contrast, here are some examples of lines that could hurt you: 
● 
 “ Our engineer has cleaned up most of the interference problems around the ofﬁ ce and he’s 
promised to get around to the rest later. ” (The sound bite:  “ Not even the applicant’s own place 
is free of interference. ” )
● 
 “ Yes, we do have one child with only one ear, but some [the right answer is  all ] of the doctors 
told me that it was completely unrelated to radio. ” (The sound bite:  “ We can’t even be sure 
that his own child hasn’t been harmed by radio transmissions. ” )
● 
 “ My husband has dreamed of bringing an AM station to a small town all of his life, and we 
hunted long and hard to ﬁ nd a town that had ordinances that permitted us to erect it. ” (The 
sound bite:  “ What he’s really saying is that he looked long and hard to ﬁ nd a town with weak 
ordinances so he could install the equivalent of a toxic-waste dump. ” ) 
● 
 “ He really needs this antenna system. In order to communicate now, he has to rent space on a 
hill three miles away. ” (The sound bite:  “ Why can’t he continue to do that? He doesn’t need 
an antenna system in our fair town. ” )

62 Chapter 5
 Perhaps there is really only one choice here. It is unlikely that your wife or sales rep will have the same 
familiarity with the issues or have practiced the correct responses as much as you have throughout your 
life. Ask your spouse or sales rep to say:  “ I’m completely familiar with what Tom intends to do. There 
is really nothing to be concerned about and I feel completely comfortable with the proposal. But, if you 
have questions, I know he’d be delighted to respond to them. Shall I have him call you? ”
 5.2.2  Talk to Other Stations or Carriers in Town 
 There are several reasons to talk with other station owners, tower owners, or potential tower tenants 
who are familiar with your city or town. These are covered in some detail in Chapter 2,  “ The Process in 
a Nutshell. ” Put succinctly, your goals for talking with other tower owners in town are fourfold: 
● 
 Gather G-2. 
● 
 Get reassurance on how to handle inquiries from neighbors. 
● 
 Receive letters of support ( “ This is really necessary ” ).
● 
 Ask for their support and attendance at the public hearing. 
 5.2.3  Talk to Your Neighbors 
 Much of this is also discussed in Chapter 2. Set these goals for your talks with neighbors: 
● 
 You can say you’ve done it. 
● 
 Gather G-2. 
● 
 Allay fears they may have about: 
 1.  TVI/RFI, 
 2.  Setting off beepers, 
 3.  Setting off alarm systems, and 
 4.  Accidentally opening garage doors. 
 5.2.4  Talk to the Building Inspector 
 5.2.4.1  The First Visit 
 The Building Inspector (also known as a Building Commissioner or Code Enforcement Ofﬁ cer) is 
usually a busy person. Also, if you walk into a Building Inspector’s ofﬁ ce and assume any female there 
is a secretary, you can only hurt yourself. Ask. 
 It is not uncommon for a Building Inspector to spend only an hour a day in the ofﬁ ce and the rest of 
it on the road. As a law enforcement ofﬁ cer, a Building Inspector may wear a uniform. The Building 
Inspector may drive a car with a seal on it and  “ state ofﬁ cial ” license plates (thus lessening the chances 
that someone will shoot at a person who appears to be trespassing). Even in the dead of winter, when 

Getting to Know the Players 63
you’d think that the building season has subsided, Building Inspectors could be busy catching up on a 
backlog of wood-stove inspections. (I’ve seen this problem in my practice.) So, be prepared before you 
go to see the Building Inspector. Your appointment could be very short — perhaps ﬁ ve minutes. Plus, 
there may well be three guys in work boots out in the hall waiting behind you. 
 Those three guys in work boots in the hall are local contractors who work with the Building Inspector 
all year round. They have relationships with him. They buy him a bottle of scotch at Christmas. They 
drink coffee with him on cold mornings onsite. They may even be in the room with you while you 
are making your presentation. It can be unnerving, especially if you thought you’d have a few private 
moments with the Building Inspector. Be prepared. 
 The Building Inspector looks at stairs, walls, rooﬁ ng, and so forth all week long. He may or may not be 
familiar with the bylaw that controls the antenna system you wish to erect. Moreover, if my experience 
is any guide, he may not be inclined to tell you that he doesn’t have  your bylaw or ordinance, building 
code and state statute, as well as federal preemption, memorized. 
 So, here are a few suggestions that will be well received by your Building Inspector: 
● 
 Bring the relevant bylaw, ordinance, building code, and state statute sections with you. 
This is why we have photocopying machines, paper clips, yellow felt-tip markers, and little 
sticky notes. 
● 
 Walk the Building Inspector through the relevant sections in a rehearsed sequence in under 
a minute .
● 
 Then turn to your list of questions, because the thing he’s thinking is:  “ Why are you here? ”
● 
 Ask the easy questions ﬁ rst and get rolling. 
 1.  “ If I use only low voltage (perhaps 24V DC for an antenna rotator), will I need to pull 
an electrical permit? ” (The answer is probably no, but you should ask since it is an easy 
question and starts you off.) 
 2.  “ I just want to put up this antenna system on an existing structure. If I provide all the 
heights and distances on a scaled drawing, will you require a sealed survey? ” 
 3.  “ Do I need to show ground contours when my only construction will be up on the tower 
and indoors in an existing building? ” 
 4.  “ Do I have to show the houses on adjacent properties or can I just show the distances? ”
 5.  “ When is an application considered  ﬁ led ? When I hand it to you, or after it has been 
circulated to any necessary Boards or Departments? ” 
● 
 Then, after you have his attention, dive right into the open-ended questions: 
 1.  “ Will you accept a catalog spec sheet? Factory drawings? ” 
 2.  “ Will I need a signature from any other departments, such as the Board of Health, the Fire 
Department or others? Do I get those signatures, or do you? ”
 3.  “ Are there any changes in the relevant ordinances now being considered by any Board or 
Committee? ”

64 Chapter 5
● 
 Save the difﬁ cult questions for the second meeting: 
 1.  “ I can put up a less visible structure (much less bulk than a self-supporting structure), if 
you’ll let me put the guy anchors between the setback and the property line. What do you 
think about that? ”
 2.  “ Is a PE seal necessary? ” If the answer is yes, then ask:  “ Will you accept a dry seal from 
the manufacturer? ”
 3.  “ Do you remember if anyone else in town has ever applied for a permit for an antenna 
system? Could I see that application, please? How did it come out? How can I contact that 
person? Is it still up? ” (If you see one, whether or not it was successful, pay the exorbitant 
photocopying fee of 25 to 50¢ per page and take home a copy. It’s well worth it.) 
 Remember, you can read the rules in the rulebook. The purpose for meeting with the Building Inspector 
is to learn the answers to questions that are not addressed in the bylaws or building code. You want a 
little local lore, history, and practice. You are trying to demonstrate to the Building Inspector that you 
are knowledgeable about the law on the subject, that you know what you are doing with respect to good 
construction practice, that you can be trusted, and that you won’t try to pull a fast one (surprise him 
with your good intent!). 
 Here are some examples of informal rules that you could learn in a visit, ones that you won’t learn in 
the rulebook or over the phone: 
● 
 Some towns have not modiﬁ ed their bylaws or ordinances to meet the requirements of state 
or federal law. For whatever reason (inertia, opposition to federal interference in local 
zoning, whatever), the bylaw may be clearly illegal. One example would be an absolute 
prohibition against a broadcast tower more than 42 feet high (such as the case in Lebanon, 
NH, which we litigated all the way to the New Hampshire Supreme Court and won a ruling 
of preemption). 
● 
 In another town, however, with a badly drafted ordinance (for example, an ordinance that 
purports to regulate interference), you might learn that the Building Inspector and Town 
Counsel are aware of the fact that their bylaw is illegal. They may have decided that, despite 
the ordinance, they will ignore the interference ordinance and testimony on it will not be 
permitted at a hearing. This could save you a lot of time and several slides in your PowerPoint 
presentation, because you won’t need to address that problem. Here’s a real-life example of an 
illegal ordinance from the Citrus County (FL) Code: 
 §4673.F.14. Communications Transmission/Reception Interference 
 Each application to allow construction or modiﬁ cation of a telecommunications tower and 
antenna shall include a certiﬁ ed statement from a qualiﬁ ed, registered, professional engineer 
licensed in the State of Florida, attesting that the construction of the tower, including receiving 
and transmitting functions, shall not interfere with public safety communications and the usual 
and customary transmission or reception of radio and television. 
● 
 You might discover that the City Planner has just decided to  “ make it up. ” For example, the 
City Planner may have decided to grant a Building Permit as a matter of course to anyone 
for an antenna system up to 60 feet high, requiring a full hearing and Special Permit process 

Getting to Know the Players 65
only for antennas above that height. (How anyone could obtain, and how they could grant, a 
Special Permit process without an authorizing bylaw remains a mystery to this day, but I have 
personally obtained Special Use Permits or Conditional Use Permits in situations where I 
prayed that no one would appeal, because there was no basis in law for the grant of the permit.) 
● 
 In another town, the bylaw had a real oddity. It permitted antennas as a matter of right up 
to 20 feet above the house if the antenna was attached to the house. This town had a lot 
of three-story houses, so the effective right was to build up to about 55 feet above grade. 
However, a freestanding accessory structure could only be constructed to a height of 35 
feet. Upon inquiry, the Building Inspector told me that if the client would run a steel wire to 
support feed lines from the house to the antenna support structure, he’d consider the structure 
to be  “ attached ” and would grant a permit as a matter of right up to 55 feet. 
● 
 Here’s another special case. One Building Inspector told me to calculate a triangle for 
the uppermost guy wire as it entered the setback area. His bylaw required that accessory 
structures in the setback area be less than 12 feet tall (where the original idea was to 
accommodate basketball nets). What he wanted was that the  average height for that portion of 
the guy wires that was within the setback area not exceed 12 feet. This permitted us to move 
the guy anchors into the setback area. 
● 
 In yet another special case, the Building Inspector simply would not permit intrusion into a 
ﬁ ve-foot setback, but he was happy to permit guying through a solid live tree, especially when 
told that a different ruling would result in cutting down the tree, because it was where the guy 
wires had to land. 
 Finally, there are times when the rule is clear, but you must know if it applies to you! Here’s an 
example. In one town, the wind-load requirement was controlled by the easily read deﬁ nitions of 
Zones A, B, or C. The lowest wind-load requirement occurred in Zone A, which is thickly forested and 
otherwise protected by rolling hills. But, given the client’s proximity to the sea, which zone was he in 
for this purpose? The answer to that question determined how we would propose to guy the structure 
(three sets or four, 3/16- or 1/4-inch EHS guys). 
 So, prepare your questions, prepare your presentation, and show some respect by showing up during 
announced ofﬁ ce hours or by appointment. Then, grab your answers and leave! You can be friendlier 
on the second visit. 
 5.2.4.2  The Second Visit 
 If time and circumstances permit, you may go back to the Building Inspector for a second visit. 
This time you should have a good idea of what you want to do, where it is going, and so forth. The 
objective of this visit is no longer to get a feel for the rules, formal or informal, but rather to nail down, 
thoroughly and ﬁ rmly,  the process . 
 Bring your draft permit application and lay it out on the table. Walk the Building Inspector through the 
application. Your principal questions this time are:  “ Am I providing everything you (or the Board of 
Appeals) will need to make a decision? Have I left anything out? Is there anything else you need to see 
to make a decision? ”

66 Chapter 5
 Don’t bother asking if you’ll get the permit from the Board. He has a feeling but is unlikely to tell you 
what his guess may be. After all, the Building Inspector is supposed to be a neutral, an employee of the 
town. He has an obligation to be helpful to the Board, which is why he’ll be helpful explaining what you 
must include in your application. Boards hate incomplete applications, and, upon hearing that you’ve 
visited with the Building Inspector and he didn’t tell you what you’d need to include, they’ll be mad at 
both you and the Building Inspector. That’s why he has an interest in telling you what to include. But, 
he is unlikely to have a reason to guess at the outcome. At this point, he doesn’t know whether there will 
be any opposition, so his guess isn’t worth much anyway. Don’t bother asking. It is the sign of a rookie. 
 5.2.5  Talk to the Secretary to the Planning Board or to the Town Planner 
 You will want to: 
● 
 Learn what the Board wants to see. 
● 
 Learn when (the day of the week and how often) the Board meets. 
● 
 Learn how crowded the Board’s calendar is. 
● 
 Learn when they decide (right then, later that night, Saturday morning?). 
 Your town may have a Planning Board, which is different from a Board of Appeals. The Planning 
Board normally works on issues such as suggesting future changes in the zoning bylaw or ordinance, 
working on strategies for trafﬁ c calming, and reviewing (in a somewhat formal yet somewhat informal 
way) proposals that will next go to the Board of Appeals for zoning approval. They also tend to handle 
applications for site plan review . 
 What is site plan review? It varies. It can be nothing more than a review, during which the Planning Board 
tries to jawbone (pressure, by strong persuasion) the applicant into doing something that the applicant did 
not plan to do — such as moving the tower base to another spot or planting vegetation (trees) not required 
by the bylaw. Or, it can be a set of conditions which, until fulﬁ lled, can hold up the necessary permits. 
 When you go to the Planning Board, you are out in the open. Your name will be on the agenda. The 
local newspaper may cover the meeting, which is probably a public meeting (meaning that anyone 
can attend), and your neighbors will learn what you are planning (which means that they can start to 
organize against you, if that’s going to happen). However, it would still be wise to go see the Secretary 
to the Planning Board or the Town Planner. 
 If your town is big enough to have a Town Planner, you should approach this person with caution, yet you 
should also approach this person. Why? Because the Town Planner is likely to be a professional, is more 
likely than a volunteer to subscribe to professional publications, and may well be the only person with 
whom you can discuss such questions as “ What has the Board looked upon in the past that is similar? ”
 Here is a list of questions to bring to the Town Planner: 
● 
 What bylaws do you think apply? 
● 
 What information will the Board of Appeals need to make a decision? 
● 
 What does the Board, as a rule, prefer in the way of siting? 

Getting to Know the Players 67
● 
 Who are the current members of the Board?  
● 
 What’s the procedure in this town? 
● 
 What’s the timing involved? How many weeks after I apply will I likely be on the agenda? Do 
they tend to decide that night, or later? How long will it take the Board to issue an opinion?  
● 
 Have there been other antenna proposals before the Board in the last decade or two? Do you 
think the Board appreciates the difference between a cellular telephone antenna system and a 
broadcast radio FM antenna system? Are there examples of paging antennas in town? 
 There are Town Planners who will play it straight and give you the scoop on how to make your 
application so it will receive fair consideration. There are also Town Planners who will be horriﬁ ed 
at the prospect that someone would want to put up a commercial antenna system. So don’t reveal 
anything to the Town Planner that you don’t want revealed at a later date to the Board of Appeals —
 such as your height strategies, if you have any. 
 What is meant by saying that you should not discuss your height strategies with the Town Planner? For 
an AM station, this might mean that, if pressed, you’d consider a top hat for capacitive loading instead 
of pressing for a full height vertical for your AM station. 
An Anecdote. The use of a top hat (see  Figure 5.1 ) enabled KFI (La Mirada, CA) to ﬁ nally resolve its 
permitting difﬁ culties when it tried to replace a tower that had been struck by an errant general aviation 
 Figure 5.1  The KFI tower with its new and distinctive capacity hat. The tower’s height was reduced by 
75 feet, but this 50-foot-diameter capacity hat makes up for the missing height. (Photograph courtesy 
of Marvin Collins.) 

68 Chapter 5
aircraft trying to land at the nearby Fullerton airport. (Note: The KFI tower is outside of the Fullerton 
Airport’s air space, and the FAA had already made a  “ determination of no hazard. ” ) 
 It is highly unlikely that the Town Planner will give you any reliable feel for the outcome of the 
proceeding. Even if the Planner did, you shouldn’t rely on it. 
 The Town Planner (other possible names being City Planner, Director of Planning  & Development, or 
Director – Building Services Department), if you have one, is always a better resource than the Secretary 
to the Planning Board, but you want to become friendly with both, if your town has one of each. Note 
that you may be asking the same questions of both the Secretary to the Planning Board and the Town 
Planner. Don’t worry about seeming repetitious. Only you know that you’ve asked the questions 
before. Each person will answer those questions in a slightly different way and that difference in 
perspective may prove useful. 
 One further word about the Town Planner. If the process where you need to apply is handled on a 
countywide basis or you are dealing with a big city, there may be an entire planning department. In 
this case, you may ﬁ nd yourself dealing with a young person, almost certainly inexperienced in tower 
zoning, except perhaps for cellular tower cases. If your project is for a weather radar antenna, an AM 
broadcast station, a major FM or TV antenna on the rooftop of an existing building, or some other 
form of project that this planner has not handled before, you may ﬁ nd yourself in a situation where all 
of your questions are met with: “ I’ll have to get back to you on that. ” This can be tricky. Nonetheless, 
remember the old adage: “ Never talk to the monkey, when the organ grinder is available. ” It may be in 
your best interest to ask if you can meet with the division chief or Director of Planning. 
 Try an approach along these lines:  “ I feel as though I’m unfairly asking you to be an intermediary. 
Would it be possible to arrange a meeting with your boss, where I might be able to clear up some of my 
questions without putting so much of the burden on you? ”
 If there is no City or Town Planner, there is no harm in asking the above questions of the Secretary to 
the Planning Board. However, you may not get answers in as much depth. Also, the Secretary to the 
Planning Board is less likely to have a degree in city planning and subscribe to professional journals, 
which is why the position pays less. But, watch out — there are places where the Secretary is the 
real power. All this only proves what your mother told you while you were growing up:  “ Be nice to 
everyone. ”
 5.2.6  Talk to the Secretary of the Zoning Authority 
 The Secretary to the Board of Appeals may be new or lack understanding of the issues. However, now 
and again you get lucky and the Secretary is a long-service employee who can help you effectively 
assemble your application. She doesn’t do this just because you have asked her to be on your side. She 
does this in response to an appeal along the following lines:  “ I don’t want to waste the Board’s time, so 
I was wondering if you could review my application to see if I’ve included everything the Board needs 
to consider to arrive at a decision. ”

Getting to Know the Players 69
 Learn when (the day of the week and how often) they meet. As a separate question, the Secretary will 
tell you about the Board’s schedule. Be careful, since it may vary; for example, here’s a schedule that is 
fairly typical, at least in New England: 
● 
 Fall — the second Tuesday of each month or every other Tuesday 
● 
 No meeting in December, or only one meeting  
● 
 Spring — the second Tuesday of each month, or every other Tuesday 
● 
 Summer — no meeting in July or August 
 As you never know (these Boards are comprised of volunteers),  ask . Learn if the calendar is crowded. 
Your application may come up in a week, or it may be six or eight weeks before agenda time is 
available. Since this affects your planning for meeting with neighbors, your printing schedule, your 
travel plans, and so forth, be sure to gather as much information about the calendar as possible. In an 
ideal world, you will have a chance to attend two meetings before yours comes up. You’ll learn a lot 
about how to present — and how  not to present — a petition. 
 Learn how and when they decide. As to how they decide, you might discover that  “ staff ” (a 
staff planner or the Town Planner) makes a written decision and mostly they follow the staff 
recommendation. If that is the case, you must try to make the Town Planner your new best 
friend to inﬂ uence the staff recommendation. If you ﬁ nd that you can’t inﬂ uence a negative staff 
recommendation, at least prepare yourself to act quickly when you get the staff report. For example, 
you may get (by asking, or automatically) the staff recommendation 14 days before the Board meeting, 
but any written materials you wish to have distributed in advance of the hearing may have to be 
submitted 10 days before the hearing. You might have to act quickly. 
 It is almost always possible to get your materials circulated with other materials to Board members 
in advance of the meeting. Getting your materials distributed to the Board is usually the job of the 
Secretary to the Board. 
 You may be able to submit written materials, and also prepare a PowerPoint presentation. You’ll want 
to ask the Secretary for the deadline on submitting materials for distribution. If you fear that deadline, 
there is no harm in inquiring if you can mail (or even e-mail) materials to the Board (always send 
a copy to the Town Planner as a courtesy). To protect a volunteer board, sometimes you can e-mail 
materials to the Secretary and the Secretary will forward them by e-mail to the Board. Some elements 
of this discussion depend on your relationship with the Secretary to the Board — another reason to be 
nice, friendly, and respectful in all dealings with her. 
 As to the PowerPoint, you get to ﬁ ddle with it right up to the hearing. Here’s one tip: Be prepared to 
bring it along on CD, on a USB stick, printed out, or any other way you can think of. The Secretary 
will tell you the usual method, but you’ve got to be prepared with a backup plan. I’ve had situations 
where the computer provided would not read the CD I burned, and situations where the computer 
provided would not read the USB stick I brought. On one occasion, I brought the same PowerPoint 
presentation on two different USB sticks, but the computer would just not read either one. I asked the 

70 Chapter 5
Board for a break and we (a member of the Department of Development Services and I) e-mailed the 
PowerPoint to the computer in the hearing room. Be prepared. 
 As to when they decide, some Boards pause, talk it out, and vote, right then. You may be shocked to 
see a motion such as: “ I move that we approve the staff report. ” Others will decide at the end of the 
evening, hoping that, despite an open-meeting law, many of those present will have gone home. Then 
they’ll be able to decide in relative tranquility — with nobody seething in the audience when a Board 
member expresses something out loud that reﬂ ects a misunderstanding of the evidence. 
 Still others make no decisions that evening, preferring to meet perhaps on Saturday morning to make 
all decisions and assign the decision writing. If you have an open-meeting law but don’t know when 
and where they meet to decide, you can’t be there. 
 5.3  Fill Your Notebook 
 Once you are out there talking to people, you must keep notes, in the bound notebook described in 
Chapter 4. You must keep details of discussions — including dates, times, and who was present. Here 
are some reasons from real-life experience why you must do this: 
● 
 The Building Inspector tells you that, in his or her view, the height is the height of the support 
structure and not the structure plus mast. If he or she has a change of mind later, you don’t 
want to be accused of  “ trying to slip one by. ” You can avoid this predicament by simply 
reminding the Building Inspector that you were following his or her instructions from your 
conversation on a given date. 
● 
 You make notes when visiting a neighbor to explain the proposal to both the husband and 
wife. At a later date one of them claims that all of this is news and you never came by to visit. 
(The truth is more likely to be that they weren’t excited back then but they are now.) If you 
have notes on the date, place, and time, as well as the fact that both were present, they will 
back off. Your notes can help to refresh their memories. 
 5.3.1  Identify Supporters and Opposition 
 If you keep notes, you are more likely to capture information that could prove useful later. For 
example, you may learn that a radar system that once occupied the top of a hill in town was later 
dismantled and the land returned to agricultural use (a real-life example that occurred in Lincoln, 
MA). You may be able to obtain photographs from the local paper’s archives or an employee who once 
worked there to show that such an antenna system once did exist and that life as we know it in Western 
Civilization did not end. It can be particularly useful to remind all concerned that an antenna system 
is not as permanent as the construction of, say, a really ugly house, a commercial building, or the 
proverbial toxic-waste dump. 
 5.3.2  Identify Speciﬁ c Objections 
 Another reason for keeping notes is to capture speciﬁ c objections. Someone may say to you:  “ But I’ll 
be staring right at it from my dining room table! ” It may be that this is not true, but you can be certain 

Getting to Know the Players 71
that you will hear this objection again at the public hearing. Having recorded the objection in your 
notebook, you can be reminded later to take a photograph showing that: (1) the actual angle of view 
does not permit a sight line to your proposed structure, or (2) the view is blocked by trees (even in the 
winter). Without photos, on the evening of the hearing it will be your word against his and a Board 
may assume that the long-term neighbor knows his property better than the newcomer who wants to 
put up an antenna to —gasp! — make money. 
 5.4  Zoning Authorities 
 What you are about to read is based on experience. You know deep in your heart that surgeons are 
different from psychiatrists, don’t you? But you also know that they’ve got some characteristics in 
common, right? Well, the people who take positions as Building Inspectors, members of Planning 
Boards, and Boards of Appeals have some common characteristics, too. Getting these feelings and 
descriptions past my editor was difﬁ cult, but here we go. 
 5.4.1  Building Inspectors, Commissioners, Code Enforcement Ofﬁ cers 
 Somewhere along the timeline of their lives, most — but not all — Building Inspectors, Building 
Commissioners, or Code Enforcement Ofﬁ cers (to use three common titles) have been contractors, 
or else they supervised construction in the military. By and large, they are  regular guys . (I’ve met just 
one who was a woman and, as you would expect, she knew her stuff.) As long as you want to talk 
about a paragraph in the building code or a drawing, they are friendly and, in my experience, pretty 
rational.
 But, they also hold their jobs at the pleasure of the Board of Selectmen, the City Council, or Mayor. 
They know which way the political winds blow. Sometimes they will decide something your way 
just because it makes sense. Sometimes they really don’t want to make a decision at all and will turn 
you down. This is not because you are wrong, but because, when something may prove controversial, 
they think a civil servant shouldn’t make a decision. The Building Inspector may feel that a Board of 
townspeople can better reﬂ ect the town’s wishes and that the Board should be making such a decision. 
 Whatever happens, Building Inspectors deserve your respect. They earn it by calling the shots as they 
see them, when they can. Always treat them with respect. If it is possible, this means you should call 
and ask when the Building Inspector has ofﬁ ce hours and whether or not he or she takes appointments. 
Some do and some don’t. 
 Treating them with respect also means that when you meet with the Building Inspector you should be 
ready with a list of questions all tied to a paragraph in the bylaw or building code or with questions that 
have to do with what the Building Inspector ﬁ nds acceptable in construction practices. 
 Showing respect means that, if you leave promising that you’ll check something out and get back with 
an answer, you’d better keep your word. Remember, you’ll have to deal with the Building Inspector 
before any hearing on your permit, during the course of the hearing, and after the grant of a permit. 
Then the Building Inspector will make inspections and issue your ﬁ nal Certiﬁ cate of Use. In other 
words, you’ve got a lot of interactions with the Building Inspector ahead of you. Be nice.

72 Chapter 5
 The Difﬁ cult Building Inspector (BI) or Code Enforcement Ofﬁ cer (CEO) 
 Despite your best intentions and pure heart, occasionally you will run into a difﬁ cult situation 
with the ﬁ rst level of ofﬁ cialdom. This is the person you start with and may be the person 
to whom you return after site plan review and approval and issuance of a Special Exception, 
Conditional Use Permit, or Special Permit. 
The mystery of it all. There will be situations where you simply do not know what is going 
on. Why doesn’t he return phone calls? Why does he seem so imperious? Why doesn’t he give 
me a break on details such as original signatures or other minor matters where it is clear I’ve 
assembled what is necessary? 
 The answer is: You don’t know. You may never know. 
 But, there are some things you can do about the situation. LBJ, that’s President Lyndon Baines 
Johnson, former majority leader of the house and the man who succeeded to the presidency 
upon the death of John F. Kennedy, used to say:  “ Keep your friends close, and your enemies 
closer. ” The application of that axiom to this situation is that you must become the Code 
Enforcement Ofﬁ cer’s new best friend. We’re talking about face time here. Package up some 
humility and go visiting. Bring a fresh cup of coffee for him. Send him a Christmas card. You can 
give him a station pen or give his kid a T-shirt, but no tickets to local sports events or anything 
of signiﬁ cant material value. Let’s not contribute to corruption. This is a terriﬁ c country that 
generally lacks corruption, and you should want to keep it that way. 
Details, details, details. The next thing you can do is to assemble what you’ve got and keep 
going back to his ofﬁ ce to ask the question:  “ Is my application complete yet? ” This means that 
if the bylaw calls for a certain signature block, a certain size of drawings, certain views, a certain 
scale, you must beat up on the surveyor or landscape architect to provide exactly what the 
municipality requires. The problem here is that surveyors like to do things the way they like to do 
things, and the bylaw may specify a way of doing things that is different. Do yourself a favor and 
provide the surveyor with a copy of the latest version of the relevant bylaw sections. He’s not the 
one who will suffer if the drawings are wrong. 
 It is easier to make the surveyor draw things up according to the bylaw than to seek and obtain 
a waiver of a bylaw requirement. 
 Similarly, if you can’t get your permit without an insurance afﬁ davit, or certiﬁ cate of worker’s 
compensation, get it now. Don’t ask the BI or CEO to waive those things. He can’t, and you will 
look foolish for asking. 
 Finally, if the ofﬁ ce has forms that they require, be sure to ﬁ ll them out. All of them. You may 
wish to learn about a nice piece of software: Omniform, by ScanSoft. The output looks much 
more professional than handwritten forms and is easier to edit and reprint. Whatever scanner 
you have may also have come with “ form-ﬁ ller ” software. Plus, who has an old-fashioned 
typewriter available to use anyway? 
Why is he saying no? The answer is that he has no reason to say yes. Get used to it, and spend 
your time preparing for the appeal to the Zoning Board. 
 The CEO may essentially be required to say no. Here’s one example: 
 The Code Enforcement Ofﬁ cer shall: 
 .  .  . Take the most conservative or restrictive approach in applying these regulations. 
 Zoning Bylaw of Wolfeboro, NH, §175 – 183 B(1)(h) 
 Second, he has no reason to stick his neck out for you. You may not live there. Your station may 
not really be part of the fabric of the local community, because the market is the big city nearby. 

Getting to Know the Players 73
You must go to the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) anyway, so why should he take a risk? He’s 
just an employee. 
 But, here’s a practice tip. If at all possible, avoid making the CEO say no. If the ZBA has all the 
powers of the CEO, it may not be necessary to get a  “ turn down ” from the CEO ﬁ rst, before you 
present the issue to the ZBA. This will vary by community, but skipping the CEO can be wise, 
because the ZBA has greater latitude in making interpretive decisions, whereas the CEO may have his 
hands and feet bound by the requirement to  “ take the most conservative and restrictive approach. ” 
Also, when you’ve got a negative decision from the CEO, you are asking the ZBA to overturn their 
own employee. The lesson? If at all possible, skip the CEO if you know he’s going to say no. 
A bump in the road — the independent PE requirement. A CEO may feel totally uncomfortable 
making a decision about high steel. Whenever a CEO feels uncomfortable, and this is based 
solely on a lack of knowledge, he has alternatives. He can ask that the design be reviewed by an 
independent structural engineer selected by the town (but for whom your station must pay). 
This may or may not be authorized by the statute, the building code, or bylaw. Don’t worry 
about it. Agreeing to it is cheaper than ﬁ ghting it. 
 Professional engineers (PEs) do this sort of second-opinion work all the time. Doctors do it all 
the time. Sometimes even lawyers have opinions subjected to a second opinion. No professional 
should be insulted, and every professional should cooperate. If your PE does not cooperate by 
providing his calculations to the reviewing PE, you should ask yourself why. 
 Even after the review of the design by an independent PE, the CEO can require  “ controlled 
construction, ” in which a PE is asked to oversee and inspect the construction and put  his stamp 
on the line. You really cannot ﬁ ght this either. Yes, he’s passing off inspection (which is, after all, 
the job of a Building Inspector) to someone else, but it’s not irrational. Don’t even bother to get 
mad. It’s just another cost of construction. 
 Bringing in an independent PE (and, if you think about it, you may be bringing in several) 
is a classic cover-your-ass move by a CEO. It allows him to have a really good answer to the 
neighbor who says:  “ Is this thing going to fall on my head? ”
 By the way, here’s how up to four PEs could be involved. I know, I lived through this situation. 
● 
 PE #1 works with the manufacturer of the steel to reinforce a tower strengthening and 
designs the project. 
● 
 PE #2 signs the building permit application, because he has a license in the jurisdiction 
involved and will be the controlled construction inspector of the work done by PE #1’s ﬁ rm. 
Obviously, PE #1 cannot inspect his own ﬁ rm’s work.  
● 
 PE #3 is the independent structural engineer whose signature is required by the state 
building code just to submit the application. 
● 
 PE #4 is selected by the ZBA to review the design. This PE is not authorized by statute or 
bylaw but has been agreed to by the applicant who didn’t want to ﬁ ght because that would 
hold up the job longer and cost more. Saying yes was cheaper than saying no. 
A conﬂ ict of interest. There is always the possibility that the CEO has a conﬂ ict of interest. He 
may live nearby or own property nearby. That should disqualify him under your state’s conﬂ ict-
of-interest laws. Check out the state law on the subject. There is no doubt a statute involved. 

74 Chapter 5
Read it. In most states, a ﬁ nancial interest is presumed and an ofﬁ cial is  “ conﬂ icted out ”  if 
(according to the Massachusetts rule): 
● 
 The ofﬁ cial’s property directly abuts (i.e., it shares any part of a property line). 
● 
 The ofﬁ cial is a  “ party in interest ” under the state statute (i.e., the ofﬁ cial’s property is 
directly opposite a street, public way, or private way, or is an abutter to an abutter within 
300 feet of the property line). 
● 
 The ofﬁ cial is a  “ person aggrieved ” for the purposes of the Wetlands Protection Act. 
●   
   The matter would otherwise alter the ofﬁ cial’s property value, rights, or utilization. For example, 
property owners are presumed to have a ﬁ nancial interest in zoning changes, variances, nearby 
subdivision or development approvals, and roadway, sewerage, or safety improvements. 
 The actual rules are always your state’s rules. 
 On the other hand, he may not be affected, but it could be his sister’s cousin’s aunt who is 
screaming at him, in which case it may not be illegal for the CEO to stay on the case, but it 
could still make for a difﬁ cult relationship with the CEO. The State Ethics Commission of 
Massachusetts has a very detailed fact sheet online regarding elected ofﬁ cials at  http://www.
mass.gov/ethics/factsheet6.htm . This provision of the law is intended to ensure that public 
employees are acting in the best interests of the citizens they represent and are not pursuing 
their own self-interest or other private interests. To read in greater detail about the Building 
Ofﬁ cial’s responsibility to the citizens, consult  http://www.mass.gov/ethics/sum17.htm .
 Here is the short form of how it should work. 
 A Building Inspector or Code Enforcement Ofﬁ cer who has a conﬂ ict of interest should not 
participate in the decision making. At all. In a small town, this means that the CEO from a 
neighboring town may have to be called in to make decisions. Some CEOs, however, are too 
cute by half. The CEO might ask a CEO from a neighboring town to step in but will remain 
active in guiding that CEO on how to make the decision. The way to test this is to call the 
acting-CEO directly and discuss things. Watch out for a phrase such as:  “ I’ll have to check on 
that. ” This could mean that what should not be happening is, indeed, happening. It could also 
mean that the Building Inspector just hasn’t read the bylaw or ordinance. So don’t be too quick 
to accuse. Nonetheless, conﬂ icts do happen. You might need to appeal to a state Building Code 
Appeals Board or to the state Ethics Board. 
An ornery personality. Despite a career-long admiration for the steady hand that CEOs 
normally bring to the situation, just as you can occasionally run into a senior ofﬁ cer in the 
military, a school teacher, a doctor, or even (heaven forefend) a lawyer who takes his or her 
power too seriously, it can also happen in the world of CEOs. You may just have found someone 
who is really difﬁ cult. It happens. 
Advice. So what should you do when faced with a really stiff Building Inspector? Here are some tips: 
● 
 Be patient, and pay attention to details. 
● 
 Be prepared to come back again and again. 
● 
 Be nice each time you come, no matter how frustrating the situation may be and how heavy 
the pressure from management. 
● 
 Meet each objection, and decide what to do about unreasonable requests (you can safely, 
and you should, refuse a request for an RFI study or follow-up or condition). 

Getting to Know the Players 75
 5.4.2  Planning Boards 
 Planning Boards may be appointed or elected; however, the method of selection does not matter with 
respect to the type of person who generally serves on a Planning Board. Planning Boards are generally 
dominated by people who always wanted to be city planners, or people who are working their way 
through the system and may soon serve (or have just served) on the Finance Committee or Conservation 
Commission. They’re on their way to Selectman or Councilman. This Board often attracts architects and 
lawyers. You can pray that, in your case, it has attracted someone who is a civil engineer or excavator. 
 There is one thing about these people of which you can be certain. They are on the Planning Board 
because they like to  plan . They have a vision about what the town should look like in 20 years. They 
just live to control developers and people like you! 
 In my experience, you cannot predict the actions of a Planning Board. Sometimes they have members 
who are diehard environmentalists and sometimes they just look at the law — then they look at what you 
propose and say “ OK ” or  “ not OK. ” 
 Here’s the thing to watch for. A Planning Board may have only limited authority, such as site plan 
review. In the past, and perhaps in your state, this is just the power to  “ jawbone ” an applicant; for 
example, they may ask, but not demand, that you move the foundation. On the other hand, in your 
state, the Planning Board (or whatever may be the name of the board doing site plan review) may have 
the power to impose conditions. They may not have the power to grant or deny a permit, but they can 
do bad things to your aspirations in the form of conditions that may be attached to site plan review. 
A condition might be a maximum height, a certain setback, camouﬂ age, fencing, a requirement to 
plant a vegetative screen, and so forth. Be careful to distinguish conditions that just cost money from 
conditions that they may not realize are the equivalent of denying your permit. Explain the difference 
to the Board during the hearing, if you see such a condition arising in the discussion. 
 5.4.3  Zoning Boards 
 It is common in small towns for lawyers to serve on a Board of Appeals or Zoning Board in order to 
please the town fathers — and to pick up local real estate work. Some lawyers are motivated to become 
powers in town so they can get trust, estate, and divorce business. Such lawyers may have no inkling at 
all about what the issues are, but they are lawyers and therefore may be inclined to think they know it 
all. (In this respect, they can resemble engineers!) 
 The blessing about lawyers, engineers, and architects is that you can sometimes get them to read a 
statute, case, or at least a paragraph of a Federal Communications Commission (FCC) ruling. The pain 
administered by such people is that, when attempting to write a tight opinion (while not getting paid), 
they can be pretty sloppy with the facts. If some fact is misstated in the decision, sometimes you’ve just 
got to paper the ﬁ le (write a letter pointing out the factual error) and get on with life. This is exactly 
what you should do when they blow it, but yet you can live with their errors. 
 Yes, you could say that this person has a need to control others. You don’t want to tangle with a person 
who totally loves to control others. This person is not your friend.  Laissez-faire personalities do not 
take these posts! 

76 Chapter 5
 At some point, you may wish to rent a video of the movie  Pleasantville (1998, directed by Gary Ross). 
This will help you understand your inner turmoil as you go through the process. It is a movie where the 
protagonists don’t want to conform to the overwhelming sameness. 
Small town? The blessing of cities is that they may have professional planners and lawyers on 
staff. The blessing of small towns is that they sometimes (but not always) have small budgets and 
cannot afford to spend money on litigation or lawyers. But, watch out. You may run into some  “ free 
lawyering, ” at least on the advice and guidance side. Lawyers seldom volunteer to litigate free of 
charge. It is just too much work. 
 One other warning: Even if you believe that the town may be unable to afford litigation, some neighbor 
may undertake litigation to enforce a bylaw by ﬁ ling an appeal. This can be very troubling, because, 
under the American system, each side pays its own attorney’s fees. You are unlikely to recover the 
cost of defending a perfectly good Special Use Permit or Building Permit just because you prevail on 
appeal. On the other hand, a close reading of the state statutes may be in order, as there are sometimes 
opportunities to recover damages and attorney ’ s fees. 
 Nevada has such statutes:
 NRS 278.0233 Actions Against Agency: Conditions and Limitations. 
 GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 1. Any person who has any right, title or interest in real property, and who has ﬁ led with the 
appropriate state or local agency an application for a permit which is required by statute or an 
ordinance, resolution or regulation adopted pursuant to NRS 278.010 to 278.630, inclusive, 
before that person may improve, convey or otherwise put that property to use, may bring an 
action against the agency to recover actual damages caused by: 
 (a) Any ﬁ nal action, decision or order of the agency which imposes requirements, limitations or 
conditions upon the use of the property in excess of those authorized by ordinances, resolutions 
or regulations adopted pursuant to NRS 278.010 to 278.630, inclusive, in effect on the date the 
application was ﬁ led, and which: 
 (1) Is arbitrary or capricious; or 
 (2) Is unlawful or exceeds lawful authority. 
 (b) Any ﬁ nal action, decision or order of the agency imposing a tax, fee or other monetary 
charge that is not expressly authorized by statute or that is in excess of the amount expressly 
authorized by statute. 
 (c) The failure of the agency to act on that application within the time for that action as limited 
by statute, ordinance or regulation. 
 2. An action must not be brought under subsection 1: 
 (a) Where the agency did not know, or reasonably could not have known, that its action, 
decision or order was unlawful or in excess of its authority. 
 (b) Based on the invalidation of an ordinance, resolution or regulation in effect on the date the 
application for the permit was ﬁ led. 

Getting to Know the Players 77
 (c) Where a lawful action, decision or order of the agency is taken or made to prevent a 
condition which would constitute a threat to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the 
community. 
 (d) Where the applicant agrees in writing to extensions of time concerning his application. 
 (e) Where the applicant agrees in writing or orally on the record during a hearing to the 
requirements, limitations or conditions imposed by the action, decision or order, unless 
the applicant expressly states in writing or orally on the record during the hearing that a 
requirement, limitation or condition is agreed to under protest and speciﬁ es which paragraph of 
subsection 1 provides cause for the protest. 
 (f) For unintentional procedural or ministerial errors of the agency. 
 (g) Unless all administrative remedies have been exhausted. 
 (h) Against any individual member of the agency. 
NRS 278.0237 Actions Against Agency: Defenses; Attorney’s Fees, Court Costs and Interest; 
Remedy Cumulative. 
 GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 1. It is a complete defense to any action brought under NRS 278.0233 against a political 
subdivision of this State that the ﬁ nal action, decision or order complained of was required by 
federal or state law or by a regulation of a state agency which became effective after the date on 
which the application for a permit was ﬁ led. 
 2. The court may award reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs and interest to the prevailing 
party in an action brought under NRS 278.0233. 
 3. The remedy prescribed by NRS 278.0233 is in addition to any other remedy provided by law. 
 So, under a statute such as this, you cannot sue individual members of the Board that just denied your 
permit; therefore, it does no good to threaten them individually. But, you can sue the city or town. This 
gives you things to talk about. 
 5.4.4  Municipal Counsel 
 Somewhere there is a lawyer for the city or town. This person may be an employee of the municipality 
or the county or the ﬁ rm may be private and hired on an annual retainer. This person may be called the 
Town Counsel, City Attorney, County Attorney, or perhaps even District Attorney. Being the sort of 
take-charge person that you are, you may be tempted to phone such a person. Bad mistake. 
 First, this person is probably more familiar with the laws than you are. If not, this person is still a 
lawyer and you are not. He or she has the upper hand. 
 Second, this person is an advocate for the municipality, not a judge. You may start thinking:  “ Why 
doesn’t he see my side of the picture? ”  The answer is that this person is listening carefully to what you 
say. If you have disobeyed this advice, called directly and gotten through (we’ll discuss that in a minute), 
you may be telling the Town Counsel why the town is screwing you improperly. In other words, by 
complaining early, you may be teaching the attorney for the town how to screw you properly. Dumb idea. 

78 Chapter 5
 Why is it that this person may not even take your call? If the City Attorney is a private lawyer, the 
city is likely paying for every phone call that this person takes. So, the City Attorney may be under 
instructions to never take calls from the public, as calls from the public could just eat up the municipal 
budget. If the City Attorney is a city employee and working in the law department, you may have a 
better chance of getting through, but the City Attorney still doesn’t want to talk to the public, just his 
or her usual clients (city employees who are authorized to call the law department). The City Attorney 
will, however, usually take a call from  your attorney, in the hope of avoiding expensive litigation. So 
heed this advice: Let the lawyers talk to each other, and speak to the city’s lawyer only through your 
lawyer. 
 Here is just one example of why you should not talk to the City Attorney. Let’s say you call and 
complain that the City Planner is requiring you to apply for a Variance, when you know that you’ll 
never get one. It is only natural for the City Attorney to say:  “ I’m sure that the City Planner knows 
what he’s doing. Apply for a Variance. ” You are now getting legal advice from someone who is clearly 
not your advocate. If you had hired your own attorney, you would have gotten independent guidance 
as to what the law requires in this situation. Your attorney may be quite ready to say:  “ That isn’t right. 
The requirement for a Variance is preempted by federal law. ” But, you’ll never know that unless you 
hire your own attorney. 
 As an engineer, you may be quite comfortable with the idea that you are the smartest guy in the room, 
but this doesn’t make you a lawyer. Remember, every lawyer has had at least four years of college and 
three years of law school. And, at the very least, you haven’t been to law school. 
 Walter Reuther, then president of the United Auto Workers, when speaking about labor negotiations 
used to say: “ If you can’t afford to get up from the table, you have no right to sit down at the table. ” For 
your purposes, this means that if you cannot afford to defend a successful grant of required permits or 
appeal a failure to obtain necessary permits, you’ve presented yourself with a real risk.  ’ Tis a sad fact 
of life, but ﬁ nances could determine the outcome of a tussle that may develop. There — you’ve been 
warned. 
 So what’s the take-away message? Careful work on the front end of the project can shorten the time 
required and sweeten the outcome. 

79
 Selected Applicable Law 
 This chapter summarizes some of the laws that you and your attorney will be dealing with in your 
tower-permitting adventure. Please forgive any duplications from earlier chapters, but it seemed 
appropriate to put as much as possible in one place for easy reference. Also, please forgive the fact that 
some topics not fully addressed in detail here include the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement, birds, 
historic preservation, consulting with Indian religious sites (because other publications exist especially 
devoted to those topics, including those readily available from government sources and the NAB 
Bookstore), and wetlands (because wetlands laws vary dramatically not only by state but also by city 
or town). 
 6.1   Covenant not to Complain or Compete 
 Occasionally, you may ﬁ nd a situation comparable to one I found in Maine, where I am an owner of a 
commercial tower. I bought 25 acres out of a 40-acre plot. The owner was going to remain in a house 
on the 15 remaining acres he kept. What I did not want was for the owner, or more likely a subsequent 
owner, to become an enemy of the tower. So, I drafted the following covenant, which he signed in 
order to complete the deal. This may be a rare occurrence, but I’ve used it twice:
  Grantor understands and agrees that Grantee intends to use the premises herein conveyed 
for communications, which may involve the construction and use of one or more towers, 
communications equipment buildings, satellite dishes, and related structures, as well as 
equipment for both receiving and transmitting. Grantor, his heirs, and assigns hereby consent 
to and waive any objections to the lawful construction and use of such facilities, as well as 
radio and television reception and transmission. Grantor, his heirs, and assigns further agree 
to not permit the construction of a communications tower or any other communications-
related commercial use, including, but not limited to, competing radio and television use, on 
the remainder of the Grantor’s land or any other land in [name of town] now owned by or 
controlled by Grantor, or any afﬁ liated entity or individual(s). 
 6.2   Preemption in the OTARD Rule 
 Direct broadcast satellite (DBS), multichannel multipoint distribution service (MMDS), and television 
broadcast antennas are covered in the Over-the-Air Reception Devices (OTARD) Rule (47 CFR 
CHAPTER 6 

80 Chapter 6
§1.4000). Unlike other preemptions, 47 CFR §1.4000 is intended to occupy the ﬁ eld. An offending 
regulation is  “ prohibited. ” This means that if the regulation you face is covered by this rule and does 
not fall into one of the exceptions listed in (b)(1 – 3) below, it is not valid. In effect, you may ignore it. 
 This rule is very helpful for TV broadcast service reception, small-dish satellite TV reception, wireless 
Internet service providers (WISPs), multipoint distribution service (MDS), MMDS, Instructional 
Television Fixed Service (ITFS), and other ﬁ xed wireless signals, such as wireless alarm antennas. 
One little-noticed provision is that antenna masts no higher than 12 feet above the roof line, if erected 
for the purposes of this rule, are essentially exempt from local rules. If the ridge pole, or roof, of a 
building is at a somewhat standard height of a three-story building or 36 feet, for example, and you 
want to go less than 12 feet higher than that, for a total of almost 48 feet, and the use falls into one of 
the permitted categories, have fun! Also, be sure to pay attention to the “reasonable fee” requirement of 
(a)(4) below. Here’s the full text: 
   CHAPTER I —FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION 
 Subpart S — Preemption of Restrictions That  “ Impair ” the Ability to Receive Television Broadcast 
Signals, Direct Broadcast Satellite Services, or Multichannel Multipoint Distribution Services or 
the Ability to Receive or Transmit Fixed Wireless Communications Signals 
 47 CFR 1.4000 Restrictions impairing reception of television broadcast signals, direct broadcast 
satellite services, or multichannel multipoint distribution services. 
 (a)(1) Any restriction, including but not limited to any state or local law or regulation, including 
zoning, land-use, or building regulations, or any private covenant, contract provision, lease 
provision, homeowners ’ association rule or similar restriction, on property within the exclusive 
use or control of the antenna user where the user has a direct or indirect ownership or leasehold 
interest in the property that impairs the installation, maintenance, or use of: 
 (i) An antenna that is: 
 (A) Used to receive direct broadcast satellite service, including direct-to-home satellite service, 
or to receive or transmit ﬁ xed wireless signals via satellite, and 
 (B) One meter or less in diameter or is located in Alaska; 
 (ii) An antenna that is: 
 (A) Used to receive video programming services via multipoint distribution services, including 
multichannel multipoint distribution services, instructional television ﬁ xed services, and local 
multipoint distribution services, or to receive or transmit ﬁ xed wireless signals other than via 
satellite, and 
 (B) That is one meter or less in diameter or diagonal measurement; 
 (iii) An antenna that is used to receive television broadcast signals; or 
 (iv) A mast supporting an antenna described in paragraphs (a)(1)(i), (a)(1)(ii), or (a)(1)(iii) of 
this section is prohibited to the extent it so impairs, subject to paragraph (b) of this section. 
 (2) For purposes of this section,  “ ﬁ xed wireless signals ” means any commercial non-broadcast 
communications signals transmitted via wireless technology to and/or from a ﬁ xed customer 
location. Fixed wireless signals do not include, among other things, AM radio, FM radio, 
amateur ( “ HAM ” ) radio, Citizen’s Band (CB) radio, and Digital Audio Radio Service (DARS) 
signals.

Selected Applicable Law 81
 (3) For purposes of this section, a law, regulation, or restriction impairs installation, 
maintenance, or use of an antenna if it: 
 (i) Unreasonably delays or prevents installation, maintenance, or use; 
 (ii) Unreasonably increases the cost of installation, maintenance, or use; or 
 (iii) Precludes reception or transmission of an acceptable quality signal. 
   (4) Any fee or cost imposed on a user by a rule, law, regulation or restriction must be reasonable 
in light of the cost of the equipment or services and the rule, law, regulation or restriction’s 
treatment of comparable devices. No civil, criminal, administrative, or other legal action of 
any kind shall be taken to enforce any restriction or regulation prohibited by this section 
except pursuant to paragraph (d) or (e) of this section. In addition, except with respect to 
restrictions pertaining to safety and historic preservation as described in paragraph (b) of 
this section, if a proceeding is initiated pursuant to paragraph (d) or (e) of this section, the 
entity seeking to enforce the antenna restrictions in question must suspend all enforcement 
efforts pending completion of review. No attorney’s fees shall be collected or assessed and 
no ﬁ ne or other penalties shall accrue against an antenna user while a proceeding is pending 
to determine the validity of any restriction. If a ruling is issued adverse to a user, the user shall 
be granted at least a 21-day grace period in which to comply with the adverse ruling; and 
neither a ﬁ ne nor a penalty may be collected from the user if the user complies with the adverse 
ruling during this grace period, unless the proponent of the restriction demonstrates, in the 
same proceeding which resulted in the adverse ruling, that the user’s claim in the proceeding 
was frivolous. 
 (b) Any restriction otherwise prohibited by paragraph (a) of this section is permitted if: 
 (1) It is necessary to accomplish a clearly deﬁ ned, legitimate safety objective that is either 
stated in the text, preamble, or legislative history of the restriction or described as applying to 
that restriction in a document that is readily available to antenna users, and would be applied 
to the extent practicable in a non-discriminatory manner to other appurtenances, devices, or 
ﬁ xtures that are comparable in size and weight and pose a similar or greater safety risk as these 
antennas and to which local regulation would normally apply; or 
 (2) It is necessary to preserve a prehistoric or historic district, site, building, structure or object 
included in, or eligible for inclusion on, the National Register of Historic Places, as set forth 
in the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, 16 U.S.C. 470, and imposes 
no greater restrictions on antennas covered by this rule than are imposed on the installation, 
maintenance, or use of other modern appurtenances, devices, or ﬁ xtures that are comparable in 
size, weight, and appearance to these antennas; and 
 (3) It is no more burdensome to affected antenna users than is necessary to achieve the 
objectives described in paragraphs (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section. 
 (c) In the case of an antenna that is used to transmit ﬁ xed wireless signals, the provisions of this 
section shall apply only if a label is afﬁ xed to the antenna that: 
 (1) Provides adequate notice regarding potential radiofrequency safety hazards, e.g., 
information regarding the safe minimum separation distance required between users and 
transceiver antennas; and 
 (2) References the applicable FCC-adopted limits for radiofrequency exposure speciﬁ ed in 
§1.1310 of this chapter. 

82 Chapter 6
 (d) Local governments or associations may apply to the Commission for a waiver of this section 
under §1.3 of this chapter. Waiver requests must comply with the procedures in paragraphs (f) 
and (h) of this section and will be put on public notice. The Commission may grant a waiver 
upon a showing by the applicant of local concerns of a highly specialized or unusual nature. 
No petition for waiver shall be considered unless it speciﬁ es the restriction at issue. Waivers 
granted in accordance with this section shall not apply to restrictions amended or enacted after 
the waiver is granted. Any responsive pleadings must be served on all parties and ﬁ led within 30 
days after release of a public notice that such petition has been ﬁ led. Any replies must be ﬁ led 
within 15 days thereafter. 
 (e) Parties may petition the Commission for a declaratory ruling under §1.2 of this chapter, or 
a court of competent jurisdiction, to determine whether a particular restriction is permissible or 
prohibited under this section. Petitions to the Commission must comply with the procedures in 
paragraphs (f) and (h) of this section and will be put on public notice. Any responsive pleadings 
in a Commission proceeding must be served on all parties and ﬁ led within 30 days after release 
of a public notice that such petition has been ﬁ led. Any replies in a Commission proceeding 
must be served on all parties and ﬁ led within 15 days thereafter. 
 (f) Copies of petitions for declaratory rulings and waivers must be served on interested parties, 
including parties against whom the petitioner seeks to enforce the restriction or parties whose 
restrictions the petitioner seeks to prohibit. A certiﬁ cate of service stating on whom the petition 
was served must be ﬁ led with the petition. In addition, in a Commission proceeding brought 
by an association or a local government, constructive notice of the proceeding must be given 
to members of the association or to the citizens under the local government’s jurisdiction. In 
a court proceeding brought by an association, an association must give constructive notice of 
the proceeding to its members. Where constructive notice is required, the petitioner or plaintiff 
must ﬁ le with the Commission or the court overseeing the proceeding a copy of the constructive 
notice with a statement explaining where the notice was placed and why such placement was 
reasonable. 
 (g) In any proceeding regarding the scope or interpretation of any provision of this section, 
the burden of demonstrating that a particular governmental or nongovernmental restriction 
complies with this section and does not impair the installation, maintenance, or use of devices 
used for over-the-air reception of video programming services or devices used to receive or 
transmit ﬁ xed wireless signals shall be on the party that seeks to impose or maintain the 
restriction. 
 (h) All allegations of fact contained in petitions and related pleadings before the Commission 
must be supported by afﬁ davit of a person or persons with actual knowledge thereof. An 
original and two copies of all petitions and pleadings should be addressed to the Secretary, 
Federal Communications Commission, 445 12th Street, SW, Washington, D.C. 20554. Copies 
of the petitions and related pleadings will be available for public inspection in the Reference 
Information Center, Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau, Federal Communications 
Commission, 445 12th Street, SW, Washington, D.C. 20554. Copies will be available for 
purchase from the Commission’s contract copy center, and the Commission decisions will be 
available on the Internet. 
 An excellent Information Sheet on the OTARD rule assembled by FCC staff may be found at  http://
www.fcc.gov/mb/facts/otard.html . The Information Sheet also contains a number of useful links 
to existing FCC decisions that are very enlightening. Cities and condominium associations that are 

Selected Applicable Law 83
frequently joined by the Community Associations Institute (CAI) may hate this rule, but it is likely 
that readers of this book will love it. This is the rule that allowed Continental Airlines to provide a 
Wi-Fi hotspot within the premises of its  “ President’s Club ” frequent ﬂ yer lounge at Boston – Logan 
International Airport despite litigation by the airport. If this subject particularly interests you, be sure 
to read the Order on Petitions for Reconsideration (and other matters) at  http://www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/
Cable/Orders/1999/fcc99360.doc . 
 For the convenience of readers, the full text printed here may be found on the CD, ﬁ lename FCC 
OTARD Rule.pdf. 
 6.3  Common Covenants and Restrictions 
 Common covenants and restrictions (CC & Rs) are normally associated with the purchase of a home or 
condominium controlled by a homeowners ’ association. Nonetheless, for business purposes, you may 
be forced to consider the purchase or rental of an “ ofﬁ ce condo ” or a building in an industrial park that 
may have CC & Rs. Think carefully. Walk away if you can. 
 If you just can’t walk away, here are some strategies. Unless you fall into an exception such as the 
OTARD rule, federal law is not easily going to help you. It may help, but it may well require litigation. 
Let’s assume that you have also discovered that state law is unlikely to help you and get into some 
serious discussion for people who are determined to go ahead anyway. Here are some tips. 
 6.3.1  Retain a Lawyer Early 
 In all likelihood, you are going to pay a lawyer to represent you in closing on the building or 
negotiating the lease. So why not hire that lawyer a few months earlier to obtain advice on state law 
and local zoning, as well as trying in advance to avoid the impact of CC & Rs? It is a good idea. And, 
remember, just because you feel comfortable with the CC & R situation does not mean that you’ve 
passed through the zoning hoop. You may need both. In parts of Texas, there may be no zoning — but 
there may be CC & Rs that will make the erection of your necessary antenna system impossible. In parts 
of Michigan there may be no CC & Rs, but difﬁ cult zoning issues. In parts of Pennsylvania, you may 
have both. Ask your lawyer to look over the entire scene. 
 6.3.2  Obtain the CC & Rs Before You Agree to Buy 
 Here is the system used by John T. Langdon of Texas: 
 Search for property that meets your location and terrain needs. When you ﬁ nd a possible piece, ask 
the real estate agent to fax you the CC & Rs. If they make reference to antennas or approvals by an 
architectural control committee (ACC) or a property owners ’ association (POA), move on to the 
next property. If it is a new property, or is yet to be built, where the developer still owns the house or 
building and land (and  is the ACC), and can grant Variances and/or approvals to the CC & Rs, seek 
and obtain such approval. Make sure that you include language ensuring that this approval cannot be 
withdrawn or modiﬁ ed by a future ACC or homeowners ’ association (HOA), and include a drawing of 
the proposed tower. All this becomes a contingency in a formal offer on the property. 

84 Chapter 6
 If there is no reference to approvals, then go down to the courthouse and get the Declaration yourself 
to make sure the agent didn’t fax you the stuff on Horse Apple Industrial Park Phase IV, instead of 
Phase V, etc. 
 Sometimes there will be a different ﬁ ling for  “ Bozo Acres ” Phase 9 than for Phases 1 to 8. I heard 
a story about a particular development that had failed to ﬁ le anything for  “ Phase 9. ” The sellers, the 
HOA, and the realtors all assumed the Declaration was the same as the other parts of the development, 
but in fact there were no restrictions at all for that section! Sometimes it really pays to do your 
homework. 
 When you are satisﬁ ed, then look into whether or not a Building Permit is required for a tower and how 
successful others have been at getting a Tower Permit actually issued in that municipality or county. 
 If you must buy property with an ACC and/or anti-antenna CC & Rs, get a good broadband connection 
and begin planning your remote antenna site, starting with the property search above. 
 Sometimes you just get lucky. Here’s a story told by radio ham Larry Burke, WI5A: 
 This is nearly exactly the situation I found myself in when I bought the property my house sits on 
today. The owner had four adjacent parcels of land, roughly 3/4 acre each. One of the four was 
already sold when I was shopping for the land. Prior to my purchase, the real estate agent provided 
me with the  “ deed restrictions ” for my lot. I checked the county courthouse .  .  . nothing was ﬁ led. 
Bought the lot, built my stuff .  .  . house, towers and all. 
 The seller and his lawyer later conceded that my lot, indeed, had no restrictions since they had 
neglected to ﬁ le them at the courthouse. They promptly ﬁ led them afterwards. Now the remaining 
two have restrictions! 
 In any event, here’s an especially dangerous, but non-obvious deed restriction to beware of:  “ engaging 
in any loud, noxious, or offensive activities that disturb the peace and quiet ” of other owners or tenants. 
The problem here is that the federal government has completely preempted the ﬁ eld of television 
interference (TVI) or radiofrequency interference (RFI), but preemption may not be a valid defense in 
state court to a complaint by an adjacent owner or occupant under the CC & Rs.
 6.3.3  Make a Contingent Offer 
 Sometimes you’ve just got to ask! But, before you just try ﬁ lling in the blanks in the following 
document yourself, remember the prior instruction and hire a lawyer early. The problem with a layman 
using the following form is determining whether or not the signer is authorized to sign it and thereby 
bind the POA or ACC. 
 Let’s repeat that. The question of whether or not the developer, in the absence of a property owners ’ 
association, can act as the agent for other owners in the building or subdivision is a question of fact 
that must be proven at trial. You’ll probably want a really good recitation of facts in the developer’s 
authorization, especially if the authorization appears to ﬂ y in the face of the express wording of the 
covenants. If you don’t understand this paragraph, this is even more proof that you should be using a 
lawyer early on. 

Selected Applicable Law 85
 Here’s some more wisdom from Jim O’Connell, Esq., of the Illinois Bar, referring to a contract add-on 
for CC & Rs in new construction: 
 Here’s my contract add-on for new construction in  “ builder as developer ”  CC & R situations. Where the 
builder/developer is involved, they’re often agreeable to exempting your antenna tower from the archi-
tectural approval process during the initial phase of sales. The real estate purchase and sale add-on 
language requires the developer to grant permission as a condition to selling you the lot or building. 
 As for existing covenants in a developed area, my recommendation is to tell your real estate agent that 
you’re not interested. If you’ve already purchased and just discovered the CC & Rs that prohibit any 
outside antenna, ﬁ nd another real estate agent and move on. I hate listening to someone complaining 
about an attorney’s fee to deal with the lawsuit seeking to remove the antenna support structure. 
 Remember, in most states, if you’re subject to CC & Rs, any other property owner subject to the same 
restrictions can sue you to remove the antenna. Most such restrictions provide that the owner in viola-
tion must pay attorney’s fees to the winner of the lawsuit. 
 Spend a few bucks on a lawyer  before you make that offer! 
 Here’s a contract (offer to purchase) add-on to help protect your desire to erect an antenna when you 
make an offer. This version is useful when you’re dealing with the builder/developer of a new ofﬁ ce 
park. Often, the builder controls the property owners ’ association or the architectural committee until 
all or most of the lots are sold, or retain approval rights forever. Getting the necessary approvals as a 
condition of your offer to purchase is key to your success. Mind the caution at the end!!
  Addendum to offer to purchase between 
 __________________________________, Buyers, and _________________________________, 
 Sellers, for the purchase of the property at 
 ___________________________________________________. 
 A. Buyer has informed Seller that Buyer is an FCC- licensed [broadcaster, WISP, etc.], and 
Seller warrants that no covenants, conditions, restrictions of record, architectural committee 
or property owner association rules or regulations presently exist or will be recorded prior to 
closing that would or that may be construed to restrict or prohibit Buyer, from and after closing 
and delivery of the premises, from installing and maintaining an outdoor antenna system with 
supporting structure not less than ________ feet in height on the property. Seller further agrees 
that no such covenants, conditions or restrictions of record affecting the subject property will 
be imposed by Seller or his transferees or assigns in any plat of subdivision or Planned Unit 
Development agreement recorded prior to closing. 
 B. Seller agrees to provide Buyer, within fourteen (14) days of the signing of this agreement, and 
again ten (10) days prior to closing, with a copy of the recorded plat of subdivision and all other 
documents showing all covenants, conditions or restrictions of record, homeowner association 
rules or regulations running with the land or affecting the property. Should such covenants, 
conditions, restrictions of record, property owner association rules or regulations exist on either 
date such that Buyer’s installation of the aforementioned antenna(s) and support structure may 
be inhibited or precluded, then at Buyer’s option this contract may be deemed null and void, all 
obligations of both parties cancelled, and all deposits refunded promptly. 

86 Chapter 6
 C. Seller further agrees that, that to the extent Seller is the owner of property located within 
300 feet of the subject property, Seller will provide Buyer with a statement that Seller, as owner of 
adjacent properties, has no objection to the granting of a building permit for an antenna support 
structure, and antenna system, by the local municipality or appropriate governmental body. 
 D. Seller also agrees, to the extent that Seller controls any Architectural Committee, Property 
Owners Association or similar committee from which permission is required for installation of 
Buyer’s antenna(s) and support structures, that Seller will grant or cause to be promptly granted 
such permission upon application by Buyer. 
 The promises and covenants by the Seller contained in Paragraphs A through D hereof shall 
survive the closing of this transaction, notwithstanding the delivery of the deed by Seller. 
 ___________________________________________________ 
 Buyers 
 ___________________________________________________ 
 Sellers 
 Dated: _______________, 2009 
 (CAUTION: This document was prepared in consideration of the laws of the State of Illinois. Real 
estate law varies among the states, and you should consult an attorney prior to entering into any 
real estate transaction. If you screw it up, you’ll have only yourself to blame.) 
 James C. O’Connell, W9WU, Attorney at Law        
 See ﬁ lename Addendum to Real-Estate Offer-CC & R.doc on the CD. 
 Why would a developer agree to allow a broadcaster or WISP to be exempt from the CC & Rs that 
control others? There are several scenarios: 
● 
 The developer has put a lot of money into preparing the development — in legal fees, land 
clearing, roads, sewers, and so forth — and really,  really needs some income fast. 
● 
 The developer never really gave any thought to the question of antenna systems, and the 
offending clause was put there when the lawyer for the development copied it in from a 
standard form. With sufﬁ cient lot size and tree cover, the clause is really irrelevant. 
● 
 The developer has sold most of the lots and built most of the buildings and is down to the last 
few. Conﬁ dent that these last remaining lots can be sold with or without such protection, the 
developer no longer cares. 
 6.3.4  Prepare to Erect Fast 
 If you’ve managed to obtain permission from the developer while he comprises the entire property 
owners ’ association or architectural control committee, build fast. He could sell the last lot and be 
gone next month, leaving you in the hands of a new POA or ACC. For this reason, you want a local 
attorney to be sure that your waiver will last beyond the developer’s departure. Building fast adds to 
your legal posture. It could, for example, prevent a later purchaser from bringing suit — on the grounds 

Selected Applicable Law 87
he knew when he bought that your antenna system was there. To prove when your antenna system was 
built, take dated photos, get a Certiﬁ cate of Use or a Certiﬁ cate of Completion from the local Building 
Inspector, and do whatever it takes to prove that your antenna system was up before the potential 
complainant bought in. Other ideas: Take a photo of young children standing next to your structure 
(you can introduce a child later as evidence). Write the date of the pour into the concrete.  
 6.3.5  Notice of Violation Received 
 Against the advice you received, you bought a lot or building with CC & Rs. Now you’ve received a 
nasty letter from someone who seeks to enforce a common covenant or from the POA. 
● 
 Look hard at the deﬁ nitions to see if your antenna system is included. Look at the deﬁ nition of 
 “ structure ” (and hope that it talks about habitable space). Look at the deﬁ nition of ﬁ xture (and 
hope that it talks about something attached to an outside wall). 
● 
 Figure out if you have received the letter because you didn’t ﬁ rst apply to the architectural 
control committee or because you have violated a speciﬁ c rule. If the covenant requires 
you to apply to the ACC, but there is no ACC anymore (it happens, sometimes because the 
development has been built out), ask your lawyer if  “ impossibility of performance ” would be 
a defense in your situation. 
 Despite stern warning from wiser heads, there will always be people who, for one reason or another, 
ﬁ nd themselves occupying land with CC & Rs. For that situation, here is Attorney Phil Kane’s approach. 
This was a situation where the POA’s counsel had threatened sanctions against the occupant after 
forcing compliance with a CC & R rule regarding antenna visibility (see ﬁ lename POA Counsel Letter.
doc on the CD).
  Dear Property Owners ’ Association Counsel: 
 My client intends to abide by all reasonable provisions of the recorded Covenants, Conditions, 
and Restrictions ( “ CC & Rs ” ) and By-Laws of the POA. 
 My client retains the right to erect any and all antennas that do not violate CC & R §[XYZ] by 
being  “ visible to the public view ” with the understanding that this is interpreted in terms of the 
reasonable observer using reasonable means to make the observation from a place where the 
observer has a right to be without requesting permission from my client to be there. 
 My client retains the right to operate licensed radio transmitter(s) in accordance with the terms of 
valid and current FCC license(s), as well as applicable statutes and regulations. Said operation will, 
by virtue of holding a current license therefor, be presumed to be in the public interest, convenience, 
and necessity absent a speciﬁ c ruling to the contrary from the Federal Communications Commission 
( “ FCC ” ) [see 47 USC §309(a)] and will be presumed to be in compliance with all FCC rules and 
regulations absent a speciﬁ c determination to the contrary by the FCC. 
 My client will handle issues of unwanted interference caused by improper technical operation 
of my client’s equipment by bearing the responsibility to take the required steps to bring 
equipment into compliance with FCC regulations, and will cease operations while it is in 

88 Chapter 6
noncompliance, with the exception of reasonable tests to determine the effectiveness of 
attempted adjustments, repairs, or remedial measures. 
 If unwanted reception is caused by conditions beyond my client’s control, my client will assume 
the obligation to reasonably cooperate with the affected party or parties to determine how 
to prevent such unwanted reception and to make a reasonable number of tests to assist the 
affected party or parties in determining the effectiveness of any remedial measures, but please 
note that there is no obligation to, and will my client not attempt to, repair or replace any 
home entertainment or other electronic equipment of the affected party or parties, especially 
equipment which may be subject to FCC Part 15 rules, nor is my client obligated to cease 
operations that are in compliance with FCC regulations and technical standards. 
 We will regard any unilateral attempts by [the Landlord or the Association] to impose 
restrictions on radio operations, beyond the parameters outlined above, as unreasonable 
and an interference with my client’s own  “ right of quiet enjoyment and use ” of the property, 
especially where the correction of the problem is in the hands of the complainant. We are 
prepared to secure and defend those rights as necessary. 
 We trust that the situation will not come to that point. As you stated in your letter,  “ I am hopeful 
that this matter has been resolved and no further action will be necessary. ” I echo that stance. 
 Sincerely, 
 [Name of Attorney], 
 Attorney for [Client] 
 As usual, use of the above approach is on the basis of  “ your mileage may vary. ” Phil Kane, a former 
FCC staffer himself, wishes everyone success! 
 Once court papers (a complaint) have actually been ﬁ led, the defense must begin. Find the right lawyer. 
This is litigation and there are many lawyers who simply do not do it — just as there are many doctors 
who do not do surgery. Investigate the possibility of asking your title insurance company to defend 
you. There is also no harm in asking your property owner’s insurance company to defend you. 
 Let’s examine lines of argument against enforcement of a covenant or restraint. A special thanks to Sid 
Leach, Esq., based in Houston, TX, where he practices with a large multi-state general practice law 
ﬁ rm and whose article  “ Federal Preemption of Deed Restrictions ” ( DX Magazine , May/June 1993, 
pp. 36 – 40) developed some of these theories. Chris Imlay, Esq., General Counsel, SBE, also 
contributed to this section. 
 6.3.6  Federal Law Prohibits Enforcement of this CC & R 
Shelley v. Kraemer , 334 U.S. 1 (1948), held that a restrictive covenant  “ against the occupancy as 
owners or tenants of any portion of said property for resident or other purpose by people of the Negro 
or Mongolian Race ” could not be enforced in a state court. That famous case stands for the principle 
that a restriction against public policy will not be enforced by the courts. A federal preemption, it can 
be argued, is a clear public policy. Thus, a court is still free to ﬁ nd that a deed restriction is against 
public policy. 

Selected Applicable Law 89
 6.3.7  State Law May Prohibit Enforcement of this CC & R 
 You can never tell what an inventive lawyer might ﬁ nd in your state in the way of a phrase in the state 
constitution or a statute that could prove useful in battling a CC & R. In addition, common law does not 
favor restrictions on land, and all ambiguities in restrictions are read against the drafter. 
 6.3.8  As a Matter of Equity, the Court Should not Enforce the Covenant 
 A court need not enforce a deed restriction that would result in an inequity. Before considering any 
of the following defenses to a complaint, however, the property owner (or tenant) must recall perhaps 
the most famous of all equity maxims:  “ He who comes into equity must do so with clean hands. ” So it 
helps if you never knew about the restriction you are now accused of violating or if you can show that 
the covenant was effectively terminated before you bought the land. An inequity results in cases of one 
or more of the following: 
● 
 Harm exceeding beneﬁ t — Enforcing the covenant would be unreasonable because the 
resulting harm to the homeowner is greater than the beneﬁ t produced. You can claim that 
the harm is to emergency communications and the beneﬁ t is ephemeral, especially where 
the outdoor antenna is hardly visible (for example, a panel antenna painted to match the wall 
on which it is mounted) or visible only when in use (a retractable structure). See Katzman v. 
Anderson, 359   Pa.438, 59  A.2d 85 (Pa. 1948). 
● 
 Acquiescence — The CC & Rs are not being enforced against other antennas in the development 
(for example, CB radio, VHF mobile radio, weather satellite dishes). However, just as 
a warning, failure to complain about rooftop TV antennas was not sufﬁ cient to estop a 
complaint about a 40-foot tall freestanding CB radio antenna. See Reed v. Williamson , 164 
Neb. 99, 82  N.W. 2d 18 (1957). 
● 
 Abandonment — Some lots (usually subsequent lots) are sold subject to the covenants and 
others are not. 
● 
 Laches — Deed restriction enforcement is delayed. 
● 
 Estoppel — The beneﬁ ted party (in a practical sense, the developer) led you to believe that the 
CC & Rs would not be enforced against you with respect to an antenna system and you relied 
upon such a representation. Try to ﬁ nd something in writing that led you to believe that the 
covenant against antennas would not be enforced. 
● 
 Changed conditions — The owner or tenant would have to claim that the character of the 
development has changed so much that it is impossible that enforcement of a restriction will 
yield the beneﬁ t of the restriction. Such a circumstance is likely to be rare.  
● 
 Clean hands (the other guy’s) — A rewrite of  “ He who comes into equity must do so with 
clean hands ” is  “ People who live in glass houses shouldn’t throw stones. ” A court is not 
required to grant a decree in equity (brieﬂ y, a civil proceeding where someone seeks a court 
order, not money damages). Read  all of your property owner rules and regulations, in the hope 
that you will ﬁ nd one that the complaining neighbor has violated. If the neighbor who seeks to 

90 Chapter 6
enforce a covenant against you built an illegal loading dock or contravenes some other rule (a 
setback?), learn everything you can about that violation. You can ﬁ le against him and you can 
defend with the facts. The ﬁ rst strategy (ﬁ le against him) may give him a reason to back off. 
The second strategy (claiming unclean hands) may give the judge a reason to back off. You 
never know. 
 6.4  Local Zoning Bylaws and Ordinances 
 The local law that applies to you is the local law. It is  not any of the following: 
● 
 What the real estate agent told you 
● 
 What the homeowner now trying to sell you the house told you 
● 
 What the counter clerk said when you dropped by Town Hall to inquire 
● 
 What the Building Inspector told you, unless he or she looked it up almost right then 
● 
 What another business in town told you, including a two-way radio dealer 
● 
 What another business or two-way radio dealer in a neighboring town told you 
 Got that? The local law is only what the local law says during your Building Permit (and if necessary, 
Special Permit) application process. You wouldn’t be the ﬁ rst company to buy a property and then 
apply for a Tower Permit, only to discover that the bylaw or ordinance is changing before your very 
eyes, with the passage of a new or modiﬁ ed  “ Wireless Communications Facilities ” ordinance. So, once 
you embark on the process of buying or renting, acquire the entire local bylaw (all of it, not just a 
photocopy of what a clerk tells you is the relevant section) and start your subscription to the local paper 
(reading the legal notices to see if some Board is proposing a change that will affect your ability to 
erect an antenna-support structure). 
 6.4.1  Vested Rights 
 If, during the course of your research, interviews, and reading of the local newspaper, you discover that 
the local bylaw is about to be changed, then you may decide that the time has come to scramble. Get 
that application in right away. If some portion of the process has begun, then you may need to know 
how to  “ freeze ” the bylaw so that you may obtain a permit for a structure that may not be possible to 
obtain later, or which may be horribly more expensive later. Freezing the bylaw can usually be done 
two ways:  plan freezes and  non-plan freezes . 
 With a plan freeze, sometimes known as an  ANR freeze (from the phrase  “ approval not required ” ), you 
submit a plan of some sort — to subdivide your property in some way (don’t worry; you’ll still own it 
all). Plan freezes involve a highly specialized area of law and you will need the aid of a local real estate 
attorney, as well as a surveyor. 
 For non-plan freezes, your rights may  “ vest ” as a result of your actions. There are many things you can 
do to help yourself create vested rights, and you should start doing them immediately. Your state may 

Selected Applicable Law 91
have a statutory non-plan freeze if you should obtain the Building Permit and start building but do not 
ﬁ nish before the new bylaw takes effect. Your state may also allow a common-law non-plan freeze. 
Here are a variety of facts that help applicants claim common-law vested rights: 
● 
 An applicant can put himself in a position to apply before the effective date of the zoning 
change. So don’t grant the seller a delay of the closing on your parcel. Also, make sure you 
have all application requirements on hand — including a plot plan and construction plans for 
the structure. 
● 
 An applicant can submit as complete an application as possible, as soon as possible.  
● 
 An applicant can engage in site preparations that exceed the  barely begun threshold. This 
probably means that pounding stakes into the ground to show the approximate position and 
laying out string is not enough . However, surveying, land clearing, and obtaining delivery 
of construction materials (rebar, sand, gravel), plus tower lattice sections, guy anchors, and 
antennas could be useful. 
● 
 An applicant can incur and keep track of substantial expenses, such as paying for surveying, 
land clearing, construction materials, parts, and so forth. If there are required preliminary 
steps (the prerequisites for issuance) under the present bylaw, you should diligently pursue 
approvals required from the Highway Department, the police, the Fire Department, the Health 
Department, the Conservation Commission, and so forth. 
● 
 An applicant can keep track of any actions by the town that could later be considered 
acts of bad faith, such as requiring submission of additional information not required of 
other applicants, losing papers previously submitted, or mysterious delays in site plan 
approval. 
● 
 An applicant can demand issuance of the permit as of right (and document the demand!) 
before the zoning change becomes effective. A court may consider it critical that the Building 
Commissioner had the authority to issue a Building Permit before the new bylaw became 
effective, especially if the issuance of the permit should have been a ministerial act. 
 These are all actions that can lead to the creation of vested rights. For a very good discussion of the 
common law of vested rights or non-plan freezes, interestingly enough with respect to a 460-foot tall 
commercial tower, see  Franks v. DiRico , MA Superior Court, August 26, 1997, 1997 Mass. Super. 
LEXIS 282 (see ﬁ lename Franks v DiRico.pdf on the CD). 
 Here is another example of common-law vested rights, from a different jurisdiction, cited by Justice E. 
Susan Garsh in the Franks case. Addressing  Mattson v. City of Chicago , 411  N.E.2d 1002, 89 Ill. 
App. 3d 378, 44 Ill. Dec.636 (1980), she wrote: 
 Every division of the Department of Buildings had approved the building plans, and all processing 
had been completed except for the actual physical issuance of the permit, and both the approval of 
the applications for the building permit and demolition occurred prior to introduction of the zoning 
amendment  .  .  . [T]he court held that a vested right arose where the plaintiff had expended substantial 
funds and issuance of the permit was purely ministerial.  

92 Chapter 6
 For additional information, see  Land Use Law , 4th ed., by D. L. Mandelker (1997, Section 6.13);  Land
Use Planning and Control Law , by J. C. Jurgensmeyer and T. E. Roberts (1998, Section 5.27); and 
 “ Zoning Estoppel: Application of the Principles of Equitable Estoppel and Vested Rights to Zoning 
Disputes, ” by D. G. Heeter (1971,  Urban Law Annual , 63, 66). 
 Should you ﬁ nd yourself in one of these situations, be sure to inform your attorney that you actually 
obtained all the required permits and started building before the bylaw changed. There is a difference 
between vested rights and equitable estoppel. You may be entitled to both. 
 In sum, if the relevant bylaw might change or actually does change midstream, then you and your 
attorney should look at a variety of distinct responses, depending on your facts: 
● 
 A plan or statutory zoning freeze 
● 
 A non-plan, but still statutory, zoning freeze 
● 
 A non-plan, common-law zoning freeze (vested rights) 
● 
 A non-plan claim of equitable estoppel, to prevent enforcement of the new bylaw. 
 The essence of the situation is that the local bylaw controlling your situation is the one in effect at the time 
your Building Permit is granted, not the law at the time you applied. There are ways to help yourself, but 
the message is still clear — the law is only what is on the books at the relevant moment in time, unless it is 
overridden in some way or unless you and your attorney fashion a strategy to work your way through it. 
 6.5  Building Codes 
 Generally, a building code is statewide. Sometimes it is local. There may be places where it is rather 
brief, however, and subject to a great deal of interpretation by the Building Inspector or Building 
Commissioner as to what must be done to make the construction safe. As with local law, the building 
code is only what the building code says. Unlike the local zoning bylaw, however, it is probably 
unnecessary to buy the entire state building code. It is probably several volumes thick, and it is enough 
to read the relevant portions at a local library, or by simply asking the Building Inspector if you can 
read his or her copy at the counter (and photocopy the relevant pages). 
 An incomplete (but more useful than anything else known to the author) chart of building codes may 
be found at http://www.wirelessestimator.com/t_content.cfm?pagename  State Building Codes .
 6.5.1  The BOCA Code 
 The Building Ofﬁ cers and Code Administrators (BOCA) code intends to replace the International 
Building Code of 2003 (IBC 2003); however, many jurisdictions are still controlled by the older IBC 
code. In general, you need to understand only a few IBC sections. Here they are, as they appear in the 
Massachusetts version (780 Code of Massachusetts Regulations [CMR], Sixth ed., 2/7/97, effective 
2/28/97), but any state building code based on the new IBC 2006 code should be similar, to the point of 
even having similar numbering. 
 Don’t worry about the fact that §3109.1 talks about reception, because (1) the antenna is for reception, 
and (2) regulation of transmission is an FCC matter, and, for these purposes, has been preempted. 

Selected Applicable Law 93
   780 CMR 3108.0 Radio and Television Towers 
 3108.1 General: Subject to the structural provisions of 780 CMR 1611.0 for  wind loads and the 
requirements of 780 CMR 1510.0 governing the ﬁ re resistance ratings of buildings for the support of 
roof structures, all radio and television towers shall be designed and constructed as herein provided. 
 3108.2 Location and access: Towers shall be located and equipped with step bolts and ladders 
so as to provide ready access for inspection purposes. Guy wires or other accessories shall not 
cross or encroach upon any street or other public space, or over any electric power lines, or 
encroach upon any other privately owned property without  written consent of the owner. 
 3108.3 Construction: All towers shall be constructed of approved corrosion-resistant 
noncombustible material. The minimum type of construction of isolated radio towers not more 
than 100 feet (30480  mm) min. height shall be Type 4. 
 3108.4 Loads: Towers shall be designed to resist  wind loads in accordance with EIA 222-E listed 
in Appendix A. Consideration shall be given to conditions involving  wind load on ice-covered 
sections in localities subject to sustained freezing temperatures. 
 3108.4 Dead load: Towers shall be designed for the  dead load plus the  ice load in regions where 
ice formation occurs. 
 3108.4.2 Uplift: Adequate foundations and anchorage shall be provided to resist two times the 
calculated wind uplift. 
 3108.5 Grounding: All towers shall be permanently and effectively grounded.  
 780 CMR 3109.0 Radio and Television Antennas 
 3109.1 Permits not required: A building permit is not required for roof installation of antennal 
structures not more than 12 feet (3658  mm) in height for private radio or television reception. 
Such a structure shall not be erected so as to injure the roof covering, and when removed 
from the roof the roof covering shall be repaired to maintain weather and water tightness. The 
installation of any antenna structure mounted on the roof of a building shall not be erected 
nearer to the  lot line than the total height of the antennal structure above the roof, nor shall such 
structure be erected near electric power lines or encroach upon any street or other public space. 
 3109.2 Permits required: Approval shall be secured for all roof mounted antennal structures more 
than 12 feet (3658       mm) in height above the roof. The application shall be accompanied by detailed 
drawings of the structure and methods of anchorage. All connections to the roof structure shall 
be properly ﬂ ashed to maintain water-tightness. The design and materials of construction shall 
comply with the requirements of 780 CMR 3108.3 for character, quality, and minimum dimension. 
 1611.1 Wind load zones: The locations of  wind load zones are shown in the ﬁ gures 1611.1A, 
1611.1B, 1611.1C maps. Zone 1 consists of the Counties of Berkshire, Franklin, Hampshire, and 
Hampden; Zone 2 consists of the County of Worcester; and Zone 3 consists of the Counties of 
Essex, Middlesex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Plymouth, Bristol, Barnstable, Dukes, and Nantucket. 
 1611.2 Exposures: Exposure is deﬁ ned as a measure of terrain roughness and is classiﬁ ed as 
follows: 
 Exposure A: centers of large cities and very rough, hilly terrain. Exposure A applies for downtown 
areas only when the terrain for at least one half mile upwind of the structure is heavily built up, 
with at least 50% of the buildings being in excess of four stories, and when Exposure B prevails 
beyond this boundary. 

94 Chapter 6
 Exercise caution in using these reduced wind pressures for buildings and structures on high 
ground in the midst of cities or rough terrain. 
 Exposure B: suburban areas, towns, city outskirts, wooded areas, and rolling terrain. Exposure 
B applies only when the terrain for at least one half mile upwind is a continuous urban 
development, forest, wooded area, or rolling terrain. 
 Exposure C: open level terrain with only scattered buildings, structures, trees or miscellaneous 
obstructions, open water, or shorelines. 
 1611.4 Reference wind pressures: Reference wind pressures for the various exposures and wind 
zones are given in the following Table 1611.4. The tabulated pressures are combined windward 
and leeward pressures representing the overall effect of the wind on essentially rectangular 
structures, and account for typical gust effects as found in ordinary buildings. These pressures 
do not account for buffeting or channeling caused by positions of nearby structures, vortex 
shedding, or wind sensitive dynamic properties of a particular structure.
 Excerpts from Table 1611.4 for locations on or near the Massachusetts seashore 
 Height Above  Grade (ft) 
 Reference Wind Pressure (pounds per square foot) Zone 3 Exposure 
 
A
B
C
 50 – 100 
 14 
 21 
 31 
 100 – 150 
 18 
 26 
 37 
 150 – 200 
 22 
 30 
 41 
 6.5.2  ANSI TIA/EIA-222-F Standard 
 Your state building code may or may not reference, copy, or mimic the ANSI standard TIA/EIA-222-F, 
 “ Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures. ” If your state 
building code does refer to wind speed, however, it may use a table (such as the excerpted portion from 
Massachusetts Table 1611.4 above) to list the wind load permitted, or, putting it another way, the wind 
speed for which an antenna-support structure must be designed. 
 TIA/EIA-222-F, Annex A, §2.3.3B, states:  “ The basic wind speed from Section 16, the equations 
for the exposure coefﬁ cient ( Kz ) and the gust response factor ( Gh ) are based on wind conditions 
in open, level country and grasslands. ” This means that if you are in a valley, protected by rolling 
hills, or protected by surrounding forested lands, you may not need to meet the highest wind-speed 
standard.
 If you have any doubt, seek the services of a professional engineer to make sure what part of which 
standard applies to your particular situation. 
 With thanks to the website wirelessestimator.com, here is an introduction to the current issues of EIA/
TIA-222-F or G, and the BOCA Code.

Selected Applicable Law 95
   Revision G is a go in Florida and Ohio but stalls throughout the nation following IBC 
adoption
 January 1, 2008 — TIA/EIA-222-G, the long-awaited revision of the structural standard for 
antenna supporting structures and antennas took effect January 1, 2006. Two years later the 
only states to adopt it are Florida and Ohio. 
 Since it is a voluntary standard and has no legal bearing, it only gains formidable strength when 
it’s referenced by the International Building Code (IBC) or any other code, and that code is 
adopted by a permitting jurisdiction. 
 Unfortunately, Revision G wasn’t passed in time to be reviewed and adopted by the IBC 2006 
committee and Revision F remained the controlling standard. Last September the publishing 
of the IBC 2007 supplement made it ofﬁ cial, Revision G is now the sanctiﬁ ed standard in the 
building code bible, but there is an excellent chance that it will not be enforced by some local 
jurisdictions for years to come, if ever. 
 ADOPTION DOESN’T MANDATE ITS USE 
 A number of industry publications and bulletin boards have left the impression that the IBC’s 
adoption now mandates the use of the new revision, but that is not the case throughout the 
nation.
 Revision G is legally applicable in the State of Florida because the 2004 Florida Building Code 
was amended December 8, 2006, referencing the newest revision of the standard — not because 
it was adopted by the IBC. 
 The 2007 Ohio Building Code, effective July 1, 2007, uses IBC 2006 and did not adopt the IBC 
2007 Supplement; however, it has ANSI/TIA-222-G 2005 in its  “ Referenced Standards. ” 
 The code referencing and adoption process is a long, sometimes arduous procedure that can 
oftentimes take years. 
 The ﬁ rst IBC Code (2000) was the culmination of an effort that started in 1997 by 
representatives of Building Ofﬁ cials and Code Administrators International, Inc. (BOCA), 
International Conference of Building Ofﬁ cials (ICBO), and Southern Building Code Congress 
International (SBCCI) to have a comprehensive set of uniﬁ ed regulations. 
 Numerous states such as Arkansas and Indiana are still using IBC 2000 and almost half of all 
states use IBC 2003. 
 When California adopts IBC 2006 on January 1, 2008, they will be the one of a dozen states 
using IBC 2006 statewide. However, Revision F will still be used since it is necessary for states to 
adopt the IBC 2007 supplement in order for Revision G to be in force, according to Gretchen 
Hesbacher of the International Code Council. 
 However, even if a local permitting authority hasn’t adopted the IBC 2007 supplement, building 
ofﬁ cials might require the most current national tower standard, especially if they feel that the 
standard provides more stringent provisions. 
 Plans examiners are more familiar with Revision G’s newly introduced three second gust wind, 
the new ice loads, the use of LRFD design procedures, and the seismic provisions that were all 
included to be more like design requirements that the building codes have for other structures. 

96 Chapter 6
 SPEC WRITERS CAN INCLUDE PORTIONS OR ALL OF REV G 
 The entire standard or relevant parts of Revision G can be used as a supplement to a 
speciﬁ cation that also requires the structure to meet jurisdictional requirements. Purchasers can 
also request that the tower meet Revision F, if that is the applicable code, as well as Revision G. 
Whereas the new revision of the tower standard may not currently having legal bearing, it gets 
all of the strength it needs when the purchaser references it. 
 Tower manufacturers are currently providing quotes for towers under both F and G revisions 
when requested. Their engineers are reluctant to discuss how, cost-wise, Revision G is affecting 
different types of structures, saying that they haven’t had the opportunity to develop meaningful 
data based upon the limited comparisons that have been made. 
 According to David Brinker of Radian Rohn Products, initial ﬁ ndings show that when 
both revisions are compared, oftentimes the differences are due to the new 3-second wind 
not correlating with the old fastest-mile wind speed. In other cases, there is usually a good 
reason for the differences such as exposure or topographical feature considerations, 
explained the company’s chief engineer and member of the TIA committee that governs 
the standard. 
 Engineer Myron Noble of Valmont Industries said that in general, those towers being 
designed under Revision G are somewhat lighter. However, he noted that Class lll structures 
(mostly governmental applications) and structures that are on top of hills are quite a bit 
heavier. 
 Some towers in Florida analyzed under Revision G, thought to have reserve capacity, 
experienced unanticipated upgrade requirements when new tenants were added, causing tower 
owners to reassess their tower assets. 
 Selecting more stringent design classiﬁ cations in Revision G will be more expensive, but will also 
reduce the capacity of existing structures. 
 Planners for the city of Jacksonville, FL, voted to use a Class III structure classiﬁ cation for all 
towers used in cellular communications, according to Morrison Hershﬁ eld. The consulting 
engineering and management ﬁ rm said the ruling will adversely impact the structural capacity of 
cell towers, reducing them by approximately 13% on average. 
 Class II is the default classiﬁ cation that includes cellular and PCS communications, as well as 
television and radio broadcasting. 
 http://www.wirelessestimator.com/t_content.cfm?pagename    TIA EIA-222-G 
 6.5.3  The National Electrical Code 
 Your jurisdiction may or may not have adopted the National Electrical Code (NEC), published by the 
National Fire Protection Association as  NFPA 70, National Electrical Code . Whether or not it applies 
where you live, the NEC should never stand in the way of the grant of a permit for an antenna system, 
so long as only low voltage (less than 36 VDC) goes out to your antenna-support structure. You can 
ﬁ nd the NEC at the public library of most medium to large cities or you may order it from the NFPA 
website ( http://www.nfpa.org/ ). For 110 volts to power a lighting system, however, you’ll need a 
licensed electrician and an electrical permit. 

Selected Applicable Law 97
 6.6  Federal Law 
 If you ever want to look up a federal regulation relating to radio, the prime source is  http://www.
gpoaccess.gov/cfr/index.html . It would be the prime source for any other federal regulation, too. 
Among insiders, one favorite source is  http://www.hallikainen.com/FccRules/ , which is updated 
frequently. As an example of looking up a federal regulation, if you’ve always wanted to know what 
the FCC’s 200-foot-height rule may really say, just go there and enter  “ 200 feet. ” You’ll be shown 
every reference in the FCC rules. 
 6.7  Federal Law Relating to TV Antennas, Satellite TV, WISPs, etc 
 The FCC has issued almost a complete preemption with respect to over-the-air reception devices 
(known as the OTARD Rule or 47 CFR §1.4000). This FCC regulation was authorized by the U.S. 
Congress. The citation for that authorization is the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 
104-104, 110 Stat. 56 (1996). Sometimes called the TCA, it is found in the U.S. Code at 47 USC 
§332(c)(7). The prime source would be  http://uscode.house.gov/ , but it is hard to read. You might 
prefer  http://www.law.cornell.edu/ and look at 47 USC §332(c)(7), which is much easier to read. 
 As a starting point for understanding the OTARD rule, you might want to go to the FCC site and ﬁ nd 
the original FCC decision (this includes the reasoning of the Commission and is not the regulation 
itself, which is 47 CFR §1.4000): 
 Report  & Order, Memorandum  &  Opinion  & Order, and Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking in the 
matter of Preemption of Local Zoning Regulation of Satellite Earth Stations; Implementation of Section 
207 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, restrictions on Over-the Air Reception Devices: Television 
Broadcast Service  &  Multichannel Multipoint Distribution Service (IB Docket 95-59, CS Docket No. 
96-83)(August 6, 1996),  http://www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Cable/Orders/1996_TXT/fcc96328.txt 
 One of the more interesting paragraphs from the FCC reads: 
 The acceptable quality signal standard is different for devices designed to receive digital signals, such 
as  .   .   .  digital television ( “ DTV ” ) antennas. For these antennas to receive an acceptable quality signal, 
[they] must be installed where [they have] an unobstructed, direct view of the satellite or other device 
from that video programming service is received. Unlike analog antennas, digital antennas, even in 
the presence of sufﬁ cient over-the-air signal strength, will at times provide no picture or sound unless 
they are placed and oriented for optimal reception. 
 Here is an example of an OTARD win over a homeowners ’ association. But ﬁ rst, a word of advice: 
Avoid misrepresenting what you are going to put up. Your mother told you to never lie. As Henry 
Kissinger has said:  “ The nice thing about the truth is that it is so much easier to remember. ” 
 This is a powerful rule, by the way. If you can ﬁ t under the rule, it is a complete preemption, not 
the limited preemption of, for example, the amateur radio preemption found at 47 CFR §97.15(b). 
It applies to both CC & Rs and zoning ordinances. Here is the FCC short description on the Potomac 
Ridge Homeowners ’ Association case, and the FCC press release on the Meade, KS (municipality) 
case (also see ﬁ lename Star Lambert v. Meade KS.pdf on the CD):

98 Chapter 6
   Application for review of declaratory ruling preempting restrictions on the use of over-the-air 
reception
 DEVICES IMPOSED BY HOMEOWNER ASSOCIATION IN POTOMAC, MD. Denied Application 
for Review of a Declaratory Ruling (DA 97-2188), in re: Jay Lubliner and Deborah Galvin, 
concerning Potomac Ridge Homeowner Association antenna restrictions. The Order afﬁ rms 
Cable Services Bureau’s ruling that the Potomac Ridge restriction prohibiting externally 
mounted television broadcast antennas violates the Commission’s Over-the-Air Reception 
Devices Rule (47 C.F.R. Section 1.4000) by impairing reception of acceptable quality signal. 
Action by the Commission. Adopted: August 18, 1998. by MO & O. (FCC No. 98 – 201). CSB 
NEWS Report No. CS 97-20 CABLE SERVICES ACTION, July 22, 1997. 
 CABLE SERVICES BUREAU PREEMPTS LOCAL RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF OVER-THE-
AIR-RECEPTION DEVICES IMPOSED BY MEADE, KANSAS 
 The Cable Services Bureau has preempted an ordinance adopted by the City of Meade, Kansas 
that restricted the installation and use of satellite dishes. The Bureau found that the ordinance 
did not comply with the Commission’s rule ( “ Rule ” ) regarding over-the-air reception devices, 
which implements Section 207 of the 1996 Telecommunications Act. The Rule prohibits 
governmental and private restrictions that impair the ability of antenna users to install, 
maintain, or use satellite dishes and wireless cable antennas that are one meter or smaller 
in diameter and television signal antennas unless justiﬁ ed by safety or historic preservation 
considerations. This is the ﬁ rst order issued by the Bureau under the Rule. 
 Star Lambert and the Satellite Broadcasting and Communications Association ( “ SBCA ” ) 
petitioned the Commission for a ruling on Meade’s ordinance. Star Lambert owns Stargate 
Enterprises, which is located in Meade. Stargate sells and installs Primestar satellite antennas, 
which are direct-to-home satellite antennas measuring one meter or less in diameter. SBCA 
is a trade association that includes among its members Primestar and other manufacturers, 
retailers, and distributors of satellite equipment and receiving devices. 
 The order holds that: 
 The Rule prohibits the ordinance’s requirement that an installer or antenna user obtain 
 (1) a $5.00 permit prior to installation and (2) prior City approval of the antenna’s placement. 
These requirements conﬂ ict with the Rule’s prohibition of restrictions that unreasonably delay 
or prevent antenna installation, maintenance, or use that are not required by safety or historic 
preservation considerations. 
 The  “ property setback regulations ” in the ordinance regulating antenna placement violate the 
Rule because they are not described anywhere and therefore impermissibly delay or prevent 
antenna installation, maintenance and use. 
 The $500 per day ﬁ ne provided for in the ordinance is prohibited by the Rule because penalties 
of this magnitude are likely to deter installation and no justiﬁ cation was given for the amount. 
 Commenting on the Meade decision, Meredith J. Jones, Chief of the Cable Services Bureau 
said, “ This order strikes a blow for competition and for the consumer. If we cannot prevent 
unreasonable restrictions on the use of satellite dishes and other receiving antennas, 
competition in the market for the delivery of multichannel video will be stiﬂ ed. ” 
 Action by the Chief, Cable Services Bureau, July 22, 1997, by Order (DA 97-1554). 
 — FCC —
 http://www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Cable/News_Releases/1997/nrcb7019.txt 

Selected Applicable Law 99
 6.7.1  Memorandum on Using 47 CFR §1.4000 
 The texts mentioned above may be found most easily by starting with  http://www.fcc.gov/csb/facts/
otard.html . This website provides links to the original FCC Dockets, the OTARD rule, and 47 CFR 
§1.4000. Note that links to 47 CFR §1.4000 are to a text that was accurate as of September 4, 1996; 
however, 47 CFR §1.4000 has been modiﬁ ed twice since then. The latest version of §1.4000 is 
presented here, as it has existed since November 20, 1998. The following commentary is intended to 
help a ham understand what is, and what is not, contained in the OTARD rule. 
Commentary on Selected Elements of FCC Decisions and Orders
 From FCC 96 – 328, paragraph 20: 
 20. Third, a regulation will be deemed to impair a viewer’s ability to receive video programming signals 
if it precludes reception of an acceptable quality signal. We afﬁ rm the consensus opinion of commenters 
who discuss this issue that the signals that are protected here are signals intended for reception in the 
viewing area. (fn 46) Under this criterion, for example, our rule would invalidate a requirement that an 
antenna be placed in a position where reception would be impossible or would be substantially degraded. 
However, a regulation requiring that antennas be placed to the extent feasible in locations that are not 
visible from the street would be permitted under our rule, if this placement would not impair recep-
tion of an acceptable signal. Requirements that antennas be set back from the street could be deemed to 
impair reception if compliance would mean that the antenna could not receive an acceptable signal. 
 What are signals intended for reception in the viewing area? An easy way to determine this is to use 
a map obtainable from the station. Contact the ofﬁ ce of the chief engineer or the sales department for 
a map showing Class B coverage, or obtain a map from  The Television and Cable Factbook , by 
A. Warren (2009)  , showing the station’s designated market area (DMA). 
 Viewers may also determine whether or not they are in the Class B coverage area by going to  www.
getawaiver.com ,  http://www.titantv.com , or  www.shva.com — sites run by Decisionmark, a database 
company serving TV stations subject to the Satellite Home Viewing Act (SHVA). As a matter of 
strategy, picking stations that are afﬁ liated with a major network (ABC, CBS, Fox, NBC, PAX, or WB) 
is likely to garner more sympathy for the cause of the potential TV watcher than a claim that the viewer 
wishes to watch an obscure, low-power, and distant station. In fact, the more distant the signal, the less 
likely the rule applies; however, many stations transmit signals intended for viewing 60 to 80 miles 
away. It would be difﬁ cult to maintain a claim that an antenna is necessary for Sporadic E or other 
forms of less-reliable propagation. 
 From FCC 96 – 328, footnote 46 to paragraph 20: 
 46. Thus, for example, we would not offer the same protection to consumers seeking to install, main-
tain, or use antennas designed to receive distant TVBS signals. 
 Here, TVBS means TV broadcast signals. While footnotes to Opinions and Orders at the FCC do not 
have the same weight as a regulation in the Code of Federal Regulations, this footnote offers a hint at 
the response that could be expected if a matter were to be appealed to the FCC. So, it is very important 
to frame a request for a Building Permit for a TV antenna system in terms of a signal or signals within 
the Designated Market Area (DMA) or Class B signal strength area (watch out — they can be different) 
of the broadcast station. 

100 Chapter 6
 From FCC 96 – 328, paragraph 20–21 : 
 20. .   .  .  (A) regulation will be deemed to impair a viewer’s ability to receive video programming sig-
nals if it precludes reception of an acceptable quality signal.  We afﬁ rm the consensus opinion of com-
menters who discuss this issue that the signals that are protected here are signals intended for reception 
in the viewing area. Under this criterion, for example, our rule would invalidate a requirement that an 
antenna be placed in a position where reception would be impossible or would be substantially degraded. 
However, a regulation requiring that antennas be placed to the extent feasible in locations that are not 
visible from the street would be permitted under our rule, if this placement would not impair reception of 
an acceptable signal.  Requirements that antennas be set back from the street could be deemed to impair 
reception if compliance would mean that the antenna could not receive an acceptable signal. 
 21. In reﬁ ning our rule to prohibit only restrictions that  “ impair ”  viewers ’  abilities to install, use or 
maintain devices designed for over-the-air reception, we remove from the scope of this prohibition all 
restrictions that may affect, but do not impair, a viewer’s ability to install, use or maintain devices to 
receive video programming signals through over-the-air TVBS, MMDS, and DBS services. As dis-
cussed below, we also exempt certain regulations protecting safety and historic areas, even though the 
regulations may impair access to over-the-air signals. 
 Don’t get too greedy and insist that the town cannot even require a Building Permit. The inspections 
that accompany the building process under a Building Permit exist for safety reasons, and the FCC 
won’t support a claim that safety inspections cannot be required. Similarly, if you live in a historic 
district the FCC may be of no help. 
 From FCC 96 – 328, paragraph 41 : 
 41. .   .  .There is general public awareness of the variations in the dimensions of TVBS antennas, and com-
menters have not sought to deﬁ ne these antennas by size or shape. Based on the lack of record showing 
any such desire, and on the variations in the dimensions of TVBS antennas, we decline to limit the size or 
shape of such antennas covered by our rule. Nonetheless, we believe that the BOCA guideline regarding 
the permissibility of permits for installations reaching more than 12 feet over the rooﬂ ine, that we believe 
to be a safety guideline, may apply to TVBS antennas as well as to MMDS antennas on masts. 
 For the purposes of convincing a town to give you an antenna-support structure permit, add together 
the size and shape discussion of FCC 96 – 328, paragraph 41, with the height discussion in FCC 
98 – 214, paragraph 35 (see below). When the viewer must get above the trees and erect a high-gain, 
multi-element Yagi or log-periodic antenna, with rotator, to avoid impairment of the reception of 
classic TV or digital TV signals, even though such a support and antenna may be substantial in height, 
size, and shape, its appearance is not a valid reason for denying a permit. However, a Building Permit 
may still be required for safety reasons. Thus, a wise applicant would apply for a Building Permit, 
submitting such reasonable plans as would ordinarily be necessary for a Building Permit for other 
routine accessory structures, and then it would seem that the permit could not be denied (see below): 
 From FCC 96 – 328, paragraph 37: 
 37. .   .   .We do not believe it will be overly burdensome to require, as is provided in the BOCA code, that 
antenna users obtain a permit in cases in which their antennas must extend more than twelve feet above 
the rooﬂ ine in order to receive signals. However, we would ﬁ nd unenforceable any restriction that 
establishes speciﬁ c per se height limits. Similarly, we believe that the BOCA code guideline regarding 
permits for setbacks is safety-based, is reasonable, and does not impose an unreasonable burden. 

Selected Applicable Law 101
 The position that a Building Permit should not be required by a municipality for a tall antenna-support 
structure will apparently fail. Unless covered by the BOCA exceptions (less than 12 feet above a roof 
line and so forth), the applicant must obtain a Building Permit. In this case, should the town decline to 
follow federal law and refuse to grant the Building Permit, the least expensive next step (though not the 
only possible next step) would be to petition the FCC. An application to the FCC would be relatively 
inexpensive but can be expected to take at least six months. (Here’s a hint: Include maps. The ofﬁ ce 
that handles such an appeal loves maps.) Other possible steps — steps that would be faster (but more 
expensive) than an appeal to the FCC — would be to seek an injunction in Land Court, Superior Court 
(or whatever the local jurisdiction calls the ﬁ rst level of court with the power to enjoin a municipality), 
or a U.S. District Court. 
 Nonetheless, an applicant wishing to take advantage of §1.4000 should not forget the impact of FCC 
98 – 238, paragraph 35, discussed above. By effectively adopting the BOCA code even for communities 
that have not otherwise adopted it, the FCC permits a community to require a Building Permit but does 
not mandate that a community require a Building Permit. So, if the municipal zoning code is silent on 
the matter, an applicant can plan his installation of, for example, an 80-foot tower so that it is at least 
80 feet back from the nearest lot line, and an argument can be made that, under the BOCA code and 
47 CFR §1.4000, no permit is required. Further, a careful reading of paragraph 35 may permit a claim 
that no permit is required when the rooﬂ ine is 30 feet high, the antenna is 80 feet high and the setback 
is 50 feet. Footnote 101 to paragraph 37 reads:  “ Thus, subject to the other provisions of the code, if an 
antenna is no closer to the lot line than its total height above the roof, no permit will be required. ”
 From FCC 96 – 328, paragraph 37 : 
 37. .   .   .Because we believe that the model antenna height and installation restrictions in the BOCA 
code are safety-related, they will be enforceable under our rule. We do not believe it will be overly 
burdensome to require, as is provided in the BOCA code, that antenna users obtain a permit in cases 
in which their antennas must extend more than twelve feet above the rooﬂ ine in order to receive 
signals. However, we would ﬁ nd unenforceable any restriction that establishes speciﬁ c per se height 
limits. Similarly, we believe that the BOCA code guideline regarding permits for setbacks is safety-
based, is reasonable, and does not impose an unreasonable burden. Any such permit application 
should be handled expeditiously. However, the antenna size restriction for satellite antennas in the 
BOCA code, 24 inches, is unacceptable, as the diameter or diagonal measurement of the satellite and 
MMDS antennas covered by our rule is one meter. 
 This is a really nice paragraph. While you must request and get a Building Permit, a ﬁ xed-height 
restriction is unenforceable. Don’t you just love that the town must act  “ expeditiously ” ? 
 From FCC 96 – 328, paragraph 40 : 
 40. Finally, we note that there is no discussion in the record regarding a history of problems regarding 
local regulation of the size of TVBS antennas that would suggest the need to impose size or height 
limitations. While commenters indicate that restrictions on TVBS antennas exist, especially from 
nongovernmental authorities, (fn omitted) these restrictions generally take the form of a total prohi-
bition on antennas rather than limits on their size or placement. The lack of record on size or height 
limits on TVBS antennas may stem from the fact that TVBS is an older and more familiar technol-
ogy than DBS or MMDS and thus subject to less regulation. There is general public awareness of 

102 Chapter 6
the variations in the dimensions of TVBS antennas, and commenters have not sought to deﬁ ne these 
antennas by size or shape. Based on the lack of record showing any such desire, and on the variations 
in the dimensions of TVBS antennas,  we decline to limit the size or shape of such antennas covered 
by our rule . Nonetheless, we believe that the BOCA guideline regarding the permissibility of permits 
for installations reaching more than 12 feet over the rooﬂ ine, which we believe to be a safety guide-
line, may apply to TVBS antennas as well as to MMDS antennas on masts. (Emphasis added.) 
 This paragraph sets up a wonderful scenario. Assuming that you erect a substantial TVBS Yagi, or 
WISP antenna, a town would be hard-pressed to subsequently argue that another, non-covered antenna 
a few feet below would be unprecedented in height or visibility in the neighborhood. In other words, 
you can erect your own height precedent! 
 From FCC 96 – 328, paragraph 79 : 
 79. If a governmental or nongovernmental authority wishes to enforce a safety restriction, the rule requires 
that the safety reasons for the restrictions be clearly deﬁ ned in the legislative history, preamble or text of 
the restriction. Alternatively, the local entity may include a restriction on a list of safety restrictions related 
to antennas, that is made available to interested parties (including those who wish to install antennas). 
 (Refer to  http://www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Cable/Orders/1996_TXT/fcc96328.txt .)
 A wise applicant will purchase the municipality’s zoning bylaw and send a letter to the Building 
Inspector asking for “ a list of safety restrictions related to antennas, that is made available to those who 
wish to install antennas. ” This will ﬁ x the municipality into a position. Many municipalities will have 
no such list. The object is to prevent the municipality from making up the rules as the game proceeds. 
 From FCC 98 – 214, paragraph 36  : 
 36. Regarding WCA’s disagreement with our conclusion in the Report and Order that BOCA requires 
a permit where the height of an antenna is longer than the distance between the antenna and the lot 
line and WCA’s argument that instead BOCA ﬂ atly forbids the installation under such circumstances, 
even if WCA’s interpretation is correct, our rules would preempt the BOCA requirement as inter-
preted by WCA. In the Report and Order, we speciﬁ cally stated that  “ we would ﬁ nd unenforceable 
any restriction that establishes speciﬁ c per se height limits. ” If a local authority created a per se bar to 
antennas over a certain height, the restriction would be prohibited.  
 (Refer to  http://www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Cable/Orders/1998/fcc98214.txt .)
 A maximum structure height of 30 feet (or 35 feet, or whatever) is,  per se , prohibited. It would appear 
that no municipality could justify a maximum height in all residential areas. Therefore, any letter to the 
Board of Appeals or Town Counsel should cite that ﬁ nal sentence:  “ If a local authority created a per se 
bar to antennas over a certain height, the restriction would be prohibited. ” Wonderful, eh? 
 From FCC 98 – 214, paragraphs 52 and 53: 
 52 . The situation is altogether different, however, for devices designed to receive digital signals, such 
as DBS antennas, digital MMDS antennas and digital television ( “ DTV ” ) antennas. Unlike analog 
antennas, digital antennas, even in the presence of sufﬁ cient over-the-air signal strength, will at times 
provide no picture or sound unless they are placed and oriented for optimal reception. Where a DBS 
antenna has an unobstructed, direct view of a satellite, the antenna will produce a complete picture 
and sound. As the antenna is moved or oriented slightly to a position where its view of the satellite 

Selected Applicable Law 103
becomes less direct or partially obstructed, the antenna will continue, up to a point, to produce a 
complete picture and sound because digital reception devices have error correcting systems that ﬁ ll in 
the missing data by taking into account interruptions in the digital data stream caused by the obstruc-
tion. At some point, however, as the antenna’s view becomes slightly more obstructed, the obstruc-
tion will cause the picture and sound to become fragmented because the obstruction is blocking too 
many pieces of digital data for the antenna’s error correcting system to correct. As the antenna is 
moved a negligible distance farther and its view of the satellite becomes more obstructed, the antenna 
will produce no picture or sound at all because the antenna can no longer receive sufﬁ cient data. This 
is the  “ cliff effect ”  that is the point at which there is a complete loss of picture and sound because the 
antenna can no longer receive sufﬁ cient data. At the cliff, the transition between a complete picture 
and no picture takes place almost immediately. 
 53. Obstructions are not the only causes of data disruption. Weather conditions such as severe rain 
can interfere with the data streams to such a degree that most antennas will be unable to produce a 
picture during some periods throughout the year. Manufacturers assume that satellite antennas will 
have an unobstructed view of the satellite and design them to keep these weather blackouts to a min-
imum while at the same time producing the smallest antenna possible. For antennas that have an 
obstructed view of the satellite, these weather blackouts will occur more frequently than for anten-
nas that have an unobstructed view of the satellite because both the obstruction and the weather are 
blocking the data stream. For this reason, we conclude that, to receive an acceptable quality signal, a 
DBS antenna or other digital reception device covered by Section 207 must be installed where it has 
an unobstructed, direct view of the satellite or other device from which video programming service is 
received, if such a location exists on the viewer’s property and the property is covered by our rules. 
 The thoughtful applicant will take note of the FCC’s direct statement that,  “ The situation is altogether 
different, however, for devices designed to receive digital signals. ” An application should be aimed at the 
reception of digital television signals and emphasize that the antenna must have an  “ unobstructed, direct 
view. ” Thus, it must be above the trees, and, if necessary, above nearby ridges or hills that could block 
reception of a DT (Digital Television) station in a given direction. Consult U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) 
maps for elevations and determine the line-of-sight directions to DT stations by using one of the relevant 
TV station direction and distance websites. Try  http://bsexton.addr.com/tvdb.html . For a little fun, try using 
the line-of-sight feature called “ Path Proﬁ ler ” at  http://www.heywhatsthat.com/proﬁ ler.html . 
 Thus, the applicant will: 
 1. 
 Find a network station (a network station is not required but seems strategically helpful) for 
desired viewing where the DMA map clearly covers the reception site but signals are not so strong 
as to be Class A (rabbit ears) reception. (See FCC 96 – 328, paragraph 20 .) 
 2. 
 Preferably ﬁ nd a station that is a  “ -DT ” (digital television) station, not viewable any other 
way (i.e., by cable TV or DBS). This is a nice touch, though not required. (See FCC 98 – 214, 
paragraphs 51 and 52  .)
 3. 
 If possible, plan an antenna-support structure installation so the support structure and antenna are 
no taller than the distance to the nearest property line. (See FCC 98 – 214, paragraph 27 .) 
 4. 
 Purchase a complete copy of the town’s zoning bylaw and make a written request of the Building 
Inspector for  “ a list of safety restrictions related to antennas that is made available to those who 
wish to install antennas. ” (Please use those exact words, as they mirror FCC 96 – 328, paragraph 79 .)

104 Chapter 6
  Subpart S — Preemption of Restrictions That  “ Impair ” a Viewer’s Ability to Receive Television 
Broadcast Signals, Direct Broadcast Satellite Services, or Multichannel Multipoint Distribution 
Services:
 Sec. 1.4000 Restrictions impairing reception of television broadcast signals, direct broadcast 
satellite services, or multichannel multipoint distribution services. 
 (a)(1) Any restriction, including but not limited to any state or local law or regulation, 
including zoning, land-use, or building regulations, or any private covenant, contract 
provision, lease provision, homeowners ’ association rule or similar restriction, on property 
within the exclusive use or control of the antenna user where the user has a direct or indirect 
ownership or leasehold interest in the property that impairs the installation, maintenance, 
or use of: 
 (i) An antenna that is: 
 (A) Used to receive direct broadcast satellite service, including direct-to-home satellite 
service, or to receive or transmit ﬁ xed wireless signals via satellite, and 
 5. 
 Apply for a Building Permit in writing to  “ freeze ” the town, preventing it from detrimentally 
changing the bylaw or adding illegitimate  “ safety ” requirements before the applicant can obtain a 
Building Permit for the proposed antenna system. 
 6. 
 Respectfully bring the appropriate law (both 47 CFR §1.4000 and the clariﬁ cations available in 
the Reports and Orders) to the attention of the Building Inspector, the Board of Appeals, and Town 
Counsel.
 7. 
 If the town threatens legal action, immediately ﬁ le a petition with the FCC. This can be done 
without the help of a lawyer by following the FCC’s instructions in §1.4000. Filing with the 
FCC, where the town has the burden of showing that its regulation outweighs the federal interest 
involved, should stay local court action if the town tries to ﬁ le against you locally. Your lawyer 
will smile when he realizes the strength of your position. Demand the grant of a Building Permit 
for the antenna-support structure and antenna. Be sure to get a Certiﬁ cate of Completion when the 
project is done. 
 8. 
 Once the TV antenna-support structure is up with a TV antenna on top, the Certiﬁ cate of 
Completion has been received, and the brouhaha has died down, it may be that no further Building 
Permit is required to add another antenna up to the loading capacity of the antenna-support structure.  
 Now for some additional tips. As an alternative to calling a station for DMA or signal-strength 
information, some TV stations have their own websites that will lead you to the sites previously 
mentioned and, in effect, provide all you need to know. 
 Should you call the station, ask for an engineer for help in obtaining signal-coverage information. If 
you don’t know or wish to check up on your latitude and longitude or you would like to print out a map 
of your neighborhood, try http://mapsonus.com/ . See the article by R. F. Gillette,W9PE, in  QST (1999, 
December, p. 55). MapsOnUs will also help you calculate the direction and distance to your desired 
TV station (or repeater, or emergency management site). 
 6.7.2  OTARD Rule, 47 CFR §1.4000,  “ Latitude and Longitude the Easy Way ” 

Selected Applicable Law 105
 (B) One meter or less in diameter or is located in Alaska; 
 (ii) An antenna that is: 
 (A) Used to receive video programming services via multipoint distribution services, including 
multichannel multipoint distribution services, instructional television ﬁ xed services, and local 
multipoint distribution services, or to receive or transmit ﬁ xed wireless signals other than via 
satellite, and 
 (B) That is one meter or less in diameter or diagonal measurement; 
 (iii) An antenna that is used to receive television broadcast signals; 
 or 
 (iv) A mast supporting an antenna described in paragraphs (a)(1)(i), (a)(1)(ii), or (a)(1)(iii) of 
this section is prohibited to the extent it so impairs, subject to paragraph (b) of this section. 
 (2) For purposes of this section,  “ ﬁ xed wireless signals ”  means any commercial non-broadcast 
communications signals transmitted via wireless technology to and/or from a ﬁ xed customer 
location. Fixed wireless signals do not include, among other things, AM radio, FM radio, amateur 
( “ HAM ” ) radio, Citizen’s Band (CB) radio, and Digital Audio Radio Service (DARS) signals. 
 (3) For purposes of this section, a law, regulation, or restriction impairs installation, 
maintenance, or use of an antenna if it: 
 (i) Unreasonably delays or prevents installation, maintenance, or use; 
 (ii) Unreasonably increases the cost of installation, maintenance, or use; or 
 (iii) Precludes reception or transmission of an acceptable quality signal. 
   (4) Any fee or cost imposed on a user by a rule, law, regulation or restriction must be reasonable 
in light of the cost of the equipment or services and the rule, law, regulation or restriction’s 
treatment of comparable devices. No civil, criminal, administrative, or other legal action of any 
kind shall be taken to enforce any restriction or regulation prohibited by this section except 
pursuant to paragraph (d) or (e) of this section. In addition, except with respect to restrictions 
pertaining to safety and historic preservation as described in paragraph (b) of this section, if 
a proceeding is initiated pursuant to paragraph (d) or (e) of this section, the entity seeking 
to enforce the antenna restrictions in question must suspend all enforcement efforts pending 
completion of review. No attorney’s fees shall be collected or assessed and no ﬁ ne or other 
penalties shall accrue against an antenna user while a proceeding is pending to determine the 
validity of any restriction. If a ruling is issued adverse to a user, the user shall be granted at 
least a 21-day grace period in which to comply with the adverse ruling; and neither a ﬁ ne nor a 
penalty may be collected from the user if the user complies with the adverse ruling during this 
grace period, unless the proponent of the restriction demonstrates, in the same proceeding 
which resulted in the adverse ruling, that the user’s claim in the proceeding was frivolous. 
 (b) Any restriction otherwise prohibited by paragraph (a) of this section is permitted if: 
 (1) It is necessary to accomplish a clearly deﬁ ned, legitimate safety objective that is either 
stated in the text, preamble, or legislative history of the restriction or described as applying to 
that restriction in a document that is readily available to antenna users, and would be applied 
to the extent practicable in a non-discriminatory manner to other appurtenances, devices, or 
ﬁ xtures that are comparable in size and weight and pose a similar or greater safety risk as these 
antennas and to which local regulation would normally apply; or 

106 Chapter 6
 (2) It is necessary to preserve a prehistoric or historic district, site, building, structure or object 
included in, or eligible for inclusion on, the National Register of Historic Places, as set forth 
in the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended (16 U.S.C. 470), and imposes 
no greater restrictions on antennas covered by this rule than are imposed on the installation, 
maintenance, or use of other modern appurtenances, devices, or ﬁ xtures that are comparable in 
size, weight, and appearance to these antennas; and 
 (3) It is no more burdensome to affected antenna users than is necessary to achieve the 
objectives described in paragraphs (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section. 
 (c) In the case of an antenna that is used to transmit ﬁ xed wireless signals, the provisions of this 
section shall apply only if a label is afﬁ xed to the antenna that: 
 (1) Provides adequate notice regarding potential radiofrequency safety hazards, e.g., 
information regarding the safe minimum separation distance required between users and 
transceiver antennas; and 
 (2) References the applicable FCC-adopted limits for radiofrequency exposure speciﬁ ed in Sec. 
1.1310 of this chapter. 
 (d) Local governments or associations may apply to the Commission for a waiver of this section 
under Sec. 1.3 of this chapter. Waiver requests must comply with the procedures in paragraphs 
(f) and (h) of this section and will be put on public notice. The Commission may grant a waiver 
upon a showing by the applicant of local concerns of a highly specialized or unusual nature. 
No petition for waiver shall be considered unless it speciﬁ es the restriction at issue. Waivers 
granted in accordance with this section shall not apply to restrictions amended or enacted after 
the waiver is granted. Any responsive pleadings must be served on all parties and ﬁ led within 30 
days after release of a public notice that such petition has been ﬁ led. Any replies must be ﬁ led 
within 15 days thereafter. 
 (e) Parties may petition the Commission for a declaratory ruling under Sec. 1.2 of this chapter, 
or a court of competent jurisdiction, to determine whether a particular restriction is permissible 
or prohibited under this section. Petitions to the Commission must comply with the procedures 
in paragraphs (f) and (h) of this section and will be put on public notice. Any responsive 
pleadings in a Commission proceeding must be served on all parties and ﬁ led within 30 days 
after release of a public notice that such petition has been ﬁ led. Any replies in a Commission 
proceeding must be served on all parties and ﬁ led within 15 days thereafter. 
 (f) Copies of petitions for declaratory rulings and waivers must be served on interested parties, 
including parties against whom the petitioner seeks to enforce the restriction or parties whose 
restrictions the petitioner seeks to prohibit. A certiﬁ cate of service stating on whom the petition 
was served must be ﬁ led with the petition. In addition, in a Commission proceeding brought 
by an association or a local government, constructive notice of the proceeding must be given 
to members of the association or to the citizens under the local government’s jurisdiction. In a 
court proceeding brought by an association, an association must give constructive notice of the 
proceeding to its members. Where constructive notice is required, the petitioner or plaintiff must 
ﬁ le with the Commission or the court overseeing the proceeding a copy of the constructive notice 
with a statement explaining where the notice was placed and why such placement was reasonable. 
 (g) In any proceeding regarding the scope or interpretation of any provision of this section, the 
burden of demonstrating that a particular governmental or nongovernmental restriction complies 
with this section and does not impair the installation, maintenance, or use of devices used for 
over-the-air reception of video programming services or devices used to receive or transmit ﬁ xed 
wireless signals shall be on the party that seeks to impose or maintain the restriction. 

Selected Applicable Law 107
 (h) All allegations of fact contained in petitions and related pleadings before the Commission 
must be supported by afﬁ davit of a person or persons with actual knowledge thereof. An 
original and two copies of all petitions and pleadings should be addressed to the Secretary, 
Federal Communications Commission, 445 12th Street, SW, Washington, D.C. 20554. Copies 
of the petitions and related pleadings will be available for public inspection in the Reference 
Information Center, Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau, Federal Communications 
Commission, 445 12th Street, SW, Washington, D.C. 20554. Copies will be available for 
purchase from the Commission’s contract copy center, and the Commission decisions will be 
available on the Internet. 
 6.8  Federal Law Relating to FM Transmitters 
 For FM broadcast stations, there are at least two arguments that a certain minimum height has a federal 
mandate that preempts local zoning. They are found in 47 CFR §73.211 — Power and antenna height 
requirements, as well as 47 CFR §73.315 — FM transmitter location. A comparable argument, that an 
FCC-mandated minimum height in 47 CFR §73.189 and §73.190 preempted a local zoning maximum 
height, succeeded for an AM broadcast station in  Koor Communications v. City of Lebanon , 148  N.H. 
618 (2002), 813  A.2d 418 (N.H. 2002) ( http://www.courts.state.nh.us/supreme/opinions/2002/0212/
koor152.htm ). Note that the minimum power requirements could also be used to claim preemption of 
a local attempt to set RF exposure levels below Ofﬁ ce of Engineering Technology (OET)-65 levels. 
Notice that §73.211(b) could be used to argue that a municipality can suggest lowering the power of 
an FM station, or lowering the height, but, because §73.211(b) presents an FCC-mandated minimum 
(i.e., preempting local zoning), the municipality cannot have both.
   47 CFR §73.211 — Power and antenna height requirements 
     Subpart B — FM Broadcast Stations   
 (a) Minimum requirements. (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (a)(3) and (b)(2) of this 
section, FM stations must operate with a minimum effective radiated power (ERP) as follows: 
 (i) The minimum ERP for Class A stations is 0.1   kW 
 (ii) The ERP for Class B1 stations must exceed 6   kW 
 (iii) The ERP for Class B stations must exceed 25   kW 
 (iv) The ERP for Class C3 stations must exceed 6   kW 
 (v) The ERP for Class C2 stations must exceed 25   kW 
 (vi) The ERP for Class C1 stations must exceed 50   kW 
 (vii) The minimum ERP for Class C and C0 stations is 100   kW 
 (2) Class C0 stations must have an antenna height above average terrain (HAAT) of at least 300 
meters (984 feet). Class C stations must have an antenna height above average terrain (HAAT) 
of at least 451 meters (1480 feet). 

108 Chapter 6
 (3) Stations of any class except Class A may have an ERP less than that speciﬁ ed in paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section, provided that the reference distance, determined in accordance with 
paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section, exceeds the distance to the class contour for the next lower 
class. Class A stations may have an ERP less than 100 watts provided that the reference distance, 
determined in accordance with paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section, equals or exceeds 6 kilometers. 
 (b) Maximum limits. (1) Except for stations located in Puerto Rico or the Virgin Islands, the 
maximum ERP in any direction, reference HAAT, and distance to the class contour for each FM 
station class are listed below: 
 Station class Maximum ERP Reference HAAT in meters (ft.) Class contour distance in kilometers 
 A 6  kW (7.8  dBk) 100 (328) 28 
 B1 25  kW (14.0  dBk) 100 (328) 39 
 B 50  kW (17.0  dBk) 150 (492) 52 
 C3 25  kW (14.0  dBk) 100 (328) 39 
 C2 50  kW (17.0  dBk) 150 (492) 52 
 C1 100  kW (20.0  dBk) 299 (981) 72 
 C0 100  kW (20.0  dBk) 450 (1476) 83 
 C 100  kW (20.0  dBk) 600 (1968) 92 
 (i) The reference distance of a station is obtained by ﬁ nding the predicted distance to the 1mV/
m contour using Figure 1 of Sec. 73.333 and then rounding to the nearest kilometer. Antenna 
HAAT is determined using the procedure in Sec. 73.313. If the HAAT so determined is less than 
30 meters (100 feet), a HAAT of 30 meters must be used when ﬁ nding the predicted distance to 
the 1  mV/m contour. 
 (ii) If a station’s ERP is equal to the maximum for its class, its antenna HAAT must not exceed 
the reference HAAT, regardless of the reference distance. For example, a Class A station 
operating with 6   kW ERP may have an antenna HAAT of 100 meters, but not 101 meters, even 
though the reference distance is 28   km in both cases. 
 (iii) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(3) of this section, no station will be authorized in 
Zone I or I-A with an ERP equal to 50  kW and a HAAT exceeding 150 meters. No station will be 
authorized in Zone II with an ERP equal to 100  kW and a HAAT exceeding 600 meters. 
 (2) If a station has an antenna HAAT greater than the reference HAAT for its class, its ERP must 
be lower than the class maximum such that the reference distance does not exceed the class 
contour distance. If the antenna HAAT is so great that the station’s ERP must be lower than the 
minimum ERP for its class (speciﬁ ed in paragraphs (a)(1) and(a)(3) of this section), that lower 
ERP will become the minimum for that station. 
 (3) For stations located in Puerto Rico or the Virgin Islands, the maximum ERP in any direction, 
reference HAAT, and distance to the class contour for each FM station class are listed below: 
 Station class Maximum ERP Reference HAAT in meters (ft.) Class contour distance in kilometers 
 A 6  kW (7.8  dBk) 240 (787) 42 
 B1 25kW (14.0  dBk) 150 (492) 46 
 B 50kW (17.0  dBk) 472 (1549) 78 

Selected Applicable Law 109
 (c) Existing stations. Stations authorized prior to March 1, 1984 that do not conform to the 
requirements of this section may continue to operate as authorized. Stations operating with 
facilities in excess of those speciﬁ ed in paragraph (b) of this section may not increase their 
effective radiated powers or extend their 1   mV/m ﬁ eld strength contour beyond the location 
permitted by their present authorizations. The provisions of this section will not apply to 
applications to increase facilities for those stations operating with less than the minimum power 
speciﬁ ed in paragraph (a) of this section. 
 (d) Existing Class C stations below minimum antenna HAAT. Class C stations authorized prior 
to January 19, 2001 that do not meet the minimum antenna HAAT speciﬁ ed in paragraph 
(a)(2) of this section for Class C stations may continue to operate as authorized subject to the 
reclassiﬁ cation procedures set forth in Note 4 to Sec. 73.3573. 
 47 CFR §73.315 — FM transmitter location 
 (a)  The transmitter location shall be chosen so that, on the basis of the effective radiated 
power and antenna height above average terrain employed, a minimum ﬁ eld strength of 70   dB 
above one uV/m (dBu), or 3.16   mV/m, will be provided  over the entire principal community 
to be served .
 (b) The transmitter location should be chosen to maximize coverage to the city of license while 
minimizing interference. This is normally accomplished by locating in the least populated 
area available while maintaining the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section. In general, 
the transmitting antenna of a station should be located in the most sparsely populated area 
available at the highest elevation available. The location of the antenna should be so chosen 
that line-of-sight can be obtained from the antenna over the principle city or cities to be served; 
in no event should there be a major obstruction in this path. 
 (c) The transmitting location should be selected so that the 1   mV/m contour encompasses the 
urban population within the area to be served. It is recognized that topography, shape of the 
desired service area, and population distribution may make the choice of a transmitter location 
difﬁ cult. In such cases consideration may be given to the use of a directional antenna system, 
although it is generally preferable to choose a site where a nondirectional antenna may be 
employed.
 (d) In cases of questionable antenna locations it is desirable to conduct propagation tests 
to indicate the ﬁ eld strength expected in the principal city or cities to be served and in other 
areas, particularly where severe shadow problems may be expected. In considering applications 
proposing the use of such locations, the Commission may require site tests to be made. Such 
tests should include measurements made in accordance with the measurement procedures 
described in Sec. 73.314, and full data thereon shall be supplied to the Commission. The test 
transmitter should employ an antenna having a height as close as possible to the proposed 
antenna height, using a balloon or other support if necessary and feasible. Information 
concerning the authorization of site tests may be obtained from the Commission upon request. 
 (e) Cognizance must of course be taken regarding the possible hazard of the proposed antenna 
structure to aviation and the proximity of the proposed site to airports and airways. Procedures 
and standards with respect to the Commission’s consideration of proposed antenna structures 
which will serve as a guide to persons intending to apply for radio station licenses are contained 
in Part 17 of this chapter (Construction, Marking, and Lighting of Antenna Structures). 
(Emphasis supplied.) 

110 Chapter 6
 6.9  Federal Law Relating to Broadcast Station Locations 
 As you consider the location of an FM station, do not forget the obligations of an FM licensee to AM 
broadcast licensees with respect to construction near or installation on an AM broadcast tower.
   47 CFR §73.1692 —FM transmitter location  
 SUBPART H — RULES APPLICABLE TO ALL BROADCAST STATIONS 
 Where a broadcast licensee or permittee proposes to mount a broadcast antenna on an AM 
station tower, or where construction is proposed within 0.8   km of an AM nondirectional tower 
or within 3.2  km of an AM directional station, the broadcast licensee or permittee is responsible 
for ensuring that the construction does not adversely affect the AM station, as follows: 
 (a) Installations on an AM nondirectional tower. During installation of the broadcast antenna 
and related equipment, the AM station shall determine operating power by the indirect method 
(see Sec. 73.51). Upon the completion of the installation, antenna impedance measurements 
on the AM antenna shall be made, and, prior to or simultaneously with the ﬁ ling of the license 
application covering the broadcast station installation, an application on FCC Form 302-AM 
(including a tower sketch of the installation) shall be ﬁ led with the Commission for the AM 
station to return to direct power measurement. 
 (b) Installations on an AM directional array. Prior to commencing construction, the broadcast 
permittee or licensee shall notify the AM station so that, if necessary, the AM station may 
determine operating power by the indirect method (see Sec. 73.51) and request special 
temporary authority pursuant to Sec. 73.1635 to operate with parameters at variance in 
order to maintain monitoring point ﬁ eld strengths within authorized limits. Both prior to the 
commencement of construction and upon completion of construction, a partial proof of 
performance (as deﬁ ned by Sec. 73.154) shall be conducted to establish that the AM array has 
not been adversely affected. Prior to or simultaneously with ﬁ ling of the license application to 
cover the broadcast station construction, the results of the partial proof of performance shall 
be ﬁ led with the Commission on Form 302-AM. 
 (c) Tower erections or modiﬁ cations within 0.8  km of an AM nondirectional tower. Prior to 
commencing the construction of tower modiﬁ cations, or the erection of a new tower, within 
0.8  km of an AM nondirectional tower, the broadcast permittee or licensee is required to notify 
the AM station so that the AM station may commence determining operating power by the 
indirect method (see Sec. 73.51). The broadcast licensee or permittee shall be responsible for 
the installation and continued maintenance of detuning apparatus necessary to prevent adverse 
effects on the radiation pattern of the AM station. Both prior to construction of the tower 
modiﬁ cations and upon completion of construction, antenna impedance measurements of the 
AM station shall be made. In addition, sufﬁ cient ﬁ eld strength measurements taken at a minimum 
of 10 locations along each of 8 equally spaced radials, shall be made to establish that the AM 
radiation pattern is essentially omnidirectional. Prior or simultaneously with the ﬁ ling of the 
application for license to cover this permit, the results of the impedance measurements and the 
ﬁ eld strength measurements shall be ﬁ led with the Commission on FCC Form 302-AM for the AM 
station to return to the direct method of power determination. 
 (d) Tower erections or modiﬁ cations within 3.2  km of an AM directional station. Prior to 
commencing construction of tower modiﬁ cations, or the erection of a new tower structure, within 
3.2  km of an AM directional array, the broadcast permittee or licensee shall notify the AM station 
so that, if necessary, the AM station may determine operating power by the indirect method 

Selected Applicable Law 111
(see Sec. 73.51) and request special temporary authority pursuant to Sec. 73.1635 to operate with 
parameters at variance in order to maintain monitoring point ﬁ eld strengths within authorized 
limits. The broadcast licensee or permittee shall be responsible for the installation and continued 
maintenance of detuning apparatus necessary to prevent adverse effects upon the radiation pattern 
of the AM station. Both prior to the commencement of construction and upon completion of 
construction, a partial proof of performance (as deﬁ ned by Sec. 73.154) shall be conducted to 
establish that the AM array has not been adversely affected. Prior to or simultaneously with ﬁ ling of 
the license application to cover the broadcast station construction, the results of the partial proof 
of performance shall be ﬁ led with the Commission on Form 302-AM. 
 6.10  Federal Law Relating to Cellular Telephone, PCS, Paging, etc 
 Perhaps you were hoping that the Telecommunications Act of 1996 contained something special. 
Perhaps you’ve even heard that it had very speciﬁ c preemptions. The answer is that it has some 
very speciﬁ c things to help the companies in personal wireless services. Don’t get too anxious. The 
deﬁ nition of personal wireless services is very speciﬁ c, and the preemption only works if you represent 
a covered service. Personal wireless services include all commercial mobile radio services, including 
personal communications services (PCS), cellular telephone, two-way mobile radio, and paging; 
unlicensed wireless services; and common carrier wireless exchange access services. 
 The preemption you want to know about is found at 47 USC §332(c)(7)(C):
   §332. Mobile services 
 (c) Regulatory treatment of mobile services 
 (7) Preservation of local zoning authority 
 (A) General authority 
 Except as provided in this paragraph, nothing in this chapter shall limit or affect the authority of 
a State or local government or instrumentality thereof over decisions regarding the placement, 
construction, and modiﬁ cation of personal wireless service facilities. 
 (B) Limitations 
 (i) The regulation of the placement, construction, and modiﬁ cation of personal wireless service 
facilities by any State or local government or instrumentality thereof —
 (I) shall not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services; and 
 (II) shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services. 
 (ii) A State or local government or instrumentality thereof shall act on any request for 
authorization to place, construct, or modify personal wireless service facilities within a 
reasonable period of time after the request is duly ﬁ led with such government or instrumentality, 
taking into account the nature and scope of such request. 
 (iii) Any decision by a State or local government or instrumentality thereof to deny a request to 
place, construct, or modify personal wireless service facilities shall be in writing and supported 
by substantial evidence contained in a written record. 

112 Chapter 6
 (iv) No State or local government or instrumentality thereof may regulate the placement, 
construction, and modiﬁ cation of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of the 
environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with 
the Commission’s regulations concerning such emissions. 
 (v) Any person adversely affected by any ﬁ nal action or failure to act by a State or local 
government or any instrumentality thereof that is inconsistent with this subparagraph may, 
within 30 days after such action or failure to act, commence an action in any court of competent 
jurisdiction. The court shall hear and decide such action on an expedited basis. Any person 
adversely affected by an act or failure to act by a State or local government or any instrumentality 
thereof that is inconsistent with clause (iv) may petition the Commission for relief. 
 (C) Deﬁ nitions 
 For purposes of this paragraph 
 (i) the term  “ personal wireless services ” means commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless 
services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services; 
 (ii) the term  “ personal wireless service facilities ” means facilities for the provision of personal 
wireless services; and 
 (iii) the term  “ unlicensed wireless service ” means the offering of telecommunications services 
using duly authorized devices which do not require individual licenses, but does not mean the 
provision of direct-to-home satellite services (as deﬁ ned in section 303 (v) of this title). 
 6.11  Federal Law Relating to FAA Clearance 
 Now and again an author gets lucky, because someone else has written what needs to be written. This is 
a fragment of a question/answer session with the late John Hennessee, N1KB, Regulatory Information 
Specialist at the Regulatory Information branch at ARRL, the national association for Amateur Radio, 
regarding tower restrictions near airports. Height is height, and the nature of the FCC-licensed service 
is irrelevant, so commercial users are bound by the same rules. 
 I plan to buy land soon and install a tower at 100 or 125 feet. The local Code Enforcement Ofﬁ cer 
said that the local ordinances did not state any prohibition on radio amateur tower height, but he said 
that the local municipal airport was about 3 miles from the land I want to put the tower on .   .   . and 
that he thinks that the hill I will be putting the tower on is in the direct ﬂ ight path. Where are the FCC 
rules on this? Can you send me a copy of the pertinent FCC rules? 
 John Hennessee, N1KB, replied: 
 In November of 1995, the FCC adopted rules requiring tower owners to register with the FCC 
each antenna structure for which Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) notiﬁ cation is required. 
Generally, this includes all structures more than 200 feet above ground or certain towers located near 
or on a public use airport. The FCC has long required registration and FAA notiﬁ cation, but they now 
have speciﬁ c rules that appear in Part 17 of FCC rules. FCC may assess stiff ﬁ nes to tower owners 
who do not comply and the ﬁ nes, that can range up to $10,000, appear in Section 1.80 of FCC rules. 
If required, all tower owners, including amateurs, must register their towers with the FCC and they 
are required to do so immediately. Part 17 mandates marking and lighting of non-exempt antenna 

Selected Applicable Law 113
structures to help protect the safety of air navigation. A copy of Part 17 is available from the FCC 
Web page at  http://wireless.fcc.gov/index.htm?job    rules_and_regulations . 
 [Remember, the federal tower registration process, and local zoning ordinances, are completely sepa-
rate. They should not be confused.] 
 Most antenna structures that are higher than 200 feet above ground level or that may interfere with the 
ﬂ ight path of a nearby airport must be cleared by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and regis-
tered with the FCC. Unless speciﬁ cally exempted, FAA notiﬁ cation and FCC registration are required: 
 1. For any construction or alteration of more than 200 feet in height above ground level at its site. 
 2. When requested by the FAA if it is determined that the antenna structure might exceed an obstruc-
tion standard of the FAA. 
 3. For any construction or alteration of greater height than an imaginary surface extending outward 
and upward at one of the following slopes that represent the ratio of distance from the longest runway 
to the feet in height an antenna may be: 
 * 100 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 20,000 feet from the nearest point of the nearest runway of 
each Speciﬁ ed Airport with at least one runway longer than 3,200 feet in actual length. If the runway 
is longer than 1       km (3,280 feet) and the airport is within 6.1       km (3.79 miles) of your proposed instal-
lation, your antenna may be no higher than 1 meter (3.28 feet) above the airport elevation for every 
100 meters (328 feet) from the nearest runway. This is a slope of 100 to 1. 
 * 50 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the nearest point of the nearest runway of 
each Speciﬁ ed Airport with its longest runway shorter than 3,280 feet (6.1     km or 3.79 miles) in actual 
length. If the runway is shorter than 1  km (3,280 feet) and the airport is within 6.1  km (3.79 miles) of 
your proposed installation, your antenna may be no higher than 2 meters (6.56 feet) above the airport 
elevation for every 100 meters (328 feet) from the nearest runway. This is a slope of 50 to 1. 
 * 25 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the nearest point of the nearest landing and 
takeoff area of each heliport at a Speciﬁ ed Airport. If the installation is within 1.5  km (4,920 feet) of a 
helipad, your antenna may be no higher than 4 meters (13.1 feet) above the airport elevation for every 
100 meters (328 feet) from the nearest landing pad. That’s a slope of 25 to 1. 
Speciﬁ ed Airport
 * A public use airport listed in the Airport Directory of the current Aeronautical Information Manual 
or in either the Alaska or Paciﬁ c Airman’s Guide and Chart Supplement; 
 * An airport under construction, that is the subject of a notice or proposal on ﬁ le with the FAA, and 
except for military airports, it is clearly indicated that the airport will be available for public use; or 
 * An airport that is operated by an armed force of the United States. 
Which Towers Are Exempt?
 The following types of antenna structures are speciﬁ cally exempted from the FAA notiﬁ cation 
requirements and FCC registration requirements by Section 17.14 of FCC rules: 
 1. Any antenna structure that would be shielded by existing structures of a permanent and substan-
tial character or by natural terrain or topographic features of equal or greater height, and would be 
located in the congested area of a city, town or settlement where it is evident beyond all reasonable 
doubt that the structure so shielded will not adversely affect safety in air navigation. 

114 Chapter 6
 2. Any antenna structure of 20 feet or less in height (except one that would increase the height of 
another antenna structure.) 
 3. An antenna which is not near an airport and is less than 200 feet tall. 
 If you are still unsure if your tower needs to be registered, you may call the FCC at 1 – 888 CALL 
FCC or contact them by e-mail at mayday@fcc.gov, or you may use online TOWAIR software that is 
available on the FCC’s website at:  http://wireless2.fcc.gov/UlsApp/AsrSearch/towairSearch.jsp 
 If your antenna is near an airport or over 200 feet tall, check this FCC Web site for additional infor-
mation:  http://www.fcc.gov/wtb/antenna . Owners of antenna structures required to be registered pur-
suant to Section 17.4 of the Commission’s rules must ﬁ rst ﬁ le FAA Form 7460-1 and obtain a ﬁ nal 
determination of  “ no hazard ” for the structure. The FAA form is available from the Web at:  http://
forms.faa.gov/forms/faa7460-1.pdf . Tower owners must ﬁ le FCC Form 854 with the Commission 
either manually or electronically to register the antenna structure. The FCC form is available from: 
 http://www.fcc.gov/formpage.html . 
 If required to register, an owner should register the antenna structure immediately. The reason for this pro-
cess is to provide a measure of safety in air navigation against tall structures that could cause an accident. 
 If you have reason to believe that the owner of a tall tower over 200 feet, or near an airport, is not car-
rying out his or her antenna structure registration responsibilities, you are required to (1) notify the 
owner; (2) notify the site management company (if applicable); and (3) notify the FCC. The FCC will 
provide additional instructions to the tower owner based on the speciﬁ cs of the case. 
 If the tower owner is unable to fulﬁ ll the Part 17 requirements for painting and lighting due to neg-
ligence, bankruptcy or whatever, the tenants may be required to carry out these duties if speciﬁ cally 
asked by the FCC. Anyone who rents or is given space on tall towers should have a signed legal docu-
ment addressing maintenance concerns as well as tower access. 
 Just to repeat, no matter the FCC-licensed service, amateur or commercial, the antenna site registration 
rules, the FAA/FCC marking and painting rules, and the FAA rules for antennas near airports all apply. 
 6.12  Federal Law Relating to RF Exposure 
 Rather than reinvent the wheel, the FCC’s short bulletin on radiofrequency safety is reproduced here. It 
provides a basis to understand the situation, and a host of references.
   FCC Policy on Human Exposure to Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields 
 The FCC is required by the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 to evaluate the effect of 
emissions from FCC-regulated transmitters on the quality of the human environment. At the 
present time there is no federally mandated radiofrequency (RF) exposure standard. However, 
several non-government organizations, such as the American National Standards Institute 
(ANSI), the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. (IEEE), and the National 
Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP) have issued recommendations 
for human exposure to RF electromagnetic ﬁ elds. The potential hazards associated with RF 
electromagnetic ﬁ elds are discussed in OET Bulletin No. 56,  “ Questions and Answers About the 
Biological Effects and Potential Hazards of Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields. ”

Selected Applicable Law 115
 On August 1, 1996, the Commission adopted the NCRP’s recommended Maximum Permissible 
Exposure limits for ﬁ eld strength and power density for the transmitters operating at frequencies 
of 300       kHz to 100       GHz. In addition, the Commission adopted the speciﬁ c absorption rate (SAR) 
limits for devices operating within close proximity to the body as speciﬁ ed within the ANSI/IEEE 
C95.1-1992 guidelines. (See Report and Order, FCC 96 – 326) The Commission’s requirements 
are detailed in Parts 1 and 2 of the FCC’s Rules and Regulations [47 C.F.R. 1.1307(b), 1.1310, 
2.1091, 2.1093]. 
 Certain applicants are required to routinely perform an environmental evaluation with respect to 
determining compliance with the Commission’s exposure limits. In the event that an applicant 
determines the site is not within compliance, the submission of an Environmental Analysis is 
required. The SAR limits for portable and mobile devices became effective August 7, 1996. 
The Commission’s limits for ﬁ eld strength and power density became effective October 15, 
1997 (see 2nd MO & O) for all services except the Amateur Radio Service. The new limits became 
effective for the Amateur Radio Service on January 1, 1998 (see First Memorandum Opinion and 
Order). As of September 1, 2000, all FCC licensees were required to be in compliance with the 
FCC’s RF exposure limits (See 47 C.F.R. 1.1307(b)(5)). 
 The following services and devices are generally required to routinely perform an environmental 
evaluation. However many transmitters licensed under these service categories may be excluded 
from routine evaluation if they meet certain height and power thresholds (see OET Bulletin 65 
for exclusion criteria). 
 * Experimental Radio Service – Part 5 
   * Radio Frequency Devices – Part 15 
 * Multipoint Distribution Service – Part 21, Subpart K 
 * Paging and Radiotelephone Service – Part 22, Subpart E 
 * Cellular Radiotelephone Service – Part 22, Subpart H 
 * Personal Communications Services – Part 24 
 * Satellite Communications – Part 25 
 * General Wireless Communications Service – Part 26 
 * Wireless Communications Service – Part 27 
 * Radio Broadcast Services – Part 73 
 * Experimental, Auxiliary, and Special Broadcast and Other Program Distributional 
Services – Part 74 
 * Stations in the Maritime Service – Part 80 
 * Private Land Mobile, Paging Operations – Part 90 
 * Private Land Mobile,  “ Covered ” Specialized Mobile Radio – Part 90 
 * Amateur Radio Service – Part 97 
 * Local Multipoint Distribution Service – Part 101, Subpart L 
 Mobile and portable devices used as follows: 
 * Cellular Radio Service 

116 Chapter 6
 * Personal Communications Service 
 * Satellite Communications Branch 
 * General Wireless Communications Service 
 * Wireless Communications Service 
 * Maritime Service 
 *  “ Covered ” Specialized Mobile Radio Service 
 * Unlicensed PCS and Millimeter Wave Devices 
 The Commission issued a Second Memorandum Opinion and Order on August 25, 1997, 
to address petitions regarding the adoption of new exposure limits. OET has revised OST 
Bulletin No. 65, to provide guidance on acceptable methods of determining compliance 
with the Commission’s new exposure limits. The revised bulletin, OET Bulletin 65, Evaluating 
Compliance With FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radiofrequency Electromagnetic 
Fields, was issued simultaneously with the release of the Second MO & O. 
  http://www.fcc.gov/oet/rfsafety/background.html          
 The best place to begin your exploration of the wealth of FCC information on this topic is at  http://
www.fcc.gov/oet/rfsafety/Welcome.html . There are other FCC information sheets on this subject as 
well, including: 
 http://www.fcc.gov/cgb/consumerfacts/rfexposure.html 
 http://www.fcc.gov/oet/rfsafety/cellpcs.html 
 FAQ’s may be found at: 
 http://www.fcc.gov/cgb/cellular.html (contains answers to the most frequently asked questions received 
by the Commission concerning cellular telephones) 
 http://www.fcc.gov/oet/rfsafety/rf-faqs.html and its update 
 http://www.fcc.gov/oet/rfsafety/rfupdate.html (contains answers to the most frequently asked questions 
received by the Commission concerning RF ﬁ elds and their application) 
 Also, see OET Bulletin 56, at  http://www.fcc.gov/oet/info/documents/bulletins/Welcome.html#56 . The 
primary source is OET Bulletin 65, known as OET-65, which can be found at  http://www.fcc.gov/oet/
info/documents/bulletins/Welcome.html#65 . 
 Fortunately, if you are any kind of serious engineer, you can follow the instructions in OET-65 and 
evaluate your own proposal in light of your circumstances, as the rules vary by frequency. 
 Rather than repeat what is so ably prepared and readily found on FCC websites, the space available in 
this book is best spent examining less well known issues, principally having to do with local attempts 
to regulate RF exposure, a ﬁ eld that, despite widespread belief, is not completely preempted by the 
FCC. Yet? 

Selected Applicable Law 117
 6.13  Tort Law Relating to RF Exposure 
 Attempting to help you obtain the necessary permits, there are many tempting tales to be told that must 
be ignored because they are simply outside the scope of this book. Nonetheless, the curious will want 
to read about an attempt by highly skilled plaintiff’s personal injury lawyers to prove that cell phones 
caused a case of cancer. 
 6.13.1  Newman v. Motorola 
 Claiming that his use of a wireless handheld telephone manufactured by Motorola caused his 
brain cancer, Dr. Christopher Newman and his wife ﬁ led a multicount complaint against numerous 
defendants in Baltimore City Circuit Court. That was just the beginning. 
 The ﬁ rst Court decision was  Newman v. Motorola, Inc. , 125 F.Supp.2d 717 (D. Md. 2000), denying 
a motion to remand to state court ( http://www.mdd.uscourts.gov/Opinions/Opinions/newman1200.
pdf ; see ﬁ lename newman1200.pdf on the CD). Subsequent District Court rulings appear at  Newman 
v. Motorola , USCA 4th, 2003, found at  Newman v. Motorola, Inc. , 218 F. Supp. 2d 769 (D. Md. 
2002),  http://www.mdd.uscourts.gov/Opinions/Opinions/newman0902.pdf (Daubert Ruling) (see 
ﬁ lename newman0902.pdf on the CD), and  http://www.mdd.uscourts.gov/Opinions/Opinions/
ChrisNewman0902.pdf (Memorandum and Order) (see ﬁ lename ChrisNewman0902.pdf on the CD). 
 At this point, with a record of no wins and three losses, the Plaintiff appealed to the U.S. Circuit Court 
of Appeals. That unpublished opinion is available at  http://pacer.ca4.uscourts.gov/opinion.pdf/022424
.U.pdf (see ﬁ lename Unpublished Newman Ruling.pdf on the CD). 
 Newman lost again. The decisions are fascinating. 
 6.14  State Law Relating to RF Exposure 
 There are two intriguing cases, well litigated, that relate to permitting. 
 6.14.1  WIZN-FM, Burlington, VT 
 Burlington Broadcasters, owner of WIZN-FM, fought off claims that the municipality might regulate 
RFI; see Freeman v. Burlington Broadcasters , 204 F. 3d 311 (2d Cir. 2000), cert. denied, 531 U.S. 917 
(2000),  http://www.fcc.gov/ogc/documents/opinions/2000/97-9141.doc . Their opponents thereafter 
launched a claim that, by virtue of the RF emitted into the atmosphere, WIZN-FM was creating  “ air 
pollution. ”
 WIZN’s ﬁ nal brief, described as  “ Supplemental Findings of Fact ” (SFOF), may be found at  http://
www.antennazoning.com/docs/wizn-supplemental-ﬁ ndings.doc and on the CD as ﬁ lename wizn-
supplemental-ﬁ ndings.doc. The cover letter and table of contents for the SFOF may be found at 
 http://www.antennazoning.com/main/page_commercial_legal_library.html  and on the CD as ﬁ lename 
wizn-table-of-contents.doc and wizn-sfof-cover.doc. 

118 Chapter 6
   Subpart I —Procedures Implementing the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 
Source: 51 FR 15000, Apr. 22, 1986, unless otherwise noted 
 SEC. 1.1301 BASIS AND PURPOSE 
 The provisions of this subpart implement Subchapter I of the National Environmental Policy 
Act of 1969, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 4321 – 4335. 
 Sec. 1.1302 Cross-reference; Regulations of the Council on Environmental Quality. 
 A further explanation regarding implementation of the National Environmental Policy Act 
is provided by the regulations issued by the Council on Environmental Quality, 40 CFR 
1500 – 1508.28.
 SEC. 1.1303 SCOPE 
 The provisions of this subpart shall apply to all Commission actions that may or will have 
a signiﬁ cant impact on the quality of the human environment. To the extent that other 
provisions of the Commission’s rules and regulations are inconsistent with the subpart, the 
provisions of this subpart shall govern. 
 A 9 – 0 decision from the Vermont Environmental Board found for WIZN. (Ask yourself what type of 
person volunteers,  in Vermont , to serve on an Environmental Board — would they be property-rights 
conservatives?) 
 Readers are urged to read the cover letter, table of contents, and proposed Supplemental Findings 
of Fact submitted by Burlington Broadcasters found at  http://www.antennazoning.com/main/page_
commercial_legal_library.html . The ﬁ nal decision of the Vermont Environmental Board may also be 
found at that page, where you can download the decision and the permit. 
 6.14.2  KRKO-AM, Seattle, WA 
 At press time, this battle continues, but KRKO-AM has received an FCC decision known as a Finding 
of No Signiﬁ cant Impact (FONSI); see  http://fjallfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-08-
1272A1.pdf . This decision will inform the reader well about RF exposure, as well as environmental 
protection issues. On the other hand, a local decision applied “ The Precautionary Principle, ” and 
the matter had not come to rest at press time. Nonetheless, the decision is worth reading; see  www
.co.snohomish.wa.us/documents/Departments/Council/Agendas/07109195ExaminerDecision.pdf .
 6.15  Federal Law Relating to Environmental Protection 
 This is no fun. As there are so many NIMBYs who will use the National Environmental Policy Act 
(NEPA) statute against you, there is really no substitute for reading the original yourself to determine 
what applies. It can be found on the CD as ﬁ lename CFR 47 Vol 1.pdf; the relevant text begins on 
page 326 with the heading “ Section 1.1301 ” and ends at the conclusion of Section 1.1319 on page 344. 
If you face major opposition, the truth is that you will probably be forced to employ all sorts of 
experts, such as a historian, a biologist, and so forth. Get over it and get on with it. There are ﬁ rms that 
specialize in providing the necessary documentation and will walk you through it.

Selected Applicable Law 119
 SEC. 1.1304 INFORMATION AND ASSISTANCE 
 For general information and assistance concerning the provisions of this subpart, the Ofﬁ ce of 
General Counsel may be contacted, (202) 632-6990. For more speciﬁ c information, the Bureau 
responsible for processing a speciﬁ c application should be contacted. 
 SEC. 1.1305 ACTIONS WHICH NORMALLY WILL HAVE A SIGNIFICANT IMPACT UPON THE 
ENVIRONMENT, FOR WHICH ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS MUST BE PREPARED 
 Any Commission action deemed to have a signiﬁ cant effect upon the quality of the human 
environment requires the preparation of a Draft Environmental Impact Statement (DEIS) and 
Final Environmental Impact Statement (FEIS) (collectively referred to as EISs) (see Secs. 1.1314, 
1.1315 and 1.1317). The Commission has reviewed representative actions and has found no 
common pattern which would enable it to specify actions that will thus automatically require EISs. 
 Note: Our current application forms refer applicants to Sec. 1.1305 to determine if their 
proposals are such that the submission of environmental information is required (see Sec. 
1.1311). Until the application forms are revised to reﬂ ect our new environmental rules, 
applicants should refer to Sec. 1.1307. Section 1.1307 now delineates those actions for which 
applicants must submit environmental information.  
 SEC. 1.1306 ACTIONS WHICH ARE CATEGORICALLY EXCLUDED FROM ENVIRONMENTAL 
PROCESSING 
 (a) Except as provided in Sec. 1.1307(c) and (d), 
 Commission actions not covered by Sec. 1.1307(a) and (b) are deemed individually and 
cumulatively to have no signiﬁ cant effect on the quality of the human environment and are 
categorically excluded from environmental processing. 
 (b) Speciﬁ cally, any Commission action with respect to any new application, or minor or major 
modiﬁ cations of existing or authorized facilities or equipment, will be categorically excluded, 
provided such proposals do not: 
 (1) Involve a site location speciﬁ ed under Sec. 1.1307(a) (1) – (7), or 
 (2) Involve high intensity lighting under Sec. 1.1307(a)(8). 
 (3) Result in human exposure to radiofrequency radiation in excess of the applicable safety 
standards speciﬁ ed in Sec. 1.1307(b). 
 Note 1: The provisions of Sec. 1.1307(a) of this part requiring the preparation of EAs do not 
encompass the mounting of antenna(s) on an existing building or antenna tower unless Sec. 
1.1307(a)(4) of this part is applicable. Such antennas are subject to Sec. 1.1307(b) of this 
part and require EAs if their construction would result in human exposure to radiofrequency 
radiation in excess of the applicable health and safety guidelines cited in Sec. 1.1307(b) of this 
part. The provisions of Sec. 1.1307(a) and (b) of this part do not encompass the installation of 
aerial wire or cable over existing aerial corridors of prior or permitted use or the underground 
installation of wire or cable along existing underground corridors of prior or permitted use, 
established by the applicant or others. The use of existing buildings, towers, or corridors is an 
environmentally desirable alternative to the construction of new facilities and is encouraged. 
The provisions of Sec. 1.1307(a) and (b) of this part do not encompass the construction of new 
submarine cable systems. 

120 Chapter 6
 Note 2: The speciﬁ c height of an antenna tower or supporting structure, as well as the speciﬁ c 
diameter of a satellite earth station, in and of itself, will not be deemed sufﬁ cient to warrant 
environmental processing; see Secs. 1.1307 and 1.1308. 
 Note 3: The construction of an antenna tower or supporting structure in an established 
 “ antenna farm ” (i.e., an area in which similar antenna towers are clustered, whether or not such 
area has been ofﬁ cially designated as an antenna farm) will be categorically excluded unless one 
or more of the antennas to be mounted on the tower or structure are subject to the provisions 
of Sec. 1.1307(b) and the additional radiofrequency radiation from the antenna(s) on the new 
tower or structure would cause human exposure in excess of the applicable health and safety 
guidelines cited in Sec. 1.1307(b). 
 SEC. 1.1307 ACTIONS THAT MAY HAVE A SIGNIFICANT ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECT, FOR 
WHICH ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENTS (EAS) MUST BE PREPARED 
 (a) Commission actions with respect to the following types of facilities may signiﬁ cantly affect 
the environment and thus require the preparation of EAs by the applicant (see Secs. 1.1308 
and 1.1311) and may require further Commission environmental processing (see Secs. 1.1314, 
1.1315 and 1.1317): 
 (1) Facilities that are to be located in an ofﬁ cially designated wilderness area. 
 (2) Facilities that are to be located in an ofﬁ cially designated wildlife preserve. 
 (3) Facilities that: (i) May affect listed threatened or endangered species or designated critical 
habitats; or (ii) are likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any proposed endangered 
or threatened species or likely to result in the destruction or adverse modiﬁ cation of proposed 
critical habitats, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior pursuant to the Endangered 
Species Act of 1973. 
 Note: The list of endangered and threatened species is contained in 50 CFR 17.11, 17.22, 
222.23(a), and 227.4. The list of designated critical habitats is contained in 50 CFR 17.95, 
17.96, and Part 226. To ascertain the status of proposed species and habitats, inquiries may be 
directed to the Regional Director of the Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior. 
 (4) Facilities that may affect districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects, signiﬁ cant in American 
history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture, that are listed, or are eligible for listing, in 
the National Register of Historic Places. (See 16 U.S.C. 470w(5); 36 CFR 60 and 800.) 
 Note: The National Register is updated and republished in the  Federal Register each year in 
February. To ascertain whether a proposal affects a historical property of national signiﬁ cance, 
inquiries also may be made to the appropriate State Historic Preservation Ofﬁ cer; see 16 U.S.C. 
470a(b); 36 CFR Parts 63 and 800. 
 (5) Facilities that may affect Indian religious sites. 
 (6) Facilities to be located in a ﬂ ood plain. (See Executive Order 11988.) 
 (7) Facilities whose construction will involve signiﬁ cant change in surface features (e.g., wetland 
ﬁ ll, deforestation or water diversion). (In the case of wetlands on Federal property, see Executive 
Order 11990.) 
 (8) Antenna towers and/or supporting structures that are to be equipped with high intensity 
white lights which are to be located in residential neighborhoods, as deﬁ ned by the applicable 
zoning law. 

Selected Applicable Law 121
 (b) In addition to the actions listed in paragraph (a) of this section, Commission actions 
granting construction permits, licenses to transmit or renewals thereof, equipment 
authorizations or modiﬁ cations in existing facilities, require the preparation of an 
Environmental Assessment (EA) if the particular facility, operation or transmitter would cause 
human exposure to levels of radiofrequency radiation in excess of the limits in Secs. 1.1310 and 
2.1093 of this chapter. 
 Applications to the Commission for construction permits, licenses to transmit or renewals 
thereof, equipment authorizations or modiﬁ cations in existing facilities must contain a 
statement conﬁ rming compliance with the limits unless the facility, operation, or transmitter 
is categorically excluded, as discussed below. Technical information showing the basis for this 
statement must be submitted to the Commission upon request. 
 (1) The appropriate exposure limits in Secs. 1.1310 and 2.1093 of this chapter are generally 
applicable to all facilities, operations and transmitters regulated by the Commission. However, 
a determination of compliance with the exposure limits in Sec. 1.1310 or Sec. 2.1093 of this 
chapter (routine environmental evaluation), and preparation of an EA if the limits are exceeded, 
is necessary only for facilities, operations and transmitters that fall into the categories listed in 
Table 1, or those speciﬁ ed in paragraph (b)(2) of this section. All other facilities, operations 
and transmitters are categorically excluded from making such studies or preparing an EA, 
except as indicated in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. For purposes of Table 1, building-
mounted antennas means antennas mounted in or on a building structure that is occupied 
as a workplace or residence. The term power in column 2 of Table 1 refers to total operating 
power of the transmitting operation in question in terms of effective radiated power (ERP), 
equivalent isotropically radiated power (EIRP), or peak envelope power (PEP), as deﬁ ned in 
Sec. 2.1 of this chapter. For the case of the Cellular Radiotelephone Service, Subpart H of Part 
22 of this chapter; the Personal Communications Service, Part 24 of this chapter; and the 
Specialized Mobile Radio Service, Part 90 of this chapter, the phrase total power of all channels 
in column 2 of Table 1 means the sum of the ERP or EIRP of all co-located simultaneously 
operating transmitters owned and operated by a single licensee. When applying the criteria of 
Table 1, radiation in all directions should be considered. For the case of transmitting facilities 
using sectorized transmitting antennas, applicants and licensees should apply the criteria to 
all transmitting channels in a given sector, noting that for a highly directional antenna there is 
relatively little contribution to ERP or EIRP summation for other directions. 
 (2) Mobile and portable transmitting devices that operate in the Cellular Radiotelephone 
Service, the Personal Communications Services (PCS), the Satellite Communications Services, 
the General Wireless Communications Service, the Wireless Communications Service, the 
Maritime Services (ship earth stations only) and the Specialized Mobile Radio Service authorized 
under Subpart H of Parts 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 80, and 90 of this chapter are subject to routine 
environmental evaluation for RF exposure prior to equipment authorization or use, as speciﬁ ed 
in Secs. 2.1091 and 2.1093 of this chapter. Unlicensed PCS, unlicensed NII and millimeter wave 
devices are also subject to routine environmental evaluation for RF exposure prior to equipment 
authorization or use, as speciﬁ ed in Secs. 15.253(f), 15.255(g), and 15.319(i) and 15.407(f) of 
this chapter. All other mobile, portable, and unlicensed transmitting devices are categorically 
excluded from routine environmental evaluation for RF exposure under Secs. 2.1091 and 2.1093 
of this chapter except as speciﬁ ed in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. 
 (3) In general, when the guidelines speciﬁ ed in Sec. 1.1310 are exceeded in an accessible area 
due to the emissions from multiple ﬁ xed transmitters, actions necessary to bring the area into 
compliance are the shared responsibility of all licensees whose transmitters produce, at the area 

122 Chapter 6
in question, power density levels that exceed 5% of the power density exposure limit applicable 
to their particular transmitter or ﬁ eld strength levels that, when squared, exceed 5% of the 
square of the electric or magnetic ﬁ eld strength limit applicable to their particular transmitter. 
Owners of transmitter sites are expected to allow applicants and licensees to take reasonable 
steps to comply with the requirements contained in Sec. 1.1307(b) and, where feasible, should 
encourage co-location of transmitters and common solutions for controlling access to areas 
where the RF exposure limits contained in Sec. 1.1310 might be exceeded. 
 (i) Applicants for proposed (not otherwise excluded) transmitters, facilities or modiﬁ cations 
that would cause non-compliance with the limits speciﬁ ed in Sec. 1.1310 at an accessible area 
previously in compliance must submit an EA if emissions from the applicant’s transmitter or 
facility would result, at the area in question, in a power density that exceeds 5% of the power 
density exposure limit applicable to that transmitter or facility or in a ﬁ eld strength that, when 
squared, exceeds 5% of the square of the electric or magnetic ﬁ eld strength limit applicable to 
that transmitter or facility. 
 (ii) Renewal applicants whose (not otherwise excluded) transmitters or facilities contribute 
to the ﬁ eld strength or power density at an accessible area not in compliance with the limits 
speciﬁ ed in Sec. 1.1310 must submit an EA if emissions from the applicant’s transmitter or 
facility results, at the area in question, in a power density that exceeds 5% of the power density 
exposure limit applicable to that transmitter or facility or in a ﬁ eld strength that, when squared, 
exceeds 5% of the square of the electric or magnetic ﬁ eld strength limit applicable to that 
transmitter of facility. 
 (4) Transition Provisions. Applications ﬁ led with the Commission prior to October 15, 1997 
(or January 1, 1998, for the Amateur Radio Service only), for construction permits, licenses 
to transmit or renewals thereof, modiﬁ cations in existing facilities or other authorizations or 
renewals thereof require the preparation of an Environmental Assessment if the particular 
facility, operation or transmitter would cause human exposure to levels of radiofrequency 
radiation that are in excess of the requirements contained in paragraphs (b)(4)(i) through 
(b)(4)(iii) of this section. In accordance with Sec. 1.1312, if no new application or Commission 
action is required for a licensee to construct a new facility or physically modify an existing 
facility, e.g., geographic area licensees, and construction begins on or after October 15, 
1997, the licensee will be required to prepare an Environmental Assessment if construction or 
modiﬁ cation of the facility would not comply with the provisions of paragraph (b)(1) of this 
section. These transition provisions do not apply to applications for equipment authorization or 
use for mobile, portable and unlicensed devices as speciﬁ ed in paragraph (b)(2) of this section. 
 (i) For facilities and operations licensed or authorized under Parts 5, 21 (Subpart K), 25, 73, 
74 (Subparts A, G, I, and L), and 80 of this chapter, the  “ Radio Frequency Protection Guides ’ ’ 
recommended in  “ American National Standard Safety Levels with Respect to Human Exposure 
to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields, 300       kHz to 100       GHz ”  (ANSI C95.1-1982), issued 
by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and copyright 1982 by the Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., New York, NY, shall apply. With respect to Subpart K 
of Part 21 and Subpart I of Part 74 of this chapter, these requirements apply only to multipoint 
distribution service and instructional television ﬁ xed service stations transmitting with an 
equivalent isotropically radiated power (EIRP) in excess of 200 watts. With respect to Subpart L 
of Part 74 of this chapter, these requirements apply only to FM booster and translator stations 
transmitting with an effective radiated power (ERP) in excess of 100 watts. With respect to 
Part 80 of this chapter, these requirements apply only to ship earth stations. 

Selected Applicable Law 123
 (ii) For facilities and operations licensed or authorized under Part 24 of this chapter, licensees 
and manufacturers are required to ensure that their facilities and equipment comply with IEEE 
C95.1-1991 (ANSI/IEEE C95.1-1992),  “ Safety Levels With Respect to Human Exposure to Radio 
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields, 3   kHz to 300  GHz. ” Measurement methods are speciﬁ ed 
in IEEE C95.3-1991,  “ Recommended Practice for the Measurement of Potentially Hazardous 
Electromagnetic Fields — RF and Microwave. ” Copies of these standards are available from IEEE 
Standards Board, 445 Hoes Lane, P.O. Box 1331, Piscataway, NJ 08855-1331. Telephone: 
1-800-678-4333. The limits for both  “ controlled ” ‘ and  “ uncontrolled ” environments, as deﬁ ned 
by IEEE C95.1-1991, will apply to all PCS base and mobile stations, as appropriate. 
 (iii) Applications for all other types of facilities and operations are categorically excluded from 
routine RF radiation evaluation except as provided in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. 
 (5) Existing transmitting facilities, devices and operations: All existing transmitting facilities, 
operations and devices regulated by the Commission must be in compliance with the 
requirements of paragraphs (b)(1) through (b)(3) of this section by September 1, 2000, or, if 
not in compliance, ﬁ le an Environmental Assessment as speciﬁ ed in Sec. 1.1311. 
 (c) If an interested person alleges that a particular action, otherwise categorically excluded, 
will have a signiﬁ cant environmental effect, the person shall submit to the Bureau responsible 
for processing that action a written petition setting forth in detail the reasons justifying or 
circumstances necessitating environmental consideration in the decision-making process (see Sec. 
1.1313). The Bureau shall review the petition and consider the environmental concerns that have 
been raised. If the Bureau determines that the action may have a signiﬁ cant environmental impact, 
the Bureau will require the applicant to prepare an EA (see Secs. 1.1308 and 1.1311), which will 
serve as the basis for the determination to proceed with or terminate environmental processing. 
 (d) If the Bureau responsible for processing a particular action, otherwise categorically 
excluded, determines that the proposal may have a signiﬁ cant environmental impact, the 
Bureau, on its own motion, shall require the applicant to submit an EA. The Bureau will review 
and consider the EA as in paragraph (c) of this section. 
 (e) No State or local government or instrumentality thereof may regulate the placement, 
construction, and modiﬁ cation of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of the 
environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities comply 
with the regulations contained in this chapter concerning the environmental effects of such 
emissions. For purposes of this paragraph: 
 (1) The term  personal wireless service means commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless 
services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services; 
 (2) The term  personal wireless service facilities means facilities for the provision of personal wireless 
services; 
 (3) The term  unlicensed wireless services means the offering of telecommunications services 
using duly authorized devices which do not require individual licenses, but does not mean the 
provision of direct-to-home satellite services; and 
 (4) The term  direct-to-home satellite services means the distribution or broadcasting of 
programming or services by satellite directly to the subscriber’s premises without the use of 
ground receiving or distribution equipment, except at the subscriber’s premises or in the uplink 
process to the satellite. 

124 Chapter 6
 Effective Date Note: At 63 FR 65099, Nov. 25, 1998, Sec. 1.1307, Table 1 was amended. This 
section contains information collection and record-keeping requirements and will not become 
effective until approval has been given by the Ofﬁ ce of Management and Budget. 
 SEC. 1.1308 CONSIDERATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENTS (EAS); FINDINGS OF 
NO SIGNIFICANT IMPACT 
 (a) Applicants shall prepare EAs for actions that may have a signiﬁ cant environmental impact (see 
Sec. 1.1307). An EA is described in detail in Sec. 1.1311 of this part of the Commission rules. 
 (b) The EA is a document which shall explain the environmental consequences of the proposal 
and set forth sufﬁ cient analysis for the Bureau or the Commission to reach a determination 
that the proposal will or will not have a signiﬁ cant environmental effect. To assist in making 
that determination, the Bureau or the Commission may request further information from the 
applicant, interested persons, and agencies and authorities which have jurisdiction by law or 
which have relevant expertise. 
 Note: With respect to actions speciﬁ ed under Sec. 1.1307 (a)(3) and (a)(4), the Commission 
shall solicit and consider the comments of the Department of Interior, and the State Historic 
Preservation Ofﬁ cer and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, respectively, in 
accordance with their established procedures. See Interagency Cooperation — Endangered 
Species Act of 1973, as amended, 50 CFR Part 402; Protection of Historic and Cultural 
Properties, 36 CFR Part 800. In addition, when an action interferes with or adversely affects an 
American Indian tribe’s religious site, the Commission shall solicit the views of that American 
Indian tribe. See Sec. 1.1307(a)(5). 
 (c) If the Bureau or the Commission determines, based on an independent review of the EA and 
any applicable mandatory consultation requirements imposed upon Federal agencies (see note 
above), that the proposal will have a signiﬁ cant environmental impact upon the quality of the 
human environment, it will so inform the applicant. The applicant will then have an opportunity 
to amend its application so as to reduce, minimize, or eliminate environmental problems. See 
Sec. 1.1309. If the environmental problem is not eliminated, the Bureau will publish in the 
Federal Register a Notice of Intent (see Sec. 1.1314) that EISs will be prepared (see Secs. 1.1315 
and 1.1317), or 
 (d) If the Bureau or Commission determines, based on an independent review of the EA, and 
any mandatory consultation requirements imposed upon Federal agencies (see the note to 
paragraph (b) of this section), that the proposal would not have a signiﬁ cant impact, it will 
make a ﬁ nding of no signiﬁ cant impact. Thereafter, the application will be processed without 
further documentation of environmental effect. 
 Pursuant to CEQ regulations, see 40 CFR 1501.4 and 1501.6, the applicant must provide the 
community notice of the Commission’s ﬁ nding of no signiﬁ cant impact. [51 FR 15000, Apr. 22, 
1986; 51 FR 18889, May 23, 1986, as amended at 53 FR 28394, July 28, 1988] 
 SEC. 1.1309 APPLICATION AMENDMENTS 
 Applicants are permitted to amend their applications to reduce, minimize or eliminate potential 
environmental problems. As a routine matter, an applicant will be permitted to amend its 
application within thirty (30) days after the Commission or the Bureau informs the applicant 
that the proposal will have a signiﬁ cant impact upon the quality of the human environment (see 
Sec. 1.1308(c)). The period of thirty (30) days may be extended upon a showing of good cause. 

Selected Applicable Law 125
 SEC. 1.1310 RADIOFREQUENCY RADIATION EXPOSURE LIMITS 
 The criteria listed in Table 1 shall be used to evaluate the environmental impact of human 
exposure to radiofrequency (RF) radiation as speciﬁ ed in Sec. 1.1307(b), except in the case of 
portable devices which shall be evaluated according to the provisions of Sec. 2.1093 of this 
chapter. Further information on evaluating compliance with these limits can be found in the 
FCC’s OST/OET Bulletin Number 65,  “ Evaluating Compliance with FCC-Speciﬁ ed Guidelines 
for Human Exposure to Radiofrequency Radiation. ”
 Note to Introductory Paragraph: These limits are generally based on recommended exposure 
guidelines published by the National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements 
(NCRP) in  “ Biological Effects and Exposure Criteria for Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields, ”
NCRP Report No. 86, Sections 17.4.1, 17.4.1.1, 17.4.2, and 17.4.3. Copyright NCRP, 1986, 
Bethesda, MD 20814. In the frequency range from 100  MHz to 1500  MHz, exposure limits 
for ﬁ eld strength and power density are also generally based on guidelines recommended by 
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) in Section 4.1 of  “ IEEE Standard for Safety 
Levels with Respect to Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields, 3   kHz to 
300  GHz, ” ANSI/IEEE C95.1-1992, Copyright 1992 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers, Inc., New York, NY 10017. 
 [61 FR 41016, Aug. 7, 1996] 
 SEC. 1.1311 ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION TO BE INCLUDED IN THE ENVIRONMENTAL 
ASSESSMENT (EA) 
 (a)  The applicant shall submit an EA with each application that is subject to environmental 
processing (see Sec. 1.1307). The EA shall contain the following information:  
 (1)  For antenna towers and satellite earth stations, a description of the facilities as well as 
supporting structures and appurtenances, and a description of the site as well as the 
surrounding area and uses. If high intensity white lighting is proposed or utilized within a 
residential area, the EA must also address the impact of this lighting upon the residents.  
 (2)  A statement as to the zoning classiﬁ cation of the site, and communications with, or 
proceedings before and determinations (if any) made by zoning, planning, environmental 
or other local, state or Federal authorities on matters relating to environmental effect. 
 (3)  A statement as to whether construction of the facilities has been a source of controversy on 
environmental grounds in the local community. 
 (4)  A discussion of environmental and other considerations which led to the selection of 
the particular site and, if relevant, the particular facility; the nature and extent of any 
unavoidable adverse environmental effects, and any alternative sites or facilities which have 
been or might reasonably be considered. 
 (5)  Any other information that may be requested by the Bureau or Commission. 
 (6)  If endangered or threatened species or their critical habitats may be affected, the 
applicant’s analysis must utilize the best scientiﬁ c and commercial data available, see 50 
CFR 402.14(c). 
 (b)    The information submitted in the EA shall be factual (not argumentative or conclusory) and 
concise with sufﬁ cient detail to explain the environmental consequences and to enable the 
Commission or Bureau, after an independent review of the EA, to reach a determination 

126 Chapter 6
concerning the proposal’s environmental impact, if any. The EA shall deal speciﬁ cally with 
any feature of the site which has special environmental signiﬁ cance (e.g., wilderness areas, 
wildlife preserves, natural migration paths for birds and other wildlife, and sites of historic, 
architectural, or archeological value). In the case of historically signiﬁ cant sites, it shall 
specify the effect of the facilities on any district, site, building, structure or object listed, or 
eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic Places. It shall also detail any sub-
stantial change in the character of the land utilized (e.g., deforestation, water diversion, 
wetland ﬁ ll, or other extensive change of surface features). In the case of wilderness areas, 
wildlife preserves, or other like areas, the statement shall discuss the effect of any continu-
ing pattern of human intrusion into the area (e.g., necessitated by the operation and main-
tenance of the facilities). 
 (c)  The EA shall also be accompanied with evidence of site approval which has been obtained 
from local or Federal land use authorities. 
 (d)  To the extent that such information is submitted in another part of the application, it need 
not be duplicated in the EA, but adequate cross-reference to such information shall be sup-
plied.
 (e)  An EA need not be submitted to the Commission if another agency of the Federal Govern-
ment has assumed responsibility for determining whether of the facilities in question will 
have a signiﬁ cant effect on the quality of the human environment and, if it will, for invoking 
the environmental impact statement process. 
 [51 FR 15000, Apr. 22, 1986, as amended at 51 FR 18889, May 23, 1986; 53 FR 28394, 
July 28, 1988] 
 SEC. 1.1312 FACILITIES FOR WHICH NO PRE-CONSTRUCTION AUTHORIZATION IS 
REQUIRED
 (a) In the case of facilities for which no Commission authorization prior to construction is 
required by the Commission’s rules and regulations the licensee or applicant shall initially 
ascertain whether the proposed facility may have a signiﬁ cant environmental impact as deﬁ ned 
in Sec. 1.1307 of this part or is categorically excluded from environmental processing under Sec. 
1.1306 of this part. 
 (b) If a facility covered by paragraph (a) of this section may have a signiﬁ cant environmental 
impact, the information required by Sec. 1.1311 of this part shall be submitted by the licensee 
or applicant and ruled on by the Commission, and environmental processing (if invoked) shall 
be completed, see Sec. 1.1308 of this part, prior to the initiation of construction of the facility. 
 (c) If a facility covered by paragraph (a) of this section is categorically excluded from 
environmental processing, the licensee or applicant may proceed with construction and 
operation of the facility in accordance with the applicable licensing rules and procedures. 
 (d) If, following the initiation of construction under this section, the licensee or applicant 
discovers that the proposed facility may have a signiﬁ cant environmental effect, it shall 
immediately cease construction which may have that effect, and submit the information 
required by Sec. 1.1311 of this part. The Commission shall rule on that submission and 
complete further environmental processing (if invoked), see Sec. 1.1308 of this part, before such 
construction is resumed. 

Selected Applicable Law 127
 (e) Paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section shall not apply to the construction of mobile 
stations. 
 [55 FR 20396, May 16, 1990, as amended at 56 FR 13414, Apr. 2, 1991]  
 SEC. 1.1313 OBJECTIONS 
 (a) In the case of an application to which section 309(b) of the Communications Act applies, 
objections based on environmental considerations shall be ﬁ led as petitions to deny. 
 (b) Informal objections which are based on environmental considerations must be ﬁ led prior 
to grant of the construction permit, or prior to authorization for facilities that do not require 
construction permits, or pursuant to the applicable rules governing services subject to lotteries. 
 SEC. 1.1314 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS (EISS) 
 (a) Draft Environmental Impact Statements (DEISs) (Sec. 1.1315) and Final Environmental 
Impact Statements (FEISs) (referred to collectively as EISs) (Sec. 1.1317) shall be prepared by 
the Bureau responsible for processing the proposal when the Commission’s or the Bureau’s 
analysis of the EA (Sec. 1.1308) indicates that the proposal will have a signiﬁ cant effect upon 
the environment and the matter has not been resolved by an amendment. 
 (b) As soon as practically feasible, the Bureau will publish in the  Federal Register a Notice of 
Intent to prepare EISs. The Notice shall brieﬂ y identify the proposal, concisely describe the 
environmental issues and concerns presented by the subject application, and generally invite 
participation from affected or involved agencies, authorities and other interested persons. 
 (c) The EISs shall not address non-environmental considerations. To safeguard against repetitive 
and unnecessarily lengthy documents, the Statements, where feasible, shall incorporate by 
reference material set forth in previous documents, with only a brief summary of its content. In 
preparing the EISs, the Bureau will identify and address the signiﬁ cant environmental issues and 
eliminate the insigniﬁ cant issues from analysis. 
 (d) To assist in the preparation of the EISs, the Bureau may request further information from 
the applicant, interested persons and agencies and authorities, which have jurisdiction by law 
or which have relevant expertise. The Bureau may direct that technical studies be made by the 
applicant and that the applicant obtain expert opinion concerning the potential environmental 
problems and costs associated with the proposed action, as well as comparative analyses of 
alternatives. The Bureau may also consult experts in an effort to identify measures that could be 
taken to minimize the adverse effects and alternatives to the proposed facilities that are not, or are 
less, objectionable. The Bureau may also direct that objections be raised with appropriate local, 
state or Federal land use agencies or authorities (if their views have not been previously sought). 
 (e) The Bureau responsible for processing the particular application and, thus, preparing 
the EISs shall draft supplements to Statements where signiﬁ cant new circumstances occur or 
information arises relevant to environmental concerns and bearing upon the application. 
 (f) The Application, the EA, the DEIS, and the FEIS and all related documents, including the 
comments ﬁ led by the public and any agency, shall be part of the administrative record and will 
be routinely available for public inspection. 
 (g) If EISs are to be prepared, the applicant must provide the community with notice of the 
availability of environmental documents and the scheduling of any Commission hearings in that 
action.

128 Chapter 6
 (h) The timing of agency action with respect to applications subject to EISs is set forth in 40 
CFR 1506.10. No decision shall be made until ninety (90) days after the Notice of Availability 
of the Draft Environmental Impact Statement is published in the  Federal Register , and thirty (30) 
days after the Notice of Availability of the Final Environmental Impact Statement is published 
in the Federal Register , which time period may run concurrently, See 40 CFR 1506.10(c); see also 
Secs. 1.1315(b) and 1.1317(b). 
 (i) Guidance concerning preparation of the Draft and Final Environmental Statements is set out 
in 40 CFR Part 1502. 
 [51 FR 15000, Apr. 22, 1986, as amended at 53 FR 28394, July 28, 1988] 
 SEC. 1.1315 THE DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT (DEIS); COMMENTS 
 (a) The DEIS shall include: 
 (1) A concise description of the proposal, the nature of the area affected, its uses, and any 
speciﬁ c feature of the area that has special environmental signiﬁ cance; 
 (2) An analysis of the proposal, and reasonable alternatives exploring the important consequent 
advantages and/or disadvantages of the action and indicating the direct and indirect effects and 
their signiﬁ cance in terms of the short and long-term uses of the human environment. 
 (b) When a DEIS and supplements, if any, are prepared, the Commission shall send ﬁ ve copies 
of the Statement, or a summary, to the Ofﬁ ce of Federal Activities, Environmental Protection 
Agency. Additional copies, or summaries, will be sent to the appropriate regional ofﬁ ce of the 
Environmental Protection Agency. Public Notice of the availability of the DEIS will be published 
in the Federal Register by the Environmental Protection Agency. 
 (c) When copies or summaries of the DEIS are sent to the Environmental Protection Agency, 
the copies or summaries will be mailed with a request for comment to Federal agencies having 
jurisdiction by law or special expertise, to the Council on Environmental Quality, to the 
applicant, to individuals, groups and state and local agencies known to have an interest in the 
environmental consequences of a grant, and to any other person who has requested a copy. 
 (d) Any person or agency may comment on the DEIS and the environmental effect of the proposal 
described therein within 45 days after notice of the availability of the statement is published in the 
Federal Register . A copy of those comments shall be mailed to the applicant by the person who ﬁ les 
them pursuant to 47 CFR 1.47. An original and one copy shall be ﬁ led with the Commission. If a 
person submitting comments is especially qualiﬁ ed in any way to comment on the environmental 
impact of the facilities, a statement of his or her qualiﬁ cations shall be set out in the comments. In 
addition, comments submitted by an agency shall identify the person(s) who prepared them. 
 (e) The applicant may ﬁ le reply comments within 15 days after the time for ﬁ ling comments has 
expired. Reply comments shall be ﬁ led with the Commission in the same manner as comments, 
and shall be served by the applicant on persons or agencies which ﬁ led comments. 
 (f) The preparation of a DEIS and the request for comments shall not open the application to 
attack on other grounds. 
 SEC. 1.1317 THE FINAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT (FEIS) 
 (a) After receipt of comments and reply comments, the Bureau will prepare a FEIS, which shall 
include a summary of the comments, and a response to the comments, and an analysis of the 

Selected Applicable Law 129
proposal in terms of its environmental consequences, and any reasonable alternatives, and 
recommendations, if any, and shall cite the Commission’s internal appeal procedures (See 47 
CFR 1.101 – 1.120). 
 (b) The FEIS and any supplements will be distributed and published in the same manner as 
speciﬁ ed in Sec. 1.1315. Copies of the comments and reply comments, or summaries thereof 
where the record is voluminous, shall be attached to the FEIS. 
 SEC. 1.1319 CONSIDERATION OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS 
 (a) If the action is subject to a hearing: 
 (1) In rendering his initial decision, the Administrative Law Judge shall utilize the FEIS in 
considering the environmental issues, together with all other non-environmental issues. In 
a comparative context, the respective parties shall be afforded the opportunity to comment 
on the FEIS, and the Administrative Law Judge’s decision shall contain an evaluation of the 
respective applications based on environmental and non-environmental public interest factors. 
 (2) Upon review of an initial decision, the Commission will consider and assess all aspects of 
the FEIS and will render its decision, giving due consideration to the environmental and non-
environmental issues. 
 (b) In all non-hearing matters, the Commission, as part of its decision-making process, will 
review the FEIS, along with other relevant issues, to ensure that the environmental effects are 
speciﬁ cally assessed and given comprehensive consideration. 
 [51 FR 15000, Apr. 22, 1986, as amended at 62 FR 4171, Jan. 29, 1997] 

This page intentionally left blank

131
 Possible Objections — Safety Issues 
 If you’re reading this book, and certainly if you’ve read this far, you’re anticipating that all manner 
of objections will be raised to your proposal, and you’re right. This chapter elaborates on some of the 
most common. If you’d like to see what a determined opponent can do to lobby against a broadcaster, 
see www.geocities.com/snohomishstewards/Towers_brochure_Final.pdf . 
 7.1   Preparing for the Permit Application and the Public Hearing 
 If you pay attention to this chapter, you will ﬁ nd some good answers to opponents. When they have 
presented their objections, the chairman typically turns to the applicant and says:  “ How do you respond 
to that? ” To avoid rambling and to respond directly, you may wish to make out 4     6-inch index cards 
with your own responses. You  must avoid rambling. If you take several minutes for each response, the 
chairman will soon stop calling on you. You might wish to print out the sample  “ Answer Cards ” from 
ﬁ lename Answer Cards.pdf on the CD. These are formatted for pasting on 4     6-inch index cards.
 How Not to Oppose a Tower Project 
 The following case reﬂ ects what happens when local residents do not want a particular tower to 
be built but fail to tack down a single issue that is fatal to the tower project. 
 T-Mobile ﬁ led an Environmental Assessment (EA) with its application, pursuant to Sections 
1.1308 and 1.1311 of the Commission’s rules. 1 The Petitioners ’ objections were based on the 
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA), but were  “ conclusory ” and wholly without 
merit — and it showed. They raised every issue including local controversy, effects on endangered 
species, RF emissions, effects on historical properties, etc. Needless to say, the proposal for 
an antenna tower submitted by T-Mobile for the Pierce Archery site in North Ridgeville, Ohio, 
received a  “ Finding of No Signiﬁ cant Impact ” (FONSI) on the environment from the FCC. 
 Several lessons can be learned from this case. 
 A stop work order would never have been issued by the FCC if T-Mobile had prepared an 
Environmental Assessment before it began construction. 
CHAPTER 7 
1   47 C.F.R. §1.1308 and §1.1311. 

132 Chapter 7
 The total delay went from June 14, 2002, to November 26, 2003, or 18 months. This allows you 
to put a cost on the risk of proceeding without the required EA. 
 Though the FONSI was eventually issued, two conditions were attached. One was that the Fish 
and Wildlife Service (FWS) of the U.S. Department of the Interior required that no potential 
roost trees for the Indiana bat be cut between April 15 and September 15 of any year. The other 
was that, in order to protect the Massasauga rattlesnake, a species that is a candidate for listing 
as a threatened species, T-Mobile was required to conduct a 40-hour survey, and, if any of the 
species were determined to be present, refrain from construction when air temperature is over 
65 ° and from habitat-disturbing maintenance activities from November 15 to March 15. 
 The case is available at:  http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-03-3826A1
.doc and on the CD as ﬁ lename TMobile.pdf. 
 Before beginning your preparations for battle, take a moment to consider Marvin Wilson’s 
poem.
 An Amateur Radio Tower 
 by Marvin Wilson, VE7BJ 
 (Originally appeared in the bulletin of the Point Grey Amateur Radio Club.) 
 Why do people get upset when one puts up a radio tower? A few things in its favor: 
It Doesn’t  . . . 
 Squeal its brakes 
 Screech its tires 
 Blow its horn 
 Roar its motor 
 Slam its doors at ungodly hours 
 Shine its headlights in your bedroom window 
 Nor does it backﬁ re 
It Doesn’t  … 
 Drop leaves that you have to clean up 
 Grow branches over your house 
 Drop fruit or nuts that block your downpipes 
 Block your view like a tree or building 
 Grow roots that damage your walk or driveway 
 Nor do its roots plug your drains 
It Doesn’t  . . . 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 133
 Bite you 
 Bark or meow 
 Leave deposits on your property 
 Dig up your garden 
 Scratch on your door 
 Widdle on your trees 
 Nor does it dig up and scatter your garbage 
It Doesn’t  … 
 Have boisterous parties 
 Or play loud music 
 Or have swimming parties through the night 
 It doesn’t ring your phone (accidentally?) 
 Nor does it ride bikes across your lawn 
 It’s just quiet and has nothing to say. 
 7.2  Structural Safety 
 If someone stands up at a public hearing and says that your structure could fall over and damage 
his house or injure his children, you can pretty much bet that the real objection is one of aesthetics. 
However, you must  not ignore the question. The proper approach is to sympathize with the concern and 
address it. Here’s how to sympathize: 
 Mr. Jones has expressed the fear that my proposed structure could damage his house or injure his 
child. He has every right to be concerned. I am very concerned about those same things. 
 And here’s how to respond: 
 For that reason, please note that: 
● 
 The proposed location was chosen so that should the structure ever fall it would be stopped by 
the tree line before ever reaching the ground. 
● 
 The proposed construction exceeds the requirements of the building code, and it is important 
to note that the building code already has safety margins built in.  
● 
 You’ll see that a certiﬁ cate of compliance with all building codes is provided in the 
application, at Exhibit X .
● 
 The construction will be under the supervision of the Building Inspector, whom we trust with 
the supervision of all other forms of construction in town, including the schools, churches, 
hospitals, and so forth. 

134 Chapter 7
● 
 I have no objections at all if the Board would like to add a condition to the Special Permit that 
the construction must meet the requirements of the state building code and be constructed 
subject to the reasonable supervision of the Building Inspector. 
● 
 Because the proposed construction will be built in accordance with the building code and 
supervised by the Building Inspector, you can expect that it will be as safe as any house 
or building in town. ( Note: This isn’t really giving anything away. With or without such a 
condition in the Special Permit, you may never be exempt from the state building code or 
supervision by the Building Inspector!) 
● 
 Failures as a result of construction are so rare that the liability insurance industry charges 
only a tiny premium for the risk of damage to persons not working on the tower or damage 
to property of another. This is proof positive that an antenna system in your backyard is 
safer than letting your teenage son drive! (Note: Humor in highly charged situations is 
always helpful, but don’t try it if you are uncomfortable at attempting humor in a public 
presentation. If you are uncomfortable, it will show and the humor will fall ﬂ at. And, it’s 
probably not a good idea to use this particular joke if the neighbor has a teenaged son in his 
household, but you did your homework and know who your neighbors and their children are, 
don’t you?) 
● 
 My company’s employees will be working in the building right under the tower. We don’t 
intend to put them at risk by the construction proposed. 
 Remember, neither federal nor state laws (the ones that provide some form of preemption with 
respect to zoning bylaws) will ever exempt you from construction safety requirements and meeting 
the provisions of the state building code. Health and safety will always override, as they should. Also, 
while the Board is understandably concerned with future liability should some injury arise as a result 
of the construction or the tower itself, concern over liability is no reason to deny a permit. (For a 
discussion of municipal liability lawsuits, see Chapter 15.) 
 At this moment, we are discussing your appearance in front of the Zoning Board, asking for permission 
to put this structure where you’d like to put it. Possible building code violations can always be dealt 
with later. What you are addressing is the use and whether it is a permissible use, as well as whether 
or not it should be granted a Zoning Permit. Remember, even after you have constructed your antenna 
system, the Building Inspector has the right to come onto your land (since he has police power) to see 
if something is unsafe. If he ﬁ nds that something is indeed unsafe, he can always remove or repair 
it and apply a lien on your building and equipment, as well as the land, to repay the town for any 
expenditure. 
Conclusion: Treat safety as a big issue, but it is a Building Inspector issue. It is not a use issue that 
belongs before the Board of Appeals. 
 7.3  The Building Code 
 A new standard, Electronics Industry Association (EIA)/Telecommunications Industry Association 
(TIA)-222-G, came into effect on January 1, 2006. This new standard will be incorporated by reference 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 135
into the International Building Code (IBC). At present, many state, county, and municipal building 
codes require conformance with the Uniform Building Code (UBC, IBC 2003). It may take a few 
years for the new IBC 2006 to be universally adopted. Copies of EIA/TIA-222-G can be purchased 
from the TIA, but they are exceptionally expensive. However, an online PDF presentation ( http://www.
mei1inc.com/NAB-2003presentation.pdf ) contains many of the key differences in EIA/TIA-222-G, 
including new wind and ice zone maps, as contrasted with prior versions. It’s also available on the CD 
as ﬁ lename EIA/TIA.pdf. 
 One of the changes is in the wind zones. EIA/TIA-222-G contains over 100 pages of wind and ice 
zone information for every county in the United States. It has changed the way in which wind speed 
is speciﬁ ed from the traditional  “ mile of wind ” approach to a 3-second maximum gust speciﬁ cation 
(referred to as V 3 s). The EIA/TIA-222-G minimum wind-speed requirement (applies to most counties 
in the United States) is now 90 mph for a 3-second gust, which is equivalent to a 75-mph  “ mile of 
wind, ” a 65-mph sustained wind for 10 minutes, or a 62-mph sustained wind for 1 hour. 
 Another aspect of EIA/TIA-222-G that could impact broadcasters and cellular carriers in the future 
is the new requirement to evaluate the risk to human life of new tower installations. When there is 
a risk to human life (for example, if a tower could topple on a residence or a populated area), the 
requirements become much more severe than current standards. For a new tower in a location where 
human life is not at risk, EIA/TIA-222-G is very similar to current requirements. 
 7.4  Fall Zone 
 Occasionally a Zoning Board will want to know if the proposed tower will fall on neighboring land. 
Funny, they never ask that about a 10-story building on Main Street. For such tall buildings, they 
simply assume that the architect and structural engineers know what they are doing. With respect to 
towers, the members of the Board seem to have a completely opposite assumption. 
 Do not, however, make this point by asserting that  “ it will be safe — the structural engineer knows what 
he is doing! ” That is not wise. If you must deal with these questions, it is better to ask:  “ Why do you 
assume that the structural engineer doesn’t know what he’s doing? You don’t require special assurances 
for signs, ﬂ ag poles, or any other structures. ” 
 Actually, towers can be incredibly strong and resistant to damage. They can even be  “ atom-bomb 
proof. ” ( Figure 7.1 ). 
 If the question simply will not go away, you must deal with it. With respect to towers, the usual person 
to provide the required assurance is a mechanical engineer or a civil engineer. Note that, in general, 
professional engineers (PEs) are not licensed in speciﬁ c ﬁ elds. They are allowed to stamp what they 
feel qualiﬁ ed to stamp. Almost all are very careful about the use of their stamp, because of the liability 
that attaches. 
 It is this question of liability that means generally you are not going to get a letter from a PE with a 
mere telephone request, unless the PE is employed by the manufacturer. The PE will have to do some 
analysis. That’s the same reason why doctors don’t like to prescribe over the phone. They want to see 
the patient. 

136 Chapter 7
 Yes, you can argue that towers do not fall the length of their height, like a falling pencil. They are 
more likely to corkscrew downward. But, if pressed, there is a concept that is much more reassuring 
to Boards. That concept may be called a  “ mechanical fuse. ” This was ﬁ rst introduced to me by John 
Corini, PE (whose amateur radio call sign is KE1IH). 
 7.4.1  A Mechanical Fuse 
 If you design a self-supporting tower that narrows as it grows higher and you don’t change the 
materials, just the design, of each section and then you model the tower, you will ﬁ nd the fuse. While 
all sections of the tower must be strong enough to pass code by resisting wind load, there will be minor 
variations in how much stronger each section is than is required.  Figure 7.2 is a diagram of such a 
modeling exercise on a Rohn SSV tower created by John Corini. 
 If you look at Section 6N, you will see that it is the  “ weakest link, ” although all sections exceed the 
TIA/EIA-222-F speciﬁ cations. But, by virtue of being the weakest link, Section 6N is where the tower 
will fail. As is plainly visible, this is not at the bottom of the tower, but rather a considerable way up, 
as each section is 20 feet tall. This particular tower, a 100-foot Rohn SSV, has its weakest link between 
20 and 40 feet down the tower (at a height of 60 to 80 feet above ground). Though we do not require a 
fall zone for a tall building, and there is good reason to argue that this entire concept of requiring a  “ fall 
zone ” is not related to safety, if one must provide some sort of response, the fall zone for this tower is 
40% of its height. 
 Figure 7.1  Hiroshima, after the bomb. Note standing tower to the far left.  

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 137
 When the  “ weakest link ” fails, the tower will fail, but it will not fall the length of its height. Don’t 
believe this? See  Figure 7.3  .
 7.4.2  Guyed Towers 
 A similar analysis can be performed for a guyed tower because, after loading, the forces are not the 
same on all elements of the tower. Again, although towers are not designed to fail (they are designed to 
stand up), in the unlikely circumstance of a failure, the failure point is actually predictable. 
 7.4.2.1  A Second Anchor 
 For guyed towers, putting more than one anchor in each direction may be the easiest solution. When 
guy wires are terminated at multiple anchors, how likely is it that two or more guy anchors or guy 
wires will fail at the same moment in time? There are just too many points of attachment. Most of the 
manufacturers have gone through this exercise before and can generate a drawing showing the likely 
fall pattern or at least a written description of what happens. 
 7.4.2.2  Debris Pattern 
 On December 19, 2004, a light plane struck the 750-foot-tall tower of KFI-AM, 640   kHz, Los Angeles, 
on its approach path to the Fullerton airport ( Figure 7.4 ). The tower collapsed mostly on itself, 
100 Foot Free Standing Tower Results
Maximum Stress
Tower Section
Tower
Section
110 MPH Wind Load
NOICE
Maximum Tower
Leg Load
Maximum Tower
Leg Stress
7N
6N
5N
4N
3WN
Tower Section
7N
6N
5N
4N
3WN
12
31
62
102
163
12
31
62
102
163
Element
Tower
Section
Element
AISC Maximum Allowable
Load or Stress
82.5 MPH Wind Load - 1/4
Radial Ice
AISC Maximum Allowable
Load or Stress
Max. Allowable Tower
Leg Load
Max. Allowable
Tower Leg Stress
Maximum Tower
Leg Load
Maximum Tower
Leg Stress
Max. Allowable Tower
Leg Load
Max. Allowable
Tower Leg Stress
34,310 psi
34,310 psi
34,150 psi
32,910 psi
32,480 psi
34,310 psi
34,310 psi
34,150 psi
32,910 psi
32,480 psi
43,977 pounds
46,980 pounds
49,030 pounds
31,270 pounds
17,029 pounds
34,530 pounds
35,950 pounds
37,390 pounds
22,780 pounds
11,430 pounds
Calculations by John F. Corini, P.E., KE1IH, Barkhamsted, CT 
50,685 pounds
50,686 pounds
55,624 pounds
40,389 pounds
22,423 pounds
50,685 pounds
50,686 pounds
55,624 pounds
40,389 pounds
22,423 pounds
29,775 psi
31,808 psi
28,962 psi
25,485 psi
24,680 psi
23,378 psi
24,340 psi
22,086 psi
18,566 psi
16,565 psi
 Figure 7.2  100-foot freestanding tower results.  

138 Chapter 7
Figure 7.3  Self-supporting tower folded in the middle (KSON-AM).  (Photograph courtesy of  www.sbe36.org .)  
Figure 7.4  The KFI-AM tower after it was struck by a plane in 2004.  (Photograph by Marvin Collins, W6OQI.)  

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 139
touching none of the nearby buildings and with its top and bottom within 20 feet of each other when it 
was all over (see  http://sakrison.com/radio/KFItowercollapse.html ). Questions about the KFI collapse 
may be addressed to Paul Sakrison at paul@sakrison.com. 
 7.4.3  Not a Reason for Denial 
 The possibility that a tower might fail, even though it exceeds (is constructed stronger than) building 
code requirements, is not a reason to deny a permit. Why not, you ask? Because, speaking generally, a 
Board cannot invent its own building or zoning codes. Building codes, depending on your jurisdiction, 
may be adopted on a statewide basis, by the county, or even by the city — but a building code is never 
invented by a Zoning Board at the time of an application. 
 If you ﬁ nd yourself in a situation where the code enforcement department or a Board is making it up 
as they go along, do not begin the conversation by saying  “ You can’t do that. ” Instead, ask for the basis 
in the code for the distance required. The nonconfrontational way to do this is to write or say:  “ Could 
you please direct me to the section of the code that speciﬁ es this requirement? I want to see how it is 
written. ”
   Requiring a setback (distance from the structure to a boundary) equal to height, height times 1.5, height 
times 2, or whatever scheme an opponent thinks up to frustrate the construction of a tower, may or may 
not be in the code. If some ridiculous setback requirement is actually in the code, turn the matter over 
to a lawyer to ﬁ nd out if, in your state or federal circuit, there is a case which has overturned such a 
requirement.
 Though the possibility of failure is not a reason for denial, don’t have a heart attack if the Building 
Inspector requires something called “ controlled construction. ” This is simply requiring someone 
licensed to supervise construction who is not a part of the erector’s organization, or yours, to inspect 
and oversee the construction. 
 Yes, controlled construction adds to costs, and yes, it can slow down construction — because the person 
with the license may need to scamper to the work site and inspect something before the erector can 
move on to the next step. But hiring such a person can be less expensive than buying additional land, 
applying to the FCC for a minor or major change, and so forth. 
 7.4.4  A Useful Letter 
 On the other hand, there are occasions when controlled construction is not required, and the request 
for information on a “ fall zone ” is not from a building ofﬁ cial under power invested in him by the 
building code. The request may come from a member of a lay Board (the Zoning Board of Appeals, or 
the Planning Board). The member may simply be seeking reassurance in a ﬁ eld that is not familiar to 
most members of such boards.  Figures 7.5 and 7.6 are an example of a letter generated by a PE in the 
employ of a popular manufacturer. It shows you what can be done. 
 Speaking of a fall radius, see the article  “ Modeling, Loading, and Preliminary Design Considerations 
for Tall Guyed Towers ” by C. Gantes et al. ( Computers and Structures , 49(5), 797 – 805, 1993), in 
which the authors summarize the results of an investigation they carried out on the collapse of a 

140 Chapter 7
 Figure 7.5  Letter from Sabre Communications Corp. 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 141
 Figure 7.6  A somewhat comparable letter, generated by Rohn Manufacturing, also a major 
manufacturer of towers.  

142 Chapter 7
1900-foot-tall guyed structure under ice and wind loads. The tower was 9 feet per side and had a 
maximum thickness of 10 inches of ice at the top. Figure 2 of that article appears to show that the 
tower debris fell within 80% of a circle the length of the guy lines. Unfortunately, the article does not 
mention the guying radius; however, if the guying were 80% and the debris ﬁ eld is within 80% of that, 
then the debris ﬁ eld was within 64% of height. 
 7.4.5  Signs 
 Signs that warn approaching hikers, hunters, or snowmobilers that they are approaching a tower 
(placed at the perimeter of the hypothetical  “ fall zone ” ) may be another way to approach a compromise 
with a hostile board. This approach succeeded for the Koor Communications station WUVR-AM, 
1490  kHz, Lebanon, NH. Signs are relatively inexpensive, and certainly less expensive than the lawyer 
time to ﬁ ght the idea, if a Board member really has a bee in her bonnet that you should warn the public 
(a public that is likely comprised entirely of trespassers). If you must go forward with signs, before you 
start negotiating, do the math (see  Table 7.1 ). As you can see from the chart, signs are far less costly 
than either lawyering to ﬁ ght the concept or fencing of almost any kind. 
 7.5  Airspace Safety 
 Occasionally someone will rise during the public hearing and ask two different kinds of questions that 
have to do with airspace safety. Roughly, those two questions might be: 
● 
 “ Will this thing be painted orange and white and be lighted? ”
● 
 “ Don’t you have to get permission from the FAA ﬁ rst? ” 
 What’s really going on here with the painting and lighting question might be that the questioner is 
expressing an innocent and curious question, a question that may be totally reasonable in the context of 
a neighborhood. However, the questioner might also be trying to throw gasoline on the ﬁ re of  “ it’s ugly 
and not appropriate for our neighborhood. ”
 Table 7.1 :  Number of Signs if Fall Zone Signs Are Required. 
 Spacing (degrees) 
 10 
 15 
 20 
 Number of signs 
 36 
 24 
 18 
 Tower Height (ft) 
 Distance between Signs (ft) 
 100 
 17.43 
 26.11 
  34.73 
 200 
 34.86 
 52.21 
  69.46 
 300 
 52.29 
 78.32 
 104.19 
 400 
 69.72 
 104.42 
 138.92 
   Cost per sign       
Total Cost
 $15.00 
  $540.00 
 $360.00 
 $270.00 
 $30.00 
 $1,080.00 
 $720.00 
 $540.00 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 143
 Let’s look more closely at this painting and lighting question. You need to know if you are close to 
an airport and the height of the tower you propose. For heights under 200 feet, your public position is 
that you don’t intend to paint and light unless federal law requires it. If you are planning a structure no 
higher than 20 feet above surrounding trees and you are not near an airport (more than 20,000 feet away, 
which is 6.1 km or 3.8 miles), you have an automatic exemption for the Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) and Federal Communications Commission (FCC) limits. Nonetheless, please consult the FCC 
website to see if the rule applies to you. (See ﬁ lename FCC Registering Antennas.pdf on the CD.) 
 7.5.1  Painting and Lighting 
 Furthermore, and again assuming that painting and lighting are not required by the FAA regulations in your 
situation, if the Board wishes to make it a condition of the permit that the structure will be  neither painted 
for marking nor lighted, that’s ﬁ ne with you, too! After all, the condition is totally harmless. Nonetheless, 
your best position is:  “ We will do what federal law requires. We are happy to agree that we will not do 
what federal law does not require. But, if the federal law requires painting and lighting or ﬂ ashing lights of 
some kind, that’s what we’ll do. Given the federal preemption in this matter, as a municipality, your only 
choice may be to tell us whether you’d prefer strobe lighting and no paint, or red lighting and paint. ” 
 No matter what, don’t fall into the hole that WLTH-AM, Gary, IN, fell into. In 2004, on appeal, the 
FCC upheld a ﬁ ne of $16,000 for several tower violations, including not registering its tower, not 
letting the FAA know tower lights were out, and not having red obstruction lighting. At the time,  Radio
World reported: 
 WLTH said lightning caused sporadic power loss and also hunters shot out the tower lights. Although 
WLTH corrected the problems, the agency ﬁ ned the station for continuing to operate without tower 
lights and not informing the FAA of the outages quickly enough.  
 For greater detail on FAA regulations, see FAA Advisory Circular 70/7460-21,  “ Proposed Construction 
or Alteration of Objects That May Affect the Navigable Airspace. ” For tremendous detail, see FAA 
Advisory Circular AC 70/7460-1H,  “ Obstruction Marking and Lighting ” ( http://wireless.fcc.gov/
antenna/index.htm?job  documentation_paint_light ). 
 The actual regulation upon which the FCC public information page is based is found at 14 CFR Part 77. 
The 200-foot height rule is covered, along with rules concerning nearby airports and exemptions. 
 If the question comes up, it may be a good idea to give the Chairman a printout of  “ 1. Do You Need To 
Register? ” (ﬁ lename FCC Registering Antennas.pdf on the CD) at the public meeting, although doing 
so at the meeting may slow down the process while the Board studies the new material. Handing over a 
printout of this federal government document is another way to assure the Board that you’ve done your 
homework and you are really prepared. It is a conﬁ dence-building measure. 
 7.5.2  FAA Permission 
 Now, let’s look more closely at the FAA permission question. Since most applicants are sensible 
enough to avoid locating within 20,000 feet, or even 1.52   km (5,000 feet) of an airport, FAA 
permission is very seldom necessary. However, a common delay tactic by opponents is to ask the Board 

144 Chapter 7
if FAA permission must be obtained. Most Boards will accept your assurance that you’ve checked 
and FAA permission is not required. A quick visit to the TOWAIR website ( http://wireless2.fcc.gov/
UlsApp/AsrSearch/towairSearch.jsp ), ﬁ lling in the required date, and printing out the result can also 
be reassuring. Nevertheless, some Boards will want to see the rule for themselves. For others, it will be 
adequate to include a printout of the results from the FCC’s TOWAIR website (see  Figure 7.7 ). 
 A few Boards will want a lawyer’s letter opining that no FAA permission is required. In any event, all 
Boards will be impressed with your preparation if you show up with an FAA  “ No Hazard ”  letter. In 
general, this is a question of lead time. If you are planning now for a hearing in six months to a year, 
you may apply to the FAA for what is not really  “ permission ” but rather a  “ Certiﬁ cate or Determination 
of No Hazard, ” sometimes also called a  “ No Hazard ” letter. An example of such a letter, issued to Jeff 
Briggs, K1ZM, is shown in  Figure 7.8 and is on the CD as ﬁ lename FAA No Hazard K1ZM.pdf. 
 Incidentally, a  “ No Hazard to Aviation ” decision is fairly bulletproof. See  Aircraft Owners and Pilots 
Association v. Federal Aviation Administration , 600 F. 2d 965 (D.C. Cir. 1979), which afﬁ rmed a 
no-hazard decision and held that, though informal, “ the adjudicatory procedures employed by the FAA 
created a record which contains substantial evidence supporting the no-hazard decision. ”
 The process begins by obtaining and ﬁ ling FAA Form 7460-1,  “ Notice of Proposed Construction or 
Alteration ” (see ﬁ lename FCC FAA AntennaForm.pdf on the CD). Fill out the form and ﬁ le it with the 
appropriate regional FAA ofﬁ ce listed on the cover page. 
 If you absolutely must know in advance, and in a hurry, about whether or not you are likely to receive 
an FAA no-hazard determination, private consultants are available. One such company is Airspace 
Safety Analysis Corporation (ASAC), Atlanta, GA, now owned by Boeing. (See the article  “ Airspace 
Safety: An Integral Part of Your Tower Management Program, ” by D. Hunter, in  Cellular Business , 
October 1991, p. 28ff.) Another, though smaller, company, created by a former ASAC employee, is 
Airspace Consulting, Inc. ( http://airspace-ken.com ). I have used Federal Airways  & Airspace (FA & A; 
1423 South Patrick Drive, Satellite Beach, FL 32937;  http://airspaceusa.com ). FA & A lists some handy 
Internet resources at http://www.airspaceusa.com/web_resources.htm . 
 If you do require a Notice to Airmen (NOTAM), you must also ﬁ le FCC Form 854, and eventually, 
though it may require some negotiation with the FAA, you will receive an FCC Structure Registration. 
 7.6  Attractive Nuisance and Child Safety 
 If this is a suburban neighborhood, someone may jump up at the public hearing and suggest that an 
antenna-support structure is inherently an attractive nuisance . That would be deﬁ ned as something 
dangerous that attracts children to climb it, children who may then suffer an accident by falling off the 
structure. This objection is usually raised by someone whose real objection relates to something else, 
but you should ignore that fact. 
 You can probably predict who this person will be. It will be someone in law, insurance, or real estate 
(who else knows about the doctrine of attractive nuisance?). This person probably has a child, usually 
a curious male child. If you respond by saying that there are no children in the neighborhood, even if 
it is true, you are effectively conceding that the claim is true and that you wish to ignore the potential 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 145
 Figure 7.7  Results from an inquiry on the FAA’s TOWAIR website.  

146 Chapter 7
 Figure 7.8  An FAA  “No Hazard ” letter issued to Jeff Briggs, K1ZM. 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 147
danger and hope for the best. Bad strategy. Remember, as you respond, that you are trying to be a good 
guy (wearing your white hat). 
 7.6.1  Anticlimbing Devices 
 The best answer is:  “ Well, I certainly agree with [person’s name, beginning with Mr., Ms., or Mrs. as a 
sign of public respect] that my proposed structure is attractive. (Pause and smile! Beam!) But, I cannot 
agree that this structure is an attractive  nuisance , as the legal term implies. Nonetheless, I’d like to call 
the attention of the Board to page xx of the application, where I have shown the type of anticlimbing 
device [or, perhaps, the fence and razor wire] that I propose to construct. ” See the photographs in 
 Figures 7.9 and 7.10 , which are also included on the CD (ﬁ lenames AntiClimbFence.jpg and K1HT 
Anti-climb.pdf). 
 7.6.2  Bushes, Guy Guards 
 As guy wires near the ground, it becomes possible to consider them a hazard, in the sense that a child 
could run into a set near the anchor. One attractive solution is to plant evergreen bushes near the anchor 
rod. Here’s another solution. Utility companies use slit plastic tubes, called  “ guy guards, ” on their 
guy wires to provide visibility (see  Figure 7.11 ). One manufacturer is Preform Line Products, who 
 Figure 7.9  Barbed wire atop fence surrounding a 250-foot Rohn KD tower in Wales, ME.  (Photograph by 
the author, courtesy of Strong Signals of Lewiston-Auburn, LLC.)  

148 Chapter 7
also make the so-called  “ big grips ” for guy wires. Check  http://www.preformed.com/artsfest/ﬁ les/ps/
Sec21_PLPCommCatalog.pdf .
 7.7  Radiation and Emissions Safety 
 Individuals who are afraid that their children may suffer headaches or some other health effect may 
know that there is really no good science to back up their position. As a result, it has probably taken 
considerable nerve for him or her to speak up. This person deserves respect and a thoughtful answer. 
Moreover, the Board will appreciate a thoughtful reply. 
 7.7.1  The Difﬁ culty of Proving a Negative 
 You might say:  “ Mr. Chairman, the concern expressed puts me in an awkward position. Logically, I 
will never be able to prove the absence of harm, because even after I point to 100 years of experience 
with radio communications, the questioner can always reply that we just haven’t pinpointed the harm 
 Figure 7.10  Plywood anticlimbing sheets surrounding a structure.  (Photograph by the owner of the antenna 
structure, David C. Hoaglin.) 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 149
yet. This is the inherent problem with what is known as  ‘ proving the null hypothesis. ’ Nonetheless, 
there are several things I can say that may aid the Board in its decision making. ”
 7.7.2  Is It Safe? 
 “ I have already done what federal law requires with respect to investigating this question of safety. 
Using the equations provided by the Federal Communications Commission, developed after an 
extensive public process that included all of the relevant agencies and professional organizations, 
including the EPA, I have calculated the power density at the property line of our site [or at the 
property line of the nearest neighbor]. The system proposed is well within federal requirements and 
presents a lower exposure than an antenna system mounted lower to the ground. 1
1  This refers, of course, to calculations made using the OET-65 guidelines, issued by the FCC’s Ofﬁ ce of Engineering 
Technology.   
 Figure 7.11  Guy guards — slit plastic tubes that ﬁ t around the base of guy wires — are an attractive and 
simple way to increase the visibility of guy wires in the only place you want them to be extra visible: near the 
ground.  (Photograph by the author.)  

150 Chapter 7
 “ In fact, should you have continuing doubts about the safety of this installation, the correct engineering 
response is to suggest a higher antenna-support structure. Increasing the height above ground would 
reduce exposure, because exposure decreases as the square of the distance. 
 “ Let me round out my response by saying that, with respect to safety, one way to understand the 
safety guidelines is that the federal standard for the maximum permissible exposure, based on the best 
scientiﬁ c evidence currently available, has a 50-fold safety margin built into it; that is, radiofrequency 
emissions must be below 1/50th, or 2%, of the level at which the expert scientiﬁ c community has 
determined that “ adverse health or safety effects ” begin to occur. The FCC guidelines provide an 
objective, measurable standard. ”
  For situations involving personal wireless services, there is a strict limitation on the powers 
of local zoning authorities created by the Communications Act of 1996; see 47 USC §332 
(c)(7)(B)(iv): 
 No State or local government or instrumentality thereof may regulate the placement, construction, 
and modiﬁ cation of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of the environmental effects of 
radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with the Commission’s regulations 
concerning such emissions. 
 And what is meant by  “ personal wireless services ” ? The deﬁ nition may be found at 47 USC 
§332(c)(7)(C)(i):
 (T)he term  “ personal wireless services ”  means commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless ser-
vices, and common carrier wireless exchange access services. 
 As you would expect of complex legislative writing, the deﬁ nitions don’t end there. The term 
 “ commercial mobile service ” is deﬁ ned by the Communications Act of 1934, as amended ( “ the 
Act ” ), as: 
  …  any mobile service  …  that is provided for proﬁ t and makes interconnected service available (A) to 
the public or (B) to such classes of eligible users as to be effectively available to a substantial portion 
of the public, as speciﬁ ed by the Commission. 
 Communications Act §332(d)(1), 47 USC §332(d)(1). 
 “ Mobile service ” is deﬁ ned at Section 3 of the Act, Communications Act §3(27), 47 USC §153(27). 
 The term  “ commercial mobile service ” came to be known as the  “ commercial mobile radio service. ” 47 
CFR §20.3. Source: FCC DA-08-453A1.doc  . 
 Only now that the reader has been dragged through several levels of the Communications Act is it safe 
to reveal that those services are Enhanced Data Rates for Global System for Mobile Communications 
Evolution (EDGE), Wideband Code Division Multiple Access (WCDMA), High-Speed Uplink Packet 
Access (HSUPA), High-Speed Downlink Packet Access (HSDPA), Evolution Data – Optimized (EV-DO 
or EV-DO Rev A), Mobile WiMax IEEE 802.16e-2005 (WiMax), Long-Term Evolution (LTE), Ultra 
Mobile Broadband (UMB), Advanced Wireless Services (AWS), wireless operators using Broadband 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 151
Radio Service/Educational Broadband Service (BRS/EBS) spectrum in the 2.5-GHz band, and Mobile 
Satellite Service (MSS). 
  But, what is the signiﬁ cance of the preceding paragraphs deﬁ ning commercial mobile services? Harken 
back to the idea that the real opposition to an antenna system is likely to be based on aesthetics, 
except for the opposition of the true believers who think there is harm at levels way below the ﬁ rst 
observable biological effects, as well as those who are not convinced there is harm but believe in the 
so-called “ Precautionary Principle ” (more about this elsewhere 2 ). If you believe that the opposition 
to the structure is really based on its height and visibility, and you wish to avoid arguments about the 
potential of harm from exposure to electromagnetic waves, even at levels below the IEEE and FCC 
standard, then consider a multistep strategy: 
 1. 
 Justify the structure and its height for use in a commercial mobile service (see above for qualifying 
uses), and obtain a permit in a proceeding where objections based on RF exposure are improper; 
see the above discussion of 47 USC. §332(c)(7)(B)(iv). 
 2. 
 Erect the structure and establish the service, and  then
 3. 
 Apply to add the  “ unprotected ” broadcasting or other use (i.e., the noncommercial mobile service), 
such as an FM station (normal or low power) or a TV station. 
 With this strategy, the tower is up, and the  “ exposure ”  argument, as an argument to prevent the 
initial construction, has been taken away. Yes, opposition could be mounted to the presence of an 
FM station, for example, but the argument would no longer involve whether the structure could be 
erected. 
  For tower-based transmitters, comparisons can also be made to the cellular phone studies. Although 
the low-level exposure from tower-based transmitters and the much higher exposure from cell 
phones are different, the lack of scientiﬁ c evidence supporting the health hazards is the same. 
The measurement is in microwatts per centimeter squared ( μ W/cm 2 ). According to the Australian 
Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Agency (ARPANSA), the lack of evidence is based primarily 
on the following criteria: 
● 
 There is no evidence of a dose – response curve. 
● 
 There is no known plausible biological mechanism for radiofrequency radiation to cause 
cancer or other diseases at the levels found in the mobile phone system. 
 Current research indicates that, at the exposure levels indicated above, radiofrequency radiation is 
not known to have any adverse health effects. ARPANSA’s Fact Sheet may be found at  http://www.
arpansa.gov.au/RadiationProtection/Factsheets/is_antenna.cfm and on the accompanying CD, ﬁ lename 
ARPANSA.pdf. 
2  See, for example, Foster, K.R. et al., Risk management: science and the precautionary principle,  Science , 288, 979 – 981, 2000. 

152 Chapter 7
 Make sure you do your own calculations using the FCC’s OET-65 formulations of the estimated RF 
power density as a percentage of the maximum permissible exposure (MPE) for an uncontrolled 
environment. This is the relevant test. 
 As you do your calculations, be sure to remember that you should adjust average transmitter power 
delivered to the antenna by several factors: 
● 
 Feed-line loss 
● 
 Connector loss (relevant at VHF, UHF, or microwave frequencies) 
● 
 Duty factor (but not relevant to a broadcast station with constant output) 
● 
 Time (generally, you multiply power by 0.67 for 10 minutes on, 10 minutes off, and 10 
minutes on — a 50% duty-cycle during a 30-minute test period) 
● 
 Calculated distance to the area of interest 
● 
 Ground reﬂ ections 
 Consider whether you should submit the page labeled  “ Calculation Results ” with your permit 
application or whether you should hold it in reserve to see if the issue is raised during the public 
meeting. (In many communities the issue never arises, and perhaps you should give no reason to scare 
people in advance.) 
  If you think local environmental activists are making your life difﬁ cult, consider yourself blessed 
that you are not running Vatican Radio. On May 9, 2005, the Associated Press reported that 
Cardinal Roberto Tucci, former head of Vatican Radio’s management committee, and the Rev. 
Pasquale Borgomeo, the station’s director general, had been convicted of  “ dangerous launching 
of objects ” for transmitting electromagnetic waves. Though their sentences were suspended, the 
Italian limits for exposure to radiofrequency were invoked. Those limits are lower than the IEEE 
and U.S. standards. On June 5, 2007, Catholic News Service reported that an Italian Appeals 
Court had overturned the 2005 convictions, but that didn’t end it. On May 13, 2008,  USA Today
reported that Italy’s top criminal court, the Supreme Court of Cassation ( Corte Suprema di 
Cassazione ) had overturned the acquittals and ordered new appeals. No ﬁ nal result had been 
reached as of press time.  
 7.7.3  Local Health and Safety Regulations 
 Are commercial radio, TV, or cellular telephone transmissions exempt from  local health and safety 
regulation of RF exposure? Only cellular telephone has complete federal protection (see the previous 
discussion). As a starting place, consult the FCC website  http://www.fcc.gov/oet/rfsafety . The 
CD accompanying this book has source materials (ﬁ lenames FCC OET-65.pdf and FCC OET-65 
Supplement B.pdf). Also very useful for local governmental authorities considering RF Safety is the 
FCC document on the CD, ﬁ lename FCC Local Government Guide.pdf. 
 The FCC’s Report and Order covering this subject is FCC 96-326, released August 1, 1996, entitled  In
the Matter of Guidelines for Evaluating the Environmental Effects of Radiofrequency Radiation , ET 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 153
Docket No. 93-62 ( http://www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Mass_Media/Databases/documents_collection/96-326
.pdf ). At paragraphs 164 – 168, the FCC decided:
 ¶ 164.  . . .  To date the Commission has declined to preempt on health and safety matters. 
However, the Commission has noted that should non-Federal RF radiation standards be 
adopted that adversely affect a licensee’s ability to engage in Commission-authorized activities, 
the Commission would consider reconsidering whether Federal action is necessary. 
 ¶ 167.  . . . At this point, it does not appear that the number of instances of state and local 
regulation of RF emissions in non-personal wireless services situations is large enough to justify 
considering whether or not they should be preempted. 
 ¶ 168.  . . .  Once states and localities have had an opportunity to review and analyze the guidelines 
we are adopting, we expect they will agree that no further state or local regulation is warranted. 
 If you are pressured to show conformance with a state law, start with a full Internet search of your state 
government website, using terms such as  “ nonionizing radiation, ”  “ radiofrequency exposure, ”  “ RF 
emissions, ” and  “ radiation. ” The ﬁ rst approach in any response to questions like this is to search for the 
state regulation, so you can see if you meet the requirements of the regulation. Here is a sample letter 
referring to applicable regulations in Massachusetts: 
 January 10, 200 n
 Mr. Health Agent 
 Health Agent, Town of  Yourtown 
 Town Ofﬁ ce Building 
 Yourtown, MA 00000 
FAX: 508/111-2222
 Dear Mr. Agent: 
 You have asked if 105 CMR §122: NONIONIZING RADIATION LIMITS FOR THE GENERAL 
PUBLIC FROM NON-OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE TO ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS, 
EMPLOYEES FROM OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE TO ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS, AND 
EXPOSURE FROM MICROWAVE OVENS is applicable to a proposed antenna system to be 
located at 6 Hostile Lane, Yourtown, MA 00000. 
 The short answer is that this is a situation covered by [cite exemption], and it may be installed 
 “ without the approval of the Director. ” No ﬁ ling or approval is necessary. See 105 CMR 
§122.021. 
 [Company name] does not propose, nor does it use, an emitter that exceeds that threshold. This 
proposal is thus exempt. 
 In the interest of putting any concern to rest, I am pleased to explain why transmitters in the 
[name of service, such as broadcast service, paging service, etc.] do not make ﬁ lings seeking 
approval of the Director of the Department of Public Health. 

154 Chapter 7
 [Explain how you calculate your exposure.] 
 This is, by the way, exactly how the FCC makes such a calculation. See  “ ____ ” Supplement ___
____to OET Bulletin 65 (Edition 97-01). See: www.fcc.gov/oet/info/documents/bulletins/#65 . 
[Author’s note: to ﬁ nd the correct supplement, go to  http://www.fcc.gov/oet/info/documents/
bulletins/ .] 
 Thus, under the Massachusetts regulation, this type of emitter with an average of 500 watts is 
clearly not required to seek approval of the Director of the Department of Public Health. 
 The precise answer you seek is that, like all citizens, the company is subject to the requirements 
of 105 CMR §122, but the regulation does not require any ﬁ lings, nor any permissions, from 
either the Director of the Department of Public Health or a town health agent. 
  
 Sincerely, 
  
 Fred Hopengarten, Esq. 
 c: Counsel for [Company] 
 Co-counsel, Esq. 
 Client
 If you are seriously concerned about this issue and do not wish to rely on the federal regulation (though 
you would be perfectly correct to rely on the federal regulation), you may obtain a letter from a 
professional engineer, such as the one prepared by Daniel Goulet and available on the CD as ﬁ lename 
RF Safety Report.pdf. 
 7.7.3.1  Other Services 
 The FCC’s position on federal preemption for other services is nuanced but surprisingly readable. 
Perhaps it is just best to insert it here.
 C.   Federal Preemption 
 164. In the past, parties have requested that the Commission preempt state and local authority 
over RF exposure matters. To date the Commission has declined to preempt on health and safety 
matters. However, the Commission has noted that should non-Federal RF radiation standards 
be adopted that adversely affect a licensee’s ability to engage in Commission-authorized 
activities, the Commission would consider reconsidering whether Federal action is necessary. 
 165. In the  Notice , we did not discuss Federal preemption of state and local regulations regarding 
RF radiation exposure. However, many commenters request that we address this matter by 
establishing Federal preemption of state and local regulations concerning RF radiation exposure. 
Two Petitions for Rule Making have been ﬁ led in this docket requesting a Further Notice of 
Proposed Rule Making to address the preemption of non-Federal government regulations 
concerning RF radiation hazards. The Village of Wilmette, Illinois, and Ergotec Association, Inc., 
in late-ﬁ led reply comments, oppose federal preemption of local RF exposure regulations. 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 155
 166.  Decision. In the past the Commission has hesitated to intrude on the ability of states and 
localities to make regulations affecting health and safety. Many of the comments indicate 
that a patchwork of divergent local and State regulations could pose a burden on interstate 
communications. However, since these comments were ﬁ led, Congress has passed the 
Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104, 110 Stat. 56 (1996). Section 704 
of the Telecommunications Act amends the Communications Act by providing for federal 
preemption of state and local regulation of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of 
RF environmental effects. The Telecommunications Act also provides for resolution of conﬂ icts 
related to the regulation of RF emissions by the courts or by petition to the Commission. 
Accordingly, we are amending §1.1307 of our rules to incorporate the provisions of Section 704 
of the Telecommunications Act. 
 167. The Telecommunications Act does not preempt state or local regulations relating to 
RF emissions of broadcast facilities or other facilities that do not fall within the deﬁ nition of 
 “ personal wireless services. ” It would appear from the comments that a few such regulations 
have been imposed, generally as a result of health and safety concerns. At this point, it does 
not appear that the number of instances of state and local regulation of RF emissions in non-
personal wireless services situations is large enough to justify considering whether or not they 
should be preempted. We have traditionally been reluctant to preempt state or local regulations 
enacted to promote bona ﬁ de health and safety objectives. We have no reason to believe that 
the instances cited in the comments were motivated by anything but  bona ﬁ de  concerns. 
 168. We believe that the regulations that we are adopting herein represent the best scientiﬁ c 
thought and are sufﬁ cient to protect the public health. Once states and localities have had an 
opportunity to review and analyze the guidelines we are adopting, we expect they will agree that 
no further state or local regulation is warranted. Should our expectations prove to be misplaced 
and should FCC licensees encounter a pattern of state or local activities which constitute an 
obstacle to the scheme of federal control of radio facilities set forth in the Communications 
Act, they should present us with such evidence as well as their view of the legal basis which 
could justify FCC preemption of state and local ordinances. At this time, however, we deny the 
petitions from the EEA and from Hammett and Edison, as well as the comments from several 
parties, requesting a broad-based preemption policy to cover all transmitting sources. 
 V.  CONCLUSION 
 169. To protect public health with respect to RF radiation from FCC-regulated transmitters, 
and to fulﬁ ll our responsibilities under NEPA, we are updating our guidelines for evaluating the 
environmental impact of RF emissions. We believe that the guidelines we are adopting will be of 
beneﬁ t both to the public and to the telecommunications industry. They will provide assurance 
that recent scientiﬁ c knowledge is taken into account regarding future decisions on approval of 
FCC-authorized facilities and equipment. 
 Reading between the lines, the FCC appears to have said something like the following: We’ve adopted a 
good standard, but we won’t preempt, except our rules are modiﬁ ed as required by the Communications 
Act of 1996 to promote the spread of cellular telephone and other commercial mobile services. That is a 
preemption. If some jurisdiction adopts rules that would have the effect of frustrating the purposes of the 
Communications Act with respect to other services, affected parties  “ should present us with such evidence 
as well as their view of the legal basis which could justify FCC preemption of state and local ordinances. ”  
Then you can hold your breath while we check to see which Commissioners will vote which way. 

156 Chapter 7
 7.7.4  Some Great, Historic RF Battles Won by Broadcasters 
 7.7.4.1  WIZN-FM, Charlotte, VT (serving the Burlington, VT, Area) 
 The case of  Freeman v. Burlington Broadcasters , 204 F. 3d 311 (2d Cir. 2000), cert. denied, 531 
U.S. 917 (2000) ( http://www.fcc.gov/ogc/documents/opinions/2000/97-9141.doc ), involved a host of 
plaintiffs, including Mary Beth Freeman, formerly of Charlotte, VT, which happens to be where the 
WIZN-FM transmitter, then owned by Burlington Broadcasters, was located. In this radiofrequency 
interference (RFI) case, the Court found that “ given the FCC’s pervasive regulation in this area  . . . 
allowing local zoning authorities to condition construction and use permits on any requirement to 
eliminate or remedy RF interference ‘ stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the 
full purposes and objectives of Congress. ’ ”
 You may not be surprised to learn that the primary address of the EMR Network, a nonproﬁ t organization, 
is also Charlotte, VT. According to its website, the purpose of the EMR Network is as follows: 
● 
 To educate the public, environmentalists, journalists, technical writers, government ofﬁ cials, 
scientists and clinicians about the body of research which exists on the biological effects of 
low-intensity, nonthermal exposures to nonionizing radiation. 
● 
 To help citizens groups and municipal agents network among themselves regarding where this 
body of knowledge intersects with public health and local land-use regulations. 
● 
 To foster intelligent laws at the state and federal levels to adequately protect the public 
regarding exposures from low-intensity nonionizing radiation. 
● 
 To reduce exposure levels of nonionizing radiation to the public and EMR professionals to 
levels as-low-as-reasonably achievable — the ALARA principle. 
● 
 To mitigate unnecessary exposures from consumer products, such as cell phones, computers, 
microwave ovens, and the myriad 60-Hz technologies, to as low as reasonably achievable, 
through research, design and shielding modiﬁ cations.  
● 
 To create and maintain a bridge between the scientiﬁ c community, the public, and lawmakers 
regarding a full range of knowledge about nonthermal effects from nonionizing radiation. 
● 
 To create and maintain the appropriate, unbiased, ongoing research across a range of 
frequencies but with a particular emphasis on radiofrequency/microwave bands. 
 Also in Vermont, you can ﬁ nd The EMR Policy Institute, using a Post Ofﬁ ce box in Marshﬁ eld, VT, 
which is, according to Google Maps, just 1 hour and 12 minutes away. According to a November 
2003 press release, 3 Atty. Deborah Carney, of Golden, CO, past president of Canyon Area Residents 
for the Environment (CARE), was then joining the Board of Directors of The EMR Policy Institute. 
CARE opposed proposals for the construction of additional broadcast antennas for digital television 
transmitters to serve the Denver, CO market. 
3     See  http://www.emrpolicy.org/news/press/pr_6nov03.pdf .   

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 157
 The EMR Policy Institute press release also listed as members of its Science Advisory Group, among others: 
● 
 Raymond S. Kasevich, who later appeared as an expert witness in the WIZN-FM (VT) RF 
emissions case 
● 
 Henry C. Lai, Ph.D., of the University of Washington, who would later appear as an expert 
witness in Newman v. Motorola, Inc.4 (where the plaintiff claimed that his use of a wireless 
handheld telephone manufactured by Motorola caused his brain cancer) 
 In  Newman v. Motorola, Inc. , by the way, the District Court held:  “ Because no sufﬁ ciently reliable 
and relevant scientiﬁ c evidence in support of either general or speciﬁ c causation has been proffered by 
the plaintiffs,  … the defendants ’ motion [to exclude the testimony of plaintiffs ’ proposed experts] will 
be granted. ” Note Judge Blake’s comment on Dr. Lai’s work below. Lai was supposed to testify at a 
hearing in the KRKO-AM 1380 matter (see below) but declined after receiving a public records request 
(as a government employee at the University of Washington). 
 The Newman case was litigated by powerful teams on both sides. In the end, District Court Judge 
Catherine C. Blake wrote:
 In summary, the causation opinions proffered by the plaintiffs ’ experts do not pass the Daubert 
test. 1 Their reasoning, theories, and methodology have not gained general acceptance in the 
scientiﬁ c community, as demonstrated by the numerous national and international scientiﬁ c and 
governmental published reports ﬁ nding no sufﬁ cient proof that use of handheld cellular phones 
causes human brain cancer, and by the array of established, experienced, and highly credentialed 
experts called to testify by the defense. The only published peer-reviewed epidemiological study 
ﬁ nding such causation has serious ﬂ aws, and reliable epidemiology is essential before any link 
between animal studies and human cancer causation can be made. Neither Dr. Hardell’s work 2
nor Dr. Lai’s animal studies, heavily relied on by the plaintiffs ’ experts, have been replicated or 
otherwise validated by other scientists. Further, Dr. Lai’s published studies lack relevance, or 
 “ ﬁ t, ” when applied to RFR at cell phone frequency. 
Source: Newman v. Motorola, Inc., 218 F. Supp. 2d 769 (D. Md. 2002), also available at the Court’s 
ofﬁ cial web site as  http://www.mdd.uscourts.gov/Opinions/Opinions/newman0902.pdf or at 
 http://news.ﬁ ndlaw.com/hdocs/docs/cellphone/newmanmotorola93002mem.pdf .        
4  For the U.S. District Court decision, see  Newman v. Motorola, Inc., 218 F. Supp. 2d 769 (D. Md. 2002). To ﬁ nd this case, with its 
extensive discussion of the evidence on the Internet, see  http://www.mdd.uscourts.gov/Opinions/Opinions/newman0902.pdf or 
 http://news.ﬁ ndlaw.com/hdocs/docs/cellphone/newmanmotorola93002mem.pdf . Do not be confused and try to look for substance on 
questions of RF dangers in the prior federal district court decision of the same name, which may be found at 125 F. Supp. 2d 717
(D. Md. 2000). The prior decision deals with (1) jurisdiction, tossing out some defendants; (2) the Maryland Consumer Protection
Act, saying it does not apply; and (3) some technical issues of discovery. The opinion of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth 
Circuit, Newman v. Motorola, Inc. , afﬁ rming the District Court opinion on the evidence (the 2002 decision), is technically 
 “ unpublished, ” which means it has no citation to the Federal Reporter series and cannot be cited as precedent. Nonetheless, the 
Fourth Circuit’s opinion can be found at  http://news.ﬁ ndlaw.com/hdocs/docs/cellphone/nwmnmot102203uopn.pdf . 
1   The Daubert test is explained in the next sentence. Here is how the judge wrote about it:  “ When testimony 
concerning scientiﬁ c, technical, or other specialized knowledge is offered in support of a party’s claim, the 
trial judge must ensure under Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence that any such testimony is  ‘ not only 
relevant, but reliable. ’  Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharm., Inc. , 509 U.S. 579, 589 (1993). ” 
2   Hardell was another expert witness for the Newman side of the case. 

158 Chapter 7
 In other words, people who may oppose you get around. Don’t be surprised, should you get into a 
situation involving claims of harm from nonthermal or nonionizing radiation, to see some of the same 
names pop up that you may have seen associated with other cases. 
 After losing the case involving the potential of interference to local public safety communications 
(Freeman v. Burlington Broadcasters ), Ms. Freeman (with others from the ﬁ rst case, the RF 
interference case) was involved in the appeal and attended hearings in a subsequent case against 
WIZN-FM before the Vermont Environmental Board, claiming that, among other things, RF was 
 “ undue air pollution. ” The attorney in both matters was Gerald R. Tarrant, Esq. The owners of WIZN-
FM were greatly relieved to win both cases. 
 In the case before the Vermont Environmental Board, some ﬁ ndings of fact were as follows:
 20. In 1996, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) adopted safety guidelines to 
regulate human exposure to RFR (FCC Guidelines). The FCC Guidelines are based on the 
recommendations of National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP) 
Scientiﬁ c Committee 53 (NCRP Report No. 86) and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE) Standards Coordinating Committee 28 (IEEE C95.1-1991). 
 21. The FCC has acknowledged that it is not a health agency and that it defers to the comments 
of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, and the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration. Each of these agencies has endorsed the FCC Guidelines, as well as numerous 
nongovernmental organizations such as the International Commission on Non-Ionizing 
Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) and IEEE. 
 22. The FCC Guidelines establish Maximum Permissible Exposure (MPE) limits, which “are 
derived from exposure criteria quantiﬁ ed in terms of SAR” @ Exhibit B-3 at 8 . 
 23. The established threshold SAR is 4 W/kg. This value represents the whole-body average rate 
of exposure which was found to disrupt learned behavior in laboratory animals. Speciﬁ cally, this 
standard is based on research that shows a decrease in the ability of food-deprived laboratory 
animals to seek food. 
  24. To account for any uncertainties in the data and increase conﬁ dence that adverse effects 
will not occur, the FCC reduced the established threshold SAR in the IEEE standard (4  W/
kg) by a factor of 10 to provide an additional margin of safety for exposures in controlled 
environments such as occupational exposure inside fenced antenna sites. In other words, the 
FCC Guidelines for controlled environments cap exposure to RFR at 10% of the established 
threshold SAR. 
  25. In addition to the safety factor of 10, a further safety factor of 5, i.e., 2% of the established 
threshold SAR, was applied for an added margin of safety for exposures in uncontrolled 
environments, where exposure to the general public could occur. Thus, the FCC Guidelines for 
public, uncontrolled environments cap exposure to RFR to 2% of the established thres-
hold SAR. 
 . . . 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 159
 57. FM radio transmitters have been in operation in various places around the country since at 
least the 1930s, and there is no epidemiologic data that proves that RFR causes cancer or other 
nonthermal health problems. 
 58. There are inherent difﬁ culties in obtaining good scientiﬁ c data on nonthermal health effects 
or the lack thereof. 
 . . . 
 71. While it appears that electromagnetic ﬁ elds, including those in the RFR range, do have an 
effect on cell function, a causal link between RFR and cancer, or any other nonthermal health 
problem, has not been persuasively established. In short, there is no persuasive evidence that 
RFR can cause cancer or any other adverse nonthermal health effect. 
 7.7.4.2  Denver, CO: The Lake Cedar Group’s New HDTV Tower 
 With the prospect of the 2009 conversion to digital TV, Denver television stations CBS4, 7News, 
9News, and my20 Denver (then UPN 20) joined together to consolidate four broadcast towers into one. 
Denver was the last major metropolitan area in the United States not to have HDTV widely available. 
Here’s the story from the perspective of the stations involved: 
 Limited HDTV was available from the Lake Cedar stations through low-powered antennas located 
in downtown Denver. Those digital signals were temporary and did not reach much of the immediate 
metro area, much less the rest of the Colorado Front Range. Transmissions from a downtown build-
ing were not a viable option for long-term digital format broadcasts. To reach the entire metro area as 
required by the FCC, the four television stations known as the Lake Cedar Group proposed a single 
tower to handle all four stations ’  digital signals. This tower was designed to replace four existing 
towers on Lookout Mountain. It is shorter than the tallest tower it replaces. It will also be less visible 
against the mountain backdrop. 
 After working for years with Jefferson County and Lookout Mountain neighbors, Lake Cedar Group 
was approved twice by the Jefferson County Commissioners to build a consolidated tower. But a new 
set of commissioners set back the clock by voting 2 to 1 against the Lake Cedar Group. 
   To complicate matters more, the City of Golden, in an effort to stop the HDTV tower, went to court 
to condemn and seize the Lake Cedar Group property on Lookout Mountain where the proposed con-
solidated tower would be built. This property, and three others targeted by Golden, lay completely 
outside Golden city limits. Lake Cedar Group claimed that the eminent domain action would have 
cost Golden taxpayers millions of dollars.  
 Lake Cedar Group is part of The Grinnell Group, a real estate planning and development ﬁ rm with 
ofﬁ ces in Denver ( http://www.grinnellgroup.com/proj_lake_cedar.html ). Lake Cedar Group was 
committed to continue its effort by working with local government ofﬁ cials, mainstream citizens, 
and, if necessary, the courts to resolve this issue. Their goal was to bring free over-the-air digital 
television to all of Denver as soon as possible. (See  http://www.hdtvcolorado.com/content_pages/
overview_print.htm .)

160 Chapter 7
 7.7.4.3  The Dedicated Opposition — CARE 
 The proposed replacement tower on Lookout Mountain was opposed by a sophisticated and highly 
motivated group, Canyon Area Residents for the Environment (CARE) ( http://www.c-a-r-e.org ), led 
by Atty. Deb Carney. CARE’s position was that the tower should be built in someone else’s backyard 
(Squaw Mountain) — even though the existing towers had been on Lookout Mountain for more than 
50 years. To accomplish their goals, CARE mounted a lobbying campaign, complete with ﬂ yers, letters 
to the editor, becoming friendly with local reporters, ﬁ ling information and briefs, local meetings, and 
an additional website, http://www.hdtvhonestly.com .
 Their determination and completeness were admirable, especially given that it was a voluntary 
association. As an example of how effectively CARE presented information, look at  Figure 7.12 , a 
slide included in a Carney presentation on August 12, 2004. 
 In the view of the broadcasters, CARE further stalled the consolidated tower by tying up the project in 
the courts at every opportunity. 
 In addition to marshalling opposition at local hearings and litigating decisions, early on in the process 
(in 2000), CARE succeeded in getting the state legislature to adopt a bill urging the FCC not to 
preempt local attempts at regulating RF emissions. Here is the bill.
1950
1952
1954
1956
1958
1960
1962
1964
1966
1968
1972
1970
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
CURRENT FCC PERMITS
Over 20 million watts of Broadcast Radiation
Effective Radiated Power (ERP) on Lookout Mountain
0
5000
Year
10000
15000
20000
KW of Power
25000
 Figure 7.12  A slide used by CARE in opposition to the Lake Cedar Group’s proposed HDTV tower in 
Denver. ( Source:  www.c-a-r-e.org/pdfs/Deb%20Final%20Powerpoint.ppt .) 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 161
 SENATE 
 Final Reading 
 April 27, 2000 
 Second Regular Session 
 Sixty-second General Assembly 
 LLS NO. R00-1142.01 Kate Rooney 
 STATE OF COLORADO 
 BY SENATORS Sullivant, Congrove, Evans, and Teck; 
 also REPRESENTATIVE Witwer. 
 SENATE JOINT RESOLUTION 00-031 
 CONCERNING URGING THE FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION TO REJECT LAKE 
CEDAR GROUP’S PETITION TO PREEMPT LOCAL GOVERNMENT LAND USE DECISION-
MAKING AUTHORITY. 
 WHEREAS, According to its comprehensive plan and its duly adopted zoning regulations, the 
Board of County Commissioners of Jefferson County, Colorado, denied an application by Lake 
Cedar Group, LLC, to rezone land on Lookout Mountain from residential and agricultural 
zoning to planned development zoning in order to allow construction of an 854-foot 
telecommunications supertower and a 26,000 square foot support building; and 
 WHEREAS, Such decision was a quasi-adjudicative decision based on factual evidence presented 
to the Jefferson County Board of County Commissioners and application of applicable legal 
standards and as such can be appealed judicially to Jefferson County District Court, which court 
is fully empowered to grant full and appropriate relief to the appellant if appropriate under the 
facts of the case; and 
 WHEREAS, Lake Cedar Group ﬁ led an appeal of Jefferson County’s decision in Jefferson County 
District Court, which appeal is now pending the ﬁ ling of briefs by the parties; and 
 WHEREAS, Despite the pending judicial appeal, and after Jefferson County spent several months 
preparing the voluminous record of proceedings for the Jefferson County District Court action, 
Lake Cedar Group, without notifying the Jefferson County Board of County Commissioners or 
any other interested party, ﬁ led a petition with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) 
requesting the FCC to  “ preempt ” Jefferson County’s decision and to declare Jefferson County’s 
decision “ prohibited and unenforceable ” ; and 
 WHEREAS, By Public Notice dated April 10, 2000, the FCC seeks public comment on Lake 
Cedar Group’s petition; and 
 WHEREAS, In the United States, control over individual land use decisions is ﬁ rmly vested in 
local governments, through statutory delegation from state governments; and 
 WHEREAS, The FCC is barred by the 10th Amendment to the United States Constitution from 
attempting to preempt decisions made by local governments on individual land use applications 
because the United States Congress has not directed or authorized the FCC to preempt such 
local decisions; and 
 WHEREAS, The FCC lacks not only the authority, but also the expertise and any adopted 
standards to second-guess and invalidate local government land use decisions; and 

162 Chapter 7
 WHEREAS, Any attempt by the FCC to preempt local government land use decision-making in 
this manner would represent an illegal, unauthorized, and unjustiﬁ ed attack on state- and local- 
government land use authority; now, therefore, 
 Be It Resolved by the Senate of the Sixty-Second General Assembly of the State of Colorado, the 
House of Representatives concurring herein: 
 That the General Assembly of the State of Colorado hereby encourages the FCC not to preempt 
local government land use decision-making and state judicial processes, thus overriding local 
and state government authority. 
 Be It Further Resolved, That copies of this Joint Resolution be sent to the President of the 
United States Senate; the Speaker of the United States House of Representatives; each member 
of Colorado’s Congressional delegation; each member of the House of Representatives 
Subcommittee on Telecommunications, Trade and Consumer Protection of the Committee on 
Commerce; the Governor of Colorado; and the Commissioners of the Federal Communications 
Commission.
 7.7.4.3.1  The Broadcasters Respond 
 Attempting to retake the initiative, Lake Cedar Group eventually used the power of their own media. 
They created a website,  http://www.hdtvcolorado.com , and also began to run 30-second spots on their 
TV stations. Apparently learning from CARE’s example that you  can get the legislature involved, Lake 
Cedar Group went to the Congress. 
 According to lobbying reports, Lake Cedar Group spent $200,000 in 2006 (see  http://www.implu.com/
lobby_client/29086/2006 ;  https://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/clientsum.php?lname  Lake  Cedar 
Group%2FGrinnell Group & year  2007 ), hiring the Government Affairs Practice of what is now 
Wiley Rein LLP, of Washington, D.C., to lobby the Senate and House, as well as the FCC, for speciﬁ c 
legislation that was cosponsored by both of Colorado’s Senators, Ken Salazar (Democrat) and Wayne 
Allard (Republican), and passed with the approval of the entire Colorado delegation in the House of 
Representatives. 
 According to the  Rocky Mountain News , it  “ was approved about 2:30 a.m. Dec. 8 as Congress was 
heading home for the holidays. ” It was the last day of the session — and the bill was packaged with 
more than 30 others, all deemed “ noncontroversial. ”
   Sen. Salazar issued a statement saying that he backed the bill to  “ ensure that Colorado does not become 
a dark hole of digital broadcasting. ”  The Denver Post commented,  “ In just eight months, [Wiley Rein] 
accomplished what the stations had been unable to achieve in eight years. ” Wiley Rein is justly proud 
of their efforts and covered the matter in the portion of their website called  “ In the News ” ( http://www.
wileyrein.com/media_news.cfm?sp  news & ID  2261 ). 
 To get a sense of how exquisite the lobbying was, here is the legislative history: 
● 
 December 6, 2006 — Introduced
● 
 December 7, 2006 — Message on Senate action sent to the House 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 163
● 
 December 7, 2006 — Received in the House 
● 
 December 7, 2006 — Held at the desk 
● 
 December 9, 2006 — Cleared for White House 
● 
 December 9, 2006 — Passed without objection in the House (text, CR 12/8/2006 H9259)  
● 
 December 9, 2006 — Considered by unanimous consent (consideration, CR 12/8/2006 H9258-
9259)
● 
 December 20, 2006 — Presented to the President 
● 
 December 22, 2006 — Signed 
● 
 December 22, 2006 — Enacted and became Public Law No. 109-466 
 And now the text:
 Page 120 STAT. 3484 
 Public Law 109-466 
 109th Congress 
 An Act 
 To clarify certain land use in Jefferson County, Colorado. 
 NOTE: Dec. 22, 2006 — S. 4092 
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in 
Congress assembled, 
 SECTION 1. CLARIFICATION OF CERTAIN LAND USE IN JEFFERSON COUNTY, COLORADO. 
  Notwithstanding any applicable State or local land use or condemnation laws or regulations, 
and subject to all applicable Federal laws and regulations, any person that holds an approved 
Federal Communications Commission permit to construct or install either a digital television 
broadcast station antenna or tower, or both, located on Lookout Mountain in Jefferson 
County in the State of Colorado, may, at such location, construct, install, use, modify, 
replace, repair, or consolidate such antenna or tower, or both, and all accompanying facilities 
and services associated with such digital television broadcasts, if such antenna or tower is of 
the same height or lower than the tallest existing analog broadcast antenna or tower at such 
location. 
 Approved December 22, 2006. 
 LEGISLATIVE HISTORY — S. 4092: 
 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD, Vol. 152 (2006): 
 Dec. 6, considered and passed Senate. 
 Dec. 8, considered and passed House. 

164 Chapter 7
 Though you might think this would have ended the matter, more litigation followed. On May 10 – 11, 
2007, Carney — in her role as both Vice President of the EMR Policy Institute and attorney for 
CARE — went to Washington to brief about 15 Colorado congressional staff at the capitol ( http://www.
c-a-r-e.org/news_new3.htm ). Presentations made included: 
Wireless and Broadcast Radiation Pollution: A U.S. Regulatory Issue
Participants and Congressional Brieﬁ ng Overview ( http://www.c-a-r-e.org/pdfs/May 2007 Washington 
DC/Intro Sage Seymour.pdf) 
Electomagnetic Fields (EMF) and Health Risk: A Scientiﬁ c Perspective , by Martin Blank, Ph.D., 
Columbia University ( http://www.c-a-r-e.org/pdfs/May 2007 Washington DC/Blank DC-EMF.pdf) 
(Note : Blank was an expert witness in the WIZN-FM case in Vermont. A transcript of his cross 
examination is probably obtainable.) 
USFWS Concerns over Potential Radiation Impacts on Migratory Birds and Other Wildlife , by Albert 
M. Manville II, Ph.D., Senior Wildlife Biologist, Division of Migratory Bird Management, 
USFWS ( http://www.c-a-r-e.org/pdfs/May 2007 Washington DC/Manville DC.pdf) 
Radiofrequency Radiation — Hidden Health and Environmental Effects , by B. Blake Levitt, Medical/
Science Author and Journalist, Former  The New York Times writer ( http://www.c-a-r-e.org/pdfs/
May 2007 Washington DC/Levitt PPT.pdf) 
We Are Unprotected: High-Powered TV  & FM Broadcast Radiation on Lookout Mountain , by Deb 
Carney, Vice President, EMR Policy Institute, attorney for CARE ( http://www.c-a-r-e.org/pdfs/
May 2007 Washington DC/Carney PPT.pdf) 
 7.7.4.3.2  Tolling 
 If you are a broadcaster and you should be so unlucky as to get caught in one of these zoning 
quagmires, do not forget to request  “ tolling ” of your construction permit (CP). Your CP gives you 
just so much time to construct or you lose the license; “ tolling ” stops the CP clock until the matter is 
resolved. The trick here, and nowhere else is this written down, is that you have to get into Court  as
soon as possible . To the casual observer, it may appear obvious that getting hung up before a Zoning 
Board would be a situation where  “ construction is prevented by  . . .  causes not under the control of 
the permittee ” (47 CFR §73.3598(b)). Nonetheless, as you will see in the following well-written 
letter requesting tolling for one of the Lookout Mountain stations,  “ (t)he Commission has advised 
that tolling is appropriate when ‘ construction  is delayed by any cause of action pending before any 
court of competent jurisdiction relating to any necessary local, state, or federal requirements for the 
construction or operation of the station, including any zoning or environmental requirement ’ ” (47 
C.F.R. §73.3598(b)(ii)). 
 The consequence of the FCC’s position on this matter is that, if the broadcaster agrees to more and 
more hearings, with time passing, opponents or a Board truly opposed to the project can try to run out 
the clock. Thus, the need for tolling. This will require some careful planning in conjunction with your 
attorneys. Do not allow the clock to keep running in the hope that you will eventually get your permit. 
The consequence may be that you have a local permit, but your CP has expired. To  “ unexpire ” or 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 165
reinvigorate a CP that has died of old age can be a daunting, perhaps impossible, task, although it has 
been done. 
 An example of a letter requesting tolling, including a request to waive 47 CFR §73.3598(c), the rule 
requiring a permittee to notify the Commission within 30 days of the occurrence of a tolling event, 
comes from the public record in the Lookout Mountain situation and can be found on the CD as 
ﬁ lename Tolling Request-Lookout Mountain.pdf. 
 To give you an idea of what happens when a tolling request is submitted as a result of being in court 
(though in a much simpler case), see ﬁ lename WYGG Tolling.pdf on the CD. This is a standard FCC 
response to an FM station request for tolling (again, deﬁ ned as preventing the clock from running out, 
but this time on a Special Temporary Authorization, or STA). 
 Note that the request for tolling in the WYGG-FM case was made on March 20, 2008, but not granted 
until October 17, 2008, 7 months later. While a request for tolling can be ﬁ led by a lawyer for the 
station or by a member of station management (including an engineer), if you ever ﬁ nd yourself in 
a situation where you have applied for tolling and the CP or STA expires before you have received a 
letter back from the FCC granting the request for tolling, you have a problem that should probably be 
handled by a communications lawyer, not station management or an engineer. This situation becomes 
most frightening when you are trying to transfer the license (sell the station) during the process, and 
you have neither an outcome on the zoning process nor a response to the tolling request. Consult a 
lawyer. 
 7.7.4.4  NorthSound 1380 (KRKO-AM), Snohomish County, WA 
 This story is most easily told by simply repeating elements of the FCC’s Finding of  “ No Signiﬁ cant 
Impact, ” dated May 30, 2008, by Peter H. Doyle, Chief, Audio Division, Media Bureau (footnotes 
omitted). The reader interested in seeing all the footnotes may ﬁ nd the complete decision, with 
footnotes, on the accompanying CD, ﬁ lename KRKO-AM FCC FONSI.doc. The complete text of the 
decision, as issued, may also be found at  http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-08-
1272A1.doc . 
 Federal Communications Commission 
 Washington, D.C. 20554 
 May 30, 2008 
 DA 08-1272 
  
 In Reply Refer to:
  
 1800B3-MFW 
  
 Released: May 30, 2008 
 Mr. Andrew Skotdal, President 
 S-R Broadcasting Co., Inc. 
 2707 Colby Avenue, Suite 1380 
 Everett, Washington 98201 

166 Chapter 7
   
 In re :  KRKO(AM), Everett, WA 
  
 Facility ID No. 62056 
  
 Application No. BP-20000308ABU 
  
 Finding of No Signiﬁ cant Impact 
  
 Informal Objections 
 Dear Mr. Skotdal: 
 This letter concerns the referenced application, as amended (the  “ Application ” ), of S-R 
Broadcasting Co., Inc. ( “ S-R ” or the  “ Licensee ” ) for minor modiﬁ cation of the facilities of 
Station KRKO(AM), Everett, Washington. Additionally, we have before us numerous objections 
to the proposal ﬁ led by area residents. For the reasons set forth below, we ﬁ nd that the S-R 
proposal will have no signiﬁ cant impact on the quality of the human environment, we deny the 
objections, and we grant the Application. 
Background . On March 8, 2000, S-R ﬁ led the Application, seeking to relocate KRKO(AM)’s 
facilities to a new site. As initially ﬁ led, the Application proposed increasing power from 5   kW 
to 50  kW unlimited time, utilizing four towers for its nighttime directional antenna array, two of 
which also would be used for its daytime directional antenna operation. The technical proposal 
in the Application was subsequently amended several times, most recently to specify a daytime 
power of 34  kW and a nighttime power of 50   kW; the amended application speciﬁ es a 106.4-
meter tower for KRKO(AM)’s nondirectional daytime operation and four towers (including the 
106.4-meter daytime tower) for KRKO(AM)’s directional nighttime operation. From January 
of 2001 through April of 2002, we received numerous objections to the KRKO(AM) proposal 
from local residents, based on their concerns about the deleterious environmental effects of the 
planned KRKO(AM) towers. Most of these objections concerned the possible effects of
the KRKO(AM) proposal on migratory birds, endangered species, and bald eagles. Two 
objectors complain that construction of the towers will lower their real estate values, and one 
objector observes that the application for conditional use permit ﬁ led with the Snohomish 
County government did not match the application ﬁ led with the Commission. One objection, 
subsequently withdrawn, expressed concern about the proximity of the proposed KRKO(AM) 
towers to the Harvey Airﬁ eld a private,  “ FAA-designated general aviation reliever airport. ”
 Because the Application proposed to construct the KRKO(AM) towers in a ﬂ ood plain, the Staff 
requested S-R to submit an environmental assessment ( “ EA ” ) pursuant to Section 1.1307(a)(6) 
of the Commission’s Rules (the “ Rules ” ). The EA was to contain the information speciﬁ ed in 
Section 1.1311 of the Rules, and it was to address each of the factors set forth in Section 1.1307 
of the rules to support the Licensee’s contention that the project is categorically excluded from 
environmental processing. 
   S-R submitted the EA, prepared by LSI Adapt, Inc., on August 17, 2001. In an amendment to the 
EA ﬁ led on July 13, 2007, at the request of the Media Bureau Staff (the  “ Staff ” ), S-R indicates 
that the representations made when the EA was ﬁ led in 2001 apply equally to the KRKO(AM) 
modiﬁ cation application as most recently amended. The Bureau released a  Public Notice
announcing the acceptance of the EA on July 25, 2007, providing a 30-day period to comment 
on the EA. 
 The EA indicated that S-R was proposing to construct up to seven towers below 200 feet above 
ground level ( “ AGL ” ) and one 425-foot tower (exclusive of the 16-foot foundation needed to 
elevate the structure out of the reach of ﬂ ood waters). The towers were to be self-supported/
freestanding towers without guy wires. In an amendment to the EA ﬁ led on July 13, 2007, S-R 
indicates that although the EA contemplated up to seven towers below 200 feet and one tower 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 167
of 425 feet (tower number 4), only four towers were actually to be used by Station KRKO(AM). 
Additionally, although the Application was again amended on November 11, 2004, to reﬂ ect a 
reduction in the height of tower number 4 from 425 feet to 349 feet, S-R represents that  “ the 
information (including the Attachments), the conclusions, and the  ‘ Finding of No Signiﬁ cant 
Impact ’ rendered in connection with the EA eight-tower project description  … are equally 
applicable to the proposal set forth in the amended KRKO FCC application. ” 
 We received no timely comments on the EA speciﬁ cally in response to the  Public Notice although, 
commencing in March of 2007, we began to receive additional letters from local residents 
objecting to construction of KRKO(AM)’s modiﬁ ed facilities in the Snohomish Valley. These 
letters have continued through April of 2008. The majority of these letters object to the 
KRKO(AM) towers on aesthetic and  “ appropriate land use ” grounds, concerns over effects on 
birds and other wildlife, and/or concern over the effects of the tower on local property values. 
However, several letters express concern that construction of the KRKO(AM) facilities had 
begun prior to issuance of a construction permit for those facilities, and several other letter 
express concern regarding the perceived unhealthy exposure of local residents to radiofrequency 
( “ RF ” ) radiation from KRKO(AM)’s facilities. Several of these letters question whether the 
Commission’s RF exposure limits are satisfactory. Finally, one letter raises concerns about both 
the alleged  “ health risks ” of the KRKO(AM) proposal to nearby residents and schoolchildren 
and indicates that, due to the location of the towers in a ﬂ ood plain and the fact that  “ dirt ﬁ ll 
and concrete [tower] bases are required, ﬂ ood water will impact other areas of the [Snohomish 
River] valley. More recently, one objector invokes the Endangered Species Act in arguing that 
the radiofrequency radiation emanating from the proposed KRKO(AM) tower will adversely 
affect migrating salmon and may adversely affect birds that reside in or migrate through the 
Snohomish River valley. The Stewards of Snohomish reference a recent decision by the Court 
of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit which, they state, criticized the Commission for 
failing to sufﬁ ciently involve the public in its tower approval process and for refusing to consult 
with the United States Fish and Wildlife Service when approving such towers. 
Discussion . Pursuant to Section 309(e) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended (the 
 “ Act ” ), informal objections must provide properly supported allegations of fact that, if true, 
would establish a substantial and material question of fact that grant of the application would 
be prima facie inconsistent with the public interest, convenience, and necessity. For the reasons 
discussed below, the objectors and others ﬁ ling comments in this proceeding do not carry that 
burden.
 Under the Commission’s Rules implementing the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, 
as amended, ( “ NEPA ” ), licensees, permittees and applicants (collectively,  “ Licensees ” ) are 
required to assess proposed facilities to determine whether the facilities may signiﬁ cantly affect 
the environment, as deﬁ ned in Section 1.1307 of the Rules. For actions that may have signiﬁ cant 
environmental effects, Licensees must prepare and submit to the Commission an EA and 
undergo environmental review and any mandatory consultation with expert agencies, prior to 
initiating construction. The Bureau or Commission conducts an independent review of the EA 
to determine whether the proposed construction would have a signiﬁ cant impact on the human 
environment. If the Commission or staff ﬁ nds, after reviewing an EA and any comments received, 
that a proposed facility will not have a signiﬁ cant environmental effect, it will issue a Finding 
of No Signiﬁ cant Impact ( “ FONSI ” ) and grant the application. If the Commission ﬁ nds that a 
proposed action will have a signiﬁ cant environmental effect and the applicant does not choose 
to amend its application, Licensees may not commence construction until the Commission 
concludes further environmental processing, including the preparation of environmental impact 
statements ( “ EISs ” ). 

168 Chapter 7
The EA and Subsequent Information . According to the EA, the KRKO(AM) antenna towers will be 
located at the southwest corner of the intersection of 132nd Street, S.E. and Shorts School 
River Road in Snohomish. The area is described as  “ rural in nature, and comprised primarily 
of agricultural ﬁ elds. ” All towers will be self-supported, freestanding towers without guy 
wires, and the towers and equipment building will be on a 16-foot foundation to elevate 
the structures out of possible ﬂ ood waters. The EA indicates that all proposed development 
activities will occur more than 300 feet from any wetlands and streams and will be physically 
separated from these areas by an earthen dike. There will be a ground system consisting of 
120 copper wires, each roughly 1/16 of an inch thick, extending 200 feet from the central base 
of each tower in a “ bicycle spoke pattern; ” these will be buried approximately 18 inches deep 
and will likely be “ planted ” by a small farm tractor pulling a spool of copper wire, feeding it in 
behind the plow. 
 With respect to the speciﬁ c factors set forth in Section 1.1307, the EA contains the following 
information and documentation: 
Ofﬁ cially Designated Wilderness Area (Section 1.1307(a)(1)): The EA states, and no parties disagree, 
that the proposed KRKO(AM) tower site does not lie within the boundaries of an ofﬁ cially 
designated wilderness area. 
Ofﬁ cially Designated Wildlife Preserve (Section 1.1307(a)(2)): The EA states, and no parties 
disagree, that the proposed KRKO(AM) tower site does not lie within the boundaries of an 
ofﬁ cially designated wildlife preserve. 
Endangered Species or Designated Critical Habitats (Section 1.1307(a)(3)): The EA indicates that 
LSI Adapt sought and received information from the Washington State Department of Fish 
 & Wildlife, the United States Department of Fish  & Wildlife ( “ USFWS ” ), the National Marine 
Fisheries Service, and the Federal Register, yielding the following state and federal list of 
threatened species in the vicinity of the site: 
● 
 Bald Eagle ( Haliaeetus leucocephalus ), threatened (and ultimately delisted) 
● 
 Marbled Murrelet ( Brachyramphus marmoratus ), threatened 
● 
 Bull Trout ( Salvelinus conﬂ uentus ), threatened 
● 
 Dolly Varden ( Salvelinus malma ), threatened 
● 
 Chinook Salmon ( Oncorhynchus tshawytscha ), threatened 
● 
 Coho Salmon ( Oncorhynchus kisutch ), candidate for listing as threatened. 
 Additionally, the EA addresses concerns raised by interested parties about possible impacts to 
other migratory birds. 
 To assess the impact of the proposed KRKO(AM) towers on the listed species and migratory 
birds, the EA contains a Biological Assessment ( “ BA ” ) prepared by Derek Marks and William 
Railton of Wetland Resources, Inc. on March 22, 2001, and an Avian Risk Assessment ( “ ARA ” ) 
prepared by Dr. Paul Kerlinger of Curry  & Kerlinger, LLC. The BA concludes that there will be 
 “ No Effect ” on any listed species identiﬁ ed as potentially occurring in the vicinity of the site. 
The ARA — including as it did at the time seven towers less than 200 feet in height and one tower 
425 feet in height, all self supporting — concludes that by amending the proposal to decrease the 
tower height of seven towers and eliminating the use of guy wires, S-R had  “ eliminated virtually 
all risk to birds. ”

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 169
 The applicant ultimately submitted the BA and the ARA to the USFWS for its concurrence. 
By letter dated April 11, 2007, USFWS (1) informed S-R’s local counsel it did not need to 
seek USFWS concurrence for the “ no effect ” ﬁ nding; and (2) stated that, while ﬁ nding that 
some birds will likely be killed by colliding with the tower over the life of the station and that 
the Migratory Bird Treaty Act does not provide for permitting of  “ incidental take ”  of migratory 
birds,  “ the [USFWS] recognizes that some birds may be killed at structures such as radio towers 
even if all reasonable measures to avoid it are implemented. ” USFWS continued that although 
it is not possible to absolve individuals, companies, or agencies from liability even if they follow 
recommended siting guidelines, the USFWS ’ Ofﬁ ce of Law Enforcement and the Department of 
Justice have used enforcement and prosecutorial discretion regarding individuals, companies, and 
agencies who have made good-faith efforts to avoid the incidental take of migratory birds. USFWS 
required S-R to report any incidents or migratory bird  “ takings, ” and ultimately it  “ commends ” S-R 
for redesigning the proposed towers to conform more closely to USFWS siting guidelines. 
Districts, Sites, Buildings, Structures or Objects Signiﬁ cant in American History, Architecture, Archaeology, 
Engineering, or Culture that Are Listed or Eligible for Listing in the National Register of Historic Places
(Section 1.1307(a)(4)): The EA indicates that, because the proposed KRKO(AM) towers will be 
constructed near an urban area (the City of Snohomish) with buildings constructed more than 
50 years ago, the Washington Department of Community, Trade, and Economic Development’s 
( “ WDCTED ” ) Ofﬁ ce of Archaeology and Historic Preservation ( “ OAHP ” ) requested that a 
Preservation Professional conduct a ﬁ le review and ﬁ eld survey of the site and surrounding 
area. LSI Adapt contacted Dr. Caroline Galacci to conduct the review. She concluded that the 
construction and operation of the proposed antenna will not affect districts, sites, buildings, 
structures, or objects listed in, or eligible for listing in, the National Register of Historic Places. 
On May 14, 2001, Dr. Galacci submitted a  “ no effect ” opinion letter to the Washington OAHP, 
which provided a written concurrence letter on May 21, 2001 for the four-tower conﬁ guration 
and an additional concurrence letter on July 9, 2001, for the possible four future towers. 
Indian Religious Sites (Section 1.1307(a)(5)): The EA indicates that, because the proposed 
KRKO(AM) towers may be located near Native American religious sites, WDCTED and OAHP 
requested that a Preservation Professional conduct a ﬁ eld review, ﬁ eld survey, and a letter 
of inquiry to any Native American tribes owning land in the are of the proposed facility and 
surrounding area for possible eligible religious sites. Dr. Galacci’s review of the literature and 
record search indicated that the construction and operation of the proposed antenna would not 
affect any federally recognized Native American religious sites. 
 Subsequently, at the request of the Staff, S-R supplemented its outreach to tribes that might 
be interested in the KRKO(AM) tower site area using the Commission’s Tower Construction 
Notiﬁ cation System ( “ TCNS ” ). S-R initiated the notiﬁ cation on October 24, 2007. TCNS identiﬁ ed 
nine tribes with an interest in the property: Muckleshoot, Sauk Suiattle, Stillaguamish, Suquamish, 
Tulalip, Yakama Nation, Coeur d’Alene, Snoqualmie, and Seattle. Of those nine tribes: 
● 
 Four (Sauk Suiattle, Tulalip, Yakama Nation, and Snoqualmie) established response 
parameters in TCNS that if there is no tribal response within 30 days after notiﬁ cation, the 
Tribe has no interest in participating in pre-construction review and requests notiﬁ cation 
only if archaeological artifacts or remains are found on-site during or after construction. 
These Tribes did not respond within 30 days, and S-R pledged to provide notiﬁ cation 
to them following issuance of a construction permit by the Commission and if any 
archaeological items are found on site; 
● 
 The Suquamish Tribe indicated that it deferred to the wishes of the Tulalip and Snoqualmie 
Tribes listed above; S-R states that it interprets that response to mean that the Suquamish 
Tribe has no interest in pre-construction review; 

170 Chapter 7
● 
 The Coeur d’Alene Tribe indicated  “ no interest ” ; 
● 
 The Muckleshoot Tribe indicated  “ no comment at this time, ” and no further response has 
been received; 
● 
 The Spokane Tribe indicated  “ no interest ” ; and 
● 
 The Stillaguamish Tribe indicated  “ no cultural concerns at this time ” and submitted no 
further responses. 
 TCNS notiﬁ cation was also provided to the OAHP, which submitted no response. 
Flood Plain (Section 1.1307(a)(6)): The EA indicates that the proposed KRKO(AM) tower 
site is in a 100-year ﬂ oodplain and must comply with all applicable local Snohomish County 
Master Planning guidelines for commercial construction in a ﬂ oodplain. The EA indicates that 
an equipment platform, approximately 12 feet x 10 feet, will be situated at the base of each 
antenna and will be elevated 16 feet above ground level. A prefabricated equipment building 
measuring 24 feet x 36 feet will be placed on its own platform, also 16 feet above ground level. 
These platforms are designed to keep the equipment above the 100-year ﬂ ood levels. 
 Ultimately, after the hearings and litigation described in Note 8 above, on April 6, 2007, the 
Snohomish County Department of Planning and Development Resources issued to S-R all 
requisite conditional use permits for completing construction in a ﬂ ood plain. Additionally, S-R 
received an Elevation Certiﬁ cate from the National Flood Insurance Program, Federal Emergency 
Management Agency, United States Department of Homeland Security. 
Change in Surface Features (Wetland Fill, Deforestation, Water Diversion, etc.) (Section 1.1307(a)(7): 
The EA indicates that the proposed KRKO(AM) towers will have no effect on any wetlands. 
 With respect to the speciﬁ c information that is to be included in an EA pursuant to Section 
1.1311 of the Rules, the EA submitted by S-R describes the tower, supporting structures, 
and construction methodology, as well as the surrounding area and uses. The site is zoned 
 “ A-10 ” and the proposed use as a radio tower site is consistent with applicable zoning code 
requirements. It is not in a residential area. Additionally, S-R has described and thoroughly 
documented the proceedings undertaken to secure local zoning approval, ultimately receiving all 
the necessary permits from state and local authorities. 
Section 1.1311(a)(3): Local Controversy : The EA acknowledges that, as originally proposed, 
the project was a source of local controversy on environmental grounds, as individuals, 
organizations, and federal and state agencies ﬁ led over 100 letters and comments on the 
proposal for guyed towers. The commenters expressed concern about protected species, 
migratory birds, aesthetics, recreational opportunities, and radiofrequency ( “ RF ” ) interference. 
The EA states that the conﬁ guration of the antennas has been signiﬁ cantly changed in response 
to the comments. 
 It appears that the proposal remains a source of local controversy on environmental grounds, 
as evidenced by the appeals taken of the local land use authorities ’ decision to grant permits for 
the modiﬁ ed KRKO(AM) facilities and by the letters and comments that have been continuously 
submitted in response to the amended proposal. Opposition to a project does not establish that 
a project is controversial and that it will have a signiﬁ cant environmental impact. Controversy 
regarding an issue that is relevant to the existence of a signiﬁ cant environmental impact may be 
a factor in favor of preparing an Environmental Impact Statement, but mere opposition in the 
absence of such a legitimate issue is not. 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 171
Section 1.1311(a)(4): Environmental and Other Considerations Leading to Selection of Proposed Site . 
The EA also contains an extensive discussion of the site selection process, and alternatives 
considered, including a  “ No Action Alternative ” under which KRKO(AM) would continue to 
operate with its presently licensed facilities. The EA indicates that the availability of alternate 
sites was limited due to (1) the Commission’s medium-wave interference spacing requirements 
for AM stations; (2) the Commission requirement that the station’s community of license 
be provided with at least a 5 mV/m daytime and nighttime signal contour; (3) Commission 
regulations designed to encourage transmitter sites to be located in rural areas, away from 
concentrated population areas; (4) the limited real estate market for sites with appropriately 
sized parcels of land with suitable signal propagation characteristics; (5) Snohomish County 
zoning requirements; and (6) the Harvey Field, a local airﬁ eld which must be protected under 
Federal Aviation Administration Regulations. The EA indicates that, utilizing a matrix of site-
selection criteria, S-R was able to identify six site alternatives; each but the current proposal was 
rejected for a variety of reasons. 
● 
 The  “ No Action Alternative ” was rejected because it prevented KRKO(AM) from achieving 
its expanded signal transmission goals and would stall the station’s transition to digital 
broadcasting and  “ limit the level of emergency broadcast services available to remote areas 
located in Snohomish and Island Counties ” ; 
● 
 The  “ Shorts River Road Site ” (original proposed antenna conﬁ guration)  “ generally met ”  all 
site selection criteria, but was rejected because the original antenna conﬁ guration type and 
size might have increased the potential for visual and possible migratory bird impacts;  
● 
 The  “ Larimer Road Site ” (the current KRKO(AM) transmitter site) was rejected because  “ it is 
not large enough to install a four-tower directional array and is too far north to allow KRKO 
to cover South Snohomish County at night ” ;
● 
 The licensed site for the nighttime facilities for station KCIS(AM), Edmonds, Washington, 
was rejected because the existing towers are not oriented in a manner that would facilitate a 
nighttime directional signal for KRKO(AM) and because the site does not have enough area 
for additional towers; 
● 
 The  “ Tualco Valley Site, ” along Crescent Lake Road north of the Snoqualmie River was 
rejected because of the low ground conductivity in the direction of Everett, Washington 
KRKO(AM)’s community of license; 
 Therefore, the EA indicates, S-R chose a reconﬁ gured antenna system at the Shorts School 
River Road site because it met S-R’s most important selection criteria and was perceived to 
 “ signiﬁ cantly reduce ” the possibility of visual and environmental impacts in the subject site area. 
It utilizes self-supported latticework towers, replacing the originally proposed guyed towers, and 
signiﬁ cantly reduced antenna heights. The EA indicates that if this site proceeds as proposed, 
it will allow for the  “ decommissioning ” of the two 225-foot guyed towers currently used by 
KRKO(AM) at the Larimer Road site. The EA observes that the site has excellent conductivity, 
which allows full coverage of Everett and southern Snohomish county, and it states that the 
rural nature of the site is ideally suited for the construction of the towers because of the lower 
population density in the vicinity of the transmitter, the size of the property available, and the 
ease of property development. 
Comments/Objections to EA . Although we received no timely comments in response to the  Public
Notice announcing the acceptance for ﬁ ling of the EA for KRKO(AM)’s modiﬁ ed facilities, we 
received comments challenging the EA from the group Snohomish Citizens, through counsel, 

172 Chapter 7
on October 4, 2007. Previously, on September 13, 2007, the President of Snohomish Citizens 
requested an extension of time to comment on the EA. We think it inappropriate to extend 
formally the comment period for the EA given the fact that Snohomish Citizens had actual 
notice of the EA and the length of time which Snohomish Citizens has already had to comment 
on the EA even prior to release of the  Public Notice . Nevertheless, we believe that consideration of 
these comments will be beneﬁ cial to obtaining a thorough review of the environmental effect of 
the proposed KRKO(AM) modiﬁ cation. 
 In their October 4 Comments, Snohomish Citizens argue that the EA is incomplete, outdated, 
and does not address signiﬁ cant environmental impacts that should be addressed in a full EIS. 
In these comments, Snohomish Citizens initially describes the area, the surrounding properties, 
and the uses made of the surrounding properties. It then reprints selected comments from the 
Snohomish County Parks Department on the potential environmental effects of the KRKO(AM) 
towers, both from internal Parks Department memoranda and in comments ﬁ led upon S-R’s 
draft EIS in the Washington state zoning approval process, expressing concerns about the 
 “ visual appeal ” and the  “ scenic viewing opportunities ” in the picturesque rural Snohomish River 
ﬂ oodplain. It observes that the upper Snohomish River Valley is part of a major migratory bird 
route in the spring, speciﬁ cally mentioning trumpeter swans and ducks (including mallards and 
American Wigeons). The Licensee ﬁ led a response to this submission on October 12, 2007. 
Conclusions Regarding EA and Objections. Upon examination of the EA and supplemental materials, 
we ﬁ nd that the information supplied satisﬁ es the requirements speciﬁ ed in Sections 1.1307 
and 1.1311 of the Rules. Initially, we reject the contention of Snohomish Citizens that the EA is 
incomplete, outdated, and insufﬁ cient. Although the EA was originally prepared in 2001, there 
is no evidence in the record that the information submitted has become stale or outdated, and 
S-R has certiﬁ ed that the representations in the original EA apply with equal validity to the most 
recent amendment to the KRKO(AM) proposal. Furthermore, as discussed in detail above, 
the EA was supplemented recently with probative evidence regarding, among other things, the 
lack of signiﬁ cant effect of the proposed KRKO(AM) towers on migratory birds and the lack of 
concern about the towers expressed by Indian tribes with an interest in the tower site area. The 
information before us is more than adequate to make a reasoned determination of the effects of 
the KRKO(AM) towers on the quality of the human environment. 
Endangered Species/Migratory Birds . With respect to the speciﬁ c criteria referenced by the objectors, 
ﬁ rst involving the purported effects of the KRKO(AM) towers on avian species under Section 
1.1307(a)(3) of the Rules, the EA and supplemental materials clearly explain the basis for the 
applicant’s determination that there are no listed or proposed threatened or endangered species or 
designated or proposed critical habitats within the project’s action area and that there would be 
no effect on listed or proposed threatened or endangered species or designated or proposed critical 
habitats within the project’s action area. It has provided the materials (with citations) that formed 
the basis for this determination, including a letter from the USFWS databases so indicating. 
 Additionally, with respect to the effect of the KRKO(AM) towers on migratory birds, USFWS 
has commended the Applicant for redesigning its antenna system to take into account USFWS 
guidelines and required it to report any  “ takings ” of migratory birds at the tower site. Nothing 
further is required of S-R on this matter at this time. 
Floodplain . With respect to the location of the KRKO(AM) towers in a ﬂ oodplain, S-R has 
provided a copy of the building permit from the local jurisdiction where the proposed antenna 
structure will be located that shows the proposed structure is above the ﬂ ood plain. It also has 
provided a copy of an Elevation Certiﬁ cate issued to it by the National Flood Insurance Program, 
Federal Emergency Management Agency, United States Department of Homeland Security. 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 173
RF Radiation Exposure . With respect to various objectors ’ concerns regarding the perceived 
unhealthy exposure of local residents to RF radiation from KRKO(AM)’s facilities and their 
concomitant concern that the Commission’s RF exposure rules do not provide adequate 
protection, we observe ﬁ rst that S-R’s engineering consultants have established that 
KRKO(AM)’s proposal complies with the RF radiation exposure limitations contained in 
Sections 1.1307(b) and 1.1310 of the Rules with the following provisos. S-R will be required 
to erect a protective fence around the transmission facility and install appropriate warning 
signs. Additionally, the construction permit will contain a condition requiring S-R to take actual 
radiation measurements which will be submitted to the Commission to ensure compliance with 
the RF exposure limitations. 
 Moreover, we reject the objectors ’ contention that the Commission’s RF exposure guidelines 
provide insufﬁ cient protection to members of the general public. The Commission’s current 
environmental rules were ﬁ rst established in 1985, pursuant to a notice and comment 
rulemaking proceeding. The current, more restrictive, guidelines were ﬁ nalized in 1997, based 
on the recommendations and advice of federal agencies and groups with expertise in health-
related areas and in standards setting. More recently, the Commission updated its procedures 
for measuring RF exposure from mobile and portable devices. These procedures are based on 
the work and recommendations of an expert group of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE). We are not persuaded by the submission of two studies — one of which is 
of dubious relevance — that the Commission’s RF exposure standards are incorrect or 
inadequate. 
 To the extent that the objectors believe that recent studies indicate that there are more 
signiﬁ cant effects of long-term low-level exposure to RF radiation from broadcast facilities, 
these suggestions are more appropriately raised in a petition for rulemaking with the 
Commission pursuant to Section 1.401 of the Rules or with other expert agencies upon which 
the Commission relies rather than in a fact-speciﬁ c adjudicatory proceeding such as this. The 
institution of a notice-and-comment rulemaking under the Administrative Procedure Act, if 
warranted, would allow for the development of a complete record on which the Commission 
could make an informed determination regarding the sufﬁ ciency of its RF radiation exposure 
rules.
  Other Matters. Effects on local property values . Several commenters express concern over the 
perceived effect of the KRKO(AM) towers on property values in the area. While we understand 
their misgivings, concern over property values is not an environmental factor considered by 
the Commission in reviewing proposals for broadcast facilities. Moreover, the environmental 
statutes governing the Commission’s obligations do not require federal agencies to consider 
socioeconomic factors, such as diminished property values, where the record establishes that 
the threshold requirement for environmental analysis — impact on the environment — has not 
been met. 
  Aesthetic concerns . Several commenters express their concern that the erection of the four KRKO(AM) 
towers in the Snohomish River valley will despoil the pristine, bucolic landscape that residents have 
long enjoyed. The Commission, in amending its environmental rules in 1986, observed that 
 [A]esthetic concerns may more appropriately be resolved by local, state, regional or local land 
use authorities. Those authorities can better handle such questions given their experience and 
familiarity with land use values. Accordingly, in considering any objections based upon aes-
thetic concerns, due recognition and considerable weight will be accorded to the fact that site 
approval has been obtained from a local, state, regional or federal land use board or agency, if 
that approval has taken into account the environmental impact of the proposal. 

174 Chapter 7
 It is clear from the record in the local zoning approval process that the Snohomish County and 
Washington State authorities have carefully reviewed the environmental impact of S-R’s proposal 
before issuing the requisite permits. We therefore defer to those authorities on the issue of the 
aesthetic impact of the KRKO(AM) towers. 
Proximity to Harvey Airﬁ eld . By letter dated April 3, 2001, the owner of the Harvey Airﬁ eld 
expressed concern about the proximity of the proposed KRKO(AM) towers to that private 
airport. Harvey Airﬁ eld ofﬁ cially withdrew its objection on April 18, 2002, because S-R had 
agreed to lower the height of the towers and there was no evidence that the towers would 
negatively impact aircraft radio or navigation equipment operations or instrument procedure 
guidance systems. Even where a petition or objection is dismissed at the ﬁ ling party’s request, 
however, the Commission considers the merits of that submission. The staff has coordinated 
with the Federal Aviation Administration ( “ FAA ” ) during the process of registering the 
KRKO(AM) towers, and the FAA has issued a  “ No Hazard ” determination. No further discussion 
is warranted on this matter. 
Cumulative effects of KRKO(AM) and the CAAM . Several objectors argue that the Commission 
must consider the cumulative effects of the KRKO(AM) proposal and the subsequent CAAM 
Application. The CAAM Application proposes the same site as the KRKO proposal, sharing two 
towers and proposing two additional towers. 
 S-R counters that the cumulative impact of all the towers involved in the KRKO(AM) and CAAM 
Applications is not relevant to the Commission’s determination of the matter before the staff 
here,  viz. , whether the KRKO(AM) modiﬁ cation application should be granted. It acknowledges 
that cumulative impact is a relevant consideration and should be a factor in determining 
whether the CAAM application should be granted; it states that if the CAAM Application is not 
granted, for whatever reason, there will be no cumulative impact. Objector Dold counters that 
NEPA has very clear requirements regarding the identiﬁ cation and evaluation of cumulative 
impacts caused by connected, cumulative, and/or similar proposals. There is no credible 
argument, she states, that S-R and CAAM’s joint use of the same radio antennas at the same 
site could not be considered connected, cumulative, or similar actions, and that the failure to 
consider the cumulative impact of both proposals would violate NEPA. 
 We ﬁ nd that we need not study the cumulative environmental effects of the KRKO(AM) and 
CAAM Applications at this time. As observed by S-R, if the CAAM application is not grantable, 
the additional towers will not be built, and there will be no  “ cumulative effect ” added by those 
additional towers. Nevertheless, we will direct CAAM, when it ultimately ﬁ les an EA for the 
CAAM Application, to include in the EA a speciﬁ c discussion regarding the cumulative effect of 
all the towers at the site on with respect to each of the environmental factors set forth in Section 
1.1307(a) of the Rules. 
Premature Construction . A number of objectors have expressed concerns that, during the late 
summer and fall of 2007, S-R commenced construction of the KRKO(AM) facilities prior to 
grant of the Application. Several objectors enclosed pictures, purportedly taken at the proposed 
KRKO(AM) site, which show a crane and pile driver. In its September 5, 2007, response, S-R 
indicates that the construction underway at that time consisted of survey work, temporary 
roads, installation of 62 steel piles (to a depth of 40 to 50 feet and extending approximately six 
inches above the soil in foundation holes) for antenna tower and storage shelter foundations 
and the utilization of batter boards in preparation for the pouring of cement.
 Section 319(a) of the Act states, in pertinent part, that  “ [n]o license shall be issued under the 
Authority of this Act for the operation of any station unless a permit for its construction has 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 175
been granted by the Commission. ” Section 319 was enacted to ensure that applicants do not 
use incurred expenses as a means of exerting improper pressure upon the Commission to grant 
an application. That section forecloses the Commission from issuing a license for the operation 
of any station that has been constructed prior to the grant of a construction permit. However, 
the Commission has held that its prohibition on premature construction of a broadcast station 
is not absolute. For instance, the Commission has sanctioned certain types of pre-authorization 
construction, including site clearance, pouring of concrete footings for a tower, installation of 
a tower base and anchors, installation of a new power line, purchase and on-site storage (but 
not installation) of radio equipment and other preliminary steps having no intrinsic broadcast 
use. Pre-authorization construction of towers or installation of radio antennas has been strictly 
prohibited. We ﬁ nd that S-R’s installation of tower foundation supports, temporary roads, 
 “ batter boards, ”  “ rebar, ” and empty conduit constitute preliminary activities having no intrinsic 
radio communication use related to the proposed facility, and thus are not premature or 
unauthorized construction activities. 
Conclusion/Actions . Upon examination of the EA, we ﬁ nd that the information supplied 
satisﬁ es the requirements speciﬁ ed in Section 1.1311 of the Rules. 
  Additionally, pursuant to Section 1.1308 of the Rules, we ﬁ nd that the KRKO(AM) tower 
array will have no signiﬁ cant environmental impact on the quality of the human environment, 
and no further environmental processing is warranted. Moreover, we have examined the 
captioned application and ﬁ nd that it complies with all pertinent statutory and regulatory 
requirements. 
 Accordingly, in light of the ﬁ ndings made above, IT IS ORDERED, that the Informal Objections 
ﬁ led by the individuals and entities listed above ARE DENIED, and the application (File No. BP-
20000308ABU) of S-R Broadcasting Co., Inc. for minor modiﬁ cation of the facilities of Station 
KRKO(AM), Everett, Washington, IS GRANTED. 
  
 Sincerely, 
  
 Peter H. Doyle 
Chief, Audio Division 
Media Bureau 
 cc: Robert Jacobi, Esq. (Counsel for the Licensee) 
 Citizens to Preserve the Upper Snohomish River Valley 
 Jennifer A. Dold, Esq. (Counsel for Citizens to Preserve the Upper Snohomish River Valley) 
 CAAM Partnership, LLC 
 Individual Objectors ( see Appendix) 
 7.7.4.4.1  Lessons to Be Learned from this FONSI 
  If you are an engineer and the decision above (the FONSI) makes your eyes glaze over, keep 
your day job 5 and leave the application and argument, when based on such detailed law, to the 
5  If you are the engineer for an AM daytimer, keep your night job. (For readers who do not get this joke,  “ AM daytimers ” are 
stations that operate at high power during the day and low power at night to avoid skip (skywave) interference with other 
stations sharing the same frequency. As a result, maintenance is done at night because there are far fewer listeners to be 
disturbed if the station is taken off the air.) 

176 Chapter 7
professionals. Do not try this at home, boys and girls. You can rely on the fact that any and every 
complaint possible will be launched against an application when the opponents are ably represented 
(as they were here).You also can rely on the fact that improbable, outlandish, and false claims will 
be launched against you by members of the public who don’t know what they are talking about. But 
the FCC (and other bodies) will take those complaints seriously, so you’d better have a passionless, 
solid response. 
 There are some really nice ﬁ ndings, such as the following: 
● 
 Opposition to a project does not establish that a project is controversial and that it will have 
a signiﬁ cant environmental impact. Controversy regarding an issue that is relevant to the 
existence of a signiﬁ cant environmental impact may be a factor in favor of preparing an 
Environmental Impact Statement, but mere opposition in the absence of such a legitimate 
issue is not. 
● 
 The FCC found that a study suggesting danger from RF exposure was of  “ dubious relevance. ” 
This phrase was ampliﬁ ed in footnote 89: 
 The 2002 research done near Rome, Italy, involved studying Vatican Radio, a powerful station 
located in a northern suburb of Rome. Vatican Radio operates with three rotating and 28 ﬁ xed 
antennas in an area 2   km north – south by 1.5   km east – west. The antennas broadcast on different 
wavelengths at from 5 to 600  kW of power. There is no correlation between Vatican Radio and 
the proposed KRKO(AM) — or any other domestic AM — facility. Additionally, the abstract of the 
article itself acknowledges: 
 Although the study adds evidence of an excess of leukemia in a population living near high-
power radio transmitters,  no causal implication can be drawn . There is still insufﬁ cient scientiﬁ c 
knowledge, and new epidemiologic studies are needed to clarify a possible leukemogenic effect 
of residential exposure to radiofrequency radiation. 
 Source:  Am J Epidemiol  2002 at 155:1096.        
● 
 As stated in the FONSI above,  “ [T]he environmental statutes governing the Commission’s 
obligations do not require federal agencies to consider socioeconomic factors, such as 
diminished property values, where the record establishes that the threshold requirement for 
environmental analysis — impact on the environment — has not been met. ” 
    7.7.5       Association Is Not Causality — Lessons from Statistics 
 Now that we have given some serious thought to the question of radiation and emissions safety, you 
must become emotionally prepared to face the charge that you may be harming innocents. To aid your 
preparation, please consider this piece of Internet humor (author unknown) designed to make the very 
serious point that “ association is not causality. ” Never forget that point.

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 177
 Bread Statistics 
  1.  More than 98% of convicted felons are bread users. 
  2.  Fully  half of all children who grow up in bread-consuming households score below average 
on standardized tests. 
  3.  In the 18th century, when virtually all bread was baked in the home, the average life expectancy 
was less than 50 years, infant mortality rates were unacceptably high, many women died in 
childbirth; and diseases such as typhoid, yellow fever, and inﬂ uenza ravaged whole nations. 
  4.  More than 90% of violent crimes are committed within 24 hours of eating bread. 
  5.  Bread is made from a substance called  “ dough. ” It has been proven that as little as one 
pound of dough can be used to suffocate a mouse. The average American eats more bread 
than that in 1 month! 
  6.  Primitive tribal societies that have no bread exhibit a low incidence of cancer, Alzheimer’s, 
Parkinson’s disease, and osteoporosis.  
  7.  Bread has been proven to be addictive. Subjects deprived of bread and given only water to 
eat begged for bread after as little as 2 days. 
  8.  Bread is often a  “ gateway ” food item, leading the user to  “ harder ” items such as butter, 
jelly, peanut butter, and even cold cuts. 
  9.  Bread has been proven to absorb water. Since the human body is more than 90% water, it 
follows that eating bread could lead to your body being taken over by this absorptive food 
product, turning you into a soggy, gooey, bread-pudding person. 
 10.  Newborn babies can choke on bread. 
 11.  Bread is baked at temperatures as high as 400 ° Fahrenheit! That kind of heat can kill an 
adult in less than one minute. 
 12.  Most American bread eaters are utterly unable to distinguish between signiﬁ cant scientiﬁ c 
fact and meaningless statistical babbling. 
 In light of these frightening statistics, we propose the following bread restrictions: 
  1.  No sale of bread to minors 
  2.  A nationwide  “ Just Say No to Toast ” campaign, with complete celebrity TV spots and 
bumper stickers 
  3.  A 300% federal tax on all bread to pay for all the societal ills we might associate with bread 
  4.  No use of animal or human images, nor any primary colors (which may appeal to children), 
to promote bread usage 
  5.  Establishment of  “ bread-free ” zones around schools 
 7.8   Lightning 
 The thought that an antenna-support structure might present a danger by attracting lightning is 
usually presented to a Board of Appeals in the form of a question:  “ Won’t this attract lightning? ”

178 Chapter 7
or  “ Will this attract lightning? ” In the midst of an otherwise vicious and mean-spirited attack on 
your proposal to erect an antenna-support structure, it is easy to think that almost any remark is 
also vicious and mean spirited. Nonetheless, in my experience, this question is most often posed 
by someone who did not grow up on a farm and who knows nothing about lightning. Should this 
question arise, do not snap at the questioner. It could well be a totally innocent question. Fortunately, 
it is easily answered. 
 7.8.1  “ The Cone of Protection ” 
 The most effective way to answer the question is to bring along a graphic, available on the CD as 
ﬁ lename Cone of Protection.pdf. It is also reproduced here in  Figure 7.13 . Basically, the  “ cone of 
protection ” principle states that objects within a cone deﬁ ned by a 45 ° down angle from the highest 
grounded thing in the area are protected because lightning will tend to seek the easiest path to 
ground. 
 For further information, see  http://www.lightningrod.com/manual5_how.html for a neat illustration of 
this principle. Don’t think this works? At America’s explosives processing plants, lightning protection 
is accomplished by a series of tall masts, usually four, placed at each corner of the building. The cones 
of protection overlap, protecting the building. Sometimes a wire is strung between masts. Thanks to 
Mark Lowell, N1LO, for this example. 
Building
Ground rods
and grounding
system as per
National Electrical
Code
Grade
Antennas
on mast
θ
θ
Antenna-
support
structure
 Figure 7.13  A depiction of the  “cone of protection ” concept in lightning protection. 

Possible Objections  — Safety Issues 179
 In any event, if you plan something really tall, own up to it, take pride in it, shine upon it! Tell the 
Board that, yes, it will be struck by lightning — thus discharging energy that could otherwise be 
conserved to later strike a church steeple, a silo, or other tall structure. If lightning is a real fear, a 
reason proposed to deny a permit, then the very reason should be used to grant a permit. No member of 
the public will be hurt when the tower is struck by lightning, and few structures are so good at getting 
that lightning strike down to the ground safely. 

This page intentionally left blank

181
 Possible Objections — Aesthetic, 
Noise, and Nuisance Issues 
CHAPTER 8 
 8.1   Aesthetic Impact 
 Aesthetics? Who on Earth doesn’t appreciate the beauty of a communications tower? Well, in the event 
you’ve been left out in the cold on this issue, let me share the perspective of your friendly neighbor. 
In an essay, journalist and member of the  New York Times Editorial Board, Eleanor Randolph has 
described our majestic friends:
    “ extremely ugly.  … dreadful. ” 
 “ They have gizmos attached at odd angles in a manner reminiscent of a sole electrical receptacle 
serving a whole roomful of appliances. The word sky-clutter comes to mind here. ” 
 “ One fake ﬁ r  … looks like an alien growth fed by a New Jersey sludge pile. (U)pstate  … , 
neighbors are battling a tower-tree they call the Frankenpine. ” 
 ( Source: “The Cell Tower Blight: Text-Message Calder, ASAP”, The New York Times , February 26, 2005) 
 For most opponents,  aesthetic impact is really the heart of the matter. As always, you’ve got to ﬁ gure 
out:  “ What is the  real question? ” It is very important for you to frame their question in a way that is 
favorable to the outcome you desire. 
 Let’s face it: You and I think that antenna systems are majestic. We show pictures of antenna systems 
to friends, and bring those photos to regional meetings of the Society of Broadcast Engineers, just like 
car buffs swap photos of cars, or grandmothers swap photos of grandchildren. We buy the annual tower 
calendar from  http://www.fybush.com/calendar.html . However, the truth is that some people might not 
agree with us, and they may be well-respected citizens in their communities. The fact that they disagree 
on aesthetic issues doesn’t mean that they should come out on top in the discussion. The usual test 
found in an ordinance is not whether something is pretty. 
 At this point in the discussion, you should remind all concerned that if you were to do at 35 feet what 
you want to do at 130 feet, or 1300 feet, there would be no discussion at all. Below a certain height 

182 Chapter 8
dictated by town ordinance or bylaw, in almost every municipality in America, you are permitted to put 
up an antenna somewhere. The exceptions are where the whole town is one big development subject to 
covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC & Rs), or historic districts. 
 One of those situations was called to the attention of all by Fred Baumgartner in a 2004  CQ 
Magazine  article. Twelve miles south of Denver lies the suburb of Highlands Ranch, CO ( http://www.
highlandsranch.org ), founded in 1981, where all 22,000 acres are  “ master planned. ” All 27,346 homes 
and 3,305 apartments are 100% covenant controlled.  “ Here the HOAs fought a short two-way radio 
tower for a neighborhood ﬁ re station and  won. ” (See Baumgartner, F., Homeowners ’ associations, 
covenants, and the radio operator. Part I. The truth about today’s HOAs,  CQ Magazine , March, 
34 – 37, 2004.) 
 Except for situations like Highlands Ranch, CO (Foster City, CA is similar), the question is not 
whether or not a communications use is permissible. Rather, it is important to answer the question 
of whether this is a permitted use in the zone where the site is located and at the height proposed. 
The same antenna system that might be permissible below 35 feet (or 42 feet, or whatever height 
your local ordinance dictates) may be impermissible (a nonconforming use) above that height. You 
must understand what is permitted in your zone and whether or not it will be necessary for you to 
seek a Special Permit (Special Land Use Permit, Special Exception, Conditional Use Permit, etc.) or a 
Variance. 
 Assuming that the real question is height, the next question is:  “ How high? ” Try to come up with a 
short, meaningful phrase to answer this question. One of the most understandable answers for VHF, 
UHF, and microwave frequencies is:  “ High enough to get above the trees. ” Other answers could be 
 “ to provide city of license coverage, ”  “ to avoid a  ‘ signiﬁ cant gap ’ in coverage, ” to provide a  “ line-
of-sight ” path to the studio, and so forth. Find the phrase that works for your installation and keep 
repeating it. 
 If we’re talking about a relatively low height (under 100 feet), you must remember that trees want to 
grow. So, if you plan on erecting in what was formerly a farmed ﬁ eld and it was converted into housing 
30 years ago, the neighborhood trees have not yet reached maturity. Allow plenty of room for further 
growth before setting the height you propose. 
 If your communications needs are not be dictated by tree height, but rather by the necessary 
propagation angles or coverage, this may require a more sophisticated discussion. But, in the 
meantime, if you are planning only a relatively modest height, remember that you’ll just barely be 
clearing the trees, especially when seen from the perspective of a neighboring street. 
 What is meant by  perspective ? Here’s an example of how a 100-foot structure can be blocked by 
a 6-foot tree. See Figure 8.1 , which is also located on the CD as ﬁ lename Tree Screening.pdf. You 
should also use your own photographs in the neighborhood to your advantage, or perhaps create a 
photosimulation.

Possible Objections—Aesthetic, Noise, and Nuisance Issues 183
90
Structure
(completely screened
by three trees)
90
Structure
(partially screened
from person A)
(fully screened
from person B)
180 Screening
by 25 tree
50
Tree
25
Tree
Person B
85
Tree
35
Building
Person A
30
Telephone
pole
 Figure 8.1  Trees can screen even a tall antenna support structure from street level. This illustrates perspective.  

184 Chapter 8
 8.2  Is It Actually Visible? 
 There is, of course, always the possibility that someone will object to the antenna system, claiming that 
it will be clearly visible, even when the facts are otherwise. Before shouting names at the opponent (a 
strategy that is almost never beneﬁ cial anyway), see if you can build your case. There are several ways 
to build a case that the opponent cannot actually see from his home what he’s complaining about. 
 8.2.1  Is It Over the Horizon? 
 For short distances (short in relationship to the radius of planet Earth), the two formulas for calculating 
distance are approximately the same. At a height  h above the surface of a spherical planet of radius  rp : 
 The straight-line distance to the horizon is: 
 
 
d
h
r
h
s
p


(
)
2
 The curved distance along the planet’s (sea-level) surface to the horizon is: 
 
 
1
cos 1
d
p
p
p
c
r
r
r
h


 ⎛
⎝
⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟
 For a detailed discussion of the question  “ How far away is the horizon? ” see  http://newton.ex.ac.
uk/research/qsystems/people/sque/physics/horizon , created by Steve Sque at the United Kingdom’s 
University of Exeter and which includes a calculator. This can be important if, for example, you are 
talking about the visibility of a tower some miles across wheat ﬁ elds.  Table 8.1 is an excerpt from a 
chart on that page, converted into feet and miles: 
 And for Canadian readers,  Table 8.2  : 
 Table 8.1 :  Visibility on the Horizon from Various Distances. 
 Height (feet) 
 Distance (miles) 
 Note
 5 
 2.7 
 Average eye level 
 33 
 7 
 — 
 328 
 22.2 
 — 
 Table 8.2 :  Visibility on the Horizon from Various Distances (Metric). 
 Height (meters) 
 Distance (kilometers) 
 Note
 1.5 
 4.37 
 Average eye level 
 10 
 11.294 
 — 
 100 
 35.71 
 — 

Possible Objections—Aesthetic, Noise, and Nuisance Issues 185
 Is there intervening terrain? On the other hand, after you’ve done the math and calculated that some 
place in Vermont may be visible from Maine, you may have forgotten that the White Mountains 
of New Hampshire intervene! In that case, you should be consulting  www.heywhatsthat.com to 
determine if there is an intervening obstruction by terrain. Michael Kosowsky, founder of the website 
 heywhatsthat.com , once tackled a comparable question when he sought to answer the question:  “ Can 
you really see Russia from Alaska? ” ( http://www.heywhatsthat.com/alaska.html ). Approaches such as 
this may prove useful if you are ever forced to prove that a proposed tower will really not be visible 
from several miles away in the historic district. 
 8.2.2  Are There Intervening Trees or Terrain Features? (Part I) 
 Microsoft’s  “ Virtual Earth ” ( http://maps.live.com ) offers a viewing feature called Bird’s Eye. If you 
zoom in and rotate the bird’s-eye view, you may be able to produce a photo that belies a claim that an 
antenna system is plainly visible. 
 8.2.3  Are There Intervening Trees or Terrain Features? (Part II) 
 Another way to approach the visibility question is to create your own Excel spreadsheet.  Figure 8.2 is 
an example, acknowledging that the concept was invented by John Worthington, W2ID. 
 8.3  Historic Preservation Ofﬁ ces 
 In September 2004, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) adopted measures to streamline 
and tailor the review process for communications towers and other Commission-licensed facilities 
under the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA). The Commission’s process protects historic 
properties, including those properties to which federally recognized Indian tribes and Native Hawaiian 
organizations attach religious or cultural signiﬁ cance. Increased tower construction has resulted in 
an exponential increase in the number of environmental and historic preservation reviews conducted 
by tower constructors, State Historic Preservation Ofﬁ cers (SHPOs), and FCC staff, creating case 
backlogs, additional paperwork, and delays in the deployment of necessary wireless, public safety, 
broadcast, and other communications infrastructure. 
 Key elements of the Commission action include the following: 
● 
 Describing standards for identifying historic properties that may be affected by an undertaking 
and assessing effects on those properties, including a streamlined process for identifying 
eligible properties not listed on the National Register that may incur visual effects 
● 
 Prescribing procedures, including enforceable deadlines for SHPO and Commission review 
● 
 Providing forms designed to standardize ﬁ lings to SHPOs 
● 
 Outlining procedures for communicating with federally recognized Indian tribes and Native 
Hawaiian organizations to ensure protection of historic properties to which tribes and Native 
Hawaiian organizations attach religious or cultural signiﬁ cance  

186 Chapter 8
Using a spreadsheet to show lack of visibility
750
C
740
730
108
720
710
Tall trees  80-foot height
700
A
690
680
B
670
108
98
660
650
640
630
620
610
600
590
580
HOUSE M
570
560
550
540
530
520
510
500
490
480
SUNSET
HILL
ROADBED
470
460
450
440
430
420
410
400
390
380
370
360
350
340
330
320
310
300
60
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
Top of structure B becomes visible above trees from
a point 160' east of House L. (But at 730' away,
structure is extremely small and difficult to see.)
Closer to house, view is blocked by trees. Though
higher up the hill, structures A and C are not visible.  
From house, none of the antenna structures
are visible as trees block the view.
7
0
8
0
9
0
2
3
0
2
4
0
2
5
0
2
6
0
2
7
0
2
8
0
2
9
0
3
0
0
3
1
0
3
2
0
3
3
0
3
4
0
3
5
0
3
6
0
3
7
0
3
8
0
3
9
0
4
0
0
4
1
0
4
2
0
4
3
0
4
4
0
4
5
0
4
6
0
4
7
0
4
8
0
4
9
0
5
0
0
5
1
0
5
2
0
5
3
0
5
4
0
5
5
0
5
6
0
5
7
0
5
8
0
5
9
0
6
0
0
6
1
0
6
2
0
6
3
0
6
4
0
6
5
0
6
6
0
6
7
0
6
8
0
6
9
0
7
0
0
7
1
0
7
2
0
7
3
0
7
4
0
7
5
0
7
6
0
7
7
0
7
8
0
7
9
0
8
0
0
8
1
0
8
2
0
8
3
0
8
4
0
8
5
0
8
6
0
8
7
0
8
8
0
8
9
0
9
0
0
9
1
0
9
2
0
9
3
0
9
4
0
9
5
0
9
6
0
9
7
0
9
8
0
9
9
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
2
0
1
0
3
0
1
0
4
0
1
0
5
0
1
0
6
0
1
0
7
0
1
0
8
0
1
0
9
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
2
0
1
1
3
0
1
1
4
0
1
1
5
0
1
1
6
0
1
1
7
0
1
1
8
0
1
1
9
0
1
2
0
0
1
2
1
0
1
2
2
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
4
0
1
2
5
0
1
2
6
0
1
2
7
0
1
2
8
0
1
2
9
0
1
3
0
0
1
3
1
0
…
…
HOUSE L
 Figure 8.2  An Excel spreadsheet demonstrating intervening terrain.  

Possible Objections—Aesthetic, Noise, and Nuisance Issues 187
● 
 Establishing categories of  “ undertakings ” that are excluded from the process set out in Section 
106 of the NHPA; exclusions from the Section 106 review process include enhancements to 
existing towers, replacement and temporary towers, certain towers constructed on industrial 
and commercial properties or in utility corridor rights-of-way, and construction in areas 
designated by a SHPO 
 You can review the complete Nationwide Programmatic Agreement on the CD at ﬁ lename Nationwide 
Programmatic Agreement.pdf. See also the FCC Antenna Collocation Programmatic Agreement (with 
a contact list) on the CD at ﬁ lename FCC Antenna Collocation.doc. 
 8.4  Photos 
 As engineers like to say,  “ A kiloword is worth a picture. ” Remember, ﬁ lm and ﬁ lm developing are 
cheap, especially if you take advantage of inexpensive mail-away developers or take digital images 
(which is strongly recommended, because they more easily permit photosimulations). It is especially 
cheap compared to lawyer time. As suggested in Chapter 4, go take some pictures! Take digital 
pictures!
 First, take pictures from the proposed site aiming toward: 
● 
 The street 
● 
 Neighboring streets 
● 
 Every neighboring lot, house, building, etc. 
● 
 Your equipment shed 
 Then, aim toward the proposed site from: 
● 
 The street, including across the street 
● 
 Neighboring streets 
● 
 Every neighboring lot, house, building, etc. 
● 
 Your equipment shed 
 Don’t try to be cute and take your photos in the middle of the summer when the leaves are fully leafed 
out. Do that and someone at the public hearing is going to pretend he is Perry Mason in high dudgeon, 
shouting:  “ But how will it look in winter? ” Actually, this is a pretty silly question, because your 
neighbor will be outdoors working on his lawn and garden much more in the summer, not the winter. 
Even during the cold months, your neighbor is not too likely to be tilted over on his side, looking up 
through a window to see the top of your structure, but the Board won’t be thinking about that, and the 
Board won’t be impressed when you mention it. 
 On the other hand, if it is summer and you must press forward with the application process, go ahead — don’t 
wait until winter just to take the photos. Wait too long and the bylaw/ordinance could change. Besides, given 
the delays inherent in the process, you can always go back and take post-fall photos later. 

188 Chapter 8
 Watch carefully to see if an opponent makes conﬂ icting statements, which you can then point out 
to the Board. Here is a common example of conﬂ icting statements:  “ The photos were taken in the 
summer when leaves block the view of this monstrosity. ” Later, he says:  “ It will stick out like a sore 
thumb above the trees. ” The opponent’s problem is that he can’t have it both ways. Either the antenna 
is visible through the trees in winter or it is above the trees (more probably), in which case the trees 
(leaves or no leaves) are irrelevant because the view (from a distance) may be unobstructed. Of course, 
there are times when your antenna is only visible through the trees in winter, which means that his 
expression that it will  “ stick out like a sore thumb above the trees ” is wrong. You might ask the Board 
if it wouldn’t be a good idea for the opponent to make up his mind. (Note that, before the hearing, there 
should be a site visit. If there has been a site visit, and your opponent’s characterizations of visibility 
are unrealistic, ask the Board to recall it the way they saw it and to conﬁ rm those memories with the 
photos you have provided.) 
 For pictures in the direction  toward adjacent houses or buildings , it is probably adequate to prepare 
four 3        5-inch prints per page and to display them with color photocopying. For all other pictures, 
two 4        6-inch prints per page will do nicely. Be sure to label each photo with some helpful remarks, 
such as “ Photo taken from the intersection of Portage and Main. This mid-winter photo shows lack of 
visibility without foliage. ”
 Again, using a digital camera and printing the photos yourself, with labeling, will make you look like 
a real pro. The best possible photo shows the exact same installation taken at your last location or a 
comparable installation in a comparable location. This shows several things: 
● 
 That some other town has approved such an installation 
● 
 That it wasn’t very obtrusive there, either 
● 
 What it will look like when erected here 
 The next-best photos are of almost any similar height installations, whether in your town or not. If 
photos can be taken of existing installations in your town, so much the better. It should then be obvious 
to the Board that civilization didn’t come to an end because of these other antennas. Nonetheless, a 
comparable installation in another town will also do. 
 Whatever you do, however, it is important to get some photos in front of the Board, because: (1) you 
want to confront the fear of the unknown, and (2) you want to make it obvious that what you propose is 
not unique, but in fact is rather common. 
 A ﬁ nal warning on taking photos.  They must fairly represent the situation . While you and I might 
think that if you take a photo at exactly the right moment — when the antenna was sparkling in the 
sky — that you have a masterpiece, such a photo does not fairly represent the situation. Instead, take a 
photo on a cloudy day. This represents the most realistic situation, in which there are no distracting, 
shiny reﬂ ections off brand-new aluminum or fresh white plastic covering a 20-foot whip. After only a 
few months in the sky, all of the shiny metal (aluminum or galvanized steel) will have oxidized or the 
plastic will have weathered and dulled. Exposed components that have weathered will remain dull for 
the rest of time. 

Possible Objections—Aesthetic, Noise, and Nuisance Issues 189
 8.5  Balloon Testing 
 You may run into a situation where you will be accused of erecting a support structure that will be 
ugly from a certain vantage point. If you know or suspect that it can’t even be seen from a particular 
place, you may wish to consider doing your own  balloon test and including photographs in the initial 
application, before you are asked to do a balloon test by the board. The Board may still ask you to 
repeat the balloon test, but for a relatively simple situation you may be able to avoid the concomitant 
delay by submitting photographs with the initial application. What you do is ﬂ oat a balloon up to the 
height you propose, from the location you propose, while communicating with another person via 
handy-talkie (HT) or cell phone. Doing this with two people is a good idea because you might not 
know that the balloon has drifted one way or another due to wind by the time you get to the spot from 
which you want to take the photo. 
 It is very powerful to show the Board that some intervening obstruction prevents a view of the balloon, 
or perhaps that the balloon can be seen but only just barely, through intervening trees. 
 Here’s an inexpensive way to perform a balloon test. A client of mine used this technique to prove to 
one neighbor that an 80-foot-tall structure, deep in the woods, would not be visible on the neighbor’s 
property — even though it was 20 feet higher than neighboring trees. He used a cluster of six or seven 
balloons, tied together with some kite string. He got them at a party store, along with a nonreﬁ llable 
helium tank. The whole kit cost him about $20. There was more than enough helium for the two tests 
he made. Fair Radio ( http://www.fairradio.com /; try  http://www.fairradio.com/catalog.php?mode 
viewitem & item  6176 ) carries 7-foot weather balloons. Surplus Sales of Nebraska ( http://www.
surplussales.com/ ) may have some also. Balloons are often found on eBay, but my client found those 
prices prohibitive for a one-time use. 
 8.6  Crank-Up Towers as a Solution 
 Should a Board, or staff member representing a Board, suggest that you accept a crank-up structure as 
an accommodation, think really hard before saying no. It is obvious that, as a commercial user, raising 
and lowering your antenna-support structure may be highly impractical, verging on the ridiculous. But, 
courts hate it when an applicant shows no ﬂ exibility. Nonetheless, the mere fact that staff has suggested 
a crank-up is encouraging. Why? Because a prime rule in zoning is:  “ Always keep them talking. ” In 
other words, if you proposed a self-supporting lattice tower and they countered with a crank-up, you 
might be able to explain why that won’t work for you (inadequate wind-load capability, perhaps), but 
then ask if they would consider a monopole or a thinner, guyed tower. 
 In any case, a condition in a permit limiting the raising of the structure to full height only during 
nighttime hours is probably illegal. Chris Imlay, Esq., SBE General Counsel, points out that:  “ Only 
the FCC can impose or regulate hours of operation, pursuant to the general enabling clause of the 
Communications Act of 1934. There is no municipal jurisdiction over hours of operation of radio 
stations. The usual situation involves hours when crank-up towers can be extended to full height, but to 
the extent that regulation determines communications ability, the infringement on Federal jurisdiction 
is the same. ”

190 Chapter 8
 In addition, Jim O’Connell, Esq. (W9WU), a former Assistant Attorney General (IL), likes to point out 
that such conditions are silly, because emergency communications readiness requires almost permanent 
connections to a local or regional packet radio network. Therefore, in extreme circumstances you may 
wish to accept a condition where you are forced to erect a crank-up, with the condition that it can only 
be raised when in use, and then just leave it up all the time — because it is in use all the time. 
 8.7  Kinstar Towers as a Solution 
 For broadcasters operating on the high end of the AM band, with omnidirectional authorization 
(i.e., a directional array is not required), here is another option: STAR-H Corp. and Kintronic 
Laboratories, Inc., have developed the Kinstar low-proﬁ le AM antenna and consider it the solution for 
broadcasters attempting to secure real estate for new antenna projects in restricted areas. The Kinstar 
antenna measures only 45 feet high at 1680  kHz.They claim that data collected in late 2002 show that the 
Kinstar antenna is 98% as efﬁ cient as a standard quarter-wave monopole antenna at less than one third 
the height. Testing results on the antenna can be found on the CD at ﬁ lename KinStar_Test_Results.pdf. 
 The comprehensive report submitted by the developers demonstrates that the radiation pattern of the
Kinstar antenna does not change signiﬁ cantly as the antenna is scaled at frequencies across the 
AM band. The report also shows that the performance of the Kinstar antenna, built according to 
the manufacturer’s speciﬁ cations, will comply with applicable rules and will remain consistent for 
installations at different AM frequencies. The report is available on the FCC’s website ( http://hraunfoss.
fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-05-2741A2.pdf  ). 
 Based on its review of the Kinstar ﬁ eld tests and submitted reports, the FCC announced in October 
2005 that it will not routinely require the submission of a proof of performance, current distribution 
measurements, or a formula for the vertical plane radiation characteristic for nondirectional AM 
facilities that utilize these relatively short antennas. The notice is available on the CD as ﬁ lename 
KinStar_FCC_review.doc. 
 Nonetheless, accepting a short tower will limit the vertical real estate available to a broadcaster as 
space available to a cellular carrier, a paging company, a WISP, etc. You may need that additional 
income to keep the AM station alive. 
 8.8  Paint 
 You may be asked if you can paint your structure to reduce visibility. The answer is that, in general, 
towers come in galvanized gray steel. After weathering, this will already be very close to the least-
visible color, and no painting is necessary for heights below 200 feet. 
 Gray is, in fact, the preferable color, if you want to limit visibility, which is why warships are gray and 
why military airplanes have gray underbellies and wings. It is the best, most unobtrusive color against 
the sea or sky. 
 Should your travels permit, consider a visit to Norfolk, VA, where the battleship  USS Wisconsin is on 
display at the Nauticus nautical museum. There you will see a sign describing the paint color of the 
USS Wisconsin as  “ Haze Gray ” (color number 26270, per MIL-STD-595), which is a silicone alkyd 

Possible Objections—Aesthetic, Noise, and Nuisance Issues 191
semigloss enamel, in accordance with MIL-PRF-24635. A good summary of the paint’s history in 
Naval use may be found at  http://www.corrosionchronicle.com/limeart_4.asp . With the lives of seamen 
and pilots at stake, the Navy has put a lot of neuron power into the subject. There is even a common 
Navy phrase:  “ Haze Gray and underway. ” Enter the phrase in Google and be amazed at the number of 
references. A 1997 bulletin to  “ NAVSURFLANT SHIPS ”  (Navy Surface Ships in the Atlantic) from 
COMMNAVSURFLANT (the Commander, Navy Surface Fleet in the Atlantic) described Haze Gray 
as a  “ passive countermeasure system  . . . to reduce the average contrast of the ship to the horizon. ”  By 
using Haze Gray, it said,  “ a ship[ ’ ]s camouﬂ age concealment ability is enhanced and the probability of 
detection and targeting is reduced ”  ( http://www.fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/ship/weaps/docs/extpaint.htm ).
 Stand up for weathered galvanized steel at heights that do not require FAA-mandated lighting and 
marking. Sooner or later, if you do nothing, weathered galvanized steel will resemble Haze Gray. 
 If you don’t think it will scuttle the whole undertaking, it may be important to point out that painting 
thin antennas (for example, whips) may not be as effective as one would like. Depending on the 
viewing angle and the weather, a painted antenna may actually be more visible than an unpainted one. 
 8.9  Camouﬂ age 
 One alternative you may have not considered is camouﬂ age netting.  Figure 8.3 shows some military 
camouﬂ age netting wrapped around the base of a Rohn SSV tower to limit visibility through the lower 
branches of trees not as fully vegetated as the upper portion of surrounding trees. This photo shows an 
experimental use of Air Force-supplied netting on the ﬁ rst 10 feet. 
 For panel antennas mounted on buildings, you might consider camouﬂ age covering that mimics the 
wall of the building ( Figure 8.4 ), available from Phazar ( http://www.phazar.com/chameleon.htm ). For 
installation photos, see  http://www.phazar.com/Installations.htm 
 8.10  Zoning Violations — Setbacks and Yards 
 Don’t try to put anything past the Board. Either someone on the Board will catch it or you can be 
assured that an opponent will be looking to catch it. So, if you need to invade a standard town setback 
or  “ required yard ” (i.e., 20 feet from a rear-lot line), or obtain a Variance (such as a Variance from a 1:1 
setback for structure height), be sure to spell it out, show it on the plot plan, and ask for what you need 
in your summary. 
 For example, the right place to put your structure for least aesthetic impact — the place that a neutral 
observer would consider to be in the best interest of your neighborhood — may be 5 feet closer to a 
side-lot line than permitted by the town bylaw or ordinance. The way to handle this is to propose  in the 
alternative . Propose Alternative A, which is permitted by the bylaw or ordinance, and then explain why 
this is a less attractive choice from the perspective of the neighbors than Alternative B, which requires 
a Variance. An example of a good reason is: 
 Alternative A would require a self-supporting tower. This involves much more concrete, a wider 
tower face all the way up, a much wider face at the base — in other words, self-supporting Alternative 
A is something really substantial. 

192 Chapter 8
   On the other hand, Alternative B might require only a guyed tower with an 18-inch face, 18 inches 
all the way up. But, due to the shape of the lot, the tower (or an anchor) may have to be a few feet 
into the side-lot area, where it would not normally be permitted. (Note by the author: I had that exact 
case once. After we pointed out that the town was much better off with a less imposing structure if a 
Variance were to be granted, the Variance was indeed granted.) 
 Fortunately, if the facts support it, you may ﬁ nd yourself in a situation where you are arguing for a 
Variance, which the Board will see is in the best interest of the neighborhood, while your opponents are 
arguing against the Variance. They are hoping that by denying you the Variance they may succeed in 
denying you the permit altogether. In this case, you must say that you are perfectly willing to spend the 
money to meet the setback conditions. 
 Express your willingness, but carefully and plainly point out that the opponents cannot possibly have 
the best interests of the neighborhood in mind. After all, the consequence of their position is to force 
you to build a structure that is 10 feet wide at the base and more plainly visible because the setback 
forces it into the open area of the yard, where it becomes highly visible. 
Bottom line: No funny business. Present the alternative (with separate plot plans) and tell the Board 
why the alternative you are promoting is best for the neighborhood. That is always your best argument. 
Trust me, the Board does not care if the reason why you urge Proposal B is because it is less expensive 
 Figure 8.3  Military camouﬂ age netting wrapped around the ﬁ rst ten feet of 
a Rohn SSV tower.  (Photograph by the author.)  

Possible Objections—Aesthetic, Noise, and Nuisance Issues 193
to you or because your staff thinks  “ it will look better there. ” If more than one site is possible, you must 
always cast your choice for a location on your parcel that is in the best interest of the neighborhood. 
 Here are some other good reasons for moving an antenna-support structure to a place on the lot where 
it would normally not be permitted under the ordinance: 
● 
 If you move it over  there and it fell — although the odds are so long as to be unthinkable — it 
would only fall in wild underbrush or forest. In the permitted location, on the other hand, the 
structure could fall on a neighbor’s house/building.  
● 
 If you move it over  there , views of the structure can be obscured by trees, whereas forcing it 
into the middle of the lot (because it must be 20 feet from a back-lot line and 50 feet from a 
side-lot line) would make it much more visible to the whole neighborhood. 
● 
 If you put the guy anchor over  there , guy wires can be snaked through the trees all the way to 
the ground. However, if the setback must be obeyed, you would have to erect a heavy I-beam 
to  “ short stop ” the guy wires before they invade the setback. The guy wires in the woods will 
never be noticed, but that 14-inch I-beam, sticking 12 feet into the air, may be less attractive to 
the casual observer. 
 8.10.1  Setback 
 Let’s get technical. A  setback usually means the distance from a  way , such as a driveway, a highway, or 
a street. Normally you’ll be dealing with the distance from your building to the street in front of your 
building. You’ve got to check the deﬁ nitions section of your town’s bylaw or your county’s ordinance. 
 Figure 8.4  Phazar makes a line of products that camouﬂ age antennas to blend in against whatever 
structures they’re mounted on.  (Photo courtesy of Phazar; Mineral Wells, TX.) 

194 Chapter 8
Similarly, you’ve got to check the deﬁ nitions section of the bylaw to ﬁ nd out what a  yard is. Normally 
it means the distance between a lot line and something. 
 Here’s one town’s deﬁ nition: 
YARD — An area open to the sky, located between a structure or other property line and any principal 
structure or element thereof other than projections allowed to encroach on building lines and yards 
under the State Building Code. Depth is to be measured perpendicular to the street or property line. 
 In a situation where the tower and equipment shed below it are just about all you’ll ﬁ nd on the parcel 
of land, the tower and shed probably constitute the principal use. 
 Here’s an example of how you can make a very strong legal argument. Start by determining if the 
setback applies to buildings (perhaps a deﬁ ned term in which the building must have a roof, or must be 
habitable), or to buildings and structures. Where an antenna-support structure is an  accessory structure , 
not a principal structure , the antenna may be an element of the antenna-support structure, but the 
antenna is not an element of the principal structure. Therefore, the  “ yard ” requirement under this bylaw 
applies to neither the antenna  nor the antenna-support structure. 
 Here’s another argument. You may discover that the yard requirement applies to a principal structure; 
however, you may be able to argue that the yard requirement does not apply to an  appurtenance to a 
principal structure. Here, the support is the principal structure and the antenna is the appurtenance. 
 The lesson? Read those deﬁ nitions sections carefully. 
 8.10.2  The Flying Setback 
 If you are a commercial user with a large antenna (perhaps a 7 to 30 MHz log periodic, or a 
10-meter dish) who is selecting a site, be sure to do the trigonometry to account for the possibility 
that the triangle formed by your boom and longest element (normally the reﬂ ector on the lowest 
frequency band the antenna covers), or the outer edge of the dish, will not go over the property 
line or the setback line as it rotates. By informal inquiry, you may also wish to ask the building 
inspector if temporary intrusions into a setback, only when the antenna is pointed in a certain 
direction, would be acceptable. After all, this would not be  construction in the setback area, 
and it would be a  de minimus intrusion, just as lamp poles and mailboxes are always permitted 
within the setback. Your antenna would be no more of an intrusion than a ﬂ ag that stretches out in 
the breeze and invades a setback. 
 If you want to put your support structure within the setback, you may have a problem. Perhaps 
you can claim it is a temporary structure, exempt for some reason under the bylaw or ordinance. 
Sometimes accessory structures such as sheds are exempt from the setback or yard requirements. 
If it is only a rotary antenna that invades the setback, argue that only the location of the base 
matters, and the antenna is just a protrusion, similar to the way a roof overhang  “ doesn’t count ”
(usually).
 Nonetheless, your best bet is always to fully understand the issues of  “ required yard ” and  “ setback ”
and to plan construction accordingly. 

Possible Objections—Aesthetic, Noise, and Nuisance Issues 195
 8.10.3  Average Height 
 You may have a zoning bylaw or ordinance that limits the height of a structure within the setback or 
required yard. This can affect guy wires going to guy anchors in the ground. Sometimes it is a 1:1 
setback, while sometimes it is a simple maximum height — something like 12 feet, a number chosen 
because that is the height of a basketball net with backboard. (Don’t be shocked; it’s an American 
sport!)
 Just because your top guy wire may be 21 feet above the ground as it enters the setback area, do 
not hesitate to propose it. Just explain that a 3/16- or 1/4-inch galvanized steel guy wire against the 
backdrop of trees disappears from view. So it is  de minimis (a triﬂ e), and the law should not concern 
itself with triﬂ es. Furthermore, argue that the  average height within the setback of the guy wire, or 
perhaps even the guy set, still meets the 1:1 setback test. 
 If worst comes to worst, and you must avoid guy wires in the required yard, propose that the guy wires 
end at a tall I-beam, or piece of railroad track, set deep into the ground. This can prevent the guy wires 
from ever entering the required yard. 
 8.11  Interference: Radiofrequency or Television 
 This is one of the most common arguments made against antenna proposals. Legally, it is also the 
most untenable. Frankly, the Board shouldn’t even hear such arguments. If this were a court your 
lawyer would jump up and shout,  “ Objection ” and the Judge would reply,  “ Sustained. ” However, this 
is not a courtroom and the Board will be very reluctant to prevent people from speaking out at a public 
hearing.
 People who stand and object to your proposal on the grounds that it may interfere with TV reception, 
stereos, pagers, garage-door openers, and alarm systems come in several ﬂ avors. As you would expect, 
many of them are just reaching for yet another argument to make, in what I call the  spaghetti defense . 
These people throw every argument possible against the wall to see what sticks. 
 Whatever the reason for putting forth the argument, remember you are not trying to satisfy the person 
making the objection. You are trying to satisfy the Board. This is a very big distinction. Here’s an 
example of why it is a big distinction. 
 Assume that someone who lives four blocks away rises to make the objection that he fears that 
you will interfere with his pager. If you respond that the inverse-square distance law (by which the 
electromagnetic ﬁ eld of your transmitted signal decreases as the inverse of the square of the distance) 
will prevent this, you may have satisﬁ ed the guy who lives four blocks away. Unfortunately, you’ve just 
told the Board that the guy who lives next door may have a problem. Bad idea. 
 There are several ways to deal with this complaint. Not wishing to waste the Board’s time by making 
the application any fatter than necessary, I prefer not to include a legal brief in the application stating 
all the reasons why the Board cannot rule in this area. However, I certainly bring with me clean copies 
of the Broyde ,  Southwestern Bell , and  Freeman cases. Feel free to hand them over — you can always 
print more! 

196 Chapter 8
 8.11.1  The Broyde Case 
Broyde v. Gotham Tower , 13 F. 3d 994 (6th Cir. 1994) ( http://pacer.ca6.uscourts.gov/cgi-bin/getopn.
pl?OPINION 94a0007p.061 ) was a case where the neighbors sued the operator of an 
800-foot tall commercial tower in Florida and the FM radio station tenants, claiming common-law 
nuisance by interference with all manner of radio, TV, telephone, garage-door opener, and other home 
electronic devices. The Court found implied preemption of the ﬁ eld by federal law and ruled that, even 
if everything the plaintiff (Broyde) said was true, the complaint had not stated a claim upon which relief 
could be granted. This opinion of the court is on the CD as ﬁ lename Broyde v. Gotham Tower.pdf. 
 8.11.2  The Southwestern Bell Case 
Southwestern Bell Wireless, Inc. v. Johnson County Board of County Commissioners , 199 F. 3d 1185 
(10th Cir. 1999); cert. denied, 530 U.S. 1204 (2000) ( http://www.ca10.uscourts.gov/opinions/98/98-
3264.pdf ), enjoined this Kansas Board of County Commissioners from enforcing an ordinance against 
interference. The court found that there was complete federal preemption of the ﬁ eld. Allowing local 
zoning authorities to condition construction and use permits on any requirement to eliminate or remedy 
interference “ stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and 
objectives of Congress.  . . .  Congress intended federal regulation of [radiofrequency interference] issues 
to be so pervasive as to occupy the ﬁ eld. ” This document is on the CD as ﬁ lename SW Bell Wireless.pdf. 
 8.11.3  The Freeman Case 
Freeman v. Burlington Broadcasters , 204 F. 3d 311 (2d Cir. 2000); cert. denied, 531 U.S. 917 (2000) 
( http://www.fcc.gov/ogc/documents/opinions/2000/97-9141.doc ), involved a 199-foot commercial 
tower on Pease Mountain in Charlotte, VT. A condition in the grant of the permit for the tower required 
the permittees to remedy any radiofrequency interference (RFI) from tower signals with appliances 
and devices in local homes. The Second Circuit court held that any attempt by the Zoning Board of 
Appeals to enforce the condition was preempted by federal law, which preempts the ﬁ eld, giving the 
FCC exclusive authority over RFI. In a little-noted last sentence of the opinion, the Court wrote:  “ The 
Appellees may recover their costs, ” so WIZN, Charlotte Fire and Rescue Services, and Bell Atlantic 
NYNEX Mobile were entitled to collect their court costs (but not attorney’s fees). This document is on 
the CD as ﬁ lename Freeman v. Burlington Broadcasters.pdf. 
 8.11.4  The U.S. Code 
 No PowerPoint or collection of slides or posters would be complete without quoting this controlling 
and preemptive federal statute (at least  § 302a(f)(2), below), which speaks powerfully and speaks for 
itself. Late in the second term of President Clinton, in 2000, the Congress passed, and the President 
signed, P.L. 106-521, which further clariﬁ ed, if there was room for doubt, that municipalities have no 
authority to act with respect to interference. The Communications Act, at 47 USC  § 302a, now reads, in 
relevant part:
1  This case precedes the start of case reports on free websites, and this link only works for PACER subscribers (mostly lawyers
who are litigators). 

Possible Objections—Aesthetic, Noise, and Nuisance Issues 197
  47 USC § 302a. Devices which interfere with radio reception 
 SUBCHAPTER III-SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO RADIO 
 (f )(2) A station that is licensed by the Commission pursuant to section 301 of this title 
in any radio service for the operation at issue shall not be subject to action by a State or 
local government under this subsection. A State or local government statute or ordinance 
enacted for purposes of this subsection shall identify the exemption available under this 
paragraph. 
 (3) The Commission shall, to the extent practicable, provide technical guidance to State and 
local governments regarding the detection and determination of violations of the regulations 
speciﬁ ed in paragraph (1). 
 (4)(A) In addition to any other remedy authorized by law, a person affected by the decision of 
a State or local government agency enforcing a statute or ordinance under paragraph (1) may 
submit to the Commission an appeal of the decision on the grounds that the State or local 
government, as the case may be, enacted a statute or ordinance outside the authority provided 
in this subsection. 
 (B) A person shall submit an appeal on a decision of a State or local government agency to the 
Commission under this paragraph, if at all, not later than 30 days after the date on which the 
decision by the State or local government agency becomes ﬁ nal, but prior to seeking judicial 
review of such decision. 
 (C) The Commission shall make a determination on an appeal submitted under subparagraph 
(B) not later than 180 days after its submittal. 
 (D) If the Commission determines under subparagraph (C) that a State or local government 
agency has acted outside its authority in enforcing a statute or ordinance, the Commission shall 
preempt the decision enforcing the statute or ordinance. 
 (5) The enforcement of statute or ordinance that prohibits a violation of a regulation by a State 
or local government under paragraph (1) in a particular case shall not preclude the Commission 
from enforcing the regulation in that case concurrently. 
 (6) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to diminish or otherwise affect the 
jurisdiction of the Commission under this section over devices capable of interfering with radio 
communications.
 Furthermore, many home entertainment electronic devices, including portable telephones, bear the 
following required label, in accordance with 47 CFR  § 15.19(a)(3): 
 This device complies with Part 15 of the FCC Rules. Operation is subject to the following two condi-
tions: (1) This device may not cause harmful interference, and (2) this device must accept any inter-
ference received, including interference that may cause undesired operation. 
 Actually, the erection of an antenna system high in the sky will have a tendency to  decrease , not 
increase, the likelihood of television interference, as higher antenna systems (and you may also be able 
to speak about the effect of a directional array) are farther away from neighboring TV sets, etc., and 
transmit over nearby homes. A shorter antenna support structure, for example, would have a greater 
likelihood of interference, since it could direct more energy toward a neighboring TV set. 

198 Chapter 8
 This is exactly the position that was taken by the FCC’s Chief of the Private Radio in a letter to the 
Board of Zoning Appeals of Hempstead, NY (October 25, 1994): 
 (A)ntenna height is inversely related to the strength, in the horizontal plane, of the radio signal that 
serves as a catalyst for interference in susceptible home electronic equipment. It is a matter of techni-
cal fact that the higher an amateur antenna, the less likely it is that radio frequency interference will 
appear in home electronic equipment. 
  For a review of the ﬁ eld of radiofrequency interference (RFI), see the article  “ The Ghost in the 
Computer: Radio Frequency Interference and the Doctrine of Federal Preemption, ”  by R. H. Brock 
(Computer Law Review and Technology Journal , 1999(1), 17 – 36, 1999;  http://www.sbot.org/docs/
RFI.pdf ). 
 For information on resolving problems, the FCC’s  Interference Handbook is available on the 
Internet. The 22-page booklet, available from the Compliance and Information Bureau via the 
FCC home page ( http://www.fcc.gov/ftp/Bureaus/Mass_Media/Databases/documents_collection/
1993InterferenceHandbook.pdf ), includes the same information and illustrations contained in the 
Interference to Home Electronic Entertainment Equipment Handbook . It includes information about 
equipment installation, identifying interference sources, curing interference problems, and ﬁ lters. 
It also contains a list of home electronic equipment manufacturers and telephone numbers. Figures 
illustrate different TV interference problems, including ham or CB transmitter interference. Note that 
the law on this subject is so strong that one federal court has even ruled that a Planning Board request 
for information on interference is unreasonable on its face; see  Palmer v. Saratoga Springs , 180 F. 
Supp. 2d 379 (N.D.N.Y. 2001) ( http://www.nysd.uscourts.gov/courtweb/pdf/D02NYNC/01-12259.pdf ; 
slip opinion at 15). 
 A short memorandum of law may be found on the CD as ﬁ lename Memorandum of Law-RFI.pdf. 
 If your town has a Town Planner, you should meet with this person in advance of the public meeting 
and lay out the cases and memorandum. There is a good chance that the Town Planner will brief the 
Board in advance of the meeting that this area is off-limits legally. Whether or not you meet with the 
Planner for this matter, whether or not he has sought legal advice in advance, during the hearing I often 
lower my voice and proceed to say, calmly and very deliberately, something like this: 
 Mr. Chairman, this is one topic that is completely off-limits to you. It is improper  . . .  to  . . .  even  . . .  
ask  . . .  the  . . .  question [paced slowly for emphasis] in a hearing. I urge you to understand that you 
should not go down this road. Before you entertain any more questions about RF interference, or 
consider conditioning the permit requested in any way that is related to RF interference, you really 
should consult the City Attorney. 
 8.11.5  RFI — The Applicant’s Assurance 
 No matter how secure your legal position, be sure to practice your  assurance in advance. As with other 
responses, this appears on an answer card that you may print straight from the CD, ﬁ lename Answer 
Cards.pdf. The idea here is that you must not promise to cure the problem, because some people 

Possible Objections—Aesthetic, Noise, and Nuisance Issues 199
own equipment you cannot cure. Second, you don’t really want to personally cure any neighbor’s 
gear. Once you touch it, the neighbor is going to blame you for any subsequent breakdown. This is 
sometimes called the  “ you touch it, you own it ” rule. 
 You might choose to offer to pay for the components necessary to ﬁ x the problem. Just don’t mention 
at the hearing who will have to install them. So where does this leave you? Think about a response 
something like this: 
 Members of the Board, this subject area is off-limits to the town. It is forbidden to you. I’ve brought 
with me citations to a statute and legal cases that make it abundantly clear that municipalities have no 
power to act in this area. The Federal Communications Commission is the sole authority in cases of 
radiofrequency interference. 
 However, I understand the concern you’ve heard here. First, let me say that I’ve used comparable 
transmitters in many situations like this one and never had the problems described. Also, the new 
antenna, by virtue of its height, will be further away from neighboring homes and ofﬁ ces than would 
be the case if it were lower and therefore it is less likely to interfere. [Obviously, this argument should 
not be made if we’re talking about an AM antenna in a residential neighborhood.] 
 The truth is that such interference issues are so uncommon that some manufacturers choose not to 
include the few extra parts necessary to calm down interference in millions of sets, when they can 
help with the occasional problem and save a lot of money cumulatively. As a result, the Consumer 
Electronics Manufacturers Association maintains a Web page on whom to contact about such prob-
lems, generally using an 800 number. The repairs are simple. In any event, I pledge to cooperate fully 
with my neighbors to help them to resolve any complaint that may arise. 
 Note that  “ cooperate fully ” doesn’t require you to ﬁ x anything. This promise is likely to be forgotten 
quickly in any event. But again, you don’t want to touch anything your hostile neighbor owns, or you 
may ﬁ nd yourself replacing all of his gear at your expense. 
 8.11.6  Installing Filters 
 Let’s say you install a 0.01- μ F bypass capacitor inside a digital video recorder (DVR) or telephone 
answering device (TAD). Years later, when some mechanical part of the DVR drive fails, or a child 
spills a cola on the TAD, the neighbor will assume that you caused the breakdown. Nevermind that you 
never touched that portion of the machine — you were the only person who ever put his hands inside. 
Your neighbor will never be convinced otherwise. So, unless you are willing to take on free repairs of 
home-entertainment equipment, don’t offer to ﬁ x anything and don’t put your hands inside. 
 On the other hand, the cost of capacitors, ﬁ lters, and toroids is not great. For ﬁ lters, one of the 
best manufacturers of ﬁ lters for dealing with RF in phone lines is the K-Y Filter, ( www.ky-ﬁ lters.
com/am.htm ). You can always offer to purchase and  “ help ” to install ﬁ lters and toroids. The cost of 
purchase is low and they are usually easy to install. Just remember that what you are offering to do is 
to buy the ﬁ lters or toroids and instruct the neighbor on how to install them. Remember the warning 
above:  “ Touch it and you own it. ”

200 Chapter 8
 8.12  Property Value 
 The claim that installing your antenna will lower property values is probably false. It is another element 
of the “ spaghetti defense ” and is usually put forward by someone who wants to put up every possible 
objection. A study in Potomac, MD, concluded that monopoles have no effect on home and property 
prices. Thorne Consultants, in conjunction with the law ﬁ rm of Cole, Raywid  & Braverman, LLP, and 
working for AT & T Wireless, issued a study in May of 2001 that included an exhaustive analysis of 85 
real estate transactions to determine the relationship between property values and the existence of a 
visible monopole. The study aimed to ﬁ nd out if homes with visible views of the monopole had either 
longer than normal marketing times or lower prices. The study concluded there was no relationship 
between proximity to and/or visibility of a monopole and prices paid for homes and vacant lots in the 
area. One illustrative example included a home adjacent to the monopole that was constructed in 1994 
for $800,000 and had increased in value to $1.975 million in 2001. There are several possible strategies 
available to the applicant. 
 8.12.1  Borrow Someone Else’s Study That Shows No Impact on Home Values 
 The CD included with this book has some property value studies that have been submitted in other 
cases, both amateur and cellular telephone cases, since the issue is common to both. One strategy is 
to simply submit those studies and point out that they have been accepted in previous cases for even 
bigger structures than you propose. Also included on the CD is a federally funded study by REPP 
(Renewable Energy Policy Project) entitled  “ The Effect of Wind Development on Local Property 
Values. ” It can be found online at  http://www.repp.org/articles/static/1/binaries/wind_online_ﬁ nal
.pdf . This highly detailed, 81-page study includes references at the end to other wind power and 
electric transmission line studies on the question of property values. A more recent analysis of power 
line studies may also be found on the accompanying CD, prepared by James A. Chalmers, Ph.D., of 
Chalmers & Associates, LLC, Billings, MT, in April 2008 and entitled:  “ Assessing the Impacts of 
High-Voltage Transmission Lines (HVTL) on Property Values. ” On the CD, see ﬁ lename Chalmers 
High Voltage.pdf. This highly qualiﬁ ed author analyzes the 16 most widely cited published studies that 
offer conclusions on the relationship, if any, between the location of power lines and property values. 
To quench your thirst to learn the conclusions across the many studies reviewed, Chalmers writes as 
follows: 
● 
 Over time, there is a consistent pattern, with about half of the studies ﬁ nding negative 
property value effects and half ﬁ nding none. 
● 
 When effects have been found, they tend to be small; almost always less than 10% and usually 
in the range of 3 to 6%. 
● 
 Where effects are found, they decay rapidly as distance to the lines increases and usually 
disappear at about 200 to 300 feet. 
● 
 Two of the studies investigated the behavior of the effect over time and found that, if there 
were effects, they tended to dissipate over time as well. 
● 
 There doesn’t appear to have been any change in the reaction of markets to high-voltage 
transmission line proximity after the 1992 Swedish health effects studies. 

Possible Objections—Aesthetic, Noise, and Nuisance Issues 201
 See ﬁ lenames K1IR Assessments.pdf, W1UK Assessments.pdf, K1NU Assessments.pdf, and K1ZM 
Dartantra Dr Study.pdf on the CD for three amateur property value studies. The Excel ﬁ les that created 
the studies are also located on the CD. There’s also an extremely large and detailed  “ Impact Study 
of Two Communication Towers/Three Subdivisions Cordova, Shelby County, Tennessee 38018. ” An 
abbreviated summary is on the CD as ﬁ lename BellSouth Mobility Property.pdf. 
 8.12.2  Bring Along Your Own  “ Expert ” 
 You can hire your own appraiser or you can just bring along your own licensed real estate agent, 
experienced in your community, to the public hearing. If you can’t get an agent who lives in town, try 
for one who works in town. If you can’t ﬁ nd that, ﬁ nd a real estate agent who works nearby. You may 
even ask around among friends who are engineers to see who has proven useful in other situations. If 
opponents argue property values, you must counter, or else someone is surely going to argue that the 
 “ evidence ” (really just the opinion of someone) was  “ uncontroverted. ” 
 8.12.3  If You Are a Broadcaster, Argue the First Amendment 
 Here’s how to argue First Amendment protection in a broadcast case. The following comes from the 
Koor Communications brief in  Koor v. City of Lebanon :
  [The broadcaster’s] position has always been that, as a broadcaster, it is a First Amendment 
 “ speaker ” subject to reasonable, narrowly drawn statues that may regulate the time, place, and 
manner of expression but that blanket prohibitions of expression are invalid. 
 Broadcasting is clearly a medium affected by a First Amendment interest.  United States 
v. Paramount Pictures, Inc. , 334 U.S. 131, 166 (1948).  “ But the reach of radio signals is 
incomparably greater than the range of the human voice and the problem of interference 
is a massive realty. ”  Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC , 395 U.S. 367, 387-88 (1969).  “ [I]f two 
broadcasters were to attempt to transmit over the same frequency in the same locale, they 
would interfere with one another’s signals, so that neither could be heard at all. The scarcity of 
broadcast frequencies thus required the establishment of some regulatory mechanism to divide 
the electromagnetic spectrum . . .  . ”  Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC , 512 U.S. 622 (1994) 
(internal citations omitted). The FCC’s regulation of minimum antenna heights speciﬁ cally 
required to avoid interference with other stations on the same or nearby frequencies, is a part 
of the regulatory mechanism. The City cannot create an effective total ban on this form of First 
Amendment speech by creating an effective total ban on new AM broadcasting. See  Metromedia
v. San Diego , 453 U.S. 490 (1981) (holding that a total ban on billboards was not a time, place 
and manner restriction). Under a First Amendment analysis, the City’s height ordinance requires 
a higher level of scrutiny than an ordinary land use regulation. 
 [Eventually we are brought back to the question of] whether the FCC would permit an array of 
42-foot antennas [the maximum allowed by that city’s ordinance]. To [the broadcaster], the 
answer is that the FCC regulations speak for themselves, do not permit 42-foot antennas in 
this instance due to interference problems, and the City’s zoning bylaw is invalid as it is both 
preempted by Federal regulation and a violation of the First Amendment. 
 Denial of the ability to broadcast at all is denial of a right secured by the Constitution. See  City
of Ladue v. Gilleo , 512 U.S. 43 (1994): 

202 Chapter 8
 Our prior decisions have voiced particular concern with laws that foreclose an entire medium 
of expression. Thus, we have held invalid ordinances that completely banned the distribution of 
pamphlets within the municipality,  Lovell v. Grifﬁ n , 303 U.S. 444, 451-452 (1938); handbills on 
the public streets,  Jamison v. Texas , 318 U.S. 413, 416(1943); the door-to-door distribution of 
literature,  Martin v. Struthers , 319 U.S. 141, 145-149 (1943);  Schneider v. State , 308 U.S. 147, 164-
165(1939), and live entertainment,  Schad v. Mount Ephraim , 452 U.S. 61, 75-76 (1981). 
 AM broadcast antennas are a  “ medium of expression ” that cannot be  “ completely banned. ” 
 What you are really trying to point out to the Board is that your opponents are unwilling to agree to any 
height where the antenna system is visible, but effectiveness may well be a function of visibility. Ask 
the Board to apply the appropriate test. If you are a broadcaster, you are required to cover your city of 
license, even at night (which helps the AM daytimer). If you are a cellular telephone carrier, you may 
need the height to prevent a  “ signiﬁ cant gap. ” 
 8.12.4  Create Your Own Study 
 There are at least two fairly easy studies you can do yourself. One is to locate a tower, or other towers 
in town (or a nearby town) and check out neighborhood assessed values before and after the erection 
of an antenna system, noting that the assessor makes no adjustments for nearby antenna systems. The 
other, requiring far more effort, might involve looking into sales data. The details for creating your own 
studies are outlined below. 
 8.12.5  Create Your Own Property Values Study Using Real Estate Professionals 
 The traditional way to present evidence on the subject of property values is to hire someone with 
certiﬁ cation as a real estate appraiser. This approach was used in a Boulder, CO, ham radio case 
(see ﬁ lename NQ0I Boulder CO Assessment.pdf on the CD) and in several cellular telephone site 
applications, also located on the CD . The appraiser picks  comparables (neighborhoods of homes that 
are comparable to yours) where antenna installations are present or absent and demonstrates that the 
presence of an antenna has no effect on property values. This approach is expensive. Whether it is 
persuasive or not depends on the presentation made by your appraiser at the hearing. 
 Such evidence is always subject to attack on the grounds that the expert has been hired by the applicant 
and has selected his comparables speciﬁ cally to prove his point. It will also be attacked on the grounds 
that the appraiser is just one real estate person. Your opponent will say,  “ I’ve spoken to several others 
who have a different opinion. ” Well, of course, the opponent has spoken to other agents, since the 
world is full of all sorts of  “ real estate persons. ” Someone who hasn’t done the hard work of analyzing 
the data can usually be found to support almost any position you like! 
 The reason for this variety of expertise is that real estate persons come in many ﬂ avors. In many states, 
one may become a real estate agent by passing a relatively simple examination or even without passing 
any examination at all. For this reason, the world is full of  “ kitchen brokers. ” This semi-derisive phrase 
generally refers to agents, not licensed brokers, and suggests that they are not very serious about the 
work, that they are not well trained, and that they often work from the family kitchen. They have the 
lowest level of authority in the industry. 

Possible Objections—Aesthetic, Noise, and Nuisance Issues 203
 The next level up is  broker . This usually requires a more serious license examination, sometimes 
accompanied by some amount of experience working with a licensed broker before the designation 
can be achieved. Finally, there is the broker who has established his or her own agency and employs 
agents or brokers in training, as well as providing ofﬁ ce space, ofﬁ ce machines, a secretary, and so 
forth. Obviously, this person is running a real estate business and is more likely than the part-timer 
to understand the subtleties. However, none of these real estate persons is necessarily an appraiser, 
certiﬁ ed by an appraising institute or perhaps having a state license as an appraiser. In some 
states—Connecticut is one of them—only an appraiser may express an opinion on property values.  
 8.12.6  Create Your Own Property Values Study — The Hopengarten Technique 
 My position is that, instead of relying on an appraiser, the best way for an applicant to prepare for a 
public hearing is to prepare his or her own exhibit using public data. This can be a lot less painful than 
you might think. This approach to the question of property values rests on several assumptions: 
● 
 Public records, such as those of the Town Assessor, are entitled to the  presumption of 
regularity . That is, a Board may presume that assessments are not prejudiced and were 
prepared by a neutral party. Since the data were produced long before your controversy 
came along, no one can say that it was produced with a view toward how it would impact the 
present case. 
●  
  An assessor’s data may be introduced without bringing the assessor to the hearing, simplifying 
the applicant’s life. 
● 
 In a typical town it is possible to avoid the charge of  “ specially selected data ”  simply by 
obtaining the data for every radio antenna system in town. It is hard to charge that you were 
selective when you have been  exhaustive . If your city or town is so large that this is impossible, 
simply reduce the area of search and be exhaustive within that area (presumably the village or 
section of town around the applicant’s property). If there is one especially well-known antenna 
installation in town, be sure to gather the data for that one (or two, if there are two prominent 
installations), since such installations may come up in the course of the evening’s discussion. 
 8.12.7  Drive by and Photograph 
 If you see an antenna system, take a photo. Be sure that the photo fairly represents what you see when 
you are driving around the neighborhood. Don’t try to take a photo that makes the antenna look too 
prominent, since this will be used against you (as in, “ Oh my gawd, it’s going to look like  that ? ” ). On 
the other hand, don’t try to minimize the antenna in the photo, since this will also be used against you 
(as in,  “ No wonder that antenna didn’t impact value. In this photo, you can hardly see it! ” ). Do take the 
photo in landscape mode ( not portrait mode). 
 For locations that do have antennas, make a note of the addresses of the neighbors and the names on their 
mailboxes. This is not completely necessary, since the information should all be available back at 
the assessor’s ofﬁ ce, but it will make you feel a lot more comfortable when you are trying to look up 
the records. If you want to go that extra step, make a note (perhaps supported by a photo) of whether 

204 Chapter 8
the antenna can be seen from a particular address. This is in preparation for the  “ But you can’t see the 
antenna from there ” argument. However, I’ve never seen this discussion go to that level of detail in a 
public hearing. 
 8.12.8  Visit the Assessor 
 Start with the assessor’s  Index Map . This will tell you which sectional map you’ll need. Let’s assume 
you want map B12. Go to map B12 and ﬁ nd the location of a commercial antenna. Now note the 
names and addresses of the abutters, as well as the name and address of the house (or houses) across 
the street. Now go to the cards for those houses or, in a more modern ofﬁ ce, to the computer in the 
public area. You will normally be looking things up by address. Fill out your spreadsheet. If the house 
has changed hands during the period you are studying (more likely if you look back 10 years than 5), 
use the name of the current owner on your spreadsheet. By the way, you are just keeping the name of 
the owner for your own convenience.  Don’t use it on the spreadsheet you eventually submit, as names 
just result in unnecessary and wasted time discussing the special circumstances of that house. 
 Don’t be concerned or intimidated about asking the assistant in the assessor’s ofﬁ ce for the information 
you seek or for help in gathering it. That’s what he or she is paid to do. And, trust me, she doesn’t care 
why you are there. You likely won’t be asked what you are trying to prove. However, if you are, just 
reply: “ Oh, it’s nothing much. I’m just trying to get a feel for the neighborhood. ”
 There is no need to tip off anyone about what you are trying to do. Most people doing this type of 
research are trying to get their assessments lowered — and they are usually angry. Be pleasant, and 
you’ll be ahead of the crowd in the estimation of the people behind the counter. 
 Examples of such a collection of data appear in the work of W1UK, Coventry, CT; K1NU, Andover, 
MA; and K1IR, Sudbury, MA. They are available on the CD as ﬁ lenames W1UK Assessments.pdf, 
K1NU Assessments.pdf, and K1IR Assessments.pdf and in Excel spreadsheets with the same base 
names. Note the differences between them. 
 Dr. Leonard Kay, K1NU, did not compare neighboring homes to the town as a whole. Instead, he 
determined the change in value for homes in the neighborhood and compared those with a view of an 
antenna system to those without such a view. 
 Town-wide data may be surprisingly easy to ﬁ nd, but you may have to root around state sources. To 
get a sense of home values for 1 year, 5 years, and 10 years where the data are available, try  http://
www.zillow.com . Enter an address in the ZIP code of concern, and you may learn the historical data 
for a particular home, ZIP code, municipality, county, or state. If you are inclined to believe that the 
presence of an antenna system has an impact on home values, then these documents may show that the 
presence of an antenna system tends to increase the value of neighboring homes. See what you ﬁ nd in 
your situation! 
 8.12.9  Possible Attacks on Your Property Valuation Data 
 The applicant or his attorney may beneﬁ t from the experiences of those who have made such 
presentations. Even if you are good on your feet, it is always useful to know in advance the kinds of 

Possible Objections—Aesthetic, Noise, and Nuisance Issues 205
questions to expect. Here are some typical attacks on the property valuation data you present, with 
reasoned responses. 
 8.12.9.1  “You Are Not a Real Estate Professional ” 
 This is a classic  ad hominem (literally,  against the person ) argument. 
Suggested response:  “ It is true that I am not a real estate professional. [If appropriate, add:  “ However, 
no one else presenting here tonight is a qualiﬁ ed appraiser either. ” ] Nonetheless, I have gathered public 
records assembled by the Town Assessor. So, if you attack my presentation, you are asking the Board 
to believe that the Assessor is right with respect to all other homes in town and wrong with respect to 
those located near antennas. I’m sure you’ll agree that this is an unlikely prospect. 
 “ You are asking us to believe that the Assessor, in his professional capacity, routinely  must be 
increasing the values of homes near antenna systems — a remarkable thought — because if, as you 
say, antenna systems negatively impact home values, then the assessments for homes near an antenna 
system should be lower. ” 
 8.12.9.2  “ It’s Just Not True ” 
 This is another veiled  ad hominem argument. 
Suggested response:  “ Assessments by the Town Assessor are entitled to the  presumption of regularity . 
The numbers were created by a neutral party, before this controversy arose. Please note that the 
assessments presented here have survived the process of appeal, if there was any appeal, indicating at 
least a passive acceptance of the valuation by even the neighbors of the antenna system. No amount of 
opinion by townspeople here tonight, or by real estate agents, should give this Board cause to reject 
actual municipal assessments. ”
 8.12.9.3  “ These Are Not Matched Pairs ” 
Suggested response:  “ They don’t have to be. The reason for selecting matched pairs is to evaluate 
absolute dollar values for the selling price of a house. The question here is not  ‘ How much should this 
house sell for? ’ The argument that opponents have put forward is that the mere presence of a visible 
antenna system causes a decline in the value of neighboring homes. As measured by a neutral party, the 
Town Assessor, this is simply not true. ”
 8.12.9.4  “ The Other Antennas Are Lower Than What You Propose ” 
Suggested response:  “ It is true that those antennas are lower. That’s why they are more visible and why 
they should impact home values  more , if the charge that antennas impact home values were true. Due 
to what artists call  “ perspective, ” the higher the antenna, the smaller it looks. If you wish, I can show 
the Board some photographs that illustrate this matter of perspective. But, generally speaking, lower 
antennas look bigger. ” 
 8.12.9.5    “ The Value of Some Neighboring Houses, As Seen in the Assessment, Probably Reﬂ ect Homeowner 
Improvements ” 
Suggested response:  “ You are absolutely correct. This is even better proof about this topic than mere 
speculation about value. Spending on a scale large enough to increase the assessment is undertaken 

206 Chapter 8
rationally. The homeowner has demonstrated a belief in the rising value of the neighborhood by 
investing even more dollars in that neighborhood. To suggest otherwise is to suggest that the neighbor 
who improved the house was throwing good money after bad. ”
 Think of the  Hopengarten maxim of public hearings,  “ Some evidence always trumps no evidence. ” It is 
not really true, of course, because the Board could legally decide to give your own testimony or studies 
no credibility whatsoever. Nonetheless, I encourage you to prepare thoroughly for the property values 
question with some evidence. You can never predict how much effort your opponents are willing to put 
in or how much money they are willing to spend. If you anticipate a pack of wolves howling at you, 
you should create your own study based on actual assessments in your town. 
 8.13  Noise 
 Let’s face it: Towers and antennas don’t make noise. While opponents may protest that  “ wind will 
whistle ” through a lattice tower or that  “ ﬂ ag poles make noise, ” those arguments are bogus. There is 
no whistling, and you may feel free to invite the Board to visit other sites to see if this is true. Issuing 
an open invitation, knowing where to send the Board to see for themselves, is a great response. Do 
not attack the idiot who made the claim. Yes, he is an idiot, but consider yourself blessed by your 
opponent — the claim itself will cause the Board to question the credibility of other overwrought 
arguments made by the same person. 
 As for the claim that ﬂ agpoles make noise, that would, of course, be true of ﬂ ag poles where the rope 
for raising and lowering the ﬂ ag slaps against the pole. By contrast, your feedlines will be afﬁ xed. 
 There is one kind of noise complaint to which you should be prepared to respond, however: generator 
noise.
 With respect to generator noise, several issues that arise may require thought beforehand: (1) the need 
to exercise a generator periodically, (2) the question of where noise measurements are to be made (or, 
putting it in real estate terms, does “ the property line ” refer to the leased area or the boundaries of the 
fee simple absolute?), (3) cumulative noise if all of the generators must be on at the same time (i.e., at 
the time of a power outage), and (4) preemption. While a casual observer may not think about each of 
these issues, determined opponents may cause the discussion of each. 
 8.13.1  Exercising a Generator Periodically 
 Most Boards can get beyond this issue when you point out that it is easy to schedule generator testing 
and routine exercising of the generator during daylight hours. Your control system may even allow you 
to promise that the generator (sometimes called a “ gen set ” ) will only be exercised on weekdays. As 
a result of proper scheduling, only one gen set need be on at a time, and the issue of cumulative noise 
will not arise. 
 8.13.2  Where to Measure Noise 
 Many noise bylaws are completely separate from the bylaw controlling the installation of wireless 
telecommunication facilities and were written without gen sets in mind. As a result, no one was 

Possible Objections—Aesthetic, Noise, and Nuisance Issues 207
thinking about the fact that the compound surrounding a tower (the leased area) may only by 
100    100 feet (or even less). This raises the question of whether you measure noise at the boundary 
of the leased area or the boundary of the total property, of which the leased area is but a small part. The 
best approach is for an applicant to take the position that measuring noise at the boundary of the largest 
possible parcel is the proper meaning of the ordinance. This matter is fully discussed in the example 
letter that follows. 
 8.13.3  Cumulative Noise 
 This is one of those situations where, at the times when the public most wants cellular telephone 
service, the ordinance, absent a waiver or Variance, may forbid it. This is terrible drafting and may 
never have been intended by the original draftsmen. Nonetheless, if you face it in your particular 
ordinance, take pride in the fact that you’ll be providing an immensely popular service at a time when 
it is most needed — during a major power outage. 
 8.13.4  Preemption 
 There are no known cases that take the position that a local noise ordinance is preempted by 
federal law. In the wake of Hurricane Katrina, the FCC convened an expert panel to address 
communications disaster preparedness. As a result, the FCC issued an order, Order on Reconsideration, 
Recommendations of the Independent Panel , 22 FCC Rcd 18013, App. B (2007). As described by 
T-Mobile and the PCIA, 
 The core requirement of the rule is that all carriers have 8 or 24 hours of backup power at every cell 
site or central facility, with the speciﬁ c amount depending on the type of network asset. In particu-
lar, every wireless cellular and paging carrier (CMRS provider) is required — within no more than 
12 months of the Order’s effective date — to have at least 8 hours of onsite backup power (e.g., 
 batteries or generators) or some alternative means of ensuring that the area covered by the site can be 
served for 8 hours in the event of a power outage. 
 (See  http://www.pcia.com/advocacy/adv_docs/1-7-08_T-Mobile_Response.pdf , which supports a stay 
of the FCC’s backup power requirements.) This Order creates a federal requirement for backup power, 
effectively requiring a generator when batteries cannot provide power for a full 24 hours. It could 
be in direct conﬂ ict with local law that might effectively forbid generators due to a noise regulation. 
However:  “ The Commission provided exemptions for when compliance with the backup power rule  ‘ is 
precluded by: (1) federal, state, tribal or local law; (2) risk to safety of life or health; or (3) private legal 
obligation or agreement ’ ” ( CTIA v. FCC, U.S. Court of Appeals (D.C. Cir.), Docket 07-1475, July 8, 
2008; http://pacer.cadc.uscourts.gov/docs/common/opinions/200807/07-1475-1126058.pdf ). 
 The backup power rule, at the time this book went to press, had not yet been implemented. Given 
the exemptions contained within the rule, however, it appears unlikely that a claim of preemption 
would be successful at this time. Nonetheless, the real need for CMRS and broadcast services in time 
of emergency would seem to be a good reason to ask for a limited waiver of any noise ordinance 
restriction.

208 Chapter 8
 8.13.5  A Real-Life Example of a Noise Ordinance Problem 
 This real-life example concerns a  “ Wireless Communications Facilities ” ordinance that provided that 
 “ [g]round-mounted equipment for personal wireless service facilities shall not generate noise in excess 
of 50  dB  at the property line . ” [ Emphasis added. ] 
 Opponents of the site sought to claim that  “ the property line ” meant the boundary of the leasehold. The 
applicant took the position that “ the property line ” meant what it said — the boundary of the property, 
the boundary of the fee simple absolute. Here’s how the argument went:
  The Zoning Code uses the phrase  “ property line ” without any qualiﬁ cation or further provision. 
Section ____ of the code creates certain deﬁ ned terms, but  “ property line ” is not one of them 
nor is it deﬁ ned in the Wireless Communications Facilities code. 
 Section ____ of the Code states:  “ Where terms are not deﬁ ned in this article, they shall have their 
ordinary accepted meaning, or such as the context may apply. ” Of course any ambiguity in a 
written document is held against the drafter, and zoning codes are no exception to the principle. 
The drafters of the Code had the opportunity to further deﬁ ne  “ property line ”  or to assign it a 
meaning other than its “ ordinary accepted meaning, ”  but no such deﬁ nition was adopted. 
 It is inconceivable that the  “ ordinary accepted meaning ” of  “ property line ” could ever conjure 
up anything other than the fee simple boundary of a site. In fact, think of the implications 
and opportunities for misinterpretation offered if the leasehold notion were applied to a strip 
shopping site, an apartment complex, or other site with multiple leasehold estates. 
 How would yard setbacks and the various other dimensional requirements enumerated in the 
Code be applied when a single fee site might contain dozens of different internal leasehold 
boundaries? The drafters of the Code did not intend to sow such misapprehension and confusion. 
 Furthermore, such an erroneous interpretation would lead to disastrous results for wireless 
installations. Most wireless compounds with an area of 40     60 feet, perhaps up to 100     100 
feet, deﬁ ne their leasehold estates along a fenced boundary. Often, equipment shelters and 
generators are placed along those fence lines, with little extra space. In such installations, no 
installation would ever be compliant, no matter how severely equipment sound was mufﬂ ed. 
It is doubtful the drafters of the Code intended to prevent standard installations when they 
speciﬁ cally wrote  “ 50       dB at the property line ”  as the noise standard for wireless installations.      
 Good argument, eh? It was successful. 2
 As to how noise at the property line can be predicted, that is the province of consultants. Modeling 
Specialties, of Westford, MA, has created a complete consultants report, representing the type of 
work routinely produced in such situations, and granted permission for it to be reproduced on the CD 
accompanying this book; see ﬁ lename Modeling Specialties Noise Report.pdf. 
 8.13.6  Engineering Solutions 
 While this book is all about zoning law, do not forget that sometimes an engineering solution may 
come to the rescue. Always consider additional cowling, additional mufﬂ ers, placing a dirt berm with 
2  The original author of the argument asked to remain anonymous and to protect the name of his client. For this reason, the 
attorney, client, town, and bylaw numbers are not reproduced. Parts of the argument were rewritten. 

Possible Objections—Aesthetic, Noise, and Nuisance Issues 209
bushes for decoration (or other noise barrier) in the direction of greatest concern, aiming the exhaust 
system upward (instead of horizontally), installing special louvers, or creating a long and winding 
exhaust path. As to the latter, remember the theme song of the acoustical engineer:  “ Sound doesn’t like 
to turn corners. ” If you can create a sound path that goes through a lot of dirt and turns a lot of corners, 
exhaust gases may escape without being accompanied by exhaust noises. Acoustical engineers have 
many cards to play. They can help. 

This page intentionally left blank

211
 Possible Objections — Environmental Issues 
 We live in an age of environmental litigation. Fortunately, you will not be bitten by a snail darter. In 
fact, you will probably not even be worried about the existence or nonexistence of a snail darter at 
your place. Except for wetlands, buffers to wetlands, or some other special circumstance, you will 
not be required to do anything with respect to the environment. You may not even be required to ﬁ le 
anything to comply with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA). An environmental 
assessment (EA), to be ﬁ led with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), is required only in 
eight environmentally sensitive situations (47 CFR  § 1.1307(a)), or for radiation in excess of Ofﬁ ce of 
Engineering Technology (OET) 65 guidelines (47 CFR  § 1.1307(b)). Here’s an overview of compliance 
with NEPA, adapted from the FCC website:
 Compliance with Commission’s Rules Implementing the National Environmental Policy 
Act of 1969 
 This document is prepared by the Wireless Telecommunications Bureau’s Commercial Wireless 
Division to assist wireless service carriers understand the Commission’s Rules implementing the 
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, 42 USC  § 4321 et seq . This document is intended to serve 
as an informal guide only, and is NOT INTENDED to revise or replace the rules contained in Subpart I, 
Part 1 of the Commission’s Rules ( http://wireless.fcc.gov/rules.html ), 47 CFR  § § 1.1301 to 1.1319. 
 Attached are answers to some frequently asked questions received by the Commercial Wireless 
Division ( http://wireless.fcc.gov/siting/npafaq.html ). These answers are general in nature, and 
do not necessarily represent the opinions of the Commission or any individual Commissioner. 
Furthermore, the Bureau’s positions reﬂ ected in these general responses may not apply to your 
individual factual circumstance. Please contact the Bureau’s Commercial Wireless Division at 
(202) 418-0620 for more questions on these compliance issues. 
 National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) 
 NEPA is the basic national charter for protection of the environment. It requires all Federal 
agencies to implement procedures to make environmental consideration a necessary part of an 
agency’s decision-making process. Speciﬁ cally, NEPA and the regulatory guidelines established 
by the Council on Environmental Quality which implemented the Act, 40 CFR  § § 1500  et seq ., 
require all Federal agencies to take into account environmental consequences when making 
decisions which could be considered  “ major federal actions. ” 
CHAPTER 9 

212 Chapter 9
 As a licensing agency, the Commission complies with NEPA by requiring our licensees to review 
their proposed actions for environmental consequences. Our rules implementing NEPA are 
found at Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 1, Subpart I, rule sections 1.1301 to 
1.1319 ( http://wireless.fcc.gov/rules.html ). 
 Section 1.1305 of these rules state that the Commission  “ has found no common pattern which 
would enable it to specify ” any particular Commission action as a  “ major action ” under NEPA. 
Thus, section 1.1306 of the Rules  “ categorically excluded from environmental processing ” all 
Commission actions except for those speciﬁ cally identiﬁ ed in section 1.1307. If a licensee’s 
proposed action falls within one of the categories of 1.1307, section 1.1308(a) requires the 
licensee to consider the potential environmental effects from its construction of antenna 
facilities or structures, and disclose those effects in an environmental assessment (EA) which is 
ﬁ led with the Commission for our review. 
 Section 1.1307 is divided into four parts: 
 1.1307(a): Lists eight areas or situations which are considered environmentally sensitive and 
requiring preparation of an EA prior to construction. 
 1.1307(b): Requires an EA if the antenna transmitter would cause exposure of workers or the general 
public to levels of radiofrequency (RF) radiation in excess of certain guidelines. These guidelines 
were recently revised. See  Report and Order in ET Docket No. 93-62 , FCC 96-326 ( http://www.fcc.gov/
Bureaus/Engineering_Technology/Orders/1996/fcc96326.txt , released Aug. 1, 1996). 
 1.1307(c): Allows  “ an interested person ” to petition the Commission to require environmental 
consideration in its decision-making process where such analysis would not otherwise be 
required by the rules. The petition must be in writing and detail the reasons justifying such 
an analysis. The Commission then reviews the petition and will either require an EA or it may 
proceed without an environmental analysis. 
 1.1307(d): Allows the Bureau responsible for processing an action which may otherwise be 
excluded from an EA, to require environmental consideration of that action upon its own 
motion.
 Wireless Telecommunications Bureau’s EA Review Process 
 If, after consulting the NEPA rules, a wireless service provider determines that its proposed 
service facility project does not fall under any of the listed categories in section 1.1307, 
section 1.1306 states that the licensee may proceed with the project without providing any 
documentation to the Bureau. Both FCC Form 601 (Application for Radio Service Authorization, 
 http://www.fcc.gov/formpage.html#601 ) and FCC Form 854 (Application for Antenna Structure 
Registration,  http://www.fcc.gov/formpage.html#854 ) contain question 28, which asks whether 
the licensee’s proposed action may have a signiﬁ cant environmental effect requiring an EA. If the 
licensee indicates  “ NO ” to this question, no environmental documentation is required to be ﬁ led 
with the Commission. However, the licensee should maintain all pertinent records and be ready 
to provide documentation supporting its determination that an EA was not required for the site, 
in the event that such information is requested by the Bureau pursuant to section 1.1307(d). 
 If, after consulting the NEPA rules, a licensee determines that its proposed construction does 
fall under one of the listed categories in section 1.1307(a) or (b), the licensee is required to 
notify that fact to the Bureau. The licensee must answer  “ YES ” to question 28 on either FCC 
Forms 601 or 854 and attach an EA to the form ﬁ ling. Once this question is answered  “ YES, ” the 
ﬁ ling is treated as a  “ major environmental action. ” Questions on how to ﬁ le an FCC Form 601 

Possible Objections—Environmental Issues 213
should be addressed to the Commercial Wireless Division, Broadband Branch, (202) 530-6008. 
Questions on how to ﬁ le an FCC Form 854 should be addressed (202) 418-1513. 
 The Bureau’s review of a major environmental action consists of the following stages: 
Initial Review: When an EA is received by the Bureau (attached to either a Form 601 or a Form 
854), the appropriate licensing ofﬁ ce initially reviews the complete ﬁ ling to determine whether 
the proposed antenna facility complies with any FAA height, location, lighting and marking 
requirements, AM station interference coordination or other engineering requirements, or any 
other non-environmental concerns. 
Acceptance Public Notice : The licensing ofﬁ ce then places the ﬁ ling on the Commission’s Public 
Notice (PN) for thirty days, indicating that the application was accepted for ﬁ ling as a  “ major 
environmental action. ” The PN indicates the licensee’s name, call sign, the market, FCC ﬁ le 
number, the date on which the application was received, and the speciﬁ c section of the 1.1307 
category invoking the need for an EA. 
Review:  The EA is then reviewed by the Bureau’s Enforcement Division, along with any comments, 
petitions or opposition ﬁ led against the EA during the 30-day PN period. 
Finding of No Signiﬁ cant Impact: If, after consulting with all relevant expert federal and state 
agencies, the Enforcement Division determines that the proposed project will not have a 
signiﬁ cant impact upon the environment, the Enforcement Division issues its ﬁ nding of no 
signiﬁ cant impact (FONSI). The licensing ofﬁ ce then notiﬁ es the licensee that the application 
has been granted and issues another PN announcing the grant of the application. 
Finding of Impact: If, after consulting with all appropriate agencies, the Enforcement Division 
determines that the proposed project will have signiﬁ cant impact upon the environment, 
it informs the licensee of this ﬁ nding. Pursuant to section 1.1308(c) of the Commission 
Rules, the licensee is afforded an opportunity to amend its proposal to reduce, minimize, or 
eliminate environmental problems. If the licensee’s amended application resolves the negative 
environmental impact, the Enforcement Division issues a FONSI and the application is granted. 
If the amended application does not eliminate the environmental problem, the Enforcement 
Division will either recommend the denial of the application or will work with the applicant 
to proceed with the project upon preparation of an environmental impact statement (EIS). 
Should the Bureau decide to proceed with the action, sections 1.1314, 1.1315 and 1.1317 
require a notice of intent that EISs will be prepared, then a draft and ﬁ nal EISs be prepared and 
announced in the Federal Register . 
 ( Source:  http://wireless.fcc.gov/siting/npaguid.html ) 
 NEPA Questions Frequently Asked by Licensees 
 The following are questions the Commercial Wireless Division frequently receives concerning 
NEPA and EA preparation. The Q & As will be updated regularly as more information becomes 
available. Please contact the Commercial Wireless Division at 202-418-0620 for additional 
questions you may have on this topic. 
 Q. Is it necessary to hire outside environmental consultants, scientists, archaeologists or 
historians to comply with these rules? 
 A. Nothing in the Commission’s Rules require that you hire these outside specialists, although 
it may be easier and more cost effective in the long run to let such experts assist you in handling 
this area of compliance. 

214 Chapter 9
 Q. Which government agency or ofﬁ ce can assist us in determining whether or not a 
proposed construction may require an environmental assessment (EA) under section 1.1307? 
 A. Because the Commission is not an expert agency on environmental matters, in evaluating 
our licensees ’ environmental assessments prepared and ﬁ led pursuant to NEPA, we defer to the 
opinions or judgments of other agencies with expertise over a particular subject matter. These 
agencies can also assist you in determining whether your proposed construction may affect the 
areas over which the agency has jurisdiction, and they can offer suggestions on how to mitigate 
any impact upon the area. The federal and certain state agencies with expertise and jurisdiction 
over each of the categories in section 1.1307 are as follows: 
 Wilderness Area: U.S. Department of Interior ( http://www.doi.gov/ ) 
 Wildlife Preserve: U.S. Department of Interior ( http://www.doi.gov/ ) 
 Endangered Species: U.S. Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service ( http://www.fws.gov )
 Historic Site: Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, State Historic Preservation Ofﬁ ce 
( http://www.achp.gov )
 Indian Religious Site: American Indian Tribes, State Historic Preservation Ofﬁ ce 
 Floodplain: Federal Emergency Management Agency ( http://www.fema.gov )
 Surface Features: U.S. Army Corp of Engineers ( http://www.usace.army.mil )
 High Intensity Lights in Residential Neighborhoods: Federal Aviation Administration 
( http://www.faa.gov )
 Excessive Radiofrequency Emission: Federal Communications Commission’s Ofﬁ ce of 
Engineering and Technology ( http://www.faa.gov/oet )
 Q. Should any state or local government agency also be contacted to determine the 
environmental effects of a situation listed under section 1.1307? 
 A. Yes. You should always contact any and all state and local government ofﬁ ces with 
responsibility over the effected area, as some of these ofﬁ ces share jurisdiction over the area with 
a federal agency. In addition, some states have environmental laws and regulations which may 
be more stringent than federal standards, and you must comply with all relevant laws in addition 
to the Commission’s NEPA rules. 
 Q. What is an EA? What does it look like? How long should it be? How can we obtain a 
sample of a good EA? 
 A. An EA is a document which, among other purposes, serves to assist the Bureau staff 
understand the environmental effects of the licensee’s proposed construction. Thus the 
document should contain all relevant information necessary for the Bureau staff to make a 
determination on the extent of negative impact the construction may have upon the area. 
Rule section 1.1311 details what should be included in an EA. It is always helpful to include as 
attachments, copies of all relevant correspondence with and permits or authorizations issued by 
the local or state ofﬁ cials concerning the proposed project. As publicly ﬁ led documents, all EAs 
are available to the public at the Bureau’s Public Reference Room, located at FCC Headquarters, 
Room CY-A257, 445 12th Street SW, Washington, DC 20554. For more information, you may 
contact the Reference Room at (202) 418-0270, Monday through Thursday from 8:00 – 4:30PM 
EST and Friday from 8:00–11:30AM EST. 

Possible Objections—Environmental Issues 215
Q. Should the EA address all the categories even if only one or two of those listed categories 
are actually effected?
 A. Yes. The EA should be comprehensive in its analysis by discussing the reasons why a particular 
category is effected as well as the reasons why other categories are not effected by the proposed 
action. The substantial portion of the analysis, of course, should address the categories which 
are effected by the proposed construction. 
Q. What is a  “ ﬂ oodplain ” referred to in section 1.1307(a)(6)? Is there a difference between a 
100-year and a 500-year ﬂ oodplain?
 A. According to Executive Order 11988 referred to in section 1.1307(a)(6), a ﬂ oodplain is 
deﬁ ned as the  “ lowland and relatively ﬂ at area adjoining inland and coastal waters  . . . including 
at a minimum, that area subject to a one percent or greater chance of ﬂ ooding in any given 
year. ” This deﬁ nition is often referred to as a  “ 100-year ﬂ oodplain. ” 
   The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is the administrator of the National 
Flood Insurance Program, and the federal agency having lead responsibility for ﬂ ood 
hazard assessment and mitigation. FEMA has adopted the 100-year ﬂ oodplain as the base 
ﬂ ood standard for NFIP as that agency is mainly concerned with construction which could 
potentially harm a 100-year ﬂ oodplain, rather than a 500-year ﬂ oodplain, which is an area 
that has a 0.2 percent chance of a ﬂ ood in a year. However, FEMA is also concerned with 
any construction in a 500-year ﬂ oodplain if the proposed project is considered a  “ critical 
action. ” A  “ critical action ” is deﬁ ned as any activity for which even a slight chance of ﬂ ooding 
is too great. Relying upon FEMA’s guidelines, this ofﬁ ce understands the term  “ ﬂ oodplain ” as 
used in Section 1.1307(a)(6) to refer to either a 100-year ﬂ oodplain, or a 500year ﬂ oodplain 
subject to “ critical action ” characterization. However, to fully understand these terms 
and concepts, it is advised that you review FEMA’s  Further Advice on Executive Order 11988 
Floodplain Management, and the U.S. Water Resources Council’s Floodplain Management Guidelines for 
Implementing E.O. 11988 , published on February 10, 1978, at page 6030 of volume 43 of the 
Federal Register . 
Q. Since the Commission issued its NEPA Rules in 1986 with certain amendments thereafter, 
are the structures built prior to 1986 exempt from compliance, or must the existing 
structures be re-evaluated now for environmental compliance?
   A. NEPA is a federal policy directive aimed at producing quality agency decisions that take 
into consideration environmental consequences. NEPA does not set a time frame in which to 
come into compliance with the law as environmental problems can change with time. Thus, 
even if you have never ﬁ led an EA on a structure because it was constructed prior to 1986, 
you are required to come into compliance now, under the environmental conditions of the 
structure as it exists today. Keep in mind, however, that coming into compliance with the 
NEPA Rules may not require you to ﬁ le an EA if the conditions under which your structure 
stands today does not involve any of the categories listed in 1.1307. It simply requires you 
to conduct a ﬁ eld investigation on the structure to be sure that no negative environmental 
problems exist today. 
 ( Source:   http://wireless.fcc.gov/siting/npafaq.html )         
 For an actual NEPA compliance ﬁ ling, demonstrating why you shouldn’t leave this to amateurs, see 
ﬁ lename Sample NEPA Screening Raw Land.pdf on the CD. This document also proves that there are 
careers for liberal arts graduates. 

216 Chapter 9
 The biggest reported bird kill was 30,000 birds at the Eau Claire, Wisconsin, telecommunication 
tower on the nights of 18 – 19 and 19 – 20 September 1963 (Kemper, 1964). ( Source:
Environmental Impact Assessment Report,  http://www.epd.gov.hk/eia/register/report/
eiareport/eia_0822002/EIA%20main%20report/Appendix/appendix%209b.pdf .)
 9.1  Danger to Birds 
 Someone may claim that the proposed structure is a danger to birds. Whether or not you believe that 
inquiries on this topic emanate from someone who is looking for a reason, any reason, to complain 
about your proposed antenna-support structure, you must still treat the objection seriously. In any 
event, listen carefully to the question or complaint. 
 9.1.1  Speciﬁ c Birds 
 Sometimes you get lucky. In a 1996 complaint by a neighboring golf club against Steven Fraasch, 
K0SF, a radio ham, the complaint was that the Fraasch tower (130 feet tall) presented a danger to 
Trumpeter Swans. The case was tried in District Court, Hennepin County, Minnesota. The Judge made 
the following ﬁ ndings of fact:
 ¶ 9. Plaintiff presented the testimony of Dr. James A. Cooper, an Associate professor of 
Wildlife at the University of Minnesota. Dr. Cooper testiﬁ ed that there is no known evidence of 
Trumpeter Swans nesting in the Goose Lake area. In fact there have been only two documented 
instances of Trumpeter Swans in the Goose Lake area over the past ﬁ fteen years. 
 ¶ 10. Dr. Cooper testiﬁ ed that he was not aware of a single example of a Trumpeter Swan 
 colliding with an amateur radio tower or the guy wires extending from radio antennas. 
 ¶ 11. The Fraasch tower does not present the potential for signiﬁ cant environmental effects 
upon birds, including the Trumpeter Swan, which may visit the Goose Lake area. 
 ¶ 12. Potential damage to Trumpeter Swans caused by the Fraasch tower is wholly speculative. 
 A complete copy of the Fraasch case may be found on the CD as ﬁ lename Fraasch Trumpeter Swans.pdf. 
 Here’s your take-away lesson. Try to force the opposition to specify exactly which species of bird they 
seek to protect. Of course, the less time the opposition has to prepare a response to such questions, the 
more likely the opposition is to get it wrong. 
 9.1.2  The Catastrophe Anecdote 
 If you haven’t heard it already, you will inevitably hear the story about the largest tower-related 
bird kill in history. Supposedly, 30,000 birds were killed at a tower in Eau Claire, WI, on the nights 
of September 18 and 19, 1963. Here are just a few of the occasions when this story has made an 
appearance:

Possible Objections—Environmental Issues 217
 During 18 – 20 September 1963, extraordinary numbers of migrating birds passed through the 
Minnesota – Wisconsin area. At an Eau Claire, Wisconsin, tower, over 10,000 birds (45 species) 
were collected; total mortality was estimated at over 30,000. ( Source: Green, J.C., Fall migration: 
western Great Lakes region,  Audubon Field Notes , 18(1), 33 – 34, 39 – 42, 1964; cited in 
 http://www.awea.org/smallwind/toolbox/windzone/wildlife.htm .) 
 An estimated 30,000 birds were killed at the Eau Claire, Wisconsin, tower on the nights of 18 
and 19 September 1963. Lists of the 10,195 birds (56 species) actually collected and of 924 
birds (47 species) killed on 20 – 21 September at Lewisville, Minnesota, are given. To explain the 
mass mortality of birds at towers, a theory is proposed in which migrants attempt to maintain a 
constant bearing with respect to the red tower lights (perceiving them as stars) and spiral closer 
to the structure, eventually striking guy wires. ( Source: Kemper, C.A., A tower for TV: 30,000 dead 
birds. Audubon Magazine , 66(1), 86 – 90, 1964; cited in  http://www.awea.org/smallwind/toolbox/
windzone/wildlife.htm .) 
 If you look closely, these reports refer back to a single report by one man, C.A. Kemper . He must have 
been an interesting man. Anyone facing a case in which this anecdote is cited should spend a lot of 
time to learn more about him. 
 Charles A. Kemper, M.D., was a graduate of the University of Maryland Medical School. He described 
himself as a small-town doctor and  “ bird bander ” ( http://www.wsobirds.org/speakers_2007.pdf ).
For 20 years, he was the editor of  The Passenger Pigeon . Here is a description of that journal 
( http://digicoll.library.wisc.edu/EcoNatRes/subcollections/PassPigeonAbout.html ):
The Passenger Pigeon is the ofﬁ cial scholarly publication of the Wisconsin Society for Ornithology, 
an organization of both professional and non-professional ornithologists dedicated to the 
study of Wisconsin birds. First published in 1939, the quarterly journal features a wide range of 
original information about Wisconsin birds and their habitats, including seasonal ﬁ eld reports, 
results from annual Christmas bird counts, descriptions of May and Big Day counts, and 
scientiﬁ c research articles. Contributions include reports from birders throughout the state on 
unusual and interesting sightings and historical accounts from and about prominent Wisconsin 
naturalists. Editorial comments from ofﬁ cers in the Wisconsin Society for Ornithology are 
provided regularly. 
 As both the author of the article reporting the largest reported bird kill of all time in the United States, 
and as the editor of the journal in which it was reported, one supposes it would be unfair to call  The
Passenger Pigeon a  “ peer-reviewed journal. ” It might also be unfair to characterize it as  “ scholarly. ” 
 But, with all those reports for which he is responsible, whether we’re talking about 10,000 or 30,000 
birds killed in a single night, or even a few nights together, are there any photographs? Did anyone ever 
give thought to the size of the mound, given all those carcasses? Were others brought in to conﬁ rm 
ﬁ ndings? Those are all interesting questions. If you ever go to trial in one of these matters, a well-
prepared lawyer will have a lot of fun with cross-examination. 

218 Chapter 9
 We begin by referring to the cumulative study by Charles Kemper,  “ A Study of Bird Mortality at a 
West Central Wisconsin TV Tower from 1957 – 1995. ” It may be found at  http://digicoll.library.wisc.
edu/cgi-bin/EcoNatRes/EcoNatRes-idx?type turn & entity  EcoNatRes.pp58n03.p0019 & isize 
M . Kemper writes, at page 224, that:  “ Red-eyed Vireos (REV) are the most numerous for all seasons. ”
So, let’s do a little calculating. 
 According to Wikipedia, the red-eyed vireo ( Vireo olivaceus ) is a small American song bird, 13 to 14   cm 
in length. Using another source ( http://www.birds.cornell.edu/AllAboutBirds/BirdGuide/Red-eyed_
Vireo.html ), we discover: 
 • 
Size, 12 – 13 centimeters ( ~ 5 inches) 
 • 
Wingspan, 23 – 25 centimeters (9 – 10 inches) 
 • 
Weight, 12 – 26 grams (0.42 – 0.92 ounces) 
 Now, to be very conservative, do not assume that there were 30,000 birds killed, but perhaps 12,000 
(pick your own number and do your own math). 12,000 ounces (oz) divided by 16   oz in a pound 
(lb)    750  lb. At 0.5  oz per bird, that’s 375  lb. However, if you believe the 30,000 bird number, at 
0.67  oz per bird (the arithmetic mean of weight), that would have been 1,256.25   lbs of birds. 
 Where did all those birds go? 
 Speaking more generally, can an opponent produce photographic or video evidence of large bird kills 
from anywhere in the literature? Have any of these studies describing massive bird kills been replicated? 
Fred Baumgartner’s 2003  Radio World article,  “ The Tower-Kill Bird Massacre Myth, ” perhaps conﬂ ating 
the 1963 report with the author’s 1974 experience, does bring to mind some relevant questions.
 The Author Says This Particular Legend May Be a Big Flap Over Nothing  
 [I grew up] in Eau Claire, Wis., home of the so-called  “ worst bird tower-kill incident of all time. ”  . . . 
 I believe my experience (or more precisely, the lack thereof) with the incident gives me the 
opportunity to ask some pointed questions about the veracity of the tower-kill story.  . . . 
 In 1974 an Eau Claire tower reportedly killed 30,000 birds in a single night. 
 Eau Claire does have one large tower, about 1,100 feet, belonging to WEAU(TV). By 1974, the 
TV station transmitted from a 2,000-footer 30 miles to the south. There was, and I believe still 
is, a 14-bay FM, belonging to WBIZ(FM), and a series of RPU, STL, two-way and other antennas 
on the tower. 
 While the reports never say which tower, it’s hard to imagine any other. Likewise, the type of 
bird(s), if mentioned, is usually reported as  “ song birds. ” 
 Towering Insanity 
 . . . I’m proud to call Eau Claire my hometown. I graduated from E.C. Memorial High School in 
1973 and spent my freshman year at the University of Wisconsin – Eau Claire, working part-time as 
a very bad DJ and neophyte technician at, you guessed it, WBIZ, whose antenna was on said tower. 

Possible Objections—Environmental Issues 219
 Worse, I was messing with ham radio and constantly biking over to Bushland Radio Specialties, 
located next to the Tower Bar, both less than a stone’s throw from the base of said tower. 
 I can’t remember if it was fall or spring 1974, but I do remember the story of the bird kill on 
the 10 o’clock news. They couldn’t have missed it, as the TV studio isn’t too much farther than 
the bar is from the tower, and the 16-foot studio door was always open outside in lieu of air 
conditioning. As I recall, it involved migrating geese (the Bob Dylans of songbirds, I suppose) on 
a foggy night. 
 I recall the use of the word  “ dozens, ” but never  “ 30,000 ” until years later. Geese are fairly big 
birds, and travel in a distinctive  “ V ” formation. As a kid, we counted the geese, and about 100 
to 200 in each formation is normal. 
 Stunt Geese 
 Having 150 to 300 of these formations, each competing for ﬂ ight plans to achieve a near 
100 percent fatality rate in one foggy night seems somewhat unbelievable to me. Paint yourself 
a mental picture of all these formations of geese, a quarter-mile across, ﬂ ying away from the 
tower, regrouping in the fog, rotating slowly around an imaginary pivot point miles away, 
relocating the tower (all the while out of sight) and making run after suicide run, each pass 
picking off a few birds at a time. 
 And why only in 1974? Why not every year, or every 10 years? Did tower avoidance become part 
of the survivors ’ genetic memory? Certainly the weather conditions that lead to this disaster have 
been repeated somewhere within the last quarter century. 
 A compressed goose takes up a good half a cubic foot — a bit smaller than the famed WKRP 
frozen turkeys. I don’t recall seeing, hearing or hearing about the 160 or so 10-yard capacity 
dump trucks that would be needed to haul them away. Certainly this would have made the 
National Enquirer ? Gee, if it took 4 hours, that’s 120-bird collisions and falls per minute, a 
 “ stranger than science ” 4-hour-long dead-bird blizzard in the fog. The stress on the tower had to 
at least damage the radomes and lamps. 
 Calculating in the spread pattern, the roof and car damage would be notable, too. A limp goose 
hitting the windshield of a car from an 800-foot power dive is serious, and Hasting’s Way, 
directly below, is a 35-mph, four-lane, heavily traveled major highway (U.S. 53). Certainly, as the 
density of dead birds and disabled cars built up, trafﬁ c would have ground to a halt. 
  The average car at the bar (and there would have been about a dozen) would take two hits. 
Across Hasting’s way, Wagner’s Bowling Alley surely would have had its 50 or so patrons up 
in arms. And Roland Bushland, who gave me good prices on things like caps and tubes, didn’t 
have anything to say about it, and I worked for his FM station most of 1974. Heck, Roland 
even had pictures of signiﬁ cant snowfalls tacked up on the wall in the sales area — a pile of birds 
would have ﬁ t right in. He would have talked about this for years even if his camera didn’t 
work. 
 It is possible the geese locked their wings and glided to the horizon  . . . but then they would be a 
mile from the tower and the affected area would be even bigger. 
 I’m not having a lot of trouble with the idea of 30 or even 300 birds that could have died in one 
night in 1974, although in my entire life around towers, I have yet to see even one tower-killed 
bird. It’s the 30,000 I need explained. 

220 Chapter 9
 Surely there must be some article about it in the  Eau Claire Leader Telegraph . Heck, half the kids in 
my UW-EC journalism classes had to scratch to string stories for 3 cents per printed line to get 
class credit. Someone must have taken a picture, driven the dump trucks or left the Tower Bar to 
slog through a wall of dead birds and remembered it. 
 It’s not the kind of thing you forget. It would be at least as memorable as that Hitchcock movie, 
 “ The Birds. ”  . . . 
 The Real Predators 
 I have, however, watched birds of prey work from a tower, killing off small furry mammals and 
tiny birds day after day. The 150-foot perching point probably gives birds an unfair advantage. 
I have had barns for some time, and I’ll testify that barn cats are very tough on birds, and cars, 
too. Honestly, each cat we’ve had surely dispatched more birds than all the towers I’ve worked 
with, tall and short, lighted and not. I’m not sure what part of the food chain I should prefer 
this week. 
 Even so, my wife and I have a dozen cat-proofed bird feeders and two birdbaths on our place, 
which we call Whippoorwill Farm. The ham tower and long wires are play toys to the birds. The 
birds are tougher on the antennas than the antennas are on the birds, from what I can see. 
 Extraordinary claims require extraordinary proof. Let’s see the cards. Bottom line? I sincerely 
doubt that the “ biggest bird kill ” ever happened. Proof should be easy to come by. Crop circles, 
cattle mutilations and tower bird kills sure look a lot alike from here . . . . 
 ( Source:   http://www.rwonline.com/reference-room/special-report/06_wrf_Feb1_part_1.shtml .)          
 9.1.3  Birds and Towers: Research and Litigation 
 Extensive research has gone into the questions of how many birds may have been killed by towers 
and why. The Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) of the U.S. Department of Interior has commissioned 
studies. In March 2000, the Ofﬁ ce of Migratory Bird Management (who knew you could manage 
bird migrations?) at FWS released “ Avian Mortality at Communications Towers: A Review of Recent 
Literature, Research, and Methodology, ” prepared by Paul Kerlinger, Ph.D., Curry  & Kerlinger, LLC, 
Cape May Point, NJ. A copy may be found on the accompanying CD, ﬁ lename Avian Mortality.pdf, 
and is available on the FWS website ( http://migratorybirds.fws.gov/issues/towers/review.pdf ). For other 
work from that ﬁ rm, see  http://www.currykerlinger.com/studies.htm . 
 In 1999, Bill Evans, for the Cornell University Laboratory of Ornithology, organized a scientiﬁ c 
conference called “ Avian Mortality at Communications Towers. ” It was held in conjunction with the 
annual meeting of the American Ornithological Union. Watch out for this, as an unethical opponent 
might take some unsupported claim made at that conference by an attendee and stand up in a hearing 
to say something like:  “ As Cornell University has reported . . . . ” You may be assured that the University 
did not endorse any of the claims made at the conference, many of which are available in the 
conference proceedings at http://www.towerkill.com/activism/workshop/index.html . 
 Speaking of Bill Evans, he originated the  Towerkill.com website. If you’ve ever wondered whether 
that site is a purely neutral collection of data or have had other questions about it, you might enjoy this 
report from Evans.

Possible Objections—Environmental Issues 221
 Backroads of a Night Flight Call Researcher: Part II  
 by  W.R.  Evans 
 [H]ere is the update on the towerkill situation that I had promised our esteemed editor. 
 Towerkill.com , a website I started with Bernie Guirey ( Verbosa brutalii ) back in April of 1998, is 
still percolating through the web at a good clip, serving 3000 pages a week. It peaked for a few 
weeks this summer at over 1000 pages per day when Popular Science  ran an article on the towerkill 
issue and included the URL. The continued steady trafﬁ c is totally amazing to me since the bulk of 
the site has remained unchanged since we put it up. The issue has survived and matured through 
an ascending concatenation of events. The tinderbox of unbridled tower construction, declining 
songbird populations, and a bloated 800  billion dollar a year broadcast and communications 
industry was ripe for a spark in late 1997. The serendipitous 5000 – 10,000 Longspur massacre 
in Kansas in January of 1998 catalyzed the blaze. Grassroots activism by former National 
Audubon policy ofﬁ ce employees and the American Bird Conservancy brought the issue to the 
Ornithological Council (policy arm of NA ornithological societies) in the form of a resolution in 
April of 1998 at the North American Ornithological Congress in St. Louis. Representatives from 
the four major ornithological societies in North America unanimously passed the resolution. 
A key point in its legalese was the request for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to address the 
problem with the FCC and FAA. This gave the FWS the support it needed to put resources toward 
the issue. Skilled FWS negotiators brokered a union of the key  “ stakeholders ” and after a year 
of meetings in DC there is now a fairly well-rounded mechanism to foster towerkill mitigation 
research. Meanwhile, the industry has been churning away building towers. 
 The irony in the whole matter is that it appears the big 1000  towerkills are not happening 
much anymore. The biggest single-night kill we have documented in the past three years of the 
informal New York State Towerkill Survey is ~65 birds (though only 40% of the tower’s perimeter 
was surveyable). The ﬁ ve long-term towerkill studies around the continent all concur that towers 
that once killed thousands of birds per year are now only killing hundreds. This has apparently 
convinced some ornithologists that the problem is not a problem anymore. A few years back 
I received an email to the  towerkill.com website from a guy on a Navy vessel in the Gulf. He 
had written me about a night when a huge swarm of migrants circled their lighted Navy vessel 
all evening. He found many dead birds on the deck in the morning and speculated about the 
hundreds that must have gone into the Gulf. He was concerned about the effect lighted oilrigs 
might be having on trans-Gulf migrants. With 4000  oilrigs in the Gulf, one would think that 
it would not be a good thing to have lights on the rigs because huge swarms of migrants might 
circle the rigs all night instead of making progress across the Gulf. And, of course, they have no 
place to refuel out over the open water — there very likely has been massive mortality associated 
with the rigs in the past. Anyway, I forwarded the email to the now head Louisiana State University 
(LSU) researcher of the Migration Across the Gulf Project, the project that places topnotch birders 
on oilrigs to document the species composition and numbers of migrants. We inquired about 
whether they had considered the effect the lights on the oilrigs might have on night migrating 
songbirds. Their website on the project did not indicate they were looking into this. Well, we hit 
a nerve and a minor brouhaha evolved. This LSU researcher was afraid of getting his funding 
pulled if we broadcast our concern [in his mind unproven] about the oilrig mortality. He said he 
believed the rigs might actually help migrants by giving them a place to rest during their crossing. 
During the ensuing fray of email, this LSU researcher said that towerkill is not a problem anymore 
and suggested that birds were adapting to the situation. Surprisingly, this notion has come up 
from other sectors of the ornithological community. Among the folks who have been active in the 
towerkill issue the past two years (FWS’s National Communications Tower Working Group), we 

222 Chapter 9
call this attitude BIRD 22 (in analogy to the novel Catch 22). Catch 22 is a term coined by Joseph 
Heller and the title of his Vietnam War 1 era novel that depicts the twisted truth that you can’t get 
out of the army by acting crazy because you are sane to want to get out of the army so therefore 
you can’t be crazy. Here, the metaphor translates somewhat to the fact that once bird populations 
have been sufﬁ ciently wiped out, there won’t be a problem with birds hitting towers or expending 
their fat reserves ﬂ ying around oilrigs all night, so there won’t be a reason to do anything about it. 
Kids will just grow up with fewer cool birds and that will be the way their world is. 
 At this point, I ask the reader to consider whether deer might ever adapt to heed a warning from 
auto headlights. Keep in mind there have been six motorcycle/deer accidents alone in Tompkins 
County already this year. It is therefore, for me, almost beyond the realm of possibility to think that 
birds may have adapted to towers in 40 years. More likely the lower towerkill mortality is due to 
two factors that now result in fewer birds congregating around towers on cloudy migration nights: 
1) lower continental populations of night migrating songbirds, and 2) the fact that there are now 
many more light sources for birds to congregate around, thus fewer birds congregating around 
any one light source. So as hundreds of new oilrigs go up out in the deep Gulf over the next ﬁ ve 
years and 5000  new towers a year spring up across the U.S. (and at the same pace in Central and 
South America in due time), the point I’d like to end this essay with is that the crux of the matter is 
not just about concern for bird populations. It is also about RESPECT for other branches of life on 
earth. If the average North American is driving down the road and sees a turtle crossing their path 
ahead, my hunch is that 99% of the men and 99.9% of the women will make an effort to swerve 
to miss it. Such conscience must, therefore, inherently exist for corporate America to do the same 
in its various and marvelous machicolations, though I don’t expect it will be the ornithologists on 
Exxon’s payroll that will champion the coalescence of this conscience toward effective mitigation. 
Source:   http://www.birds.cornell.edu/bcc/cup5.7.html         
 Avatar Environmental, LLC, released a study to develop the record on how, and to what extent, 
migratory birds may be affected by the nation’s communications infrastructure. In a section entitled 
 “ Conclusions and Recommendations, ” Avatar explained that,  “ Although most of the causes and 
possible solutions for increased avian mortalities associated with communication structures remain 
speculative, a few conclusions have been advanced with some degree of conﬁ dence within the scientiﬁ c 
community studying this problem. ” This report is included on the CD as ﬁ lename Avatar_Bird_Report
.pdf; it’s also available at  wireless.fcc.gov/reports/documents/avatar-migratory-bird-report10104.pdf . 
 In 2003, the FCC opened a docket on  “ Effects of Communications Towers on Migratory Birds ” (Dkt 
No. 03-187). On November 7, 2006, the Commission released a  Notice of Proposed Rulemaking , 
available in four parts at  http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-06-164A1.doc , 
 http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-06-164A2.doc ,  http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/
edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-06-164A3.doc , and  http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/
FCC-06-164A4.doc . On January 12, 2007, the FCC extended time to ﬁ le (DA-07-72). No one knows 
when the issue of migratory birds will reach a stable endpoint. 
 Meanwhile, the American Bird Conservancy has been litigating. As described by the Ninth Circuit 
Court of Appeals: 
 In 2002, American Bird ﬁ led a petition with the FCC formally requesting that the FCC consult with 
the appropriate agency regarding towers in the Gulf Coast region. In 2005, the FCC issued an order 
1  Actually, Catch-22 (with a hyphen) was about World War II and ﬁ rst published in 1961—before the Vietnam War. 

Possible Objections—Environmental Issues 223
denying in part, dismissing in part, and deferring in part American Bird’s claims. In February 2008 
the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit vacated the FCC’s order, 
bringing American Bird’s claims to a successful conclusion.  American Bird Conservancy, Inc. v. 
FCC , 516 F.3d 1027 (D.C. Cir. 2008). 
 Another lawsuit was ﬁ led by the American Bird Conservancy to challenge an FCC decision to issue 
licenses for seven communications towers in Hawaii. Presumably seeking to avoid the U.S. Circuit 
Court for the District of Columbia, where FCC matters are normally heard, American Bird sought 
to litigate in Hawaii, a jurisdiction where, one guesses, they thought they had a better chance of 
convincing a court the Endangered Species Act should trump action of the FCC. In a decision dated 
October 8, 2008, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals held that the matter must be brought in D.C. (see 
 http://caselaw.lp.ﬁ ndlaw.com/data2/circs/9th/0615429p.pdf ). 
 Here are the take-away lessons. Don’t ignore the Endangered Species Act. Be very careful in ﬁ lling out 
forms. If you expect a challenge, bring in a lawyer early. 
 9.1.4  Towers Under 200 Feet 
 If you review the literature, you’ll discover that, except for the most ardent opponents of towers, 
there is some support for the proposition that towers at heights less than 200 feet do not pose serious 
problems to bird populations. In a letter to the author (see  Figure 9.1 ), Massachusetts Audobon Society 
ﬁ eld ornithologist Wayne Peterson wrote:  “ Given the heights (less than 200 feet) of these towers, 
dangers to birds from amateur radio support structures is undoubtedly minimal. ” (The full text of the 
letter is available on the CD as ﬁ lename Audobon_Letter.pdf.) 
 9.2  Lighting 
 Now here’s a problem. 
 9.2.1  None 
 Some groups are enamored of the  “ Dark Skies Initiative. ” Those people are devoted to a concept they 
call “ Kill-a-Light ” (see  http://www.darkskyinitiative.org/ ). For those people, lights, or lights with 
shields that prevent light from drifting downward, are no solution at all. On the other hand, some 
people favor the concept of preventing airplanes from hitting tall structures. 
 9.2.2  Shields 
 The Vermont Environmental Board, in a decision afﬁ rmed by the Vermont Supreme Court,  In re Stokes 
Communications , 164 Vt 30, 664 A.2d 712 (1995) (see  http://libraries.vermont.gov/sites/libraries/
ﬁ les/supct/164/op94-208.txt ), has ruled that light shields could be required on a 303-foot tower, placed 
on a 93-acre parcel (one acre rented for the tower). The case does include one interesting comment, 
however:  “ It is fair to infer from the Board’s comment that it realized the FAA could preempt its light 
shield requirement. ” Thus the Court recognized that the FAA would have the ﬁ nal say on whether light 

224 Chapter 9
 Figure 9.1  Letter from Massachusetts Audobon Society ﬁ eld ornithologist Wayne Peterson noting that 
danger to birds from antenna-support structures less than 200 feet is  “undoubtedly minimal. ” 

Possible Objections—Environmental Issues 225
shields could be required. Nonetheless,  “ [b]ased on Stokes’s representations to the Board, light shields 
have been manufactured, purchased and installed for use on at least one other tower. There was no 
suggestion that the shields posed a technological, logistical or ﬁ nancial impediment. Stokes’s expert 
testiﬁ ed that with installed shields, the tower would comply with FAA regulations and likely receive 
FAA approval. ” Here’s a report of an example proof, although not for a tall communications tower: 
Medium Intensity Approach Lighting System with Runway Alignment Indicator Lights 
Bafﬂ ing Effort
 Personnel from the Airport Technology R & D Sub Team traveled to Vandenburg, Florida, to install 
metal shields, or bafﬂ es, on the ﬁ ve white strobe lights that make up the Runway Alignment Indicator 
Lights portion of the Medium Intensity Approach Lighting System with Runway Alignment Indicator 
Lights (MALSR). Homeowners living near the ﬁ nal approach area of the runway were complaining 
about excessive light shining on their houses from these ﬁ xtures. Project personnel were able to design, 
construct, and install metal shields that block the light from hitting the ground where the houses are 
located but do not affect the light needed by approaching aircraft. After the bafﬂ es were installed, 
project personnel used a small aircraft to view the lights from the air to ensure that the changes did not 
affect the performance of the lights.  — Jim Patterson, AJP-6312, (609) 485-4989, 2/15/08. 
 ( Source:   http://www.airtech.tc.faa.gov/news.asp .)   
 Readers should understand that we are in the early days of light shields. There is no consensus yet as to 
their effectiveness, in terms of shielding or cost. 
 9.2.3  Existing Lighting 
 Local ordinances, such as a proposed Beaufort County, SC, ordinance, often require all towers to 
comply with newly adopted marking and lighting requirements. Federal law (in the form of FCC and 
FAA rules) speciﬁ cally provides that new tower painting and lighting requirements shall not apply to 
towers built prior to July 1, 1996. Accordingly, local ordinances that require grandfathered towers to 
comply with new requirements may be seen as preempted and unenforceable. 
 9.2.4  Is the Subject of Lighting Preempted by Federal Law? 
 Some support exists for a ﬁ eld preemption argument relative to tower lighting and marking. In the 
Communications Act (47 USC  § 303(q)), Congress vested the FCC with the  “ authority to require the 
painting and/or illumination of radio towers if and when in its judgment such towers constitute  . . . a 
menace to air navigation. ” Moreover, the FCC’s Rules interpreting  § 303(q) conﬁ rm Congress ’ grant of 
jurisdiction (47 CFR § 17.22): 
 If an antenna installation is of such a nature that its painting and lighting in accordance with these 
speciﬁ cations  . . .  endanger rather than assist airmen, or are otherwise inadequate, the  Commission
will specify the type of painting and lighting  or other marking to be used in the individual situation. 
[Emphasis added.] 
 ( Source: Lemley, C.C. and Carr, B., How federal preemption helps tower owners,  Above Ground 
Level, October 2006;  http://www.wileyrein.com/publication.cfm?publication_id  13118. )

226 Chapter 9
 9.2.5  Lighting and Birds 
 The FWS guidelines provide:  “ Unless otherwise requested by the FAA, only white strobe lights should 
be used at night, and these should be the minimum number, minimum intensity, and minimum number 
of ﬂ ashes per minute (longest duration between ﬂ ashes) allowable by the FAA. Solid red or pulsating 
red incandescent lights should not be used, as they appear to attract night-migrating birds at a much 
higher rate than white strobe lights. ” However, it is not clear that this guideline was based on ﬁ eld 
testing.2 Its conclusion appears to be contradicted by recent ﬁ eld work. 
 A well-structured study was created by Joelle Gehring, Ph.D., 3 Senior Conservation Scientist, 
Zoology Section, Michigan Natural Features Inventory. Her disciplined study, with counts and 
photographs, shows that both red and white strobe lights result in the lowest number of bird carcasses 
found during a migration period at the base of towers. Blinking lights were next best. Red, blinking 
(nonstrobe) incandescent lights, with nonblinking lights on the same tower, were worst ( http://www.
fws.gov/midwest/greatlakes/windpowerpresentations/gehring.pdf ). The bottom line that appears to be 
emerging from her studies is: Turn off the steady red lights at night. Replace them with red strobes. 
 9.2.5.1  LED Lighting 
 Note that modern LED lighting does not spread light as much as older lighting. This is an area worthy 
of further investigation and engineering. 
 9.2.6  A New Approach to Avian – Tower Interaction 
 A novel idea would be to perform your own study. This would prove useful not only for immediate 
purposes but also for future situations that you may run into. If you don’t have a standing tower now, 
you might have to ﬁ nd a local tower owner who is willing to help out. Mount a camera about 5 feet 
from the top of the tower looking down. Let’s be smart and make sure it is not looking into the rising 
sun. The farther away from the tower you get, the better so you can see the base, but make sure the 
base is visible so a small bird-like object is distinguishable. 
 Now ﬁ gure out a way for this camera to take a picture every day at the same time. (I didn’t say this 
was going to be easy). A recommended time would be one hour after sunrise (this is close enough to 
2  One of these days the author will query either the Internet or the FWS, or both, to discover how they came up with this 
recommendation.
3     Dr. Gehring’s work is both thorough and ongoing. If the question of the best lighting to use in the presence of migrating birds is 
of interest to the reader, it would be best to check out the current state of her research. In 2007, she was named  “ Conservationist 
of the Year ” by the Detroit Audobon Society. In 2008, she presented at the Tower Technology Summit (held in conjunction with 
the CTIA Annual Meeting), and it is easy to predict that her work will shape the ﬁ eld. Here is her resume: Dr. Gehring designed 
and oversees a multi-year study of the variables associated with bird collisions at communication towers. Research results will
provide information on methods to reduce such collisions. She collaborates with the Michigan State Police, Michigan’s Ofﬁ ce 
of the Attorney General, Michigan Department of Natural Resources, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, National Fish and Wildlife 
Foundation, U.S. Forest Service, the FAA, and the FCC. Dr. Gehring is the facilitator for the Solving the Avian-Tower Interaction 
Committee (STATIC), a collaboration of tower industry representatives and environmental groups working to reach resolution on 
the issue of avian collisions with communication towers. She completed her doctorate in Wildlife Ecology at Purdue University 
in 2003. Her research focused on the ﬂ ight patterns and behavior of red-tailed hawks with direct implications and application to 
reducing bird-aircraft collisions. Dr. Gehring is also Adjunct Faculty in the Biology Department at Central Michigan University.

Possible Objections—Environmental Issues 227
darkness for overnight kills and light enough for a good picture). Perhaps you can program a camera 
function to make it easy. 
 Store the photos automatically, each day, to a computer hard drive. Review at leisure. Let your 
summer intern review the previous year’s 365 photos, issue a report and burn the photos to a CD. Start 
again. Now you have a protocol that could be implemented at a great number of stations and provide 
scientiﬁ cally useful information. It would also be a good science fair project. 
 Asking an engineer to take a photo each day is bad protocol. He could forget, he could get sick, he 
could go on vacation. He’ll never do it the same time each day, and the pictures could get lost. If the 
Society of Broadcast Engineers (SBE) comes up with a research protocol, somewhat akin to what I’ve 
outlined here, that would be serious science. So, Mr. Engineer, what’s a practical way to implement it? 
 Below is a series of letters and documents on the subject of bird strikes for you to review. Perhaps one 
of them will be useful at the hearing if someone should come up with a complaint about birds. 
(The letters are also on the CD as ﬁ lenames Fairfax Bird Letter.doc and Fraasch Bird Letter.doc.) 
The CD also contains a very comprehensive study done for Minnesota Public Radio by Svoboda 
Ecological Resources, ﬁ lename Svoboda MPR Radio Tower Study.pdf. Additional information may be 
gleaned by studying information available from the American Wind Energy Association ( http://www.
awea.org ).
 Fairfax Letter 
 From: Steve Fairfax, President, MTechnology 
 Date: Wed, 09 Dec 1998 
 Subject: Birds 
 Hi Fred; 
 I looked into this several years ago during my stint at Failure Analysis Associates. The basic 
answer is this: 
 Birds have lightning-fast reﬂ exes and very keen eyesight. They can ﬂ y through a thick woods they 
have never seen, in almost any kind of light or weather, and never touch a branch until they are 
ready to land. When they are ready to land, they will land precisely on the branch they want. If 
they are gregarious birds, like crows, that spot is often a matter of inches away from another 
bird. They can spot an insect or seed from scores of yards away, ﬂ y through a maze of branches, 
vines, and twigs, and land within inches of their target, every time. 
 Why are they so good at this? It’s what they do. They are birds. Their ﬂ ight control systems have 
evolved for thousands of centuries and are far more sophisticated and complex than the best 
mankind has to offer. Birds will almost certainly continue to outperform human aircraft controls 
for a long time to come. 
 Ham radio antennas, cell towers, telephone poles, tall trees, cliffs, wires, and other obstacles 
present no hazard to birds. Extremely ﬁ ne wires that are hard to see can potentially trick them, 
but remember that their eyesight is several times keener than ours, and their idea of  “ extremely 
ﬁ ne ” is correspondingly smaller than ours. Tower guys may make attractive roosting spots, but 
they pose no hazards. It requires specially constructed  “ mist nets ” to catch birds in ﬂ ight. Modern 

228 Chapter 9
 “ mist nets ” are so ﬁ ne that even the birds can’t see them in dim light, but it took the development 
of things like Kevlar to make threads that were ﬁ ne enough and strong enough for a practical net. 
 The one hazard that does confuse birds is reﬂ ection of skylight from glass windows and building 
facades. Birds use their eyes to determine their ﬂ ight path and sometimes will head for daylight 
reﬂ ected from a window, ﬂ ying into it at full speed. Some tall buildings hurt dozens of birds 
annually that way, and anyone who keeps a backyard birdfeeder has probably seen or heard a 
bird smack into their windows. This is due entirely to the false cue given by reﬂ ected skylight, not 
to the bird’s clumsiness. One can completely eliminate birds ﬂ ying into windows by putting a 
silhouette of a hawk on the window, which the birds will see and avoid. 
 As to more authoritative sources, there are tens of thousands of articles in the literature on bird 
ﬂ ight, published over the last 300 years or more. Chet Raymo answered a question along the 
lines of “ How can a bird ﬂ y through the trees without hitting anything? ” in the Boston Globe 
about a year ago. His answer was very close to mine, though more succinct. Anyone (and I 
do mean anyone) who has closely watched birds ﬂ y, land, feed, quarrel, and mate knows that 
birds are masters of their aerial environment. Mankind must resort to things like guns, rapidly 
spinning wind turbine blades, or high-speed aircraft to make a serious threat to a ﬂ ying bird. 
 The Audubon Society possesses the necessary information and credentials, but they have agendas 
that may discourage them from supporting your case. The fundamental point is this: Birds ﬂ y 
using their eyes, and they can easily see and avoid virtually any obstacle we choose to put up. 
 A few birds, like homing pigeons, use the Earth’s magnetic ﬁ eld for navigation. Navigation is 
not the same as ﬂ ight control. Big chunks of steel may distort the local magnetic ﬁ eld enough to 
cause a pigeon to veer off course, but so do many other things, including air currents, natural 
deposits of iron ore, and the sight of tasty seeds or fresh water on the ground below. Once they 
have ﬂ own out of the immediate vicinity of the steel, they will ﬁ nd their way home. 
 Last but not least: If towers were hazardous to birds, we would have found out about it 50 years 
ago, if not earlier. There have been towers and avid bird watchers around for a long time. 
 Here are a few citations: I like the ﬁ rst — the big predator birds  like the densest towers for building 
nests!
 AUTHORS: Steenhof, Karen; Kochert, Michael N.; Roppe, Jerry A. 
 TITLE: Nesting by raptors and common ravens on electrical transmission line towers 
 SOURCE:  The Journal of Wildlife Management , v 57 (Apr 1993) p 271 – 81 bibl il map 
 ABSTRACT: A study of the attraction to artiﬁ cial structures in nesting populations of raptors and 
common ravens ( Corvus corax ). A 596-km segment of a 500-kV transmission line in southern Idaho 
and Oregon was the chosen site. The breeding success of raptor and raven pairs, their ﬁ delity to 
a nest site, and the condition of the nest on successive years were assessed by helicopter survey. 
Those towers with a dense steel latticework, which afforded the nest greater protection from wind, 
were preferred. Provision of stable nesting substrates improved raptor nesting opportunities. 
Guidelines on how utility companies could increase nest site availability are provided. 
 AUTHORS: Osborn, Robert G.; Dieter, Charles D.; Higgins, Kenneth F. 
 TITLE: Bird ﬂ ight characteristics near wind turbines in Minnesota. 
 SOURCE:  The American Midland Naturalist , v 139 (Jan 1998) p 29 – 38 bibl il. 
 ABSTRACT: During 1994 – 1995, we saw 70 species of birds on the Buffalo Ridge Wind 
Resource Area. In both years, bird abundance peaked in spring. Red-winged blackbirds ( Agelaius 

Possible Objections—Environmental Issues 229
phoeniceus ), mallards ( Anas platyrhynchos ), common grackles ( Quiscalus quiscula ), and barn swallows 
(Hirundo rustica ) were the species most commonly seen. Most birds (82 – 84%) ﬂ ew above or 
below the height range of wind turbine blades (22 – 55  m). The Buffalo Ridge Wind Resource 
Area poses little threat to resident or migrating birds at its current operating level. 
 AUTHORS: Cuthill, Innes; Guilford, Tim 
 TITLE: Perceived risk and obstacle avoidance in ﬂ ying birds 
 SOURCE:  Animal Behaviour , v 40 (July 1990) p 188 – 90 bibl il 
 Frasch Letter 
 From: Steve Fraasch, K0SF 
 Fred: 
 First off, as of 9:45 CDT, 31 Aug, the Corcoran, MN city council voted NO ENVIRONMENTAL 
ASSESSMENT WORKSHEET REQUIRED!!! 
 Summary: 
 At the last minute, I managed to persuade a prominent birder, Mr. Robert Janssen, editor of 
32 years of the MN Ornithologist Union’s journal,  “ The Loon, ” and writer of numerous 
ornithology books, to appear and testify. He was able to counter the opponents ’ other expert’s 
testimony quite effectively. [The opponent] claimed the swans lived in my wetlands (I have no 
conﬁ rmed spottings) and were especially vulnerable to power lines, towers, and other structures. 
 The atmosphere was not as contentious as the previous 7 hearings; the speakers were limited 
to 3 – 5 minutes, with discussion limited to only the impacts alleged in the environmental quality 
board petition. 
 Of possible use to the fraternity (and now you’ll understand his value): Mr. Janssen conducted 
a 1-year study on short tower bird strikes on behalf of Minnesota Public Radio (MPR), who is 
applying to a metro suburb for 3 each 395 ’ AM towers. 
 Mr. Janssen’s study group found no strikes whatsoever, after studying 4 other tower sites (3 ea 
260 ’ AM, 127 ’ and 195 ’ AM, 295 ’ Cellular, and NSP power lines in nearby wetlands). 
 Conclusion: Towers of these heights cause insigniﬁ cant kills, if at all. 
 I read some of your e-mail testimonials last night to the council, but had all of them available 
for record. They’re all in my continuity ﬁ le, and I will condense them into a text ﬁ le to make 
available on request. 
 My mayor (who voted against the EAW) said that the ham’s testimony was relevant and crucial, 
since no other ham tower-bird strike data were available. 
 Also, heroes of the evenings are: Jay Bellows, K0QB, ARRL Volunteer Counsel. What else can 
I say about Jay? He’s simply the best. Dave Wester, K0IEA, for his appearance and testimony 
and Bob Garwood, N0BG, for his extremely relevant testimony of a 130 ’ tower he owned near 
a wildlife area, and endorsement letter from a DNR ofﬁ cial citing no affect of the tower on the 
trumpeter swans and other rare birds in the area. He had appeared without asking; only by 
reading about it in our local paper. I had forgotten all about that, but he showed on his own 
initiative.

230 Chapter 9
 Again, any and all of my experience and documentation are available upon request. Pardon 
the pun: Us “ birds of a feather ” need to stick together on tower actions. Legal action may be 
pursued in court, but we’re ready. 
 Very 73 and again thanks for the wonderful testimony, 
 Steve Fraasch, K0SF 
 Attachment: 
 “ Final Report: Study to Assess the Potential Effect of Three AM Radio Towers on Bird 
Migration and Local Bird Movements. ” Prepared in 1994 – 1995 by: 
 Franklin J. Svoboda  & Associates 
 25580 Nelsine Dr. 
 Shorewood, MN 55331 
 Specializing in Wetland Services and Wildlife/Vegetation Studies 
 (See ﬁ lename Svoboda Report.pdf on the CD.) 
1
250
700
700
800
1000
1000
5500
Wind
turbines
Communication
towers
Vehicles
Other
Buildings/
windows
Pesticides
High
tension
lines
House
cats
For every 10,000 birds
killed by human
activities, less than one death
is caused by a wind
turbine.
 Figure 9.2  Bird deaths caused by human activities.   (Source: Erickson, W. P. et al., 2002,  Summary and 
Comparison of Bird Mortality from Anthropogenic Causes , USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-
191, U.S Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C., 2005.) 
 Finally, in the interest of providing some perspective on the threat of towers to birds in relation to other 
causes of avian mortality, see  Figure 9.2  . 

231
 Possible Objections — Diversionary Tactics 
 10.1   Alternative Technologies — Internet, Satellites, Smaller Antennas 
 There’s always someone in the crowd at the hearing who is thinking and sometimes says:  “ Why 
do we have to grant a permit for a big antenna system when we have more modern methods of 
communications available, such as the Internet, cellular telephone, 1 satellites, and technologies that 
shrink the size of antennas? ”
 It is hard to believe that this person believes that this is a serious argument. He or she just wants to see 
you dance. It is another piece of spaghetti to throw against the wall to see if it sticks. Don’t get rattled. 
The strategy is always the same. Politely acknowledge the objection and then bury it: 
 Mr. Chairman, I share Mr. Smith’s interest in new technologies. We need them all, and the FCC, which 
licenses each of these services, thinks so, too. We don’t know now, when push comes to shove, which 
method of communications will prove effective to which individuals. Some will get their information one 
way; others another way. But, in any event, this is a land use proceeding and not a public policy discussion 
about effective use of the radio spectrum. That matter is exclusively reserved to the Federal government. 
The law does not require me to use methods that satisfy opponents. Instead, the law requires the Board 
test this application against the criteria in the ordinance, and this complaint does not address one of those 
criteria. What is proposed here is a permissible use in the zone, and I urge you to grant the application. 
 10.2   The Height Proposed Is Not Required 
 This objector who uses this line of attack is really saying that he or she doesn’t want to see something 
tall. This objection must be approached separately according to the service involved. 
 10.2.1  UHF and Microwave 
 Every panel should be able to understand, when you tell them, that UHF and microwave signals are 
strongly attenuated by leaves, trees, buildings, and hills. Especially hills. It is an excellent idea to use 
CHAPTER 10 
1  The author has heard it argued that we don’t need new AM or FM broadcast antennas, because all the news you need in a time 
of emergency can be obtained from an RSS text feed to your cell phone. Conversely, one supposes, a similarly false argument 
could be fashioned to say that we don’t need cell phones, because all the news you need to learn in time of emergency is best 
carried by broadcast stations, and not by clogging up cellular telephone circuits. Lest there be doubt, the correct answer is that 
we need both. 

232 Chapter 10
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) topographic information to portray intervening landmasses that are 
higher than your location or higher than the target location. You could also print out a wide topographic 
view from the TopoZone website, now part of  http://www.trails.com . Another source for a graphical 
representation of intervening terrain is  http://www.heywhatsthat.com . Look for “ Path Proﬁ ler. ” Enter 
your two way points and then click  “ Show Proﬁ le. ” Additional terrain mapping information can be 
found using these websites: 
 • 
 http://maptech.mytopo.com/land/index.cfm?CFID  11614376 & CFTOKEN  77150389 , or 
 http://mapserver.maptech.com/homepage/index.cfm 
 • 
 http://maps.live.com , a site that has terriﬁ c aerial photographs to show the forest in the 
direction of interest (i.e., you need to get over the trees), sponsored by Microsoft 
 • 
  http://www.wikimapia.org , which has good aerial photographs, powered by Google 
 • 
  http://acme.com/mapper / (check out the  “ Terrain ” function) 
 • 
Your state’s GIS website (in Massachusetts, it is  http://www.mass.gov/mgis/Cool_
Interactive_Maps_on_the_Web.htm , which has a collection of links you might useful) 
 A topographic map presentation can show the need for height to improve a path that requires line-of-sight 
communications.
 Figure 10.1 shows a path proﬁ le created using DeLorme  Topo software for a microwave path from a 
spot in Whately, MA, to Springﬁ eld, MA, to the south. The challenge was to get over the immediately 
abutting hill. 
 The experimental software program  Radio Mobile Deluxe, created as freeware by VE2DBE, can also be 
used to analyze terrain obtained from the USGS digital elevation map (DEM) database for VHF/UHF 
line-of-sight capability. The program has a fairly steep learning curve, particularly when it comes to how 
to access the necessary terrain databases. However, it is also very powerful, especially when you’re trying 
to make a compelling, full-color presentation to a Planning Board showing that your path to a particular 
repeater or packet node is blocked by the intervening terrain. See  http://www.cplus.org/rmw/english1.html . 
For further discussion of free tools, see  http://freegeographytools.com /2007/mapping-radio-coverage-
and-viewing-it-in-google-earth. You might also wish to try SPLAT! ( http://splat.ecok.edu/). 
 If a cellular telephone company will be a tenant, their engineering departments can all produce 
coverage maps. If one is available to you, don’t leave home without it. 
 Speaking generally, maps are a good thing. 
 10.2.2  AM Broadcasting 
 For AM broadcast stations where there is an objection to the height, every applicant must be completely 
familiar with  Koor v. City of Lebanon , 148       NH 618 (2002), 813       A.2d 418 (N.H. 2002),  http://www.
courts.state.nh.us/supreme/opinions/2002/0212/koor152.htm . In this case, Koor Communications, Inc., 
had been granted a 50 KW (daytime) license for an AM broadcast station at 720   kHz. For this frequency, 
the minimum height permitted under the FCC’s regulation at 47 CFR  § 73.189 (b)(2)(ii) (2001) was 

Possible Objections–Diversionary Tactics 233
Tower
561 ft
Direction of interest
Demonstrating the need for height due to an intervening hill
520 ft
470 ft
0 0.18 mi
4.87 mi
Wpt  Waypoint
9.74 mi
14.61 mi
19.48 mi
24.35 mi
29.22 mi
34.09 mi
Wpt2
Wpt3
3-D Topo Quads Copyright © 1999 DeLorme Yarmouth, ME 04096
 Figure 10.1  Topographic proﬁ le of the propagation path from W1UK’s location in Coventry, C  T, to a 
repeater in Bolton, C  T. It shows that a hill about 6.7 miles away would obscure a direct line-of-sight path. 
This hill could be overcome if the repeater were mounted on a 100-foot-high tower and if W1UK were 
allowed to put up a 200-foot tower!  
559 ft
380 ft
230 ft
60 ft
0 mi
5 mi
10 mi
15 mi
It is possible to show intervening terrain
20 mi
25 mi
28.43 mi
Wpt2
Wpt1

234 Chapter 10
266 feet. That regulation is accompanied by a chart showing the minimum height for all frequencies in 
the AM band, found at 47 CFR  § 73.190 (Fig. 7) (2001). As the Court noted:  “ At no frequency does the 
minimum height appear to fall below forty-four meters or approximately 144.36 feet. ” 
 Unfortunately, the city’s zoning ordinance prohibited any antenna at a height greater than 42 feet. 
Thus, the Supreme Court of New Hampshire found that there was a conﬂ ict between local and 
federal law.  “ Accordingly [wrote the Court], we conclude that for anyone seeking to operate a new 
FCC-licensed AM station in the city, compliance with both the zoning ordinance and federal law is a 
physical impossibility. ” The Court continued:  “ In the case of AM broadcast stations, there are detailed 
regulations mandating minimum antenna heights,  see , e.g., 47 CFR  § § 73.189, 73.190 (2001), at least 
in lieu of proof to the FCC that required minimum ﬁ eld strengths can be achieved by an antenna of less 
than the speciﬁ ed minimum height, see 47 CFR  § § 73.186, 73.189 (2001). Such detailed regulations 
weigh in favor of a ﬁ nding of preemption. ”
 The Court ruled that the local zoning ordinance was preempted by the FCC’s regulations. Koor’s brief to 
the Supreme Court of New Hampshire may be found at  http://www.antennazoning.com/docs/ koor-brief-
ﬁ nal.doc . The brief  amicus curiae by the Society of Broadcast Engineers is at  http://www.antennazoning
.com/docs/koor-amicus.doc . The City’s brief is at  http://www.antennazoning.com/ docs/lebanon-brief.pdf , 
and a reply brief by Koor is at  http://www.antennazoning.com/docs/koor-reply-brief-ﬁ nal.doc . The 
decision ( http://www.antennazoning.com/docs/koor-decision.doc ) and all four briefs may be found on 
the accompanying CD. 
 As a side note: When it was all over, Koor sought to recover its attorney ’ s fees on the grounds that it 
had asserted a First Amendment right. Though the Court ruled in favor of Koor on preemption grounds 
and never reached the First Amendment claim, Koor argued that it had presented a civil rights claim, 
had been the prevailing party, and was due its attorney fees under 42 USC  § 1983. The argument did 
not prevail. The Court ruled that it had not been asserted in timely fashion. Your author thinks that 
the argument should be tried again, as the New Hampshire Supreme Court never reached the First 
Amendment claim, for either preemption or attorney’s fees. 
 Since the Koor decision, there have been two major developments at the FCC: acceptance for certain 
purposes of the KinStar Antenna and the Valcom Whip. 
 10.2.3  The KinStar Antenna 
 For a single vertical, the FCC has accepted a proof of performance in accordance with 47 CFR 
 § 73.160(b)(2), for a  “ new, efﬁ cient low-proﬁ le AM ” antenna, as described at the 2003 National 
Association of Broadcasters (NAB) show in a paper by James K. Breakall, Ph.D., of Pennsylvania 
State University ( http://www.star-h.com/publications/nabpaper.pdf ). That paper describes the KinStar 
antenna at 1680  kHz as  “ 45 feet high by 105 feet in radius, with four L-shaped radiating wires arranged 
symmetrically around the center ” (see  Figure 10.2 ). Additional papers describing this antenna may 
be found listed at http://www.star-h.com/publications/papers.html . The FCC Public Notice for this 
antenna says that it will have a height of 75 feet at 1000   kHz. At 550  kHz, it would, of course, be even 
taller. A complete ground system and fencing are still required. 
 In 2005, the FCC issued its public notice approving the use of the KinStar antenna by Class B, C, 
and D AM medium-frequency broadcasting stations in the United States. Stations can immediately 

Possible Objections–Diversionary Tactics 235
apply for licensing of the KinStar and do not need to submit current distribution or ﬁ eld-strength proof 
measurements. The full text of the announcement is available in PDF format at  http://hraunfoss.fcc
.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-05-2741A1.pdf  ( http://www.star-h.com/news/press.html ). 
 Applicants may only specify the KinStar antenna for nondirectional use, so it is not an answer to those 
who require a directional (multi-antenna) array. 
Attention engineers: If your local bylaw speciﬁ es a maximum height of perhaps 36 feet, this antenna 
does you no good anywhere in the AM broadcast band (550 to 1700  kHz). 
Attention lawyers: You may not be an engineer, too. Don’t even think about discussing this antenna in 
public before you speak with the station engineer. 
Attention station management: One of these antennas, made of wires, cannot support cellular
telephone antennas, which can be a signiﬁ cant source of income to a nondominant AM radio station. In 
the 2009 marketplace, rental income from Commercial Mobile Radio Service (cellular)
antennas placed on an AM tower could make the difference between station viability and
station death. 
 10.2.3.1  The Crossed-Field Antenna (CFA) 
 Do not confuse the KinStar antenna with the crossed-ﬁ eld antenna (CFA), or E-H antenna, developed 
in the 1980s by Dr. Maurice Hately, F.M. Kabbary, and B.G. Stewart. As reported by Cris Alexander, 
 Figure 10.2  The KinStar low-proﬁ le antenna developed by STAR-H Corporation.   (Photograph courtesy 
STAR-H Corporation; Lancaster, PA;  http://www.star-h.com .) 

236 Chapter 10
Director of Engineering, Crawford Broadcasting Co., Denver, CO, in  Radio World Engineering Extra
(August 20, 2008, p. 28 ff), despite claims of deployment in Egypt, India, and China, this antenna has: 
 not made any inroads into the U.S., despite a push to do so back in the late 1990s. The reason: to my 
knowledge, no one has ever made any scientiﬁ cally valid radial ﬁ eld strength measurements on the 
CFA that demonstrated usable performance. Such measurements are the only way to prove the inverse-
distance ﬁ eld of the antenna. 
 Indeed, the FCC would require a pretty hefty set of measurement data before it would authorize such 
an antenna. I can’t help but wonder why the proponents have never gone to the trouble of making 
and publishing such radial measurements. Could it be that the antenna does not produce the required 
minimum 282  mV/m/kW at 1 km? Without measurements, there’s no way to know. 
 Whether you believe in the CFA antenna or not, lacking the proof of performance required by 47 CFR 
 § 73.189(b)(2)(ii), which has never been produced, it cannot be licensed. Or, as a headline in  Radio
World (March 31, 1999) put it:  “ Is this AM Antenna for Real? ”
 After ﬁ eld experiments with several designs of CFA in 2008, Alexander ( op. cit.) reported: 
 I remain  “ hopefully skeptical ” about the whole thing, hoping it will work but believing in my heart 
that the laws of physics can’t be cheated; that a very low element radiation resistance will lead to very 
high losses in the matching network and wiring, creating in essence a high-Q dummy load. 
 For nonengineers in the crowd, that means the results of the inventors could not be replicated by other 
researchers, and the claims remain unveriﬁ ed. 
 10.2.4  The Valcom Antenna 
 Staying within the laws of physics, however, Valcom Manufacturing Group, of Guelph, Ontario, has 
produced an 85-foot, coil-loaded, self-supporting whip, Model V-33085AM/CL2 ( http://www.valcom-
guelph.com/products/V-33085AM-CL2.html ), which has been tested and proven to meet FCC ﬁ eld-
strength requirements for Class B or Class D stations at frequencies of 1200   kHz or higher. 
It cannot be licensed for frequencies below 1200   kHz. The brochure for this antenna may be found at 
 http://www.valcom-guelph.com/products/downloads/brochure/V33085AM-CL2%20(BR267%20rev%20A).pdf . 
A 75-foot version may be used at frequencies from 1390 to 1700   kHz. 
 A ﬁ berglass self-supporting whip antenna with loading coil and top loading, the Valcom whip is 
described by the manufacturer as  “ ideally suited for use as an STA or backup antenna. ” Reference data 
for the antenna show limitations on its power handling capability. There is no reason to believe that it 
can be licensed for a directional array. Further testing and data will be required to see if FCC minimum 
performance requirements can be achieved. 
 The FCC Public Notice for the use of this antenna, issued February 22, 2008, may be found at DA 
08-448 ( http://fjallfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-08-448A1.doc ).
 10.2.5  A Side Track on the Question of AM Preemption 
 Lest anyone think that the area of AM preemption presents settled law and that the lawyering in 
this area is easy, potential proponents should be aware of some brilliant lawyering on behalf of a 

Possible Objections–Diversionary Tactics 237
group of opponents to an AM radio station. Through Atty. Barry Friedman, Damascus Residents 
for Responsible Tower Siting (DRRTS) petitioned the FCC for a declaratory ruling. As you read it, 
and consider the pages that follow, notice the beauty of the request, which was truly a very limited 
request, applying to a narrow set of circumstances, and circumstances where, unlike the  Koor case, AM 
broadcasting does not, in the documents, appear to be banned from the entire municipality. Thus, the 
matter seems more akin to a respect for a historic district than an agreement that the FCC’s regulations 
would not result in a preemption in other circumstances. One year later, the FCC replied. Thereafter, 
another ﬁ ling questioned the FCC ruling, for among other reasons, the fact that the FCC got the facts 
wrong. The subject is interesting and, as yet, not completely ﬂ eshed out. 
 The September 2005 letter from Atty. Friedman is presented as  Figure 10.3 , and the FCC’s September 
2006 response is presented as  Figure 10.4 . 
 Figure 10.3  Letter from Atty. Friedman to FCC.  

238 Chapter 10
 Here is the objection to the FCC ruling I ﬁ led in October 2006. 
 
 Before the 
 
 Federal Communications Commission
 
 Washington, D.C. 20554
 In the Matter of  
 ) 
 
  ) 
Petition by Thompson Hine LLP for a 
 ) 
Declaratory Ruling on Whether Zoning Rules   
) 
  DA 06-1920
on Broadcast Towers Would be Preempted by  
) 
the Commission  
)  
 Figure 10.4  September 2006 FCC ruling. 

Possible Objections–Diversionary Tactics 239
 To: The Commission
PETITION FOR RECONSIDERATION OR WITHDRAWAL
 Alternative Technologies — Internet, Satellites, Smaller Antennas  ...........................................   1 
 The Height Proposed Is Not Required .................................................................................   2 
UHF and Microwave  ........................................................................................................   2 
AM Broadcasting  .............................................................................................................   3 
   The Kinstar Antenna ......................................................................................................  4 
   The Crossed-Field Antenna (CFA) ..................................................................................  6 
  The Valcom Antenna .....................................................................................................  7 
   A Side Track on the Question of AM Preemption ............................................................  8 
 I. SUMMARY .......................................................................................................................   9 
 II. BACKGROUND  ............................................................................................................   10 
 A. This Petition and Petitioner  ....................................................................................   10 
  B. This Proceeding .....................................................................................................   12 
    1. History  ................................................................................................................  12 
   2. Omissions. ..........................................................................................................  14 
III. HARM BY MISQUOTING  ............................................................................................   17 
 IV. RELIEF SOUGHT  .........................................................................................................   18 
      The First Amendment Argument     ...............................................................................   24 
 We Don’t Need Another Broadcast Station   .......................................................................   27 
 I. SUMMARY 
 Acting under  § 1.2 of the Commission’s Rules, in response to a letter request on behalf of 
Damascus Residents for Responsible Tower Siting, Inc. ( “ DRRTS ” ),      1 the Media Bureau has
issued a Declaratory Ruling, DA 06-1920, dated September 26, 2006. 
 There was no Public Notice (which would have allowed for comment by the numerous parties 
affected). The Ruling was improvidently granted because it neither terminates a controversy, nor 
does it remove uncertainty. The Ruling is not responsive to the request presented to the Bureau. 
Deﬁ nitions, and an explanation of a variety of preemptions resulting from Commission, 
Congressional and Court action, are critical to an understanding of the law involved. Without 
1   Koor, on information and belief, submits that DRRTS, acting through Thompson Hine, LLP, is the real party in interest 
in this matter. It is a matter of great curiosity to Koor as to why the name of the party and its more detailed purposes 
were omitted. Among other reasons to believe that DRRTS sought this Order is the following reporting from Maryland 
Community Newspapers Online, cited on the DRRTS web site: 
 
Based on FCC precedent, the Damascus residents ’ group thinks the FCC may not renew the building permit. 
 
 Their lawyer wrote to the FCC for an opinion on whether it thinks an FCC permit would supercede county 
regulations. The issue would pit environmental law against communications rules. 
 
 “ It is true that to date the commission has not adopted any rules or regulations that preempt local zoning 
rules affecting construction of broadcast towers, ” Donna C. Gregg, FCC chief of the media bureau, 
responded in a Sept. 26 letter. 
 http://www.gazette.net/stories/100406/damanew213914_31941.shtml (last visited October 23, 2006) 

240 Chapter 10
deﬁ nitions and explanations, the statement of the law is incomplete. While the Order of DA 
06-1920 is both brief and technically correct, matters left unstated have already caused it to be 
misused and misquoted — cited for what it does not hold. Finally, it is being read as predictive 
of what the Commission would do at a future time on a matter that has been before the 
Commission for some years, extensively briefed, but not decided. 
 This Order should be reconsidered and reissued with appropriate context, or withdrawn.
To avoid harms resulting from misquotation, this matter should be handled on an expedited 
basis.
 II. BACKGROUND 
 A. This Petition and Petitioner 
 Pursuant to 47 CFR  § 1.106, Koor Communications, Inc. ( “ Koor ” ) seeks reconsideration 
or withdrawal of DA 06-1920 ( “ the Ruling ” ), issued by the Chief of the Media Bureau. 
The original ruling may be found at:  http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/
DA-06-1920A1.pdf 
 Koor is the holder of four AM broadcast licenses and one FM broadcast license. At great 
expense, after a great deal of time, Koor succeeded before the Supreme Court of New Hampshire in 
obtaining a ruling that Commission Rules may, and did in its case, impliedly preempt local 
zoning rules. 
 In the case of AM broadcast stations, there are detailed regulations mandating minimum antenna 
heights, see, e.g., 47 CFR  § § 73.189, 73.190 (2001), at least in lieu of proof to the FCC that 
required minimum ﬁ eld strengths can be achieved by an antenna of less than the speciﬁ ed minimum 
height, see 47 CFR  §  § 73.186, 73.189 (2001). Such detailed regulations weigh in favor of a ﬁ nding 
of preemption. 
Koor Communication v. City of Lebanon , 148  N.H. 618, 623 (2002) 
 Referencing 47 CFR  § 1.106 (b)(1), Koor submits that it is a party adversely affected by any 
Order that may further embolden the City of Lebanon in its previously stated opposition to 
the construction of new broadcast towers anywhere in the City. When counsel for the City 
of Lebanon stood before the New Hampshire Supreme Court to argue that Koor was merely 
choosing to erect its antenna system in Lebanon, and that it was not necessary for the good of 
Lebanon because the City had plenty of communications already, a New Hampshire Supreme 
Court judge asked:  “ Where is he supposed to put his towers? Vermont? ” That the animus
toward broadcast towers exhibited by the City of Lebanon in the past is undiminished is
shown by the extraordinary requirements of Lebanon’s new zoning bylaw directed at
broadcast towers. 
 At present, in Lebanon, NH, the new bylaw (passed  after Lebanon lost the preemption case 
to Koor) provides that broadcast towers can only be in the Rural Lands zone (and not in the 
residential, industrial or commercial zones) 2 . The bylaw also provides that the broadcast towers 
2   Koor notes, with irony, that a broadcast tower in Lebanon, NH, may  not be located next to a cement plant, or other heavy 
industry plant, the town dump, in an industrial park, and so forth. Koor speculates that limiting the location of broadcast (and
only broadcast) towers was designed to cause a permanent and irreconcilable conﬂ ict with other portions of the zoning bylaw 
designed to protect scenic vistas (whatever they may be and however delineated). In other words, a broadcaster may only build 
in a rural district, and the bylaw discourages contruction in the rural districts as incompatible with preserving the rural district. 

Possible Objections–Diversionary Tactics 241
must meet additional burdens applicable only to broadcast towers , by requiring ﬁ ndings in addition to 
the usual ﬁ nding required of all Special Exceptions. 3
 B. This Proceeding 
 1. History 
The Request. This proceeding began with the submission of a Request for Declaratory Ruling, 
dated and received at the Commission on September 26, 2005 ( “ the Request ” ). See Attachment 
A. The original ruling may be found at: http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-
06-1920A1.pdf
Lack of Public Notice. Referring to 47 CFR  § 1.106(b)(1), Koor believes that this matter was 
not the subject of a Public Notice. Thus, no previous opportunity to comment was afforded 
to Koor, to other broadcast interests who were heavily involved in the 1997 proceeding 
mentioned by Thompson Hine in its request, Thompson Hine Letter at 1, 4 nor to others whose 
towers might be confused with broadcast towers by a lay zoning board. 5 Furthermore, Birach 
Broadcasting (WDMV), the party most immediately affected by the Order, could have 
responded had this matter been on Public Notice, yet does not appear to have been able to 
participate. 
The Requester. The Order recites: 
 According to the request, your client is participating in the development of modiﬁ ed local zoning 
regulations addressing the construction of new broadcast television towers. 6
3   Lebanon’s bylaw requires ﬁ ndings: 
a. 
That the proposed height of the antenna and associated structures such as towers is the minimum height permitted 
by federal regulations for the frequency and type of broadcast signal to be used by the applicant, in light of the 
best available technology, and that no additional height is being sought solely to increase the range of the signal 
b. 
That there are no feasible alternative sites within the RL [Rural Lands] Districts of the City where the facility 
could be located with signiﬁ cantly less visual impact on the neighborhood and City as a whole, due to reduced 
height needs, reduced visibility, or other site advantages. 
 
To show that these standard are met, the applicant shall furnish the Board with a written impact analysis prepared by 
a professional radio frequency engineer familiar with both the technology and the regulatory framework for the type 
of station proposed. The analysis shall not be conclusory, but shall detail the applicant’s speciﬁ c objectives, and shall 
evaluate and compare speciﬁ c alternative technologies, and the suitability and visual impacts of speciﬁ c alternative 
sites within the City, using viewshed maps and photo simulations. The Board of Adjustment may, at the applicant’s 
expense, hire a person, with such qualiﬁ cations as the Board may determine, to review the analysis. The Board may 
require additional information as needed to decide the case. 
 http://lebanonnh.virtualtownhall.net/public_documents/lebanonnh_plandocs/050703%20zoning%20ord.pdf (last visited 
October 23, 2006). 
4   Thompson Hine no doubt refers to the NPRM,  “ Preemption of State and Local Zoning and Land Use Restrictions on the 
Siting, Placement and Construction of Broadcast Transmission Facilities, 62 Fed. Reg. 46241 (proposed August 19, 1997), 
 http://www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Mass_Media/Notices/1997/fcc97296.html (last visited October 23, 2006).
5   Examples of non-broadcast towers that might be confused with broadcast towers by a lay board include radio amateurs (but 
see 47 CFR  § 97.1), and CMRS — including cellular telephone (but see 47 USC  § 332). 
6   DRRTS actually opposes the construction of AM broadcast towers, and did not mention  “ the construction of new  television
towers in its request. ” [ Emphasis supplied .] In this respect, the Order is not responsive to the request. 

242 Chapter 10
 Koor believes that the petition was actually prompted by a proposal to build a multiple tower 
AM broadcast station in Damascus, MD. See  http://drrts.com . A hyperlink on that web page refers 
to DA 06-1920. Koor believes that the Thompson Hine client, though unnamed and benignly 
described in the initial petition only as “ a non-proﬁ t citizens group, ” was actually Damascus 
Residents for Responsible Tower Siting, Inc. ( “ DRRTS ” ), 26501 Ridge Road, Damascus, MD 
20872, which describes itself this way: 
 [DRRTS] Is a non proﬁ t corporation that was formed to ﬁ ght tall AM radio broadcasting towers in 
Damascus. The ﬁ ght began 10 years ago, and will continue until Damascus is free of this menace. 
 http://drrts.com/aboutus.html (last visited October 5, 2006) 
 DRRTS does not seek  “ responsible siting ” of broadcast antennas in Damascus. It seeks a 
prohibition, a  “ Damascus  . . . free of this menace. ” DRRTS has also raised, at the local level, 
but not before the Commission, arguments asking local authorities to ignore Commission 
jurisdiction and rulings, by claiming that “ These towers will:  . . . Negatively affect quality of life 
(radio transmission interference). ”  http://drrts.com (last visited October 23, 2006). 
Prior Commission Consideration. In 1997, preemption of local zoning was the subject of a petition 
for a rulemaking by the Association for Maximum Service Television and the National Association 
of Broadcasters,  In the Matter of Preemption of State and Local Zoning and Land Use Restrictions on the Siting, 
Placement and Construction of Broadcast Station Transmission Facilities,  MM Docket No. 97-182,  http://
www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Mass_Media/Notices/1997/fcc97296.pdf . Considerable effort by numerous 
parties went into consideration of that NPRM. In the words of Thompson Hine, the Commission 
 “ has elected not to render a decision on this subject. ” Thompson Hine Letter, at 1. 
 Failing to render a decision is not the same thing as rendering a decision. 
   We also reject the city’s argument that the FCC’s failure to adopt proposed preemptive rules that 
would have covered all broadcast facilities indicates a lack of federal preemption. See Preemption 
of State and Local Zoning and Land Use Restrictions on the Siting, Placement and Construction of Broadcast 
Transmission Facilities, 62 Fed. Reg. 46241 (proposed August 19, 1997). We have noted that  “ [t]he 
legislature expresses its will by enacting laws, not by failing to do so. ”   Merrill v. Manchester , 114  N.
H. 722, 728 (1974). The same holds true for the FCC and its promulgation of regulations. 
Koor , ibid., at 624. 
 In normal usage, a request for a declaratory order may be helpful in  “ removing uncertainty. ”
47 CFR § 1.2. Here, however, the issuance of the Order, in its brevity, with resulting misuse,  creates
uncertainty. 
 2. Omissions. 
Other Preemptions. While the Request mentions preemptions for CMRS (47 USC  § 332) and 
DBS dishes (47 CFR  § 1.4000), the Request does not mention: 
 • 
 the preemption for VHF and UHF antennas under the OTARD rule of 47 CFR  § 1.4000, 
 • 
  the preemption for amateur radio found at 47 CFR  § 97.15(b) and in  “ PRB-1 ” at 
http://wireless.fcc.gov/services/index.htm?jobprb-1 & idamateur & page1 ,  et seq. , and 
 • 
 the implied preemption for AM broadcast towers (the cause of the Damascus situation) 
caused by an actual conﬂ ict between local zoning and 47 CFR  § § 73.45, 73.189, and 
73.190,  Koor Communication v. City of Lebanon , 148  N.H. 618 (2002). 

Possible Objections–Diversionary Tactics 243
 As a result of these omissions from both the Request and the Order, a lay reader might conclude, 
as DRRTS has, that  “ a review of Commission decisions evidences a clear desire to defer to local 
ofﬁ cials on such matters. ” Thompson Hine letter, at 1. 
  Deﬁ nitions. The phrase  “ broadcast towers ” is not deﬁ ned in the Order. It is a term of art. Koor 
submits that, from its experience, vividly recalled, perhaps every member of every board it faced in 
Lebanon, NH, as well as counsel for the City (particularly counsel for the City), was unfamiliar with the 
distinctions between broadcast towers (whether for AM, FM or TV), amateur radio towers, CB towers, 
CMRS towers, non-communications towers subject to FAA/FCC rules for marking and lighting, and so 
forth. As written, the Order is likely to sew unending confusion at the local zoning level. 
The Order is incomplete. It does not address the 1997 proceeding. It does not say that 
preemption can occur by congressional action. It does not say that preemption can occur by 
implication when there is an actual conﬂ ict between local and federal rules. It leaves open the 
opportunity for municipal mischief with respect to the conversion from analog to digital signals, 
when the conversion requires new  “ construction ” to accommodate broader bandwidth for an 
AM signal, or a second antenna for a different TV channel. 
 The Request speaks to the preservation of  “ agriculturally zoned land and scenic vistas. ” Koor has 
no idea as to what the deﬁ nition of a  “ scenic vista ” may be, nor is it possible to discern from the 
Order whether this represents the view  from the site, or the view  to the site. The Order virtually 
invites local zoning authorities to bypass, perhaps ignore, the SHPO (State Historic Preservation 
Ofﬁ ce) process of the NEPA (National Environmental Policy Act) of 1969. 
 There are substantial public policy issues involved with respect to tall towers. The question must 
be asked: If you can’t put a tower on agriculturally zoned land, and no parcels large enough 
exist in commercially zoned areas, and there may be no industrially zoned land, and there 
is no  “ broadcast overlay district, ” and no parcels large enough in residential areas, then the 
consequence is that broadcast (whether AM, FM or TV) antennas may be effectively prohibited. 
 III. HARM BY MISQUOTING 
 It was never the intention of the Congress or the Commission to allow the prohibition of local 
broadcast coverage. Yet there is good reason to fear that a misreading of this Order will result 
in effective prohibition of new broadcast towers in many communities. This would be in direct 
conﬂ ict with the basis and purpose of the FCC, as found in the Communications Act, which is  “ to 
provide for the use of [radio transmission channels]. ” (Emphasis added.) See generally 47 U.S.C. 
 § 151 (purpose of the Act includes  “ to make available, so far as possible . . . a rapid, efﬁ cient
Nation-wide and world-wide radio communication service with adequate facilities ” ); 47 U.S.C. 
 § 157 ( “ It shall be the policy of the United States to encourage the provision of new technologies 
and services to the public. ” ).  http://www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Mass_Media/Notices/1997/fcc97296
.html at footnote 20 (last visited October 23, 2006). 
 It may be the Commission’s intention to restate existing law and policy in the Order. Nonetheless, 
the Order quotes the Request that  “ local zoning rules which are predicated on land use preservation, 
including preservation of agriculturally-zoned land and scenic vistas, would not be preempted by the 
Commission. ” The Order then holds:  “ It is true that, to date, the Commission has not adopted any 
rules or regulations that preempt local zoning rules affecting construction of broadcast towers. ”  
 While the statement is technically correct, and may be understood to be technically correct by 
skilled practitioners, its omissions leave a highly misleading impression. The Order has already 
been misquoted, by the use of the future tense — which is not what the Commission said. 

244 Chapter 10
 The FCC gives us a declaratory ruling. The FCC rules that it will  NOT  preempt local zoning, land 
use, and height regulations in the case of broadcast towers! This should prove very useful at the 
Montgomery County Planning Board meeting on September 28th, and the zoning exception hear-
ing on October 6th. 
http://drrts.com/ (last visited October 5, 2006) 
 At least one newspaper reporter has already misunderstood the Commission’s statement — in the 
present tense — to be predictive of the future. 
   She [the Chief of the Media Bureau] granted a declaratory ruling that according to her under-
standing of the facts in the case, the FCC would not preempt local authorities. 
 http://www.gazette.net/stories/100406/damanew213914_31941.shtml (last visited October 23, 2006) 
 IV. RELIEF SOUGHT 
 Koor seeks expedited treatment of this Petition, on the ground that it, in particular, is seeking 
to build a 720  KHz AM broadcast station but has been the subject of any number of delaying 
tactics. Koor fears that the mere existence of DA 06-1920, so readily misquoted, and subject to 
misinterpretation due to its brevity, will be used to defeat attempts to build by causing delays, 
or suggesting a moratorium while new regulations are drafted. Koor suggests that it is not alone 
in such a fear, as fear of delay or denial was a substantial element in the positions of MSTV and 
NAB in FCC Dkt. No. 97-182, and long delays have certainly been part of the present Lookout 
Mountain proceedings in Colorado. 
Koor asks that Order DA 06-1920 be withdrawn . 
As permitted by 47 CFR §1.106(d)(1), allowing alternative requests, Koor asks that any revised 
Order, issued upon reconsideration: 
● 
 Include deﬁ nitions for  “ construction ” and  “ broadcast tower. ” A mere change of antennas 
(perhaps, to use only a few examples, to broadband an AM antenna for HD Radio use, to 
duplex an FM antenna, or to add an HDTV antenna) should not trigger a zoning proceeding 
as if a request had been submitted for a new or higher tower. 
● 
 Include a discussion of the distinctions between antenna towers, making it plain that there 
may be a variety of preemptions (see above). 
● 
 Identify the Thompson Hine client and its purpose (to prohibit the construction of AM 
broadcast towers anywhere in the municipality). 
● 
 Include a discussion that zoning changes for the purpose of controlling  “ radio emission 
interference ” is impermissible. (See DRRTS web site for claim that the proposed towers 
 “ will … (n)egatively affect quality of life (radio emission interference). ” ) 
● 
 Conclude with the following: 
 This Order is not intended to predict the FCC’s response to a claim, based on a particular set 
of facts, that particular governmental action is preempted by federal law. Furthermore, this 
letter is issued without prejudice to any action that the FCC may take with respect to the subject 
matter of your request, including but not limited to the pending 1997 Petition you referenced, 
any threatened or adopted action by a local government, or any proposed construction or 

Possible Objections–Diversionary Tactics 245
modiﬁ cation of any antenna structure. Accordingly, this letter may not be used as evidence of the 
FCC’s position in respect to any particular matter. 
 Respectfully submitted, 
 KOOR COMMUNICATIONS, Inc. 
 by 
 Fred Hopengarten, Esq. 
 D.C. Bar #114124 
 Six Willarch Road 
 Lincoln, MA 01773-5105 
 781/259-0088 
 e-mail: hopengarten@post.harvard.edu 
 10.2.6  The First Amendment Argument 
 In its preemption case, Koor Communications also made a First Amendment argument. By deciding 
on the grounds of preemption, the New Hampshire Supreme Court was not required to decide the 
matter on the basis of the First Amendment argument, so it is impossible to predict how it would 
work in other circumstances. Nevertheless, it is important to point out that in  Koor the required height 
could not be erected in any zone within the city. As a result, Koor argued that the maximum height 
bylaw was not a  “ time, place, and manner ” restriction, because the result of the bylaw was  “ no time, 
no place, no manner ” — a complete ban. If you face similar circumstances, a complete ban throughout 
the municipality, and it is a broadcasting application (not ham radio, as the case law for trying that 
argument in a ham radio case is discouraging), you might want to consider an argument something 
along the line prepared for that case. 
 Here’s how that argument is assembled (and be mindful that you are always addressing the use of 
private land, not public streets): 
▼ Broadcasting is clearly a medium affected by a First Amendment interest; see  United States v. 
Paramount Pictures, Inc. , 334 U.S. 131, 166 (1948). The City cannot create an effective total ban on 
this form of First Amendment expression by creating an effective total ban on new AM broadcasting; 
see Metromedia v. San Diego , 453 U.S. 490 (1981) (holding that a total ban on billboards was not a 
time, place and manner restriction). Under a First Amendment analysis, the City’s height ordinance 
requires a higher level of scrutiny than an ordinary land use regulation. And denial of the ability 
to broadcast at all is denial of a right secured by the constitution. See City of Ladue v. Gilleo , 512 
U.S. 43 (1994): 
 Our prior decisions have voiced particular concern with laws that foreclose an entire medium of 
expression. Thus, we have held invalid ordinances that completely banned the distribution of pam-
phlets within the municipality,  Lovell v. Grifﬁ n , 303 U.S. 444, 451-452 (1938); handbills on the 
public streets, Jamison v. Texas , 318 U.S. 413, 416(1943); the door-to-door distribution of literature, 
Martin v. Struthers , 319 U.S. 141, 145-149 (1943);  Schneider v. State , 308 U.S. 147, 164-165(1939), 
and live entertainment,  Schad v. Mount Ephraim , 452 U.S. 61, 75-76 (1981). 

246 Chapter 10
 Similarly, the Supreme Court has held that the First Amendment is implicated in regulations banning 
newsracks containing commercial publications; see  City of Cincinnati v. Discovery Network, Inc. , 507 
U.S. 410 (1993) and City of Lakewood v. Plain Dealer Publishing Co. , 486 U.S. 750 (1988); governing 
the ampliﬁ cation of music, see  Ward v. Rock Against Racism , 419 U.S. 781 (1989); restricting the use 
of sound trucks, see Kovacs v. Cooper , 336 U.S. 77 (1949); and prohibiting the use of loudspeakers, 
see Saia v. New York , 334 U.S. 558 (1948). 
 While cities may zone adult businesses, they may not totally ban them; see  Schad v. Borough of Mount 
Ephraim , 452 U.S. 61(1981) (nude dancing) and  City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc. , 475 U.S. 41 
(1986) (adult motion picture theater). There is no principled reason why a city should be forbidden to ban 
nude dancing and adult bookstores from all zones within the city, yet allow a complete ban an essential 
element of communication for an AM radio station — a vertical antenna meeting FCC requirements.  ▲ 
 If you face a  “ smart ” city, one that has not completely banned AM antennas but rather provided that 
they may only be erected in places within the municipality where it would be impossible to obtain the 
required amount of land (whether for the radial ﬁ eld, an artiﬁ cial  “ fall zone, ” or other reason), feel 
free to go ahead with the “ total ban ” style of argument — just add the additional factual basis (with 
extensive documentation) to claim that forcing AM antennas into an area of town where construction is 
a practical impossibility is “ an effective total ban, ” which deserves the same outcome as a total ban. 
 Along those lines, be aware that there are many ways this game can be played. For example, a city 
might not ban AM antennas but rather require so much land to surround them (perhaps calling it a 
 “ buffer zone ” ) that the result is the same — an effective total ban. 
 By the way, sooner or later, the city will argue that its ordinance  “ serves a substantial governmental 
interest and allows for reasonable alternative avenues of communication. ” Usually this argument is 
cloaked in the claim that  “ attempting to preserve the quality of urban life [note that the argument could 
just as well be about preserving the quality of suburban life or the quality of rural life] is one that must 
be accorded high respect ” ( City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., op. cit. ). 
 One counter to that claim is that an antenna, sitting silently, has no impact on the quality of life. It is, 
at most, merely visible. Then proceed to treat the argument as strictly one of aesthetics. Here are some 
useful quotations, but comparable citations may be available in your jurisdiction: 
 Alleged adverse aesthetic effects of an antenna do not justify the denial of a permit; see  Evans v. 
Shore Communications, Inc. et al. , 112 Md. App. 284 (1996);  AT & T Wireless Services v. Mayor and 
City Council of Baltimore , 123 Md. App. 681 (1998). 
 In this particular case, while we have sympathy for plaintiffs ’  plight, not all plights give rise to legal 
rights. We conclude that the mere displeasing appearance in size and shape of a neighboring structure 
that is otherwise permitted by law, the only admitted effect of which is an alleged diminution in value of 
the adjacent property, cannot constitute a nuisance or give rise to an inverse condemnation claim. Since a 
landowner has no natural right to an unobstructed view ( Posey v. Leavitt  (1991) 229 Cal. App. 3d 1236, 
1250 [280 Cal. Rptr. 568]), the size and shape of an otherwise lawful structure on one side of a boundary 
cannot be deemed either to damage (for purposes of inverse condemnation) or to interfere with the enjoy-
ment (for purposes of nuisance) of that which is on the other side of the boundary. Otherwise, one per-
son’s tastes could form the basis for depriving another person of the right to use his or her property, and 

Possible Objections–Diversionary Tactics 247
nuisance law would be transformed into a license to the courts to set neighborhood aesthetic standards. 
See Oliver v. AT & T Wireless Services , 76 Cal. App. 4th 521, 525 (1999) (allowing a 130-foot cell tower). 
Reasons for height — The most appealing reasons for height in a zoning proceeding for an AM 
broadcast station, and this list makes no pretense of suggesting which reason will work best in a 
particular circumstance, appear to be: 
 1. 
FCC regulations require this minimum height at the frequency of license, and the matter is 
preempted.
 2. 
For a directional array, heights lower than those required in 47 CFR  § § 73.189 and 73.190 have 
never been approved by the FCC. This is a technical matter and is preempted by the FCC’s 
regulations. 
 3. 
The licensee is required to serve the city of license. 
 4. 
The antenna is an instrumentality of free speech (see above, as to how to make this argument). 
 5. 
The programming is really useful. 
 6. 
The programming serves underserved audiences (deﬁ ned by race, ethnicity, or language). 
 10.2.7  FM/TV Broadcasting 
 No cases have been found to support a claim that local zoning is preempted by federal rule or statute for 
FM broadcasting or television broadcasting. Thus, all of the above arguments, except for the argument 
based on minimum required height for an AM radio station, can also be made for FM and TV broadcasting. 
 10.3   We Don’t Need Another Broadcast Station 
 Fortunately, the arrogance of this argument is easily countered. As a precondition to the grant of a 
license, every AM broadcast station licensee has already demonstrated  “ [t]hat the public interest, 
convenience, and necessity will be served through the operation under the proposed assignment ” (47 
CFR § 73.24(j)). 
 In other words, not only has a need been demonstrated, but a  “ necessity ” has also been shown! 
 Furthermore, as an applicant for a license, you have already shown, to the satisfaction of the FCC, that 
the station meets each and every element of this ten-part test: 
 (a) That the proposed assignment will tend to effect a fair, efﬁ cient, and equitable distribution of radio 
service among the several states and communities. 
 (b) That a proposed new station (or a proposed change in the facilities of an authorized station) com-
plies with the pertinent requirements of Sec. 73.37 of this chapter. 
 (c) That the applicant is ﬁ nancially qualiﬁ ed to construct and operate the proposed station. 
 (d) That the applicant is legally qualiﬁ ed. That the applicant (or the person or persons in control of 
an applicant corporation or other organization) is of good character and possesses other qualiﬁ cations 
sufﬁ cient to provide a satisfactory public service. 

248 Chapter 10
 (e) That the technical equipment proposed, the location of the transmitter, and other technical phases 
of operation comply with the regulations governing the same, and the requirements of good engineer-
ing practice. 
 (f) That the facilities sought are subject to assignment as requested under existing international agree-
ments and the rules and regulations of the Commission. 
 (g) That the population within the 1 V/m contour does not exceed 1.0 percent of the population 
within the 25      mV/m contour: Provided, however, That where the number of persons within the 1     V/m 
contour is 300 or less the provisions of this paragraph are not applicable. 
 (h) That, in the case of an application for a Class B or Class D station on a clear channel, the pro-
posed station would radiate, during two hours following local sunrise and two hours preceding local 
sunset, in any direction toward the 0.1       mV/m groundwave contour of a co-channel United States Class 
A station, no more than the maximum value permitted under the provisions of Sec. 73.187. 
 (i) That, for all stations, the daytime 5       mV/m contour encompasses the entire principal community to 
be served. That, for stations in the 535 – 1605       kHz band, 80% of the principal community is encom-
passed by the nighttime 5       mV/m contour or the nighttime interference-free contour, whichever value 
is higher. That, for stations in the 1605 – 1705    kHz band, 50% of the principal community is encom-
passed by the 5       mV/m contour or the nighttime interference-free contour, whichever value is higher. 
That, Class D stations with nighttime authorizations need not demonstrate such coverage during 
nighttime operation. 
 (j) That the public interest, convenience, and necessity will be served through the operation under the 
proposed assignment. 
 The  “ public interest, convenience, and necessity ” test exists for almost every radio and TV service. 
Find it for your service, and use it!
Times of emergency are too late — When rising to speak at a public hearing, don’t be ashamed to 
point out the role that broadcast stations play in times of emergency, such as ﬁ res, snowstorms, 
ﬂ oods, hurricanes, tornadoes, etc. When such a time comes, it is too late to build a broadcast station 
so government agencies may broadcast instructions to the people. The Internet and cable TV may be 
worthless when lines are down and power is out. Cellular telephone circuits may be jammed. But, 
many people have portable, battery-powered transistor radios which can provide critical emergency 
communications from Emergency Management ofﬁ cials, Civil Defense, or the Red Cross. When the 
time comes, it is too late. An antenna system must be up and working before the emergency comes. 

249
 The Permit Application 
 This is a discussion of issues arising in the course of drafting an application. The accompanying CD 
has the text of a real application (see ﬁ lename Commercial Application Sample.doc), ready for you to 
open as a Microsoft Word ﬁ le and modify using your word processor. As you go through the process of 
preparing a permit application, there are a few overarching things to remember: 
● 
 Only submit material that is relevant to  your situation and  your application. 
● 
 Argue and use preemption where it is available to you. Do  not over argue preemption (i.e., try 
to convince a Code Enforcement Ofﬁ cer or Board that a preemption protects you to a greater 
extent than can be justiﬁ ed).  
● 
 Tell the Code Enforcement Ofﬁ cer or Board what does not apply and what does apply. 
● 
 Be sure that you understand that you may face up to four sets of rules: (1) criteria that apply 
to any and all building permit applications, such as setback and minimum or  “ required ”
yards; (2) criteria under a special portion of the ordinance drafted for towers or  “ wireless 
communications facilities ” ; (3) a completely separate set of criteria that apply to any and all 
applications for a Special Permit; and (4) criteria for site plan review. If you haven’t dealt with 
all four, you have not assembled a complete application. 
● 
 Answer  every question. Don’t leave anything blank. If the bylaw asks for trafﬁ c impacts, do 
not write “ N/A ” or  “ not applicable. ” Instead, write whatever is true, such as,  “ The Applicant 
anticipates that the site will be visited approximately three times per month by one vehicle, for 
maintenance purposes. ”
● 
 If a criterion poses an impossible burden, do not ignore it. Just ask that it be waived, and 
give a reason. Here’s an example. Suppose that the ordinance was drafted thinking that a 
typical cell phone site is 75    75 feet, and it asks for 2-foot contour lines  “ for the entire 
property. ” But, you’ve leased 1 acre on a 900-acre farm. Here’s a suggested response:  “ The 
Applicant has provided 2-foot contour lines for the leased area, and asks for a waiver of this 
requirement with respect to contour lines for the entire property, which includes 899 acres of 
unaffected land. The Applicant has, however, included a portion of a USGS map depicting the 
neighborhood. ” 
CHAPTER 11 

250 Chapter 11
 11.1   Purposes of the Permit Application 
● 
 To concentrate the discussion on technology, not aesthetics 
● 
 To force the applicant to think through all elements of the application 
● 
 To impress the town with your thoroughness 
● 
 To shift the burden to those who would deny the permit, using a thoughtful presentation 
● 
 To give the permit-granting authority a peg or two to hang their hats on 
 You will no doubt edit the sample document available on the CD, as it is unlikely that all issues 
brought up here are relevant to all applicants. Import the document into a word processor, such as 
Microsoft Word or WordPerfect, to make editing easier.  Immediately remove sections that are not 
relevant to your application.
 Be sure that the wording is appropriate to your situation. If you are applying for a Building Permit, talk 
about a Building Permit. If you are applying for a Special Use Permit, talk about a Special Use Permit, 
and so forth. 
 11.2   Filing the Permit Application 
 Should you submit your application by registered mail? It won’t really help you much. Even if you can 
prove that you ﬁ led by a certain date, if your application is somehow lost, notices won’t go out to your 
neighbors and you still won’t be on the agenda. If the neighbors haven’t been notiﬁ ed, your application 
won’t be considered, even if you ﬁ led it in a timely fashion. The usual goal is to get a  “ stamped in ” 
ﬁ rst page. 
 You will be doing yourself a favor if you call in advance and make an appointment with the Code 
Enforcement Ofﬁ cer or Building Inspector to go through your application with you. The purpose of 
this “ walk through ” is not to get a feel for the reaction of the Building Inspector. Rather, it is to make 
sure that you have included everything that the inspector thinks you’ll need. Later, the Planning Board 
(or Zoning Board of Appeals or Planning Commission — various names for this Board are used across 
the country) will make a decision using this information. 
 For example, it is far better to learn early on that you must get clearance from the Health Department 
for the placement of a guy anchor near your septic system, that you’ve left off a measurement or 
failed to include an exhibit, or that you haven’t met the side-yard (sometimes called  “ required 
yard ” ) requirement than it is to learn about it the night of the public hearing. Boards like thorough 
applications.
 When you are ready to hand over the application, ask the ofﬁ cial to time stamp both your document 
and the duplicate cover you should bring for this purpose. This is a routine aspect of front desk life 
in a public ofﬁ ce, and no one will think the less of you for requesting a time stamp. Experienced 
hands will tell you that it is very important to start the clock running, because many states (but not all, 

The Permit Application 251
Georgia being one example) have building code rules that town ofﬁ cials must grant or deny within so 
many days. Nevada has a rule that the application must be accepted or rejected (with reasons related 
to completeness) within three days, but no rule as to how fast the Building Department must act on the 
substance of the application. There may be rules that Boards must meet within so many days. 
 Delay plays into the hands of your opponents, who hope that you will get frustrated and move the 
project. Start the clock with a good date/time stamp. 
 11.3   Preparing Your Application 
 While printing your application might seem straightforward enough, there are a few lessons I can share 
with you from personal experience. 
 11.3.1  Before Printing 
 One last time, read through the document to be sure that the Table of Contents matches the actual 
pagination, then please read through the document searching for typographical errors. You should also 
have someone else proofread the document, because by now you should be almost blind from having 
reviewed the document so many times. If you ﬁ nd errors, you have choices: 
● 
 Correct the errors before printing. 
● 
 Correct the errors after printing and before binding by substituting only the affected page. 
● 
 File an errata sheet, if necessary. 
 In any event, if you don’t ﬁ nd the typos, you can’t correct them. Here’s a  “ been there, done that ” tip: 
Pay special attention to headers and footers. Make sure that dates in headers or footers match the cover. 
 11.3.2  Convert to PDF 
 When you are completely satisﬁ ed with the document,  convert it to a PDF . The best way to take a 
document to the printer is not to print out one nice copy and then go to the printer. Any modern print 
shop will give you better quality if you show up with the document in PDF format. Instead of printing 
from your original, the shop is now printing an original every time. 
 If you own only the PDF reader, Adobe will permit you to create a PDF document on their website. Go 
to  http://www.adobe.com/ , and look down the left-hand side of the opening page for the  “ Create Adobe 
PDF Online ” icon. 
 You also can buy emulators, such as PDF995. Creating a PDF version is good, as it ﬁ xes pagination. 
Should you subsequently add pages, you won’t have to reprint the entire document — just print and 
insert pages 34a and 34b. 
 Do not give it to the printer in .doc or .wpd format, because the margins set in the printer’s computer 
may be different. Problems will creep in. 

252 Chapter 11
 11.3.3  Printing 
 11.3.3.1  One or Two Sides? 
 You’ll probably choose one-sided printing. (Two-sided requires thicker paper on  every page and is 
probably more expensive. Why thicker paper on every page? Because you need thicker paper for color 
printing, and you will have some pages of color printing.) Also, think about whether you are going to 
ship the document. If so, two-sided printing can save you shipping costs. Usually, though, you will 
deliver it by hand. See below for discussion about proof of delivery, a very important aspect of the 
process.
 11.3.3.2  Color Pages? 
 Go through the document and decide which pages should be printed in color. Then prepare a sheet for 
your printer that looks something like this: 
 Please print the following pages in  color : 
 7 
 8 
 11 
 14 
 15 
 16 
 31 – 34
 37 – 38
 41 
 43 
 Total: 14 
 The newspaper articles or other documents that make you look good should appear just behind the last 
page of the document, because they are Exhibits and  are part of the supplement. 
 11.3.3.3  Covers 
 I recommend a clear plastic front cover and a dark blue thick paper or plastic back cover, with a black 
comb. (See notes below on binding.) I concede that some people prefer a spiral binding. 
 11.3.3.4  Collating 
 If the pages have to be hand collated, you can probably save some money by inserting the color pages 
yourself, as you may need only 8 to 10 copies. But, then you have to bring it back to the printer to use 
their machine to install the binding combs. You can avoid a second trip to the printer by using three-
ring binders. 

The Permit Application 253
 11.3.3.5  Delivery 
  Hand deliver the required number of copies to the planning and zoning ofﬁ ce (and before they leave 
the ofﬁ ce for the day!). Keep two — one for you and one for your attorney. If you know that you are 
going to have a public hearing, be sure to deliver them the required number of days before the hearing. 
This will give the Board Secretary the time necessary to distribute them to Board members.  Practice 
tip : Find out when they are due! 
 11.3.3.6  Printing Quantity 
 It is not uncommon for a thorough application to require 100 to 150 pages of printing, when you 
include copies of law cases to which the planning and zoning department may not have access, as well 
as a number of exhibits (including photographs). You could be facing a printing bill of several hundred 
dollars, or  $ 8.00 to  $ 30.00 per copy of the application submitted. This makes it worthwhile to work 
hard to understand how many copies you need to submit. 
 Here are some possibilities: 
● 
 One for the Town Clerk 
● 
 Five (or eight or nine) for the members of the Board before which you will appear (some 
Boards require copies for alternates, some do not) 
● 
 One for the Secretary to the Board  
● 
 One for yourself 
● 
 One for your lawyer 
 That’s a possibility of 13 copies. If it is a joint meeting of the Planning Board  and the Zoning Board, 
add another ﬁ ve (or more) copies. 
 If you have decided on three-ring binders, print an extra cover page for each copy (to insert in the clear 
front cover of the three-ring binder). The printer will tell you whether to use cover stock (80-lb) or a more 
standard 24-lb paper. Cover stock is only necessary with comb binding that has no clear plastic cover. 
 Also, print two extra copies of the cover page that you will have  “ date stamped in. ”
 11.3.3.7  Printing Quality 
 You might think the least expensive way to print is to print on 20-lb standard white using your home 
printer. But this is a lot of printing, as you could be making 100 pages times 13 copies, or 1300 
impressions. A copy shop may give you a better price for the black and white portion of the printing 
than is possible at home, when you add in the cost of inkjet cartridges. Color pages I leave to your own 
investigations. In any event, as you are no doubt aware, a laser printer will produce sharper images 
than an ink-jet printer. Moreover, 24-lb (maybe 28-lb if you insist on spending more money) bright 

254 Chapter 11
white (brightness of 96 or more) will better support the impression that you are quite professional in 
everything you do and ready to go to court if necessary. 
 11.3.3.8  Binding 
 I like one-inch, three-ring binders with a slip-in front cover duplicating the cover page of the document. 
Using a binder permits last-minute substitutions when you ﬁ nd an error or need to slip in one more 
letter from a neighbor, another photo page, or a new law case. Other alternatives are comb or spiral 
binding (which allows the document to lie ﬂ at) and GBC binding (which features a stiff plastic strip 
on the front and back that allows it to stand tall; it also requires a special punch). If using three-ring 
binders, be sure to print two copies of each cover page — one to go under the clear plastic on the cover 
and one to go inside, plus one extra front page to get stamped in with a date/time stamp. 
 11.4   Submitting Your Application 
 The men and women who work out front as town clerks and secretaries in building departments, or 
departments of planning and zoning, are almost always nice people, deserving of respect. This does 
not mean, however, that they are completely worthy of your trust. Strange things can happen, mostly 
through innocent neglect or mistake, but they still happen. It is important that you be able to show that 
an application was submitted and the date on which it was submitted. 
 Just one last thing before you leave to make the delivery. Make sure that at least one copy has all of the 
original signatures required (from you, your contractor, your PE, whomever). 
 11.4.1  Delivery 
 If you are going to ﬁ le the application with the Building Inspector or Code Enforcement Ofﬁ cer, call 
and make an appointment. It is a sign of respect. The Building Inspector, Zoning Administrator, or 
Code Enforcement Ofﬁ cer will write the covering memo that goes to any Board or Commission and 
you want it to be favorable. Let’s assume, though, that you are ﬁ ling with the town clerk. You’ve got 
your copies ready for delivery, in a box, in your vehicle, and you drive to Town Hall. You walk in and 
present yourself to the desk. Smile. Talk: 
 “ I’m here to ﬁ le an application. I think I have enough copies, but could you conﬁ rm that ____ copies 
is enough? And, while we’re at it, could you stamp in the one with original signatures, and two cop-
ies for my records? ” 
Every Building Department in the nation can put a date stamp that says  “ Received ” on the front cover. 
If you ﬁ nd one that can’t, ask the secretary to write:  “ Received. [Date] [Signature]. Example: 
 RECEIVED
 February 16, 2005 
 Maren Schumacher-Rasmussen 

The Permit Application 255
 11.4.2  A Photo? 
 No witness, or still feeling insecure? Take a photo of the clerk holding the application, with the box of 
copies on the counter. Ask her to smile and hold up the three-ring binder. Tell her:  “ This is a really big 
day for me. I’ve been waiting to ﬁ le this form all of my life. ” (Or,  “ I need to prove to my boss that I 
was here, and not in some local watering hole. ” ) 
 What if she doesn’t want to cooperate, smile. and hold up a copy? Take a picture anyway. You have 
a perfect right to do so. It’s a public ofﬁ ce. You can later testify:  “ I took this picture on February 16, 
2005, and it shows the applications on the counter as I ﬁ led them. ”
 The surest possible proof? Have your witness take a photo of you delivering the application to the 
Secretary. Now you have a witness, a photo, and a stamped copy. See  Figure 11.1 for a wonderful 
example of a photograph of an applicant submitting his application, complete with clock in the 
background to show the time of ﬁ ling. (The application was granted, too; see  Figure 11.2  for the 
approval letter.) 
 11.4.3  Before Leaving 
 You want two copies with stamps for yourself — one for you and one for your lawyer. Don’t leave 
without checking to see that the date is correct. (Was it the last century when last the stamp was used?)  
 Figure 11.1  K0KT submitting his Building Permit application to the Code Enforcement Ofﬁ cer in Story 
County, IA. There will never be an argument — it was submitted at 3:42 p.m. 

256 Chapter 11
 11.4.4  The Reluctant Recipient 
 It has been my experience (though just once) that there was some confusion as to  who receives the 
application. It was a small town. The state statute clearly said that the application must be made to the 
town clerk, but the Building Department insisted that the application was to be ﬁ led with the Secretary 
to the Building Inspector (which was just plain wrong). Here’s how we did it. 
Applicant to Town Clerk:  “ I know that this goes to the Secretary in the Building Department, and I’ll 
gladly walk it down the hall to her, but could you please stamp these three pages? ”  (He was referring 
to the cover page on the original signature document, and the two copies for our ﬁ les.) 
 Figure 11.2  The approval letter from Story County to K0KT. 

The Permit Application 257
Town Clerk:   “ No one ever ﬁ les with me. You are supposed to ﬁ le with the Secretary in the Building 
Department. ”  
Applicant:   “ I know, but my lawyer absolutely insists that I get a date stamp from you. Just this once, 
could you help me out? It costs way too much to have a full-blown argument with the damn lawyer. ” 
Town Clerk:  “ OK. [Stamps the three pages.] Now walk it down the hall and do the right thing. ” 
Applicant:  “ Thanks. You are saving me a lot of grief. ” 
 This is what is commonly known as  “ blaming it on a third party, ” and lawyers are used to being the 
person blamed. It comes with the territory. It’s right up there with  “ My doctor insists  … , my CPA 
insists  … , my teacher insists  … , and my wife insists  … . ” The devil made me do it. 
 Why am I getting excited about this? I have  experienced each of the following: 
● 
 A lost application (completely missing from the town’s paper ﬁ les) 
● 
 A town that took the position that an application is not ﬁ led until it has been stamped in  after
ﬁ re, water, police, health, and other departments have reviewed the application, so the stamp 
date on the document was almost three weeks later than the originally ﬁ led date (that will 
never happen to me again) 
● 
 The need to prove a ﬁ ling on Wednesday, when the Planning Board met to announce the draft 
of a bylaw change on Thursday — which would have effectively cut off any claim to vested 
rights (the ability to apply under the old bylaw, not the new) 
 Now your application is ﬁ led. You can prove it was ﬁ led on the date necessary to get on the agenda 
for the next meeting of the Board (so you don’t have to wait a month) and, hoping this never happens 
to you, you can show that you ﬁ led before a change in the bylaw was proposed to foreclose your 
project — giving you the right to apply under the prior bylaw. 
 While you are there ﬁ ling your application, if a question is asked to which you do  not have the answer 
in the application or supplementary materials, do not offer to come back and reﬁ le another day.  File 
today and offer to supplement later. A rebuff for a minor matter is a trap, and any question you have 
not already addressed is minor, believe me, because your application (any application your lawyer has 
given you permission to ﬁ le) is thorough. 
 One more thing about the need for a date/time stamp. You may be lucky enough to live in a state 
like Pennsylvania which has a  “ deemed approved ” statute (35 P.S.  § 7210.502). It establishes a 15 
business-day rule, after which an application for a Building Permit is deemed approved if no action has 
been taken. If the drawings are prepared by a Pennsylvania-licensed engineer, architect, etc., and the 
engineer or architect certiﬁ es that the plans meet or exceed the Uniform Construction Code, then the 
period is only ﬁ ve days! There is a 30-day period for  “ other construction, ” which some municipalities 
will argue applies to antenna-support structures, but even if you concede that, there is still a time period 
after which an application upon which no action has been taken is deemed approved. 

258 Chapter 11
 The full text of the statute is available on the CD as ﬁ lename PA_deemed_approved.pdf. Pray that you 
have such a statute. 
 On the other hand, you could be ﬁ ling in Georgia, where it seems that the Building Department can 
take forever, and your only alternative is to go to court seeking a  “ writ of mandamus. ” That’s no fun. 
 11.5   Follow Up 
 Getting nervous, about a week or 10 days after ﬁ ling his application, a client wrote to me:  “ I am going 
to call the ZO [Zoning Ofﬁ ce] on Wednesday morning to see what progress has been made over the 
two weeks since ﬁ ling. Any words of advice before I make that call? ” I replied:  “ Actually, yes. ” The 
correct questions are: 
● 
 Have you had a chance to go through my Building Permit application? 
● 
 Is there any more information that your department will need in order to make a decision? 
 These are low-pressure questions, and friendly.  “When are you going to grant my permit? ” is high 
pressure and assumes a conclusion. That is unfriendly. 
 Ask the friendly questions. You will get the answers you need. Likely answers include: 
● 
 We sent it out to Town Counsel for an opinion. 
● 
 The City Manager/County Executive is reviewing it [a bit discouraging, by the way, since he 
should have nothing to do with it]. 
● 
 Actually, I haven’t had a chance to wade through it yet. It’s quite a bit denser than most 
submissions I see. 
● 
 Actually, I’ve been through it and sent a copy to the Zoning Administrator/Building Inspector/
Code Enforcement Ofﬁ cer. As soon as he ﬁ nishes with it, you’ll have an answer. 
 Your best comeback to a vague or unhelpful response is  “ When should I check in again? ”
 11.6   Format of the Sample Permit Application 
 One of my clients was gracious enough to allow me to supply their actual application as part of the CD 
in this book; see ﬁ lename Commercial Application Sample.pdf. While every application is unique, the 
application of The Fifth Estate Tower should give you a very clear idea of both the proper format and 
content of an application, as well as the range of supplemental material (Exhibits and Appendices) you 
may need to provide. What follows is a brief discussion of just two elements that are common to all 
applications.

The Permit Application 259
 11.6.1  Blank Page 
 If you’ve ever read a stock prospectus, you’ve seen that they follow something of a prescribed format. 
This occasionally results in a blank page. For reasons hard to fathom, the page is usually labeled: 
 This page intentionally left blank. 
 As you set out to prepare your application, you may ﬁ nd that you’d really like to leave blank the rest of 
a page. In that case, you’d be tempted to write: 
 This area intentionally left blank. 
 James O’Connell, Esq., of the Illinois Bar, and formerly with the Ofﬁ ce of the Attorney General in that 
state, came across the following explanation and development of the theme for such a blank and was 
kind enough to provide it. Unfortunately, the name of the original author is not known. 
 This area intentionally left blank. Well, not completely blank, since the above non-empty disclaimer 
appears on the page. What is meant is that this area is devoid of meaningful content related to the rest 
of the document. This area serves only as a separator between sections, chapters, or other divisions 
of the document. The area is not completely blank so that you know that nothing was unintentionally 
left out, or because of an error in duplication, or even because of some other production problem. If 
this area were really blank, you wouldn’t be reading anything. Therefore, this area has not been left 
blank by accident, but is left non-blank on purpose. The statement in the area should say:  “ This page 
was intentionally left non-blank. ” 
 And now, with that moment of legal levity passed, we consider further the sample permit application. 
The cover page follows. Cover pages are a nice touch. 
 11.6.2  Cover Page 
 STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE 
 TOWN OF WOLFEBORO 
 PLANNING BOARD 
 & ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
APPLICATION
 TO ALLOW REPLACEMENT OF
AN EXISTING USE UNDER RSA 674:19 OR UNDER ARTICLE XXVI,  § § 175 – 159 
TO 175 – 175 OF THE WOLFEBORO CODE 
AND
TO APPROVE THE PLACEMENT OF PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE 
FACILITIES ON THE REPLACEMENT STRUCTURE 
 SUBMITTED ON BEHALF OF : 
THE F IFTH E STATE T OWER , LLC

260 Chapter 11
 J AY W ILLIAMS, J R., M ANAGING M EMBER
 c/o B ROADCASTING U NLIMITED, I NC . 
 35 M AIN S TREET
 W AYLAND, MA 01778 
 E MAIL:  JWILLIAMS@DMRINTERACTIVE.COM
 B Y ITS A TTORNEYS:
 F RED H OPENGARTEN
 S IX W ILLARCH R OAD
 L INCOLN, MA 01773-5105 
 781/259-0088; FAX 419/858-2421 
 E MAIL:  FRED.HOPENGARTEN.LAW@BC.EDU
 AND 
 W ILLIAM P HILPOT, J R.
 H AUGHEY, P HILPOT  & L AURANT
 816 N ORTH M AIN S TREET
 L ACONIA, NH 03246 
 603/524-4101; FAX 603/524-1775 
 E MAIL:  DMJ@HPLLAW.COM
 D ECEMBER 7, 2004 

261
 The Public Hearing — Your Big Moment 
in the Spotlight 
 The public hearing serves several purposes. Among these is that, in the words of Supreme Court Justice 
Brandeis,  “ Sunshine is the best disinfectant. ” The public hearing is the very essence of democracy. It is 
supposed to guarantee that all sides are heard, but there are rules and common procedures — formal and 
informal. Here are some thoughts on getting through the process, which actually begins long before the 
hearing itself. 
 12.1   Advertising 
 12.1.1  Newspaper 
 You will no doubt be required to pay for the advertisement in the local weekly or biweekly newspaper 
where legal notices appear. This will cost $100 and up, as it is usual for the notice to appear twice. As a 
data point, for a commercial TV antenna in a major market, it cost $426.60 for a notice to appear twice 
in a newspaper of large circulation. 
 If there is a continuance, it is unlikely you will be required to advertise the notice again. But note that  if
you withdraw the application, perhaps because you feel that you still need to gather more information 
for presentation to the Board, you would then be required to pay for a new notice (and a new round of 
registered mailed notices, too). 
 The notice will probably parrot the opening paragraph of your application. You can save yourself some 
grief if you work with the secretary who puts the ad in the paper. 
 If what you propose is less than 200 feet high, try to make the notice refer to an  “ antenna-support 
structure for [paging, an FM broadcasting antenna, an HDTV broadcast antenna, etc.] ” and not a 
 “ tower. ” Of course, if you are proposing an AM broadcast antenna, or an array of towers that will 
be the AM antenna, then it is not a  “ support structure, ” as the tower is the antenna itself. For an AM 
broadcast antenna, the notice should be for  “ the erection and maintenance of an AM broadcast antenna 
system. ” You can even try to make it a form of advertising, by suggesting that the notice might read  “ to 
erect and maintain an AM broadcast antenna for a new AM radio station at 1490   kHz. ” 
 You probably cannot control the wording of the legal notice, but you may be able to inﬂ uence it. Do 
the best you can. 
CHAPTER 12 

262 Chapter 12
 The newspaper advertisement will appear in the  “ Legal Notices ” section of your local weekly, in very 
small type. It may look something like this actual (but disguised) notice:
 THE COMMONWEALTH 
 OF MASSACHUSETTS 
 TOWN OF UNFRIENDLY 
 Zoning Board of Appeals 
 NOTICE OF 
 PUBLIC HEARING 
 In accordance with the Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40A Section 10 Zoning Bylaws, 
you are hereby notiﬁ ed of a public hearing. The Zoning Board of Appeals will hold a public 
hearing to review the application of Channel  nn Television, Inc., of 28 Noname Road, Unfriendly, 
MA, for a special permit as per the attached notice: 
 The Town of Unfriendly Zoning Board of Appeals will conduct a public hearing on Wednesday, 
April 17, 2009, at 6:30 p.m. at the Unfriendly Town Hall, 6 East Main Street, Unfriendly, MA, 
to act on the petition of Channel nn Television, Inc. The petitioner is requesting a special permit 
in order to install a 48  digital (DTV) antenna and associated site work on an existing tower 
located at 28 Noname Road, Unfriendly, MA, Assessors Map 88, Lot 73. The existing tower is a 
structure over one hundred feet in height, and any repair, alteration, or modiﬁ cation requires a 
special permit in accordance with the Town of Unfriendly Protective Bylaws, Article XI, Section 
17 – 100  High Structures. All persons, parties, or corporations interested therein may appear 
and be heard in relation thereto. Town of Unfriendly Zoning Board of Appeals, Gary Guilty, 
Chairman Nov. 3, 10 
 Note the odd mention of  “ Nov. 3, 10 ” at the end of the actual notice. Though a mistake, this is not 
uncommon. The Town tells the paper which editions the advertisement should run in. The typographer 
thought it was part of the notice. Things like that just happen. There’s no need to get upset. 
 12.1.2  Posting 
 In some jurisdictions you are required to post a sign or two out front, readable from the street, about the 
upcoming public meeting. Don’t get cute and hide it behind a bush. The temptation may be great, but you 
will regret it, because opponents will use your hiding strategy to argue that you can’t be trusted to conform 
your other actions to the requirements of the law. See  Figure 12.1 for an example of such a posting. 
 12.1.3  The Public File 
 Long before your  “ big night, ” be sure to drop by Town Hall. You’ll want to examine the public ﬁ le on 
your case. It could have information on a prior application for a Building Permit on the same lot that 
was denied. If you are not the ﬁ rst owner of the tower, it could have information on how things went 
the last time anyone tried to modify the permit under which the tower was constructed. 

The Public Hearing—Your Big Moment in the Spotlight 263
 You might be amazed at what is in your property ﬁ le. For example, in the case of  Bodony v. Sands Point 
(NY) , 681 F. Supp. 1009 (EDNY 1987), the applicant was at Town Hall nosing through the ﬁ le for his 
address when he discovered papers showing that the Board of Zoning and Appeals, well in advance of 
the hearing, intended to deny his application. There were letters to Town Counsel requesting help as to 
how to go about denying the permit. The applicant’s lawyers used that information about the Board’s 
prior intent (i.e., failure to approach the decision with an open mind) very effectively. 
 In a broadcast case I once handled, I found a memorandum from Town Counsel to the Board of 
Selectmen, recommending against ﬁ ling of an appeal (a few years ago, when the tower was ﬁ rst 
erected). Ordinarily that would be unavailable if you asked for it, because of the  “ attorney – client 
privilege. ” However, as it was in the public ﬁ le, I read it, paid for a photocopy, and took it away. 
Everyone at the station was amazed that I’d found it, and I looked like a hero. It was useful. 
 Just before your  “ big night, ” drop by Town Hall  again , and examine the public ﬁ le once more. You 
may learn that someone has circulated and submitted a petition or that there are letters on ﬁ le against 
you. The petition or letters may make false claims. This gives you a chance to prepare exhibits to 
counter such claims. You don’t want to be surprised. 
 12.1.4  Visit the Hearing Room 
 While visiting Town Hall for the last time before your hearing, be sure to see the hearing room. 
Observe where you’ll ﬁ nd electrical outlets. See if there is a blackboard, an easel, or a podium. Inquire 
 Figure 12.1  A clearly visible sign announcing that there is an application pending regarding this property.  

264 Chapter 12
 if there is a screen you can use to display slides or a PowerPoint. Ask if there is an AC extension cord 
(please learn from my experience on this). 
 12.1.5  Find Out About Presentation Timing 
 In conjunction with your visit, be sure to ask the Secretary to the Board or the Planner how much time 
you’ll have to open. (The proponent always goes ﬁ rst.) Some places give you as much time as you need, 
but I was once in a Florida county where the opening was timed and strictly held to 5 minutes, complete 
with a red light to tell me when my time was up. (Afterward, each member of the public was given 3 
minutes, and there were 11 of them, totaling 33 minutes. I then had only, and exactly, 5 minutes to reply.) 
 12.2   Your Big Night 
 The public hearing is typically held on only one of four nights, Monday through Thursday. Friday 
nights are not favored because it is difﬁ cult to ensure that members of the Board will attend that night. 
A Friday night hearing may also conﬂ ict with some members who are celebrating the Sabbath. For 
similar reasons, hearings on Saturdays are rare, and “ never on Sunday. ” 
 It will be held in Town Hall, a municipal building, or a school. The hearing room typically uses some 
long tables, sometimes called “ catering tables. ” The members of the Board will face the audience. They 
may have nameplates in front of them. The audience has no tables and typically sits on uncomfortable 
folding chairs looking back at the Board. 
 If you arrive early (and you should), volunteer to help set up the room. It is a nice thing to do as a 
citizen. It shows that you observe common courtesies. It allows you to introduce yourself. Do  not
use the time for lobbying a member or two, as this is seen as impolite and may well be illegal as  ex 
parte communications (communicating to a Board member without the presence of others, especially 
opposing parties). This is not to say that Board members have never spoken with parties outside of the 
public hearing, but trying to do so right then and there, for the ﬁ rst time, might make Board members 
nervous and suspicious. 
 If you are going to show slides or project a PowerPoint presentation, you will need time to set up. With 
permission of the Chair, please set up before the hearing starts, as holding up these volunteer board 
members while you fumble with equipment is simply bad form. In any event, here’s a checklist of 
things to bring (as appropriate): 
● 
 Clipboard (it is rare to get a ﬂ at surface — a desk — on which to write) and pad of yellow lined 
paper
● 
 Yellow felt-tip pen (for calling attention to speciﬁ c elements of a bylaw) 
● 
 A complete copy of your application (and a spare, in case you need to let someone in the 
audience look at a copy; you don’t want to give up your own copy and then look awkward 
trying to get your copy back to respond to a question) 
● 
 A laptop or netbook computer 
● 
 A projector with connecting cables (test everything out before leaving for the hearing) 

The Public Hearing—Your Big Moment in the Spotlight 265
● 
 An extension cord (25-foot minimum) with at least three outlets  
● 
 A portable screen 
● 
 Speakers, including a portable ampliﬁ ed woofer (if you are using audio) 
 If this is an application for an HDTV transmitting antenna and you don’t use a video, you should 
forfeit your role in the entertainment business. But remember, if you are going to use a piece with 
on-air talent, keep it short and information ﬁ lled. 
 This is not the time to give out tickets to an upcoming concert, but a quick visit to the advertising 
department might be in order to see what freebies they might have of no consequential value for a 
 “ leave behind ” (pens and pads of paper, refrigerator magnets, and bumper stickers come to mind). 
 In  Figure 12.2 , the Vermont Environmental Board sits at  “ catering tables ” set up in a church social 
hall. The attorneys have tables and chairs to the left. The witness sits straight ahead. Not exactly 
a TV courtroom, eh? In other situations, before town Boards, there may be no place to spread out 
materials — or even a place to put a computer and projector for a PowerPoint presentation. These setup 
matters make it all the more important to learn about the venue in advance; for example, you may need 
to bring your own extension cord and screen. 
 If you are lucky, the members have nameplates in front of them. Try to write down those names so you 
can later remember who said what. Note also that there is no podium in this photo. Sometimes a Board 
will have one from which you will speak, and sometimes there will be no podium. 
 Figure 12.2  Martin Blank, Ph.D., appearing before the Vermont Environmental Board. Not exactly a TV 
courtroom, eh? 

266 Chapter 12
 Bringing along your own projection screen is a whole lot better than trying to project onto the 
1950s dark wood walls. The man sitting alone at a separate table in front of you may be the Zoning 
Enforcement Ofﬁ cer, sometimes called the Zoning Administrator or Code Enforcement Ofﬁ cer (yes, 
the CEO!). The ZEO/ZA/CEO or Town Planner may also have a nameplate. The CEO does not vote, 
but the CEO has seen how the Board votes many times and has a sense of what questions they will ask. 
 Whatever else you do, be sure to time your presentation in advance. The puff piece, plus your 
presentation, should not, under any circumstances, exceed 20 minutes total. Never. Twelve minutes 
would be better. Ten minutes is excellent. Less than 10 minutes and the Board may not quite 
understand what you are applying for and under exactly which bylaw provisions. In any event, if you 
learn that you’ll get only 5 minutes or 10 minutes prepare to obey that time limit. 
 Before the meeting begins, go up and introduce yourself to the Board, if you haven’t done so 
previously. Hand a business card to the Board Secretary, as well as a piece of paper labeled  “ Potential 
Participants ” with the names of every person on your side who may speak (RF engineer, neighbor, 
appraiser, etc.). Provide the same to the stenographer, if one is present. The Secretary and stenographer 
will appreciate that. Make him or her your new best friend and you’ll get copies of the minutes 
quicker. You’ll also want to help the Chairman by informing him or her how to pronounce your name 
(correcting the Chairman later is bad form). 
 If there are hearings before yours, do not leave the room. Stick around and see how they go. See if this 
Board likes a touch of humor or whether it shows a profound distaste for a light touch. See if they are 
formal or informal. See if they ask questions as proponents talk, or only after a presentation is made. 
See if they vote right then and there. Get comfortable with the process. 
 If you are reading this section a long time before your own hearing, go to a Board meeting in advance and 
sit through one evening session. If asked  “ Is there anything we can do for you? ” reply  “ No, thanks. I’ll have 
an application coming in soon and I wanted to see how things work, so I can be more helpful to the Board 
when my time comes. ” They’ll appreciate that. It is a sign of respect. In addition, sitting through a session 
from start to ﬁ nish really will help you prepare. You’ll feel more comfortable when your time comes. 
 Take a seat near the front and near an aisle. This reduces the amount of stumbling and fumbling when 
you rise. Personally, I like the front row, as it allows you to step to the side and make your presentation 
so that both the Board and members of the audience can hear you. 
 Now let’s assume the Chairman or Secretary announces your item on the agenda. You will be expected 
to stand to make your case. Begin with your name and the purpose for your presence. 
 12.2.1  Your Presentation 
      “ Good evening. My name is ___________. I’m here this evening from ___________ [business name 
of applicant]. You may better know us as Oldies 101. I’m the Chief Engineer/Owner/Whatever. I’m 
here tonight on an application for a Special Permit under Section 123.456. ” 
 Cite the  exact section of the bylaw in excruciating detail, since this tells them that you are prepared. At 
this point, at least one member of the Board is going to reach for his own copy of the bylaw and start 

The Public Hearing—Your Big Moment in the Spotlight 267
 reading it — while you continue. Other members will be rustling papers so they can be sure that it is 
your application in front of them. Don’t let this seeming inattention distract you. 
 Your application may be anywhere from 2 to 150 pages long. Under no circumstance should you read 
from it. Furthermore, the best presentations are made from outlines and are not read. But you knew 
that. Unless you have Ronald Reagan’s speech-reading skills (and you don’t), you will be much, much 
better off speaking from an outline. 
 Despite whatever you’ve been told about having a full opportunity to answer questions later, make sure 
that this presentation has a beginning, a middle, and an end. Make it complete unto itself. But make it 
brief. If you go over 10 minutes, you’d better have a good reason. A really good reason. A really, really 
good reason. 
 Nonetheless, show what you intend to do; explain why it meets all the requirements of the bylaw or 
ordinance that applies; tell them if some bylaw does not apply (and why), why the site you’ve chosen 
is the best site, what the total height is going to be, and that you’ve spoken to the neighbors you could 
ﬁ nd; and then ask for exactly what you want from the Board. 
 What is meant by  “ what you want ” ? You may want some waivers of ﬁ ling requirements, a Variance 
from a setback requirement, and a Special Use Permit. I don’t know what you need, but you should be 
very certain about what you need. Do your homework in advance. 
 At this point it is important for you to have read the state statute on municipal hearings. Few people 
do. You might be surprised to learn that you are entitled to cross-examine opposing witnesses, which is 
true in Maine. On the other hand, this may not be permitted in your state (this is more common). 
 Expect to have some nasty, accusatory questions put to you — some relevant, some not so relevant. 
Practice your answers to the tough questions in advance by rehearsing the hearing with friends and 
engineers with whom you get along. Always answer by addressing the Chairman of the Board, not the 
questioner. And  never attack an opponent — only his arguments.
 Here, from the 1915 version of Robert’s Rules of Order, now in the public domain ( http://www.
robertsrules.org/rror-07.htm#43 ), is the rule on decorum. Rule 43 was wise then, and is wise now. It 
reﬂ ects civilized democracy in action: 
43. Decorum in Debate . In debate a member must conﬁ ne himself to the question before the assem-
bly, and avoid personalities. He cannot reﬂ ect upon any act of the assembly, unless he intends to 
conclude his remarks with a motion to rescind such action, or else while debating such a motion. In 
referring to another member, he should, as much as possible, avoid using his name, rather referring to 
him as  “ the member who spoke last, ”  or in some other way describing him. The ofﬁ cers of the assem-
bly should always be referred to by their ofﬁ cial titles. It is not allowable to arraign the motives of a 
member, but the nature or consequences of a measure may be condemned in strong terms. It is not the 
man, but the measure, that is the subject of debate. 
 If one desires to ask a question of the member speaking, he should rise, and without waiting to be recog-
nized, say,  “ Mr. Chairman, I should like to ask the gentleman a question. ”  The chair then asks the speaker if 
he is willing to be interrupted, or the speaker may at once consent or decline, addressing, however, the chair, 
through whom the conversation must be carried on, as members cannot directly address one another in a 

268 Chapter 12
 deliberative assembly. If the speaker consents to the question, the time consumed by the interruption comes 
out of the time of the speaker. 
 If at any time the chairman rises to state a point of order, or give information, or otherwise speak, 
within his privilege, the member speaking must take his seat till the chairman has been heard ﬁ rst. 
When called to order by the chair the member must sit down until the question of order is decided. 
If his remarks are decided to be improper, he cannot proceed, if any one objects, without the leave of 
the assembly expressed by a vote, upon which question no debate is allowed. 
 Disorderly words should be taken down by the member who objects to them, or by the secretary, and then 
read to the member. If he denies them, the assembly shall decide by a vote whether they are his words or 
not. If a member cannot justify the words he used, and will not suitably apologize for using them, it is the 
duty of the assembly to act in the case. If the disorderly words are of a personal nature, after each party 
has been heard, and before the assembly proceeds to deliberate upon the case, both parties to the person-
ality should retire, it being a general rule that no member should be present in the assembly when any 
matter relating to himself is under debate. It is not, however, necessary for the member objecting to the 
words to retire unless he is personally involved in the case. Disorderly words to the presiding ofﬁ cer, or in 
respect to the ofﬁ cial acts of an ofﬁ cer, do not involve the ofﬁ cer so as to require him to retire. If any busi-
ness has taken place since the member spoke, it is too late to take notice of any disorderly words he used. 
 During debate, and while the chairman is speaking, or the assembly is engaged in voting, no member is 
permitted to disturb the assembly by whispering, or walking across the ﬂ oor, or in any other way. 
 Here’s the philosophy you should keep in mind, in a few punchy sentences: 
 1. 
 Try to know more about the facts than the other side. 
 2. 
 Never let the other side control the agenda. (Example: When the other side says it will look bad, 
do not answer that it will look okay. Instead, cite your First Amendment rights as a broadcaster or 
the advantages of cellular telephone to a stranded motorist, and why it is in the best interest of the 
community that the inevitable tower be the one proposed.) 
    3. 
 Answer lies with facts, citing the best possible (least contestible) source. And never let the lies hang 
around in public uncontroverted, lest the lies become  “ facts ”  in the minds of the townspeople. 
 4. 
 Make sure the record shows that the other side was always informed of your proposal and never 
surprised. You don’t want a Court to later say:  “ At the last minute, the Applicant revealed  … ” or 
 “ The ZBA was surprised to learn  … . ” 
 5. 
 As a continuing strategy, always leak good facts and repeat good facts. Most people don’t get the 
message the ﬁ rst time. As President Roosevelt, a former Secretary of the Navy, once said:  “ 10% of 
the people never get the word, and then there’s the Navy. ” 
 Here is a sample list of some difﬁ cult questions and suggested answers. (A full set of answer cards, 
formatted to ﬁ t on 4    6-inch index cards can be found on the CD as ﬁ lename Answer Cards.doc and 
Answer Cards.pdf.) Remember what you were taught in customer-service school: Validate the concern 
and answer the question. 
 “ I’m a doctor and I rely on my beeper and cellphone. Lives are at stake. What if you interfere with 
my beeper and cellphone? ” 

The Public Hearing—Your Big Moment in the Spotlight 269
Suggested answer:   “ Given the doctor’s responsibilities, she has every right to be concerned. However, 
we’ve been using the same transmitter, at a comparable height, in Adjacentville for many months now 
and I’ve had no reports of interference. I would point out to the Board that this topic is entirely outside 
of the Board’s jurisdiction, as it is completely preempted by federal law. Nonetheless, whether it is a 
television, VCR, cable TV, beeper, or whatever, should a problem arise, I pledge to work in good faith 
with anyone concerned to resolve the problem. [If you are a broadcaster, be sure you know the FCC 
requirements on blanketing interference.] However, you should know that a higher antenna is  less
likely to cause interference than a low one, because it is farther away. If interference is a concern, you 
should ask me to put the antenna up 1500 feet high — to be really far away. ” 
 “ When you came around, you misled me. I didn’t realize that what you were planning was going to 
be so monstrous. ” 
Suggested answer:  “ Ladies and Gentlemen (remember to address the Board, and do not respond 
directly to a person in the audience), I am very sorry that anyone feels he was misled. If the gentleman 
feels that way, then I failed in my mission to make the plan clear. When I walked around to meet with 
the neighbors, I carried a copy of the application you have before you tonight. If someone remembers 
my presentation differently, I assure you I had no intention to mislead. The proposal then was the same 
one before you tonight. I’ve tried to explain the project to the neighbors before this evening. ” 
 “ Isn’t this stuff really old technology that’s going to be replaced by the Internet and satellite commu-
nications or cellphones? Why do we have to have one of these things in our neighborhood? ” 
Suggested answer:  “ Members of the Board, I’m also a big fan of new technologies. But, when a 
disaster comes, will the Internet or cellular phone [pick an appropriate service for comparison] be there 
for emergency communications? Battery-powered radios work even after the cable TV wires are down. 
[An alternative: Cell phone systems work on the principle of reusing frequencies every few miles. Each 
satellite is just one cell tower.] Nonetheless, we’re not talking about a permanent change here. Antenna 
systems go up and antenna systems come down. You could condition the permit by insisting that the 
tower come down if it is not used for communications purposes for 18 months. I do believe that this 
proposal qualiﬁ es for a Special Permit under the bylaw and that it should be granted, despite whatever 
other methods of communications are available. ”
 “ It’s going to ruin our nice neighborhood. ” 
Suggested answer:  “ Ladies and gentlemen, if it were true that the antenna system would ruin the 
neighborhood, I wouldn’t propose it, because we are part of this community too. However, as the 
photos in my application demonstrate, it will not be visible at all from several directions, even in 
winter, and from the spots from which it can be seen, the tower will just look like a pencil line 
against the sky. Finally, as you can see from examples of similar antennas located in [name a fancy 
neighborhood or town], Western Civilization as we know it will not end if this permit is granted. It 
will not change the character of the neighborhood or the zoning district, which was residential and will 
remain residential. Here are photos of comparable antennas in community situations where property 
values continue to improve rapidly. ” 
 “ We already have a radio station. Why do we need another?

270 Chapter 12
Suggested answer:  “ I’m pleased to learn that you are a radio listener, and we hope to attract you to 
our station because we’ll be doing different things. Besides, you believe in competition, don’t you? It 
makes everyone work harder. However, the Federal Communications Commission is charged by law 
with deciding which stations go where. Because radio signals cannot be contained to political division 
lines, nationwide regulation in this area was required. Only the FCC can decide where stations may go. 
 “ Nobody really needs this, right? It’s just another [radio station, an opportunity to get into an acci-
dent], right? ” 
Suggested answer for broadcasting:  “ Our station will provide a unique service, serving our 
community, as we are required to do by law. If you are really saying that you don’t like the 
programming we contemplate, that would be censorship — wouldn’t you agree? The U.S. Congress 
assigns the licensing of broadcast stations to the FCC, not local communities. ”
Suggested answer for cellular telephone:  “ The controlling federal statute has been interpreted by the 
Courts to say that we must provide service, and the zoning ordinance cannot result in signiﬁ cant gaps in our 
coverage. We have presented evidence that this site is necessary to avoid a signiﬁ cant gap in our coverage. ”
 12.3   Substance 
 During the course of your presentation, you must never assume that all of the members of the Board 
have read your written presentation. If you get a question that can be answered straight out of the 
written proposal, simply begin:  “ Good question. I apologize for not covering it earlier in my oral 
presentation. May I call your attention to page 12, where I show that this is true. ”
 Don’t smirk. Don’t even  think about implying that a better-prepared Board member would have spotted 
it. Here are a few more tips: 
● 
 Don’t talk about what they allow in a neighboring town. You can be sure that the Board 
members here in your new town feel that they’d never stoop that low. 
● 
 Do stress that you’ve tried to be thorough and that you’ve tried to seek out the placement of 
the antenna system on the site that is the least visible to the most families, not because it is 
ugly (it isn’t), but because you want to be a good neighbor. 
 12.4   Summary 
 Eventually, it will be time to sum up. If things have been going well, use just one sentence.  “ Members 
of the Board, I’ve put a proposal before you that meets all the requirements of the bylaw, shows 
consideration for the neighbors and deserves your support. I ask that you grant [a Building Permit, a 
Special Use Permit, whatever it is you are seeking] under Section 123.456 of the bylaw. ”
 If you’ve been getting slammed, emphasize everything you’ve done to prevent what they’ve witnessed: 
 “ Members of the Board, I’m more than a little stunned by the opposition to this proposal. We 
assembled it over weeks and months, after consultations with [name the other parties — engineers, 
surveyors, the Town Planner, other town father and mothers, as well as neighbors with whom you 
consulted]. I came here proposing an antenna system designed to limit visual impact [if true]. It 
deserves an afﬁ rmative vote under the ordinance, state, and federal law. ” 

The Public Hearing—Your Big Moment in the Spotlight 271
 12.5   What I Bring to the Hearing 
 If you should ﬁ nd yourself packing up to appear before a Planning Board, Board of Appeals, or the 
like, perhaps you will ﬁ nd it useful to know what I keep in my permanently packed three-ring binder. 
These details are shown below. In addition to my permanent three-ring binder, I bring a copy of the 
local zoning code (bylaws), which can be bought at Town Hall for a nominal cost (in 2009, this is 
usually $10 to $45, but sometimes it is free when the bylaw is online). This permits you to respond 
to speciﬁ c questions on how that code applies. You could, especially with respect to radiofrequency 
interference, print out some legal cases from this book’s CD that you think are relevant to your 
situation.
 12.5.1  Federal Law 
 12.5.1.1  Which Structures Must Be Registered with the FCC? 
 See ﬁ lename FCC-Registering Antennas.pdf on the CD and  http://www.fcc.gov/wtb/antenna.what.
html . This information includes the 200-foot height rule, airport rules, and exemptions.  Use: Why 
argue about what the rule may be when you can bring a copy? 
 12.5.1.2  Compliance with Commission’s Rules Implementing the National Environmental Policy Act 
of 1969 (NEPA) 
 See ﬁ lename FCC  & National Environmental Policy.pdf on the CD and  http://www.fcc.gov/wtb/siting/
npaguid.html . An environmental assessment (EA) is required only in eight environmentally sensitive 
situations (47 CFR 1.1307(a)) or for radiation in excess of Ofﬁ ce of Engineering Technology (OET) 65 
guidelines (47 CFR 1.1307(b)). Use: To show that no EPA ﬁ ling is necessary or to show that the ﬁ ling 
you’ve done is all that is required. 
 12.5.2  State Law 
● 
 The state zoning statute 
● 
 The state statute governing the Board you are meeting  
● 
 The Building Code,  § 3108.0 Radio and Television Towers (or equivalent) 
● 
 The Building Code,  § 3109.1 Radio and Television Antennas (or equivalent)  
● 
 The Building Code,  § 1611 Wind Load (speciﬁ es mph by zone and psf by height, zone, and 
exposure), including Table 1611.4 (or equivalent) 
● 
 The state statute governing requirements for professional seals (such as a surveyor or 
professional engineer, including any section that waives a requirement, permits nonresident 
seals, or says that no seal is required for standard manufactured goods) 
 12.5.3  Radiofrequency Interference (RFI) 
 There is always someone who does not believe that the Board has no power over RFI. Be prepared to 
hand over a copy of the statute (47 USC  § 302a), and the three big cases. 

272 Chapter 12
 12.5.3.1  The Federal Statute 
 Refer to 47 USC  § 302a, Devices which interfere with radio reception. Key wording in  § 302a (f)(2) is 
 “ A station that is licensed by the Commission pursuant to section 301 of this title in any radio service 
for the operation at issue shall not be subject to action by a State or local government. ”
 12.5.3.2  Cases 
 Cases on the CD and completely cited and described elsewhere in this book include: 
● 
 Broyde v. Gotham Tower (a Florida case) 
● 
 Southwestern Bell Wireless, Inc. v. Johnson Co. Board of Co. Commissioners (a Kansas case) 
● 
 Freeman v. Burlington Broadcasters (a Vermont case) 
 12.5.3.3  Inverse Square Law 
 My binder also includes an illustration showing the inverse square law (1/ r2 ) to demonstrate that 
power is reduced as the square of the distance. There are many sources for such a drawing, including 
Wikipedia. 
 12.5.4  Nomenclature 
 I bring a pictorial to help a Board understand the various parts of an antenna: the mast, the boom, 
the elements, the support structure, the guy wires, and so forth. See Figure 12.3 (ﬁ lename Antenna 
Nomenclature.pdf on the CD). 
 12.5.5  Public Service 
 Include citations to your AM/FM/TV station from the governor, the mayor, etc., for public service 
(perhaps during a hurricane or snowstorm). 
 12.5.6  Bioeffects or Hazards (Electromagnetic Radiation) 
● 
 FCC OET 65 
● 
 Any relevant state code 
 12.5.7  Screening 
Sight Lines and Screening of Towers by Trees is a graphic prepared for the author; see ﬁ lename Tree 
Screening.pdf on the CD. 
 12.5.8  Property Values 
● 
 “ Electric Transmission Lines and the Selling Price of Residential Property, ”  The Appraisal 
Journal , October, pp. 490 – 499, 1979. See ﬁ lename Electric Power Study.pdf on the CD. This 

The Public Hearing—Your Big Moment in the Spotlight 273
 document shows no effect on prices of homes more than 50 feet away from power line towers. 
(Be sure to point out that, unlike power company transmission lines, radio antennas may 
someday go away, so there is no possible permanent effect.  Note : If anyone ﬁ nds an article 
later than 1979 in a serious appraisal journal, please let the rest of us know.) 
Panel antenna
(cellular telephone)
2 bay UHF antenna
(mobile radio)
UHF fiberglass
omnidirectional whip
VHF fiberglass
omnidirectional whip
VHF/UHF ground plane
VHF yagi
VHF dipole
Microwave parabolic dish
Guyed lattice tower, showing land requirements,
with three sets of guys and three guy anchors
Self supporting lattice tower
with platform on top
Tapered monopole
 Figure 12.3  Standard nomenclature for antenna types and elements. 

274 Chapter 12
● 
 “ Market Analyses to Determine Impact of Property Values in Proximity to Tower Sites, ”
prepared for BellSouth Mobility (April 21, 1996; Gwinnett County, GA):  “ … the construction 
and on-going presence of BellSouth Mobility cellular towers have no adverse effect on 
surrounding and adjoining residential property values. ” See ﬁ lename BellSouth Mobility 
Property Value Study.pdf on the CD. 
● 
 “ Impact Study of Two Communication Towers/Three Subdivisions, Cordova, Shelby County, 
Tennessee 38018, ” prepared for Contel Cellular (March 14, 1995, Memphis, TN):  “ … no 
negative impact exists from a communication tower and its relationship to single-family 
properties as tested. ” See ﬁ lename Memphis PCS Towers-Summary.pdf on the CD. 
 12.5.9  Birds 
● 
 MA Audubon Society letter from a ﬁ eld ornithologist saying,  “ Those of us who love birds are 
not concerned about small towers [less than 200 feet]. ” See ﬁ lename Audubon Letter.pdf on 
the CD. 
● 
 Summary page from U.S. Fish and Wildlife study 
 12.6   Your Opportunity to Make (or Break) Your Case 
 Your oral presentation will make, or break, your case. If you are calm, respectful, professional, and 
prepared for all the usual questions, you will do well in most circumstances. But you knew that. If you 
are unprepared for the inevitable questions and angry when you answer them, you will be hurt. A few 
tips on what can really hurt you: 
● 
  Do not tell the Board that they  have to give you this permit because you are entitled to it under 
federal law. That’s not really what any preemption says. If you are arguing preemption, you 
must do so in measured tones and make the smallest possible claim. For example, if you are 
applying for an AM broadcast station, do not claim a preemption for all broadcast stations. If 
you are seeking to ﬁ ll a  “ signiﬁ cant gap, ” limit your claim to this one gap. 
● 
 Do not tell the Board that you could do this easily in another town you name. The Board 
members don’t care. In fact, the Board members truly and sincerely believe that the reason 
their town is better than that other town is that this town exerts more control over such things 
as zoning matters. 
● 
 Do not tell the Board that what you propose will be invisible, unless it is really true. How 
could it be truly invisible? It could be, if it is below the tops of trees, if it is blocked by trees, 
or if it is set against a backdrop of trees that go higher up a slope. On the other hand, you 
can always say that people really don’t spend time looking up, that it will quickly become 
a routine feature, that it will go away when you move or when it is no longer in use as a 
communications antenna support structure (a condition you’ll gladly accept), and that the 
impact is limited. All construction has some impact and this proposal has an acceptable 
impact, within the bylaw or ordinance. Use the language of the bylaw — ” not materially 
adverse, ”  “ not signiﬁ cantly detrimental, ” etc. 

The Public Hearing—Your Big Moment in the Spotlight 275
 On the other hand, the following is true and can help you: 
● 
 Be respectful (not belligerent), even when asked a question that is designed to enrage you 
(such as:  “ Nobody really needs this, right? It’s just entertainment, right? ”  “ It’s just right-wing 
talk radio, right? ”  “ It’s just rock and roll, right? ” ).
● 
 Your station will be available as a resource in times of public emergency. 
● 
 The federal government has already decided that your license is in the public interest, 
convenience, and necessity. 
● 
 Your activities  are in the public interest. 
● 
 All elements of the bylaw or ordinance for this request have been met.  
● 
 It will be safe. 
 For advice on what to do when your moment in the spotlight is over and the Chairman has ended your 
event for the evening, see Chapter 13. It discusses what to do immediately after your last words (which, 
incidentally, are always:  “ Thank you, Mr. Chairman/Mme. Chairman ” ). 
 Here are some words of wisdom from one client, concerning zoning for tower(s): 
 A few comments on my experience in dealing with the town authorities and the value of having the 
right attitude.  …  When I faced the local Zoning Board of Appeals with my tower permit application, 
the whole room was ﬁ lled with neighbors who were opposed to it. We [Fred Hopengarten and I] won 
the permit under very difﬁ cult conditions for the following reasons: 
1. 
 Our homework was done. We had answers prepared for every potential question. As each 
question was asked during the hearings, a carefully written document was submitted to the 
record in response. No information was omitted or exaggerated in any way. Every fact presented 
was supportable. 
2. 
 We listened carefully to the speciﬁ c concerns raised by the opponents — and responded to every 
issue. We demonstrated a high degree of ﬂ exibility. We did not, however, compromise our most 
important requirements — the height and the types of antennas to be installed. 
 3. 
 We cooperated fully with the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals. We considered every 
question carefully. We showed respect for each individual and his position. We provided every 
piece of information requested immediately. When the Board members came to the site visit, 
they were treated to a complete tour of the property, which included clearly marked locations 
of several potential tower sites and guy anchors as well as trees marked with their measured 
heights for reference. 
 4. 
 Our primary opponent made us look good. The most vociferous opposition came from one 
neighbor. He is an attorney. Fortunately, he was not skilled in these matters. His attitude was 
extremely offensive to the Board. After making many unreasonable arguments and showing a 
lack of respect for the Board and its process, he was asked to be seated because his  “ input was 
no longer needed. ” The other neighbors were somewhat embarrassed at this point because they 
had chosen to allow him to lead their opposition to my application. He essentially showed that a 
bad attitude can drive your case in exactly the wrong direction. 

276 Chapter 12
 5. 
 I extended an olive branch to the entire neighborhood in my closing remarks — letting them 
know that I didn’t hold their opposition against them, and that whatever the outcome, I would 
continue to be a good neighbor — and that I would expect the same of them. I believe the Board 
saw this as a mature gesture, which only added to the long list of positives for our case. 
Bottom Line — During deliberations, Board members commented on the  “ quality of the presentation 
by the applicant. ” They were also impressed with the fact that I had dealt directly and honestly with 
the neighbors. Had we presented the same case and all the facts with  “ an attitude, ” we would most 
certainly have been  denied . Instead, I now have both an 80-foot tower and a neighborhood that gets 
along just ﬁ ne. 
 From Bill Sohl (Councilman for Mt. Olive Township, NJ), here is some solid, positive advice: 
 A little free advice for those working with municipal government ofﬁ cials:  “ You’ll catch more ﬂ ies 
with honey than with vinegar. ”  Be nice. Be agreeable. As someone very knowledgeable once said, 
 “ Be wise as serpents, gentle as doves. ” Know your stuff, but don’t throw it in their faces. 
 I am an elected ofﬁ cial myself. Remember, like it or not, the ofﬁ cials hold all the cards and even if 
you are right, you can waste much time, effort, and $$$ ﬁ ghting to get your way if you take an acri-
monious attitude. You don’t have to kiss up — just be polite, open, and willing to listen. 
 Show them (as early in the process as you can) how you can offer a workable compromise that allows 
them to save face, yet preserve the local communications resource. Show them what a resource it is, 
and give them just a taste of the depth of technical, electronic considerations that go into an efﬁ cient, 
non-interfering station. Be sure they are the ones who  “ ﬁ gure out ” the solution for your tower or 
antenna needs that you are trying to lead them towards. Don’t force them (by your abrasive attitude) 
to dig in their heels. 
 Remember, they are political and trying to represent those who will keep them in power. Living with 
your neighbors means compromise for everyone, except maybe a dictator. Most ofﬁ cials are willing 
to consider alternatives. Be sure you are too. Don’t try to be a bully. It won’t work! 
 Mike Lazaroff, Esq., of the Pennsylvania Bar, adds: 
 Like Bill Sohl, I am also a local elected ofﬁ cial and agree wholeheartedly with the advice given. We 
try to be reasonable and fair with all applicants, no matter what they want to do, but everybody is 
much more satisﬁ ed with the outcome when people don’t come in with an arrogant,  “ know-it-all ”  
attitude. You’ll ﬁ nd that most people are a lot more reasonable than you’d expect if you make an hon-
est effort to be cooperative. 
 Finally, some notes from Jim Idelson: 
 Lessons Learned from the Sudbury, MA, Experience: 
● 
 The nomenclature sheet was useful. [See  Figure 12.3  and ﬁ lename Antenna Nomenclature.
pdf on the CD.] 
● 
 It would be nice to have positive articles to hand out when the question comes up in which 
[radio, TV, cellular telephone] is described in negative terms, perhaps as quaint, or perhaps 
unnecessary in this era of modern technology and the Internet.  
● 
 Include recent articles showing what your station, other stations, or cellular telephone did 
in the most recent crisis or hurricane or ﬂ ood. The articles should prove that the emergency 
aspects of your service are still vibrant. 

The Public Hearing—Your Big Moment in the Spotlight 277
● 
 Get a number as to how many towers there are nationwide. Include TV antenna towers. 
This would help to show that they are in all sorts of neighborhoods. 
● 
 Be prepared to show that certain people have no sight line. 
● 
 Don’t screw around with the height. Tell them the height of the tower and the height to the 
top of the mast. Otherwise, it will come out painfully.  
● 
 Only photos of the woods in winter will ultimately satisfy questioners as to whether it will 
be a problem in winter. 
●
 Always close with the bylaw test to be applied and exactly what you are asking for. 
●
 In the closing, emphasize that, with time, the offensiveness evaporates. 
● 
 Offer to plant evergreens as appropriate to block view of base. 
●
 Always volunteer the anticlimbing device, and bring a photo that will allow the board to 
believe it will be effective. 
 Inviting supporters to attend has its pros and cons: 
●
 You don’t want to be seen as the guy who brought a riot to the meeting. 
● 
 You don’t want an invited  “ friend ” to sing off key; i.e., to say something that contravenes 
the very carefully thought-out position that you’ve put together. 
● 
 Out-of-town observers (speakers are usually asked to say their names and addresses) are 
heavily discounted, unless such a person is an expert. Boards tend to look on this hearing 
as a town matter. 
 Thus, the following good ideas: 
● 
 If employees come, ask that they leave the baseball hats at home. It is disrespectful to wear 
a hat indoors anyway. Other indicia attire may only look, to the untrained eye, like they are 
members of a motorcycle gang. 
● 
 Most employees will not help your legal arguments. Ask them to do their best to remain 
silent. On the other hand, do not underestimate the star power of on-air talent. 
● 
 Ask your friends to get there early and take seats. This forces the NIMBYs (a NIMBY is a 
person who is there to say:  “ Not in my back yard ” ) to stand, to tire, and to leave early. 
●
 Employees who live in town are, however, usually useful, as they may actually know the 
bylaw, the Board members, and some history. 
 12.7   Continuances 
 There are several reasons why a Board may decide to continue your hearing until the next session. This 
is called a continuance . There are some subtleties to consider: 
● 
 The Board may want the continuance because you submitted a big pile of information at the 
last minute (within a few days of the hearing or that very evening). In this case it is perfectly 
reasonable for them to continue the hearing to absorb the material. You can sometimes avoid 

278 Chapter 12
 this situation by submitting your ton of information well in advance, yet this is sometimes 
impossible. So, you must live with the continuance. 
● 
 If you have retained a lawyer, the continuance will add to your expense. You are now asking 
your lawyer to show up twice. This is another reason to get your materials in early. 
● 
 Some states have a maximum number of days between the date of the original submission 
of the Building Permit application, or the date of the original appeal to the Board, and the 
date by which the Board must render a decision in writing, or else the appeal is granted. This 
creates an interesting dynamic. 
● 
 You may be asked to agree to the continuance. If you do, the number of days until the hearing 
continues will be tacked onto the current end date. The tension here is that, if you refuse to 
agree to a continuance, the Board can become irritated with you and not give you any breaks. 
● 
 If the continuance is due to your late submission of information or because you want to 
supplement the record, you should agree to it. If the continuance is because they are going to 
ask Town Counsel for ways to torpedo your application, you should not agree to it. 
● 
 In particular, if you hear the Board discussing the real meaning of some court case that came out 
badly for your side, and they appear to be looking for time to solicit advice from Town Counsel 
on how to use that case against you,  do not agree to the continuance. It will just extend the time, 
cost you more money, and allow the Board to write a decision that denies your application even 
more elegantly! You are going to lose. Make them decide more quickly, as this increases the 
likelihood that they will write something in the opinion that will make it easy to appeal and win! 
● 
 If the continuance is to allow a site visit so they can resolve for themselves a fact situation, 
then you must stress that you are only agreeing to the continuance for the purpose of the site 
visit, but the public comment portion of the hearing should be closed. This can be good, if 
the facts are in your favor. A typical example: You say that your antennas will not be visible 
from the neighbor’s bedroom window because of the 200 feet of thick forest in between. 
The neighbor says that your antennas will dominate his view. 1 By all means, agree to a 
continuance for the purpose of a site visit. Let the Board see that the neighbor is a liar. 
● 
 You could also agree to a continuance solely for the purpose of submitting additional written 
materials. If possible, try to avoid a continuance of the public portion. This gives your neighbors 
a chance to organize and develop a real head of steam — by getting petitions, dragooning 
neighbors to appear and testify against you, and so forth. Since you don’t want an angry mob 
of neighbors appearing the next time, if they weren’t there the ﬁ rst time, do your best to avoid a 
continuation of the public portion of the hearing. Here are some arguments you may use: 
 1.  You’ve assembled a team of experts to appear on your behalf, the meeting had fully 
published notice, and it is simply not fair for you to be forced to bring your witnesses back 
1  I once attended a site view where the neighbor claimed that the proposed tower would wreck his view. On site, the Board 
realized that his great view was East, while the tower was going to be Southwest. No matter how much he pointed in the 
direction of the tower and complained, those present on site saw that the porch and all of the picture windows were aimed East!

The Public Hearing—Your Big Moment in the Spotlight 279
 again. This is especially true because your lawyer, engineer, professor, whatever, came in 
from out of town and cannot be there to rebut testimony the next time due to the distance 
or a scheduling conﬂ ict, or both. Even hostile Boards want a fair hearing, since it makes it 
harder to overturn their decision against you. 
 2.  Everything they need has already been submitted. There is no need for a further public hearing. 
 3.  It is unfair to make you pay your lawyer for an additional hearing. Can’t any additional 
information required be obtained by a site visit or submitted in writing? 
 12.7.1  The Viewing 
 The Board may decide that, before making a decision, it wishes to visit the site and see for itself 
how tall the trees may be, how good or bad the view may be, etc. There are several things about the 
 “ Viewing ” or the  “ Site Visit ” that you should know. 
 12.7.1.1  Opportunity for Argument 
 When the Board shows up on your property, you may think that you will have that extra moment to 
show just what a brilliant orator you are, holding forth with a captive audience while waving your 
hands. Dream on. 
 First, the visit is likely to last only a few minutes. Unless your Board is different from most, they will 
not be there long enough to have a cup of coffee. Furthermore, they don’t want your cup of coffee — for 
reasons of the appearance of impropriety, delay, or whatever. 
 Second, this is likely not part of the public hearing, so they shouldn’t want to hear any argument. The 
most you can do is point and say: “ This is north. ”  “ Mr. Jones lives there. ”  “ The property line is marked 
by that pin with the blue cap. ”  “ The piece of wood stuck in the ground with the top painted orange is 
the proposed site. ” And so forth. 
 Furthermore, if you start to engage in oral argument on the spot, and an opposing neighbor is present 
(as the opposing neighbor has every right to be under your state’s  “ government in the sunshine ” act, 
even though he would otherwise be trespassing on your land), you’ve really opened up the chance for 
the neighbors to start arguing all over again. This will remind the Board just how much your project is 
opposed. Arguing at the viewing is rarely in your best interest. 
 What do you do if an opponent starts arguing ﬁ rst? First, point out that this is not part of the public 
hearing and that the Board should not be hearing argument. This accomplishes the point of making it 
plain that you are law abiding and the opponent is not. Second,  ask the Board members present if you 
should respond. From there, if you are asked to respond, or you just can’t help yourself,  speak brieﬂ y . 
This is a viewing, these are daylight hours, and the Board is composed of volunteers who would rather 
be at home mowing the lawn or watching a football game. Or, it might be a weekday, and they need to 
scamper off to work. In any event, they want to get out of there. 
 Here are some tips on preparing for the viewing: 
● 
 Get rid of  “ slash. ” You may have cut some trees or branches recently, to prepare for the 
construction. No matter how all those dead branches came to be on the property, get rid 

280 Chapter 12
 of them. There is no need to remind the Board that you may cut down some more trees or 
branches to accommodate the structure or guy wires. The presence of slash would do that. 
● 
 Clean up the yard so that no one could get hurt. You are arguing that you will construct the 
project safely. Why would you want to leave out ladders, shovels, or other tools that someone 
could trip over? 
● 
 Cover any holes. You wouldn’t leave an open hole into which someone could fall, would you? 
● 
 Take the trash to the dump before they arrive. Some people equate neat construction with safe 
construction. While the essential truth of this equation may be tested, there is simply no need 
for it to become an issue. 
● 
 Plant ﬂ ags or wooden sticks (a pointy 1     3-inch pine stick often used by builders to show 
boundaries or mark a driveway is a useful tool) to show where the support structure will go, 
where the guy wires will go, and if not otherwise marked, to show where boundaries are 
located. This will allow you to just say:  “ The orange-painted 1    3 is where the structure will 
go. The unpainted 1    3 is where the guy wires will go. ” Thus, you can do less talking, which 
is generally good, especially if a neighbor is blathering on and repeating himself or herself. 
 12.8   Submitting a Proposed Decision and Order 
 It is hard to understand why, in cases such as this, Boards do not simply ask the applicant, who is going 
to be granted a permit anyway, to submit a proposed decision and order. But they don’t. However, if the 
Board has decided in your favor and is fumbling with the question of who is going to write the opinion 
and order, you should volunteer to submit a proposed decision and order. Here’s a sample based on a 
real decision, with only the names changed. It is included on the CD as ﬁ lename Proposed Decision 
 & Order.doc. Find a recent decision by the same Board and submit your own sample decision. The 
Board may have no interest whatsoever in looking at your proposed decision. But, if you have written 
the proposed decision straight and not slanted any wording in your favor, using only the language of 
the ordinance, such as you will ﬁ nd below ( “ will not pose a detriment to the public good ” ), there is 
a chance that the Board may ﬁ nd it helpful. Submitting a draft decision is used in court matters all 
the time, but Boards may not be used to it. The worst thing that can happen is that you’ve spent time 
drafting and the Board ignores it. Nonetheless, the exercise of drafting it will tell you what you need to 
concentrate on as you make your presentation.
 Decision of the Board of Appeals on the Appeal and Petition of Channel 666 Television, Inc., 
666 Friendlyville Road, Unfriendly, MA  
 Pursuant to public notice in the _________ [name of newspaper], a newspaper of general 
circulation in the Town of Unfriendly, published on [Month] 19  & 26, 200_, and pursuant to 
notice sent by mail, postage prepaid, to all interested parties in accordance with the provisions 
of State General Laws, a Public Hearing was held on the petition of Channel 666 Television, 
Inc., ﬁ led on [Month and Day], 200_. The public hearing was held Thursday, November 16, 
200_, at 6:30 p.m., and continued through December 14, 200_, at Unfriendly Town Hall, 9 East 

The Public Hearing—Your Big Moment in the Spotlight 281
 Main Street, Unfriendly, MA. Voting members of the Board, Jean Pierre Inconnu, Chairman; 
Anne Judith; and Steven Paul were present for both sessions. The petition requested a special 
permit seeking relief from the Unfriendly Zoning Ordinance, Article XX, Section 17, Antenna 
Height Limits, for property located at 666 Friendlyville Road, Unfriendly, MA, Assessors Map 
88, Lot 73. The petitioner has requested a special permit to install a 35  digital (DTV) antenna 
and associated site work on an existing tower. The proposed tower is a structure over 35 feet 
in height and would require a special permit in accordance with the Town of Unfriendly Zoning 
Ordinance, Article XX, Section 17, which limits antenna heights to 35 feet. 
 It was the ﬁ nding of the Board of Appeals that: 
 The installation of a 45  digital (DTV) antenna and associated site work on an existing tower will 
not pose a detriment to the public good, and the Board voted to issue a special permit for the 
following work: 
 1) Add 45  digital (DTV) antenna (at elevation 525  – 570  ), 
 2) Replace one level of 1-3/13  guy wires with 1-5/16  cable, 
 3) Replace existing 3/4  diameter solid rod diagonals with 7/8  rods from elevation 510 
to 570  , 
 4) Add 2     2  mid-braces from 320  to 460  and 510  to 570  , and 
 5) Add 3  electronic news gathering (ENG) dish antenna (elevation 627  ). 
 This special permit shall be issued for a period of ﬁ ve (5) years from the date of this decision. It shall 
be renewed automatically for successive ﬁ ve-year periods provided that a written request for renewal 
is made to the Zoning Board of Appeals not less than three (3) months prior to the expiration of the 
then-existing ﬁ ve-year period. Publication of notice of said request shall be made in the same manner 
as would be required for an original application for a special permit. Said notice shall state that 
the renewal request will be granted automatically unless, prior to the expiration of the then-existing 
permit, a written objection to the renewal, stating reasons, is received by the Board. In the event that 
a written objection is received, a hearing on the permit renewal shall be held and shall proceed in a 
manner identical to the course of proceedings in connection with an original permit application. 
 A vote was taken. The Board voted to grant the petition unanimously. 
 Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Appeals has the right to appeal such decision 
to a Court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40A, 
Section 17, by ﬁ ling such appeal within twenty (20) days after the date on which the decision 
was ﬁ led with the Town Clerk. 
 The structure must be sited and constructed in substantial conformance with the plans and 
speciﬁ cations submitted with the application and shall otherwise comply with the letter and 
spirit of Section _____. 
 Member 4 was not present at the deliberation meeting, so did not vote. 
 Jean Pierre Inconnu, Chairman 
 Anne Judith, Clerk 
 Steven Paul, Member 
 Name 4, Member 
 Dated: ____Month_______, 200_ 

282 Chapter 12
 12.9   The Press 
 12.9.1  The Interview 
 At some point a reporter may approach you. Prepare for it now by asking yourself the questions that a 
reporter will ask you: Who? What? Where? When? Why? Figure out the answers you want to give and 
stick to them. But ﬁ rst, a story: 
 One cold morning, two boys were playing hockey at the Frog Pond on Boston Common, when all of a 
sudden a pit bull appeared out of nowhere and attacked one of the boys. The second boy, thinking quickly, 
stuck his hockey stick under the dog’s collar and twisted it, breaking the dog’s neck and killing it. 
 A reporter who happened to be walking by saw this event and hurried over to get the story.  “ Young 
Bruins fan saves friend from vicious dog! ” he began writing in his notebook. 
 “ But I’m not a Bruins fan, ” protested the boy.  “ Oh, I’m sorry, ” replied the reporter, scratching out his initial 
headline.  “ Brave Red Sox fan heroically rescues friend from horriﬁ c attack! ” the reporter wrote anew. 
 “ But I’m not a Red Sox fan either, ” the boy protested again.  “ My mistake, ” said the reporter,  “ I just 
assumed that here in Boston everyone was either a Bruins or Red Sox fan. Never mind, though. What 
team do you like? ”  “ I’m a Yankees fan, ” the boy said proudly. 
 The reporter disgustedly turned the page in his notebook and wrote furiously,  “ Little bastard from 
New York kills beloved family pet. ” 
 Now what is the point of this story, besides a gratuitous slap at the fourth estate? It is that there is a 
strong likelihood that you are from out of town (moving in and seeking to erect an antenna system) 
and that you are a minority (homeowners are plentiful, tower owners are rare). You cannot rely on a 
reporter to put your best face forward. A local weekly newspaper is usually the place where young, 
inexperienced reporters get a start. In addition, always remember that they became reporters because 
they were good with words, not numbers or science. Keep that in mind. Now, on to the usual questions. 
 12.9.2  Who? 
 Decide how you would like to be called in the article. The reporter is likely to ask you how to spell 
your name. If you spell L-A-W-R-E-N-C-E, you will be called Lawrence in the article. It will also 
avoid an entire article in which you are called Laurence. If you spell L-A-R-R-Y, you will be called 
Larry in the article. Don’t insist on getting your station call sign or an operating frequency into the 
article, because the reporter will only think you are more of a geek than he already believes you are. 
But, if you can offer a well-known brand (CBS or AT & T, for example), try to work it in. It can be 
comforting, and suggests that things will be done right. 
 12.9.3  What? 
 The building code calls it an  “ antenna-support structure. ” Call it a  structure for short. If you can avoid 
it, don’t call it a  “ tower ” (unless it is over 200 feet tall, in which case trying to avoid the word  “ tower ” 
is a fruitless exercise). The reporter will probably use both, just to vary the text. Call what’s on top an 

The Public Hearing—Your Big Moment in the Spotlight 283
 “ antenna, ” not a  “ multibay array. ” Do not use the phrase  “ beam. ” Beam conjures up the idea of being 
zapped or transported, as in  “ Beam me up, Scotty. ” Not a good phrase. 
 12.9.4  Where? 
 If it is the truth, keep talking about the location as  “ in the woods, ”  “ in the industrial zone, ” or  “ next to 
the cement plant. ”
 12.9.5  When? 
 If you are an experienced engineer, with experience that might be known to readers (experience that 
does not have negative connotations), use that to convey that this is not a novel experiment and that you 
know what you are doing. 
 12.9.6  Why? 
 Emphasize public service and public safety, or an attempt to conquer the  “ digital divide ” by spreading 
wireless Internet. Sorry, my reporter friends, but that’s mostly what the public will understand. One 
more cell site or another hip-hop station won’t really help with the zoning folks. Try to ﬁ gure out a 
reason that the public should care. 
 Finally, remember that reporters have deadlines. Delay, and the story will feature your opponents, if 
you have them, without your side.  “ The applicant could not be reached ” does not help your cause. 
 12.9.7  On the Record or Off? 
 If you’re going to speak to the press, I cannot recommend highly enough an article called  “ Hard 
Pressed ” by David Reich from the Fall 2001 issue of  BC Law , the alumni magazine of Boston College 
Law School. It’s on the CD as ﬁ lename HardPressed.pdf. One section of this article in particular 
bears reprinting here, as it can save you a lot of grief and potential embarrassment or trouble if you’re 
unfamiliar with what exactly the terms  “ on the record ” and  “ off the record ” mean, as well as the useful 
phrases “ on background ” and  “ on deep background ” : 
 The terms  on and  off the record ,  on background , and  on deep background  can mean different things 
to different reporters, so while the deﬁ nitions given here are generally accepted, it makes sense to 
spell out exactly what you and the reporter are agreeing to before you start an interview. 
 Unless a reporter says otherwise, all conversations between you and the reporter are considered on 
the record. This means anything you say can be quoted verbatim, paraphrased, or summarized. It can 
also be attributed to you by name, with your job title, or other identiﬁ cation. 
 If a reporter agrees to speak with you off the record, nothing you say can be used in any form. 
 If a reporter agrees to speak with you on background, anything you say can be quoted verbatim, 
paraphrased, or summarized, but the reporter may not identify you as the source except in a generic 
way — e.g., as  “ a Manhattan civil rights lawyer. ” 
 If a reporter agrees to speak with you on deep background, your words can be paraphrased or summarized 
but not quoted. Also, conversations on deep background must be reported without attribution of any kind. 

284 Chapter 12
 12.9.8  The Photos 
 If your case has stirred up a local storm, the paper will want a photo of an existing structure. We are now on 
dangerous ground, for technical reasons. There is a chance that your own 4     6-inch color photos of your 
former structure (if you had one erected at your former site) will be rejected because they don’t scan well. 
This excuse is, however, also a reason to reject your photos because they  “ don’t tell an interesting story. ” 
 Closer to the truth is that the paper employs photographers, and your own photos were  “ not invented 
here. ” Nonetheless, it is in your best interest to suggest where to ﬁ nd a comparable antenna-support 
structure in your area, rather than letting the paper’s photographer loose. If that happens, the paper may 
run a photo accompanying your story of the local 1,400-foot broadcast tower, 8-feet wide all the way 
up and visible for miles. The caption could read:  “ The WBZ-TV tower, similar to the one LocalTel 
seeks to erect behind the truck stop. ” You don’t want that. Not only that, but the photo will be taken 
 “ vertically ” (in portrait mode). Any photo you provide should always be in landscape mode and from a 
distance. That’s a fairer representation. 
 So, if you are going to erect a standard U.S. Tower, Pirod, Sabre, Rohn SSV, or Rohn 55G structure 
(any standard structure), tell the newspaper where to ﬁ nd a similar antenna system — in the woods, 
if possible — and give them an exact address and directions. If you have applied for a second or 
subsequent structure on your property, point out that the controversy is not how it looks from your 
backyard but how it looks from the home of a particular complaining neighbor. Send the photographer 
to that neighbor. The farther away the photo is taken, the better off you are, due to the granularity of 
reproduction of a halftone. (This means that the farther away the photographer gets from those thin 
tower legs, the more they will look like a pencil line in the photo.) 
 Whatever you do,  do not agree to pose in front of an existing structure . When the photo of you in the 
foreground is taken, the camera will be almost on the ground. You will look like the Jolly Green Giant, 
and the structure will loom large with a bad view. This is a view not available to members of the public 
and is not the view about which anyone will complain. 
 That’s totally unfair. Don’t let them do it to you! One way to avoid such a photo is to say that you will 
not pose in front of your existing structure or outdoors at all. That’s your privilege. 
 12.9.9  The Letter to the Editor 
 Okay, the ﬁ rst hearing is over, the article has come out, and the editorial has railed against you. What 
do you do? The temptation is to write a letter to the editor in which you tell the editor that the reporter: 
● 
 Is a poor excuse for a human being 
● 
 Promised to tell your side of the story with compassion 
● 
 Misrepresented something you said 
● 
 Got your call sign (or frequency or power output) wrong 
● 
 And so forth 

The Public Hearing—Your Big Moment in the Spotlight 285
 Resist that temptation. If the article was small and had no photo and only a few neighbors are raging 
against you, leave it alone. The result of your letter may be a follow-up article and a photo, because 
now the newspaper has a genuine controversy and a guarantee that even more people will come out to 
the second hearing. You don’t want that.
 If it is a small ﬁ re, keep it a small ﬁ re. Furthermore, you will ﬁ nd that some neighbors just wanted 
to vent against you. Perhaps your kid bit their dog, or they once had TV interference from a CBer 
at a former home. It doesn’t matter. Once having had the chance to vent their feelings, Mr. and Mrs. 
Neighbor will go home and not return to a second hearing — because they’ve had their say. You may 
also be able to placate them between a ﬁ rst and a second hearing. 
 What you  don’t want to do is to cause your application to become a  cause c é l è bre . If you absolutely 
must write a letter to the editor,  do not tell him that: 
● 
 This is newsworthy (this brings out the photographer). 
● 
 His reporter is a lying dog (this brings out staff loyalty).  
● 
 The editor is trying to rule the world from the editorial page (of course he is). 
 Why? For the reason in an expression oft-attributed to Mark Twain:  “ Never argue with someone who 
buys ink by the barrel and paper by the ton. ”
 So what do you do? Make one or two, not more, afﬁ rmative points that are part of the story you are 
trying to sell. For example: 
● 
 “ For those who wonder what such an antenna system will look like, there is an existing one on 
Old County Road, two blocks west of Main. Though your readers may have never noticed it, 
it has been there for 20 years. ”
● 
 “ Concerning claims that such a system will lower property values, I suggest that they drive by 
Old County Road, two blocks west of Main. Every home in the neighborhood sells for more 
than $750,000, so it will probably come as a surprise to people that their homes have been 
negatively impacted in price. ”
● 
 “ While the claim has been made that we’re just another broadcaster [that you can get cell 
service from another company], I call your attention to [name a recent public-relations 
triumph], where the storm took out power [or we exposed a local scam or explained a local 
ballot initiative], and the Governor of that state cited us for their excellent work supporting 
disaster-relief teams [or informing the electorate]. ” 
 The best ways to get a story printed are to keep it short, to add something to the discussion, and not to 
attack any person. A long letter will be edited for length anyway. 
 So, before you send any protest off to an editor, ask your spouse and a friend to review the letter. Make 
them move quickly, however, because if you are dealing with a weekly local paper it is easy to miss the 
deadline and become “ old news. ” 

286 Chapter 12
 An example of an appropriate response would be:
 Hi, Andy: 
 Thank you for taking the time to interview me for the story; much appreciated. I think your 
story was fair and largely accurate, but I would disagree with your opening sentence (of course, 
that’s water over the dam, under the bridge, or wherever water goes). It says:  “ A radio tower 
in Charlotte might have negative effects on neighbors ’ health, but the scientiﬁ c evidence isn’t 
strong enough. ”
 In its recommendation to the Zoning Board, the Board of Health clearly stated,  “ In short, 
there is NO [ emphasis added ] persuasive evidence that RFR can cause cancer or any other adverse 
nonthermal health effect. ” Later, the report added,  “ The Project complies with FCC guidelines 
which protect against thermal health effects of RFR with a wide margin of safety. ” And the 
E-Board concluded, in part,  “ At this time there is no persuasive and comprehensive evidence 
that RFR causes any nonthermal health effect, ” and lastly that the station  “ has proved by 
a preponderance of the evidence that RFR from the Project will cause no adverse health 
effects. ” 
 This last sentence is important, and I hope that you will use it in any follow-up stories on the 
tower. Our opponents, some of whom no longer live near this tower, have long argued that the 
tower is dangerous to the health of those in its immediate neighborhood. But, after the evidence 
was in, the Board of Health concluded that the tower “ will cause no adverse health effects ” not, 
as you suggest, that it “ might have negative effects on neighbors ’ health. ” That is a most critical 
distinction.
 Thanks again. 
 Jim Broad 
 Caster, Inc. 

287
 Deliberations and Decisions 
 13.1   Immediately Afterward 
 Whew, the public hearing is over. The Chairman has said thank you to all parties, and the next agenda 
item is now under consideration. The tradition is that you gather somewhere — down the hall or out 
in the parking lot — out of earshot of the other side. You may want to call someone a liar or describe 
someone else as playing fast and loose with the facts. It’s natural. You want to replay the ballgame. 
 WAIT! 
 If the panel hears all items and then votes at the end of the evening, you’ll want to be there when the 
discussion occurs and the vote is taken, or else your lawyer should be there. If someone makes an 
obvious mistake with a name or address or other plain fact, don’t interrupt, but walk calmly over to the 
Secretary and quietly tell her the correct name, correct spelling, etc. The time for public comment is 
over, but as a practical matter, you can still answer a question if someone wants to ask one. If anything 
else affecting your application is going to happen that evening, you should be there when it happens. 
 On the other hand, if nothing more is going to happen that evening with respect to your decision, 
you and your team can leave the room to discuss how it went. (How do you know nothing more will 
happen? You’ve sat through a prior meeting and seen how this Board does things, and, in addition, 
you’ve asked the Chairman before you left the room.) 
 Even if that’s the case, don’t replay the hearing within earshot of anyone else! No good can come of that. 
 First and foremost, if you’re in the hall and making noise that drifts back into the hearing room as they 
move on to other issues, members of the panel be irritated with you for being rude. It is not good to 
irritate the panel. 
 Second, the local newspaper reporter could report what you say. You could give away an essential fact 
that is against your interest to disclose. You could threaten someone. (Don’t do that!) 
 Another possibility is that the reporter from the local newspaper, who covers week after week of dull 
meetings, is all excited and rushes over to you to ask some questions. If you have a lawyer, let your 
lawyer answer the questions. If you don’t have a lawyer, be pleasant and do not say anything that you 
did not say during the hearing. A real danger is that you could say something that could wind up in the 
paper before the Board has met to vote on its decision. 
CHAPTER 13 

288 Chapter 13
 By the way, forget about telling the reporter something  “ on background ” or  “ on deep background. ”
You have no relationship built up with that reporter and little likelihood of a post-encounter 
relationship. You have no way to control the reporter, no way to punish bad behavior. If the reporter 
reveals something in print that you didn’t want revealed, unlike a lawyer, doctor, or priest, he or
she has no license to take away. For further tips on speaking with the press, see Chapter 12. 
 Away from the reporter, and back at your group meeting, remember that your lawyer charges by the 
hour. He’s human and is only too happy to replay the game, too, but you aren’t going to get much 
beneﬁ t from his thinking after the ﬁ rst 20 minutes or so. However, there is one exception. 
 Let’s say you have gathered a team — an engineer, surveyor, a close friend or colleague who has been 
useful, and the lawyer. Let’s say that you need to map another strategy, perhaps to reapply for
a different site on your property or perhaps to strategize your appeal. It will be hard and expensive
to get them together again. If you need to talk, leave Town Hall immediately and go to some place 
where you can have coffee and take notes. 
 The next day, people are going to ask how it went. People who were there may ask what you are going 
to do next. It is really easy to say something inappropriate responding to these questions, so be careful. 
 13.2   If You Won 
 If you won, don’t gloat. Don’t tell the newspaper reporter that the folks on the other side were a bunch 
of idiots or that they lied or misrepresented things. It is never a good idea to anger an enemy. 
   Be gracious. If you don’t know how, here is a sample sound bite:  “ I’m pleased that the Board supported 
the application. I understand that in an adversary situation they have to make tough decisions. Now, we 
just want to put up the antennas and do what we are supposed to do under our FCC license. ”
   Don’t say anything that will cause the Board to rewrite the favorable decision that is coming. Here is an 
example of something stupid that you could do.  “ Now that we’ve got the permit, I’m going to cut down 
all the trees on the street side of the property and pave it over. ” 
 If you say such a thing and the Board hears about it, they may decide to add a condition requiring you 
to come back to them every time you need to cut so much as a blade of grass. Of course, the remark 
and the response are exaggerations, but you get the idea. 
 Another thing: Please don’t walk out of the hearing saying,  “ Boy, we really pulled the wool over the 
eyes of those dummies. ” Do I have to explain why? 
 Well, I  will explain. Remember:  “ It ain’t over until it’s over. ” The actual decision isn’t written yet. That 
will be done by one member, or perhaps by the Secretary to the Board. The Board must still reconvene 
to sign the decision. Many Boards vote, then assign the drafting of the decision to a member, and then 
must sign the decision at their next meeting. Some Boards just ask members to drop by Town Hall to 
sign. Some Boards have a signing session on a Saturday morning, when they do nothing but sign things. 
Every Board has its own practices. But, when you are thinking about a timeline, it is very common to 
have one or more evenings for the hearing, a continuation after the close of the public hearing so that 
additional material may be presented in writing, and another evening after the vote for the signing of the 

Deliberations and Decisions 289
decision. In some jurisdictions the Board may have 30, 65, or even 90 days to issue a decision. They’ll 
have a lot of time to ﬁ gure out a way to pay you back for any belittling remark that ﬁ lters back to them. 
 13.3   If You Lost 
 Don’t insult the Board and don’t insult your opponents. 
 Don’t insult the Board because it is likely that you are going to be back in front of them again someday. 
You may have to come up with a different plan and then go back to them. When you do, you’d like to 
be treated courteously and you’d like to be successful. 
 Or you may appeal. If you win that appeal you may get a  “ remand ” order that sends you back to the 
Board with instructions for them to reconsider in light of the new court decision. Should that happen, 
you could wind up again in front of the same people you insulted six months earlier. 
 Remember, these people are volunteers. They are not paid to take insults. They don’t work in the NBA, 
where referees are paid to listen to hoots, whistles, and catcalls. Unlike the referee, who can’t take it out 
on the man in the crowd who is booing him, the Board can and will ﬁ nd a way to vent their anger on an 
arrogant and ungrateful applicant. So be nice. Be respectful, just like your mother taught you to be. 
 Also, be kind to your neighbors. After all, you still have to live with them. If you must return to the 
Board with another plan or appeal, you don’t want your neighbors to be so angry from the last time that 
they really do a lot of homework, hire a lawyer, and try to crush you in the next public hearing. 
 In victory or defeat, it always pays to be nice to your opponents. Remember that. As President Lyndon 
Johnson used to say:  “ Keep your friends close and your enemies closer. ” 
 13.4   Modifying the Decision 
 Occasionally, you will run into a Board that publishes draft decisions. This is really good government, 
because it is always possible for a volunteer decision writer to bungle something — whether it be a typo, 
a term of art, or a confusion. 
 For example, let’s say you’ve applied for a Special Permit to put an array of cellular panel antennas on an 
existing broadcast tower, and the decision refers to the panels as broadcast antennas. The ﬁ rst thing you 
will want to do is get that mistake corrected, but your lawyer is going to ask:  “ Does it make a difference? 
Isn’t an antenna an antenna? ” Your answer is:  “ Yes, it makes a difference. ” Someday you’ll want to swap 
out those panel antennas for dual-band antennas or the latest and greatest phased array. You’ll show up 
and a member of the panel who wasn’t there the ﬁ rst time around will say:  “ Hey, wait a minute. The use 
authorized is a broadcast antenna — it says so right here in the decision. Now you are asking for a cellular 
telephone use. We now have a different ordinance for those. You’ll have to start fresh. ” 
 I’m not making this up. I lived through something almost identical. 
 As a result of the typo or mistake, you’ll want a corrected decision. The best thing to do is to get in 
touch with the decision writer immediately and point out the problem. Maybe it can be taken care of 
before the ofﬁ cial vote to approve the decision or before the signing of the decision. 

290 Chapter 13
 If the draft opinion was not distributed to the parties for corrections (and, it must be repeated, circulating 
a draft opinion is a rare but really good government thing to do), be sure to attend the signing session. 
Ask the Secretary if you can see a copy before the vote to check for typos. Many will say yes. 
 If the opinion (the decision) is written and signed without your input and contains an error, write 
a formal letter asking for a correction. In the letter requesting a formal correction, suggest correct 
language, including the full sentence as it should appear. Sometimes a Board will  “ republish ” a 
corrected version or  “ publish ” a corrected version. 
 It doesn’t hurt to ask, but be sure to include the wording exactly as you would like it. Don’t try to 
change the meaning or direction of the opinion, just go for the words — the terms of art — that make a 
difference. 
One word of caution: If you lost, and the opinion says something stupid or wrong, consider carefully 
before you ask for corrections. If you must appeal to a court, the matter will wind up in front of a 
judge, to whom words make a difference. If you keep quiet at the Board level, and the decision retains 
something really stupid or wrong, you’ll be able to argue to the judge that the Board clearly did not 
understand what was going on, and the language of the opinion proves it. You can then ask the judge 
for a remand order that straightens things out, or you can ask the judge (as lawyers say)  “ to put a gloss 
on the wording. ” What the judge then does is to write an opinion that says something like this:  “ The 
decision of the Board is inartfully phrased. Though the opinion says that the total height authorized is 
780 feet, the panel understood that the broadcast antenna would extend 50 feet above that. As a result, 
the height of both the tower and the antennas is authorized to a height of 830 feet. ” 

291
 Appeals
 14.1   Process: Can You Spell REMAND? 
 In the event that your permit is denied, the good news is that you can appeal the decision. The bad 
news is that a successful appeal normally results in a  remand (a return) to the original forum (the Board 
of Appeals, for example) with instructions to that (normally hostile) Board to reconsider the matter in 
light of the Court’s further instructions. It is a rare event for a court to grant the permit itself. For the 
Court to grant the permit itself, you would generally have to show that a remand to the original panel 
would be a fruitless act, because of the demonstrated hostility of that Board to the applicant or to the 
application itself. While the Board’s hostility might be obvious to you, proving it to a court is a far 
more difﬁ cult proposition. 
 To give you an idea of just how hard it can be to convince a court to skip over the remand step, 
MacGibbon v. Board of Appeals of Duxbury , 369 Mass. 512 (1976) (though not an antenna case) 
covered 13 years and three denials on legally untenable grounds before the Court issued the permit 
itself. A direct issuance may be easier in your state, or in federal court, but it is usually difﬁ cult. 
 On the other hand, so many cities and towns are so hostile to antennas that something of a special body 
of law has developed on the question of remedy. This will be discussed later in this chapter. It is now 
common for a court to order a remand with 30 to 60 days to issue the permit, conditioned only on such 
things as fencing, painting, access, and so forth. 
 14.2   Appeals of a GRANTED Permit 
 You may be tempted to appeal the grant of a permit that contains conditions you don’t like. Before 
you consider this course of action, remember that a really hostile Board could succeed in getting new 
information introduced by an opponent the second time around, leaving you worse off, or no better off, 
than you were when you started, having suffered considerable delay and legal expenses. Try to see if 
you can live with the permit originally granted. 
 If you really feel that you cannot, ask yourself if you could live with the permit as granted for a year or 
two. After the controversy has died down and neighbors have discovered that the sky has not fallen, a 
modiﬁ cation totally unacceptable to the Board today may be possible in a year or two. 
 It may be hard to accept, but if you will spend less than $5,000 to $7,000 fulﬁ lling some outrageous 
condition, you are better off just living with it. Here’s my favorite example: After winning its case 
CHAPTER 14 

292 Chapter 14
 before the Supreme Court of New Hampshire, requiring that the city allow a 266-foot-tall tower, the 
matter was remanded to the Zoning Board. This time, Koor Communications ’ Tower Permit was 
granted, but Koor was required to put up a sign every 100 feet around the perimeter of a  “ fall zone ”
with a radius equal to the height of the tower. The site is several hundred acres in size — so large that 
people go hunting in the woods surrounding the tower. Most signs are in the middle of the woods, 
serving, presumably, to warn deer, turkeys, and rabbits (the most frequent inhabitants of the woods) 
that the tower might fall. At a cost of $15 each, the signs were cheaper than the appeal. Think this is a 
joke?  Figure 14.1 shows the site. 
 14.3   Appealing a DENIED Permit 
 On the other hand, if your permit has been denied and you cannot live with the result, you really 
must consider an appeal. This gets tricky, as you must now select the forum to which you will appeal. 
For example, according to your own local situation, you may be able to appeal to another level of 
land use authority (perhaps at the county or regional level), a land court, a state superior court, or 
a federal district court. Selecting the appropriate venue really requires the advice of a local lawyer 
and an analysis of your facts. No matter what, it almost always pays to include a count of federal 
preemption — if you have such a claim. 
 Figure 14.1  A “fall zone ” warning sign in the middle of the woods, presumably to warn deer, turkeys, and 
rabbits that the tower might fall.   Photograph courtesy of Bob Vinikoor, President, Koor Communications, 
Inc. Printed by permission.  

Appeals 293
    Can you handle the appeal yourself? Most lawyers would advise against it. In a commercial situation, it 
would be foolish. As it is really not advisable, this book does not provide a generic form of complaint. 
Nonetheless, your job will be to supply some exhibits to help your lawyer: a timeline, the application, 
the decision of the Board, the relevant bylaw for antenna-support structures, the relevant bylaw for 
Special Permits (or whatever you applied for), and so forth. 
 14.4   The Remedy 
 With a well-considered decision, where the facts were against it, the Town of Lincoln, MA, decided 
not to appeal a U.S. District Court opinion, Omnipoint v. Town of Lincoln, Mass. , 107 F. Supp. 2d 108 
(D. Mass. 2000), where the Court included these two paragraphs:
    This case dramatizes the perpetual clash between national and local interests and between 
material progress and natural beauty. In the Nineteenth Century railroad tracks were layed 
 by Walden Pond; in the Twentieth Century telephone poles were the trees that grew on urban 
streets; in the Twenty-First Century wireless towers will become familiar landmarks across the 
suburban landscape. A universal technological advance cannot be permanently stayed by a local 
stratagem devised to preserve the character and beauty of a locality. The enduring principle 
of local control of land use shall be honored, but only if a federal law which promotes the 
establishment of a comprehensive nationwide wireless communication network is not thereby 
subverted. For good or for ill, Hamilton’s, not Jefferson’s, vision for America has prevailed. 
 … 
 The Court orders that the Board of Appeals ’ April 20, 1999, decision is null and void. The 
Court orders that, within thirty (30) days from the issuance of this Order, the Defendant Town 
of Lincoln, its ofﬁ cers, boards, commissions, departments and instrumentalities, including 
the Lincoln Board of Appeals and Planning Board, take all steps necessary, including, but not 
limited to, the issuance of special permits and/or variances, as well as the issuance of building 
permits, to permit Omnipoint to erect a WCF, as described in Omnipoint’s application to the 
Defendant Board of Appeals, upon the parcel herein referred to as Tracey’s Towing which is 
located within the Town of Lincoln at the intersection of Route 2 and Bedford Road. If the Town 
fails to take such action within the prescribed time, then the Court shall issue an order granting 
Omnipoint the authority to erect said WCF at Tracey’s Towing. 
 In  National Tower v. Plainville Zoning Bd. of Appeals , 297 F.3d 14 (1st Cir. 2002), the Court wrote: 
 “ The federal courts now routinely hear cases brought under the Telecommunications Act of 1996 by 
those who wish to construct cellular antenna towers and have been denied permission to do so by local 
town ofﬁ cials. ” As a result, a body of law has been created on what to do with recalcitrant cities and 
towns. Here’s how the Appeals Court resolved this particular case:
  Since the board’s order cannot be upheld on the grounds it stated, the question becomes one of 
what should be the appropriate remedy: remand to the board, or afﬁ rmance of the injunction. 
While we can conceive of circumstances in which a remand may be in order — for example, an 

294 Chapter 14
 instance of good faith confusion by a board that has acted quite promptly — this case is not a 
candidate for remand to the board. 
 Like the district court, we think the only fair inference from the board’s words and actions in 
this case is that whether or not there is a coverage gap, and whether or not there are alternative 
sites that could ﬁ ll that coverage gap, the board is not prepared to permit construction on 
Omnipoint’s chosen site. As a result, any further reasonable efforts by Omnipoint are so likely 
to be fruitless that it is a waste of time even to try. Thus, the record compels the conclusion 
that the board has effectively prohibited the provision of wireless services in violation of the 
Act.(6 [fn6 omitted]) That justiﬁ es the remedial order entered by the district court. (7)
 Fortunately, the Appeals Court told us what was said in the remedial order (i.e., it provided footnote 7):
 7. The district court ordered the board  “ to issue within thirty (30) days of this Order the 
dimensional and use variances and special permit necessary for the construction of plaintiffs ’ 
170 foot lattice tower and maintenance facility on the locus at 75 Washington Street in 
Plainville. ”  Nat’l Tower , 164 F. Supp. 2d at 190. It added that  “ [t]he Board may condition 
the issuance of the variances and permit on plaintiffs ’ compliance with such reasonable 
environmental conditions as are necessary to insure the protection of the Town’s watershed 
during the construction and operation of the tower. ” 
 As you can see, the courts can be tough on municipalities that demonstrate real hostility to 
a communications tower for cellular purposes. Some of that language should be borrowed in urging 
a court to help your cause, too. 

295
 Lawsuits 
 This is going to be a short chapter, because the questions and answers are really an entire civics course —
 or a brief orientation. We’ll stick to the brief orientation. 
 15.1   Can I Be Sued? 
 Of course! You can be sued every step of the way and for the silliest of reasons. The more detailed 
questions are  “ Is anyone likely to sue me? ” and  “ Is anyone likely to win? ”
 It generally costs money to sue someone else. When an abutter takes her complaint to a lawyer, her 
lawyer will discuss the likelihood of success and the cost. If you’ve followed the law and obtained the 
correct permits, most of the time your neighbor will stop right there. However, you can never tell. 
 My all-time favorite true story comes from my own ham radio antenna Special Permit, right here 
in the little town of Lincoln, MA. Since it is instructive, I’ll tell the story here. If you want to, you 
can ﬁ nd the case under  Anderson v. Barker , Middlesex Superior Court Civil Action No. 81-2494 
(Massachusetts, 1981). As a local district court case, you cannot ﬁ nd it on the Internet or in any 
publication. You’ll have to go to the courthouse to see the original decision. 
 Here’s the story. After I bought my house, I sought a Special Permit under the local bylaw to erect 
and maintain an amateur radio antenna-support structure. The permit was granted to erect an antenna 
system totaling 100 feet in height. Within the appeal period (20 days), my neighbors to the east (the 
Andersons, now deceased) sued the Board of Appeals (Barbara Barker was the ﬁ rst name on the list 
of Board members) to annul the grant of the permit. I was later named as a party defendant. Here’s the 
critical wording from the complaint, reprinted as written, for it is worthy of examination: 
 One should not under estimate [ sic ] the force of Mother Nature and should not rule out the possibility 
that either the tower could fall or the 26 ft antenna on top of it could fall, depending upon the prevail-
ing wind, on the abutters ’ properties. 
 Of course, a lawyer did not draft this. Mr. Anderson drafted it himself. As I understand it, he 
subsequently tried to hire a lawyer to prosecute the complaint but could not ﬁ nd one who would sign a 
pleading. Eventually, he did ﬁ nd an attorney who helped draft the wording of documents ﬁ led in Court, 
but even that attorney would not sign any of the documents. Readers should understand that when a 
lawyer signs pleadings in a lawsuit the lawyer takes on the responsibility of seeing to it that a claim 
CHAPTER 15 

296 Chapter 15
is legitimate (i.e., it is not a  vexatious claim) and that there is no fraud on the court. In addition, by 
signing it the attorney afﬁ rms that the pleading is not interposed for the purpose of delay. 
 In any event, I responded with interrogatories (a series of questions in writing to which a party must 
reply in good faith, after reasonable inquiry) and requests for admission of facts. These are standard 
procedures in litigation aimed at narrowing the issues — by requiring the parties to agree on certain 
basic facts such as names, addresses, ages, and so forth. 
 As soon as it became possible, I requested a pre-trial conference, 1 which was scheduled in due course. 
At the appointed date and time, I was asked to come into the Judge’s chambers, accompanied by the 
neighbors ’ lawyer. He entered an appearance for the limited purpose of representing them in the 
pre-trial conference. Since his clients were the plaintiffs, the judge asked him the usual judge’s 
question: “ What’s this all about? ”
 My neighbors ’ lawyer replied that his clients thought that what I intended to do was dangerous and that 
they should have their day in court to make the complaint. Then the judge turned to me. Here’s
the approach I took: 
 Your Honor, as you can see from the complaint itself, the heart of the complaint is that one should not 
underestimate the force of Mother Nature. However, the good mother is unavailable for testimony, 
and safety is always a responsibility of the Building Inspector — who acts on her behalf. In response 
to my interrogatories, the plaintiffs basically replied that there was no height or site at which I could 
erect an antenna system on my property that would, in their opinion, be safe. While they clearly have 
issues, none of them is genuine. You can’t call Mother Nature as a witness. 
 Returning to the lawyer for my neighbors, the judge calmly asked for a reply. He stated that his clients would 
be affected by the antenna system and should have their day in court. The judge then returned to me and I 
said, “ Your Honor, I’ve prepared a Motion for Summary Judgment for you. Here it is. ” I then handed the 
following to opposing counsel (who had entered an appearance limited to this conference) and to the judge.  
 COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS 
 MIDDLESEX, ss.  
 SUPERIOR COURT 
  
 Civil Action No. 81-2494 
 RONALD F. ANDERSON  et al., Plaintiffs 
) 
  
)  
MOTION FOR 
  
)  
 SUMMARY JUDGMENT 
 v.  
 ) 
  
) 
 BARBARA BARKER  et al., Defendants 
) 
1  Judges like a pre-trial conference because it can  “ clean out the underbrush, ” getting rid of certain claims. Judges can also 
apprise the lawyers, generally without the parties in the room, that one side or the other is entitled to a  “ day in court, ”  but that 
it will be an  “ uphill climb, ”  “ a hard proposition to prove, ” or some other warning phrase may be used. A warning from a judge 
in such a situation tends to hasten settlements. For the lawyers reading this, it was a Rule 16 pre-trial conference. 

Lawsuits 297
 1. Fred Hopengarten, Party Defendant, is the applicant for a permit to erect and maintain a mast 
and antenna structure for his hobby of Amateur Radio. He has applied under Lincoln Town 
By-law Section 6.2.f., which states that a permit for such a structure  “ shall not be denied unless 
the safety of the public will be endangered by such erection or maintenance. ”
 2. The Party Defendant, holder of the highest class of license issued by the FCC (the Amateur 
Extra Class), has introduced information to the record intending to show the safety of the 
proposed installation. 
 3. The Party Defendant has also produced information for the record by the manufacturer of the 
proposed mast, signed by a Registered Professional Engineer, and further information on various 
issues of safety to respond to questions raised by the Board of Appeals and at previous stages of 
this application, again signed by another Registered Professional Engineer. 
  4. Under the ordinance, the burden is upon a party opposing the grant of a permit to show danger. 
Yet, in almost one year’s time since the ﬁ ling of the suit by Plaintiff, and in all of the time since the 
ﬁ ling of the Party Defendant’s original petition on November 18, 1980, Plaintiffs have never done 
more than claim danger exists. No facts tending to show danger have been produced. 
 Under Rule 56, there being no genuine issue as to any material fact, the Party Defendant now 
therefore moves this Court: 
 To grant a motion for summary judgment for the defendants. 
  
 (signature, address, telephone) 
 March 16, 1982 
 Without going into the courtroom (you’ve often heard the phrase  “ in open court ” ), Judge William 
Garbose granted the motion right then and there, in his chambers. The neighbors ’ lawyer sputtered a 
bit, but it was over. 
 So what lessons can be learned from my story? 
● 
 I originally ﬁ led for the permit on November 18, 1980, and the neighbors ’ lawsuit was not 
dismissed until March 16, 1982, a period of almost 16 months. Litigation can take less time 
or more time. But anyone can be sued for even the ﬂ imsiest of reasons, and it can still take up 
a considerable amount of time before you may put up your antenna. It might go faster today, 
as some courts have gotten a little speedier. It might have taken longer had the neighbors been 
willing to spend more money on a lawyer to prosecute their case. 
● 
 There are some things even lawyers won’t do. My neighbors never got a lawyer to sign a 
pleading.
● 
 There are judges who, when the proper paperwork is in front of them, will make decisions 
promptly. 
 In recent years, I have represented two hams who applied for Special Permits and were opposed at the public 
hearing by lawyers who were neighbors. In each case, the lawyers did not ﬁ le suit after the Special Permit 
was granted. On the other hand, other neighbors did ﬁ le suit. So there you have an interesting contrast: non-
lawyer neighbors who did ﬁ le suit and lawyer neighbors who did not. Such things are not predictable. 

298 Chapter 15
 Was it a question of money? There is a joke of long standing among lawyers,  “ Whenever you hear 
a client say ‘ It’s not the money, it’s the principle, ’ you can bet it’s the money. ” In some respects, the 
opposite is also true. If there is no money at stake, even a lawyer who could do his own lawyering 
is unlikely to ﬁ le suit where the likelihood of success is low. Most lawyers are averse to the idea of 
spending time on a fruitless endeavor, especially one for which they are not being paid. 
 The ﬂ ip side of all of this is also true. If you proceed to apply for a permit for an antenna system and 
somehow wind up in a lawsuit, remember this line uttered by Richard Gere, as Atty. Martin Vail in the 
1996 movie  Primal Fear :  “ The ﬁ rst thing I ask a new client is:  ‘ You been saving up for a rainy day? ’
Guess what? It’s raining. ”
 Walter Reuther, while president of the United Auto Workers, used to say:  “ If you can’t get up from 
the table, you have no right to sit down at the table. ” In other words, if you aren’t prepared to strike, 
you have no right to threaten a strike. In our context, you must decide just how far you will carry a 
disappointment, should you lose along the way or be sued after winning. You don’t really have to make 
this decision before you start, but once a lawsuit pops up it is a question you must ask yourself at every 
step along the way. 
 15.2   Can the City Be Sued? 
 Can a municipality or other governmental entity (Zoning Appeals Board, county commission, 
statewide siting board, etc.) be held liable in tort if an antenna system falls down and creates injury to 
property or persons? 
 Fortunately, the answer is black letter law:  No . 
 The common law principle has always been one of  “ sovereign immunity, ” based on the principle that 
 “ the king can do no wrong. ” From that basis, American courts created the doctrine of  “ governmental 
immunity, ” sometimes also called  “ municipal immunity. ” 
 State law may vary with respect to physical actions by a municipal employee or volunteer. But, where a 
Board or inspector is acting in good faith and performing a responsibility that is strictly governmental, 
such as issuing or denying permits, the municipality is immune from suit. (There is an exception 
when civil rights are involved, protected as they are by the Bill of Rights. No cases have been found 
involving a civil rights claim arising out of the grant of an antenna permit.) 
 15.2.1  Some Leading Cases and Statutes 
 15.2.1.1  New York 
 The decision whether to issue a permit is a discretionary determination and the actions of the 
government in such instances are immune from lawsuits based on such decisions (see  Rottkamp v. 
Young , 15 NY2d 831, aff ’ d 21 AD2d 373, 377; see also  Matter of Parkview Assocs. v. City of New 
York , 71 NY2d 274;  City of New York v. 17 Vista Associates , 84 N.Y.2d 299, 642 N.E.2d 606, 618 
N.Y.S.2d 249) .

Lawsuits 299
 15.2.1.2  Texas 
City of Round Rock v. Smith , 687 S.W.2d 300 (Tex. 1985), held that, as the approval of a subdivision 
plat is a governmental function, a city cannot be liable for negligent approval of a plat after the 
developer had ﬁ lled in natural watercourses that provided drainage.  
 15.2.1.3  Vermont 
 Municipal immunity is a common-law doctrine dating back to the mid-1800s in Vermont. Vermont 
follows the common law and provides municipal immunity for functions that are  “ governmental ” as 
distinguished from “ proprietary ” in nature. See  Hillerby v. Town of Colchester , 167 Vt 270, 272 (1997). 
 15.2.1.4  Massachusetts 
 See Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 258,  § 10. The law speciﬁ cally provides immunity against claims based on 
issuance of or refusal to issue a license or permit, failure to inspect or negligent inspection, acts or 
omissions connected with ﬁ ghting a ﬁ re, failure to provide adequate police protection or to arrest or 
detain suspects or enforce any law, and the release of persons in public custody.  
 15.2.1.5  All New England States Extend Municipal Immunity to Discretionary Acts 
 See Conn. Gen. Stat.  § 52-557n(a)(2)(B) (Supp. 1997);  Gordon v. Bridgeport Housing Auth. , 544 A.2d 
1185, 1189 (Conn. 1988); Me. Rev. Stat. Ann. tit. 14  § 8104-B(3) (West Supp. 1996);  Adriance v. Town 
of Standish , 687 A.2d 238, 240 (Me. 1996); Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 258,  § 10(b);  Horta v. Sullivan , 638 
N.E.2d 33, 36 – 37 (Mass. 1994);  Merrill v. City of Manchester , 332 A.2d 378, 383 (N.H. 1974); and 
Haley v. Town of Lincoln , 611 A.2d 845, 849 (R.I. 1992). 
 15.2.2  Looking Beyond Municipal Immunity 
 If we’re in the middle of a hurricane, children should not be outdoors, and there are bigger problems 
than a radio antenna falling down. Parents who allow children outdoors in such circumstances could be 
responsible for contributory negligence should a child be injured — because injury would be seen as a 
natural consequence of ﬂ ying debris. 
 The town also carries general liability insurance. The premium for protection against a successful claim 
in the face of governmental immunity is no doubt tiny, reﬂ ecting — one suspects — only the cost of the 
defense, because the likelihood of success by a plaintiff on the merits is so low. 
 Construction in accordance with the building code is all that is required — of all parties. Concern for 
the hypothetical plaintiff, playing outdoors during a hurricane, is laudable. Yet, the applicant, denied a 
permit for an antenna system on grounds primarily or partially out of concern for liability, represents a 
much more likely plaintiff. 
 15.3   Stress 
 In the course of my years of representing applicants for antenna permits, I’ve found that being in a lawsuit 
can be very stressful. When I went through it 20 years ago — as a lawyer who knew that he’d win — it was 
stressful. There will always be questions. If you are erecting an antenna-support structure on spec (in the 

300 Chapter 15
hope that this speculative venture will pay off), there will be questions you ask yourself, or questions from 
a spouse, that amount to: “ Are you sure you want to go through with all this just for a tower on this site? ”
It is a legitimate question. No one at AT & T Wireless loses sleep when they are engaged in a lawsuit. But, 
if you are a small operation, and you will personally be a witness, the situation can feel very distressing. 
Fortunately, well-represented tower owners who were entitled to their permits win a lot of these cases. 
Even though your likelihood of success may be good, prepare yourself for the stress of it all and analyze 
the budget to see if the proposition is still proﬁ table after including litigation costs. 
 15.4   Can I Sue to Recover My Legal Fees? 
 Yes. See above. Anyone can sue for anything. The real question must be  “ What is the likelihood of 
recovering my legal fees? ” Frankly, the answer is that your likelihood of recovering your legal fees is 
not good, at least not in the United States. The tradition here is that each side in a controversy pays its 
own legal fees, absent special circumstances. 
 Nonetheless, now and again the municipality takes a stupid pill and puts forward a defense which, in 
the words of a New York law (22 NYCRR 130-1.1), is  “ completely without merit in law and cannot be 
supported by a reasonable argument for an extension, modiﬁ cation, or reversal of existing law. ” This 
New York law may have a cognate in your jurisdiction. 
 There is a Massachusetts case that stands for virtually the same proposition. 
 15.4.1  The Barrett Case 
 In this case, the Barretts claimed fees under a state statute that permits a court to award fees where the 
position of a municipality, Board, or Commission (or even a neighbor!) is  “ wholly insubstantial, frivolous 
and not advanced in good faith. ” Just such an example, where fees were awarded to someone abused by the 
Falmouth (MA) Conservation Commission (the Conservation Commission insisted on a buffer strip, though 
it had no authority to require it), occurred in Barrett and Barrett v. Conservation Commission of Falmouth , 
Mass. App. Ct. (1996) (see ﬁ lenames Barrett v Conservation Com.pdf and Barrett II.pdf on the CD) under 
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 231,  § 6F ( http://www.state.ma.us/legis/laws/mgl/231%2D6f.htm ). 
 Your state may have a similar statute. Here’s the wording of the Massachusetts statute ( http://www.
state.ma.us/legis/laws/mgl/231%2D6f.htm ):
 Chapter 231: Section 6F. Costs, expenses and interest for insubstantial, frivolous, or bad faith 
claims or defenses 
 Section 6F. Upon motion of any party in any civil action in which a ﬁ nding, verdict, decision, 
award, order or judgment has been made by a judge or justice or by a jury, auditor, master or 
other ﬁ nder of fact, the court may determine, after a hearing, as a separate and distinct ﬁ nding, 
that all or substantially all of the claims, defenses, setoffs or counterclaims, whether of a factual, 
legal or mixed nature, made by any party who was represented by counsel during most or all of 
the proceeding, were wholly insubstantial, frivolous and not advanced in good faith. The court 
shall include in such ﬁ nding the speciﬁ c facts and reasons on which the ﬁ nding is based. 

Lawsuits 301
 If such a ﬁ nding is made with respect to a party’s claims, the court shall award to each party 
against whom such claims were asserted an amount representing the reasonable counsel fees 
and other costs and expenses incurred in defending against such claims. If the party against 
whom such claims were asserted was not represented by counsel, the court shall award to such 
party an amount representing his reasonable costs, expenses and effort in defending against 
such claims. If such a ﬁ nding is made with respect to a party’s defenses, setoffs or counterclaims, 
the court shall award to each party against whom such defenses, setoffs or counterclaims were 
asserted (1) interest on the unpaid portion of the monetary claim at issue in such defense, setoff 
or counterclaim at one hundred and ﬁ fty percent of the rate set in section six C from the date 
when the claim was due to the claimant pursuant to the substantive rules of law pertaining 
thereto, which date shall be stated in the award, until the claim is paid in full; and (2) an amount 
representing the reasonable counsel fees, costs and expenses of the claimant in prosecuting 
his claims or in defending against those setoffs or counterclaims found to have been wholly 
insubstantial, frivolous and not advanced in good faith. 
 Apart from any award made pursuant to the preceding paragraph, if the court ﬁ nds that all or 
substantially all of the defenses, setoffs or counterclaims to any portion of a monetary claim 
made by any party who was represented by counsel during most or all of the proceeding were 
wholly insubstantial, frivolous and not advanced in good faith, the court shall award interest to 
the claimant on that portion of the claim according to the provisions of the preceding paragraph. 
 In any award made pursuant to either of the preceding paragraphs, the court shall specify in 
reasonable detail the method by which the amount of the award was computed and the calculation 
thereof. 
 No ﬁ nding shall be made that any claim, defense, setoff or counterclaim was wholly 
insubstantial, frivolous and not advanced in good faith solely because a novel or unusual 
argument or principle of law was advanced in support thereof. No such ﬁ nding shall be made in 
any action in which judgment was entered by default without an appearance having been entered 
by the defendant. The authority granted to a court by this section shall be in addition to, and not 
in limitation of, that already established by law. 
 If any parties to a civil action shall settle the dispute which was the subject thereof and shall ﬁ le in 
the appropriate court documents setting forth such settlement, the court shall not make any ﬁ nding 
or award pursuant to this section with respect to such parties. If an award had previously been 
made pursuant to this section, such award shall be vacated unless the parties shall agree otherwise.        
 Again, the important thing about this statute is that your state may have a similar one. 
 Even if your state does not have such a statute, it is not required, because, if you are in federal court 
anywhere, Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (FRCP) would apply. Furthermore, most 
state courts have a version of this same Rule 11: 
 Rule 11. Signing Pleadings, Motions, and Other Papers; Representations to the Court; Sanctions  
…
 (b) Representations to the Court. 
 By presenting to the court a pleading, written motion, or other paper — whether by signing, ﬁ ling, 
submitting, or later advocating it — an attorney or unrepresented party certiﬁ es that to the best of 

302 Chapter 15
the person’s knowledge, information, and belief, formed after an inquiry reasonable under the 
circumstances: 
 (1) it is not being presented for any improper purpose, such as to harass, cause unnecessary 
delay, or needlessly increase the cost of litigation; 
 (2) the claims, defenses, and other legal contentions are warranted by existing law or by a 
nonfrivolous argument for extending, modifying, or reversing existing law or for establishing new 
law; 
 (3) the factual contentions have evidentiary support or, if speciﬁ cally so identiﬁ ed, will likely have 
evidentiary support after a reasonable opportunity for further investigation or discovery; and 
 (4) the denials of factual contentions are warranted on the evidence or, if speciﬁ cally so 
identiﬁ ed, are reasonably based on belief or a lack of information. 
 (c) Sanctions. 
 (1) In General. 
 If, after notice and a reasonable opportunity to respond, the court determines that Rule 11(b) has 
been violated, the court may impose an appropriate sanction on any attorney, law ﬁ rm, or party 
that violated the rule or is responsible for the violation. Absent exceptional circumstances, a law ﬁ rm 
must be held jointly responsible for a violation committed by its partner, associate, or employee. 
 (2) Motion for Sanctions. 
 A motion for sanctions must be made separately from any other motion and must describe 
the speciﬁ c conduct that allegedly violates Rule 11(b). The motion must be served under Rule 
5, but it must not be ﬁ led or be presented to the court if the challenged paper, claim, defense, 
contention, or denial is withdrawn or appropriately corrected within 21 days after service or 
within another time the court sets. If warranted, the court may award to the prevailing party the 
reasonable expenses, including attorney’s fees, incurred for the motion. 
 (3) On the Court’s Initiative. 
 On its own, the court may order an attorney, law ﬁ rm, or party to show cause why conduct 
speciﬁ cally described in the order has not violated Rule 11(b). 
 (4) Nature of a Sanction. 
 A sanction imposed under this rule must be limited to what sufﬁ ces to deter repetition of 
the conduct or comparable conduct by others similarly situated. The sanction may include 
nonmonetary directives; an order to pay a penalty into court; or, if imposed on motion and 
warranted for effective deterrence, an order directing payment to the movant of part or all of the 
reasonable attorney’s fees and other expenses directly resulting from the violation. 
 (5) Limitations on Monetary Sanctions. 
 The court must not impose a monetary sanction: 
 (A) against a represented party for violating Rule 11(b) (2) 
 … 
 As stated above, many state courts follow variations of this same rule of court. 
 Here’s one wrinkle. You would, of course, hope that the attorney for the municipality puts forward 
the same unwarranted claim that was the basis of the decision by the Board that ruled against you. 

Lawsuits 303
However, smart municipal counsel will try to defend the decision on more defensible grounds. Blessedly, 
the courts are onto that ploy ( http://bulk.resource.org/courts.gov/c/F3/297/297.F3d.14.01-2472.html ): 
  A board may not provide the applicant with one reason for a denial and then, in court, seek to 
uphold its decision on different grounds.  National Tower, L.L.C. v. Plainville Zoning Board of Appeals , 
297 F.3d 14 (1st Cir. 2002) 
 15.4.2  No Recovery of Legal Fees for Cellular and CMRS Cases 
 If you are a carrier, or other party claiming the right to construct a tower by virtue of the 
Communications Act of 1996, you are the sad victim of a decision by the Supreme Court of the United 
States, which is unlikely to be revisited any time soon. Mark Abrams sued the City of Rancho Palos 
Verde, CA, seeking injunctive relief under  § 332(c)(7)(B)(v) of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 
USC  § 332(c)(7), as added by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (TCA), and money damages under 
42 USC  § 1983 (the civil rights statute involving the recovery of monetary damages). He received the 
injunctive relief he sought. Though he won legal fees when the matter was heard by the Ninth Circuit 
Court of Appeals, the matter was appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court and now stands as an obstacle to 
the recovery of legal fees in Commercial Mobile Radio Service (CMRS) cases. That decision held that 
 “ [a]n individual may not enforce  § 332(c)(7)’s limitations on local zoning authority through a  § 1983 
action. The TCA — by providing a judicial remedy different from  § 1983 in  § 332(c)(7) itself — precluded 
resort to § 1983. ” See  City of Rancho Palos Verdes et al. v. Abrams , 544 U.S. 113 (2005) ( http://www.
law.cornell.edu/supct/html/03-1601.ZS.html ). 
 15.4.3  Recovery of Legal Fees for a Broadcaster 
 The position of a broadcaster may be different from that of a cellular carrier, because the speciﬁ c 
remedies set forth in 47 USC  § 332(c)(7) are limited to CMRS. While no known case has yet upheld 
a claim for legal fees by a broadcaster whose permits a municipality illegally denied, there is a good 
argument to be made. As this line of reasoning cannot be found in any court decision, it is presented here.  
 In  Koor v. City of Lebanon , New Hampshire, Koor’s position was that, as a broadcaster, it is a First 
Amendment “ speaker ”  subject to  “ reasonable, narrowly drawn statutes [that] may regulate the 
time, place, and manner of expression but that  …  blanket prohibitions of expression are invalid … . ” 
 Broadcasting is clearly a medium affected by a First Amendment interest.  United States v. 
Paramount Pictures, Inc ., 334 U.S. 131, 166 (1948).  “ But the reach of radio signals is incomparably 
greater than the range of the human voice and the problem of interference is a massive realty. ” 
Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC , 395 U.S. 367, 387 – 88 (1969).  “ [I]f two broadcasters were to 
attempt to transmit over the same frequency in the same locale, they would interfere with one 
another’s signals, so that neither could be heard at all. The scarcity of broadcast frequencies 
thus required the establishment of some regulatory mechanism to divide the electromagnetic 
spectrum … . ”  Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC , 512 U.S. 622 (1994) (internal citations 
omitted). The FCC’s regulation of minimum antenna heights, speciﬁ cally required to avoid 
interference with other stations on the same or nearby frequencies, is a part of the regulatory 
mechanism. The City cannot create an effective total ban on this form of First Amendment 
speech by creating an effective total ban on new AM broadcasting. See  Metromedia v. San Diego , 

304 Chapter 15
453 U.S. 490 (1981) (holding that a total ban on billboards was not a time, place and manner 
restriction). Under a First Amendment analysis, the City’s height ordinance requires a higher level 
of scrutiny than an ordinary land use regulation  . 
 Koor won the case on preemption grounds, and the New Hampshire Supreme Court never decided the 
question of legal fees on substantive grounds. That question is still open for a broadcaster. 
 15.4.4  Over-the-Air Reception Devices (OTARD) Rule on Recovery of Legal Fees 
 Some courts have held that fee shifting is appropriate in the satellite TV dish antenna cases under 47 
CFR § 1.4000, which allowed  § 1988 recovery of fees when the municipality ignored FCC regulations. 
See Loschavio v. City of Dearborn, 33 F.3d 548 (6th Cir. 1994), cert. denied, 115 S.Ct. 1099 (1995); 
Ermler v. Brookhaven , 780 F. Supp 120 (EDNY 1992). 
 15.5   Conclusion 
 All of the above said and done, don’t count on getting a court to award you your legal fees. Most towns 
are too smart to be so blatant that a court will award fees on the basis of bad faith. But it does happen. 
For CMRS cases, absent a claim of bad faith, that door to fees seems closed. For broadcasters, no one 
knows the outcome. There is case law that supports fee shifting for cases under the OTARD rule. So, 
what type of applicant are you? 

305
 Now Get the Permit and Build 
Your Antenna System! 
 Congratulations! You’ve been granted a Special Permit or perhaps a Variance. Can you put up your 
tower now? No. What you really have now is permission to go to the Building Inspector (your new best 
friend). Even if you never needed a Special Permit or Variance, you still need to read this chapter. 
 16.1   The Process 
 16.1.1  The Application 
 The typical Building Permit application is fairly simple, normally demanding no more than you have 
already assembled for any public hearing. If you didn’t have to go through a public hearing and you are 
applying directly for a Building Permit, you will still ﬁ nd that you must supply many of the same items 
discussed previously: plot plan, setback information, height, description of the proposed work, etc. 
 If you haven’t already done so, it is now time to make a formal call on the Building Inspector to 
discuss what he or she needs before signing the permit. Assemble what is requested and ﬁ le it, pronto! 
Be sure to get a date stamp on the ﬁ ling, and keep a copy of the stamped ﬁ ling. 
 After the Building Permit is granted, do not lose it! The original is very important, since typically the 
Building Inspector wants to see it posted at the job site so he can sign it at each inspection. 
 16.1.2  Posting 
 Now that you have the permit, you’ll notice that it says something like  “ Post at worksite. ” Let’s 
consider this requirement. Should you post it in at the front gate, near the street where passersby can 
see it? Or should you post it near the job site, deep in the woods? 
 If you have the luxury of a place to put the Building Permit where it is less likely, or unlikely, to be 
seen by the public, that’s what you should do. There will always be someone who never knew about 
your Special Permit or Variance proceeding. Reduce the chances that this person will learn about the 
project before the fait accompli stage, if possible. Do what is required and no more, but do not fail to 
do exactly what is required. 
CHAPTER 16 

306 Chapter 16
 At the start of your project, you cannot hang the Building Permit from the structure, since you haven’t 
even dug the ﬁ rst hole in the ground yet. So step about 8 feet away from the proposed base site, and 
pound a 1    3-inch or 2    4-inch post into the ground. The post should be tall enough to go down 1 
foot and up 2 or 3 feet above the highest snow you expect during the winter. 
 Mount the Building Permit on the post in a plastic bag, a page protector, or the like (open side  down ). 
This will keep it from getting wet. Many Building Inspectors like to make efﬁ cient use of their ﬁ eld time 
and they will not necessarily schedule a visit with you. Instead, the Building Inspector may just drop by 
after you’ve told him that you are ready for the next inspection. Thus, the Building Inspector wants to 
drop by, take a look, sign the posted permit, and leave. For this reason, make sure the inspector knows 
how to get on the property (and through your gate, if necessary), and  do not keep the permit indoors . 
 16.1.3  Inspections 
 Since few Building Inspectors have a great deal of experience with the construction of antenna-support 
structures, you’ll have to negotiate a bit on exactly what inspections will be required. Ask the Building 
Inspector to cross out and initial several of the boxes, such as  “ plumbing ” or  “ electrical ” (if you have 
no lights). Why be so formal? Sadly, the Inspector could get hit by a bus or be ﬁ red. You want the next 
Inspector to know exactly where to pick up the ball. See  Figure 16.1 , which shows a Building Permit 
granted to Fifth Estate. Basically building permit posters haven’t changed for decades, although some 
jurisdictions have now computerized and entries are made back at the Building Inspector’s ofﬁ ce. 
 The usual permit calls for inspections for several speciﬁ c purposes: 
● 
 To see holes at the correct depth (for a guyed structure, that’s four holes — the base and three 
anchors), the stones at the bottom, the “ dobie bricks ” (usually available at Home Depot in 
the section near the concrete mixers) so your rebar won’t stick down into dirt, and the rebar 
(neatly tied with wire) 
● 
 To see that the concrete has been poured and ﬁ nished, which means going about six inches 
up (or more!) for the base and staying below grade (or going above grade, whatever is called 
for in your plans) and backﬁ lling for the anchors — follow the directions of your structure’s 
manufacturer 
● 
 To see the ﬁ nished structure and to see that it is properly grounded — for this inspection, you 
should have the safety wires on the anchor turnbuckles, the anticlimbing device (if one is 
required), and so forth 
 At each inspection, the Building Inspector should simply initial and date the appropriate box. After 
the last inspection, the Building Inspector may let you keep the permit or he may want it for his ﬁ le. In 
any event, you want a copy for your ﬁ le, to prove dates. Since you may not be there when he makes the 
last inspection, make a photocopy before you invite the Building Inspector to make the last inspection, 
then go to work on securing a Certiﬁ cate of Completion. As most projects involve habitable structures, 
some jurisdictions do not call it a “ Certiﬁ cate of Completion ” or a  “ Certiﬁ cate of Use, ” but rather a 
 “ Certiﬁ cate of Occupancy. ” The proper term should be Certiﬁ cate of Completion, or Certiﬁ cate of Use, 
but it is not worth having an argument with the Building Inspector on this. 

 Figure 16.1  Building Permit granted to The Fifth Estate Tower, LLC.  

308 Chapter 16
 16.1.4  Technical Standards 
 If you are contracting out the construction or if you are subleasing to someone who will do his own 
construction, you may wish to include a set of technical standards in the building contract or lease. 
Some of these technical standards refer to electrical code requirements, some are common-sense 
engineering, some are standards designed to reduce rust, and so forth. If you are new to the game and 
have never seen a set of construction standards, you might ﬁ nd these helpful. 
 Obviously, some of the items mentioned may not apply in your situation. Feel free to modify these 
technical standards (borrowed from an experienced tower company) to ﬁ t your situation.
 Antenna Site Technical Standards  
 I. General 
 All users shall furnish the following to Licensor prior to installation of any equipment: 
 1) Site application. 
 2) Copies of FCC licenses/construction permits. 
 3) Accurate block diagrams showing operating frequencies, all system components (active or 
passive) with gains and losses in dB, along with power levels. 
 4) Copies of manufacturers ’ equipment speciﬁ cations. 
 II. Written Consent Required 
 The following will not be permitted at the Antenna Site without the written consent of Licensor, 
which consent may be withheld by Licensor in its sole discretion. 
 1) Any equipment without FCC type acceptance. 
 2) Add-on power ampliﬁ ers. 
 3)  “ Hybrid ” equipment with different manufacturers ’ RF strips. 
 4) Open rack mounted receivers and transmitters. 
 5) Equipment with crystal oscillator modules which have not been temperature compensated. 
 6) Digital/analog hybriding in exciters, unless type-accepted. 
 7) Equipment which does not conform to FCC Rules and Regulations. 
 8) Noncontinuous duty-rated transmitters used in continuous duty applications. 
 9) Transmitter outputs without a harmonic ﬁ lter and antenna matching circuitry. 
 10) Change in operating frequency(ies). 
 11) Equipment not designed for high-density site applications. 
 12) Ferrite devices looking directly at an antenna. 
 13) Nickel-plated connectors. 
 14) Cascaded receiver multicouplers/preamps. 
 II. Radiofrequency Interference Protective Devices 
 In general, the following minimum speciﬁ cations will apply: 

Now Get the Permit and Build Your Antenna System! 309
 30 – 76  mHz 
 Isolators — minimum of 30  dB 
 TX output cavity — minimum of 20  dB rejection @ plus or minus 
 130 – 114  mHz 
 Isolators — minimum of 30  dB with bandpass cavity 
 406 – 512  mHz 
 Isolators — minimum of 60  dB with bandpass cavity 
 806 – 866  mHz 
 Isolators — minimum of 60  dB with bandpass cavity 
    866  mHz — as determined by Licensor 
 It should be emphasized that the above speciﬁ cations are minimum requirements. Additional 
protective devices may be required based upon evaluation of the following information: 
 Theoretical TX mixes, particularly second antenna location and type, combiner/multicoupler 
conﬁ gurations 
 Transmitter speciﬁ cations 
 Receiver speciﬁ cations 
 Historical problems 
 Transmitter to transmitter isolation 
 Transmitter to antenna isolation 
 Transmitter to receiver isolation 
 Calculated level of IM products 
 Transmitter output power 
 Transmitter ERP 
 Spectrum analyzer measurements 
 VSWR measurements 
 Existing cavity selectivity 
 III. Antennas and Mounts 
 1) Mounted only on approved side arms or other speciﬁ ed mount, and only one per mount 
unless authorized in writing. 
 2) All mounting hardware galvanized or noncorroding metal. 
 3) Tagged with weatherproof labels showing manufacturer, model, frequency range, and owner. 
 4) Bonded with copper braid to tower. 
 5) Connections to be taped with stretch vinyl tape (Scotch #33 or equivalent) and Scotchkoted 
(including booted pigtails). 

310 Chapter 16
 6) Must meet manufacturer’s VSWR speciﬁ cations. 
 7) Antennas with corroded elements must be repaired or replaced. 
 8) Must be DC grounded type, or have the appropriate lightning protection as determined by 
Licensor. 
 9) Unless otherwise authorized by Licensor, all antennas must be encased in ﬁ berglass radomes. 
 10) Mounting pipes must be cut such that they do not extend above the antenna mounting 
sleeve.
 11) Any corroded hardware must be replaced. 
 IV. Tower 
 1) No welding or drilling of any tower members will be permitted. 
 2) Tower work shall be done only by authorized contractors. 
 V. Cable 
 1) All antenna lines to be jacketed Heliax (or equivalent), 1/2-inch or greater. 
 2) No kinked or cracked cable. 
 3) Any cable fasteners exposed to weather must be nylon ultraviolet-resistant type or stainless 
steel. 
 4) All transmit interconnecting cables/jumpers must be solid copper outer conductor (1/2-inch 
superﬂ ex or equivalent), not to exceed 8 feet in length where practical. 
 5) All receiver intercabling must be 100% shielded coax. 
 6) All inside cable must be run in troughs where provided. 
 7) All unused lines must be tagged at both ends showing termination points. 
 8) All AC line cords must be three-conductor with grounding plugs. 
 9) Where no troughs or cable trays exist, all cable must be tied at not less than 3-foot intervals. 
 10) All transmission lines must be grounded immediately before making the bend under the 
waveguide bridge with grounding kits made speciﬁ cally for this purpose. 
 11) All transmission lines must be clamped with stainless steel clamps made speciﬁ cally for 
this purpose (not wraplock) to the waveguide ladder and to the waveguide bridge for the full 
external run of the line. 
 12) All antenna transmission lines shall be grounded at both the antenna and equipment ends, 
with the appropriate grounding kits. 
 VI. Connectors 
 1) Must be Teﬂ on ﬁ lled, UHF or N type, including chassis/bulkhead connectors. 
 2) Must be properly fabricated (soldered if applicable) if ﬁ eld installed. 
 3) Must be taped and Scotchkoted at least 4 inches onto jacket if exposed to weather. 
 4) Male pins must be proper length. 
 5) Female contacts may not be spread. 

Now Get the Permit and Build Your Antenna System! 311
 6) Connectors must be plier tight as opposed to hand tight. 
 7) Must be silver plated or brass. 
 8) Must be electrically and mechanically equivalent to OEM connectors. 
 VII. Receivers 
 1) No RF preamps permitted in front end unless authorized by Licensor. 
 2) All shields must be in place. 
 3) VHF and up must use helical resonator front ends. 
 4) Must meet manufacturer’s speciﬁ cations, particularly with regard to bandwidth, 
discriminator swing and symmetry, and spurious responses. 
 5) Crystal ﬁ lters/preselectors/cavities must be installed in RX legs where appropriate. 
 6) All repeater tone squelch circuitry must use  “ AND ” logic. 
 VIII. Transmitters 
 1) Must meet original manufacturer’s speciﬁ cations. 
 2) All shields must be in place. 
 3) Must have a visual indication of transmitter operation. 
 4) Must be tagged with Licensee’s name, equipment model number, serial number, and 
operating frequency(ies). 
 5) All low level pre-driver and driver stages in exciter must be shielded. 
 6) All power ampliﬁ ers must be shielded. 
 7) Output power may not exceed 330 watts unless otherwise authorized by Licensor. 
 IX. Combiners/Multicouplers 
 1) Shall at all times meet manufacturer’s speciﬁ cations. 
 2) Must be tuned using manufacturer approved procedures. 
 3) Must provide a minimum of 55  dB transmitter to transmitter isolation. 
 X. Cabinets 
 1) All cabinets must be bonded together and must be grounded to the building ground system. 
 2) All doors must be on or closed. 
 3) All non-original holes larger than 1 inch must be covered with copper screen or solid metal 
plates. 
 XI. Installation Procedures 
 1) Installation may take place only after Licensor has been notiﬁ ed of the date and time and 
only during normal working hours unless otherwise authorized. 
 2) Equipment may not be operated until the installation has been approved by Licensor, which 
approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 

312 Chapter 16
 Construction Practices 
 1. Tenant shall replace the Initial Construction Drawing of Exhibit B with an  “ as built ” survey 
of the Premises once Tenant receives it. 
 2. All Tenant equipment and construction shall be set back from the Property’s boundaries as 
required by the applicable governmental authorities. 
 3. The access way’s width shall be only the width required by the applicable governmental 
authorities, including police and ﬁ re departments. Any upgrade which may be required by 
an applicable governmental authority shall be at Tenant’s expense. 
 4. Tenant is authorized to install and maintain the equipment shown on the Landlord-approved 
Initial Construction Drawing, for which an  “ as built ” drawing to substitute as Exhibit B-2 
shall be provided within 90 days of the completion of Tenant’s construction. The type, 
number, mounting positions and locations of antennas and transmission lines, as well as all 
other installed equipment, shall be portrayed in the  “ as built ” survey drawing. The  “ as built ” 
 XII. Maintenance/Tuning Procedures 
 1) All external indicator lamps/LEDs must be working. 
 2) Equipment parameters must meet manufacturers ’ speciﬁ cations. 
 3) All cover, shield, and rack fasteners must be in place and securely tightened. 
 4) Local speakers must be turned off except during service. 
 XIII. FCC Licensing 
 1) All FCC licenses must be current. 
 XIV. Interference Diagnosing Procedures 
 1) All licensees must cooperate in a timely fashion with Licensor when called upon to investigate 
a source of interference, whether or not it can be conclusively proven that their equipment is 
involved. 
 XV. Miscellaneous 
 1) All installations must be maintained in a neat and orderly manner. 
 2) Doors to equipment and antenna spaces shall be closed and locked at all times. 
 3) Access to equipment and antennas shall be by authorized personnel only, and only for 
purposes of installation, service or maintenance. 
 4) No trash may be stored on site. Boxes and packing material must be removed immediately. 
 5) Only combination locks, or a lock box, may be used, and combinations must be provided to 
Landlord.
 Here’s a different set of technical standards, from a different source. It is included to give you an 
assurance that you need to consider what is relevant to your site:

Now Get the Permit and Build Your Antenna System! 313
drawing will thereafter be replaced and kept current as necessary, should Tenant’s equipment 
on the Tower change, after approval if it represents a change or modiﬁ cation. Cost for such 
work shall be borne by the Tenant. After initial construction, no change or modiﬁ cation of 
equipment on the tower, or outside of the equipment building, as shown on the  “ as built ” 
drawings, may thereafter be made without written consent of Landlord in the form of a 
Plan Approval. In any event, however, no change may materially increase Tenant’s wind-
loading on the tower, and Tenant will provide evidence to Landlord’s reasonable satisfaction 
that equipment exchanges or upgrades do not increase loading on the Tower. A Plan 
Approval will only be issued upon receipt by Landlord of (a) a detailed plan of the proposed 
construction, replacement or upgrading, (b) all necessary governmental approvals, including 
a building permit if necessary, and (c) receipt by Landlord of assurance from its own engineer 
that the proposed construction, replacement or upgrading will not affect windloading on 
the tower, nor interfere with other tower users. The cost of this review, up to $1,000 (which 
cost maximum shall increase at the same rate of annual increase as the rent), shall be at the 
expense of Tenant. 
 5. Landlord understands that the location of any utility easement on the Initial Drawing is 
illustrative only. The actual location will be determined by the servicing utility company in 
compliance with all local laws and regulations and approved by Landlord. 
 6. All construction shall comply with generally accepted good commercial construction 
practices, including: 
 (a) In case of suspected interference or intermodulation problems, Tenant must cooperate 
in a timely fashion with Landlord, whether or not it can be conclusively proven whose 
equipment is involved. 
 (b) All ferrous metals used as part of the mounting hardware must be hot-dipped 
galvanized or stainless steel. The screws, bolts, lock washers and nuts should be either 
stainless steel, brass or hot-dip galvanized. 
 (c) All antennas shall be tagged with weatherproof labels showing the manufacturer, 
model and frequency range. 
 (d) For grounding systems, the metallic contact surfaces where the interconnections 
are made should be cleaned and be free of foreign materials like paint and rust. All 
exposed metallic contact surfaces shall be coated with an antioxidant compound. 
Where possible, grounding connections shall be cad-welded. 
 (e) Tenant shall cooperate with Landlord in a timely fashion to ensure that RF exposure 
for tower repair/rigging personnel, or other construction personnel perform work 
at the site, does not exceed the limits of 47 CFR §1.1310, or as it may subsequently 
be amended. If necessary to comply with the FCC’s Maximum Permissible Exposure 
guidelines, the power to antennas shall be temporarily reduced as much and as long 
as necessary to avoid exposing the crew to RF emissions in excess of the current FCC 
standards. 
 (f) Tenant may not store materials outside of its equipment building or enclosure. 
Garbage and packing material shall be promptly removed from the Premises. Garbage 
and packing material remaining on the premises for more than seven (7) days after 
Notice, may be removed by Landlord at Tenant’s expense. 

314 Chapter 16
 16.1.5  Construction Tips 
 Don’t give your unfriendly neighbors a reason to go screaming to the Building Inspector. This is 
another way of saying:  “ Don’t give the Building Inspector a reason to doubt your good faith or ability 
to build the project correctly and safely. ” Here are some tips: 
● 
 When you cut down trees, get the slash out of the way. You don’t want the neighbors to go 
complaining that you are raping the forest. Make neat piles of ﬁ rewood. Don’t leave any wood 
where it could later interfere with the pouring of concrete or the handling of ropes during 
construction (as you go vertical). 
● 
 If the construction crew eats on-site (and they all do, sooner or later), make sure they clean up. 
No bottles or cans, paper or plastic bags, or luncheon trash should be left behind. The neighbors 
hate that, because, sooner or later, the trash will get blown around — perhaps even off the site. 
● 
 When you dig a hole in the ground, cover it before leaving the site — even if just overnight. If 
you are going to bury cables in PVC pipe (or conduit), close up the trench as you go so no one 
twists an ankle. 
● 
 When you pour concrete in the winter, cover it with straw and a tarpaulin to aid proper curing. 
When you pour concrete in the summer, spray it with water to help the cure. 
● 
 When you install ground rods, make sure there are no sharp bends in the ground wires. When 
you run the guy wires to the anchor points, either protect them with guy guards (see Chapter 6) 
or plant bushes so no one will run into them accidentally. Before the bushes are planted, put 
construction orange tape on guy wires as ﬂ ags to make them visible. 
● 
 Don’t leave rotator cable, lighting cable, control cables or feed lines dangling across your yard 
at a height that could catch someone in the neck or face, even if that person would have to be on 
horseback. (The author once had a client against whom a lawsuit was brought when a trespassing 
horseback rider hit a cable and fell off. Fortunately, the suit was later dismissed, when ﬁ lm 
showed the rider competing in a subsequent horse show, but you might not be so lucky.) 
● 
 Don’t run 110-V AC to the base of the tower without an electrical permit (and inspection). If 
you decide to run 110-V AC to the base of the tower for tools, use a ground-fault interrupter 
(GFI) socket to detect a ground fault interruption. 
 16.1.6  The Certiﬁ cate of Completion 
 When the project is completed, invite the Building Inspector back for the ﬁ nal inspection. This is a 
point in the process where it can be easy to let a few things slip. These things are so easy to do that 
now is not the time to get sloppy. I’ll explain why in a minute. 
 Don’t let it slide. Keep a signed copy, and be sure it has a date on it to prove that the structure was built 
within two years from the grant of the original permit (or whatever your state requires) and to prove 
that it was built before the town may have changed a bylaw — to grant you the status of a  prior existing 
structure with  vested rights . Remember that we have always insisted you call it a structure? This is one 
of the reasons. The law surrounding this subject matter is called the  law of prior existing structures . 

Now Get the Permit and Build Your Antenna System! 315
 If, for whatever reason, you must get a renewal or a subsequent inspection, a year later (or two or three 
or ﬁ ve), this is the time to get an agreement from the Building Inspector about when that subsequent 
renewal or inspection should take place. Will it be on the anniversary of the grant of the permit, the 
anniversary of the Certiﬁ cate of Completion, or some other time? Put it in a memo to yourself and 
write it in your calendar. It is very embarrassing not to know when your permit is up for renewal. It can 
also be devastating. 
 If your renewal date comes and goes and the bylaw has changed, you could wind up with a prior 
existing structure for which you no longer have a permit. This could require you to reapply and, if 
everything is going badly for you in this life, you might be forced to reapply under any new bylaw that 
may have passed since you were granted your original permit. This is not a good thing. 
 When the blessed day comes that you have completed your construction for the purposes of the 
Building Permit (this awkward phrase represents the fact that few folks in the communications business 
have ever completed an antenna installation — as there is always another experiment to perform, a new 
path required, a new frequency to use), it is time for you to seek out from the Building Inspector a 
Certiﬁ cate of Completion. Similar to a Certiﬁ cate of Occupancy, sometimes called a Certiﬁ cate of Use, 
this certiﬁ cate serves several purposes: 
● 
 It tells your insurance company that you built the project according to the building code, and 
if the system should ever suffer, for whatever reason, it could prove helpful in ﬁ ling your 
insurance claim. Among other reasons, it tells the adjuster that you did not have a  “ phantom ” 
system upon which you are now trying to make a fraudulent claim.  
● 
 It serves to show that you had completed construction and your system had become a prior 
existing use before any subsequent bylaw changes. 
● 
 It can be shown to any neighbor who wants to know if what you’ve put up is  “ safe. ” Should 
you need it for this purpose, however, be gentle. It never pays to make an enemy of your 
neighbor. Some readers may have passing familiarity with the expression  “ Love thy neighbor. ”   
● 
 Here are some real-life examples of Certiﬁ cates of Completion, issued in letter form, where 
only the identifying information has been changed. If your Building Department doesn’t have 
a form, type up something based on the concepts below and ask the Building Inspector to sign 
it. These form letters are on the CD under ﬁ lename Building Inspector Form Letters.doc. 
 Dear Mr. Caster: 
 Construction under Building Permit # ______, having been completed in accordance with its 
terms and conditions, this Certiﬁ cate of Use is hereby granted on [date]. 
 (Signature) 
 Name 
 Building Commissioner/Inspector 

316 Chapter 16
 or
 Mr. Caster, 
 It is my opinion, as Building Commissioner for the Town of xxxxx, that the antenna-support 
structure, with appurtenant antenna systems, located on the approved site plan and 
constructed on your property at [Address] Street conforms to the xxxxx Zoning Bylaws and the 
[Name of state] State Building Code regulations. 
 This letter is the ﬁ nal afﬁ davit for the tower as permitted. 
 Sincerely, 
 (Signature) 
 Name 
 Building Commissioner 
 Once you’ve got that Certiﬁ cate of Completion in hand, make a photocopy and put it in your ﬁ le. In 
addition, you might consider taking a photograph of the structure with a child or two (or three or four 
would be even better) around the base. This makes it easy to demonstrate later  when the structure was 
erected, should an argument ever erupt. Why would you want to pose children around the base of the 
tower? Because they’ll be older and taller in later years when the controversy erupts about when you 
constructed the antenna-support structure. 
 At this point in the discussion, someone always suggests that you just use a stick to put the date in the 
concrete. Bzzzzt! Concrete poured today could have 1492 written into it, but that would not prove that 
the tower was built in 1492. 
 Someone else may suggest that you take a photograph holding that day’s newspaper. Another Bzzzzt! 
It is possible to stand in front of a new tower holding a newspaper with the headline  “ Dewey Wins! ” 
but that does not mean that the tower was built in 1947. 
 You could, however, mail a photograph (and I do recommend that you have people in it who may be 
alive later to testify) to yourself as a postcard to get a postmark. Put the originals in the company vault 
or someplace where it will not get tossed out by your successor when he cleans out your ﬁ les. Now you 
can relax, smile, and enjoy other things. 
 After a few days of use, and when the site is really clean, make up your mind to reestablish 
relationships with your neighbors. You’ll want to do this for several reasons: 
● 
 It is the right thing to do — after all, you will still be neighbors. You don’t want them to poison 
your children at Halloween, do you? It is also what your religion tells you to do. 
● 
 You don’t want them to go running to the Building Inspector every time you change out a 
connector because water seeped in, or every time you change a light bulb. Permanent war is 
no fun. 

Now Get the Permit and Build Your Antenna System! 317
● 
 You may one day want to erect a satellite dish or a second antenna structure or mount a 
spotlight where you park — who knows? You don’t want to go to war all over again because 
you never smoothed those feathers. 
● 
 And, ﬁ nally, there is always the possibility that your town requires a renewal at some point in 
the game. That will be covered in detail in the next chapter. 
● 
 Be the ﬁ rst to bring bread and salt, or wine, to any new neighbor. Welcome new families to 
your neighborhood. They’ll be less inclined to gang up on you later. 
 The point? Make your enemy your friend. That may sound like a bumper sticker, but the concept will 
permit you and your company to return to a state of neighborhood tranquility. 

This page intentionally left blank

319
 Awkward Post-Permit Situations 
 17.1   Construction Problems 
 In towns where an antenna system may be constructed without a Special Exception, Special Use 
Permit, or the like, neighbors may ﬁ rst ﬁ nd out about construction of your system when you begin 
constructing it. This can sometimes cause a ﬂ urry of activity on their part. If you are afraid that a 
neighbor may go ballistic when you start construction, there are several principles you can use to 
reduce distractions to the construction of your antenna system: 
● 
 Work fast. 
● 
 Work neatly. 
● 
 Work thoughtfully. 
● 
 Work safely. 
 17.1.1  Work Fast 
 Have you ever noticed that hostile corporate takeovers often begin on a Friday afternoon after the 
market closes? Have you ever noticed that when the President of the United States is about to do 
something unpopular, it is usually announced on Friday night, after the national newscasts, or early on 
Saturday morning? 
 It is more difﬁ cult, although not impossible, to assemble a corporate-takeover defense team if everyone 
you need has gone away for the weekend. Similarly, if bad news is released and published in the 
Saturday papers, by Sunday morning it is old news and may no longer warrant a headline. 
 Similar thinking suggests that if you have a permit in hand, you should begin construction after the 
Building Inspector goes home on Friday afternoon and ﬁ nish before he comes in on Monday morning. 
Why would you do that? For one thing, it becomes more difﬁ cult, if not nearly impossible, for the 
Building Inspector to issue a stop work order over the weekend. The neighbors may not know how to 
reach him, and the police will consider it to be a civil matter that can wait until Monday morning. 
 Building over the weekend is not impossible, if you have an existing set of holes in the ground, a 
concrete base that has cured (allow 10 to 27 days, depending on local construction requirements), and 
CHAPTER 17 

320 Chapter 17
 the ﬁ rst section or pier pin plus anchors all ready to go. Do the rest of your preparation in a garage to 
avoid creating a stir. 
 Preparation for fast construction should include putting each section of a lattice structure together 
on the ground, ﬁ ling off burrs, and reaming out bolt holes as necessary, marking matching legs with 
colored tape and so forth. It would also include building guy sets, or as much of them as possible, in 
advance in a garage — out of sight. 
 A heavy equipment contractor who specialized in building golf courses ﬁ rst introduced me to this 
concept. Over an Egg McMufﬁ n one day, he described to me how he once found himself in a situation 
where a privately owned woods was going to be converted into a golf course. He checked with the 
Building Inspector to see if any Special Permits would be required to clear the land and was (correctly) 
told that no Special Permits would be required. So he lined up a huge crew of forest workers and 
machinery. 
 They went to work on Friday afternoon and worked almost continuously until Sunday night. On 
Monday morning, the neighbors were banging on the Building Inspector’s door, demanding that he 
ﬁ nd a way to stop the construction. Lacking authority to stop the construction, but wishing to appear 
responsive to the neighbors, the Building Inspector called the contractor and asked him to hold off a 
while so the town Conservation Commission could consider the situation. To this request, the builder 
replied: “ Of course, but perhaps you should drive over here to better understand the situation. ”
 Eighteen acres had been cleared over the weekend. Ever hear of the French expression  fait accompli
(translated literally as “ accomplished fact ” )? In the Middle East, this is known as  “ creating facts on the 
ground. ” The  fait accompli is a well-established principle of international relations. It can be employed 
by the communications industry, too. 
 Of course not everyone can erect a tower over the weekend, but perhaps you’ve enjoyed learning about 
the strategy. 
 17.1.2  Work Neatly 
 It sounds odd but it is a fact of life: Your neighbors may not know whether you have designed your 
support structure well or badly, but they can tell if you are sloppy or neat. So, if you work neatly, they 
will think you have designed well. Whether this is rational or not is debatable, yet it is still an oft-
experienced fact. Thus, you can instill conﬁ dence in your neighbors by doing a few simple things: 
● 
 If you must store things outdoors (although you’d be better off strategically with indoor 
storage), stack support sections and antenna parts neatly. 
● 
 Build your rebar cages in a garage, perhaps off-site. 
● 
 Cover holes with plywood so no one falls in. 
● 
 Cover outside piles of materials with tarpaulins. 
● 
 Cut guy wire ends to length and tape them. 

Awkward Post-Permit Situations 321
● 
 Coil excess cables neatly. 
● 
 Use a wood chipper to get rid of slash. Rake the construction area and plant grass as soon as 
possible.
 In other words, don’t leave your construction site looking like a construction site.  
 17.1.3  Work Thoughtfully 
 Be considerate of your neighbors. Don’t stack things along the property line. Don’t store antennas 
along the property line. Plant bushes to block the view where guy wires meet your guy anchors. 
 17.1.4  Work Safely 
 Never leave an open hole. Get that anticlimbing device on the structure as fast as possible. Wear safety 
glasses. Wear hard hats. Use handy-talkies instead of shouting. Keep nosey kids away (nicely, of 
course) for their own safety. Many of the strategies for working neatly also result in greater safety. 
 17.1.5  Tree Removal 
 The golf course story above reminds me of a ham who became the victim of irate neighbors. Intending 
to install both a swimming pool and an antenna-support structure the following year, he had about 
an acre of his backyard forest cleared. With a whole year to organize and bare stumps to point at, the 
neighbors built up a full head of steam before the ham went to the permit-granting authority for his 
Special Use Permit to erect and maintain an amateur radio antenna system. The neighbors organized 
and fought, raising the grief factor substantially for the ham and requiring him to retain a lawyer. 
If he’d built the antenna-support structure in the woods and cleared the land later for the pool, his 
situation might have been different. 
 Think hard about the phases of construction, so you can improve your chances of obtaining a permit. 
There will always be neighbors who hold to a simply expressed view:  “ We love trees. ” For some 
reason, they believe that this view also entitles them to require you to forego the use of your own 
land. He may be legally wrong, but a determined neighbor who holds this view can make your life 
miserable. Think very hard about your land-clearing strategy. 
 How much of a clearing do you need to start your project? Can you live with  “ alleys ” for guy wires 
instead of a cleared acre? Can you live with an alley created by discrete cutting of the limbs on trees? 
Can you leave trees standing that can limit the ability of a neighbor to even see your antenna system? 
 Please remember that if tree cutting or limb cutting is part of your project (and especially if you don’t 
live in a rural area), get rid of the slash quickly. Do this before neighbors can take photos, however 
irrelevant, of trees and branches all over your yard. Rent a chipper or have a landscaper chip up the 
slash. If your yard looks like a wreck, your neighbors will be upset. Nothing good happens when the 
neighbors are upset. 

322 Chapter 17
 17.1.6  Holes in the Ground 
 Don’t leave any open holes in the ground. This will upset the Building Inspector and give the neighbors 
a reason to complain. It makes good sense anyway to cover holes with 2     4s and plywood so no 
one can fall in. Also, your insurance company wants you to do that. The issue you are attacking is an 
outcrop of an old Latin expression:  falsum in unum ,  falsum in omnium (verbatim translation:  “ false in 
one, false in all ” ). This is a line of argument that holds that if you can be false about any one fact, you 
can be false about all facts. 
 The problem with this line of argument is, of course, that it is not true. For example, is it necessarily 
true that you would falsely represent the visual impact of a communications antenna just because you 
once told your wife that you liked that hideous dress she’d just bought? 
 However, you can be sure that neighbors who oppose you will stand up at a public hearing and say: 
 “ He left open holes in the ground. This is dangerous construction. How can we believe that he’ll build 
a safe antenna-support structure? ”
 So, be a good neighbor and make sure you build anything you build safely. This way, when you later 
stand up at the hearing and say that you are going to build this antenna system yourself and it will be 
safe, you will be more believable. 
 17.1.7  Anticlimbing Devices 
 Some applicants are reluctant to include their plans for an anticlimbing device in the Special Use 
Permit application. They may feel it is not necessary. They may feel that any kid who climbs the tower 
and gets hurt is just a trespasser who gets what he deserves. They may think of this as yet another 
unnecessary government intrusion. 
 You may think any or all of those things, but you will still be asked about it during the course of the 
hearing — unless the support structure is a push-up pole or something like a crank-up round pole that is 
inherently unclimbable. 
 For your typical lattice structure, however, a device to prevent curious children from climbing it is 
often a requirement of municipalities. There is always some member of the Board who is reenacting 
in his mind the scene from the movie  Kindergarten Cop , where Arnold Schwarzenegger must climb 
to save a frightened child who has climbed a huge, self-supporting microwave link tower to get away 
from something scary. The movie tower may be wider and taller than you had in mind, or it may be 
exactly what you had in mind, but such is the power of modern cinematic illusion — it may be stuck in 
the mind of a Board member. 
 So don’t ﬁ ght it. Include your method for preventing trespassers from climbing the structure in the 
application, and assure the Board that at least this element will not be a problem. 
 There are several common approaches. One is to wrap the bottom 10 feet in hardware cloth and mount 
a ladder to begin your climb above the cloth fencing. 
 Another approach uses either pine board or plywood. Start with a thick (1 inch is good; 3/8 inch may 
not stand up to the animals) plywood sheet, 4    8 feet. A sheet yields three panels just under 16 inches 
in width, each 8 feet tall. A 16-inch panel is adequate for Rohn 25G or other structures with a 12-inch 

Awkward Post-Permit Situations 323
 face. It is just a bit too small for Rohn 45G or 55G, as those models have an 18-inch face. Start the 
panel at 2 or 3 feet above the ground and end 10 to 11 feet above the ground. This is above the grasp of 
all but the most determined trespassers. 
 See  Figure 17.1 for the method developed by K1ZM. You may also refer back to Figure 7.10 for the 
method used by K1HT, who uses neat construction with pine boards, painted gray in this case. 
 Most commercial installations simply go forward with a 6- or 8-foot-high chain-link fence, the same 
style you’d put around a tennis court, topped by barbed wire pointing outward. However, make no 
assumptions. Some bylaws prevent chain-link fences, some require camouﬂ age fencing, and some 
specify a particular type of enclosure. 
 17.1.8  Posting Your Registration Number 
 When your Antenna Structure Registration (ASR) Number (also called the FCC Registration Number) 
has been issued, the next step is to decide where to display the number to make it most visible. Section 
17.4(g) of the Commission’s Rules, 47 CFR §17.4(g), states that, with the exception of certain historic 
structures,  “ the Antenna Structure Registration Number must be displayed in a conspicuous place so 
 Figure 17.1  K1ZM’s anticlimbing technique using hardware cloth. 

324 Chapter 17
 that it is readily visible near the base of the antenna structure. Materials used to display the Antenna 
Structure Registration Number must be weather-resistant and of sufﬁ cient size to be easily seen at the 
base of the antenna structure. ”
 Just use some common sense when posting the number. You are permitted to post the ASR Number on 
the fence or gate to the access road, or on the fence surrounding the tower. Ask,  “ Is this readily visible 
to someone who doesn’t have access to the site? ” Take the following into account: 
● 
 Rules do not prohibit multiple postings of your ASR Number. You may wish to post around 
the perimeter of your structure and at the access gate. This is cheap insurance against a 
citation for failure to post the ASR Number. 
● 
 You are strongly encouraged to use the FCC Registration Number to make the identiﬁ cation 
of your structure painless. 
● 
 If you have  “ No Trespassing ” signs posted or other signs that grace your property, your 
Registration Number should be posted with them. If not, someone would have to trespass to 
ﬁ nd your Registration Number, which is in conﬂ ict with the intent of the rules. 
 The FCC website ( http://wireless.fcc.gov/antenna/about/postingguidelines.html ) contains general guidance 
for posting and also provides answers to hypothetical situations you might encounter when posting. 
 Tower site signs may be purchased from Antenna ID Products in Glenmoore, PA (www.antennaid
.com), Curt Bennett ’ s Sign Pro of Lexington, NE, co-owned with KRVN (AM) (signpro@atcjet.net), 
888/230-7446.
 17.1.9  “ Danger: High Voltage ” Signs 
 If the town asks you to put up a sign saying  “ Danger: High Voltage, ” you should resist (unless it is true 
that you have a high voltage point readily touchable). Your position is:  “ If it were true, I’d be happy to 
put it up. But it is not true, and the Board doesn’t want me to lie, right? ” In addition, any sign at all is 
like inviting teenagers to defy the  “ sign of authority ” and climb the structure. However, in the end, if 
they just absolutely, positively insist, put it up. If you can, put it on the face of the structure facing the 
backyard, where it is least likely to be seen by curious teenagers. 
 17.1.10  Phillystran 
 This book cannot resolve controversies about costs, or the inﬂ uence of metallic guy wires on radiation 
patterns. However, if guy wire visibility is going to be a complaint against you, it is hard to imagine 
anything less visible than a guy wire made so that the outer covering is black and uninterrupted. Grey 
galvanized steel quickly dulls and becomes hardly visible, but black guy wire is almost impossible 
to see at any time. If you install insulators in your guy wires to avoid parasitic resonances, those 
insulators do increase visibility if they appear above the tree line. Below the tree line, both galvanized 
steel and Phillystran are almost impossible to spot. 
 In the interest of compromise with respect to cost, consider using Phillystran for guy wires above 
the tree line and convert to steel at the tree line. This is perfectly safe (even recommended by the 

Awkward Post-Permit Situations 325
 manufacturer of Phillystran, who would rather not have Phillystran be too close to the ground, where a 
vandal or a small brush ﬁ re could attack it). 
 17.2   The TVI/RFI Complaint 
 Before wading into the discussion of how to respond (in the sense of letters and legal actions) to a 
radiofrequency interference (RFI) complaint, see  http://www.arrl.org/tis for some good information 
packages on various aspects of RFI.  The ARRL RFI Book  ( http://arrl.org/catalog/ ) is another good source 
of help for all types of RFI problems. There’s nothing like curing an RFI problem to quiet the situation. 
 17.2.1  TVI/RFI Complaint by a Town Ofﬁ cial 
 It is with uncanny freakishness that it can be predicted that your site will wind up across the street 
from the sister of the Chairman of the Board of Appeals. This creates all kinds of problems. To deal 
with the most important one ﬁ rst, if your Board of Appeals (or other permit-granting authority) has no 
alternate members available should a member be forced to recuse himself, and one member recuses 
himself because he has interference from your site, you could wind up requiring unanimous approval 
from the remaining members of the Board. For example, you might ﬁ nd yourself needing all four votes 
on a ﬁ ve-member panel, where the ﬁ fth member cannot vote. While your presentation may be brilliant, 
winning unanimously is always hard. 
 Second, RFI is a possibility in today’s world of poorly designed legacy VCRs or 49MHz wireless 
telephones left over from another era. Those who have experienced RFI just don’t want to hear your 
logic. They will complain, for example, to their brother, who is the Chairman of your permit-granting 
authority. This will happen even though putting your antenna higher in the sky not only will improve 
your coverage but will also reduce interference, simply because the antenna is farther away. 
 The best way to deal with this is to be proactive and ask your neighbor if he or she has experienced any 
interference. Then, if necessary, do what you need to do. In any event, get the ball rolling! Prove that 
you are technically competent and try to ameliorate the problem. Show yourself to be a good neighbor. 
It will help later. Learn from the experience of others — engineering your way out of this problem is 
less expensive than trying to work your way out using a lawyer.  
 17.2.2  TVI/RFI Complaint by a Neighbor 
 (Note: A much deserved  “ thank you ” is due to Greg Becker, J.D., Ph.D., NA2N, and a former 
policeman, for advice contained in this section.) 
 The ﬁ rst rule to remember when confronted by an angry neighbor who knocks on the door of your 
equipment shed is to let him say his piece. Don’t try to interrupt. Let him get it all out. 
 Yet, venting only works when the situation is relatively calm, even within the nature of a confrontation. 
The instant it rises to the point where you feel that you may no longer be in control of the situation, 
end it if you possibly can. Close the door. Ask him to leave and come back when you can both be calm. 
Don’t know what to say? Try:  “ Listen, it’s late and we’re both a little upset. Can we talk about this 
another time when we’re both calm? ”

326 Chapter 17
 If it is late at night and no drinking is involved, ask if he can shut off his motion-sensor lights, TV, 
stereo, or whatever, and you can work on the problem during the day, or the next day — when you will 
have had the chance to gather some materials to work on the project. Nothing is going to get settled 
right then and there. If it is late at night and he’s been drinking, don’t even try to settle anything right 
then and there. 
 If he starts yelling, tell him,  “ I’ll be happy to work with you to resolve this, but the way you’re acting is 
frightening me. Please leave. We can talk about this when we’re both calm. ” 
 The  “ frightening ” part places language into the situation evincing your state of mind, should the 
situation escalate. Should the neighbor persist in that behavior, it strengthens the position that his 
threatening conduct was intended to place you in fear of your safety (or that is a negligent result) and 
gives the law-enforcement ofﬁ cer or district attorney grounds for criminal action (at least in New York). 
 If he threatens to call the cops, hand him a phone. If he calls the cops, thank your lucky stars. Now you 
have a neutral party with a district attorney on call to be an arbiter. You are lucky, because the neighbor 
who does not call the cops could be thinking of taking things into his own hands (see below). 
 On the other hand, if he has really frightened you, even without threats, or is in any way acting in what 
might be perceived as a threatening manner, you should call the police — do not wait for him to do it. 
 Worried that the police won’t pay attention if it is just a phone call and it’s just swearing ( “ Get the hell 
off the air, right now!! ” ), with no words conveying a threat, just a menacing voice? Should you ﬁ le a 
complaint? You could be really scared, yet lack the words or act that amounts to a threat or unwanted 
touching to form the basis of a complaint. Should you still ﬁ le a report? 
   If you are asking that question, you are assuming that nothing much happens when the cops get the ﬁ rst 
ﬁ ling — as it lacks a criminal act. However, the mere ﬁ ling means that the second time it happens, cop 
nostrils should ﬂ are. 
 Yet, the ugly neighbor could now make lawsuit noises (defamation). Don’t worry too much, as the 
station (or the carrier) would likely win any lawsuit against you by taking the position that ﬁ ling a 
police report fails the  “ publication ” test and is privileged. Nonetheless, the company still winds up 
hiring a lawyer and defending itself in court. Thus, the question is really interesting. 
 Here’s something to consider. There can be a number of crimes that are less than an assault. Atty. Brent 
H. Gourley, of Klemm  & Gourley, PC, in Dothan, AL, provided information on the Alabama situation. 
 Put brieﬂ y, in Alabama: 
● 
 Class A misdemeanors    $2,000 ﬁ ne and 1 year with the sheriff 
● 
 Class B misdemeanors    $1,000 ﬁ ne and 6 months 
● 
 Class C misdemeanors    $500 ﬁ ne and 90 days 
● 
 Sentence is usually suspended upon payment of the ﬁ ne and good behavior. 
 Here are the crimes that may be involved.

Awkward Post-Permit Situations 327
   Sec. 13A-6-23. Menacing [threaten with a weapon] 
 (a) A person commits the crime of menacing if, by physical action, he intentionally places or 
attempts to place another person in fear of imminent serious physical injury. 
 (b) Menacing is a Class B misdemeanor. 
 Sec. 13A-6-24. Reckless endangerment [usually motor vehicle, but  . . . ] 
 (a) A person commits the crime of reckless endangerment if he recklessly engages in conduct 
which creates a substantial risk of serious physical injury to another person. 
 (b) Reckless endangerment is a Class A misdemeanor. 
  Sec. 13A-11-8. Harassment or harassing communications [verbal, physical, e-mail, telephone] 
 (a)(1) HARASSMENT — A person commits the crime of harassment if, with intent to harass, 
annoy, or alarm another person, he or she either: 
 a. Strikes, shoves, kicks, or otherwise touches a person or subjects him or her to physical contact. 
 b. Directs abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene gesture towards another person. 
 (2) For purposes of this section, harassment shall include a threat, verbal or nonverbal, made 
with the intent to carry out the threat, that would cause a reasonable person who is the target 
of the threat to fear for his or her safety. 
 (3) Harassment is a Class C misdemeanor. 
 (b)(1) HARASSING COMMUNICATIONS — A person commits the crime of harassing communications 
if, with intent to harass or alarm another person, he or she does any of the following: 
 a. Communicates with a person, anonymously or otherwise, by telephone, telegraph, mail, or any 
other form of written or electronic communication, in a manner likely to harass or cause alarm. 
 b. Makes a telephone call, whether or not a conversation ensues, with no purpose of legitimate 
communication.
 c. Telephones another person and addresses to or about such other person any lewd or obscene 
words or language. 
 Nothing in this section shall apply to legitimate business telephone communications. 
 (2) Harassing communications is a Class C misdemeanor. 
 17.2.3  Some Sample RFI Letters 
 In any event, here are some sample RFI letters for you to use as a guide in responding to your jerky 
neighbor. After reading a few, you should have the conﬁ dence to compose an appropriate one for 
yourself. After the ﬁ rst few, you’ll see  “ lawyer to lawyer ” letters. Don’t, please don’t, think that if you 
write English well you can write a lawyer’s letter. Offer these as useful examples to a lawyer you have 
retained. For ease of use, they are also on the CD accompanying this book. 
 17.2.3.1  Sample RFI Letter to a Neighbor 
 This letter is on the CD as ﬁ lename Neader RFI Letter.doc.

328 Chapter 17
  Dear __________, 
 I am really sorry that you are having problems with your motion-detecting lights picking up 
radio transmissions. As you know, your lights should not be doing this. If you would be willing 
to cooperate in some experiments, I am hopeful your interference problem could be resolved by 
the application of standard engineering techniques. As a good neighbor, I am willing to assist in 
applying these techniques to your speciﬁ c situation. 
 I do want to clarify that federal law does not require me to assist with interference problems 
such as the one you are experiencing, as long as our transmitter meets all applicable FCC 
regulations. I am conﬁ dent our transmitter meets and even exceeds all regulations. The power 
output is always within speciﬁ ed limitations, and we’ve spent considerable time and money to 
be sure that everything is properly installed with better than average grounding and ﬁ ltering. 
 While we don’t have to help, we want to help, as we want to be a good neighbor, but it will take 
cooperation to cure any interference problem. I cannot do it alone. If you want help in curing 
your interference problem, all you have to do is call me at [Telephone Number] and, while I 
cannot make any promises, I will do the best that I can to help you solve the problem. 
 I have attached some additional information regarding radiofrequency interference issues that 
you may ﬁ nd useful. However, I believe the best solution is neighborly cooperation and I await 
your phone call. 
   Sincerely, 
   Scott Neader 
 Attachment 
  Can local or state authorities or laws be involved in matters of radiofrequency interference? 
 No. RFI matters are handled exclusively by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). In 
amending the Communications Act of 1934, the Congress clearly expressed its opinion: 
 Section 302(a) (formal citation: 47 USC §302(a)) reads, in relevant part: 
 47 USC §302a. Devices which interfere with radio reception 
 SUBCHAPTER III — SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO RADIO 
 .  .  . 
     (f)(2) A station that is licensed by the Commission pursuant to section 301 of this title in any 
radio service for the operation at issue shall not be subject to action by a State or local govern-
ment under this subsection. A State or local government statute or ordinance enacted for pur-
poses of this subsection shall identify the exemption available under this paragraph. 
 Furthermore, many home entertainment electronic devices, including portable telephones, bear 
the following required label, in accordance with 47 CFR §15.19(a)(3): 
 This device complies with Part 15 of the FCC Rules. Operation is subject to the following two 
conditions: (1) This device may not cause harmful interference, and (2) this device must accept 
any interference received, including interference that may cause undesired operation. 
 Here’s the attachment to Neader’s letter:

Awkward Post-Permit Situations 329
 17.2.3.2  Sample RFI Letter to a Neighbor, by Phil Kane, Esq. 
 This is the typical TVI/RFI situation where the neighbor has refused to cooperate in resolving the 
problem and has started to harass your people. Remember, if you are a broadcaster, and the problem is 
blanketing interference, the situation is different. But, if you are a taxi company and your signals are 
clean, this type of format may help. This letter is on the CD as ﬁ lename Kane RFI Letter.doc.
 Putting it another way, there is really no such thing as a successful private lawsuit in an RFI matter. 
Who ya gonna call when there are RFI problems? The neighbor must complain to the Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC). If it would help to cool him off, he can even call the 
Watch Ofﬁ cer of the FCC Compliance and Information Bureau at 202-632-6975, 24 hours 
a day, 7 days a week (fax, 202-418-2812; TTY, 202-418-2989). For information on resolving 
problems, the FCC’s  Interference Handbook is available online. Figures illustrate different TV 
interference problems, including CB transmitter interference. This 59-page  Interference Handbook
can be found at  http://www.fcc.gov/ftp/Bureaus/Mass_Media/Databases/documents_
collection/1993InterferenceHandbook.pdf . Guard that URL carefully, as it is next to impossible 
to ﬁ nd using the FCC’s search engine. It includes information about equipment installation, 
identifying interference sources, curing interference problems, and ﬁ lters. Unfortunately, the 
list of home electronic equipment manufacturers and telephone numbers it contains may be 
outdated. 
  Would a shorter tower help?  Actually, the higher the antenna, the better! The erection of a taller 
antenna system will have a tendency to decrease, not increase, the likelihood of television 
interference, as higher antenna systems, with directional arrays, are farther away from 
neighboring electronic devices and transmit over nearby homes. Lower antennas have a far 
greater likelihood of interference, as they would direct more energy toward a neighboring TV set. 
 This is exactly the position that was taken by the FCC’s chief of the Private Radio Bureau in a 
letter to the Board of Zoning Appeals of Hempstead, NY (October 25, 1994): 
 “ (A)ntenna height is inversely related to the strength, in the horizontal plane, of the radio signal 
that serves as a catalyst for interference in susceptible home electronic equipment. It is a matter 
of technical fact that the higher an . . . antenna, the less likely it is that radio frequency interfer-
ence will appear in home electronic equipment. ”          
  Dear Mr. Neighbor: 
 I understand that since the spring of 200 n , you have alleged that your television receiver, VCR, 
and telephone have been receiving the radio signals from [Client, the alleged source] and that not 
only have you refused to apply the necessary corrective measures (ﬁ lters) to your home electronic/
entertainment equipment ( “ HEEE ” ) which would reduce or eliminate the effects of that unwanted 
reception, but you have also been abusive to employees and have made threats of further abuse. 
 My client is licensed to operate that station by the Federal Communications Commission 
( “ FCC ” ), which has sole jurisdiction and authority in connection with any complaints of this 
nature. The particular problem which you are experiencing is, unfortunately, the most common 
complaint from the general public with which the FCC deals. 
 FCC engineers have looked into this type of problem, its causes, and its solutions for literally 
decades, and their research, both in the laboratory and in the ﬁ eld — the homes and ofﬁ ces of 

330 Chapter 17
 folks like yourself — has shown that the overwhelming cause of the problem is the lack of effective 
shielding and ﬁ ltering of the affected HEEE devices to prevent the interception and detection of 
such radio signals. Indeed, my client is able to operate HEEE devices such as television receivers, 
computers, and telephones in his ofﬁ ces without experiencing the effects you complain about. 
 We live in an era where radio transmitters of all types — cellular radio telephones, electronic baby 
monitors and other types of wireless communicators, mobile radios, business and personal 
communications devices, as well as citizen’s band (CB) transmitters — are proliferating in the effort 
to bring the beneﬁ ts of wireless communications to the public. This has resulted in increasing 
technical incompatibility with HEEE devices that were not designed with the interception 
resistance needed to coexist in that environment. 
 Most people such as yourself are never aware of this sort of deﬁ ciency and the proper methods 
of curing it until being exposed to a nearby radio signal causes the unwanted interception. 
Then your natural reaction is:  “ I never had the problem before, why should I have to deal with 
it? It must be someone else’s problem. ” The analogy, which has been used all over the country 
and for many years, is:  “ Why does my roof leak when it rains? It didn’t leak before it started 
raining. ” The solution to the problem, though, is in your own hands, not my client’s. 
 I suggest you begin your investigations with an FCC Fact Sheet at  http://www.fcc.gov/cgb/
consumerfacts/interference.html . It explains the steps that have to be taken for you to restore 
the proper operation of your equipment. The appropriate Enforcement Bureau ofﬁ ce may be 
found by looking at  http://www.fcc.gov/eb/rfo/ . 
 You may also write to them at [Regional FCC Public Service Address]. 
 My client is willing is to operate the radio transmitter upon mutual prearrangement, to 
see whether the things that you do are effective in restoring the proper operation of your 
equipment. He is not obligated to stop operation in the interim. He is not obligated to provide 
the necessary ﬁ lters or technical repairs to your equipment, nor will he. 
 With the above as a background, then, we insist that you cease harassing [Client] about a 
problem the solution to which is in your own hands, and we reserve the right to take necessary 
legal action to restrain such harassment should you continue to do so. 
 Sincerely, 
 Phil Kane 
 Principal Attorney 
 Communications Law Center 
 17.2.3.3  Sample RFI Letter to a Neighbor Who Is a Policeman, by Fred Hopengarten, Esq. 
 This is available on the CD as ﬁ lename K1VR Lawyer to Cop RFI Letter.doc.
  Dear Mr. Neighbor: 
 I am an attorney with a particular interest in communications law. It is the only area in which I 
am active. I write to you today on behalf of [Client] located at [# Same Street]. 
The Concern
 Mr. Client has recorded, in notes made at the time, that you phoned his ofﬁ ce during the day, 
and his home later that night, on November 30, 200 n . In the course of a call at approximately 

Awkward Post-Permit Situations 331
 6:00 p.m., you said to him that an interference problem from which you now suffer was his 
fault, and that if he does not stop it you would get a court order to arrest him for disturbing the 
peace. As you are a police ofﬁ cer employed by the Town of Town, Mr. Client was very concerned 
and asked for my help. 
Escalation Is Undesirable
 If this matter escalates, it will involve all sorts of claims by Mr. Client, based on actions you have 
taken in attempting to restrain the station’s First Amendment right of free speech [if a broadcaster] 
and attempting to deprive his company of equal protection under the law. In that case, I would 
advise you to retain a lawyer to defend yourself, and it would become necessary to call in Town 
Counsel to defend the Town, due to your role as a police ofﬁ cer. The matter would then become 
protracted and expensive for you and for the Town and is not likely to solve your essential problem. 
 If I understand the situation correctly, you suffer from some interference. Frankly, your concerns 
are best solved by engineering, not litigation. 
A Helpful Publication
 The law on interference to a television set or intercom is clear. To start, I suggest that you refer 
to  http://www.fcc.gov/cgb/consumerfacts/interference.html . 
 The FCC has written: 
 Interference from a radio transmitter  . . .  can occur, even when the radio transmitter is properly 
operated. One or all of the following may be a contributing factor: 
● 
Technical deﬁ ciencies in a radio transmitter or improper operation of the transmitter. 
● 
Design deﬁ ciencies in the device receiving the interference (television, telephone, stereo, or 
AM/FM radio). 
● 
Inadequate antenna system (rabbit ears versus a well-maintained outside antenna system). 
● 
Distant TV or radio signal being received (referred to as fringe area reception). 
● 
Booster ampliﬁ er installed on TV receiving antenna. 
Action Steps
 Mr. Client is a degreed electronics engineer who has worked in the electronics industry all his 
life. He has had no word from other neighbors that they have problems. It is highly unlikely that 
the problem is with his transmitter or antennas. Furthermore, it is likely that the problem in your 
home can be easily remedied. 
 By letter of December 5, 200 n , Mr. Client offered written suggestions and has provided, at his 
own expense, some materials (0.002- μ fd capacitors with alligator clips for your telephone line 
and snap-on ﬁ lter chokes for your TV feed line) that may be of help to you. Furthermore, if you 
have cable TV, and the problem continues, you may contact me or Mr. Client, and we will be 
happy to coordinate with the local cable TV company to see what further steps can be taken. 
Furthermore, as I understand it, no one has yet tried any ﬁ lters in your home. This step may be 
appropriate after you have taken the ﬁ rst steps Mr. Client suggested. 
Mr. Client’s Antenna
 Mr. Client has reason to believe that you have complained to the Town Building Inspection 
Department about the company’s antenna, perhaps in the hope that without an antenna up in 
the sky your problem would go away. Unfortunately, that concept is faulty. If it were true that an 
antenna caused the problem, which isn’t true, you would not want a low antenna (which would 

332 Chapter 17
 be closer to your house), but rather the highest antenna known to man (which would be farther 
away from your house). Let’s put it another way. If the antenna caused the problem, you’d want 
the antenna 5 miles up, not 85 feet up. 
 Due to the physics of signal dispersion, each additional foot of height in the antenna actually 
makes the potential interfering signal increasingly weaker and less likely to present a problem. 
Here is an example we can all relate to: 
 If you shine a ﬂ ashlight at a wall from a distance of 1 foot, you will see a strong light in a narrow 
spot on that wall. Now move the ﬂ ashlight back 4 feet, and any one spot on the wall will now 
have only 1/16th as much light, as the light disperses over a broader area and gets weaker. 
 Any requirement to lower Mr. Client’s antenna, taken alone, would therefore actually increase 
any problem which you may suffer, not decrease the problem. 
The Zoning Bylaw
 As you have mentioned the zoning bylaw of the Town of Town, I examined it. The antenna 
system has all of the proper permits, and the subject of interference is off-limits to enforcement 
by the town. Use of the Town’s zoning bylaw will not reduce your interference. 
Your Equipment Manufacturer
 While I do not know which brand of equipment you use, many manufacturers of equipment 
provide free technical help and are anxious to aid their customers. Please check your User’s 
Manual for information on how to cure interference. 
Conclusion
 Ofﬁ cer Neighbor, it seems that you have a technical problem that is susceptible to a technical 
solution. I know that Mr. Client and other [broadcasters, ambulance or taxi companies, etc.] 
have a long and proud tradition of public service. We are willing, even anxious, to help out. I 
urge you, in the strongest terms, not to make a law case out of this situation. Instead, I ask you 
to help create a  “ win/win ” situation here. 
 With cooperation, you can be rid of your interference problem and Mr. Client can be relieved of his 
concerns about any possible action you may take. Are you willing to take a chance on cooperation? 
It could solve your problem and avoid a confrontation in which no one wins, except the attorney 
for the broadcaster, especially if awarded his fees by the Court at the conclusion of litigation. 
 I hope that you and Mr. Client can work this thing out. If I can be of assistance in any way, on 
questions of engineering or law, please feel free to contact me. 
   Sincerely, 
   Fred Hopengarten, Esq. 
 ( Note: The policeman was never heard from again.) 
 17.2.3.4  Sample Lawyer’s RFI Letter to a Neighbor’s Lawyer 
 This is available on the CD as ﬁ lename K1VR Lawyer to Lawyer RFI Letter.doc.
  In re : Your letter to Client dated November 7, 200 n
 Dear Atty. Robert: 
 I represent [Client] with respect to matters of federal law governing radiofrequency interference. 
Mr. Client has provided me with a copy of your letter to him dated November 7, 200 n . Your 

Awkward Post-Permit Situations 333
 letter advised Mr. Client that  “ a CB tower installed on your property has caused a substantial 
interference with the electronics within the Neighbor’s home. This interference includes, but is 
not limited to, audio interference with their telephone, stereo and TV sound systems. ”
 On behalf of Mr. and Mrs. Neighbor, you wrote:  “ I must respectfully request that you cease and 
desist from using your CB radio until you have acquired the technology necessary to stop this 
interference. ” You advised Mr. Client that, should he not comply with your request, you have 
been authorized by your clients to take appropriate legal action including, but not limited to, a 
restraining order to stop this condition deemed a nuisance. 
A Federally Licensed Provider of Commercial Mobile Radio Services
 Mr. Client is a federally licensed Commercial Mobile Radio Services (CMRS) carrier, holding the 
proper licenses issued by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The FCC-licensed 
Commercial Mobile Radio Service is separate and distinct from the FCC-licensed Citizen’s 
Band (CB) Radio Service. The FCC has sole jurisdiction and authority in connection with any 
complaints of radiofrequency interference (RFI). 
Applicable Law
 Congress has preempted any state or local regulation of radiofrequency interference (RFI) 
pursuant to the provisions of Section 302(a) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended. 
For your convenience, it reads: 
 47 USC §302a. Devices which interfere with radio reception 
 SUBCHAPTER III — SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO RADIO 
 .  .  . 
 (f)(2) A station that is licensed by the Commission pursuant to section 301 of this title in any 
radio service for the operation at issue shall not be subject to action by a State or local govern-
ment under this subsection. A State or local government statute or ordinance enacted for pur-
poses of this subsection shall identify the exemption available under this paragraph. 
 Furthermore, many home entertainment electronic devices, including portable telephones, bear 
the following required label, in accordance with 47 CFR §15.19(a)(3): 
 This device complies with Part 15 of the FCC Rules. Operation is subject to the following two 
conditions: (1) This device may not cause harmful interference, and (2) this device must accept 
any interference received, including interference that may cause undesired operation. 
 The consequence of this statute and this regulation is that, there is really no such thing as a 
successful private lawsuit in an RFI matter. 
 In  Still v. Michaels , 791 F. Supp. 248 (USDC AZ, 1992), the Court held that the law of nuisance 
in the area of radiofrequency interference was preempted by the Communications Act, as it 
would obstruct the FCC’s ability to regulate such matters. In that case, the plaintiffs ’ state law 
action for nuisance had been dismissed on the grounds that state courts were precluded by 
federal preemption from remedying an alleged private nuisance caused by interference from the 
operation of a radio transmitter. 166 Ariz. 403, 803 P.2d 124 (App. 1990) 
 In  Blackburn v. Doubleday Broadcasting Company, Inc. , 353  N.W. 2d 550 (Minn. 1984), plaintiffs 
brought a nuisance action against ﬁ ve radio stations that broadcast from a Minneapolis 
building, alleging the defendants ’ transmissions interfered with plaintiffs ’ reception of other 
stations. The Minnesota Supreme Court held that the Communications Act preempted 
plaintiffs ’ claim that defendants ’ radio transmissions constituted an actionable nuisance by 
distorting their reception of other desired signals. 

334 Chapter 17
 In  E.G. Helm, Jr. v. Louisville Two-Way Radio Corporation , 667 S.W. 2d 691 (Ky. 1984), the Jefferson 
County Police Department ﬁ led suit against a commercial radio paging service, seeking 
injunctive relief for interference with police communications. The police chief alleged that 
the interference was a dangerous nuisance and threatened the public safety. The Kentucky 
Supreme Court held that Congress and the federal government were the sole regulators of radio 
interference, and that a common law nuisance action was not sufﬁ cient to confer jurisdiction 
on the state court. 
 Additionally, the Illinois Supreme Court has held that a claim for interference with television 
reception simply does not state a cause of action for nuisance.  People ex rel. Hoogasian v. Sears, 
Roebuck and Co. , 52 Ill. 2d 301 (1972). See also  Public Service Co. of New Mexico v. Catron , 98  N.
M. 134 (1982) (holding that a claim that construction of a high tension transmission line 
would cause interference to television and radio reception failed to state a cause of action for 
nuisance).
 State law or state action that requires anyone to cease operations or incur penalties as a 
consequence of radio interference have been entirely preempted by Congress. This position has 
been conﬁ rmed repeatedly by the courts. See, for example,  Broyde v. Gotham Tower , 13 F.3d 994 
(6th Cir. 1994). For an excellent discussion, and a wealth of cases, see  Southwestern Bell Wireless, 
Inc. v. Johnson County Board of County Commissioners , 199 F. 3d 1185 (10th Cir. 1999),  cert. denied , 
530 U.S. 1204 (2000),  http://www.ca10.uscourts.gov/opinions/98/98-3264.pdf .
 Another well-written and thorough discussion states plainly:  “ We conclude that allowing local 
zoning authorities to condition construction and use permits on any requirement to eliminate 
or remedy RF interference  ‘ stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the 
full purposes and objectives of Congress. ’ ”  Freeman v. Burlington Broadcasters, Inc ., 204 F. 3d 
311 (2d Cir. 2000),  cert. denied , 531 U.S. 917 (2000),  http://www.fcc.gov/ogc/documents/
opinions/2000/97-9141.doc. 
 Finally, you should be informed that the solution is in the hands of the complainant. 
A Helpful Publication
 For information on resolving problems, the FCC’s  Interference Handbook is available online. 
Figures illustrate different TV interference problems, including CB transmitter interference. 
This 59-page Interference Handbook can be found at  http://www.fcc.gov/ftp/Bureaus/Mass_
Media/Databases/documents_collection/1993InterferenceHandbook.pdf . The FCC has 
written:  “ Telephones, stereos, computers, electronic organs and home intercom systems can 
receive interference from nearby radio transmitters. When this happens, the device improperly 
functions as a radio receiver. Proper shielding or ﬁ ltering can eliminate such interference. ” The 
FCC clearly puts the responsibility for interference to home electronics interference devices on 
the manufacturer. Most manufacturers respond appropriately if contacted about consumer RFI. 
Technical Solution and Responsibility
 We live in an era where radio transmitters of all types — cell phones, electronic baby 
monitors and other types of wireless communications, mobile radios, business and personal 
communications devices, and services such as citizens band and amateur radio transmitters —
 are proliferating in the effort to bring the beneﬁ ts of wireless communications to the public. 
This has resulted in increasing technical incompatibility with home electronic/entertainment 
devices that have not been designed with the interception resistance needed to coexist in that 
environment. 

Awkward Post-Permit Situations 335
 Most people, such as your client, are never aware of this sort of deﬁ ciency and the proper 
methods of curing it until exposure to a nearby radio signal results in the unwanted 
interception. Your client’s reaction is natural:  “ I never had the problem before. Why should I 
have to deal with it? ” The analogy, which has been used for years, is:  “ Why does my roof leak 
when it rains? It didn’t leak before it started raining. ” The solution to the problem, however, is 
in the hands of your client, not mine. 
 My client would be willing to operate the radio transmitter by mutual prearrangement, for your 
client to see if there are steps that may be effective in restoring the proper operation of your 
client’s equipment. Nonetheless, my client is not obligated to stop operation in the interim. If 
there is nothing further my client can do thereafter, he is not obligated to provide the necessary 
ﬁ lters or perform the technical repairs to your client’s equipment. 
Conclusion
 In conclusion, I refer you to an excellent article entitled  “ The Ghost in the Computer: Radio 
Frequency Interference and the Doctrine of Federal Preemption ” (R. Brock et al.,  Computer 
Law Review and Technology Journal , 1999(1), Fall 1998 – Spring 1999;  http://www.smu.edu/stlr/
articles/1999/spring/Brock.pdf ). Section V, Conclusion, of that article reads: 
 Although home electronic equipment is immersed in a sea of radio frequency energy from myriad 
sources, most of it functions as intended. The FCC has the authority to virtually eliminate RFI 
problems by requiring manufacturers to implement design features and ﬁ ltering that would make 
all home electronics equipment  “ bullet proof. ” Instead, it has chosen to require such equipment 
to accept any interference it receives, while relying on the marketplace to compel manufacturers to 
produce serviceable merchandise. 
 Historically, local authorities have attempted to regulate RFI as a common-law nuisance or trespass.
But as courts have consistently concluded, Congress has completely preempted the ﬁ eld of RFI 
regulation, thus precluding local regulation and state-law claims. 
 .  .  . 
     City, county, and private attorneys who understand how federal preemption applies in RFI matters 
can prevent potential litigants, beset by RFI problems, from ﬁ ling ineffective lawsuits. Attorneys 
should also help their clients to understand that under current law, RFI is properly viewed as the 
equipment’s inability to reject unwanted signals, not as transmitter interference. The focus of elim-
inating RFI can then properly shift to improving the ﬁ ltering capabilities of home electronic equip-
ment. Unless the law changes, this approach is the only reliable method of exorcizing the ghost in 
the computer. 
 Although the law does not require my client to  “ solve ” your client’s problem, I believe that he 
would be willing, even anxious, to help out. I urge you, in the strongest terms, not to make 
a law case out of this situation. Instead, I ask you to help create a  “ win/win ” situation here. 
Cooperation could solve Mr. Neighbor’s problem and avoid a confrontation in which no one 
wins, except the attorney for the FCC licensee who is awarded his fees by the Court at the 
conclusion of frivolous litigation. 
   Sincerely, 
   Fred Hopengarten, Esq. 

336 Chapter 17
 17.2.4  TVI/RFI Complaint by a Neighbor with a Gun 
 (Note: Again, a much deserved  “ thank you ” is due to Greg Becker, J.D., Ph.D., NA2N, and a former 
policeman, for advice he gave me contained in this section.) 
 The author once received a 10 p.m. phone call from a very shaken client. It seems that a neighbor had 
just come calling, carrying a gun. The essence of the message delivered by the neighbor was:  “ Shut 
that damn thing off or I’ll use this. ” 
 Was this a direct threat against the life or property of the client? I don’t know, and I didn’t care. I 
advised him to ﬁ le a written report with his town’s police department right then, by leaving the house 
and driving down to the station. And that’s what I’d advise you. 
 Don’t be a namby-pamby, ﬁ lled with  “ I don’t want to cause hard feelings or make things more difﬁ cult 
by talking to the police ” crap. If your neighbor was concerned about hard feelings or making things 
more difﬁ cult, chances are he would have stayed in bed and would not have presented himself at your 
front door. 
 However, there are two schools of thought about this situation. The Hopengarten school of thought is 
that by driving to the police department you are removing yourself from the physical situation. It is hard 
to get knifed or shot if you aren’t there. On the other hand, Greg Becker — and recall that he is a former 
policeman — would call the police and have them come to your house. By bringing a marked unit to 
your house, you make a visible statement to the neighbor that you will not tolerate that behavior and 
give the ofﬁ cers the opportunity to deal with the situation right then and there (that is, arrest, chat, etc.). 
 Nonetheless, when you place the 911 call, say that you are frightened for your safety. Now it’s on 
tape. When the patrol car arrives, remember to mention that you are  “ frightened for your safety, ” and 
make sure it gets written down. And, if you follow my advice rather than Greg’s, you should still tell 
the police at the station that you are “ frightened for your safety. ” It may sound like a little thing, but it 
gives law enforcement a bigger stick should it become necessary to do more than  “ speak softly. ” 
 Threats with guns are just not neighborly. They amount to a criminal offense, not just a civil concern. 
That’s what the police are for: To protect and defend. In the  “ neighbor with gun ” case mentioned 
above, the police took the issue seriously. In essence, they told the offending neighbor,  “ We don’t care 
about your interference. Don’t do that. ” After the police report was ﬁ led, the neighbor was never heard 
from again and moved a little while later. 
 This does not mean that the client was not shaken. Both the client and his wife didn’t sleep easily for a 
while. But, if I had to do it again, I’d escalate again. Start a paper trail immediately by ﬁ ling a police report. 
 By the way, don’t say or write:  “ He threatened me. ” That’s a conclusion. Report the words of the threat 
or your best memory of what was said. If he said  “ Cut it out or I’ll use my trusty riﬂ e, ” report those 
words. And, if it is true, be sure to say:  “ I’m frightened and concerned for my safety. ” Those words, if 
not overplayed, will normally make a police department jump. 
 Someone who shows up at your door with a gun should be in handcuffs, at least for criminal trespass, 
menacing, and potentially some weapons charges. Let the judge sort it out when everything has calmed 

Awkward Post-Permit Situations 337
 down. You can’t  “ un-arrest ” someone, but it’s much more difﬁ cult to resolve the situation with the rest 
of your family sitting in the hospital (or, God forbid, in the funeral parlor) saying  “ If only we’d called 
the police … . ” 
 My view of the world is that threats of physical violence are not to be ignored. Whether the caller 
mentioned a gun or another weapon — and even if the caller did not mention a weapon — if you felt 
threatened, you should take action. Call the police. This is not 1835, and this is not the Wild West. 
 17.3   The CB Interference Statute 
 There is always the possibility that a law enforcement ofﬁ cial may believe that there is a federal statute 
that has changed things. Public Law 106 – 521, an act entitled  “ State and Local Enforcement of Federal 
Communications Commission regulations on Use of Citizens Band Radio Equipment ” amends the 
Communications Act of 1934, creating 47 USC §302a (f)(1). This law makes it legal for a state or local 
government to enact a statute or ordinance prohibiting unauthorized operation of citizens band radio 
equipment from 24 to 35  MHz. But this is a very limited authority. 
 Such a statute is sometimes called  “ an enabling statute. ” This means that it doesn’t immediately 
empower the police to assume jurisdiction in the area of RFI, where once only the FCC could act. 
A state or local government must still ﬁ rst create legislation under this statute, and the legislation  “ shall 
identify the exemption ” under which the local law is authorized. So even the local law must tell the 
police which transmitters are exempt from the general prohibition against action by local authorities. 
 Note that, absent a requirement for type approval, an appropriately licensed transmitter could, indeed, use 
converted CB gear on a licensed frequency, even if such a local statute or ordinance exists, because the 
transmission would  not be  “ unauthorized. ” However, as most law enforcement ofﬁ cers cannot be expected 
to know the difference between citizens band radio and other radios, you may need to be informed about 
the following law, signed by President Clinton in late 2000, just before the end of his term. 
 SECTION 302a OF THE COMMUNICATIONS ACT OF 1934 
 SEC. 302a. DEVICES WHICH INTERFERE WITH RADIO RECEPTION. 
 (f)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), a State or local government may enact a statute or ordi-
nance that prohibits a violation of the following regulations of the Commission under this section: 
 (A) A regulation that prohibits a use of citizens band radio equipment not authorized by the 
Commission.
 (B) A regulation that prohibits the unauthorized operation of citizens band radio equipment on a fre-
quency between 24       MHz and 35       MHz.        
 (2) A station that is licensed by the Commission pursuant to section 301 in any radio service for the 
operation at issue shall not be subject to action by a State or local government under this subsection. 
A State or local government statute or ordinance enacted for purposes of this subsection shall identify 
the exemption available under this paragraph. 
 (3) The Commission shall provide technical guidance to State and local governments regarding the 
detection and determination of violations of the regulations speciﬁ ed in paragraph (1). 

338 Chapter 17
  (4)(A) In addition to any other remedy authorized by law, a person affected by the decision of a 
State or local government enforcing a statute or ordinance under paragraph (1) may submit to the 
Commission an appeal of the decision on the grounds that the State or local government, as the case 
may be, enacted a statute or ordinance outside the authority provided in this subsection. 
 (B) A person shall submit an appeal on a decision of a State or local government to the Commission 
under this paragraph, if at all, not later than 30 days after the date on which the decision by the State 
or local government becomes ﬁ nal, but prior to seeking judicial review of such decision. 
 (C) The Commission shall make a determination on an appeal submitted under subparagraph (B) not 
later than 180 days after its submittal. 
 (D) If the Commission determines under subparagraph (C) that a State or local government has acted 
outside its authority in enforcing a statute or ordinance, the Commission shall preempt the decision 
enforcing the statute or ordinance. 
 (5) The enforcement of statute or ordinance that prohibits a violation of a regulation by a State or 
local government under paragraph (1) in a particular case shall not preclude the Commission from 
enforcing the regulation in that case concurrently. 
 (6) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to diminish or otherwise affect the jurisdiction of the 
Commission under this section over devices capable of interfering with radio communications. 
 (7) The enforcement of a statute or ordinance by a State or local government under paragraph (1) 
with regard to citizens band radio equipment on board a  “ commercial motor vehicle ” , as deﬁ ned in 
section 31101 of title 49, United States Code, shall require probable cause to ﬁ nd that the commercial 
motor vehicle or the individual operating the vehicle is in violation of the regulations described in 
paragraph (1). Probable cause shall be deﬁ ned in accordance with the technical guidance provided by 
the Commission under paragraph (3). 
 For most readers, the heart of the statute is found at 47 USC §302a(f)(2):  “ A station that is licensed 
by the Commission pursuant to section 301 in any radio service for the operation at issue shall not be 
subject to action by a State or local government under this subsection. ” You are exempt. You are not 
required to produce your radio license in order to be exempt. 
 17.4   The Renewal 
 Occasionally you ﬁ nd a town that requires  renewal of the Special Exception or Special Use Permit you 
fought so hard to win. The renewal may be required by the general bylaws of the town or the zoning 
bylaw, or it may be an invention of the permit-granting authority (this means that they just made up the 
requirement, all by themselves). 
 A renewal requirement is  very dangerous and must be treated with great respect, taking every 
opportunity to soften its requirements while trying to eliminate the periodicity or to elongate the 
period. A renewal is basically bad public policy, because as time passes and the tower becomes part 
of the neighborhood, it will be forgotten by the majority of inhabitants and will never be noticed by 
passersby. Why stir up passions and animosities unnecessarily? 
 Should someone on the Board say that a renewal is necessary because of a concern for safety, there is a 
simple reply: “ This is construction like all other construction. You don’t require renewals on a Building 

Awkward Post-Permit Situations 339
 Permit for a freestanding garage, do you? ” If a neighbor really fears that your structure may become 
dangerous, it can be treated like any other dangerous construction. Using his police power (which is why 
most Building Inspectors are issued a badge), a Building Inspector may come onto your property without 
your permission if she or he has a reason to believe there is a danger to the public’s health or safety. 
 Furthermore, if the Building Inspector does ﬁ nd a danger, and the owner doesn’t correct the problem, 
the Building Inspector has the power to put a lien against the property to pay for repair or removal. The 
town always gets paid back, because the property cannot be sold without clearing that lien. A mortgage 
company or bank would see to that. Thus, a renewal is totally unnecessary. 
 17.4.1  Frequency of Renewal 
 There are many different towns and many different Boards, with many different applicants. Unless there 
is something different about your state (and there are states where Variances may be conditioned and 
thus limited to a period of time) a Variance is permanent and runs with the land. This means that you 
can record it in your local registry of deeds and any subsequent owner of the land may take advantage of 
the Variance. However, a Special Use Permit may be made  personal — to you or the corporation . When 
you are no longer there to use that permit, it could expire. The real story is always a matter of state law. 
 It is not unusual to ﬁ nd Boards that take the position that the Town must be  protected . One of the ways 
that such Boards seek to protect the town is by not issuing permanent Special Use Permits for antenna-
support structures. Of course, this begs the very real question:  “ From what are they protecting the town 
once a permit is granted? ”
 Nonetheless, as a form of harassment — because no other logical explanation can be put forward for 
renewal requirements except to hasten the removal of a support structure by harassing the structure’s 
owner — some towns will add periodic renewal requirements to a Special Permit. In many cases they do 
so because they can, not because it makes any sense. Many such towns don’t think the process through 
completely. 
 If your ordinance, or Board, absolutely, positively insists that a Special Use Permit for an antenna-
support structure must have periodic renewals, there are several strategies, some with variations, you 
might suggest to the Board. Expressed brieﬂ y, they are: 
● 
 One year, then permanent 
● 
 Three years, then permanent 
● 
 Some years, then to coincide with license renewal 
 17.4.1.1  One Year, Then Permanent 
 In this scenario, the Board issues a one-year permit, then reexamines the issue. Actually, this is silly. 
Things may not yet have gelled in a year. Assume that 20 days, or some number of days, must pass 
before the Special Use Permit becomes valid, to allow the passing of the appeal deadline. Then one 
applies to the Building Inspector for a Building Permit, which has a time frame all its own. Only after 
the grant of a Building Permit can construction actually begin. If construction is interrupted by bad 

340 Chapter 17
 weather (more properly known as  winter in northern climates), the structure may not be up, populated 
by antennas, and eligible for a Certiﬁ cate of Completion for six to nine months. Thus, a one-year 
period before renewal is really bad public policy, because you could wind up in a situation where it is 
time to renew a Special Permit before construction has concluded. 
 17.4.1.2  Three Years, Then Permanent 
 If a Board feels compelled to revisit the situation after construction, allowing three years after the grant 
of a Special Use Permit makes more sense (four or ﬁ ve years would make even more sense). This 
time period allows for construction of the antenna system and a period of time for grass to grow back 
around the base of the structure (where it may have been bothered by the pouring of concrete). It also 
allows time for neighborhood hotheads to cool off. Presentations to the Board, if there are any, will be 
much more levelheaded in three or more years, and they can be accompanied by photographs of the 
actual installation. 
 However, there is little or no beneﬁ t to further hearings after this  “ post-construction ” hearing. 
Thereafter, the only matters are matters of safety, because no matter what changes may come in zoning 
bylaws, the antenna-support structure has achieved the status of a  “ prior existing structure ” (even if it is 
then nonconforming!). 
 There are Boards that have claimed that they cannot and will not delegate matters of public safety to 
the Building Inspector. This is total nonsense, since the job of the Building Inspector is to be the person 
to whom matters of public safety arising out of construction are delegated. 
 After the hearing (three, four, or ﬁ ve years), the renewal should be made  permanent . Well, actually 
not permanent, as that would then be a Variance. In this case, permanent really means that the permit 
should expire when the FCC licensee, or a successor licensee, no longer has a substantial ownership 
and use interest, direct or beneﬁ cial, in the land. 
 Why is it necessary to write such a convoluted expiration date? For one thing, the FCC licensee may 
not now, or at some time in the future, be the owner of the property. For example, ownership of the 
property may be in the name of a landlord or a sister corporation. For another thing, make sure the 
Board does not write that the permit will expire when the business is no longer  domiciled there, since 
domicile is a very technical word that can sometimes involve counting the number of nights someone 
slept somewhere, or perhaps a studio-to-transmitter link (STL) was installed and the studio moved to 
another town! As long as the antenna has not moved, it is hard to conceive of a rational reason for the 
expiration of a Special Use Permit. 
 17.4.1.3  A Period of Years, Then to Coincide with License Renewal 
 If the Board just cannot live with itself without insisting on a renewal, it would be rational and good public 
policy to make the renewal of the Special Permit coincide with the FCC license renewal. At least license 
renewal would prompt someone (even if it is your successor) to remember a looming renewal deadline. 
 A possible problem with this suggestion, but only from the perspective of the Board, is the arithmetic 
possibility that an FCC license could be renewed and then the Special Use Permit granted, so that the 
Special Use Permit would not come up for review for a long time. To the Board, this may seem like too 
much time before they review the situation. 

Awkward Post-Permit Situations 341
 From the perspective of the licensee/permittee, who would rather just get the Special Use Permit and 
have that end the matter, the challenge of a renewal is still presented. However, except in the case 
where the renewal would be presented in less than three years (which, as previously expressed, is just 
too short), a better solution is to agree to a renewal process in three to ﬁ ve years and thereafter on 
renewal of the FCC license. 
 This would be reasonable public-policy thinking — if only licenses were stable. The problem is:  “ What 
if the call sign is changed and the license clock begins anew? ” Ah, well. 
 There is no doubt a compromise somewhere out there that you can make. Make a good suggestion to 
your Board, and include it in your suggested decision! 
 17.4.2  What if You’re Stuck with a Renewal? 
 If, despite your best efforts, you ﬁ nd yourself stuck with a renewal requirement, the best thing you 
can do is to make it easy for the Board to renew without sliding off the rails. And how do you make it 
easy? You provide the Board all the information that it needs to renew. Furthermore, you do this with 
respect for the Board, by being formal in your request. 
 You should help them ﬁ nd your ﬁ le by citing the ﬁ le or case number, if one was ever assigned. You 
should provide, in advance, the text of the notice to be published in the local newspaper, so that when 
the legal notice appears your neighbors won’t think you are up to something new or different. You 
should provide the correct language in a suggested renewal decision. 
 Never forget that the Board is made up of volunteers, and the Secretary to the Board is not a lawyer. 
The facts may be elusive or few may remember what you are talking about. Your permit may have 
been granted before the person assigned to write up your renewal grant was ever named to the Board. 
Mistakes are easily made, so it is your job to prevent such mistakes by doing their work for them. 
 The following documents appear on the CD enclosed with this book, ready for you to modify. They are 
presented here with commentary in italics. See ﬁ lename Late Renewal Request Letter.doc. 
 17.4.3  The Request for Renewal 
 If a question arises, be sure to give the Secretary to the Board many different ways to get in touch with 
you. It can be useful to include an e-mail address, a fax number (if possible), and your work telephone 
number, in case the Secretary wants to get in touch with you and ask a question. The example below 
comes out of an amateur radio Special Use Permit renewal, but a commercial situation would require 
comparable wording. Renewal requirements often include  “ bracket dates ” — no sooner than three 
months before expiration and no later than 30 days before expiration (to allow for advertising and 
scheduling on the agenda for the next available hearing).
  December 10, 200 n
 Board of Appeals 
 Town of Lincoln 
 Town Ofﬁ ces 

342 Chapter 17
 P.O. Box 353 
 Lincoln, MA 01773 
 To the Board: 
 On February 22, 1984, the Massachusetts Appeals Court issued its opinion in  Fred Hopengarten 
v. Board of Appeals of Lincoln , 17 Mass. App. Ct. 1006 (1984), the case involving my application 
for a Special Permit to erect a noncommercial amateur radio antenna-support structure at my 
home at Six Willarch Road. With the expiration of the appeal period occurring 20 days later, the 
effective date of the permit granted in this matter was March 14, 1984. 
 [ Note: Sometimes it can be tricky to ﬁ gure out exactly when the permit comes up for renewal. You cannot rely 
on the Board to spend the time to ﬁ gure this out. This is especially true because the Board’s Secretary may 
forget to include the appeal period, yet the permit may specify that the permit is  “ valid for 5 years from the 
effective date ” and not the date on the decision. ] 
 The original permit granted by the Board of Appeals dated April 8, 1981, reads, in relevant part: 
 “ Said permit shall be renewed automatically for successive three-year periods provided that a 
written request for renewal is made to the Board of Appeals by Petitioner for such renewal not 
less than three (3) months prior to the expiration of the then-existing three-year period. ”
 Thus, I write to request the automatic renewal of the Special Permit granted in this matter for 
this existing antenna-support structure. No objections to automatic renewal were ﬁ led in 1986, 
1990, 1993, or 1996, when on each occasion this permit was automatically renewed. I enclose 
a check in the appropriate amount. As a convenience to the Board, I enclose suggested wording 
for the decision. 
 [ Note: In renewal situations, keep telling everyone concerned that this is for an  existing structure . Once on a 
roll, remind the Board that there is no need to get excited. Tell them, effectively, that they need not tax their 
brains. Don’t forget any required payment, for the process and for the legal advertising. ] 
   Sincerely, 
   Fred Hopengarten 
 Enc:  Check; suggested decision 
 [The Suggested Decision] 
 TOWN OF LINCOLN 
 Middlesex County, Massachusetts 
 Town Ofﬁ ces 
 P.O. Box 353 
 Lincoln Center, MA 01773 
 781-259-2607 
 BOARD OF APPEALS 
 In the Matter of 
 AUTOMATIC RENEWAL OF SPECIAL PERMIT 
 FRED HOPENGARTEN 
 WHEREAS, the Petitioner has, within the required time period, requested in writing that the 
Special Permit granted by the Board of Appeals on April 8, 1981 (effective date March 14, 1984, 

Awkward Post-Permit Situations 343
 the  “ Special Permit ” ) be renewed automatically for a period of three (3) years pursuant to the 
terms of the Special Permit; 
 WHEREAS, public notice in connection with said request has been given as required by law; 
 NOW, THEREFORE, said Special Permit is hereby extended until March 14, 2002, subject to being 
further renewed automatically thereafter in accordance with the terms of the Special Permit. 
 The permit herein granted is personal to the owner and expires only if the petitioner ceases to have 
a substantial ownership and use interest, direct or beneﬁ cial, in his present land. 
 By: 
   Chairman 
   Board of Appeals 
   Date: 
 To: Nancy Zuelke, Clerk, Board of Appeals 
 From: Fred Hopengarten 
 Date: December 10, 1998 
 For your convenience, I found the notice you prepared in 1989 for publication, which has been 
used subsequently. Its wording is correct, and we agree on it. 
 BOARD OF APPEALS 
 The Board of Appeals of the Town of Lincoln hereby gives notice that the SPECIAL PERMIT TO 
MAINTAIN AN AMATEUR RADIO TOWER now held by FRED HOPENGARTEN, SIX WILLARCH 
ROAD, will be renewed for a period of three years unless an objection, in writing, citing grounds 
under Section 6.2(f), is received. Any such objection should be ﬁ led with the Clerk of the Board of 
Appeals, in writing, no later than January 6, 2001. The hearing date for renewal is February 6, 2001. 
   Nancy Zuelke, Clerk 
               Board of Appeals         
 17.4.4  Late to Renew? 
 Let’s face it. Humans are imperfect, and radio has its share of imperfect humans, too. Let’s say you 
somehow forget to renew a permit, if renewal is required. The usual questions in this situation are: 
● 
 Should I not bring it to their attention and just submit the application and let them worry about 
whether the late submission is a problem? (No.) 
● 
 Should I make a big thing of it? (Don’t be an idiot.) 
● 
 Should I at least offer an excuse, such as  “ I was out of town ” ? (Yes, if it is the truth.) 
● 
 Should I ask the Board to remove the renewal requirement? (Yes. The worst thing they can do 
is say no, in which case you are where you were already.) 
● 
 How do I handle it? 
 There is likely to be at least one lawyer on the Board of Appeals (or whatever the Board is called). 
Lawyers may not know anything about antenna-support structures, but they  love deadlines, deﬁ nitions, 

344 Chapter 17
 and distances. Those are things they can understand. The proper thing is to ask for  “ an enlargement of 
time to ﬁ le for renewal. ” 
 In addition, since you are back in front of the dreaded Board anyway, now is your chance to ask for 
removal of a condition in the permit that you don’t like, that being the requirement for renewal. If they 
don’t grant it, ask again next time! Here’s the gist of your application letter (ﬁ lename Late Renewal 
Request Letter.doc on the CD):
  Ladies and Gentlemen: 
 This Special Permit was originally granted by decision dated __________, 200 n , and was for a 
term of ﬁ ve years. By its terms, it requires renewal. 
 Construction began on [Date] [or,  “ in the month of ___ ” ] and a Certiﬁ cate of Completion 
dated _______, 200 n , has been received. See Exhibit A. 
 This is a motion for an enlargement of time to ﬁ le for renewal, a petition to renew the Special 
Permit, and a motion to remove the renewal requirement. 
 [ Note to the reader: If you are convinced they will never remove the renewal requirement, ask that it be 
extended to 10 years, or to coincide with the renewal date of your FCC license. ] 
 With respect to the motion for an enlargement of time, I apologize to the Board for failure to 
meet the time requirement, but please note that I’ve been traveling for business three of the past 
four weeks. 
 With respect to the last motion, to remove the renewal requirement, please note that: 
● 
Whereas the Board may not have had a clear idea of the appearance and visibility of the 
proposed antenna-support structure when the application was ﬁ rst submitted, the structure 
has been up for more than ﬁ ve years now. The predictions and consequences envisioned by 
opponents have not come to pass, lessening the need for supervision. 
● 
No change in the construction of the antenna-support structure is contemplated and, with or 
without a renewal process, a change in the structure would trigger a new hearing anyway. 
● 
With respect to any questions of safety, the Building Inspector retains his right of entry to 
inspect for safety at any time under his police power. 
● 
Should the antenna-support structure remain after it is no longer in use, with or without 
a renewal process, it puts the property at risk during any sale, since the cost of the Town’s 
removal of the structure would become a lien on the property — a very effective and self-
enforcing protection for the town. 
 I ask for a hearing as soon as your calendar permits. 
 Respectfully submitted, 
 You have now created a written record, which could be useful if a nasty neighbor ever makes an issue of 
it. Most Boards will either grant the enlargement or ignore the motion for enlargement because granting 
renewal subsumes the procedural question of the ﬁ ling deadline — making the question go away. 

Awkward Post-Permit Situations 345
 As a convenience to the Board, and because you are a good guy, you may also wish to include the 
suggested wording for the renewal: 
 Board of Appeals Renewal of Special Permit 
 In the Matter of KOKOKO 
 WHEREAS, the Petitioner has, within the required time period [alternative: after a request for and the 
grant of an enlargement of time to ﬁ le], requested in writing that the Special Permit granted by the 
Board of Appeals on April 8, 1999 (effective date April 28, 1999, the  “ Special Permit ” ) be renewed 
for a period of ﬁ ve (5) years or more pursuant to the terms of the Special Permit, and; 
 WHEREAS, no material change in the construction of the antenna-support structure is contemplated 
and a material change in the structure would require a hearing anyway, and; 
 WHEREAS, with respect to any question of safety, the Building Inspector retains a right of entry to 
inspect for safety at any time under the police power of that ofﬁ ce; 
 NOW, THEREFORE, said Special Permit is hereby extended and shall expire when Petitioner no 
longer has a substantial ownership and use interest, direct or beneﬁ cial, in the land [alternative: when 
it is no longer in an amateur radio use]. Should the antenna-support structure remain thereafter, it may 
be removed by the Town at the expense of the landowner, with the cost of removal of the structure 
eligible to become a lien on the property. 
 By: 
 Chairman 
 Board of Appeals 
 Date: _____________________    
 17.4.5  Bond to Guarantee Removal 
 The same principles hold for a bond to guarantee removal. The occasional Town Planner will say: 
 “ We need a bond to protect the town and guarantee removal. ” There is a simple, and self-enforcing 
mechanism that accomplishes the same thing without much paperwork or cost. 
 Make the Special Use Permit  personal to the entity that applies for it, or any successor licensed entity using 
the structure at the property. If the property is sold and the successor does not apply for a continuation of 
the permit within two years, the permit will then expire. The structure is still subject to removal by the 
town under police power and subject to a lien on the house and land to pay for that removal. 
 That is a painful and unnecessary rigmarole, but acceptable, because it really doesn’t require anything 
more than removal someday — this is easy because there is an active market for antenna-support structures, 
even those that are still vertical. For small towers, the usual terms are:  “ Take it down and it is yours. ”  
 On the other hand, I once saw a bylaw that required a cash bond to guarantee removal. While totally 
unnecessary for all the reasons cited above, the proper way to approach this is to suggest that the 
proper cash bond is $50, or just enough to place the ad in the right newspaper or on eBay. You can also 
buy or sell your tower items online at no additional cost by going to  http://groups.yahoo.com/group/
Tower-stuff4sale/ . This website is a Yahoo ﬁ nance group that posts your tower items online. You can 
add pictures and descriptions of the product that you intend to sell. 

This page intentionally left blank

347
 Post-Construction Issues 
 If you’ve ever thought that  “ it’s over when it’s over, ” you’re wrong. It’s only over when you’ve sold, 
cashed the check, and paid the taxes. Then it’s over — for you. Remember back when you applied for 
the permit? You applied  “ to build and maintain ” the structure. Now it is time to talk about some of 
those “ maintain ” issues. 
 What you have now is a steel structure in a highly regulated government environment, outdoors in the 
weather. For a really good and useful paper delivered by Thomas J. Hoenninger, PE, of Stainless, LLC, 
at the 2005 NAB Show, see  “ Tips on Analyzing, Modifying, and Maintaining Guyed Broadcast Towers 
( http://stainlessllc.com/Resources/NAB2005_Paper.pdf ). 
 18.1   Fencing 
  By the way, if you learn nothing else from this chapter, learn this: You must keep the fence well 
maintained and locked. The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) routinely ﬁ nes antenna 
structure owners, as well as tenants, for fence violations, as demonstrated by the following two 
articles.
 September 11, 2007 
 FCC Cuts No Slack on Fines — Temporarily Unfenced Tower, Expired STA, Former Owner — All 
Draw Fines 
 The FCC today issued three orders imposing ﬁ nes on broadcasters — cutting no slack to anyone. 
These cases demonstrate how important strict compliance with all FCC rules is to avoid ﬁ nes before 
the current Commission. The ﬁ rst decision imposed a ﬁ ne of $2800 on a broadcaster for having an 
unfenced tower — where the broadcaster claimed that the fence was temporarily removed to facili-
tate the clearing of brush as required by local authorities to remove a potential ﬁ re hazard. While 
the FCC seemed to recognize that the fence removal was temporary, and that it was missing for 
only a few weeks while weed killer was being applied at the site, the Commission still imposed the 
ﬁ ne — requiring that access to an AM tower always be restricted, prohibiting open access even for a 
short period. 
Source:  http://www.broadcastlawblog.com/archives/cat-tower-issues.html 
 Decision:   http://fjallfoss/fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-07-3870A1.pdf
CHAPTER 18 

348 Chapter 18
 October 8, 2006 
 AM Tower Fencing Requirements Cannot Be Delegated 
 In a decision released Friday, the FCC’s Enforcement Bureau imposed a ﬁ ne of $7000 on a station 
for violation of Section 73.49 of the Rules, requiring AM station towers with the potential for RF 
radiation at their base to be completely enclosed within a fence or other secure enclosure. What was 
notable about this decision is that the FCC rejected claims that the station should not be ﬁ ned because 
it did not own the tower. 
 The Enforcement Bureau found that Section 73.49 imposed a duty on AM licensees, not on tower 
owners. Thus, the duty to fence the tower is one that the licensee is responsible for meeting, even if 
some other party owns the tower. 
 The FCC noted that for all other towers, the primary duty for maintenance and repair of a tower is 
on the antenna structure owner, but even then the FCC imposes a secondary duty on the licensee to 
make sure that all legal obligations are being met. While the FCC left for another day the issue of 
what would happen if a licensee did not meet that secondary duty in some case not involving an AM 
station, they made clear that, for AM stations, the licensee cannot delegate the responsibility for the 
fencing obligation. 
 Source:   http://www.broadcastlawblog.com/archives/cat-tower-issues.html 
Decision:  http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-06-1978A1.pdf 
 18.2   Damage Repair 
 There is always the possibility that, for some reason, the tower has been damaged. Perhaps a crane hit 
it. Perhaps a big wind caught a dish and kinked a tower leg. Whatever the cause, let’s assume that you 
are faced with the need to do a repair on the structure. If it is an emergency, just do it; but be sure to 
do the “ right thing. ” That’s my advice. I also give similar advice to physicians who are worried. Other 
parties, the courts, indeed the whole world will think better of you if you are trying to do the right 
thing, especially if the current situation endangers anyone or a nearby structure. Physicians have  “ Good 
Samaritan ” laws to protect them. You may not, but doing the right thing, doing something that would 
make your Sunday School teacher proud — that will always be a good strategy. However, there are two 
schools of thought on a nonemergency repair. 
 18.2.1  Don’t Tell Anyone? 
 If you try a post-construction repair without a permit, there is a strong likelihood that someone will 
ﬁ nd out about it. Perhaps the initial damage was the subject of a local news story. Perhaps the crew of 
professional erectors brought in to do the repair is staying in a nearby motel. Perhaps someone will 
see humans high in the sky, with ropes, on your tower and start asking questions. Remember, there is a 
high likelihood that your tower is visible from somewhere, especially if it was tall enough in the 
ﬁ rst place. 
 Once the repair crew has been spotted, someone is going to start asking the Building Inspector: 
 “ What’s going on over at the KOKOKO tower? ” (Why would someone ask the Building Inspector? 

Post-Construction Issues 349
 Because it is supposed that he knows everything that is going on around town.) If the Building 
Inspector or Zoning Administrator doesn’t know, he’ll jump in his car or truck (the one with the town 
seal on the sides) and come by to visit. 
 A Building Inspector (BI) or Code Enforcement Ofﬁ cer (CEO) or Zoning Enforcement Ofﬁ cer (ZEO) 
or Zoning Administrator (ZA) has many of the powers of a police ofﬁ cer. While few carry guns, 
almost all can call the Police Department and get a police ofﬁ cer to accompany them into unfriendly 
situations. So, now a Zoning Enforcement Ofﬁ cer shows up, having driven over your driveway. As 
a law enforcement ofﬁ cer, he is not trespassing. Trespassing involves coming onto the land without 
permission or authority. The BI/CEO/ZEO/ZA has authority. 
 Upon arrival, the ﬁ rst thing that the ZA says is:  “ Hi, what’s going on here? Do you have a Building 
Permit? ” Things could go downhill from there. The erectors, who have seen this movie before, either 
mumble something about a minor repair or tell the ZA to call the station. Helpful as ever, they may 
even offer a phone to the ZA to make the call. 
 Now your trouble is really getting underway. 
 The next thing you know, a  stop work order has been issued. The erectors leave town and send you 
a bill. (Has anyone ever noticed that this always happens just before winter sets in and further work 
becomes even more difﬁ cult, expensive, or even impossible?) Management has to hire a lawyer. No 
one is pleased with the guy who went ahead without permission. 
 Remember, even if you were only replacing the rooﬁ ng shingles on a garage, a Building Permit has to 
be pulled. 
 18.2.2  Apply Formally 
 Okay, you have a problem. So, you ﬁ nd the Building Inspector and chat it over. If he says:  “ Go ahead, I 
don’t mind, it’s maintenance, ” you should go ahead. Nonetheless, it would be better if you got a permit, 
because of the  “ oh, by the way ” (OBTW) problem. 
 What’s an OBTW problem? That’s the general manager who discovers that you’ve got a crew coming 
and decides that this is the perfect time to install a link to a new bureau in the second-largest town in 
the county. Whatever the speciﬁ cs, it means something new is going up, and you won’t have a permit. 
 It’s always better to wear the white hat and have the permit. This is especially true 20 (or 2!) years later 
when the station is about to be sold and the buyer’s  “ due diligence ” effort discovers an STL (studio-to-
transmitter link) without a permit. 
 Even if you don’t add anything up in the sky, and you are only doing a repair to a damaged steel 
member or bracket, checking with the Building Inspector in advance is a good practice. 
 18.3   Strengthening 
 This chapter began with the concept of a damage repair. Let’s examine a different scenario, however. 
What if you want to add antennas for which your present tower is not strong enough? You might be 

350 Chapter 18
 surprised at what can be done without taking down and replacing the tower. You may also have good 
reason to avoid taking down the tower, perhaps having to do with the fact that, in the intervening years, 
you’ve become a  “ nonconforming use. ”
 In land use law, there is a general trend toward eliminating nonconforming uses. That’s why it is 
typical for the law to forbid the rebuilding of a nonconforming use (a use that may have once been 
legal to construct but is no longer legal to construct in that zone) if it is not rebuilt within a year of two 
after it comes down. Certainly, if a tower is seriously damaged, and you want to erect a replacement 
elsewhere on the lot (perhaps trying to keep the existing antennas on the air while you construct the 
replacement), you will need to consult the laws of your state. 
 Here is a typical statute, this time from New Hampshire:
 NH RSA 674:19 Applicability of Zoning Ordinance 
 A zoning ordinance adopted under RSA 674:16 shall not apply to existing structures or to the 
existing use of any building. It shall apply to any alteration of a building for use for a purpose or 
in a manner which is substantially different from the use to which it was put before alteration. 
 18.3.1  So What Does This Say? 
 It says that if you have an existing structure, you can repair it and the new zoning law adopted by the 
town does not apply. But, if you intend to alter a building to put it into a different use or the alteration 
is  “ substantially different ” (which is deﬁ ned, by the way, for all practical purposes, by the Board you 
will face), then the new zoning bylaw applies (which will no doubt make your life difﬁ cult), and you 
are not “ grandfathered. ” Why is it expected that the new zoning bylaw will make your life difﬁ cult? 
Because that was the purpose of the bylaw. For example, the new bylaw may require that the tower be 
rebuilt so as to accommodate co-location for additional wireless communications facilities, so as to 
reduce the total number of towers in town. 
 18.4   Additional Antennas 
 18.4.1  Replacing/Reinforcing the Tower 
 As mentioned above, if you wish to avoid replacing the tower, you might want to consider 
strengthening. No doubt there is more than one ﬁ rm qualiﬁ ed to strengthen a tower. But, if you haven’t 
got any good ideas as to how it is done, see  http://www.tower-technologies.com/Reinforce.htm .  Figures 
18.1 and 18.2 provide some examples of what strengthening can look like. 
 18.4.2  Prior Existing Conforming Use 
 If the bylaw has not changed and you want to rebuild or add to the existing antenna-support structure, 
you’ve pretty much got no problem. However, this process needs to be as efﬁ cient, professional, 
and well documented as the application. There may well be more to the story, but if there isn’t we 

Post-Construction Issues 351
 don’t need to look any farther than the KROY radio station in Sacramento. When the tower fell in 
a windstorm in 2001, the station was denied a permit to rebuild due to factors such as not being 
compatible for the neighborhood and a reportedly difﬁ cult rapport with neighbors (as well as some 
airport issues). This reinforces my suggestion to maintain a positive relationship with your 
neighbors and planning commission. For KROY, this should have been as simple as mowing the lawn 
and maintaining the property. Read ﬁ lename KROY Tower-losing a rebuild case.pdf on the CD. 
It took a while, and a lot of negotiating, to rebuild that tower, but it did eventually get rebuilt on 
the spot. 
 18.4.3  Prior Existing Nonconforming Use 
 If the bylaw has changed, it is an important factor, as you can see from the above New Hampshire 
statute. First, try to ﬁ nd a statute in your state that is comparable to New Hampshire’s and claim you 
are  “ grandfathered ” because you really aren’t changing the use. Then, assuming the use was as a 
telecommunications tower in the ﬁ rst place, and it will continue to be a telecommunications tower, 
you get to argue that the replacement tower or an alteration of the existing tower is also 
 “ grandfathered. ” 
 Some people might think it is harder, but it is not impossible, to argue that replacing a guyed Rohn 25 
tower having a 12-inch face with a self-supporting Sabre tower having a 19-foot face at the base is not 
a substantially different use. After all, as mentioned above, the use (to support telecommunications 
antennas) has not changed. That is the key to the discussion.  “ It was a radio tower before. It is a radio 
tower now. Nothing has changed! ”
 Figure 18.1  An example of tower reinforcement. The lighter-colored supports and clamps were added to 
strengthen the tower.   (Photograph courtesy of Broadcast Tower Technologies, Inc.)  

352 Chapter 18
 18.5   New Bylaws 
 The one thing you should be wary of, however, is that a tower erected before 1996 is likely to have 
a new issue with which to contend. The Communications Act of 1996, which ushered in the cellular 
telephone age, changed the game. Many towns wrote new chapters to their bylaws. You’ll have to read 
 Figure 18.2  A tower that has been reinforced by wrapping the original tubes with larger tubes.
 (Photograph courtesy of Broadcast Tower Technologies, Inc.)  

Post-Construction Issues 353
 the bylaw to see if it affects a broadcast tower. Start with the deﬁ nitions section and look for  “ tower ” or 
 “ telecommunications. ” After that, look to see if any types of towers are exempt. 
 Mostly what you are looking for is to ﬁ nd out whether additional broadcast antennas will require a full-
ﬂ edged proceeding. As it is highly likely that mounting a cellular telephone or other common carrier 
antenna will trigger review under the new bylaw, you’ll want to know about that too. Sooner or later, 
you may be asked if you’d like to have a cellular antenna system on your tower. Don’t assume that you 
have an AM antenna and no one would be interested. Though you currently have a  “ hot ” AM tower, 
there are things that can be done to make it  “ cold ” and acceptable to a cellular carrier. Go to  http://
www.kintronic.com/products/productinfo.aspx and ﬁ nd folded monopole or folded unipole kits from 
Kintronics. Nott, Ltd., is another manufacturer; see  http://www.nottltd.com/antennasother.html . LBA 
Group is also very popular; see  http://www.lbagroup.com/technology/app13.php  for a nice technical 
paper on how it works. ( Quick answer: Make it into a folded unipole.) Their marketing piece is at 
 http://www.lbagroup.com/technology/tunifaq.php .
 Mounting cellular telephone antenna systems on your broadcast tower is a nice way to supplement the 
income of a small-town AM station. For a major-city TV broadcaster, however, the decision must be 
more carefully considered, in light of the fact that such broadcasters zealously guard their towers —
 given the rates for a 30-second spot during the evening news. Management may not think it is worth it 
to put the integrity of the tower at risk when cellular telephone contractors may be crawling all over the 
tower. There is no  “ right ” answer to this question. 
 18.6   The Special Case of HDTV 
 With the conversion of most TV stations (there are a few exceptions) from analog to digital TV in 
June 2009, most of the action in swapping out antennas is over. But, there may still be some tower 
projects that linger on. The less time you have to swap around antennas, the more urgent it is that you 
squeeze through the process as quickly as possible. There are a couple of thoughts that might speed the 
process.
 18.6.1  Greenmail 
 Blackmail is extortion, and illegal. Greenmail, named after the color of money, involves making an 
offer in public, as a good corporate citizen, with no  quid pro quo expected (yeah, right) in the hope 
that your company will be well regarded. If you have been ignoring your  community of antenna (as 
opposed to your community of license , which may not be the same), that chicken may have come home 
to roost. Payback time may have arrived. Nonetheless, we’re not talking morality here; we’re talking 
the need to get that radiator in the sky. 
 So what can you offer? Airtime, advertising time, the purchase of some Little League shirts, 
advertising on the boards at the high school hockey rink, a weather forecaster for the classroom, or a 
DJ for the high school dance? Think of something and get moving. Just remember that you are making 
the offer because you want to be a good citizen and not because you expect something in return. That 

354 Chapter 18
 path leads away from zoning law and toward criminal law. Whatever you do, please do it in public. 
This maximizes goodwill for the station and insulates you from claims of “ backroom deals. ”
 18.6.2  Photosimulation 
 If there ever was an application that begs for photosimulation, it is a high-deﬁ nition antenna application 
for installation on an existing tower. It will really show that there is little to be seen in the way of 
difference in the before and after pictures. A persuasive case for photosimulation may be seen in 
 Figure 18.3 . 
 The photosimulation began with a photograph of the existing tower and added in a simulation of the 
HDTV antenna. Pretty good, huh? 
 Figure 18.3  A photosimulation of a proposed HDTV antenna added to an existing tower for WLWC-TV, 
East Freetown, MA, serving the Providence, RI, market.   (Photograph courtesy of Robert Yankowitz, 
CBS Boston) 

355
 Lease Issues 
 This chapter assumes you’ve got the necessary permits, and the structure is up. You may ﬁ nd that you 
soon have cellular carriers or other operators knocking on your door looking to either lease space on 
your tower or lease a subplot of your land to erect a tower of their own. That’s a good thing, but before 
you get carried away by the dollar signs ﬂ ashing before your eyes, you must consider several issues. 
Among them are the following: 
● 
The effect such a structure and its construction will have upon your operations 
● 
The ﬁ nancial and legal terms of the lease 
  ● 
The effect additional antennas on your structure, or additional structures on your land, may 
have upon your compliance with the terms of the permit you’ve fought so tenaciously to secure 
● 
The implications such a lease will have on your ability to modify your own structure or to sell 
the structure and the land upon which it sits 
 There are plenty of issues to evaluate and negotiate. This chapter will walk you through many of the 
common terms and provisions that you will need to sort out as you decide whether or not to lease, to 
whom, and under what conditions. What follows is almost every term that appears in a lease, along 
with examples of how various companies have drafted those elements in actual leases and, when 
appropriate, comments and suggestions about how you might handle those same elements in 
your own lease. Within quoted lease language, changes that were added to existing terms are noted 
in italics. 
 The following discussion relates to leasing space on your own antenna support structure. 
 19.1   Table of Contents 
 If the carrier’s or broadcaster’s draft lease does not come with a Table of Contents, add one. How could 
anyone sign a multi-paragraph, multi-page lease and expect to remember how to read it in 10, 20, or 30 
years without a Table of Contents? Become familiar with Microsoft Word’s Table of Contents function, 
which can generate a table of contents automatically from headings within the document. 
CHAPTER 19 

356 Chapter 19
 19.2   Premises 
 19.2.1  How Much Land Should Be Leased? 
 Dedicated space of 200 to 240 square feet (10   20, 10   24, or even 16    44 feet is typical) is common 
for an equipment building. Does the Tenant really need more? By the way, eventually you’ll need the 
book and page citation to ﬁ nd the deed at your local registry of deeds. Get it now to avoid a rush. 
 19.2.2  Use 
 Think about the  “ use ” clause as representing a spectrum of outcomes. You could let the Tenant change 
almost anything, at any time, even increasing weight and wind load on the tower. (By the way, weight 
is almost irrelevant in many cases. The real tower killer, and sometimes space hog, is wind load.) Or, 
you could (if you have the negotiating power) require that the Tenant get permission to change almost 
everything, except one-for-one maintenance swaps. A sensible middle ground is to allow changes when 
you receive notice, where the change does not affect the wind load. 
 Here’s the way one deal worked out. Consider the combined effect of Use and Facilities clauses, with 
language accepted by the carrier in italics. This is a situation where some work may be accomplished 
without notice to proceed: 
5. Use.
 From and after the Term Commencement Date, the Premises may be used by Tenant for 
any activity in connection with the installation, operation, maintenance, and removal of the 
telecommunications equipment, but only to the extent shown in Exhibit B and under the rules 
and procedures described in Exhibit B, and for the provision of communications services [you 
could add limiting language here to the effect of  “ but only for such services as are permitted 
under Tenant’s license issued pursuant to the Communications Act of 1996 ” ], but in no event 
is any right to use conveyed which exceeds that which it is the power of Landlord to grant. 
Tenant shall have the ongoing right to perform such Investigations and Tests as Tenant may 
deem necessary or desirable. Landlord agrees to cooperate with Tenant, at Tenant’s expense, 
in making application for and obtaining all licenses, permits and any and all other necessary 
approvals that may be required for Tenant’s intended use of the Premises. 
 6. Facilities; Utilities; Access. 
 (a) Tenant has the right to construct, erect, maintain, test, replace, remove, and operate on the 
Premises such communications facilities as are shown in Exhibit B, including without limitation 
utility lines, transmission lines, an air conditioned equipment shelter(s), electronic equipment, 
transmitting and receiving antennas, a standby power generator, and supporting equipment and 
structures therefore shown therein ( “ Tenant Facilities ” ). In connection therewith, Tenant has the right 
to do all work necessary to prepare, maintain and alter the Premises for Tenant’s business operations 
and to install transmission lines connecting the antennas to the transmitters and receivers, but 
only as set forth and described in Exhibit B. All of Tenant’s construction and installation work shall 
be performed at Tenant’s sole cost and expense and in a good and workmanlike manner. Tenant 
shall hold title to the Tenant Facilities and all of the Tenant Facilities shall remain Tenant’s personal 
property and are not ﬁ xtures. Tenant has the right to remove the Tenant Facilities at its sole expense 

Lease Issues 357
 You can play with the cost of review number. You could also institute a minimum cost just to review 
(add to “ a detailed plan .  .  ., which shall be accompanied by an application fee of $250.00 ” ), and you 
could raise the maximum exposure of the applicant for review. 
 Do not limit the review to structural engineering, as you might also wish to review radiofrequency 
interference (RFI) potential. 
 19.2.3  Access 
 The Tenant will also want the agreement to permit a nonexclusive access easement to the leased site. 
That’s reasonable, but remember that you should deﬁ ne the access. Make the communications crews 
use one access road and one access road only. Will it be the front road, the side road, or the back road? 
By the way, should the tenant be required to build a road? Where will the gate be? Unless there isn’t 
much choice, the farmer might not want service trucks driving by his kitchen all the time. 
 Also, the Tenant will ask for an additional utility easement. That’s ﬁ ne, but make sure that the new 
utilities will not go through your favorite petunia garden. Deﬁ ne where those conduits and cables will 
go in advance. And make sure you specify that you are not obligated to plow snow. 
 Here are some typical paragraphs. Each is from an actual lease, from either a wireless carrier or a 
broadcaster, the names of which I’ve replaced with generic identiﬁ ers. 
 4. The type, number, mounting positions, and locations of antennas and transmission lines are 
illustrative only. The actual types, numbers, mounting positions, and locations for the initial 
installation may vary from what is shown above, provided that Landlord has issued a Notice 
to Proceed letter allowing any changes. Tenant is authorized to install and maintain the above 
equipment, for which an  “ as built ”  drawing will be provided within 90 days of the completion of 
Tenant’s construction, which  “ as built ”  drawing will thereafter be replaced and kept current as 
necessary, should Tenant’s equipment on the Tower change. Cost for such work shall be borne by 
the Tenant. No change or modiﬁ cation of equipment on the tower, or outside of the equipment 
building, as shown on the  “ as built ”  drawings, may thereafter be made without written consent 
of Landlord in the form of a Notice to Proceed. In any event, however, no change may increase 
Tenant’s wind loading on the tower, and Tenant will provide evidence to Landlord’s reasonable 
satisfaction that equipment exchanges or upgrades do not increase loading on the Tower. A Notice 
to Proceed will only be issued upon receipt by Landlord of (a) a detailed plan of the proposed 
construction, replacement or upgrading, (b) all necessary governmental approvals, including a 
building permit if necessary, and (c) receipt by Landlord of assurance from its own engineer that 
the proposed construction, replacement or upgrading will not affect wind loading on the tower, 
nor interfere with other tower users. The cost of this review, up to $1,000 (which cost maximum 
shall increase at the same rate of annual increase as the rent), shall be at the expense of Tenant. 
on or before the expiration or earlier termination of this Agreement, and Tenant shall repair any 
damage to the Premises caused by such removal. Upon the expiration or earlier termination of this 
Agreement, Tenant shall remove the Tenant Facilities from the Property. 
 The relevant portion of Exhibit B presently reads: 
 Regulations: 
 .  .  . 

358 Chapter 19
 Carrier 1 (with suggested change in italics) 
 (c) Tenant, Tenant’s employees, agents, and contractors shall have access to the Premises 
without notice to Landlord twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, at no charge. 
Landlord grants to Tenant, and Tenant’s agents, employees, and contractors, a nonexclusive 
right and easement for pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress across the Land as may 
be described generally in Exhibit B-1. In the event of inclement weather that restricts Tenant’s 
access, Landlord shall restore such access as soon as commercially reasonable.  Notwithstanding 
the above, Landlord is not responsible for clearing ice or plowing snow. 
 Carrier 2 (with an agreed change in italics)  
  12. Access. At all times throughout the Term of this Agreement, and at no additional charge to 
Tenant, only Tenant and its authorized employees, or agents and subcontractors under their 
direct supervision, will have twenty-four (24) hour per day, seven (7) day per week pedestrian 
and vehicular access to and over the Property, from an open and improved public road to the 
Premises, for the installation, maintenance and operation of the Communication Facility and 
any utilities serving the Premises and Landlord grants to Tenant an easement for such access. 
It is further agreed that, as the premises are close to Landlord’s residence, except in cases of emergency, such 
access shall be only during the business day. Nonetheless, Landlord is not responsible for plowing snow to 
provide access to the Premises. Upon Tenant’s request, Landlord will execute a separate recordable 
easement evidencing this right. In the event any public utility is unable to use the access 
or easement provided to Tenant then the Landlord agrees to grant additional access or an 
easement either to Tenant or to the public utility, for the beneﬁ t of Tenant, at no cost to Tenant. 
 Here are some additional suggested clauses that may be relevant to your situation:
  As the premises are close to the Landlord’s residence, all other access shall be during reasonable 
business hours (weekdays, 8:00 a.m. to 6 p.m. local time), and upon at least one hour’s notice. 
For the purpose of this paragraph, notice by telephone is sufﬁ cient. 
 Notwithstanding the above, Landlord is not responsible for clearing ice or plowing snow, 
removing fallen trees, or otherwise clearing the accessway when it has been obstructed by an act 
of nature. 
 The recordable easement should be valid only during the term of the lease. 
 Here are some examples of how those clauses might look inserted into more standard language. 
 From a subsequent Carrier 2 lease (with agreed changes in italics) 
 12. Access. At all times throughout the Term of this Agreement, and at no additional charge to 
Tenant, Tenant and its employees, agents, and subcontractors will have twenty-four (24) hour 
per day, seven (7) day per week pedestrian and vehicular access to and over the Property, from an 
open and improved public road to the Premises, for the installation, maintenance and operation 
of the Communication Facility and any utilities serving the Premises. Landlord grants to Tenant 

Lease Issues 359
 Inserted and accepted in a Carrier 3 lease 
 Notwithstanding the above, Landlord is not responsible for clearing ice or plowing snow, 
removing fallen trees, or otherwise clearing any access roadway when it has been obstructed by 
an act of nature. 
an easement for such access and Landlord agrees to provide to Tenant such codes, keys, and other 
instruments necessary for such access at no additional cost to Tenant. Landlord acknowledges 
that in the event Tenant cannot access the Premises, Tenant shall incur signiﬁ cant damage. If 
Landlord fails to provide the access granted by this Paragraph 12, such failure shall be a default 
under this Lease. Notwithstanding the above, Landlord will not be responsible for clearing ice or plowing snow, 
removing fallen trees, or otherwise clearing the accessway when it has been obstructed by an act of nature. In 
connection with such default, in addition to any other rights or remedies available to Tenant under 
this Lease or at law or equity, Landlord shall pay Tenant, as liquidated damages and not as a 
penalty, $500.00 per day in consideration of Tenant’s damages, including, but not limited to, its 
lost proﬁ ts, until Landlord cures such default. Landlord and Tenant agree that Tenant’s damages 
in the event of a denial of access are difﬁ cult, if not impossible, to ascertain, and the liquidated 
damages set forth herein are a reasonable approximation of such damages. Upon Tenant’s 
request, Landlord will execute a separate recordable  license, or  easement  limited to the term of this lease, 
evidencing this right. In the event any public utility is unable to use the access or easement provided 
to Tenant then the Landlord agrees to grant additional access or an easement either to Tenant or 
to the public utility, for the beneﬁ t of Tenant, at no cost to Tenant. 
From a public radio/ETV lease
 LESSEE shall not damage or obstruct the access route to the Premises and any antenna support 
structures thereon during construction or installation of its facilities at the Premises, and 
shall repair any disturbance to the Property and adjacent lands created by its installation or 
construction. LESSOR shall not be responsible for clearing snow, or otherwise maintaining the 
access to the Premises for LESSEE, and may maintain the access to whatever standards LESSOR 
deems acceptable. 
 Very restrictive form from a Carrier 5 lease 
 8. Access to Tower. LESSOR agrees the LESSEE shall have free access to the Tower at all times, 
under the terms and conditions of the Prime Lease (see Paragraph 1  “ Lease ” ), for the purpose 
of installing and maintaining the said equipment and LESSOR shall furnish LESSEE with 
necessary means of access for the purpose of ingress and egress to this site and Tower location, 
for pedestrians and vehicles, except that LESSOR is not required to provide any snow plowing 
services on the access road. It is agreed, however, that only authorized engineers, employees, 
or properly authorized contractors of LESSEE, or persons under their direct supervision, will 
be permitted to enter said premises. It is further agreed that such access, for the purpose of 
installing and maintaining said equipment shall be only during the business day, except in cases 
of emergency. If access is necessary due to an emergency, LESSEE agrees to notify LESSOR 
within 24 hours of the access by calling 508/653-7200, extension 501 (or such other number as 
may be subsequently provided). 

360 Chapter 19
 From Carrier 4 
 C. Utility Installation. Landlord grants Tenant an easement to install and use an electrical power 
source to the Premises either by means of above-ground pole transmission or by on-the-ground 
or underground facilities, whichever is deemed more appropriate by the Tenant. Landlord 
grants Tenant an easement to install and use telephone service at the Communications Facility. 
The cost of installation of power supply and cost of telephone service installation shall be 
paid by Tenant, except that Tenant shall not pay any amount in addition to the rent reserved 
hereunder for use of utility poles, wires or cables owned by Landlord and used by Tenant to 
obtain such utility service. Tenant shall obtain Landlord’s written consent to the location 
of new or replaced utility poles, wires, or cables used for transmission of electrical power or 
telephone communications to and from the Premises prior to ﬁ ling any applicable construction 
permits. Landlord’s consent shall not be unreasonably delayed or withheld. Modiﬁ cation of 
Landlord’s utility installations, if any, shall not interrupt, damage or conﬂ ict with the utility 
services constructed by Tenant, or with requirements imposed by any utility or governmental 
authority with jurisdiction over the construction of the Communications Facility.  [Add:] If utilities 
are to be modiﬁ ed, with Landlord’s consent as provided herein, Tenant shall promptly provide Landlord with 
 Carrier 3 (with accepted changes in italics)  
With Landlord’s written consent as to location in each instance, obtained prior to ﬁ ling for any applicable 
construction permits, Tenant shall have the right to install utilities, at Tenant’s expense, and to 
improve the present utilities on the Property (including, but not limited to, the installation of 
emergency power generators). Landlord agrees to use reasonable efforts in assisting Tenant to 
acquire necessary utility service. Tenant shall, wherever practicable, install separate meters for 
utilities used on the Property by Tenant. In the event separate meters are not installed,  within
twenty (20) days after an invoice is rendered to Tenant by any means actually received (so as to aid Landlord 
in avoiding any interest or penalty), Tenant shall pay the periodic charges for all utilities attributable 
to Tenant’s use, at the rate charged by the servicing utility. Landlord shall diligently correct any 
variation, interruption or failure of utility service. 
 19.2.4  Utility Poles/Utility Service 
 Do you want to ensure that the poles come from the same direction as the road and along the road? Or 
should the power or telephone poles be placed by agreement? Will the Tenant agree to bury the power 
or telephone feed? (Underground construction is much more expensive.) Sketch it in Exhibit A, the 
plot, or site plan.
 A common clause 
 13. Utilities. Landlord shall ensure that utility services are accessible and available at the Site 
for Tenant’s intended use. Tenant shall be responsible for the separate metering, billing, and 
payment of its utility services consumed by its operations. 
Practice Tip: What does this mean? Do you have to provide the utility poles if the present power is 
inadequate?

Lease Issues 361
 19.2.5  Easements for Utilities 
 Carrier 3 (with accepted changes in italics)  
 As partial consideration for Rent paid under this Lease, Landlord hereby grants Tenant 
easements on, under, and across the Property for ingress, egress, utilities, and access (including 
access for the purposes described in Section 1) to the Premises adequate to install and maintain 
utilities, including, but not limited to, the installation of power and telephone service cable, 
and to service the Premises and the Antenna Facilities at all times during the Initial Term of this 
Lease and any Renewal Term (collectively, the  “ Easements ” ).  Tenant shall obtain Landlord’s written 
consent to the location of new or replaced utility poles, wires, or cables used for power and telephone service 
prior to ﬁ ling any applicable construction permits. Landlord’s consent shall not be unreasonably delayed or 
withheld. The Easements provided hereunder shall have the same term as this Lease. 
 19.2.6  Antennas 
 Watch out for wind-load creep and height creep. The antennas should be speciﬁ ed by make and model, 
as that pins down the wind load if a later controversy arises. (By the way, you can’t trust anyone’s 
wind-load numbers, because they can be calculated in different ways, due to choice of method for 
shedding wind). The lease and exhibit (generally Exhibit B) should specify the mid-line, as that is the 
industry standard (also called  “ center-line ” or  “ C/L ” ). It is not fair if the Tenant mounts the  bottom of 
the antennas at the height mentioned, so to avoid surprise specify a mid-line. The number and size of 
coax and any other lines going up the tower should be speciﬁ ed. If wind load is going to be a problem, 
and even if it isn’t, for appearance sake you probably want feedlines bundled, instead of spread across 
the face of the tower (which can make it look dark). Here’s a suggested Exhibit that helps Landlords:
 EXHIBIT B-2 
LIST OF EQUIPMENT AND CONSTRUCTION PRACTICES
 Tenant may install the equipment described as follows. 
 1. A prefabricated equipment shelter, 12     20     11   (W    L    H), with ice bridge to the 
tower. 
 2. Antennas: 
 
 Up to __ antennas total (DB844H80 or EMS FR90-13 or equivalent), with their radiation 
center at ___   /  feet AGL. For the purposes of avoiding damage to the tower, Tenant’s 
antenna quantity shall be approved by a licensed professional structural engineer, at 
Tenant’s expense, and said engineer’s report shall be provided to Landlord prior to Tenant’s 
installation. 
an amendment to, or substitute for, this Exhibit B, showing the  “ as built ” conditions. [Add to deal with a 
noise ordinance:] Subject to any applicable regulation of noise, and with Landlord’s consent which shall not 
be unreasonably delayed or withheld, Tenant shall also have the right to install permanent or temporary 
generators for Tenant’s emergency power requirements.

362 Chapter 19
 3. Coaxial cables — up to ___ lines of Commscope (or equivalent) 1-5/8 
 
 4. Other cables: __________________________ 
 5. Frequencies: 
 
 Transmit band: 851 – 866  MHz; 935 – 940 MHz 
 
 Receive band: 806 – 821  MHz; 896 – 901 MHz 
 6. Source of emergency power: ______________________ 
 Construction Practices 
 1. Tenant shall replace the Initial Construction Drawing of Exhibit B with an  “ as built ” survey 
of the Premises once Tenant receives it. 
 2. All Tenant equipment and construction shall be set back from the Property’s boundaries as 
required by the applicable governmental authorities. 
 3. The access way’s width shall be only the width required by the applicable governmental 
authorities, including police and ﬁ re departments. Any upgrade which may be required by 
an applicable governmental authority shall be at Tenant’s expense. 
 4. Tenant is authorized to install and maintain the equipment shown on the Landlord-
approved Initial Construction Drawing, for which an  “ as built ” drawing to substitute as 
Exhibit B-2 shall be provided within 90 days of the completion of Tenant’s construction. 
The type, number, mounting positions and locations of antennas and transmission lines, 
as well as all other installed equipment, shall be portrayed in the  “ as built ” survey drawing. 
The “ as built ” drawing will thereafter be replaced and kept current as necessary, should 
Tenant’s equipment on the Tower change, after approval if it represents a change or 
modiﬁ cation. Cost for such work shall be borne by the Tenant. After initial construction, 
no change or modiﬁ cation of equipment on the tower, or outside of the equipment 
building, as shown on the “ as built ” drawings, may thereafter be made without written 
consent of Landlord in the form of a Plan Approval. In any event, however, no change may 
materially increase Tenant’s wind-loading on the tower, and Tenant will provide evidence to 
Landlord’s reasonable satisfaction that equipment exchanges or upgrades do not increase 
loading on the Tower. A Plan Approval will only be issued upon receipt by Landlord of (a) 
a detailed plan of the proposed construction, replacement or upgrading, (b) all necessary 
governmental approvals, including a building permit if necessary, and (c) receipt by 
Landlord of assurance from its own engineer that the proposed construction, replacement 
or upgrading will not affect windloading on the tower, nor interfere with other tower users. 
The cost of this review, up to $1,000 (which cost maximum shall increase at the same rate 
of annual increase as the rent), shall be at the expense of Tenant. 
 5. Landlord understands that the location of any utility easement on the Initial Drawing is 
illustrative only. The actual location will be determined by the servicing utility company in 
compliance with all local laws and regulations and approved by Landlord. 
 6. All construction shall comply with generally accepted good commercial construction 
practices, including: 
 
 (a)  In case of suspected interference or intermodulation problems, Tenant must cooperate 
in a timely fashion with Landlord, whether or not it can be conclusively proven whose 
equipment is involved. 

Lease Issues 363
 
   (b)  All ferrous metals used as part of the mounting hardware must be hot-dipped 
galvanized or stainless steel. The screws, bolts, lock washers, and nuts should be 
stainless steel, brass, or hot-dip galvanized. 
 
   (c)  All antennas shall be tagged with weatherproof labels showing the manufacturer, model 
and frequency range. 
 
 (d)  For grounding systems, the metallic contact surfaces where the interconnections are 
made should be cleaned and be free of foreign materials like paint and rust. All exposed 
metallic contact surfaces shall be coated with an anti-oxidant compound. Where 
possible, grounding connections shall be cad-welded. 
 
  (e)  Tenant shall cooperate with Landlord in a timely fashion to ensure that RF exposure for 
tower repair/rigging personnel, or other construction personnel perform work at the site, 
does not exceed the limits of 47 CFR  § 1.1310, or as it may subsequently be amended. 
If necessary to comply with the FCC’s Maximum Permissible Exposure guidelines, the 
power to antennas shall be temporarily reduced as much and as long as necessary to 
avoid exposing the crew to RF emissions in excess of the current FCC standards. 
 
 (f)  Tenant may not store materials outside of its equipment building or enclosure. Garbage 
and packing material shall be promptly removed from the Premises. Garbage and 
packing material remaining on the premises for more than seven (7) days after Notice, 
may be removed by Landlord at Tenant’s expense. 
 19.2.7  Changes 
 (See also Section 19.2.2, Use.) Make sure that the lease requires the Tenant to get written consent for 
any alterations to the installation, but be reasonable and agree that consent cannot be unreasonably 
denied ( “ withheld, delayed, or denied ” can be used as fallback language). 
 Suggested Language 
 Upon written consent of Landlord in each instance, obtained prior to ﬁ ling for any applicable 
construction permits .  .  . Nonetheless, Tenant may not exceed the wind load on the tower of the 
antenna system, nor the leased area on the ground, described in Exhibit A-2. 
 In any event, the  “ Use ” paragraph should be examined to prevent upgrade or additional enlargement 
of antennas or ground space use without permission. The only thing a tower owner has to rent is space 
and wind load. Guard it carefully. 
 19.2.8  Wind-Load Upgrades 
 Make sure the carrier is required to make any structural upgrades to the tower that result from 
additional loads. The best way to do this is to use the absolute prohibition on increasing wind load on 
the tower, as described above. Additional weight or wind load, additional power output (especially 
if the tenant does not have separately metered AC power), or additional frequencies could cause an 

364 Chapter 19
 From a Carrier 3 lease in a backyard site: 
 After the completion of initial or any subsequent construction, Tenant shall return any portion 
of the Property disturbed by construction to a condition comparable to the condition of 
the Property before the construction. Tenant shall, at Tenant’s expense, keep and maintain 
the Antenna Facilities now or hereafter located on the Property in commercially reasonable 
condition and repair during the term of this Lease, normal wear and tear and casualty excepted. 
Upon termination or expiration of this Lease, the Premises shall be returned to Landlord in 
good, usable condition, normal wear and tear and casualty excepted. 
 “ appropriate ” increase in rent. But don’t be greedy. You don’t want to send a perfectly good-paying 
tenant out hunting for a new site. 
 19.2.9  Condition of the Premises 
 19.3   Title and Quiet Possession 
 19.3.1  Transfer of Warranty 
 No grant of lien, encumbrance, easement, restriction, or other change to title without prior written 
consent of Tenant/Lessee? Nah.  No Landlord should ever give that to a Tenant. But,  “ subject to tenant’s 
rights ” ? Yes. 
 19.3.2  CC & Rs 
 Do you know of any covenant, condition, or restriction of record (sometimes CC & R stands for 
 “ Common Covenant and Restraint ” ) that may make you a defendant to a complaint asking a court to 
enjoin the construction of a tower? If you do, disclose it  now — and avoid a lawsuit later. How would 
you make such a disclosure? The answer is formally and in writing. 
 19.3.3  Defects of Title 
 If the potential Lessee has the right to clear clouds on title by spending his rent, you could wind up with 
the Lessee getting perfect title and the Lessor getting no rent at all, as the Lessee will have no incentive 
to be spare in his spending to clear the title. How about a maximum of $2,000? Or, Lessee should 
obtain an abstract of title beforehand and, if there is no clear title, Lessor shall have 18 months in which 
to clear title or the lease is terminated. Be careful if Landlord does not own the underlying land. 
 Carrier 1 lease (with accepted changes in italics) 
 (i) Landlord agrees to fully cooperate, including executing necessary documentation, with 
Tenant to obtain information and documentation clearing,  insofar as Landlord is capable of obtaining 
such information and documentation, as well as clearing, any outstanding title issues that could adversely 
affect Tenant’s interest in the Premises created by this Agreement. 

Lease Issues 365
 (iii) Agree to Convey. In accordance with other provisions of this Lease Agreement,  insofar as 
Landlord is capable, Landlord agrees to execute such documents as shall be necessary to carry out 
the intent of this Lease Agreement, including, without limitation, agreements for utilities, as well 
as ingress and egress, on the Property and to the Premises. 
 Carrier 4 
 S. Protection of Tenant’s Cellular System. Landlord covenants that Landlord, its successor and 
assigns, shall not contract with any other wireless two-way communications broadcaster, who 
is a competitor of Tenant, for a leasehold, license, other fee or interest in the Property or Tower 
during the Lease Term without Tenant’s written approval which shall not be unreasonably 
withheld. Landlord shall provide ninety (90) days ’ prior written notice to Tenant of the terms of 
a proposed contract and supply to Tenant such information as Tenant shall reasonably require, 
including, but not limited to, the competitor’s broadcast frequencies, power output, and all 
proposed antenna types, sizes and locations. Should Tenant in its sole discretion reasonably 
deem any term of the proposed contract to be more economic or advantageous than the 
corresponding term of this Agreement, Tenant may notify Landlord in writing of the terms it has 
selected and Landlord shall be obligated to amend this lease to include such term within thirty 
(30) days of said notice. 
 If Landlord makes such competitive contract, written or oral, without prior approval of 
Tenant, Tenant may terminate this Lease Agreement without further notice to Landlord, and, 
 Suggested change to Carrier 4 lease 
 At all times from the Effective Date forward, LESSOR  agrees to fully cooperate, including executing 
necessary documentation, with LESSEE to obtain information and documentation clearing, insofar as LESSOR 
is reasonably capable of clearing, any outstanding title issues that could adversely affect LESSEE’s interest in 
the Premises created by this Agreement.
 Carrier 4 lease 
 At all times from the Effective Date forward, LESSOR warrants to LESSEE that LESSOR holds 
good and marketable title to the Property and has the full power and authority to enter into and 
execute this Agreement. 
 If Landlord does not own the underlying land, a request for easements must be modiﬁ ed as follows.
 If you are not careful, though you do not own the land, you might see this paragraph:
 19.3.4  Most Favored Nation Clause 

366 Chapter 19
 Carrier 4 
 Ownership of Communications Facility. Tenant at all times shall have exclusive ownership of the 
Communications Facility. 
 Communications Facility. All equipment and structures required for Tenant’s use of the 
Premises, including but not limited to antennas, the Building, cable connections, generator, fuel 
storage tank, heating/cooling unit(s), parking area, and waveguide bridge. 
 Ownership of Communications Facility. Tenant at all times shall have exclusive ownership of its 
personalty at the Communications Facility. 
 Watch out for the deﬁ nition of the Communications Facility, as it includes:
 The solution?
 19.4   Term 
 The typical lease is for a term of ﬁ ve years, with renewals for additional ﬁ ve-year terms after that. 
If it’s a good business for all concerned, there’s probably no need for a total of more than 20 to 25 
years in total. Thirty-ﬁ ve years is probably excessive. Remember, however, that the number of years 
in the term is a business, not a legal decision. Your lawyer will have no special guidance (except his 
experience that 35 years is probably not necessary to do a deal). Most Landlords would favor 25 years 
(four renewals). Absent other plans, most Tenants favor 30 years (ﬁ ve renewals). Remember, the 
Tenant is not forced to renew. 
 This says that you have to make any concession to Carrier 4 that you agree to make with anyone else. 
Bzzzzt. Delete it in its entirety. 
 19.3.5  Ownership 
 You might see a clause declaring that you have  “ exclusive ownership ” of something. If you don’t, 
modify that clause! 
notwithstanding any other term of this Lease Agreement to the contrary, Tenant may seek a 
remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction, against either or both Landlord and the other 
communications broadcaster, including but not limited to an action for money damages for the 
value of its Communications Facility and the leasehold and an action in equity to remove such 
other broadcaster from the Premises. 

Lease Issues 367
 Carrier 3 lease 
 In consideration of the payment of One Hundred and no/100 dollars ($100.00) (the  “ Option 
Fee” ) by Tenant to Landlord, Landlord hereby grants to Tenant an option to lease a portion of 
the real property described in the attached  Exhibit A (the  “ Property ” ), together with the right 
to use the tower located thereon ( “ Tower ” ), on the terms and conditions set forth herein (the 
 “ Option ” ). The Option shall be for an initial term of twelve (12) months, commencing on the 
Effective Date (as deﬁ ned below) (the  “ Option Period ” ). The Option Period may be extended by 
Tenant for an additional twelve (12) months upon written notice to Landlord and payment of 
the sum of One Hundred and no/100 dollars ($100.00) ( “ Additional Option Fee ” ) at any time 
prior to the end of the Option Period. 
 19.4.1  Start (See also Commencement .) 
 There are two different  “ commencement ” issues. The ﬁ rst question is  when does the lease begin? The 
usual answer is after the option period. The second question is  when should the rent start? A sensible 
approach is $100 to $500/month rent from the signing or ﬁ rst available date if there is some zoning to go 
through. Certainly the Tenant should start paying when the permit is issued, although perhaps at a lesser 
rate until construction is complete, but in any event not later than six months after all permits have been 
obtained. Otherwise, the carrier is just warehousing the space and not paying for the space, while the 
tower owner must keep that space off the market. A typical solution is that rent starts when all permits 
are obtained (on the ﬁ rst day of the month following the issuance of all necessary permits, or within 30 
days thereafter), or six months after signing the lease by Tenant. Landlords have every incentive to start 
that rent ﬂ owing, but should not be too greedy. After all, this is a long-term relationship. 
 In consideration of the payment of One Hundred and no/100 dollars ($100.00) (the  “ Option 
Fee” ) by Tenant to Landlord, Landlord hereby grants to Tenant an option to lease a portion of 
the real property described in the attached  Exhibit A (the  “ Property ” ), together with the right 
to use the tower located thereon ( “ Tower ” ), on the terms and conditions set forth herein (the 
 “ Option ” ). The Option shall be for an initial term of  six (6) months, commencing on the Effective Date 
(as deﬁ ned below) (the  “ Option Period ” ). Unless sooner begun, the Term of this lease and monthly rent shall 
begin six (6) months after the Effective Date.
 As modiﬁ ed for this existing tower (where the Tenant needed only to add antennas and an equipment shed):
 19.4.2  Renewal 
 If you have rented bare land to a carrier, it is reasonable for the Lessee to have renewal in his sole 
discretion for the ﬁ rst 15 to 20 years, as he’s got to amortize the costs of his construction (any driveway, 
pad, equipment shed, utilities, and antennas/feedlines on the tower). After that, however, it is reasonable 
for the landowner to be able to end the agreement, too. At this point, there are two common approaches. 
 The ﬁ rst approach to the end of a lease is to just end the agreement. If the parties wish to continue, 
they can then renew and just specify the new term and rent. Or, the second approach is that the 

368 Chapter 19
 If Tenant is not in default of any provision of this Lease Agreement at the time for extension, 
including its payment terms, Landlord grants to Tenant four (4) separate options to extend 
the Lease Agreement for four (4) Additional Terms of ﬁ ve (5) years each, on the same terms 
and conditions set forth in this Lease Agreement for the Initial Term, except as modiﬁ ed by the 
provisions in Section 7. [Section 7 is the increase in rent clause.] 
original agreement could have more ﬁ ve-year terms, with either party able to notify the other that the 
agreement will not be renewed. There’s not much difference between those two strategies legally, but 
the additional years, though subject to nonrenewal, might help persuade a bank to make a loan to the 
landowner, or might help the carrier sell the site as part of the company. 
 19.4.3  No Renewal If in Default 
 Why would you wish to allow a renewal if the Tenant is in default, especially if the Tenant is not current 
on rent? Look for this question to arise in the paragraph on “ term and renewals. ” Here’s how to modify 
the Carrier 4 agreement:
 19.4.4  Lessor/Landlord Termination 
 Mere progress is no reason  not to terminate a lease that has not generated any income for more than 
18 months. I apologize for writing in a double negative. The lease should have a  “ terminate or pay ”
clause, with payments beginning after 18 months, no matter what — or else the Landlord may (but is not 
required to) terminate the lease. Or, a front-end payment to keep the lease alive for up to two to three 
years might be reasonable. There is a deal that can be cut here. A larger front-end payment should keep 
the lease valid for a longer period before the regular monthly payments kick in. 
 If the Tenant insists that you shouldn’t be able to terminate once he can demonstrate progress, your 
reply is that it must be continuous progress, and any time the progress stops, for 30 to 45 days or more, 
you should be able to terminate. 
 19.4.5  Lessee/Tenant Termination 
 What is usual? Three months ’ notice and three months ’ penalty. Better is nine months ’ notice, with 
no penalty. (It has been done). The Carrier 4 standard lease offers six months ’ notice for nonrenewal. 
The outer limit for asking is probably nine months ’ notice and three months ’ penalty. Here’s an idea on 
limiting what amounts to an unfettered ability to quit the premises:
 For economic reasons. .  .  . by Tenant if Tenant determines that the Premises are not appropriate 
for its operations for economic  (though the ability to substitute a different site within ﬁ ve miles at a lower 
cost shall not qualify) or technological reasons, including, without limitation, signal interference. 
 Unfortunately, no matter how rational this idea may be, no one can assure you that this concept will be 
accepted by the carrier. 

Lease Issues 369
 24. Termination. 
 (a) General Right of Termination. Notwithstanding any other termination rights available to 
SUBLESSEE under this Agreement, SUBLESSEE, at its sole and absolute discretion, shall have 
the right to terminate this Agreement with  ninety (90) days prior written notice to SUBLESSOR and 
a lump sum payment to SUBLESSOR in an amount equal to six (6) months rent or the total of the 
remaining months of the term, whichever is less. The rental rate shall be  computed at the rate that is 
in effect at the time of termination.
 (f) Penalty. If this lease is terminated under paragraph 8(c), Tenant shall pay Landlord, during 
the notice period, an amount equal to six months of the then current rent. 
 Here’s a pretty standard paragraph:
 Here’s another standard carrier termination, showing how to modify the amount due to the Landlord.
 As the phrase or concept of  “ current rent ” freezes rent at the  “ old ” rate, when a  “ new ” rate was just 
about to kick in, the Landlord should try for:  “ an amount equal to the sum of the rents due for each of 
the next six months of the term, or the total of the remaining months of the term, whichever is less. ”
 Public radio FM as Tenant (this language looks pretty reasonable) 
 15. Termination. 
 This Agreement may be terminated without further liability as follows: (i) on thirty (30) days 
prior written notice by LESSEE if LESSEE is unable to occupy and utilize the telephone poles 
and/or Property due to an action of the FCC (including without limitation, a take back of 
channels or change in frequencies) that did not result from a ﬁ nding that LESSEE acted or failed 
to act in accord with its obligations under its License or applicable federal law; or (ii) on thirty 
(30) days prior written notice by LESSEE if LESSEE’s use of the Property is materially impaired 
due to casualty loss to the Property or for other any other reason not caused by LESSEE; or (iii) 
on thirty (30) days prior written notice by LESSOR if LESSOR enters into a written contract to 
sell the Property, or to sell a controlling interest in LESSOR and if the buyer under such contract 
has notiﬁ ed LESSOR in writing that the buyer wishes LESSOR to terminate this Agreement. 
 Carrier 3 as Tenant (suggested change in italics) 
 Termination for Damage or Destruction. 
Except for damage caused by Tenant or its agents, immediately upon written notice by Tenant if the 
Premises or the Antenna Facilities are destroyed or damaged so as in Tenant’s reasonable judgment 
to substantially and adversely affect the effective use of the Antenna Facilities. In such event, all 
rights and obligations of the parties shall cease as of the date of the damage or destruction, and 
Tenant shall be entitled to the reimbursement of any Rent prepaid by Tenant. If Tenant elects to 
continue this Lease, then all Rent shall abate until the Premises and/or the Antenna Facilities are 
restored to the condition existing immediately prior to such damage or destruction. 

370 Chapter 19
 The question here is why should the Tenant be allowed to destroy or damage the tower and then use 
that as an excuse to quit the premises? 
 19.5   Rent 
 Now don’t go crazy. Despite your pride in your prowess in selecting and owning prime real estate, it 
is probably not the only game in town, and the site acquisition consultants are very good at ﬁ nding 
alternatives within the geographic circles given to them by the likes of Sprint, AT & T Wireless, Verizon, 
and so forth. 
 Just because you have a cousin with the only high-rise building in an exclusive suburb who gets $3,000 
per month for antennas on his roof, does not mean that you will get the same amount for a corner of 
your farm in rural Ohio, even when dealing with the very same carrier. 
 Despite the leases in the past that came with conﬁ dentiality clauses to hold the terms of deals struck 
as conﬁ dential, you can still become calibrated as to the value of land in your neighborhood. How? 
There are some deals to which the conﬁ dentiality clauses do not apply — for example, deals with some 
churches where the lease must be voted upon by the entire congregation or deals with municipalities 
where a “ sunshine law ” (Freedom of Information Act) applies. You can always ask the question a 
different way and get a useful answer. 
 Let’s say you know that Carrier X is the prime Tenant at a site and that there is a conﬁ dentiality clause. 
While you cannot get an answer to the question of how much Carrier X is paying, you might get an 
answer to the question: “ How high was the offer you turned down, because Carrier X was higher? ”
 19.5.1  501(c)(3) Tenants 
 A public or religious radio or TV station, or a college station, might ask for lower rent on a structure. 
You might consider agreeing in exchange for the tax beneﬁ t appearing in the sentence below. If your 
Tenant is a qualiﬁ ed 501(c)(3) organization, ask if, in consideration for the very reasonable rent you 
are offering, an additional 20% could be considered an  “ in-kind ” donation, acknowledged annually, so 
you, as a land owner (or tower owner) can get a tax beneﬁ t. 
 A Public Radio FM Station as Tenant 
 The LESSEE shall pay a rate of $1,000 per month (the  “ Base Fee ” ), where the LESSEE shall 
make a monthly cash payment of $800 and shall acknowledge the $200 balance as an in-kind 
donation by the LESSOR to the LESSEE. LESSEE shall pay to LESSOR in monthly installments 
due on the ﬁ rst day of each calendar month in advance. 
 7.2 Escalations. 
 Beginning on June 1, 2009, and on June 1st of each succeeding year of the term of this Agreement, 
the Base Fee, reﬂ ecting the proportion of cash payment to in-kind donation as set forth in the 
initial term (80/20), for each yearly period shall increase at a rate of three percent (3%). 

Lease Issues 371
 Carrier 2 will agree to 
 Commencing one year after the date of this Agreement, or on the date that Tenant commences 
construction (the “ Commencement Date ” ), whichever comes sooner, Tenant will pay the 
Landlord a monthly rental payment .  .  .
 19.5.2  Start Date for Payments 
 It is normal to have a potential Tenant pay a small amount, whether $500 for the ﬁ rst year as an option 
payment, or $500/month (i.e., you are holding space at 160 feet and you are being asked to keep that 
height off the market). If permits are not granted within one year of the date of signing, it would be 
normal to ask for another payment to hold the space. This option payment might continue until (1) 
the grant of required zoning permits, (2) the grant of all required zoning and building permits, or (3) 
the commencement or completion of construction. Then the rent would go to market rent (i.e., the full 
agreed rent). Here’s a good compromise. 
 19.5.3  Late Payments 
 One public radio station (as Tenant) agreed to 
 LESSEE shall pay a late fee in the amount of ﬁ ve percent (5%), or the maximum permitted by 
law, whichever is less, of the amount due if LESSEE does not pay rent within ﬁ ve (5) days after it 
becomes due and payable. 
 Trust me, the only Landlord who gets a 5% late fee is one with a strong position, perhaps a Landlord 
who can legally engage in self-help (shutting off electricity). But, it is really painful when a Tenant 
doesn’t pay on time — month after month, year after year. 
 Be aware that you’ll probably never get a late payment fee from the federal government, even 
when they go through the annual dance with Congress where budgets (the federal ﬁ scal year begins 
on October 1) are not passed until well after the end of the ﬁ scal year and you haven’t been paid.
For this reason, think long and hard before giving the federal government a break on rent, as you 
may be looking at late rent payments every October and November for the rest of your days on this 
planet.
 19.5.4  Extension Rentals 
 If no one does anything, and the lease says that, upon expiration, it continues on under the terms and 
conditions of the last rental period, the Landlord loses. At least the rent should continue to go up by 
the same amount that it went up in the past, such as 3% per year. The lease should not continue  “ at the 
same terms and conditions, ” a common clause. 

372 Chapter 19
 During the Initial Term and any Renewal Terms, as well as any month-to-month tenancy 
thereafter, monthly Rent shall be increased on each annual anniversary of the Commencement 
Date to an amount equal to one hundred three percent (103%) of the monthly Rent in effect 
immediately prior to the anniversary date. 
 19.5.5  Renewal Rent Increases 
 If the lease says that the rent will go up 3% at each renewal term, that means 3% every ﬁ ve years. If 
the lease says 15% at the start of each renewal term, that’s not the same as 3% per year; it is less. The 
industrywide accepted ﬁ gure is 3% per year. Here’s one way to accomplish a 3% increase after the 
lease has expired, which has been accepted by a carrier:
 Another common rent increase clause calls for rent to increase with the Consumer Price Index. 
 19.6   Revenue Sharing 
 For a situation where you do  not own the tower, and a multi-carrier tower is going to be constructed 
on your land, you can certainly ask for a share of the revenue of subsequent Tenants. The folks who 
are doing the permitting, clearing the ground, paving the road, building the tower, and fencing in the 
area — the initial Tenant — deserves to have those costs reduced by payments from the presence of 
additional Tenants. As a form of resisting your request for sharing the revenue of those additional 
Tenants, the primary Tenant is likely to reply:  “ You don’t need anything as part of the Agreement, any 
additional Tenant will have to negotiate with you for a ground lease in any event. ” Not good. 
 A Tenant could ﬁ nd that making two leases happen (one for tower space and one for a ground lease) 
is too much effort. Or, the Tenant could be someone who needs only a tiny box, instead of a major 
prefabricated concrete building, and your ground lease rent could be equally tiny. 
 The better way is probably revenue sharing. Deals are done at rates between 15% and 50%. This is a 
matter of arm wrestling. Ten percent is not enough. At 15%, the Tenant is still taking advantage of the 
landowner. Most deals are done in the 25% to 50% range, with 25% as normal. 
 Watch out for terms that call for additional rent for additional  “ carriers ” . As a landowner, you want 
additional rent even if the additional Tenant is not a carrier. It could be a land-clearing company, a taxi 
or ambulance service, a weather reporting station for a broadcaster, a trafﬁ c camera, and so forth. In 
the additional rent sentence, offering a percentage of rent from additional carriers, change the word 
 “ Carrier ” to  “ Tenant, ” because you want additional rent for additional Tenants. 
 19.6.1  Books and Records 
 For revenue sharing deals, the Landlord needs reasonable access, upon notice and during business 
hours, to such books and records as shall assure him that the payment reﬂ ects his proper share. The 
Tenant may wish to limit the access to once or twice per year, to keep the Landlord out of his hair. 
That’s fair. 

Lease Issues 373
 19.6.2  Initial Payment 
 The reason why a Landlord may request an initial payment is that, in exchange, he’s taking his land 
off the market. However, in today’s market the Landlord can only expect a single payment of $500 to 
$2,000 — no more. Some companies will not make any initial payments. If that’s the way they feel, you 
should be sure that the lease payments are, in your view, adequate. Or you might request something 
akin to a  “ break-up ”  fee, should the Tenant decide, after all, not to use your land. Such a fee would 
compensate you for the legal expenses you’ve incurred in negotiating the lease and for keeping your 
property off the market. Such a fee would be comparable to the loss of the  “ earnest money ”  deposit 
when a homebuyer backs out of a sale. You could insert it into the  “ Termination ”  clause, for situations 
where the termination occurred before anything was constructed. Again, don’t be greedy. The carriers are 
constantly engaged in hand-to-hand combat for customers and really do need to keep their costs in line. 
 19.7   AM Towers 
 See 47 CFR  § 73.186 for the requirements for a complete proof of performance of an AM broadcast 
antenna system. See 47 CFR  § 73.154 for the requirements for a partial proof of performance of an AM 
broadcast antenna system. 
 The partial proof is used to show that nothing has changed substantially since the last full proof was 
performed. If the partial proof shows a change, it is necessary either (1) to do whatever is necessary to 
restore the parameters to their original values, or (2) to perform a new full proof and submit FCC Form 
301 to have the terms of the AM station’s license modiﬁ ed. In general, the ﬁ rst alternative (restoration 
of parameters) will be less expensive than the latter (a new full proof). 
 If the broadcaster who owns the AM tower (or his attorney) is smart, the contract with the wireless 
Tenant will require the Tenant to bear the costs of these measurements, FCC ﬁ lings, etc. 
 None of this applies to FM or TV stations. It is only the pattern of the AM station that must be 
ascertained after installation on a  “ hot ” tower or within the ﬁ eld of an AM tower. (A tip of the hat to 
Lew Collins, Ph.D., W1GXT, of Broadcast Signal Labs for this tip.) 
 As a broadcaster, sooner or later you will need FCC Form 301, Application for Construction Permit 
for a Commercial Broadcast Station ( http://www.fcc.gov/Forms/Form301/301.pdf ), or Form 302, 
Application for AM Broadcast Station License ( http://www.fcc.gov/Forms/Form302-AM/302-amFill
.pdf ). If you own the AM station’s tower, consider this clause.
 This is an AM Tower. 
 SUBLESSEE understands that this is an AM broadcast tower. Upon completion of construction 
by SUBLESSEE, SUBLESSEE shall cause to be performed a partial proof of performance of an 
AM broadcast antenna system, in conformance with 47 CFR  § 73.154. If the partial proof shows 
a change in performance, SUBLESSEE shall do whatever is necessary to restore the parameters 
of the AM antenna system to their original values, or perform a new full proof of performance in 
accordance with 47 CFR § 73.186 and, if necessary, cause to be submitted FCC Form  301 [302-
AM?] which must result in the modiﬁ cation of the terms of the AM station license which satisfy, 
in its sole discretion, SUBLESSOR. 

374 Chapter 19
 Should Landlord reasonably require the assistance of legal counsel to create, review or negotiate 
any documents sought by Tenant, reasonable attorney’s fees for that assistance will be paid by 
Tenant within 30 days after an invoice for those fees is submitted to Tenant. 
 In any event, Tenant shall diligently, continuously, and in good faith pursue such approvals as 
may be necessary for the intended use of the Premises. 
 19.8   Contingencies 
 19.8.1  Governmental Approvals 
 These are getting to be a bear and could take three years. Get used to it. Nonetheless, don’t confuse the 
period necessary to get through a recalcitrant Town Board with the period necessary for the Tenant to 
perform his due diligence. Add one of the following clauses:
 or
 19.8.2  Suitability or Due Diligence Period 
 The Tenant should not have an unlimited time to keep the property tied up without a rent payment. 
Suitability or due diligence should take no more than 30 to 45 days. It would be okay to give a 
potential Tenant at least that much time rent free. However, getting through the zoning process should 
be limited to three years, at most. 
 19.9   Rent Increases 
 It is very common for the Lessee to offer increases of 15% every 5 years. While this element of the 
agreement is very much subject to arm wrestling (i.e., negotiation), there are two points you should 
understand:
 • 
Fifteen percent every ﬁ ve years is  not the same as 3% per year. It’s more like 2.7%. Ask, and 
you will probably ﬁ nd that the carrier will agree to 3% per year. 
 • 
If you think inﬂ ation is going to be wild and crazy (do you remember the Ford 
Administration’s WIN — Whip Inﬂ ation Now — buttons?) or that the days of Jimmy Carter and 
16% interest rates are coming back, you can always choose to use a Cost of Living increase. 
Here’s an example of such a clause, following the recommendation of the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics ( http://stats.bls.gov/dolfaq/bls_ques7.htm ):

Lease Issues 375
 The CPI measures the average change in the prices paid for a market basket of goods and 
services. These items are purchased for consumption by the two groups covered by the index: All 
Urban Consumers (CPI-U) and Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers, (CPI-W). 
 Escalation agreements often use the CPI — the most widely used measure of price change — to 
adjust payments for changes in prices. The most frequently used escalation applications are 
in private sector collective bargaining agreements, rental contracts, insurance policies with 
automatic inﬂ ation protection, and alimony and child support payments. 
 The following are general guidelines to consider when developing an escalation agreement using 
the CPI: 
 DEFINE clearly the base payment (rent, wage rate, alimony, child support, or other value) that is 
subject to escalation. 
 IDENTIFY precisely which CPI index series will be used to escalate the base payment. This should 
include: The population coverage (CPI-U or CPI-W), area coverage (U.S. City Average, West 
Region, Chicago, etc.), series title (all items, rent of primary residence, etc.), and index base 
period (1982 – 84    100). 
 SPECIFY a reference period from which changes in the CPI will be measured. This is usually a 
single month (the CPI does not correspond to a speciﬁ c day or week of the month) or an annual 
average. There is about a 2-week lag from the reference month to the date on which the index 
is released (e.g., the CPI for May is released in mid-June). The CPIs for most metropolitan areas 
are not published as frequently as are the data for the U.S. City Average and the 4 regions. 
Indexes for the U.S. City Average, the 4 regions, 3 city-size classes, 10 region-by-size classes, 
and 3 major metropolitan areas (Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York) are published monthly. 
Indexes for the remaining 23 published metropolitan areas are available only on a bimonthly or 
semiannual basis. Contact the BLS address at the end of this fact sheet for information on the 
frequency of publication for the 26 metropolitan areas. 
 STATE the frequency of adjustment. Adjustments are usually made at ﬁ xed time intervals, such 
as quarterly, semiannually, or, most often, annually. 
 DETERMINE the formula for the adjustment calculation. Usually the change in payments is 
directly proportional to the percent change in the CPI index between two speciﬁ ed time periods. 
Consider whether to make an allowance for a  “ cap ” that places an upper limit to the increase 
in wages, rents, etc., or a  “ ﬂ oor ” that promises a minimum increase regardless of the percent 
change (up or down) in the CPI. 
 PROVIDE a built-in method for handling situations that may arise because of major CPI 
revisions or changes in the CPI index base period. The Bureau always provides timely 
notiﬁ cation of upcoming revisions or changes in the index base. 
 The CPI and escalation: Some points to consider: 
 The CPI is calculated for two population groups: All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) and Urban 
Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W). The CPI-U represents about 87 percent of the total 
U.S. population and is based on the expenditures of  all families living in urban areas. The CPI-W 
is a subset of the CPI-U and is based on the expenditures of families living in urban areas who 
meet additional requirements related to employment: more than one-half of the family’s income 
has to be earned from clerical or hourly-wage occupations. The CPI-W represents about 32 
percent of the total U.S. population. 

376 Chapter 19
 There can be small differences in movement of the two indexes over short periods of time 
because differences in the spending habits of the two population groups result in slightly 
different weighting. The long-term movements in the indexes are similar. CPI-U and CPI-W 
indexes are calculated using measurement of price changes for goods and services with the same 
speciﬁ cations and from the same retail outlets. The CPI-W is used for escalation primarily in 
blue-collar cost-of-living adjustments (COLAs). Because the CPI-U population coverage is more 
comprehensive, it is used in most other escalation agreements. 
 The 26 metropolitan areas for which BLS publishes separate index series are by-products of 
the U.S. City Average index. Metropolitan area indexes have a relatively small sample size and, 
therefore, are subject to substantially larger sampling errors. Metropolitan area and other sub-
components of the national indexes (regions, size-classes) often exhibit greater volatility than 
the national index. BLS strongly recommends that users adopt the U.S. City Average CPI for use 
in escalator clauses. 
 The U.S. City Average CPIs are published on a seasonally adjusted basis as well as on an 
unadjusted basis. The purpose of seasonal adjustment is to remove the estimated effect of price 
changes that normally occur at the same time and in about the same magnitude every year (e.g., 
price movements due to the change in weather patterns, model change-overs, holidays, end-of-
season sales, etc.). The primary use of seasonally adjusted data is for current economic analysis. 
In addition, the factors that are used to seasonally adjust the data are updated annually. 
Also, seasonally adjusted data that have been published earlier are subject to revision for up 
to 5 years after their original release. For these reasons, the use of seasonally adjusted data in 
escalation agreements is inappropriate. 
 Escalation agreements using the CPI usually involve changing the base payment by the percent 
change in the level of the CPI between the reference period and a subsequent time period. This 
is calculated by ﬁ rst determining the index point change between the two periods and then the 
percent change. The following example illustrates the computation of percent change:
 CPI for current period 
 136.0 
 Less CPI for previous period 
 129.9 
 Equals index point change 
 6.1 
 Divided by previous period CPI 
 129.9 
 Equals 
 0.047 
 Result multiplied by 100 
 0.047   100 
 Equals percent change 
 4.7 
 The Bureau of Labor Statistics neither encourages nor discourages the use of price adjustment 
measures in contractual agreements. Also, while BLS can provide technical and statistical 
assistance to parties developing escalation agreements, we can neither develop speciﬁ c wording 
for contracts nor mediate legal or interpretive disputes which might arise between the parties to 
the agreement. 
 For any additional information about the CPI, please call (202) 691-7000, or write to: 
 Bureau of Labor Statistics 
 Ofﬁ ce of Prices and Living Conditions 
 2 Massachusetts Avenue, NE., Room 3615 
 Washington, D.C. 20212-0001 

Lease Issues 377
 For the period ending [month] [last day of month], [year], the Base Fee shall be $350 per 
month.
 During each one year renewal period, the Base Fee payable immediately prior to the renewal 
date shall be adjusted by the total change, if any (expressed as a percentage), in the Consumer 
Price Index (CPI) for the month of the expiration date of the Initial Term or current renewal 
period, as the case may be, compared to the CPI for the same month of the preceding year. 
Nonetheless, in no event shall the Base Fee payable during any renewal period be less than the 
Base Fee payable for the immediately prior period. 
 CPI as used herein shall mean the Consumer Price Index published by the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics of the United States Department of Labor, for All Urban Consumers, All Items 
(1982 – 1984    100), for the area called  “ Northeast Urban ” (CPI-U)  “ All items ” or an equivalent 
successor ofﬁ cial index then in effect. In the event that the Bureau of Labor Statistics changes 
the form or basis for the computation of the CPI, a reliable governmental or other non-partisan 
publication of Landlord’s choice evaluating substantially the same information previously 
used in determining the CPI shall be used. No adjustments or recomputations, retroactive or 
otherwise, shall be made due to any revision which may later be made in the ﬁ rst published 
ﬁ gure of the CPI. 
 Here is a CPI clause that was negotiated for one whip antenna on a tower.
 19.10   Interference 
 Everyone thinks interference is an important issue. However, the drafting of interference clauses varies 
signiﬁ cantly. 
  Carrier 2 lease 
 8. Interference. 
 (a) Where there are existing radiofrequency user(s) on the Property, the Landlord will provide 
Tenant with a list of all existing radiofrequency user(s) on the Property to allow Tenant to 
evaluate the potential for interference. Tenant warrants that its use of the Premises will not 
interfere with existing radiofrequency user(s) on the Property so disclosed by Landlord as long 
as the existing radiofrequency user(s) operate and continue to operate within their respective 
frequencies and in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations. 
 (b) With respect to radiofrequency interference or access to equipment or any other activity that 
interferes with Tenant’s rights under this Agreement, Landlord will not grant, after the date of this 
Agreement, a lease, license, or any other right to any third party for the use of the Property, if such 
use may in any way adversely affect or interfere with Tenant’s Communication Facility. Landlord 
will notify Tenant in writing prior to granting any third party the right to install and operate 
communications equipment on the Property. Nothing contained herein will restrict Tenant nor 
its successors and assigns from installing and modifying its communications equipment, so long 
as such modiﬁ cation does not increase wind load. Tenant warrants it will operate in accordance 
with all applicable laws and regulations and within its respective frequencies. 

378 Chapter 19
 In any event, Landlord and Tenant each acknowledge that discovering the source of interference 
and the party at fault can be difﬁ cult, if not impossible, and that should interference occur 
to any Tower User, each agrees to cooperate with the other to the fullest extent that is 
commercially reasonable to discover and cure any RF interference. 
 Carrier 6 lease 
 Interference. Landlord shall not use, nor shall Landlord permit its tenants or Tenants to use, 
any portion of the Property in any way that interferes with the operations of Tenant. Such 
interference shall be deemed a material breach by Landlord, and Landlord shall have the 
responsibility to promptly cause any such interference to be eliminated. If said interference 
cannot be eliminated within twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of notice that such interference 
is occurring, Landlord shall discontinue or cause to be discontinued the operation of any 
equipment causing the interference until the same can be corrected, except for such intermittent 
operation as may be necessary for the purposes of testing, after action has been taken for the 
purposes of correcting such interference. In the event any such interference does not cease 
promptly, Tenant shall have the right, in addition to any other right that it may have at law or in 
equity, to enjoin such interference or to terminate this Lease. 
 (c) Landlord will not use, nor will Landlord permit its employees, tenants, licensees, invitees, 
or agents to use, any portion of the Property in any way which interferes with the operations of 
Tenant or the rights of Tenant under this Agreement. Landlord will cause such interference to 
cease within a commercially reasonable period of time, not to exceed seventy two (72) hours 
after receipt of notice of interference from Tenant. In the event any such interference does not 
cease within the aforementioned cure period then the parties acknowledge that Tenant will 
suffer irreparable injury, and therefore Tenant will have the right, in addition to any other rights 
that it may have at law or in equity, for Landlord’s breach of this Agreement, to elect to enjoin 
such interference or to terminate this Agreement upon notice to Landlord. 
 Carrier 5 lease 
 Interference. LESSEE agrees to have installed radio equipment of the type and frequency which 
will not cause measurable interference to the equipment existing as of the date this Agreement 
is executed by the Parties of the LESSOR or other LESSEEs of the Property. In the event LESSEE’s 
equipment causes such interference, and after LESSOR has notiﬁ ed LESSEE of such interference, 
LESSEE will take all steps necessary to correct and eliminate the interference. LESSOR agrees 
that LESSOR and any other tenants of the property who currently have or in the future take 
possession of the Property will be permitted to install only such radio equipment that is of the 
type and frequency which will not cause measurable interference to the existing equipment 
of the LESSEE. The parties acknowledge that there will not be an adequate remedy at law for 
noncompliance with the provisions of this paragraph and therefore, either Party shall have the 
right to speciﬁ cally enforce the provisions of the paragraph in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
 Here’s language that has been accepted in some leases:

Lease Issues 379
 A public radio station as Tenant 
 13. Interference. 
 13.1. LESSEE’s Obligation to Cure. 
 LESSEE shall operate the LESSEE’s facilities in a manner that will not cause interference to 
LESSOR and other pre-existing FCC licensed LESSEES, Tower Users, or licensees of the Property, 
provided that their installations predate that of the LESSEE’s facilities and are operated in 
accordance with the FCC license authorized for the installation. LESSEE has determined that 
its equipment will be compatible with the pre-existing FCC licensed Tower Users based upon 
an  “ intermod ” study (a study of intermodulation) performed during the negotiation period. 
LESSEE agrees to immediately cure any such interference to other FCC licensed and authorized 
facilities at the site or, if such interference cannot immediately be cured, to temporarily 
reduce power or cease the offending operations if so demanded by LESSOR on the grounds of 
interference, until a cure at full power is achieved; provided nothing in this section is intended to 
supercede the requirements of unlicensed Part 15 devices to receive incoming interference and 
for which no cure is mandated by FCC regulations. 
 LESSOR covenants to use LESSOR’s best efforts to protect LESSEE from interference caused 
or potentially caused by subsequent users or changes in the use. Adherence to the FCC rules 
and chronological incumbency as to frequencies, power levels, and physical connections and 
device locations, and requirements by unlicensed operations to permit received interference as 
stated in FCC rules governing Part 15 devices (speciﬁ cally Part 15.5(c)) are hereby agreed to be 
determinative in resolving interference disputes and LESSOR shall take reasonable action 
to assist LESSEE in resisting claims which violate this standard. LESSEE recognizes LESSOR’s 
right to allow additional equipment to be added to the Tower subject to the structural 
limitations of the Tower, as well as applicable FCC and FAA rules and regulations. All operations 
by LESSEE shall be in compliance with all Federal Communications Commission ( “ FCC ” ) 
requirements. 
 [inserted by the Public Radio FM station] 
 Subsequent to the installation of the LESSEE facilities, LESSOR shall not permit itself, its 
LESSEEs, or licensees to install new equipment on the Property or property contiguous 
thereto owned or controlled by LESSOR, if such equipment is likely to cause interference with 
LESSEE’s operations. LESSEE shall deem such interference a material breach. In the event 
interference occurs, LESSOR agrees to take all action necessary to eliminate such interference, 
in a reasonable time period. In the event LESSOR fails to comply with this paragraph, LESSEE 
may terminate this AGREEMENT, and/or pursue any other remedies available under this 
AGREEMENT, at law and/or at equity. 
 LESSEE must obtain an intermodulation study from a licensed professional engineer and a 
structural tower study, subject to LESSOR’s approval, before installation of equipment. 
 13.2. Subsequent Installations. 
 In the event that transmitting or receiving devices installed on the telephone poles or the 
Property in the future by any subsequently authorized user shall interfere with LESSEE’s 
communications signals, LESSEE shall cooperate with such user in eliminating interference by 
assisting the subsequent user in identifying the source, extent and nature of the interference and 
modifying equipment where feasible, except interference to those devices governed by Federal 
Communications Commission Rules governing the operation of Part 15 devices. LESSEE will not 

380 Chapter 19
incur cost to modify equipment, if such modiﬁ cation is necessary. LESSOR shall ensure that the 
subsequent authorized user shall be required to cease its operations if the interference cannot 
be eliminated as a result of its efforts. Nothing in this Paragraph shall be construed to prohibit 
LESSOR or exempt LESSEE from complying with duly authorized governmental requests for 
priority use of the site in cases of federal, state, or local emergency. 
 From a daytime AM lease (where Landlord is a broadcaster) 
 Neither party shall be liable to the other for any incidental, indirect, special, or consequential 
damages, including, without limitation, loss of airtime, lost proﬁ ts or revenues, resulting from 
or occurring in connection with this Agreement or any breach hereof. 
  From public radio FM as Tenant lease 
 LESSOR shall not be held liable or responsible for airtime losses or any other consequential 
damages sustained for any reason by LESSEE under this AGREEMENT or its rights hereunder. If 
any claim is made against LESSOR by LESSEE’s client, customer, or other third party for air time 
losses and damage arising out of or resulting from such losses, LESSEE shall indemnify and hold 
harmless LESSOR for all losses and expenses incurred by LESSOR including but not limited to all 
costs of defense. 
 If there is interference, Lessor should be able to shut down Lessee’s facilities if they are not repaired 
to eliminate interference. Eliminating interference should have a time deadline much shorter than the 
usual 30-day cure allowed for other matters. 
 You’ll note the language excepting Part 15 devices. No one should have to protect Part 15 devices. 
 Issues of  “ blanketing interference ” are beyond the scope of this book. Nonetheless, if you are a 
broadcaster, you’ll need an engineer familiar with the  “ blanketing interference ” rules. 
 19.11  Airtime Loss 
 19.12  Assignment or Sublet 
 Assignment and sublet are really two different issues. 
 19.12.1  Assignment 
 Financial strength is not the only issue that you might have with an assignee. What if he’s a crook, 
sleaze, or just a difﬁ cult person (or corporation)? While the Lessee will never agree to absolute 
ability to deny transfer, the usual compromise language is that  “ no assignment may be made without 
approval of the Lessor, which approval shall not be unreasonably (1) delayed beyond thirty (30) 
days, (2) withheld, or (3) denied. ” The trade-off here is that the Lessee has invested a lot of money in 

Lease Issues 381
 From a Carrier 3 lease 
 1(a). Assignment by Tenant. 
 Afﬁ liate Assignment 
 Tenant shall have the right to assign or otherwise transfer this Lease and the Easements (as 
deﬁ ned above) granted herein upon written notice to Landlord, provided that the assignee 
(i) is FCC licensed to operate a wireless communications business; (ii) is a parent, subsidiary, 
or afﬁ liate of Tenant or Tenant’s parent; (iii) is merged or consolidated with Tenant; or (iv) 
acquires more than ﬁ fty percent (50%) of either an ownership interest in Tenant or the assets of 
Tenant in the  “ Metropolitan Trading Area ” or  “ Basic Trading Area ” (as those terms are deﬁ ned 
by the FCC) in which the Property is located. Upon such assignment, Tenant shall be relieved 
of all liabilities and obligations hereunder and Landlord shall look solely to the assignee for 
performance under this Lease and all obligations hereunder. Tenant may sublease the Premises, 
upon written notice to Landlord. 
 (2). Non-afﬁ liate Assignment.  
 Tenant may otherwise assign this Lease only upon written approval of Landlord. 
engineering, permitting, as well as building a road, building and tower. But, perhaps the rent should 
 “ go to market ” (meaning to a then-current market price) when the property is sold or a change of 
ownership occurs. 
 Suggested additional language 
 Notwithstanding the foregoing, where Landlord believes, in its sole discretion, that a prospective 
assignee presents a credit risk, approval of assignment may be withheld. 
 19.12.2  Sublet 
 The Lessor/Landlord deserves something, perhaps 20% to 50% of any sublet. In a build-to-suit, it is 
understandable that an override might not kick in until the third or fourth Tenant. If a long driveway is 
necessary (i.e., construction costs are great), it might well be the fourth Tenant. 
 19.13   Utilities 
 19.13.1  Construction 
 An owner deserves some control over construction, blasting, tree cutting, etc. Utilities should be 
subject to approval of routing and construction, submitted in advance, but with no more than 7 to 21 
days to consider it (unless the owner is unavailable) or it may be considered approved. Approval should 
not be unreasonably withheld, denied, or delayed. The problem in picking a length of time is that the 
time should be short, so the project can go forward, but the time should be long enough so the owner 
can take a 14- to 20-day vacation without fear of inappropriate construction. 

382 Chapter 19
 Suggested wording 
 With respect to construction for utilities, such construction is subject to Landlord’s approval 
of routing and construction. Plans for such routing and construction shall be submitted in 
advance, and Landlord shall have at least seven (7) [twenty-one (21)] days to consider the 
proposal (unless Landlord is unavailable at the time of submission). Lack of response by 
Landlord when Landlord has seven (7) [twenty-one (21)] days ’ actual notice and time for 
consideration may be considered approval. In any event, approval shall not be unreasonably 
withheld, denied or delayed. 
  From public radio FM as Tenant lease 
 This AGREEMENT may not be modiﬁ ed or amended except by written AGREEMENT signed by 
both parties. 
 19.13.2  Timeliness of Payments 
 If the tower owner has to pay utilities and recover those costs from the Tenant, the Tenant has no 
right to expect that the tower owner will loan the money to the tenant. The Tenant should pay within 
20 days, so the tower owner can pay on time. There is an alternative, of course. If the Landlord must 
advance the payment, the Landlord should be entitled to some interest on the payment. The Landlord 
should not be the Tenant’s bank! See discussion above about late fees. 
 19.14  Amendment 
 This is a totally normal, expectable condition found in almost every lease. No one wants side deals cut 
by local maintenance people to control the tenancy for such long periods of time. 
 19.15  Force Majeure 
 If the tower is hit by an airplane or a hurricane, it may take a while to re-erect and for the rents to start 
ﬂ owing again. However, think of the worst case possible and establish a period of time after which 
the Tenant should resume lease payments. So, for example, if the tower falls over on the day before the 
ground freezes, the Tenant should still be required to resume lease payments ﬁ ve months later, when 
the ground becomes workable again. That’s 5    30, or 150 days later. So rent may be suspended for 
a period not to exceed 150 days. If rent is not paid for 150 days, or so, the landowner should have the 
power to terminate the lease. 
 19.16  Indemniﬁ cation or Indemnity 
 Indemniﬁ cation should be completely two-way. Watch out for gross negligence or intentional 
acts. Survival (see Carrier 1’s agreement) is a good thing. Note that there are two ways of drafting 
indemniﬁ cation clauses: one paragraph that is completely mutual or two separate paragraphs. 

Lease Issues 383
 Language from Carrier 2, paragraph 9, separate subsections 
 Indemniﬁ cation. 
 (a) Tenant agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold Landlord harmless from and against any and 
all injury, loss, damage or liability (or any claims in respect of the foregoing), costs or expenses 
(including reasonable attorneys ’ fees and court costs) arising directly from the installation, 
use, maintenance, repair, or removal of the Communication Facility or Tenant’s breach of any 
provision of this Agreement, except to the extent attributable to the negligent or intentional act 
or omission of Landlord, its employees, agents, or independent contractors. 
 (b) Landlord agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold Tenant harmless from and against any and 
all injury, loss, damage or liability (or any claims in respect of the foregoing), costs or expenses 
(including reasonable attorneys ’ fees and court costs) arising directly from the actions or failure 
to act of Landlord or its employees or agents, or Landlord’s breach of any provision of this 
Agreement, except to the extent attributable to the negligent or intentional act or omission of 
Tenant, its employees, agents, or independent contractors. 
 (c) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement, Tenant and Landlord each 
waive any claims that each may have against the other with respect to consequential, incidental, 
or special damages. 
 Language from Carrier 5, one consolidated paragraph 
 12. Indemniﬁ cation. Each Party shall indemnify and hold the other harmless against any 
claim of liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising 
out of the use and occupancy of the Premises or the Property by the Party, its servants or 
agents, excepting, however, such claims or damages as may be due to or caused by the acts or 
omissions of the other Party, or its servants or agents. 
 Language from Carrier 1, one consolidated paragraph 
 14. Liability and Indemnity. Landlord and Tenant shall each indemnify, defend, and hold the 
other harmless from and against all claims, losses, liabilities, damages, costs, and expenses 
(including reasonable attorneys ’ and consultants ’ fees, costs, and expenses) (collectively 
 “ Losses ” ) arising from the indemnifying party’s breach of any term or condition of this 
Agreement or from the negligence or willful misconduct of the indemnifying party’s agents, 
employees, or contractors in or about the Property. The duties described in this Paragraph 
14 shall apply as of the Effective Date of this Agreement and survive the termination of this 
Agreement. 
 19.17   Hazardous Substances or Material 
 The Lessee should not introduce any uncontained hazardous substances to the property. If he does, you 
must be indemniﬁ ed. What happens if they spill gasoline or diesel fuel (used to power a generator)? It 

384 Chapter 19
 From public radio FM as Tenant lease 
 9. Hazardous Substances. 
 LESSEE agrees that it will not use, generate, store, or dispose of any hazardous materials on, 
under, about or within the Property in violation of any law or regulation. LESSOR represents, 
warrants, and agrees (a) that neither LESSOR nor, to LESSOR’s knowledge, any third party has 
used, generated, stored, or disposed of, or permitted the use, generation, storage, or disposal 
of any hazardous material on, under, about, or within the Property in violation of any law or 
regulation, and (b) that LESSOR will not, and will not permit any third party to, use, generate, 
store, or dispose of any hazardous material on, under, about, or within the Property in violation 
of any law or regulation. 
 19.18  Underground Storage Tank 
 Some leases require the Landlord to certify that there is no underground storage tank on the premises. 
This is a wholly rational request. Be sure to ﬁ nd out the answer before signing the lease. If there is one, 
there are two answers: indemniﬁ cation or removal. My advice? Remove it before it gets even costlier. 
 19.19  Insurance 
 19.19.1  General Liability 
 While $1 million to $2.5 million of commercial general liability (CGL) coverage seems reasonable 
today, it should not only be  reviewed periodically but also  increased as necessary in light of current 
conditions, especially if the lease is for 25 to 40 years! Should the parties disagree on the type, amount, 
and coverage of insurance, it should all be subject to mandatory arbitration. 
 Suggested language 
 The limits amount shall be reviewed at least at the start of each renewal term, and sooner 
if appropriate, and thereupon increased as appropriate, to reﬂ ect then existing comparable 
general liability risks and exposures. 
 From a prominent national tower company 
 Landlord/Licensor reserves the right, from time to time, to increase the required liability limits of 
Tenant described above, in accordance with then-current customary insurance requirements in 
the tower industry nationally. 
should be the responsibility of party that spills. Any environmental indemniﬁ cation clause should be 
mutual.

Lease Issues 385
 Suggested language combining elements of the above two 
  Landlord/Licensor reserves the right, from time to time, to increase the required liability limits 
of Tenant described above, to appropriately reﬂ ect then existing general liability risks and 
exposures. 
 Version Carrier 1 has accepted 
 (v) Review of Limits. Landlord reserves the right, from time to time, to increase the required 
liability limits of Tenant described above, in accordance with then-current customary insurance 
requirements in the tower industry nationally. 
 Example where Carrier 1 was willing to specify a new rate after a while, but would not go 
 “ open-ended ” 
 12. Insurance. Tenant, at Tenant’s sole cost and expense, shall procure and maintain on the 
Premises and on the Tenant Facilities, bodily injury and property damage insurance with 
a combined single limit of at least Two Million and 00/100 Dollars ($2,000,000.00) per 
occurrence provided; however, the Landlord may, during the Term hereof, by written notice 
given to Tenant, increase the amount of insurance coverage required to be maintained 
hereunder to Five Million and 00/100 Dollars ($5,000,000.00), which amount may be 
maintained under an umbrella policy. Such insurance shall insure, on an occurrence basis, 
against liability of Tenant, its employees and agents arising out of or in connection with Tenant’s 
use of the Premises, all as provided for herein. Landlord, at Landlord’s sole cost and expense, 
shall procure and maintain on the Property, bodily injury and property damage insurance 
with a combined single limit of at least One Million and 00/100 Dollars ($1,000,000.00) 
per occurrence, plus an additional One Million and 00/100 Dollars ($1,000,000.00), which 
amount may be maintained under an umbrella policy, provided, however, if Landlord shall 
give notice increasing the amount of insurance Tenant is required to maintain hereunder, 
Landlord’s total insurance obligation shall be increased to Five Million and 00/100 Dollars 
($5,000,000.00), which amount may be maintained under a combination of bodily injury 
and property damage coverage plus an umbrella policy. Such insurance shall insure, on an 
occurrence basis, against liability of Landlord, its employees and agents arising out of or in 
connection with Landlord’s use, occupancy and maintenance of the Property. Each party shall 
be named as an additional insured on the other’s policy. Each party shall provide to the other 
a certiﬁ cate of insurance evidencing the coverage required by this paragraph within thirty (30) 
days of the Commencement Date. 
 Version Carrier 3 has accepted 
 11(a) Tenant and Landlord each will maintain Commercial General Liability Insurance in 
amounts of One Million and no/100 Dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and Two Million 
and no/100 Dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate. Each party may satisfy this requirement by 
obtaining the appropriate endorsement to any master policy of liability insurance such party 

386 Chapter 19
 19.19.2  Other Insurance Requirements 
 So you won’t be surprised, here are some other typical insurance clauses: 
 19.20   Default and Right to Cure 
 The opportunity to cure a default, after notice of the default, is normal. However, the clause should be 
bilateral or mutual, not unilateral. Thus, for example, if the road to the site is blocked, the Landlord 
should have some time to unblock the road before the lease is cancelled. In any event, however, 
whatever cure period is chosen should not apply to interference. 
 From public radio FM as lessor/tower owner 
 12.2. Property Insurance. 
 LESSEE shall maintain, at LESSEE’s expense, insurance against loss or damages to LESSEE’s 
equipment, including, without limitation, loss or damage from ﬁ re, vandalism, malicious 
mischief, and acts of God. 
 12.3. Worker’s Compensation Insurance. 
   Throughout the term of this AGREEMENT, LESSEE shall maintain worker’s compensation 
insurance for its employees who work at the Property and shall require worker’s compensation 
certiﬁ cates from any contractor or agent hired to construct or install its equipment at the 
Property. 
 12.4. Certiﬁ cates of Insurance. 
 Each insurance policy required under this AGREEMENT will provide minimum limits of One 
Million Dollars ($1,000,000) per personal injury or death. LESSEE shall name LESSOR as 
additional insured under each policy. Said insurance may be in the form of general coverage 
or ﬂ oating policies covering these and other property. Upon execution of this AGREEMENT, 
LESSEE shall furnish to LESSOR certiﬁ cates of insurance for each of the insurance policies 
required by this section. Such insurance shall be obtained from insurance companies acceptable 
to LESSOR and authorized to do business in State. Each such certiﬁ cate shall provide that the 
insurance indicated therein shall not be cancelled or changed without at least thirty (30) days ’ 
prior written notice to the additional insureds. 
 Version Carrier 4 has accepted 
 (v) Review of Limits. Landlord reserves the right, from time to time, to increase the required 
liability limits of Tenant described above, in accordance with then-current customary insurance 
requirements in the tower industry nationally. 
may maintain. Landlord reserves the right, from time to time, to increase the required liability 
limits of Tenant described above, in accordance with then-current customary insurance 
requirements in the tower industry nationally. 

Lease Issues 387
 From a Carrier 3 lease 
 9. Default and Right to Cure. 
 (a) Generally 
 Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary and without waiving any other 
rights granted to it at law or in equity, each party shall have the right, but not the obligation, to 
terminate this Lease on written notice pursuant to Section 12 hereof, to take effect immediately, 
if the other party fails to perform any covenant or commits a material breach of this Lease and 
fails to diligently pursue a cure thereof to its completion after thirty (30) days ’ written notice 
specifying such failure of performance or default. 
 (b) Rent 
 As to rent due to Landlord, the opportunity to cure a default shall be thirty (30) days. 
 (c) Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) 
 As to Radio Frequency Interference, see paragraph 6(b). 
 Here’s a real-life example of splitting up default and cure into categories. 
 19.21  Notices 
 Using the U.S. Postal Service or recognized overnight carrier (even if not overnight) should be okay. 
Also, this clause should require a copy to your attorney or renting agent, or to whomever else you 
designate. This way you have less chance of missing an important notice. 
Tricks: A default on the payment of rent should be cured within 30 days after notice. Other forms of 
default, whether by Landlord or Tenant, should have the same number of days to cure (usually 60 or 
90 days). But, the number of days should be equal for each party. As to RFI, refer to the RFI clause, so 
that the general default clause does not apply. 
 Watch out for things that are hard to cure promptly. For example, a problem on a mountaintop in the 
dead of winter, occurring on December 15, might take more than 90 days to cure. If the Tenant can 
cure the problem at Landlord’s expense, the  “ reasonable ” cost of curing in the dead of winter could be 
very high (involving helicopters and such). 
 The following is usually acceptable:
 Suggested language 
  .  .  . or by recognized overnight carrier with a comparable acknowledgement of receipt 
 If the non-performance is of such a character as to require more than ninety days to cure, then 
Landlord’s (or Tenant’s) failure to use reasonable diligence in curing such nonperformance 
during such longer period shall be an event of default. 

388 Chapter 19
 .  .  . or to such other address as may be subsequently designated in writing, notice of which 
change of address shall be given in the same manner. 
 Carrier 2 form 
 Notices. All notices, requests, demands, and communications hereunder will be given by First 
Class certiﬁ ed or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by a nationally recognized overnight 
courier, postage prepaid, to be effective when properly sent and received, refused, or returned 
undelivered. Notices will be addressed to the parties as follows. As to Tenant, c/o Carrier 2  , 
Attn: Network Real Estate Administration Re: Cell Site # ME1234, Cell Site Name SST Sabattus, 
Address, State Zip, with a copy to Carrier 2, Attn: Legal Department, Address, State Zip, Re: 
Cell Site # ME1234, Cell Site Name SST Sabattus, PTLDME 1234; and as to Landlord, Strong 
Signals, 6 Willarch Road, Lincoln, MA 01773. Either party hereto may change the place for the 
giving of notice to it by thirty (30) days ’ prior written notice to the other as provided herein. 
 This paragraph should also specify that you can change the addresses to which notice shall be sent:
 19.22   Quiet Enjoyment, Title, and Authority 
 A paragraph dealing with such matters is not the right place (within a lease) for a Tenant to try to sneak 
in exclusivity for communications, but one supposes that, from the Lessee’s perspective, there is no 
harm in trying. I mention this only because I’ve seen a Tenant try to slip into the paragraph on quiet 
enjoyment an exclusivity for communications uses. If you are the tower owner, you’d never want to 
give a Tenant exclusivity for communications, radio broadcasting, or any such thing. 
 19.22.1  Fee Simple 
 Be careful, the Landlord may be a Tenant itself, unable to warrant that it owns the property in fee simple. 
 Carrier 1 lease, with suggested modiﬁ cation 
 16. Warranty of Title and Quiet Enjoyment. Landlord warrants that: (i) Landlord has  such interest 
in the Property as is evidenced in the Prime Lease, see Exhibit A, and has rights of access as therein described, 
and Landlord’s leasehold interest is free and clear of all liens, encumbrances, and restrictions except 
those of record as of the Effective Date; and (ii) Landlord covenants and agrees with Tenant 
that Tenant may peacefully and quietly enjoy the Premises, provided that Tenant is not in 
default hereunder after notice and expiration of all cure periods. 
 Carrier 1 (as accepted) 
 (iii) Quiet Enjoyment. The Landlord covenants and agrees with the Tenant that, so long as 
the Tenant keeps and performs all of the covenants and conditions required of the Tenant 
under this Lease Agreement to be performed and kept, then the Tenant shall have quiet and 
undisturbed and continued possession of the Premises, free from any interference by Landlord 
or any claim against the Landlord and all persons claiming under, by or through the Landlord. 

Lease Issues 389
 From a Carrier 2 lease 
 (iii) As long as Tenant is not in default then Landlord grants to Tenant sole (except as 
to Premises which are non-exclusive), actual, quiet, and peaceful use, enjoyment, and 
possession of the Premises .   .  . 
 [Note: Tenant is not entitled to sole possession of the non-exclusive accessway or tower legs 
where coax rises to the antennas.] 
 From a Carrier 7 lease 
 Landlord covenants that at all times during the term of this Lease, Tenant’s quiet enjoyment 
of the Premises or any part thereof shall not be disturbed as long as Tenant is not in default 
beyond any applicable grace or cure period. 
 19.23  Termination 
 See also Section 19.4, Term. 
 19.23.1  Condition of Property on Surrender/Removal of Equipment 
 Where the carrier (Tenant) constructed the tower on land you own, you must consider what should 
happen when the lease comes to an end. Normally, the only real question is who gets the tower. The 
best idea for the landowner: Landowner’s Choice. A removal bond is nice after the tower is old and 
may be unsafe, but generally not required, as there is an active market in used towers. Separately, if 
the lease calls for the return of the land to the condition before the letting, do you really want the road 
removed if it is against your interest? On the other hand, you might absolutely want the crumbling 
blockhouse or concrete equipment housing removed. 
 Here’s a hint: Carrier 2 will remove foundations for the tower and guy anchors, down to two feet below 
ground (maybe four feet), but not all of it. 
 On the other hand, you probably do want any space in an equipment shed you own restored to 
marketable condition (i.e., ready to rent). 
 Here’s some wording that is even-handed.
 From a public radio FM as Tenant lease 
 10. Removal of Equipment. 
 LESSEE shall be solely responsible for removal of all its antennas, equipment, ﬁ ttings, cables, 
and every article of LESSEE’s property from LESSOR’s facilities, Building, telephone poles, and 
Property upon termination or expiration of this AGREEMENT. Said removal shall occur within a 
reasonable time not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date of termination or expiration. Title 
to any property not removed within thirty (30) days of termination or expiration shall vest in 

390 Chapter 19
  From public radio FM as Tenant lease 
 Whenever action, consent, or approval of either party is required, that party shall not 
unreasonably withhold or delay such consent or approval. 
 We now enter that portion of a lease frequently entitled  “ Miscellaneous. ” If you are not a close reader, 
sometimes mischief can be done in these sections. Nonetheless, here are some typical issues. 
 19.24   Consent 
 Everyone deserves an  “ original. ” Don’t be surprised if you eventually sign up to four  “ originals. ” 
LESSOR unless LESSEE has obtained, prior to expiration of such period, written consent from 
LESSOR for an extension of time within which to remove such equipment. Subject to the terms 
of Paragraph 10, LESSEE shall assume responsibility for the cost and expense of restoring the 
Property to a marketable condition, reasonable wear and tear excepted. 
  From public radio FM as Tenant lease 
 From and after the date of this AGREEMENT, the parties hereto agree to promptly execute, 
acknowledge, and deliver, or cause to be executed, acknowledged, and delivered, all such 
instruments or documents and to take all actions pursuant to the provisions hereof as may 
reasonably be necessary or proper in order to carry out the intent of both parties of this 
AGREEMENT. 
 19.25   Execution 
 From public radio FM as Tenant lease
 This AGREEMENT has been signed in multiple copies, each of which shall stand as an original. 
Caution: No one should give the other side a power of attorney. That’s too dangerous. But, a party 
should have the comfort of knowing that the other side can’t ask for money to do what they ought to be 
doing anyway. 
 19.26   Counterparts 

Lease Issues 391
  From public radio FM as Tenant lease 
 The terms, conditions, covenants, and provisions of this AGREEMENT shall be deemed to 
be severable. If any clause or provisions herein contained shall be adjudged to be invalid or 
unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction or by operation of any applicable law, it 
shall not affect the validity of any other clause or provision herein, but such other clauses or 
provisions shall remain in full force and effect. 
 19.27  Severability 
 This language, known as a  “ severability clause, ” is totally ordinary. 
 19.28  Captions 
  From public radio FM as Tenant lease 
 No caption or heading shall be used to have meaning separately or in addition to the terms 
of this AGREEMENT. 
 This Lease shall be construed in accordance with the laws of the state in which the Property 
is located, without regard to the conﬂ icts of law principles of such state. 
  From public radio FM as Tenant lease 
 This AGREEMENT shall be governed by the laws of the State of [Name of State]. 
 This is another ordinary clause, designed to prevent mischief in captions that was not intended. Only 
the words of the text control. 
 19.29  Applicable Law or Choice of Law 
 It almost doesn’t matter what law is chosen to apply, but the routine in the industry is that the law of 
the state in which the antenna-support structure is located should apply. Specifying which state’s law 
applies is always a good idea. National carriers, not wishing to take a chance that a busy paralegal 
might forget to enter the correct state in a standard lease, typically use language like this:

392 Chapter 19
  From public radio FM as Tenant lease 
 Any and all claims arising hereunder shall be subject exclusively to binding arbitration. Any 
demand for arbitration hereunder shall be presented to an arbitrator mutually selected by the 
parties, which arbitrator shall be instructed to endeavor to deliver, within 60 days thereafter, 
a ﬁ nal, binding, and conclusive decision upon each of the parties. In the event that the parties 
cannot agree on the selection of an arbitrator within 15 days after service of a written demand 
for arbitration, either party may request the American Arbitration Association to appoint 
an arbitrator, and such appointment shall be ﬁ nal, binding, and conclusive on the parties. 
Promptly after acceptance of its appointment as arbitrator, the arbitrator shall determine the 
disputed issues and shall render a written report to the parties. Unless otherwise agreed by 
the parties in writing, the arbitration shall be conducted in [the state capital]. The arbitrator’s 
decision shall be ﬁ nal, binding, and conclusive on all parties. The parties shall cooperate with 
each other and each other’s representatives and with the arbitrator in order that any and all 
matters in dispute shall be resolved as soon as practicable. The fees, costs, and expenses of such 
arbitrator incurred in connection therewith shall be shared equally between the parties unless 
ordered otherwise by the arbitrator. Nothing herein shall bar either party from applying to a 
court of competent jurisdiction within the State of [name of State] to obtain solely injunctive 
relief pending arbitration, or to enforce an arbitration award. 
 Acknowledgement of Arbitration 
 Each party acknowledges that this AGREEMENT contains an AGREEMENT to arbitrate. After 
signing this AGREEMENT each party understands that it will not be able to bring a lawsuit 
concerning any dispute that may arise which is covered by the Arbitration Agreement, unless it 
involves a question of constitutional or civil rights. Instead, the parties agree to submit any such 
dispute to an impartial board, as herein deﬁ ned. 
 19.30   Arbitration 
 You might wish to allow the use of neutral arbitrators other than the AAA (American Arbitration 
Association) , but, if you want arbitration, you’ll still want to specify the city in which the arbitration 
will be heard. Pick a place where it is easy for the arbitrator to show up and easy for you to get there. 
That may be the state capital (Austin) or a populous city (Dallas or Houston). 
 19.31   Subordination, Non-Disturbance, and Attornment 
Agreement (SNDAA) 
 19.31.1  Agree to It 
 The Landlord must grant this in order for the Lessee to get a bank loan to ﬁ nance the construction, but 
subordination is not the same thing as giving up all claims. Suppose that the company stops making 
rent payments. Why shouldn’t the Landlord have the right to take a lien on the equipment on site? But, 
there is another way to prevent the equipment from leaving the site. 

Lease Issues 393
 From Carrier 4 agreement 
 Furthermore, all improvements constructed or installed by SUBLESSEE shall be removable by 
SUBLESSEE at the expiration or earlier termination of this Agreement, provided SUBLESSEE 
shall not at such time be in default under any covenant or agreement contained in this 
Agreement. SUBLESSEE, upon termination of this Agreement, shall, within ninety (90) days, 
remove all improvements, ﬁ xtures, and personal property constructed or installed on the 
Premises by SUBLESSEE and restore the Premises to substantially the same condition as 
received, reasonable wear and tear and damage by insured casualty excepted. 
 It is hard for a representative of a Tenant to say to you, with a straight face:  “ We’re leaving. We haven’t 
repaired the damage we did or paid the rent we owe, but we’re taking everything away anyway. ” The 
Landlord is entitled to some way, other than a lawsuit, to force the Tenant to do the right thing. 
 19.31.2  Make it an Exhibit 
 A sample SNDAA, even though it has a lot of blanks (you don’t yet know the name of the bank that 
will one day be involved, for example) should appear as an Exhibit, and the lease should require that 
the SNDAA be  “ in form substantially similar to ” it. 
 19.31.3  Pay to Review 
 Who pays for counsel to review the agreements to ensure that these documents, for the beneﬁ t of the 
Tenant (and not the Landlord), do not reduce the Landlord’s rights? Tenant should. In today’s dollars, 
$250 to $500 should cover it. A review fee representing one to two hours of time (the combined time 
necessary for review by LESSOR and counsel for LESSOR), currently $250 to $500, may be required. 
 19.31.4  When Required? 
 Carrier 2 Lease 
 10. Warranties. 
 .  .  . 
 (b)(v) If the Property is or becomes encumbered by a deed to secure a debt, mortgage, or other 
security interest, Landlord will provide promptly to Tenant a mutually agreeable Subordination, 
Non-Disturbance, and Attornment Agreement. 
 (b)(v) If the Property is or becomes encumbered by a deed to secure a debt, mortgage, or other 
security interest,  upon Tenant’s written request to Landlord’s Notice address, Landlord will provide 
promptly to Tenant a mutually agreeable Subordination, Non-Disturbance, and Attornment 
Agreement (SNDAA),  in form substantially similar to Exhibit 3.
 Change to:

394 Chapter 19
 Suggestion 
 Taxes. Upon presentation of sufﬁ cient and proper documentation, Tenant will pay all 
personal property or sales taxes assessed on, or any portion of, such taxes attributable to 
the Communications Facility [LESSEE’s Communications Equipment]. Upon presentation of 
sufﬁ cient and proper documentation, Tenant shall also reimburse Landlord for any increases, of 
any kind, in taxes or fees which are assessed as a direct result of Tenant’s improvements to the 
Premises. Tenant shall have the right to contest all taxes, assessments, charges, and impositions, 
and Landlord agrees to join in such contest, if required by law, and to permit Tenant to proceed 
with the contest in Landlord’s name, provided that the expense of the contest is borne by Tenant. 
 From Carrier 5 
 LESSOR shall pay all real property taxes it is obligated to pay on LESSOR’s Property. Upon 
presentation of sufﬁ cient and proper documentation, LESSEE will pay all personal property or 
 From the perspective of the Landlord, this concept was improved even more in a later lease:
 In the event the Property is encumbered by a mortgage or deed of trust, Landlord agrees,  upon
request of Tenant, to obtain and furnish to Tenant a non-disturbance and attornment agreement 
for each such mortgage or deed of trust, in a form reasonably acceptable to Tenant.  The cost for 
Landlord to review such an agreement, up to $250 (which cost maximum shall increase at the same rate of 
annual increase as the rent), shall be at the expense of Tenant.
 That is about as good a deal as you could ever get from a Tenant, but it is fair. You don’t want to wipe 
out a year’s proﬁ ts because the Tenant is changing something, something that requires a review by 
Landlord’s counsel. Some national tower companies charge $1,000 for a review, or something like  “ the 
ordinary and necessary expense of legal review. ” 
 19.32   Taxes 
   The landowner should not pay any increase in real estate or personal property taxes due to the presence 
of the antenna-support structure, antennas, equipment shed, or equipment. Furthermore, it wouldn’t 
hurt to make it plain that any sales taxes due as a result of the operations on the property are the 
responsibility of the Tenant(s). When the Tenant explains that there is no such thing as a sales tax on 
communications, the Landlord should reply: “ Yes, but perhaps what I should really say is  ‘ not yet. ’ ”
Remember, with modern computerization, every text message, every call (even if only a momentary 
use of a cell from a passing vehicle) creates a record, and your friendly lawmakers, in search of 
revenue, are always looking for things to tax. Keep it quiet, please, but, as a Landlord, it is something 
you need to think about. 

Lease Issues 395
 From Carrier 1 
 F. Taxes. Landlord shall pay for any assessments against the Premises except that Tenant 
shall pay to Landlord the Proportionate Share of Tax, providing that the Proportionate Share of 
Tax is demonstrated to Tenant’s reasonable satisfaction to be based on (i) the actual value of 
the Communications Facility, and/or (ii) Tenant’s activities at the site. The Proportionate 
Share of Tax shall be paid within thirty (30) days of Landlord’s written notice, or written 
notice by the taxing authority to Tenant, of such Proportionate Share of Tax, whichever is 
later. 
sales taxes assessed on, or any portion of, such taxes attributable to, LESSEE’s Communications 
Equipment. Upon presentation of sufﬁ cient and proper documentation, LESSEE shall also 
reimburse LESSOR for any increases, of any kind, in taxes or fees which are assessed as a direct 
result of LESSEE’s improvements to the Premises. LESSEE shall have the right to contest all 
taxes, assessments, charges, and impositions, and LESSOR agrees to join in such contest, if 
required by law, and to permit LESSEE to proceed with the contest in LESSOR’s name, provided 
that the expense of the contest is borne by LESSEE. 
 Next time, it ought to be  “ whichever notice is sooner. ” The Landlord should not be required to pay the 
Tenant’s taxes and then wait even longer for payment, just because the town is slow in billing.  
 From Carrier 3 
 10. Taxes. 
 Landlord shall pay when due all real property taxes for the Property, including the Premises. In 
the event that Landlord fails to pay any such real property taxes or other fees and assessments, 
Tenant shall have the right, but not the obligation, to pay such owed amounts and deduct them 
from Rent amounts due under this Lease. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Tenant shall pay any 
personal property tax, real property tax or any other tax (including, but not limited to, a sales or 
use tax) or fee which is directly attributable to the presence or installation of Tenant’s Antenna 
Facilities, only for so long as this Lease remains in effect. If Landlord receives notice of any 
personal property or real property tax assessment against Landlord, which may affect Tenant 
and is directly attributable to Tenant’s installation, Landlord shall provide timely notice of the 
assessment to Tenant sufﬁ cient to allow Tenant to consent to or challenge such assessment, 
whether in a Court, administrative proceeding, or other venue, on behalf of Landlord and/or 
Tenant. Further, Landlord shall provide to Tenant any and all documentation associated with 
the assessment and shall execute any and all documents reasonably necessary to effectuate the 
intent of this Section 10. In the event new real property taxes are assessed against Landlord or 
Tenant for the Premises or the Property (the parties acknowledge that there are present real 
property taxes), Tenant shall have the right, but not the obligation, to terminate this Lease 
without further liability after thirty (30) days ’ written notice to Landlord, provided Tenant pays 
any real property taxes assessed as provided herein. 

396 Chapter 19
  From public radio FM lease 
 With LESSOR’s prior review and written approval of all applications, LESSEE shall, at its own 
expense, be solely responsible for obtaining and maintaining all local, state, and federal permits 
and licenses required for its operations under this AGREEMENT. LESSEE shall pay a fee to 
cover LESSOR’s legal and administrative expenses for such review in the amount of $250 per 
application, if application is necessary. 
 19.33   Permits; Costs 
 19.34  Emergency Power 
 If the Lessee installs a 25- or 50-KW generator, and it is no skin off his nose, wouldn’t it be a nice 
thought to let the Lessor have 5 KW (so long as the wiring is at Lessor’s expense) to keep the alarm 
system at the farmhouse running in an emergency? The author hasn’t seen such a clause, and doesn’t 
know if it might be accepted, but there is no harm in asking. 
 19.35   Right of First Refusal 
 Even the quickest right of ﬁ rst refusal inserts delays of 15 to 45 days. This is a lease. If the Lessee 
wants a right of ﬁ rst refusal, let him pay for it separately. Ask to have it removed. The Lessee should 
agree to that. If it is a deal breaker, here’s a compromise: If the Lessee is concerned about a sale within 
the ﬁ rst few years, then let it expire in three to ﬁ ve years or so.
 19.36   Description of Equipment 
 The actual description of the equipment to be installed is normally included in an exhibit, and not the 
text of the lease.
 Exhibit A. Description of Equipment and  “As Built ”
 The type, number, mounting positions, and locations of antennas and transmission lines are 
illustrative only. The actual types, numbers, mounting positions, and locations may vary from 
what is shown above. Tenant is authorized to install and maintain the above equipment, for 
which an “ as built ” drawing will be provided within 90 days of the completion of Tenant’s 
construction, which “ as built ” drawing will thereafter be replaced and kept current as 
necessary, should Tenant’s equipment on the Tower change. Cost for such work shall be borne 
by the Tenant. No change or modiﬁ cation of equipment on the tower, as shown on the  “ as 
built ” drawings, may be made without written consent of Landlord, such consent not to be 
unreasonably withheld or delayed beyond thirty (30) days of receipt by Landlord of notice of 
such proposed change or modiﬁ cation. 

Lease Issues 397
 19.37  Wireless Tower Space Lease Tips 
 Now, considering things broadly and explaining why there is so much fussing above, as the Landlord 
it is important to watch out for the following in leases provided by the carriers. A tip of the hat to site 
acquisition specialist Brian Allen, of Worcester, MA, for these hard-hitting concepts. 
 19.37.1  Height Creep 
 Make sure that the lease speciﬁ es how many antennas, what size and model number, and at what height 
the center-line of the antennas will be. Sometimes the carrier will try to hang an antenna with the 
bottom of the antenna at the height requested, picking up a few feet and making your life difﬁ cult.  
 19.37.2  Changes 
 Make sure that the lease requires the Tenant to get written consent for any alterations to the installation. 
It is often good to have  “ as built ” drawings included subsequently in the lease, then, any time the tenant 
changes anything, the Landlord’s permission will be required. This way if you think they have done 
something without permission, you can get someone to climb up and take digital photos, and then you 
can hit them up for a default of the lease. This concept can also prove useful if they try to get a permit 
for something, or fail to get a permit for something, and get you in trouble with the town. 
 19.37.3  Coax 
 Make sure to limit the number and size of the coax cables. Many times the lease will state  “ and any 
necessary wires or attachments. ” This gives the carrier the ability to share antennas on multiple systems 
(e.g., use 6 antennas and 12 lines and use  “ X-pols ” or dual-pole antennas, which are simply two 
antennas in the same shell). Sometimes a carrier will add little boxes next to the antennas that are the 
size of a loaf of bread to accomplish the same goal. As Landlord, you want to avoid letting them do 
this. Typically, carriers want to lease for 1-5/8  cables, as these are good for runs of up to 250  from 
antenna to the ground equipment. For shorter runs, under 175  or so, they can get away with 7/8 
 .
 19.37.4  Start Date for Payments 
 Make sure that you have a date certain for the start of payments. At least one national carrier in 
particular likes to get leases, then not do the construction for a while. You can think of it as a desire to 
 “ bank ” sites. It is normal to have someone pay $1,000 per year, or, if you have real negotiating power, 
a small monthly ($200 – 500/month?) payment until the commencement or completion of construction, 
then the rent would go to market rent (the ultimate rent shown in the lease).  
 19.37.5  Shelter Size 
 For ground space, a normal prefab shelter is in the neighborhood of 12   W    24   L    10   H. If space 
is tight, anything bigger should pay more rent. One national carrier uses outdoor equipment (no 
equipment shed required) and tries to get a small space for short money. However, in most instances, 

398 Chapter 19
space on the ground is not very relevant. What you are really renting is space in the air! Just rent them 
12    24  and charge them the same as everyone else. 
 19.37.6  Deals 
 When building a new tower, in the old days the carriers would build the tower, sell it to you for $1, and 
then rent space from you. You don’t see that anymore. Another deal might be for the carrier to own 
the tower for a certain period of time and lease the land from you. After say 20 years (when the tower 
is old and needs repair), the carrier might want to give you the tower and any buildings they built, and 
then you would lease space to them. Another option is for the carrier to build the tower for their needs 
and then give you the tower in exchange for a rent reduction over a period of time (e.g., the tower costs 
$100k to build, market rent is $2000/month, the carrier pays the $100k up front, and they only pay 
$1000/month for the ﬁ rst 100 months). If they decide not to fulﬁ ll the lease, you keep the tower. This 
encourages them to stay there. 
 19.37.7  Termination 
 Typically, the lease will allow the carrier to leave with 3 months ’ notice and 3 months ’ rent as 
damages. Sometimes they will accept a deal that requires the carrier to pay the remainder of a 5-year 
term to leave, but this is rare today. The carriers usually want 20 years ’ worth of term set up as four 
5-year terms. 
 19.37.8  Additional Loads 
 Make sure it states that the carriers are required to make any structural upgrades to the tower that are 
necessary as a result of their additional loads. Reinforcing a tower to accommodate additional load can 
be very expensive. 
 19.37.9  Removal Bond 
 Some people would say that if the carrier builds a tower they own on your land, make sure you get a 
removal bond. You never know who is going into bankruptcy! 
 19.37.10  Default or Bankruptcy 
 You’d like to make sure that you are able to remove and store their equipment if they default or go 
into bankruptcy. That way you can lease the space they occupied. Just be aware that, in the event of 
bankruptcy, virtually all bets are off, and the bankruptcy court is authorized to change the terms 
of the lease. 
 19.38   Conclusion 
 Leases can be very detailed. Just because a lease is offered to you in 9-point type on two pages is 
no reason to sign it “ as is. ” And, just because the site acquisition specialist tells you that this is the 
 “ standard form lease, ” that’s no reason not to take it to your lawyer. 

399
 Drafting or Redrafting a Bylaw, 
or State Statute 
 Before we get going, please understand that the words  ordinance and  bylaw (sometimes spelled  by-law ) 
are interchangeable. In addition, in case you missed it in your seventh-grade civics class, when there 
is a conﬂ ict between the U.S. Constitution and a federal statute, the Constitution wins. When there is 
a conﬂ ict between a federal statute and a federal regulation, the federal statute wins. When there is a 
conﬂ ict between a federal statute and a state law (or statute), the federal statute wins. When there is a 
conﬂ ict between a state law and a city or town bylaw, state law wins. But, the most common problem 
you will run into is when a bylaw conﬂ icts with a federal statute or regulation. If you are an engineer, 
you might prefer  Table 20.1 , which lists authority and type of regulation in descending order of power. 
 The Personal Communications Industry Association (PCIA) has created a suggested ordinance to 
accommodate the needs of cellular carriers and other commercial mobile radio services. As a sign of 
its importance, the PCIA Model Siting Ordinance is available as a click-through from the home page 
of their website ( http://www.pcia.com/ ). There you will also ﬁ nd what they call  “ PCIA Model Siting 
Legislation. ” In 2008, the South Dakota Public Utilities Commission recommended the PCIA Model 
Zoning Ordinance to cities and counties statewide, recognizing it as an example of balanced local 
regulation that squares the need for wireless infrastructure with local control of facilities placement and 
siting (Saperstein, M., Model zoning ordinance, Above Ground Level , November, 2008, p. 10). 
 “ Homegrown versions ” vary widely, and some are more artfully drafted than others. It is not unusual to 
see a homegrown ordinance modiﬁ ed after a situation arises that was not contemplated by the drafters 
of the original ordinance. For example, when the relevant ordinance in Wolfeboro, NH, was originally 
drafted, it really did not contemplate the possibility that there were existing towers in town, nor did 
it contemplate the need to replace an existing tower to accommodate co-location (something most 
towns wish to encourage, and they did, too). As a result, an applicant with an existing 172-foot tower 
CHAPTER 20 
 Table 20.1 :  Regulations in Descending Order of Power 
 Authority
Name
 The Congress, signed by the President 
 Federal statute 
 Federal Agency (e.g., FCC, FAA) 
 Federal regulation 
 State legislature 
 State statute or law 
 City or town 
 Ordinance, bylaw 
 Board 
 Regulation 

400 Chapter 20
 in Wolfeboro was forced to ask for 22 waivers to replace it with a tower capable of holding multiple 
carriers. (He was successful, but it was painful.) 
 To help you out, this chapter includes several bylaw phrases with suggestions on how an ordinance 
could be changed for the better. Please remember that if your town is considering amending the present 
bylaw it is always better to participate in the process than not. 
 Participation means being there night after night as the ordinance is drafted. Do not rely on the Town 
Planner to represent your views. As the bylaw is changed  “ on the ﬂ y, ” the Planner may not understand 
your needs. Get the ordinance right, and the application process later will be greatly simpliﬁ ed. 
The PCIA invites contact with its Government Affairs Team at 703-739-0300, if you are aware of a 
jurisdiction considering a revision or adoption of a wireless facilities siting ordinance. 
 Once again, there is some duplication of material that has been presented in earlier chapters of this 
book. Believe me, the motive is not to increase the number of trees killed to print this book, but it 
seems like a good idea to keep arguments together here so that they make sense in context. 
 As you proceed, remember that everyone wants the beneﬁ ts of communications, but frequently many 
people don’t want to see the visible requirements of communications — antennas and their support 
structures.
 20.1   The Elements of a Bylaw 
 Obviously, it is impossible to review the thousands and thousands of bylaws from around the 
nation. But, by describing the common elements and reviewing a few, this chapter might offer you 
some help. 
 20.1.1  Does It Meet Federal Law Requirements? 
 Thanks to SBE General Counsel Chris Imlay for contributing much of the thinking in this section. 
 20.1.1.1  For Video Services 
 Does the proposal meet the Telecommunications Act (TCA) requirement of accommodation for 
video delivery service facilities? What is the exemption for satellite antennas? (The FCC preemption 
deﬁ nition is broad.) Is there an exemption for television broadcast reception and multichannel 
multipoint distribution service (MMDS) antennas (as the FCC regulations require)? If you are 
looking to at least get this kicked back to the drawing board, where you might have an opportunity 
for more input, tell them that the ordinance is void as preempted by the FCC’s Order of August 1996, 
implementing the TCA requirements for video delivery services. See Chapter 6 of this book and look 
for the discussion of the Over-the Air Reception Devices (OTARD) rule, 47 CFR  § 1.4000 ( http://www.
fcc.gov/mb/facts/otard.html ). 
 20.1.1.2  For Radiofrequency Interference (RFI) 
 Zoning bylaws (or any other local bylaws, such as nuisance bylaws) may not attempt to control 
radiofrequency interference (RFI). This subject area is completely preempted by federal statute, 
conﬁ rmed by several U.S. Circuit Courts of Appeals and FCC decisions. The statute reads:

Drafting or Redrafting a Bylaw, or State Statute 401
  47 USC  § 302a. Devices which interfere with radio reception 
 SUBCHAPTER III — SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO RADIO 
 … 
 (f)(2) A station that is licensed by the Commission pursuant to section 301 of this title in 
any radio service for the operation at issue shall not be subject to action by a State or local 
government under this subsection. 
 For an excellent discussion, and a wealth of cases, see  Southwestern Bell Wireless, Inc. v. Johnson 
County Board of County Commissioners , 199 F. 3d 1185 (10th Cir. 1999),  cert. denied , 530 U.S. 1204 
(2000) ( http://www.ca10.uscourts.gov/opinions/98/98-3264.pdf ). This was a Kansas case that held 
that allowing local zoning authorities to condition construction and use permits on any requirement to 
eliminate or remedy interference  “ stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the 
full purposes and objectives of Congress. ” The decision went on to say:  “ Congress intended federal 
regulation of [radiofrequency interference] issues to be so pervasive as to occupy the ﬁ eld. ” 
 A Vermont case offers another well-written and thorough discussion and states plainly:  “ We conclude 
that allowing local zoning authorities to condition construction and use permits on any requirement to 
eliminate or remedy RF interference  ‘ stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full 
purposes and objectives of Congress. ’ ”  Freeman v. Burlington Broadcasters, Inc ., 204 F. 3d 311 (2d Cir. 
2000) cert. denied , 531 U.S. 917 (2000) ( http://www.fcc.gov/ogc/documents/opinions/2000/97-9141.doc ). 
 For an FCC version of this type of holding, see  In the Matter of Petition of Cingular Wireless L.L.C. 
for a Declaratory Ruling that Provisions of the Anne Arundel County Zoning Ordinance are Preempted 
as Impermissible Regulation of Radio Frequency Interference Reserved Exclusively to the Federal 
Communications Commission , DA 03-2196 (released July 7, 2003) ( http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_
public/attachmatch/DA-03-2196A1.doc or *.pdf). 
 20.1.2  Does It Meet State Law Requirements? 
 20.1.2.1  Fees or Costs 
 In evaluating an existing or proposed zoning bylaw, consider also whether or not it may fail to meet 
the requirements of any state statute that limits the cost of a Special Permit. Allan L. Yackey, Esq., 
WB9PKM, of the Indiana Bar (Indianapolis), notes, for example, that an Indiana statute prohibits 
towns and cities from using licenses to generate income. See I.C. 36-1-3-8, which is entitled POWERS 
SPECIFICALLY WITHHELD and reads:
  Sec 8 (a) *** a unit does not have the following: *** 
 (5) The power to impose a license fee greater than that reasonably related to the administrative 
cost of exercising a regulatory power. 
 (6) The power to impose a service charge or user fee greater than that reasonably related to 
reasonable and just rates and charges for services. 

402 Chapter 20
 This has been rather effective in restraining costs of permits and licenses in Indiana, where they are rather 
conservative when it comes to government power. You may beneﬁ t from a similar statute in your state. 
 Even if you don’t have a similar statute, here are some additional ideas on how to deal with high fees 
or costs. Listed below are comments on the following question:
  My city will be raising the fee for a Permit for an antenna-support structure from  $ (a small 
dollar amount) to $ (a really big dollar amount). This is part of the city’s  “ fee for service ” or 
 “ cost recovery system ” program. Tower permits are grouped in with licensed day care, satellite 
dishes over 18 inches, and homes rented to 4 or more adults, all within a particular Special Use 
Permit Category. What do I do now? 
 Here are some answers, offering strategies for negotiating in good faith.
  1. A Different Category. Ask to be moved to a different Special Use Permit category. Why? 
Because the level of evaluation for a standard antenna-support structure is more like evaluating 
yet another telephone pole than it is like evaluating a proposal to install a major shopping 
center. 
2. Waiver for Standard Installations. Leave the price alone, but ask for a very modest fee or 
even a waiver “ upon submission by the applicant of manufacturer’s speciﬁ cations for installation 
and a showing that the Applicant can erect to those speciﬁ cations. ” 
3. Standard Installations, Standard Cost. As this is a  “ cost-recovery ” measure, argue that antenna 
installations have great commonalities, and that the staff is experienced in reviewing them. If 
it is a standard monopole or a communications tower with a survey and PE stamp, the review 
should take all of ﬁ ve minutes. The new proposed charge is unrelated to the cost. This would be 
especially true when merely adding an additional carrier to an existing pole or an STL dish to a 
tower. No review fee should be a percentage of the construction costs, as it ought to be hard to 
argue that review charges double when height goes from 300 to 600 feet. While cost recovery may 
be justiﬁ able, proﬁ t making is not. This idea was adopted by Brevard County, FL, where standard 
manufacturers ’ speciﬁ cations are on ﬁ le. Use one of those structures and the review is perfunctory. 
4. Waiver Below 150 Feet. If they don’t buy exemption by removal to another category or 
waiver within the same category, ask to insert a deﬁ nition of which antenna-support structures 
require such studies, which deﬁ nes them as:  “ antenna-support structures exceeding 150 feet in 
height. ” (You might compromise at 125 feet.) 
5. Waiver for Large Lots. Finally, if you are in a rural area, where ﬁ ve-acre lots are common, try 
to exempt antenna systems when they will be constructed on large lots, deﬁ ned as at least ﬁ ve 
acres (or even ten acres; in some states like Nevada, regulations change when a lot is larger than 
ten acres). An example of an exemption based on lot size is found in the exemption from certain 
land-use regulations for farms, where the farm exceeds ﬁ ve acres in size. Massachusetts General 
Laws, Chapter 61A, Section 3 ( http://www.mass.gov/legis/laws/mgl/61a-3.htm ).
6. Change the Effective Date. Try arguing that, while the goal may be laudable, as proposed it 
is presently illegal. Take for example the situation in which a cellular antenna system may only 
be installed at the dump (but that site will not allow coverage without signiﬁ cant gaps):  “ This 

Drafting or Redrafting a Bylaw, or State Statute 403
 section shall become effective at such time as Federal law shall no longer require that local 
zoning may not result in signiﬁ cant gaps on coverage. ” As another example,  “ This section shall 
become effective at such time as Federal law shall no longer require that AM broadcast antennas 
be of a certain minimum height. See 47 CFR  § 73.189. ” Here’s another approach:  “ This section 
shall become effective at such time as Federal law shall no longer contain the preemption 
relevant to the application, such as 47 CFR  § 97.15(b) (Amateur Radio), 47 CFR  § 1.4000 
(Satellite and TV Broadcast), 47 CFR  § 73.189 (AM Broadcast) , or 47 USC  § 332 (Commercial 
Mobile Radio Services). ” 
 Still here? Change categories, waive the fee, make the standard fee low, deﬁ ne it away, make large lots 
exempt, or change the effective date. 
 20.2   Speciﬁ c Issues 
 We now proceed to consider some very speciﬁ c issues in drafting. 
 20.2.1  Setback or Fall Zone 
 Are the setback limitations arbitrary and self-defeating? As an example, despite a concern for safety, 
no one can justify an extra six inches of setback for one foot of height limitation (a ratio of 1.5:1). 
Towers don’t jump if they fall. 
 If someone insists on inserting a 1:1 setback ratio, you might choose to agree to it (but see below for 
exceptions), provided that the counting begins at a reasonable height in feet (such as 36 feet or 100 
feet), the rooﬂ ine, or the ﬁ rst (second? uppermost?) guy point. Remember the negotiating concept that 
you can always accept the other side’s price, if you get to set the deﬁ nitions, terms, and conditions. 
 A restriction of one foot for each foot of height above a house or building bracket, or a set of guy 
wires or 36 feet, comes closer to being reasonable, though it may still lead to results even planners will 
concede are bad. See below for the discussion of narrow lots backing up to a forest. To give you an 
example, if the restriction was 1:1 above 36 feet,  Table 20.2  shows what that would mean. 
 Ask out loud why such impediments should apply to antenna-support structures when they do not apply 
to ﬂ ag poles, churches, or apartment buildings, and such a setback was never required of the town’s 
 Table 20.2 :  1:1 Setback Above 36 Feet 
 Distance from Structure to Lot 
Line (Feet) 
Maximum Tower Height 
(Feet)
 20 
 56 
 30 
 66 
 40 
 76 
 50 
 86 
 60 
 96 
 70 
 106 
 80 
 116 

404 Chapter 20
 police/ﬁ re tower in the center of town only 20 feet from the sidewalk? When proponents of a restrictive 
ordinance seek to hobble your opportunities, stand up and shout these words:  “ effective prohibition. ”
After all, that is not just a suggestion; it is a requirement of the federal statute or regulation. 
 If you’d like to make someone uncomfortable in a public forum, ask this question:  “ Why would you wish 
to force an antenna system into the most visible portion of a parcel? ”  Suggest alternatives that are better 
for you than those already “ on the table. ”  For example, if the proposed ordinance has a 1:1 setback: 
 1. 
 Make the point that the best place to  “ hide ” an antenna system may well be in the back corner, out 
 “ in the woods. ” 
 2. 
 If a concern is to avoid tall structures, note that if the applicant’s land slopes, such a setback bylaw 
forces operators to build  taller antenna structures. A location on the  uphill side of the lot could be 
shorter! See Figure 20.1 for an example. 
 3. 
 Make the point that these structures don’t fall the length of their height, and propose that the 
setback begin at 50 feet or more (see discussion elsewhere in this chapter). 
 4. 
 Redeﬁ ne the setback for this purpose, so it is not to the property line but to the nearest existing 
inhabited building. Be sure to try for all three tests:  “ existing, ”  “ inhabited, ” and  “ building. ” The 
building should be an existing building, so a spiteful neighbor cannot erect a new tool shed or 
garage, and thereby require the removal of the antenna system. It should be inhabited, to prevent 
How a Tree or Slope Screens a Tall Structure
180 Structure
(completely screened
by three trees plus
90 slope)
90 Structure
(completely screened
by three trees)
85 Tree
50 Tree
150 Screening
by 25 tree
25 Tree
30
Telephone
pole
θ  30
90 Structure
(mostly screened
by two trees)
150 Structure
(partially screened
by one tree)
Arctan p  h/d
h  height of structure
d  distance to structure
h/d  90/150  0.6
θ  30°
d  150
 Figure 20.1  Note how, if an applicant is forced to build a structure at the base of the slope, it may actually 
end up being a taller structure —but still be hidden by trees because of the slope.  

Drafting or Redrafting a Bylaw, or State Statute 405
 an existing tool shed or garage from holding up an otherwise worthy project just to theoretically 
protect a power lawnmower. (Insurance will protect the lawnmower.) And, it should be a building, 
as opposed to a structure, so a fence, basketball hoop, or cold frame cannot bar erection of an 
antenna-support structure. 
“Guywire setback” problem
20 rear
setback 
Trees
“Building envelope”
Most
visible
site
Trees
50 side
setback
or required
yard
Diagram shows that increasing setbacks forces antenna into most
visible site on a parcel. Flexibility is a better public policy.
Driveway
Street
50 side
setback
or required
yard
Building
Whether guyed or
self-supporting,
this location
behind a line of
trees is the
least visible site.
If 100
setback
required
for tower
Guy wires
Guyed tower
 Figure 20.2  As this illustration shows, the best place to  “ hide ” an antenna system may be in the back 
corner, out in the woods, rather than within the ratio-based or minimum footage boundaries speciﬁ ed in a 
local bylaw. 

406 Chapter 20
 Good public policy requires that the ordinance must include an  escape valve (without the requirement 
of a Variance) where a different placement would be in the best interest of the neighbors. Take the 
example of a string of half-acre lots along the street, where each lot is 100   200 feet. (But the 
example would be better if each lot were 50   400 feet.) Assume all lots back up to the town dump, a 
state highway, or a forest. Most people would argue that the spot to erect the structure where it would 
have the least aesthetic impact would be  “ way out back. ” Yet, a ratio-based ordinance would force the 
structure into a more visible place,  closer to the neighbors (see  Figure 20.2 ). 
Conclusion: If the planners insist on a ratio, you should insist on an escape valve and add words such 
as: “ … except where, for good reason shown, the Board decides that it is in the best interests of the 
neighborhood to permit construction closer to a lot line than would otherwise be permitted. ”
 Avoid  “ Variance ” language, as the test to grant a Variance is likely a higher hurdle than  “ for good 
reason shown. ” In addition, you might seek to have the ordinance allow an easement, lease, or written 
permission from a neighbor to be applied to a setback requirement. 
 20.2.1.1  A Fall Zone Easement 
 If you fail to convince the authorities that a  “ fall zone ” is of limited or no value, consider another 
approach. If you own the adjacent lot or have friendly neighbors who live on the adjacent affected lot 
(your son or daughter?), the best approach might be a fall zone easement (see  Figure 20.3  ). 
No scale
Fall zone easement
Easement
Fall zone easement
indicated by dotted
line on land owned
by owner B
“Impact area” could be a “fall zone” 
(Note: A comparable easement might provide for the area necessary for guy wires)
Building B
Building A
20
32
Tower
Parcel #37321.1025
Property line
cul-de-sac
Impact
Area R  52
Unaffected
parcel
Unaffected
parcel
N
 Figure 20.3  If you own the adjacent lot or have friendly neighbors who live on the adjacent affected lot, the 
best approach might be a fall zone easement. 

Drafting or Redrafting a Bylaw, or State Statute 407
 Ultimately facing a requirement for a fall zone, Dale Avery, WU7X, a clever man who is not a lawyer, 
created a set of easement documents for himself that were accepted by Spokane County, WA. He had 
to create a map for the easement document, but the county did not require that it be to scale, although 
it did have to display a required North arrow and name the streets. The documents may be found on the 
accompanying CD as ﬁ lename Easement.doc. 
 Return Address: 
 Dale W. Avery 
 1109 E. Glencrest Dr. 
 Spokane, WA 99208 
 Private Tower Impact Area Easement 
 THIS AGREEMENT made and entered into this _____ day of _____________, 2006, by the under-
signed property owners, who are granting the easement across their property, being tax parcel number 
 37321.1026 . 
 WHEREAS this easement was created to cover a private tower impact area on the following described 
property:
 One parcel---- SW ¼ of NW ¼ of NE ¼ of NE ¼ 
 Located within Section 32 Township  27 Range  43 EWM, Spokane County, Washington. 
 Tower impact access to the above described tract of land is provided by an easement being  40  feet wide 
and described as follows: 
 An elliptical area, with a maximum depth of 40 feet located along the southern edge of parcel 
37321.1026 where it shares a common property border with parcel 37321.1025 to the south, 
 Located within Section 32 Township 27 Range 43 EWM, Spokane County, Washington, as shown on 
attached MAP. 
 MAINTENANCE of the property covered by this easement shall be by the property owners, as described 
above. Spokane County has no responsibility to maintain or otherwise service the private easement 
herein described. Only the Division of Building and Planning or its successor agency can remove this 
easement.
 I am co-owner of record of the property involved with granting this easement. 
 Co-owner of Record: ________________________________________________________________ 
 Signed:_______________________________________________ Date: _______________________ 
 STATE OF WASHINGTON ) 
  
) SS 
 County of Spokane 
) 
 I certify that I know or have satisfactory evidence that ______________________________ and ______
_________________________ are the persons who appeared before me, and said persons acknowledge 

408 Chapter 20
 that they signed this instrument and acknowledge it to be their free and voluntary act for the use and 
purposes mentioned in the instrument. 
 Dated:____________________________   ____________________________________________ 
 Notary Signature 
 My appointment expires: ___________________      _______________________________________ 
 Title 
 20.2.1.2  Setback for Guy Wires 
 Watch out for the setback rule. Typically, this rule says that no structure may be erected closer to a 
lot line than 10 to 50 feet, depending on the neighborhood or lot size. Normally there is an absolute 
minimum. However, local public policy may already recognize some exceptions. Examples of exceptions 
include basketball backboards and nets, fences, post boxes, stonewalls, and a shed for children to keep 
them dry while waiting for the school bus. Sometimes the setback rule includes an exception by height 
(for example, nothing greater than 10 feet in height within the setback area). Sometimes the setback rule 
includes an exception by use (such as some of the uses listed above). Sometimes the setback rule is set 
out as an exception for construction that is expressed (in Latin) as  de minimis.
 Here are a few approaches that can work in the face of such a setback rule. If you are dealing 
speciﬁ cally with a guyed antenna-support structure, you could suggest this language:  “ No anchor for 
guy wires may be located closer to a boundary line than three (3) feet. ” If there is an exception for 
construction under 10 feet in height, you might try: “ For the purposes of the exception for structures 
less than ten (10) feet in height, the height of sloping guy wires entering the setback area shall be the 
average height of the wires in the setback area. ”
 If you’re feeling lucky, suggest:  “ Antenna system guy wires shall be considered  de minimis
construction to which the setback shall not apply. ” The public policy reason that supports this approach 
is that, if it is not applied, the erector will be forced to install a tall pole or a steel I-beam to intercept 
the sloping guy wires or to “ shorten ” the guy wires, perhaps mounted into a really big block of 
concrete. The pole or I-beam with its concrete foundation will be far less aesthetically pleasing than 
allowing the antenna or guy wires to come all the way to the ground anchor. Furthermore, you can hide 
guy wires more easily than a big concrete block and I-beam — with shrubbery planted to block the view 
of the wires gathering at the anchor’s equalizer plate. 
 For the purposes of the bylaw, horizontal elements of an antenna should be permitted (when space is 
tight, the long Yagi antennas for a cable TV system could be a problem):  “ The horizontal elements of 
an antenna may encroach upon the setback area, as if a plane were drawn vertically on the lot line, but 
in no event may such an element intrude into the air space of an abutting lot without permission of the 
abutting lot owner. ” The public policy argument here is that no one ever requires that a ﬂ ag may not 
encroach on the setback, and therefore a Yagi antenna turning radius should similarly be irrelevant. 

Drafting or Redrafting a Bylaw, or State Statute 409
 20.3   Deﬁ nitions 
 A wise lawyer once told me that he would allow a client to agree to anything, as long as he got to draft 
the deﬁ nitions and starting dates. So spend a great deal of time working on the deﬁ nitions section. Ask 
yourself if the bylaw you are looking at has a silly deﬁ nition, perhaps one that would theoretically 
require a permit for a crystal radio set with a wire out the window or that would prohibit a shortwave 
listener’s all-band dipole antenna. In one Massachusetts town, if you read the deﬁ nition closely and 
have a dipole in a tree higher than 50 feet, you’d have to chop off any portion of the tree above 50 
feet — because the support of any antenna whatsoever cannot exceed 50 feet. 
 Elsewhere, a municipality forbade any transmitting antenna within so many feet of a school —
 forgetting that cell phones, police radios, security systems, wireless Internet, and so forth all require 
transmitting antennas. 
Practice Tip: Think about a blanket exemption for accessory antenna-support structures less than 75 to 
150 feet in height. In other words, leave the ordinance alone but exempt short towers in the deﬁ nitions 
section, not the height section. Then add:  “ For the purposes of this ordinance, an antenna or mast 
extending less than 12 feet above any support structure shall not require a permit of any kind. ” 
Think this is impossible? Go read the Virginia statute at  http://leg1.state.va.us/cgi-bin/legp504
.exe?000    cod    15.2-2293.1 . 
 Another possible exemption to a height limit (or a requirement for a Special Use Permit) could be:  “ If 
a supporting structure adjoins and is securely attached to a building (not including a chimney) or is 
integral to the building, the additional height above such point of secure attachment shall not exceed 
one foot for each one foot in horizontal distance from the point of secure attachment to the nearest 
property line. ” Under such a deﬁ nition, if you have a 36-foot house and 40 feet to the side lot line, you 
get a 76-foot structure without a Special Permit, but you knew this from the earlier discussion about 
ratios. The reason to review the subject is that this time it is approached from the  deﬁ nitions section 
and not in the height section. 
 20.4   Height-to-Lot-Line Ratios 
 These are dangerous for the applicant and unwise for the town. They are usually expressed as a 
maximum of one foot of height for each foot of distance to the nearest lot line (a 1:1 ratio), or the like. 
Imagine a lot 100 feet wide with a tower. The maximum height tower would be less than 50 feet (due 
to the width of the tower) and you would be forced to build at the mid-line of the property. The real 
purpose behind such ratios is to control height, since the building code controls safety. However, if the 
town’s purpose is to minimize aesthetic impact, the town would really want the tower put along a tree 
line, or in that portion of the lot where it would have the least impact — not in the most visible place, out 
in the open in the middle of the grassy area. 
 Often cast as a concern for safety, a setback based on a ratio assumes that the building code is inadequate 
as a method for protecting the public. Yet, no one has ever suggested that the Empire State Building 
should have a 1:1 setback to the property line — because, unlike the situation involving towers, for some 
reason the powers that be are willing to accept the seal of a professional engineer (PE) if the construction 
is a building, but not willing to accept the stamp of the very same PE if the construction is a tower. 

410 Chapter 20
 The other reason sometimes put forth to justify a  “ ratio-based ” setback is a concern for radiofrequency 
safety or exposure to electromagnetic waves. The odd thing about such a rationale is that if the 
Planning Board is really concerned about the Maximum Permissible Exposure, then exposure is not 
measured in feet (a measure of distance) — it is measured in units of energy present at the property line 
(usually expressed in microwatts per square centimeter). 
 20.5   Back Lot Only 
 An ordinance provision against placement in a side lot or front lot also reduces ﬂ exibility and could 
prevent someone from placing an antenna in the least visible spot. Examples include a long driveway 
from the street, perhaps through an unbuildable area (wetland?) sometimes called a  ﬂ ag lot because 
the lot resembles a ﬂ ag pole with ﬂ ag, with a building that is actually closer to the backdoor neighbors 
than the street. In this case, the neighbors might prefer a “ front ” yard placement. Similarly, a side lot 
may also have the least aesthetic impact. It depends on the characteristics of the lot. The bylaw should 
not take that ﬂ exibility away by assuming that all lots are tidy squares. Suggested language if you are 
backed into a corner:  “ Except where visibility to neighbors would be lessened by placement in a front 
or sidelot location, … . ” 
 20.6   Structure Type 
 The type of antenna-support you use is really not the business of the town — just as it ought not dictate 
that all houses must be colonials or ranches. In any event, be sure to preserve the possibility of using a 
utility pole, as well as a guyed lattice or unguyed monopoles, as types of antenna-supports. You don’t 
know today what will be considered most tasteful many years from now. 
 20.7   Grandfathering 
 Make sure that the new bylaw doesn’t make some existing towers illegal! If that happens, it will 
discourage co-location on an existing structure, yet most jurisdictions consider co-location to be a very 
desirable goal. 
 20.8   Cost 
 You don’t want the process to be costly, to the applicant or to the town. Keep asking this question: 
 “ Sure, it would be nice to have all that additional information — such as a survey with contour lines 
drawn every three feet of elevation — but is it necessary? ” Everything that adds cost and delay is: 
 1. 
 Bad government, since it tacitly encourages some people to ﬂ out the law 
 2. 
 A burden on the volunteers who serve on Boards 
Suggested language:  “ In no event shall submission and documentation requirements result in costs that 
exceed a reasonable proportion of the proposed construction cost. ” If you have the votes, make it 10% 
or  $ 2,000, whichever is greater. 

Drafting or Redrafting a Bylaw, or State Statute 411
 20.9   Wind-Speed Requirement 
 It is possible for a town to think that increasing the wind-speed requirement may discourage antenna-
support structures. That’s what happened in one town on Cape Cod in Massachusetts. A proposed 
bylaw would have increased the size and cost of a tower — resulting in something they really didn’t 
want. Here’s how a response (edited for this book) to just such a suggestion was fashioned, along with 
some other proposed changes to the town bylaw. This letter was created after the ﬁ rst draft and before 
the required hearing on the proposed bylaw change. If your town is thinking of changing a bylaw, a 
respectful letter that says what is wrong — and why it is wrong — and that suggests substitute language 
can go a long way. 
 January 10, 2002 
 Unfriendly Planning Board 
 Attn: Mr. Mao Tse Tung, Chairman 
 Town of Unfriendly 
 Town Ofﬁ ce Building 
 Main Street 
 Unfriendly, MA 01111         By fax 508/555-1111 
 Dear Chairman Mao: 
 I write to comment on the proposed Town of Unfriendly zoning bylaw amendment, Section 111-11.1 
Wireless Communications Towers. I understand that a public hearing on the matter is scheduled for 
January 11, 2002. I ask that you read these remarks at the hearing, as I shall be unable to attend. 
 I represent [name of client], a federally licensed [description of client and service], with respect to a pro-
posed wireless communications facility/tower at 6 Unfriendly Street, Unfriendly, MA. 
 The proposed bylaw, as currently drafted, fails to meet several standards of federal and/or state law. I 
hope that my remarks will aid the Board in its drafting efforts. 
Conﬂ icts with Federal Law
 An analysis of federal law bearing on proposals such as 111-11.1 begins with [citation to federal law]: 
 [Quoting the federal law] 
 As drafted, it is hard to ﬁ nd that the proposed ordinance complies with [the cited federal law]. [This 
section then continued with the reasons why the proposed bylaw was deﬁ cient in light of federal 
requirements.]
Conﬂ icts with State Law
 Two sections of the proposed Unfriendly bylaw deserve detailed discussion. 
 (1) Category-5 Hurricane Design 
 Proposed Section 111-11.1, Section B. Requirements, subsection (2) Safety, requires that antenna-sup-
port structures  “ shall be designed to withstand sustained winds and gusts of a Category-5 hurricane. ” 

412 Chapter 20
  Suggestion: This section should be deleted entirely. It is superﬂ uous, because all construction must meet 
the requirements of federal, state, and local law. It should also be deleted for the additional reasons 
speciﬁ ed below. In the alternative, it should be shortened to read: 
 Communications facilities shall be installed, maintained, and operated in accordance with applicable 
federal, state, and local codes, standards, and regulations. 
(a) As proposed, Section B. (2) does not conform to the State Building Code . 
 I refer you to the Massachusetts State Building Code, 780 CMR  § 3108.0,  “ Radio and Television 
Towers. ” 
 3108.1 General: Subject to the structural provisions of 780 CMR 1611.0 for  wind loads and the 
requirements of 780 CMR 1510.0 governing the ﬁ re resistance ratings of buildings for the sup-
port of roof structures, all radio and television towers shall be designed and constructed as herein 
provided. 
 At 780 CMR  § 1611.0, for tower structures in Barnstable County, the design standard required (the refer-
ence wind velocity) at Table 1611.3 is 90 miles per hour for the  “ fastest-mile ”  wind velocity (780 CMR 
 § 1611.3). Where the exposure (a measure of terrain roughness) includes wooded areas and rolling ter-
rain, and is at least one half mile upwind, the design requirement is actually reduced in accordance with 
Table 1611.4a. In other words, the wind speed requirement in wooded areas and rolling terrain at least 
one half mile from the water in Unfriendly is less than 90 mph. 
 There being no rational reason to distinguish Unfriendly winds from similar winds in other Barnstable 
County towns, the State Building Code is sufﬁ cient. By contrast, a Category-5 requirement fails to meet 
the standard  “ rational relationship ”  test. 
 In addition, in the past I have inquired about such things from the Ofﬁ ce of the State Climatologist. A 
Category-5 wind speed has never been recorded in Barnstable County. 
 This calls into question the rational basis for the regulation. See also the discussion below, reﬂ ecting the 
position of the American Society of Civil Engineers. 
 By applying a Category-5 construction standard to antenna-support structures, in a court action the town 
would face these questions:  “ Why is a wind speed requirement applied to antenna-support structures that 
is not applied to other structures, for which a lower wind speed requirement — the State Building Code —
 applies? What distinguishes a communications tower at any height, from a house, church steeple, and so 
forth, at the same height? ” 
 Incidentally, a Category-5 requirement would also exceed ANSI EIA/TIA 222-F, the stan-
dard of the American National Standards Institute, the Electronic Industries Association, and the 
Telecommunications Industries Association. If the Town includes the Category-5 standard in its bylaw, 
it would be hard-pressed to argue that the bylaw was passed in good faith. 
(b) This section involves a subject which zoning may not regulate.
 I refer you to MGL Chapter 40A, Section 3, Subjects which zoning may not regulate. It reads:  “ No 
zoning ordinance or by-law shall regulate or restrict the use of materials, or methods of construction of 
structures regulated by the state building code. ” 

Drafting or Redrafting a Bylaw, or State Statute 413
  The Category-5 wind survival requirement in the proposed amateur tower bylaw dramatically exceeds the 
Massachusetts Building Code requirement. By specifying a standard of construction currently regulated by 
the State Building Code, the Town would exceed its power and violate Chapter 40A, Section 3. 
(c) This section represents bad engineering . 
 I refer you to the American Society of Civil Engineers, ANSI/ASCE 7-95, Section 6.5.2.1, Special wind 
regions. 
  …  The authority having jurisdiction shall, if necessary, adjust the values given in Fig. 6-1 [the 
basic wind-speed chart] to account for higher local wind speeds. Such adjustment shall be based 
on meteorological information and an estimate of the basic wind speed obtained in accordance 
with the provisions of 6.5.2.2. 
6.5.2.2 Estimation of basic winds speeds from regional climactic data. Regional climactic data 
shall only be used in lieu of the basic wind speeds given in Fig. 6-1 when: (1) Approved extreme-
value statistical analysis procedures have been employed in reducing the data; and (2) the length 
of record, sampling error, averaging time, anemometer height, data quality, and terrain exposure 
have been taken into account. 
 Even if it were legal to change the State Building Code basic wind speeds uniquely for Unfriendly and 
legal to single out communications uses (as contrasted with all other uses) for a higher wind speed stan-
dard, I am unaware that the data required by ANSI/ASCE 6.5.2.1 and 6.5.2.2 is in front of the Planning 
Board. I doubt the existence of such data. 
(d) This Category-5 standard conﬂ icts with the expressed aesthetic concern . 
 A Category-5 design standard is clearly in conﬂ ict with an underlying intent of this bylaw; i.e., aesthetic 
impact. Section B. (6) states:  “ Communications towers shall be designed to minimize visual impact. ” The 
imposition of a Category-5 standard will maximize visual impact. The resulting mass of a tower designed to 
meet such a requirement will be a far more imposing structure than a typical antenna-support structure. This 
would be especially true where an antenna-support structure is proposed for an otherwise residential area. 
 If in doubt, examine the two towers on Unfriendly Hill Road in Unfriendly. The original tower was 
designed to meet either the State Building Code or the ANSI standard and is far less obvious to the 
casual passerby than its twin  “ Category-5 ” design located to its south. The more massive tower was 
designed to meet the more stringent requirements now proposed. 
 Stepping aside from the conﬂ icts with Federal and State law, surely this Board does not wish to create a 
situation where more massive structures will result. 
(2) Fencing . 
 May I suggest: 
 (4) Access Control. Fencing, an anti-climbing device, or other form of access control determined by the 
Building Commissioner to be adequate to protect public safety shall be provided. 
Discussion
 As presently written, this section requires fencing,  and fencing only . While subsection (4) is not in con-
ﬂ ict with either Federal or State law, it should be reworded to promote the reduction of visual impact. 

414 Chapter 20
 There are many forms of anti-climbing devices that blend in with the surroundings, and could be more 
pleasing and less industrial than chain-link fence. 
Conclusion
 Thank for you for reviewing these suggestions and comments. If I can answer any questions this letter 
has raised, or if I can help in any way to review possible revisions that may be made to the text of this 
proposed bylaw, please do not hesitate to contact me. 
 Sincerely, 
 Fred Hopengarten, Esq. 
 The result? As a result of this letter, the 125-mile-per-hour wind requirement was dropped entirely and 
the suggested change to fencing language was adopted. 
 20.10  Drafting a State Statute 
 First, the obvious. You should consider suggesting the PCIA Model Siting Legislation ( http://www.
pcia.com ). 
 20.10.1  Do Not Cite an FCC Report and Order 
 If you have anything to say about it, do not cite an FCC Report and Order. It may be modiﬁ ed by 
subsequent FCC language. It may also be effectively modiﬁ ed by subsequent court decisions. You do 
not want to freeze state protections to those available at the time of the drafting of the state statute, 
before subsequent writing and court decisions that proved more favorable. Leave it more general. If 
forced to cite an FCC Report and Order, add  “ as it may subsequently be amended or replaced. ”
 20.10.2  Not Just Zoning Ordinances! 
 Do not limit your protections to  zoning ordinances that impact the placement, screening, or height of 
an antenna system. There are other municipal ordinances with impact that are not zoning ordinances. 
This category includes such additional ordinances as  “ general bylaws, ”  “ wetlands, ”  “ scenic road, ”
 “ steep slope, ”  “ historic district, ” or  “ conservation ” bylaws, and so forth. 
 Be sure that the statute protecting communications facilities applies generally and to more than just 
zoning ordinances. Try not to get caught on this one. In addition, if you are drafting a state law, there is 
no logical reason that it should be less extensive than the federal law, which will control anyway. 
 Nonetheless, don’t spend your goodwill ﬁ ghting for an exemption from historic-district regulation, 
unless the local authority has attempted to put the entire town and not just the town green, or commons 
with surrounding houses, into the historic district. 
 20.10.3  Go for a Minimum? 
 When speaking to colleagues in your business, inquire if it is possible to suggest an easier permitting 
process for structures under 125 feet. 

Drafting or Redrafting a Bylaw, or State Statute 415
 20.10.4  Think Real Hard About How to Exceed Any Height Mentioned 
 Do not allow the method to exceed any mentioned height to be by  Variance , since a Variance presents 
substantially different tests when compared to a Site Review or a Special Use Permit, for example. 
Deciding what will work in your jurisdiction is the province of lawyers. Contact the PCIA or the NAB 
(if you are a member) and get some drafting help. 
 20.10.5  Line Up Lobbying Help 
 Get the regional ofﬁ ce of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the Department of 
Homeland Security, the Red Cross, and your state emergency management agency lined up to support 
your position. It may take some doing to ﬁ nd a person authorized to write a letter or to testify, and it 
may take additional doing to convince that person to actually do it! If you succeed, however, encourage 
such people to show up at a hearing in uniform. The uniform speaks volumes and demands respect. 
A ﬁ nal word: Lobbying does not require Armani suits and Gucci shoes, despite the fact that it is 
frequently practiced that way. It does, however, require persistence, patience, and politeness. 
Good luck! 
 20.10.5.1  Testimony at the Legislative Public Hearing 
 If you are pursuing a new statute to protect communications, sooner or later there will be a public 
hearing at the state house before the committee charged with the responsibility for this subject area. 
When this happens you may receive a sheet of rules established by the legislature for public testimony. 
Here is a list of rules from Connecticut, with comments and advice: 
 Please submit 50 copies of written testimony to Committee staff one hour prior to the start of the 
hearing in Room 3900 of the LOB [Legislative Ofﬁ ce Building]. 
Comment: I have testiﬁ ed before the Connecticut legislature. They are serious about the 50-copies rule, 
but paper is cheap. In any event, you’d want to produce enough copies for the committee, committee 
staff, allies, and the press. Also, written testimony requires that people really think through their 
complaint, and their proposed solution. It is a good public policy. 
 Sign-up for the hearing will begin at 12:00 PM in Room 2B of the LOB. The ﬁ rst two hours of the 
hearing is reserved for the public comment and will recess at 3:00 PM. Public speakers will be lim-
ited to 3 minutes of testimony. Agency and Department ofﬁ cials and legislator testimony will begin 
at 3:00 PM. Public comment will resume at 4:00 PM. Unofﬁ cial sign-up sheets have no standing with 
the Committee. 
Comment: They are serious about the 3-minute rule. Forget the thanks; a serious  “ thank you ” eats up 
15% of your available time. Do not concentrate on language, unless you have something really 
speciﬁ c. I recommend testimony that will grab the attention of a newspaper reporter (there are always 
two or three reporters at every hearing — they have the state house beat). I recommend horror stories 
and public safety stories (hurricanes, ﬂ oods, forest ﬁ res, ice storms, medical help to missionaries 
overseas, ships at sea, disasters, etc.). Drafting technicalities are best handled in private conversations 
with staff. 

416 Chapter 20
 What they mean by  “ unofﬁ cial sign-up sheets ” is that if you come along with a list of people in proper 
order, each for 3 minutes, hoping that  one person can sign up for everyone, they won’t accept that. 
Each person wishing to speak must sign up individually, and you should be there at 12 p.m. to sign 
up, as the late signers don’t get to speak at all. 120 minutes divided by 3 minutes theoretically permits 
40 speakers, but things tend to get sloppy. I doubt that 25 people will have time to speak. So get there 
early to sign up. 
 In summary, submit serious testimony in writing, and speak about human-interest issues in public oral 
testimony. If reporters approach, take all the time they want (they usually break off after two to ﬁ ve 
minutes to talk with someone else). Bring business cards so reporters can follow up. 

417
 Bibliography 
 Laws and Regulations 
 ANSI standard TIA/EIA-222-F, Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting 
Structures.
 ANSI/ASCE 7-95, Section 6.5.2.1, Special wind regions. 
 Citrus County FL Code §4673.F.14, Communications Transmission/Reception Interference. 
       Colorado, Common Interest Ownership Act (CIOA).      
       Communications Act of 1934, 47 USC §302a.      
       Communications Act of 1934, 47 USC §332(c)(7).      
       Conn. Gen. Stat. §52-557n(a)(2)(B) (Supp. 1997).      
       FAA Lighting Regulations.14 CFR, Part 77.      
 FCC Opinion and Order.  In the Matter of T-Mobile and the Pierce Archery Proposed Antenna Tower (North 
Ridgeville, OH). (2003).   http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-03-3826A1.doc  . 
 FCC Opinion and Order.  In the Matter of Petition of Cingular Wireless L.L.C. for a Declaratory Ruling that 
Provisions of the Anne Arundel County Zoning Ordinance are Preempted as Impermissible Regulation of Radio 
Frequency Interference Reserved Exclusively to the Federal Communications Commission . (2003).   http://
hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-03-2196A1.doc   . 
 FCC Public Notice.  Use of Valcom Manufacturing Group Self-supporting Whip, Model V-33085AM/CL2 Antenna.
(2008).   http://fjallfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-08-448A1.doc   . 
 FCC Report and Order.  In the Matter of Guidelines for Evaluating the Environmental Effects of Radiofrequency 
Radiation, ET Docket No. 93-62 (1996). 
 FCC Report and Order.  In the Matter of Restrictions on [OTARD Rule]. CS Docket No. 96-83 (1996).   http://
www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Cable/Orders/1996_TXT/fcc96328.txt   . 
 FCC 47 CFR §1.4000, Over-the-Air Reception Devices (OTARD) rule.  See  47 USC §309(a).      
       FCC 47 CFR §73.189, 190, Minimum height.      
 FCC 47 CFR §73.211, Power and antenna height requirements, as well as 47 CFR §73.315. 
 FCC 47 CFR §73.1692, Radio Broadcast Services, Part 73, Subpart H, FM transmitter location. 
 FCC Order on Reconsideration.  In the Matter of Restrictions on [OTARD Rule]. CS Docket No. 96-83 (1998). 
  http://www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Cable/Orders/1998/fcc98214.txt   . 
 FCC Order on Reconsideration.  In the Matter of Restrictions on [OTARD Rule]. CS Docket No. 96-83 (1999). 
 http://www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Cable/Orders/1999/fcc99360.doc  . 
 Mass. CMR 780 3108.0, Radio and Television Towers. 
       Mass. CMR 780 3109.0, Radio and Television Antennas.      
 Mass. Gen. Laws, Ch. 231, §6F.    http://www.state.ma.us/legis/laws/mgl/231%2D6f.htm   . 
       Mass. Gen. Laws, Ch. 258, §10.      
 Mass. State Building Code, 780 CMR §3108.0, Radio and Television Towers. 
       Me. Rev. Stat. Ann. tit. 14 §8104-B(3) (West Supp. 1996).      
 National Electrical Code (NEC):  NFPA 70, National Electrical Code . 
       National Environmental Policy Act section 106 47 CFR §1.1308.      

418 Bibliography
 National Register of Historic Places National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, 16 USC 470. 
 Nevada Code NRS 278.0233, Actions against agency: Conditions and limitations. 
 Nevada Code NRS 278.0237, Actions against agency: Defenses; attorney’s fees, court costs and interest; remedy 
cumulative. 
       NH RSA 674:19. Applicability of Zoning Ordinance.      
       New York 22 NYCRR §130-1.1. Costs and Sanctions for Frivolous Actions.      
       New York, City Environmental Quality Review Act (CEQRA).      
       New York, State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA).      
       Penn. 35 P.S. §7210.502.  “ Deemed approved ”  statute. Establishes 15 business-day rule.      
 Telecommunications Act of 1996 Pub. L. No. 104-104, 110 Stat. 56 (1996). Sometimes called the TCA, it is found 
in the U.S. Code at 47 USC §332 (c)(7). 
 Virginia §15.2-2293.1. Placement of amateur radio antennas.   http://leg1.state.va.us/cgi-bin/legp504.
exe?000  cod  15.2-2293.1 . 
 Wolfeboro, NH. §175-183 B(1)(h) Zoning Bylaw. 
 Cases 
Adriance v. Town of Standish , 687       A.2d 238, 240 (Me., 1996).      
Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association v. Federal Aviation Administration , 600 F. 2d 965 (D.C. Cir. 1979). 
American Bird Conservancy, Inc.v. FCC , 516 F.3d 1027 (D.C. Cir. 2008). 
Anderson v. Barker , Middlesex Superior Court Civil Action No. 81-2494 (Massachusetts, 1981). 
AT & T Wireless Services v. Mayor and City Council of Baltimore , 123 Md. App. 681 (1998).      
Barrett and Barrett v. Conservation Commission of Falmouth , Mass. App. Ct. (1996).      
Blackburn v. Doubleday Broadcasting Company, Inc. , 353       N.W. 2d 550 (Minn., 1984).      
Bodony v. Sands Point (NY) , 681 F. Supp. 1009 (EDNY 1987). 
Borowski v. Burbank (IL) , 101 FRD 59 (ND IL, 1984). 
Broyde v. Gotham Tower , 13 F.3d 994 (6th Circuit, 1994).   http://pacer.ca6.uscourts.gov/cgi-bin/getopn.
pl?OPINION 94a0007p.06 . 
Burlington Broadcasters . Proposed Supplemental Findings of Fact (2004).   http://www.antennazoning.com/docs/
wizn-supplemental-ﬁ ndings.doc   . 
City of Cincinnati v. Discovery Network, Inc. , 507 U.S. 410 (1993).      
City of Ladue v. Gilleo , 512 U.S. 43 (1994).                    
City of New York v 17 Vista Associates , 84 NY2d 299, 642 NE2d 606, 618 NYS2d 249.  
City of Rancho Palos Verdes et al. v. Abrams , 544 U.S. 113 (2005).   http://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/03-
1601.ZS.html . 
City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc. , 475 U.S. 41 (1986).      
City of Round Rock v. Smith , 687 SW2d 300 (Tex. 1985). 
Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharm., Inc. , 509 U.S. 579, 589 (1993). 
CTIA v. FCC, U.S. Court of Appeals (D.C. Cir.), Docket 07-1475, July 8, 2008   http://pacer.cadc.uscourts.gov/
docs/common/opinions/200807/07-1475-1126058.pdf . 
E.G. Helm, Jr. v. Louisville Two-Way Radio Corporation . 667 S.W. 2d 691 (Ky., 1984). 
Ermler v. Brookhaven , 780 F. Supp 120 (USDC EDNY 1992). 
Evans v. Shore Communications, Inc. et al. , 112 Md. App. 284 (1996).      
First Amendment Cases:  City of Lakewood v. Plain Dealer Publishing Co. , 486 U.S. 750 (1988), newsracks;  Ward 
v. Rock Against Racism , 419 U.S. 781 (1989), governing the ampliﬁ cation of music;  Kovacs v. Cooper , 336 
U.S. 77 (1949), restricting the use of sound trucks;   Saia v. New York , 334 U.S. 558 (1948) prohibiting the use of 
loudspeakers.   
Franks v. DiRico , MA Superior Court, August 26, 1997, 1997 Mass. Super. LEXIS 282.  
Freeman v. Burlington Broadcasters, Inc. , 204 F.3d 311 (2d Cir. 2000),  cert. denied , 531 U.S. 917 (2000).   http://
www.fcc.gov/ogc/documents/opinions/2000/97-9141.doc  . 
Gordon v. Bridgeport Housing Auth. , 544       A.2d 1185, 1189 (Conn., 1988).      
Haley v. Town of Lincoln , 611       A.2d 845, 849 (R.I. 1992).      

Bibliography 419
Hillerby v. Town of Colchester , 167 Vt 270, 272 (1997).      
Horta v. Sullivan , 638       N.E.2d 33, 36-37 (Mass.1994).      
Katzman v. Anderson , 359       Pa.438, 59       A.2d 85 (Pa. 1948).        
Kleinhaus et al. v. Cortlandt , S. Ct. N.Y., County of Westchester, Index No. 19396/95, (Lefkowitz, J.), (Ny. 1996). 
Koor Communications v. City of Lebanon , 148 NH 618 (2002), 813  A.2d 418 [N.H. 2002].   http://www.courts.
state.nh.us/supreme/opinions/2002/0212/koor152.htm   . 
KRKO(AM), Everett, WA. FCC Finding of No Signiﬁ cant Impact.   http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/
attachmatch/DA-08-1272A1.doc   . 
Loschavio v. City of Dearborn , 33 F.3d 548 (6th Cir. 1994),  cert. denied , 115 S.Ct. 1099 (1995).      
MacGibbon v. Board of Appeals of Duxbury , 369 Mass. 512 (1976).      
Mattson v. City of Chicago , 411  N.E.2d 1002, 89 Ill. App. 3d 378, 44 Ill. Dec.636 (1980), Potomac Ridge 
Homeowner Association case. 
Merrill v. City of Manchester , 332       A.2d 378, 383 (N.H. 1974);.      
Metromedia v. San Diego , 453 U.S. 490 (1981) (holding that a total ban on billboards was not a time, place, and 
manner restriction).      
National Tower, L.L.C. v. Plainville Zoning Board of Appeals , 297 F.3d 14 (USCA 1st Cir. 2002).   http://bulk.
resource.org/courts.gov/c/F3/297/297.F3d.14.01-2472.html  . 
Newman v. Motorola , 218 F. Supp. 2d 769. (D. Md. 2002).   http://www.mdd.uscourts.gov/Opinions/Opinions/
newman0902.pdf   . 
Newman v. Motorola, USDC Md. 2002 Memorandum and Order.   http://news.ﬁ ndlaw.com/hdocs/docs/cellphone/
newmanmotorola93002mem.pdf  . 
Newman v. Motorola, USCA 4th 2003.   http://ﬂ 1.ﬁ ndlaw.com/news.ﬁ ndlaw.com/hdocs/docs/cellphone/
nwmnmot102203uopn.pdf . 
Newman v. Motorola (Unpublished), USCA 4 th 2003.   http://pacer.ca4.uscourts.gov/opinion.pdf/022424.
U.pdf . 
Oliver v. AT & T Wireless Services , 76 Cal. App. 4th 521, 525 (1999) (130-foot cell tower). 
Omnipoint v. Town of Lincoln, Mass ., 107 F. Supp. 2d 108 (USDC, Mass., 2000).  
Palmer v. Saratoga Springs , 180 F. Supp. 2d 379 (NDNY 2001)   http://www.nysd.uscourts.gov/courtweb/pdf/
D02NYNC/01-12259.pdf; slip opinion at 15  . 
Parkview Assocs. v. City of New York , 71 NY2d 274.      
People ex rel. Hoogasian v. Sears, Roebuck and Co. , 52 Ill.2d 301 (1972).      
Posey v. Leavitt (1991) 229 Cal. App. 3d 1236, 1250 [280 Cal. Rptr. 568].  
Public Service Co. of New Mexico v. Catron , 98       N.M. 134 (1982).      
Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC , 395 U.S. 367, 387-88 (1969). 
Reed v. Williamson , 164 Neb. 99, 82       N.W. 2d 18 (1957).      
Rottkamp v. Young , 15 NY2d 831, affd 21 AD2d 373, 377. 
Schad v. Borough of Mount Ephraim , 452 U.S. 61(1981) (nude dancing).  
Shelley v. Kraemer , 334 U.S. 1 (1948).      
Southwestern Bell Wireless, Inc. v. Johnson County Board of County Commissioners , 199 F.3d 1185 (10th Circuit 
1999); cert. denied , 530 U.S. 1204 (2000).   http://www.ca10.uscourts.gov/opinions/98/98-3264.pdf  . 
Still v. Michaels , 791 F. Supp. 248 (USDC AZ, 1992), 166 Ariz. 403, 803 P.2d 124 (App. 1990).                  
Stokes Communications , 164 Vt 30, 664       A.2d 712 (1995).   http://libraries.vermont.gov/sites/libraries/ﬁ les/
supct/164/op94-208.txt . 
Southwestern Bell Wireless, Inc. v. Johnson County Board of County Commissioners , 199 F.3d 1185 (10th Cir. 
1999), cert. denied , 530 U.S. 1204 (2000).   http://www.ca10.uscourts.gov/opinions/98/98-3264.pdf  . 
Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC , 512 U.S. 622 (1994).      
United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc. , 334 U.S. 131, 166 (1948).        
 Books 
         ARRL         ,   The ARRL RFI Book: Practical Cures for Radio Frequency Interference                ,  2nd ed .       ,  The American Radio 
Relay League      ,  Newington, CT      ,  2007                http://arrl.org/catalog/6834/  . 

420 Bibliography
        Hopengarten     F.            ,   Antenna Zoning for the Radio Amateur                   ,  The American Radio Relay League      ,  Newington, CT      , 
 2001 .  
 Jurgensmeyer  J.C. ,  Roberts  T.E. ,  Land Use Planning and Development Regulation Law    ,  2nd ed .       ,  Thomson West      , 
 Eagan, MN      ,  2007            .     
        Mandelker     D.R.            ,   Land Use Law                ,  4th ed .       ,  Lexis Law Publishing      ,  Charlottesville, VA ,  1997 .  
 O’Neill, T., with Novak, W.  Man of the House: The Life and Political Memoirs of Speaker Tip O’Neill . New York: 
Random House, 1987.      
        Warren     A.            ,   The Television  &  Cable Factbook                   ,  Warren Communications News      ,  Washington ,  2002 .  
 Articles 
        Alexander     W.C.            ,   Is this AM antenna for real?                      Radio World         March 31        ( 1995 ) .  
        Baumgartner     F.            ,   Homeowners associations, covenants, and the radio operator. Part 1. The truth about today’s 
HOAs                ,      CQ Magazine         March          ( 1995 )            34  –       37            .     
        Baumgartner     F.M.            ,   The tower-kill bird massacre myth                ,      Radio World         February 1          ( 2003 )                       http://www.rwonline.
com/reference-room/special-report/06_wrf_Feb1_part_1.shtml .  
 Breakall, J., Jacobs, M., King, T., Resnick, A. (2003). Testing and Results of a New, Efﬁ cient Low-Proﬁ le AM 
Medium Frequency Antenna System. NAB Broadcast Engineering Conference.   http://www.star-h.com/
publications/nabpaper.pdf   . 
 Brock  R. , et al. ,  The Ghost in the Computer: Radio Frequency Interference and the Doctrine of Federal
Preemption                ,      Computer Law Review and Technology Journal         1          ( 1999 )            17  –       36   http://www.sbot.org/docs/RFI.
pdf .  
 Chalmers, J. A. (2008). Assessing the Impacts of High-Voltage Transmission Lines (HVTL) on Property Values. 
 Colwell  P.F. ,  Foley  K.W. ,  Electric transmission lines and the selling price of residential property                ,      The Appraisal 
Journal  47 ( 4 ) ( 1979 )  490 – 499 .  
 Cuthill  I. ,  Guilford  T. ,  Perceived risk and obstacle avoidance in ﬂ ying birds                ,      Animal Behaviour         40          ( 1990 )           
 188 – 190 .  
 Erickson, W. P., Johnson, G. D., and Young, Jr., D. P. (2005). Summary of Anthropogenic Causes of Bird 
Mortality. Gen. Tech. Rep. PSW-GTR-191, U.S. Department of Agriculture. 
 Evans, W. R., Backroads of a Night Flight Call Researcher, Part II.   http://www.birds.cornell.edu/bcc/
cup5.7.html . 
 FAA (1995). Proposed Construction or Alteration of Objects That May Affect the Navigable Airspace.  FAA 
Advisory Circular 70/7460-21. 
 FAA (1992). Obstruction Marking and Lighting.  FAA Advisory Circular AC 70/7460-1H.   http://wireless.fcc.
gov/antenna/index.htm?job  documentation_paint_light . 
 FCC (1997). Cable Services Bureau Preempts Local Restrictions on the Use of Over-the-Air-Reception Devices 
Imposed by Meade, Kansas.  http://www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Cable/News_Releases/1997/nrcb7019.txt  . 
 Foster  K.H. ,  Vecchia  M.H. ,  Repacholi  M.H. ,  Risk management: science and the precautionary principle                ,      Science        
 288 ( 2000 )  979 – 981 .  
 Gantes  C. ,  Khoury  R. ,  Connor  J.J. ,  Pouangare  C. ,  Modeling, loading, and preliminary design considerations for 
tall guyed towers                ,      Computers and Structures         49       ( 5 )        ( 1993 )            797  –       805 .  
 Gehring, J., Michigan State Police Communication Tower Study: Results Applicable to Wind Turbines. U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service.   http://www.fws.gov/midwest/greatlakes/windpowerpresentations/gehring.pdf  . 
        Green     J.C.            ,   Fall migration: western Great Lakes region                ,      Audubon Field Notes         18       ( 1 )        ( 1964 )            33  –       34           39 – 42      .     
 Heeter  D.G. ,  Zoning estoppel: application of the principles of equitable estoppel and vested rights in zoning 
disputes                ,      Urban Law Annual         63          ( 1971 )            66               .     
 Hoenninger, T. J. (2005). Tips on Analyzing, Modifying and Maintaining Guyed Broadcast Towers. NAB.   http://
stainlessllc.com/Resources/NAB2005_Paper.pdf   . 
        Hunter     D.            ,   Airspace safety: an integral part of your tower management program                ,      Cellular Business         October          ( 1991 )           
 28ff .  

Bibliography 421
        Kemper     C.A.            ,   A tower for TV: 30,000 dead birds                ,      Audubon Magazine         66       ( 1 )        ( 1964 )            86  –       90            .     
        Kemper     C.A.            ,   A study of bird mortality at a west central Wisconsin TV tower from 1957 – 1995          ,  The Passenger 
Pigeon  58 ( 3 ) ( 1996 )  219 – 236   http://digicoll.library.wisc.edu/cgi-bin/EcoNatRes/EcoNatRes-idx?type  turn 
& entity  EcoNatRes.pp58n03.p0019 & isize  M .  
 Kerlinger, P. (2000). Avian Mortality at Communications Towers: A Review of Recent Literature, Research, and 
Methodology. Ofﬁ ce of Migratory Bird Management, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.   http://www.fws.gov/
migratorybirds/issues/towers/review.pdf  . 
        Lemley     C.C.  ,   Carr     B.            ,   How federal preemption helps tower owners                ,      Above Ground Level         October          ( 2006 )                       http://
www.wileyrein.com/publication.cfm?publication_id  13118 .  
        Osborn     R.G.  ,   Dieter     C.D.  ,   Higgins     K.F.            ,   Bird ﬂ ight characteristics near wind turbines in Minnesota                ,      The American 
Midland Naturalist         139          ( 1998 )            29  –       38            .     
 Ove Arup  & Partners ,  Bird Collisions with Man-made Structures with Reference to the Proposed Shenzen Western
Corridor                   ,  Government of Hong Kong         ,  2002                http://www.epd.gov.hk/eia/register/report/eiareport/eia_0822002/
EIA%20main%20report/Appendix/appendix%209b.pdf   .  
 Oxenford  D. ,  AM tower fencing requirements cannot be delegated ,  Broadcast Law Blog         October 8          ( 2006 )                       http://
www.broadcastlawblog.com/archives/cat-tower-issues.html  .  
 Oxenford  D. ,  FCC cuts no slack on ﬁ nes — temporarily unfenced tower, expired STA, former owner — all draw 
ﬁ nes                ,      Broadcast Law Blog         September 11          ( 2007 )                       http://www.broadcastlawblog.com/archives/cat-tower-issues.
html .  
 Randolph   E. ,  The cell tower blight: text-message Calder, ASAP ,  The New York Times         February 26          ( 2005 )                      .     
        Reich     D.            ,   Hard pressed                ,      BC Law         Fall.          ( 2001 )                   .  
 Renewable Energy Policy Project (REPP) (2003). The Effect of Wind Development on Local Property Values. 
 http://www.repp.org/articles/static/1/binaries/wind_online_ﬁ nal.pdf   . 
 Silverberg  StevenM. ,  Zalantis  K. ,  Chambers v. Old Stone Hill: Court of Appeals Rejects Public Policy Argument 
and Declines to Extinguish Private Contractual Rights                ,      NYSBA/MLRC Municipal Lawyer         18       ( 2 )        ( 2004 )            25  –       29            .     
 Steenhof  K. ,  Kochert  M.N. ,  Roppe  J.A. ,  Nesting by raptors and common ravens on electrical transmission line 
towers                ,      The Journal of Wildlife Management         57          ( 1993 )            271  –       281        .  
 Internet Sources 
Acme. ACME Mapper 2.0. http://www.acme.com/mapper  . 
Adobe. Create Adobe PDF Online. (2009).   http://www.adobe.com  . 
Airspace Consulting, Inc .    http://airspace-ken.com   . 
Amazon.com. Online Shopping for Electronics, Apparel, Computers, Books, DVDs  & more. http://www.amazon.
com . 
American Wind Energy Association .    http://www.awea.org   . 
Antenna Zoning. Commercial  – Legal Library. http://www.antennazoning.com/main/page_commercial_legal_
library.html   . 
ARRL. ARRL Technical Information Service .   http://www.arrl.org/tis  . 
Audio Systems Group, Inc. A Ham’s Guide to RFI, Ferrites, Baluns, and Audio Interfacing. (2008).   http://www.
audiosystemsgroup.com/RFI-Ham.pdf . 
Australian Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Agency (ARPANSA). Are Mobile Telephone Communications 
Antennas a Health Hazard? (2007).   http://www.arpansa.gov.au/RadiationProtection/Factsheets/is_antenna.
cfm . 
Automatic Lightning Protection. How a Lightning Protection System Works. http://www.lightningrod.com/
manual5_how.html  . 
Bureau of Labor Statistics: How to use the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for escalating contracts. http://stats.bls.
gov/dolfaq/bls_ques7.htm   . 
Broadcast Tower Technologies, Inc. Tower Reinforcing. http://www.tower-technologies.com/Reinforce.htm  . 
Canyon Area Residents for the Environment .   http://www.c-a-r-e.org  . 

422 Bibliography
Cornell University Lab of Ornithology. All About Birds: Red-eyed Vireo. (2003).   http://www.birds.cornell.edu/
AllAboutBirds/BirdGuide/Red-eyed_Vireo.html   . 
Cornell University Law School. Legal Information Institute. http://www.law.cornell.edu  . 
Counselman III, C. Common-Mode Chokes. (2006).   http://www.yccc.org/Articles/W1HIS/
CommonModeChokesW1HIS2006Apr06.pdf   . 
Curry  & Kerlinger, LLC. Wind Power and Bird Studies. (2002).   http://www.currykerlinger.com/studies.htm  . 
Dark Sky Initiative .    http://www.darkskyinitiative.org/   . 
TitanTV. Analog, Digital (HDTV), Cable and Satellite TV Listings .    http://www.titantv.com   . 
DeLorme. GPS, Maps  & Data. http://www.delorme.com  . 
DXZone. RFI: Technical Reference: Radio Frequency Interference. (2009).   http://www.dxzone.com/catalog/
Technical_Reference/Radio_Frequency_Interference/  . 
EMR Policy Institute. The EMR Policy Institute Introduces Two New Directors and Science Advisory Group.
(2003).   http://www.emrpolicy.org/news/press/pr_6nov03.pdf   . 
FAA. Airport Technology Research  & Development Branch News Page .   http://www.airtech.tc.faa.gov/news.
asp . 
FAA. Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration . (2007).   http://forms.faa.gov/forms/faa7460-1.pdf  . 
FCC. Antenna Registration System (ASR): About ASR . (2002).   http://www.wireless.fcc.gov/antenna/index/
htm?job about . 
FCC. Antenna Registration System (ASR): About ASR: Posting Guidelines . (2001).   http://wireless.fcc.gov/
antenna/about/postingguidelines.html . 
FCC. Antenna Structure Registration .   http://wireless2.fcc.gov/UlsApp/AsrSearch/towairSearch.jsp  . 
FCC. Avian/Communication Tower Collisions . (2004).   http://wireless.fcc.gov/reports/documents/avatar-
migratory-bird-report10104.pdf . 
FCC. Cellular FAQs .   http://www.fcc.gov/cgb/cellular.html  . 
FCC. Compliance with Commission Rules Implementing NEPA . (2004).   http://wireless.fcc.gov/siting/npaguid.
html . 
FCC. Enforcement Bureau (EB) Regional  & Field Ofﬁ ces . (2006).   http://www.fcc.gov/eb/rfo/  . 
FCC. FCC Fact Sheet on Placement of Antennas . (2007).   http://www.fcc.gov/mb/facts/otard.html  . 
FCC. Federal Communications Commission Forms Available via Internet. (2009).   http://www.fcc.gov/formpage.
html . 
FCC. Form 301, Application for Construction Permit for a Commercial Broadcast Station . (2008).   http://www.
fcc.gov/Forms/Form301/301.pdf   . 
FCC. Form 302, Application for AM Broadcast Station License . (1995).   http://www.fcc.gov/Forms/Form302-
AM/302-amFill.pdf . 
FCC. Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Fields From Cellular and PCS Radio Transmitters . (2008).   http://
www.fcc.gov/oet/rfsafety/cellpcs.html  . 
FCC. Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Fields: Guidelines for Cellular  &  PCS Sites . (2007).   http://www.fcc.
gov/cgb/consumerfacts/rfexposure.html  . 
FCC. Interference: Deﬁ ning the Source . (2008).   http://www.fcc.gov/cgb/consumerfacts/interference.html  . 
FCC. Interference Handbook. (1993).   http://www.fcc.gov/ftp/Bureaus/Mass_Media/Databases/documents_
collection/1993InterferenceHandbook.pdf . 
FCC. Media Bureau .    http://www.fcc.gov/mb   . 
FCC. NEPA Frequently Asked Questions . (2006).   http://wireless.fcc.gov/siting/npafaq.html  . 
FCC. Ofﬁ ce of Engineering and Technology (OET) Bulletins On-Line . (2002).   http://www.fcc.gov/oet/info/
documents/bulletins/   . 
FCC. OET Bulletin No. 56: Questions and Answers about Biological Effects and Potential Hazards of Radiofrequency 
Electromagnetic Fields . (1999).   http://www.fcc.gov/oet/info/documents/bulletins/Welcome.html#56  . 
FCC. OET Bulletin No. 65: Evaluating Compliance With FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radiofrequency 
Electromagnetic Fields . (1997).    http://www.fcc.gov/oet/info/documents/bulletins/#65   . 
FCC. OET  –  RF Safety FAQ’s . (2008).   http://www.fcc.gov/oet/rfsafety/rf-faqs.html  . 

Bibliography 423
FCC. Public Notice: Media Bureau Adopts Simpliﬁ ed Application Procedures for AM Nondirectional Kinstar 
Antennas . (2005).    http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-05-2741A1.pdf   . 
FCC. Radio Frequency Safety . (2003).   http://www.fcc.gov/oet/rfsafety  . 
FCC. TOWAIR Determination .   http://wireless2.fcc.gov/UlsApp/AsrSearch/towairSearch.jsp  . 
FCC. Wireless Telecommunications Bureau .    http://www.wireless.fcc.gov   . 
FCC. Wireless Telecommunications Bureau: Rules and Regulations .   http://wireless.fcc.gov/index.
htm?job rules_and_regulations  . 
Federal Airways  & Airspace (FA & A) .   http://airspaceusa.com . 
Federal Airways  & Airspace (FA & A). Web Resources. (2008).   http://www.airspaceusa.com/web_resources.
htm . 
Federation of American Scientists. Ships Exterior Paint Schemes. (1997).   http://www.fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/
ship/weaps/docs/EXTPAINT.HTM  . 
Free Geography Tools. Mapping Radio Coverage, and Viewing it in Google Earth. (2007).   http://
freegeographytools.com/2007/mapping-radio-coverage-and-viewing-it-in-google-earth   . 
FYBush. Tower Site Calendar. (Annual). http://www.fybush.com/calendar.html  . 
Google Earth .   http://www.earth.google.com  . 
GPO. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) .    http://www.gpoaccess.gov/cfr/index.html   . 
Hallikainen.com. FCC Rules  & Regulations. http://www.hallikainen.com/FccRules/  . 
HDTVColorado.com. Lookout Mountain Tower Consolidation. (2006).   http://www.hdtvcolorado.com/  . 
HDTVColorado.com. Who is Lake Cedar Group? (2006).   http://www.hdtvcolorado.com/content_pages/
overview_print.htm   . 
HDTVHonestly.com. The Truth About the HDTV SuperTower. (2006).    http://www.hdtvhonestly.com/   . 
Hey, What’s That? 360 ° Panoramic Views of Overlooks.  http://www.heywhatsthat.com   . 
Hey, What’s That? Path Proﬁ ler .   http://www.heywhatsthat.com/proﬁ ler.html  . 
Implu Corporation. Lake Cedar Group/Grinnell Group Federal Lobbying Activities. (2006).   http://www.implu.
com/lobby_client/29086/2006 . 
IMSI Design .   http://www.imsisoft.com  . 
IVI International. Inspection  & Valuation. http://www.ivi-intl.com  . 
Kintronic Labs. Folded monopole or folded unipole kits. (2009).   http://www.kintronic.com/products/productinfo.
aspx . 
K-Y Filter Company. Modem Filters. http://www.ky-ﬁ lters.com/am.htm  . 
Lake Cedar Group. HDTV Facility. (2006).    http://www.grinnellgroup.com/proj_lake_cedar.html   . 
Lawrence Behr Associates (LBA). The Combipole. (2003).   http://www.lbagroup.com/technology/app13.php  . 
Lawrence Behr Associates (LBA) FAQs on Tunipole Folded Unipole Antenna Systems . (2003).   http://www.
lbagroup.com/technology/tunifaq.php   . 
Mapsonus.com. Maps, Driving Directions, Yellow Pages, White Pages. http://www.mapsonus.com  . 
Maptech. Topo Maps Charts Navigation Software GPS and Online MapServer. http://mapserver.maptech.com/
homepage/index.cfm  . 
Maptech. USGS Topographic Maps. http://maptech.mytopo.com/land/index.cfm?CFID  11614376 & CFTOKEN 
 77150389
MassGIS. Cool Interactive Maps on the Web! (2006).   http://www.mass.gov/mgis/Cool_Interactive_Maps_on_
the_Web.htm  . 
Massachusetts State Ethics Commission. Summary of the Conﬂ ict of Interest Law  – No. 17. http://www.mass.
gov/ethics/sum17.htm   . 
Microsoft. Live Search Maps. http://maps.live.com  . 
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) .    http://www.nfpa.org/   . 
National Geographic. TOPO! Explorer. http://www.topo.com  . 
Nott Ltd. Antennas. (2004).    http://www.nottltd.com/antennasother.html   . 
OpenSecrets.org. Lobbying Spending Database-Lake Cedar Group/Grinnell Group . (2007).   http://www.
opensecrets.org/lobby/clientsum.php?lname  Lake  Cedar  Group%2FGrinnell  Group & year  2007 . 

Ofﬁ ce of the Law Revision Counsel .   http://uscode.house.gov/  . 
PCIA  – The Wireless Infrastructure Association. PCIA Model Sitting Ordinance  & PCIA Model Siting 
Legislation. http://www.pcia.com  . 
Phazar Wireless Antennas. Chameleon Coverings and Installations.  http://www.phazar.com/chameleon.htm   , 
  http://www.phazar.com/installations.htm   . 
Preformed Line Products. Catalog. http://www.preformed.com/artsfest/ﬁ les/ps/Sec21_PLPCommCatalog.pdf   . 
Radio Mobile WEB Site. Radio Mobile Freeware by VE2DBE. (2009).   http://www.cplus.org/rmw/english1.
html . 
Rohn Products .   http://www.rohnnet.com  . 
Sakrison.com. KFI Tower Collapse. (2004).   http://sakrison.com/radio/KFItowercollapse.html  . 
Splat! Splat Web Interface . (2009).   http://splat.ecok.edu/ . 
Star-H Corporation. Antenna Systems. (2006).    http://www.star-h.com   . 
Star-H Corporation. Publications by Star-H Corporation. (2003).   http://www.star-h.com/publications/papers.
html . 
Star-H Corporation  & Kintronic Labs. Engineering Report for Experimental Station WS2XTR and Request for 
Application of 47 CFR 73.160(b)(2) for the Kinstar AM Transmitting Antenna for General Use by AM Radio 
Stations in the United States. (2004).   http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-05-2741A2.
pdf . 
Stewards of the Land and Community. Informational Brochure ( 2008 ). http://www.geocities.com/
snohomishstewards/Towers_brochure_Final.pdf  . 
Towerkill.com. 1999 Towerkill Workshop Proceedings. (2009).   http://www.towerkill.com/activism/workshop/
index.html   . 
Trails.com. Trails, Topo Maps, Hiking, Mountain Biking. http://www.trails.com  . 
University of Exeter/Steve Sque. [Measuring] Distance to the Horizon. (2006).   http://newton.ex.ac.uk/research/
qsystems/people/sque/physics/horizon . 
USGS. Maps, Imagery, and Publications .   http://www.usgs.gov/pubprod/  . 
USGS. The USGS Store .   http://store.usgs.gov/  . 
Valcom Manufacturing Group Inc. 85-Ft Coil Loaded Self-Supporting Whip Antenna V-33085 Series. http://
www.valcom-guelph.com/products/V-33085AM-CL2.html  or   http://www.valcom-guelph.com/products/
downloads/brochure/V33085AM-CL2 (BR267 rev A).pdf  . 
Wikimapia .    http://www.wikimapia.org   . 
Wiley Rein, LLP. Successful Lobbying Efforts [on Behalf of Denver area TV stations]. (2007).   http://www.
wileyrein.com/media_news.cfm?sp  news & ID  2261 . 
Wireless Estimator .   http://www.wirelessestimator.com  . 
Wireless Estimator. Revision G is a go in Florida and Ohio, but stalls throughout the nation following IBC 
adoption. (2008).   http://www.wirelessestimator.com/t_content.cfm?pagename  TIA%20EIA-222-G . 
Wireless Estimator. State Building Codes. http://www.wirelessestimator.com/t_content.cfm?pagename  State%2
0Building%20Codes . 
Wisconsin Society for Ornithology. The Passenger Pigeon. http://digital.library.wisc.edu/1711.dl/EcoNatRes.
PassPigeon  . 
Wisconsin Society for Ornithology. Speakers Bureau. (2007).    http://www.wsobirds.org/speakers_2007.pdf   . 
Yahoo Groups. Tower-stuff for Sale. http://groups.yahoo.com/group/Tower-stuff4sale/  . 
Zillow. Real Estate Values  & Homes for Sale. http://www.zillow.com  . 
Phone Numbers 
       FCC. 1-888-CALL-FCC.      
       FCC. Compliance and Information Bureau. 202-632-6975.      
       PCIA. Government Affairs Team. 703-739-0300.      
       USGS. 1-888-ASK-USGS.                                  
424 Bibliography

425
 Index 
17 Vista Associates, City of New 
York v. ,  298 
 47 CFR §73.189, 73.190   ,  107   , 
 232 – 234
 47 CFR §73.3598   ,  164 – 165   
 47 U.S.C. § 302a   ,  35   ,  196 – 198   , 
 271 – 272 ,  331 ,  337 – 338 , 
 400 – 401
 501(c)(3) tenants   ,  370    
 A
Abrams, City of Rancho Palos 
Verdes et al. v. ,  303 
 ACC (architectural control 
committee) ,  83 – 84 ,  86 – 87 
 Access, lease   ,  357 – 359   
 Accessory structure   ,  194   
 acme.com/mapper   ,  44   ,  46   
 Adobe online PDF converter ,  251 
Adriance v. Town of Standish ,  299 
 Adult theater   ,  246   
 Advertising public hearings   , 
 261 – 263
 Advisory Council on Historic 
Preservation   ,  124   ,  214   
 Aesthetics
 aesthetic impact   ,  181 – 183   
 balloon tests   ,  189   
 camouﬂ age ,  191 
 crank-up towers as solution , 
 189 – 190
 Historic Preservation Ofﬁ ces , 
 185 ,  187 
 intervening trees/terrain   ,  103   , 
 185 ,  186 ,  232 ,  233 
 KinStar antennas   ,  190   , 
 234 – 235
 painting to reduce visibility , 
 190 – 191
 perspective and screened 
views   ,  47   ,  183   ,  272   
 photographs as fair 
representation   ,  49 – 50   , 
 187 – 188 
 visibility of antenna system , 
 184 – 185 ,  404 – 405 
 zoning violations, reasons for , 
 191 – 195 ,  403 – 405 
 Agent .  See  Real estate agent 
Aircraft Owners and Pilots 
Association v. Federal 
Aviation Administration ,  144 
 Airﬁ , Harvey ,  174 
 Airspace consultant   ,  144   
 Airspace safety   ,  142 – 144  
 FAA exemption conditions   , 
 143
 FAA permission   ,  143 – 144   
 light shields   ,  223   ,  225   
 painting/lighting requirements   , 
 142 – 143 ,  214 
 airspaceusa.com ,  144 
 Airtime loss   ,  380   
 Alabama ,  326 
 Alaska ,  80 ,  104 ,  113 
 Alexander, Cris ,  235 – 236 
 Allard, Wayne ,  162 
 Allen, Brian ,  397 
 Allies ,  21 
 AM antennas 
 First Amendment arguments , 
 201 – 202 ,  245 – 247 , 
 303 – 304
 height requirements   ,  232   ,  234   
Koor Communication v. City 
of Lebanon ,  107 ,  142 , 
 201 ,  232 ,  303 
 lease issues ,  373 
 preemption ,  236 – 245 
 reasons for height   ,  247    
 AM license ,  247 – 248 
Amateur Radio Tower, An  (Wilson)   , 
 132 – 133
 Amendments, lease   ,  382   
 American Bird Conservancy , 
 222 – 223
American Bird Conservancy, Inc. v. 
FCC ,  223 
American Radio Relay League 
(ARRL) Antenna Book, The ,  12 
 American Wind Energy 
Association ,  227 
 Anchors, guyed towers ,  137 
Anderson, Katzman v. ,  89 
Anderson v. Barker ,  295 
 ANR Freeze ,  90 
 ANSI TIA/EIA-222-F standard , 
 94 – 96 ,  134 – 135 
 ANSI/ASCE 7-95   ,  413   
 Antenna owners  
 allies ,  21 
 analysis of proposal by ,  19 – 20 
 contacting, for information , 
 19 – 20
 favorable letters from   ,  20 – 21   
 as supporters   ,  26    
 Antenna Structure Registration 
(ASR) Number   ,  323 – 324   
 Antennas
 additional ,  350 – 351 ,  352 – 353 , 
 355
 Crossed-Field Antenna   , 
 235 – 236
 E-H antenna   ,  235 – 236   
 KinStar antennas   ,  190   , 
 234 – 235
 lease issues   ,  361 – 363   

426 Index
Antennas ( continued )
 nomenclature ,  272 ,  273 
 speciﬁ cation sheets   ,  47   
 Valcom whip   ,  236    
 Antenna-support structure   ,  45   .  See
also  Construction 
 antennazoning.com ,  117 – 118 ,  234 
 Anticlimbing devices ,  147 , 
 322 – 323
 Appeals ,  22 
 Applicable law 
 building codes   ,  92 – 107   
 CC & Rs ,  83 – 90 
 federal .  See  Federal laws 
 local ,  90 – 92 .  See also  Local 
laws   
 precedence of federal/state/
local ,  399 
 state .  See  State laws 
 Applicant’s role  
 always wear white hat   ,  2 – 3   
 being nice and ﬂ exible ,  8 
 preparation process   ,  7 – 8    
 Application process  
 appeals ,  22 
 being nice and ﬂ exible ,  8 
 building permits   .  See  Building 
permit process 
 buying land   ,  9 – 11   
 canvassing neighborhood   , 
 17 – 18
 costs of   ,  23   
 deliberations/decisions ,  22 , 
 287 – 290
 documents you may need , 
 45 – 47
 drafting applications   .  See
 Permit applications   
 evaluating antenna sites   ,  12   
 ﬁ xing TVI/RFI   ,  15 – 16   
 lawsuits .  See  Lawsuits 
 making offers ,  13 – 15 
 My Property documents   ,  44   
 Nancy Reagan posture   ,  2   
 obtaining favorable letters   , 
 19 – 21
 petitions ,  18 – 19 
 preparation, importance of   ,  9   
 preparation process   .  See
 Preparations
 public hearings   .  See  Public 
hearings
 purchase and sale contract , 
 12 – 15
 retail politics   ,  17   
 steamroller effect ,  21 
 timeframe ,  22 
 using attorneys for purchase 
and sale contracts   ,  12 – 13   
 viewings ,  21 – 22 ,  279 – 280 
 Applications .  See  Application 
process; Building permit 
process; Permit applications 
Appraisal Journal, The ,  272 
 Appraiser ,  202 – 203 
 Arbitration ,  392 
 Arizona ,  181 
 Arkansas ,  42 ,  95 
ARRL RFI Book ,  16 
 arrl.org ,  325 
 ASR (Antenna Structure 
Registration) Number , 
 323 – 324
 Assessments ,  204 
 Assessor’s/neighborhood maps   ,  44   , 
 46 ,  204 
 Assignment, lease   ,  380 – 381   
 Association vs. causality   ,  176 – 177   
 Assurance ,  198 – 199 
AT & T Wireless Services v. Mayor 
and City Council of Baltimore , 
 246
AT & T Wireless Services, Oliver v. , 
 247
 Attorneys  
 fees for hearings   ,  17   ,  34 – 35   
 hiring tips   ,  11   ,  83   
 Letter of Understanding   , 
 27 – 29
 municipal counsel   ,  77 – 78   
 purchase and sale offer/
contract ,  12 – 13 
 retainer letter ,  29 – 34 
 Rules of Professional 
Conduct ,  38 
 Attractive nuisance   ,  144 – 148   
Audubon Field Notes ,  217 
Audubon Magazine ,  217 
 Audubon Society   ,  228   ,  274   
 Avatar Environmental, LLC   ,  222   
 Average height   ,  195   
 Avery, Dale ,  407 
 Avian mortality research ,  220 .  See
also  Birds and towers 
 awea.org ,  227 
 B
 Backup power rule   ,  207   
 Balloon tests   ,  189   
Baltimore, AT & T Wireless 
Services v. Mayor and City 
Council of ,  246 
 Bankruptcy ,  398 
 Bans ,  201 ,  245 – 247 ,  303 – 304 
Barker, Anderson v. ,  295 
 Barker, Barbara ,  295 ,  296 
Barrett and Barrett v. Conservation 
Commission of Falmouth ,  300 
 Baumgartner, Fred ,  182 ,  218 
BC Law  (magazine)   ,  283   
 Becker, Greg ,  325 ,  336 
 Big mo   ,  20   
 Binding permit applications ,  254 
 Bird Conservancy, American , 
 222 – 223
 Birds and towers   ,  216 – 223  
 bird deaths caused by human 
activities (chart)   ,  230   
 catastrophe anecdote   ,  216 – 220   
 Fairfax letter ,  227 – 229 
 Fraasch letter ,  229 – 230 
 lighting recommendations   , 
 226
 performing your own study , 
 226 – 227
 research and litigation   , 
 220 – 223
 towers under 200 feet   ,  223   , 
 224
 Trumpeter Swan case   ,  216    
 birds.cornell.edu   ,  218   
 Black hat   ,  3   
Blackburn v. Doubleday 
Broadcasting Company, Inc. , 
 333
 Blake, Catherine C.   ,  157   
 Blank, Martin   ,  164   ,  265   
 Blank page in permit application , 
 259

Index 427
 Blanketing interference   ,  380   
 Board of Appeals ,  16 ,  22 
 Boards
 decisions .  See  Decision of the 
Board
 deliberations ,  22 ,  287 – 288 
 hearings .  See   Public hearings    
 BOCA code   ,  92 – 94   
Bodony v. Sands Point (NY) ,  263 
 Bond to guarantee removal ,  345 
 Borgomeo, Rev. Pasquale ,  152 
Borowski case ,  13 
 Bound notebook   ,  43 – 44   
 Brandeis, Louis   ,  261   
 Bread statistics   ,  177   
 Breakall, James   ,  234   
Bridgeport Housing Auth., Gordon 
v. ,  299 
 Briggs, Jeff ,  144 ,  146 
 Brinker, David   ,  96   
 Broadcast station locations, federal 
law relating to   ,  110 – 111   
 Brock, Ralph   ,  198   ,  334   
 Brokers   ,  203   
Brookhaven, Ermler v. ,  304 
Broyde v. Gotham Tower ,  35 ,  196 , 
 272 ,  334 
 Building codes   ,  92 – 107  
 ANSI TIA/EIA-222-F 
standard ,  94 – 96 ,  134 – 135 
 BOCA code ,  92 – 94 
 National Electrical Code   ,  96   
 safety issues   ,  134 – 135    
 Building Commissioner   ,  16   
 Building envelope ,  6 
 Building Inspector  
 advice for dealing with ,  
72 – 74
 characteristics of   ,  71   
 informal discussions at ﬁ rst 
visit ,  62 – 65 
 informal discussions at second 
visit ,  65 – 66 
 inspections ,  306 
 overview ,  16 
 PE requirements   ,  37 – 38    
 Building Ofﬁ cers and Code 
Administrators .  See  BOCA 
code
 Building permit process 
 antenna site technical 
standards ,  308 – 312 
 application ,  44 ,  305 
 Certiﬁ cate of Completion   ,  87   , 
 104 ,  306 ,  314 – 317 ,  340 
 construction practices/tips , 
 312 – 314
 inspections ,  306 
 overview ,  16 – 17 
 posting permits   ,  305 – 306   
 sample permit   ,  307    
Burlington Broadcasters, Freeman 
v. ,  35 ,  117 ,  156 – 159 ,  196 ,  272 , 
 334 ,  401 
 Bushes, planting for child safety , 
 147 – 148
 Bushland, Roland   ,  219   
 Bylaws  
 back lot only requirement   ,  410   
 cost limits   ,  410   
 deﬁ nitions ,  51 ,  409 
 drafting/redrafting process , 
 399 – 400
 federal requirements for , 
 400 – 401
 freezes ,  90 – 92 
 grandfathering   ,  350   ,  410   
 height-to-lot-line ratio   , 
 403 – 404 ,  409 – 410 
 new, and additional antennas , 
 352 – 353
 obtaining/reading ,  46 ,  51 – 52 
 overview ,  90 
 RFI ,  400 – 401 
 setbacks/fall zone 
requirements ,  193 – 194 , 
 403 – 408
 state requirements for , 
 401 – 403
 structure type   ,  410     
 vested rights   ,  90 – 92   
 video delivery services   ,  400   
 wind speed requirement   , 
 411 – 414
 C
 California ,  32 ,  42 ,  95 
 Cameras ,  48 – 51 .  See also
 Photographs
 supporting pictures for 
application ,  48 – 49 
 Camouﬂ age ,  191 
 Captions, lease   ,  391   
 CARE (Canyon Area Residents for 
the Environment) ,  160 
 c-a-r-e.org ,  160 ,  164 
 Carney, Deborah ,  156 ,  160 ,  164 
 Carter, Jimmy   ,  374   
 Causality   ,  176 – 177   
 CB interference statute ,  337 – 338 
 CC & Rs (covenants, conditions, and 
restrictions)   ,  83 – 90  
 build fast recommendation   , 
 86 – 87
 contingency offers ,  84 – 86 
 Covenant Not to Complain or 
Compete ,  79 
 equity and non-enforcement   , 
 89 – 90
 federal/state laws prohibiting 
enforcement   ,  88 – 89   
 lease issues   ,  364   
 notice of violation received , 
 87 – 88
 obtaining before agreeing to 
purchase ,  83 – 84 
 retain lawyer early ,  83 
Cell Tower Blight, The (Randolph) , 
 181
Cellular Business ,  144 
 Cellular leases   .  See  Lease issues 
 Cellular telephone, federal law 
relating to   ,  111 – 112   
 Center-line (C/L)   ,  361   ,  397   
 CEQRA (City Environmental 
Quality Review Act) ,  40 
 Certiﬁ cate of Completion   ,  87   ,  104   , 
 306 ,  314 – 317 ,  340 
 Certiﬁ cate of insurance   ,  47   ,  72   ,  
386
 Certiﬁ cate of Occupancy ,  306 
 Certiﬁ cate of Use   ,  71   ,  87   ,  306   ,  315   
 CFA (crossed-ﬁ eld antenna)   , 
 235 – 236
 CFR 47 Vol 1.pdf   ,  118   
 Chalmers, James A. ,  200 
Chambers v. Old Stone Hill ,  10n 
 Changes to installation and leases , 
 363 ,  397 

428 Index
 Charlotte, VT ( Freeman v. 
Burlington Broadcasters ) ,  35 , 
 117 ,  156 – 159 ,  196 ,  272 ,  334 , 
 401
Chicago, Mattson v. City of ,  91 
 Child safety  
 anticlimbing devices ,  147 , 
 322 – 323
 attractive nuisance   ,  144   
 bushes/guy guards   ,  147 – 148    
 Choice of law ,  391 
 Churchill, Winston ,  2 
Cincinnati v. Discovery Network, 
Inc. ,  246 
 Cities, suing   ,  76 – 77   ,  298 – 299   
City of Ladue v. Gilleo ,  245 
 Clinton, Bill   ,  196   ,  337   
 Close ,  18 
 Coax cables   ,  397   
 Code Enforcement Ofﬁ cers  
 advice for dealing with ,  
72 – 74
 characteristics of   ,  71    
Colchester, Hillerby v. Town of ,  299 
 Collating applications   ,  252   
 Collins, Lew ,  373 
 Collins, Marvin   ,  67   ,  138   
 Colorado ,  11 ,  182 ,  202 ,  244 
 Lake Cedar Group (Denver, 
CO) ,  159 – 165 
 Commencement, lease   ,  367   
 Commercial buyer’s agent   ,  11   
 Commercial general liability (CGL) 
insurance ,  47 ,  384 – 386 
 Commercial Mobile Radio Service 
(CMRS) ,  303 
 Commercial real estate agents   ,  10   
 Commissioners, characteristics of   , 
 71 – 74
 Committing yourself to win   ,  1 – 2   
 Common Interest Ownership Act 
(CIOA)   ,  11   
 Communications Act of 1996   ,  51   , 
 150 ,  155 ,  303 ,  352 ,  356 
 Communications Facility, 
deﬁ nition ,  366 
 Company, informal discussions 
with ,  60 – 62 
 Comparables and property values , 
 202
 Compass, handheld   ,  52   
Computer Law Review and 
Technology Journal ,  198 ,  334 , 
 335
 Computers ,  53 – 56 
 drafting software   ,  56   
 image/image editing software   , 
 56
 PowerPoint presentations   , 
 69 – 70
 showing antennas on 
photographs ,  56 
 spreadsheet software   ,  56   ,  185   , 
 186
 word processing software   , 
 55 – 56 ,  250 
 Concrete ,  306 ,  314 ,  319 
 Conditional Use Approval (CUA)   , 
 16
 Conditional Use Permit (CUP)   ,  16   
 Cone of protection   ,  178   
 Conﬂ ict of interest   ,  73 – 74   
 Connecticut ,  204 ,  299 ,  415 
 Consent, lease   ,  390   
 Construction
 anticlimbing devices ,  147 , 
 322 – 323
 holes in ground   ,  322   
 Phillystran ,  324 – 325 
 plans ,  47 
 posting  “ Danger: High 
Voltage ” signs ,  324 
 posting registration number , 
 323 – 324
 practices/tips ,  312 – 314 , 
 361 – 363
 for tenant’s utilities   ,  381 – 382   
 tree removal ,  321 
 work fast   ,  86 – 87   ,  319 – 320   
 work neatly   ,  320 – 321   
 work safely   ,  321   
 work thoughtfully   ,  321    
 Construction permit (CP)   ,  164 – 165   
 Consumer Electronics 
Manufacturers Association   , 
 199
 Consumer Price Index (CPI) , 
 375 – 377
 Contigent offer ,  84 – 86 
 Contingencies, lease   ,  374   
 Continuances ,  277 – 280 
 Contractors ,  41 – 42 
 Contracts, purchase and sale ,  12 – 15 
 Cooper, James A. ,  216 
Cooper, Kovacs v. ,  246 
 Corini, John   ,  136   ,  137   
 Cornell University Laboratory of 
Ornithology   ,  220   
 corrosionchronicle.com   ,  191   
 Cost of Living increase   ,  374   
 Costs
 application process   ,  23   ,  410   
 committing yourself to win ,  2 
 legal .  See   Legal fees   
 permit fees ,  401 – 403 
 Counterparts ,  390 
 Covenant Not to Complain or 
Compete ,  79 
 Covenants, conditions, and 
restrictions   .  See  CC & Rs 
 Cover page ,  259 – 260 
 CPI (Consumer Price Index) , 
 375 – 377
CQ Magazine ,  182 
 Crank-up towers   ,  189 – 190   
 Crimes, complaints escalating to , 
 326 – 327
 Crossed-Field Antenna (CFA)   , 
 235 – 236
CTIA v. FCC, U.S. Court of 
Appeals ,  207 
 Cure defaults, right to   ,  386 – 387   
 currykerlinger.com ,  220 
 D
 Damage repair ,  348 – 349 
 Damascus Residents for 
Responsible Tower Siting 
(DRRTS) ,  237 – 245 
 “ Danger: High Voltage ” signs ,  324 
 Dark Skies Initiative ,  223 
 Date/time stamping   ,  250   ,  254   , 
 255 – 257
Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharm., 
Inc. ,  157 
 De minimus construction   ,  195   ,  408   
Dearborn, Loschavio v. City of ,  304 
 Debris pattern and fall zone , 
 137 – 139
 Decision of the Board 
 if you lost   ,  289   
 if you won   ,  288 – 289   

Index 429
 modifying decisions   ,  289 – 290   
 overview ,  22 
 reaction/behavior immediately 
after public 
hearing ,  287 – 290 
 submitting proposed decision/
order ,  280 – 281 
 Deemed approved ,  257 
 Default, lease   ,  368   ,  386 – 387   
 Defects of Title ,  364 
 Deﬁ nitions, bylaws   ,  51   ,  409   
 Deliberations of Board   ,  22   , 
 287 – 288 .  See also  Decision of 
the Board 
 Delivery 
 of lease notices   ,  387   
 of permit applications   ,  253   , 
 254
 DeLorme maps   ,  12   ,  46   ,  232   ,  233   
Denver Post, The ,  162 
 Different grounds   ,  303   
 Digital cameras   ,  51   
DiRico, Franks v. ,  91 
 Disclosure, full   ,  3 – 5   
Discovery Network, Inc., Cincinnati 
v. ,  246 
 Distances
 full disclosure of   ,  4   
 visibility calculations   , 
 184 – 185
 District of Columbia   ,  31   ,  167   ,  223   
 Documents .  See also  Letters 
 .doc/.pdf ﬁ les. See  CD-ROM 
(included with book) 
 documents you may need , 
 45 – 47
 My Property documents   ,  44   
 for offers ,  13 – 15 
 for timeline   ,  55    
Doubleday Broadcasting Company, 
Inc, Blackburn v. ,  333 
 Doyle, Peter H.   ,  165   ,  175   
 Drafting bylaws 
 basics of   ,  399 – 400   
 elements of bylaws   ,  400 – 403   
 speciﬁ c issues .  See   Bylaws    
 Drafting software   ,  56   
 DRRTS (Damascus Residents for 
Responsible Tower Siting)   , 
 237 – 245
 Dry seal/dry stamp   ,  36 – 38   ,  47   ,  64   
 Due diligence period   ,  374   
Duxbury, MacGibbon v. Board of 
Appeals of ,  291 
 Dylans, Bob   ,  219    
 E
 earth.google.com ,  44 ,  46 
 Easements
 fall zone   ,  406 – 408   
 for utilities   ,  361    
 Eau Claire, WI ,  216 – 220 
 Editor, Letter to ,  284 – 286 
E.G. Helm, Jr. v. Louisville Two-
Way Radio 
Corporation ,  334 
 E-H antenna   ,  235 – 236   
 EIA/TIA-222 ,  47 ,  94 – 96 ,  134 – 135 
Electomagnetic Fields (EMF) and 
Health Risk: 
A Scientiﬁ c Perspective
(Blank) ,  164 
 Electrical permits   ,  46   ,  63   ,  96   ,  314   
 Emergency communications   ,  248   
 Emergency power ,  206 – 207 ,  396 
 EMF (Electromagnetic force)   ,  36   , 
 45 ,  164 
 Empire State Building   ,  409   
 EMR Network   ,  156   
 EMR Policy Institute   ,  156 – 157   , 
 164
 Endangered Species Act ,  223 
 Environmental Assessment (EA) , 
 211 – 215
 Environmental issues  
 danger to birds   ,  216 – 223   
 environmental/regulatory 
consultants ,  39 
 federal law relating to , 
 118 – 129
 government agencies   ,  214   
 lighting ,  223 – 230 
 NEPA compliance   ,  211 – 215   
 T-Mobile case   ,  131 – 132    
 Equity and CC & R enforcement   , 
 89 – 90
Ermler v. Brookhaven ,  304 
 Evans, Bill   ,  220 – 222   
Evans v. Shore Communications, 
Inc. ,  246 
 Excel spreadsheets  
 property value studies   ,  201   
 visibility calculations ,  185 , 
 186
 Execution, lease   ,  390   
 Existing structure  
 alterations to   ,  350   
 damage repair ,  348 – 349 
 grandfathering   ,  350   ,  410   
 law of prior existing 
structures ,  314 ,  315 ,  340 
 prior conforming use   , 
 350 – 351
 prior nonconforming use   ,  
351
 replacing/reinforcing towers , 
 350
 strengthening ,  349 – 350 
 town background   ,  19 – 20    
 Expenses .  See  Costs 
 Experts, team support from ,  26 
 Extension rentals   ,  371    
 F
 FAA (Federal Aviation 
Administration)
Aircraft Owners and Pilots 
Association v. FAA ,  144 
 exemption conditions   ,  143   
 “ No Hazard ” decision ,  144 , 
 146
 painting/lighting 
requirements   ,  143   
 permission ,  143 – 144 
 TOWAIR ﬁ ndings ,  145 
 TOWAIR website   ,  144    
 FAA clearance, federal law relating 
to ,  112 – 114 
 Facilities clause   ,  355 – 356   
 Fair Radio   ,  189   
 Fair representation   ,  49 – 50   
 Fairfax letter ,  227 – 229 
 Fairfax, Steve ,  227 
 Fall zone   ,  135 – 142  
 easement ,  406 – 408 
 expert opinions   ,  139   ,  142   
 guyed towers   ,  137 – 139   
 letters from tower 
manufacturers   ,  140 – 141   
 mechanical fuse   ,  136 – 137   
 possible failure and denials , 
 139
 warning signs   ,  142    

430 Index
Falmouth, Barrett and Barrett v. 
Conservation
Commission of ,  300 
 FCC (Federal Communications 
Commission)
 AM license process   ,  247 – 248   
 AM preemption ruling/appeal   , 
 236 – 245
American Bird Conservancy, 
Inc. v. FCC ,  223 
 backup power rule   ,  207   
CTIA v. FCC ,  207 
 fence violations   ,  347 – 348   
 Form ,  301 ,  302 ,  110 – 111 ,  373 
Interference Handbook ,  198 , 
 329 ,  334 
 KinStar antennas   ,  190   , 
 234 – 235
 license ,  47 
 migratory bird docket   ,  222   
Recommendations of the 
Independent Panel ,  207 
Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. 
FCC ,  201 ,  303 
 Registration Number ,  323 – 324 
Turner Broadcasting System, 
Inc. v. FCC ,  201 ,  303 
 Valcom whip   ,  236    
 FCC Form 601   ,  212 – 213   
 FCC Form 854   ,  114   ,  144   ,  
212 – 213
 FCC OET-65 Supplement B.pdf , 
 36 ,  152 
 FCC OET-65.pdf   ,  36   ,  152   
 Federal Aviation Administration   . 
See  FAA 
 Federal Emergency Management 
Agency (FEMA)   ,  215   
 Federal land   ,  126   ,  127   ,  173   ,  214   
 Federal laws 
 47 CFR §1.4000   ,  99 – 107   
 broadcast station locations   , 
 110 – 111
 bylaws meeting requirements 
of ,  400 – 401 
 environmental protection   , 
 118 – 129
 FAA clearance   ,  112 – 114   
 FM transmitters   ,  107 – 109   
 information sources   ,  97   
 mobile services   ,  111 – 112   
 OTARD rule ,  79 – 83 ,  97 – 107 , 
 304 ,  400 
 precedence of federal/state/
local laws ,  399 
 prohibiting enforcement of 
CC & R ,  88 
 reference materials   ,  271   
 RF exposure ,  114 – 116 , 
 149 – 152
 RFI ,  35 ,  271 – 272 ,  331 ,  338 , 
 400 – 401
Federal Register ,  120 ,  124 ,  127 , 
 128 ,  168 ,  213 ,  215 
 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 
(FRCP) ,  301 – 302 
 Fee simple   ,  388 – 389   
 Fees, legal .  See   Legal fees   
 Fees, permit ,  401 – 403 
 FEMA (Federal Emergency 
Management Agency) ,  215 
 Fencing ,  347 – 348 
 Filing permit applications   ,  250 – 251   
 Filters ,  199 
 First Amendment argument 
 basics of   ,  245 – 247   
 for broadcasters   ,  201 – 202   
 in  Koor Communications case , 
 234 ,  245 
 Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) , 
 168 ,  214 ,  220 – 221 ,  274 
 Flag lots   ,  410   
 Flood zones   ,  214   
 Floodplains ,  215 
 Florida ,  64 ,  95 ,  96 ,  196 ,  225 ,  264 , 
 272
 Flying setback   ,  194   
 FM transmitters, federal law 
relating to   ,  107 – 109   
 Folded monopole/unipole kits   ,  353   
 FONSI (Finding of No Signiﬁ cant 
Impact) ,  118 ,  131 – 132 ,  213 
 KRKO-AM ,  165 – 176 
 Force Majeure   ,  382   
 Form ,  301 ,  302 ,  110 – 111 ,  373 
 Forms 
 Building Permit application   , 
 44
 purchase and sale agreements , 
 13 – 15
 Fort Worth Tower ,  52 
 Fraasch letter   ,  229 – 230   
 Fraasch, Steven ,  216 ,  229 
Franks v. DiRico ,  91 
Fred Hopengarten v. Board of 
Appeals of Lincoln ,  342 
 Freeman, Mary Beth   ,  156   
Freeman v. Burlington 
Broadcasters ,  35 ,  117 , 
 156 – 159 ,  196 ,  272 ,  334 ,  401 
 Freezes, plan/non-plan   ,  90 – 92   
 Friedman, Barry   ,  237   ,  238   
 Full disclosure policy ,  3 – 5 
 Fybush ,  182 
 G
 G-2 (good gossip) on neighbors , 
 20
 Galacci, Caroline   ,  169   
 Galvin, Deborah   ,  98   
 Garbose, William ,  297 
 Garsh, Susan   ,  91   
 Gehring, Joelle   ,  226   
 Generators ,  206 – 207 
 Georgia   ,  251   ,  258   
 Gere, Richard   ,  298   
 getawaiver.com ,  99 
 “ Ghost in the Computer: Radio 
Frequency Interference and 
the Doctrine of Federal 
Preemption ” (Brock) ,  198 , 
 334 ,  335 
Gilleo, City of Ladue v. ,  201 ,  245 
 Good faith   ,  300 – 301   ,  402   
Gordon v. Bridgeport Housing 
Auth. ,  299 
Gotham Tower, Broyde v. ,  35 ,  196 , 
 272 ,  334 
 Gourley, Brent H. ,  326 
 Government approvals, lease   ,  374   
 GPS receiver ,  53 
 Grandfathering   ,  350   ,  410   
 Gray, Haze ,  49 ,  190 – 191 
 Greenmail ,  353 – 354 
 Gregg, Donna C.   ,  239   
Grifﬁ n, Lovell v. ,  202 ,  245 
 grinnellgroup.com   ,  159   
 Guirey, Bernie ,  221 
 Guy guards   ,  147 – 148   
 Guy wires 
 bushes/guy guards   ,  147 – 148   
 Phillystran ,  324 – 325 
 setbacks for ,  195 ,  408 

Index 431
 Guyed towers  
 debris pattern   ,  137 – 139   
 fall zone   ,  137 – 139   
 land requirements/orientation   , 
 4 – 5
 second anchors   ,  137     
 H
Haley v. Town of Lincoln ,  299 
 hallikainen.com ,  97 
  “ Hard Pressed ”  (Reich)   ,  283   
 Hardell, Dr. ,  157 
 Harrassment ,  327 
 Harvey Airﬁ eld ,  166 ,  171 ,  174 
 Hately, Maurice   ,  235   
 Hawaii ,  51 ,  185 ,  223 
 Hazardous substances/materials   , 
 383 – 384
 Haze Gray ,  49 ,  190 – 191 
 HDTV antennas   ,  353 – 354   
 hdtvcolorado.com ,  159 ,  162 
 hdtvhonestly.com   ,  160   
 Hearing room   ,  263 – 264   
 Hearings .  See   Public hearings   
 Height requirements  
 AM broadcasting   ,  232 – 247   
 considerations for drafting 
state statutes   ,  414 – 415   
 height-to-lot-line ratio   , 
 404 – 405 ,  409 – 410 
 KinStar antennas   ,  190   , 
 234 – 235
 path proﬁ le ,  103 ,  232 ,  233 
 UHF/microwave ,  231 – 232 
 Valcom whip   ,  236    
 Heights towers   ,  52   
 Heller, Joseph   ,  222   
Helm (E.G.), Jr. v. Louisville 
Two-Way Radio 
Corporation ,  334 
 Hempstead, NY   ,  198   ,  329   
 Hesbacher, Gretchen ,  95 
 heywhatsthat.com ,  103 ,  185 ,  232 
 High voltage transmission lines, 
effect on property values   ,  200   
 highlandsranch.org ,  182 
Hillerby v. Town of Colchester ,  
299
 Hiroshima tower ,  136 
 Historic preservation  
 Historic Preservation Ofﬁ ces , 
 185 ,  187 
 National Historic Preservation 
Act ,  81 ,  106 ,  185 ,  187 
 National Register of Historic 
Places ,  81 ,  106 ,  120 ,  126 , 
 169
 resources ,  214 
 State Historic Preservation 
Ofﬁ ce ,  25 ,  185 ,  187 ,  214 , 
 243
 Hoaglin, David C. ,  148 
 Hoenninger, Thomas J.   ,  347   
 Holes, construction   ,  322   
 Homeowners ’  association (HOA)   , 
 11
 Hopengarten, Fred (author) 
 letters responding to RFI 
complaints ,  330 – 335 
 letters responding to wind-
speed requirement   , 
 330 – 335
 maxim of public hearings   ,  206   
 renewal request letter ,  342 
 retainer letter ,  29 – 31 
 technique for property value 
studies ,  203 – 206 
 Horizon and visibility   ,  184 – 185   
Horta v. Sullivan ,  299 
 Hunter, D.   ,  144    
 I
 IBC (International Building Code) , 
 47 ,  92 ,  95 ,  135 
 Ice zone ,  135 
 Idelson, Jim   ,  50 – 51   ,  276   
 Idelson, Sander   ,  50 – 51   
 Illinois ,  15 ,  154 ,  334 
 Image/image editing software   ,  56   
 Imlay, Chris   ,  88   ,  189   
 imsisoft.com ,  56 
 Inclinometer   ,  53   
 Indemniﬁ cation ,  382 – 383 
 Indiana ,  95 ,  132 ,  143 ,  401 ,  402 
 Industrial area   ,  10   
 Ink by the barrel   ,  285   
 Inspections ,  306 
 Insurance
 afﬁ davit for permit   ,  72   
 certiﬁ cate ,  47 ,  72 ,  386 
 CGL ,  47 ,  384 – 386 
 lease issues   ,  384 – 386   
 property   ,  386   
 umbrella policy ,  47 ,  385 
 worker’s compensation   ,  386    
 Interference .  See also  RFI ;  TVI 
 basics ,  15 – 16 ,  195 – 199 
 CB interference statute , 
 337 – 338
 lease issues   ,  377 – 380    
 Intervening trees/terrain ,  103 ,  185 , 
 186 ,  232 ,  233 
 Interviews with press   ,  282 – 283   
 Inverse square law ,  272 
 IVI Due Diligence Services, Inc. , 
 40
 J
 Jacobi, Robert   ,  175   
Jamison v. Texas ,  202 ,  245 
Johnson County Board of County 
Commissioners, Southwestern 
Bell Wireless, Inc. v. ,  35 ,  196 , 
 272 ,  334 ,  401 
 Johnson, Lyndon Baines   ,  72   ,  289   
 Jones, Meredith J.   ,  98    
 K
 K1ZM ,  144 ,  146 ,  323 
 Kabbary, F.M. ,  235 
 Kane, Philip M.   ,  29   ,  32 – 34   ,  329   , 
 330
 Kansas ,  98 ,  196 ,  221 ,  272 ,  401 
 Kasevich, Raymond   ,  157   
Katzman v. Anderson ,  89 
 Kay, Leonard ,  204 
 Kemper, Charles A.   ,  217 – 218   
 Kennedy, John F. ,  72 
 Kentucky ,  334 
 Kerlinger, Paul ,  168 ,  220 
 KFI-AM tower ,  67 – 68 ,  137 – 139 
Kindergarten Cop (movie) ,  322 
 KinStar antennas   ,  190   ,  234 – 235   
 Kintronics ,  353 
 Kissinger, Henry ,  97 
 Kitchen brokers   ,  202   
 Knowledge, lack of   ,  57   
Koor Communication v. City of 
Lebanon ,  107 ,  142 ,  201 ,  232 , 
 303
 Kosowsky, Michael ,  185 

432 Index
Kovacs v. Cooper ,  246 
Kraemer, Shelley v. ,  88 
 KRKO-AM ,  118 
 FONSI ,  165 – 176 
 KROY rebuilding denial   ,  351   
 K-Y Filter   ,  199    
 L
Ladue v. Gilleo, City of ,  201 
 Lai, Henry   ,  157   
 Lake Cedar Group (Denver, CO) , 
 159 – 165
Lakewood v. Plain Dealer 
Publishing Co., City of ,  246 
 Land .  See also   Property values  
 buying ,  9 – 12 
 evaluating/walking antenna 
sites ,  12 
 full disclosure of ownership ,  3 
 leased ,  356 
 selecting real estate agent , 
 9 – 12
 topographical maps   ,  12   ,  44   ,  46    
 Landscape view, photograph ,  203 , 
 284
 Langdon, John T. ,  83 
 Late rent payments   ,  371   
 Laws 
 building codes   ,  92 – 107   
 CC & Rs ,  83 – 90 
 copies/information about   ,  7 – 8   , 
 44 – 45 ,  51 – 52 
 federal .  See  Federal laws 
 leases, applicable/choice of   , 
 391
 local .  See  Local laws 
 precedence of federal/state/
local ,  399 
 state .  See  State laws 
 Lawsuits 
 CC & R violations ,  87 – 89 
 leading cases/laws ,  298 
 municipal immunity extended 
to discretionary acts   ,  299   
 overview ,  22 
 recovering legal fees   ,  300 – 304   
 stress of   ,  299 – 300   
 suing antenna owner ,  295 – 298 
 suing city/town   ,  76 – 77   , 
 298 – 299
 Lawyers .  See   Attorneys   
 Lazaroff, Mike   ,  276   
 LBA Group   ,  353   
 Leach, Sid   ,  88   
 Lease issues  
 501(c)(3) tenants   ,  370   
 access ,  357 – 359 
 access to revenue books/
records ,  372 
 additional loads   ,  398   
 airtime loss   ,  380   
 AM towers ,  373 
 amendments ,  382 
 antennas ,  361 – 363 
 arbitration ,  392 
 assignment ,  380 – 381 
 bankruptcy ,  398 
 captions ,  391 
 CC & Rs ,  364 
 changes to installation   ,  363   , 
 397
 coax cables ,  397 
 Communications Facility, 
deﬁ nition ,  366 
 condition of premises   ,  364   , 
 389 – 390
 consent ,  390 
 construction for utilities   , 
 381 – 382
 contingencies ,  374 
 counterparts ,  390 
 deals ,  398 
 default ,  368 ,  398 
 default and right to cure , 
 386 – 387
 easements for utilities   ,  361   
 emergency power ,  396 
 execution ,  390 
 extension rentals   ,  371   
 fee simple ,  388 – 389 
 force majeure   ,  382   
 government approvals ,  374 
 hazardous substances/
materials ,  383 – 384 
 height creep ,  361 ,  397 
 indemniﬁ cation/indemnity   , 
 382 – 383
 insurance ,  384 – 386 
 interference ,  377 – 380 
 land requirements   ,  356   , 
 397 – 398
 late rent payments   ,  371   
 law, applicable/choice of   ,  391   
 most favored nation clause , 
 365 – 366
 ownership clause   ,  366   
 payments for utility 
construction ,  381 – 382 
 permits/costs   ,  396   
 premises ,  356 – 364 
 Quiet Enjoyment/Quiet 
Possession ,  364 – 366 , 
 388 – 389
 removal bond   ,  398   
 removal of equipment   , 
 389 – 390 ,  398 
 renewal of lease   ,  367 – 368   
 renewal rent increases   ,  372 
 rent ,  370 – 372 
 rent increases   ,  372   ,  375 – 377   
 revenue sharing   ,  372 – 373   
 review payments ,  357 ,  374 , 
 393
 Right of First Refusal   ,  396   
 severability   ,  391   
 SNDAA ,  392 – 394 
 start date for rent payments , 
 371 ,  397 
 start/commencement of lease   , 
 367
 sublet ,  381 
 suitability/due diligence 
period ,  374 
 Table of Contents missing , 
 355
 taxes ,  394 – 395 
 term of lease   ,  366 – 370   
 termination ,  368 – 370 ,  398 
 termination and condition of 
property   ,  389 – 390   
 tips ,  397 – 398 
 title ,  364 – 366 ,  388 – 389 
 transfer of warranty ,  364 
 underground storage tanks   , 
 384
 use clause ,  356 – 357 ,  363 
 utility poles/service   ,  360 – 361   , 
 381 – 382
 wind-load upgrades   ,  
363 – 364
 Lease regulations ,  357 
Leavitt, Posey v. ,  246 

Index 433
Lebanon (NH),  Koor 
Communication v. City of ,  142 , 
 201 ,  232 ,  303 
 Lebanon, NH   ,  64   ,  107   
 LED lighting   ,  226   
 Legal fees 
 fees for attending hearings , 
 17 ,  34 – 35 
 Letter of Understanding   , 
 27 – 29
 no recovery for cellular/
CMRS cases   ,  303   
 recovery for broadcasters   , 
 303 – 304
 recovery for OTARD rule 
lawsuits   ,  304   
 suing to recover legal fees , 
 300 – 304
 Letter to the Editor ,  284 – 286 
 Letters
 to law ﬁ rms (Letter of 
Understanding) ,  27 – 29 
 permission to act as agent for 
landlord ,  47 
 vs. petitions   ,  18 – 19   
 from real estate agents   ,  40 – 41   
 request for renewal ,  341 
 retainer letters   ,  29 – 34   
 sample, responding to RFI 
complaints ,  327 – 335 
 of support   ,  17 – 21   ,  47    
 Levitt, B. Blake   ,  164   
 Licensed Contractors   ,  41 – 42   
 Light shields   ,  223   ,  225   
 Lighting
 bird study   ,  226   
 environmental issues   ,  214   , 
 223 – 230
 existing, compliance of   ,  225   
 LED lighting   ,  226   
 preemption ,  225 
 safety issues   ,  143   ,  177 – 179    
 Lightning ,  177 – 179 
 lightningrod.com ,  178 
Lincoln, Fred Hopengarten v. 
Board of Appeals of ,  342 
Lincoln, Haley v. Town of ,  299 
Lincoln, Mass., Omnipoint v. Town 
of ,  293 
 Line-of-sight paths   ,  46   ,  103   ,  232   , 
 233
 Litigation   .  See  Lawsuits 
 Loans and stick value   ,  35   
 Lobbying ,  415 – 416 
 Local laws 
 CC & Rs ,  83 – 90 
 copies/information about   ,  7 – 8   
 health/safety regulations , 
 152 – 155
 precedence of federal/state/
local laws ,  399 
 zoning bylaws/ordinances , 
 51 – 52 ,  90 – 92 
 Lookout Mountain   ,  159 – 165   
 Loose-leaf binder w/ section 
dividers ,  44 
Loschavio v. City of Dearborn ,  304 
 Losing decision   ,  289   
Louisville Two-Way Radio 
Corporation, E.G. Helm, Jr. 
v. ,  334 
Lovell v. Grifﬁ n ,  202 ,  245 
 Lowell, Mark   ,  178   
 Lubliner, Jay ,  98 
 M
MacGibbon v. Board of Appeals of 
Duxbury ,  291 
 Maine ,  30 ,  31 ,  79 ,  147 ,  267 ,  299 
 Maintenance
 damage repair ,  348 – 349 
 fencing ,  347 – 348 
 permits ,  349 
 strengthening ,  349 – 350 
Man of the House: The Life and 
Political Memoirs of Speaker 
Tip O’Neill (Novak) ,  17 
Manchester, Merrill v. City of ,  242 , 
 299
 Manufacturer’s speciﬁ cations/
installation requirements for 
your tower   ,  52   
 Manville, Albert M. ,  164 
 Maps ,  46 
 assessor’s/neighborhood   ,  44   , 
 46
 plot plans   ,  44   ,  46 – 47   
 topographical ,  12 ,  44 ,  46 
 U.S. Geological Survey 
(USGS) maps   ,  10   ,  44    
 maps.google.com ,  54 
Martin v. Struthers ,  202 ,  245 
 Maryland ,  97 – 98 ,  200 
 Maryland Community Newspapers 
Online ,  239 
 Maryland Consumer Protection 
Act ,  157 
 Maryland Medical School   ,  217   
 Mason, Perry   ,  187   
 Massachusetts   ,  22   ,  37   ,  38   ,  74   ,  153   , 
 154 ,  204 ,  295 ,  299 ,  342 ,  409 
Fred Hopengarten v. Board of 
Appeals of Lincoln ,  342 
 GIS website   ,  232   
Haley v. Town of Lincoln ,  299 
Omnipoint v. Town of Lincoln, 
Mass. ,  293 
 Massachusetts Appeals Court ,  342 
 Massachusetts Audobon Society   , 
 223 ,  224 
 Massachusetts Building Code   , 
 92 – 94 ,  413 
 Massachusetts General Laws ,  262 , 
 281 ,  300 ,  402 
 Massachusetts Regulations ,  92 
 Massachusetts State Building Code , 
 412
Matter of Parkview Assocs. v. City 
of New York ,  298 
Mattson v. City of Chicago ,  91 
 Maximum permissible exposure 
(MPE) ,  115 ,  150 
 Meade, KS (municipality) case , 
 97 – 98
 Mechanical fuse   ,  136 – 137   
 Meetings .  See also   Public hearings  
 attending to know the process , 
 6 – 7
 informal discussions   ,  60 – 70   
 schedule for formal zoning   ,  69    
 Menacing ,  327 
Merrell Dow Pharm., Inc., Daubert 
v. ,  157 
Merrill v. City of Manchester ,  242 , 
 299
Metromedia v. San Diego ,  201 ,  245 , 
 303
Michaels, Still v. ,  333 
 Michigan   ,  83   ,  226   
 Michigan Natural Features 
Inventory   ,  226   
 Migratory Bird Management, 
Ofﬁ ce of ,  220 

434 Index
 Migratory Birds   ,  220 – 223   
 Minimum yard   ,  46   
 Minnesota ,  216 ,  217 ,  333 
 Minnesota Public Radio (MPR) , 
 227 ,  229 
 Miscellaneous section of lease   ,  390   
 Mississippi ,  42 
 Mobile services, federal law 
relating to   ,  111 – 112   
 Model Siting Legislation ,  399 ,  414 
 Model Siting Ordinance   ,  399   
 Most favored nation clause in lease , 
 365 – 366
 Motion for Summary Judgment , 
 296 – 297
Motorola, Inc., Newman v. ,  117 , 
 157
Mount Ephraim, Schad v. ,  202 ,  245 , 
 246
 MPE (maximum permissible 
exposure) ,  115 ,  150 
 MSN TerraServer website   ,  54   
 Municipal Counsel   ,  77 – 78   
 Municipal immunity   ,  76 – 77   , 
 298 – 299
 My Property documents   ,  44    
 N
 Nancy Reagan posture   ,  2   
 National Electrical Code (NEC)   ,  96   
 National Environmental Policy Act 
of 1969   ,  118 – 129   
 National Geographic maps   ,  12   
 National Historic Preservation Act 
(NHPA) ,  81 ,  106 ,  185 ,  187 
 National Register of Historic 
Places ,  81 ,  106 ,  120 ,  126 ,  169 
National Tower v. Plainville Zoning 
Board of Appeals ,  293 ,  303 
 Native American sites ,  39 ,  169 ,  214 
 Native American tribes ,  185 
 Neader, Scott   ,  328   
 Neighbors
 canvassing neighborhood   , 
 17 – 18
 convinced of negative impact , 
 58 – 60
 fear of unknown ,  57 – 58 
 G-2 (good gossip) on   ,  20   
 informal discussions with   ,  62   
 obtaining favorable letters 
from ,  21 
 petitions ,  18 – 19 
 retail politics   ,  17   
 sample letters responding 
to RFI complaints by , 
 327 – 335
 steamroller effect ,  21 
 TVI/RFI complaint by   , 
 325 – 327
 TVI/RFI complaint by gun-
toting ,  336 – 337 
 Nello ,  52 
 NEPA (National Environmental 
Policy Act)  
 compliance, described   , 
 211 – 215
 exclusions ,  187 
 Nevada ,  76 ,  251 ,  402 
 New Hampshire   ,  72   ,  303   ,  350   ,  351   , 
 399 .  See also   Lebanon, NH   
 New Hampshire Supreme Court , 
 64 ,  234 ,  240 ,  245 ,  292 ,  304 
 New York ,  198 ,  298 ,  300 ,  350 ,  351 
Saia v. New York ,  246 
 New York City  
City of New York v. 17 Vista 
Associates ,  298 
Matter of Parkview Assocs. v. 
City of New York ,  298 
New York Times ,  164 ,  182 
 Newman, Christopher ,  117 
Newman v. Motorola, Inc. ,  117 ,  157 
 Newspaper advertisements   , 
 261 – 262
 Newsrack bans   ,  246   
 nfpa.org   ,  96   
 NHPA (National Historic 
Preservation Act) ,  81 ,  106 , 
 185 ,  187 
 “ No Hazard ” FAA decision ,  144 , 
 146
 Noise ,  206 – 209 
 cumulative ,  207 
 engineering solutions   , 
 208 – 209
 generator testing/exercising , 
 206
 ordinance problem (example) , 
 208
 preemption ,  207 
 types of   ,  206   
 where to measure   ,  206 – 207    
 Nomenclature   ,  272   ,  273   
 Non-plan freeze   ,  90 – 92   
 Nonthermal health effects ,  159 ,  286 
 Non-zoning ordinances   ,  414   
 North Carolina   ,  42   
 Notebooks
 identifying speciﬁ c objections   , 
 70 – 71
 identifying supporters/
opposition ,  70 
 preparing ,  43 – 45 
 taking notes   ,  70    
 Notices
 Notice to Airmen (NOTAM) , 
 144
 posting .  See  Posting 
 of public hearings   ,  261 – 263   
 regarding leases   ,  387 – 388    
 Nott, Ltd.   ,  353   
 Novak, William ,  17 
 Null hypothesis ,  149 
 O
 Objections .  See  Aesthetics; Height 
requirements; Interference; 
Noise; Property values; Safety 
issues
 O’Connell, James   ,  13   ,  15   ,  85   ,  86   , 
 190 ,  259 
 OET-65 (OET Bulletin 65)   ,  36   , 
 116 ,  149 
 Off the record   ,  283   
 Offers, purchase   ,  12 – 15  
 contingent offer ,  84 – 86 
 forms ,  13 – 15 
 Ohio ,  95 ,  131 ,  370 
Oliver v. AT & T Wireless Services , 
 247
 Omniform (ScanSoft)   ,  72   
Omnipoint v. Town of Lincoln, 
Mass. ,  293 
 On the record   ,  283   
 O’Neill, Thomas P. (Tip)   ,  17   
 Opposition
 convinced of negative impact , 
 58 – 60
 fear of unknown ,  57 – 58 
 lack of knowledge ,  57 

Index 435
 Option, lease   ,  367   
 Ordinances .  See  Bylaws; Zoning 
bylaws/ordinances 
 OTARD (Over-the-Air Reception 
Devices) rule ,  79 – 83 ,  97 – 107 , 
 304 ,  400 
 Over-the-Air Reception Devices 
(OTARD rule)   ,  79 – 83   , 
 97 – 107 ,  304 ,  400 
 Owner of existing antenna .  See
 Antenna owners   
 Ownership clause in lease   ,  366   
 Ownership of property, full 
disclosure ,  3 
 P
 Paging, federal law relating to , 
 111 – 112
 Painting requirements   ,  143   , 
 190 – 191
Palmer v. Saratoga Springs ,  198 
 Paper the ﬁ le ,  75 
Paramount Pictures, Inc., United 
States v. ,  201 ,  245 ,  303 
Participants and Congressional 
Brieﬁ ng Overview ,  164 
Passenger Pigeon, The ,  217 
 Path proﬁ le ,  103 ,  232 ,  233 
 Patterson, Jim   ,  225   
 Payments 
 revenue-sharing ,  373 
 to review lease documents , 
 357 ,  374 ,  393 
 PCIA (Personal Communications 
Industry Association)   , 
 399 – 400
 pcia.com ,  207 ,  399 ,  414 
 PCS, federal law relating to , 
 111 – 112
 PDF format, converting 
applications to   ,  251   
 PE seals   ,  36 – 38   .  See also
 Professional Engineer (PE) 
 Pennsylvania   ,  11   ,  83   ,  234   ,  257   
People ex rel. Hoogasian v. Sears, 
Roebuck and Co. ,  334 
 Permission to act as agent for 
landlord ,  47 
 Permit applications   .  See also
 Application process  
 binding ,  254 
 blank pages   ,  259   
 checking before printing   ,  251   
 collating ,  252 
 color printing   ,  252   
 converting to PDF   ,  251   
 cover page ,  259 – 260 
 covers for   ,  252   
 date/time stamping   ,  250   ,  254   , 
 255 – 257
 delivery ,  253 ,  254 
 editing sample document   ,  250   
 ﬁ ling ,  250 – 251 
 follow up   ,  258   
 overview ,  249 
 photo of submission   ,  255   
 printing quantity/quality , 
 253 – 254
 purpose of   ,  250   
 reluctant recipient   ,  256 – 258   
 sample document   ,  249   
 single/dual-sided printing   ,  252   
 submitting ,  254 – 258 
 Permits, building   .  See  Building 
permit process 
 Perspective 
 in photos   ,  49 – 51   
 trees and screened views ,  47 , 
 183 ,  272 
 Peterson, Wayne ,  223 ,  224 
 Petitions ,  18 – 19 
 phazar.com ,  191 
 Phillystran ,  324 – 325 
 Photographs
 of application submission   ,  255   
 for applications   ,  48 – 49   
 of comparables   ,  49   
 digital cameras   ,  51   
 documenting completion   ,  316   
 as fair representation   ,  49 – 50   , 
 187 – 188
 image/image editing software   , 
 56
 landscape/portrait orientation , 
 203 ,  284 
 My Property documents   ,  44   
 photo perspective ,  49 – 51 
 for press   ,  284   
 property value research   , 
 203 – 204
 showing antennas on   ,  56   
 suitable ,  47 
 Photosimulation   ,  56   ,  354   
 Pictures .  See  Photographs 
 Pirod ,  52 ,  284 
Plain Dealer Publishing Co., City 
of Lakewood v. , 
 246
Plainville Zoning Board of Appeals, 
National Tower v. ,  293 ,  303 
 Plan freeze ,  90 – 92 
 Planning Board  
 characteristics of ,  75 
 informal discussions with 
secretary of   ,  66 – 68    
 Players
 informal discussions with , 
 60 – 70
 learning about   ,  8   
 objector convinced of negative 
impact ,  58 – 60 
 objector fearing the unknown , 
 57 – 58
 types of   ,  57    
Playtime Theatres, Inc., City of 
Renton v. ,  246 
Pleasantville  (movie)   ,  76   
 Plot plans   ,  44   ,  46 – 47   
 POA (property owners ’ 
association)   ,  83 – 84   ,  86 – 87   
 Poem,  An Amateur Radio Tower , 
 132 – 133
 Portrait view, photograph   ,  203   ,  
284
Posey v. Leavitt ,  246 
 Posting
 building permits   ,  305 – 306   
 “ Danger: High Voltage ” signs , 
 324
 fall zone warnings   ,  142   
 public hearings   ,  262   
 registration number ,  323 – 324 
 Potomac Ridge Homeowners ’ 
Association case   ,  97 – 98   
 PowerPoint presentations   ,  69 – 70   
 Precedence of federal/state/local 
laws   ,  399   
 Preemption
 AM broadcasting   ,  236 – 245   
 applicability   ,  60   
 FCC on   ,  154 – 155   
 federal law information   ,  45   
 FM/TV broadcasting   ,  247   

436 Index
Preemption ( continued )
Koor Communication v. City 
of Lebanon ,  107 ,  142 , 
 201 ,  232 ,  303 
 lighting/marking towers   ,  225   
 noise ordinances   ,  207   
 OTARD rule ,  79 – 83 ,  97 – 107 , 
 304 ,  400 
 preformed.com ,  148 
 Premises, lease   ,  356 – 364   
 Preparations
 answer cards   ,  131   ,  198 – 199   , 
 268
 bound notebook   ,  43 – 44   
 computer w/ applications   , 
 53 – 56
 copies of relevant state law ,  52 
 copies/information about laws , 
 7 – 8 ,  44 – 45 ,  
51 – 52
 documents you may need , 
 45 – 47
 GPS receiver ,  53 
 great impressions for great 
decisions ,  48 
 handheld compass   ,  52   
 importance of   ,  5 – 8   
 inclinometer   ,  53     
 know the laws ,  7 – 8 
 know the players   ,  8   
 know the process   ,  6 – 7   ,  65   
 know what you want ,  6 
 long tape measure   ,  52   
 loose-leaf binder w/ section 
dividers ,  44 – 45 
 manufacturer’s speciﬁ cations/
installation
requirements for your 
tower ,  52 
 My Property documents   ,  44   
 pictures ,  48 – 49 
 Presentation at public hearing   ,  264   , 
 266 – 270
 Preservation   .  See  Historic 
preservation   
 Press
 interviews with ,  282 – 283 
 Letter to the Editor ,  284 – 286 
 photographs ,  284 
 Presumption of regularity   ,  203   ,  205   
 Pre-trial conference   ,  296   
Primal Fear ,  298 
 Principal structure   ,  194   
 Principles that help you win 
 be nice/ﬂ exible ,  8 
 building winning team   ,  2   
 committing yourself to win , 
 1 – 2
 full disclosure policy ,  3 – 5 
 preparation .  See  Preparations 
 wearing white hat   ,  2 – 3    
 Printing permit applications   , 
 252 – 254
 Prior existing structure ,  314 – 315 , 
 340
 Professional Engineer (PE) 
 requirement for independent 
PE ,  73 
 seals ,  36 – 38 
 as team members   ,  35 – 36    
 Property insurance   ,  386   
 Property values   ,  200 – 209  
 arguing First Amendment , 
 201 – 202
 borrowing no-impact studies   , 
 200 – 201
 comparables ,  202 
 creating your own study   ,  202   
 expert opinions   ,  201   
 high voltage transmission line 
effect on   ,  200   
 photographs of existing 
systems ,  203 – 204 
 possible attacks on data , 
 204 – 206
 reference materials   ,  272 – 274   
 studies by real estate 
professionals ,  202 – 203 
 study based on public data 
(Hopengarten
technique) ,  203 – 206 
 wind development effect on , 
 200
 Proposed Decision and Order ,  280 
 Public ﬁ le ,  262 – 263 
 Public hearings   ,  21  
 approach to discussion   , 
 267 – 268
 bioeffects/hazards reference 
material ,  272 
 bird-related reference 
material ,  274 
 bringing reference materials 
to ,  271 – 274 
 cases, related   ,  272   
 checklist for ,  264 – 265 
 citing exact section of law , 
 266
 contact with press   ,  282 – 286   
 continuances ,  277 – 280 
 deliberations/decisions ,  22 , 
 287 – 290
 federal/state/local law 
reference material   ,  271   
 Hopengarten maxim of   ,  206   
 making/breaking your case   , 
 274 – 277
 newspaper advertisements   , 
 261 – 262
 nomenclature reference 
material   ,  272   ,  273   
 posting ,  262 
 presentation ,  266 – 270 
 presentation timing   ,  264   
 process/procedures during   , 
 264 – 265
 property value reference 
material   ,  272 – 274   
 public ﬁ le ,  262 – 263 
 public service citations ,  272 
 RFI reference material , 
 271 – 272
 Robert’s Rules of Order ,  
267
 screening/sight line reference 
material   ,  272   
 submitting proposed decision/
order ,  280 – 281 
 substance ,  270 
 suggested answers for 
questions ,  269 – 270 
 summary   ,  270   
 visiting hearing room   , 
 263 – 264
 Public interest, convenience and 
necessity   ,  87   ,  167   ,  247 – 248   , 
 275
 Public Law ,  106-521 ,  337 
 Public Law ,  109-466 ,  163 
 Public records and property value 
studies ,  203 
 Public service   ,  272   ,  283   
 Puerto Rico   ,  108   

Index 437
 Purchase and sale offer/contract , 
 12 – 15
 Q
 Questions/answers at public 
hearing ,  268 – 270 
 Quiet Enjoyment/Quiet Possession , 
 364 – 366 ,  388 – 389 
 R
 Radio Frequency Interference .  See
 RFI
Radio Mobile Deluxe freeware ,  232 
Radio World ,  143 ,  218 ,  236 
Radio World Engineering Extra , 
 236
Radiofrequency Radiation 
 — Hidden Health and 
Environmental Effects  (Levitt)   , 
 164
 Railton, William ,  168 
 Raining ( It’s raining ) ,  298 
Rancho Palos Verdes et al. v. 
Abrams, City of ,  303 
 Randolph, Eleanor   ,  181   
 Reagan, Ronald   ,  267   
 Real estate agent 
 commercial ,  10 
 commercial buyer’s agent   ,  11   
 letter of support   ,  40 – 41   
 purchase and sale offer/
contract ,  12 – 15 
 selecting ,  9 – 11 
 testimony ,  40 
 what to tell   ,  11    
 Real estate appraisers   ,  202 – 203   
 Reasonably related   ,  401   
 Reckless endangerment   ,  327   
 Red lights   ,  143   ,  226   
Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC , 
 201 ,  303 
 Red-eyed vireo ( Vireo olivaceus ) , 
 217
Reed v. Williamson ,  89 
 Regularity, presumption of   ,  203   
 Regulations, lease   ,  357   
 Reich, David   ,  283   
 Rein, Wiley ,  162 
 Reluctant recipient of permit 
applications ,  256 – 258 
 Remedy   ,  293 – 294   
 Removal bond   ,  398   
 Renewable Energy Policy Project 
(REPP) ,  200 
 Renewals 
 basics of   ,  338 – 339   
 bond to guarantee removal , 
 345
 frequency of   ,  339   
 handling ,  341 
 late to renew ,  343 – 345 
 lease ,  367 – 368 
 one year, then permanent , 
 339 – 340
 period coinciding with license 
renewal ,  340 – 341 
 request letter   ,  341 – 343   
 three years, then permanent , 
 340
 Rent ,  370 – 372 
 increases ,  372 ,  375 – 377 
Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 
City of ,  246 
 Repairs ,  348 – 349 
 Replacing/reinforcing towers ,  350 
 Reporter and interviews ,  282 – 283 
 REPP (Renewable Energy Policy 
Project) ,  200 
 Required yard   ,  5   ,  47   ,  194 – 195   ,  250   
 Retail politics   ,  17   
 Retainer letters   ,  29 – 34   
 Reuther, Walter ,  78 ,  298 
 Revenue sharing   ,  372 – 373   
 RF emissions   ,  47   
 RF exposure 
 association vs. causality   , 
 176 – 177
 difﬁ culty of proving a 
negative ,  148 – 149 
 FCC on Federal preemption , 
 154 – 155
 federal law relating to , 
 114 – 116
 Lake Cedar Group (Denver, 
CO) ,  159 – 165 
 local health/safety regulations , 
 152 – 155
Newman v. Motorola, Inc. , 
 157
 safety guidelines   ,  149 – 152   
 state law relating to   ,  117 – 118   
 tort law relating to   ,  117   
 Vatican Radio   ,  152   
 WIZN-FM ,  117 – 118 , 
 156 – 159
 RFI (Radio Frequency 
Interference)   ,  195 – 199  
 applicant’s assurance   , 
 198 – 199
Broyde case ,  196 
 complaint by neighbor   , 
 325 – 327
 complaint by neighbor with 
gun ,  336 – 337 
 complaint by town ofﬁ cial , 
 325
 complaints, letters responding 
to ,  327 – 335 
 decreasing with antenna 
height ,  197 – 198 
 FCC’s  Interference Handbook , 
 198 ,  329 ,  334 
 ﬁ xing ,  15 – 16 
Freeman case ,  35 ,  117 , 
 156 – 159 ,  196 ,  272 ,  334 , 
 401
 installing ﬁ lters ,  199 
 lease issues   ,  377 – 380   
 OET-65 ,  36 ,  39 ,  116 ,  149 
 reference materials   ,  271 – 272   
 resources ,  198 
Southwestern Bell case ,  35 , 
 196 ,  334 ,  401 
 U.S. Code   ,  35   ,  271 – 272   ,  331   , 
 338 ,  400 – 401 
 RFI information   ,  16   
 Right of First Refusal   ,  396   
 Right to Cure   ,  386 – 387   
 Robert’s Rules of Order ,  267 
 robertsrules.org ,  267 
Rock Against Racism, Ward v. , 
 246
Rocky Mountain News ,  162 
 Rohn Manufacturing safety letter , 
 141
 Rohn towers   ,  52   ,  136   ,  147   , 
 191 – 192 ,  323 ,  351 
 rohnnet.com ,  52 
 Rooney, Kate   ,  161   
Rottkamp v. Young ,  298 
Round Rock v. Smith, City of ,  299 
 Rule ,  11 ,  301 – 320 

438 Index
 Rules of Professional Conduct 
(American Bar 
Association) ,  38 
 S
 Sabre Communications Corp.   ,  140   
 Sabre towers   ,  52   ,  284   ,  351  
 safety letter   ,  140    
 Safety issues  
 airspace safety   ,  142 – 144   
 attractive nuisance and child 
safety   ,  144 – 148   
 building codes   ,  134 – 135   
 fall zone   ,  135 – 142   
 lightning ,  177 – 179 ,  214 
 possible failure and denials , 
 139
 radiation and emissions safety , 
 148 – 177
 structural safety   ,  133 – 134    
Saia v. New York ,  246 
 Sakrison, Paul   ,  139   
 Salazar, Ken ,  162 
San Diego, Metromedia v. ,  201 , 
 245 ,  303 
 Sanctions ,  301 – 302 
Sands Point (NY), Bodony v. ,  263 
 Saperstein, Michael   ,  399   
Saratoga Springs, Palmer v. ,  198 
 Satellite TV, OTARD rule   ,  79 – 83   , 
 97 – 107 ,  304 ,  400 
Schad v. Mount Ephraim ,  202 ,  245 , 
 246
Schneider v. State ,  202 ,  245 
 Schwarzenegger, Arnold ,  322 
 Screened views ,  47 ,  183 ,  272 , 
 404 – 405
 Seals, PE   ,  36 – 38   
Sears, Roebuck and Co., People ex 
rel. Hoogasian v. ,  334 
 Section 106 of NHPA   ,  187   
 SEQRA (State Environmental 
Quality Review Act) ,  39 
 Setback
 bylaw requirements   ,  193 – 194   , 
 403 – 406
 for guy wires   ,  195   ,  408   
 vs. visibility   ,  404 – 405    
 Severability   ,  391   
Shelley v. Kraemer ,  88 
Shore Communications, Inc., Evans 
v. ,  246 
 SHPO (State Historic Preservation 
Ofﬁ ce) ,  25 ,  185 ,  187 ,  214 ,  243 
 shva.com ,  99 
 Signs .  See  Posting 
 Single/dual-sided printing   ,  252   
 Site acquisition businesses   ,  58   
 Site plan review ,  66 
 Site visits   ,  12   ,  21 – 22   ,  279 – 280   
 Skotdal, Andy ,  165 – 166 
 Sky-clutter   ,  181   
 Smardon, Richard   ,  181   
Smith, City of Round Rock v. ,  299 
 SNDAA (Subordination, Non-
Disturbance, and 
Attornment Agreement)   , 
 392 – 394
 South Dakota Public Utilities 
Commission ,  399 
Southwestern Bell Wireless, Inc. 
v. Johnson County Board of 
County Commissioners ,  35 , 
 196 ,  272 ,  334 ,  401 
 Spaghetti defense   ,  195   
 Special Exception   ,  16   ,  51   
 Special Permits  
 application form   ,  44   
 overview ,  16 
 Special Use Permit (SUP)   ,  16   ,  51   
 Speciﬁ cation sheets   ,  47   
 Speciﬁ cations/installation 
requirements for your tower , 
 52
 SPLAT!   ,  232   
 Spreadsheet software   ,  56   ,  185   ,  186   
 Sque, Steve ,  184 
 Stamping, date/time   ,  250   ,  254   , 
 255 – 257
Standish, Adriance v. Town of ,  299 
 star-h.com   ,  234 – 235   
 Start date for rent payments   ,  371   , 
 397
 Start/commencement of lease   ,  
367
 State Historic Preservation Ofﬁ ce 
(SHPO) ,  25 ,  185 ,  187 ,  214 , 
 243
 State laws 
 building codes   ,  92 – 96   
 bylaws meeting requirements 
of ,  401 – 403 
 citing FCC reports/orders   ,  414   
 drafting state statute   ,  414 – 416   
 height considerations   , 
 414 – 415
 increasing scope of   ,  414   
 lobbying ,  415 – 416 
 prohibiting enforcement of 
CC & R ,  89 
 reference materials   ,  271   
 relating to RF exposure , 
 117 – 118 ,  153 – 154 
State, Schneider v. ,  202 ,  245 
 Stations/carriers in town   ,  62   
 Statute, drafting   ,  414 – 416   
 Steamroller effect ,  21 
 Stewart, B.G. ,  235 
 Stick value   ,  35   
Still v. Michaels ,  333 
 Stohl, Bill   ,  276   
 Stokes Communications   ,  223   ,  225   
 Stop work order ,  319 
 Straw man ,  10 
 Strengthening ,  349 – 350 
 Stress of lawsuits   ,  299 – 300   
 Strobe lights   ,  226   
 Structural safety   ,  133 – 134   
 Structure type   ,  410   
Struthers, Martin v. ,  202 ,  245 
 Studio-to-transmitter link (STL) 
analysis ,  12 
 Sublet ,  381 
 Submitting
 permit applications   ,  254 – 258   
 proposed decision/order , 
 280 – 281
 Subordination, Non-Disturbance, 
and Attornment Agreement 
(SNDAA) ,  392 – 394 
 Suing .  See  Lawsuits 
 Suitability/due diligence period   , 
 374
Sullivan, Horta v. ,  299 
 surplussales.com   ,  189   
 Surveyors ,  38 – 39 
 Svoboda  &  Associates   ,  227   
 Swartz, John   ,  13    
 T
 Table of Contents, lease   ,  355   
 Tape measure   ,  52   
 Tarrant, Gerald R.   ,  158   
 Tax maps   ,  44   ,  46   
 Taxes ,  394 – 395 
 Team roles 

Index 439
 attorneys   ,  27 – 35   .  See also
 Attorneys   
 building winning teams   ,  2   
 contractors ,  41 – 42 
 environmental/regulatory 
consultants ,  39 – 40 
 experts ,  26 
 identifying your strengths/
needs ,  25 – 26 
 other antenna owners   ,  19 – 21   , 
 26
 real estate agents   ,  9 – 15   ,  40 – 41   
 registered professional 
engineer   ,  35 – 36   
 surveyors ,  38 – 39 
 Technical standards  
 antenna site   ,  308 – 312   
 construction practices   , 
 312 – 313
 Technologies, alternative ,  231 
 Telecommunications Act of 1996 
(TCA) ,  60 ,  97 ,  155 ,  293 ,  303 , 
 400
 Television interference .  See  TVI 
(Television 
Interference)
 Tennessee ,  42 ,  201 ,  274 
 Term, lease ,  366 – 370 
 Termination, lease   ,  368 – 370   , 
 389 – 390 ,  398 
 Terrain mapping   ,  103   ,  185   ,  186   , 
 232 ,  233 
 Testimony at a legislative hearing , 
 415
 Texas ,  83 ,  202 ,  245 ,  299 
Texas, Jamison v. ,  202 ,  245 
 Thompson Hine   ,  237 – 245   
 Thorne Consultants   ,  200   
 TIA-222 ,  47 ,  94 – 96 ,  134 – 135 
 Time stamping   ,  250   ,  254   ,  255 – 257   
 Timeframe for application process , 
 22
 Timelines, documenting events ,  55 
 titantv.com   ,  99   
 Title and leases   ,  364 – 366   ,  388 – 389   
 Title Defects   ,  364 – 365   
 T-Mobile case   ,  131 – 132   
 Tolling ,  164 – 165 
 Top hat (capacity hat)   ,  67   
Topo  software (DeLorme)   ,  232   ,  233   
 topo.com ,  46 
 Topographic maps   ,  12   ,  44   ,  46   ,  232   
 TopoZone ,  12 ,  44 ,  46 ,  54 ,  232 
 TopoZone Pro service   ,  12   
 Tort law relating to RF exposure , 
 117
 TOWAIR ,  144 
 towerkill.com ,  220 – 221 
 Towers 
 additional antennas   ,  350 – 351   
 constructing .  See  Construction 
 damage repair ,  348 – 349 
 described ,  45 
 replacing/reinforcing   ,  350   
 strengthening ,  349 – 350 
 types of   ,  57    
 tower-technologies.com   ,  350   
 Town Planner   ,  66 – 68   
 Towns, background information on , 
 19 – 20
 trails.com ,  232 
 Trees 
 intervening trees/terrain   ,  103   , 
 185 ,  186 ,  232 ,  233 
 removing   ,  321   
 screened views ,  47 ,  183 ,  272 , 
 404 – 405
 Tucci, Cardinal Roberto   ,  152   
Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. 
FCC ,  201 ,  303 
 TV antennas, OTARD rule   ,  79 – 83   , 
 97 – 107 ,  304 ,  400 
 TVI (Television Interference)   .  See
also  RFI 
 cases involving ,  196 
 complaint by neighbor   , 
 325 – 327
 complaint by town ofﬁ cial , 
 325
 decreasing with antenna 
height ,  197 – 198 
 ﬁ xing ,  15 – 16 
 lease issues ,  377 – 380 
 Twain, Mark   ,  285    
 U
 UBC (Uniform Building Code) , 
 47 ,  135 
 UHF/microwave ,  231 – 232 
 Umbrella policy ,  47 ,  385 
 Underground storage tanks   ,  384   
United States v. Paramount 
Pictures, Inc. ,  201 ,  245 ,  303 
 U.S. Fish  & Wildlife Service 
(USFWS) ,  168 ,  214 ,  220 – 221 , 
 274
 U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) 
maps ,  12 ,  44 ,  46 ,  103 ,  232 
 U.S. Tower ,  52 ,  284 
USA Today ,  152 
 Use clause in lease   ,  356 – 357   ,  363   
USFWS Concerns over Potential 
Radiation Impacts on 
Migratory Birds and Other 
Wildlife  (Manville)   ,  164   
 Utilities, lease issues ,  360 – 361 , 
 381 – 382
 Utility Poles, lease issues ,  360 – 361 
 V
 Vail, Martin   ,  298   
 Valcom whip   ,  236   
 Variances 
 alternative for better 
aesthetics ,  191 – 195 
 overview ,  16 – 17 ,  51 
 Vatican Radio   ,  152   ,  176   
 Vermont ,  22 ,  117 – 118 ,  156 ,  164 , 
 196 ,  240 ,  272 ,  299 ,  401 
 Vermont cases   ,  299   
 Vermont Environmental Board   , 
 118 ,  158 ,  223 ,  265 
 Vested rights   ,  90 – 92   
 Vexatious claim   ,  296   
 Video delivery services   ,  400   
 Viewing land/property   ,  12   ,  21 – 22   , 
 279 – 280
 Vinikoor, Bob   ,  292   
 Violations 
 CC & R violations ,  87 – 89 
 fence violations   ,  347 – 348   
 setbacks and yards   ,  191 – 195   , 
 403 – 405
 Virgin Islands   ,  108   
 Virginia ,  409 
 VirtualEarth (Microsoft)   ,  185   
 Visibility of antenna system , 
 184 – 185 ,  404 – 405 .  See also
 Aesthetics
 W
 Waivers ,  82 ,  99 ,  402 
 Walking sites   ,  12   .  See also  Land 
Ward v. Rock Against Racism ,  246 

440 Index
 Warnings, posting  
 “ Danger: High Voltage ” signs , 
 324
 fall zone warnings   ,  142    
 Warranty, transfer of   ,  364   
 Washington (state)   ,  407  
 KRKO-AM ,  118 ,  165 – 176 
We Are Unprotected: High-Powered 
TV  & FM Broadcast Radiation 
on Lookout Mountain
(Carney) ,  164 
 Websites 
 acme.com/mapper   ,  44   ,  46   
 adobe.com ,  251 
 airspaceusa.com ,  144 
 antennazoning.com ,  117 – 118 , 
 234
 arrl.org ,  325 
 awea.org ,  227 
 birds.cornell.edu ,  218 
 c-a-r-e.org ,  160 ,  164 
 corrosionchronicle.com ,  191 
 currykerlinger.com ,  220 
 darkskyinitiative.org ,  223 
 delorme.com ,  46 
 earth.google.com ,  44 ,  46 
 fairradio.com ,  189 
 fybush.com ,  182 
 getawaiver.com ,  99 
 grinnellgroup.com ,  159 
 hallikainen.com ,  97 
 hdtvcolorado.com ,  159 ,  162 
 hdtvhonestly.com   ,  160   
 heightstowers.com ,  52 
 heywhatsthat.com ,  103 ,  185 , 
 232
 highlandsranch.org ,  182 
 imsisoft.com ,  56 
 kintronic.com ,  353 
 ky-ﬁ  lters.com   ,  199   
 lbagroup.com ,  353 
 lightningrod.com ,  178 
 maps.google.com ,  54 
 nfpa.org   ,  96   
 nottltd.com ,  353 
 pcia.com ,  207 ,  399 ,  414 
 phazar.com ,  191 
 preformed.com ,  148 
 RFI information   ,  16   
 robertsrules.org ,  267 
 rohnnet.com ,  52 
 shva.com ,  99 
 star-h.com   ,  234 – 235   
 surplussales.com ,  189 
 titantv.com   ,  99   
 topo.com ,  46 
 topozone.com ,  12 ,  44 ,  46 ,  54 
 TOWAIR ,  144 
 towerkill.com ,  220 
 tower-technologies.com   ,  350   
 trails.com ,  232 
 valcomguelph.com ,  236 
 wikimapia.org   ,  232   
 wileyrein.com ,  162 
 wirelessestimator.com ,  41 ,  42 , 
 92 ,  94 ,  96 
 wsobirds.org ,  217 
 zillow.com ,  204 
 Weekend construction   ,  319 – 320   
 Wet seal/wet stamp   ,  36 – 38   
 Wetlands ,  46 
 What I bring to hearings   ,  271   
 White hat   ,  2 – 3   
 wikimapia.org   ,  232   
 Wilderness areas   ,  214   
 Wildlife 
 danger to birds   ,  216 – 223   
 government agencies   ,  214   
 habitat surveys ,  39 
 wileyrein.com ,  162 
Williamson, Reed v. ,  89 
 Wind development effect on 
property values   ,  200   
 Wind Energy Association, 
American ,  227 
 Wind load   ,  46   ,  94   ,  135   ,  363 – 364   
 Wind speed   ,  94   ,  411 – 414   
 Winning decision   ,  288 – 289   .  See
also  Principles that help you 
win
Wireless and Broadcast Radiation 
Pollution: A U.S. Regulatory 
Issue ,  164 
 Wireless Communications Facilities 
section, zoning bylaws   ,  51   
 Wireless Estimator ,  41 – 42 ,  92 ,  94 , 
 96
 Wisconsin, Eau Claire   ,  216 – 220   
 WISPs, OTARD rule ,  79 – 83 , 
 97 – 107 ,  304 ,  400 
 WIZN-FM ,  117 – 118 ,  156 – 159 
 WLTH-AM ,  143 
 Word processing software   ,  55 – 56   , 
 250
 Work, informal discussions at , 
 60 – 62
 Worker’s compensation insurance , 
 72 ,  386 
 Worthington, John   ,  185   
 wsobirds.org ,  217 
 WYGG(FM) ,  165 
 Y
 Yackey, Allan L. ,  401 
 Yankowitz, Robert   ,  354   
 Yard, required   ,  5   ,  47   ,  194 – 195   ,  249   
Young, Rottkamp v. ,  298 
 Z
 Zillow ,  204 
 Zoning authority/boards  
 characteristics of ,  75 – 77 
 conﬂ ict of interest   ,  73 – 74   
 informal discussions with 
secretary of   ,  68 – 70   
 types of   ,  71 – 74    
 Zoning bylaws/ordinances .  See
 Bylaws       

