JASON STRIKER
MARTIAL ARTS
SERIES VOLUME II
 
JASON STRIKER
MARTIAL ARTS
SERIES VOLUME II
Bamboo Bloodbath & Ninja's Revenge
Piers Anthony and
Roberto Fuentes
 
Copyright (c) 1974, 1975, 2001 by Piers Anthony and Roberto Fuentes.
Library of Congress Number:
Softcover
2001119025
1-4010-3351-2 ISBN #:
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission
in writing from the copyright owner.
This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places and incidents either are the
product of the author's imagination or are used fictitiously, and any resemblance
to any actual persons, living or dead, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.
This book was printed in the United States of America.
To order additional copies of this book, contact:
Xlibris Corporation
1-888-7-XLIBRIS
www.Xlibris.com
Orders@Xlibris.com
CONTENTS
BAMBOO BLOODBATH
Chapter 1 ..................................................................... 9
RUNNING THE LINE .......................................... 9
Chapter 2 ...................................................................34
HYENA ................................................................34
Chapter 3 ...................................................................46
THERA ................................................................46
Chapter 4 ...................................................................60
ILUNGA...............................................................60
Chapter 5 ...................................................................82
BRAINWASH.......................................................82
Chapter 6 ...................................................................97
CUBA ...................................................................97
Chapter 7 .................................................................116
TAO VS. KILL-13 ...............................................116
Chapter 8 .................................................................137
KI ........................................................................137
Chapter 9 .................................................................157
FIDEL .................................................................157
Chapter 10 ...............................................................177
EVERGLADES ...................................................177
NINJA'S REVENGE
Prologue: ...................................................................205
FALL OF THE BLACK CASTLE........................205
 
Chapter 1:.................................................................219
HIROSHI ...........................................................219
Chapter 2:.................................................................233
FU ANTOS .........................................................233
Chapter 3:.................................................................251
BASTARD BONES .............................................251
Chapter 4:.................................................................271
NYMPHO ..........................................................271
Chapter 5:.................................................................290

HOT ICE ...........................................................290
Chapter 6:.................................................................306
ASSASSIN ...........................................................306
Chapter 7:.................................................................336
MONK'S TREASURE ........................................336
Chapter 8:.................................................................362
DEMON ............................................................362
Epilogue: ...................................................................387
NINJA'S MINIONS............................................387
Glossary ....................................................................389
BAMBOO
BLOODBATH
 
Chapter 1
RUNNING THE LINE
I took hold of the lad's arm, tugged gently. He resisted, whereupon
I caught his left ankle with my right foot and swept it out
from under him in a de-ashi barai foot-sweep. His weight was on
that leg; he fell with a cry. He was ten years old.
Instantly I was on top of him, pulling his arm back in a jujigatame
cross lock till he shouted "Mate! I yield!"
I leaped at the next. He was twelve, and he weighed about
ninety pounds. I caught him with his hands down and pinned
them to his sides. I lifted his feet from the tatami, the judo practice
mat, twisted him to the horizontal, and set him down. There
was laughter in the dojo, the practice hall.
The next one was a fifteen year old, obese; he weighed almost
as much as I did, but it was mostly fat. I went over his head with
my right hand, forcing him to bend almost horizontally; then I
grabbed the back of his belt and went down in a fast sumi-gaeshi,
or back rolldown. He went over me; instead of letting go I rolled
on top of him and grabbed him in a yoko-gatame holddown.
 
10
So it went. I was "running the line" with my judo students,
starting with the novices and working my way up to my black
belts. The object was to throw each one as rapidly as possible,
until I had met every one of them. This gave each student the
instructor's individual attention, if only for a moment, and that
was important. It also served to illustrate that I was still the master
here; every so often they needed a reminder that the old man still
had it.
Still, there was room for variation. Sometimes I played with a
beginner, a small kid, going in hard but not throwing him, making
it look as if he was really resisting, and even on occasion (but
very seldom!) letting him throw me. On the other hand, when I
met a cocky brat too big for his britches, I did the opposite, throwing
him several times very quickly with a variety of moves-or
even with the same move, making him look ridiculous. Sometimes
I would strangle him a couple of times for good measure. Never
hard, of course.
It always started fast, but as I encountered the more experienced
students at the other end, it slowed. They were harder to
throw-my instruction would have been worthless if they weren't-
and I was no longer fresh. The last two or three could be real
bastards. But I had to throw them, and in reasonable time, or I
would lose the respect of the group.
I grappled with a green belt. He had good promise, but was
too timid to know it. So I eased up, trying a couple of moves I
knew he could block, making him look good. Instruction is more
than merely physical; I tried to inculcate confidence and courtesy,
too. Then I put him down with a harai-goshi-a sweeping loin
hip-throw-and moved on.
One after the other, I put them down. I lost track of the number;

I wanted only to get on through and proceed with the formal
class session. Each time I ran the line it was rougher, because all
my students were getting better, learning my tricks, and I had too
many students at the moment. In time the size of the classes would
11
whittle down. Then I would have to worry only about paying the
rent.
Hardly looking. I tried a foot-sweep on the next okuri ashi
barai. He fell, but did not release his hold on my sleeve. The kimono
stretched tight across his chest as he twisted, and pulled
halfway up to his shoulders.
She!
He? One white globe of flesh showed under that twisted shirt.
I have taught many women self-defense, but this particular
class was all male. What was woman doing in the line?
My surprise interfered with my concentration, and her yank
on my sleeve pulled me down so that I barely avoided falling on
top of that handsome breast. I have quick reflexes but this was
happening in mid-throw. I spun to the side, rolling on my shoulder
while the girl raised her legs and flipped to her feet. There was
another tantalizing flash of her bosom, her breasts bouncing together,
before the shirt fell back, covering it.
I sat up on the mat, bemused and dismayed. No student should
have thrown me like that, especially not a girl, and most particularly
not a strange one. Of course I had been trying to disengage
when she made her move, but who would believe that? My students
were already chuckling at my embarrassment-those whose
eyes had recovered from the girl's startling display of anatomy. It
would be hell to get them oriented on basic judo practice after
this.
She looked my way, enjoying the commotion, and now I got a
good look at her face. She was a platinum blonde, her long hair
almost white, and her green eyes were heavily painted with deep
shadows. She was using some kind of far-out makeup, with white
lips and powdered skin, the powder perhaps concealing a tan. She
had long false eyelashes and longer silver nails.
I knew I had never seen her before; but something about the
bones of her face, and particularly her manner, nagged me. I have
a fair memory for distaff beauty-and she was a beauty, despite
the baggy judogi uniform, or gi, she wore.
 
12
Then it clicked. "Thera Drummond!" I exclaimed. Her hair
had changed completely, from moderate-length brown to long
blonde, and she had put on weight in provocative places, but it
was her.
She smiled. "At your service, Jason Striker. Your memory must
be fading with age, like your judo skill. Can I give you a few
pointers in technique?"
"She's got pointers, all right!" one of the black belts commented
admiringly. That wasn't strictly true, as she was manifestly bra-less
under the gi; I like the soft rounded bouncy effect of the unbound
bosom, but "pointers" is not the applicable description.
"Let me give you a hand, old man," Thera said. "I'll raise you."
"She sure will!" someone called. "Stiff and tall!"
I needed no assistance to stand, either way, but I played along.
Class discipline was already a shambles; I could only aggravate it
by getting stuffy. What was Thera doing here? I hadn't seen her in
months, and had thought she was away at college. I reached up to
take her proffered hand.
A mistake! She wasn't through fooling with me, as I should
have known. She didn't pull, she pushed, with the result that we
both went sprawling, with her on top of me. Possibly by accident,
but more likely by design, her left breast landed in my face with

tangible impact. It was a good breast, long since graduated from
the orange league to the grapefruit league or even beyond, and I
suppose she wanted me to know it.
"Hey, I'd take a fall for you anytime, Jason," she said, twitching
her shoulder so as to make that breast move an enticing inch
under the gi, but no more than an inch. "Let's try that again."
There was more vigorous laughter from the line, even from the
ten year old. The students were enjoying this, and their eyes were
taking in every detail.
I disengaged my nose from her anatomy. "Cut it out, Thera!
This is a class!"
"You look tired," she said mischievously. "Why not let me
finish running the line?"
13
"Yeah, yeah!" the husky black belts at the end of the line agreed
eagerly.
I moved Thera off me and stood. "I'll talk to you after the
class." I said.
She caught my hand. "Jason, it can't wait."
God, she was as passionate as she was beautiful. But I had had
prior experience with her, and regarded her as one of my three top
prospects for avoidance. Nothing but trouble could come of this,
tempting as she was physically. "It'll have to."
"Jason, it's my father!" she said urgently.
Her father: millionaire industrialist Johnson Drummond. He
had once paid me a pretty figure to tutor his pretty daughter in
self-defense, and he hadn't cared what else she learned in the process.
He was tough and unscrupulous, but I understood why; it
was the natural mode of the born moneymaker. But in his daughter
the same qualities were not so appealing.
"He knows where to reach me," I said. I turned to the class
and bowed to the next student in line, signaling the resumption of
our exercises.
But Thera just wouldn't let go. "You must come with me now!
His life is in danger!"
"So you came to play games with my judo class!" I snapped.
"I shouldn't have," she admitted. "But I just couldn't resist,
and at least I got your attention in a hurry. Now I'm serious. You've
got to come talk to Daddy."
I had to get rid of her, that was certain. I couldn't do it while
there was a male audience for her to play to; she'd be running
around the dojo naked pretty soon if she thought that would help
her get her way. "Arny, take over. Randori!" I called. That meant it
was time for the students to pair off for mock fighting. Some tried
for throws while others did mat work, while Arny watched. Sometimes
he would stand over a pair on the mat, so as to prevent
others from stepping on them accidentally. It gets crowded when
a whole class goes at it, and we don't like accidents.
"Now, Thera, come to my office," I said.
 
14
"Sure thing," she said, jiggling after me. One student was so
busy watching her motions that he paid too little attention to
those of his opponent, and got ignominiously thrown. God! Before
the day was out the rumor would be all over town: Jason
Striker was seducing sexy girls in his office. Thera was trouble when
just passing through.
In the office I put it to her succinctly. "I am the trainer for this
year's American judo team," I explained. "We're a fifth-rate judo
nation, but this time we hope to put up a respectable showing.
The meet is only three weeks off. I'll be happy to help your father
-but not right now. It's all I can do to keep up with my regular
classes. This team assignment has priority."
"But he's been threatened! We can't wait three weeks!"

"Let him hire a bodyguard. He can afford it."
"Jason, you just don't understand!" she said. "They're going to
kill him! Horribly!"
"Is there a nice way to kill?" I asked dryly. But my resolve was
wavering. I did owe Johnson Drummond a favor or two, and Thera
was not the type to go into hysterics over trifles.
"He's sent for Diago, but you know how it is, it takes a while
to locate Diago."
I knew. Diago was a top flight martial artist, distantly related
to Thera-something of a black sheep-and he was in trouble
with the law. He had to stay hidden whenever he was in the States,
and he could not afford to trust many people. Drummond had
resources, but locating Diago was bound to be slow.
"Dad's going to be killed tonight or tomorrow. I know it. He's
afraid of everyone. He's dismissed all the help, and he won't talk to
strangers. But he trusts you, Jason."
"Sounds like a case for the police," I said uneasily.
"They don't provide bodyguards for private citizens, and anyway,
it wouldn't work. This isn't ordinary murder! And Dad would
be sure the policemen were really killers in disguise. He could be
right; the killer may have them in his pay."
"That's paranoid," I exclaimed.
15
"Maybe if you ever had more money, you'd know what it could
do, Jason. We know. We can't trust the police-not for this. Those
who trusted the police are dead."
This didn't add up. Drummond was no coward, and neither
was his daughter. They weren't paranoid, either, just imperiously
rich.
"What good could I do?" I asked. "If what you say is true, he'll
think I'm in the pay of his enemy, too."
"No! I told you, he knows you and he trusts you. He was
going to offer you a lot of money to be his bodyguard, but I told
him that'd drive you off in a huff. So I came myself." Her eyes
looked pleadingly into mine, and it was effective because I had the
feeling she was not putting on an act. "Jason, please. Will you?"
A lot of money . . . It was true that I tried not to let money
influence me too much, but it happened that I was unusually
hard up at the moment. That seems to be chronic in the trade; few
teachers make fortunes, and martial arts teachers are no exception.
Many go broke, in fact.
Thera pulled on my arm, making me face her. Her eyes were
teary, a fetching effect. "Jason, it's not for me! If it's money you
want, you can have it; Dad will pay anything! If it's something
else, well, I know you liked me once, and there won't be any strings."
"Shut up!" I yelled explosively.
She actually got down on her knees before me. "I love my
father. I don't want him dead! What do I have to do to make you
help him?"
Brother! She was pulling out all the stops. I realized I'd probably
be better off to check this out now, rather than suffer her
further blandishments. And, in truth, I had liked her once. Maybe
it hadn't really worn off.
"All right, I'll go talk to your father," I said.
"I knew you would!" she exclaimed, delighted. She tried to
kiss me, but I fended her off "My car's right outside."
"We'll use my car!" I said, remembering the way she drove.
 
16
Better to face an armed berserker . . ."It won't be as fast, but at
least we'll get there alive."
Docile enough, she acquiesced. She stepped into a dressing
room and changed out of her gi within a minute. She had always
been quick at manipulating her clothing. I just had time to give

more instructions to Arny and dive into my own street clothes.
My students, seeing me dressing on the run, shirttails flying, chuckled
knowingly. What could I say?
We drove sedately across town toward her father's estate.
"Was it really so bad between us, Jason?" Thera asked wistfully.
"It's past history," I shrugged, "I've known other girls before
and after you. Some better, some worse."
"But things are changed now. I'm older-"
"Age has nothing to do with it! You said you wanted to marry
me-"
"And you said I'd have to be a black belt in judo and get two
years of college-"
"And long before you did either, you fornicated with my friend
and top student-"
"Who is dead because of you!" she cried angrily. "I loved him!"
That hurt. There was too much truth in it.
"I'm sorry, Jason," she said after a moment, contritely. "I didn't
really love him. I thought I did at the time, but-well, he was
available, and you weren't, and I was young. The more I learn
about men, the more you stand out. I was wrong . . . but I'm learning.
Learning how right you were the first time, and how right I
was to want to marry you. You're teaching me yet, just as you
taught me judo. Can't we-"
"No!"
"I guess you meant it when you said you'd met someone better."
"Yes. A Chinese girl. Kung fu,"
"Why didn't you many her, Jason?"
"She's dead."
God, that memory hurt!
17
Thera sighed ruefully. "I just keep striking out! Well, tell me
about the worse one."
That was easy. "Latin. She's married. She tried to kill my fiancee,
and maybe succeeded, and I-oh, forget it!"
"So you really aren't currently attached."
"I don't know."
"Oh, so you're holding back on me!" she said with a mock
affront. "There's yet another girl."
Actually, I had been thinking of my Chinese fiancee; I loved
her yet. But I felt too ornery to say that to Thera. "No girl. She's a
woman. A drug addict. I call her the Black Karate Mistress."
Thera laughed. "Now you're pulling my leg! Here-I'll help
you." She lifted her right leg and crossed it right over her left and
into my lap-a fair contortion, in a car. But then, she had always
been athletic. All my girlfriends tend to be; I'm attracted by physical
competence.
I was pulling her leg in a way-but there actually was a woman
such as I had described. That was a whole separate story, however.
Or so I thought at the time.
"For God's sake!" I exclaimed as my hand, reaching for the
gearshift, smacked into her shapely calf. I picked up her leg by the
ankle glanced across-and was treated to a striking view of her
firm inner thigh beneath her short skirt. Her panties had "I LOVE
YOU" embroidered in red-right in the crotch.
I almost drove off the road.
"A black woman-and an addict," she murmured as I finally
got her leg out of my way. "I really hadn't figured you for that,
Jason. You're so . . . so strait-laced, really."
"It's my judo ethic," I said, nettled. It was not the first time I
had been accused of being stuffy. "Don't make it more than it is.
She attacked me and injured me-damn near castrated me!-and
then she saved my life. I don't know whether she hates me or loves
me."
"Or you her," she murmured. "Unfinished business."

 
18
"No business of yours!" I said angrily. "Who gave you leave to
pry into my romantic life?"
"By the authority vested in me as one of your has-beens, I
pry," she said.
I tried to stifle it, but the laugh burst out anyway.
"Come on, Jason. How many of those girls did you actually
lay?"
"What?"
"Don't pretend you don't know the word. You're not that sheltered.
How many did you run the line with-all the way?"
Running the line-an apt analogy! "All of them," I said. The
strange thing was the confessions Thera was prying from me were
cathartic. I should not have answered her at all, but I couldn't help
myself.
"Don't you think I deserve an equal shot?"
"Now just a-"
"After all, you said some were worse than me."
What next! "Thera, I-"
"I'm no virgin; you know that. Why not permit me the same
lapses you've indulged yourself with? How can you hold my fling
with Jim against me, when you've done the same with at least
three other girls since then? I don't even profess the same moral
standards you do; mine are looser."
She was beginning to make sense. It alarmed me. All I really
had against her was that "fling" . . . and I had done worse myself.
Was I really a male chauvinist or hypocrite?
Reaching for her blouse, she said, "Let's stop right now and-"
That was too much. She had overplayed her hand. Theoretically
we were going to save her father's life. "I'm no casual stud for
nymphos," I said harshly, to cover the fact that I had been more
than a little tempted. Sighting down a well-formed leg has a peculiar
but powerful effect on me. In fact, I become tempted to augment
vision with touch.
She sighed. "Damn! Almost had you that time."
A fair analysis. Still, she had made me think, and to re-evalu-
19
ate my personal inclinations. On that basis, I had to deem Thera a
current prospect, rather than a defunct one. She really had done
me less injury than I'd supposed, and she had a lot to recommend
her.
We pulled up at the estate. There was no guard at the gate-
evidence that Drummond really had dismissed his help. It seemed
foolish, if his life were really in danger; but the pressure of fear can
do strange things to people. Drummond, evidently, was not accustomed
to an immediate, personal, physical threat to his existence,
and didn't know how to handle it.
The door was locked-an almost pitiful precaution, considering
the number of large plate-glass windows in the house. Any
serious murderer could readily enter.
"Daddy, it's me!" Thera called. "I brought him,"
In a moment Drummond opened the door himself. He was a
husky, well-fed man, but now he looked haggard. He could not
have slept well or eaten well in several days.
He shook my hand vigorously. "God, am I glad to see you,
Striker!" he said. It was the obvious truth.
"Thera would not take no for an answer," I said.
"Whatever she offered you, consider it doubled! Striker, I want
you with me!"
"She mentioned money and sex," I said, nettled again. These
people thought anything at all could be bought, if the price was
right. The irony was, ninety per cent of the time they were quite
correct.

"I'll go fix us something to eat," Thera said quickly. She strode
out of the room without a backward glance.
Drummond smiled briefly. "She's a big girl now. Age of consent.
I could wish my daughter were more circumspect, but . . ."
He shrugged. "How much?"
"Don't worry. I turned her down."
Again he smiled, even more briefly. "I was referring to money.
"So was I."
"Striker, name your figure!"
 
20
I thought of Thera's figure, but resisted further by-play.
"Drummond, I didn't come here for money or sex, even though I
know you've got a lot of the one and she's got a lot of the other. I
came because you've bailed me out a couple of-times and I figure I
owe it to you. I don't know whether I'll stay. But if I do, it won't
be for a fee."
"Yes, Thera said you'd be that way." He sat down in an easy
chair, gesturing me to do the same. "But I'm a money-oriented
man, Striker. I've got to pay for what I get, or I don't trust it."
"Thera said your life had been threatened."
"I want-you for three days; twenty-four hours a day. When I
sleep, I want you next to me; when I sit on the pot, I want you
there. The moment I am alone may be my last. Once the time is
up, I'll be safe. Shall we call it five thousand for the duration?"
Five thousand dollars for three days' work! He was one-tracked
on money, all right! "No fee, I told you! What was the nature of
this threat-mail, phone, personal?"
"You have assumed the training of a number of new students,"
he said. "They were formerly at a rival studio-"
"Dojo, not studio," I said. "Associate, not rival." I didn't see
the relevance to his problem, but at least be was off the subject of
money. Just as well; his money, like his daughter's body, was underhandedly
tempting. Five thousand dollars would magically convert
my estate from red to black.
"Why do you train them?" he inquired.
"Their original dojo went out of business. These things happen."
"Why did they all come to you? Surely some would have preferred
other dojos?"
"They had to come to me, or lose their money. They're all on
contract. Look, we're wasting time! Why are you afraid for your
life?"
"On contract. Does that mean they have to train with you. as
in baseball?"
Why his questions? "No," I explained, "they're paying, not
21
playing. Martial arts interest tends to be transitory, so many
senseis-trainers, to you-can't earn a living on drop-out students.
The bills have to be paid, even if no students show up. So they
require a contract: so many lessons at such and such a price for the
package. It's a good deal, for the serious student."
"And the drop-outs?"
"They have to pay for the full course anyway. They know that
when they sign. Without contracts, many dojos could not stay in
business; they need to be assured of a regular income."
"Do you use such a system in your own dojo?"
"Contracts? No. My students pay only for the lessons they
receive. That's just the way I work. Now, if you'll just answer my
questions-"
"In a moment, Striker. You have many drop-outs?"
"The usual percentage. But I don't think any of them would
be a threat to you, if that's what you're driving at."
"So you don't make much money," he said.
Oh-so that was it. I sighed. "Not much. But I'm choosy

about how I make it, so if you don't mind-"
"That is why I trust you, Striker. You can't be bought. You
will take money only for services rendered and you will not -
render an illicit service."
I smiled. "Yes. Now we understand each other. So you can
stop trying to pay me for-"
"Not quite. I require a service of you, and I will pay." He
raised his hand to forestall my objection. "But who do your inherited
students pay?"
"A finance company. It took over their contracts when their
dojo closed."
"And the finance company pays you?"
"No," I said shortly.
"Then why do you train them, if you receive no payment?"
"It isn't right to make them pay for nothing, when they are
not at fault. That sort of thing gives the field a bad name."
"So you train them for nothing? Because of principle?"
 
22
"I'm not the first to do that. There are some bad apples in the
arts-fake senseis who put on a big show and sign up many students,
then deliberately skip town and open a new dojo under
another name and start all over. These unscrupulous operators hurt
the business for all of us. I'd like to see them all in jail! But meanwhile
there is the problem of the students. A responsible sensei
will-"
"What finance company is involved?"
"General Loans, Inc. But don't blame them; they made a business
investment, and they advanced money to the failing dojo in
good faith. They have a right to-"
"I own General Loans."
"I'm not surprised," I said, surprised. I hadn't known he was
into that kind of enterprise; but of course he was into everything
that had the smell of money. "Well, you made a good investment."
"I shall reimburse you the value of those students' contracts-
the amount you should have earned if they had signed with you I
think this is the ethical thing to do, since you are already training
them, and since you are not at fault in the failure of the other dojo.
Do you agree?"
But then General Loans would be taking a loss!"
"If a finance company keeps money at the expense of innocents
-and you, sir, are a financial innocent-it looks bad. That
sort of thing gives the field a bad name. Sometimes a sacrifice has
to be made for the benefit of the industry . . . as you pointed out
just now."
"I-" But he had me, oh so cleverly. He'd known all about
training contracts and my connection with his company, of course;
Johnson Drummond knew all about all of his business interests.
Which was one reason he was rich.
I should never have tried to debate the ethics of finance with a
professional. He had destroyed my position as readily as I would
have destroyed his body, had he attacked me with a knife. It meant
a sizable payment-enough to relieve me of my present difficulties
and keep me flush for some time. Five dollars per lesson for
23
each hundred-lesson contract, and twenty transfer students
. . . $10,000 total!
"Now I ask you as a friend," Drummond said. "Will you stay
with me for three days-at no charge?"
What could I do? "Tell me your problem."
For answer, he handed me two pieces of paper. One was a
check for $10,000, already signed. The other was a crudely scrawled
note on a torn fragment of a grocery bag. "TWO MILLION. TWO
HUNDRED THIRTY-FOUR THOUSAND, EIGHT HUNDRED

FIVE DOLLARS. EIGHTEEN CENTS."
There was no signature-just sketch like a child's drawing of a
dog, hardly recognizable. And overall, a smudge.
I looked up. "A practical joke!"
He shook his head. "No."
"There's no-no inducement. Your daughter has not been kidnapped,
no bomb has been planted. And no instruction for delivery
of the money. Just a figure chosen at random. How do you
know it's even a threat?"
"That figure is not random. it represents precisely ten per cent
of my immediately liquifiable assets as of last month."
Immediately liquifiable assets . . . That would be savings accounts
and the like. Only a small portion of his actual wealth, most of which
would be invested in real estate, stocks, bonds and God knew what
else. And still a figure a thousand times the size of what I could ever
make in a year. But what point to dwell on that? "A tithe," I said.
"But how could anyone know your worth, except you?"
"Only my accountants. I thought they were absolutely trustworthy.
You can see why I have been firing people recently."
"Yes."
Thera returned with a tray. "It's not much, but I never was
much of a cook-and it's getting scary in the far corners of this
house." She saw the note. "Yes, that's real, Jason. It's the way the
Hyena operates."
I shook my head unbelievingly. "If I received such a note, I'd
throw it away and go to bed."
 
24
"You could afford to," Drummond said. "You have wealth to
rival mine-only yours is all invested in physical combat expertise.
That's why I want you with me . . . when the Hyena comes."
Thera had brought hot chocolate and sweet rolls-not my idea
of good nutrition, And she was right; the drink was thin and the
rolls were burned. She was no chef. "What's this about a hyena?"
"I suppose you would not be in a position to know,"
Drummond said. "He doesn't bother with anyone worth less than
ten million dollars."
"See that paw-print?" Thera asked me, pointing to the smudge.
"That's the key. It's genuine. We had it checked out."
"An actual hyena print?" I asked, bemused.
"Yes," she said. "Lab, zoologist, the works. A real live hyena
stepped on that paper, and not long before we got it. The mud
wasn't dry yet."
"But we don't have hyenas running loose around here!" I protested.
"Precisely," Drummond said "Coincidence is out of the question."
"I haven't seen anything in the newspapers about big shakedowns.
Are you sure-"
"It has been hushed up until the police can catch the Hyena.
Assuming they're not already in his pay. But word gets around, in
business circles as elsewhere. I know of six strikes by the Hyena,
and I suspect that's only half the total. A lot of people must have
quietly paid up. Now he's coming for me." And there was no doubt
Drummond took the threat seriously.
I set my inedible roll aside. "I guess I just don't think the way
a millionaire does! If I were threatened, I'd go to the police-or at
least double my guard. Or use electronic defenses. Or skip town
for a while. You're just sitting here, wide open for an invasion!"
"You're a liar," he replied. "If you were threatened, you'd stand
and fight."
Good point! But I tried again. "If you really believe you have
no protection, why don't you simply pay off and be done with it?"
25
"Why don't you take money for bodyguard duty?" he asked
in turn.

"Dad's ornery about payoffs," Thera said. "Matter of principle
involved, he claims. I never could understand it myself -but he'll
die before he pays one cent of tribute."
I could understand it, put that way. I had thought Drummond
was unscrupulous, but I saw now that he had his scruples and
held firmly to them. I respected him more for it.
"And I told you about bringing in the police or other strangers,"
Thera said. "Dad backed the wrong political machine last
time out, and those scandals didn't help."
Her remark didn't help me. Political machine,
scandals . . . Where were Drummond's scruples when he was involved
in that?
"And I do have protection-now," Drummond finished. "The
best."
I got up and paced the floor. "You overestimate what I can do.
One hood with a gun could take me out with no trouble. Or they
could lob a grenade in here."
Father and daughter shook their heads in unison. "The Hyena
doesn't use firearms," Drummond said. "Not unless there are police
or armed guards about. That's why we have none here."
I pounded my right fist into my left hand. "Two or more of us
here are crazy! Even if there were honor among extortionists-and
there sure as hell isn't--how would your attacker know you didn't
have a gunman planted in ambush? He can't-"
"He knows," Drummond said. "The way I know money, he
knows murder."
"You'll have to explain it to me in concepts of one syllable!
There's a piece or three missing from this jigsaw."
"Let me do it, Daddy," Thera said. "Jason, sit down."
I sat down. She planted her exquisite posterior on my lap and
spoke quietly into my ear, as though this were a love tryst. Her
warm breath tickling the hairs of my ear was sexually exciting-
but what she said was something else.
 
26
The typical "Hyena" case went something like this: the businessman
received a note, naming a tenth of his available assets;
and the financial assessment was always uncannily accurate. If he
paid, he put the exact amount, in cash, in a satchel and dropped it
from an airplane over a certain wilderness area, buoyed by a small
parachute so that it would not burst on impact with the ground.
That was the end of the matter-provided he made the payment
exactly ten days after receiving the note.
If, in paying, he tried to set a trap of some sort, he would be
killed just as though he had not paid. On one occasion the victim
had not known about a secret police stake-out. But the Hyena had
known, and had come for the kill. So the police were generally left
out of it. In fact, they were seldom notified.
If the person refused to pay, the Hyena would come for him
within three days of the deadline. No one had seen the Hyena and
lived. Instead their mauled bodies were found, chewed and
scratched as if by some vicious wild animal. Sometimes hyena dung
was: found in the area-and once the victim's bones had been
cracked, as though a beast with extraordinarily powerful jaws had
sought the marrow within them.
No hired protection sufficed; one way or another, the Hyena
nullified every measure. But if the victim braved it alone, he was
the only one killed, and none of his family were touched. One
man had fancied himself an artist with the foil; he had been found
stabbed through the heart by that weapon, but not otherwise
mauled. The Hyena seemed to be a sportsman, of sorts.
"That's his way of running the line," Thera concluded, touching
my ear electrifyingly with her lips. I was appalled at my body's
readiness to be aroused despite the sinister material being fed to

my mind.
"My deadline passed this morning," Drummond said. "The
Hyena will come tonight-or tomorrow, or the night after. My
daughter refuses to leave me here alone. So I have had to seek
help-special help. If only I had been able to locate Diago in time!
He could have handled the monster!"
27
Probably true. Diago was a top-notch judoka, seventh dan,
with a phenomenal kiai! yell that could stun a roomful of attackers.
I had had adventures with him, and had thought at one time
he was dead, but he had shown up again alive. An excellent choice-
but Diago wasn't here.
"Let me get my nunchakus." I said. "They're back at my dojo."
"You stay with Daddy," Thera said, giving my crotch a last
hot nudge with her derriere. God, she could wiggle! "I'll fetch
your-what did you call it?"
"Nunchakus. Like two billy clubs chained together. It is a deadly
hand weapon, good against one person or a crowd, and I know
how to use it. If the hyena comes armed with sword or club-"
"So long as it's not a firearm," Drummond said as Thera
bounced up and out. "I think we can fight him off-but we've got
to go by his rules."
"If you say so," I said dubiously. But the truth was, I didn't
much like guns myself. A gun turns the trwas ional ninety-sevenpound
weakling into Superman, negating twenty years of discipline,
leading to irresponsible threats and murder. Banish guns
and a lot of trouble in our world would disappear. That's my view,
anyway.
This Hyena sounded like a demented but highly skilled martial
artist, possibly a kung fu adept, who had turned his deadly
talent to extortion-successfully, so far. Probably he had had many
years of rigorous training; and such training necessarily inculcates
the martial discipline and ethics along with physical proficiency.
So he followed certain rules, because they were part of his being-
such as meeting weapon with matching weapon. This was not a
thing outsiders could understand well, but I understood it.
I was intrigued. I had encountered some of the best, in the
course of my career, with and without weapons. I was ready to take
my chances. Probably the Hyena had not come up against a competent
professional martial artist in the course of his extortions. I
was a fifth-degree black belt in judo, and a third in karate-a true
third, as I had been rated in Japan by Mas Oyama himself. Which,
 
28
frankly, is plenty competent. I had taken my share of titles in
competition, and I had a good deal of practical experience.
Yes, we would see! Perhaps we could both solve the mystery
and eliminate the menace of this dreaded Hyena. And then I could
return to my training duties with the American judo team.
I heard the roar of Thera's car taking off. She had a spare, of
course; her first car had been left at my dojo. The luxury of
riches . . .
There were still a couple of hours until dusk, and the Hyena
never struck by daylight, so there was time. "Come on,
Drummond," I said. "It could be tonight. I hope it is, because
we're fresher now than we will be in a couple of days of waiting. I
want to check over this house-all the doors, windows dumb waters,
secret panels, other potential entrances. Chimneys, too. We'll
lock everything and nail boards wherever we can. We'll do a thousand
dollars' worth of damage to your furnishings, but I want to
hear him coming."
"It won't work," he mumbled. "All that's been tried before.
He's like a cunning wild animal; he gets in no matter what, and he
doesn't make noise."

"Maybe-but let's encourage him to come in the way we want
him to. If there's a fight, I want to know the terrain; maybe we can
trap him in a cul-de-sac."
"I hope so," he said without much hope. "Look, Striker-I
don't really expect to come out of this alive. But you may be able
to get the Hyena while he's getting me, or to trap him before he
gets away. That will stop his extortions, and that alone seems
worthwhile . . . Take care of my daughter . . ."
He hid courage, when it came to the crunch. But this would
take more than courage. "She'll be with us, remember? We may all
die."
"I hope not." He shrugged. "What I'm saying is, if you and
she survive me, I want you to-well, if you'd just move in for a
while, until she settles down-"
"I can't do that!" I said. "I've got a team to train!" That was
29
only half my objection, of course. Drummond evidently wanted
to marry his daughter off to someone who could control her, but I
wasn't interested. Oh, the notion had its points . . . But Thera
was only eighteen years old, and big money was not my bag.
"Guess you'll just have to see that I pull through, then," he
said with a wan smile.
I nodded. "I intend to do that."
We checked out the house, making it as secure as possible.
The structure was sound, but there was so much glass that the job
was reasonably hopeless. Drummond had electronics devices galore,
including closed-circuit TV coverage of every room, even the
bathrooms. That made me pause a moment, for I had used a bathroom.
But neither of us had much faith in this system. Electronics
could be nullified by other electronics-or by a cut in a power
line. And the other victims had had similar devices.
Dusk came. I was satisfied that no quick entry could be made
without our knowledge, and I was now thoroughly familiar with
the layout. Much of the glass was of the so-called unbreakable
type, and it was in double sheets with a vacuum area sandwiched
in between, for insulation and frost-free viewing. Hard as hell to
break or cut through silently! I had also set up several little boobytraps
for the potential intruder, mostly makeshift: a bucket of silverware
perched atop a partly opened door; a spring device behind
another door that would release a kitchen knife against whoever
opened it; nails, and thumbtacks scattered in dark passages and
near windows, several broken glass bottles outside the house; a
concealed trap in the earth near the front door-with a knife standing
inside, point up; old Christmas bells hung from the bushes, to
make tintinnabulation when brushed against; ankle-high strings
tied to noisy tin cans . . . A real pro would not be fazed, unless he
laughed himself to death; but an amateur would be in trouble.
Again, there was a subtle design to it all: to bring the intruder
to me, at the place of my choosing. Which was the tremendous
family room. It was really a combination living room, den, and
dining room, with a functional fireplace, soft sofas, and a huge
 
30
black mahogany dinner table complete with ornate silver candleholders.
These things were used, too; there was plenty of wood,
and the candles had been burned part way down. Fancy cigarette
lighters were all about.
It was not that Drummond could not afford separate rooms
for these various functions; it was that he could afford to ignore
convention and arrange his house for his private convenience. He,
didn't even have a wife to say him nay, evidently. I did not know
whether Thera's mother was dead or divorced-but judging from
her lack of concern and Drummond's silence, it was probably divorce.
She must have been some swinger, since he had kept the

child.
There were floor-to-ceiling mirrors set in the walls, so that the
room seemed three times as big as it was; in fact, it looked palatial.
A huge crystal chandelier hung over the table. Bronze and marble
sculptures were set artistically about, and there were a number of
paintings. The entire floor was covered by a deep white carpet-
hell on the cleaning woman, I was sure-and a plush pool table
stood at one end.
I shook my head, half in admiration, half in wonder. If I had a
million dollars to spend; I would not have invested in such things
as rugs and mahogany tables. But the room had a certain comfort
and elegance, and I knew I could quickly become spoiled by such
surroundings. Too bad it was about to be the scene of a death
struggle.
Last, I gave Drummond himself some tips on self defense. It
takes years to really master this subject as ft does with any discipline,
but a little common sense goes along way in a pinch.
Drummond was a stout, strong man, somewhat handicapped by
rich living but still capable of striking with power. Certainly I did
not expect him to sit passively in the face of murder threats.
"Don't try to use a knife," I cautioned. "The way you describe
the Hyena, he would merely take it away from you and cut off
your nose with it. Stick to things a trained fighter wouldn't use;
that puts you on a more even basis if he tries to match weapons.
31
Pick up one of those silver candlesticks and bash him in the face.
Silver is heavy, and it'll really hurt! Or grab some of your ivory
pool balls and start throwing. They're potentially lethal. Of course,
your best bet is to get out of his way-I mean to run; like hell!-
but in this instance I think you're safest right here with me. If he
tries to finish you while I'm still functioning, I'll be on him in a
hurry."
He nodded emphatically in agreement.
"But if I'm done, you run! If you do go outside, grab the lid
from a metal garbage can. It makes a hell of a good defense against
a knife. It's like a big shield."
"That's right!" he agreed, gaining confidence. "I can defend
myself-without formal weapons. Especially if you have wounded
him. That's the best way."
We were ready, except for one thing. "Where's There?" I asked.
"She should be back with my nunchukus by now." I was also concerned
lest she stray from the front walk in the dusk and step in to
my pit trap.
Drummond looked nervously at his watch. "She might have
had trouble getting into your building."
"My dojo is open. There's an evening karate class there. All she
had to do was go in and ask for the weapon."
"Would they give it to her?"
"She knows where to phone for confirmation!"
"Yes . . ." he agreed "Perhaps we should phone there, just to
be sure." He picked up the phone.
His face became set. "The line is dead he said, his voice the
same.
"Uh-oh." I felt a prickling at the nape of my neck. Had the
Hyena been at work even while we prepared to repel him? "She
couldn't call . . ."
Then I had a worse thought. "Could she have returned here-
and been intercepted by the Hyena?"
Drummond set down the receiver and paced nervously, skuffing
the rug. "I should never have let her go alone!"
 
32
"She can take care of herself," I said. "I taught her how to
disable a man who tried to . . ." But right now I didn't believe it.

A first-degree black belt cannot stand against a higher degree unless
there are special circumstances. Everything favored the Hyena.
We had been fools. I could have phoned the dojo and had a
student deliver the nunchakus. Now-well, maybe she was just
late. A routine disruption of the phone service could account for
that, preventing her call, complicating things.
Suddenly the lights went out.
"I have an emergency generator that should cut in automatically,"
Drummond said nervously. "Unless that has been disabled
. . ."
The lights stayed out. That was answer enough.
"Light the candles!" I said. "And make a fire in the fireplace."
"Yes!" he agreed as if clutching a life raft. In a moment he had
an ornate candelabra lit; it was a monstrous silver artifact with four
arms. There was a candle in each, plus another in the center. The
baroque whirls in the silver resembled waves of the ocean, and in
the flickering light of the candles those waves seemed to move.
There seemed to be waves across Drummond's face, too, and the
mirrors made of the entire room a ghostly sea.
Then he touched a lighter to the logs lying stacked in the
fireplace. The tinder ignited readily, and soon there was a blazing
fire that threw its own brand of light all across the room and the
ghost-rooms. It was one of the most impressive effects I had ever
seen; the room must have been designed for this.
Drummond stopped suddenly, squatting by the flame. "I heard
something!"
I listened intently. Was there a sound-or were we overreacting?
The wood was crackling merrily.
Then I heard it: a gentle, hurried rapping on the distant front
door. The acoustics of the house brought that faint sound to us as
if it were a few feet away.
"Thera!" I exclaimed, vastly relieved. "She must be trying to
33
get in without arousing the Hyena!" She could not use her key; we
had not only locked the door, we had barred it. It was made with
a big iron bar in the back: old fashioned, but about as secure as it
was possible to get. Impossible to pick this lock!
"Yes!" he agreed gratefully. "I shall let her in immediately,
before . . ."
Before the Hyena caught her. Yes indeed! She was in deadly
peril. But I held him back. "No-I'll do it"
I trotted to the door and cleared it.
It burst open in my face. A man charged in, slamming me
back with his shoulder. Several others followed him, all masked.
Half a dozen killers, at least.
I had a stunned moment of realization before my reflexes threw
me into action. We had blocked every entrance-and then innocently
opened the front door to the Hyena.
Because he had knocked.
 
Chapter 2
HYENA
I leaped at the first intruder, the one who had shouldered me
back. He was wearing a ski mask: a brightly knitted stocking affair
that covered his head and face down to the throat, with only two
holes for the eyes, one for the nostrils, and a slit for the mouth. It
made him completely anonymous and somewhat unearthly. He
looked a little like a TV puppet, one of the Muppets.
But he had tiger's claws on his hands. Those claws were like
brass knuckles, except that their business side was inside-razorsharp
projections passing over the fingers, making them true claws
that could take the eye out of a victim or tear the flesh from his
bone. Such a strike would give the impression that a wild animal
had mutilated the victim.

He struck with those claws in a descending arc, trying to rip
open my face. I countered with a seiken jodan-uke, an upper block
with the forefist. As part of that motion I drew back my other
hand, the gesture creating a counterforce that lent more power to
my block. That is one of the distinctions between amateur and
35
professional fighting; the novice commits himself wholly to one
attack, however ill-advised, while the professional takes care that
his entire body contributes. Thus he had no follow-up when his
shot was parried, while I was balanced and ready for my own attack
even before my defense was made. I delivered a powerful roundhouse
kick, mawashi-geri, the ball of my foot ramming into his
armpit.
The effect of that kick was electric. He uttered a stricken cry,
his whole body convulsed, his arms shot stiffly to the sides and he
crumpled to the floor. My foot had connected squarely with the
big nerve complex in the armpit. He was dead from shock to his
involuntary nervous system.
I whirled, batting aside the clutching claws of the second man
as they went straight for my face. The trouble with tiger's claws is
that you have to be a tiger; you can't vary your attack much. He
followed up with a strike to the side of my head, that I parried
with a forefist middle inside block, seiken chudan uchi-uke. I put a
twist in my blocking arm for extra strength, keeping my withdrawn
arm tightly tensed. Then I used my free hand to give him
an oyayubi ipponken, a thumb one-finger fist: my hand was balled,
but the thumb was bent with its tip pressed hard down on the
second knuckle of the forefinger. Striking with the knuckle of that
thumb just below his covered ear, I felt the bone of his jaw give
way; the blow had terrible force. It is high on the proscribed list
for karate matches, and not in common use. But I was not in any
civilized tournament now!
I set up to kick him, but withdrew my foot before connecting.
You do not kick dead meat.
I spun to face the rest, but they were gone. While I had been
battling the first two in the hall, the others had gone right on into
the house. Drummond could be dead by now!
I charged down the hall and into the living room. It had only
been a few seconds.
I saw the pack rushing Drummond, who was behind the pool
 
36
table. His arm moved. The first thug fell to the rug clutching his
shoulder. It had been broken by a thrown billiard ball.
Drummond, spurred by a wholly realistic fear for his life, was
really acting on my advice. He was a veritable windmill, filling the
air with colored balls. Alas, I wished his aim had been as good as
his intentions; he could have knocked them all out. Even so, massed
as they were-another foolish amateur tactic-the attackers presented
a good target. A second man was hit in the stomach and
momentarily stopped.
The first man to reach Drummond was balked by the pool
table; I could not have placed the millionaire in a better defensive
position, considering the nature of the weapons. The thug's head
leaned over the table as his body was brought up short, and
Drummond hit him with so much force that his cue ball broke.
The man fell to his knee, while Drummond grappled with another.
I had made Drummond wear a heavy leather jacket as an
afterthought, perhaps anticipating the tiger's claws, and this now
protected his back from the raking metal. Both men fell, rolling
on the floor behind the pool table, Drummond's powerful arms
squeezing the man in a bear-like embrace.
I was not idle, of course, while this was happening. I charged
toward the action, barely pausing as I passed the thug with the

broken shoulder to crush the back of his knee with my heel as he
tried to get up. He was on his hands and knees, one leg extended
to the rear; it was that knee I struck. Only a second, and his knee
cartilage gave way, putting him out of action for good. That kind
of injury is extremely painful, and never heals completely.
Now I came to the one who had been hit in the stomach. He
was not in top form, as he was still gasping for breath; spittle flew
from the mouth-slit in his gaudy ski mask. But he tried to stop
me, grasping for my legs as he rose from the floor. With my fingers
tensed, I gave him a blow with the heel of my palm, a shotei to the
upraised chin and combined it with an o-soto-gari half-leg sweep
to his right leg. The combination snapped his neck and sent him
tumbling on his back to the floor.
37
Drummond and his bandit were still embraced, neither able
to obtain a clear-cut advantage. They had now rolled over before
the blazing fire, scattering the ornate fire tongs, ash-shovel and
black broom across the hearth.
Another killer leaned over the pair of them, trying to get the
schaining body of his companion out of the way so as to finish
Drummond with some clawing to the face. I leaped high in the air
while uttering a terrible battle cry-TAO!-and landed with both
feet solidly on the assassin's back, breaking his spine.
But the last man was already on me, the metal of his handclaw
raking the top and side of my head. The pain was terrible, and
blood streamed down and into my right eye. Half blinded, I threw
him off and staggered back.
My rear crashed into the mahogany table. The silver candelabra
toppled and started to fall. Automatically I caught it, afraid
the burning candles would set the house on fire.
The man who had raked my face regained his feet. Now he
hurdled the tangle on the floor and came at me. The blood was
running over my eye, filling the socket and making the tissues
burn and sting so awfully I could hardly see.
I threw the candelabra at his head. His ski mask caught fire.
The thing blazed up hideously, yet it was anchored at his neck so
that he could not take it off quickly. He screamed and clutched at
it-and in doing so tore his face with his tiger's claws so that the
bright red of his blood mixed with the decorative colors of the
mask. He had no further interest in combat.
I took advantage of the respite to grab the tablecloth and mop
my own face with it. The beautiful white cloth was ruined, of
course, but my sight was a matter of life and death at the moment.
Drummond was on his feet again, clutching a huge heavy chair.
He had a nasty rip on his scalp-these were endemic in this fight!-
right across the bald dome. Evidently that was the price he had
paid for wrenching himself from the assassin. Then he dropped
the chair on his assailant. That piece of furniture must have weighed
 
38
two hundred pounds, and the oaken edge of it landed across the
man's neck. He didn't even groan; he was out.
It seemed we had weathered the onslaught of the Hyena. Just
a bunch of cheap hoods after all. Seven bodies strewn about the
stained rug.
"That smell . . ." Drummond said, looking about. I sniffed.
He was right; there was a peculiar odor, some kind of animal scent,
cloying and nauseous. The carrion aroma of an ill-kept tiger cage,
perhaps. I hadn't noticed it before, because I had been rather busy,
but it had to be associated with these hyenas.
Then a shape appeared in the hall, and the odor intensified.
Dumbly I looked, allowing the blood to drip once more into my
face.
It was a man-form with a grotesquely powerful body: short

legs, small hips, but a torso rising into a barrel-like chest, a mighty
back, huge muscular shoulders and a thick neck. But the figure
was hunchbacked-and it had the head of some predatory animal.
Doglike, but not a dog or wolf.
This was the Hyena. The real one, not an underling.
He wore a rubber mask over his head, of course. The effect was
striking, but I was not superstitious. I had fought his minions;
now at last I had come to grips with the master.
I was barehanded, but so was he. I saw that he needed no
metal tiger's claws; his own nails were long and sharp. His feet
were bare, the toenails, like the fingernails, shaped into deadly
claws.
Quickly I removed my shoes and socks to stand barefooted.
"Can't you kick heavier with your shoes on?" Drummond asked.
He knew, as I did, that it was no sense of fairness or appearance
that prompted me. The real fight was just about to begin. What
had passed before had been no more than the preliminaries.
I laughed, but my eyes never left the Hyena, who stood immobile,
sizing me up. He knew, as I did, that an extraordinary
encounter was about to take place. "No, I am much faster without
that weight hindering my feet. Feel the callus."
39
Drummond felt the horny shield of tissue on the ball of my
foot and along the edge, harder than any shoe leather. I wore shoes
for public appearances but my feet were private killers.
I stepped forward, watching him with my left eye, no longer
trying to use my right. It was hard to see him clearly, because now
there was only the light of the fire. But I had fought in the dark
before.
That animal snout of his opened, and he emitted a startlingly
loud, weird, cackling laugh. And I froze in place-for that laugh
was echoed outside.
He came to meet me, his little legs seeming to offer insufficient
support, but his mighty arms giving an entirely different
impression. Awkward on his feet he might be, but he was a thoroughly
trained fighter. I could see it in his manner, the way he
carried his upper torso.
The Hyena's hands reached out. I was not eager to grapple
with him until I had weakened him somewhat. He was an extremely
powerful man, especially in the arms, and he was fresh,
while I had just fought several other people. I'm no weakling myself,
but I fight with my brain and training as much as with my
physical strength. At weightlifting the Hyena would clobber me;
at mortal combat he would have to have other assets.
The animal-headed man had other ideas. He jumped at me,
trying to grab me with his long claws so as to finish me rapidly. I
think he was expecting me to try to batter him with karate and
kung fu blows, as I had done with his henchmen.
Instead I surprised him, grabbing both of his arms from underneath,
meeting his rush and dropping to the floor while both
my feet went to his midsection. I pulled with my arms and pushed
with my feet-an unorthodox variation of the tomoe-nage stomach
throw. This put my stronger legs into play against his weaker abdomen,
a tactical advantage. And it sent him flying.
He should have rammed head-on against the wall, ending the
fight. But he surprised me with catlike agility as he twisted in the
air. Even so, he crashed into a cabinet full of Sevres china, sending
 
40
it to the floor on top of him with a tremendous noise of breaking
dishes.
I leaped at him, hoping to catch him with a front kick, maegeri,
straight at his face before he recovered. There is no polite donot-
hit-a-man-when-he's-down convention in real combat; you

go all out to win, or you lose. If you make an advantage for yourself
by throwing your opponent on the floor, you are stupid not to
follow it up.
But again the Hyena reacted swiftly. Rolling to his knees, he
batted my feet aside. His claws ripped the side of my ankle. I was
lucky he had not cut the tendons, as that would have finished me.
This man was every bit as dangerous, as I had anticipated.
He reached out with those enormously long arms and tried to
strike me down as he jumped to his feet. I barely managed to step
aside or block his many swipes. I could not afford either to be
slashed or grabbed, for that was his style, not mine, and no one
was going to beat him his way.
We circled each other in furious fight, while I trusted that
Drummond was keeping an eye on any undead minions. I did not
want the industrialist messing in this fight-the Hyena would kill
him with a single strike. It was not just a matter of blocking a slash
or kick; I had many years of training that Drummond lacked, so
that my blocks were as fast as reflex, yet well chosen. The Hyena
would have killed me several times over already, had I not been a
thoroughly experienced martial artist. And I would have killed
him, had he been less than he was. In moments, we had come to a
mutual appreciation of each other's abilities.
I managed to land a good blow to his upper triceps muscle at
the top of his right arm. It was a middle-knuckle strike, nakayubi
ipponken, with the second knuckle of the middle finger out. His
arm went down, as it was momentarily paralyzed. I had scored
indirectly on a nerve center under the muscle, crushing it against
the bone of his arm.
But he countered with his other hand: a numbing forefist
roundhouse strike, seiken mawashi-uchi, to the side of my head. It
41
missed my ear narrowly; half an inch to the back and I would have
been dead. Even so, the force of the blow stunned me.
I fell forward to my knees, on the hearth, my consciousness
fading. I had a vision of flames, real flames, for I was staring into
the fire. The blood from my prior wound had filled my right eye
again and spattered some to my left. That was why I had not
dodged the blow; the Hyena had taken advantage of my liability
to penetrate my blind side. Now I could barely see his knee coming
at my face, to ruin it.
Here was where my trained reflexes saved me. My mind was
foggy, but my body knew what to do. I somersaulted backward.
Even so, his knee grazed my nose, and more blood flowed.
I stood up groggily. Had this been a formal encounter, the
referee would have stopped the match, disqualifying me because
of the threat to my health. There was a threat, all right. But it was
to my life, not my health.
I felt the Hyena's arms around me, pinning mine to my sides.
Now he had me where he wanted me. His fetor was so overpowering
I might have puked, had I not been in worse distress from the
pressure. Those arms were crushing me, crushing the air and life
out of my body. He was trying to swing me from my feet, so as to
break my back more easily.
Two things helped me to stave that off. First, I was taller than
he; it was hard for him to lift me without changing his grip, and
he did not dare do that. A bear hug cannot be intermittent! Second,
my training: tai sabaki. I automatically lowered my center of
gravity, tensing my stomach, putting all of my strength into my
lower belly. My legs became like iron. It is not true that no man
can be lifted against his will, as some supposed experts claim. But
the process can be greatly complicated by the proper defensive
measures. He could not lift me. While he strained in vain, my
head cleared and my strength returned.
Suddenly I felt his awful jaws close in the juncture of my neck

and torso. I had thought his animal mask nonfunctional, but I'd
been wrong. The Hyena could bite. He started worrying me as
 
42
though I were a tough hunk of meat, a carcass. He was a hunting
beast tearing apart his victim, not caring how it might struggle so
long as he got his mouthful. The pain was terrible; soon those
teeth would find my jugular vein. I felt fresh warm blood flowing
down my chest, and felt his tongue rasping into the wound.
I hunched my neck and contracted my muscles. My neck was
twice as strong as that of the normal man, and that was all that
enabled me to hold out against this new onslaught. It could not
help me long.
I hooked my right leg against the back of his leg in a kosotogake,
a small outside hook. I reaped his leg from under him, much
as I might do with a student, and brought him down. Nothing
wrong with the standard techniques; that's why we teach them.
With his teeth and arms committed, he could not maneuver to
retain his balance.
I fell on top of him, knocking his wind out. His teeth ripped
away from my throat. I had suffered serious injury, but now my
blood-lust was aroused. My judo was almost forgotten. My fingers
grabbed at each side of his thick neck, and my thumbs went in
deep, converging on his windpipe, almost meeting. I could also
feel the blood pulsing in his carotid arteries, as I squeezed them
shut too. In a moment the flow of blood to his brain would stop,
and he would lose consciousness. Not slowly, as is the case with
asphyxiation, but instantly.
"AAHHHH!" The scream of sheer agony rang in my ears. But I
had his air cut off; how could-?
No wonder! It was my scream. My head was on fire!
The Hyena had grabbed a burning stick from the nearby fireplace,
heedless of the pain to himself as he wrenched it through
the protective mesh and rammed it at my face. Luckily for me he
had missed my eyes; his own concentration had been suffering
because of my choke-hold. But the brand had hit the top of my
head, setting my hair on fire.
I let go and jumped away, trying to smother my blazing hair.
43
Theoretically, human hair is self-damping and will not really burn.
You could never prove that theory by my experience.
Again the Hyena laughed, as well he might. I was badly
burned, bitten, half blind, and he still held that flaming torch in
his hands. The damned thing should have gone out when removed
from the fire, but it blazed with ornery determination. No doubt
Drummond had specially treated wood, to ensure a good fire. Damn
him!
He stalked me, waving his light in front of him as an animal
trainer does his whip, and I had little defense against it. Then he
lunged.
I tried to bat the brand aside with the edge of my hand, using
the knife-defense, so that I could follow up by catching his arm
and forcing him to drop the weapon. But once again he was too
fast; his reflexes were as sophisticated as mine. He drew back the
torch and thrust the bright tip of it against my arm, sliding it up
so that I was burned in a streak from the inside elbow to the hand.
Yet another painful wound.
"Jason!"
I looked about wildly with my clear eye. Thera was there; I
recognized her more by her voice than her figure.
"I got it, Jason," she called. "Here."
Something sailed through the air. The Hyena grabbed for it,
but couldn't catch it because he already held the hot stick. My
nunchakus!

Suddenly the complexion of the fight changed. Now I was
armed. Now I had power!
The Hyena approached me. He must not have been familiar
with my weapon, for he did not change his style. He held his
burning brand threateningly before him, ready to jab at my face
again, and to punish any effort of mine to block it.
I delivered a flail-like blow with my nunchaku that hit his
extended forearm solidly. A lesser arm would have snapped like a
dry stick. His did not; but even that tree-like limb must have
 
44
smarted terribly, for the smash of the nunchaku is deadly. The
brand fell to the floor and he cried out, in real pain this time.
I surprised him again, thrusting the end of one stick to his
midsection. I heard his grunt of anguish as he expelled all the air
from his lungs. I had him at my mercy now.
Then I made a mistake. It was the most elementary blunder,
of the type I had warned my students about repeatedly. It was the
error of overconfidence.
I wanted him to be afraid, as he had made me afraid. I wanted
him to know I was going to batter him into a shuddering pulp,
and that there was nothing he could do about it.
I could have finished him quickly, flinging one stick of the
nunchaku out to sweep behind his neck, and catching it so that
the cord throttled him. Or I could simply have struck repeatedly
at his head until it cracked open like a rotten melon. One way or
another I could have finished him in seconds.
Instead I indulged myself in a display of expertise, my nunchaku
moving in glittering arcs and figure-eights above me like a bird in
flight. The zigzags were so swift that the eye could hardly follow
them, especially in this poor light. Yes, disarmed, bruised, and
overmatched, he saw his doom in the making!
With an animal cry-no laugh this time!-the Hyena pounded
across the floor, away from me. I moved to head him off, and Thera
stood her ground in the hall, blocking his escape. But he did not
go that way. He ran to the end of the room and crashed through
the huge curtained picture window there. He broke into the night
amid a shower of glass and tatters of curtain. I had thought that
window was truly unbreakable, and that he was trapped; another
miscalculation. I had once again underestimated his animal
strength.
In a moment he was gone, silently. I tried to pursue him, but
the glass edges were jagged and I just couldn't see him in the dark.
It would be suicidal to follow him outside. The Hyena was a creature
of the night. He could turn on me and rend me in a moment,
even armed as I was. I had to have the light to operate.
45
And I had not forgotten that animal sound somewhere out
there. The awful echo of his laughter. Was I afraid? Yes, I was not
ashamed to admit I was. Fear is often healthy; it prevents a man
from throwing his life away foolishly.
"You did it!" Drummond gasped. "Striker, you beat him! You
took the Hyena and saved my life!"
"I didn't take him," I said. "Your daughter provided me with a
new option, and he wouldn't gamble. That's all." That was not all,
but I lacked the gumption to admit the truth: that I had foolishly
thrown away certain victory.
"But he didn't kill me! It's over! He never strikes the same
target twice. I won't have to fear him any more."
"Nice for you," I said. Now I felt the renewed pains of the
gashes on my head and foot, the bite on my neck, the burn on my
arm and my scorched hair. What a fighter that Hyena was! He had
done me more damage in a shorter time than anyone I could remember.
Drummond's account might be settled, but the Hyena-Striker

account was just beginning. I knew his type; if I didn't run him
down and put him out of commission, he would surely come after
me and kill me.
At his convenience.
 
Chapter 3
THERA
By day, in familiar territory, I could probably take the Hyena.
But by night, in his own locale, he could probably take me. He
was tough, right through the core. I didn't fear anonymous assassination
from that quarter; he would meet me squarely. But if I
were the slightest bit off-sick or injured or sleepy or distracted-
I would die. Unless I caught up to him at my convenience.
"I knew you could do it!" Thera said. "Oh, Jason, I'm so glad!"
"I wouldn't have done it without your help," I reminded her,
and it was no gallantry. But that reminded me. "What kept you,
Thera?"-
"They gave me a hard time at your dojo. I tried to call, but
couldn't get through. That scared me, so I snuck in, grabbed the
weapon, and ran."
"You're lucky they didn't catch you!"
"They did catch me," she said innocently.
"Then how-?"
"Somehow one of those karate students got the idea that there
47
might be something between us, if he helped me. His name was
Andy."
Andy-one of my best, now, despite his loss of sight in one
eye and poor vision in the other. He had been scratched across the
eyes during a melee some months ago, by the same black karate
mistress I had teased Thera about. Poetic, in a way; that woman
had made a profound impression on my life and business. Andy
had made a remarkable recovery. Before that episode he had been
just an average student. Now he showed real promise.
No point asking this teen-aged sex bomb just who had put
that idea-something between them!-into Andy's head. Andy
was normal, but not sexually aggressive.
"So it took a little while," she said.
I let it drop. I didn't want to know whether she had cheated
Andy of his high expectations, or had delivered full measure. She
had accomplished her mission: to fetch the nunchakus. I could
hardly condemn her for that.
"Well, let's clean up in here," I said. "We'll have to see about
restoring the phone and power, and getting something decent to
eat. And maybe we'd better get a doctor."
"I notified the phone company when I couldn't get through.
They said they'd have a man on it right away."
"Where is he, then?" Drummond demanded. He was an ugly
sight, with his clothing ripped and blood caked on his head and
shoulders, but he seemed exhilarated. His death sentence had been
reprieved, and he had fought valiantly on his own behalf. Reason
enough for satisfaction.
"We'd better check the grounds." I said.
"There's something-out there," Thera said nervously. "I
smelled it when I came in, and-"
"The Hyena," I said.
"No, he was inside fighting with you. This was-all I could
see was two glowing eyes, and the smell was awful. I thought it
was going to attack me, but it just watched. I drove the car right
 
48
up to the door so I wouldn't have to get out, and then I just ran
inside."
"It must have been the real hyena," I said. "The one that makes

those paw-prints. We heard it laughing, answering its master. He
probably has trained it to stand guard, but not to attack except on
direct order from him. You're lucky."
She nodded soberly. We checked the grounds. Sure enough,
the phone repairman was there, tied and gagged in his truck. The
Hyena had intercepted him, but hadn't hurt him. As they had
told me: the Hyena didn't bother with people worth less than ten
million dollars. He must have known the phone man was only an
innocent bystander doing his job, and dealt with him accordingly.
Which verified what I had already learned about the Hyena's professionalism:
he was no berserker, no wild sadist. He was out for
money, a lot of it, and he concentrated his energies economically
on the ramifications of that one problem.
Soon we had the phone back in order. We used it to order a
catered supper, an electric company repairman, the police, and a
doctor. (Yes, doctors do make house calls-for millionaires.) The
electric company, with typical efficiency, did not get the power
restored until several hours later, so meal and medication had to
be handled by candlelight. The doctor was rather put out, but
Drummond tipped him two bits and shut him up.
The police came while my several injuries were being bandaged,
and the officers looked with amazement at the seven dead
and injured thugs. "There'll have to be an investigation," the sergeant
said.
"No investigation, no publicity," Drummond said. He now
had a bandage on his head that made him look like a turbaned
sultan, and his bearing was every bit as regal. "These rascals burst
into my house intent on robbery and mayhem. I resisted. Fortunately
my friend Mr. Striker was here, visiting my daughter. He's
a judo instructor, you know. World champion."
I opened my mouth to protest the distortions, but Drummond
gave me a warning look.
49
"What about the window?" the sergeant asked. "It looks broken
from the inside."
"I shall have it replaced in the morning."
The officer shook his head dubiously. "Just as you say, sir."
I knew there would be no complications from the police.
Drummond had implied they could be bought; evidently he had
invested a little himself. He trusted them, now that the Hyena
was out of the picture. But I had to admit, publicity about this
fracas would have been awkward for me as well as for Drummond.
What was the trainer of the U.S. judo team doing in a common
brawl, killing several people? So I kept my mouth shut, feeling like
a hypocrite.
At any rate, there would be no news from the Hyena hoods; I
knew they were nondescript hirelings who would know nothing of
the Hyena's real nature or whereabouts. Besides, they would be
killed soon if they talked; underworld contracts on informers were
easy to come by and hard to prevent.
The police cleared out the bodies just before the caterers arrived.
Nice timing, that. We adjourned into another room, lit a
new fire in its fireplace, and ate a romantic, candlelight, fire-bright
meal, the three of us. I declined the cocktails in favor of milk, to
Drummond's evident amusement. I am not a conscious Spartan,
apart from financial necessity, but I tend to stay away from alcohol
in all its forms, along with cigarettes, coffee, speed, and other civilized
vices. It is because I take pride in my mind and body, and do
not like to damage either, even marginally.
This moderation also applies to food. I don't like too much
sugar, fat, starch, cholesterol, or artificially treated delicacies.
But there are limits to my resolve. I was tired, hungry, bandaged
from head to foot (several unconnected bandages, fortunately),
emotionally tense-and Drummond had ordered one hell

of a meal.
It started with a plate of cold cuts-cheeses, ham, salami, olives
(black, green,and stuffed), small pieces of bread with anchovies
and salmon-and proceeded to clear turtle soup cooked with
 
50
sherry (ah, well, that little bit couldn't hurt me) and Alaskan king
crab cocktails: big pieces of juicy crab with spicy tomato sauce.
Then the main entree of filet mignon cooked rare and very tender.
I lost control and gorged myself on four of them. Next came a
salad of palm hearts, and good old-fashioned American apple pie
for dessert.
The discomfort of my injuries faded. God-if the Hyena appeared
now, I'd simply burp him to death!
Drummond and Thera ate less of the food, no novelty to them,
but drank more of the liquor. They put down champagne, Bloody
Mary vodka, Barcardi yellow rum with Coca-Cola, light Italian
wine; and God knows what else. Ah, decadence!
I finally sampled a little sweet liqueur myself, because my milk
and water did not seem sufficient to slack the thirst brought on by
my huge meal. It had been a rough evening, and we were in no
hurry. I felt better and better as time passed.
"Will you stay the night?" Drummond inquired.
"I should get back," I started, loath to get out of my chair
because of my gorging. Then I realized that it was not a hint, and
not an idle question. He had said the menace was over, but he
didn't quite believe it himself. "I'll stay," I said, relieved for the
pretext.
"You can use my room," Thera said, sipping some green absinthe.
"Why make you move? Don't you have a spare?"
"Who said I was going to move?"
The problem was, she was not exactly joking, and I was not
exactly indifferent. She had wrought well, when she showed me
her leg and panties in the car; it had put a notion into my baser
mind. That sort of notion does not readily leave a man, unless
satisfied in the obvious fashion. Now she was waxing suggestive
right in her father's presence, and he wasn't saying a word. All of
which spelled M-A-R-R-I-A-G-E-and I didn't want it.
"Do you have an encyclopedia here?" I asked, changing the
subject.
51
"If you have to look it up, you're hardly ready to do it," Thera
said. "But nature will guide you, and I'll help, if you'll just let
me."
"I want to look up the word hyena," I said. "He may not be
back for you, Mr. Drummond, but I know he and I will meet
again. I want to be prepared."
"There are several books on zoology in my library," Drummond
said, "My daughter will show you."
Undoubtedly. She had been showing me things all evening. I
sighed inwardly. "Let's take a look."
We took two candles and made our way to the library. Thera
also carried a glass of something, another yellow liqueur. We had
to dismantle the barricade of furniture we had made before that
door.
Inside was a spacious, pleasant, carpeted room with an impressive
array of books, all arranged by subject much as in a real
library. Sure enough, there were numerous books on all aspects of
biology, ranging from popular essays on human sexuality to technical
texts on zoology. Many of them were worn. Drummond evidently
read his books (or maybe it was Thera), and he didn't stop
with the illustrated sexual manuals; this library was not just for
show. But of course the rich had time to educate themselves, if
they wished.

I located a book on mammals. "'HYAENIDS-four species,'"
I read aloud, holding the candle as close to the page as I dared. We
didn't need another fire. "'Order CARNIVORA, Superfamily
FELOIDEA. Family HYAENIDAE. Sub-family PROTELINAE.
Proteles cristatus. Aardwolf.'" I looked up. "Aardwolf? That's not it!"
"I'll say!" Thera agreed. "Any man who has a beautiful and
willing girl alone with the lights out, and reads about aardwolves-
"
"'Subfamily HYAENINAE. Crocuta crocuta. Spotted Hyaena.'
That's it!"
"Bookworm!" she complained, sipping from her glass. It
smelled more like perfume than wine.
 
52
"'Superficially resembles a big dog, but more closely related to
the cats,'" I said as my eyes squinted at the fine text in the flickering
light. "I didn't know that. I thought it was related to the jackal-
a cowardly dog."
"I don't know about the animal hyena," Thera said, "but the
human one's no coward. I guess you could call him a dog, though."
"No, it's not a dog," I said. "Not related to the canines."
"A son of a bitch," she said, holding the candle up to her face
so that I could see her smile.
Oh, a pun. I wasn't in the mood. "Why don't you go wash a
dish?" I suggested, knowing that this rich girl never sullied her
hands on such menial tasks.
"I am a dish. You can wash me."
"What the hell are you drinking?"
"Fuji plum wine. Smell it?" She held it under my nose. The
aroma was delicious. I wrenched my face away.
"'Shoulder height of thirty-one inches, weight 120 pounds,
rounded ear tips . . . '"
"You're right on the mark about my weight and ears, but a bit
short on my height," Thera said. "I'm twice as tall as-oh, you
mean that position! We call it 'doggie fashion'-or maybe 'hyena
fashion' tonight. Well, since that's the way you want it, we'll put
the shoulders at thirty-one inches." She got down on her hands
and knees and wiggled her posterior suggestively.
It was pointless to react to her come-ons; it only led to more of
the same. I did want to learn about the animal hyena, getting
clues to the philosophy of the human one. "'Keen sense of smell . . .
lives twenty years or more . . . '"
"You mean I have only two years left?"
I resisted the temptation to goose her hard with my foot. "'Distinguished
by an eerie, chattering call, like a cackling human
laugh.'"
"Ha ha!"
"'Unpopular in some areas because it raids graves and digs up
53
and consumes recently buried bodies.'" I waited for her comment
on that, but it seemed I had finally shut her up.
"'Powerful jaws . . . able to crack virtually any marrow bones.'"
I looked up. "That explains the chewed-up bodies! He let the live
animal go at them."
"The one that was watching me . . ." she said, suddenly sober.
"'Feeds mainly on carrion, but is also a formidable night hunter.
No coward-has backed off and even killed old lions.'" I looked
up again. "That's some animal."
Then I discovered that Thera had risen from the floor, set glass
and candle on a bookshelf, and was undressing herself. Apparently
she had given up dialogue as unproductive, so now was turning to
a more basic strategy. She certainly had the figure for it. The flickering
candlelight made traveling highlights along her breasts and
torso, bringing first one rondure into prominence and then another.

Even the shadows were stimulating as hell.
I put my eyes firmly back on the page. However sweetly baited
it might be, I was not going to fall into that trap. "'Prodigious
appetite . . . Leopard forced to protect its kill by dragging it into
fork of a tree, out of reach of hyena . . . '" I shook my head. "That's
some fighter, if it backs off leopards too." But it was dangerous to
take my eyes off the page.
"'Powerful forequarters, but weak hindquarters, so incapable
of running at high speed . . . peculiar skulking movement . . . intelligent
. . . formidable organized hunter.'"
I stopped then, for Thera had blown out my candle and hers.
"Enough of this dawdling, Jason," she said, putting her warm
nude body into my arms. "I let you talk me out of it when you
taught me judo, but times have changed." Her hungry, wine-perfumed
lips sought mine.
"Thera, I don't want to marry you!" I said desperately. "It's
not my kind of life."
She laughed, a bit like the hyena, and I felt her breasts rippling
against me. "And I don't want to marry you, idiot! When I
was a child last year, I spoke as a child, but now I have put aside
 
54
childish things. You'd be dull as hell for more than a month, with
your prudish ways and your dismal karate-class routine. But I promised
myself I'd have you, and now is the time."
That put me in my place, all right. I had had quite another
impression. But it also released my inhibitions. If all she wanted
was a passing affair . . .
Possibly this was just another artifice, an attempt to compromise
me into marrying her. But that objection was only a small,
distant fling, easily brushed aside. I grabbed her in the dark and
applied a kote waza wrist-lock. With my right hand I took her left
hand, my thumb on her palm, my fingers on the back of it. I bent
her hand inward at the wrist, forcing her lower body against mine.
She was amenable; she yielded to the pressure, though it was token,
and thrust her pelvis forward against mine.
Somehow my neck/shoulder bandage covering the hyena's bite
got tangled in our embrace and ripped loose. I tore it the rest of
the way off and threw it aside, only spurred on by the momentary
pain. Yes, it was time.
"I hear something," Thera whispered in my ear as I loosened
my belt.
"Oh, so now we're being coy!" My pants dropped, and I ran
my left hand over her right breast and squeezed. What sensation!
"No-someone's in the hall!" she breathed urgently.
Then I heard it: a slight noise, as of a hand sliding along a
wall. I let Thera go and dropped into combat-ready stance, somewhat
hampered by the hobbling trousers around my ankles. Of all
times! It wouldn't be Drummond; was it the Hyena again?
Light flooded the room blindingly. My eyes hurt; they had
been adapted to the dim candle and then the complete dark. Evidently,
the power had been restored in the past few minutes, and
we had never thought to try the switch. And here I stood, the
Compleat Dunce in underpants. My shirt was hanging open, with
the raw wound in my neck exposed.
Through the pain of light I saw a figure, black like a silhouette,
framed in the doorway. Not Drummond.
55
I kicked aside my trousers and charged that figure. And got an
expert foot in my midriff that shoved me back but did not cripple
me. An intentional miss.
"Take it easy, honky," a low female voice said. "I have no fight
with you, unless you want it that way."
"Ilunga!" I exclaimed, my vision clearing as I caught my balance.

She stood with hands on hips: tall, voluptuous, self-assured.
She wore a tight-fitting black knitted outfit, somewhat like a body
stocking extending to her neck, wrists and ankles, with a wide
leather belt, and she was barefooted. Because her skin was black, it
was hard to tell exactly where the clothing left off, and she appeared
hazily nude. She seemed to have nothing on underneath;
her breasts were clearly formed, including the nipples, and the
rest of her anatomy was as specific. She would have been stunning,
except for three things: her broken nose, her fierce orange eyeballs,
and her knowing sneer.
Thera stood behind me, gloriously naked, shading her eyes
with one hand. The contrast between the two women was striking:
the one statuesquely white, the other statuesquely black. "You
know this person, Jason?" she asked.
"What are you doing here?" I demanded of Ilunga.
"I had to talk to you, Bwana," she said, her tone mocking me.
This was one black woman who catered to no white man.
"Look at her eyes!" Thera exclaimed. "What is she, a drug addict?"
"Yes," I said shortly. "Look, Ilunga-"
Thera strode forward, breasts and buttocks jiggling brightly
under her platinum tresses. "So this is Black Beauty! Your unfinished
business!"
"Stay clear of her!" I warned. "She's dangerous!"
"She's a horse of a different color, dangerous to our privacy!"
Thera snapped. "Get your tail out of here, Ebony!"
"White trash, I got no business with you," Ilunga said contemptuously.
"I'd as soon cut off your honky ass as look at it, and
 
56
feed all that pork to my dog. But all I want is to talk to him.
Now."
"Well, come and get a piece of my ass, because you aren't talking
to Jason right now."
Ilunga glanced at me, the orange flashing as her eyeballs moved.
"Who is this peroxide floozy?"
And of course Thera had used peroxide. I saw that trouble
could not be avoided "Ilunga, meet Thera Drummond, judo black
belt, millionaire heiress. Thera, meet Ilunga, karate expert, black
militant. I wash my hands of what follows, only keep it clean, will
you, girls?" Actually, I'd have to see that neither of them got killed
or maimed, and I might have to take some more wounds myself
doing that. Human females are worse than real bitches, when they
get bitchy.
"So glad to meet you, heiress."
"Likewise, militant."
They made a formal half-bow to each other. Good-it was
going to be clean. Maybe.
Ilunga aimed a punch at Thera, but Thera batted it aside and
grabbed the hand, trying to turn the wrist inward, much as I had
just done to her. But it was ineffective against an expert karateka.
Ilunga somersaulted forward, escaping the hold. Then she aimed a
roundhouse kick at Thera. Thera stepped in and behind the leg,
and swept Ilunga's other foot forward in a judo o-soto-gari,the big
outside reap. Ilunga crashed to the floor on her butt.
Thera looked pleased-but her smile was premature. Ilunga's
leg shot out and caught her in the stomach. Now Thera fell to the
floor. Ilunga jumped on top of her as she was trying to get up,
landing on her back. Black figure and white figure fused in the
struggle. One black hand reached around to catch hold of a white
breast, while the other caught at Thera's shaved crotch. I could not
identify that particular grip, but evidently it was a pain hold, because
suddenly Thera's eyes went wide open and she screamed.
"Maite!" Thera cried, meaning "I yield!"
Ilunga let go immediately and stood back, breathing hard.

57
Thera got up without apparent discomfort. The two made another
formal little bow to each other.
"All right-you talk to him," Thera said. "You earned it." I
could see that she had had a good lesson; probably no woman had
mastered her before. She picked up her clothes and left the room.
"She fought clean, so I did," Ilunga said to me, as though an
explanation were required. "You must've trained her."
"I did. Thanks. But let's not make small talk." I climbed back
into my trousers as I spoke. "You went to a lot of trouble to find
me here, and it must be serious."
She told me, mincing no words. It was serious. But to oblige
her, I would have had to give up my position as a U.S. world judo
trainer, and I simply wasn't ready to make that sacrifice. No point
in telling her that, however; it would sound ungracious, and sport
judo was not a thing she understood or respected.
On the other hand, I did not want this woman for an enemy,
not when I already had the Hyena to contend with. So I compromised.
I gave her a referral. Someone who might be able to help
her as well as I could have. With that she had to be satisfied.
Ilunga was gone by the time Thera returned, dressed in a clinging
negligee. "Who is she?" Thera asked, almost as though disappointed
to find me alone. "I mean, to you?"
"She's the last addict on Kill-13, a devastating martial-arts
drug. It gives superior reflexes and power."
"So I discovered! That woman can fight!"
"And virtual immunity to pain. But it's hell on the body; the
eyes are first to suffer, and in time the debilitation extends everywhere.
I destroyed the Kill-13 Demon cult, and she helped me.
She saved my life. So I owe her something."
"So she came to collect?"
"Yes. But this time I couldn't help her." I shrugged. "So let's
drop the subject."
Thera looked thoughtful. "She's some woman."
"Yes. Now where's my room?"
"You know, when I was grappling with her . . ." She trailed
 
58
off, shaking her head. "Maybe we'll meet again, sometime."
"I doubt it," I said. "She hates all whites."
"All white men."
I glanced at her uneasily. What was she getting at?
"What was that grip she used on you?" I asked curiously. "I
don't believe I've seen that one before." Which was odd, because I
have made quite a study of judo, kung fu and aikido grips.
"You are not in a position to experience it," she said with a
funny look.
Not much of an answer, but I didn't push it. Probably Thera
didn't like being reminded of her abrupt loss. "Where's my room?"
I repeated.
She shook her head as if clearing it of some intriguing thought,
and I had the distinct impression that I was not the subject of that
thought. "This way."
She led me upstairs and into an obviously feminine room.
"Here?" I asked somewhat forlornly. Furnishings are not important,
but flowered curtains, perfumed sheets, and an ornate
vanity are simply not my style.
She twirled about so that her negligee spread out, showing her
attributes in turning silhouette. "I told you: my room."
"But I presumed-after your fight-"
"You presume too much," she said. "First things first. I'm twice
as ready now as I was in the library."
So her priorities remained unchanged. I had other things to
worry about. I would have to plan how to deal with the Hyena,

and I still had a team to train for the world championship competition.
This year it was going to be held in Cuba, and this didn't
make me feel any easier.
But this was not three weeks from now; this was now. Tired,
wounded, and overstuffed on gourmet food I might be, but she
was right. First things first.
I moved to the door. "What're you doing, coward?" Thera asked
from the bed.
"I'm seeing that this time there is no interruption," I said,
59
closing the door, locking it, and bracing a chair under the knob.
I turned, ambled nonchalantly across the room, and stared at
her voluptuous figure under the negligee for a long, blas moment.
Then I leaped at her.
It was an illusion, of course-but I could have sworn she
bounced into the air to meet me.
Next morning I found my clothes scattered all across the room.
And her pretty negligee had a hole in it as though some idiot had
punctured it with a tent peg. I was never able to remember exactly
how that had happened, and never got up the gumption to inquire.
 
Chapter 4
ILUNGA
Ilunga rolled off the bed and hit the carpet silently. She could
not see well in the dark, but her hearing was acute. Someone was
coming up the stairs toward her apartment. Male, by the tread.
She was logy, suffering from Kill-13 letdown. She picked up
her electric cup, popped in a pellet of the demon drug, and turned
on the heat. She wanted to be high before she tackled the intruder,
but it took thirty seconds for the pellet to vaporize.
The footsteps reached the landing and stopped. Ilunga cradled
the cup in her hands. "Come on, come on!" she breathed to it.
"Get hot!" Too bad she had to use it at this hour of the morning;
her supply was dwindling, and there would be no replacements.
She tried to stretch it out by sleeping more, but nothing worked
very well.
The man outside walked up to the door, paused another moment,
and knocked.
The drug was hot at last. Ilunga brought the cup to her face,
opened the spout, and inhaled the vapor. Immediately the thrill of
61
it radiated into her head from the nasal cavities, giving her joy and
strength. Now she had power; now she could handle the man at
the door. She capped the spout, conserving the remainder of the
vapor for another sniff in a few hours.
He knocked again. The kind of man she feared did not usually
knock at all; maybe this was legitimate. "Yes?" she said sharply,
then stepped aside. On occasion, in this neighborhood, the sound
of a voice brought a bullet through the door. Ilunga had many
enemies, few friends, and now was stripped of her main power.
She had to sell her precious furnishings regularly in order to get
money to live on; her brief period of affluence was over.
"It's Danny."
It was his voice, though she could not be certain after two
years. She had known he would come back; she hadn't known
when or in what condition. "Anyone with you?"
"Not yet. Let me in, will you, Sis?"
She let him in. Danny was seventeen, but looked younger. He
was about five-eight and thin to the point of malnutrition. His
narrow face was scarred by acne, but his small wispy beard did not
help. He wore his hair in a tall Afro, with a black comb stuck in it,
a comb that saw frequent use. But his Afro never stayed just right;
he had just enough white ancestry, from his mother's side (therefore
not connected to Ilunga), to interfere. He wore a small gold

earring in one ear, and he had not taken a bath in a week. His left
hand had six fingers; they had not had the money to have the extra
removed at birth the way other families did.
"Give me five, Sis," and as she put her hands out he slapped
one and then the other in black fashion. "You got to help me,
Sis-I'm in bad trouble."
"I'll help you, Danny. You know. that." Danny was her halfbrother,
the only man she cared about. She had always protected
him. But two years ago he had fallen in with a bad crowd. She had
known he would have to learn things for himself, so she had left
him alone, even though she despised the men he ran with. It was
better for her, too, alone.
 
62
For Ilunga had had a rather special life of her own, that necessitated
a solitary existence. She had mastered karate so that she
could disable rapists-and she had effectively cured scores of them.
A man with his testicles crushed by a good kick was unlikely ever
to rape again.
Then she had fallen into addiction, trapped involuntarily by
the most potent drug of all, Kill-13. She had become a "Demon"-
a member of the Kill-13 cult among martial artists. Now the demons
were finished, the supplies of the drug destroyed. The other
addicts had died from the ravages of withdrawal; she survived because
she had managed to salvage a substantial cache.
Kill-13 was absolute; once hooked on it, the addict had no
way off, except death. And in time the drug would destroy her
anyway. She knew it, but accepted it, as she accepted the problems
of being black, or female, or poor, or alone.
Danny was different, however. He had a future.
"Sis, I want out-and they won't let me go." He walked jerkily
to the couch and plumped down.
She knew how that was, too. She had had no way out of the
Demon cult, except destruction. Worse than heroin, worse than
cocaine, Kill-13 would not let go, and its supplier was absolute
monarch over the addicts. Destruction was what had happened,
but by a fluke it had been the cult that was demolished, not her.
That man Jason Striker-he had been the key.
Striker. Male and white, typical of all she hated most. Yet he
had power and integrity, and there was something in her that
yearned to him, however much she tried to suppress it.
Danny took her silence for condemnation. "Sis, you were right
all the time. They're no good. None of 'em. They're horses' asses.
But they'll total me."
She focused on the present. "Who?"
"Blakrev. They put out a contract on any dropout--"
"What's this Blakrev? I never heard of it."
"It's new, Sis. Last six months, maybe a year. No big splash,
yet. You're too old."
63
"What is it?"
"Black Revolution. We're going to take over, only it's too tough.
Shit, I don't want to kill."
"Sounds like you've been moving in a fast crowd, Danny."
He looked at her, and his face began to crumple. "I'm not like
you, Sis. I tried to be tough, so you'd be proud of me, but I get
sick just thinking about it. If I tried to kill, I'd just fall to fuckin'
pieces. I just want to be left alone."
He was going to cry, and she despised that in a man. But
Danny was weak; she had always known that.
"Danny, that's just an initiation. They want to see if you're
really with them, so they ask you if you'll kill. So you say yes, and
you're in. They know you don't mean it."
He shook his head. "You don't know 'em, Sis. It's not like that.

They mean it."
She didn't believe it, but it was evident he did, and she had
learned not to act without checking out the situation. She went to
the phone and dialed a number from her head.
"Bettye? Ilunga. Know Blakrev?" She listened for a time, then
hung up.
"I've been way out of touch," she admitted. And she had been;
the Demon cult had been her whole world. "That's a hard-nosed
group. They do mean it." She paused to consider. "Yes, we'd better
get you out of it. It's not that I'm against their aim, or afraid of
killing. But I don't trust them. They're too new, too tough, too
sudden-and they have too much money. There's got to be someone
behind it, and chances are it's not a black man. Black men
don't have money, not when they're revolutionaries. I'd support a
real black revolution, but I'm not about to gamble on a fake one."
Danny only nodded. Obviously he didn't care whether it was
real or fake; he had lost what little nerve he had, and just wanted
out.
"Now I could go see someone in Blakrev," she said. "Bettye
gave me the name of their local wheel. But that's iffy. I might have
to kill him, and then they'd have to put a contract on me. Then I'd
 
64
have to kill the one they sent and it would probably be some poor
sucker like you, who couldn't get out. No percentage in that." She
looked at him obliquely. "So I think we'd better surprise them.
You surrender to the FBI."
"The pigs?" Danny shrieked.
"The one place Blakrev can't reach is in a honky jail cell. You
don't have to tell them anything important. They'll let you go
after a few days. After that, Blakrev won't touch you. They'll know
you're marked and maybe staked out. They need anonymous killers;
an FBI record is taboo."
"But the honkies-"
"I know it's bad. I hate 'em myself. Nothing I'd rather do than
kill a honky cop. But sometimes we just got to use them, and this
is the time."
"And that'll get me out of Blakrev-alive?"
"That's the way I figure it. Best chance, Danny."
He nodded. "You'll look out for me, Sis?"
"Always." She considered for a moment. "But you can't just go
down there to the station." She had tried that once herself, and
learned a bitter lesson about white policemen, and black girls.
"They'll have to arrest you. So Blakrev knows you didn't sell out.
I'll call."
"Will they hurt me, Sis?" Danny asked plaintively.
"No, not if you cooperate. Tell them everything you know,
except for names. For all you know, all the Blakrev names you have
are funny, anyway. Everyone talks; the thing is to have a good
story. You can string them on a lot with things they already know.
You can blame dead people. If they think you've got anything at
all, they may try to recruit you as a regular informer."
"No!" Danny cried in terror.
She shrugged. "Then tell them the truth: you're scared stiff,
and you'd rather rot in jail than inform and be dead." She dialed
the number.
A male voice answered. "FBI. Your name, please."
65
Ilunga made her voice harsh, masculine-an easy task, for her.
"Dondo. You got my address."
There was a pause. "Go on."
"Tip for you, if the pay's right. Blakrev contract man hiding
out at his half-sister's. She don't know his business. He's armed."
She waited a moment, until she had confirmation of their willingness

to pay. Then she gave her own address and hung up.
"Sis!" Danny squealed. "What're you saying! I'm not armed
or-"
She put a switchblade into his hand. "You just lie on that
couch there brother, and spring it open when they come. Look
mean, if you can, but don't fight." No danger of that! "I'll come in
from the bedroom and put on a scene. They'll take you and book
you, and when they realize you aren't what they thought they
had, they'll boot you out."
"But the money! Who'd you tell 'em to pay?"
"Dondo-the man Bettye mentioned. Local wheel in Blakrev.
When the pigs find out they've been taken, they'll leak his name,
and Blakrev will figure him for the tipster and take care of him in
its own fashion."
Danny was not wholly obtuse. "Sis, you're smart!"
"I've dabbled in this sort of mess before. Now get some sleep.
We've only got about two minutes. The cops move fast on this sort
of lead."
In less time than that, the knock came. "FBI. Open up!"
Fast, indeed! Danny rolled off the couch, touching his thumb
to the button. The blade snapped out gleaming. But it shook in
his hand, and he tossed it aside and opened the door.
There were two of them, cut from the same mold: male, white,
big, square-jawed, with crewcut hair and a lot of beef. Both wore
conservative dark suits with loud ties over solid-color shirts. Both
were in their late twenties or early thirties. One wore horn-rimmed
glasses. They stepped into the room briskly, without further invitation.
 
66
Ilunga emerged from her room in a nightgown and outsized
blue sunglasses to hide her orange eyeballs. She screamed when
she saw the men.
"FBI," one said tersely, showing his badge. "We are apprehending
your brother for interrogation. He's suspected of being a
hit man for Blakrev."
Ilunga staggered and grabbed onto a chair for support, letting
her nightgown fall-open to expose one dark breast. "Not my brother!
He's a good boy! He wouldn't do anything like that! Officer, you've
got to believe me! It's a mistake! He-"
"Shut up, sister," the horn-rimmed one said. He had alligatorskin
shoes and his hair was longer than that of his companion; a
long crewcut, modishly styled. His face was well tanned. He frisked
Danny while the other put handcuffs on him. They led him out
the door.
"No! You can't take him!" Ilunga cried, letting both breasts
show artfully as she moved. The FBI was used to temptations like
this, and always resisted them. "He hasn't done anything!" She
broke down, sobbing, as the door closed.
But as the heavy footsteps descended the stairs, she ripped off
the glasses. "Fuckin' honkies!" she muttered. "One swift kick in
the balls . . ."
She peered out the corner of the window, under the curtain,
where the pane had been broken out. She was looking for the third
FBI man she knew would be there, on guard for a sneak exit. He
was.
The other two emerged, jerking Danny along between them.
She thought they would take him directly to their car, but they
stopped on the sidewalk. The third one pinned something to
Danny's shirt-a piece of paper. Strange. Then he stepped back.
Suddenly a suspicion blossomed. Loud ties? Colored shirts?
Alligator shoes? Modish hairstyle? The FBI did not tolerate any of
that; deviance from its strict dress code was a more certain route to
demotion than graft or incompetence. And no FBI man ever said
67

"Shut up, sister." The FBI was as completely square as it was possible
to be.
Suddenly Danny threw himself to one side. "Sis!" he screamed-
but his cry was punctuated by the sound of a shot.
In a flash, Ilunga realized the truth. These were not FBI men.
They were Blakrev killers! She had missed it because they were
white. But they weren't white; one was deeply tanned. In fact, he
was a light skinned black man masquerading as a honky. But such
thugs would work for anyone with money; they had no politics.
And Blakrev had money.
Even as the realization hit her, Ilunga was galvanized into action.
She jumped through the window, breaking the remainder
Of the glass out with her feet.
It was a ten-foot drop, but she was prepared for it, and her
Kill-13 high made her super-strong. Her two feet struck the head
and back of the two men holding Danny. She heard and felt the
neck and spine of the first crack. He was finished.
She bounced off, using the two bodies of the men to break her
fall. Twisting in the air, she grasped the hair of the second. As her
feet touched the pavement she turned his head violently to the
side until his neck also cracked.
The third man still held the gun; the suddenness of her action
had kept him from firing. Her reflexes were faster and surer. That
was the thing about the drug: it really delivered! But now he
aimed-and she was not in position to get to him in time. She had
miscalculated; she should have gone for him first.
Her hands went to her head. She had two tiny throwing knives
hidden in her piled-up hairdo. Her wrists flicked. The knives flashed
together, flying toward their target with the precision of twin SAM
II rockets shooting down an Israeli Phantom.
The gunman screamed. The two blades were embedded in his
eyes, the handles sticking out like telescopic eyestalks.
Now she turned to Danny. He was groaning on the sidewalk,
a bullet in his shoulder. Only his sudden motion had kept it from
 
68
his heart. But he was still badly injured; he could bleed to death if
she didn't get him to a doctor.
She ripped the paper off his shirt. "I SOLD OUT BLAKREV,"
it said. They had intended to kill him almost in public view, and
leave the body there as a warning to all the neighborhood.
Blakrev was tough, all right. How had they intercepted her
call? They must have had a tap on her line, which meant they were
already aware of her relation to Danny, and primed for action.
And they could have heard her conversation with Bettye, too; Bettye
would now be a target as well.
She was up against real professionals. More than she could
handle alone, especially with Danny wounded. As soon as they
learned about the failure of this fake FBI strike, they'd be after
Danny again-and now she was right in it with him.
If she got out of this, she'd have a score to settle!
A yellow car came down the street, slowly. "Taxi!" she called,
waving. She knew a black doctor who was hot for her; this time
she'd have to meet his terms.
The taxi stopped. "I've got to get my brother to a doctor!" she
gasped. "Help me get him up-"
The metal snout of an M-3 army submachine gun poked out
of the black window of the car. It had a special extra-thick barrel-
a silencer.
Blakrev!
Ilunga leaned over the third thug, grasped one of her knives
from his eye, yanked it out, and in almost the same motion wafted
it at the face behind the gun. Then she dived for the car.
Sharp as they were, the killers had made a couple of mistakes.

They had stopped the car before trying to fire the gun, and they
had pointed it at Ilunga from too near. Bullets from a moving car
a hundred feet away could have cut her down without a chance,
and no special accuracy was needed, with this machine gun. But
as it was, she reached it in a single bound.
"Taoo!" she cried, startling the hood with the gun. He was a
big black dude with shades-black sunglasses. Apparently her
69
thrown tonki had missed him, but that didn't matter so long as it
had distracted him enough to delay in firing that all-important
moment. Now she hit upward rapidly with her right hand, deflecting
the thick barrel of the M-3. She heard a series of small
clicks or coughs as the bullets shot out to her right. It was silent,
all right.
She grabbed the barrel and hauled on it hard. The man, already
leaning toward the window, was jerked half out of it, his
head projecting from the car. Expertly, with her other hand, she
battered it a couple of times against the sill, breaking open the
skin, and finished pulling the weapon from his slackened grasp.
There was another man in the car, the driver or chauffeur.
Unable to go to the aid of his companion because of the cramped
interior, he made the obvious move-and it was another mistake.
He opened the front door and scrambled out. He jumped onto
the hood, drew forth a wicked ice pick and hurled himself from
this vantage on Ilunga.
But he had wasted time, setting up, and now she was ready for
him. She dropped to the ground and kicked upward with her
right leg in a motion similar to a tome nage. Her foot caught him
squarely in the groin with double force, crushing his testicles. That
was her specialty; she hardly ever missed.
He was propelled through the air by the force of her thrust.
Stupid but tough, he clutched at his mangled balls with one hand
and the ice pick with the other. Amazingly, he found his feet,
crouching; few men were able to offer any fight at all after that
kick.
Ilunga was also in a crouch, recovering from her exertion. Like
a Russian cossack dancer, she shot one leg out from that position,
connecting to the side of his jaw and breaking it. Before he could
fall, she caught him with a second kick to the other side of the jaw,
fracturing it again. For good measure she jumped and fell with
both feet on the arm holding the ice pick, one foot on the wrist,
the other on the forearm. The limb broke in two places.
That dude was finished. But the other one was tough, too.
 
70
Stunned and half blinded from blood flowing from his cut head,
he still had the tenacity to reach for the machine gun. He got it,
but as he was turning toward her, she picked up the ice pick and
sent it sailing through the air. The point entered his ear and penetrated
his brain.
A difficult shot; only her proficiency with the kung fu shuriken,
the miniature throwing knives, enabled her to do it. That and her
Kill-13 high, that multiplied her power and accuracy.
The thug beside her, amazingly, still hadn't given up. He had
crushed balls, a doubly broken jaw, and a shattered arm, yet he
tried to grab her. He was a monster, six and a half feet tall, 300
pounds; perhaps his pain threshhold was high. She crushed his
throat with her heel, and finally he succumbed.
Just as well. She did not want to leave anyone alive behind her,
both because of her fury at their attack on Danny, and her need to
conceal her whereabouts from Blakrev.
There was one positive aspect: now she had a car. She halfcarried
Danny to it and laid him on the back seat. She had no
driver's license and had done little driving, but this was an emergency.

She could make do.
She drove to the doctor's house, circuitously to be sure she
wasn't being tailed. She stalled the car several times in traffic before
she got the hang of it. Apparently she had now eliminated
Blakrev's backup party. But she would have to keep moving.
The doctor was amenable. He had no concern with Ilunga's
mind or conscience; it was her body he appreciated. And it was an
excellent body; she was at pains to keep it in shape. He put Danny
under sedation, fished out the bullet, gave him plasma, and took
Ilunga into a locked office for payment. She was so glad to have
Danny taken care of that for once in her life she didn't really mind
the act. She closed her eyes and tried to imagine it was Jason
Striker-and then was furious at herself for that effort. What was
Striker to her? A honky, the Man . . .
Yet there had been a time. He had just learned of the kidnapping
of his Chinese fiancee, and perhaps had known in that mo-
71
ment that the girl would never be released alive. Ilunga had comforted
him, giving of herself in a fashion she had not before realized
was possible, and somehow the ugliness of sex had become
transformed. Was this what it was to love a man?
But a white man! How was it possible?
Afterward, the doctor asked: "Am I the first to have you-and
not get kicked?"
"Yes," she said. It was a lie, but not much of one. Few men had
any sexual life after her, and she had done her best to make it none.
But there had been two occasions of rape, and she had never run
down all the men involved in those. Too, upon occasion she had
had to buy favors, as now. Since it was obviously important to the
doctor, and since she wanted Danny to have the best care, she told
the lie and agreed with him.
"Your brother should not be moved for twenty-four hours,"
the doctor said, satisfied as much by her statement as her body.
"I'll keep him here. But tomorrow you'll have to take him."
Take him where? Her apartment was a disaster; she could not
go near it now. She had always kept her Kill-13 supply with her,
so at least she could survive, but everything else was lost. She had
no money.
She had only one day to come up with a safe, cheap, secret
place for Danny to recuperate. Who would help her? Who could
help her, without Blakrev finding out?
In her desperation, she could think of only one man; Jason
Striker.
*
Locating him was a problem, but at last she tracked him down:
in the mansion of a millionaire, doing bodyguard duty. The house
was mostly dark. An older man, evidently the proprietor, sat before
a blazing fire in one lighted room with a drink of some sort in
his hand. His head was bandaged. She entered silently, avoiding
that room, not wanting to advertise her whereabouts unnecessar-
 
72
ily, and finally heard Striker's voice coming from a darkened room.
"Thera, I don't want to marry you!"
It was almost like a physical attack, the pang of raw jealousy
she felt. She had no claim on the man, and wanted none. He was
white. All she wanted was his help for Danny. And yet . . .
"I promised myself I'd have you!" the girl's voice said. Then
there was only the sound of bodies in clandestine motion. Obviously,
Striker was having at some rich white bitch-and Ilunga
couldn't stand it. She fumbled for the light switch, determined to
expose them.
"Now we're being coy!" Striker said.
Ilunga paused, for an instant imagining that he was addressing

her. But that was impossible. She finally found the light and
turned it on.
Suddenly she could see; she suffered no blindness because her
night vision was so poor that her eyes did not adapt. Her expectations
were fully confirmed. Striker stood there, pants down beside
a full-bodied white siren.
Striker was a Nordic giant, about thirty years old, clean-shaven
with a crewcut He was not extremely tall--perhaps six feet one
inch-but he weighed about 225 pounds without an ounce of fat.
All his muscles were etched on him, from his wide shoulders to his
heavy calves. He had a narrow waist, but rather wide hips-not at
all effeminate, but essential for power. His neck would have been
grotesque in a less developed man: a stout column of gristle and
sinew that made his bead look small. He had high cheekbones,
bronzed by the sun; a prominent cleft chin; and a large nose that
had been broken and reset more than once. There were a number
of old scars on his face and body-and several fresh ones, including
one hell of a love-bite on the junction of his neck and shoulder.
And one side of his head was bandaged.
Striker jumped clumsily out of his trousers, almost taking a
tumble, and staggered toward Ilunga. He limped slightly, unconsciously
favoring his right knee, which had probably been often
injured. Without effort she put the flat of her foot in his belly,
73
overcoming the temptation to hit him in the crotch, and shoved
him back. She needed his help; she couldn't let emotion get in the
way.
"Ilunga!" he cried foolishly.
Then the white whore came up, shaking everything she had.
There was something intriguing about it despite the color. Again,
Ilunga didn't want to get sidetracked; she had to talk to Striker
and enlist his help in a hurry, and squabbling with his buxom
playmate of the hour was a waste of time.
"Get your black ass out of here!" the floozy demanded.
"Who is this girl?" Ilunga asked Striker imperturbably.
"Thera Drummond, judo novice," he said, embarrassed.
But the girl wanted to quarrel, so Ilunga had to oblige her. It
was the only way to eliminate the distraction so she could talk to
Striker.
She kicked the bitch cleanly on the bouncy posterior. The girl
actually tried to grab Ilunga's foot, attempting a clumsy throw.
Ilunga refrained from laughing; it was necessary to make allowance
for the inexperience of the pretty child. No need to hurt her.
Let her try a few grips, then break the holds easily. Black cat playing
with white mouse.
But Ilunga was not a play-combatant, and soon tired of the
game. She landed a foot in the girl's stomach, calculated to do no
damage, then got on top of her. With one hand Ilunga pinched a
white nipple, with the other she put pressure on the most sensitive
area of the genital. A double pain-hold when fully exerted.
However, this was not fully exerted, just a token. Shame to
destroy a body like this. White it was, but well formed; there was
a certain pleasure in handling it. Even the silky hair falling over
Ilunga's arm had its qualities; cut short, it would never hold an
Afro, yet the texture was pleasant.
The girl screamed. Ilunga let her go; the hold could not have
been that harsh. Then she realized. It had not been pain that made
the girl react, but pleasure. That body was made for one purpose,
but this was not the time. Not in front of a man.
 
74
The white girl got out, leaving Ilunga with little more than
the memory of the feel of that lush body under her hands. God,
there were times when she was tempted . . .

Actually, the girl had not been a bad fighter, and she had
performed cleanly. What form would the encounter have taken if
there hadn't been a man watching?
But now to business. Quickly she sketched her encounter with
Danny and the Blakrev thugs. As she described Danny's condition
she felt ridiculous tears coming to her eyes. What shame, to plead
before this honky-but it had to be done.
"I can't help you," he said.
And there it was. She had broken up his liaison with the white
tart, and sent the girl packing, and now he was getting back at her.
Why hadn't she waited? The rate he had been going, another minute
would have abated his lust and he would have been ready to talk.
Now it had to be the hard way.
"Once you were in need," she said, "and I helped you. This is
all I'll ever ask of you. I never asked anything of a white man
before." It galled her like hell, but she could still picture Danny,
bleeding.
"I want to help you," he said. "It's just that I'm backlogged on
prior commitments. I'd have to have your brother in my apartment
and stand guard over him for weeks-and I'm going to be
out of the country in that time. I can't call my trip off. There's no
explanation I could make that wouldn't arouse suspicion and betray
your brother's whereabouts. Students are in and out all the
time. It just wouldn't work."
He was protesting too much. What was the use? There was no
help here. Honkies didn't help blacks.
"But I can tell you who could do just as good a job. He paused.
"No, I forgot, he's in Japan. Let's see. Ah, I know! A black man,
and a martial artist. I can call him-"
Hope dawned. "Who?"
"Mustapha."
She looked up, surprised. "The Mustapha? You know him?"
75
He nodded "I met him in a tournament. We aren't close, but
I think we understand each other. I think he'd like you."
That again. He'd take one look at her ass, and want it. Striker
himself was the only man who wasn't that way. He liked sex, but it
was second or third among his priorities, instead of first. With a
black woman, at any rate. That white siren . . ."Most men do like
me. I don't like them."
"I know. But he has merit under his braggadocio, and a kind
of heart. If any man is worth-"
"Don't tell me my business!" she snapped. "Make the call."
Now Striker was pimping for a black man. Where would it end?
There was a phone in the library. Striker called. There was
some static with a secretary or someone else running interference,
but he bulled through. "Jason Striker. S-T-R-I-K-E-R. Just give
him the name. I'll hang on."
He hadn't been bluffing. In less than a minute Mustapha himself
was evidently on the line. "Yes, it was some time, down in
Nicaragua!" Striker said. "Remember that banquet? I know, I threw
up too!"
At last he got down to business. "Look, I have a woman here.
She saved my life, and now she needs help. I'm tied up. Well, it's
her brother. He got shot by a black militant outfit. I know you're
militant yourself. So is Ilunga-one of the best. I-L-U-N-G-A.
But her brother couldn't take it. He tried to drop out, and they
sent an extermination crew after him. Blakrev. Yes, but you know
this sort of thing only damages your cause. We all want equality,
but the white racists pounce on every episode, play it up big. All
she wants is a safe place for him while he recovers. Thanks,
Mustapha! I knew you'd understand. You'll like her; she's some
woman. Karate. Equivalent to fourth dan, I'd say. And kung fu.
Probably can beat the bejesus out of most of the self-styled sifus

around. One thing, though; she's an addict. But it's not anything
that gets in her way. Kill-13. Okay, I'll put her on."
He handed the phone to Ilunga. "Hello," she said shortly.
Mustapha's familiar voice came through loud and clear. "Lis-
 
76
ten babe, I know you. I'm a fan of yours from way back. But you
kicked one of my sparring partners once . . ."
"I don't kick black men unless they push their luck."
"Like walking in the park? He's a honky. 'S'okay, small loss.
But I don't want anything like that happening to me, see?"
"Understood." She knew what was coming next.
"It's going to be some trouble, if I help your brother."
"Understood," she repeated. There had never been any question
but that it would come to this; she had no other coin. She did
know how to make a man happy, when she had to. It was part of
knowing how to make a man unhappy.
"Every day he's here." He had big ideas.
"Yes." All things considered, it was a fair bargain. No one would
suspect a ranking boxer like Mustapha.
"I'll send a friend for him. Where is he?"
She told him. She had to chance it, at this point.
"You come straight to my place. Now," he said.
"Yes." She hung up, disgusted.
"I'm sorry," Striker said. "It would not have been this way
with Hiroshi, my Japanese friend. He's an old man. If there had
been any way do it myself-"
"I know. That's why I came to you." She could have prostituted
herself to Striker and justified it to herself on the grounds of
helping Danny. And Striker would have helped without demanding
such payment. Now she'd really have to do it, with no personal
satisfaction whatever. She shrugged. "So I pay. It's worth it,
this one time. Thanks."
"I still owe you," he said. "Some other time."
Some other time . . . She left without further comment.
*
Mustapha was like the doctor, only worse. He had bigger appetites
and much more stamina. He wanted to talk at her in that
mile a minute way he had, then make love, then talk some more.
77
Evidently his knowledge that she was the castrator of men was
highly stimulating to him, so long as he was assured she would
not practice her art on him.
But Danny was brought safely, ensconced in Mustapha's large
apartment, and treated well. That was what counted.
Mustapha was a big man, taller than Striker, well muscled and
handsome. He had been a contender for the world heavyweight
championship in boxing, but had been denied his actual shot at
the title because of his militant beliefs. The denial had been illegal;
he had gone to court and won his case. But by that time his
best years were past; younger men had come up, and Mustapha's
chance was gone. He had reason to be bitter.
Still, he seemed to live well, and he was still a fine black figure
of a man. His facial injuries had had the attention of a plastic
surgeon. He dressed in flashy clothes and spent money freely, too
freely. He was often reputed to be in debt.
Next morning, weary from a workout fully as rigorous as any
karate program, she went in to see Danny-and he was gone. The
bed was empty.
Mustapha entered behind her. "He's okay," he said. "He's being
taken care of. But his future depends on you."
Ilunga stood motionless, realizing that she had been betrayed-
again. While she submitted to this man's revels, her brother had
been quietly taken away. But she could not act.

"I want you to know," Mustapha said, "that I don't like this
part."
"I don't like your black ass either!" she snapped. "You try to
touch me again-!"
He stepped back, guarding his crotch. "That's not what I
meant. I'm with Blakrev, of course. But Striker was my friend,
close as a honky can count, and I had to lie to him. When he said
you could deliver your brother, I had to do it. Or I'd be dead
tomorrow."
Not to mention the ass he would have passed up! But what
 
78
could she do? They had Danny. But she grasped at one straw. "Striker
didn't know?"
"He didn't know. Honkies are naive about these things. Keep
him that way, and he won't get hurt."
White Striker had not betrayed her, but black Mustapha had.
After having his night with her. That was what she called a royal
fuck! Striker was not the only one who had been naive! Now she
was helpless. One act of vengeance against one Blakrev agent, and
Danny was dead. "I thought all you wanted was to kill Danny,"
she said dully.
"That was all," he agreed. "To make a real fine example of him,
right in the street. Until yesterday morning, when you wiped out
five Blakrevs in as many minutes. Then we wanted you. Your
brother's small-fry; we can use someone else for the example."
And she had put herself right into their hands. Incredible coincidence
-or was it? Mustapha had been at pains to exonerate
Striker, which could mean that Striker was the real betrayer after
all. They didn't want his cover blown, so they had arranged for
Mustapha to take the rap. Good white agents for a black revolution
must be hard to come by.
Mustapha had said Striker was naive. But she remembered
how Striker had taken on the Demon cult, fully as formidable as
this Blakrev thing, and destroyed it in a few weeks. And they had
had Striker's fiancee hostage. Naive? Like a mongoose among snakes.
Blakrev had her. Why did they care what she know about Striker?
If they intended to kill her, they could readily do so now.
"You're working it out, aren't you," Mustapha said. "You have
talents, talents we can use. You killed five of ours. You'll kill twice
that many working for us."
Yes, of course. She would be a good asset to such a movement.
She would have to play along. Until she could rescue Danny. Meanwhile,
she would learn all she could. If Striker was the one who
had done this to her, there would be a reckoning.
79
*
"Big Banana wants to rap with you," Mustapha said. "Come
with me and watch your tongue, woman. We'll see who gives the
orders around here."
The leader of Blakrev? It had not taken her long to obtain
audience with the top. But that, too, was suspicious.
She was taken in a black (naturally!) limousine. She sat in a
back compartment, all to herself, like a rich bitch with a sealed-off
chauffeur. Black curtains prevented her from seeing out. She took
a deep breath as the car took off, glad to be rid of Mustapha at last,
and the overpowering temptation to smash his arrogant balls-
and realized too late that there was gas in here. Before she could
even attempt to break out, she lost consciousness.
When she woke, she could not tell how long it had been; but
her body said many hours. She was hungry, and her bladder was
full. She needed a refreshment stop. They were zooming along a
superhighway, by the sound of it.
She tapped on the glass partition that separated her from the

chauffeur. The man looked around and nodded-and it was not
the same driver. She couldn't even be certain it was the same car. A
long trip, indeed!
Soon it pulled into a filling station. The chauffeur got out,
walked around, unlocked the door and let her "Five minutes," he
said.
The air was hot, though it was night. Night! It had been noon
when she started.
Make a break for it? No, no use. They still had Danny. Judging
from the warmth; she was somewhere in a southern state. Where
could she go, with no money? Into the cotton fields?
She finished with the restroom and returned to the limousine.
A box lunch awaited her on the seat. She ate slowly, listening to
the whine of the tires: high-speed travel, seventy or eighty miles
an hour. It was possible to go long way on an interstate in ten
hours at that velocity.
 
80
On and on. Finally she slept-then woke with a start as the
car pulled to a halt. The chauffeur let her out again. "Just walk
through this gate," he said, "and up to the door."
Ilunga unlatched the gate and walked down the path. Odd,
that the driver hadn't taken her all the way in. The limousine
drove off.
She could turn about and walk out; no one was guarding her
now. But then Danny . . .
Resolutely, she went on.
The night was warm and sultry, and there was the smell of the
sea in the air. She glanced back, and noted that the wall surrounding
the estate was ten feet tall and had broken glass embedded in
the top and a strand of barbed wire above that. Electrified; she
could tell by the insulators.
Inside, it was huge. The lights near the wall showed that there
were small rolling hills covered with verdant grass, and there was
the musical sound of a small stream meandering through. The
trees were strange: she recognized a many-trunked banyan and a
coconut palm, but others were hauntingly unfamiliar.
Something charged through the dark shrubbery. She strained
to see, but the light was too dim away from the wall, and the view
too obstructed. But it sounded like an animal of some sort, a large
one. Perhaps a guard dog, a Great Dane. It had a slow, funny
gait-she bad never heard footfalls quite like that before-and a
funnier smell.
Well, she had killed obnoxious dogs before.
The thing came closer then slowed to a walk, just out of clear
sight. It was a dog, huge and spotted-she thought. "Come on,
Bowser. I'm ready for you," she muttered. What better way to
relieve her frustrations.
But it only watched, its eyes bright in the night. If only her
night vision were better. Before she'd started on Kill-13 she'd had
excellent sight.
"All right, I'm coming after you!" she snapped. She was not
afraid; the dog did not live who could make her back off. Some-
81
times she had deballed curs in the park, in lieu of men. This was
like a park. She moved toward it, her deadly hands and feet ready.
She didn't really need good vision for this; her ears and reflexes
sufficed. Though she could use a good sniff of Kill-13.
The creature gave a loud, cackling cry and retreated.
Startled, she stopped. That was no dog! That was a laughing
hyena!
Hyena? Ridiculous! They were African creatures, and Asian.
This was America.
Then she realized this estate was like the African veldt at night.

That one great, odd shape, like an upside-down beer-bellied tree-
an African baobab? The kind of terrain for lions, rhinos-and hyenas.
Home of the black man. Home of Blakrev.
"All right, hyena. We'll go see your master," she said.
That man, she would learn in due course, had started as heir
to a million dollars, but lost it in the stock market by gambling on
cocoa futures. He had excellent connections, both business and
political-but broke, he was nothing. So he combined his martial-
arts talents with his connections in the Internal Revenue Service,
using tax audits to ascertain the worth of vulnerable businessmen,
then extorting ten per cent. He also knew key Cuban exiles,
and Latin American drug contacts. Now he ran Blackrev, using
those drugs. And because of his anonymity and his intimacy with
highly placed politicians, he seemed to be immune to investigation
or prosecution.
No black man himself, but an unscrupulous white renegade
and accomplished martial artist.
The Hyena.
 
Chapter 5
BRAINWASH
I did not feel easy about Ilunga. She had accepted my referral
to Mustapha, and I knew she had followed up on it. But when I
called a few days later, Mustapha told me she had taken her brother
Danny and gone, he knew not where.
I had the feeling he was lying to me, but I didn't know why.
His tone was different than when I had first called him. Was he
hiding something?
Perhaps he had had a fight with Ilunga and kicked her out.
There was a lot I didn't understand about black relations. I checked
her ghetto apartment, but it was empty. Where had she gone?
I was busy; the judo team training was taking more and more
of my time, as we entered the final weeks. I had the team at my
own dojo, but it still pre-empted my regular schedule. I had to let
substitutes teach my private morning and afternoon classes. Ideally
the U.S. team should work out together anywhere from one to
three months before the big event. In Russia, Europe and Japan
they do. But in America they are lucky to get more than a week.
83
Only strenuous effort on my part had gotten most of them together
for two to three weeks in advance. But it did consume my
time!
I also had to worry about the Hyena. The last thing I needed
was to get involved in black politics and drug addiction. But Ilunga's
plea just wouldn't let go of me. If she was no longer with Mustapha,
I might have failed her. Something was wrong; she should have
gotten in touch with me again. I owed her something, and after
this judo meet I would be able to follow it up.
But somehow I had the feeling it could not wait that long.
Her brother Danny was a dabbler in drugs, she had told me; that
was what had gotten him in trouble, for Blakrev evidently used
drugs to control its converts. A bad situation-but it meant that if
Danny and other youngsters could be freed of their drug dependencies,
Blakrev would lose its power over them.
I had worked with a few youths with drug histories. Some had
gone straight, preferring judo or karate to the drugs. They had
really been searching for purpose and acceptance by their peers,
and my martial-arts classes gave that to them. But some were not
amenable, and had to be denied further training in my classes. I
could not tolerate overt drug addiction in a trained judoka or
karateka.
"Say, Andy," I said to my half-blind karate student/instructor.
No, it was unkind to call him that, or even to think it. He had
been raked across the eyes by Ilunga, back when she was a Demon;

that was one of the problems about her. Now he had partial vision
in one eye, and in a few months he would have another operation
to restore his sight to normal. "Do you know anything about drugs?
I mean how to get off them?"
"You don't have a drug problem, sensei!" he laughed. "All you
ever take is aspirin, and I don't believe you're addicted."
"A friend asked me for help with her brother. He'd been shot,
but it was drugs that led up to it. I wondered-"
"Oh, you mean one of those peer-pressure groups," Andy said,
getting serious. "They catch a kid before he's really addicted and
 
84
run him through the mill. I think we have a judo student here
who-"
"Maybe so," I agreed. "I don't know if I can find this kid now,
and I don't know whether he'd go. But next time someone like
that needs help, I want to know where to send him." Actually, it
was more than that; it was an attempt to expiate my failure to
proffer real help to Ilunga in her hour of need. Not that she was
ever likely to know. The human conscience works like that; at
times-too little, too late-but still the motions have to be honored.
And in the back of my mind was the half-formed notion that
maybe Ilunga had taken her brother to such a place, and that I
might locate her that way. Small chance, but as I said, conscience
isn't always reasonable. Mine isn't, anyway.
"Try Strate," Andy suggested.
"Straight? Straight where?"
"S-T-R-A-T-E," he spelled. "Sort of a pun on strait, as in being
in a bind, like hooked on drugs, and straight as in arrow. Idea is
you start out strait and wind up straight. In between, you're
'strate'-part of the stratum. One of the good crowd."
"Oh," I said. "Do they do anything besides make puns?"
"See for yourself," he said. "I sat in on one of their meetings,
and I'll admit I was impressed. But it's no good telling you, any
more than you could train a black belt in karate just by telling
him. You have to see."
"Okay. Thanks."
After the training session I drove down to the Strate headquarters.
I was hailed at the entrance by two young men. My muscles
tightened but I reminded myself that this had nothing to do with
either the judo meet or the Hyena-in fact I had no business here
at all, really-and relaxed. I explained that I wanted to talk with
their front desk. "Okay!" they said cheerfully. "Love you!"
Love me? Startled, I drove on in without acknowledging. I
parked, noticing that a printed placard in a neighboring car said
"STRATE LOVES YOU."
I began to catch on. So love was their motif.
85
Their office was in a huge garage: obviously not a high-budget
operation. Several people were waiting for attention, so I sat down
for my turn. The others seemed to be white teenagers and their
parents. A small puppy frolicked on the floor. There was no sense
of tension; it was more like a bus station.
After twenty minutes nothing had happened. Had I missed
my bus? Evidently Strate had more time spare than I did. I finally
approached the desk and inquired how one applied for admittance
to their meetings.
An older woman looked at me suspiciously. "You wish to admit
your child?"
"I have no child," I said. "I just want to attend a meeting."
"Why?"
The question caught me by surprise. Surely they knew why
people wanted to attend. But if she wanted me to spell it out, all
right. "I was told you have a good drug rehabilitation program

here. I want to see it in action."
"You're a professional?"
"If you mean in the drug field, no. I'm just a concerned citizen.
I think it's too bad so many kids are getting hooked on drugs
today, and I want to know what's being done about it. So I came
here, to learn." Actually I had had experience with the worst drug
of them all, Kill-13, usually addictive with one sniff. I had had a
sniff myself, and only the grace of God had spared me from permanent
addiction. But the average kid would not be exposed to
Kill-13. Not any more.
The woman scribbled something on a bit of paper and walked
away. Shortly, three young people came out, a boy and two girls.
"I'm the director," the smallest of them said, a little girl with reddish
hair, not well kept. She was not well dressed, either, and looked
about fifteen.
Were they fooling me? They seemed serious. "I'm Jason Striker."
The girl looked at the paper the woman had given her. "You
came to give a lecture?"
Some foul-up! Their bureaucracy was as inefficient as any other.
 
86
"As I told the other woman, I came here to learn. I want to attend
one of your meetings, talk with your people, to see how your program
works."
"Are you bringing in your son or daughter?"
"I have no children." I was getting tired of this. Were they
stupid, or merely double-checking? "I just want to see how you
operate, in case I have occasion to refer anyone here."
"We don't allow anyone to attend unless he's on drugs or the
parent of a person on drugs," she said firmly.
Oh? That wasn't what Andy had said. He had attended, and
he was not on drugs. It appeared these people didn't trust me, and
that was funny, because I had come with complete candor. All I
wanted was information. Why should they be suspicious of strangers?
"How do you expect anyone to learn about your program in
time to help him-or his children-if you won't let him see until
he's actually hooked on drugs?" I asked.
The little girl shrugged inelegantly, oddly sober for her age. It
was as though she had been through this many times before. She
was not pretty, and I wondered whether she had found a home
here at Strate, being accepted as a staffer instead of taking her
chances in the outside world. "We can't change our rules."
How often had I heard that, as the refuge of the indefensible
in mindless bureaucracy! If the world were likely to end tomorrow,
this type of person would not change a rule to save it.
Somewhat disturbed by being balked by this youngster half
my age I was about to leave. I had wasted my time, and this did
not improve my temper.
"We love you!" the three youngsters chorused as I turned my
back.
I lacked the grace to respond in kind. Love without trust? My
love was more discriminating. I could not love Strate without knowing
it better.
"Hey, Mr. Striker!" someone called. I looked around. It was
Mario, one of my judo students. He was tall and thin, with a small
87
beard and long hair. Not one of my best, and his tonsure was in
technical violation of judo guidelines, but a hardworking, decent
sort.
"What are you doing here?" I asked.
"I'm on staff," he said with pride. "I've been with Strate three
years."
"You were an addict?" I asked, surprised.
"Pot, hash, speed, downs, opium, peyote-the whole route,"

he said. "I tried them all. It's all on my record. Don't you read
those forms you have us fill out for judo?"
"Not well enough," I muttered. "I could have asked you about
Strate and saved myself the trouble of coming here."
"That's no good," he said. "You have to attend a meeting, at
least, to really appreciate it."
I had been that route. "They won't let me in. I just tried."
He looked at me in disbelief. "Something's fishy."
"I'm not the parent of a drug addict," I said.
"Come on, we'll see about this."
He led me back to the desk. "Georgia, set it up tonight for this
man. The works."
The girl stared at me coldly, showing no trace of the love she
had expressed a moment ago when she thought she was rid of me.
"Mario, you know we don't let strangers watch."
"Strangers!" he cried indignantly. "This is Jason Striker! My
judo sensei. He's done more good for more kids-" He continued
with a deluge of praise that had my ears burning. I often wish my
students could talk about me without exaggerating. Well, without
too much exaggeration, maybe. The upshot was that I found myself
invited to their evening meeting. I had, it seemed, a connection
after all.
I came, of course. After the scrambling I had had to do to gain
admission, I viewed Strate with a certain cynicism, but I still wanted
to learn. Maybe they had reason to distrust strangers; maybe drugusing
gangs tried to infiltrate their meetings and break them up.
So I tried to keep an open mind.
 
88
It was impressive. There may have been a thousand people
cramming that warehouse, inmates, parents, and selected members
of the community, such as myself. If every one of these visitors
had worked as hard as I had to get here, they were a determined
lot.
We all sat in a mighty circle on the floor, for there were not
enough chairs by a factor of a hundred or so, and we sang songs.
They sang, anyway; I tried to follow, but music is not my forte,
and I didn't know the tune or words. Even so, I could appreciate
the skill with which the Strates sang. They did multi-part harmonies,
and the beat was exact. When they started, they started precisely
together; when they stopped, it was on a dime, with no sour
note. There must have been a lot of practice and a lot of discipline
to get them that sharp.
Then there was an expectant silence. After a moment a young
boy stood up and spoke. "I'm Bill. I'm twelve years old. I've been
on pot, hash, peyote, speed, and acid since I was nine. I saw the
older kids doing it. I wanted to get in with the crowd. I felt awful
guilty, but I didn't really care about myself. My folks didn't know
I was skipping school. I stole money to support my habit. When
they caught me, I wanted to die. The juvenile court sent me to
Strate, and I was really scared. I didn't want to come here. Now I
know I was wrong. I hurt my folks. I wouldn't let them help me. I
don't want to touch drugs again, ever. Not even a trank. I just
want to go home and make it up to my folks. Get a job, make
something of myself. Thank you for helping me. I love you."
"I love you!" the Strates in the crowd cried as he sat down.
I was amazed. This boy, by his own admission, had been on
half a dozen drugs, in and out of juvenile court, and now was
confessed and reformed-and he was only twelve! Apparently Strate
had saved him from a lifetime of addiction and crime, and had set
him firmly on the road to good citizenship. What more could
anyone ask?
Another person rose-a girl in her late teens, I judged. "I'm
Jill. I was hooked on pot, acid, cocaine, hash, alcohol, speed. I

89
wanted to be grown-up. I thought I was smart, that I had things
together. But I was really very lonely. I ran away from home when
I was fourteen. I tried everything to feel good. Nothing worked. I
lost my motivation. Anything that happened, I just said people
didn't like me, that was my excuse for everything. I had no purpose
in life, no meaning. My friends were just people around. I
was easily hurt, but I never showed it. They thought I was strong,
but I was weak. I never stood up for what I thought was right.
Now I love living, I love my parents. I love you!"
Tears were streaming down her face as she sat down. "I love
you!" the others chorused again, comfortingly.
So Strate had the secret of curing addicts! Why hadn't I been
aware of this before? The world should know!
Almost immediately another girl stood up. "I'm Millie. I'm
seventeen. I was on pot, hash, acid, speed, downs, and horse . . ."
She continued her recitation, but my attention swerved. These
confessions-they were too similar to one another. Each person
had tried half a dozen addictive drugs at an early age, and gotten
in trouble for it, and come here, and now each was overflowing
with remorse and love for the group that had cured him or her. It
was like a memorized spiel, a litany, and the script was becoming
familiar. Effective the first time, but losing authenticity with every
repetition.
Perhaps these kids really believed what they were saying but I
didn't. Reform is excellent, and so are good intentions and positive
attitude. So is love. But not at the price of rote conformity. What
was Strate's program? What was happening to these kids behind
the scene, to make them speak out in public apology like this?
I remembered something a friend had told me in confidence
about a mental hospital where he worked as an aide. "Most of the
patients are okay," he said. "They don't want trouble. They have
their hang-ups, that's why they're here, but we know about these.
Some are incontinent-real mess to clean up that shit! Some have
amnesia, some do screwy things like masturbating in the open
every hour. But they aren't ornery. A few are real troublemakers,
 
90
though. Nobody can handle 'em. So we send 'em down to Wing
IV. I don't know what happens to 'em there, but when they come
back in a few days, they're like lambs. No trouble at all, any more.
Not for a long time. 'Course, some never make it back . . ."
This public display of contrition-it had the aspect of Wing
IV. Maybe I was being paranoid, but it was damn well worth checking
out. No sense leaving Strate with the wrong impression.
After the meeting, Mario arranged for another talk with the
child-director. I was no longer surprised at her youth; it was obvious
that Strates could be any age from ten on up. A fifteen year old
could be a three-year veteran, and this one was.
"I'm not clear exactly how this works," I said carefully. "I heard
the Strates talking, but none of them said how they were cured.
What do you do the rest of the day, when you're not at the big
meeting?"
"Nothing," she told me. "To succeed here, you have to change.
You have to realize what a jerk you are, being hooked on drugs."
I shook my head dubiously. "A lot of kids I know would never
voluntarily admit they were jerks." Would Ilunga's brother Danny
admit it, or would he laugh derisively at the very notion? No need
to ask.
"It works," she insisted. "All you have to do is walk through
that door." She gestured toward the far aperture of the warehouse,
where a Strate staffer stood guard. I realized that no one could pass
through that door, either way, without being challenged.
"This is something I understand," I said, thinking again of

Wing IV. What was behind that door? "If I were an addict, and I
walked through that door; would I be cured?"
"We don't handle adults," she said. "You would have to go to
another program."
"What other programs are there? For adults?"
She shrugged. "I don't know."
This was a director? Curious. "What is your program? What
happens to a person-behind that door?"
91
Her reply was another shrug. But then she said, "I just told
you. He comes to realize what a jerk-"
I sighed. I had heard of revelation, religious and otherwise, in
which a person came to realize the error of his ways and resolved to
change. Some really did change. But that was not my question.
There had to be some inducement, some lead-up, experience to
make that person alter the habits of a lifetime. This child would
not, or could not, tell me what that was. And I suspected I knew
why.
Strate, in whatever wholesome guise, was practicing brainwashing.
With a guarded controlled environment and strenuous group
pressure, it was able to tame all but the most adamant subject.
Teenaged youngsters were still suggestible. They could be molded
in a fashion hardened adults could not.
But brainwashing was an extremely dangerous tool. It did not
turn out free-thinking individuals, it turned out conformist automatons,
all parroting the prescribed line. That line could be "I
love you" or "I hate you"-they would say it and believe it. Perhaps
that was the only real cure for incipient drug addiction. But
in my mind, the cure might well be worse than the ailment.
No, I would not send a boy like Danny here, had I the option.
My student Mario might swear by Strate, but I knew him to be a
narrow, limited personality. He would never make a really good
judoka; he lacked the initiative and imagination, and most of all
he lacked the sheer fight. He had a positive attitude, certainly, but
I saw now, more clearly than ever before, that this was not enough.
Later, I followed up with a little private research into the statistics.
They were not optimistic. Of those who graduated from
programs like Strate and returned to the open world, approximately
ninety per cent were back on drugs within six months. The
only sure way to stay straight was to stay with the program-
either as an inmate or as staff, as Mario was.
I had not learned what I expected or wanted, and I had not
found Danny or Ilunga, but I had learned. In future, I would stick
to my martial arts.
 
92
*
Danny slumped in the dark cell. He had no idea whether it
was night or day, or how long he had been there. He was naked
and thirsty. They fed him irregularly so that he could not keep
track of the time. There was no place to urinate or defecate except
where he was and his hands were tied behind him. The cell stank
of his own refuse. He was also in the throes of a mild withdrawal
from his minor drug habit.
Only his mind remained bright, his passions, his memories.
He was a coward, and knew it, but somehow, when Blakrev had
actually tried to kill him, he had gained courage. Now there was
no doubt of their nature, no doubt at all. If he believed in anything,
anything at all, it was the sanctity of human life. His sister
had fought them and taken him to a doctor, and then somehow
she had gone and he was here, and one thing he knew was that she
would never have betrayed him. She must be dead, and now there
was no one to protect him, no one to lean on. No one to uphold
her honor except him.

They had told him he was in Blakrev. He had lifted himself off
the bed despite the agony of his wound. "I'm not with you, you
motherfuckers!" And then he was here. His wound still hurt, but
now it was a badge of honor, a vital evidence that they had done
their worst.
Light bathed him blindingly. Someone untied his hands,
cleaned him up gently. It was a woman, dark-skinned like him,
attractive. He was embarrassed as she washed off his privates, the
refuse on his legs, but he suffered it without protest.
She guided him to a pleasant room with a picture window
opening out onto a tropical landscape: palms, shrubbery, sand.
He relaxed in a comfortable chair.
A man entered-brown, handsome, casually well dressed.
"Sorry about the misunderstanding," the man said. "Those fools
thought you were an impostor. When we checked out your refer-
93
ences, we knew you were of good black stock. Your sister may have
deceived you."
"Never!" Danny exclaimed.
The man took no notice. "Smoke?" he inquired, proffering a
cigarette. It had the look and smell of a reefer, and Danny wanted
it badly, but he shook his head no. "Drink?" the man asked next,
bringing out a bottle. But Danny distrusted this too. The moment
he accepted any drug from Blakrev, he was done.
The man shrugged. "She's been telling you lies about Blakrev,
trying to turn you against our interests. But of course you know
there can be no peace with the honkies. They have to be put down."
Danny carried no brief for the white man, but that didn't
make Blakrev his friend. "Go suck your ass," he said. He knew
about the Tarzan-Jane approach; he had seen the police use it.
One interrogator would be harsh, tough; the other gentle, friendly.
This one was Jane, and not be trusted.
"I don't think I understand you," Jane said. "There are very
good things waiting for friends of Blakrev, and very bad things in
store for Blakrev's enemies. I would hate to see you hurt."
"Then let me out of here!" Danny cried.
Jane sighed. "It really would be easier if you supported us."
Danny didn't answer. He knew what was coming, and he was
terrified, but something in him would not let go.
A second man entered the room: short, muscular, and with
the head of an animal. His skin was white. Tarzan. Jane faded out.
"Stand!" the beast-man snapped.
Danny, though his body was shaking and sweating, ignored
him. Naturally Tarzan was white!
Crack! A fist like iron crashed down on his shoulder, hurling
him to the floor.
After that it was vague. When Danny found himself back in
his cell, he knew he'd had the worst beating of his life. Every part
of him hurt.
Now it was glaringly bright. He sat on the bare metal cot,
shuddering, unable to alleviate the pain. What a monster that
 
94
white beast-man was! Wouldn't it have been better to go along
with nice black Jane?
Logically, yes. But still Danny couldn't let go. His sister would
never have given in, and now he couldn't betray her. If she were
dead, she had died fighting Blakrev.
He lay down, shielding his eyes against the awful light. That
must be a thousand-watt bulb! At last he began to relax, to fall
asleep despite his pains.
A terrible shock ran through him. Danny cried out in new
agony and threw himself off the cot. They had electrified it!
That was the beginning of his next ordeal. He could not sleep.

Every time he nodded off, something violent happened. An electric
shock, a deafening clang, or a swift blow through the bars.
Whatever it took to keep him alert and hurting.
He understood, now, what they were doing. They were brainwashing
him. If he began to go along with Blakrev, these harassments
would ease. If not, they would continue until he cracked-
or died.
Contrary to all his own expectations, he held out. Because it
was what Ilunga would have done.
Somewhere in that maze of waking fatigue he was taken back
to the room with the picture window. He was put in the chair and
made to face the window. The lights went out, so that there was
nothing to see except the pleasant view outside.
A man stumbled onto the scene, a black man who looked
vaguely familiar. Maybe it was just the type; he looked like one of
the Blakrev drug pushers.
"This man tried to cheat Blakrev by holding back part of his
sales," the man behind Danny said. "Watch." Danny watched,
because he didn't want to be hit again. The pusher was running
from something, but what? He kept looking nervously over his
shoulder.
Suddenly a hulking animal shape appeared, some kind of huge
dog or cat. "The hyena," the voice behind said. The hyena leaped
and grabbed the fugitive's leg with his teeth. The man screamed.
95
Danny heard nothing; the glass was soundproof. But the vision
was enough. The pusher fell, but the animal did not let go. It
crunched hard on the leg until the bone snapped.
The man was still conscious. He tried to crawl away on two
hands and one leg. But the hyena caught an arm, and again crushed
the bone with a single vicelike closing of its terrible jaws.
Then it went to work on the helpless man's torso. Using claws
and teeth, it ripped at the abdomen, tearing away skin and muscle.
Finally it dragged out the living intestine and began to feed. For a
moment it looked up, as if seeing Danny, a bloody string of entrails
dangling from its smiling mouth.
"Delicious!" the man behind him remarked, and smacked his
lips.
Danny threw himself off the chair and hurtled into the man
headfirst. His forehead struck the man's crotch as the lights came
on. Now there was an audible scream! As the man fell, Danny
punched him on the nose. Then he lifted his foot for a stomp.
Never before had he fought like this!
They dragged him away and hung him up by his feet, naked,
his head immersed in a tub of water, almost drowning him. Only
by bending his body could he clear his mouth to breathe . . . and
then a standing ring of men beat him in the face and body with
leather straps. Tarzan, Jane, and the others--they were all there,
even the woman. They swung him around by the rope, each laying
the leather into his buttocks, until his rear was a raw mass of
bleeding meat. He thought he was going to die, and now he wanted
to, but they knew what they were doing, and kept him alive and
in constant pain.
At last they took him back to the picture window, still without
food, water, or sleep. Now there was salt in the chair, stinging
cruelly, but he had to sit. And watch.
Was it to be another kill for the hyena? He didn't care. Nothing
further could dismay him. He had won a victory of sorts: he
had unmasked Jane, shown the black man up as the torturer he
was.
 
96
The beast-headed Tarzan came into view. He stopped, turned,
and beckoned.

Then Ilunga stepped out.
"Sis!" Danny cried. But it was useless; she could not hear him
through the soundproof glass.
Ilunga came up to the man. Tarzan put his hand on her arm
and guided her around to face the window directly. Now she could
see Danny.
Tarzan said something. Ilunga looked at Danny-and spat at
him.
Danny was too shocked to move or speak. Ilunga was alive and
well, and she had gone over to Blakrev!
They took him back to his cell. Food and water were there,
and there was now a mattress and blanket on his cot. They even let
him sleep.
But what use was any of this, now?
Chapter 6
CUBA
We traveled to Cuba via Mexico; no direct flights went to
Havana from America. Mexico City, from the air, was a giant bowl
surrounded by mountains. It was dusk, and the lights were coming
on; myriads of twinkling glows, and the eerie illumination of
the oil refineries.
Mexico City is one of the great cities of the world, with a
population of about eight and a half million; it is second only to
New York in the Americas, and second to none in age and beauty.
Long before the Europeans came, this mile-and-a-half high metropolis
flourished amid Aztec sacrifices.
Next day we flew to Cuba. As we neared the island, the plane's
intercom came to life, spouting Spanish. One of my bilingual
judokas translated for me and the others. "We are now flying over
the infamous Bay of Pigs."
The Bay of Pigs! Where American-backed Cuban exiles had
launched their abortive invasion of Castro's regime, only to be wiped
out. I remembered the long effort to redeem the prisoners, trading
 
98
them for 500 monster tractors. It gave me a chill. Had things
really changed that much in the past decade or so? Now we Americans
were invading again, and our fighters had little better chance
of success.
More Spanish, and the translation: "You all know what happened
here. A great victory for Democracy over Imperialism . . ."
I tuned it out of my mind. I was no expert on politics, being
basically apolitical, and I had never decided on the rights and
wrongs of the Bay of Pigs fiasco; but if Castro's Cuba was a democracy,
my understanding was backwards. I looked down, watching
the landscape change to flat country, first swamps, then plains
covered with farms. Finally we landed at Havana International Airport,
announced as Jose Marti Airport, and called Rancho Boyeros
Airport by the natives because that was the town it was actually in.
A bus took us into Havana, through rolling countryside with
small vegetable patches: lettuce, cabbage, beans, carrots, gourds,
and so on. Gardens seemed to grow the same under communism
as under capitalism. We were given a small tour of the city, via the
windows of the bus and spot announcements.
The road took us past the big round Sports Complex where
the judo meet was to be held. Several roads met in front of it, at a
large fountain lit by colored lights. We moved right alongside the
Civic Center, with its monument to Jose Marti, a major figure in
Cuban history, atop his star-shaped pedestal. Then the Palace of
Justice; did they really have justice here, I wondered? And the
University complex and the beautiful Church of the Sacred Heart,
which looked like a European Cathedral. I'm no connoisseur of
architecture, but I enjoyed the whole tour as a simple ignorant
tourist.

I saw many Spanish-language posters on buildings and poles,
no doubt excoriating the vices of capitalism. We rode along the
Malecon, or seaside highway, past the Capitolo or capitol building
I was surprised to see that at was an exact replica of the one in
Washington. Then on by the Presidential Palace, and through the
99
Havana Tunnel. When we emerged I saw the of the grim Cabanas
fortress, the prison filled with political dissenters.
After that it was the Via Blanca, or White Road to Varadero,
eighty miles from Havana, where we would stay for our final training.
This trip took an hour and a half. Added to the tour, it made
a total of three hours from airport to hotel.
Havana was a huge place, almost two million people. In fact,
it accounted for about a fifth of the total population of Cuba, a
remarkable concentration. But the whole road, through Havana
and beyond, bordered the sea, and there were beautiful beaches all
along the way.
The International Hotel, where we were staying, was on a narrow
spit of land, a lovely peninsula, with beaches on both sides. I
could see that it would be a lot of fun here, and I hoped my team
did not suffer from the distraction. We had to fit in a lot of lastminute
training if we were to make a decent showing.
We trained, and trained hard; but as the sweltering days passed,
we had to take some breaks. There is, after all, more to life than
judo, traitorous as it may seem to say it.
The last afternoon, before our move to the Havana Libre in
Havana for the meet, I walked alone out on the beach to clear my
head after a grueling session. The sand was clean and warm, so fine
it was like powder, and I was tempted to plunge into the water for
a swim. As a part of our training, we ran over this loose sand every
morning, much harder than normal running. I had on my bathing
suit, like everyone else.
I didn't try to strike up any conversations. The ideal Cuban, I
had discovered, is an orator. Despite my ignorance of the language
I could appreciate the rhetorical rhythms of the incessant, loud,
fast talk, accompanied by expressive gestures. We Americans lack
that zest in our dialogue.
The sea here was shallow and clear, with a great variety of
beautiful seashells. I could make out sea horses and schools of little
cuttlefish. Give it time, I thought; one day soon Cuba would enter
 
100
the twentieth century and pollute its waters in civilized fashion,
and all this beauty would pass.
A Rubenesque girl accosted me. "Que hora es?" she inquired.
She had long brown hair, wore glasses even on the beach-nearsighted,
I judged-and had extremely generous breasts that would
surely sag before her youth passed.
"No hablo Espanol," I replied regretfully, using one of the
phrases I had learned for such occasions. "I can't speak Spanish.
Sorry." In this case I really was sorry, for she had a really voluptuous
figure barely contained by her bathing suit.
"Ah, you are Canadian," she said in my language.
"American," I said. "Sorry again."
She looked disappointed, but put a positive face on it. "The
Americans are not all bad. Just their government. I am sure the
people want our friendship."
"I certainly do!" I agreed; "We're not bad. We're just bad
judokas," Less than stunning repartee.
"Oh, so you are with the judo team!"
I confessed I was.
"You will lose," she said confidently. "Our teams will win the
championship."
I shrugged. I didn't want to fight with her. "What makes you

think that?" Actually I could think of worse ways to relax than
talking with a buxom girl, communist though she might be. It
was not her politics that showed up so amply in the sun, after all.
One deep breath and she would burst out. Voyeur that I am, I
wanted to be on hand for the event.
"Cuba was a pioneer in Central America," she said warmly.
"Kolychkine brought it here from Belgium. We were host to the
first Pan American Games, and also the second, and we organized
the Pan American Judo Union. Cuban senseis organized and introduced
judo to Guatamala, Puerto Rico, and Costa Rica. With our
new government, run by the people, it is even more popular. We
have courses in judo at the University, with graduates and tenured
judo teachers."
101
"Say, you must be a real judo fan!" I exclaimed. "Who are
you?"
She was, it turned out, a University student, studying
pedagogia-that is, to become a teacher. (Her students, I thought,
had better be below the age of ten, or they would never be able to
concentrate on the subject. Such jiggles!) She was making a study
of judo her graduate thesis. She was not terrifically proficient in it
herself, being a green belt, but she knew a great deal about the
subject.
I realized that she had been on the prowl for foreign judo team
members. An American could hardly have been her first or second
choice.
"I'd like to see that University," I said wistfully.
"I will show it to you," she said. "When do you go to Havana?"
"Tomorrow," I said.
"I will pick you up tomorrow," she said.
I nodded gratefully. So she was willing to settle for the lowly
American after all. She left me then, and walked on down the
beach. Her buttocks jiggled from side to side.
*
Dulce was as good her word. The Havana Libre was only two
blocks from the University, so we walked over. She wore an ample
ruffled skirt reaching down to her knees; no more covert glances at
her remarkable legs and thighs. Her dark brown hair hung in waves
to her shoulders, and her breasts seemed incredibly large, her waist
miraculously small, and her hips amazingly broad. Everything was
accentuated today. I'd always thought of Cubans as dark-skinned,
but her skin was creamy white.
We moved uphill to the foot of a broad staircase leading up to
the University. The buildings were all in Greek style, with granite
Doric columns topped by relief carvings. There was a park in the
middle. We dallied there briefly, then passed the library and the
 
102
huge stadium and finally made it to the monstrous indoor dojo
where the Cuban judo team was training. A man came up as we
entered the judo hail. He was forty-five or fifty, a big man about
six feet tall, beefy but strong, with wide bones, black curly hair, a
small scar on his check, and a slightly cauliflower ear. He did not
look too bright, but I knew this was an illusion. "Buenas, los puedo
ayudar en algo?" he inquired, big white teeth flashing in a friendly
smile. His voice was deep.
"This is a visitor from the American team," Dulce said.
"The American team! We shall plow you under! Welcome! I
am Rolando Rubio, coach of the Cuban team."
"Jason Striker-American coach," I said. We shook hands, and
I felt the extreme musculature of his body. This was a powerful,
trained man.
There were a number of judokas training in the hall. I could
not help sneaking a peek, for these were what my boys would have

to compete against. I saw one man on his back, running the line.
Student after student attacked him, only to be overturned and
held down, or strangled efficiently. What a demonstration of skill!
"Jason Striker? I know of you! How glad I am to meet you! I
saw you beat the karateka last year, on television."
"Actually it was a draw," I demurred. It was amazing how
news of that martial-arts tournament had spread. I kept running
into people who remembered it.
"Luis!" Rolando shouted, his voice booming in the hall. The
man on the mat disengaged from practice and approached.
"This is Jason Striker, American fifth dan." He turned to me.
"Sensei Luis Guardia, fifth dan, who works with me on the mat."
Luis was about fifty, with curly brown, hair and blue eyes odd
in a Cuban. I noticed that be limped somewhat; his knees had
been badly injured in the past, so that he could no longer walk
easily. He stood only about five feet five inches tall-but there was
no doubt he was a devil on the tatami.
"I was just admiring your style," I told him.
"And I have admired yours!" he said, with an infectious smile.
103
He had a scar on his forehead, as though he had not been quite
quick enough against a swordsman. "Come, friend. Let's work out
on the mat."
I hesitated; I really hadn't come for this. But these people
inspired me with an instant feeling of camaraderie; they were real
judokas, my type of company. Where was the harm in a friendly
match? "Okay," I said.
I changed into one of their judogis, donned my black belt,
and joined Luis. A number of the students stopped to watch. No
matter.
Luis lay on his back. "Attack me," he invited.
I was puzzled. He was not even defending himself. What did
he think I was-a novice, a-white-belt? I approached. He changed
position slightly rolling on his side I slipped up and caught him in
a kesa gatame, a scarf hold. I sat at his side, one arm around his
neck, the other catching his arm against my armpit.
Correction: I intended to apply that hold, and thought for a
moment I had. But at the last moment Luis moved aside, as slippery
as an eel. His hand pushed against my arm, his head was out
of the noose, and I was face down on the mat. He was at my back,
both hands choking my neck in an okuri-eri jime or lapel strangle,
using the lapels of my kimono to choke me.
I tried to resist, but his hands were in deep and the cloth was
cutting my neck. His arms were strong as a bull, deceptive for so
small a person. In a real fight I might have tried to hit him in a
vital spot, before falling unconscious, but this was sport judo.
I tapped with my leg, since I couldn't speak, surrendering.
Luis released me, smiling. "Want to try again?"
Yes, I wanted to try again. I didn't like being so readily defeated.
I knew I was not the best judoka in the world, and I was
out of shape; having spent most of my time training others. But
still, I was no patsy, and his rank was the same as mine, and he was
older and smaller.
I grabbed his knees and pushed them to one side. I was to the
rear of him now, holding him down kami shiho gatame, my body
 
104
in a line with his, my head pressing down in his chest, my hips
over his head, and both arms pressing his arms tightly against his
side, with my hands holding his belt. Let's see him get out of this!
I thought. This was the toughest of all holddowns to break.
But again I was surprised by his speed and flexibility. He really
was a master of mat work. His body arched back, back, back in
a backbend, while I held his upper torso. His legs bent back and

hooked under my belt. Both his feet started pushing. It was impossible
to hold him down, because the legs are so much stronger
than the arms. Slowly he pushed himself back. But I was not going
to let him get off so easily. I kept turning on the mat with him,
till suddenly I was on his back, one forearm pressing against his
throat and the other pushing down the back of his head: a modified
hadaka jime, or bare strangle. My legs crossed over his abdomen
to impede his escape. I also started a little bit of illegal pressing
down with both legs to scissor his stomach, to help put force
on his powerful neck. I squeezed with both arms and legs for all I
was worth.
Suddenly his body arched back, one leg over mine; the other
caught his own leg, trapping mine in a leg lock. The pain was
unbearable and I had to shout "Maitta!" surrender.
Luis laughed as he released me. "I know this is illegal-but so
was your tightening on the leg scissor. I set you up for this hold."
No wonder I had gotten my hold so easily. He had let me have
it, so as to break it. I could not match him in mat work, his chosen
specialty. He had suckered me.
"Kolychkine taught us such tricks," Luis said. "I like to surprise
judokas with them."
I could not stay mad at him. He had taught me a valuable
lesson in tactics. "Good match," I said.
Luis turned to Dulce, who had been watching avidly. "This
Yankee you picked up," he remarked, "this beach derelict-he is a
true judoka. He loses to an illegal hold, but he makes no excuses,
though he has beaten the best in the world when the rules were
suspended. That is the mark of a champion."
105
Rolando was soon called away to attend to his coaching duties,
but Luis remained with us. He introduced us to his beautiful,
willowy Cuban Chinese wife. Seeing her gave me a pang, for I had
once sought to marry a Chinese girl. But another Chinese, Kan-
Sen, head Kill-13 Demon, had slit her throat. Might he burn
forever in the hell to which I had dispatched him!
The four of us-Luis, his black-haired wife, Dulce, and I-at
in the stadium, refreshed by the breeze, and talked all afternoon
about judo the world over. The time passed like a shot. Then we
went over to the bar on the top, of the Havana Libre, tallest building
in Cuba. All Havana lay like a jewel beneath us in the evening.
The women departed briefly for the ladies' room. Luis leaned over
to me confidentially. "Seor, I do not suggest anything. But there
have been certain rumors-I do not credit them for a moment!-
that you might have trouble."
"Oh, we'll have trouble, all right!" I agreed. "I saw how sharp
your judokas were. And we have little hope of matching the teams
of the other nations."
He made a littte gesture of negation. "That too, perhaps. But
you-if you are ever in need-I cannot speak freely . . ."
I looked at him, realizing that this was not idle conversation.
"I am not familiar with this country."
"La Esperanza in Pinar del Rio," he said. "Find it on a map.
Go there, ask for Tomas the fisherman. Tomas Cepero."
Then the girls returned, and he was suddenly full of jovial
inconsequentials again. We finished a pleasant evening. In fact, I
enjoyed myself about as much as I ever had, for a competent judo
sensei and good-looking girls make excellent company.
But why did Luis suppose I might get into such trouble that I
would need an underground escape route? What could he know of
my affairs that I did not? After all, I had never met him before.
 
106
*
Next day I went out with Dulce again. This time she took me

to Copelin, the Castro Ice Cream Palace, on the corner opposite to
the Havana Libre. It was a huge structure, filling a quarter of the
block, with a surrounding park. It was an ice cream parlor.
"Cubans are crazy about ice cream." Dulce confided. "They
sell fifty flavors here, made of real milk and eggs."
"Ice cream!" I have my own peculiarities, and chief among
them is this: I love ice cream. I know it is mostly sugar, and is no
fit training diet for a martial artist. But I was the coach, not a
player, and I was sweating hot, and the very thought of cold, highquality
ice cream made me salivate like one of Pavlov's dogs. Fifty
flavors? My willpower crumbled like hammered plaster. More appropriately,
it melted.
We ate ice cream, cone after cone. I felt compelled to try all
the exotic flavors: maranon (sour and astringent), mango, pina,
purple caimito, anon, guanabana, papaya, fruitabamba, melon,
guava, zapote-God, what a capitalist pig I made of myself! But it
sure was fun. I especially liked the coco glace, a half a coconut filled
with delicious coconut ice cream.
Afterwards, we went swimming at Rio Crystal, the Crystal
River with an artificial waterfall hear the Havana waterworks. I was
embarrassed, because my gut was bulging with all that ice cream;
I must have looked like a potbellied retiree. In the evening we
went to the Tropicana nightclub. The government allowed no gambling,
but it had a fabulous show. I could not keep my eyes off the
remarkable array of chorus cuties. Dulce was quite piqued. We
dined under the stars, the wonderful crystal roof moving back so
we could enjoy the scenery. Chicken and rice-arroz con pollo-
with deboned chicken cut into small pieces, fried ripe plantains,
Cuban bread, a salad of lettuce and tomatoes, and dulce de leche, or
milk dessert.
All in all, I did not suffer unduly in my off hours. I think
Dulce might have dropped me after the first day, having satisfied
107
her curiosity, but when she saw how the University personnel welcomed
me, she decided to stick around. I'm only conjecturing, of
course; no man really knows what a girl sees in him. But Dulce
was an intellectual, which I am not, and she could hardly have
found my mind or knowledge stimulating.
At any rate, we necked a little bit, and she was amazingly
passionate. But she was an old-fashioned girl, still a virgin, and
she retained that status during our acquaintance. I think she really
liked me, but my memory of my dead fiancee kept us apart.
Dulce was also in the Cuban FAR, the Fuerzes Armadas
Revolucionarias, some kind of a paramilitary organization. I got the
shock of my life when I first saw her in her working clothes, instead
of bathing suit or evening dress. She wore a dark green military
uniform with a pistol on her side, and I was sure she knew
how to use it. Black boots, plus a jaunty black beret on top of her
hair. Her job had something to do with military talks, indoctrination,
morale, and Marxist-Leninist Theory.
But we had a judo meet to compete in, and as it approached
all else was blotted from my attention. I wanted to overlook nothing
that could give our team a chance; no technique, no discipline,
no frame of mind. We were entering as underdogs; no one expected
us to do well. I didn't either, but I sure as hell was going to
try my best to surprise them.
In sport judo the object is to win without hurting your opponent.
A full point is called an ippon, and that immediately terminates
the match. Normally an ippon is scored by throwing your
opponent cleanly on his back. In a real life situation, that would
shake him up considerably, probably putting him out of commission,
for few untrained people know how to take a fall.
There are other ways: holddowns, locks, strangles, or simply a
superior performance within the time limit of six to ten minutes.

But an ippon is like a knockout in boxing: fast and sure, no matter
what has gone before.
The meet itself seemed anticlimactic. I watched the great sports
palace fill up, a huge crowd, unlike the usually deserted stands
 
108
common to American judo meets. This was what I thought of as a
football turnout. There were even reserved seats-empty in this
crowded hall, but still guarded by militiamen-for Fidel Castro
and his entourage. In this communist paradise of equality, some
were more equal than others. There were constant exhibitions between
the matches, breaking the presumed monotony. I understood
that Mustapha the American boxer would participate in one
of these. Maybe I'd get a chance to talk to him.
The Japanese did well, of course; they always do. They demonstrated
their superiority, by cornering most of the first-place
medals. The Russians followed through with many of the silver
medals. I was surprised to learn that the Soviets had fewer than a
hundred black-belt judokas in all their realm, compared to some
nineteen thousand for France and similarly large numbers for other
European nations. But Russia, going for quality rather than quantity,
was first in European judo. Oh, the Europeans took some
medals, too, and one Cuban lightweight surprised everybody by
defeating the Japanese champion with a kesa gatame holddown.
The hope of our team was Tony, a young college student shodan,
a collegiate champion in the 205-and-under division. He
was Italian-Greek extraction, swarthy, with black hair. He wore
glasses-but woe betide the bully who took him for Mister Milquetoast.
His favorite throws were the uchi-mata and morote seio nage.
Tony's first match was against Mihaly Szabo of Hungary. Szabo
came in with a full tight o-soto-gari and Tony shifted his weight
backward and countered with a left o-soto, winning half a point,
waza ari. Half a point was not enough to win, but it was a good
start in fifteen seconds. Szabo came in again with the o-soto-gari;
Tony blocked him and threw him with his own o-soto, making his
second half point.
That brought him victory. I refrained with difficulty from doing
an unsportsmanlike whoop of sheer joy; our entry was proving
himself.
All of our other entries were eliminated in the first round,
however.
109
Next, Tony went against Norberto Vasquez of Cuba. I saw
Rolando and Luis watching, and I did not meet their gaze. One of
our boys would have to win, and the other had to lose, and I knew
exactly how the Cubans felt. They had said their team would annihilate
ours. How sweet it would be to prove them wrong-but
how sad, too, for I liked these people.
Norberto was a mat man-not surprising, with Luis as a trainer.
But Tony could handle himself on the mat too, and I had warned
him what to expect. In fact I had drilled him until we both were
dizzy. He could win-he could!-but my hands were sweating as
they lined up. I remembered what Luis had done to me on the
mat, and knew he had drilled Norberto too.
Tony tried a morote seoi nage, lifting Norberto and spilling
him on his side. It could have gone for a half a point, but there was
no call from the judge. Then Norberto tried a left uki-waza sutemi
and it was Tony's turn to sprawl on his face. I winced, but no call
from the judges here, either. Norberto was on top of him, trying
for a hold Tony managed to reverse him and grab him in a yokoshiho
gatame side hold down. I held my breath, counting seconds;
half a minute would mean the win.
Noberto struggled, but Tony hung on, as Ihad taught him to.
Fifteen seconds, twenty, twenty-five, thirty! Victory!

Now Luis caught my eye. He smiled, a gracious loser, and I
felt both warm and cold inside. Would I have been so generous?
Then Tony came up against the Russian, Novokov. If he won
this one, he would make it to the finals and be assured of at least a
third-place medal. I was only a spectator at this point, but my
heart was pounding like that of a first-time contestant. Russia was
big-league judo; did Tony have a chance?
I watched Tony do a beautiful uchi-mata, throwing the Russian,
and in that instant I knew he had won. My feet really did
leave the floor! The Japanese referee raised his hand to signal IPPON,
and it was the most beautiful sign I ever saw.
But the two judges-one Argentinian, the other Polish-stood
up to disagree.
 
110
What? I was on my feet and over there, protesting. I had been
in competition a dozen years, and I damn well knew an ippon
when I saw one. The anti-American bias of certain regions is well
known, but it should not extend to the judging of a judo match.
Well, what did I expect? Americans are not the best-liked people
around the world, and I guess I'd feel the same if I were from a
have-not nation, watching the conspicuous consumption of precious
resources that the U.S.A. practices. And the Japanese suffered
from similar discrimination in judo contests, but their superiority
kept them winning in spite of it. The Americans lacked
that level of skill, so the bias really hurt. Sometimes at decision
time it looked as though there were a Japanese-American alliance
against the rest of the world.
My protest was disallowed. Tony was granted only half a point,
a waza ari. Not enough to win. So the match continued.
Something went out of Tony after that. Oh, he stood up and
put on a good show, but I could see that his shock at the miscall
had destroyed his concentration. I couldn't blame him; he had
just learned the hard-way that America's fifth-rate judo status was
not due entirely to the inability of its players. So many people of
the world wanted so much to see the Yankee humiliated, and here
was their chance.
There was nothing we could do about it.
Novokov faked a tome-nage sutemi, and changed to an arm-bar,
a standing juji-gatame. Tony should have been able to avoid it,
ordinarily, but he had lost his edge. That was the end; I knew it.
All you can do in the face of such a hold is capitulate.
But Tony tried to resist it.
"No! No!" I cried from the sidelines in sudden alarm. "Don't
fight it! Surrender!" That may sound like cowardly advice, but
anyone who has experienced a standing arm-bar knows otherwise.
Tony did not hear or heed. He tried a forward somersault, a
foolish maneuver against an expert. The Russian did not let go; he
twisted instead and pulled back harder; I heard the snap as Tony's
111
arm broke at the elbow, like a sudden pistol shot. He gave a cry of
pain, and there went the American hope for a medal.
The judo meet continued, but it was over for us. I was abruptly
more interested in our return to the States than in the tournament
proceedings. We had arrived by plane, but would be going home
by boat, via Canada. Such circuitous routings were necessitated
because there was no direct communication between Cuba and
the U.S.A., and we did not have enough money left to take a plane
home. Money might have materialized had we made a decent
showing in the meet; but we were dead, now, as far as any news
interest went. So we would limp home in our shame and isolation.
Well; variety, spice of life, etc. Maybe the sea air would wash out
the taste of ashes.
*

Dulce drove me to the harbor in a Volkswagen sedan. She was
in uniform, gun and all; I suppose this counted as shore patrol or
something for her. Quite possibly she had been assigned to keep
an eye on me, but I wasn't worried, as I had nothing to hide except
my chagrin about the meet results. I was sure our initial meeting
had been coincidental, but after that she had been forced to mix
business with pleasure, and I wasn't sure in which category I fit.
Our romance, if you could call it that, never got beyond the polite
stage. I knew she didn't mean me any harm, anyway.
There were, it turned out, advantages. I got convenient chauffeuring
service, and I hadn't realized that it required a special permit
to visit the ship. Dulce had obtained it for me on her own.
And she was nice company.
We parked and walked down toward the docks. This was the
Old Havana section, with small twisted streets and crowded houses,
then the usual wharves and warehouses and ships. It was evening,
and the harbor lights illuminated the water. A big moon was reflected
on the sea, and I saw the glow of the refineries across the
bay, their excess gas fires burning brightly. The sweep of the light-
 
112
house beam passed us, adding romance. But then a mischievous
sea breeze brought the smell of dead fish and the pungent effluvium
of some chemical cargo. Over all hung the odor of the natural
sea, with its clean, salty ambiance.
We showed the permit and boarded the ship via a small gangplank.
It was a Canadian cargo vessel, the Maple Leaf Forever, a
small, well-kept ship with about five cabins for passengers and a
large cargo hold. There were a couple of crewmen aboard who
greeted us with friendly Canadian accents and gladly showed us
around when they learned I was to be their passenger. They were
polite even when they learned that bouncy Dulce was not coming
along. I comprehended their disappointment.
They explained that the ship had brought American spare parts
to Cuba, the American companies evading the embargo by this
device; patriotism took a back seat to profit, as always. The Maple
Leaf usually returned with a cargo of Havana cigars that would
probably infiltrate the U.S.A. illegally. Also sugar, refrigerated beef,
and big lobsters. But she was empty at the moment, with most of
her crew on shore leave.
It would not be luxurious for my returning team, but it would
do. And the people were nice.
"Well, I guess that's it," I remarked we returned to the dock. I
felt out of sorts. Everything in Cuba had lost interest for me since
that disaster with Tony. Even Dulce. "I'll probably get seasick."
Then it happened. Several black figures charged out of the
night. I was walking around the front of the little car to the other
door, having helped Dulce into the driver's seat, a male courtesy
that she didn't need and may not have appreciated.
Luis Guardia's comment about possible trouble for me sprang
to my mind. Was this it? Ridiculous; these were wharf rats, stevedores,
out to mug the stranger. Still . . .
They were three large black men. One hefted what looked like
a machete; I saw the big curved blade glint. The machete is the
cane cutter's all-purpose tool. It was capable of lopping off a
Spaniard's head when wielded by a mambi-the Cuban indepen-
113
dence soldier, but was normally used for the island's main cash
crop, sugar cane.
He was the first to reach me, that weapon chopping down. I
went in under the blade, blocked the descending arm at the wrist
with my left hand, and went in low with my other arm against his
legs. I threw him with a kata guruma hard against the car. He
bounced off and fell in a heap. He tried to get up; he was tough.

But my first kick sent the machete flying from his fractured wrist,
and the second caught him in the side of the jaw, breaking it.
The second attacker made the mistake of going after Dulce,
trying to haul her out of her seat in the car. Her gun fired, once,
and he went down. I had been right: a Cuban army woman was no
easy mark.
But the third man was on me already. He caught me on the
head with a lead pipe. I fell with the blow, so that it only grazed
me, doing much less damage than otherwise, but still it hurt, and
I had to fight to retain my equilibrium. From the ground I kicked
his knee with one foot while hooking his ankle with my other. He
fell down with a dislocated knee. But he still held the pipe in his
hand. I hunched near him on the pavement. Again my foot went
out in straight stomp to his groin, putting him out of commission.
No more attackers came. "You don't seem to have done much
about crime in the street," I said to Dulce.
My remark was half in jest, and I expected a short diatribe on
how bad crime on American streets was in comparison. But she
took me seriously. "We have very little crime," she said as she bent
to search the body of the man she had shot, right through the
heart if I was any judge. "There is something funny about this."
"Is there?" I had the nasty suspicion, now, that there was more
to this than met the eye, and that she was somehow involved. She
was taking this too calmly. Had it been a setup to get rid of me, as
perhaps Luis had warned? But why? Whatever threat I represented
to Cuba had been dissipated when Tony lost his judo match.
"He has no identification, no papers," Dulce said. "That means
 
114
he's an outlaw. Come-we must report this to the G-2."
"The G-2?" I asked blankly.
"The political police. Like your CIA or FBI. Their three main
functions are patrolling, intelligence, and legal. They arrest individuals
they consider suspicious, like these." She nudged the corpse
with her foot, and continued with a neat capsule description of
the G-2. I didn't like her comparison to our FBI, but I also wondered
about her ready knowledge. From her own description of G-
2 activities, I realized that she herself could be a member, a secret
agent. Was she trying to warn me without betraying her assignment?
No, she would not have shot one of her own. This could not
have been a put-up job. She had acted to protect herself, and me.
If she had wanted me dead, she could simply have shot me, and
said the thugs had done it. Still, I didn't like the sound of the G-
2; I had heard stories of the way secret police operated around the
world. Maybe it was a different sort of trap: I would be accused of
murder and detained. But again, why? Luis's warning, and now
this. Coincidence?
"I'd like to take a look around," I said. "Maybe I can spot
something."
"The G-2 will check," she assured me. She wanted the G-2
here, all right.
"How long will it take them to get here? We need to check
now, in case there are others." I really wanted to see whether she'd
balk at letting me search, and possibly leave the area.
"Very well. You check. I will drive to the nearest phone and
report. They will be here in a few minutes."
What about that. She was letting me do it. No sign of connivance
here. "Good. I'll duck down out of sight, so no one knows
I'm still here. They'll think we both left in the car, if there are
more than just these three."
She nodded. Then she leaned over in the dark and kissed me.
I was caught by surprise, doubly: first, because she had never before
initiated such action, and second because of its extreme pas-
115

sion. Abruptly-too late--I realized the truth: Dulce did not
merely like me, she had a full-fledged crush on me. Some intellectual
women really go for the physical type of male; I should have
read the signs. But her natural restraint and modesty had made it
seem like less. I had an ugly premonition I would not see her soon
again, if ever, and knew she had it too. Hence her ardent kiss.
Then she started up the motor, turned on the headlights, and
maneuvered around the bodies. I ducked into the shadow of a
building and awaited developments. I was glad that whatever was
afoot, Dulce wasn't involved.
"So it was you, honky!" a low voice said behind me.
I whirled, startled. I had heard nothing before that. I was further
confused because I recognized that voice, and it made no
sense at all. What was she doing here, in Cuba?
I saw a tall black woman with her hair in a flaring Afro, her
lips full, her nose broken and never properly set, ruining an otherwise
pretty face. Large firm breasts, small waist, muscular arms
and legs for a female, taut belly. A woman who could move with
blurring speed and strike with uncanny accuracy, yet possessed,
too, of a dynamic beauty.
It was Ilunga, the Black Karate Mistress.
 
Chapter 7
TAO VS. KILL-13
"So you are mine," the Hyena said.
Ilunga looked at him a moment. He was shorter than she, but
massively constructed. He wore a grotesque animal-head mask,
but it could not conceal the fact that his skin was white, not black.
This was the leader of Blakrev? A renegade white?
It was obviously a fraud, as she had expected all along. Blacks
wanted freedom, equality, vengeance, so the white exploiterso ined
in to capitalize on that drive. Even in revolution, blacks were not
equal.
She could overcome him, torture him to make him talk, use
him as a hostage. Get Danny back, break up this fake revolution,
or better yet, take over the apparatus and convert it to a real revolution.
Right now she could strike . . .
"Try it, black mama," he said.
He was a fighter, and a deadly one-she could see that in his
bearing. He was confident; he was challenging her. Which meant
he thought he had the situation in hand. He must have studied
117
her, analyzed her techniques. His house could be set up with every
conceivable device. She could be shot down the moment she made
her move.
Better to bide her time, galling as that was. Find out what this
man wanted of her. Play along, until she could deal with him
effectively, without the risk of treachery.
"You're smart," he said. "No wonder you did well in the Demon
cult. You will do better with me. Now I'll take those tonki--
the ones you hide in your hair."
Slowly she removed the little blades and handed them over.
She saw that his fingernails were longer than hers, and pointed
like needles. When she fought him, her first move would be to
break off those nails.
"Now the drug," he said.
"What?"
"Your supply of Kill-13, the red-eye medicine. I will take charge
of it."
How had he known about that? She had to bluff. "I don't
know what you're talking about."
He made a gesture, a mere flick of his thumb, as though flipping
out a marble. A tiny dart jumped from his hand and lodged
in her arm.

She yanked it out, but already something was wrong. Before
she could do more, she fell forward.
"Curare, my own special blend," the Hyena said, as he caught
her neatly in his strong arms. "Used by the Amazon headhunters.
Nerve poison. Completely disconnects the voluntary muscles, renders
the subject absolutely immobile. But it has one intriguing
attribute."
He carried her into another room and set her on a laboratory
table. The surface was hard and cold, and she felt both qualities
readily. But she was unable to shift her weight, or to make any
voluntary motion at all.
"It does not impair sensation," he said. "As you are now aware."
He made a bark of laughter, sounding like an animal. "It was once
 
118
tried as an anesthetic for surgery, and seemed to work. But when
the patients recovered, they claimed they had felt every cut of the
scalpel." He put his hands to her head, his fingers removing her
silk neckerchief and going through her Afro to the scalp. "Finally a
doctor-took curare himself, and found it was true. He never lost
consciousness, and he retained full sensation-but while under
the influence, he had been unable to react in any way, not even to
make his discomfort known."
His nails combed through her hair, searching methodically.
He found and withdrew the little bags of Kill-13 pellets hidden
there. He was right; she felt every tug of his fingers, but could
make no protest. If he chose to torture her, she would be unable
even to scream.
"Since you are currently doped on your own drug, your awareness
is heightened," he said. "No doubt you feel even more clearly
than normal. But your drug dampens pain. An interesting combination;
you cannot express the pain you cannot feel."
Interesting, indeed, but she felt neither intrigue nor mirth.
What was he going to do to her? Rape her? She had been raped
before; it was no novelty, and no longer any torture.
"There will be more of the drug elsewhere," he said. He poked
one long nail into her ear, and for a moment she thought he was
going to puncture her eardrum, or even her brain. But he moved
carefully, showing precise control, and did not.
His hands moved to her clothing, undressing her. Despite his
long nails, his fingers were adept. He moved her arms, legs and
torso about, getting all her clothing off, including the tight vest
she wore beneath her blouse, and her black lace panties. So what
use are undergarments? she thought. They are no protection. They
only came off . . .
He turned her over, and she flopped limply at the urging of
his strong hands, still powerless to offer even token resistance. She
would have killed him if she could. Not because she was sensitive
to nudity, but because of his arrogant presumption.
He palpitated her bare breasts with his knuckles, but found
119
nothing beyond the knife sheathed between them. He squeezed
her nipples, watching them react normally: no hardware there. He
spread her legs, removed the little dagger strapped to one thigh,
and ran one nail deep into her vagina, fishing for other packets.
But probe as he might, there were none.
It was a specialized, impersonal sort of rape, without even the
excuse of lust. She wondered whether he was capable of such an
urge. Perhaps he was a eunuch, invulnerable to betrayal via the
wiles of women. Whatever she had, he would take, indifferently.
She had castrated men for far less than this. But she made a note:
Do not rely on the castration kick with this man.
Then he turned her over, parted her buttocks, and thrust the
nail into her rectum. There he found it: her last reserve of the vital

drug, sealed in a small aluminum cylinder. He hooked it out.
"Your body has excellent tonus," he remarked. "Well, sleep it
off, now." He put a cloth over her face, and she felt herself fading.
Any other man would have been driven to some, expression of
carnal passion, for Ilunga knew she had remarkable anatomy. The
Hyena had insulted her on more than one level. But perhaps she
had already learned his vital secret.
*
She woke with nausea, a splitting headache, and an odd, unpleasant
taste in her mouth. Her body felt numb, with pin-prickling
all over, as though all of it had gone to sleep.
The Hyena was there, still in his animal visage. "Now you are
conscious," he said. "Now you have volition. Stand."
She ignored him.
He brought out a single pellet of Kill-13, and suddenly she
was aware of her need for it. She had been out for some time; her
Demon-high had worn off. Soon the first withdrawal pangs would
start. They would intensify until fatal, if she didn't take another
sniff.
The Hyena walked to the toilet, dropped the pellet in, flushed.
 
120
Nothing could have shocked Ilunga more than that loud rush
of water, carrying the pellet away forever. She had so few doses left!
To see one deliberately wasted . . .
The Hyena returned. "That one is gone. There will be no
more today. I do not like to be balked. Stand."
This time Ilunga stood. She was shaking.
The Hyena had her. She could not live without Kill-13, literally;
there was no way off the drug but death. When he had robbed
her of her entire supply, he had captured her life force.
She had to perform, or die. However much her mind sought
to resist, her body could not. She had to obey.
"You will go far in Blakrev," he told her. "You have had experience
in forming terrorist bands. The blacks trust you. And you can
fight. You will be my lieutenant-but first you must be trained.
We have little time, so you will work hard."
She stared at him stonily. If there were only some way to kill
him! But he had the Kill-13 locked in a safe, surely, and he would
be canny about the combination. She had had experience; she knew
how these things worked. If he died, there would be no way to
open the safe, and she would die too. And so would Danny; there
would be standing orders.
"This nation is running short of fuel," he said. "Blakrev is
going to start blowing up petroleum refineries, to make that energy
pinch worse. It will cause more disruption than a thousand
raids on military or industrial targets. You will be in charge of
Operation Fuel Crunch."
"I'm no arsonist!" she protested. "The minorities would be
hurt worst of all. The honky fat-cats will get their gas first, and the
black man last. When the industries close for lack of fuel, the blacks
will be fired first-and lynched first."
"Not if the revolution is successful," he said. "Then the blacks
will be first, and the whites will wait. But we have to destroy the
bases of white power, and energy is crucial to it."
She looked at him. This was a white talking. It was phony.
121
The Hyena made a motion as of dropping a pellet into the
toilet. The warning was plain. "I'll study arson," she said.
The Hyena considered. "I think you have not yet learned," he
said. "One does not argue cases with the Hyena; one obeys without
question." His thumb flicked, and though she tried to dodge,
the curare-derivative barb caught her on the hand.
She whipped that hand to her face, biting into the skin to

draw blood, trying to suck out the poison before it penetrated.
But it was no use; she fell, as she had before.
She was in for it now. Before, the Hyena had merely searched
her. This time he would torture her. He intended to drive out any
vestige of self-will. Why had she resisted? She should have cooperated
eagerly, giving no hint of her true feelings. Until her chance
came.
Even her capitulation had not been enough for him. It had
not been instant. But this experience had already shown her one
thing: there was no simple way out of this. She had to get off Kill-
13, and develop a defense against the curare darts.
The Hyena picked up her body, still naked, and carried her to
a back room that was like a medieval dark-cell. He fastened her
wrists and ankles to manacles set in the wall, letting her half-stand,
half-hang there. Then he left her.
Was this all? Hung in isolation? He'd have to take her down
soon, if he wanted her services. She could not last long, with the
Demon-hunger growing in her. He knew that. He would free her
before long, if he was sensible.
Sensible? There was the catch. The Hyena was a maniac. He
was half insane. She had talked back to him; he just might let her
rot here.
Hours passed. The curare wore off, but her pain grew. She
could not rest; if she did not maintain her weight on her feet, her
wrists took up the slack, and that was worse. She was hungry,
thirsty, and the Demon monkey was on her back, the worst torture
of all.
 
122
What was she to do? Call the Hyena? She knew that was what
he wanted, and that he would torture her further by refusing to
answer until he was quite ready. He wanted her to suffer, to lose all
semblance of individual character. To accept his orders without
question, no matter what they were. He would have her crying,
crawling, mewling.
She could not. No man could do that to her. Better to die.
But how would she react when the withdrawal agony became
unbearable?
Was there an alternative? She had thought there was, when
the Demon cult fell. She had tried the most positive approach she
knew.
*
Sifu Teng Yu-Feng was short and fat and about fifty-five years
old. His teeth were gold. The small fingers of each hand were bent
or broken. Not impressive. But her contacts said he was the top
man in the field, locally, and that he had been known to train
promising students in kung fu without charge. And that he had
command of many secret mysteries-mysteries that just might
aid her in her quest for freedom from Kill-13.
"Ah, the Black Karate Mistress," the sifu said, recognizing her.
"I have admired your barbarian handiwork."
"Sifu, I don't understand."
"You have been violent, yet you have punished many who
required it, and you saved one who was worthy."
How had he known? She had a reputation as castrator of men.
But she had told no one of her connection with Jason Striker,
whom she had hauled from the burning remains of the Demon
headquarters.
The sifu puffed on a tremendously long ivory pipe, possibly
formed from the tusk of an elephant-one entire tusk. The end of
its stem was shaped into little carved hands holding the bowl.
"And now you come to me for help."
123
"I want to get off Kill-13.," she blurted. She did not like asking

anything of any man, not even a sifu.
"That has never been done before," he murmured, blowing
out fragrant smoke. Suddenly she recognized the odor: opium.
How could an opium addict help her break her own addiction?
"Except, perhaps, by one," he continued. "And he was not
really on it. Your friend the judoka."
"Striker came to you?" This was amazing!
"He had no need to. He has had good instruction." The sifu's
eyes gazed on her serenely. "But you are thoroughly addicted. For
you, it would not be easy."
She didn't care about ease! "You can cure me?"
"No."
Disappointment was like a kakato-geri, a heel-kick, to her face.
"Why?"
Another fragrant puff of smoke. "I do not take barbarian girls
as students."
Rage came, like the shock of hurricane-force winds after the
dead eye of the center of the storm. She was high on the Demon
drug; she always dosed herself before undertaking any challenging
project, even this quest to get off that drug. She had strength beyond
what most men could imagine in a woman. She spread her
legs and bent her arms in the contour known as the Horse Stance
of kung fu and stood firmly in the sifu's doorway.
He puffed slowly on his ornate pipe, watching her. Nothing
needed to be said. The Horse Stance was a model of difficulty for
the novice; only with long practice could a person maintain it for
more than a few minutes. Serious students learned to hold it for an
hour or more. The sifu finished his pipeful, then got up and wandered
back inside his kwoon, or practice hall, the kung fu dojo.
She stayed where she was, drawing on her Demon strength to
hold the position. Half an hour had passed; had the drug let her
feel pain, she would have been suffering. She had assumed a much
deeper and lower Horse Stance than normal, one only for masters,
much more difficult to hold.
 
124
Bye and bye the sifu wandered back. Two students followed
him. They inspected Ilunga as if she were a statue, remarking on
the form of her stance. "I'd give her another fifteen minutes," one
said.
The other shook his head judiciously. "Ten, at the most. No
woman can hold her legs apart longer than that." They laughed,
male-fashion. But she did not move or speak.
Fifteen minutes later her stance had not changed. The two
students shook their heads. "She must be dead," one remarked.
"Fossilized." They departed.
As she passed an hour, a larger group appeared. Several of these
assumed the Horse Stance opposite her. Five minutes passed; ten.
The first student collapsed, unable to maintain it longer. One by
one the others dropped; they were young, and simply not up to
the grueling continuation. Sifu Teng settled down again and commenced
another pipeful of sweet opium.
At an hour and a half the Kill-13 drug began to wear thin.
Normally a sniff lasted longer than this, but the drug was used up
faster by strenuous exertion. This was quite a test.
Her head became light, and waves of pain came-pain the
drug had suppressed before. Sweat poured down her body in rivulets,
making her itch, but she could not scratch. The itch became
almost as bad as the pain. But she could not stop now; there was a
considerable crowd of people, inside and outside the kwoon. An
hour and forty-five minutes; she could see the big clock mounted
inside the exercise hall. Her legs were numb, yet they hurt terribly.
The prickling sensation that had started low now encompassed
her whole body. She was racked by terrible cramps, especially in

her buttocks.
Now the kwoon was packed with men, sitting on the floor,
facing her, watching her, waiting for her to fall. No word was spoken.
One hour fifty minutes. She clung to consciousness, but it
was as though she rode a saddle of fire. Her head seemed to bobble
just above that flame, rolling about, ready to fall in. Yet she suf-
125
fered from water, too. She wanted very badly to empty her bladder,
and the position was absolutely no help.
One hour fifty-five minutes. The burning reached up her neck,
into her jaw, her palate, climbing, climbing. Her brain was cooking
in agony; she was suffering Kill-13 withdrawal. But she would
not stop.
Two hours! The face of the clock loomed huge in her vision.
Then she fell, crashing down like the statue some had said she
was, and lost consciousness.
Hands hauled her up, firmly, gently, and set her in a chair.
She had been out only a few seconds, but her lower half remained
numb. Someone brought her fragrant herb tea, odd and bittertasting.
She felt her strength returning.
Sifu Teng approached. "This is not a barbarian girl," he remarked.
"This is a woman."
By no more than that did he signify the reversal of his prior
decision. But the students broke discipline and applauded. Ilunga
had set a kwoon record for the Horse Stance.
"Still, I cannot cure you." He paused. but she was too far gone
to react. "I can only point out the way. You must cure yourself."
Relief was like a successful counterblow. "I have no money,
only the will to be free."
He waved his hand negligently. "No more is required." And so
Ilunga became the student of Sifu. The first thing she learned was
that he frowned on the term "kung fu."
"Kung fu?" he asked as though mystified. "I do not know this
word."
Perplexed, she tried to explain. "Kung fu-the Chinese boxing.
Tiger's claw, crane's beak, dragon's tail-"
"Perhaps you refer to hsing-i or pa-kua. Hsing-i has twelve styles:
dragon, tiger, monkey, horse, iguana, cock, hawk, snake, eagle,
bear, swallow, and ostrich. Some schools include the mythical T'ai
bird, the falcon, and the camel, omitting the ostrich and-"
"No, I mean kung fu, like karate," she said, amazed that he
should profess such ignorance.
 
126
"There is a generic term for exercise," he said. "Perhaps that is
what you refer to, kung fu. But this is no more definitive than
saying 'businessman' for an American. What kind of exercise? It is
not clear."
"The martial arts," she said. "To fight, to overcome-"
"The martial arts," he repeated. "That would be wu-shu. And
still we do not know which martial art."
Ilunga realized that this was a lesson. The Demons had spoken
of themselves as the kung fu temple, but this was no more
accurate than the Black Muslim connection to the true Moslem
religion. Borrowing a name meant nothing.
"Perhaps hsing-i, then," she agreed.
"Perhaps ch'in-na," he countered.
She was unfamiliar with this term, too. But now she had some
notion how to proceed. "Please, sifu-I know nothing: Teach me."
He smiled, nodding. This was the attitude he wanted. "Meditation
in repose is excellent, but meditation in activity is a thousand
times superior. The mind must be in a state where the meditation
is steady and continuous." He paused to take another puff
of his opium.

Ilunga's heart sank. What could meditation do against the irresistible
compulsion of Kill-13? The sifu could lecture all week, but
if this was all he had to offer . . .
"Or tai-chi," he said, observing her doubt. "Permit me to make
a demonstration. You are an agile woman, skilled in striking and
evading, are you not?"
"Yes, sifu." At this point she was wondering how to excuse
herself from this discussion without offending him. Sifu Teng might
be a talkative old fraud, but he was treated with a respect bordering
on worship by his students, and she didn't want more trouble
than she already had.
He set aside his pipe and fetched several bricks from a pile in
the corner of the courtyard and set them on the floor, two feet
apart, in a circle. "Do you suppose you could escape the grasp of a
man by jumping from brick to brick?" he inquired.
127
"That depends on the man, and the grasp," she said cautiously.
The sifu placed his right hand on her back, unclenched, touching
lightly. "This grasp." he murmured.
She was alert for the catch. "No more than that? No attack?"
"None," he assured her.
"That is no grasp at all," she protested. "I could escape it without
effort."
"Then do so."
Mystified she jumped from one brick to the next. And stood
surprised, for the gentle weight of that pudgy hand with its warped
little finger was still upon her, just as though neither person had
moved.
She jumped again, more quickly, but Teng jumped with her,
his hand never moving, never varying its pressure.
Now she realized the nature of the demonstration. She launched
herself around the circle of bricks, now ducking low, now leaping
high, now weaving this way and that. But that soft touch remained.
Amazed, she halted without warning, whirled about-and the sifu
was gone.
"Well!" she said breathlessly. "So it was a trick!"
She put her hand over her shoulder to feel the place where his
palm seemed to rest. There would be an empty glove there, perhaps.
But her fingers touched warm flesh.
She spun again-and there was Sifu Teng. His hand had never
left her.
"With such power to hold," he remarked, "could you also not
let go?"
With such power, this power of tai-chi, was it possible? Could
the reverse of such a thing break the hold of Kill-13? Perhaps so.
And so she learned. She practiced the soft exercises of tai-chi,
heightening her awareness and concentration. The movements were
slow, smooth, flowing without strain, and it was as though she
were floating in air. There was never any strain. It resembled the
hard blows of karate-but these were gentle, dancelike.
Touch the South Wind. Her body turned to the south, hands
 
128
moving around the rim of a great circle, left hand at the top. On
they went, left hand dropping, right rising, and the right foot also
rising. Then forward, and on into Touch the East Wind.
The River Crests and Ebbs . . . The White Crane Pecks . . . The
Mantis Springs . . . The Dragon's Tail Strikes . . . The Dark Lady Spins
Flax . . . The King of Heaven Rides the Tiger . . . The Soft Endless
Sea . . . The Eight Drunken Fairies . . . She learned them all. And
her mental control strengthened.
But somehow it wasn't enough. She felt the growing control,
but it still fell short of the strength of Kill-13.
Sifu Teng saw it too. "For you, tai-chi is not enough. Perhaps

ch'in-na would work-but I am the wrong man to teach you that."
"Who is the right man?" she asked, relieved.
"Sifu Tuh Hsinn-wu. But he lives in Cuba."
Cuba! It might as well have been hell. There was no way she
could go there except by hijacking a plane, and that sort of thing
had become much less feasible than in prior years. The airlines
had stringent protective measures, and the Cubans only dumped
the hijackers in jail upon arrival. And jail would be the end of her,
with her addiction. In Cuba, as in many foreign countries, the
authorities dealt harshly with addicts.
So she and the sifu parted company amicably. Despite the
failure, the experience had been worthwhile. She had not known
before that there could be softness in martial art. This new approach
did not improve her fighting ability significantly, but it
did make her aware of the gentler side of her own nature, a side
long suppressed. Now she could understand that a person who
did not choose to fight was not necessarily a coward or weakling.
She had, however, picked up a few hints about the martial art
of ch'in-na. Sifu Teng was master of it; he had declined to teach it
to her because he felt he could not relate to her properly. But she
had seen some of what he imparted to other students. He followed
the mystic religion and philosophy of Taoism, a simple, frugal way
of life-but he pointed out that the very word tao meant "sword"
in Chinese. Hence there was a certain ambivalence, and she now
129
understood just enough of this to know that he was not being
capricious in referring her to an unreachable authority for further
training.
Ch'in-na was neither boxing nor wrestling, neither karate nor
judo, yet it was integral to both. It was called the muscle-splitting
skill, the twisting skill, or simply "The Devil's Hand." It stabilized
the opponent's body for a strike or throw, making maximum
effect for minimum force. The student first studied anatomy, so as
to know when and how to press, twist, or grasp. He learned to
counter strikes and locks. He learned to attack swiftly but with
relaxation, avoiding unnecessary force.
Some of the techniques were fantastic. Students practiced the
"Well Fist," gesturing with a fist at water in a well, trying to make
the water murmur. Theoretically this could lead, in ten years or
so, to a "Distance Death" blow against some hapless enemy. Or
"One Finger," in which a man struck an iron bell with one finger,
making it ring. Then he withdrew so that his finger did not quite
touch it, trying to make it move without contact. Or to extinguish
a candle by making his motion several feet away. This was another
potential Distance Death blow.
Yet Sifu Teng was a man of peace. "Show me a man of violence
who came to a good end," he said, and I will take him for my
teacher." She had smiled, thinking it a joke, but he had been serious
in his fashion.
*
Now, hanging from chains in the Hyena's dungeon, Ilunga
found renewed meaning in Sifu Teng's teachings. The violent way
was denied her now, but the gentle way remained. She could not
attack the Hyena, but she could work on herself. As the pain
mounted in her wrists and body, much as the pain of her Horse
Stance had risen before, she concentrated on her inner system and
made it fade. As her thirst intensified, she visualized a sea of water
 
130
and imagined she was floating, and her thirst abated. The seemingly
futile exercises of tai-chi became the key to relief.
But her need for the drug Kill-13 could not be assuaged so
readily. Tai-chi had failed her before, and it would fail her now.
Nothing sated the compulsive craving except the drug.

Unless-
The revelation was stunning. Tai-chi could not overcome the
craving in direct confrontation, but it could change her attitude
toward it. Suppose she took another addictive drug, and persuaded
herself it was Kill-13? Heroin, perhaps. If she could make that
conversion with the aid of the Chinese discipline, then she would
be addicted to a drug she could obtain. She would still be an addict,
but one of the Hyena's two great holds on her would be broken.
And he would not know it.
Later, she could go the methadone route, taking the cure for
heroin addiction. There were many methadone clinics around the
country, and such treatment was legal.
Or cocaine, better yet! For heroin it was necessary to have a
needle, which was awkward. But cocaine was sniffed, like Kill-13;
in fact, she understood that cocaine was one of the thirteen secret
ingredients of the Demon drug. Not only could she make that
shift unobtrusively, it would be easier to convince herself that it
was Kill-13. In fact, she could mix the two drugs, gradually shifting
the ratio from one to the other, until it was all cocaine.
But then she saw the one great flaw, assuming the process
would work. The Hyena watched her all the time when he did not
have her confined. She could not get any cocaine, or any other
drug. Unless-wait! There were telltale signs. The Hyena's nose
was chronically runny under his mask, and he sniffed a lot. She
had thought it was irritation from the confining mask, for it had
to be hideously close inside that animal head. But it could be cocaine
addiction. His animal odor-possibly another signal of the
habit. He had lost his sense of smell . . .
Doctors claimed that cocaine was not physically addictive. Haha.
But psychologically, it was irresistible. Such emotional com-
131
pulsion-it could account for some of the Hyena's peculiarities.
Potent, expensive, dangerous stuff.
Still, it was her best chance. Striker had gotten off Kill-13.
True, he had had only one sniff, immediately worked out of his
system by savage physical action and the emotional shock of the
death of his Chinese fiancee. And he had friends with extremely
specialized knowledge. But he must have done something similar,
sliding from one drug to another. The secret was to do it in stages;
one-step cessation was fatal, like a hammerfist blow to the brain.
Several steps could cushion it, until the addiction was gone.
If Striker could do it, so could she. She had to believe that.
First, she had to practice the discipline of conversion. Perhaps
she would not be able to apply it soon, but if she cooperated with
the Hyena, he would give her more freedom, and then she might
have access to some other drug. Possibly she would be able to steal
some of his own supply of cocaine.
A strange sensation suffused her. It took her some time to identify
it, masked as it was by her pain. It had been long since she had
experienced anything like it.
It was unholy joy.
*
Hours later, when the Hyena returned, Ilunga was fully amenable
to any orders he might give. Satisfied, he gave her one pellet
of Kill-13, and she used it. But it was the beginning of the end of
her addiction; she knew it.
The Hyena had made the mistake of forcing her to think.
Actually, the Hyena, like Sifu Teng, had much to show her.
Some of it was simple: the huge handsome house and grounds,
with pretty trees and stream. One side of the house had a monstrous
picture window, dark from the outside: one way glass.
The Hyena stopped her there. "An enemy of Blakrev looks out
of that room," he said. "What do you do?"
He was testing her new cooperation. All right; she would play

 
132
the game. She hawked up a mouthful and spat directly at the
glass.
The Hyena seemed to smile under his mask. He sniffed. "Now,
now-we are more subtle. We either convert or kill our enemies.
We do not waste effort in futile gestures." But he was pleased, and
they went on.
She wondered idly whether there really had been anyone looking
out. But it wasn't important.
There was a huge cellar under the house with a shooting range.
He taught her how to handle guns; to shoot fast and accurately
with a .45 pistol, an M3 silent machine gun, a Springfield 30-06
sniper rifle with telescopic sights, and a sawed-off shotgun. "Do
not aim," he said. "Just point the gun as an extension of your arm
and fire. The one who fires first lives to fire second. But take the
gun up to shoulder level; shooting from the hip is just a waste of
time."
She turned out to be a natural shooter, especially when high
on Kill-13, and he was pleased. But she observed that he never
used a gun himself, and that was odd. Why would he study guns,
collect them, and be expert in their use, and not use them?
He brought out an olive-drab cardboard box containing a block
of cheeselike yellow substance. The block had a cross section of
two inches and was eleven inches long. "This is C-3," he said.
"Plastic explosive, very powerful. One pound is equivalent to three
pounds of commercial dynamite. This is two and a quarter pounds.
Here, catch!" He tossed the mass-not to her, but beside her.
Ilunga dived for it, catching the sticky, putty-textured stuff
before it hit the floor. What would seven pounds of dynamite do
in this confined space?
The Hyena laughed his animal laugh. "It will not go off without
the detonator cap. That is dangerous, however."
He was toying with her, making her react. Naturally he would
not have blown himself up along with her. But she dared not show
any ire.
He showed her how to use the primer, making a hole in the
133
plastic and inserting the detonator. To prime it, she had to cut off
a piece of blasting fuse, then crimp the cap around the fuse and
insert the other end into the plastic. There was also detonating
cord for simultaneous explosions, blasting caps for priming other
explosives; pencil detonators that provided a time delay from three
minutes to twenty-three days, depending on model and temperature.
He also showed her how to set off incendiary grenades, how
to make Molotov cocktails, how to derail a train, and similar modes
of sabotage. Blakrev certainly meant business.
Still, she had no chance to get any cocaine, even though she
was now certain the Hyena himself used it. He was too canny, too
careful.
Under the suspicious eye of the animal hyena, she molded the
C-3 about dummy objects in the yard, setting up for practice
explosions. The stuff was slick and oily, smelling like fresh shoe
polish. This plastic explosive was fantastic stuff. She had worked a
little with dynamite before, as a member of the Demon cult, and
was frankly afraid of it. Dynamite was deadly dangerous, especially
when old; it couldn't be jarred, or frozen, or heated, or left in
the sun, or it might go off prematurely, taking its handler with it.
When it sweated, the juice was not water but nitroglycerin. If it
was stored too long, the nitro tended to concentrate in the bottom
of the cartridge. The very notion gave her the shakes.
Plastic, in contrast, was a delight. It could be frozen, heated,
or even burned, and it would not go off. She could make a ball of
it and throw it against the wall, with no danger. It was completely

inert, until properly primed. It was even possible to eat it and
suffer no harm other than an upset stomach, if it wasn't overdone.
And suddenly inspiration. She had heard of army junkies eating
C-3 in Vietnam, getting a high like that of a drug, a kind of
psychedelic. Like glue-sniffing, in the long run it was poisonous
and could damage the brain, but in the short run, before the tolerance
built up, it was comparatively safe. Safer than Kill-13, certainly.
She tore off a small segment and brought it to her face. The
 
134
shoe-polish odor was penetrating but not unpleasant. In a way it
reminded her of Kill-13.
And there was her salvation. Why quest vainly for cocaine when
the Hyena had put another drug right into her hands? He had
made his second critical mistake. Here was her tool!
She put the chunk into her mouth and chewed. It tasted as it
smelled: like oily shoe polish. But that was of no importance. If
this worked . . .
She concentrated on the mood. Now was the occasion to remember
the beautiful messages of the Tao Te Ching. "Dow Duh
Jing," she murmured, pronouncing it the way Sifu Teng did.
"There are ways, but the Way is uncharted . . ." This was the
way, uncharted, but if she held to it firmly enough . . .
"The softest stuff in the world penetrates quickly the hardest." Her
mind was soft, her chains were hard.
In due course she became violently sick. Her stomach hurt
terribly, and her mental control gave way. She retched from the
bottom of her gut. But the plastic high was upon her, and the
pang of Kill-13 withdrawal was less intense. Plastic was canceling
out Kill-l3, at least partially.
Now was the time for tai-chi. The high was the same. The
High Was the Same. THE HIGH WAS THE SAME. Or at least so
close as made no difference. She didn't need the Demon-drug.
She didn't believe that, quite. But it was close, close.
Damn Striker! Damn his treachery for getting her into this.
No-this was not the occasion for hate. Kill-13 thrived on
hate. Forget the betrayer, concentrate on herself. "It is wisdom to
know others. It is enlightenment to know oneself."
She was on her way.
*
But the Hyena had a surprise for her that completely changed
the situation. "Are you ready to take out that oil refinery?" he
asked.
135
"Yes." She had resigned herself to that crime. Until she was
able to break completely with the Hyena, she must make no attempt
to balk him. She had been thoroughly trained for this mission,
and knew how to use every necessary weapon. "Weapons at
best are tools of bad omen, loathed and avoided by those of the Way."
But she had not yet mastered the Way.
"Forget it. You are going to Cuba."
"Cuba!"
"I'm expecting an arms shipment. Guns, ammunition, plastic
-all the things you have been trained to use. I can't go there
myself to pick it up. You will handle it instead. If there is trouble,
you know what to do."
She knew. Use the guns to wipe out the opposition, and C-3
to destroy the evidence. But perhaps she could get through with
minimum damage. "A skillful soldier is not violent . . ."
The Hyena gave her back just enough of her Demon capsules
to tide her through the period he had scheduled for the mission.
He didn't know she was now able to extend them.
She knew she would not return. He still had Danny, hidden
somewhere, but she would simply have to gamble on locating and

freeing her brother before the Hyena realized how weak his hold
on her had become.
"The arms will be smuggled aboard the ship that carries the
American judo team back from the judo meet in Havana. A man
named Jason Striker coaches that team. The Hyena looked grim,
even through his mask. "He will recognize you, so stay away from
him. If the weapons are found aboard the ship he will be blamed.
It is your job to get them loaded without his knowledge."
Interesting. Did he want her away from Striker because Striker
would suspect something, or because she might reveal Striker's
true complicity? No one in the Hyena's organization had ever implicated
Striker, yet Striker was turning up just where the Hyena
needed him. Coincidence? Or the secret backup man, present to
take care of any last minute foul-up or attempted betrayal? She
had to know.
 
136
She traveled with Mustapha, as his wife. Mustapha had been
invited to give an exhibition boxing match during the world judo
championships, another neat detail in the Hyena's scheme. The
truth, she was sure, was that the Hyena trusted no one. So he sent
several agents in, to check on each other.
But there was one great advantage to her in this mission. The
Cuban sifu who might help her was here. That was the Hyena's
third great mistake: he had sent her to the one man who might
release her from the drug Kill-13.
Still, Jason Striker . . . He had sent her and Danny into this.
Maybe he knew where Danny was hidden. The Hyena had ordered
her to stay clear of Striker, but she had no intention of doing
so. If he were guilty of this betrayal, she would kill him. But because
her mind was in doubt, and because she needed to learn
where Danny was, she would talk with him first. It might take a
lot of pain to make him divulge the secret, and she would enjoy
every minute of it.
Yet there was a hard core of misery in her. Why did it have to be
Striker? She had thought him an honest man.
If she bided her time and played her hand correctly, she could
accomplish everything at one stroke. Freedom from her addiction,
the rescue of her brother, and the deaths of all those who had
betrayed her. Then let the black revolution proceed; a lot of other
honkies might die before it ran its course.
But one mistake, and she would be finished.
Chapter 8
KI
"I come on my own mission-as you know," Ilunga said.
There was a loading on her words. I tried to study her, but her
face was now shadowed, and her short skirt showed her fine legs,
not her thoughts. "All I know is that I sent you to Mustapha for
help." I paused: "Mustapha-he's doing an exhibition match at
the judo meet. You came with him?"
She nodded slowly in the dark.
"Then it worked out! I'm glad. How's your brother?"
Her red eyes, black in the deep shadow, were like angry holes
in her face. "You do not know?"
I sensed something wrong. "Ilunga, I never found out. I called
Mustapha a couple of days later, but he said you had taken Danny
and gone, he didn't know where." I paused again. "But why would
he say that, if you were still with him?"
"Why, indeed," she murmured.
"I looked for you. I thought Danny might be in one of those
peer-pressure drug rehabilitation groups."
 
138
She laughed, unprettily, derisively.

"And why are you out here near our return ship?" I continued,
nettled. "Are you coming back with us?"
"Maybe."
"Well, three thugs just tried to mug me." Once again I paused.
"But you were watching! And you didn't help." I jumped away
from her, on guard now. "Were they with you?"
"Yes."
Something was fishy. "Why should you attack me? After I
helped you?"
"Helped me!" she cried sardonically. "You betrayed me to
Blakrev!"
"I what?"
"You sent me to Mustapha, right-hand man to the Hyena.
They've got Danny-and they've got me. That's why I'm here. So
we're on the same side now. But that won't stop me from killing
you." Something appeared in her hand: a gun.
I stood still. Blakrev-Mustapha-the Hyena? It was incredible!
I had never suspected such a triple connection. This was what
Luis had tried to warn me about; he must have had access to government
information. But I knew Ilunga well enough to know
that she wasn't fooling. "If you're with the Hyena, you're not on
my side! The man's an extortionist, a killer. I fought him once, but
he got away. Next time I'll finish him."
"You fought the Hyena?" She sounded amazed.
"Don't you remember? Just before you came to me at
Drummond's house. He was out to kill Drummond for balking
on the payment. I balked him. We're enemies now." This was my
first hint what the Hyena was using all that extorted money for.
Revolution!
"Why should I believe you?"
I shook my head. "Why should you doubt me? I never lied to
you before, and I'm not starting now. You saved my life. I thought
I was helping you. But you don't have to take my word for anything.
Just tell me where to find the Hyena, and you'll see whether
139
we're friends." The truth was, I was bitter about the American
judo team's humiliation, and the manner of it, and would have
welcomed a no-holds-barred brawl. What better opponent than
the Hyena?
"Uh-uh, honky! You'll report I contacted you, instead of staying
away from you, and he'll kill me. I've got only one way to go:
forward. You tell me now: where's my brother?"
Her brother-hostage to her cooperation. She was really on
my side, against the Hyena. But she didn't believe it. "Did the
Hyena tell you I was with him? Part of his organization?"
"No. I worked that out for myself."
"He didn't tell you, and I deny it, but you think we're both
lying?"
"I-don't know," she admitted.
"We're together, Ilunga," I said. "We're both against the Hyena.
Trust me, or shoot me." I was sure she would not shoot me
until she had resolved her doubt. "Call Mustapha. Ask him which
side I'm on."
"Another liar!" she snorted. "You don't know about the arms
shipment?"
"Arms shipment!"
She made a quick decision. "I'll show you."
At that moment two cars shot silently down the street toward
us. "That's Dulce bringing the G-2," I said.
"Move!" Ilunga snapped. "No noise." She gestured with the
gun.
Bewildered, I moved. I didn't fully comprehend her motive,
but I was sure she would shoot me if I balked. If she really believed
I had betrayed her to Blakrev . . .

We ran down an alley until we came to her Mercedes Benz,
another impressive evidence of the Hyena's connections, for there
were no cars available on a rental basis in Cuba. We got in and
took off, driving without lights. Her driving in the night was horrendous,
because of her lack of experience and her poor night vision;
we wandered back and forth across the road, ran stoplights,
 
140
and bucked a wheel over the curb a couple of times. I became very
nervous, especially since she was using one hand to hold the gun
on me.
"You could cover me better if I drove," I offered.
She ignored me and increased her speed. I didn't like this at
all, but that gun remained pointed unwaveringly at my head, and
I knew that it was more dangerous to my health than either the
Cuban secret police or an auto wreck. Ordinarily this would have
seemed to be a good time to attempt to disarm her, but I knew
that one reason she drove so badly was that she was paying close
attention to my every movement. Her eyes were not good, but her
other senses were far sharper than mine.
"Here," Ilunga said, and pulled to a stop before an old nondescript
house in a Vedado suburb. It was in front of a block-sized
park, across from a big fountain with a statue of the god Neptune
surrounded by date palms. Hardly a suspicious residence.
I saw then that this was on C Street, and house was 104. It
was an old home, with a garden in front and an ancient fence of
wrought iron. The entrance doors were big and tall, wide enough
for a horse and coach to pass through, with a massive bronze knocker.
"Knock," she said.
I knocked. After a long wait; the door opened and a man answered.
"Si?"
"Ilunga. I want to inspect the shipment," she said.
"Mustapha said no one could enter," the man replied in English.
"And who's this?"
"Jason Striker. I want him to see it."
"Striker! The boss gave orders that he was to be kept away at
all costs!" And suddenly the muzzle of another gun was swinging
toward me.
I danced aside, hoping Ilunga would not shoot me in the back.
But she concentrated on the other man. Her foot shot out, knocking
the gun from his hand. "I'll be responsible for Striker," she
said.
But in that moment of her preoccupation, I struck. I caught
141
her pistol, with one hand, pushed its slide back with the other
hand so that it could not fire, and twisted the weapon out of her
hand.
Then I returned it to her. "Call Mustapha," I said. "Get him
over here. If he's high up in Blakrev, he'll know whether I'm part
of the organization. It will be hard for him to lie, with me right
here; he can't let me go, after I've seen your cache-unless I am
your betrayer." I was playing a dangerous game, for if Ilunga didn't
kill me, Mustapha would. But I trusted her motive more, and
with her on my side . . .
She took the gun. "I'll do that. Get on inside."
But the man tried to intervene, grabbing me from behind. I
struck backward with my elbow, scoring on his solar plexus. Cowed,
he made no further protest.
We entered. The interior was not well kept; it was a vast
barnlike place, with big wooden beams supporting the roof and
flaking yellow paint on the walls. There were boxes with books all
about. One of the rooms we passed was lined from floor to ceiling
on all walls with books, and I could see sparrows nesting in the
rafters. There was also an interior patio. Evidently this house was

used as a temporary warehouse for literary supplies.
Hidden behind stacked boxes were some unmarked crates.
Ilunga put away her gun and handed me a crowbar. "Take a look."
I wedged in the point and began to pry. The lid of the first
crate squeaked up. I pried again, gaining leverage.
"What the hell is this?" a voice snapped behind me.
I froze. I knew that voice. Mustapha! How soon he had come!
He must have been only a few blocks away.
"All I want to know," Ilunga said evenly, "is whether this honky
is in this with us. So I'm showing him the cargo for his boat. We
can't conceal it without his cooperation."
"He's involved now," Mustapha muttered, covering me with
his gun.
"Not before?"
He faced her angrily. "Woman, why did you do it? He was my
 
142
friend, once. It was bad enough lying to him so as to trap you and
your brother; it'll be worse having to kill him!" He shook his head
grimly. His hand tightened on the gun. "I'm sorry, Jason. I really
am. I'm going to have nightmares about this. But there's no way
out-not with the Hyena."
He meant it. I braced for action, wondering which side Ilunga
was on now. If I had miscalculated-
"Let's take a look at that cargo first," Ilunga said. Her right
hand was on her head, her left on her hip. A large jangly metal
bracelet was on her left, that I hadn't noticed before. It was not her
way to wear ostentatious jewelry.
"I can shoot him before you move," Mustapha said. He was
suffering from no illusions about her propensities, either. "Then
I'd have to shoot you-if you move."
"You'll only get off one shot," she said. I knew that was true,
too; she'd have her knife out of her hair and into his body while he
was firing at me.
But Mustapha didn't seem fazed. "You may not recognize my
weapon," he said. I turned, slowly, to face him. He held a peculiar
revolver with a bulbous barrel. "It is a cyanide pellet gun. The
pellets penetrate the skin and cause instant death, no matter where
they hit. The Russian secret police use these, and they are extremely
effective."
"I recognize it," she said. "But you still won't have time to aim
twice."
Mustapha nodded. "I don't need to aim at all well. Chances
are fifty-fifty I could squeeze off the second after your knife hit me,
and touch you somewhere. But I see no purpose in having three
deaths. So it's an impasse. I'll compromise. We'll look at the cargo.
But it won't change a thing."
I went back to work on the crate, feeling an itch on that spot
on my back the cyanide pellet would strike. What would this accomplish?
I had been exonerated, but there was still a gun trained
on me-a more deadly one than before.
I unloaded the crate, then another. What a cache of weapons!
143
All captured American equipment. Naturally, I thought; Sovietmade
weapons would be immediately suspicious, betraying the
true origin of the "revolution." The first crate contained blocks of
C-3 plastic explosive. The second had detonator caps, rolls of fuse,
and similar apparatus. I handled these with extreme care, knowing
how dangerous they were. The third had fragmentation hand grenades
and incendiary devices. The fourth had M3 machine guns
with silencer barrels, .45 pistols, and similar weapons. There was
plenty of ammunition in the last crate.
I had a bright idea. I picked up a detonator cap in one hand,
and a box of C-3 explosive in the other. "Guess what will happen,"

I said, "if anything happens to me."
"He's right," Ilunga said, and I knew that this was what she
had had in mind. "Those caps are very touchy, and there's enough
plastic to blow apart this whole city block."
Actually, it was a bluff. I didn't know much about plastic explosive,
but suspected that the caps had to be properly prepared
and inserted in the plastic before they would set it off. Ilunga
surely knew this. But Mustapha didn't.
Mustapha nodded. "I can kill him, you can kill me, and he
can kill us all. It doesn't really change anything."
"So we'll chat bit," Ilunga said evenly. "Maybe we can come to
some sort of agreement that isn't quite as fatal." She glanced at me.
"What do you think of it?"
"If these are destined for the States, it's illegal," I said. "And
I'll bet they're not for the benefit of Blakrev or any other black
group. These guns would be for American communists. Why
should Fidel Castro arm the blacks, when communism's real aim is
to take over all the world-including the blacks?"
"What would you do with these, then?" she asked.
"I'd destroy them!" I said. "And if you knew where your real
interest lies, you'd help me."
"Would you destroy them, if we let you? By your own hand?"
"Yes!" I said. "I'd set fire to this house."
"Would you?"
 
144
What was she driving at? I shook my head. "No. I can't destroy
property wantonly. But I could carry the weapons out to the
sea and dump them."
"Listen, man, I can jostle that cargo as well as you can,"
Mustapha said. "So can she. My gun, her knife don't make any
difference." He holstered his cyanide pistol and approached the
cache. "But this looks like real cool iron."
I relaxed. He was right. Any action could destroy us all, now
that the crates were open and spread out. We could not afford to
fight; we all could lose. It wasn't just the plastic; the grenades
didn't need primers to explode.
Ilunga's hand dropped from her head. "Yes," she agreed.
Mustapha picked up a rifle and broke it open so as to fit a clip
into it. Oil dripped, from it. "Hey!" he exclaimed.
"They ship them oiled, stupid," Ilunga said. "They're still
usable."
"I know that! But there's something inside it." He fished out a
packet and twisted it open. White powder spilled out, falling to
the floor.
I stared. "That just might be-"
"Horse!" Ilunga said.
"Smack!" Mustapha echoed, shocked.
"Heroin!" I said. "So that's what your boss is really shipping."
Ilunga put one finger in the powder and touched it to her
tongue. She nodded affirmatively. "Pure shit."
Mustapha drew out a clip of ammunition, then several more.
"Look here!" he exclaimed.
We looked. The crate had only a thin layer of ammo on top;
the main part of it consisted of plastic bags of powder.
"Twenty million dollars street value!" Mustapha breathed. Of
course there was no immediate way to verify this estimate, but I
had a hunch it was close enough.
"The Hyena," I said, working it out as I spoke. "He's using
Blakrev as a cover for the really lucrative trade. Heroin. He doesn't
give a damn about black revolution. Hell, he's white himself. He
145
just wants the blacks to take the rap if the scheme is exposed. He
doesn't even touch the guns himself."

Ilunga's head lifted. "What's that?" She ran to the cobwebbed
window. "The G-2!" she cried.
"They traced us here!" I said. "We've got to run!" I knew a fight
would be futile; the G-2 would quickly have a small army of reinforcements.
"There's no percentage in this," Mustapha said. "Let's us call
it quits. You two get lost; I'll talk to the G-2."
I didn't know which side he was on, now. He was no drug
pusher, but he might still be loyal to the Hyena. In the circumstance,
it seemed best not to argue.
Ilunga and I ran out the back way. But the Cuban G-2 was
marvelously efficient. A spotlight blinded us. "ALTO!" a voice cried.
I halted, knowing better than to attempt to break in such
straits. But Ilunga staggered and fell to the ground. She rolled
back, her legs coming up, her thighs spreading. She was wearing a
short skirt so that her legs were exposed directly to the glare of the
spotlight, right up to the panties.
"Coo!" the voice exclaimed. The light wavered.
No wonder. She had no panties on. She was giving the G-2 an
eyeful seldom offered outside of a harem.
Then her arm moved. Something glinted in the beam, and
there was a hideous scream. The light slewed off into the sky.
She had hurled one of her little shuriken at the voice. Now I
realized that her heavy bracelet was not a hanging geegaw; the
decoration was a deadly throwing knife, ready to pull and heave. I,
like Mustapha, had thought her hair was the only place she kept
such weapons, a potentially fatal misjudgment.
We ran again. I let Ilunga lead the way, as she obviously knew
this area far better than I did. She jumped a low iron fence into the
porch of a neighboring house, forced open the old wooden door,
and ran up some rickety iron stairs. We leaped across the roof until
we reached the side of a modern apartment building. There was a
fire escape, and we climbed it. Then a short run, a death-defying
 
146
leap to a nearby building, and we were in another city block and
out of reach of the G-2, for we were among the maze-like warrens
of the azotas, upper roofs. We made another short run and jumped
across a narrow street, to fall on a smaller building in front. We
were, I discovered in mid-air, some eight stories high; there was an
auto moving far below, its headlights spearing forward through
the dark canyon of the street. I was frankly terrified.
Ilunga came to a small washing shed in the azotea. The door
was ajar and we crawled inside. The space was constricted, and we
were practically on top of each other. The roof was actually open to
the sky, but were wires strung across, full of hanging laundry that
provided some concealment from the view of plane or helicopter.
"We'll be safe here," she said. "For several hours, at least. Dogs
can't trace us. I know a better place, when it's safe to move."
"Good enough," I said. "Actually, I should be able to talk to
the Cuba authorities. I know one of their militia women-army
women, I mean."
"I saw her. You mean she's your friend?"
I made myself comfortable beside her, sharing the limited cover
of the laundry. Ironically, a pair of feminine panties hung right
above my face. "Don't act shocked. I know lots of women, and
some are quite attractive."
"She came as your friend? Not to snoop around the boat?"
"So that was it!" I said. "You saw her uniform, and thought
the Cuban authorities were after the arms!"
She nodded in the dark. "I didn't know it was you until I saw
you fight."
"But if this shipment was a communist plot, why should the
G-2 bother it?"
"That's one of the questions," she said. "Betrayals happen.

Maybe the G-2 was coming to make sure the shipment went
through. I stayed to watch, just in case."
If so, we would get little comfort from the Cuban authorities.
We had tried to destroy that shipment, and certainly we would
expose the presence of the heroin. But it could be; I had not been
147
in trouble until I got near that arms cache, and then trouble had
come looking for me, as though the G-2 had known all along
where the cache was. "So you were trying to get the arms shipment
through on schedule."
"Uh-uh, honky. I was going through the motions, so the Hyena
wouldn't kill my brother."
"Then why did you bother to talk with me? The worst I could
have done was expose the shipment, and you didn't care about
that."
She was silent for a time. "Do you know how he died?"
There was a slight accent on "he," and somehow it telegraphed
her meaning. "Kobi Chija, my fiancee's father? He was ambushed
by the Demons in a taxi." It was a bitter memory, seemingly irrelevant,
but I knew that Ilunga had a purpose in bringing it up.
"I learned the details later," she said. "I thought you would
want to know, but we never had a chance to talk."
True enough. Ilunga had been a Demon then, and she and I
had been enemies in our fashion. We hadn't talked much when we
met. And I had been set to marry Chiyako, beautiful daughter of
the Chinese Northern Shaolin kung fu instructor, Kobi Chija.
"The Demons wanted to recruit you," Ilunga said. "They
thought that if they captured your fiancee, you would have to join
them. So the order went out to bring them both in, father and
daughter. Alive, because they knew you would never be swayed by
more killing. With the girl hostage-"
I began to see the relevance. Ilunga's brother had been kidnapped
and held hostage to her cooperation, and I had seemed to
be implicated. Before, it had been my fiancee Chiyako kidnapped,
to put pressure on me, and I had thought Ilunga had been party
to that. I had been ready to kill her. Yes I could understand her
feelings, this time around.
"So they set an ambush for Kobi and Chiyako," she continued.
And I listened intently, for this dreadful knowledge was vital
to me. I had had enormous respect for the old kung fu sifu, and I
had loved his daughter. As Ilunga spoke, in the gloom of that
 
148
lonely rooftop refuge, I visualized the nightmare as it had happened.
*
Chiyako, dark-eyed, fair-skinned, lovely despite her bandaged
breast, sat in the taxi beside her father. A treacherous broken-bottle
attack had almost torn off her left breast and put her in the hospital,
but now she was coming home.
The taxi stopped for a light. Suddenly another car pulled up
beside it, and a gun poked out from its right window into the face
of the cabbie. "Stay where you are!" a harsh voice said.
Kobi looked, and saw the blazing orange eyeballs of a Demon
high on Kill-13. For an instant the Shaolin sifu tensed for action.
But he knew he could not act in time to prevent that gun from
going off. The cabbie would die, and so, probably, would Chiyako.
No victory would be worth such a price.
So Kobi surrendered. He and his daughter got out of the cab,
which drove off with alacrity the moment the Demons gave the
word. Now it would be possible to fight, for there were no more
than six Demons. But again he refrained, for Chiyako, though
versed in martial art and possessed of discipline and courage, was
not well. She could still die in the fracas, and it was not worth that
risk. Also, he hesitated to initiate violence; he was a man of peace,

and perhaps these Demons intended no harm. That chance was
slight, after the threats they had made against him, but so long as
it was a possibility . . .
"Into the car," the Demon-leader ordered. "Her, not you,
chink!" He shoved Kobi back roughly.
Kobi almost acted then. He saw his daughter pause, on the
verge of crippling the Demon with a swift blow. They could put
away two of the men before the others reacted, then take out two
more in the next few seconds. But the odds were still adverse.
Only a fool attacked a man with a gun. He did not want to be
149
separated from his daughter. But until he was sure of their intent,
or had opportunity act without risk to Chiyako . . .
So he desisted, and she, acknowledging his decision, got into
the first car. Kobi was taken to the second. He sat in the back seat
between two Demons, with two more in front. The first car sped
away.
The Demon to his right drew a knife 'Now, old man . . ." the
addict said. Suddenly Kobi was sure they intended to kill him and
use his daughter to nullify Jason Striker. There was no mercy in
them. First the capture, then the separation, then murder.
They had taken the old man's acquiescence for cowardice. Had
any of them fought him before, they would have known better.
But none of them had, for the simple reason that no Demons had
survived their previous encounter with him. Now, at least he could
act without imperiling Chiyako; the Demons in her car would not
know what transpired here until too late. The addicts, in separating
father and daughter, had made a tactical mistake.
The knife was hovering near his face. The Demon was grinning;
he was going to entertain himself with a little innocent torture
before finishing the job. Demons felt very little pain themselves,
but their heightened perceptions could appreciate it in others.
No doubt they liked to see blood flow, to hear the music of a
victim's screams of agony as the mutilation proceeded. Demons
had little sexual appetite; their drives were sublimated in sadism.
Kobi had, over the past few weeks, searched for some redeeming
feature of Kill-13 addiction, but apart from the immediate physical
lift, he had found none. The humane qualities of the addict
seemed to be suppressed, the bad ones exaggerated, in a kind of
Jekyll/Hyde metamorphosis. Even common sense and proper caution
were blunted by the drug, as now.
Kobi suddenly drove sideways with his elbow. It was a Chinese
atemi blow. Its force, crushing muscle and nerve against bone
with deadly precision, permanently incapacitated the Demon. Even
without pain, the man could not withstand the destruction of his
 
150
nervous system, and his body reacted automatically, falling forward.
Simultaneously, Kobi swung his hand past the knife of the
other and connected to his temple. In that hand the old man held
a tiny weapon, overlooked by the Demons: a yawara stick, like a
hardwood dumbbell grooved to fit the fingers. Though only a few
inches long it provided a hard surface-and under the force of that
blow, the Demon's temple crumpled like an eggshell. The knife
dropped from abruptly flaccid fingers.
Then Kobi struck with his yawara to the neck of the driver,
the wood jamming where the neck joined the head. The blow
caused a massive hemorrhage of the cerebellum. The driver died
instantly.
The car swerved and crashed against the curb, but the fourth
Demon, with his drug-induced reflexes, had time to fire his gun.
Even as the sound of the shot blasted in the confines of the car,
Kobi was going down, his forehead smashing into the crotch of
the Demon on his left.

The car bucked over the curb and sideswiped a building on
the right. Glass shattered; the side stove in. The Demon with the
gun was caught in that crush as the car slowed to a stop.
From the wreckage only Kobi emerged, for only he had been
trained to survive such violence. His right arm was broken, and
there was a slash down his back where the bullet had grazed him.
Only in storybooks and bad novels do heroes tackle superior odds
and emerge unscathed, particularly where guns are involved. In
life there are wounds for the just as well as the unjust.
But there was a third Demon car, behind. It screeched to a
stop. Kobi ran for it-not away, for there could be no escape from
their bullets-but toward the car. Two Demons scrambled out
and started shooting at him, but there was no time to aim properly,
and this time he actually did beat the odds and reached them
without sustaining another injury. He bowled one over with his
shoulder, then with his good hand grasped the throat of the other.
Kobi was an expert in Northern Shaolin kung fu, the most
151
deadly of the complex of Chinese martial arts. Though he always
sought peace, he could, literally, kill a man with the strike of one
finger. When he got his hand on the Demon, that Demon was
doomed.
But the addicts of Kill-13 were not ordinary-thugs. Their
strength and reflexes were far better than those of any normal person,
and the drug gave them a berserker courage. And this Demon
still had his gun.
He put that gun to the side of Kobi's face, quickly, like the
motion of a rat-trap springing shut, and pulled the trigger. Kobi's
deadly nails tore his larynx out, but the bullet smashed upward
through the soft part of the jaw and on through the brain and out
the top of Kobi's head.
*
"And that was it," Ilunga finished "He took six Demons with
him, that old man, but he died, his brains splattered across the
sidewalk. The others took the bodies away and covered the traces,
so there was no police report. And of course they had the girl."
I nodded in the dark. "I appreciate your telling me," I said,
smarting from the knowledge, for that old wound was deep. But
now I had confirmation of what I had believed, that Kobi Chija,
my prospective father-in-law, had acquitted himself with honor.
His life could never be recovered, but the pride of his memory was
essential.
"You know why I told you," she said.
"Yes."
"I suspected you, as you suspected me, then. But I never betrayed
you, though we were enemies."
"And I never betrayed you," I said. "And we are not enemies,
now."
"I guess I knew that all along, but I didn't know I knew. You're
a honky, and-"
"And you hate all honkies," I finished for her.
 
152
"I did hate honkies. But since I studied Tao, I can't get the old
edge on it any more. 'God's Way is gain that works no harm.'
That's from the Lao Tzu. I wish-"
"Kobi was wrong in one thing," I said. "Kill-13 addiction does
not convert a good man into an evil one. It only accentuates traits
within that man, and stifles his inhibitions. You retained your
good qualities, and the Demon leaders had intelligence and integrity.
When I learned of the abduction of my fiancee, you comforted
me instead of taking advantage of my shock. There was that
in you that responded to my need. I never forgot that favor."
She spat viciously to the side. "Shit, Striker! You don't know a

thing! I never did anything for you."
But I understood her. I had complimented her and thanked
her for the aid she had rendered during the Demon adventure,
and she was constitutionally unable to accept such appreciation
gracefully. That Tao training obviously had affected her profoundly,
but the negative passions of a lifetime could not be reversed overnight
Her emotion was ambivalent, but powerful.
Racism was deeply ingrained in her; it was part of her nature.
She had been mob-raped as a child by white men, and ridiculed
by white policemen when she sought justice, simply because she
was black. Her whole life thereafter had been dedicated to revenge
against the white man. Now she had been used again, by the Hyena.
How could she profess any respect for any white man?
Yet she had taken the trouble to tell me of the abduction of
my fiancee and the murder of Kobi. On one level it could be interpreted
as a desire to hurt me, for the news was undeniably painful.
But on the deeper level, this was Ilunga's way of apologizing for
believing I had betrayed her. And an excellent way it was.
"I studied Tao to try to get off Kill-13," she said. "But I didn't
make it."
"I thought Kill-13 addiction was incurable," I said.
"You got off it."
"I wasn't really on it," I said, realizing I had been tactless. I
153
had had one sniff forced on me, and had suffered a hell of a high,
but in my case, one sniff did not an addict make.
"You would have been an addict, if you hadn't had some way
to stop it," she insisted. "What did you do?"
I saw she meant it. She thought I had some secret remedy, and
she really wanted to know what it was, so that she could use it
herself. "It isn't what I did, it's what I am," I said carefully. "Drug
addiction comes to the disadvantaged, the emotionally insecure,
the ones with seemingly overwhelming problems. They need an
escape, and drugs are the easiest way, short term. I've had a better
life. I was raised in a happy home, and I did well enough in school.
I like my profession, instructing judo and karate. I have no reason
to escape my life. I'm not bored or hungry or dissatisfied. So for
me the drug euphoria is no temptation. But you-well, if I'd had
your background, I'd be an addict too. Don't get me wrong. But
you never had the chances I had because you're a woman and your
skin is black."
"And when you lost your fiancee?" she asked softly.
Just like that, she punctured my glowing balloon, turned the
knife in my gut. Expertly, with no warning. Now there was no
way out but the truth. "I wanted to die. I would have died, if you
hadn't dragged me out, you bitch."
"That was when you had your sniff of Kill-13," she reminded
me. "There was your escape from grief. Why didn't you take it?"
"I hated Kill-l3 and its Demon cult," I said. "I destroyed it,
and I'd do it again ten times over, and still not be satisfied. They
killed my love."
"I hate Kill-13 too," she said. "And my brother may die because
of it. How did you get off it?"
She was forcing me into admissions I had never made before. I
had been a setup for addiction, in that circumstance, by my own
definition. Without my fiancee, Chiyako, my life was meaningless;
color, sex, and job satisfaction were irrelevant. Yet I had escaped
the power of the drug. "I think it was the ki," I said at last.
The ki-that mysterious inner force, indefinable yet potent,
 
154
so hard to master. Hiroshi the aikido sensei had it, but few others
could do more than talk about it.
"You believe in the ki?" she asked.

"I was a skeptic once, but one day a man showed me its power
He was a sixty-year-old little philosopher, but as formidable a martial
artist as I have ever known. Hiroshi--he was the one I intended
to refer you to for help with Danny, had he not been too far away,
in Japan. The normal laws of the universe seem to apply to him
only imperfectly. With ki, a man can do things . . . I can't explain
it, really."
"This ki stopped the drug," she said.
"Yes. I can't describe it better than that."
"Teach me the ki."
"I can't. Don't you see, I don't have perfect command of it
myself. It comes with need-sometimes-but it's involuntary."
"Feel my face," she said.
Perplexed, I ran my hand over her black hair in the dark and
found her black face. It was slick with moisture.
I froze, my hand across her closed eyes, those red Demon eyes.
It seemed impossible, but there was only one explanation. This
tough, emotionless woman-she was crying.
And she had let me know. That was as incredible as the act.
Ilunga could kill without scruple; she had done so many times. If
ever she should cry, it would never be before a honky. Unless she
were moved by something more fundamental than I had yet appreciated.
Her captive brother, her Tao training, her determination to
break the unbreakable addiction of the Demon drug-she was not
the vicious woman I had known; she was at the breaking point.
She had humbled herself to ask me for help, again.
It humbled me. I knew what this display had to have cost her.
And I had to respond. This was an emergency as real as that of any
combat. I felt it right through to the core of my being.
And from that core came the ki. It rose in me like a living tide,
spreading from my hara, the seat of my soul in my body, growing
155
until it became a pulsing sphere of raging forces. Up, up through
my viscera, my muscles, my arms, suffusing me with its unique
power. It pulsed out through my hand that rested across her bloodshot
eyes, and it entered her body. It was as though my hand
glowed, and her head glowed under it, receiving that subtle charge.
Ki-the invincible, all-permeating force, animating the ultimate
resources of mind and body. It engulfed us both, that secret essence
of miracles.
But it left us calm in the center of its sphere, like the eerie
stillness at the eye of a hurricane. It has been said that with ki you
may move for a few seconds outside the normal time continuum,
projecting your mind to infinity. This may be true; I really could
not tell, for the power was not anything I controlled. I was only its
vehicle.
Then it passed. The erratic force left me, and I shivered in the
night, feeling a nakedness that no clothing could abate. Had it
shown her, had it somehow helped her? I could not know.
For perhaps twenty minutes she lay there in silence. Then,
abruptly, she sat up. "Got a match?" she asked.
A match-to heat a pellet of Kill-13 into vapor for inhalation?
"Don't do it, Ilunga!" I cried, the weight of failure abruptly
heavy on my soul.
"'It is wisdom to know others,'" she said, and I knew she was
quoting from Lao Tzu. "'It is enlightenment to know one's self.'"
She paused. "Strike a match, hold it to my face, tell me what you
see."
I found a match and lighted it. I don't smoke, and have few
occasions to start a fire, but there are assorted oddities in my pockets
like matches and paper clips, don't ask me why. I brought the
light to her head, seeing the white of her eyeballs reflected in the
black of her face. She seemed serene; even her broken nose seemed
straighter, healed. She looked back at me, unblinking, silent. But

her seeming peace was the effect of the shadow; what was it that
she wanted me to observe?
The match burned low, scorching my fingers, and I dropped
 
156
it. We were in darkness again.
Then it came to me. "Your eyes!" I exclaimed. "I saw the whites
of your eyes!"
The telltale mark of Demon addiction was gone.
She leaned toward me, her hand catching my shoulder, pulling
me about. "I love you," she said. "You have made me whole."
I opened my mouth to demur, but she closed it with a deep
kiss. Then I knew that the ki had animated her, providing that last
impetus she required to break the addiction. She had no other way
to respond to it, in this first flash of its ambiance. She loved me-
because she loved the world. That nucleus of hate that had fashioned
her into a cold killer, that had made her hate herself, made
her prey to the drug-that thing was gone, melted by the ki. I had
not been the cause, only the instrument. The power obeyed its
own imperative.
With this understanding came acceptance. Ki had saved me
before, more than once. Now, perhaps, it had saved her. There was
no experience like it; we both were children under its beneficence.
And so we made love, there on the roof, with the stars shining
through the laundry above us, while the Cuban G-2 quested in
vain. We made love, not as white to black, not even as man to
woman, but as a merging of equals, united by the amazing quality
of the ki. Not since I lost my fiancee had I experienced anything
like it.
Chapter 9
FIDEL
When we were assured that the chase had subsided, we descended
and made our way across Havana by foot. By this time,
we knew, the G-2 had ascertained our identities and comprehended
that we had tried to destroy the weapons shipment. Mustapha
might have saved himself by blaming us-and quite possibly he
had not had to lie to do it. We could not return to our former
roles; they would arrest us on sight, and hold us on one pretext or
another until the arms and heroin were delivered. And then-
they might execute us.
Oh, there would be a stink, about me, at least. But totalitarian
governments were accustomed to getting away with such things.
If they could get rid of me secretly, they could deny any knowledge
of my whereabouts, and who could prove otherwise? It wasn't
as though Cuba had any great concern for the opinion of gringo
America. After all, more than twenty American citizens had met
the dreaded paredon, the execution wall, at Cabanas prison alone.
Many Yankees languished in Cuban jails, disillusioned about the
 
158
protective aura of American citizenship. "You can't do this to me!
I'm an American . . ."
I was destined to share some such fate. All because I had
stumbled across that illicit arms and drug shipment. Yet there was
merit in it, for it had united me with Ilunga.
She guided me to the kwoon of the sifu she had been seeing in
Cuba. We walked for a long time, till we hit Havana's Chinatown.
We were right in the center of the street, Zanja, with old ramshackle
buildings crowded together, Chinese laundries, fruit stalls
and vegetable stands. Even at this late hour there were faces peering
at us from the windows, old male faces.
We entered an old building. On the ground floor there was an
authentic Chinese restaurant, the Pacifico, with several more old
men lounging around the entrance despite the predawn hour.

Above was the small kwoon and room of the sifu. It could be
reached by an old open-cage elevator with wire around the upper
portion, or by a staircase. We used the stair. There had not been
time for the sifu to help her fight her addiction, and now there was
no need; but she believed he would hide us. At least until I could
contact the Swiss Embassy and arrange to get out of the country.
It was now early morning, but we had no choice; we couldn't wait
for an afternoon appointment.
But Sifu Tuh Hsin-wu was there, and seemed to be expecting
us. He was in his late seventies, very small and thin, standing
about five feet two inches tall. His skin was like yellow parchment,
taut across his cheekbones yet hanging flaccid on his arms. He was
completely hairless; and his teeth were rotten stumps. He was
smoking an opium pipe whose sweet odor permeated the room.
This habit of Chinese martial artists appalled me, yet many of
them did it. He had the dreamy look of the lifetime addict.
"I see you do not approve," he said to me.
Was I to insult the man who might help me? "Your ways are
not mine. Perhaps with greater understanding I would see it otherwise."
"You Americans put undue stress on appearances."
159
"No doubt," I agreed.
"Sifu Tuh is dying of cancer," Ilunga murmured to me. "The
opium gives him relief from the pain. He has smoked it for fifty
years."
More than pain relief was involved, then, I thought. Fifty years!
I have lived a long satisfying life," Sifu Tuh said equitably "My
one remaining desire is to die in honest combat, not from the
debilitations of disease." He shrugged. "'The Wise Man's mind is
free.'"
I recognized another quotation, probably from the Lao Tzu.'
Ilunga had really been exposed to this Taoist philosophy, and it
had benefited her in more than the relief from addiction.
A child appeared, evidently some kind of servant. "Master, it
is time to cook the rice," he said.
Sifu Tuh nodded. He went to a closet and brought out a twentyfive-
pound sack. He held it above the kettle with his left hand,
and drove the extended fingers of his right hand at it, once, twice,
three times.
It was, as though his fingers were knives. At every stroke his
hand plunged into the sack, making a neat incision. Rice poured
out.
This was a true sifu, all right. I could not have done that trick;
my fingers would have snapped off.
He gave the pot to the boy, who hauled it away. It was for the
restaurant below, I surmised; the sifu could hardly consume so
large an amount in one meal.
I sensed that this display was not idle; he hardly needed to
open the bag in this fashion in my presence. Probably he felt he
had lost face because of my disapproval of his opium habit. He
had not had cancer fifty years ago, so had needed no pain-killer
then. So now he wanted to gain my respect with this exhibition.
"Lift me," he said. I put my hands to his elbows, knowing he
could not weigh more than a hundred pounds. I heaved upward-
and he did not budge. It was as though he weighed five hundred
 
160
pounds. It was another demonstration, and I had to go along, for
we needed his help. But I was impressed.
I desisted, shaking my head. "I will show you how it is done,"
Tuh said. He led the way to the roof, and held some rice in the
palm of his hand. A sparrow flew down to eat. When the rice was
gone, the bird tried to fly away, but evidently could not. Yet it did
not seem to be injured. "When it seeks to fly, I hear its energy and

yield, so that it has no base from which to launch itself," he explained.
"Even so the proper yielding can prevent a man from
being lifted."
He let the bird go. Yes, I was impressed.
Then Tuh put his arm out straight to the side. "Bend it down,"
he suggested.
At this point I knew the resistance I would meet. I went ahead
and tried. I put pressure on the arm, to force it down, and of
course it would not go.
Then I felt the ki again, unbidden, flowing into my own arms.
Slowly I forced the arm down.
"Ah," he murmured, undismayed. "I feel that! You have some
ch'i yourself! I thought I perceived it in her, and I wondered at its
source." He gestured to Ilunga, who smiled. That was another
thing: now she smiled, whereas in the past she had only bared her
teeth.
"It has no source," I said. "It infuses whatever it will."
"True, true!" he agreed. "But give it time. If the will is concentrated,
the vital energy will follow it. Will is of the highest importance,
vitality stands second. Do not seek in your vitality for what
you do not find in your heart. What you have is untrained, but it
is very strong. It has made a woman of her."
"It wasn't just the ki the ch'i," Ilunga said. "He-"
"It was to cure the addiction," I said quickly. This hardly seemed
the occasion to rehash our rooftop liaison. "She needed that extra
push."
Tuh nodded, not pursuing the matter. He had recovered his
face, and did not choose to make me lose mine. We had a leisurely
161
breakfast of Chinese herb tea, fragrant and tasting of mint, boiled
rice with fish heads and chunks of lobster, and lotus seed cookies.
Evidently the restaurant below took good care of the sifu's dietary
needs. Tuh told us how he had been sixteen at the fall of the Manchu
Empire in China in 1912, and quite involved in the secret societies
of the time, as well as in the Chinese underground. Later, when
China fell to the communists, he migrated to Cuba, only to have
it, too, fall.
"But here they tolerate me and my habit," he said, taking
another puff of his opium. "So long as I do not publicize my way
of life or my beliefs. And I am old, and soon to die. I take no joy in
quarrels."
The boy dashed in. "Master!" the lad cried breathlessly. "The
G-2 are coming!"
Ilunga and I jumped, alarmed. "They traced us here already!"
I said. "God, they're efficient!"
Tuh walked to the wall and took down a red silk kimono with
mystical signs embroidered on it in gold, "I have been expecting
them. I will delay them while you depart."
"Sifu!" I protested. "This is not your concern. You said you
take no joy in quarrels."
Tuh, garbed; now took down two kung fu swords: one a long
chien, the other a broad tao. I marveled privately that the same
name applied to both a sword and a philosophy of peace. "True.
But this quarrel is necessary, and it is to be my last. 'A brave man
who dares to, will kill; a brave man who dares not, spares life; and
from them both come good and ill.' If they will desist, there will
be no bloodshed, and that is good. Otherwise, it is a fitting way
for an old warrior to end."
A brave man who dares not, spares life. An interesting thought.
Sometimes it did take more courage not to kill.
Yet it was preposterous, this ancient, ill bag of bones standing
up to the brutal, armed thugs of the G-2! I had seen the sifu's
demonstration of skills, and felt the power of his ch'i, but still . . .
"Yes, the ch'i," he said. "Yours must be preserved, for it has not

 
162
flowered yet." Startled, I looked at him. Could he read my mind?
There was a loud banging on the wooden door, Ilunga and I
drew back into shadowed recesses, unable to get away unseen, and
uncertain whether it was honorable to flee. This was our fight.
Tuh opened the door and stepped to one side. Four men charged
in, carrying drawn metralletas, Czech 9mm submachine guns, faster
but less accurate than the M-3. One carried a 9mm pistol. One
man fired at a shadow; the bullet thudded into the wall near my
head. Trigger-happy!
Tuh's long sword danced in the air, coming at the last of the
four as he crashed in. The man's head flew off, but the decapitated
body remained upright, grotesquely spouting blood.
The others turned as their comrade toppled, bringing their
weapons to bear. The barrel of a submachine gun swung toward
Tuh's torso. But it was toward this man that the awful corpse fell,
and he pumped a dozen bullets into that body before realizing
that it was not the enemy. Then Tuh's broadsword slashed across,
sending sparks from the barrel as it struck, cutting into the man's
raised forearm, and finally embedding itself in the man's side. His
spinal column was severed; he too fell.
Tuh was already hurdling the collapsing bodies, his free sword
leading. The third man got the point directly in his solar plexus.
The fourth was firing now, but he was already too late. Tuh's
foot lashed out, tripping him. Tuh's razor-nailed fingers ripped
into his crotch, emasculating him. No rice, this time . . .
It had all taken perhaps twenty seconds. Four men were dead
or incapacitated, by this tiny ill bag of bones! But that was pa-kua,
the Taoist-derived boxing.
Tuh looked back, spying us. "Now it is safe to go. There will
be no pursuit."
But coming down the hall from the staircase were two more
men with guns drawn. Tuh took a pronged spear from the wall,
the ko mo, with a second blade placed at right angles to the iron
head. He hurled it with such force that it impaled both men.
Through the open door behind him I saw the elevator rising
163
with another load of troops. The gate opened, and the new men
spied the carnage. Guns lifted, but the men were still jammed in
the elevator, unable to take proper aim because of their own jostling.
There were five of them.
Tuh turned, ran to the door, and stooped momentarily over
the bleeding bodies. His hand flashed-and a red spray of blood
fanned out to strike the crowded men. The effect must have been
more psychological than physical, for the spray was too thin to
blind them. It was as if some unseen force had momentarily pushed
them back. Could this be the fabulous "sand palm?" Hands toughened
by immersion in sand . . .
Tuh launched himself through the air in a prodigious leap. It
was as though he were a great bright bird taking off, or a red kite,
for his kung fu tunic fluttered. And in that instant I wondered: he
had been able to make himself too heavy to lift by the power of his
ch'i; could he also reverse that force, to make himself light enough
to fly? The notion was fantastic, yet I could not entirely discount
it.
He hit the open cage of the elevator, not giving the men a
chance to spread out. Yet the air was filled with bullets, forcing
Ilunga and me to upend the table and hide behind it. I put my
arm around her automatically, as though she were a frail girl, and
she did not protest. Tuh must have been hit twenty times, but he
never stopped. All the men went down, and he was in their midst,
rolling on the floor. He was screaming, and they were screaming,
but his was the scream of the predator, theirs the prey. Those deadly

hands were doing their work, those rice-bag slicers. Like knives
they flashed, going in and out of living flesh, cutting their way
through. It was as if instead of muscle and bone they were meeting
paper dolls. It was the terrible dragon's-claw effect, the result of
decades of harsh training, of throwing empty jars up into the air
and catching them with the fingers, and gradually filling the jars
with more and more sand, increasing their weight. In the course of
time, the hands became incredibly strong. And it was also his
mastery of ch'in-na, the Chinese atemis, that enabled this wounded
 
164
little man to inflict death so readily. Each of his opponents had
been hit with at least two death-dealing blows; his fingers had
terrible strength and were capable of snapping bones as if they
were twigs. That, too, was the result of specialized exercise: twisting
bamboo and similar finger drills. Each finger was as rigid as a
little spear as it stabbed at vital spots. The long sharp nails passed
right through eyeballs and into the brain.
And it was over. Tuh expired as he completed his effort, and
lay amid the corpses of his opponents.
He had died as he wanted to die, in honorable combat. He
had given his life to preserve ours. There was nothing we could do
but accept.
"I have an address," I said, remembering what Luis had said
that evening at the restaurant. How could he have anticipated
this? "La Experanza in Pinar del Rio. Tomas the Fisherman."
"Pinar del Rio!" she exclaimed. "That's a hundred miles from
Havana, over the mountains!"
Geography was never my strong subject; I had somehow
thought it was closer. "It's all I have," I said. "Havana's no good for
us now, anyway."
"Cuba's no good for us!" she agreed. "Well, we can walk. But if
I run out of the drug, we're in trouble."
I stared at her. "Kill-13?"
She shook her head violently. "What am I thinking of! I'm off
the Demon! I don't need the drug anymore."
The habits of years were not simply forgotten. She might be
off the drug, but she wasn't cured, yet. She had told me how she
had eaten plastic explosive to fight off the addiction, and studied
Tao. My ki had helped her, but drug addiction is no patsy. Only a
long, consistent abstinence can truly break it. There are no miracle
cures, no easy ways. The addict has to suffer the long, hard route
to freedom.
But I would knock her out and tie her up before I allowed her
to take another sniff of Kill-13. If she could only resist the urge for
it now, that urge would decrease with time, until the longings
165
became phantoms and finally departed entirely. If I could get her
to destroy her remaining supplies of the drug, it would be impossible
for her ever to become re-addicted.
We walked. We didn't dare solicit any rides, for we knew the
efficiency of the G-2. We were both in good condition; even traveling
cross-country and foraging for food, we figured we could do
at least twenty miles a day, and make it to Pinar del Rio in five
days.
But we got a ride anyway. A friendly farmer stopped, and we
were unable to decline without giving away our language handicap
and betraying our origins. So we piled on the back of the truck
with nods grunts of thanks, and piled off again two hours later
when he slowed for a steep hill. It did give us a healthy start on our
journey.
The country was beautiful. We trekked through the Valle de
Pinales, a big valley with small mountains covered by pine forest,
called mogotes, full of caves. But daytime travel was no good; this

was settled country, and the risk of discovery was too great. We hid
in clumps of sugar cane or crawled under the ubiquitous spiny
maribu bush.
We slept together and fought off her sieges of withdrawal; when
the pangs became intolerable I wrestled her down and made love
to her instead, and, odd as it may seem, this therapy helped. Her
need for the drug was partly based on her need for love, and sexual
expression is a form of love.
During the second day we crossed a chill river, and she suffered
another pang of withdrawal. Her hand went to her hair. I
leaped on her and shoved her head under the water while I clawed
at her hair with the fingers of my other hand. A package of something
was dislodged, and it floated away in the current.
Ilunga fought her way to the surface and gave a single despairing
cry, as though she had been stabbed. But I hung on to her,
preventing her from going after the package. She could have crippled
me with a blow but she did not; not one of her motions was directed
at me personally. She knew what I was doing, and deep
 
166
inside she really wanted me to prevail. And when she saw that
there could be no recovery of the drug, she turned to me, and
kissed me, and we made love there in the water, only our heads
above it. The river was so cold my hands and feet were numb, but
where we touched each other our skins were burning hot, and our
kisses were desperately passionate. In the delirium of the climactic
ecstasy, it seemed as if the water must boil away!
That slow trek through the Valle de Pinales was as uplifting an
experience as I can remember. But alas, it was not to endure. Next
day we heard the baying of dogs, and knew the G-2 was on our
trail again. It was the dread peinazo, a massive pursuit by hundreds
of men, cutting off all escape, combing through every square
yard of the terrain.
"Maybe we can hide," I said without real hope "If we can fool
the dogs . . ." I cast about. "It's the sweat-impregnated leather of
our shoes they smell."
We tried. We re-entered the river and swam downstream as far
as we dared, then ditched our footgear and fashioned massive bandages
of leaves and vine. With luck, the scent would be muted
enough to lose the dogs, and the men would assume we had gone
further down the river.
We limped to a mogoto and entered a cave. There we hid,
huddled in the deepest recess, listening to the milling of the throng.
They had lost our trail!
Once again we made love. It was as though we had a lot of
catching up to do. The fading drug-hunger was no longer an excuse;
proximity was enough. I had lost count of the times we had
done it.
Then, probably by accident, a dog sniffed at the entrance to
our cave. Our sweaty odor had become intense in that confined
space. I saw the hound's ears perking up; then he opened his mouth
to give cry.
One of Ilunga's stilettoes shot into that open mouth and the
dog fell over backward, its palate and brain pierced. But now we
167
had to move, for we would be rats in a trap. "I'd rather die fighting!"
Ilunga muttered, and I agreed.
We emerged, quickly scooped a grave with our hands, and
buried the dog so as to hide the evidence. We climbed the hill. We
could not risk that cave any more. What one dog could sniff, others
would too.
A man rose up out of the brush. I caught him with a fast
whipping inverted uraken or back-fist to the pit of the stomach.
He crumpled unconscious and we went on.

At the top we looked out, and saw a veritable army surrounding
us. There were at least five thousand men spread out below.
The first in a row of five big mortars fired, and an incendiary
shell, white phosphorus, exploded a hundred yards from us. It
showered the surrounding area with its deadly beautiful spray,
like falling stars-but stars that burned to the bone with a fire no
water could quench.
"God, I hate those!" I muttered. "I've seen what phosphorus
can do to a man, burning the flesh right off his bone, and nothing
in the world can stop it."
Then a voice blared out, from a power megaphone. "Surrender,
gringos!"
"Gringos!" Ilunga snorted derisively. Perhaps this was the first
time she had been seriously lumped with American whites.
"We have your range," the voice cried. "Surrender, or we will
blast you!"
"They've got us," I said. "They could drop a round on our
heads."
"I always knew they would," Ilunga said. "But I wanted this
time with you. It's been real nice, honky."
I knew that she had never said that to a white man before, not
without heavy sarcasm. "Yes, nice," I agreed. It had been more
than nice. I felt a lump in my throat.
And so we surrendered.
 
168
*
We were taken by car to one of the suburbs of Havana. I expected
interrogation and possibly execution, but we were not
roughly treated. We were given a chance to clean up, then were
taken to another house.
There were men all over, armed and alert. This was a real center
of activity, all right. We were brought to a large room ringed
with guards, and I knew that it would be impossible to fight our
way clear of this though we were not tied or drugged. What were
they going to do with us?
A large man sat in a Cuban sillon, a big rocking chair with a
foam cushion, before a massive mahogany table. He was bearded,
sweaty, and tired-looking, about forty-five years old. He had a big
Havana cigar in his mouth, and beside him was a bottle of Spanish
cognac. His unkempt appearance was in contrast to the military
neatness of the guards. Some lesser interrogation officer, I judged;
one day he would get himself canned for his failure to uphold
military dignity of dress. But at the moment we were in his power.
"Welcome, Jason Striker!" he exclaimed in passable English,
putting forth one big hand. I considered rejecting it, but realized
that the gesture would be futile. Little men had big egos, and we
were in enough trouble already. So I played the game and took it.
"And you, Black Mistress."
Ilunga shrugged, not deigning to reply.
The man laughed good-naturedly. "I see by your faces you do
not know me. Ah, you gringos, for you the rest of the world does
not exist!" He shook his head as in dismay. "Well, I know you! I
watched you on TV, in that Nicaraguan tournament. I said to
myself, 'Now there is one gringo I'd like to meet-but not in the
arena!' And now, we meet."
I nodded, noncommittally.
"I am a great fan of the martial arts," he continued. "You cannot
know what joy it has been to me to host the judo competition
right here in Cuba. And your team did all right, eh? Since I took
169
over, judo has prospered here like never before, and I am proud of
it."
Since he took over? What was this?

"In fact, all Cuba has prospered!" he continued exuberantly.
"We produce more sugar, more tobacco, meat, milk, oranges, cobalt,
manganese, oil, cement, tungsten, nickel, copper. More and
better housing, better education-everyone can read now!"
He signaled, and an orderly brought a tray of food. I looked at
the Cuban "hero" sandwich, with butter, ham, pierna sliced pork,
cold cuts, cheese, pickles, and guava pastries, and suddenly I was
aware that I had not eaten more than scraps for two days. To pitch
into that repast . . .
He took up a huge Cuban roll, bit off a jagged hunk, chewed,
and belched. My own hunger intensified. But now I had no doubt.
This was no underling; this was Fidel Castro himself, the ruler of
Cuba! Why had he chosen to interrogate us personally?
But there was no chance to ask. Fidel was talking. Despite his
mouthful, he spoke well, with compelling interest, and we listened,
fascinated. But we had to wait on his convenience. How I
longed for a bite of that bread!
"But you Americans don't believe that, how well we have done,"
he continued, drinking from a bottle of beer. Now I was thirsty,
too. But I had heard he spiked his drinks with Benzedrine. Addiction
of one kind or another was almost universal.
"Your politicians lie to you, your newspapers prevaricate. Your
free press is much less free than you believe, amigos! Half your
foreign correspondents are in the pay of the CIA. Just think, but
for the carelessness of one unbribed night watchman in one hotel,
you would never have known of the complete corruption of your
government! Watergate-there will never be a Watergate in Cuba!"
Naturally not, I thought. There was no two-party system in
Cuba, and all the spying was authorized by the government.
Fidel gestured expansively under my nose with a chorizo, a
Spanish sausage, before cramming it into his mouth. I could al-
 
170
most have taken a bite of it in passing. I swallowed the excess saliva
in my mouth and paid attention to his words.
"Once Cuba was like that, too, in the time of the Sergeant,
that embezzler Batista. But we routed out those murderers and
put in honest men. We eliminated crime. There is no drug addiction
in all the country, except for a few opium smokers too old to
cure. I can't abide addiction!" He took another swig of spiked beer,
then puffed on his cigar. Some ash fell on his food, unnoticed.
Probably true, I realized. To Fidel, Benzedrine, alcohol, and
nicotine were not addictions-not in himself, at any rate. All hardcore
addicts in Cuba were either dead or in prison. Totalitarian
regimes could be very efficient with specific problems. But this
did not preclude drugs for export, as we knew.
My expression must have given me away, for he addressed himself
directly to me now. "You think I am a hypocrite, Jason Striker!
You found that heroin. Admit it-you suspect us of smuggling
the drug into your country!"
I nodded, for he did not pause long enough to permit a verbal
reply. What a talker he was! "I know they call me the Horse-but
I do not smuggle horse!" He laughed, but I noticed that not one of
the guards cracked a smile. "No, that shipment was not of my
doing." He blew a cloud of cigar smoke at us.
I thought he was going to elaborate, but abruptly he was off
on another tangent of oratory "We have done well, but we have
had help. The Soviet socialists have made many loans." He paused,
then added musingly: "Soon we shall have to repay them, with
interest, and how we shall do that I do not know! You see, I admit
my mistakes. Even I can commit a mistake!" This was obviously
humor; he was the perfect megalomaniac. "But it takes more than
money! I told Allende that; 'Chico,' I said, 'you can not make a
revolution with democracy and without controlling the army. Those

fascist officers will turn on you, they will destroy you!' I told him,
'They will betray you the moment you interfere with their comfort
or their real sources of power. Do not trust them. You must
take over the army yourself, or you are doomed!' But he would not
171
listen." Fidel shook his head sadly, wisely. "The military mind is
dangerous. It is paranoid. My friend Che discovered that in Bolivia.
A hard lesson!"
Che Guevara had died in Bolivia, fomenting revolution there.
They had executed him. A hard lesson indeed.
"No one pays attention to the problems of the world. There
has been drought in Africa; the Sahara is being blown into the sky,
and that dust is wafted across the great Atlantic, and it lands on
Cuba, polluting our skies. But nobody cares, nobody acts!"
On and on it went, punctuated by that cigar after the food
was gone: Fidel's view of the world, its politics and customs. We
were a captive audience, yet it was not dull. Fidel really did have
charisma; he compelled belief.
And then, suddenly, he was back on the subject. "That heroin-
that is the work of a gringo, the one you call the Hyena." He
chuckled, noting our reactions. "Oh yes, amigos-we know of the
Hyena here! He was once in Cuba, professing loyalty to our principles.
But he sought to betray us for his own advantage. He escaped
-he is a cunning one!-but it is not safe for him here any
more!" His eyes rolled toward the ceiling momentarily. "Alas, we
do not practice torture in Cuba-but for him we might make an
exception."
So Castro was the Hyena's enemy! Others might lie about such
affiliations, but Fidel had no motive to lie to captives. I exchanged
glances with Ilunga. Did he mean it, or was he putting us on? I
did not know what kind of sense of humor he had.
"Why should I lie to you?" Fidel inquired, correctly interpreting
our concern. Now I suspected he was an expert in body language,
for he comprehended thoughts before we could voice them.
A useful ability in a leader. "You have killed some of my best agents,
and a good dog." He paused, and I had the impression the dog
was of more importance to him than the men. "I could have you
executed." He held up his hand. "But do not fear. I know your
motive. You thought my men were protecting the cache of heroin.
You wanted to destroy it, no?"
 
172
Again there was only opportunity for a nod. This one-way
dialogue was the darnedest thing.
"And I want it destroyed!" Fidel continued. "But you were
with the black boxer, a known henchman of the Hyena, and he
covered your exit. And you accompanied this Black Mistress, and
much as I admire her form-" Here he looked at Ilunga with an
intensity that would have caused any other woman to blush, though
we could not be certain whether he referred to her physical form
or her karate form. "She was working for that same criminal. I
assumed you had joined her. Another mistake! When I reviewed
your files, I discovered that you are mortal enemy to the Hyena,
having balked one of his extortions. He has you marked for death,
as soon as he sees the heroin through to his contacts in the U.S.A.
But that extortion-what an intriguing way to finance a revolution!
I wish I had thought of it, when I was in the Sierra Maestra,
cold and hungry in the mountains! While you-" He turned again
to Ilunga. "You fought him from the outset, and killed half a dozen
of his men; but you were betrayed into his hands. He has your
brother." He shook his head. "I am sorry. I am a busy man. I get
behind, and files are so dull!" Dull, I thought with fascinated
amazement. His files were right up to date. What an intelligence
network he must have! "There are so many details of running socialist

republic . . ."
My brow furrowed, and once more he responded immediately.
"I shall explain, amigo! I do not want a confrontation with
your country. We are not on speaking terms, it is true, and your
government is inferior in many ways, and there have been unfortunate
episodes. But we are neighbors, and it is not good for neighbors
to quarrel. I return all your airplanes, you keep the gusanos,
the exile worms off my shores. We cooperate in our fashion. We
have a dtente. It is best this way."
He took a breath, and paused, but before either of us could
say a word, he resumed. "But there are politics, always politics!
The Soviets are not the only communists in Cuba. There are radicals,
young Maoists from China. Cuba is not a large nation; we
173
cannot afford to antagonize a large socialist state like China. You
have relations with Mao; can we afford less? I can not risk a confrontation
at this time! So those people have power. In fact it would
be awkward to purge them at this time; one misstep could mean
civil war here. So we tolerate a certain amount of mischief."
A critical admission. The Chinese communists must be powerful
indeed, if this man was so wary of them. But what was the
relevance to heroin?
"These radicals, they would like nothing better than war with
America, with Cuba taking all the risk. The Soviets are more sensible,
though they, too, have their moments. Those missiles . . ."
Here he paused longer, scowling. Yes-I was sure that would be a
bitter memory! Not the fact of the missiles, but the manner in
which Russia had removed them, on pressure from President
Kennedy, without consulting Castro. They had shown him up for
the mere pawn he was. "Anyway, the Maoists want to send weapons
and trained men to America, to arm and train the Indians, the
Chicanos, the blacks." He glanced at Ilunga again. "They hope to
finance their efforts by the sale of heroin, more valuable than gold
on the international market, yet cheap in China! But they are crazy!
They will never conquer America with arms. The capitalists would
like nothing better than a race war. They would make huge profits
producing the weapons to exterminate the blacks and the Indians,
all their nonwhite minorities. All those racists want is the excuse."
The thing was, he was making a certain kind of sense. An
armed insurrection by any of America's minorities would be disastrous
to those minorities.
"And to what purpose?" Fidel asked rhetorically. "You do not
need to attack America to finish it; capitalism thrives on war! Just
leave it alone, and it will fall of its own momentum. Already it is
beginning. Look at your inflation, your corruption! And the drugs-
they will not harm the dictators. Ninety per cent of that heroin
will end up befuddling the brains of those same oppressed minorities,
using up the money they need to live. No, I don't want that
heroin delivered!"
 
174
Then why didn't he destroy the shipment? I opened my mouth.
"But the Maoists are behind that shipment," Fidel continued.
"If I make a move, they will take offense, and the time is not right.
One day I shall deal with them." He smiled, and it was a singularly
vicious smile. I was abruptly glad I was not a Maoist. "But
not today. Politics. Everything in its time." He spread his hands.
"Do you understand?"
Yet again I tried to answer. I should have known better.
"I cannot act at the moment," Fidel said. "But neither can I
fail to act. I am caught between the Maoist faction and my American
dtente, not daring to offend either party. So I must keep my
hands clean, scrupulously clean." He looked down at his hands,
which were assuredly not clean. Did he ever take a bath? "But I

would not interfere if someone else should act. Someone who had
no connection to me, like a capitalist gringo, or perhaps, his black
mistress." Was that an intentional pun? Ilunga was no man's mistress,
but the Karate Mistress.
It was coming clear at last. Like a chess player, Fidel was maneuvering
his enemies to cancel each other out-leaving, as he put
it, his hands clean.
"Naturally there could be no question of collusion," he continued
affably. "People who kill my men are outlaws; I will have
nothing to do with them!" He looked at me penetratingly. "Of
course, you did not actually kill any of mine, Jason Striker. The
three wharf thugs were the Hyena's, not mine. The eleven G-2
troops-who would have believed that one dying old man, hardly
larger than a child, in pain from terminal cancer, could wreak such
havoc! No one could believe it, no sensible man! No one but me!
And we shall keep that secret, eh?"
Ilunga leaned forward, but Fidel shook his head. "What of the
man with the spotlight, you inquire? He did not die. He will be
blind, but he will live. We pulled your little blade out of his eye . . ."
Fidel reached into his pocket and brought it out, handing it to
her. "He told a remarkable tale of the last sight he saw, or will ever
see. No doubt he exaggerated, wanting something unique on record
175
for that occasion. I do not believe him for a moment; all women
wear undergarments." He shook his head, smiling. "Sometimes I
yearn for the old days, when I was a young man in the Universidad.
Such adventures we had, such sights we saw!" He glanced at Ilunga's
skirt, but now her knees were close together.
He sighed windily, then belched, and drew on his cigar. "Power
has its liabilities, you see. We are no longer treated to the simple
pleasures. But we bear with it. La Patria me necesita, my country
needs me!" Then he refocused on me. "But if you had killed any of
mine, make no mistake. The penalty is death." And I saw with
chilling certainty that he meant it. Our lives were of small account
to him, affable as he might seem. He needed us, so he used us, but
in other circumstances he would have thrown us away without a
thought.
"And of course you do not care about the Maoist faction," he
continued. "You are after the Hyena. Who resides, I happen to
know, on the tip of the Florida peninsula, in the Everglades."
I jumped. Another giant step in locating the Hyena! Now we
knew which section of the country.
"But the arms and drugs are not at his estate, and not going
there; he is more careful than that! He is a most important man, in
his human guise, though his true nature is best illustrated by the
mask he wears! He is the confidant of someone extremely high up,
but one horrified of scandal. Though expert in firearms, he never
touches them himself, so as to keep any taint away. At his home he
confines himself to training missions-and the brainwashing of
someone's little brother."
This time Ilunga jumped, as well she might. Danny had been
right there at Hyena's estate, all the time she was looking for him!
The beast-man certainly knew how to keep a secret, and Fidel
knew how to push our buttons.
"The shipment you saw was only a small part of the total. We
have watched many such loads, but have not interfered, for the
reason I explained before. Their main cache is in the Marquesas
Islands, deposited somewhere there by a Chinese tramp steamer.
 
176
The materiel is awaiting suitable means for transport past the
American shore patrol. Your judo boat was to have been one such
means. Now wouldn't it be terrible if something happened to that
main cache?"

This time we didn't even try to interrupt his dramatic pause.
He didn't need any response; he had it all worked out. Very cleverly,
I had to admit; there was a brain behind that beard. "Now it
happens there is a launch anchored not far from here, on the
Almendares River. An excellent craft, fueled and provisioned, capable
of doing almost fifty knots. I'm afraid the skipper has been
very careless; he leaves it unguarded while he goes ashore for an
illicit drink. Tonight the naval guard is away on maneuvers. Somebody
might steal that boat, and I shall be most upset. My rage
shall be heard all the way to China! But I suspect the skipper,
afraid for his hide, will not report the theft for sevt, h hours, so
there will be no alert." He wiped away a mock tear. "Such a fine
boat, too! What a shame! But we have so few criminals, we do get
careless. A thief could take that boat all the way to the Marquesas,
and I really do not understand why the Maoist faction should be
so upset about that, since it is no concern of theirs-that we know
of."
He stood up. "It has been pleasant talking with you. We must
get together again sometime, in better circumstances. Have a cigar!"
He shoved a fresh Havana into my hand. "I always like to
exchange views with others, even Americans." And with a careless
wave of his hand he dismissed us.
I looked at Ilunga, and she looked at me. I looked at the damned
cigar. She opened her mouth to speak as we passed through the
door with the guards.
"You'll want to check the sifu's kwoon for weapons and food,"
Fidel called. "There is water aboard the launch."
Chapter 10
EVERGLADES
It all fell out as Fidel had suggested. So long as we followed the
charted course, his men took no notice of us. The moment we
deviated, even to pick up extra food, they closed in. The message
was plain enough. We had better perform.
We went to the sifu's kwoon, saddened that he had perished for
nothing, and picked up an assortment of hand weapons for later
use. Knives, daggers, a nunchaku, a kusarigama-the chained
sickle-a sling, a manriki gusari, or chained ball, kamas, the
Okinawan sickle, bows and arrows, and a powerful Chinese crossbow
ornamented with silver and engraved with the figures of birds:
an eagle fighting a phoenix. All in all, a deadly assortment of items,
for we knew we were traveling into danger.
We also took some food: packages of dried shrimp ready to eat,
salt fish, and even some leftover cooked rice. But it was sad, inheriting
these spoils from Sifu Tuh. He had been quite a man, and I
wished I had known him sooner.
The cache lay buried on a small island, but only the smug-
 
178
glers knew the specific spot. Since they could dig anywhere in the
sand and have the tide wash out all traces, or dig away the turf
inland and replace the squares carefully, a quick search would be
futile. We had to catch them in the act of picking it up. Only then
could we discover and destroy the weapons and heroin. Too early
or too late, and we would miss the Hyena's men, or alert them.
We anchored the craft in a secluded cove in a nearby island,
then swam across to the cache-island. I was concerned about sharks,
but we had shark repellent, and Ilunga assured me that they rarely
attacked men in this area. We used rubberized swim suits, frogmen
outfits we found in the launch. Ilunga was really stunning
with the black rubber clinging to her body and nothing underneath.
We used snorkels and swim fins, and towed our weapons and
reserve food in an inflated black rubber raft that could be deflated
and hidden in the sand. The island was small-hardly a hundred
yards across, jungle-covered. There would have been no place to

conceal the launch, and it would have been a dead giveaway.
We were in plenty of time, as the Hyena's pickup party was
not due till well after nightfall. We arrived in the morning, wanting
no premature encounter. They had to think the isle was deserted,
and no doubt they would spy it out hours beforehand,
before coming ashore to dig up the cache.
It was going to be tricky, because only from one of those men
could I get the rest of the Hyena's address, and they were unlikely
to be eager to talk. We would have to capture their party, then
radio the U.S. Coast Guard to pick them up. I had the suspicion
that Fidel had known the exact location of the Hyena's estate, but
had withheld the information as an added inducement for us to
make contact with the Hyena's party.
We made ourselves comfortable under the concealing fronds
of a palmetto patch, rubbed on mosquito repellent, and settled
down for what would probably be a wait of several hors. Naturally
we made love again.
Afterward, as the sun set across the restless ocean, we talked.
179
Ilunga told me in detail about her Taoist training with Sifu Teng,
and I told her about the Shaolin training I received long ago in a
Cambodian monastery, learning the meaning of weapons as training
tools. "It seems almost sacrilegious to use them for violence,
now," I said.
"Ha!" she snorted. "I wish I'd had a good weapon the first
time I was raped!" But then she reconsidered. "'Weapons at best
are tools of bad omen,'" she quoted, as Sifu Tuh had done, "'loathed
and avoided by those of the Way.'"
I knew about her rape. She had been caught by four white
men in a city park when she was only twelve years old, and brutally
assaulted. Her nose had been smashed, and the white male
police had taken a "boys will be boys" attitude. Thus her lifelong
quest for vengeance against men, especially white men. Like me.
Yet she had helped me try to save my fiancee, and she had saved
my life. And now . . .
"Ilunga," I said carefully. "After this, are you going back to
that life? Castrating men?" My groin gave a twinge; the first time
she and I had met, she had damn near castrated me. One smashing
kick . . . Yet I had been, if anything, more active sexually since
that injury. Perhaps it was because it had given me reason to feel
insecure about my masculinity.
"I don't know," she admitted. "I thought all whites were my
enemies. But now I've been betrayed by a black man, Mustapha,
and-" She gestured toward me. What could she say about me,
after our passion of the afternoon?
I knew better than to speak of love. There had been too much
between us, good and bad. "You have a lot to offer," I told her.
"You could be a karate instructor, training women, black and white,
to protect themselves. You could work with drug addicts, setting
them straight. There is so much you could do, so positive-"
"Who would hire the Black Karate Mistress!" she snarled. She
was still a creature of passion; she could veer either way, now.
"I would!" I snapped without thinking. But then, reconsidering,
I said it again. "I'm against rape and drug addiction. And I'm
 
180
always in need of competent instructors in my dojo. I can't pay
much, and some of my students can be difficult, like Thera
Drummond, but . . ." I let it trail off. Would she listen-or laugh?
Until this moment such a possibility had never occurred to me,
yet it had its appeal.
"That white piece of ass," Ilunga muttered. Then she was silent
a long time. What was going on in her mind? Maybe I
shouldn't have reminded her of Thera, the heiress she had fought

briefly, but that was the kind of problem she would have to face as
an instructor. And men who would try to make her. She would
have to learn to turn them down without kicking them in the
crotch.
Did I really want her to accept? I could not place her in any
good/bad category. Yet this could be her turning point. If she
came in with me, she would become a productive citizen; if not,
what was there but the ghetto and more violence?
"Yes," she said.
Suddenly I was glad. It was like a proposal of marriage, and its
acceptance. In this moment we were commencing an association
that might endure twenty years, or two hours, depending on the
outcome of our mission on this beach. I knew the odds for our
survival were not ideal.
I rolled over and brought her to me, kissing her on the lips.
Once more we made love, slowly, methodically, thoroughly. Love?
No, an insult to call it that. I'm no racist, but this particular affair
was not made in heaven. Sex? Yes, of course-but if it was less than
love, it was still more than sex. Perhaps it was dtente.
And Ilunga would make a damn fine karate instructor.
Now it was amout, and suddenly I spotted it. One faint light,
as of a small boat coming in with no more illumination than that
necessary to find its way. We would not know which shore the
cache was buried under, but on an island as small as this, it hardly
mattered.
"Remember, wait until they actually start digging," I said.
181
"Then you cover me with the crossbow while I talk to them. We
don't want bloodshed if we can avoid it."
"Naive honkies," she muttered. "They never learn."
"All the same," I said. "I expect my instructors to be of good
character. No unnecessary killing."
She stifled a snort of laughter. "How many people you going
to hire-after you're dead?"
"As many as I need to keep the devils off my back."
"So you're going to hell!" She grimaced; I saw her teeth flash.
"See you there, in about an hour. Now don't get lost."
Slowly, slowly, the boat came in, about a quarter of the way
around the island from us. Excellent location: if they came this
way, Ilunga could cover me without moving at all.
The boat anchored about a hundred yards out. Five frogmen
slipped into the water and swam to shore.
I stood carefully and stepped out on the beach, making no
noise in the dark. I wanted to surprise them; if they surprised me,
I surely would be dead.
I carried a sling with a supply of heavy, balanced lead pellets.
I had been exposed to this in the course of my Shaolin training,
and was a fair shot with it. The thing about a sling is that it is easy
to carry or to hide, deadly at short or long range, silent and readily
provided with replacement ammunition. The Biblical David and
Goliath encounter was a mismatch, all right; Goliath never had a
chance. David would have had to get within a few feet for Goliath's
sword to take effect; but David could strike from hundreds of feet.
In fact, the sling was one of mankind's oldest and most effective
weapons, an equalizer that made any naked shepherd boy the equal
of a mounted knight in armor. Provided the boy was good enough
with his weapon.
The frogmen splashed out of the water, removed their fins,
and walked toward me along the beach. I froze in place near a
palm tree, hoping they would not shine their light in my direction.
 
182
Fortunately they stopped. "There's the rocks" one said. "It'll
be ten feet south . . ."

Evidently one of them had a compass. In a moment they were
digging, scooping the sand out with small shovels.
"Gentlemen, you're covered," I said. "Do not move." It might
have worked, but it didn't. "Trap!" one of them bawled. They scattered
explosively. Two of them charged me; the rest dived for the
water. A gun fired.
I slung my sling. The lead caught the man nearest me in the
chest, breaking at least one rib; in this light I was aiming for the
broadest part of the body. He grunted and stumbled. I heaved my
second pellet at the other, but this time I missed.
One of the three near the water screamed and splashed down.
Ilunga had put an arrow through his back. The other two wheeled
at the water's edge and started firing, but the bullets went wild,
because they didn't know where the shaft had come from. They
were lucky they didn't hit their own men. Which was one of several
reasons Ilunga and I had elected not to use firearms; they are
about as likely to hurt friend as foe. Another reason, of course, was
that Fidel had allowed us none; he didn't want this to smack too
much of a G-2 operation. To raid an old sifu's kwoon and steal a
launch-these were acts of outlaws, not government agents. Right;
Mao?
I waded into the two nearest me. Alone in the darkness, I had
an advantage they lacked: I couldn't strike my own people. I carried
a kama, the Okinawan sickle. I saw a glint of gunmetal; with
one hand I thrust it aside as if I were deflecting a knife, and then I
sliced with the kama. I had hoped to disarm and subdue him, but
the anatomy I struck felt too soft. I bad cut his belly open.
The other was trying to train his gun on me, but he held his
fire for the obvious reason. He could see me as well as I saw him,
and once he was certain I had overcome his companion, he fired.
I leaped mightily, passing over the line of fire, and straight
over his head. On the way I struck down with the bloody point of
the kama. If I had tried to kill him under these conditions, I would
183
surely have missed. As it was, the point of the sickle penetrated the
man's skull, right through his brain.
I stood over the gory corpses. Ilunga appeared. "I took care of
the wounded," she said. "They fight to the end, every one of them-
that's the way the Hyena trains 'em. No surrender, no quarter."
"Damn!" I said. "It all means nothing, without the address."
Quite possibly Ilunga had saved my life again, taking out gunmen
who might have gotten me from behind, but I felt little gratitude.
Surely she could have disabled one without killing him. Yet I had
done no better.
"Got to be someone manning the boat," Ilunga said.
The Hyena's ship. I nodded affirmatively. We stripped the
paraphernalia from two of the frogmen, not to use, but as camouflage.
There was no way to tell how many men might be aboard
the ship, but even one would be more than enough, if he suspected
us. We would be sitting ducks in the landing craft. But the
water was no better; swimming would take longer, and alert the
guard. The shots would have abolished secrecy, at any rate.
Their landing craft was a Boston Whaler fiberglass boat, with
a flat bottom and a silent motor. Very nice equipment.
Ilunga placed a charge in the cache, timing the plastic in the
way she knew with a pencil detonator. It would blow in fifteen
minutes. We'd better have things in hand at the ship by then.
We started the motor and headed out the way the craft had
come. We hoped the ship would show us a light.
It did not. But we were able to make out its silhouette against
the horizon, for it was not far off the shore. It was a pleasure yacht,
about forty feet long. Who would suspect such a craft of gun running
and drug smuggling!
We guided our boat toward it. As we pulled in close, a spotlight

shone on us. "Halt!"
The voice sounded familiar-but there was surely a gun behind
that light. We halted, cutting the motor. A routine challenge?
We had to bluff it.
"I heard gunfire" the voice said. "Three of you are missing."
 
184
I had to answer. "We were ambushed," I said, changing my
voice as well as I could. I have never been adept at this sort of
thing.
"By whom?" No doubt about the suspicion. I was sweating.
"That Striker fellow."
"Striker! You kill him?"
I hesitated, not liking the lie "Yes," Ilunga said for me.
There was a burst of firing from a Browning automatic rifle
mounted on the yacht. I plunged into the water on one side, and
Ilunga on the other. It hadn't worked! Could we get away?
"Now listen, brother, before I hole you for fish bait," the voice
cried. "Striker was my friend! After you I'm going to do the same
to your honky boss!"
"Mustapha!" I cried.
There was a pause, while the spotlight searched. When it came
across me, I chanced betrayal and waved. "Damn! It is!" Mustapha
said. "The bleached judoka! I should have known."
So he had decided which side he was on at last. I was glad, and
not just because it enhanced my own survival. In moments Ilunga
and I were aboard.
It developed that Mustapha had learned the truth about Fidel's
attitude when the G-2 took him in. But they had turned him
loose and left the cache in the house so as to keep the knowledge of
his changeover from the Hyena. He had become a double agent,
giving his boxing exhibition and supervising the trans-shipment
of the arms. "They're aboard this ship right now," he said. "We
sneake gavem out right under the noses of the naval patrol." He
grinned; we all knew how that could happen. "I was just waiting
for the men to pick up the rest of the cache before making my
move."
Fidel had taken no chances. He had sent Mustapha by one
route, and us by another, all with the same objective. We could
have killed each other-but the cache would have been destroyed
without Fidel's apparent involvement. In fact, if we all died, there
would be no one at all to betray Fidel's interest. Slick and ruthless.
185
We fished out the supplies we had saved from the boat. As we
worked, an explosion rent the island. Ilunga's delayed charge had
gone off; the cache was no more.
"Are there any charts or anything that might show where the
Hyena's estate is!" I asked "We have to reach him in a hurry, before
he gets word of this interception."
"I know where it is. You mean you don't? Why didn't you ask
me before?"
I exchanged glances with Ilunga. "Never mind," I said. "Let's
just get there, fast."
"Not so fast," he cautioned me. "This ship's supposed to take
the arms to another port. We can't just dock at his Key Largo
rendezvous and drive his truck to his Everglades estate. He'd blast
the truck right off the road!"
"We can't wait, either," I said. "We have to hit him first, hard."
"Can't," he said. "That whole property's booby-trapped. No
way to get in unless he lets us in."
"Unless we had an inside agent to sabotage the defenses," I
said.
"Forget it. His troops are all dependent on him for their fixes.
They may not like him, but they're loyal."

"What about Danny?" I asked.
Ilunga's face lighted. "Danny!"
Mustapha looked grim. "Look, sister, he was taken there for
indoctrination. Brainwashing, really, the same techniques they used
in Korea in the fifties. The same they use to cure teen druggies,
only worse. Much worse. They can make a man eat his own steaming
shit and like it, after that program. He's been there over a
month, now-all the time you were there, and more. He's either a
loyal Hyena honcho, or he's dead."
As he spoke, Ilunga's hand went to her hair. But she froze with
an effort, knowing he spoke the truth.
I was sorry I had brought it up. I wondered what Danny was
doing now.
 
186
*
The three stood on the lawn, knowing the end was coming,
but determined to fight like cornered rats for their lives. Two were
small, slinky pusher-types, but the third was big and brawny.
The Hyena went after the big guy first. He moved deceptively
fast, making a claw-hand swipe at the black man's face. The victim
raised his hands to protect his eyes, and the Hyena delivered a
snap kick to the groin. The man buckled, his head thrown back,
his mouth wide open in a scream of agony. The Hyena hooked his
claws in that exposed throat and tore it out, the jugular vein, larynx
and carotid arteries coming loose in a bright red mass.
The two smaller men, realizing that they were next, didn't
wait their turns. With the mad courage of desperation they attacked.
One leaped on the Hyena's back and tried to strangle him.
The other pulled out a concealed small knife and went in low,
aiming for the belly.
"HYAAAA!" The Hyena snapped his head back, crushing the
first man's nose, breaking his hold and sloughing him off unconscious.
He then did a tai-sabaki to the side, so that the second
man's knife-thrust missed. He grabbed the wrist and pulled the
man forward by the arm. The razor claws of the Hyena's other
hand raked across the man's face, leaving a raw pulpy mass where
the eyes and nose had been.
In the space of a minute, this one white man had destroyed
three black men who had tried to deceive him; and he had done it
in fair combat. Tarzan he was, but he was also the Hyena, a powerful
leader of men, a revolutionist. These three had plainly deserved
what they had gotten.
The Hyena dispatched the unconscious man, the one with
the smashed nose, by picking him up by the feet, whirling him
around a couple of times, then smashing his skull against a tree.
He dropped the carcass and turned to Danny. "Throw this offal to
my friend," he said. His friend was the animal hyena. "What he
doesn't like for today, put in the freezer for tomorrow."
187
Danny obeyed. He wondered whether, after this, he would be
permitted to see his sister, but he knew better than to ask. The
Hyena expected absolute obedience from his minions. And what
would Danny say to Ilunga, who had gone over to the enemy so
readily?
*
We anchored at a small dock in Isla Morada's beach, near Key
Largo, then drove the waiting truck off. It was dawn. This was the
very thing Mustapha had said we couldn't do, but we were gambling
that it would be the last thing the Hyena expected. Fortunately
there had been no provision for radio communication; the
Hyena's fear of exposure of his part in the smuggling was greater
than his fear of betrayal. A radio message could be overheard.
We did not attempt to talk to the authorities. The Hyena, in

his civilian identity without the mask, was highly influential, and
we had no direct proof of his involvement in this smuggling scheme.
None that would stand up in court, not against the kind of defense
the Hyena's money could buy, that included murder of all
adverse witnesses. And the mission we contemplated could hardly
have been condoned by the officials. Naturally the Hyena would
kill Danny the moment the news of Ilunga's and Mustapha's defection
hit the press.
We had to destroy him first; then the real evidence would
pour into the light of day like pus from massively infected wound
just lanced. If we were stopped before we could accomplish this,
the law would crucify us, not him.
Still, we had to sleep a few hours. All three of us had been
going steadily for too long, and any mistake caused by our fatigue
could be fatal.
In due course we drove to Fort Lauderdale until we got to the
Tamiami Trail, then entered a small dirt road with a NO TRESPASSING
sign. "Forgive us our trespass," Mustapha murmured.
Now it was near dusk. We hid the car in a clump of vegetation
 
188
and continued on foot. This was not the front entrance, of course;
there was little sign that anyone had been this way before. The
Hyena himself had a private airplane, Mustapha said.
It was a grueling trek, for the evening was hot, the footing was
rough, and we had a lot to carry. But I told myself a daytime
approach was best because we could not afford to wait until night,
and the Hyena would least expect it. We hoped he had no secret
runners to keep him informed. The lengthening shadows would
help conceal our approach.
We were in the Everglades, which made for dull scenery. Saw
grass, cattails, small clumps of trees, and where there was sufficient
elevation, large numbers of birds. I had thought I would be
excited, for I had heard of the Everglades many times, but there is
only so much swamp one can endure without feeling the monotony,
particularly when sweating under a load. I didn't even see
an alligator. My intrigue departed like one of the flying herons.
Too bad I wasn't a bird-watcher.
At last we came to the outer wall surrounding the estate. It
was some ten feet tall with broken glass embedded in the top
cement, and electrified wires above that, just as Ilunga had described
it. A kind of dry moat was before it; in wet weather this
would be brimming with water, I knew, and there would be hungry
wildlife in it. But at the moment the Everglades were in
drought. Fire was as great a hazard here as flooding.
This is as far as I know the route," Mustapha said. "I've never
actually been inside."
"I have," Ilunga said. "I know the whole layout. And I know
how to infiltrate and sabotage this sort of place, because the Man
taught me. Taught me well."
I smiled. "He taught us all-different things." But I doubted
the Hyena would have shown her all his tricks; he would have
saved some, just in case.
We set up the portable trampoline we had hauled so laboriously.
It was essential that we scale the wall without touching a
wire, and this was the way. We were all athletes, and we had prac-
189
ticed on this sort of thing before. We could get over, but the landing
could be tricky. Especially if anyone were keeping really effective
watch, or if there were some electric eye beam above the wire.
Ilunga said there wasn't, but how could we sure?
"I'll go first," Mustapha said. He stood on the trampoline and
bounced. In moments he was rising high-six feet, eight, ten.
"Look before you leap," I cautioned him, not intending it as a

pun. "If anyone's in sight--"
He bounced in place several times, his head passing well above
the top. "All clear!" he said "Ground level, visibility good, turf
soft. I'm going over!"
Now he made two much stronger bounces and angled himself
forward. He sailed above the wall, clearing it by a good yard, and
dropped out of sight. We heard the thud of his landing.
This was the test. We were gambling that the Hyena was overconfident,
and had added nothing to the wall's defenses. The man
who depends on insufficient protection is more vulnerable than
the one who depends on none.
"Sokay!" Mustapha called back, not too loudly. "That last step's
a doozy!"
Ilunga went next. Her kung fu training gave her better control,
and she cleared the wire neatly with only inches to spare, and
landed almost silently. "Ready," she said.
I threw over our remaining supplies, lofting them high so that
the two inside had time to catch them. We didn't want any of this
stuff broken. Then I took my turn on the trampoline. As I bounced
high I saw the spacious grounds, with a large neat two-story Spanish-
style stucco mansion in the background. It had a sort of tower
on one side, and red tiles on the roof. There was even a pleasantly
winding stream. But I was doing too much sightseeing, and I miscalculated
my hurdle. One foot snagged on the topmost wire.
There was no shock, for I was not grounded I maintained my
balance and landed cleanly. But somewhere on the premises an
alarm bell sounded.
Overconfidence? I was the one who suffered from it! Now we
 
190
were in trouble, for the trampoline was outside. We could not
jump back out.
*
"Up," the Hyena said.
Danny, logy from his daytime nap, did not react immediately.
That was his mistake.
"I expect instant response," the beastman said. "Tie him."
Two men entered and tied the bemused Danny by the arms
and feet. They carried him outside.
Across the estate they went, and down to the edge of the marsh
where the stream spread out into a damp wilderness. There were
alligators there, but they had been recently fed and were not interested
in the current proceedings.
"Throw him in," the Hyena said.
They threw him in. Danny landed feet-first in the muck and
began to sink. Then he realized what it was. He screamed. It was
quicksand!
He tried to struggle, but bound as he was, it only got him in
deeper. The moist sand and water rose up around his body, sucking
him down. "Help!" he cried. But they only watched.
As the quicksand came up around his neck and reached for his
mouth and nose, the Hyena made a sign. Then, they threw in a
rope and began hauling him out. One man reached forward and
cut the rope binding his wrists, so that he could hang on.
Next time he would move immediately when the Hyena spoke.
He did not need another such reminder, for he realized that the
Hyena would not pull him out a second time. Instant obedience.
As his body came loose, an alarm bell clanged in the house.
The Hyena looked about, showing alarm for the first time Danny
had seen. "Something on the wall," he barked.
"Probably a heron banging the wire, sir," the man holding the
rope said.
191
The Hyena caught him across the cheek with a backhand slap,

knocking him to the ground. "Then kill that heron!"
The man licked blood off his lip, dropped the rope, and followed
the Hyena toward the house. Danny was left to flounder in
the quicksand, his feet still tied and mired.
Suddenly he realized the scale of values the Hyena had. Danny
could die here while they checked out a routine impingement of
the perimeter-by a bird! That was all the beast man cared.
And he had been ready to give his allegiance to the Hyena!
He struggled valiantly. He had been almost out when the alarm
rang. If he could just haul himself the rest of the way out of the
muck, then get the rope off his feet . . .
Then he would be loose, outside, with no guard, and the
Hyena's attention distracted. His sister might have gone over to
the enemy-but he hadn't!
*
Mustapha and Ilunga stood looking at me, disapproving black
statues, listening to that ominous bell. I felt like the ass I was.
"Maybe they'll think it was a bird," Mustapha said after an
interminable moment. "Let's hide."
We hauled our equipment hastily into a clump of bushes, and
began setting up for action. We had C-3 plastic explosive that
Ilunga knew how to use; we planned to blow up the estate's generator
and sever the incoming power lines in a commando raid
similar to the Hyena's own efforts against rich men. But we knew
it would not be easy, for our enemy was more expert at this sort of
thing than we were. We had assorted hand weapons, not firearms-
none of us felt at ease with guns when it came to the crunch, for
silence was essential-and these would very quickly be put to the
test.
Three men came out, carrying rifles. We waited in a clump of
bamboo, which is damned uncomfortable stuff, I discovered too
 
192
late. There were all sorts of scratchy little branches that were too
springy to bend permanently aside, and too tough to rip off, and
that also had jackets of fine nettles. But we were stuck with it.
"There are seven regulars," Ilunga said. "Six men and a woman,
all black. Not all of them fight. Plus the hyenas, both of them."
These three were not the Hyena's best troops (those had no
doubt been sent on the smuggling mission), for they marched
right into the brush, rifles pointed ahead. Obviously they considered
this a routine false alarm, and were humoring their master by
combing the area quickly and carelessly.
We struck silently, together. Ilunga confronted her man, holding
a silk handkerchief with a lead ball tied to one end. Before the
man could fire, she flung the weighted end around his neck and
tightened the silk into a garrote. He was eliminated silently. The
ancient Thugs of India, in their practice of Thuggee, had used a
similar method in their ritual killings in honor of their goddess
Kali, the same goddess who had dominated the Kill-13 Demon
cult. Ilunga's old ways still showed.
"The hyena!" Mustapha exclaimed.
Startled in the act of rising for the attack, I looked across, and
saw a fourth man running toward us with the huge, vicious animal.
I also got hung up on a strong, claw-twigged bamboo shoot
that ruined my lunge.
No point in silence now; we would be lucky to get out of this
intact! It is bad business changing strategy in the midst of a surprise
attack, but we did it. I tackled two men-mine and
Mustapha's-while Mustapha dived for the fourth man. We had
to down them all before the animal struck.
I had a manriki gusari, a thirty-inch length of chain with
weighted ends. "KIAIII!" I screamed, swinging that chain. It ensnared
the rifle of the first one and yanked it out of his grip. I

swung again, and the rifle, still caught, hit the second man across
the face.
That softened them up. I did an okuri ashi barai foot-sweep on
the first man, tapping him on the head with the free end of my
193
chain as he fell. The second man, though blinded by the blow of
the swinging rifle, managed to fire a burst into the air. Ilunga,
finished with her assignment, tackled him from behind and lifted
him in a sukui-nage scoop-throw: one hand grabbed his crotch,
the other his shoulders. She pulled with the first and pushed with
the second, scooping him into the air and hurling him against a
tree. He dropped from the trunk, unconscious.
Mustapha, meanwhile, had donned brass knuckles. He stood
up to the fourth man-and hesitated. "Oh, no!" he cried.
I realized the hyena was too close. "I'll take him!" I cried,
launching myself at the fourth man. I got him in a stranglehold,
my forearm across his chest and pressing down firmly. Then I discovered
Mustapha's actual problem.
This was no man. It was an unarmed woman. Full busted.
I had no choice; I couldn't trust her. "Sorry, honey," I said,
and tightened my strangle. She passed out painlessly. I held it
long enough to be certain she would not recover too soon, then let
her drop. She would be okay later.
The great spotted shape of the hyena leaped on Mustapha,
who was trying to snag it with a length of rope. The impact bowled
him over. His rope went wide. The awful teeth closed on his left
arm, crunching the bone. But as he fell on his back, Mustapha
cocked his right fist and let fly with the most devastating haymaker
of his career. It struck the hyena's skull and crushed it in, killing
the animal instantly. But Mustapha himself was out of action with
a badly mangled and bleeding arm.
Now we moved toward the house, leaving Mustapha with the
guards' guns to cover our rear as well as he could. "I want to go in
after my brother," Ilunga said.
"The Hyena knows we're here now," I reminded her. "First
thing he'll do is get Danny and use him for a hostage."
"That's why I have to go after him," she said. "Now."
I didn't like it. In his own house, the Hyena would be virtually
invincible. We had to make him come out. But I knew how
 
194
she felt about Danny. "Well, I'd better prepare the way," I said.
"My arrows will be a pretty good distraction."
Few people appreciate the variety and deadliness of bows and
arrows. Because a weapon is ancient does not mean it is ineffective;
quite the contrary. Some bows are wood, others bamboo, metal, or
combinations of these things together with bone, horn, leather, or
plastic. Some are asymmetrical. The medieval Japanese archers used
to shoot one thousand arrows a day for training, and some bows
were so inflexible that they took as many as five men to pull the
string back. What cannons they must have been! The arrows were
even more varied. There is a horrible "bowel raker" designed to be
shot into the midsection of the enemy soldier, and a "willow leaf,"
double-edged.
But my arrows were simple and deadly, if cumbersome. Ilunga
had molded C-3 plastic explosive around the shafts, and taped
common nails onto the plastic. The resultant shrapnel would be
worse than a conventional grenade. They were set with five-second
fuses, and each weighed over a pound, so I had to be mighty sure
of my technique. If I failed to get one off in time after lighting the
fuse . . .
But first I had to light that fuse. I couldn't afford to pause each
time to strike a match.
I knew what to do. I needed a permanent light, something

that would keep burning for fifteen minutes or so. I brought out
Fidel's cigar.
Only one problem. I don't smoke.
Ilunga saw me hesitating. "For God's sake, honky-light it!"
she snapped. "That's the finest Havana you'll ever taste."
I lit it. It went out.
"Not that way!" she said, exasperated. "Draw on it."
I put the phallic monster in my mouth and sucked as the
flame touched the end. Foul smoke poured into my lungs. I stifled
a coughing fit. God, what torture! How could Fidel stand it? If
this were the finest cigar, I'd hate ever to have to try a cheap one!
195
A machine gun opened up on the roof of the house. We dived
for better cover.
"I'm going on in!" Ilunga said. "You stay here and smoke your
cigar!" She crawled rapidly away through the brush, taking two
swords with her.
I stayed. I puffed, this time managing to keep most of the
pestilential vapor out of my innocent lungs. If this were my main
pleasure, I'd be a revolutionary too! I touched the glowing end to
the fuse and waited until it lighted. I fitted the arrow, aimed, and
let go.
I had been too hasty, and the shaft fell short. It bounced on
the ground before the house, then exploded, doing no real damage.
I had fouled up because I had been afraid the thing would
explode in my face; I would do better next time.
The machine gun clattered into life again. Quickly I took another
arrow and another puff-and choked again. My eyes went
teary. But I got the arrow lit, aimed, and let fly. This time it struck
the side of the house, dropped-and went off, blasting out a section
of the wall. Ilunga had done a good job on these missiles; the
Hyena had been, a good instructor.
But now the gunman on the roof, keen-eyed, had my range.
Steadily the bullets came nearer, covering the brush in a scientific
saturation pattern. I tried to set up a third arrow, but got another
lungful of smoke and felt nauseous. How could anyone enjoy this
horror of a cigar? The name Havana would be a bad taste in my
mouth for a decade! My face must be turning green already, and I
still had half a dozen arrows to go.
Ilunga had an easy task: all she had to do was brave the house
I was trying to ignite!
*
Ilunga carried Sifu Tuh's two kung fu swords. She entered the
house by a rear window, heedless of any alarm wires; the alarm was
 
196
already clanging, after all, and no one had thought to turn it off.
Where would Danny be? Tied in a cell, she hoped. That would
mean he had not enlisted with the Hyena.
A man leaped at her. She knew him: one of the house guards,
the Hyena's loyal minion, and a bastard in his own right. She
slashed open his belly with the broadsword. His intestines burst
out as he collapsed.
Something stung her on the shoulder. She whirled. There was
the Hyena, grinning. The loyal minion had distracted her, and
now the Hyena's curare dart was in her flesh. Again.
She collapsed, feeling nothing but fury. When would she ever
learn!
"This will be a genuine pleasure," the Hyena said. He turned
her face up and waved his needle-nails before her face, so that she
could see what he was about to do. "So you turned traitor after all,
black mama!" The nails dropped toward her eyes, and she could
not even blink.
A tremendous explosion rocked the house. "There're more of

them!" the Hyena cried angrily. "I'll get back to you, sweetie, never
fear!" He ran to the door, as the smell of smoke came. The house
was burning.
She would die, either way. If the beast-man did not return to
torture her to death, the fire would consume her. She couldn't
even cry for help. Danny, too, would die. And what chance would
Striker have against those darts?
She could have been such a good karate instructor . . .
*
Then the house exploded, and not from my arrow. Someone
had set off a substantial charge. The lights went out and the alarm
clangor ceased. So did the machine gun.
The power was off, the electronic defenses null. What a break!
Ilunga must have done it, somehow.
A black man charged around the house. I fitted another arrow,
197
unlit, and aimed it at him. Even a dead arrow could do a lot of
damage. But something made me pause. He was coated with mud.
I had never seen him before, I was sure, yet he seemed familiar. For
some reason I thought of Strate, the drug rehabilitation program.
There was also something funny about his hand, as though it had
too many fingers.
He saw me. "Don't shoot!" he cried. "I'm Danny! I found his
dynamite, and some grenades, and I lobbed a grenade into the
works and-"
And the grenade set off a sympathetic explosion that practically
tore the house apart, set it afire, and put the generator out of
commission. Our inside agent had come through after all.
I studied him. So this was Danny. All right and unbrainwashed.
"Where's your sister?" I called.
He stopped. "She don't matter."
"Doesn't matter!" I exclaimed. "She-"
"She went over to the Hyena. If I see her, I'll kill her!"
Sheer braggadocio. But that wasn't what concerned me. "She
came back to save you. She collaborated only to save your life!"
"Nice try, honky," he said. He turned away, toward the huge
picture window, miraculously intact after the explosion. "But I
saw-" He stopped, as though something significant had happened.
"That's one-way glass!"
"Sure," I agreed. "Lots of people use it. Now get out of sight
before the Hyena-"
"Sis-she couldn't see me!" he said, staring into his reflection
in the dark glass. "She never saw me!"
"Well, she went in looking for you," I said. "She never knew
you were here until Fidel told us. Now-"
"She never knew . . ." he repeated. Then he actually took a
handful of his mud-caked hair and tried to tear it out with a single
violent jerk. "How could I have doubted her!"
I realized that the brainwashing had affected his mind, even
though it evidently had not broken his will. "Mustapha is back
 
198
that way," I said, gesturing. "Go stay with him, until I find out
what's happened to Ilunga."
"No," he said. "I want the Hyena. He left me in quicksand, he
deceived me, he tortured me."
So that accounted for his condition. Quicksand! "All right," I
said. "Ilunga went in that house. Where would she be, if the Hyena
got her? They must have been fighting when you got at that
generator."
"Dead," he said. "That beast can fight."
"I mean the man-Hyena. We killed the beast."
"That's the one. Ilunga can fight too, but he cheats. He has
curare darts."

"Curare!"
"Some kind of derivative. It paralyzes without knocking out.
You can't get close to him, unless he wants you to."
That was what Mustapha had said about this estate, too. But
we were in. "Thanks. I'll watch it. Now, are there any booby-traps
in the house?" Ilunga had told us what to watch out for; I was
really testing Danny, just in case. If the Hyena had sent him out
to divert me . . .
"Not any more, since I blew the power. But he's got peepholes
in every room, so he can see you."
That checked. "Those are irrelevant, with all that smoke," I
said.
The house was burning briskly now. It is amazing how rapidly
a fire can spread when given a fair start in dry weather.
Suddenly the front door opened and the Hyena himself
bounded out, unarmed. He wore nondescript work clothes and
heavy paratrooper boots: obviously he had been caught off-guard.
Our haste to reach him had paid off, but if he escaped now, there
would be hell to pay.
I threw aside my bow. "Hyena!" I bawled, striking a stance.
There was no mistaking my meaning; this was our second meeting,
where the unfinished business of the first meeting would be
finished. I could have brought him down with an arrow, but even
199
in a situation like this there is such a thing as fair play. By the same
token, I doubted he would use his curare darts, if he had any with
him; his pride in his personal prowess when challenged would not
permit it.
He saw me, and charged. I had been right. He was no coward,
and this settlement was important to him.
"You go in and drag out your sister before she burns to death!"
I snapped at Danny. "I'll take care of the beast."
Danny ran to the house, avoiding the Hyena. I didn't know
whether Ilunga was alive or dead. But I would have no chance to
search for her myself before I dealt with the Hyena.
The Hyena tried a showy kung fu technique, a high jumpkick.
Had those boots struck my face or chest I would have been in
trouble. But I dodged it easily and countered with a powerful
round kick to his back, in the kidney region. The blow was enough
to send a normal man to the hospital.
This was not a normal man. The Hyena fell down, but rolled
forward and regained his feet, visibly shaken. Too visibly; he was a
master of deceit, and I didn't trust it. He moved into me and
gathered me in his arms, trying to crush me. His claws raked my
back. He had terrible strength.
I got my right hand up and hooked my thumb in the corner
of his animal-mouth. I ripped outward-and his face tore right off
his head, to dangle loosely, a horrible flap of skin.
He screamed-no laugh this time!-and let go of me, covering
his destroyed face with his hands.
It was the mask, of course. I had unmasked him, but I could
not recognize his true face through the wreckage. My thumb-hook
method would have made him scream, all right, had I caught his
real face, but apparently the mask was as important to him as his
flesh. By tearing it off, I had unmanned him.
He started kicking at me. His heavy boots slowed him somewhat,
his aim was poor because of the flap of mask still hanging
from his face, half blinding him. Also, much of his confidence was
gone. I reached for the mask again, curious to know his real iden-
 
200
tity-and he caught me with a crippling kick to my middle thigh.
It almost broke the bone, and the pain was incapacitating.
As I staggered, he charged me again, head down. He butted

me in the midriff, but I was already jumping back, alleviating the
thrust of his heavy skull. I grabbed his hair and mask and turned
his head violently to the side. Again his toughness saved him; my
move could have snapped his neck. As it was, he sprawled on the
ground and now his face was masked again, by dirt.
Then I made another mistake. I thought he was through, so I
did not move in immediately to finish him. That instant of respite
was all he needed. He grabbed a handful of dirt and threw it in my
face, one of the oldest tricks in the rough-and-tumble business. I
was momentarily blinded. The Hyena swiped at me again; I sensed
the movement; thanks to my Shaolin training, and jumped back.
Still, his claws raked across my face.
I reverted to the automatic combat of my long experience. I
made a round kick to his face, and another to the side of his neck,
bringing him down as my vision cleared. This time I didn't pause;
I tried to finish him with a powerful elephant stomp with my
heel, but he caught my descending foot and sent me sprawling to
the ground, twisting my injured leg.
I thought he was going to attack me again, and I scrambled
aside. But now he wanted only to escape. He ran for the swamp.
By the time my eyes cleared fully and I realized he was getting
away, he had had a good head start.
I should have known. The Hyena had done the same thing the
first time we met. As the ditty goes: "He who fights and runs away
lives, to fight another day."
But this time I wasn't going to let him get away. There was no
telling what mischief he would wreak upon the world.
I pursued him, but my thigh injury made me slow, and he
was already out of sight behind the bamboo. His tracks led toward
the swamp; did he have a boat there? He had to be somewhere
near. I would find him!
Something stung me between the shoulders, just below the
201
neck. The pain was minor, and I ignored it. But a coldness spread
from that sting, suffusing my body I turned-and saw the Hyena
standing behind me.
He made his hyena-laugh. I realized he had treacherously struck
me with one of his curare darts. Now I was helpless, and surely
that was what had happened to Ilunga in the house. I fell on my
face in the mud at the edge of the swamp.
Yet I tried to fight it. The dart had passed through the cloth of
my shirt; some of its poison would have been wiped off, leaving
me with a minimal dose. I struggled mightily, and managed to get
to my hands and knees. I sucked in air.
The Hyena laughed again, the pseudo-flesh of his mask billowing
out from his face. He hurled another dart-and I lacked
the reflex to dodge. It lodged in the side of my jaw, the point firm
in the bone. This time I had gotten the full dose.
He stepped toward me, and there was no doubt of his intention.
He had tried twice to kill me fairly, and failed. Now he would
kill me unfairly.
I felt a fire in my hara, the seat of my vitality in my belly.
Slowly it expanded.
It was the ki!
The Hyena kicked my shoulder. I rolled over on my back in
the muck, but that sphere within me was still expanding, revitalizing
my body. The ki was overcoming the poison! The power of
motion was returning to my body, my limbs. But too slowly. I was
still weak, very weak.
The Hyena took my head in his hands and stared into my
eyes. In that moment I recognized him-and was amazed. This
was one of the most powerful political figures in America, the consort
of Senators and Cabinet ministers and governors! If they only
knew his real nature . . .

I recoiled in horror. Maybe they did! If so, our government was
every bit as corrupt as Fidel said it was.
The Hyena smiled. He had wanted me to know him, before
 
202
he killed me. Then he pushed slowly on my face, letting the mud
come up over my ears, to my mouth.
His revelation of identity had given me time. My ki exploded,
banishing the lingering power of the curare. The dart still hung
from the flesh of my jaw. I moved my hand quickly, wrenched it
out, and stabbed him with it, in the neck.
He rocked back as if fatally wounded. For him, it was as if the
dead had come to life and struck him down. Supposedly I was
completely immobile.
Then he shoved at my head again, violently. My face went
under, but as the mud covered my eyes and mouth and nose, I
jackknifed. My legs came up and caught him in the belly. I boosted
him right over my head and into the swamp.
I struggled out myself, wiping the muck from my face. I tried
to stand, but the ki, its task completed, was already fading. The
nerve damage of the two curare darts reasserted itself, and I sat
down heavily in the mud. I was facing the Hyena, unable to do
more than hold my upper body erect and clear of the swamp. If he
came back to finish me now-
I saw him. He was sinking without a struggle. I realized two
things, for my mind was clear despite the rigor of my body. The
Hyena was immobile, because of his own curare poison; I must
have scored directly on his carotid artery, so that the trace residual
coating on the dart reached his brain quickly. And he was in no
ordinary swamp. That was quicksand!
I would have pulled him out, for I would not voluntarily allow
anyone to perish that way. But my ki was gone, and I was helpless.
As his head sank beneath the semi-liquid, I heard the footsteps
of another man approaching from behind. The Hyena's last
minion?
"I got her out!" Danny called. "She's alive! Where's the beastman?"
Then he stopped, realizing the situation. Together we watched
the slow bubbles burst at the surface of the swamp.
NINJA'S
REVENGE
 
Prologue:
FALL OF THE BLACK CASTLE
In the sixteenth century Japan was divided among a number
of autonomous domains governed by feudal barons, or daimyos. In
1573 Oda Nobunaga, daimyo of the province of Owari, became
the de facto shogun, or hereditary commander-in-chief of the army,
the seat of power in Japan. The emperor was at this time largely a
figurehead. For almost a decade thereafter Nobunaga consolidated
his authority, subjugating hostile barons and restoring order in
about half the empire.
But Nobunaga was a brutal man, even in a brutal age. He
slaughtered wantonly. He destroyed the Buddhist stronghold on
Mount Huei, burning the temple and three thousand buildings
and massacring thousands of monks, women, and children. This
terminated all Buddhist pretensions to political power-but at
what cost?
History records that Nobunaga was treacherously assassinated
by one of his generals, Akechi Mitsuhide, in 1582. This was a
half-truth, hiding a highly sensitive episode. The real manner of
 
206
his demise was rigorously excised from all records, in a pogrom as
savage as any implemented during his life.

Only one person survived to carry the truth; and for reasons of
his own, that person did not speak.
*
The bright silk banners of the emperor fluttered in the wind:
a great red dragon marching on the Black Castle. The samurai
warriors wore armor dresses of glittering red, blue, and gold laminae;
some had their heads bare, and others wore their hair tied in
knots. Rank after rank they marched, an awesome display of power.
Fu Antos, lord of the ninjas, looked out from the sturdy walls
of the Black Castle, seething with rage. Fifteen years before, Fu's
grandfather had influenced the emperor to promote Nobunaga's
career, and soon the daimyo had become the most powerful man in
Japan. Fu's grandfather had continued with valuable aid and advice
until his mysterious illness and death two years before.
Fu's father, also a gifted ninja leader, had spoken darkly of
poison smeared on the apples of the old man's private orchard, but
the source of that treachery was unknown. The ninja who had
performed the deed had committed seppuku, ritual suicide, before
he could be interrogated; surely some outside force had motivated
him. Fu's father had pursued the quest for information with extraordinary
diligence right to the emperor's palace itself-where
he died, suddenly, in what was said to be a most unfortunate hunting
accident.
Fu Antos, barely twenty years old when he assumed the lordship
of the Black Castle, was in many ways the most gifted ninja of
them all. He required no further warnings. Someone highly placed
was systematically eliminating the ninja leadership, and he was
very likely to be next. He dismissed all personnel of questionable
loyalty and prepared his defenses of the castle with exceeding care.
And waited.
Now the enemy had manifested openly: the shogun himself!
207
Fu Antos had harbored suspicions, but the confirmation was a
shock. Nobunaga tolerated no rival source of power in all of Japan
-especially, it seemed, that to which he was beholden.
Fu Antos was a young giant, drilled in the most sinister arts of
warfare and adept at techniques unknown by normal men. Since
the age of five he had trained rigorously, and still spent many
hours a day perfecting his discipline. His ninjas were as devastating
in man-to-man combat as any soldiers ever seen; in fact, the
average soldier had an almost supernatural fear of the ninjas, with
good reason.
Nobunaga was, it seemed, a skeptic. He had had years of ninja
advice, and assumed he knew it all. He thought to eradicate the
last of the line by this direct assault.
He would have a harsh education.
*
The siege was horrendous. The numerical strength of the ninjas
was small, while the shogun's army was the mightiest ever massed
in that period of Japan's history. But the Black Castle was a virtually
impregnable fortress, and the ninjas were the most skilled
siege and antisiege artists known.
Nobunaga was the first in Japan to appreciate the value of
firearms. He had a corps of musket men, using the new Portuguese
imported weapons. But the muskets were cumbersome things,
heavy, each requiring a long forked stick like a tripod to support
the barrel, because it was impossible to hold it up by the arms
alone. The warrior had to be strapped to the weapon to prevent
the recoil from sending him tumbling. Embossed in gold and silver
filigree, the musket was more a work of art than a field weapon.
It took a long time to set it up.
The ninjas, on the other hand, had special rapid-firing crossbows,
capable of penetrating the armor of the musketeers even
from the distance they were separated. They blanketed the sky

with poisoned arrows; the slightest scratch was fatal. The ninja
 
208
archers were protected by special leather shields erected on frames,
neru kawa, so that the musketballs did very little damage. And
they could shoot their missiles high into the air, like mortar shells,
negating the shields of the enemy.
There would come a day when firearms were more effective
than bows and crossbows. But not in this century.
The shogun's men tried to use a battering ram to break down
the doors. The ninjas used catapults to lob homemade powder
bombs on them, nullifying the effort explosively.
Nobunaga directed the construction of a mighty siege engine,
a tower as tall as the wall, shielded from fire arrows and bombs. It
was on stout wheels, and capable of carrying enough soldiers to
hold a beachhead on the ramparts. But the ninjas made a night
foray and planted a cache of gunpowder within it, blowing it to
pieces.
The soldiers tried to tunnel under the wall, but the castle was
built atop a mountain, the foundations sunk into bedrock in all
but a few secret places, impervious to any tunneling that could be
accomplished within a year.
The shogun had many troops. He tried a human-sea tactic,
heedless of the great numbers lost so long as some few got through
to scale the walls and open the way. But only a few paths were
available up the mountain, and above those were perched huge
boulders, readily tipped to roll crushingly down. The vibrations of
their irresistible descent set off small avalanches that further decimated
the attackers. There were also pits, cunningly concealed,
with poisoned stakes mounted in the bottom; only a supremely
cautious approach could negate these traps, and caution was impossible
under the gaze of the ninja archers.
But for those who did win through to the base of the walls,
scrambling over the corpses of their companions, a special treat
had been prepared: tremendous wooden vats filled with human
excreta, dead animals, scraps of spoiled food, garbage, manure,
and other organic refuse. It had been stewed in urine for several
weeks, until it simmered with its own heat of decomposition and
209
bubbled bilious gases from its fulsome mass. This was poured on
the heads of the soldiers, and the streams of foul-smelling slurry
mixture coated everything with nauseous slime-walls, ground,
and men.
The soldiers fled in disgust and panic, as experience had shown
them that the slightest wound, the most minor cut or scrape or
break in the skin, became infected. Soon it festered, blood poisoning
developed, and the sequence terminated in the most painfully
bloated death. The retreating men were hardly welcomed by their
cleaner comrades.
A cavalry charge was met by two giant bears suddenly uncaged.
The bears rose high on their hind feet, swiping at soldiers and
panicking the horses, who reared and threw their riders. The bears
were finally killed by archers from a distance, but the carnage had
been terrible.
The ninjas also loosed fierce dogs upon the enemy camp at
night, to rove among the sleeping men tearing out throats. Deadly
vipers slithered into the tents, striking at will, almost impossible
to locate and kill. Hundreds of ferrets scurried through, lighted
firebrands tied to their tails, igniting hundreds of structures and
wreaking havoc throughout the camp.
Nevertheless, the samurais persevered, for they were the ultimate
dedicated soldiers. They threw ladders against the walls and
scaled them. They were met at the top by the naginata, a kind of
sword attached to the end of a pole, five to nine feet long. Vicious

slashing arcs cleaned the troops off the ladders before they could
get close enough to fight back with their swords.
*
And so the siege settled down to weeks and months. The Black
Castle could not be taken by storm; its walls were too strong and
its defenders too valiant and clever. But it could not hold out forever.
The castle water supply was secure, as it came from deep wells
 
210
within the walled enclosure. In fact, it was the shogun's troops
who suffered from thirst, for the few springs down the mountain
had been poisoned, and water had to be hauled from a distance.
Fu Antos had seen to a large food supply of grains and tubers,
enough to sustain his personnel for a full year. There were gardens
within the walls, to grow fresh vegetables and greatly extend the
stores.
But there was one weapon against which the Black Castle was
not quite proof, and to this Nobunaga at last resorted. Treachery.
Months before, in anticipation of this need, Nobunaga had
sent a spy to contact the beautiful concubine of Fu Antos, Mitsuko.
It was delicately suggested to her that the shogun himself had
conceived a certain passion for her beauty and wit, and should she
ever be in need she would find a most royal welcome at his splendid
palace. She would have luxury far beyond any possible expectation
of the rigorous ninja life. But the time was not yet, for the
shogun did not wish to precipitate dissent in a loyal ally such as
Fu Antos.
In all the intervening time, this suggestion had worked its
indelicate magic on the girl's lquely-loving mind, abetted by tokens
of extraordinary value and luster. The last was a gold signet
ring containing an artfully broken portion of jade. "If ever you
wish to contact Nobunaga privately, send this ring," the agent
whispered. "The other half of the jewel is set into the ring on the
finger of the shogun himself; there is no other perfect match. Even
as these jewels must be united to be perfect, so must their owners
be, in the proper time."
Now, faced with the increasing hardships of the siege, and
rebuffed by the hard-driving, ascetic ways of her ninja lord, Mitsuko
made her decision. She sent the ring out of the Black Castle by a
secret route that only Fu Antos' inner circle knew. Soon the betrayal
was complete; she opened the door to an escape tunnel deep
in the bowels of the foundation, letting a picked squad of the
shogun's men inside. They were able to defend this passage long
enough for the first thousand samurai warriors to enter the castle.
211
Mitsuko herself was escorted in the other direction. She had a
long-awaited appointment with the shogun.
*
Still the ninjas fought. Outnumbered twenty to one inside
the castle, and a thousand to one outside it, they defended themselves
with unmitigated ferocity. One ninja was trapped in the
castle courtyard, surrounded by samurai. He had a kusarigama,
the chained sickle. He lashed out with the weighted chain and
struck one warrior in the neck, destroying his windpipe. He caught
the second with the blade, swung like a bola in a vicious circle
around his head. The iron weight on the end of the chain caved in
the chest of a third. A spearman thrust at him; the ninja caught
hold of the weapon, pulled the man forward, and put the point of
his sickle through that man's eye. A musketeer, given time during
this battle to set up, fired point-blank, killing him at last. But as
he fell, the ninja hurled the kusarigama at him. The chain whipped
around the soldier's neck, and the sickle swung in a narrowing arc
until it stabbed the body, and the man died.
Another ninja, cornered on a parapet, sprayed a cloud of poisoned

needles from his mouth, bringing down half a dozen attackers
before being shoved off the wall to fall to his death on the rocks
far below.
One ninja held out for some time by wafting clouds of powder
through a special blowtube. It settled over the heads of the soldiers,
and the stuff got into their eyes and burned fiercely, blinding
them, making them easy marks.
Another tried to escape by launching himself from the castle
wall on a glider contraption, with huge silk wings and a rudder on
his feet. For a moment he was airborne, to the amazement and
fury of the samurai, whose swords could not reach him. But again
a musketeer prevailed; he braced his weapon to point upward, and
tagged the ninja with the ball. He went out of control in the strong
 
212
air current and crashed down the mountain slope, his blood flying
out with the tattered silk.
Yet another ninja manned a cannon that squirted poison water.
Others threw eggs filled with chemicals; those that did not kill
their targets outright filled the air with an unbearable stench.
Fu Antos himself operated a special large-barreled mortar made
of wood and reinforced with paper, which blooped crude grenades
from the highest tower, to explode among the men below. But the
samurai charged up the narrow stair and finally overwhelmed him
after sustaining tremendous losses.
But no enemy sword touched Fu Antos. When he saw that all
was lost, he turned his sword against himself and slit his own
belly. It was the start of the act of seppuku, or ritual suicide.
The samurai leaped forward, for their orders were to take Fu
Antos alive for torture. They ripped the sword from his hands and
from his belly, but too late. His heartbeat had stopped, his body
was growing cold. He had escaped the remainder of the shogun's
sport.
Others were not so fortunate. Of perhaps a hundred ninjas in
the castle at the start of the siege, five were taken alive, and a score
of their women and children. All the male captives were grievously
wounded, so the bulk of the retribution had to be exacted on their
families, who had fought valiantly alongside their men.
Of the five, two were suspended, tightly bound, on wooden
frames set above sharpened bamboo stakes. Positioned as if seated,
their legs stretched widely apart, they were lowered anus-first onto
the points. The ropes holding them were wet down, so that they
softened and elongated slowly, making the impalement lingeringly
inevitable. Two others were boiled in oil, and the last was skinned
alive, slowly. Too slowly: he died of his prior wounds before the
job was completed.
Not one of these men screamed, giving their torturers no satisfaction.
Some frustrated samurai warriors tested the techniques
out on one of the torture specialists, just to make sure they worked
properly. They did; the screams were resounding.
213
The ninja women were sorted out according to age and appearance,
and mass-raped. The shogun's warriors lined up eagerly
for these intangible spoils, twenty or thirty to a woman, and even
more for the top choices. The action proceeded on an assemblyline
basis in full public view, with a large audience to applaud
especially dramatic thrusts.
The women, as resolute in adversity as their men, did not
scream or cry or even fight. They tolerated it without visible show
of emotion, accepting nothing, contributing nothing. But no
chances were taken; all were bound and gagged for the occasion,
their legs staked apart.
Suddenly a samurai began screaming. His private parts were
burning! Awful blisters rose on the tender skin. In moments he

sank to the ground, unconscious, his skin peeling off, while the
lines continued to move.
Then others screamed, falling with similar symptoms. Ten,
twenty, fifty-and every one had had connection with one of the
ninja victims in the prior twenty minutes.
By the time they realized the source of their mysterious illness,
almost a thousand men were doomed. The ninja women,
knowing that they would be raped and killed, had secreted a slowstarting
poison within their genitals, a suppository that dissolved
into fluid at a controlled rate. Every early rapist died in terrible
agony, and the later ones, who hastily washed off their members
when the danger was realized, suffered castrating burns.
Now the women were stabbed, beheaded, or throttled where
they lay bound. In moments all were dead. But, ironically, this
quick emotional slaughter only spared them the slower agony of
their own poison. They, too, had escaped vengeance, after killing
as heroically and effectively as had their men.
That left the children, who had fought right alongside their
parents, throwing sharp-pointed caltrops under the feet of the samurai,
firing little crossbows, and darting at the legs of warriors, to
disable them with spears and knives. A child could do a lot of
damage, partly because he was not seen as a threat until too late.
 
214
The surviving children were tortured, and they, at least, lacked
the discipline to stifle their screams. But they also lacked endurance,
and far too soon they died. It was most unsatisfactory.
*
Nobunaga had Fu Antos' body hung at the entrance to the
royal tent, untouched. He had not yet decided the appropriate
disposition of it, since all the other captives had been disposed of
and Fu's only living relative was the traitress Mitsuko. How to
make a man suffer-after he was dead?
For now the shogun had to settle for dishonor and symbolism:
perhaps the spirit of the ninja leader would writhe in appropriate
distress. Nobunaga took Mitsuko inside that tent and put her
through a series of contortions almost as demanding as those of
the battle. The flap of the tent was left open so that the corpse
could witness what its trusted concubine was doing with such
delight. Later, she would be discarded, her purpose served.
At last, sated, the shogun fell asleep. Mitsuko lay awake, still
connected to his body; and now a nameless fear overcame her and
made her want to scream, but she dared not. For the hanging
corpse was in sight, and the guards were stationed well clear, and
she had some inkling of what Fu Antos was capable of. She had
supposed the body would be utterly destroyed and buried far from
her sight. This was too close; she thought she heard something or
saw something. Was it just the wind stirring the dead man, or was
his ghost already coming back to haunt her?
In the chill of the night the seeming corpse of Fu Antos quivered.
The gaping, bloody wound in his belly closed up. His heartbeat
resumed, and body heat developed.
For the ninja master was not dead. Through his secret studies
he had learned the art of temporary suspended animation. He
could control his internal functions, stop bleeding from an open
wound by act of will, and slow his heartbeat to the point of
undetectability. Thus he had feigned death after making his self-
215
inflicted wound, in which his blade had carefully avoided vital
organs. He had permitted just enough blood to flow to make it
realistic. Now he was free, in the presence of the shogun, inside
the ring of samurai guards, after hours of listening.
A contortion, and Fu Antos was free of his bindings. He flexed
his muscles, restoring his flesh to serviceability. Then, like a reanimated

corpse, he stalked into the tent.
Mitsuko's widely staring eyes met his. With a hypnotic gesture
he silenced her and froze her in place, so that she could not
even wake Nobunaga. Still clasped in her lover's arms, she watched,
terrified.
The shogun lay snoring. For a moment Fu Antos gazed upon
him. Then he took up the shogun's own katana sword and lifted it
high. One cut would sever them both, making four parts of two.
But he hesitated. This lacked artistry. All that he had built
had been destroyed by this man, and the last of the ninjas' children
still groaned feebly on the stakes, slow to die, though they no
longer could be saved. Could one swift cut repay it all?
He set aside the large blade. From the remnant of his garment
he brought out a small vial of liquid. He let a few drops fall into
the open mouth of the shogun. It was a special ninja brew that
would immobilize the man physically while not interfering with
his sensations or mental processes. He would be conscious, but
unable to react in any physical way.
Then Fu took a small fine dagger and began his work, while
the horrified Mitsuko watched. He heated the blade in a brazier
there in the tent, keeping the interior warm against the chill of the
night. His cold eyes rested on the two figures, still embraced among
the cushions, as his hand fanned the coals. Too bad he had not
paid more attention to his concubine; she had talents he had not
properly appreciated, both mental and physical. As a ninja he
should have been the first to anticipate her potential for treachery,
not the last. And as a man, he should have put her through her
sexual paces long ago, instead of allowing the shogun to show him
up. Hard lessons!
 
216
The fire came up high, and the steel glowed red. It would
automatically cauterize all wounds, most painfully, so that the
subject would not become infected and die prematurely.
Then he took that searing blade and cut the tendons of the
shogun's heels and wrists, laming him forever. He removed the
eyelids so that the man's eyes could never again close; he would
soon be blind. He slit the nose, punctured the eardrums, and
amputated the tongue. He carefully separated the two figures, slit
the anus of the shogun, and severed his virile member. Though the
man's lust would remain intact, he would have no way to satisfy it,
and the very act of elimination would be a daily torture.
Lame, blind, deaf, dumb, half-sexed, and half-assed, Nobunaga
would live out his life in whatever fashion he could. Fu Antos'
vengeance was almost complete.
"Tell them who did it," Fu said to Mitsuko. She only nodded.
He garbed himself in a soldier's dress and walked out of the
tent and out of the camp, unchallenged.
Mitsuko, knowing she would be blamed-for that was Fu's
vengeance on her-drew forth a vial from her own hiding place.
Moments after the drops touched her tongue, she was dead.
*
When General Akechi Mitsuhide discovered them in the morning,
he mercifully slew his commander and fabricated a story to
conceal the awful truth. The shogun's body was buried in a closed
coffin. Much of the blame, Mitsuhide had to take upon himself,
for he had been responsible for his commander's safety. Thus it
was recorded by history.
The domains of the Black Castle were given up to horrendous
pillage. The castle itself was torn apart, the huge blocks scattered
and broken up, until only a pile of rubble remained atop the mountain.
The fields, houses, and persons of all Fu Antos' peasant supporters
were burned. The children were enslaved, and the prettiest
girls taken for distant harems, after being thoroughly checked to

217
be sure they had no poison. It was a better fate than that visited
upon the older and homelier females. Everything in the vicinity
was systematically laid waste. A foul pall of smoke lay over all.
Fu Antos did not bother to swear further vengeance. It was
futile, as he had already dealt with the principals of the betrayal,
and there was no way he could save his people. But the odor of
those awful fires stank in his nostrils for many years, and he developed
an abiding hate of such destruction.
*
Fu Antos made his lonely way to the far wilds of Hokkaido
island, in northern Japan. There he recruited more ninjas and built
a second Black Castle, all in secret. The job took centuries, for he
dared not attract the attention of the Empire of the South. Laboriously
they hewed and hauled the great stones, and diligently
they trained.
The job was too much to be compassed by the life of one
normal man. But Fu Antos also explored the occult mysteries of
the deepest ninja secrets. Accounts differ; some claim that he lived
for four hundred years, sustained by his immense power of ki, that
phenomenal and mysterious inner force. Others believe that he
transferred that awesome intelligence and will to the body of a
child, his son. So he continued in a chain of incarnations, developing
his extraordinary powers to a level unknown in prior human
history. Certainly he was a most remarkable man, though few outsiders
knew of him or his talents.
The rulers of Japan changed, and so did its governments. The
shoguns gave way to their emperors, and the unbroken line of this
royal family continued, always on the alert for news of the hated
ninjas. Population increased enormously, and technology blossomed
beyond all prior imagination. But Fu Antos was determined to
save this last wilderness from the ravages of the larger society. From
time to time he emerged from his sanctuary to meddle in the
affairs of ordinary men, always with his own basic objective in
 
218
mind: preserve the original sanctity of nature, explore the inner
nature of man.
On occasion he deigned to train worthy students-extraordinary
men in themselves, who returned to the world but kept his
secret scrupulously. One such was little Hiroshi, later the leading
aikido practitioner of his time and a globally respected sensei, or
teacher and philosopher.
Yet by the time of the twentieth century, Fu Antos' power was
waning. There were fewer recruits, and the devices of civilization
were phenomenal. Mighty demon birds called airplanes roared
across the sky, and metal monsters called trains and trucks roved
the earth. Fu Antos himself was aging, trapped in a decrepit body.
His few remaining ninjas, afraid of his continuing ambitions, refused
to enact the transfer of his sentience to his prepared childbody
-that son he had begotten in his only amorous liaison of the
century was the sole purpose of that liaison, the woman soon forgotten
-and they prevented assistance from outside. They could
not touch him personally, because of his powerful ki, and they
were loyal in their fashion. They simply did not understand his
needs, and waited patiently for his eventual death. He was in dire
straits.
Into this situation came a foreigner-Jason Striker, an American
martial-arts instructor. Yet Fu Antos had made use of even
less likely tools in the past.
Chapter 1:
HIROSHI
The little man entered the post office and looked about. He was
in his sixties, Oriental, with a small wispy white beard and scraggly

white locks blowing about his head. He wore a hakama, a Japanese
pleated black cotton skirt that reached down to his ankles, and a kind
of white blouse, along with wooden sandals that were elevated on
cleats. This was a common garb in his own country, and seemed out
of place in America only because of his advanced age.
He carried an envelope in his hand. He looked about, then
spied the window for stamps. He smiled, and went to stand at the
rear of the line.
In a moment a woman joined the line behind him. She glanced
over his shoulder, for she was taller than he. He stood barely over
five feet tall, and massed a hundred pounds. "Say, mister," she
said. Her voice had the city twang, able to penetrate the constant
noise pollution.
He turned to face her. "Hiroshi, Japan. A pleasure to meet
you." He made a little bow.
 
220
Disgruntled by this unexpected courtesy, she pointed to his
envelope. "You can't mail that. You forgot the zip code."
Hiroshi's brow furrowed. "Zip code? This is a letter from Mr.
Diago, who is staying in Japan, to his cousin Mr. Drummond in
America. I can carry it only this far, as I have other business. I
believe the address is correct."
"I guess they don't have the zip code where you come from,"
she said. "It's a number you put on the end of the address. Nobody
pays any attention to it, and it slows down the mail, but the
P0 gets pretty sticky if you don't put it on. You better look it up.
There's a zip-code guide over there." She pointed to a table across
the room. "Go ahead. I'll save your place."
Hiroshi bowed again. "Thank you most kindly, lovely lady."
He walked to the table, leaving her flustered with pleasure, for she
was stout and fortyish.
A large man of about fifty joined the line. He was overweight
but still muscular under his overalls, with a hard hat and lunch
pail, a tough blue-collar worker. He smoked a vile-smelling cigar,
in plain violation of the NO SMOKING sign. "Come on, move it
along," he muttered impatiently at no one in particular. "I don't
have all day."
Hiroshi returned. "The omission has been corrected," he said,
showing the envelope to the woman as he took his place in line.
"No, please stand ahead. I have time."
She nodded, and he stepped behind her.
"Hey, what is this?" the big man demanded. "Line forms to
the rear!" He puffed angrily on his cigar.
The woman turned. "It's all right. He-"
"Don't tell me it's all right!" the man exclaimed. "No goddamn
Jap cuts in front of me!"
Hiroshi bowed to him. "I shall move back."
"You yellow bastards think you won the war!" the man bellowed,
so that the whole post office could hear. "You think you
can shove in anywhere! Well, I have news for you!" He blew a
cloud of smoke down into Hiroshi's face.
221
"For God's sake!" the woman cried. "All he did was-"
"I killed dozens of you stinking buggers in the war!" the man
shouted. He jabbed the lighted end of his cigar at Hiroshi's face.
"We should of A-bombed every last one of you to hell!" He stepped
forward as Hiroshi stepped back, advancing behind his cigar.
Now the whole post office was watching. People stood around
awkwardly, not wanting to get involved, but not liking to see the
bully go unchecked. Hiroshi was as visibly harmless as a man could
be, with his small stature, white hair, and dresslike hakama. The
employee in the stamp window was leaning out.
"I regret if I have given offense," Hiroshi said mildly. "I am not

familiar with all your ways."
"Get your ass out of here before I throw it out!" the man yelled.
He shoved Hiroshi with one stout arm. There he made a bad mistake.
Hiroshi caught that arm with one small hand. His other hand
reached up to put a nerve pinch on the man's trapezius muscle in
the shoulder. Even through the heavy material of the coverall, it
was obviously a painful grip.
The man screamed and fell to his knees. His cigar dropped to
the floor.
Calmly Hiroshi picked up the cigar, maintaining the nerve
pinch. He shoved it into the man's open mouth. "Eat-it is for
your soul!"
The man tried to spit the tobacco out, but Hiroshi increased
his pressure. Sweat appeared on the man's face. He chewed the
cigar and swallowed it.
Hiroshi let him go. The man stumbled out. "Police!" he bawled
"Police! I've been attacked!" Cigar ashes fell from his lips.
Hiroshi calmly returned to his place in the line, waiting to
buy his stamp.
"Listen, I'm sorry," the woman said. "The city is full of boors
like him. Every last one of them needs a good lesson in manners!
Are you all right?"
"Excellent, thank you," Hiroshi said. "I regret causing you
alarm."
 
222
"Alarm! I just wish you'd do the same to every ill mannered
lout you meet!" she said. "Very soon there'd be less mugging, fewer
rapes . . ."
"That's for sure!" the stamp clerk said from his window. "This
whole country's in a crisis of contempt. The law means nothing,
and common courtesy means less. We need to return to the oldfashioned
values."
There was a general murmur of agreement throughout the
post office. Hiroshi nodded thoughtfully. Perhaps he had been too
conservative, not realizing that ill-manners were not irrevocably
ingrained in the American personality. He would have to modify
his reactions.
*
The phone rang as I was stepping out the door. I backtracked
and scooped it up, irritated because I was already late for my trip
to the dojo, or judo and karate practice hall. "Yes?"
"Striker?" a voice demanded. "Jason Striker?"
"Yes! What do you want?"
"You know a Jap named Hiroshi?"
"Hiroshi!" I exclaimed, remembering my little friend. "Yes, I
know a Japanese sensei, an aikido instructor-"
"Well, get over here fast! He's disturbing the peace!"
"Now, hold on!" I protested. "Hiroshi is a highly respected
martial artist, perhaps the top man in his field, and a man of peace
and courtesy. He would never-"
"Just get down to the station, pronto!" he snapped. "Foreign
national or not, one more episode and we'll throw the book at
him."
"But I have a class to teach!" I said. Too late; he had hung up.
223
*
The light turned green. Hiroshi moved sideways a few steps,
because a recent shower had left a large puddle just below the curb
where a drain was partly clogged with litter. The water poured
noisily down the storm drains on both sides of the street farther
along. He circled the area and returned to the pedestrian zone, as
the others were doing. "Goddamned litterbugs!" one man muttered,
leaning over to fish out a large plastic wrapper so that the

water could flow more freely.
A big truck rounded the corner, its tires spraying out dirty
water. The other people scattered, forced to splash through the
puddle to get out of the way, soaking their shoes and cuffs. The
driver evidently had no intention of stopping; he was arrogantly
preempting the right-of-way, confident that no one who valued
his life would argue against such a juggernaut.
Hiroshi stood where he was, directly in the path of the truck.
The brakes squealed; the truck shuddered to a halt bare inches
from Hiroshi, who had not moved at all.
The driver leaned out of his cab. He was a burly Italian-American
with greasy black hair, weighing 225 pounds. "Goddamn chink!
Don't you know enough to get out of the way?"
"I believe I had the right-of-way," Hiroshi said politely. "I did
not wish to step in the dirty water."
The driver's face reddened. "Up your ass, yellow monkey! You're
damned lucky I didn't run you down!"
Hiroshi paused, as if recalling a recent discussion. A crowd of
spectators gathered, a number of them with wet feet. "Better move
on, old man," one of them murmured. "Those truckers are murder."
"Now, fuck off before I clobber you!" the driver yelled.
"I am waiting," Hiroshi said, his voice level.
"Waiting?" the man demanded, his face purpling. Cars were
already honking behind him as a traffic snarl developed. "You little
fairy! What for?"
 
224
"For your apology."
The driver, incoherent with rage, put his truck in gear and
nudged forward as if to run over the little man. Hiroshi stepped
nimbly to the side and approached the cab. The driver opened the
door part way and brandished a tire iron threateningly, as though
to bash Hiroshi in passing. There was a murmur of alarm through
the crowd.
Hiroshi jumped near, caught the descending arm, and pulled
the man out of the cab. So skillful was the sensei's motion that the
driver stumbled all the way across the street, almost bowling over
the backpedaling spectators, and finally fell-to skid on his face
into the dirty water flowing into the far gutter.
The truck, meanwhile, rolled on. It ground over the curb and
lodged against a fire hydrant, bending it over and breaking the
pipe.
A fountain of water jetted out, splashing against the truck and
angling up over the street and sidewalk. The crowd withdrew hastily
as this new rain descended. Hiroshi merely held out his hand,
appreciating the refreshing shower. This was good clean water, in
contrast to the puddles.
The truck driver pulled himself erect, gutter water dripping
from his ugly face. He still had the tire iron. He saw the mess his
truck had made, and he saw Hiroshi, hand angelically outstretched,
facing away from him.
The driver roared like a wounded bear and charged, the tire
iron lifted high. A woman screamed.
Hiroshi waited until the driver was almost upon him, following
the sounds with his acutely trained ear. Then he turned, grabbed
the man's wrist, and performed a kote-nage swing-throw, pulling
back while swiftly turning the wrist. The driver somersaulted forward
and landed on his back, his wind knocked out.
In the distance a siren sounded. The traffic snarl was such that
the police would be a long time arriving.
Hiroshi walked on in the direction he had been traveling, nod-
225
ding amicably to the gaping spectators. The lesson in courtesy was
complete.

*
The police lieutenant mopped his sweating face with a sodden
handkerchief. "He arrived from Japan this morning; we verified
that with the airline. Everything in order. Then he headed into
the city on foot. First thing he does is beat up a man waiting in
line at the post office."
"Hiroshi?" I repeated incredulously. "He would never-"
The lieutenant silenced me with an imperious gesture. "After
that, he wrecked a truck and roughed up the driver and destroyed
city property. No provocation at all-just yanked the poor guy
out at an intersection and dumped him in the gutter. We have the
victim's complete unbiased statement."
I shook my head. "This is a case of mistaken identity! Hiroshi
is a man of peace. He always does the right thing."
The lieutenant grabbed his cap. "Well, come see for yourself,
skeptic! If we're lucky, we'll catch him before he kills somebody."
I blew my breath out through puffed cheeks and followed
him. I was now hopelessly late for my judo class; I only hoped
Ilunga was able to cover for me properly, though her specialty was
karate. Something was certainly wrong.
*
The cab careened toward the pregnant woman. She had no
chance at all to get out of the way.
Hiroshi, unused to the ways of this violent country, did not
realize the facility with which such vehicles maneuvered. The cabbie,
intent on catching the 10:40 for a five-dollar tip, was shaving
it close. He was an expert dealing with moving, changing spaces at
high velocity, instinctively figuring what would be there for his
cab before it actually manifested. He was acutely aware of the flex-
 
226
ible pattern of traffic, for he had honed his skill on fifteen years'
experience in this jungle, with no more than one accident a year,
with only one-fifth of those actually his fault. He saw a gap developing
ahead in the other lane, and the blockage shaping up in his
own lane. He saw the jaywalking woman, twice a fool to risk her
swelling baby, and had made due allowance. There was just room
to squeeze into the inner lane without slowing. He would miss her
by a good eighteen inches as he swerved. Like a fine musician, he
played his singing vehicle through the shifting spaces available,
phasing through a parameter of vectors, just so.
"But the little sensei did not know that. His field was hand-tohand
combat, not vehicular phase racing. He saw death in the
making, and he acted instantly.
From his robe he drew a ninja weapon, a shuriken. It was a tiny
star-shaped throwing blade. He hurled it almost in the same motion,
with uncanny accuracy. It punctured the speeding cab's front
tire.
The tire exploded. The car swerved, for it had been under
severe stress before the blowout. It slewed about as the driver fought
for control in an abruptly diminished parameter. In a moment
there was a three-car pileup.
But the pregnant woman was safe. "Idiot driver!" she bawled
as she stepped back and lost herself in the crowd.
With surprising alacrity, two of the city's finest were on the
scene. "There he is!" one cried.
They ignored the pileup. With guns drawn, they converged
on Hiroshi. They were both beefy cops, red-faced Irish, with an
aggregate of thirty-five years' experience on the force. They knew
their business.
"Get over by that wall!" one snapped at Hiroshi.
Perplexed, the little man obeyed.
They made him lean against the building at a forty-five-degree
angle, balanced on his fingertips, feet spread apart. One policeman

stood with one foot inside Hiroshi's, in order to trip him
if he tried to move. The other stood to the rear on the other side,
227
covering Hiroshi with his gun. The first policeman holstered his
gun and put his left hand on Hiroshi's spine, to feel for any telegraphic
muscle movements.
It was the standard setup for frisking a suspect, a procedure
considered foolproof all over the world. They were taking no
chances, they thought.
But Hiroshi was an extraordinary man, and he felt that it was
discourteous of them to treat him like a common criminal. He
who had instructed thousands of policemen of many nationalities
in the rudiments and refinements of the martial art of aikido. In
fact, he was the author of an authoritative text on the subject.
They should at least have explained what they suspected him of,
and formally acquainted him with his rights. These minions of the
law, like certain other parties, required a lesson in manners. After
all, if the police were not polite, who else would be?
He moved like lightning. It was as though he disappeared for
an instant and reappeared in a more commanding position.
Abruptly he had disarmed the frisking policeman and held him as
a shield, his own gun to his head. The man's hand was twisted
against his own forearm, the wrist bent inward at his back. Hiroshi's
fingers pressed the pain centers at the base of that wrist and in the
soft fold of flesh between thumb and forefinger. The other policeman
could not shoot, lest he hurt his partner. At a gesture from
Hiroshi, he dropped his gun.
Hiroshi shoved his hostage into the other man, and such was
his skill that the big cop, over twice Hiroshi's weight, was propelled
violently forward. The two collided belly-to-belly with a
loud smack.
"Now," Hiroshi said, making a small bow, "allow me to run
through that again, more slowly, so that you may see where you
erred. Pick up your weapons; I shall stand at the wall again, so."
And he assumed the forty-five-degree lean.
One policeman looked at the other, shaking his head unbelievingly.
They were now ringed by a substantial crowd. From some-
 
228
where in the rear came a guffaw. Red-faced, they resumed their
positions for the frisking. There was little else to do.
Hiroshi spun around slower than before, but still amazingly
rapidly. One hand knocked up the policeman's hand at his spine.
He then seized this hand and twisted into the submission hold.
The officer tried to resist, but seemed powerless.
"One must frisk very quickly and lightly," Hiroshi said, as
though addressing recruits. "So as not to be caught by such a
motion. Instead of touching the suspect's spine with the fingertips,
do it with the barrel of the gun, so as to be able to shoot him
if he makes a break. But mainly"-here he frowned like a little
professor, commanding their attention-"be alert. When it becomes
routine, it grows careless, and a desperate man can strike.
Never take a suspect for granted."
The policemen were disgruntled but impressed. "I was alert,"
the frisker said. "But it was like I was frozen for an instant there."
"Oh, yes," Hiroshi agreed. "Never go against someone with
highly developed ki. There are those who can stun you without
touching you. I regret I had to use mine, so as to minimize the risk
of injury to either party."
"Key," the man said, puzzled.
"Ki. Inner force. All people have it, but in most it is untrained."
"Yeah," the policeman agreed, shaking his head numbly.
"And now, farewell," Hiroshi said, bowing. He walked on, leaving
the disgruntled policemen to unsnarl yet another traffic jam.

They had even forgotten they were supposed to arrest him.
*
I looked at the carnage: three cars wrecked, a hundred stalled
in the press, three people injured, and the ambulances still trying
to get through. The two officers on the scene were tight-lipped
and uncommunicative; apparently Hiroshi had escaped them and
made a profound impression. Positive or negative? Both, evidently.
"Satisfied?" the lieutenant demanded. "That little Jap is a
229
criminal menace! He's turning the whole city upside-down, and
he's got to be stopped. One more episode like this, and I'm issuing
a shoot-on-sight bulletin!"
"I'll stop him!" I said. This officer was prone to overstatement,
but I certainly didn't want Hiroshi in any more trouble. "Just give
me a chance to catch up."
"You'd better!" he snapped.
I ran on down the street, forging through the throng. Quite a
number of people were snickering, which was incongruous. Just
what had Hiroshi done, to spread such simultaneous carnage and
goodwill? Such mischief was hardly like him.
I was now certain it was Hiroshi. All descriptions tallied, and
no one else was capable of the deeds he seemed to have done. The
police had called me because I had many worldwide martial-arts
contacts, and he was obviously martial artist. Simplistic logic, but
valid, in this case. It was just as well they had.
I had to catch him and stop him before someone really did get
killed.
*
Hiroshi entered the dojo, the judo and karate practice hall.
The students were doing uchi-komis, or one-to-one practice drill.
They were trying the same isolated movement again and again, so
as to perfect it. There is no easy way to achieve perfection.
A tall black woman with a broken nose and a remarkable figure
was in charge. But she was having difficulties. Hiroshi's experienced
eye took it in at a glance: she was a karateka, and this was
a judo class. Karate is basically a system of unarmed striking, a
deadly form of boxing, while judo consists primarily of throws and
holds, like wrestling. She might be competent in her specialty,
but was not properly equipped to instruct here, and was evidently
a substitute.
He approached her. "If you please, miss . . ."
The woman whirled, startled, for he had come noiselessly. Beads
 
230
of sweat stood on her forehead and upper lip. "Get out of my way;
can't you see I'm busy?"
Undaunted, Hiroshi persisted. "I wish only to speak with Jason
Striker. Is this not his dojo?"
"Yes, it's his dojo!" she snapped. "But you can't see him."
Hiroshi's brow furrowed. "It is not like him to leave his students
to one not qualified to instruct. Where is he now?"
The woman's lip curled. She had mobile features, and it was
an effective expression. It was obvious that her temper was not
normally long, and now it was unusually truncated. "You can talk
to me! What the hell do you want?"
"I want to speak with my friend Jason Striker," he repeated
patiently, as to a child.
"So I am not good enough for you!" she said challengingly.
Hiroshi realized that this person, too, required a lesson in courtesy.
The people at the post office were correct: rudeness and disrespect
were endemic in this busy city. Courtesy was fundamental
to martial art, for such powers should never be used arrogantly. "I
regret that is so," he said, making a little bow. "I seek your master."
"No man is Ilunga's master!" she cried. She rushed at him

with upraised arm, ready to give him the bum's rush out.
The students, true to the mores of the city instead of the dojo,
had formed a crowd of avid spectators. They stood in a tight ring
around the two, watching silently.
Hiroshi now made a formal bow of welcome. He dropped to
his knees and lowered his head, placing both hands flat on the
mat. As it happened, by no coincidence, he made his obeisance
right against Ilunga's knees as she charged. The momentum of her
rush carried her right over his body. She flipped in the air and
sprawled on her back, hard. A driblet of blood flowed from her
nostril.
Suddenly Hiroshi was on his feet and leaning over her. His
two hands touched the sides of her head, putting pressure on the
231
nerve centers behind her ears. It was a submission hold that had
her powerless.
The students watched, amazed. "It is nothing," Hiroshi said,
letting her go. "She is very tired. I will make it better."
He gestured to the shaken woman. "Kneel, please."
Like a dazed tigress, she yielded, reluctantly. Hiroshi made a
little bow, then made a terrific kiai yell.
Ilunga jumped up, hands to her face. The blood was gone.
"Cold water!" she said. "Like a current of water up my nose!"
The students saw something she could not: the nose also appeared
straighter, as though the fall had somehow reset the cartilage.
But that could have been a trick of the lighting.
Hiroshi nodded benignly. "An excellent description, my dear."
He looked about. "But where is Jason Striker?"
"We don't know," one of the students said. "He's usually right
on time. Something must have held him up."
"Very well," Hiroshi said amicably. "I will instruct your class
until he returns. My specialty is aikido, but a number of the techniques
overlap."
And while Ilunga sat on the mat, amazed, he organized the
class and proceeded to give authoritative instruction in judo, demonstrating
throws and holds with unparalleled expertise.
*
The trail led, of all places, straight to my own dojo. Hiroshi
had been coming to see me all the time!
As I entered the door, I saw a surprisingly well-organized class
in session. But Ilunga was not conducting it.
Well, this was no wackier than the rest of the morning's activities.
Who had come to handle things, unbidden, in my absence? A
little old man in a skirt.
"Hiroshi!" I cried. "What are you doing here?"
"Substituting for an errant judoka," he said mildly. The stu-
 
232
dents chuckled, much as the people in the street had. He had
done it again.
"You didn't come all the way from Japan just to visit!"
Hiroshi frowned. "I have a matter of some privacy to discuss,"
he said. "Look at this while I finish the job at hand." He handed
me a small leather pouch, and returned to his instruction. I felt
like an intruder in my own dojo.
I took the pouch and opened it. And gasped.
It was full of large uncut diamonds.
This meant something extremely serious. "Ilunga, can you wrap
things up here?" I asked her. "I'd better talk with Hiroshi, alone.
Now."
She nodded sullenly. She looked subtly better, but I saw that
her pride had been hurt. I would have to attend to that later. I had
to settle with Hiroshi before the police caught up with us. His
other actions were mischief enough, but with these stolen diamonds

. . .
What was Hiroshi, the original impoverished philosopher,
doing with what might be a million dollars worth of hot stones?
"There's a bar a couple blocks down the street," I said. I wasn't
much for drinking, but that wasn't the point. "They carry sake,
and it is private."
Hiroshi nodded amicably. We set off for our talk. I already felt
like a criminal collaborator.
Chapter 2:
FU ANTOS
A young boy walked through the forest of Hokkaido island,
Japan. He wore black cotton trousers, ragged at the fringes, a frayed
white shirt, a wide-brimmed peasant straw hat, and cleated sandals
fashioned from cut rubber tires. But he was no peasant child;
he had obtained the clothing from a man who had a child his size,
paying for it with the least of the several fighting knives he possessed.
He did not like the outfit, for much of it was machinemade,
and the composition of the sandals he did not comprehend
at all.
Yet his eyes, under the wiry black hair, were bright. There was
a certain aura about him, the way he moved and looked about,
that suggested a mind of uncanny comprehension. And he was
well-armed. He used a long wood staff to assist his footing, but it
doubled as a bo, an effective weapon. Under his hat were hidden
several shuriken. From his belt dangled nunchakus, the linked clubs
concealed by the overlap of his shirt so that their nature was hardly
evident. Around his waist was the chain of a kusarigama, the chained
 
234
sickle. He wore a small backpack, and in it were packets of poisons
and blinding powders, a pair of tekagi, or iron spikes for the palms
of the hands, a grappling hook with a long rope attached, the rope
made of twined human hair, several caltrops, or spiked balls used
to impede pursuit on the ground, and, almost incidentally, a little
food.
Tonki, small throwing knives, were strapped to his back, and a
kyoketsu-shogi, a double-pointed knife attached by a cord to a metal
ring, was bound to one leg.
But to the casual glance, he was just a wandering child, and
little in his manner indicated otherwise. One would have had to
observe him for several hours before his true strangeness became
evident. And that was problematical, for though he seemed to be
paying only indifferent attention to his surroundings, no one could
have followed him undetected for long.
He stopped at a stream to drink. But as his lips approached
the water, he paused. He frowned, showing the irritation of a man
who had really expected better-though he was hardly eight years
old, physically. He did not drink.
For some time the boy contemplated his wavering reflection
in the moving water, as though meditating. What had he expected
to see-the face of an old man? Physically he was undernourished,
his stiff hair radiating out from under his hat in an unruly manner.
His skin was faintly yellow, hairless, and his eyes were Oriental.
He had good, clean white teeth and even features, but was otherwise
undistinctive.
Then he looked up, noting a slight milky cloudiness in the
water, and saw a fish floating by, belly-up. This only confirmed
what he had already fathomed: the river had been poisoned.
He walked along the bank, upstream, seeking the source of
the poison. As he proceeded, his strange mind sifted through an
incredible store of information, remembering, reasoning, assimilating.
He recognized the river poison: it was predominantly mercury,
one of the ninja staples. Yet it differed, being grossly impure;
and there were no longer ninjas hereabouts.

235
The boy was in a position to know, for he was Fu Antos, lord
of the ninjas. His body harbored a mind whose awareness extended
back four centuries.
But Fu Antos was a figure of the past. Once highly active,
involved in intrigue in any part of Japan, he had lost touch in the
past century. He had been confined to an inevitably aging and
deteriorating body, physically helpless. Now, restored, he was surveying
the contemporary situation.
He came to a village and passed through it without making
any stir. To the villagers he was merely an idle boy. He kept his
compelling eyes averted, deliberately, or shielded them with his
hand, preferring anonymity. And he observed.
He saw the ravages of the river poison. It was dilute, not immediately
fatal, and because of other contaminants that gave it a
foul appearance and odor, few people drank from it directly. But
that tainted water seeped into the ground, and was used to irrigate
the crops, and domestic animals drank of it. In due course, cows
passed the poison on in their milk, so that it reached little children.
It became concentrated in the flesh of the river fish, the
staple of the villagers. The government, becoming aware of this,
merely upgraded the standards at which this pollution was deemed
"safe"; thus there was no alarm and no action. So the mercury
continued to infuse the village, subtly, giving no obvious alarm.
He saw blind, maimed, crippled people. Years of mercury infiltration
had had its slow effect, strongest in the children. A young
girl of about fifteen sat before her home; she might have been
beautiful, for her face was elfin, but her body was grotesquely twisted
by the bone damage of the poison. He saw another child, a boy
about the same age as Fu Antos' own physical body, but naked, his
arms and legs so deformed that he could neither walk nor crawl.
Instead he wriggled through the dust on his belly, soiling himself
from either end as he went. Yet the glance he gave Fu Antos in
passing was intelligent: the child's mind was whole.
Other children were, in contrast, idiots with whole bodies.
They contentedly played with their own feces, smearing them about
 
236
over their torsos, smelling, tasting, forgetting. He heard villagers
crying. When he approached the sound, he found that it was the
funeral for a baby boy, stillborn. His casket was a small wooden
box made from an old crate, cradled in the arms of his father.
There was evidently no money for anything better.
The mourners were dressed in white, the traditional Japanese
color. Two villagers made sad wailing music with flute and cymbals.
A shaven-faced, angry Buddhist monk garbed in yellow robes
led the procession, holding a small, fragrant-burning lamp.
Fu Antos was an accomplished spy and warrior. He had killed
many times in his long history. But he considered himself to be a
man of the people. He had always killed for good reason, always
with the conviction that ultimate justice was on his side. And
always with a certain artistry. This use of a ninja poison to maim
and kill indiscriminately among innocents disturbed him. The villagers
did not even know the cause of their woes.
For a moment he forgot to shield his eyes. The light of his
wrath shone out from them, a subtle but terrible thing, akin, in its
fashion, to the nature of the poison itself. Fu Antos hated torture
and death, except in a necessary cause, and he was appalled by
unnecessary destruction and fouling of the environment. His passion
against these things had built up through centuries. His nostrils
still twitched with the remembered odor of his own lands
devoured by the flame, so long ago in his true youth.
With that anger came decision: he would right this wrong. Fu
Antos left the village.

He followed the stream on up, tracing the poison by the deterioration
of the life in and around the water. He found a modern
factory engaged in manufacturing tungsten and other metallic parts
for rocket motors. The wastes from this factory poured into the
river, contaminating it.
Fu Antos was not familiar with the Industrial Age. He did not
understand mechanized mass production. To him this was a malignant
castle, spewing out the burning urine of a dragon, killing
the helpless villagers. It was his duty to destroy it.
237
The castle was well guarded. It had massive windowless walls,
and a fence of metal spikes surrounded it. The day was overcast,
but electric dragon's eyes illuminated the grounds like sunlight.
Secret entry seemed impossible.
It was a sufficient challenge for a ninja.
Fu Antos did not like what he had to do, but he refused to be
deterred. He removed from his pack his black ninja suit and donned
it. He fastened it carefully so that it was virtually watertight, and
brought the hood tight about his face so that little skin was exposed.
Then he dived into the polluted river. He swam strongly
upcurrent, his eyes tightly closed to keep out the poison. He relied
on his ki for ultimate protection, but still the chemicals made
his face burn. His body was young yet; neither its muscles nor its
ki had been properly broken in.
Where the metal fence crossed the water, he handed his way
down deep, passing under the bottom of the barricade. Then he
floated up slowly inside the factory compound.
He broke water silently, shaking the fluid off his face before
opening his eyes. Wherever the water touched him, he was smarting.
But he remained in it a few moments longer, for the river was
in shadow here. The depth of pollution made it opaque; with his
black hood he was virtually invisible. This, of course, was no coincidence;
for centuries the ninjas had been the masters of invisibility,
the spy class of Japan. Fu Antos was the master ninja.
Close to the building he drew himself out, shedding water in
the manner of an aquatic bird. Concealment would be better in
the river, but he didn't care to immerse himself in the highly concentrated
effluence spewing out from the factory pipe, the penis of
the dragon. He emerged like a shadow.
Now his uniform was a liability, black against a light background,
and the lingering drips marked his trail. He doffed it,
shook it dry, and reversed it. The other side was a light creamy hue
that blended perfectly with the color of the gaunt walls. He would
now be difficult to see when he froze against that background.
He tucked his kusarigama into the belt behind him, so that
 
238
the chained sickle did not show from front or side, and palmed
two star-shaped shuriken, ready for instant use. To the casual observer,
he was still an unarmed child.
He considered scaling the wall, but this would have been difficult
in this body. But if he used a normal entrance, he would not
be able to avoid the guard pacing in the dazzling light. So he did
not try; he walked boldly toward the main portal.
The guard saw him. The man's eyes widened at the sight of
this strangely garbed child. His mouth opened.
In that moment of confusion, Fu Antos could have killed him
with a shuriken in the throat. The star-shaped throwing blades did
not penetrate as deeply as the single-bladed ones, but a score on
the throat would have been sufficient. Instead he used his fingers.
From a distance of twenty feet he initiated the hypnotic kuji-kiri
compulsion.
The guard could not break away and could not cry alarm. He
seemed to be drowning in those eyes, drawn right out of his body

and sucked into the orbs. Yet it was the hands that really compelled,
their incessant mystic motions telling him something,
numbing his brain, forcing it through a convolution, as though it
were being thrown headlong, rolling over and over-yet he was
standing still. Then, as it were, a door closed.
Suddenly the guard forgot to see the odd boy. He walked on,
blithely unaware of anything unusual. The ancient ninja fingerhypnotism
technique had rendered Fu Antos invisible to this man.
Fu Antos opened the large front door, seeking the master of
this grim fortress. He paused, startled by the blast of cold air that
met him. What sort of a dragon had a cold lair? He had never
before encountered air-conditioning. But after his initial surprise,
he recognized it as a harmless phenomenon, and entered the front
office.
A pretty girl looked up from the information desk. A maiden
in distress? "Yes?" she said, then did a double-take.
"What are you doing here? This is no place for-"
Fu Antos used the kuji-kiri technique on her, hypnotizing her
239
instantly. "I seek the robber baron," he said. "I will free you and
the village from the grasp of the dragon."
The hypnosis gave her comprehension. "The directors are in a
board meeting with the company president and the owner," she
said. "The owner is a bit of a dragon! It is on the third floor, and
there are instructions to keep everyone else out."
"Excellent," Fu Antos said. "Return to your duties for now,
and do not let anyone else enter that room after me."
She forgot his presence, as the guard outside had. He climbed
the stairs, disdaining the elevator, because he hardly understood
it.
A guard stood outside the boardroom door. He was a strapping
big man, armed and tough. He was a mercenary, a hired
goon who hardly cared what method he used to prevent intrusions.
In this sense, Japan had not become softer with the technological
age; men still performed brutal tasks for pay. Fu Antos
assessed the guard with one glance, realizing that he was too stupid
to be properly susceptible to the kuji-kiri technique, and too
loyal (well-paid loyalty!) to be subverted. He had to be eliminated,
and quickly.
The guard saw him. There was no hesitation like that of the
fundamentally decent outdoor watch; this man's hand was already
reaching for a weapon. Fu Antos moved in so rapidly that his little
body seemed a blur. As the goon's hand raised a short wooden
club, Fu Antos drove his stiffened fingers-the spear hand-into
the man's groin.
There was a scream, but it cut off as the man doubled up,
unconscious.
For a moment Fu Antos listened at the boardroom door, verifying
the identity of the occupants. " . . . to prevent an adverse
profit ratio from developing," a man's deep voice was saying.
"No problem there," a higher voice replied. "Declare another
cost overrun. They'll pay; it would cost them three times as much
to change from our specifications, now that the contract is well
under way. That's why we set it up that way."
 
240
They were concerned with riches, not health. This was the
place: the minions of the dragon.
Fu Antos pushed open the door a crack and entered with ninja
stealth. The directors did not realize what had happened, for the
outside action had been swift and concealed from their view. They
thought the guard had merely let the intruder pass, despite the
standing orders to the contrary. His pay would be docked accordingly.
Fu Antos turned to face the directors. "Men, you are poisoning

the river," he said boldly as he approached the table.
The directors glanced around at each other. "One of your sons?"
one inquired facetiously of another.
"Not mine! I teach mine manners!"
"I hope you also teach yours to dress according to their stations,"
a third said, eyeing the ninja suit with insulting directness.
"The poison must stop immediately," Fu Antos said. "You
must make reparations to the villagers for their suffering. You must
restore the wildlife of the river."
The president of the company faced him. "Son, you have blundered
into the wrong room. When you grow up and have a hundred
million yen to invest, you may play 'executive'; right now
you must return to your mother."
It did not even occur to Fu Antos that he was being mocked;
no one had mocked him and lived, for over a century. "I shall not
depart until this wrong has been set right," he said firmly, absentmindedly
scratching his posterior where a trickle of the river water
still irritated it.
"We have played games enough!" a board member snapped.
"Get the brat out of here!"
The president called to the guard outside the door. "Kindly
escort this young man out," he said.
There was no response from the hall.
"Orderly!" the president snapped, his facade of good humor
evaporating. "Pay attention!"
Still there was no answer. One of the directors got up, opened
241
the door, and peered out. "Hey, he's lying down!"
"If that dolt has been drinking on duty . . ."
"No smell of liquor."
"The man's ill!" a board member said irritably.
"Ill, hell!" another said nervously. "He's been sabotaged!"
"This must be a midget disguised as a child, sent by our enemies
to assassinate us!"
The president sighed. "You're hysterical."
But now the others were distinctly uneasy. "Let's not take
chances. Buzz the office."
"All right-this time," the president said. "Bunch of old
women," he muttered as he touched a button on the table.
"Yes, sir?" a woman's voice said from an intercom.
"There is a child in the boardroom, disrupting our meeting.
Have the internal security force remove him." He glanced through
the door at the prostrate guard. "And send a doctor; the orderly
appears to have had a fit."
"Right away, sir," the girl replied.
Fu Antos had been caught unaware by the intercom; such
things had never been part of his world. Now he realized that
reinforcements had been summoned. The robber barons intended
to fight.
He had made a number of embarrassing tactical mistakes, owing
to his incompletely broken-in body and his unfamiliarity with the
vastly changed outside world. Now it was time for action.
"This is your last chance!" Fu Antos said, preparing his body
for what was to come. "Stop the poison. Make reparations, or suffer
the consequence."
The paunchy board member nearest him lunged to his feet.
"You impertinent brat!" he shouted. "I'll teach you to-"
With a quick twist of his body, Fu Antos caught the charging
man by the sleeve and lapel, ducked down, and executed the morote
seoi nage shoulder throw. He had mastered it long ago by another
name, before it had been codified in jujitsu or its recent offshoot,
judo. His right elbow came up hard under the man's right armpit
 
242

while his left hand hauled the man's right arm down. The man's
inertia carried him forward into the throw.
Though Fu Antos weighed barely sixty pounds, and the man
weighed a hundred and eighty, the throw was performed with
such superlative expertise that the man flipped completely over
and landed hard on the top of the ornate table. Although it was
massive oak, it creaked and groaned under the sudden weight and
stress. The man groaned once and lay still. He was unconscious.
"Good God!" another board member ejaculated. "He fell!"
He had indeed fallen, but not by any accident. Fu Antos realized
that he had made another error. Through centuries he had
fought ninjas in practice and samurai warriors in earnest, healthy
men, muscular, skilled in tactics and counters and falls. A samurai
would have landed on his feet and whirled back to the attack without
pause. An unfriendly ninja would not have waited that long;
he would have stabbed down with a dagger while he was still in
midair. In fact, neither would have permitted an unopposed throw.
So Fu Antos had erred doubly in attempting a throw that
could not have been successful against a trained opponent, especially
when his own body was so puny; and he had used unnecessary
force against a novice. The throw was harmless on a mat against
an opponent who knew how to take a fall. On a hard floor, or
table, against this obese weakling, it was devastating. Fu Antos
still was not properly adapted to his body; he was acting like the
youngster he appeared to be. He had to correct that, for it would
surely lead him into disaster.
Now all the men were rising. Fu Antos raised both hands,
initiating the kuji-kiri compulsion.
The door burst open, and four burly guards charged in. They
were all of the goon-type: huge slabs of fighting meat unrestricted
by any excess intelligence. Seeing the man on the table, they reached
for their holstered pistols. The original guard had by this time
recovered somewhat, and was ready to join the action.
Fu Antos shook his head in self-recrimination. He had certainly
made an inartistic mess of it. He had not misplayed his
243
hand this egregiously since his real youth, centuries ago. He had
lost much of his touch, and would have to practice group-subduing
techniques until he regained it. Now he had to deal with ten
alerted opponents. If he had used the kuji-kiri at the outset, there
would have been no such complications.
The hypnotic technique was ineffective against an aroused
crowd; there was no proper concentration. He would have to retreat,
or fight.
If he departed, they would never stop the poison; he could
judge men well enough to know their basic nature. None of these
money barons had any interest in the common people. None had
any twinge of conscience about the horrors the river poison brought
to the villagers. They were tyrants of the old, familiar stripe-
possessed of dangerous new technology.
Well, he had tried to talk with them. He had given them a fair
chance, not only by his words but also by his inexcusable series of
errors. Now he would revert to more familiar tactics.
A guard advanced on him, pistol drawn. The others were not
far behind. "Now, don't give us any trouble, youngster!"
Fu Antos' two hands moved. Despite his prior activity, he had
retained the two shuriken in his palms. Now, in a motion so swift
it seemed no motion at all, he placed the metal stars inside the
band of his belt and drew instead his two tonki from their sheaths
at his back. The little knives whistled by the ears of the leading
guard.
But the ninja had not missed his targets. The blades embedded
themselves in the eye sockets of the guards immediately following.
Too small and light to inflict severe damage elsewhere,

they were most effective here. Both men pitched forward, clutching
at their faces.
Suddenly the chained sickle was in Fu Antos' hand. He swung,
and the blade cut off the front guard's gun hand at the wrist. The
flow of blood was phenomenal, and the man was too much in
shock to try to stanch it. In some societies, amputation of a hand is
punishment for stealing, but in such cases a blazing torch is held
 
244
to the stump immediately after the knife has cut, cauterizing it
and stopping the blood. Here there was no such precaution. The
man ran back screaming and waving his stump, the bright arterial
fluid spraying the room, generating a climate of horror.
Meanwhile, the ninja swung the ball on the other end of the
kusarigama chain. It struck one of the board members on the nose,
crushing it and sending the shock of impact right through his
head. Whether more damage was caused by concussion or by slivers
of bone projected into his brain was academic: he was dead.
Even as that body fell, Fu Antos whipped the chain back
around the neck of another executive, who was half out of his chair.
A wrench, and the neck snapped; a jerk, and the chain swung free
again.
Another guard was on him. Fu Antos struck up with the handle
of the sickle, caving in the man's temple.
This action had taken mere seconds. Now the others realized
that they faced no ordinary boy. They backed away.
But Fu Antos had overextended his small, imperfectly trained
body, and was tired. Should the remaining enemies charge him
together, he would be overwhelmed. Accordingly, he discouraged
any such activity. He used his shuriken.
One star flew out to strike a man on the back of the neck,
penetrating between the vertebrae and severing the spinal cord,
killing him. His fallen body blocked the doorway, so that the few
remaining men thought their escape was being cut off. That filled
them with mindless alarm, and they scrambled over him to get
out. Only two managed to struggle out the door, fighting each
other like drowning men. One of the executives, surprisingly,
straight-armed the last guard and broke loose first.
One man did not panic. This one Fu Antos fixed on. This was
the major stockholder of the company, chairman of the board. Fu
Antos, without comprehending the nuances of financial power,
had nevertheless identified him as the real authority here, the one
who could stop the poison, if he would. This one was gross, bald,
245
fat, with oily sweat oozing from his pores despite the artificially
cooled air. Fu Antos moved to make him captive.
But under that fat was a cynical, hard-driving mind. Fu Antos
cut the owner out of the fleeing pack, but the man was not really
afraid. He had a weapon concealed under his coat, a gun of some
sort, and knew how to use it; Fu Antos could read the signs. This
man never risked himself unnecessarily, but he was no coward. He
never forgot that one who dealt in violence of any type, whether
financial or physical, could eventually suffer from it. He had, in
his fashion, been expecting Fu Antos.
"I see you are not what you seem," he said.
"Stop the poison. Make reparations," Fu Antos repeated.
"That would bankrupt me," the owner said. And Fu Antos
saw that the man preferred death to the loss of his money.
"I will destroy your castle," Fu Antos said. As Nobunaga destroyed
mine, he thought.
"That, lad, is beyond your eerie power." The owner leaned
forward, taking the measure of his opponent. He was an extremely
talented infighter in his realm, for he had clawed his way up over
the bankruptcies of his competitors. "What do you really want?

Money? Education? Ice cream?"
"Ice cream?" Fu Antos had never heard of this.
"By the bucketful. You can grow fat, like me."
"Stop the poison."
"You're a talented young man. There's room in my organization
for-"
The man was stalling. Fu Antos was thoroughly versed in such
trickery long before this robber baron had been born. He heard
the castle minions approaching down the ball stealthily, or so they
thought. In a moment they would attack, and then the baron's
hints and promises would be worthless.
Yet the man himself was more useful alive than dead, at the
moment.
Fu Antos jumped at him so suddenly that the owner had no
chance to react, as thumbs pressed through the fat of his neck,
 
246
expertly seeking the carotid arteries. Even so, there was a moment's
delay, for the training of centuries had been in full-sized bodies,
and these shorter, weaker fingers were not quite right. The baron
had a chance to reach for his weapon.
Then Fu Antos found the carotids and completed the strangle.
It cut off the blood supply to the brain, painlessly but effectively.
In five seconds the man was unconscious.
The baron was out for only a few seconds, but Fu Antos had
timed this carefully. He removed the weapon from the man's shoulder
holster. It was a Spanish Llama, a 9-mm automatic pistol,
gold-plated and inlaid with mother-of-pearl. No Japanese weapon!
The money baron considered foreign equipment to have more cachet,
so even when choosing a weapon for the defense of his life he
betrayed his contempt for his native country. This was the consequence,
Fu Antos thought, of allowing the good old ways of Japan
to be corrupted by foreign barbarians. It should never have been
permitted.
He sat the man up against the wall. As the baron awakened,
Fu Antos held the bloody blade of the sickle under his nose. "Look
into my eyes."
The owner, disoriented, found it expedient to oblige. As he
did so, Fu Antos sheathed his blade in the belt of his outfit and
put his two hands on the sides of the man's head and exerted his
ki, that potent inner force. In most people, ki was poorly developed;
in some it was an art. Fu Antos had the most powerful ki
ever known on earth; that was what had enabled him to survive so
long. He remembered when he had discovered the ki-but he had
no time to reminisce now. "Now you will stop the poison," he
said.
Amazingly, the baron shook his head. "You have a one-track
mind. I cannot stop it. I am a rich man, but this factory represents
a far larger investment than I could make alone. I would have to
close it down, for the tungsten processes and the other metallic
rare earths we use-these cannot be economically modified. Then
my creditors would take me to court, and the government itself is
247
among those creditors. I would lose my money and my authority.
Either the factory would resume production and pollution under
new management, or a competitor would take over the contracts.
The poison would continue."
The man was speaking the truth as he understood it, for Fu
Antos had taken over his mind. There was no way to stop the
poison without destroying the factory, and all other factories like
it.
"Then we shall destroy it," Fu Antos said. "Show me how."
For it was more efficient to use the talents of this baron than to
attempt to figure it out for himself. Had ninjas operated in the

world of industry, this man would have been a master ninja.
The owner hesitated a moment, resisting the notion. Only
the most powerful will could oppose the ninja's ki even momentarily.
But he was helpless. "You must blow up the boilers that
make pressure for the turbines, the power plant. We generate our
own operating current, can't depend on an outside supply. You
understand?"
Fu Antos did not understand.
"Well, those boilers must be blown, otherwise everything will
soon be repaired. But there are many safety precautions."
"Take me to the boilers," Fu Antos said. He had a mental
picture of the huge vats his ninjas had used to heat oil in when
repelling a siege against the Black Castle. "Do not betray me."
That was an order, not a plea; now the owner lost all ability to
betray him voluntarily.
They left the room and walked down the hall, right through
the personnel massing for attack. "Take it easy," the owner said to
the surprised people. "This lad's with me. Go back to your stations."
Obviously they would not do that, since there were dead
bodies in the boardroom. But it kept them at bay for the time
being.
They entered the power room. Surely this was the bowel of
the dragon! Huge, incomprehensible monsters radiated heat and
noise, with mouths in their distended bellies that opened to re-
 
248
ceive coal from moving conveyor belts. Whenever a mouth opened,
it belched forth awful heat and light. Fu Antos had never imagined
anything like this, but he stayed close to the money baron
and did not flinch.
"Where are the boilers?" he demanded, not recognizing what
he saw.
"Eh?" the baron called back over the hideous background roar.
"The boilers!"
"Oh, some are on coal, some on oil. We've been converting to
oil, against my better judgment; the board overruled me. It is true
that oil is plentiful and cheap now, but we are dependent on potentially
unfriendly nations for the bulk of our supply. Oil could
become very expensive indeed if the political situation changed,
and politics is the most treacherous . . ."
The man continued talking, but Fu Antos could hear little
and understand less. In this din, communication was difficult.
The baron had not betrayed him, but someone, suspicious,
had phoned ahead. Fu Antos had not thought to prevent that, still
handicapped by his lack of knowledge about the modern world.
He was going to have to retrain himself to take into account the
modern devices. But first he would have to learn them all, and
that would take time.
Yet he was ready, as always, for the unexpected. Two husky
mechanics came at him as he entered the control chamber. One
swung a heavy iron bar.
Fu Antos stepped nimbly aside, and the bar crashed into the
door, clanging against the metal. The owner drew back in alarm,
but made no move either to enter the fray or to flee. He had been
neutralized by the ki.
Fu Antos turned, grabbed the mechanic's wrist, passed his
other arm under the man's elbow, and grasped his own wrist. He
levered his arm against the captive elbow, jerking upward. The
arm snapped at the elbow. The man dropped the bar and fell to
his knees. Fu Antos grabbed the bar and bashed him across the
skull, knocking him out with a hairline fracture.
249
The second mechanic had paused for a moment, startled by
the sight of the owner. Then he grabbed at Fu Antos, who rammed

the point of the bar into his solar plexus, provoking a fatal nervous
shock to the autonomous system. The bar was so heavy that even
the power of a boy was enough to make it devastating, provided he
had the skill to direct it.
"Now-how?" Fu Antos demanded tersely, paying no further
attention to the recent assailants.
"You have to fire the boilers at maximum and shut off the
safety valves," the owner said. "And disconnect the alarms, for if
they alert others to the buildup, certain other precautions will be
taken to nullify whatever we might do here."
"Do it."
The owner did it. It had been twenty years since he had touched
such controls directly, for like most executives he disdained physical
work, even at the expense of his health. But his basic knowledge
of the equipment sufficed. Soon the gauges were rising, and
the fires heated the boilers, and the pressure built up intolerably.
"We had better get out of here," the baron said. "This will
blow in minutes, and there may be a chain reaction."
Fu Antos handed him a knife. "If we are attacked again, defend
yourself, for I shall not do it for you. Lead the way."
"I know a private exit," the man said, eyeing the blade in his
hand with distaste.
So the moderns had secret passages too. Fu Antos followed
him out of the factory.
They emerged from an elevator on the hillside above the complex.
Just in time, for the boilers were beginning to go.
First there was a series of rumbles. Then a shock wave hit them,
like a gigantic hand squeezing the chest, driving the breath out,
throwing the whole body into the air-yet no visible explosion.
For an instant.
Fu Antos took a forward roll, protecting himself from damage;
this was second nature to him. The industrialist fell heavily in the
 
250
gravel of the hillside, scraping his face, knees, and the palms of his
hands.
Then it was as if a giant red blossom unfolded from the middle
of the factory, outward. The boilers had started it; then the chemicals
caught, and the oil storage tanks. There was a series of explosions,
ripping open one part of the complex and then another.
Parts of human bodies were flung into the air like dolls. Some
human torches ran screaming from the environs, crashing into the
perimeter fence that still stood, burning to death while on their
feet.
The river itself caught fire near the factory; it was so polluted
it was able to sustain combustion, in this heat.
"Chain reaction," Fu Antos said, at last comprehending the
term the executive had used. He smiled, liking this demonstration.
Slowly the two tall smokestacks tilted, their foundations undermined.
One fell, bending as its bricks separated, crashing into
the holocaust, crushing whatever remained. Then the other chimney,
as impressive.
After that, a mantle of oily smoke arose, shrouding everything
in its thick, roiling mass.
"Now the poison will stop," Fu Antos said with satisfaction.
"Not yet," the owner replied. "That smoke is deadly; it contains
chemicals few people knew we were producing. It will kill
everything it touches, horribly."
"Then it is time to move," Fu Antos said, for the smoke was
already filling the valley, climbing toward them as though seeking
new prey.
But the owner did not move. "My knee is gone," he said.
Fu Antos glanced at the position of the robber baron's leg.
It was true: the joint had been thrown out. The man, in severe

pain, had not protested; now he was ready to commit an honorable
suicide by remaining here.
"It is fitting," he said, saluting the baron's courage in adversity
as the smoke rose up to claim him.
Chapter 3:
BASTARD BONES
We walked down the sidewalk silently, Hiroshi in his Japanese
skirt and carrying his little bag. I was in my street clothes, never
having had a chance to change. Those diamonds made me nervous,
and I wished now that I had taken time to pack a weapon. I
had walked this street a thousand times without molestation, but
now, suddenly, I was afraid of trouble. That shows what a glimpse
of illicit riches can do. I was especially afraid of the police, whom I
normally considered to be my best friends. How could I explain
that bag, after all the antagonism Hiroshi had already aroused in
the minions of the law?
The crowds of people ignored me, but there were a number of
curious passing glances at Hiroshi. The little man was blithely
indifferent. But I knew that he was here on important business,
and that nothing escaped his attention.
We passed two teenagers in dirty blue jeans and leather jackets
who were standing against a wall. "Get the little fairy," one muttered,
and the other chuckled coarsely.
 
252
Hiroshi stopped suddenly. "What is the meaning of that term?"
he asked me, loudly enough for the others to hear.
I tried to shrug it off. "They're just punk kids; they don't
know anything or mean anything."
"I am not certain of that." He faced the two. "Will you elucidate?"
The two youths stared at him coolly, not deigning to reply.
"What is that picture?" Hiroshi persisted, indicating their jackets.
The emblem was skeletal, stick figures made of white bones.
Both boys were dark-skinned Puerto Ricans with curly black hair
and bad complexions.
"It's a juvenile gang," I said. "Teen toughs. Call themselves the
Bastard Bones."
"They are illegitimate?" he asked, surprised.
"No, just ugly. Better to leave them alone."
"They are impolite," Hiroshi said, as though that were important.
Perhaps, to him, it was.
"They're dangerous," I said. "Much of the crime in this country
is committed by boys-and girls-in their teens. There are
white gangs, black gangs, and Latin gangs. They all mean trouble,
but they won't usually bother us if we don't bother them. Live and
let live."
"I am not so sure," he said. "I have seen much discourtesy in
this city."
This wasn't like him. Hiroshi had never been one to seek a
quarrel or to look for trouble. "Let's go on," I said. The last thing I
wanted was to get diverted by an argument with these freaks.
Hiroshi seemed about to comply, but then one of the boys
spoke again. "What you got in that bag, fairy?"
"A fortune in uncut diamonds," Hiroshi replied.
Both youths reacted with anger, thinking they were being
mocked. "Listen, Chink-" one began.
"Jap," Hiroshi corrected him. "I am listening."
But they abruptly had had enough. They saw me standing
behind Hiroshi, my fists clenched, a scowl on my face, and they
253
had the minimum sense to know I was about to intercede with
more than mere words. Like all their number of any age, sex, or
color, they were cowards. So they were silent again.
At last Hiroshi went on, to my relief. We came to the bar

called La Gruta, The Cave; it had a certain cultivated Latin flavor.
Inside it was dark, with a long bar to one side and tables on the
other. A few booths were against the wall. A color TV set was on
the bar, a bit incongruous.
I showed the way to the most secluded booth. "This place is
expensive, but they carry anything you want," I told Hiroshi. I
gestured to the row of bottles behind the bar: aquavit, schnapps,
tequila, pulque, mescal, aguardiente, chaca, ron-the emphasis
on South American drinks, but with many others too.
The waitress came up. Hiroshi looked at me. "You can order
sake; they have it," I reminded him. "They carry everything; it's a
point of pride."
"Everything?"
"Everything legal, they claim."
"And you?"
I paused. "Oh, I don't drink intoxicants. I'll settle for milk."
Hiroshi smiled. "Milk, then. An excellent beverage, when water
is not available."
"Milk?" the girl asked, thinking it a joke.
"Milk," I repeated firmly. "It is bottled under a number of
prominent brand names; I'm sure you can locate some."
"Any particular kind?" she inquired, unable to resist her bit of
sarcasm.
"Yak," Hiroshi said.
"Yak yak to you too," she said. "Now, how about your order?"
"Yak milk," Hiroshi explained.
"Beg pardon?"
"Himalayan ox. Very fine animal."
The waitress obviously felt she was being teased. Many people
have never heard of the yak. "Yak milk," she said, making a note on
 
254
her pad. She turned to me. "And what do you want, Mesopotamian
minx?"
"American bovine will suffice," I said.
A couple of barflies, overhearing, laughed crudely. "I'd like
milk from them boobs," one remarked as the buxom girl walked
somewhat stiffly by him.
I returned to Hiroshi. "That bag . . ." I said.
He shrugged. "We have known each other long."
"Not that long. We only met at the Martial Open, and again
in Japan. You advised me and showed me the ki power." How well
I remembered. I had been drafted as the judo representative in an
interdiscipline contest: judo, karate, kung fu, boxing, wrestling,
aikido and Thai kick boxing. For the first-and, I hoped, the last-
time, all the major fighting arts of the world had been pitted against
each other, to see just which was the most effective in terms of selfdefense.
The result had been a tie between judo and karate, with
kung fu a close third, but it could easily have turned out otherwise,
for all the contestants were deadly. Hiroshi had been the
representative for aikido, the smallest and oldest man in the tournament;
and only through his help had I survived that ordeal. For
he was the man of ki, that phenomenal yet elusive force that could
heal a sick body or generate incredible strength. Hiroshi had suffered
from a recurrence of malaria, yet continued to compete until
has arm had been shattered; and even then, in his fashion, he had
been active. There was no man I admired more.
"Time is of no moment when ki is shared," he murmured. I
nodded. I could not refute that argument. The world he had opened
to me by demonstrating the ki had fundamentally changed my
life and prepared the way for the release of important buried experiences.
The erratic ki I had developed after that had saved my life
on several occasions and had enabled me to bring my karate assistant
Ilunga out of her terrible drug addiction. My life, in one

sense, had really begun with ki-and Hiroshi had been responsible.
His eyes dropped to the table. "There were many good men at
255
that tournament. Your judo partner, Takao . . ."
The milk arrived, two tall glasses. Mine was chill creamy cow's
milk; Hiroshi's had a yellowish tinge, with a number of what appeared
to be globules of fat floating on the surface, and it smelled
sour.
He lifted it to his lips and took a sip. I refrained from grimacing.
He nodded sagely. "Excellent."
My brow furrowed. "You mean that really is yak milk?"
"Indubitably." He turned to the waitress. "My compliments
to the chef."
She looked as surprised as I felt.
"A chef doesn't fix milk," I protested. "Or do you mean they
put some kind of flavoring in it?"
"It is fermented, of course," he said. "This is the way they
store it and use it in Tibet." He returned to the waitress. "I should
like to meet the person who provided this."
Nonplused, she backed off. "I'll tell him."
Hiroshi had certainly changed, or maybe I was just seeing a
new side of him. First he had reacted to that "fairy" snigger outside;
now he was making a big thing of this yak business, and I
could not be certain whether it was serious. The bartender could
have dumped some spoiled cream into the glass, reversing Hiroshi's
joke, so that now he was inviting the jokester to meet him face-toface.
Obviously there was still much I had to learn about Oriental
humor.
"Poor Takao," I said, returning to the subject the yak had interrupted.
Takao had been an older judoka, there as a judge at the
Martial Open. But he had become a participant and my team
partner, until his death in a violent match against kung fu. Takao
and Hiroshi had had a decades-long feud that was resolved just
before Takao's demise.
"He was at heart a good man," Hiroshi said. "I paid a call on
his wife in Japan, as he desired. She thanked me for the money-
the money that you had so generously made available from your
tournament winnings-but she elected not to leave Japan."
 
256
"Money," I repeated. "Which brings us to the dia-" I broke
off, not certain of our privacy. I nodded meaningfully at the bag
sitting between us on the table.
"And do you remember when you suffered an injury and came
to my dojo in Japan?" he inquired, still avoiding the subject.
I suppressed my flash of irritation. I owed Hiroshi a lot, and
respected him a lot, but this pussyfooting was frustrating. It was
also not like him. So I had to assume that he was working his way
into the subject in his own fashion, and had good reason for his
seeming indirection.
"That was no injury, that was the delayed-action death blow,"
I said, remembering with a shudder. "You sent me to O-sensei Fu
Antos for the cure."
He nodded. "Now you understand."
"Understand what?" I yelped. But then I had to break off again,
for someone else was approaching the table.
It was a Latin-looking gentleman. For a moment I thought it
was the father of one of the gang punks we had met outside, but I
knew this could not be. If the parents were cognizant of their
children's activities, there would not be any juvenile gangs. This
was a stranger.
"Seor," the visitor said to Hiroshi. "You asked to see me?"
Hiroshi stood. "Ah, the yak milk!"
The man inclined his head. He was a dark, swarthy man with

a slight Chinese look and a bulging belly. "I am Jos Peon. This is
my son, Robertico."
Hiroshi bowed. "I am Hiroshi."
I waited with ill grace. Hiroshi had been about to explain
about the diamonds, and now this interruption!
"You are from Japan?" Jos inquired politely.
The boy tugged at his father's sleeve. "Papi-"
"Qu quieres, hijo?" Jos asked his son.
"No lo conoces?"
"Lo acabo de conocer, como voy a saber quien es."
"That's Hiroshi! The aikido O-sensei!"
257
I knew very little Spanish, despite occasional travels to Central
and South American countries. This rapid exchange left me in the
air. I could catch a word here and there, and the intonation. But
obviously the boy recognized Hiroshi.
Now Hiroshi bowed to the boy. "Yo soy."
"For God's sake!" I said, exasperated. Perhaps I was jealous of
Hiroshi's linguistic ability; it made me feel ignorant.
"My friend speaks very little Spanish," Hiroshi said. "We are
being discourteous."
Jos turned to me. "My apologies, seor," he said.
"Quite all right," I said, unwilling to admit that I was
unmollified.
The boy stared at me. "Ese es Jason Striker-el campen de judo."
Now, that was more like it.
Jos frowned at the boy and spoke with a slightly sad voice.
"We are speaking only in English now, son," he said.
"I see the boy is a martial-arts fan," I said.
Jos rolled his eyes. "At any rate, he is taking lessons. Not like
his fat old papi."
I wondered what kind of a man would let himself go so obviously
to pot while his son hero-worshipped martial artists, but of
course I didn't say anything.
"You have studied in Tibet?" Hiroshi inquired of Jos.
The man shrugged, so that his fat bounced. It disgusted me.
"It is true, sensei. I developed a taste for yak's milk."
Now it was coming clear. This man had been to Asia for some
reason-it must have been before the Chinese Communists took
over the region-and picked up some exotic tastes in the fleshpots
there, and somehow he could afford to indulge them yet. The bar
manager must have known of this, and laid in a supply; or perhaps
Jos kept his own, and sold some to the bar on demand. At any
rate, Hiroshi had his yak milk. I wondered whether it was pure
coincidence that Hiroshi had asked for this particular drink. Somehow
I doubted it; he had an almost supernatural ability to make
special connections in devious ways.
 
258
"I have a friend who works at the city zoo," Jos explained. "In
fact, he is in charge of hooved herbivores, so he gets me a gallon
from time to time, and I store it here. I did not realize yak milk
was becoming so popular." He made a gesture to show this was
not seriously intended. "Yak cheese is also excellent, if you would
like some."
"No, thanks!" I said quickly.
Hiroshi smiled. "We must talk again, amigo."
"At your pleasure." The two men shook hands, pausing a moment
before breaking the grip and looking into each other's eyes.
Then the boy insisted on shaking hands with both Hiroshi and
me, and finally they left, to my relief. I hate having the feeling that
important things are transpiring when I have no part in them.
Probably all they wanted to do was discuss yak cheese.
"Now, let's get on with this," I said. "I helped Fu-Antos change

to his new body, if that's what really happened; he helped me
survive the delayed death blow. Fair exchange. What has that to do
with your visit, or those . . ." I nodded at the bag. I still wondered
about my fantastic adventure with Fu Antos, the legendary ninja
mystic. What had been real, what illusion? Had I really killed his
ancient body by attempting to disembowel myself? It was a lingering
nightmare, half-real; it would probably continue to repel
me all my life.
"Fu Antos needs you again," Hiroshi said. He pushed the bag
of diamonds across the table toward me.
"Now, wait a minute!" I said, my throat tight. I shoved them
back as though they were hot-which they probably were. "I don't
traffic in stolen merchandise."
He turned on me a gaze of purest innocence. "Stolen? Why
would Fu Antos steal?"
I realized I had made a prejudicial assumption. It was a natural
mistake, on this unnatural day. "These are his, uh, items? He's
had them all along?"
Hiroshi nodded. "He mined them in Brazil, from land he has
259
title to. Fu Antos cares little for wealth. He employs it only when
necessary:" Gently he moved the bag back to me.
Firmly I rejected it. This was like a game of Ping-Pong, with
the diamonds bouncing back and forth. "I don't know anything
about Fu Antos, but I don't like payoffs."
"I will tell you about Fu Antos," Hiroshi said. "That is why I
came."
I raised an eyebrow.
He told. It was a compelling, awful, incredible history. Fu
Antos, medieval warrior, top-level ninja, or jonin-betrayed by
the shogun, or ruler, of Japan, betrayed again by his own lovely
wife. A terrible siege, and a terrible sacking, and a terrible revenge.
Then, comparative isolation in the second Black Castle-for centuries.
At last, reincarnation in the body of a child. Return to the
outer world of modern Japan. Destruction of a tungsten factory.
Flight from an army of police.
"And so Fu Antos realized that he had no proper place in the
modern world," Hiroshi finished. "Japan is overcrowded, industrialized.
The ninja and samurai traditions are forgotten. Destroying
the factory was symbolic, but it was not contemporary civilization
that went up in the explosion. It was Fu Antos' own illusion
that he could reverse the tide.
"For he did not stop the pollution. He only threw hundreds of
poor employees out of work. A number of them lived in the very
village he had seen. The father of the dead, deformed baby lost his
livelihood and cursed the unknown perpetrator of the sabotage.
Fu Antos realized, to his horror, that the peasants did not want to
be liberated from either their commercial tyranny or the poison of
their environment. Even as the famous modern Japanese writer
Mishina came to the same realization. He harangued the troops,
but found his ideals were not shared by those he sought to help, so
he committed seppuku."
I sat bolt upright. "Fu Antos committed suicide?" I demanded,
shocked.
 
260
"Mishina, of course. Fu Antos did not live four hundred years
merely to desist because of a slight reversal."
"Oh. Sorry."
Hiroshi spread his hands. "And so he has left Japan. He has
removed with his remaining ninjas to the wilds of the Amazon
River in South America, there to build his third Black Castle and
to form a medieval enclave apart from the modern scene. In a few
more centuries, when even that desolate region becomes too

crowded, he will remove once more, to some other planet, and
build the fourth Black Castle."
"A good decision," I agreed, sipping the dregs of my milk.
"He's really thinking ahead." Travel to another planet! From the
medieval straight into science fiction.
"But there are complexities. Passports, immigration visas, permissions
. . ."
"I thought you said he had already moved! What does he need
with passports now?"
Hiroshi merely looked at me. Oh, no-Fu Antos had entered
the Western Hemisphere illegally, and now he wanted me to make
it right?
"That matter will be handled elsewhere," Hiroshi said. "Fu
Antos also requires building materials for the castle, and special
equipment, and weapons for defense."
"Weapons! The ninjas are well-armed." I remembered how viciously
the ninjas had fought when I went to the ruins of the
Second Black Castle.
Hiroshi shook his head. "They have not used guns. Now they
will learn. Their preliminary survey indicates that there can be
resistance to the establishment of an enclave. The enemy may come
with very rapidly firing rifles, mechanized guns . . ."
"Machine guns," I said. "BAR's-Browning Automatic Rifles.
Yes, I see your point. Even the most proficient swordsman would
be at a disadvantage against a modern trooper." I paused. "But if
the ninjas chose the most remote wilderness, no one would ever
seek them out
261
"Ah, but they would. Fu Antos did not choose the region merely
because it was remote; he also considered its resources, until now
unknown to others."
"Oh, the diamonds!" I said, catching on. "Fu Antos must have
psychic treasure-hunting powers!"
"Of course," Hiroshi said seriously. "It is an aspect of his ki.
He can sense the ki of the inanimate. However, do not lose the
diamonds; there are others, but they are impossible to recover without
extensive mining operations, not worthwhile at present."
"Then there is still no danger. No one's going after a nonpaying
diamond mine."
"You see, there is also oil."
"Oil! In the Amazon?"
"Yes. Fu Antos dowsed and discovered a massive oil-bearing
stratum not far from the diamonds. He recognized it as the same
substance the businessman in Japan set such store by."
"The one he let die in the poison smoke?" I asked dryly.
"The man is not dead. Fu Antos does not waste material. He is
merely blind and disfigured. Fu Antos took him to Brazil as a
technical adviser, and he confirmed the oil."
"I can't believe that man would help Fu Antos!"
"Subject to the ki," Hiroshi said gently. "At any rate, such
secrets are very hard to keep. Eventually there is sure to be an
intrusion."
"I should think so, with the price of oil what it is today," I
said. "Maybe Fu Antos had better build elsewhere."
"But he requires money for the supplies and construction.
These diamonds are all that he has at the moment. The oil should
solve that problem."
"And bring a thousand more problems!" I said. "So he'll stand
and fight against impossible odds. Well, I guess he knows what
he's in for! His way obviously isn't my way, but each to his own. I
must admit he's pretty damned sharp, the way he goes about
things. But you'd better return the diamonds to him, since he
obviously needs them more than I do."
 

262
Having made my decision, I thought that would be the end of
it. I should have known better. Again, Hiroshi pushed the bag at
me. "He requires an agent in this country, a native. For the acquisition
of building supplies and drilling equipment. One he trusts."
"Now, just a minute!"
But he nodded his head authoritatively. "You. You can not
refuse."
"I can and I do refuse! I'm no contractor; I know nothing about
the Amazon, less about building a castle. I can't even get the oil
out of my car's crankcase without gunking up the terrain!"
"It is possible to learn," he murmured.
"I have a job to do here! I'm a Fifth Dan judo instructor. I can't
go traipsing around construction companies or oil combines; I
wouldn't even know what to ask for!" My eye fell on the bag again,
and I shuddered. "With a cache of uncut ice, yet!"
Hiroshi put his hand on mine, and I felt his powerful ki. The
force pulsed through me, making the world seem surrealistic. It
was like a hallucinogenic drug high, except that I never took drugs.
Not voluntarily. "Indeed, for all these reasons, no one would suspect
you. Therefore you are ideal."
But I summoned my own ki and fought it off. "Any other way,
I would try to help Fu Antos," I said. "But this would be crazy. I
would do him no favor by attempting something for which I am
plainly incompetent. I'd only waste the only wealth he has. So for
his own good, no. Hire a contractor, or a lawyer, or both. Or enlist
the help of someone skilled in such ventures, like Johnson
Drummond or Vicente Pedro." Drummond was the multimillionaire
industrialist father of a lovely girl I had trained in judo,
Thera. I still looked her up once in a while. Pedro was a Nicaraguan
power who had been with me when I encountered Fu Antos;
Pedro's hand had wielded the sword that finally ended the animation
of the ninja's old body.
"Neither man is able to undertake such a project without immediate
suspicion," Hiroshi said. But he removed his hand, and
the ki ceased. "I must return to Japan."
263
I was both relieved and sorry. He had come all this way, and I
could not help him. Yet what a crazy notion: me, builder and
oilman!
"These matters are not, after all, within your sphere of competence,"
Hiroshi said.
"That's it exactly!" I agreed, refusing to be shamed.
"Fu Antos also required weapons of the modern type, as I
mentioned. This would seem to be more within your sphere."
"Well, I'm hardly expert in guns," I said modestly.
"He accepts that level of expertise you offer." Yet again he moved
the bag.
What a sucker's trap! I had used the pretext of ignorance in
one area, and now I was half-committed in another. Hiroshi had
in effect forced me into an off-balanced resistance to a forward
throw, and then flipped me neatly to the rear.
But I wouldn't have it. I ignored the bag and signaled to the
waitress, indicating we were ready for the bill.
"That has been taken care of," she said.
I shook my head. "We're the ones who ordered milk."
"I remember," she said. "Yak." She made a wry face.
"We haven't paid yet."
"The management is declining the money," she said. "The
yak is on the house."
I realized that Hiroshi's new friend had spoken to someone on
the way out; there wasn't much choice now, though I really didn't
like being beholden to the man even for a glass of milk. It was
hardly worth making an issue. "Tell the management thanks," I

said gruffly. I deposited a tip that should more than cover the
price of the drinks, and we moved out.
"In certain ways you are less than gracious," Hiroshi murmured.
"Yet it becomes you."
"Umph," I said, out-of-sorts.
Our friends the Bastard Bones gang were there, augmented by
eight more of their number. Two of them were female, one a darkcomplexioned
girl, Latin, with luxurious long wavy hair, but dis-
 
264
tressingly fat and dirty. The other was a Caucasian girl, actually
quite pretty under the dirt; her hair was blond, her eyes blue, her
skin pale. She was very small and thin, childlike; she couldn't be
more than thirteen.
The males spread out to impede our passage. Hiroshi stepped
off the sidewalk to let them pass, while I stopped where I was. But
two of them stepped out to block him again.
"Excuse me, please," Hiroshi said politely, seeking once more
to get around. But the toughs formed a circle around us. There
had been other people on the sidewalk, but they abruptly faded
out.
"I think you hurt someone's feelings," I muttered.
"I apologize," Hiroshi said brightly. "I was only curious about
their emblem, the little bones." He made to pass through the
ring.
Acutely conscious of the bag of diamonds he still carried in
one hand, I stepped close behind him. I didn't like the look of
this, but I suspected the punks were bluffing. I had run into some
of them before, and once one of them had worked out briefly in
my dojo, practicing karate. I had discouraged his attendance once
I ascertained that he wanted to learn only how to crack skulls, not
absorb philosophy along with the physical discipline. These kids
knew my business and generally steered clear of me.
But the line held firm. "What's the matter, gook?" the Bastard
leader demanded of Hiroshi. "We're not good enough for you to
walk the sidewalk with us?"
"By no means. I have admired your emblem, the illegitimate
skeleton."
"What's in that bag?" another youth demanded. "Snow?"
"He's with me," I said sharply, hoping to warn the Bastards
off. If they realized that Hiroshi was a martial artist, they might
quit.
But the gang was hungry for violence, and its numbers gave it
courage. The word had evidently leaked out that Hiroshi's bag
265
contained something valuable; I regretted having let my voice rise
in the bar.
The leader grabbed Hiroshi with his left hand, taking the loose
material of the kimono over the little aikidoist's chest and hauling
him forward while he cocked his right fist.
Then the Bastard leader screamed and dropped to his knees.
The other gang members looked on, startled at this seeming display
of weakness or of cowardice, not comprehending what had
happened.
I knew. There may be more dangerous men in the world to
attack than the little old aikido sensei, but the average person will
go a lifetime without encountering one. I myself, opposing Hiroshi
in the Martial Open, had suffered a broken finger, and he had
been not trying to hurt me. Age is no barrier to prowess, not when
you happen to be a man like this. Hiroshi had applied a thumb
lock to the gang leader's left hand, grasping the wrist so as to
prevent escape, and with his other hand pressed down on the
thumb. He bent that captive thumb inward against the palm of
the hand. It was a submission hold.

There are a number of submission holds in the martial arts.
Some apply to the fingers, some to the wrists, some to the e news,
some to the neck-in fact, just about any part of the body is vulnerable
to some kind of compulsion. Anyone who has experienced
a submission hold applied by a competent person knows there is
only one reasonable reaction: to submit. It is not just that there is
pain; it is that even the attempt to fight out of it is very likely to
result in severe injury of a crippling nature. I'd far rather risk being
knocked out by a powerful blow than suffering a dislocated elbow;
I'll get over the effects of the first in minutes, hours, or days, but
the second could impair the use of that arm for the rest of my life.
But the Bones leader could not submit-not in front of all the
Bastards, including the girls. Pain prevented him from acting with
his body, so he used his voice. It was a mistake. "Kill him!" he
screamed.
A small ratty-looking kid lunged at Hiroshi from the side. The
 
266
leader gave a piercing scream accompanied by a loud crunching
sound as his thumb-socket articulation was destroyed. Hiroshi,
his attention divided by the second attack, had allowed his hold to
become too strong. At the same time, he launched a side kick, yoko
geri, to the other kid's face. The second Bastard fell back, his face
bent out of shape, his jaw broken.
Meanwhile, I was moving into position, covering Hiroshi's
rear, watching for weapons. They appeared, as the remaining eight,
including the girls, closed in. Knives, an ice pick, a tire iron, baseball
bat, potato stuck with razor blades-the usual alley assortment.
These punks were cowards, but they did not yet realize
what they were up against, and they were armed. Such cowards
are a genuine menace.
Then I saw the nunchaku, like two billy clubs strung together
on eight inches of cord. It was a weapon I was well familiar with,
having been trained in it in Asia. Now it was becoming popular in
America, as it was easy to make at home, and potent in combat.
There was my obvious target. A man who is skilled in the
nunchaku, or "chukas," can tackle a crowd; but an amateur only
fouls himself up. I was sure this was an amateur; I could tell by the
manner in which he held his weapon. That was a double advantage
for me.
I charged the nunchaku. He swung at me overhand, the loose
stick whistling down. But I was moving fast, ducking under the
blow, and sure enough, he was inexpert. He did not have the proper
wrist action, stick speed, or aim to score effectively. I caught his
descending arm as I turned about, so that the force of the wood
was almost spent as the point hit my back. It stung, but it was no
more than a bruise.
Now I put my right arm around his neck, thrust one leg deep
between his legs and threw him with the uchi mata hip technique.
One has to be careful when executing this throw, or it is possible
to mash a man's genitals as his crotch gets hauled across your leg.
I was careful-to hit him right where his thighs met. He got
mashed. I can't say I'm proud of such lapses in sportsmanship, but
267
in a combat situation against weapons I want to be sure the man I
put down stays down. Then he landed on the concrete, hard. That
took whatever fight remained out of him. I plucked the weapon
out of his flaccid hand.
That was my second advantage: now I was armed, and unlike
this clod, I was proficient in its use. I had not just disarmed an
opponent, I had quadrupled my own fighting effectiveness. I
whirled to meet the six remaining Bastards, for Hiroshi had dispatched
another in the interim.
The youth had run at Hiroshi from the back, and he obviously

had had some wrestling training at school. He grabbed the
little sensei in a full-nelson from behind, intent on breaking his
frail neck. Very calmly Hiroshi took one of the fingers and bent it
until it popped out of its socket. The pressure on Hiroshi's neck
relaxed with this pain, and he threw the punk to the left with an
eri otoshi shoulder throw. The Bastard had the misfortune to land
on his shoulder on the curb, dislocating it. He was out of the
fight.
Too bad we were in this fray, I thought as I searched for the
most dangerous remaining Bone. The kids were mostly Puerto
Rican, but it was not their origin that set them off, it was their
criminality. Many Puerto Ricans worked out in my dojo, and several
were real whizzes. In fact, some of the best American karatekas
come from that island. Their numbers and importance in the martial
arts are all out of proportion to their strength in the population.
But people, seeing the Bastard Bones, would assume that all
Puerto Ricans were gangsters, forgetting that the white gangs were
just as bad.
One had a knife that he thought to plunge into Hiroshi's back.
Knowing Hiroshi, I doubted the blade would ever touch him-
but why take chances? My nunchaku shot out, striking the jerk in
the solar plexus, knocking him out. Then I turned on the one with
the potato razor.
This is a more formidable weapon than it looks, perhaps the
most deadly nickel's worth of armament available. Several razor
 
268
blades are embedded in half a potato. It is usually used to maim
during close contact, though death can occur from bleeding. A
scraping motion is used, and the face is the preferred target. The
blades are, by definition, razor-sharp; where they touch, they cut.
The potato anchors them and protects the hand of the wielder.
Very nasty.
But not against a weapon like the nunchaku. I scissored his
potato hand between my sticks. Over the noise of battle I could
hear the sound of his bones breaking. I let him drop just in time to
catch a tire-iron wielder next, across the jaw, smashing in a tooth
or two.
Hiroshi, the pressure relieved, relaxed. He stood calmly by,
watching me perform, as though I were an apt student, a benign
half-smile on his face. He wasn't worried; only three of the Bastard
Bones remained standing, and two of those were girls.
But the fat dark girl was opening her purse, and the gang
leader, the one with the broken thumb, was reaching for it. I knew
it was no cosmetic she had in there, but I had to deal with the last
male Bastard, who was coming at me with a piece of metal pipe.
He had a certain skill with his weapon, and I could not afford to
take my eye off him. Not until I had put him away.
I wrapped the chain of my nunchaku around his arm, jerking
him forward. Then I hit him with a straight inverted fist, uraken,
a punch in the middle of his nose. He evidently did not feel the
formidable pain of that strike, as is sometimes the case in the midst
of combat; he continued to fight.
I glanced at my companion. But Hiroshi had the situation
well in hand. He was across the circle of bodies and could not get
to the girl in time. For it was a gun she took from her purse, a
cheap "Saturday Night Special" that was no aristocrat among firearms
but would kill just as effectively at this range. Instead, Hiroshi
let fly with his tonki, a tiny throwing knife. He must have learned
this weapon from his ninja mentor, Fu Antos. At any rate, his aim
was true, and the blade skewered the reaching hand of the Bas-
269
tard. Now neither hand was any good for holding a weapon or
anything else.

The girl had spunk. She lifted the gun herself, snarling like a
cat at bay, and pointed it at Hiroshi.
But I had finally tapped my opponent, him of the potato, on
the head, putting him forcefully to sleep. Now I shot the chuka
sticks at the girl. The tip of one struck her arm and knocked it
upward. Then Hiroshi was on her, having hurdled the bodies with
surprising agility. One hand caught her wrist, the other gently
wrenching the gun upward and backward so as to disarm her without
maiming her hand, whose index finger was still caught in the
trigger guard.
Something landed on my back, hard. It was the blond girl-
and what a little wildcat she was! She clung like a sucker, her hard,
pointed nails racking my face, going for the eyes. Her legs were
locked around my waist, and though she was so small and light I
found it hard to dislodge her, especially while fending off those
claws, I was also aware of the feminine mass of her thighs. Childlike,
but no child.
I didn't like to do it, but I had to. I reached over my shoulder
and grabbed a hank of her long straggly yellow hair and pulled,
twisting hard backward and sidewise. Hair-pulling is frowned on
in formal judo, but so is eye-gouging. A good yank on the hair at
the proper moment can break the strongest man's neck or easily
bring him down to the ground. In certain respects street fighting
differs from polite practice.
Having loosened her clutch, I hauled up, hard, and she had to
come. She fell off my back, twisting sidewise, and landed on her
buttocks, what there was of them. The hard blow at the end of her
spine must have been felt all the way to her brain, addling it even
more. She had probably fissured her tailbone. At any rate, she gave
a cry of anguish, and despite the circumstances, I felt remorse for
hurting a girl.
The fight was over. The few Bastard Bones who were still mobile
fled; the rest waited in their assorted agonies for whatever was
 
270
to come. I would have felt sorry for these youngsters, but they had
asked for it. They had terrorized the neighborhood for several years,
with new young punks coming in to replace those who grew out of
it; many people had been robbed or beaten and possibly killed. So
we had done the neighborhood a favor, and given the gang a good
taste of its own medicine.
I heard a police siren coming. I remembered Hiroshi's diamonds,
and knew they would be impounded as police evidence.
"Come on," I said. "We don't want to get tangled up in police
reports."
No indeed! The police were likely to arrest us, not the Bastards.
After all, we were grown men, established martial artists,
and I was holding the nunchaku, a legally defined "deadly weapon."
The lawyers would have a field day ridiculing how a martial-arts
champion took that weapon and beat up a bunch of underprivileged
children. And how could I deny it? That was exactly what I
had done. Which shows what a lie a half-truth can be.
Hiroshi had not answered. I looked about. He was gone. He
must have departed while I was dealing with the blond bitch.
Bastard, I mean.
Except . . . I looked down in amazement.
The bag of diamonds was in my hand.
The bastard-sensei, I mean-had stuck me with the ninja
exchequer after all, thereby committing me to its cause. For I had
either to return the diamonds or to use them, and I knew I would
never find Hiroshi unless he wanted to be found. It would be
easier to investigate the weapons-supply situation.
Chapter 4:
NYMPHO

By the time I got back to my dojo, I had made up my mind: I
would try. Hiroshi was obviously determined to see me committed
to this effort, and Fu Antos-well, I was really quite curious to
know whether this child really was the four-hundred-year-old ninja
master. I didn't believe it, of course, yet one part of my mind could
not shake off the awe of what had happened, or had seemed to
happen, in the second Black Castle on Hokkaido island. Only by
meeting this boy again, and observing him, could I resolve that
nagging doubt. And only by cooperating would I have the chance.
So I would at least make the effort. Perhaps for the wrong
reasons, but what man really understands his own motives? If it
turned out to be impossible, legally, to obtain weapons for export,
as I rather suspected was the case, I would then admit my failure
and try to contact Hiroshi again. At least I would have tried.
First I had to convert those diamonds to cash. I didn't care to
take them to a bank or jeweler; I knew they would ask me a multitude
of unanswerable questions. Hiroshi had assured me the stones
were legitimate, and I believed him, but a whole bagful of uniden-
 
272
tified diamonds would arouse instant suspicion that would foil
my purpose.
The judo class was gone, but Ilunga remained, putting things
in order. I had never been able to afford really good exercise mats,
so each day the small ones had to be rolled up and put away so the
place could be cleaned, a tedious chore. Ilunga was a good housewife
to my dojo, though she would have clobbered anyone who
called her that. She was fiercely independent, yet she had artistic
sensitivity, and I suppose she liked the feel of legitimacy and proprietorship.
At any rate, I was satisfied with her performance on several
counts: she was a good karate instructor, she kept the dojo neat,
she handled the accounts well, and her presence encouraged both
female and black attendance. I had never had any great number of
either type-black or female-before; now business was improving,
and it was because of the increase in female and black attendance.
As I saw the black karate mistress, I remembered the humiliation
Hiroshi had visited upon her in front of the class. I would
have to set that right, somehow.
"Don't bother," she said, as if reading my mind. "Hiroshi came
by not five minutes ago and apologized."
"He's here?" I asked, startled.
"When I turned around, he was gone. The man moves like a
little old ghost."
"He studied under a ninja master," I explained. "Ninjitsu is
sometimes called the art of invisibility. The ninjas were a kind of
spy class in medieval Japan, highly trained warriors who usually
specialized in stealth. So it's not surprising that Hiroshi has that
talent. He just pulled the same thing on me. Disappearing."
She shrugged. "You know, he has the ki."
"I know."
"Like yours, only he can call it up anytime. He's quite a man."
"He's the leading aikidoist of the world," I said. "But that isn't
what you meant, is it?"
273
"No."
"Look, Ilunga, I need some advice."
"He told me."
I looked at her, surprised again. "Told you?"
"The bag of rocks. Hot ice. You need it fenced."
"Fenced! That's what criminals do with stolen goods!"
She smiled a trifle bitterly. "How does it feel, white knight?"
"But I'm no-I mean, I couldn't help-"
"Lots of suckers in jail say the same thing."
"But these are legitimate diamonds!"

She shrugged. "Who's to know the difference?"
Who indeed! Already I liked this business less, and I had hardly
liked it before. Selling uncut diamonds to a fence to raise money
to buy quasi-legal arms for export! Was this the way all criminals
got started, step by step, just trying to help out a friend? I would
watch myself before I talked about any "criminal type" again.
But I had already decided I had no conventional alternative.
"You have connections?"
"I used to," she said.
I understood her reticence. Ilunga had a criminal past, tied in
with the drug addiction: kill-13, the demon drug. Now she was
going straight. There had been a police inquest, and I had testified
as to her character and the vital assistance she had rendered me on
more than one occasion. No adverse witnesses had shown up, and
the judge had finally put her on probation, on condition that she
remain in town and behave. She had no incentive to associate with
criminal elements, now that she was off the drug and gainfully
employed.
In fact, I doubted she had ever been a criminal. She had been
gang-raped as a child by four white men, and had no reprieve from
the law. So she had turned to karate, so as to deal with such men.
She had been an apt student, and her anti-rape campaign, while
lacking in grace, had been remarkably effective. Rarely did any
woman get raped or mugged in this area today. All the chronic
offenders were now castrated. Then she had gotten hooked on kill-
 
274
13, the most compulsive habit of them all, and been forced into
criminal behavior. It was the drug, not the person, responsible.
And in the end she had helped me to demolish the demon cult
and wipe out its leader, Kan Sen.
Kan Sen. The name still sent an ugly little shiver through me.
That man had killed my fiance. If I had not killed him already, I
would love to do it now. In a way, I was sorry he did not have nine
lives, like a cat, so that I could kill him eight more times.
But such reminiscences were not profitable. "Can you give me
a name? Don't involve yourself, just tell me whom to contact. Someone
with money, discretion, and some integrity, if that's possible."
"You want the moon," she muttered. "My information is not
current. These things change awful fast sometimes, and I've been
out of touch. I'd have to research."
"Okay, research," I said. "Meanwhile, I'll try to figure out
how to spend the money."
"You do that. Meanwhile I'll need someone to instruct judo
while you're gone."
"Who says I'm going anywhere?" I retorted. "I'm just going to
make a few phone calls, get some permits, and place a few orders."
But it sounded phony, even to me. If this were really so simple a
matter, Hiroshi would have handled it himself.
She shook her head, her dark eyes on me. Ilunga was a striking
figure of a woman, with only the misshapen nose marring her face,
and the nose looked better than it had. We had once had an affair
of sorts, and it wasn't really over yet; she knew me too well. "You're
going, and I don't know if you'll be back. Take care of yourself,
white master."
I always felt uncomfortable when she called me that. I wasn't
quite sure what this fiercely independent black woman meant by
it. She called no man master, so it could be ridicule; little boys are
addressed as "Master" instead of "Mister." In another sense it could
be a complementary version of "black mistress," but I doubted
that was the whole of it. The plain fact was that Ilunga was smarter
than I, and I could not fathom all her thought processes. "Well,
275
see if you can find a name for me by morning," I said. "I'm going

home."
She nodded, and I left, feeling ill-at-ease.
*
The phone was ringing as I entered my apartment. A phone
call had started this hectic day; I was tempted not to answer it.
But before I could build up resistance, my hand lifted the receiver.
"Jason Striker," I said.
"Ah, I am glad you are home at last," a familiar voice said.
There was a Spanish accent, but I couldn't quite place the man
until he identified himself. "Luis Guardia here. Cuba. Remember?
Te acuerdas?"
I remembered with a rush. Luis, small and lame and older
than I, but a Fifth Dan judoka, like me. I had met him in Cuba
during the recent world team competition. We had done randori,
and he had wiped me out. But he had tried to help me out of
trouble there, too, being less naive than I about the political machinations
of that island. "You're calling from Cuba?" I asked incredulously.
I hadn't realized this was possible.
He laughed. "No, Seor! Miami. I am an exile now; I escaped
with my family by boat."
"But you were so well-situated there!" I exclaimed. "You gave
up everything just to-?"
"Just to find freedom," he finished for me. "My time was short;
the G-2 was after me because of my underground connections. I
had to go."
"You-underground?" I asked, amazed. "I never suspected!"
Yet how else had he known of my own problems when I was in
Cuba? Naturally he had not tipped his hand to me.
"I was a receiver of weapons for the anti-government guerrillas,"
he said. "I met the boat on the coast and delivered the weapons
to the underground. But the G-2 was almost too clever. They
cut me off, and I could not deliver my shipment. So I set course
 
276
with it all for Miami, and now I am here. But I do not know
whom to trust-except you, Seor. If you will help me. I have no
money."
"Of course I'll help you!" Then I paused. "But there's something
you should know."
"That you did a favor for Fidel? I know of that. But you are
apolitical; you are not Fidel's man."
An accurate assessment. Then something else registered. "You
have weapons-here in America?"
"I did not say that," he said, and I realized I had been crude. If
he had weapons here, they were surely illegal, and he hardly needed
that sort of trouble. Yet it opened up a fantastic possibility, for I
needed weapons of exactly the sort he was likely to have.
In fact, this very connection might have been what prescient
little Hiroshi had in mind. Perhaps Fu Antos had known that Luis
was on his way and that he would contact me.
"I have money," I said. "A lot of it. Or I will have soon. And I
need-certain supplies. Where can I meet you?"
"I do not have an address," he said. "I can not trust the parent
exile organization, as I suspect the chivatazo came from there."
"The what? I don't understand much Spanish."
He chuckled. "The chivo is a goat."
"A goat?" I felt dense.
"Goats bleat, they squeal."
"A squealer!" Suddenly I understood: he did not feel safe, as a
defector so recently from Cuba. Castro's G-2 agents would be liberally
sprinkled throughout the sizable exile community in Miami.
If there was one organization whose deadly efficiency I appreciated,
it was the Cuban G-2. That was why he could not trust the
exiles. Only one Cuban in a thousand might be his enemy, an

informer, but that would wipe him out in an instant.
"Perhaps I can get to you," he said.
"Sure. Can you make it tomorrow?" I asked eagerly. Not only
his weapons, but his skills-he could really help me in this ninja
277
business. If nothing else, he could instruct my judo classes while I
went for Fu Antos' supplies.
"Yes," he said after a pause.
"Can you get here okay? I can wire you money."
"No need." What he meant was that he didn't dare give out
his precise location; someone might be bugging the line. I doubted
it, but such fears are much more immediate to people from totalitarian
countries. Actually, our own country has not set any shining
examples recently. "I will get there. Tomorrow, by nightfall.
Thank you, amigo."
"Thank you, amigo!" I replied, hoping he was not being overconfident.
It was a long way from Miami, and he had no money.
No doubt he could hitchhike.
The phone went dead, and I hung up. The call exhilarated
me; now I knew that I could do much of what Hiroshi had requested.
And reestablish a valuable friendship in the process.
I stripped off my shirt and trousers as I munched a carrot from
the refrigerator. I was hungry, but too unsettled to sit down and
eat properly. Anyway, since when do I have to apologize for eating
something as healthy as a carrot? A few calisthenics, some practice
breakfalls on the floor, and maybe I'd unwind enough to digest a
real meal. What was I going to do with those diamonds overnight?
The doorbell rang. That was all I needed, some peddler selling
magazines or brushes. I strode across the room and flung open the
door, ready to tell him off. Maybe he was selling life insurance;
maybe he'd need some!
A lovely woman stood there. Not beautiful, technically; her
black hair was a bit frizzled, and her face was acne-pitted. But her
black eyes were alert, her lips full, and her figure had definite sex
appeal. She wore a bright red sweater that made the most of a
modest bust, and her hips were broad, serving as a magnet for
male attention. Some women have a middle section that makes all
the rest irrelevant, and she was certainly that type. She was tall-
about five-ten-and her face showed character. Undoubtedly an
interesting person to know.
 
278
She looked vaguely familiar, but I couldn't place her. And I
stood there in my undershorts, carrot in hand. "I think you have
the wrong apartment," I mumbled.
She looked me over from shoulder to crotch. "No, I think it's
the right one."
"I don't think we've met." I felt stupid as hell. But what was
there to say, in this circumstance?
"Aren't you the wrestling instructor? I'm sure you are; you
have the muscle. My daughter goes to your class."
It began to fall halfway into place. "Judo. Karate. I have lots of
children in my classes. What's her name?"
"Jan. She said you wanted to see me."
I remembered. Jan Green was twelve years old, big for her age,
and just getting serious about judo. Under age ten they don't have
the attention span to get very far, but the older children can become
relatively proficient, and I like working with them. It astounds
outsiders to see a child throw a man my size in a somersault
to the mat, but it can be done, and Jan knew how. I had
hardly met her parents; she usually came to class alone. There was
a definite family resemblance, which explained this woman's seeming
familiarity. The girl had said something once about her folks
being separated or divorced; that could account for their absence.

I still didn't like her walking unaccompanied through the city.
These days it simply isn't safe for girls of any age, and most areas
have not had the benefit of Ilunga's anti-molestation campaign.
So I had told Jan I wanted to see her mother. I had wanted to
say something about safety, and also to obtain permission for Jan
to enter a junior tournament at another dojo. I could take her there
myself, along with the others. But I had meant for the woman to
stop by at my dojo, not my apartment.
"Better chew on that carrot before it rots," the woman said.
"Your daughter's doing fine," I said hastily. What a time for
this female to show up! "She's a yellow belt now, and I expect her
to make orange next month." In judo and karate, a person's skill is
shown by the color of his belt. White is the lowest grade, followed
279
by yellow, going on up to black. Perhaps one student in twenty
makes it all the way up the ladder; most drop out somewhere in
the kyus, or lower grades. Many more could make it if they had
the determination and attitude. Work, more than aptitude, is the
critical factor.
"That's fine," Mrs. Green said, stepping forward. I hastily
stepped back, and she moved on into my apartment.
"This really isn't the time," I protested ineffectively. Now it
was coming back: I had seen this woman at the dojo, in other
clothing. I have a terrible memory for people out of context; I can
recognize a parent with his/her child, but not in some other situation,
and a woman's change of clothing can baffle me entirely.
Especially when she switches from dowdy street outfit to bright,
tight sweater and lets her hair down. I hadn't realized who she
was, then. She sat through a couple of class sessions avidly watching
me as I demonstrated throws and holds. The seoi otoshi shoulder-
drop throw: I have a good memory for judo, anyway. "I just
wanted your permission for Jan to enter a tournament. I think
she-"
"You doing anything tonight?" she asked, looking about my
messy domicile.
"Look, Mrs. Green-"
"Onelida," she said.
"Who?"
"Onelida. Ms. Onelida Green, if you want it formal."
Divorced, undoubtedly. Few married women used the Ms. in
lieu of the Mrs.
"All right, Onelida. I don't entertain strange women in my
apartment, and I've had a busy day."
"Why not relax, then? I know an excellent restaurant, and I'm
very good company. You look as though you need a change of
pace."
I paused. I did need a change of pace. Hiroshi, Bastard Bones,
Luis Guardia, Fu Antos . . . What the hell. "All right. I'll dress."
She smiled. "I knew you'd see the light."
 
280
As I passed the table, I saw Hiroshi's bag of diamonds. Good
God, I had almost forgotten them! I swept it up and took it into
my bedroom, hiding it under my hamper of dirty laundry. Not an
ideal place, but who would suspect? Anyway, my door would be
locked.
In retrospect I can hardly account for my carelessness. I must
have been very tired. I had a forceful lesson coming.
Onelida insisted on using her car. We went to Chang's, a
Polynesian restaurant on I-9 north. The decor was semi-authentic
Polynesian, including stuffed fish on the walls.
Onelida talked. I tried to pay attention, but kept thinking of
those diamonds in my laundry. What was I doing here with a
woman I hardly knew?

On the other hand, she was intriguing. Some women are like
store-window mannequins, impeccably dressed, ideally formed,
and unrelievedly neutral. Others, with far less substantial physical
endowment, manage to animate it so well that they are far more
appealing. Gradually my concerns diminished, and my attention
oriented exclusively on her. It was not a romantic attachment; it
was sexual. There was a fascination about her, a touchability. I
became aware of a burgeoning need for expression that could not
be satisfied in a restaurant.
But was Onelida really the type? Perhaps I was misreading the
signals. So I bided my time.
Liquor was served: apertif first, more with the meal, and more
yet after it. I don't drink, but once in a while, against my better
judgment, I yield to temptation and make an exception. We had
an exotic concoction, mai-tai-rum in a hollowed-out pineapple-
so I sampled it. Later there was another rum drink made of three
distinct layers of different density and color, each of which stayed
at its own level. All I did was taste it, through a straw, first one
color and then another. Hardly enough to intoxicate a man, I
thought. Now I know why they call it demon rum. It was deceptively
mild; perhaps the fruit juice hid the taste of alcohol.
I knew damn well I ought to cut this date short and go home
281
to the diamonds, but those rocks symbolized an entire complex of
developments I wished I could forget for a few hours.
And so I lingered, and imbibed a bit too much. The impact
was greater on me because of my inexperience as a drinker. I felt
pleasantly dizzy, and I paid absolute attention to everything
Onelida said. I can't remember a word of it now.
The meal was as exotic as the beverages. A pu-pu platter-a
Polynesian volcano. A veritable cornucopia of small plates around
a fake volcano of blue flame to heat the food. Giant fried shrimps,
skewered squares of steak, spareribs, chicken wings, deviled crab,
small bits of chicken liver with bacon around them.
I was a novice, or maybe just drunk. I made the mistake of
asking for the Polynesian chicken. It was too much food. I had
already consumed what amounted to a normal meal, and this-
well, let me just describe it.
The waiter arrived with a cart loaded with bowls. He poured
heaps of pieces of fried batter-covered chicken, mixed it with Chinese
and Polynesian vegetables, Chinese melons, and celery-I don't
know what went into it, but it was a lot. Then he lit a saucer of
some kind of wine and poured the flaming liquid over the mixture.
It burned eerily blue. He mixed everything together in the
flame, a phenomenal performance. If I didn't imagine the whole
thing in an alcoholic nightmare . . .
But the taste was out of this world. And during the meal the
waiter kept filling our pot with hot fragrant Chinese tea.
"You're not used to it," Onelida said, surveying me with an
experienced eye. "I'd better get you home." Or something like
that; as I said, I can't recollect. I think they call that an alcoholic
blackout.
I nodded, not speaking for fear I'd say something really stupid.
In that, I think I was really smart.
But it was not to my apartment she took me; it was hers.
"Oh-your home," I mumbled brightly.
"What did you expect, Jason?"
Well, I didn't exactly know. But one thing I know now: watch
 
282
out for mild, multicolored drinks! No, she hadn't given me a mickey;
the alcohol alone was sufficient.
She let me in-I think she must have supported me somewhat
-shut the door, and began to undress me.

"What. . . ?" I inquired, hardly resisting.
"Of course," she said soothingly.
"Oh." That seemed to make sense. I was certainly sharp! I was
lucky I could still stand without staggering.
But that was academic. I wasn't standing now. She set me
down on the bed-it was a big, soft, queen-sized affair-and lay
beside me. I realized, somewhat late, that both of us were now
naked.
That reminded me of something urgent I had wanted to do,
only I couldn't quite recollect what. But I had no time to think
about it. Onelida was all over me, kissing my face and body with
feverish abandon. "I'm an awful sucker for a good physique," she
murmured as her lips cruised past my right ear. "I saw you doing
that wrestling . . ."
"Countering the kuzure-kamishihogatame broken upper fourquarter
hold," I said. "You do it like this." And I actually started to
break what I thought was her hold, though the resemblance was
coincidental. Why I struggled, I don't know; it really is quite an
intriguing hold when applied by a naked woman, since her upper
torso is almost across your face, her head on your stomach, her arm
reaching around your-well, never mind.
"The feel of all that muscle . . ." She tweaked my triceps as a
man might tweak a feminine posterior.
Unfortunately, all this inhibited me; she was too aggressive.
The rum, of course, had dulled my sexual capacity, so that my
response was slower yet. The result was that my performance in
what should have been an ideal situation was distinctly lackluster.
More correctly, fuzzily lackluster.
Nevertheless, thanks to her enthusiasm, we were getting there.
Perhaps my slowness gave her a better chance to get aroused, more
time to titillate herself with my muscle. Then she climbed on top
283
of me, spreading her body the length of mine. "Tate-shihogatame,"
I muttered. "Vertical four-direction hold . . ." Actually, she was
straddling my torso, her thighs spread, getting into position.
"Give me a baby! Give me a baby!" she screamed, biting me on
the neck.
That shriveled me. First, I didn't really like her sexual assault;
it made me feel less masculine, as though our male-female roles
were reversed. Second, her words reminded me that she had a
daughter in my class, her baby; I wondered where Jan was, and
how I would face her in class next time. Third, I hardly wanted to
give this woman a baby. And fourth, I was afraid her bite would
mark me, to my embarrassment before Ilunga and others, who
would surely know.
As a result, I sobered up some and performed, but there was
very little force or pleasure in it. And that half-failure mortified me
too, for it was obvious that she was still en route.
Then I had a notion that would not have occurred to me in
my normal, sober mind, but seemed terrifically original at the
time. The fact is, I am rather straitlaced about sex; I know this
because several of my partners have been at pains to so inform me.
I suffer, they say, from undue conventionality.
So this time I became, for me, radically unconventional. I went,
if the vernacular serves me correctly, down on her.
She reacted like a wind-up doll with its regulating mechanism
haywire. Her arms and legs flexed spasmodically; her head banged
back and forth on the bed, knocking off one of the pillows. She
groaned, whether in ecstasy or pain, I was not certain. Both, probably;
I think there was a sadomasochistic streak in her, sexually
expressed.
"No one ever did that to me before!" she exclaimed. "Don't
stop!"
No one before? Not more than a thousand times, anyway! She

was obviously well familiar with the procedure, primed to respond
to it.
Then she came, explosively, catching my head between her
 
284
thighs and crushing it with painful force. "Oh, that's good! My
husband never socked me like that! Not in three hours, he couldn't
do that to me!"
He had tried for three hours? At the time that seemed like a
pretty good testimonial for someone. Him or me?
Soon she subsided, and I made as if to dress. I had fought the
good fight and won a victory of sorts, I thought, and my head was
beginning to clear. "Oh, don't go!" she exclaimed, horrified. "The
night is young yet!"
Young? Maybe so, but I felt old. I tried to demur, but she
clung to me, literally. Her arms caught firmly around my hips,
and one of her breasts was wedged into my crotch. It was a difficult
plea to deny. I couldn't even think of an equivalent judo hold
to name. And of course I had no convenient way to go home at this
hour if she didn't take me. Not that I had any clear idea what the
hour was.
It turned out to be true: her night was young. Like an indefatigable
warrior, she was soon after me again, eager to arouse and
be aroused. "I am a nymphomaniac," she said candidly.
A nympho! I believed it. The dream of the Playboy-type American
male. But I doubt that many of those studs have actually tried
it. Enthusiasm diminishes with each too-rapid repetition, until
the act becomes extremely uncomfortable. I know; I learned the
hard way.
"Keep going-that's good," she murmured passionately. "It
reminds me of Larry, short but oh so wide, it always hurt the first
time . . ."
I wondered just how that description applied. Was it Larry
who was short and wide, or merely a portion of him?
"I used to work for the telephone company," she continued.
She certainly liked to talk. She kept up a running monologue
throughout, which was just one more disconcerting thing about
her. It was like having a play-by-play report on a sport event, only
I was one of the players. Well, at least I knew what the score was.
"My hours were eight to twelve and six to ten, a split shift. I had
285
two boyfriends. I'd split for Zack from twelve to four, and for Aaron
overnight."
Split shift indeed! Sex from A to Z. Was she teasing me? I
wished one of those boyfriends would spell me now. She had bitten
me so many times I felt as though I'd been in a fight to the
death. My loins certainly felt deceased. If Ilunga saw me now,
she'd probably castrate me. Here she was getting information for
me on how to fence the diamonds, while I-
The diamonds! When was I going to get out of this?
At last Onelida had mercy and let me collapse into sleep. I
dreamed of Cuba and judo tournaments: the anticipation, the excitement,
the agonizing loss. Luis had been there, my friend, though
his team opposed mine. I seldom meet people I really like, but
those I do like are normally in judo or proficient in another martial
art. Luis had beaten me in informal randori, judo practice, yet he
had made me feel like twice a winner. The right remark at the
right time.
It would be good to see him again.
Then I dreamed of Fu Antos, the ninja mystic, now reincarnated
as an old-eyed child. I did not like Fu Antos; I was afraid of
him. I respected his formidable powers, but I knew his basic philosophy
was not mine. He was not a violent throwback to medieval
times; he was a native of those times. That factory destruction

. . . I would try to help him, of course, out of respect for
Hiroshi. But the faster my part of this effort was over, the better off
I'd be.
The thing about Fu Antos was his ki. It was too strong, an
overwhelming magic. Call it super-hypnotism, if you will, or voodoo
come true. I am a twentieth-century man; I do not believe in
magic or voodoo, and I distrust hypnotism. And none of these are
perfect parallels to his ki. That demonstration Fu Antos had made,
when he made me think I had committed suicide when I was
actually killing him-if he could do that, where were his limits?
Then, to see him reincarnated immediately in the form of a young
boy-this defied common sense.
 
286
So I preferred to forget Fu Antos, just as I had to forget my
prior experience in the northern Shaolin monastery and my lost
fiance, Chiyako. I was strong physically; I feared no man in honest
hand-to-hand combat. But I was weak emotionally; my mental
and spiritual wounds had never really healed. I had never achieved
any lasting certainty of values or peace of mind. How comforting
it would be to turn off my doubting mind and exist the way so
many other people did, certain of my own worth and morality.
But somehow I could not.
Chiyako smiled at me, her stunningly beautiful face framed
by soft black hair. Half Chinese, and, as it were, half kung fu.
Behind her I saw the old Shaolin monastery where I had, almost,
found spiritual relief.
Then all vanished in the flare of bursting bombs, and I felt the
utter helplessness and horror of the destruction my presence had
wrought. The monastery was rubble, Chiyako was dead-because
of me.
I woke in a cold sweat. The monks had given me life, but
where was my soul? They had told me I had a mission, and I
thought at one time that mission was to abolish the scourge of
kill-13 from the world. But that was done, and still I was unsatisfied.
It was as though my mission remained unfulfilled.
Yet I had been through similar nightmares before. Always, the
new day came, as it did now, and I busied myself in the trivia of
contemporary routine. Today I had diamonds to fence and weapons
to buy. Tonight Luis would come. Some trivia!
I paused in my thoughts, looking around. Something unpleasant
rippled up my spine. It was daylight, perhaps nine o'clock.
Someone was knocking on the door.
After a moment of disorientation I remembered that I was not
in my own apartment. Onelida was just emerging from the bathroom
in her negligee, looking flower-fresh. She had the stamina of
an ox.
She heard the knocking. "Omigod, I forgot! That's my husband!"
she whispered.
287
Her husband! What was this?
"He's a brute of a man!" she said urgently. "Run out the back
way. Hide in the car!"
I was not afraid of any "brute of a man" per se, for I have
fought the best. But if she were, after all, still married, then I was
an interloper. I wanted no part of that.
I slid out of bed, grabbing my clothing from the chair in a
messy bundle. Naked, holding it defensively before me, I barged
out the back just as Onelida opened the front. Had the man seen
me?
I scampered barefoot across the pavement, searching for her
car. Something moved, and for a heart-stopping instant I thought
it was a person, a housewife. But it was only a cat jumping down
from a garbage can. All I needed now was an arrest for indecent

exposure-me and the hickeys all over my body.
Luckily I found the car without being seen. I dived inside,
banging my forehead on the steering wheel. I huddled there, trying
to get dressed in a hurry in that hellishly cramped space.
A man emerged from the same door I had so precipitously
exited from. He carried a pair of shoes in his big hand.
My shoes.
I would have driven off in a panic, but I didn't have the car
keys.
The man came purposefully up to the car. I waited, chagrined.
I could not fight him; I was in the wrong. Why hadn't the bitch
told me she was still married? I would simply have to take whatever
he dished out, and she had not exaggerated about his size. A stevedore,
by the look of him.
I saw Onelida standing in the doorway, looking scared. Beside
her was the child, Jan. The prior absence of her daughter should
have alerted me; nine times out of ten the woman gains custody of
the child in a divorce action, even if she is a poor mother. Where
else would Jan have stayed, with only one parent? Obviously she
was out with her father, who would return. Had returned.
He peered in the window while I cowered. "You did not have
 
288
to run," he said mildly. "The bitch does not mean anything to me.
I only came to bring my daughter back."
I opened my mouth but could not speak.
"All I care about at this house is my little girl," he said. "I'd
ten times rather take her out for a night than her mother. I'm even
sending her to self-defense school so no one can hurt her. I don't
give a damn about Onelida; I quit bothering after the first dozen
lovers she had. You know, she was even cheating on her A.M. and
P.M. lovers when she worked for the phone company?"
I made an explosive exhalation of breath, half-laughter, halfamazement.
Every part of this misadventure was incredible.
He nodded. "Every time we have a quarrel, she goes out and
finds another stud. Anyway, she's insatiable. You can visit anytime
you want, as long as you can stand it. You don't have to sneak
around. Just make sure the child's not there, okay?"
I nodded dumbly, not having the nerve to tell him I was Jan's
self-defense instructor. But maybe he knew.
"Here's your shoes," he said, handing them in. "Nice meeting
you. I know what you've been through." And he ambled away.
I would have felt better if he had bashed me one.
Fifteen interminable minutes later, Onelida, dressed, came out
to the car. "I'll take you home," she said.
She drove. On the way we passed a park. She halted the car.
"This is pretty quiet this time of day," she said. "We can do it right
here in the car." And she opened her blouse, revealing her braless
bosom.
"Thanks, no," I choked. Now I was really feeling my hangover.
The sight of her body made me feel sick, literally. It had been
quite a night of conditioning. "No time, got to get home!"
"But I haven't had it this morning!" she protested indignantly.
"My husband won't touch me, the bastard."
Which reminded me of the Bastard Bones-another unfortunate
association. So that was where she had spent that fifteen minutes,
trying to make her brute of a husband oblige her. But he was
289
too smart to start in. "Home," I said firmly. I knew we'd never get
out of that park if I made any attempt to fill the bottomless pit.
To my immense relief, she acquiesced. I suppose she had an
eye to the future; if she made a pest of herself this time, she might
lose out the next time. I had no intention of there being any next
time, but had sense enough not to say that. She started the car

again and drove me without further comment to my apartment.
Her very silence was a reprimand; and so help me, I actually
felt guilty. Was she hoping I'd invite her in for a two-hour quickie?
No chance!
"See you again," she said as I stepped out.
"Sure," I lied.
 
Chapter 5:
HOT ICE
As I entered my apartment, I remembered yet again Hiroshi's
bag of diamonds. I rushed to the laundry hamper, fearing the worst.
They had to be there, but if they weren't-
And they weren't. The bag was gone.
I looked wildly around the apartment, refusing to believe it.
The place was its usual sloppy self, dusty and not too clean. My
judo gi was hanging over the back of a chair, undisturbed. My
ancient black-and-white TV set sat in one corner, and my shelf of
martial-arts books was along one wall. Overall, the place was in
need of a woman's touch, but the one woman I ever wanted to
touch it was dead. It certainly did not look as if anybody had been
here in my absence; everything was exactly as I had left it.
For an hour I ransacked my own apartment. I was sweating. I
had no air-conditioner, but that was only half the reason. Because
I didn't like a stuffy room, I had locked my door-and left my
window wide open to let in the night breeze.
Some protection! But ordinarily I had nothing worth stealing.
291
Naturally I should have taken better precautions this time, but it
was a bit late for recriminations.
I had no luck. The diamonds had been stolen while I was out
on my ridiculous hot date. What a price I had paid for my foolishness.
I might as well have put up a billboard: DIAMONDS IN
HAMPER-PLEASE STEAL.
I fell back on the bed. Who could have done this? I had been
criminally careless to leave the diamonds exposed; yet who would
have suspected I had them? I had never been robbed before, and
nothing else had been touched. The thief had obviously known
exactly what he was after, and where to look.
Who had known, then? I ran over the list.
First, Hiroshi himself. No, he was no suspect. He had no motive;
he wanted me to have the diamonds. He had nothing to gain
by stealing them back, when I would gladly have returned them.
And he was honest. I could not imagine him acting in a criminal
fashion.
Second, Ilunga. Again, no. She had been a criminal, technically,
but was changed now. Her basic nature had never been criminal,
and she had never lied to me or coveted anything that was
mine. All she wanted of me was-me.
The Bastard Bones gang? They didn't really know, and most of
them were in no condition to attempt a robbery right now anyway.
And they would not have stopped with theft; they would
have laid into things with sections of pipe, ripping up my apartment
in an orgy of vandalism. This was a more dispassionate, professional
job.
Who else? Had the waitress at the bar overheard our conversation?
I doubted it; she had other duties, and we had desisted when
she was near. The general hum of conversation in such places provides
a certain privacy, anyway.
What about Onelida? No, she had been with me all the time.
Even in my sleep I had been aware of her insatiable hands running
over my body, her torso pressing near, as if to wring out the last
vestige of experience. Her husband or daughter? They would have
 
292

had to be in collusion with her, and I doubted either was the type.
And it really made no sense, distracting me all night when an hour
or so would have done. On top of that, there had been nothing
furtive about any of them; I had been the furtive one.
Then it came to me: the yak-milk drinker. He could have
caught on. Hiroshi might even have confided in him. I hadn't
liked his face, anyway; too oily and sweaty.
Well, I could run him down. Hiroshi would know where to
find him.
Hiroshi! How could I locate the little aikidoist?
The phone rang. I jumped; was that Hiroshi, presciently calling
in?
No; it was Ilunga. "I have a name for you."
Oh, no! She had the contact, but I had no diamonds. If I had
regretted my night's dalliance before, I felt abysmal now.
"You awake yet?" Ilunga inquired in response to my silence.
Suddenly a new notion came to me. "Did you tell your contact
what we had?"
She sounded disgusted. "I was not born yesterday, honky. He
thinks I have skag."
She meant heroin. Smart indirection. "There's a hitch."
She caught on instantly. "Not even a white man's that stupid!"
"I was. I went out on a date." No, better not go into that. "I've
got to find Hiroshi."
"That must have been some date," she muttered. "But you're
in luck, more than you deserve. I saw him with a fat Mexican and
a boy, not fifteen minutes ago. Going down toward the bar."
The bar! "Thanks!" I said, hanging up. I scrambled into my
clothing and headed that way.
No Bastard Bones punks were about. Not surprising.
They were there, having a breakfast, naturally, of yak's milk.
And if I judged correctly, yak cheese. Hiroshi and the boy were on
one side of the table, Jos Peon on the other. I slid into the booth
beside Jos, so as to block any attempted escape.
"There has been a theft," I said grimly.
293
Jos turned toward me, and I tensed. "Seor, I do not know
what you have lost, but I think it is your temper. I suspect you
suspect me of something."
"Jos is blameless," Hiroshi said.
That put me in an awkward spot. Hiroshi was a trusting soul,
but he was no fool. He could touch a person's hand and know by
his ki whether that person was friend or enemy. I could not accuse
Jos now.
"Perhaps we had better excuse ourselves," Jos said. His son
sidled out.
"The boy," I said, thinking how easy it would be to scramble
in a window and out again. An invitingly open window.
Hiroshi shook his head. "My friend means well," he said to
Jos, as though apologizing for me.
"Say no more," Jos said, smiling. "If we can help-"
"Perhaps another time."
I had to move out of the way so that Jos could leave. I did not
feel at all comfortable as his bulk passed me.
"How can you be sure?" I demanded when we were alone.
"The diamonds are gone, and you met this man only yesterday.
What do you know about him?"
"All acquaintances must have a beginning," he said calmly. "I
excused Jos because this misfortune is not of his making, and it
would not be polite to involve him in it." He looked at me with
that gentle yet soul-penetrating manner he had. "Do not blame
yourself. It is not possible to keep a matter such as Fu Antos' mission
entirely secret. I have been aware of the inimical presence of
others since I arrived in America. I thought it was merely the fundamental

arrogance of your Western society, but when you accepted
the diamonds, that presence deserted me and followed you.
Then I knew that someone was after that wealth."
Some of Hiroshi's inexplicable actions became explicable. "You
were being tailed, so you tested to see what they were after!"
He nodded. "I was sure no harm would come to you, or I
would not have done it. The parties never approached me closely
 
294
while I retained the bag; for some reason they doubted their ability
to take it from me, though I sought to provide opportunity."
"I'm not surprised." Hiroshi had been seemingly careless with
that bag, but he was always alert, unlike the lummox I had turned
out to be.
"Now, fortunately, we have succeeded in transferring the diamonds."
"Fortunately! You said you needed the money for-"
"That is true. But it became more important to identify our
enemy. So long as he was unknown, we could not safely proceed
with our mission."
"But how-?"
"It is possible to orient on specific objects," he explained. "I
have attuned my perception to the diamonds. I shall be able to
trace them, if they are not too far away."
This smacked of the supernatural, but I kept my hackles down.
I had heard of strange new discoveries about the human brain and
its perceptions. Some people could receive the aura of particular
objects and tune in on those objects even though blindfolded. It
had been demonstrated in the laboratory, I understood. Certainly,
if anyone had such a talent, Hiroshi would be the one. His power
of ki was miraculous, second only to that of his ancient mentor, Fu
Antos.
"Have you a map?" he inquired.
"At home."
"Excellent! I shall also need one of your metal coat hangers."
"A map and a coat hanger?" I asked blankly.
He nodded. "To locate the diamonds and identify our enemy."
I shrugged mentally. Everything Hiroshi did made sense, eventually.
He had strategies and perceptions and ways of thinking
that fell outside any conventional scheme. In time it would come
clear, I hoped.
At my apartment he took my map of Manhattan and laid it
out flat on the table. Then he took the coat hanger, cut off the
295hey'

hook, and twisted the remainder into something like a slingshot.
He held it up. "Does that suffice?" he inquired, for all the world
like a harmless nut.
"I think you need a rubber band," I said, making a gesture as
of a slingshot being loosed.
He smiled. He took the ends of the Y in the fingers of each
hand and held the point over the map. He reminded me of nothing
so much as a charlatan dowsing for water.
Dowsing? Oh, no! "Hiroshi, you aren't seriously trying to. . . ?"
He ignored me. The point moved back and forth over the
map, as though questing. Hiroshi's eyes were closed, his face serene.
I suspected he had gone into a light trance.
Emanations from an object-that I could understand, cynical
though I might be about a person's ability to perceive them. But
to locate such an object by dowsing over a map!
Hiroshi looked up. "Nothing. Have you another map?"
"There are other sections of the city and suburbs. What do
you want?"
"Evidently the diamonds have been removed from the immediate
vicinity. They should show up on a map of Greater New
York."
"That figures," I said. "Only eight million people to choose
from."
I dug out the map, and he spread it out as before, weighting it
down with knives and spoons to flatten the creases. He resumed
his dowsing.
The point dipped. Hiroshi's eyes opened. "There." I looked at
the map. The clothes hanger pointed to Long Island.
"You have a map of Long Island?"
I rummaged in my collection and produced a tattered map.
Again Hiroshi dowsed. Again the stick dipped. This time it
pointed to an area I remembered as a classy suburban neighborhood
where I knew there were a number of wealthy estates.
"One of these people would hardly need to steal," I remarked
dubiously. Was this dowsing real, or merely random? And if real,
 
296
was it because of his sensitivity to the diamonds, or did he actually
have a notion where they might be? If he had a prime suspect, why
didn't he just say so?
"It is not for the money for them," he said. "It is to take the
money from us. So that the ninjas cannot move equipment to the
Amazon."
"Oh." I should have seen it for myself. "Then you do have
some idea who is behind this theft."
"Yes. But there are several possibilities. We must be sure before
we act."
A good policy anytime. But it left me still in doubt whether
he was sure, or guessing, or trusting to magic. If he proposed to
make demands on some wealthy New York person simply because
his dowsing rod had dipped over that spot of the map . . .
"How do you propose to act?" I inquired suspiciously.
He turned innocent eyes upon me. "Why, you and I shall go
there tonight and recover the diamonds."
"Just like that," I said. "We just knock on the door and say
'Please give back the ice,' and hold out a hand?"
"No, I think we shall not ask. We shall take."
"One theft doesn't justify another!"
He ignored this point. "It must be done swiftly and privately.
We do not want your newspapers to exploit the matter."
I sighed. My certainty that Hiroshi would never commit a
crime was taking a beating. And what about me? I was in it with
him. The thing was impossible, but what could I do?
*

It was no private estate. It was the Brazilian embassy. Or consulate,
or residence for the staff thereof; I wasn't clear on that. But
I did know it was the property of a foreign nation, and that hardly
eased my concern. Were we about to be involved in an international
incident?
Horrified, I tried again to talk Hiroshi out of it, but he was
297
unshakable. His dowsing had shown the way and identified the
opposition, he claimed; now he wanted the diamonds back. If I
didn't go with him, he would do it alone.
It was a big old house surrounded by a garden. The main
domicile was hardly visible from the streets because of the high
stone wall, theoretically decorative, but with little pieces of colored
glass embedded in the top to prevent ready access.
We decided the best approach was through the garden. I
boosted Hiroshi up so he could peer over the top; he was amazingly
light, hardly a hundred pounds.
But inside, we discovered, were vicious attack dogs. I could
hear their swift, businesslike approach; there seemed to be four of
them. It would be possible for us to subdue them, but it would be
an ugly, noisy business that would rouse the neighborhood, defeating
our purpose. Even a harmless lapdog can be excellent protection
because of the noise it makes, alerting its owner to intrusion.
Robbers don't like dogs.
I didn't like dogs much either, at the moment. Which showed
the current state of my conscience.
Well, we had come prepared, in ninja fashion. Hiroshi tossed
doped meat over the wall to them; one mouthful would put the
canines to sleep for hours. That was one reason this approach
through the garden was best; the people inside would not pay
undue attention to noise, assuming it was the dogs. We might
even have to bark a bit.
No joke! In medieval Japan the ninjas used to carry tame crickets
with them, so that when the wild crickets were silenced by the
surreptitious approach of the spy, in this way warning an alert
guard, the tame ones would take up the musical slack. Thus there
was no interruption in the background noise of the night, and no
one suspected the presence of the ninja. We could do the same by
imitating the sounds of the dogs.
Alas, not so easy. These dogs were well-trained and well-fed;
they would not touch the meat. So Hiroshi produced his second
trick, a tiny vial containing a milky liquid.
 
298
"They won't go for poison," I said dubiously.
He unstoppered the vial. I didn't smell anything special, but
suddenly the attitude of the dogs changed. They leaped at the
wall where Hiroshi poured the fluid, whining. "Essence of bitchin-
heat," he explained.
Clever! For a male dog, that was the ultimate perfume. Human
beings are to a large extent eye-oriented. Dogs are nose-oriented.
They could no more ignore this smell than I could ignore a
shapely nude belly dancer performing in the street. Certain matters
require immediate attention.
We did not, after all, try to scale the garden wall on this side;
our presence just might distract the dogs from their futile romantic
quest. I wondered fleetingly what Hiroshi would have come up
with if they had turned out to be bitches. How much of his technique
was skill and how much luck, I could not guess.
We moved around to the rear, following the wall. At intervals
there were small iron spikes set vertically in the top. Presumably
these were intended to further discourage intrusions, while beautifying
the premises. As it happened, those sharp spikes had the
opposite effect on us.

I had a kyoketsu-shogi, a double-bladed knife attached to a genuine
woman's-hair cord with a ring on the end. Another handy
little ninja item.
I threw the ring at a spike, as though I were playing horseshoes.
I missed. I tried again, and missed again. Then Hiroshi took
it from me, skimmed it up once, and the ring settled neatly over
the spike.
I donned tegaki, the spiked brass knuckles, took the cord in
both hands and walked up the wall. The broad iron bands around
my hands protected my palms from the glass as I seized the top of
the wall. This ninja equipment was actually pretty good. They
had really known how to infiltrate, those Japanese agents; their
tools were simple yet sophisticated.
I pulled the knife up after me, unhooked the ring, and jumped
down inside the garden. I crossed quickly to the rear wall of the
299
house, concerned lest the dogs discover me after all. Now I had a
harder ascent: up the rough wall like a human fly, no rope this
time. For a true ninja this might be child's play; for me it was
horrendous.
Now I donned some more of the artifacts Hiroshi had provided,
tabi, Japanese socks with metal spikes to give my feet purchase.
They actually worked; I scaled the wall as though I were
climbing a tree.
Hiroshi had told me where to look for the diamonds. I still
hardly believed his dowsing, but he seemed so certain that it was
easier simply to go along. I squatted on the broad sill, feeling terribly
exposed; one shot from inside the room would finish me. But
Hiroshi had assured me that the man guarding the diamonds was
asleep.
I brought out the little glass cutter and stroked it along the
pane. The cutter had a diamond blade, and theoretically would do
the job. Nothing seemed to happen, so I stroked again, bearing
down harder. Unsatisfied, I ran my finger across the cut, and lo! a
channel was forming. Hiroshi had instructed me in its use during
the day, but that's not the same as doing it while perching insecurely
on a window ledge.
I never really fancied myself as a second-story man, but I did
feel a certain responsibility for the diamonds I had lost, so I suppressed
my misgivings and continued with the job. First I made a
horizontal cut and covered it with sticky tape. Then I made a
vertical cut from each end, and finally a bottom cut. The tape
hinge held the severed panel in place. When the cuts had been
completed, I drew out the panel with a small suction-cup device
so that it would not fall. I freed it from the tape and set it carefully
aside. Now I could enter.
Inside the room was a bed with a cabinet beside it. Obviously
the diamonds were in the cabinet. Sure enough, the guard was
asleep. Evidently he didn't believe there'd be any trouble, especially
in the early evening. How could we know where the diamonds
were, let alone recover them?
 
300
I stood indecisively. Maybe we didn't know. All we had to go
on was Hiroshi's dowsing. If we were wrong-well, no wonder the
man was asleep. He had nothing to guard. In fact, he was probably
a functionary of the embassy or consulate, snoozing away his
off-shift, as he had every right to do. He might be on duty at
night, so he had to sleep in the daytime.
With resignation I went to the cabinet. Might as well finish
this charade and get out. I checked the top drawer but didn't see
any alarm wires. I tugged at its handle. It was locked.
I looked at the sleeping man. There was a key on a string
around his neck. I reached across him and carefully cut the string.

How many ninjas had performed just this sort of chore in ages
past? I took the key and tried it. Success: the drawer slid open.
And it was empty. So were all the other drawers. Just as I
thought. A wild-goose chase. Disgusted with myself for ever getting
involved in this, I turned away.
"Do not move, seor," a gruff voice said. Something hard
jammed into my back.
I reacted automatically. The man was an amateur; he should
have held his weapon back, not making contact with my body. I
turned rapidly, twisting my torso sidewise so as to remove it from
the line of fire. My right hand shoved the gun aside and up, catching
the barrel, twisting. But his finger caught in the trigger guard,
and the gun fired. I felt the burn of it on my wrist.
Then I reversed my swing as I wrenched the weapon out of his
hand. I felt the crack as his finger snapped. I clipped him on the
chin with the metal butt. He fell back on the bed, unconscious.
The bullet had hit the ceiling. I was not hurt, except for the
powder burn. But I had only seconds before the whole house would
be on my back. And I hadn't recovered the diamonds. In fact, I
was now guilty of breaking and entering, and battery, for no reason
the authorities would believe.
Feverishly I searched the man, just in case. Nothing. Then I
ripped the sheets off the bed, flipping them over the man while I
checked under the mattress. Nothing.
301
I looked up-and saw the safe in the corner. Fine sleuth I was!
There was the obvious place-and I had no way to get into it. My
time had been wasted from the start.
I turned, ready to sneak out, and there was a huge goon blocking
the doorway, the biggest monster I had seen in a long time. He
was about six feet six inches tall, wide in proportion, and must
have weighed three hundred pounds, only some of which was fat.
An ugly scar ran down his face. He was hairy, with wrists as big as
normal hands. He was wearing incongruous sky-pink pajamas.
There was no mistaking his intent, however. He charged me
with a hideous roar: pure kill-lust.
I grabbed him by the head, one hand on each side. I turned
and twisted that head to the side while pulling forward with all
my strength. It was a forbidden neck lock, but this was no polite
tournament match. We know a lot in judo and karate and the
other martial arts that is never used in sport, for reasons of safety.
In a normal man the neck would have snapped instantly.
But this giant had such a neck! It was so big that it hardly
seemed to exist. A column of muscle and gristle that filled the
region between ears and shoulders, leaving scarcely any indentation.
I succeeded only in wrenching it, causing him discomfort
that hardly improved his disposition, and in throwing the man
against the bed.
The bed collapsed under his weight, dumping its other occupant.
The giant twisted about like a crocodile and started to get
up. I planted a swift kick with the heel of my foot to the back of
his knee, breaking the meniscus of the joint and tearing the tendons.
It was a brutal injury. Another man would have sprawled on
the floor screaming, for such damage to the knee is extremely painful.
This one got up somehow and lunged at me as I turned to leave
the room via the window. But with all his weight on it, his leg
collapsed under him, and he dropped heavily to the floor. Still he
tried to crawl after me, and I had no desire to grapple with him!
I could not get past him to the window; and if I could, I
 
302
would not have time to don my hand and foot spikes for the descent
before he grabbed me. The giant's knee was broken, but the
rest of him was more than I could handle in the time I had. At any

moment the rest of the household would be upon me. So I had to
use the door to flee.
I sidled into the empty hail. There was a landing leading to an
ornate staircase complete with curling banister. I trotted down,
resisting the irrational urge to slide down the banister.
But another man appeared at the bottom. As he spied me, he
tried to pull a gun. I jumped the rest of the way down, both feet
forward. I struck him on the chest, my feet crushing several of his
bones and his sternum. He was knocked unconscious, and his body
served to break my fall. I completed the action in a front roll,
ducking my head to let my shoulders and back bear the brunt of
the impact harmlessly. The first thing a judo student learns is how
to take a fall, and it is well worth knowing. I came neatly back to
my feet, and there was the front door.
The giant was crawling down the stairs, dragging his leg, doggedly
pursuing me. I didn't have the diamonds, but I had to get
out. I opened the front door.
Two policemen were charging up the walk as I looked out.
Hastily I drew back, but there was the giant, pulling himself erect
against the banister, able to hop on one foot, and still plenty dangerous.
I could not afford to tangle with either the giant or the
law. I froze.
Then an old blind man with a white cane and dark glasses
appeared on a crosswalk. What on earth he was doing here I couldn't
guess; maybe consulates were soft touches for beggars. I was hardly
concerned with him; right now I had to foil the two police guards
and find Hiroshi and get the hell out of here. What a disaster!
Then, surprisingly, the blind man stepped into the guards,
holding up something small and round. They both stopped and
stared. The blind man swung his cane to strike the first man on
the back of the head, knocking him out. Then a flourish like that
of a kendo bamboo sword master, and the cane hit the gun hand of
303
the other guard and continued straight into the solar plexus. Had
it been a sword, it would have skewered him. Both guards were
out, but not wounded.
"Hiroshi!" I exclaimed, catching on.
He made one of his little bows. "I did not really hurt them.
Come, we must depart."
"But I didn't get the-"
He stopped me with a gesture. In his hand he held another
little bag, and I knew by his manner that it contained the diamonds.
"They had placed the diamonds in a secure place," he
said. "I discovered this too late to inform you."
He was trying to spare my feelings, but I saw through him. I
had, I realized, been a decoy, sent in after the decoy guard and
decoy safe. Hiroshi had allowed me to spring the trap and distract
the guards and make a commotion, while he zeroed in on the bag
himself. No sense leaving the job of recovery to an incompetent.
Or was it even more insidious? Hiroshi had been incredibly
nonchalant about the diamonds from the outset, and he was not a
careless man. There had really been too little time for him to enter
the house, open a safe, emerge unobserved, and don the blindman
disguise. If he had the real diamonds now, he must have had
them all along.
I felt a prickle of discovery as we made our rapid, silent way
out. Could he have given me imitations for stealing, while he kept
the real ones safe all the time? Why?
I could not ask him directly, for he would never hurt my feelings
by admitting such a ruse. But as I mulled it over, it made
sense of a sort. The job had been done: the diamonds had been
stolen and yet kept safe, the enemy had been exposed, and my
commitment to the dubious cause of Fu Antos had been tested
and cemented.

Still, there were loose threads, elements that didn't quite jibe.
If the diamonds I had had were fakes, and had not been recovered
by Hiroshi, surely the enemy knew it now. So they would naturally
plot to obtain the real ones. That would renew the danger.
 
304
We should have left things strictly alone, allowing them to discover
the ruse in their own time, too late to stop the fencing of the
diamonds and the delivery of the arms to Fu Antos. Why had
Hiroshi insisted on complicating the picture, antagonizing the
enemy at peril to our lives? These were not small-time hoods we
were dealing with; these were thoroughgoing international gangsters,
a tough breed. That giant . . .
There, too, an answer of sorts emerged from the shrouds.
Hiroshi did not want merely to identify the enemy; he wanted
that enemy to know that he knew, and to feel the weight of Fu
Antos' retribution. Not only would it be clear that no place was
safe from the ninja lord's infiltration; a new dimension had been
opened. For they would now check the diamonds in the safe and
have them appraised by experts, and the stones would be exposed
as fakes. They would have to assume that the raid had after all
been successful.
To blast open the safe and steal the diamonds back would have
been one thing, an impressive demonstration. To exchange them
for paste without tampering with the safe was quite another thing.
Only the legendary ninja talent could accomplish such a feat. That
would put the awful fear of the supernatural into the hearts of the
enemy. These people would be ten times as nervous about tangling
with Fu Antos, or anyone connected with him, again.
Hiroshi had committed no real crime, but he had made his
point with a vengeance! If my understanding were correct, and I
would never be sure of that. And in the process, he had given me
an unforgettable lesson in the imperatives of a ninja: the need for
strength, stealth, and desperate measures. The inevitable ruthlessness.
Perform or die! I could no longer question the motives of Fu
Antos; he was what he had to be.
So I let that aspect rest and asked a different question. "How
did you make them stop-those two policemen? I saw them freeze,
and I can't believe the sight of the diamonds would have done
that. What did you have in your hand?"
Hiroshi opened his bag and showed me.
305
It was a gruesome shrunken head.
I paused, just as the guards had. "What are you doing with a
headhunter's trophy?" I demanded. This was the last thing I had
anticipated, despite the bizarreness of this episode.
"It belongs to Fu Antos," Hiroshi said. "I merely safeguard it
while he is otherwise occupied."
"But why bring it here?"
Calmly he ran his nail along the back of the head. The leathery
surface parted, revealing the interior. The entire head was a
kind of pouch, and inside it were the diamonds. The real ones, I
was sure.
I realized I had asked the wrong question. "How did Fu Antos
come by this head?"
Hiroshi smiled. "It is best that you know, Jason Striker," he
said, handing the whole grisly package to me. "I shall tell you."
And on our way home, he did.
 
Chapter 6:
ASSASSIN
Medieval Japan was restive. Barbaric Western nations had been
demanding that Japan open her ports to world trade, and the
American Commodore Perry had impressed upon the empire the

ruthless power of uncivilized warships. The feudal system was ending,
but a wave of antiforeign sentiment was building up.
Fu Antos shared this feeling. An open Japan would be a modernized,
commercial Japan, the antithesis of the society he valued.
The ancient ways were the proper ways; these could not be permitted
to dissipate without resistance.
But the leadership of the nation was drifting toward Westernization.
One of the prime movers was the powerful regent Ii
Naosuke, Kamon-no-Kami. Lord Ii, as he was called, had arranged
treaties with the Netherlands, Russia, Britain, and France. He was
an unashamed internationalist. He had to be stopped. Perhaps the
trend was already too strong, and like the tide, it would inevitably
have its way; but if it could be reversed, the elimination of Lord Ii
was the way.
307
But Lord Ii was powerful. He was always well-guarded, and
no one could approach him without his permission. So the job
was up to a specialist in assassination, the fabled ninja master Fu
Antos.
It was the twenty-second of March, 1860. Fu Antos was no
longer young. He had lived, by some accounts, exactly three hundred
years, and he appeared to be about sixty. He was garbed as a
ronin, an unattached samurai warrior. Like many of these masterless
martial artists, he was shabbily dressed, as though quite poor. The
days of rich patrons were declining, but professional pride remained.
The sheath of his long sword was covered with cracks where the
lacquer had worn away because of long use and exposure.
In Yokohama he had to make his way through a crowd. He
had made a long journey-a fit ninja could travel a hundred miles
in a day on foot, and Fu Antos was the best-and though he was
not really tired, the sharp edge of his alertness was off. His long
scabbard stuck out behind his back, and it happened to brush the
scabbard of one of three stalwart youths passing by. This was sayaate,
scabbard-striking, an offense against dignity.
"You have insulted me!" the youth exclaimed dramatically. "I
demand satisfaction!"
Immediately his two friends drew in beside him. All three
were tipsy: the odor of sake, rice wine, was on their breaths. "You
have insulted us all, dull ancient!"
Fu Antos was not looking for incidental trouble; he had quite
another mission in mind, which would bring him all the trouble
he needed for this century, though it might also preserve his culture
as he knew it. As a ninja he had little superficial pride. All he
cared about was accomplishing his purpose expeditiously. So he
apologized. "I am most regretful, honored sirs; I was unpardonably
clumsy."
Others stopped in the street to watch his humiliation. But the
three half-drunken samurai, sensing easy prey, refused to be mollified.
"Your apology is worthless, old man; for this offense you
must pay a steeper price." And three right hands crossed to the
 
308
hilts of the swords thrust through their obis, or sashes. The meaning
was unmistakable.
Privately, Fu Antos was furious. These clowns were foolishly
arrogant, a disgrace to the samurai class, and ignorant of whom
they faced. But he did not want to attract attention to himself;
that could interfere with his mission. "I humble myself before
you," he said, bowing even deeper, until it seemed as though his
forehead would touch the ground. "I admit my fault, and beg
your indulgence for an old man." If they only knew how old!
But this only aggravated their impertinence. "We shall settle
for nothing less than the ultimate, reprobate!"
The utter idiots! "Are you challenging me, then?" Fu Antos

inquired softly, rising to his feet. An observant man would have
noted the subtle change in his bearing, and taken warning. Indeed,
there was a well-dressed samurai in the crowd who took
note, allowing the faintest of smiles to touch his lips. But this man
said nothing.
By this time a fair number of spectators had gathered around,
ranging from street urchins to warriors. Though there were murmurs
supporting the lone ronin, sympathizing with the underdog,
no one offered to intercede directly.
"Yes, I challenge you, dotard!" the offended warrior said loudly,
playing to his own audience.
Fu Antos did not smile. "You alone?" The implication was
manifest, and a chuckle rippled through the crowd. The brash
youngster realized too late that he faced a seasoned warrior: no
easy mark.
"All three of us!" one of the others said, and the third nodded.
Now they had confidence again, for the odds were satisfactory.
"Then I shall identify myself," Fu Antos said, as protocol required.
But he did not speak loudly enough for the crowd beyond
the three to hear, for he hoped no word of this would reach Lord
Ii. The man, no fool, might recognize the presence of the ninja
and be alert.
The three youths gave their names. Then, the formalities com-
309
pleted, all four unsheathed their swords. Fu Antos drew his slowly,
as though he were not accustomed to strenuous activity; the truth
was, no living man could match the speed of his draw. The blades
glittered in the sun.
Fu Antos fixed his gaze on the center samurai, advancing behind
the unwavering point of his weapon. That youth, fixed by
the steely eye and blade, slowly gave way, dismayed by the evident
confidence of his single opponent. Small wonder, for it was impossible
to conceal completely the competence of the finest swordsman
in all Japan. It had been a century since he had actually fought,
but Fu Antos had trained when more stringent standards of swordsmanship
prevailed, and still practiced daily in private.
The youth on his right thought he saw an opening, and rushed
to the attack.
Fu Antos, who had anticipated that very move, parried with
lightning speed, then cut the man down with a stroke across his
neck. Even as the hapless man fell, Fu Antos whirled to meet the
charge of the left-hand samurai. A single motion severed the youth's
head from his neck. The head flew into the air, its startled eyes
staring, then dropped to roll in the street. The masterless body
assayed a few drunken steps, while a crimson fountain of arterial
blood jetted upward a good two hands of=driven by the still
furiously beating heart. There was a gasp of amazement and morbid
delight from the crowd.
The one in the center suddenly revealed himself to be a coward.
He whirled away and started to flee down the street.
Fu Antos hurled his sword like a spear so that it transfixed the
coward's back and stood out from his chest. The youth looked
down, amazed. He tried to claw the steel out of his body, "But he
was so old!" he protested, as though he had merely suffered an
indignity at the hands of an incompetent, an accident, as it were.
Then he died.
The spectators applauded as Fu Antos calmly drew out his
blood-wet sword, wiped it on the dead man's tunic and coolly
 
310
returned it to its sheath. His feat of arms was warmly congratulated
by the samurai in the audience.
Fortunately, none of the three who had heard his name had
survived. The secret was safe.

Fu Antos turned to go. "Sir!" someone called. "Aren't you going
to the magistrate's office to report?"
Annoyed, Fu Antos paused. He saw that the speaker was one
of the samurai spectators, obviously a man of good breeding. Because
it was the fashion of the ninja to notice everything, Fu Antos
had observed this man's smiling anticipation of the climax. Had it
been mere professional interest, or something more?
But obviously the man intended no offense. "What interest
have I in this offal?" he asked, glancing at the corpses. "What interest
does the magistrate have?"
"It is the law. Do you not remember?"
Fu Antos had not forgotten. He had never known of this law,
as it had not been in force when he was current with affairs of the
world. He had emerged from his seclusive retreat only because of
the urgency of his mission, and would return to it the moment
that mission was done. "I apologize, sir. The quarrel confused me;
I had forgotten."
The samurai smiled. "No apology necessary, but I hasten to
accept, as I hardly wish to share the fate of the three buffoons who
declined your plea! It was a natural error on your part. These regulations
are a nuisance. The office is right down the street, here; I
will escort you, if you have no objection." And he fell in beside the
ninja, though Fu Antos had not solicited his company and did not
want it.
"I do not recognize you," the man continued. "I thought I
knew all the superior swordsmen of Japan-God knows they are
fewer than they were in the old days!-but surely you are among
the finest. I have seldom seen such efficiency in a duel, such composure.
I am Yonezuka, of the Mito clan."
The busybody was soliciting a return introduction. Fu Antos
could not decline without insulting the clansman, and that would
311
mean another duel, this time against no bumpkin. In the end, the
samurai would indeed share the fate of the three. But if he gave the
name, Yonezuka would surely recognize it, for he was a weapons
sophisticate, collecting reputations like butterflies. That explained
his intense interest.
Still, the Mito clan was a formidable one, much attached to
the ancient ways. Fu Antos had intimate knowledge of this clan of
old, and was intrigued. Perhaps this chance encounter could be
turned to advantage after all. "Your pardon-I must first ask a
question," Fu Antos said.
"Granted, certainly!" Now Yonezuka was doubly curious.
"Do you support the ancient ways?"
This was no superficial question; it was the leading issue of the
day. "Indeed I do!" the samurai said warmly. "Do you know that
they are trying to let accursed foreigners into Japan? The filthy
French, the dastardly Dutch, the ridiculous Russians, even the
awful Americans! What is it coming to?"
Fu Antos' eyes widened a trifle. Here was a man after his own
heart. The Mito blood was running true. "Yet what can any man
do?" he asked rhetorically. "The leaders sign the treaties, not the
real Japanese warriors."
"There are ways," Yonezuka said grimly. Then he remembered
himself, and backtracked. "I mean no treason, of course."
"Of course." They both understood the implication: the treason
was by the leaders who were opening Japan to the foreign
element, not by the warriors who defended the old ways. Thus, by
definition, it was not treason to consider ridding the nation of
those leaders, but it could be death to speak it aloud.
"Here is the office."
"Thank you. I am Fu Antos."
Yonezuka paused. "I don't believe I-" He did a double-take.
"Impossible!"

Fu Antos did not take offense. The samurai's reaction was in
fact encouraging. "Perhaps you recall my ancestor, him of the Black
Castle. Men called him a traitor."
 
312
"Not the men of Mito," Yonezuka murmured, staring at him.
"That swordsmanship-yet it fits. It could be! I had thought that
particular ninja line was extinct."
"Not quite. We have been in hiding, for reasons of expediency.
My ancestor was no friend of the shogun."
"There are others who have had less courage in expressing their
objections to certain high officials." The samurai still stared at Fu
Antos. "I have heard certain rumors, surely false, of long life-
extremely long life!-of absolute seclusion, of extraordinary spiritual
powers."
"On occasion the seclusion must be abridged, when there is
necessary work to be done."
"Necessary work," Yonezuka repeated thoughtfully. "There is
that today!" Abruptly he straightened. "You cannot put your name
to that magistrate's report! Allow me; then we shall talk."
Fu Antos nodded. They entered the office, and the samurai
assumed credit for the killings. "This ronin was witness," he concluded,
indicating Fu Antos. "Those three ruffians would not be
satisfied with anything less than bared blades."
"We understand," the magistrate said. "Strange they did not
recognize your name."
"I admit to feeling some affront on that score," Yonezuka said.
"But these days many worthy warriors go unrecognized." He
glanced meaningfully at Fu Antos.
"Yes, it is too bad," the magistrate agreed, misunderstanding,
as he was supposed to. "All those accursed foreigners disrupting
our sacred customs . . ."
They were hardly outside the office before Yonezuka resumed.
"You come for Lord Ii!"
Fu Antos shrugged. "Perhaps."
"But you cannot approach him alone! There have been many
attempts on his life, and as many executions. His guards are alert,
the pick of the samurai. They leap to dispatch any fool who intrudes
even accidentally into the regent's party."
"That is edifying news."
313
"One man-it is impossible. Even for the nefarious ninja!"
Fu Antos shrugged again, eloquently.
"I have friends," Yonezuka said thoughtfully. "Strong men of
my clan, and courageous. But not foolhardy. They lack the proper
leadership, they have no feasible plan. If that leadership and that
plan were provided-"
Fu Antos smiled.
Fu Antos repaired that evening to the ill-famed "Nightless
City," Yoshiwara of Edo. Here many of the houses were extraordinarily
tall-four, five, and even six stories high.
They were brightly illuminated, of almost palatial aspect.
For this was the home of the licensed hetaerae.
He entered at the main gate, where he divested himself of
both his katana long sword and his dirk. As a member of the
samurai class, he did not, of course, carry the special ninja weapons.
He understood the need for this disarmament; it was not that
the proprietors feared mayhem-though certainly they had no
desire for drunken brawls-so much as the fact that certain of the
hetaerae so loathed their captive existence that they would quickly
kill themselves if they ever had access to a suitable weapon. Fu
Antos had considerable sympathy for the plight of the common
man, but this did not extend to that of women. There were, after
all, limits.

He proceeded on foot to one of the introductory tea houses.
He was ushered into a private room, where an attendant brought
him a cup of tea. It was, he had to admit, excellent tea.
As he sipped, a parade of young, pretty, elegantly attired girls
passed before him. Some carried decorative fans with which they
concealed portions of their faces, vastly enhancing the allure by
means of this affected mystery. Some showed portions of their
anatomy-a hip, a breast, or intriguing fractions thereof. Some
smoked their little kiseru pipes containing a few puffs' worth of
fragrant tobacco. All had gorgeous raiment, brocade of gold or
silver, high clogs on their feet, with black hair piled high and set
with rows of light tortoiseshell hairpins. Their faces were pow-
 
314
dered white, their lips gilded, and they were completely expressionless.
Some proudly bore aloft phallic emblems, in case there
should be any lingering doubt about the nature of their profession.
These were the queenly oiran, the first-class courtesans. Fu
Antos watched without expression, remembering that he had possessed
one more beautiful than any of these in his youth. At length
he indicated his choice, an extremely attractive specimen, not altogether
unlike his wife of centuries past.
He was then conducted to a more comfortable and private
locale equipped for diverse entertainments. In due course the selected
girl entered. "I am Little Butterfly," she said, making obeisance.
Fu Antos surveyed her charms at closer range, giving no advance
sign of his reaction. Yes, she was indeed lovely. Just as she
was about to withdraw, thinking herself rejected, he spoke. "Please
have some sake." In this way he signified his final acceptance of
her.
They went through the ceremony, exchanging cups of wine
three times in the symbolic marriage. Little Butterfly was now his
girl; if ever he should come to this house again, she alone would be
his companion.
She had, he knew, been sold into virtual slavery for the term of
her greatest sexual charm. After age twenty she would no longer
solicit new patrons, and at age twenty-seven she would become
her own property and retire, her allure gone. Women aged rapidly
in Japan; the Western notion of beauty extending into middle
age-thirty or even thirty-five!-was plainly an opium dream having
no reality. There was no shame in this profession; in fact, it was
hardly more stringent for a woman than that of legal wife.
They chatted about inconsequentials, and she fed him supper:
excellent raw fish, rice balls, bean soup, shredded cabbage,
fried shrimp, and, of course, copious sake. She acted very shy whenever
he hinted at the amorous consummation for which he had,
handsomely, paid, thereby extending and intensifying his desire
315
for that climax. She giggled in a high pitch as she put bits of
delicious jellyfish into his mouth and danced away before he got
proper hold of her.
At last Fu Antos, acting the tipsy celebrant, though the wine
had not touched him at all, brought her to the soft couch. She
would not disrobe completely, for a woman naked is a woman
stripped of her mystery, but she allowed him to survey in tantalizing
installments her most intimate attractions. Her breasts were
large and round, unusual in an Oriental girl; that was a point
against her. Only barbarian women were huge-uddered cows! But
her thighs were sleek and firm.
Like a man performing a jujitsu technique, he wrestled her
into a suitable hold, his crotch against her supple buttocks. Neither
of them had disrobed; instead, the relevant portions of the
attire were opened or pulled aside, so that the vital action was
largely concealed. This, again, heightened the effect. Fu Antos did

not need to pretend interest; he was well ready for the explosive
culmination.
Flesh met flesh, seeking that rapturous lodging, the hard within
the soft. As the experienced martial artist conquered by seeming to
yield, so the female conquered by accepting the thrust.
And his member failed him.
It was as though he had drawn his sword confidently from its
scabbard and found it broken. With a skilled samurai awaiting
satisfaction. Most embarrassing.
"Ten thousand fools!" he swore. How could this happen to
him? Him, of all people! He did not care about the girl; sex was
something he could take or leave, and he had been too busy at the
Black Castle to indulge in such pastimes often. But when he did,
he did, proving himself no less a master of the fleshly sword than of
the steel.
The geisha stirred, bemused at his delay. Had she not brought
him to the fever pitch, making it physically impossible for him to
stave off final expression, even had he wanted to? How had she
failed?
 
316
Fu Antos touched her neck with the ki, and her mind went
blank. She remained frozen in position, aware of nothing but her
own respiration and heartbeat.
His mind remained active. He remembered back almost three
centuries, to the time before he was married. Then he had been
potent, even in wildly adverse circumstances. Actually, it was like
his test of this afternoon, though there was a superficial dissimilarity
in the episodes. In each case there had been a fundamental
challenge not obvious to the outsider; in each case he had vindicated
himself and gained tremendously.
Fu Antos closed his eyes, remembering, comparing, savoring,
while the girl stayed still, a living statue. But the memories, new
and old, would not converge properly, as though the impotence
extended from his groin right into his brain.
"Listen, Little Butterfly," he said.
The girl looked around, aware of him again. Now she was
frightened; she had felt his strange power, not the kind of penetration
she had anticipated. He liked her fear; it recharged him. And
so he spoke, not entirely with his voice, but with the hypnotic
control of his hands, the kuji-kiri. Hands and fingers moved in
exotic rhythms of their own, tracing eldritch patterns, while his
eyes fixed hers.
Though the geisha's eyes were locked on his, still she had to be
aware of those queerly moving hands, as though they were independent
of each other and of the rest of his body. The fingers
intertwined like nests of vipers. The combination made her react
far more expressively than she could otherwise have managed, for
all her training. She not only heard, she saw the image forming
behind the facade of his body. Her psyche, like her physical presence,
was now captive to his thrust.
*
-There is one thing, the samurai said.
I glanced at him. -You wish to be certain I'm really a ninja,
not an agent provocateur of the government.
317
Yonezuka nodded agreement -I would not send the Mito
clan into such a trap. If you will give substantial evidence of your
sincerity, your commitment to the ideals you have expressed . . .
I put my hand to the hilt of my sword. -Need you other
commitment than this?
He shook his head. -I could test you with the blade, it is
true. But if you are not whom you imply, you will die; if you are,
I will die. In neither case is there anything to be gained.

-I, too, need an affirmation, I said cautiously. Did he think
me a fool, to lay myself vulnerable to the commitment of words
alone?
-Certainly, he agreed, perhaps too readily.
I looked about. The crowd had dissipated, and we happened
to be on a street bereft of people. Yonezuka's request was legitimate,
but so was mine: each of us had to be sure of the other
before either made any treasonous (by certain definitions) commitment.
We required a demonstration that would implicate
Yonezuka and the Mito clan as irrevocably as it did me. Of course,
I could test him with my ki, but I preferred not to employ that
indiscriminately. It is not to a ninja's advantage to reveal his fundamental
assets prematurely, if ever.
We happened by a house inside whose lighted interior two
aliens sat. Their loud voices attracted my attention, irritating me.
Why should they be in the warm shelter, while I roamed the gathering
chill of the winter evening?
-Who are these creatures? I inquired, wrinkling my nose.
Indeed, their odor offended me, even through the window; it was
of leather and tobacco and overindulgence in the flesh of animals.
-They are British, from an isle across the world, Yonezuka
replied, his own face mirroring my distaste. -Such things are
appearing all over Japan, but especially in Yokohama. Their fat
merchants come to practice the extortion they call trade; their
villainous soldiers come to protect their merchants from the righteous
wrath of those they cheat.
-And this is tolerated? I asked incredulously.
-What can one man do? he asked rhetorically in return, glanc-
 
318
ing sidelong at me. -The British battleships have truly awful
cannon that can shell the city.
I considered. -I think that direct action against the merchants
would not be politic on our part, and shelling would not
be politic on theirs. It is money they want, not rage. Eliminate the
soldiers, who are, after all, paid to fight and die, and the merchants
will not long remain.
-Yes, certainly! But who can eliminate a beast who wears a
revolver?
-I do not understand your question, I said, giving him a
direct stare that showed I understood perfectly.
-I mean that even a redoubtable warrior (not that we know
of any in these parts!) might find himself at a disadvantage against
even so lowly a pair as these, unless, of course, he attacked by
stealth in the night.
I shook my head as if perplexed. -It is, of course, the ninja
way to utilize stealth. But in a case such as you mention, that
would hardly be necessary. Anyone who could master three stalwart
Japanese samurai could certainly deal with a mere barbarian.
To imply otherwise is nonsensical.
-Perhaps. But there happen to be two barbarians.
I looked again, feigning surprise. -Why, so there are. To me a
pigpen is much the same whether it has one pig or ten. It ought to
be cleaned.
-Yes. The stink is oppressive.
-Perhaps a ninja and a samurai would not find it beneath
their dignity to dispatch the chore.
-So it would seem, he agreed.
We marched up to the door and hailed the two barbarians.
-What a stench! Yonezuka bawled.
After a moment the door opened and we beheld the aliens at
close range. One was a British major, and he was indeed hoglike of
jaw and snout and gut, with porcine bristles on his moist fat lip.
The other was a lesser swine, a lieutenant.

-Eh? the major grunted.
319
-We feel constrained to request your departure, I said.
-Beg pardon? the major squealed in bad Japanese, his hairy
lip quivering.
-Pardon can be granted only after an act of contrition, I explained.
Now both barbarians frowned. How ugly their white faces
were! -Contrition?
-Depart, Yonezuka put in helpfully, realizing that they were
too stupid to comprehend an indirect statement.
The major turned red, in the way that only an obese palecomplexioned
foreigner could manage. -Sir, these are our premises!
Where would you have us go?
-Back to your barbarian isles, I said.
Both Britishers jerked as if stung. Apparently an insult could
after all penetrate their stout hides, if it was delivered with sufficient
accuracy and force. -We don't have to listen to this! Get
out! And they bulled out the door as if to push us with the might
of their flabby bellies.
-Your presence in fair Japan fouls the air, I said, stepping
back to give them more room.
The major's right hand descended to his revolver. At last!
I performed the uppercut. My right hand drew the sword
from its scabbard at my left hip with eye-blurring speed. The blade
emerged, gaining velocity, moving from left to right and upward
at a sharp angle. The point touched the beast's right hip and continued
the sweep diagonally to his left shoulder. Such was the
force of the strike that his spinal cord was severed. He was dead
before he toppled, his intestines spilling out in a boiling mass.
Then his snout crashed into the ground as I stepped back to avoid
contamination from the splash of his alien blood.
I whirled immediately on the lieutenant. But Yonezuka had
already taken care of the matter. His cut had not been as deep or
clean, so that he had to remedy the matter with a second slash at
the barbarian's neck, but the job was done.
-Jo-i, Yonezuka muttered with satisfaction. -The barbar-
 
320
ian-expelling spirit.
-Let us not remain longer in the smell of this offal, I suggested.
-Unless you wish to register the matter with the magistrate?
He laughed. We both knew that there would be serious repercussions
for this double execution if we were caught. The last thing
we wanted to do was tell the magistrate.
But the gesture had been made: the ninja and the samurai had
established their credits as serious opponents of the current policy
of Japan's unworthy government. Now we could trust each other.
No agent provocateur, no spy of the capital city Edo, would have
gone so far as to challenge and kill ranking foreigners.
*
"And so I came to you," Fu Antos said to the terrified geisha.
"A man is entitled to a bit of entertainment after a good day's
work. Yonezuka is out rousing the Mito clan, moving them into
Edo, twenty miles to the north. I am obviously a tourist with
nothing on my mind but my genitals."
"But this is Edo!" the girl said. "You speak as if you are still in
Yokohama."
"I am," Fu Antos said. "At least, the ronin is, officially."
"It is impossible for a man to be in Yokohama in the afternoon
and in Edo at dusk," she said. "Unless worn out from riding."
"I have no horse. Where I go, I go on foot."
"Then-"
"Correct. So I am there, not here. The perfect alibi."
"Let me go!" the girl pleaded, wanting no part of this. She had

encountered many men and experienced many things, but nothing
like this.
"What, before our business is finished?" he inquired mockingly.
"Then finish it! I shall not tell."
"Indeed you shall not." His eye moved to his long sword, so
321
recently bloodied, and she gave a little cry of horror.
"Did you not leave your weapons at the entrance?" she demanded,
cringing.
"I did. It is required."
"Then how can your sword be here? I am sure you did not
carry it in."
"My blade is never far from my hand, though I can kill as
quickly with another weapon, or with none." He savored her fear.
"Intriguing that my weapon, like myself, is where it can not be! Is
it ninja sleight-of-hand, or is it magic?"
But she was deaf to the intellectual humor of the situation.
"Magic . . ." she whispered, believing.
"The code of the bushido, the way of the fighting knights,
includes benevolence," he said. "I shall deprive you of the memory
of this night, so that you will not suffer unduly. Later that memory
will return, but by that time it will not be so frightening, and my
business will be long finished."
She stared at him, her apprehension unabated.
"But first I must complete my narrative," he said. "Surely you
find it fascinating?"
"Yes, yes!" she agreed with pathetic eagerness.
"You are too much like my wife. How readily she agreed with
me, yet she betrayed me." He scowled, the memory bitter even
after three centuries. He had had too much sake; his tongue was
loose. He could control it with the ki, but did not, at this moment,
choose to. "Listen."
Wide-eyed, hardly breathing, she listened.
*
The year was 1576. I was then a youth of sixteen, as yet unburdened
by the demise of my honorable grandfather and fathers
I was on a training mission. My assignment: to obtain a lock of the
hair of the enemy lord and to steal his list of secret spies and informers.
I had already passed the simpler tests of ninja proficiency,
 
322
such as hanging silently from the branch of a tall tree for six hours,
then dropping safely to stun an unsuspecting watchman. This current
mission, I was certain, would be more challenging.
Suddenly I came upon a glade below the castle, a clearing
through which a stream passed. A girl was there, washing herself.
I came near, silently. I had intended to swim up this stream to
where it entered the castle, thus gaining secret entry; this girl's
presence complicated that. But perhaps she would soon depart,
and in any event I would not make the attempt until nightfall.
The cover of darkness has ever been the ninja's best friend.
Meanwhile, I was curious; she was facing away from me, her
glossy black hair tumbling across her shoulders attractively. She
was naked, humming tunelessly as her hands dipped in and out of
the water.
I had not lacked for women. But my interests had been primarily
with my martial art. The girls my grandfather sent to me were
like unarmed peasants before the katana: so little challenge as to
be meaningless. But this stranger intrigued me: she was an enemy
maiden, no pawn of my family. No peasant, by the look of her;
surely the young wife of a noble, unaccustomed to the drudgery of
the peasant class. Why not take a really significant trophy home:
the conquest of such a female?
No, I had better stick to my original mission. It was my impetuous

gonad urging me to divert my energy, not my brain. Discipline
was crucial to a ninja, and this was really part of my test.
Still, I could at least examine the front of her before I moved on
upstream to survey the castle itself.
-Ho, stranger! a man's voice called.
I froze. Had I been discovered?
Rising from the brush on either side of me were armed men, a
party of warriors in the habiliments of the rival clan. There were
some thirty of them. They had anticipated my coming and laid a
trap for me, with the girl as bait. I, like an inexperienced, overconfident
fool, had fallen into it. Where was my ninja cunning and
caution now? I should never have allowed myself to become so
323
distracted by one thing that I neglected to observe my surroundings.
Who had betrayed me? Suddenly I realized the full nature of
this test: my grandfather had done it. For an ordinary man this
mission would have been impossible. For a ninja it would have
been a challenge. But for the scion of Fu Antos, it would have been
elementary, unless the degree of difficulty were artificially elevated.
So the cunning old man had sent word ahead.
It was not that he hated me. I knew that he had a deep if
hidden affection for me, and pride in my development. It was that
he simply could not tolerate a weakling as eventual heir to the
Black Castle. The ninja master had to be able to prevail in any
situation, however difficult, and to be alert for anything, even betrayal
from those closest to him. If I survived this mission, I would
have proved myself a fit master.
If I survived.
Immediately I sought to withdraw, wriggling through the undergrowth
like a snake, taking advantage of natural cover. But others
rose ahead of me and behind me, cutting off my retreat. The
trap had sprung; I was captive.
Or so they thought. I drew my sword as the ring of fighting
men closed in. I did not wait for their attack. My blade flashed in
a terrible uppercut, disemboweling the nearest attacker and slicing
across the midsections of two more on the return swing. Then
I lunged ahead, spearing a fourth; and back, catching a fifth.
-Hold! the enemy leader cried. -This is a bold one!
The warriors drew back, leaving their five dead in a half-circle
about me. Actually, my swordsmanship had not been remarkable;
we were trained to be aware of the entire picture and to rapidly
reverse direction of attack. They had been crowding in so close
that they could not maneuver, and had been setups for a standard
combination. Had I essayed that trick against a similar number of
samurai, only one would have died: me. But of course I had taken
that into account.
Their blades were ready, and reinforcements had swelled their
 
324
numbers, and a number of these were samurai. They seemed undaunted
by my prowess; I would not catch many more so easily.
There was no apparent way to come out of this alive.
I burned inside to think of the embarrassment I had caused
my grandfather. He had naturally expected me to anticipate this
action and avoid capture. But I had been heedless, and now might
never get beyond that stage. The question was, should I commence
seppuku, the ritual self-disembowelment, now, or dispatch myself
by less formal means? The longer I waited, the less likely I was to
be able to redeem myself even to that extent, for they would surely
seek to prevent it.
-You must be the cub of the Black Castle, the leader said. I
recognized him; I had studied artist's pictures. It was his lock I
was supposed to have shorn.
-Yes, I replied. There is no point in lying when the truth is

known.
-It is not meet that you should die a dog's death. We shall
put you to a fitting test for your life.
My tongue paused on the poison pellet hidden in my mouth.
So long as I did not bite down hard, cracking open the shell, I
would live. I returned it to my cheek. -My sword is ready, I said.
-Indeed it is. But we shall make you this bargain: perform
one task, and we shall set you free without animus. Fail, and you
must join our clan, replacing our losses with your service.
I surveyed the ready weapons. My ninja training had taught
me to prevail by any means at hand; the prime ethic was survival.
They could not trust my word given in this circumstance, and
they knew it; they would kill me regardless, and I would try to
escape regardless. So we were merely entertaining each other with
dialogue, seeking verbal as well as physical ascendancy. -What is
your task?
-Only to complete the action you contemplated, the man
said, smiling. The other warriors laughed.
Strange. -I sought no more than to explore the region.
He did not even bother to challenge the obvious lie. -Ex-
325
plore that region, he said, gesturing toward the river. He smiled.
-It is virgin territory.
The girl still bathed, oblivious of the commotion. That, too,
was strange. -I sought no more than a glimpse in passing. That,
at least, was the truth, not that it mattered. I was parrying his
thrusts without comprehending the nature of his strategy.
-Broaden your perspective, the man said.
-I do not understand, I said, for the first time employing a
verbal device that was to serve me in good stead for centuries. For
suddenly I understood, all right; I merely didn't believe.
He shrugged this off. -To be quite sure you perform, we shall
watch. All of us.
Oh. That did add to the challenge. Still, it made no sense.
Why should they demand the defloration of one of their own by
an enemy?
-She is sick? I conjectured.
-By no means! Her body is strong and healthy.
Again, a round of chuckles.
-Then where is the challenge? I asked, not ashamed to show
my perplexity.
-She may be resistive.
That meant a rape. No doubt their own men had tried her
and been repulsed. A woman trained in martial art? -She is your
captive? I asked. -One you mean to torture, to degrade?
-She is my daughter, the chief said. -My only child.
I have encountered many remarkable things in my life, but
seldom more so than this. -So be it, I said. -I accept your terms.
These people were crazy!
The armed circle parted, allowing me access to the river. I
walked to the brink, and stopped. -Hello, girl! I called.
She did not turn. She continued to wash herself, as she had
done throughout. Why such extraordinary concern with personal
hygiene? I saw the swell of her breast under her arm, and the
strong curve of her spine. -She is deaf? I inquired, trying to fathom
 
326
the mystery of her and of their attitude toward her. Their chief 's
daughter?
Had my grandfather anticipated this turn of events? The crafty
dog!
-Call her Masami.
I obliged. -Masami!
Now she turned slowly.

She was grotesque. Her teeth were gross and yellow, the skin
of her face mottled with a huge purple birthmark covering half of
it, her cheeks sunken, and from her crossed eyes burned the light
of madness. Crosseyes were an ill-omen, but I was not much affected,
as the ninjas normally utilized the superstition of others for
their own advantage. But this was more than that.
Yet her body was robust, even muscular, and her nails were
long. As she moved, the muscles of her torso rippled like those of a
samurai. This did not enhance her beauty. Healthy, yes-but repulsive.
No man would voluntarily accept such a woman to wife.
I did not know it then, but I was gazing upon my first example
of mercury poisoning. Somehow the girl or her mother had
imbibed the poison, and it had damaged her head, not her body.
-Ninjas did that, the chief said, not smiling now. -They
poisoned the spring where we traveled. Her mother was about to
give birth; she bathed in it, drank of it. She died; thus the rest of
us were warned. Now the child likes water like a fish, and we let
her bathe for hours each day; what else is there to do with her?
-I am sorry, I said, meaning it. -We do not seek to poison
women and babies.
-Then give me an heir! he cried, and I saw the agony in the
man. His wife was long dead, and his daughter an idiot; no one
would put a child inside her. Yet she was nubile; she could bear.
And I was the grandson of the ninja chief, one day to be lord
of the Black Castle. I had to admit this was a fitting retribution. If
the seed of the Black Castle were united with that of this clan
through Masami, we would share the onus of that black deed of
the past.
327
Why should this clan kill me? If I performed here today, my
power would be forever theirs; never would I turn against the kinsmen
of my issue. Yet if I did not perform, there would be no leash
on their fury.
How my grandfather must be laughing!
Or was this his way of making amends? The old man had such
a devious mind that it was impossible to tell. Had he anticipated
my decision?
What was my decision? Did I have any way to salvage both my
life and my seed? If not, there remained the pellet in my cheek.
What did the enemy really want? Obviously they doubted my
ability to perform. Certainly in public!
The water was deep. I was a strong swimmer, as all ninjas are.
I could escape them if they did not suspect my intent.
I stripped, ostensibly to perform the ritual, but actually to
free myself from encumbrances that would hamper underwater
swimming. I could hold my breath for five minutes; they would
think I had drowned. I took care that no ninja secrets remained in
my clothing, for they would surely inspect my garments closely. I
had to leave them on the bank, as evidence of my supposed intent
to return to them. The enemy would not expect a man to run
away naked.
But now that I knew I could get away, my pride asserted itself.
They did not think I could handle the mad daughter. I would
make a demonstration. Actually, the chances of her swelling with
child after a single contact were small; normally a man must lie
with a woman many times before his seed takes root. This is another
aspect of the inferiority of the female.
I stood naked at the shore, staring at the girl. Fleshed she was,
but in the manner of a man: lean and sinewy. Her breasts were
almost flat, her hips narrow. Only her luxurious hair gave her any
sort of appeal, and that primarily from the rear; her ruined face
negated all else. Even in the most advantageous privacy, arousal
would have been difficult. Here, in broad daylight, with smirking
warriors watching, it seemed impossible.

 
328
That angered me. I had, indeed, been shown a challenge. I
would despise myself if I let it master me. As a ninja, I was ready to
bury myself in human excrement, awaiting the chance to spear an
enemy through his nether aperture; why not bury myself in this?
I had excellent control over all my body. I could dislocate my
joints to escape bonds or squeeze through narrow passages. I could
swallow a capsule containing a small blade and belch it up again
upon need. But not before had I had occasion to force voluntary
control over this particular function. Success would be obvious to
every spectator; and so would failure.
I willed it so. I dared not even shut my eyes to the specter
before me; that would be a confession of failure. Masami would
fight me, I knew; she was virgin not only because of her ugliness
but because of her madness. It was a double challenge.
Sweat beaded my forehead; I felt the rivulets tickle. My muscles
tensed, relaxed, tensed. I held my breath and bore down, making
the veins of my skin stand out. Could I do it?
I heard a murmur among the warriors. By this token I first
realized that I was succeeding. In the absence of personal lust, I
was forcing an erection.
At last I stood tall and proud. There was even a smattering of
applause. But I had achieved only the first stage. Could I complete
the task?
I stepped into the water. The girl stared at me; evidently she
had never before seen this phenomenon. That gave me confidence.
But the chill water sapped my control. There was laughter
from the shore. Angry, I concentrated again, and managed to raise
the standard high once more. That quelled the mirth. I resumed
my advance.
Now came the real trial. The girl was standing. I could not lay
her down; we both would drown. At least, she would, in the event
I completed the act while holding my breath. And that culmination
would not be apparent from the shore. The conditions of this
challenge required that the act be so plain as to be undeniable.
On the other hand, if I took her to the shore, I would have no
329
ready access to the deep water. Twenty swords could transfix me
before I got there. I had to remain here, hip-deep, upright, where
I could sink out of sight quickly. Then I could swim well away
before the warriors realized their noose had slipped.
That meant I had to perform vertically.
It was possible, with a cooperative woman; I had done it before.
With an indifferent female it was questionable. And with a
resistive one-
I put my hand on her. She uncoiled like a striking snake, knocking
me back. I splashed in the water, my head going momentarily
under as mud swirled up from below.
The warriors were laughing uncontrollably. Some were slapping
their thighs, some were rolling on the ground, and some
were emulating the splash of water. I failed to discern the humor
in the situation.
Now was my chance to swim for it. But I did not. I knew my
pride was folly, but I intended to perform.
I stood, dripping. I had lost my erection again. This caused a
new outburst of merriment amidst the audience. I bore down,
restoring it, and approached Masami again.
This time I leaped on her, encircling her torso, holding her
arms to her sides, keeping her upright, facing me. She could not
avoid me; she had to spread her legs to keep her footing.
And she threw me off.
I picked myself up again. If the mirth had been boisterous
before, now it was deafening. I could have stalked out of that river,

snatched up my sword, and slain another five men before any of
them recovered enough to oppose me. But I didn't. I intended to
shut them up by conquering the most ambitious challenge:
Masami.
As I concentrated on my erection yet again, I pondered what
she had done. She had seemed helpless, yet she had sent me splashing.
Some kind of torso throw? I doubted it; I had practiced long
and hard on every type of throw known to my trainers, and thought
 
330
I was proof against them. Some throws involve the legs, others the
arms; none was like this.
I clasped her again, hanging on tightly. This time I paid attention
to her bony torso, not the crutch of her legs. She would not
catch me another time!
But she did. A shock ran through my body; my arms loosened,
and I fell away, half-stunned.
She had not moved.
This was my first experience with the ki. Young and rash as I
was, I remained alert enough to grasp two things: I could not,
after all, conquer this woman by direct force, and I had been shown
a skill of incalculable potential.
But I had not given up. When direct force does not avail,
indirect force often suffices. By yielding to her force I hoped to
overcome her.
I launched myself at her again, this time carrying her backward
into deep water. She repulsed me with her power, but I clung
to one wrist, twisting it, forcing her head under. Though her ki
stunned me, that impetus carried the motion through until I was
able to recover somewhat, and now she had to fight the water
covering her face. Sure enough, she directed her force at the water,
not at me, and that was of no avail. The bubbles burst anxiously at
the surface, and the chief, her father, strode angrily through the
shallow brim toward us. But then I raised her head, smacked her
jaw with my open hand, and dunked her again as she inhaled for a
scream. Water flowed into her lungs.
-Back! I cried. -Back, or she dies!
And he stood back, for he did not want her dead.
When I had her semiconscious I propped her up and lifted her
spread-legged onto my waiting spear of flesh. Thus I took her, in
plain sight of all, in that brief period when she was too dazed by
the water in her to use her power. Her very coughing and spluttering
sent powerful flexes through her torso that precipitated my
fulfillment. When she recovered enough to throw me off-which
331
she did with an impact that deadened my entire body-the deed
had been done.
-Kill him! the chief cried in fury. Though I had done what
he demanded, and mingled my seed with his, yet in the end he
reacted as a father who has seen his daughter raped.
The warriors converged, but not rapidly; they showed their
reluctance to violate their collective oath. The attitude became
them, for integrity uplifts a fighting man.
*
"And so I used my escape route," Fu Antos concluded to the
geisha. "I sank under the water and swam rapidly downstream,
concealed by the muddy water our struggles had made. I had to
kill two more tribesmen to complete my retreat, but I escaped
unscathed. Two hours later my grandfather's ninjas ambushed the
clan, drove off the men, and captured the mad girl. From her I
learned the ki. It was not a power subject to instruction; I approached
her again and again, and gradually something in me
developed the ability to oppose her force, and that was my own ki.
Then I knew what it was.

"Later we sent her back to her father, pregnant with my seed.
That enemy family was a branch of what is now known as the
Mito clan. In penance for his violation of oath, the chief sent me a
lock of his hair and his list of spies. We never made formal peace,
but there was no strife between us thereafter. Masami was delivered
of a healthy son, heir to their lands and fortune."
Fu Antos' eyes went briefly out of focus, seeing ancient heroics.
"Alas, I did not learn the ultimate lesson: to suspect everybody,
even my blood kin. By betraying me himself, my grandfather had
sought to educate me in the proper ninja suspicion. Had I mastered
that then, and anticipated the perfidy of beauty, I would
have married the idiot girl! She at least had no wit to be disloyal.
And so I was doomed, fated to be betrayed by my beautiful wife
from another clan. Her of the silken tresses. Mitsuko."
 
332
He touched the geisha, letting her feel the ki. "It took me five
years to develop my own ki strongly enough to feign death, and
centuries to achieve its full potential. But it was well worth it!"
"Let me go," the girl repeated.
"Now we finish my business," he said. "From the time of my
wife's betrayal, I have been impotent with desirable women. Especially
those who most resemble my wife and who therefore arouse
in me the strongest conflicting passions. Until this moment! But
now I have shrived myself, speaking openly the truth that I hardly
let myself think before. Now the curse is off."
He sent his ki into his member, to stiffen it, and for the first
time in three hundred years, that ki failed him. He remained impotent.
"Damn that traitress!" he cried, half in fury, half in agony.
"Am I doomed forever to embrace only ugly women?"
"Let me go!"
Furious, he stood over her. He swept up his katana sword,
which he had smuggled in unseen, ninja style. "Slut, traitress,
defiler of honor, lovely anus of a pig, abomination, wife-I'll let
you go!" he screamed.
With a single stroke he cut her fair body in half.
*
On March 24, 1860, Lord Ii was on his way to the palace of
the shogun. He had just reached the Sakurada Gate in the heart of
Edo, or Yedo, later to be known as Tokyo, the capital city of Japan.
Lord Ii was carried on a palanquin in state, as befitted his
rank, surrounded by his retainers. The party halted at the bridge
over the palace moat, for the retinue of the prince of Kyushu was
already crossing. Meanwhile, the prince of Owai was approaching
with his train along the road.
Lord Ii was not annoyed at this delay. He was a busy man who
snatched his rest at such times, and he was glad to see the two
princes, with whom he had business. He waited in the broad plaza
333
formed by the conjunction of the street with the bridge, while
light snow fell. Only the presence of a few idle peasants marred
the tranquillity of the setting. It was not worth the effort of cleaning
them out; like weeds, in their cheap oil-paper cloaks, they
sprouted wherever royalty moved, hoping for handouts. He seldom
even noticed them.
Suddenly one of the riffraff flung himself across the line of
march, right in front of the regent's palanquin. This was a gross
affront, not to be tolerated for a moment. The officers of Lord Ii's
household rushed forward, drawing their swords; they would make
swift example of the oaf!
Abruptly the places they had vacated beside the palanquin
were filled with armed men who seemed to have sprung from the
earth-or from the ranks of the peasants, much the same thing.
Fifteen, eighteen, twenty men, swords raised-admitted by

the careless interruption of the regent's defensive formation.
But the troops of Lord Ii outnumbered the intruders by more
than two to one, and those of the two princes were converging on
either side to lend their assistance. Though caught completely by
surprise, and hampered by their poor position, they were welltrained
samurais. Quickly they reversed direction and attacked.
Their swords reaped flesh with deadly efficiency. Many fell in the
first few seconds, but very soon the tide was turned and the attackers
driven off. Men fell into the moat, breaking the thin cover of
ice, dyeing the water red with their blood. The palanquin was safe.
Then there was a cry: "Yaaaa! Mito!" A lone figure ran along
the causeway, waving a gory trophy. It was the head of one of the
regent's troops.
"That's Yonezuka!" someone cried, recognizing the fugitive.
"Head of the Mito clan! They're behind this outrage!"
"Lord Ii will have his head!" another cried. Five samurai detached
themselves from the dwindling fray and pursued Yonezuka.
Two of the Mito clan tried to stop them, but both were already
gravely wounded, and it was hopeless. Instead of fleeing, the
two knelt on the pavement and deliberately performed seppuku,
 
334
the ritual disembowelment. The troops of the regent stood and
watched, for so sacred was this act of suicide that no interruption
was permitted-not even in the case of criminals like these.
Meanwhile, the five samurai gained on Yonezuka, who was
also wounded.
A retainer opened the curtain to the regent's palanquin. "Sir,
the criminals have been driven off. Is there anything you-" He
stared, aghast. Then: "Lord Ii is dead!"
Indeed he was. The palanquin contained only his headless
corpse. "The trophy . . ." someone cried in awe and horror, realizing
the significance of Yonezuka's burden.
The fighting died away. Seven Mito clansmen lay in their blood,
and a little distance away were the twin corpses of the suicides. A
score of the regent's men also lay dead in the street or in the moat.
The samurai caught Yonezuka, dispatched him, and brought
back the head he had flaunted. Then a further horror manifested:
it was not the head of Lord Ii.
Two persons had been beheaded in that brief period of confusion.
The trophy Yonezuka had carried belonged to one of the
retainers, whose trunk they now discovered among the fallen. It
had been a decoy, manufactured under their very noses, while another
person escaped unnoticed with Lord Ii's head. Insult added
to injury!
Who had devised this daring, complex, cunning plot and supervised
its execution? Surely not Yonezuka; he lacked the imagination.
It was almost like one of the ninja tricks of old.
*
Hiroshi lifted the shrunken trophy. "And that is the way it
was, Jason Striker," he said to me. "This trophy has been preserved
for over a century in the Black Castle, one of Fu Antos' most prized
possessions. He spent many hours preserving it, curing it so that it
would not deteriorate, using secret ancient methods to reduce its
size to the present convenient ball without destroying the like-
335
ness. Now he has given it to me for safekeeping, until he has made
a place for it in the third Black Castle. Is it not a beauty?"
I stared at the grisly memento, now stuffed with diamonds-
the head of Lord Ii. Not for the first time I wondered whether I
really approved of Fu Antos. His ways and his conscience were far
different from mine. Yet I was committed to help him reestablish
himself and his remaining ninjas in a new, private Black Castle.
Perhaps that was best. It might be another century before Fu

Antos ventured once more into the contemporary world. Maybe it
was best that East and West, ancient and modern, not meet.
 
Chapter 7:
MONK'S TREASURE
This time I had left the apartment unlocked. There was nothing
left to steal, and I wanted Luis to enter and feel at home.
He was not there, and my note for him was untouched. I had
another sinking feeling. Had I lost another diamond while searching
for the first?
I ate a dismal solitary supper of cold beans from the can. Maybe
Luis was late. I didn't know how he planned to get here; probably
hitchhiking. That meant his rate of travel was unpredictable. All I
could do was wait and hope.
My doorbell rang. If that was the nympho again . . . But it
wasn't. It was a telegram. I read it over four times without comprehending
it: WATCH THE MONK'S TREASURE STOP ISLE
TO MIAMI KISS LEG.
It was the strangest telegram I had ever received. There was no
signature, no address, just the ten enigmatic words. What did it
mean?
I phoned Ilunga. The black karate mistress was actually a lot
337
smarter than I was, and smart enough never to make an issue of
that particular matter. She was taking college-level courses during
her off-hours. I was coming to depend on her more and more.
"Can you get over here? I have two problems."
She didn't even conjecture whether my problem was how to
bed another girl or how to master the elementary breakfalls. She
knew by my tone that the matter was serious, and she came. But
she did eye me with a certain scorn as I met her at the door. "What
happened-you bite yourself while shaving this morning?"
"I ran afoul of one hell of a tough customer," I said, thinking
of the monster in the Brazilian premises we had raided. "I crippled
him, but he-"
Then I realized where she was looking. I covered the most
obvious hickey on my neck with one hand. Ilunga surely knew
that wasn't from any encounter with a man! "Luis isn't here. That's
one problem. And I got this telegram; that's the other." I handed
it to her.
"Code," she said, examining it. "Really digging into you.
Monk's treasure could be your fiance."
I felt deep pain. Lovely Chiyako, the girl I would have married.
Daughter of a Shoalin temple's kung fu sifu: monk's treasure
indeed! But she was dead. As always, my fists clenched. Kan-Sen,
her murderer-I hated him yet, however far beyond the grave he
might be.
"Kiss leg," Ilunga said. "Kiss my foot? Kiss my ass? Someone's
riding you!"
"I don't think so," I said. "If Luis doesn't show up-Do you
think this could be related? A message from him?"
"No signature. Unless that last word-" She frowned. "What's
his initials?"
"LG," I said. "Luis Guardia. He's from Cuba."
"How do you pronounce those initials?"
I shook my head, not getting her drift. "El Gee," I said.
"No. As a word."
"Lig. Leg. What's the-?" I paused. "Leg! You think so?"
 
338
"He comes from Cuba-that's an island, or isle. He went to
Miami. Isle to Miami, kiss Luis Guardia. It could relate."
"Yes it could!" I exclaimed. "Illunga, you're a wonder! But why
would he send it like this?"

"So his enemies couldn't spot him. You know how that Cuban
G-2 is! Only somebody who knew him could figure this message
out."
"But he's coming here! Why would he change his mind and
send this?"
"Because maybe the G-2 has your apartment staked out, waiting
to nab him. Or he thinks it does. So he can't risk it. You'll have
to get out and find him."
"But where?"
"Watch the Monk's treasure," she said. "Maybe it's a boat.
You say he's got a shipment of arms; maybe that's where they are."
"It all seems highly theoretical," I said dubiously.
She shrugged. "Pure guesswork. Why don't you ignore it and
start teaching judo classes again? Some of your students are forgetting
what your face looks like."
I swung my fist at her face. She blocked it easily and countered
with two knuckles to my solar plexus, brought up short a
fraction of an inch so that there was no contact. I leaned over and
kissed her on the mouth. "I'm going to Miami," I said.
She had known it all along. "Call in, between nymphos," she
said. "I'm going to hire a decent judo teacher, meanwhile. Somebody's
got to put business before pleasure."
"Maybe Luis will show up," I said. "If so, put him to work.
You won't find a better judoka."
"Watch your step, massa," she said.
*
There were a number of dojos in Miami. Quite possibly one of
my friends at one of them would know something of Luis. But I
doubted it would be that easy, and my inquiry might just alert his
339
enemies or the Cuban G-2 to my quest, complicating things. So I
saved that for a last resort.
I took out the telegram, though I had it memorized, and read
it again. WATCH THE MONK'S TREASURE STOP ISLE TO
MIAMI KISS LEG. A hell of a slender clue! I was probably wasting
my time, muffing things again. But if there were a boat called
the Monk's Treasure . . .
I walked up and down the white-painted piers. I had spent
much of the day checking marinas. This one was alongside a big
park with lots of coconut trees. I had seen the police harassing
hippies there on my way in.
The names on the assorted craft were myriad: Daisy, Fog Cutter,
Queen Anne, Treasure Island. I started, but it was merely a near-miss.
Still, it gave me hope. Maybe there really was such a ship, and I could
find it, and my long shot would pay off, and all the tangled threads of
this confusing adventure would fall into place. All I needed was to
locate Luis, buy his weapons for Fu Antos, and retire to my dojo.
"What did you say?"
I looked about, startled. The one who had hailed me was a
young girl, with very white skin and freckles on an Irish face. "I
didn't say anything."
"Then why are you so happy?"
"I'm not happy!"
She tossed back her black hair and gave me a direct glance
with blue eyes. I suppose there's no reason why a black-haired girl
shouldn't have blue eyes, but it startled me. "That's what I meant.
Why the big scowl?"
I had to smile. So this teen-age flirt was teasing me! Actually I
seem to have a certain fatal appeal for girls on the youngish side, a
problem that has never alarmed me unduly. "You can make me
happy by telling me where to find the Monk's Treasure."
"I don't know any monks, but I'd love to search for treasure."
"It's a boat," I said.
She made a moue. "You're not much for dialogue, you know

that?"
 
340
"I'm serious. I have to find that boat"
I turned to continue on my way, a trifle regretfully, for the
girl's approach had hinted of better things there for the taking,
like sweet fruit on a tree. I'm not immune to that sort of suggestion;
in fact, I'm rather susceptible.
But she spotted my gi, coiled and tied by my black belt. I had
left the diamonds in their grisly head with Ilunga to fence, but
brought my gis in order to mix in at a dojo more naturally. "You're
in judo!" she exclaimed. "Or karate."
"Both," I admitted.
"And you're good at it, too," she said enthusiastically. I nodded
modestly, happy for the compliment but needing to continue
my search. There were a great many boats remaining to be checked.
"My boyfriend was in judo. Not Pete; my real boyfriend. He
was a brown belt. What are you?"
So Pete was her current boyfriend. Who the hell was Pete?
"Black belt," I said.
"I know that," she responded, wrinkling her button nose.
"What Dan?"
So she did know a little bit about judo! "Godan."
"Fifth degree! Really?"
"Really," I said, enjoying her awe. I had given the Japanese
name, and she had understood it without hesitation. I like that
type.
"What are you doing way out here?"
This was getting repetitive, however. "I was looking for a boat."
"Aren't we all!" She glanced at her watch. "I wish Pete would
hurry up. He's always late, and it's almost time."
"Going on a cruise?" I inquired, suppressing my unwarranted
disappointment. After all, Pete was her boyfriend, and I was just a
man passing through. "What's the name of the boat?"
"Just a spin. Pete has this friend he met who's rich, and he
invited us out on his yacht for the afternoon. We're supposed to be
waiting here at one sharp, and it's almost time. That bastard-if
he stood me up-"
341
"Well, best of luck," I said, finally forcing myself to get on
with my business. Suppose the Monk's Treasure were just at the
next pier, and I missed it because I was dallying with a girl who
liked judo? And Luis died. No! Don't even think it!
I walked on down the pier, reading more names.
Stormrunner . . . Flosweet . . . Julie J . . . Too bad I hadn't learned
the name of the boat"I k girl was waiting for, but I'd keep an eye
out for it.
I might have been smarter to look in a registry of local boats,
but I was afraid that it would give away my mission. Someone
might be just waiting for me to make that inquiry, and thus discover
where Luis was hiding and who was coming to help him. I'm
no expert at this sort of intrigue, but caution seemed warranted.
A fancy yacht came in. I watched it, trying to make out the
name painted on its side. Something . . . on . . . something. It could
be the one! Was the first letter M, as in Monk?
Suddenly the young girl I had chatted with was running along
the pier, waving and calling. Her short skirt blew up attractively as
she moved. I waited for her, uncertain of her motive, or of mine.
Hell, just two days ago I'd been had by a nympho.
She came up breathlessly. Her exertion had worked open two
buttons of her blouse, so that her breasts were exposed. They were
unsupported, completely free of encumbrance. I have heard many
objections to the braless fashion (most by women), but I have no
personal antipathy to it other than taste. That is, pendulous middleaged

women should wear bras; firm, pert teen-agers can do nicely
without. I admit a small bosom seems to work best on its own; a
more substantial superstructure does tend to sag. All of which is to
say that I liked what I saw, in this case, though I have often seen
larger.
"Pete's not here, and that's the boat!" she gasped, her chest
heaving. One advantage of the male's greater height is his ability
to inspect such a situation from the best angle. "I can't go aboard
alone! You know-"
"Tough break," I said sympathetically, wondering whether I
 
342
should mention the buttons or let her discover them for herself in
due course. Strange that an illicit view is so much more intriguing
than complete exposure would be. I'm no gentleman about such
things; when the view is there, I look.
"But I've never been on a yacht before! My only chance-" She
paused prettily. "Would you come with me? Be my escort?"
"But I'm a stranger to you!"
"No judoka's a stranger to me!" she said earnestly. "Oh, come
on, please! They won't know the difference! And maybe someone
aboard will know about that boat you're looking for." Her blue
eyes became big and soulful. "Please?"
This was nonsensical, but I am the world's worst sucker for a
plea by a pretty girl, especially with her blouse open.
It's the American blood in me: I really am charged up by apple
pie, ice cream, and girls. And my search didn't seem to be getting
anywhere. Who could tell what might develop?
"All right."
"Oh, goody!" She hauled me along by the hand, running to
make the rendezvous with the yacht. "I'm Gloria."
"I'm amazed," I muttered, only half-punning, suffering myself
to be towed along. We got there just as the yacht did.
It was not the Monk's Treasure. It was the Connie. And the skipper
did not seem pleased to see me. He was about forty-five, a handsome,
fit, blond, tanned American sportsman with long wavy hair. Evidently
an ex-football player running to fat, but so far he was merely beefy,
strong, with a beer gut, and developing jowls and a slightly red nose.
If he were to go on a suitable diet and exercise program now, he would
soon be a very impressive figure for his age; otherwise, not even his
yacht would lure the girls aboard much longer.
But Gloria made it plain that she was not about to board
alone. "Pete couldn't make it," she explained blithely, "so I
brought-"
"Jason," I supplied. "Jason Striker."
The skipper glowered. "Well, get aboard! We haven't got all
day!"
343
All day for what? I wondered cynically.
We boarded. Gloria went up the gangplank first. I saw the
way the man looked at her as she passed him. I knew he was seeing
into her open blouse, as I had, and that similar masculine thoughts
were crowding the communications lines between brain and crotch.
Suddenly I had a suspicion: Pete had not forgotten his date, he
had been detained. This man had wanted Gloria aboard alone.
My presence interfered.
It was a beautiful craft, about thirty feet long with tight double
cabins. Too bad it wasn't the Monk's Treasure.
We went out on Biscayne Bay, alongside Key Biscayne, past
the long causeway to the key with its small sand beaches filled
with bathing facilities. We rounded the tip of land, passed pinefilled
shores and a lighthouse.
"That lighthouse was attacked by Seminole Indians around
1850," Gloria said. "I read about it. They lit a huge fire at its base,

driftwood. Two men were trapped inside. The top of the lighthouse
had an iron floor. It got so hot that one man jumped to his
death. The other stayed, and was rescued, but he suffered such
burns on his legs that he couldn't walk again. Isn't that something?"
"Something," I muttered, noting with guilty disappointment
that she had now done up her buttons.
There were a couple of crewmen aboard who kept to themselves.
And the skipper. And Gloria. And me. That was all. A pretty
small party. Yes, a setup for undisturbed romance in a shuttered
cabin, provided the female lead was willing-or helpless. Just as
well I was aboard, though this really was none of my business. I
seemed to have a genius for getting diverted from my mission.
But as we moved out into the open sea, the skipper came to
terms with the situation. "I admit it-I had a notion," he said to
me privately in the larger cabin, while Gloria stood on the deck
letting the sea spray invigorate her. "She has a way about her. No
force-I never use that. Just wine and dine and gifts and a ride on
this boat-they usually come around. I'm used to indulging my
 
344
yens." He patted his gut a trifle self-consciously, indicating that
good food and drink were among the indulgences. "Sorry I was
gruff. Nothing personal. You know how it is. She obviously isn't
interested, so that's it. Have a nice cruise. We'll loop around, do
some fishing, be back in port before nightfall."
He had a certain charm, when he turned it on. I believed his
statement that he generally had his way without force. "She's nothing
to me," I said with a tinge of regret. "Pete was held up, so I'm
just along to see that whatever she does is voluntary. If she takes an
interest in you . . ."
He sucked in his cheeks and pursed his lips. 'What's your
angle, then?"
"I'm looking for a boat. The Monk's Treasure. That's all." All he
needed to know, at any rate.
"All?" He lifted an eyebrow expressively. "You'd have done better
checking the piers."
"I was." I shrugged. "If you have any lists, records-"
"Sorry, no. No stack of registries here. Nautical charts, operating
instructions-"
"Thanks, no."
"Got a marine band radio. Maybe if you called the coast guard.
Here, I'll show you how to operate the set, and you can have some
beer and-"
"No beer. But the set intrigues me. Is it okay to call in when
there's no emergency?"
Gloria came in. "Hey, Jason-do some judo with me!"
At the moment this pleased neither the skipper nor me. "I was
about to learn how to use the radio. Maybe the boat I want is
known to the coast guard."
"I'll help you call!" she said enthusiastically.
The skipper made a little gesture of resignation with one hand.
He had his gestures down pat. "Oblige the girl. Show her judo."
He meant that if her eagerness to help me stemmed from her reluctance
to be with him, he would not push it.
Meanwhile, I wasn't quite sure about letting the coast guard
345
in on my search. So I changed into my gi, and Gloria put on baggy
slacks and a heavy sweatshirt. We spread plastic-covered mattresses
from the bunks on the deck, in lieu of mats.
The skipper watched. Despite his wealth, he evidently suffered
from boredom, and one form of entertainment was as good
as another. Probably this was typical of the spoiled sons of inherited
wealth. I had no way of knowing, never having been wealthy
myself.

We spread a tarpaulin over the mats, and our miniature dojo,
or exercise hall, was ready. I bowed before I stepped onto the mat,
as is the custom, and Gloria did likewise. Then we bowed to each
other.
"What is this-a formal dance?" the skipper asked, chuckling.
"Judo courtesy," I explained without rancor. "Judo, like all martial
arts, can be dangerous, so we don't treat it lightly. We bow to
show our respect, much as a private salutes an officer in the army.
We regard attitude as very important, and politeness is essential."
"Even to the damned mat?"
"We respect the mat that prevents us from breaking our bones
on the floor."
He shut up, and I returned to Gloria. "You know the ukemi?"
I asked her.
"Bobby showed me," she said, performing a creditable backward
breakfall, slapping the mat with both hands as she landed.
From this, I gathered that Bobby was her former boyfriend who
had known judo. The brown belt.
"All right, let's warm up," I said. "Right-side breakfall, yoko
ukemi. Hit it!" And we went down together, slapping the mat
resoundingly.
"Why the bit with the noise?" the skipper asked.
"It's not for the sound," I said. "We strike the mat just before
the body hits, to take up some of the shock. That makes the fall
easier to take. Fewer injuries."
We ran through several assorted falls. "Now," I said, "let's do a
throw. Here is the ippon seoi nage-the one-arm shoulder throw.
 
346
Start facing each other, right hand on your partner's left lapel." I
grabbed a handful of her sweatshirt above the left breast, since she
had no lapel. "Left hand on his sleeve. Now turn to the left, switch
your right arm to his right armpit, catch his arm, and haul him
over your back for the throw." I threw her, taking care to set her
down gently.
Gloria was overjoyed. "That's what Bobby always did!" Then
she sobered, evidently remembering her separation from him. What
had happened to him?
"Now you throw me," I said. The skipper chuckled, thinking
this was impossible, as I was substantially larger than she. But I
talked her through the motions, and when she heaved on my arm
I went over and landed resoundingly on the mat.
"Hey, that's something!" the skipper said, genuinely impressed.
"Can anybody do it?"
"Certainly," I said. "Take off your shoes and I'll show you."
He removed his shoes, cleaned the bric-a-brac out of his pockets,
and stepped onto the mat. "Oops!" he said, and stepped back
off. He bowed. Then he stepped on again and bowed to me.
He was catching on.
I tried to have him throw me, as Gloria had. But he was completely
new to judo, and it made a big difference. What is simple
to the person with a little experience is hopelessly complex to the
newcomer, for there are many seemingly minor things to take into
account, such as proper balance. He just couldn't get it right. Rather
than have him work up a negative attitude, I switched to a simpler
technique.
"Try o soto gari, the major outer reaping," I said. "It works like
this: you take hold of your opponent in the natural position, step
forward to his side with your left foot, pulling his shoulder up
against yours. See, he's half-unbalanced already." I had him leaning
slightly back, and I knew he was aware I could put him down
easily. A throw is most impressive when you feel its authority; he'd
be eager to learn it.
"Now you lift your right leg high behind him, swing it back

347
and catch his right knee from the back while you shove him backward.
It's a glorified trip, like pushing him over a log. He has to
fall." And I put him down firmly, hanging on so that he did not
land hard.
Then I talked him through it while he put me down. Of course,
his technique was clumsy, but I obliged with an impressive fall,
slapping the mat.
"It really works!" he said, almost as pleased as Gloria. "I thought
all that stuff was fake!"
"It's real," I said. "But of course there are counters. You could
not throw me if I didn't cooperate."
"But I could throw someone who didn't know it?"
"If you did it correctly, yes. But don't go trying it on all your
friends. If you do it to someone who doesn't know how to take a
fall, on a hard floor, you'll put him in the hospital." That, of course,
was the theory of the judo throw: in a street-fight situation, a
person thrown with force and control on his back would be unlikely
to continue hostilities with any real enthusiasm. Similarly,
someone held in an armlock or strangle would be disinclined to
offer further resistance. Thus contest matches were decided in favor
of the person who made such a throw or obtained such a hold,
or showed his advantage in some other fashion.
"What are we waiting for! Get on with the lesson!"
That was not the ideal attitude, but actually the proper attitude
can be one of the hardest aspects of judo to master, and many
physically competent players fail to advance because of imperfections
in attitude. The skipper had found a new interest, however
transitory. Well, I believe in judo, karate, or any martial art as
entertainment; they are far better than dope or gambling. If he
exchanged his dissipated life for the discipline of judo, he would
be a better man in every way.
So I drilled them both in the ippon seoi nage and the o soto gari,
keeping it simple. The mat was so bouncy that it was practically
impossible for them to hurt themselves, so long as they followed
instructions. I kept a close eye on it anyway.
 
348
Theoretically judo is the "gentle" or "yielding" way, and no
student should get hurt; but imperfectly applied techniques are
dangerous.
One of the crewmen appeared in the door. "Yes?" the skipper
inquired, looking up from the mat, where Gloria had just thrown
him, both of them enjoying it.
"All of you move over to one side," the man said.
Then I saw he was holding a gun.
"Hey, what is this?" the skipper demanded.
"We're hijacking your boat," the man said. He was a thin,
college-boy type, no more than twenty, nervous but determined.
"We don't want to kill anybody, so just take it easy and the boat's
all you'll lose."
"Do as he says," I muttered. "Only a fool goes against a gun."
"Hey, I thought you knew how to handle such things!" the
skipper said. "What good is a martial art if you just surrender?"
"It may sound cowardly to you, but it is common sense," I
said. "Foolish heroics against a gun can get you needlessly killed."
Gloria turned on me a gaze of incredulous contempt. "With
three of us and one of him-"
"Never make resistance to a gun unless you have no choice," I
said.
"Listen to the man," the crewman said. "He's right!" Gloria
exchanged glances with the skipper. It was obvious my stature had
just taken a dive.
We lined up against the wall. "I'm paying you good money!"

the skipper said indignantly to the crewman. "What's the matter
with you?"
"Maybe I'm making a break for Havana, find a better life there,"
the man said.
"They put hijackers to work in the cane fields," I said. "You're
a fool."
"I'd be a worse fool to work all my life for peanuts," he snorted.
"The dope we move in two, three trips could net us a million
dollars. No one will check this pleasure craft. When they start to
349
catch on, we'll scuttle her and sign on another. I expect to retire
richer than you are in a couple. of years."
So it was dope, not escape. Unless that was another lie. Not
that it made much difference to us.
"Scuttle her!" the skipper cried in horror. "The Connie is worth
a hundred and seventy thousand dollars, and I'm still making payments
on her!"
"Shut up," the hijacker said. "You'll be put adrift in a lifeboat."
"We'll die!" Gloria cried.
He eyed her. "Maybe you'll stay aboard, cutes. Come here."
She approached him hesitantly. I made ready to move, fast, if
he hurt her. But his gun was still dangerous.
"Get that sweatshirt off-see what you look like," he said,
reaching for it.
Gloria grabbed his arm and spun into the ippon seoi nage. It
was the throw I had just taught her.
She did not perform it well, but she caught him completely
by surprise. The gun fired and he stumbled to the side, not actually
falling. But that was all the leeway. I needed. I leaped across
the cabin and caught him with an atemi blow to the side of the
neck. I hit the nerve-center complex astride the carotid arteries
with my bunched fist. The blow inhibited his respiratory reflexes,
and he fell down as if poleaxed. Many people, even judokas, do
not know that judo utilizes blows too, and atemi waza. These are
so dangerous that they are taught only at black-belt level. They are
similar to but superior to the karate blows.
"That's enough!"
It was the other crewman, also with a gun. I saw at once that
he was an entirely different type, and not merely physically. He
was short and stocky, with a very wide, strong neck and big arms-
the build of a wrestler, a weight lifter.
"Your friend's unconscious," I said. "His respiratory reflexes
have been stunned by the nerve blow I used. He will die unless I
perform katsu-"
 
350
The gun swung on me. "Get away from him!" the man snapped.
"You can't bluff me!"
I moved away, still protesting. "It's no bluff! He has to be
shocked into breathing again, now."
"You'll be shocked into not breathing, by a bullet, if you touch
him," he said. "You only want a hostage."
But the first crewman was obviously in a bad way. His accomplice
jogged him with one foot. "Come on, Bruce, snap out of it!"
But the unconscious man only shuddered. Then his eyes
opened. It was not recovery; it was death.
"You bastards!" the gunman cried. "Now you'll walk the plank,
if I don't shoot you first!" He aimed at me.
Then the skipper made his move. He jumped for the gun. It
was a well-timed effort, but the hijacker was cat-quick. The weapon
spun around and fired. The skipper stumbled to the floor, wounded
in the thigh.
The gunman stepped back. "Now you can try your treatment-
on him," he said to me, allowing himself a flickering, humorless

grin. "Get him out on deck. Next one who tries it gets it in the
chest."
I knelt beside the skipper. I peeled back his trouser leg. It was
a nasty wound through the great muscle of the thigh, but clean;
the bullet had passed right through, missing both bone and artery.
The wound was bleeding slowly from both ends.
"You're damn lucky," I told him. "Small-caliber, high-velocity
bullet-I know it hurts like hell, but you'll survive. He's not bluffing;
he had time to shoot you in the gut, but he aimed for the leg
instead. I told you not to resist a gun!"
The skipper was ashen-faced. "You told me, all right."
"You bastard!" Gloria flared at me. "He did it to stop you from
getting shot!" She knelt beside the skipper. "Move over-I'll tend
to it."
I moved, slowly standing. The gunman's eyes were on Gloria,
whose loose sweatshirt was now hanging open at the neck as she
leaned over, affording the familiar view of her bosom. Some girls
351
just can't seem to avoid displaying their assets; no doubt it takes
years of practice until it becomes automatic and unconscious. It
was a godsend now.
I gave the kiai yell with all my power and launched myself
into a forward roll. My head and shoulders went down, my feet
up, as I flipped over toward my antagonist.
The gun went off again, and I felt the searing passage of the
bullet across my back. Not serious, I knew; a couple inches lower
would have finished me, for it would have caught my spinal nerve.
He had aimed for the chest, as promised, and hadn't reacted quickly
enough to my unexpectedly low attack. I flung my feet out, and
they struck something, hard.
I was incredibly lucky, for the second time in as many seconds.
I had caught his arm with one heel and knocked the gun
loose. That was what I had tried to do, but I had rated my chances
for success at about five-to-one against. The only reason I had initiated
my action was that I was now certain he meant to kill us. He
merely preferred to make it look like an accidental drowning, just
in case there should ever be an investigation. I had hoped to entangle
him before he could fire again, and fight for the gun.
As it was, I rolled to my feet, coming up fast in front of him.
He was trying to swing his fist at me. I caught his shirt in two
hands, hauled him close to me, then spun around and thrust out
my leg in the tai otoshi body-drop throw.
He should have stumbled over my leg and fallen to the deck.
But the man just stood there, his stomach hard as a rock. He was
tough, and he had had experience. I could not throw him.
A failed throw is an invitation to disaster, and so it was in this
case. His arms snaked upward under my armpits and behind my
head in a wrestler's full-nelson. He applied pressure, shoving my
head forward, my chin down into my chest, until it seemed my
neck must break. Which, of course, is the general idea of a nelson.
I tried to break the grip by lifting my arms and lowering them
fast while dropping to one knee. But his arms were too strong. I
resisted with all my strength, but it was not enough. My head was
 
352
lowered more and more against my chest, and I knew that my
neck was going to be broken. The pain was awful, and I could feel
the creaking of the vertebrae in my neck.
I went for another atemi waza blow. I raised my right foot,
then brought my heel down as hard as I could on the top of his
right foot near the base of the big toe. This attack is called sokuchu,
to the metatarsal bone. This gives a nervous shock that is
potentially fatal.
But he was wearing sneakers, so the effect was only partial.

Still, he cried out in anguish, loosening his hold on me and falling
to the deck. I was free, and it would take only a moment to finish
him off.
"Murderers!" a high-pitched female voice cried.
I looked up, and there was another woman. She must have
been a stowaway. She stood just in front of the open hatch to the
engine room-a disheveled, thin, blue-eyed blonde. I was reminded
of the girl member of the Bastard Bones. She held in one hand a
ball, or fruit.
Fruit? No-it was a grenade!
"I'll get you!" she screamed, lifting her arm high in a womanfashion
throw.
There was a shot. The skipper had picked up one of the guns
and fired at her. The girl collapsed and fell backward into the
hatch.
"God, I shot her . . ." the skipper said, appalled.
Then there was a tremendous explosion below. The grenade
had detonated. Almost immediately flames shot up, as gasoline
spread and burned.
"We've got to get out of here!" the skipper cried. "Before the
main tank goes!"
I leaned down, caught him under the arms, and dragged him
out onto the deck. "You get the lifeboat down!" I yelled to Gloria.
"I'm going back for the man!"
"You're crazy!" the skipper screamed. "No time-"
"I've got to try!" I said, turning.
353
Then I was stumbling over the rail. As I fell into the water, I
realized that Gloria had shoved me. Then she put her arm around
the skipper, supporting him as well as she could, and they both
jumped. After the splash, we all moved away from the boat, and
the gas tank blew.
Burning debris showered down around us. The yacht was done
for, already sinking, her hull ripped apart. Gloria had saved my
life, for I would have been in that explosion if she had not pushed
me.
We were lucky, again. We were alive, and all three of us could
swim. Land was not far off. Our chance for survival seemed good.
Better than for those aboard the burning, sinking Connie.
Then the sharks came. Well, one shark-but that was much
more than I liked. It circled us curiously. "Keep on swimming!" I
cried. "Not all sharks are maneaters. We can make it."
But the skipper panicked. The shark brushed against his
wounded leg, attracted by the blood. The skipper started screaming
and thrashing, and the fish kept cruising in diminishing circles.
Suddenly the fin veered off and came at me. I flexed legs and
arms together in one powerful thrust that lifted the top third of
my body clear of the water, and punched downward with my right
fist on the top of its head where it broke the surface. My aim was
good; my blow scored, and it had all my strength behind it.
Ouch! It felt like hitting a board set with sandpaper. My fist
was badly scraped. Sharkskin is tough, as though little teeth are
set all over its body.
The shark shot away. I don't think it was hurt, just surprised.
Despite their reputation, sharks are not eager to do battle on an
even basis. They close in cautiously, and retreat if there seems to
be danger. So a good bash on the snout can discourage even a large
specimen; he doesn't want more of the same. It's better if you have
a sharp rod, of course, and even then nothing is certain. Sharks are
like people: some are tougher than others.
I was no longer optimistic about our chances for survival; in
 
354
fact, I was plain scared. But I kept that to myself, and I intended

to fight it out.
Gloria screamed as the fin came at her. I had sent the shark
away from me, only to bother her! I stroked toward her, but her
scream had already made it veer off again. Very cautious fish. "Stay
close to me!" I gasped. "Splash a lot!"
Then the skipper screamed. "My leg!"
We moved toward him, but already I saw blood on the water.
Not a little-a lot. The shark went mad. There was a frenzied
thrashing.
I dived under and saw the shark worrying at the skipper's leg.
The predator had bitten an enormous chunk out of it. I swam
under the shark's belly and struck it with my spear hand, the fingers
stiff and together. But the water impeded my movement, and
I succeeded only in annoying the creature. It flicked its tail and
sent me tumbling through the froth.
The blow almost knocked me unconscious. My whole side felt
numb. Now much more than my fist was scraped.
By the time I regained my orientation, it was too late for the
skipper. The shark had dragged him under.
I gestured before Gloria's frightened face, pointing toward land.
At this point there was nothing we could do but save ourselves.
We swam, side by side. The shark was intent on the carnage
behind, giving us some respite. But Gloria could not keep the
pace. I had to slow to keep her from falling behind, and slow
again. She was panting and choking, obviously in trouble. But at
any time the shark would complete its grisly repast and seek new
prey-us.
"Hang on to me!" I cried.
Gratefully she came up to me, and I realized one source of
trouble. She still wore the heavy sweatshirt. Waterlogged, it was
hampering her movements and dragging in the water, draining
her strength. "Get it off!" I cried. "Strip!"
To set the example, I stripped myself. My own gis weren't any
asset either. Then I helped pull off her sweatshirt and slacks. Na-
355
ked, we were both better off. Then she clasped her arms around
my neck from behind, and I moved ahead with the breast stroke,
frog-kick combination-slower than the crawl, but powerful. Breast
stroke: no pun intended, but when she slid off my back to one side
or the other, my shoulder did stroke one of her breasts. I am never
too busy to notice such things.
"Shark!" she cried.
Sure enough, another fin had spotted us. This shark was a
monster-a good fourteen feet. It circled twice, then came directly
in. It didn't have any doubts about its ability to handle the
situation. And why should it?
"Hang on!" I cried. I curled myself into a ball, feet toward the
monster, bracing my shoulders against Gloria.
When the huge jaws were about to close, I let fly with what
amounted to a drop kick. Both my feet smashed into the shark's
nose just above the terrible teeth. The impact was terrific; Gloria
and I shot away, propelled by the rebound.
We didn't see the shark after that. Apparently surprise had
paid off again. After a moment we resumed swimming toward the
island. Soon my feet touched sand, and I knew we were there.
Gloria was exhausted, and I couldn't blame her. I had shucked
everything but my waterproof watch, which I had forgotten to
remove when we started the judo practice, and it showed we had
been in the water more than an hour. It hardly seemed that long,
yet at the same time it seemed much longer. No doubt the psychiatrists
can explain that phenomenon; I can't. I was just glad to
be out of that water.
I half-dragged her out of the sea and across the warm beach.
She was laughing deliriously, but did not seem to be hurt. Relief,

I hoped. The cold, tension, and exertion-she had only a fraction
the muscle I did, and had really suffered. I tended to forget how
fragile women were. But I wouldn't change them, not for the world.
It was the usual tropical atoll, except it wasn't technically an
atoll, as there was no coral. Sandy beach, clean blue sea, palm
 
356
trees. I set her down in the shade, scraping away palm fronds and
incidental debris. "You saved me!" she gasped.
"And lost the skipper," I said sourly. "He was a decent fellow,
after all."
She looked around. "Maybe we'll die too. We're on an island,
aren't we?"
"We must be. Rest a while. I'll look around. Maybe there's a
village or something."
"No," she cried in alarm. "Don't leave me!" She clung to my
arm.
"But, Gloria, we can't just stay here."
"Yes we can, for a little while. I don't want the headhunters to
get me."
"Headhunters!" I laughed.
"Please?"
Again that plea. I became aware we were naked. She was a
good-looking girl, and I didn't want to take advantage of her.
"I want to thank you," she said, pulling me down beside her.
"I never could have made it myself."
"No thanks necessary," I said gruffly. I have been told that
complete nakedness is much less sexy than clothing. Maybe so; it
depends on the woman. Gloria had a sort of innocent appeal about
her that put inevitable notions in my brain. I knew I should get on
with my island exploration before those notions became physically
evident, embarrassing us both.
She moved around and kissed me. "I'm not out of my head,
Jason, if that's what you're worried about. I'm cold and tired, but
you're a judoka and it's what I want. Really."
Still, it didn't seem right. "Your boyfriend, the brown belt-
what happened to him?"
"We were going to be married," she said. "He-" She broke
off. "I always liked the judo." And she kissed me again.
She was too young for me, and it wasn't just a matter of age. I
would not have wanted to be seen with her on the streets. But in
this situation it was difficult to resist temptation. I kissed her back.
357
Then she pulled away a little. "No, no . . ."
I had encountered that sort of response before. My lips moved
down to her neck. "Don't do that," she said, wriggling but hardly
drawing away.
Then on to her breasts, that had preoccupied me so continuously.
"It tickles!" she said. "Stop."
I looked up. "I thought you said this was what you wanted."
She looked down, partly in assumed modesty, partly to see the
state of my readiness, which perhaps alarmed her. "But I knew you
wouldn't do it!"
I began to appreciate how things had been with her boyfriend.
All come-on and turn-off. He must have gotten disgusted and
thrown her over. "Okay, let's go look for civilization." I was frankly
a bit put out; I don't like on-off sex play.
She sighed and got up. We walked along the beach. It didn't
take long to ascertain that this was a small uninhabited island. We
really were stranded. For the second time this week I found myself
in one of the dream situations of the American imagination: first
in bed with a nympho, now marooned with a lovely nude girl. Ah,
well.
"What if no one comes here?" she asked worriedly. "Isn't this

what they call the Devil's Triangle?"
The Devil's Triangle-a region of the Caribbean sea notorious
for mysterious disappearances of a vast number of ships over the
years. I didn't like the notion. "We must be somewhere near
Bimini," I said. "Not that far from Miami. Bound to be ships
passing. We'll hail one." I hoped. "Meanwhile, we can set up a
signal-big SOS drawn in the sand. Maybe we can form it with
coconuts, so it can be seen from the air."
"Maybe we can drink coconut milk," she said.
I had had wilderness-survival courses when training with the
Green Berets in Panama, and I had already noted edible plants on
the island. "We can do that, yes. We can also dig out clams and
catch crabs. There may be sour orange trees, and papayas. We
won't starve. We can last for several days, and probably much longer,
 
358
if there's fresh water, and I think there is. We may have to dig for
it, though, or catch rainwater."
"That's good." She did not seem unduly alarmed. Her mind
was concerned with immediacies; next week was too far away to
worry about. Which is part of what I mean by saying she was too
young for me.
So we gathered debris and made our SOS on the sand. When
we were finished, she settled down under another palm tree.
I settled beside her. "We should try to make some clothing.
Palm-frond skirts or something."
She giggled. "You'd look cute in a skirt."
"Some very prominent martial artists wear skirts," I said, thinking
of Hiroshi-which in turn reminded me how far I was from
solving the mystery of Luis' disappearance or obtaining the weapons
for Fu Antos. I had muffed this chore about as thoroughly as
Fu Antos' worst enemy could have.
And that brought an unpleasantly stunning notion to my consciousness.
I had blundered the Fu Antos mission throughout.
Was it because I distrusted Fu Antos' purpose, and wanted to fail?
"That sounds like a painter!" Gloria said.
"What?" I had completely lost track of what we had been talking
about.
"Martial artist. A man painting a picture of a battlefield."
I grimaced. "There's more than one kind of artist."
"You're kind of stuffy, when you put your mind to it," she
remarked, smiling.
I smiled too, relaxing. "That's not true. Stuffiness comes naturally
to me. I never have to work at it."
"Were you really looking for a boat?"
I was getting accustomed to her jumps of subject. "I really
was." Or was I? I had surely taken the least effective way to locate
that boat. Damn it, I would have to decide: either I was with Fu
Antos and really trying, or I should go home and quit pretending.
I told her about the telegram. There didn't seem to be any
harm in the information now.
359
She laughed musically. "You nut-that monk's treasure doesn't
have to be a boat. It could be a monastery!"
"Are there many monasteries in Miami?" I inquired dryly.
"Sure. One, anyway. Someone's been building one. Rebuilding,
I should say; they shipped it over from Europe, stone by stone,
and put it together here, just the same way it was. Actually, that
was done years ago by some rich eccentric; then it was abandoned.
Went up for taxes, I guess. Now they're fixing it up again. Anybody
can be a monk now, if he has the money."
"Monks don't have money," I said. "They take a vow of poverty."
"All the same, you have to pay to get in. Something like a
thousand dollars a month. Talk about treasure-the proprietor

must really be raking it in."
Monk's treasure . . . Maybe she had a point. If Luis were hiding
in a place like that-perfect concealment. "You're a doll," I
said, kissing her again. Suddenly my decision was made: I would
follow up Fu Antos' mission with all my power-once I got off
this island.
She turned right toward me. "Are we going to start that again?"
"No, of course not!" I said, nettled, for I had indeed been
about to warm up to her, partly, in gratitude for the decision she
had unwittingly helped me make, and partly because-well, she
was a pretty girl, nude, and what the hell else was there to do on
this damned island? Count mosquitoes?
"Why the hell do you listen to me?" she flared.
So it was that way! I caught her by both shoulders and kissed
her again. This time she responded warmly. We rolled on the sand,
working into the conclusive embrace, and I discovered she was a
virgin.
"For God's sake!" she yelled as I paused. "I kept my mouth
shut, didn't I?"
So I went ahead, interpreting her signals as well as I could.
Body language was everything; her words were just for the record,
in case anyone should ever accuse her of being too eager.
 
360
She squirmed, whether in eagerness or pain I could not tell.
Though she was virginal, the barrier was not formidable; a technicality,
as it were. Still, I went carefully, trying not to hurt her.
"Is it all in?" she cried. "Is it all in?"
What a question! "Half-in," I muttered. "Three-quarters." As
though I were announcing a depth gauge. Did she think a bell
would ring when penetration was complete? I suffered a momentary
mental picture of a slot machine, ready for the, payoff when
the symbols fell into place.
"Huge!" she exclaimed. "I can't believe I have the whole thing!"
There are limits. I would have chastised her for her pun-if
pun it was-but the urge overmastered me. I stopped calling signals
and thrust the remaining distance, heedless of the discomfort
this might cause her. She had the whole thing now.
And in the midst of my climax, she started crying. But at the
same time, she clung to me, not letting me withdraw.
"Bobby-I keep remembering Bobby!" she cried. "We always
got up to the point, but he wouldn't finish it. And then he died of
Hodgkin's disease."
Now she told me! In the heat and sweat of my ebbing climax,
I felt disgusted. Yesterday, or whenever it was-half a lifetime ago!-
I had cuckolded a living man; today a dead one.
"I wanted it from a judoka," she said. "To remember Bobby
by."
That was one way of looking at it. I finally disengaged, not
awfully proud of myself.
"You lost yours too," she said. "She was young, like me?"
How do women always know these things? Are there secret
signals embedded in the technique of my lovemaking, there for all
females to interpret? Chiyako, dead at the hands of Kan-Sen. It
had been a year, but the wound had not healed. It would never
heal. I felt tears in my own eyes.
"That's all right," Gloria said, cradling my head on her small
breast. She certainly knew how to make the most of that bosom!
"We're even."
361
I submitted to her comforting. Was there no end to her little
foibles?
Then I saw the ship. A fast military cutter, coast-guard-type.
Not American, I judged, but this was no time to be choosy.

We both jumped up and waved frantically, yelling. It was anticlimactic,
in more ways than one. They saw us and came right
in. It turned out to be a small police launch on a routine trip from
Bimini to the other islands of the region. Some airplane had spotted
our SOS and notified the authorities, so the launch had swung
by to investigate.
They gave us clothing, made out a report, and dropped us off
at Bimini. "I guess I won't see you again," Gloria said sadly as we
waited for American transport back to Miami. "But thanks, Jason.
I can let Bobby go, now, maybe."
"Thanks to you!" I said warmly. "You may have given me the
hint about the monk's treasure!" A hell of a long way around, but
worth it all-especially if this new interpretation were correct.
 
Chapter 8:
DEMON
I entered the dojo, looking for the sensei, the instructor. I wasn't
really familiar with the Miami scene, but I knew several of the
judo masters of the area. I felt that a dojo would be the best place
to obtain good advice and help-such as information about the
nature of this monastery, and whether a refugee Cuban would be
likely to go there. And of course I was at home in a dojo anywhere
in the world.
No one paid attention to me, so I approached the nearest black
belt I saw. He was a shodan, or first degree black belt-the minimum
master grade-I judged. He looked about forty, of medium
height, a solid 190 pounds or so. He seemed to be of Italian descent,
with a big Italian nose and wavy black hair. "Excuse me, I'd
like to talk to-"
"Move on, move on-we have a class coming up!" he said
roughly. "Why haven't you changed yet?"
This was not exactly dojo courtesy as I understood it. "I lost
my gis in the ocean," I said. "I only wanted to ask-"
363
"All right!" he snapped. "Use the spare set in the locker room.
Now, don't bother me again!"
I was having trouble getting through to him. Of course, I had
come in at a bad time, just before a class, but that was also when
the black belts showed up. One reason I wanted to talk with a
black belt was that I had lost my money and identification in the
hijacking episode, and needed to get to someone who would recognize
me and lend me enough money to continue my quest. Oid y0
I could have phoned Ilunga, collect, and she would have bailed me
out, but I would never have lived down the I-told-you-so sneer on
her face. I am a long way from achieving that exalted state where
personal pride is secondary to common sense.
Irritated, I went to the locker room in the back and found the
spare gis. But the belt was white.
I came out with the belt draped over my shoulder. In judo,
black is beautiful; it signifies the master grades, or Dan. White is
rank amateur.
The class was just completing its warm-up exercises. "I need a
black belt," I told the instructor. It was not that I wanted to work
out with the class; it was my way of getting his attention so that I
could get on with my business.
He rolled his eyes expressively ceilingward. "First night, and
he wants a black belt! You've got a lot to learn!"
Not half as much to learn as he had! My temper was taking a
beating, and the smarting of the bullet graze I had suffered aboard
the Connie did not help. "Listen, sensei," I said with sarcastic emphasis,
"I am a black belt. I only came to-"
He whirled on me. "You listen, mac! I don't care what you
think you have from some crackpot splinter group that calls itself
judo. Maybe you paid two grand and they gave you a black belt.

But this is Kodokan, real judo. You claim you have a black belt,
you prove it!"
Now I knew what he was thinking of. Theoretically, there are
many schools of judo, as there are of karate or any martial art. But
to the serious player there is only one-Kodokan, the school
 
364
founded by Jigoro Kano, originator of judo, in the 1880's. Some
supposed schools give out black belts for money instead of prowess;
never the Kodokan. There is also the problem of players claiming
high rank they haven't actually earned. So he was right, but
also wrong, for he had not bothered to ascertain that I wasn't
Kodokan. He had just assumed it.
"All right!" I snapped back. "Want me to run the line?"
The ultimate check of a person's proficiency was always on the
mat.
He smiled grimly. "Sure-you do that. Let's see what you're
really made of." He called the class to attention. "This visitor wants
to run the line. Don't keep him waiting."
A score of Latin faces grinned back. This was an advanced class;
no white belts, only a couple of yellow belts, and half a dozen
brown belts. There were even three black belts at the end of the
line.
Running the line can be tough. You start with the easiest, and
go on to the next as soon as you defeat each one. No break, no
rest-and you come to the toughest when you're worn out. It is a
real test of the runner's skill and stamina. It takes clear superiority
to get all the way through, because every single student is out to
nail you, and any mistake can wipe you out.
The idea of a white belt seriously running the line was preposterous.
He would not last more than one or two matches. They
were really setting me up for a comedown-they thought.
But the fact is, I am a superior judoka. I have run the line with
all black belts, for my fifth degree is as far beyond the first degree
as First Dan is above an orange belt. And this arrogant dojo needed
a lesson in manners.
I started in with the first yellow. I simply hauled him out of
the line and put him back with an o soto gari leg throw, the same
one I had shown the skipper. It's a good technique at any level.
The second yellow skittered to the side to avoid a similar indignity,
perhaps thinking it was the only throw I knew, and I caught
him with the okuri ashi barai foot sweep. The next was orange: o
365
uchi gari, straight back, sweeping his foot from the inside so that
he almost fell on his butt. He was surprised. Another orange: tai
otoshi, the body drop, that had been unsuccessful against the wrestler
hijacking the Connie. Less than a minute had passed, and four
were down with four leg techniques, and I was just warming up.
So it went, on up the line. I never repeated a technique. Very
soon they knew they were dealing with a master, for I set down the
green and blue belts almost as readily as before. On the brown
belts, too canny for the elementary throws, I used sutemi, or sacrifices.
That's a misnomer, for the judoka never voluntarily sacrifices
his balance; it simply means that I took them to the mat in controlled
fashion by throwing myself down.
One I caught with the kami basani, or crab pincers. I jumped
high in the air, one leg across his waist and the other behind his
legs, my body sideways to him. He looked amazed as he went
down; he had probably never encountered this throw before, as it
is seldom performed. Another I took with one of my favorites, the
ukiwaza, or floating throw, so-called because your opponent seems
to float over you without touching.
Then the black belts. The first tried a sutemi on me. It was the
tomoe nage, or circle throw, in which you try to haul your opponent

over you as you roll back. It's a good technique, but I was
ready for it. I merely squatted down, resisting the leg he put in my
gut with all the hara power of my stomach. I flipped his arms
aside and was on him in the kesa gatame, or scarf hold-down. My
right arm was around his neck, while my left held his right arm
captive. He could not break it within thirty seconds, so he was
finished.
The second tried another sutemi, the soto makikomi, or wraparound
throw. It is an excellent technique in which you wrap your
opponent around you, then throw yourself to the mat, carrying
him along. But if you do not get the point, the drawback is that he
is behind you, ready to apply a new technique. And so it was in
this case: I retained my footing as he went down, and I slid my
arms around his neck, one going deep and grabbing his collar, the
 
366
other snaking up behind his head. I applied the kata hajime onewing
strangle, and he capitulated. He would have been unconscious
very shortly if he had not yielded.
The third tried a straight defensive posture, shoulders forward,
feet braced back. This can be very tough to overcome. I bent, pulled
him forward, grabbed one leg with my arm, and picked him up in
the kata guruma, or shoulder whirl. He struggled and managed to
turn aside as he went down, making the throw imperfect, so I
applied an ude gatame as he tried to push me away. I caught his
outstretched arm alongside my face while I put pressure with both
hands against his elbow, shoving it against my chest. He had to
tap out, yielding.
I had completed the line in just over five minutes. Now they
knew who I was; I saw the recognition in the faces of the black
belts. But two more had shown up during the action. One was a
white belt, a short man about five feet five inches, but big around.
He weighed about two hundred pounds, had a big belly, and arms
like tree trunks. His disheveled blond hair was flecked with white.
He had big green staring eyes with a disconcerting glare. His face
was square, and he wore a short blond goatee and moustache. A
gold tooth showed when he opened his mouth. Well, you see all
types in judo.
The other man was in street clothes, a huge black. Apparently
he was just along to watch the fun; I gave him no more than a
passing glance. Which, as I learned, was a mistake.
"You missed one," the white belt said, standing forward. "Don't
leave out Loco."
Loco? The name meant nothing to me. I have enough trouble
keeping track of the second-and third-degree black belts, let alone
the myriad white belts. So I moved out to meet him, intending to
put him down gently. A beginner with his evident strength would
tend to bull through on muscle alone, not appreciating the finer
nuances of position and balance which are the essence of judo. I
went into a soft harai goshi hip sweep, pushing his right leg out
from under him as I brought him over my right hip.
367
But his foot did not sweep properly. Bent half over, he came
forward and picked me up in a savage sukui nage scoop throw, one
hand across my waist, the other under my legs. He lifted me high
and threw me backward against the wall. He was amazingly strong.
I protected my head with my arms, pushing off from the wall
as I fell. That was no white belt! The bastard had used my own
unintentional ruse against me, concealing his true level. I was in
for a real fight this time.
Loco came at me, leaping into the air to land on me feet-first.
I reacted without thought; rolling aside, I let him land on the
mat, then I kicked his legs out from under.
Real fight? Literally! This wasn't judo practice-it was mayhem!

But why? I had to defend myself, but I had no idea why I
was being attacked in this manner. As far as I knew, I had never
run afoul of this man before.
We rolled on the floor. The man tried a hadaka jime naked
choke on me from behind, but I profited from the bygone instruction
of the very man I sought, Luis Guardia. I arched my body
backward toward him, easing the pressure. At the same time, I
tried an illegal yubi waza finger lock against one hand. If he played
rough, so could I. There's a hell of a lot more to judo than is ever
seen in the formal contests. He had to let go or suffer some broken
fingers.
We stood, and now it came to blows. He swung with a vicious
knife-hand strike to my face, shuto gammen-uchi, which I blocked
with the edge of my own left hand to his forearm. I countered
with a terrible punch to the pit of his stomach. It was an invertedfist
low thrust, uraken shita-uchi, snapping my fist slightly at the
moment of contact for more force.
I almost broke my hand. His stomach was iron-hard. He must
have practiced for years, hitting it with everything imaginable,
until his muscles became so strong they could take almost anything.
My hand felt numb and swollen, as it had when I hit the
big shark.
His leg shot out, catching my ankle in a powerful combina-
 
368
tion foot-sweep and kick. His foot, too, was like iron. I fell to the
floor; my ankle felt broken. I rolled out of reach of that terrible
weapon.
I caught his leg, pushing upward as I leaped to my feet. It was
a version of the kuchiki-taoshi throw, the dead-tree drop. I lifted
his leg high and shoved him back, trying to make him fall, but all
I succeeded in doing was to push him into a corner. This man's
whole body was conditioned.
He braced against the wall and shoved me back and down. I
rolled again, expecting him to kick me, but this time he stood
back and let me regain my feet. Then he knocked my legs out
again. But as I fell, I caught one of his ankles: it is always a mistake
to try the same technique twice in succession, unless you are sure
your opponent doesn't expect it. I used him as a crutch to regain
my own balance, shoving him into the corner again. He couldn't
right himself; I had control. For the moment.
I had to subdue him, before he subdued me. This was no
running-the-line randori, and no friendly dojo rivalry. There was
something ugly behind it, and I had the feeling, now, that it involved
Luis.
I had no intention of disappearing the way Luis had. I had
come to find him, and if this man knew anything, he would talk.
When I got through with him.
Loco tried a series of strikes at my face. I dodged them. Then
he made a numbing shuto blow to my forearm, the arm holding
his leg. I was taking a lot of punishment.
Time to give him his own medicine. I brought my knee up,
but I didn't go for the crotch. I twisted my hips and made a terrible
hiza-geri strike to his abdomen-a blow that would have ruptured
a normal man's intestines, possibly killing him from shock.
It had no apparent effect. I kneed him again, and a third time.
On the fourth blow his knees began to give, and on the fifth he
buckled, losing consciousness.
"That's some man," I said, turning away. I wasn't being facetious;
the guy had been damn tough, but he had also, in his fash-
369
ion, been fair. There had been opportunities for really dirty stuff. I
knew he knew how, but he hadn't tried it.
"Saaiii!" The other man, the one in civvies, gave an earsplitting

kiai yell and took to the air with a vicious two-footed kick at my
head. His hard-soled shoes made the threat all the more effective.
I twisted away, and he missed. These kicks can be devastating
when they score, but you can see them coming. Undismayed, he
landed on his feet, whirled, and tried a powerful straight kick. But
I aided his leg, pushing it upward with my hand, while I stepped
in and swept his supporting foot in a ko uchi gari small inside clip,
sweeping his supporting foot so that he fell.
He put his hand inside his shirt. A knife came out.
"No, Eugenio!" Loco cried, sitting up.
But the blade of the knife was already moving purposefully
toward me. I kicked it out of his hand as he jabbed, and it clattered
against the wall. This was one of those cases when resistance
had to be made to a weapon. I would have been dead if I had
waited for him, for he obviously meant to kill me.
I don't like attempts on my life. I caught his wrist, pulled his
arm around, and applied an ude garami arm wrap as I bore him to
the mat. My left hand held his left wrist, while my right passed
under his bent arm and joined my own left wrist. By lifting and
putting pressure on his elbow and shoulder joints, I had him in
pain and at my mercy.
"Why were you trying to kill me?" I demanded, pressing his
elbow. His arm was strong, but I had all the leverage; I could snap
his joint out, and he knew it.
Even so, he resisted for a moment. I gave him a surge of force
to show I meant it, and suddenly he slapped the mat with his foot
in surrender. I let him go, but remained on guard; this man lacked
the nicety of discipline of the other, and I didn't trust him.
"Because you are a Fidelista," he said. "Here to betray our
cause."
"Me?" I said, amazed. "I have no interest in Cuban politics!"
Loco stood up, listening closely but not interfering. "You were
 
370
in Cuba!" Eugenio said. "You talked with Fidel himself for over an
hour. We know!"
"Just how do you know that?" I asked.
"We have witnesses!"
"The only witnesses were Fidel's own guards." He was silent,
so I continued. "Look, I know Fidel Castro. I didn't talk to him; he
talked to me. I was his captive a few months ago. That doesn't
mean I'm his agent-any more than it does for any of you who left
Cuba. I also know Luis Guardia; in fact, he's the one I'm looking
for now."
"We know," Eugenio cried. "To betray him!"
"To help him!" I cried back. "He's my friend. If you know him,
if you know where he is, ask him! He'll tell you. I came down here
in answer to a telegram-"
"You lie!" Eugenio said.
But Loco wasn't so sure. "I did send Striker a telegram, Eugenio.
You know he's telling the truth about that. We knew he'd show up
here sooner or later; that was the idea."
I stared at Loco. "You sent the telegram? I thought it was Luis!"
"You were meant to," Eugenio said. "You'd never have shown
your face here if you knew the reckoning awaiting you!"
I turned to him. "Why do you call me liar and coward when
you know I'm not?"
"Luis deserted Cuba!" he said. "You want to kill him! We had
to stop you!"
"By summoning me here?" I shook my head. "Seems to me you
were trying to do the killing."
Loco considered. "I was sure, but now I am not. His story
stands up better than yours, Eugenio. It seems to me I have listened
too much to one person."

"But all those betrayals!" Eugenio cried. "Someone had to-"
Loco looked at him with cool calculation. "Yes. Someone. But
Striker was hardly in a position to do all that. He can't mix with
us; he doesn't know our ways. His cause is not ours. He was far
away. And Luis trusted him. Did Luis trust you?"
371
Eugenio looked away, and something like fear showed on his
face. "I am your own kind! Why should I-?"
Loco took a step toward him. I was amazed at Loco's recovery
from the beating I had just given him. "Why indeed? It does not
make sense, if you are one of us. We wanted to get the truth from
Striker. But you tried to kill him. It doesn't add up-unless you
don't want the truth known. You called him liar, as though you
were trying to put the guilt on him without even thinking. As
though that is really why you want him here: to assume the guilt,
dead. Your motive showed through; you made a slip. That doesn't
happen to those with nothing to hide."
"No!" Eugenio cried, backing off. "I can explain-"
"Where is Luis?" Loco barked.
And Eugenio, seeing he could not hide any longer, said, "In
the monastery."
Loco showed amazement. "He is there? It's not just the story
we made up?"
Interesting, I thought: Loco had thought he was misleading
me with the telegram, but it had been the truth after all. Wheels
within wheels!
Loco turned to me. "My apologies, Seor Striker. I was misled."
"Accepted!" I said. "Let's go get Luis!"
He raised a hand in caution. "He may be prisoner. We must
learn more first, or our very approach will kill him. We must make
plans."
"All right," I said. "But there's still a lot I don't understand."
"I sent the telegram," Loco said. "Luis thought the G-2 was
after him, to destroy the arms shipment he had aboard the Monk's
Treasure. He thought there was a spy among us, so he didn't trust
us. Not enough to-"
"You mean there is a ship called the Monk's Treasure?"
"Not registered as such. He called it that as a code name, and
he scuttled it after he buried the weapons in a secluded place.
Where, that is his secret. The G-2 wants to catch him or betray
 
372
the weapons to the American police, so they will be lost to us.
Their agents are everywhere, and the American government is really
on the same side; we can hardly trust anyone. Luis said he was
going to hide with a friend."
"I was that friend," I said. "He phoned me-"
"We knew. Then he disappeared. Your pardon; we drew a conclusion."
So I saw. Had I been a spy, I could have betrayed Luis the
moment I knew his location. But of course I wasn't, and I hadn't-
and I hadn't even known where he was.
"Eugenio said we should protect Luis; if anyone came asking
for him, we should-well, nothing too violent, just enough to
discourage inquiries." He made a gesture. "Nothing personal, seor!
We were not sure."
"I understand," I said. What a tangled web of deceit had been
woven. Now it all seemed hopelessly contradictory, but that was
in retrospect; it had probably seemed authentic as long as I was
under suspicion. At least this solved the riddle of why Loco had
fought me. "But Luis never told me where he was, and he never
arrived at my place. That's why I came here. I was afraid something
had happened to him. And I didn't really understand that
telegram; I thought it was from him."
"You were meant to. Eugenio found out about his call to you;

I curse myself for an idiot that I didn't think to question how.
Only a clever spy has such resources! He said you had been in
Cuba, talked with Fidel, that Fidel had actually given you a boat
to return on, you and your black mistress. He said-"
"Uh-oh," I said. "That much is true. I did meet Castro, as I
said before, and he did let me have a boat. I was in Cuba for the
world judo meet, and he wanted some help in stopping gun and
drug running, because it was interfering with his relations with
the USA."
"Exactly!" Loco agreed. "They work together now!"
"I'm against drugs and gun running, too. So we cooperated.
373
But that was all. Luis is my friend; I want him to teach judo at my
dojo."
"And you have no interest in his weapons?"
Oops! "I do want the weapons, too, but I mean to buy them
from him, for another party. I can't tell you who, but it's not American
or Cuban."
"See?" Eugenio cried. "He has secrets too!"
Loco pondered. I realized my case had lost credibility, but I
did not feel free to tell these people about Fu Antos and the ninjas.
"I believe you," Loco said to me at last. "Now." He shook his
head. "When Eugenio actually tried to kill you, I knew there was
something he hadn't told me. He is clever; he used the truth, but
not the whole truth. I think he wanted to kill you and put the
blame on you."
"Blame for Luis' disappearance?"
"For all the betrayals we have suffered. Someone has exposed
some of our best people to the G-2, and they have disappeared.
Like Luis. Now I think we know who that traitor is-at last." He
turned to Eugenio.
The big black backed away. "You have no proof!"
"You knew where Luis was, but you did not tell me! You knew
Seor Striker was innocent but how guilty he might look. He was
ideal for the patsy, to remove suspicion from you."
"It was a mistake! I thought-"
"We know what you thought! Now you will pray we find Luis
alive and well at the monastery."
"He is! He is! I don't know in what room for sure, but he's
there. Most likely in the power room. We wanted him to tell where
the arms were sunk, but he refused to talk to anyone but Striker."
"So you had me send Striker a cryptic telegram-so the G-2
would not understand it, you said. But of course the G-2 already
knew!" Loco took another step forward. "You played me for a patsy,
me cojiste de comemierda."
I didn't know what that meant, but I was sure it was strong
language.
 
374
"It was the only way!" Eugenio cried desperately.
Loco turned away, disgusted. "I think you are our traitor, but
I have no real proof yet, and I will not act again on mere suspicion.
But word will get around." He looked at the black belts and students.
They looked back, smiling grimly. "Yes, word will get around.
Not everyone is as finicky as I am. Those who lost their friends . . ."
Now Eugenio looked distinctly nervous. I did not envy him
his position, despite his effort to frame me. He was tough, but so
were a number of the exiles, and some had serious grievances, as
certain other disappearances and assassinations had demonstrated.
*
The monastery was a huge stone edifice resembling a medieval
castle in certain respects, but it was actually only half a castle. It
was an ancient Spanish monastery that an eccentric millionaire,
who had made his fortune in Cuban sugar in 1910, had brought

stone by stone to his secluded estate. It was part of an elaborate
system of gardens and artifacts. He had also built extensive wine
cellars underneath, and added to the original structure. There was
a huge central patio with many smaller walled vegetable and fruit
gardens, genuine catacombs, halls full of trophies, and a big chapel.
All were surrounded by a high stone wall. Medieval tapestries hung
inside, and the furniture was of massive carved black ebony.
The millionaire had died, and his sons had squandered his
fortune. The state of Florida won possession of the monastery by
default on the taxes. Now a deal had been made, and the recent
kung fu craze was making the monastery pay again.
"We wish to tour," I said to the monk at the front gate. "There
may be something we want here." Such as a captive black-belt
judoka.
He was used to these requests. There was considerable tourist
interest in this project. We paid five dollars apiece and were led
through the somber halls and chambers by a silent monk.
It was impressive. Everything was dense, almost black stone.
375
Rows of lighted candles lined the passages. Statues of the Buddha
were everywhere, seeming out of place, but of course this was supposed
to be a Chinese kung fu monastery now, not a European
Catholic one. Thus Oriental artifacts replaced the crucifixes.
Where the chapel altar had been, there was now a huge golden
statue of Buddha, with a number of worshipers before it, chanting
Buddhist prayers. On an outer patio, other worshipers were dancing,
whirling. Anything went, it seemed, so long as the customers
had money.
The monks wore saffron robes, and yellow ones, while the
ranking ones were in blue and golden kimonos with embroidered
dragons and Chinese motifs. The heads of the men were shaven.
It reminded me strongly of the real monastery I had stayed at
in Cambodia years ago, where I had learned something of the philosophy
of weapons and the art of the nunchaku. But all those
genuine monks were dead now, and I shied away from the memory.
It tied in with my lost fiance, and with her murderer, Kan-Sen,
and I could not afford to get off on that awful train of thought
again.
But at the same time, this monastery was phony. The medieval
monks, of whatever hemisphere, had hand-carried water in
buckets attached to shoulder yokes, from a spring below the building.
Here they had hot and cold running water piped into every
residential chamber. The originals had used tallow lamps for illumination;
now they had electric lights wherever the candles were
not on show. True monks had eaten hard bread baked in great
stone ovens heated by wood fires; now they had "Monk's Bread"
delivered every morning by truck. Television sets were mounted in
the walls, and the laundry room had automatic washing machines.
It was really a huge hotel, with most of the modern comforts
thereof.
True, all inhabitants were required to wear monk's h of=Even
the paying tourists, like us. This had the incidental effect of preventing
us from bringing in any concealed weapons or tools. But
the habit was hardly haircloth, though I understood that was avail-
 
376
able on demand for masochists; it was silken, extremely comfortable
in the air-conditioning. And the supposedly harsh, deprived
life of the monks was alleviated by the maid service; no one had to
clean up his own room. The maids I saw were exceedingly comely,
too.
In short, it was one big fake. There was no celibacy here, no
hardship, no renunciation of the world, no dedication of body and
spirit to God. It was just another moneymaking scheme. Successful,

by the look of it. But I could not respect it.
But our real purpose was to discover, if we could, where Luis
Guardia was, and to rescue him. I studied every contour, analyzing
the layout for secret rooms and passages. I peered into every
monkish face. If Luis were here, he might be drugged, insensible
of his whereabouts, subjected to brainwashing techniques . . .
I saw a stairwell leading down from an interior patio. Two
burly monks stood guard. This alerted me: why should any portion
of the monastery be off limits to visitors, without any posted
notice? "I'd like to see your catacombs," I said to the guide. "Such
things fascinate me."
"Sorry, they are closed for renovations," he said.
I caught Loco's eye. The power room must be down there.
There were just the five of us in the chamber-him, me, the
guide, and the two guards. "Oh, I'm sure it will be all right," I
said, walking to the steps the way a spoiled tourist might. Loco
followed me.
The guards closed in immediately. They were hiding something,
all right! "It is not permitted," one said, one hand reaching
into his robe. He was a leather-faced thug, no paying customer by
the look of him. It was surely a gun he had in there.
Loco made as if to go away, but as he turned he delivered a
backward kick with the heel of his foot to the pit of the guard's
stomach. At the same time, I used the keiko, or chicken-beak hand,
on the other. My fingers and thumb were pressed tightly together
to form a point, the back of my hand turned up. That beak hit the
man in the hollow of his throat where it joins the neck. He should
377
have been rendered unconscious instantly, but just to be sure, I
followed up with a short blow to the abdomen.
Loco had already jumped across the floor and knocked out the
guide-a painless termination of consciousness, since the man was
probably an innocent employee. Quickly we stacked the three men
out of sight around a turn of the stair and moved swiftly and silently
on down. Now time was of the essence, before they caught
on to what we were up to.
There was no renovation going on. The catacombs were dark
and cool, the walls moist; mildew covered the crevices. We had to
feel our way along the wall in places, because the light was so bad.
Fortunately, it wasn't difficult to locate the power room; we
oriented on it by the humming sound. Alert for more guards but
knowing we had to complete our mission swiftly, we zeroed in on
what we hoped was Luis' prison.
A modern door closed it off, with a heavy bar across it. Loco
lifted the bar clear, and I kicked open the door, ready for anything.
But inside it was dark and silent.
I stepped in cautiously. Then I saw the glint of a moving metal
chain. I threw myself to the floor, rolling aside before the weapon
could score. Then I flipped up to grapple with the ambusher.
Suddenly a strong arm was around my neck, choking me. I
tried to twist out of the hold, but I was in the grip of an expert. I
couldn't even yell a warning to Loco.
Then the hold relaxed. "You Americans are such amateurs!" a
voice said in my ear. "When will you ever master self-defense?"
"Luis!" I exclaimed joyfully.
He chuckled. "I thought for a moment you two were coming
to do away with me in secret, and I was not ready to go. Fortunately
I recognized your style. Hello, Loco."
He had recognized my style-bumbling American. "Let's get
out of here!" I said, amazed at how easy it had been.
"I fear I cannot, Seor," Luis said. "I am chained."
Loco took the chain in his hand. It extended from a tight
metal anklet on Luis' leg to an iron ring set in the wall. It was long
 

378
enough so that he could walk about or lie on his bunk, but it was
strong steel.
Loco tried to break it but could not. I tried, invoking my ki.
That power came, suffusing me with extraordinary strength, but
to no avail. Only in cheap fiction can a man actually break a sturdy
steel binding; the metal is beyond mortal power, unless you have
the proper tools or leverage. We had not brought any equipment,
knowing it would give away our mission.
"All together," Luis suggested. "The chain itself is too sturdy;
I have tested its merit many times. But the wall is old. . . ."
We took hold, braced ourselves, and hauled together. Still no
luck, no matter how we strained. Whatever company had made
that chain had had good quality control; no weak link.
"We must jerk it hard," Loco said. "Wrap it around me, then
use me as a lever."
"You'll crush your guts!" I protested.
"Not my guts!" he said with a certain grim pride. And I remembered
how phenomenally conditioned his body was.
We looped it about his waist, leaving plenty of slack on Luis'
end. Then we lifted Loco so that his feet were braced against the
wall on either side of the ring.
"Hit it!" he cried. He shoved his feet forward hard in a kind of
drop kick, while Luis and I slammed into his shoulders on either
side, adding to his thrust away from the wall.
The shock was hellish. All three of us crashed to the floor,
tangled up in the chain. But the chain was free, pulled out from
its mooring at last.
The chain? The block to which it was attached had popped
right out of the wall!
Had the noise alerted the monastery? We hoped not. The power
room was noisy anyway because of the steady hum of the generators;
it seemed silent after a few seconds because the mind tuned
the hum out, but it still would help cover our activity. Also, the
room was well-removed from the main residential section.
Luis picked up his block and chain, and we moved out, care-
379
fully barring the door behind us. I didn't like making him carry
that substantial load, for he limped from years-old leg injuries;
but no one else could do it, really.
We passed the three pseudo-monks we had knocked out. One
was stirring, so Loco kicked him gently in the temple, anesthetizing
him for another period. We removed his yellow robe and put it
on Luis, concealing the chain and stone. Then we marched on,
like tourists continuing the tour.
I felt nervous. This was too easy. Surely the monastery had a
better security system than this. Unless they didn't want to alert
the paying residents to the shady doings below.
We passed the main dojo, curtained off from the hall. A class
was in session. I heard the instructor: "I teach my own system of
wu shu or kung fu."
I froze. That voice-impossible!
I turned at right angles and plowed through the curtains.
"Wait!" Loco whispered compellingly, but he was too late. I already
stood contemplating the class. I had forgotten my mission
for Fu Antos, my need to save Luis. My attention was riveted on
the class.
It was the biggest kwoon I had ever seen. The former central
dining room of the monastery had been adapted for this purpose,
the tables removed and huge permanent mats installed. Martialarts
accouterments adorned the walls-costumes, weapons, and
even shields.
There were about a hundred students dressed in black and
white kimonos, and ten teachers in more elaborate bright red and

blue ones. They wore soft kung fu slippers. At one end of the great
hall, on a raised dais, sitting on a kind of throne and wearing a
golden kimono, was the head instructor. He had a Chinese moustache,
and he looked older and fatter than when I had seen him
last, but there was no doubt in my mind.
"Join me-or this girl dies!" He drew forth a knife and brought
it to Chiyako's throat. Bound as she was, she could not resist him.
I knew he would do it. I had to give in.
 
380
"Never!" Chiyako cried.
Slowly he brought Chiyako to him, and slowly he forced the
blade toward her throat. "Then she dies." And carefully he slit her
throat.
Kan-Sen-the slayer of my love. It was impossible, for I had
killed him. Yet here he sat.
Loco came through the door and put his hand on my arm.
"We must get out of here before they recognize us!" he whispered
urgently.
"That's Kan-Sen!" I said.
Luis came up. "Of course it is. He runs the monastery. He was
trying to make me tell where I had hidden the arms. Do you know
him?"
"But he's dead! I killed him."
I could feel Loco and Luis exchanging glances behind me. They
were wondering if I had gone crazy.
I wondered too.
My horror turned to rage. I charged Kan-Sen. But he was
ready for me. He was high on kill-13; his reflexes were faster than
mine. We hovered above Chiyako's body, weaving back and forth,
but the advantage was his.
Then his foot landed in the pool of blood that had gushed
from Chiyako's throat. His arm came down in an automatic effort
to regain balance. I augmented that motion with a shove-and as
we fell, his knife was caught between us, the blade pointed inward.
My weight landed on him, shoving the knife down. I could
not see the action, but he gave a sharp cry and went limp.
Suddenly I realized: I had not actually verified his death! The
knife had been there, and he had cried out, but that was not the
same as a mortal wound.
Fool that I was, I had not made sure. And so he had tricked
me, feigning death, and escaped.
That would be corrected!
"Kan-Sen!" I roared. There was no mistaking my fury and in-
381
tent.
The figure on the dais turned to me, startled. Apparently he
did not recognize me. "Stop the intruders!" he shouted. "They
want to defile the sacred temple!"
Immediately the students and instructors swung about, orienting
on us. I did not care about them. Kan-Sen was running
true to form, organizing a supposed kung fu hierarchy. He had
done that with the Kill-13 demons, from whose cult I had released
Ilunga. Now he seemed to be operating without benefit of
the drug; not surprising, since I had destroyed the major supplies
of it. I wondered how he had gotten off it; normally withdrawal
was fatal. But these were only fleeting thoughts.
I plunged ahead, intent on Kan-Sen. This time, for sure, he
would die at my hands. Chiyako would be avenged.
Loco and Luis had no choice but to fall in behind me, protecting
my back and flank. They did not comprehend my motive, but
they stood by me.
Luis, with his weak knee and chain, was at a seeming disadvantage.
But as the students converged, he disproved this with a

vengeance. He was a fifth-degree black belt in judo, and he well
knew how to fight.
He brought out his chain and started whirling it around over
his head, the heavy block of stone swinging ponderously but with
devastating effect. It crashed into anyone who came near. Heads
were cracked, arms broken, ribs crushed. They tried to catch the
slow-moving chain, but the stone cracked open as it bounced on
the floor at the edge of the mat, and suddenly the chain was free
and light. Luis whirled it faster and faster, wreaking havoc.
But one of the blue-garbed teachers was down but still conscious.
As Luis stepped over him, the man hooked his foot and
kicked his bad knee. Luis dropped, almost passing out from the
pain. But still he fought, kicking with his one good leg at anyone
who approached, crawling after me, despite everything intent on
protecting my flank as long as he was able.
But there were simply too many opponents, and soon Luis
 
382
disappeared under a football-style pileup of bodies.
Loco, meanwhile, was putting on one hell of a fight. He was a
bull, and every time he struck, someone fell. He kicked, jabbed
with fists and elbows, and even used his head like a bucking ram.
From time to time he used a judo throw. Once he caught one of
the students by one leg and one arm and whirled him around like
a club, opening the way, then threw him to crash against the crowd.
Another man jumped on Loco's back. Loco threw himself into
a hard rear fall, crushing the man underneath him. Then he used
both feet to kick another man who was jumping on top of him. He
sent the man flying, then bounced to his feet again.
Once two men made the mistake of grabbing Loco, one on
each hand. Loco pivoted on his left foot, twisting his body, and
caught one opponent in the left armpit with a right roundhouse
kick. Then, with the same leg, he aimed a side kick at the other's
solar plexus.
Loco was taking lots of punishment, but the blood lust was
upon him, a kind of berserk fury, so that he did not mind the
blows that rained on him. He took two or three strikes for every
one he delivered, but such was his fury that while he merely
shrugged off even the hardest hits, his opponents went down injured
or unconscious. Because these were kung fu students, they
preferred to strike rather than to grapple, and this was a major
weakness, especially against such a man. But when they realized
that he was virtually invulnerable to ordinary strikes, they tried to
overwhelm him with massed action.
Still he fought, holding them off in a circle. But no man can
maintain such a pace indefinitely, and Loco had had a bruising
encounter with me and a shock to his body when we used him to
haul out Luis' chain. His strikes grew wilder, his throws less controlled.
Finally he stood there panting, no longer attacking, just
waiting like a tiger caged within a circle. He was so tired he was
almost out on his feet, but who steps into the range of a tiger, even
a tired one, while that tiger keeps his feet?
They ringed him, afraid of him. Now and then one of them
383
would dart at him, making a daring sally, and he would dispatch
that idiot with a quick chop or kick or throw.
Occasionally he would charge the ring, enlarging it for a while.
But he had been nullified, for he could not break out.
Meanwhile, I was on my way to Kan-Sen, heedless of all else.
I think he recognized me now, for he was off his throne. I have no
memory of how many men I tossed aside; my reactions were automatic,
like swatting mosquitoes. I know I lifted one blue instructor
in a mighty te guruma, grabbing him by one leg with my other
arm around his stomach and hurling him into the man in front.

Another I took with a hane goshi hip throw that I converted to
makikomi, going down in a wraparound sacrifice but landing on
top of him, hard, so that I crushed in his rib cage. It wasn't that I
bore him any personal malice; it was that he wouldn't let go, and
I refused to be constrained even for a moment.
At one point three men surrounded me. I lashed forward with
my head and squashed a nose, then sideways and broke a jaw, then
backward to crush a face. Three blows, using my head as a weapon,
and perhaps the ki imbued me, for I never felt the impact, while
all three men went down.
The one I remember clearly was competent: a blue-clad teacher
who made an impressive jump-kick at me. I sidestepped it. He
landed cleanly, then started the whirlwind hand movements of
the Chinese kung fu combat. I knew better than to step into that
pattern. The others were standing back, letting the expert put on
his show, demonstrating how to foil a barbarian. It would be an
expression of contempt for their instructor if any of them piled
into me now. So I waited calmly, out of reach, watching for an
opening. I don't hold any grade in kung fu, but I have been exposed
to it, and much of its technique overlaps that of karate.
I realized that my blue opponent's defense was flawed. His
hands were too high, at times leaving him open. This would not
have been perceptible to the average opponent. Also, he expected
me to come to him, which meant I didn't have to worry about his
potential charge. Too much defense can be a man's undoing.
 
384
I figured the pattern, timed my move precisely, and made it
with untelegraphed speed. I made a right roundhouse kick to the
left side of his neck, felling him in that fraction of a second he was
vulnerable.
Then the others piled on me, but I had little concern for them.
I kicked them in the armpit, stomach, and chest, downing them
like so many tenpins. I jumped onto the dais, laying about me,
and suddenly I was kicked hard in the back. The blow sent me
careening into two men in front, who clobbered me with blows
about the head and shoulders before I righted myself. I threw
them down, but three more were on me immediately, and I could
not turn to see who had landed the telling blow on me. I swept
my arms forward, bringing two men down, but the third entangled
my legs, and I ended up in the pile with them.
I struggled to extricate myself from the tangle. I had an inherent
advantage here, because this is a form of grappling, and much
of judo consists of grappling. I punched one in the chest, butted
another in the groin, and made working room for myself. But as I
lifted my head, ready to try for a joint technique or strangle, I felt
cold steel around my neck.
My hands went up, but it was the noose of a manriki gusari, a
twelve-inch chain weighted at the ends. Bogged down as I was,
unable to maneuver, with my antagonist tightening the noose from
the rear, I was helpless. I made one valiant effort, throwing my
head forward, trying to jerk the ends out of his hands, but only
succeeded in tightening it.
I began to black out. Strangulation looks and sounds awful,
and many people oppose execution by hanging as cruel and unusual
punishment, but actually it is one of the less painful ways to
go. It can even be pleasant, for your fading awareness conjures
visions. After the initial discomfort-and discomfort was what it
was, rather than pain-I felt a great lassitude, a pleasurable sinking.
I saw the face of Chiyako, my lovely fiance. "Come to me . . ."
my lost one called, and I went to rejoin her.
Then an ear-splitting kiai yell cut through my contentment, a
385
hot knife through butter. Suddenly the pressure was off. I took in

a rasping lungful of air as the chain unwound.
I tried to stand, but could not. I fell to my knees. If the going
had been blissful, the returning was agonizing.
Arms caught me, lifting me to my feet. A hated face loomed
before me, smiling. Then I knew that I was not going to be allowed
to expire peacefully; my mortal enemy wanted me alive-
for a time.
"Hotheaded fool," Kan-Sen said. "You and I have no quarrel. I
tried to call out to you, but you gave me no chance to explain. I
would dearly like to boil you in oil, but I cannot. I must help you,
for we are on the same side now."
"Why lie to me?" I demanded. "We shall be enemies as long as
either lives!"
"Hate, yes. Enemies, no. I killed your woman, you destroyed
my empire. But now I am Fu Antos' right-hand man."
"Fu Antos!" How could he know of that?
"It is for him I need the weapons. I serve him; he freed me
from my demon addiction and turned my eyeballs white again. I
am as loyal to him as I was to the drug. He tells me I must work
with you, so I obey."
Then I perceived hell. I hated Kan-Sen with unrelenting passion.
I remembered his leering face as he slid the knife across the
fair throat of my beloved and let her blood gush out. Ever since
that time I had dreamed of new ways to slaughter him, if only he
were not dead already. Now he was alive, after all.
But what he said had to be true, for nothing else would have
compelled him to spare me. And his eyeballs were white, instead
of red from the Kill-13 addiction. Only ki could do that, and only
ki of the power Fu Antos possessed. I knew, for I had wrestled with
that addiction myself, and brought Ilunga out of it after a terrific
struggle. Kan-Sen had been no short-term addict, but the master
of the demon cult.
The demon and I were expected to work together now. What
 
386
sane entity would seriously believe that I would ever tolerate such
an abomination?
"Fu Antos, you are Satan!" I whispered, meaning it.
Kan-Sen nodded agreement.
Epilogue:
NINJA'S MINIONS
Fu Antos smiled as he read the note. It was in Chinese symbols,
so similar to the Japanese writing that he had no trouble
with it. He returned the homing pigeon to its hutch.
The message was from Kan-Sen. The demon had made contact
with Jason Striker and located a superlative cache of modern
barbarian weapons. Not merely rifles and ammunition, but portable
antitank launchers and missiles, red-eye antiplane missiles,
and similar artifacts. Arrangements were being made to transport
these across the sea and up the Amazon River to the ninja enclave
hidden in the jungle.
This would enable him to defend his campsite from any likely
attack. As his other far-flung minions performed, gaining him necessary
supplies, he would construct the third Black Castle. From it
he would manage his crusade against the physical and philosophical
poisoning of his world.
Too bad he had not been able to prevent that decay by killing
Lord Ii. He had severely underestimated the decadent trend. Now
 
388
he knew that complete isolation was not practical, and that no
single assassination could be depended on to reverse the tide of
history. He had to be more aware of the world, and work toward
its improvement.

Gradually, inevitably, the ideal would be restored-bushido,
the samurai warrior code of medieval Japan. All over the world!
Glossary
aikido [ai-KEE-doh] A martial art, strictly defensive in philosophy
and application, specializing in avoidance of brute force.
It is noted for its application of the inner power of the mind,
or ki. Aikido is extremely effective for self-defense, utilizing
wrist and arm locks, not strikes or bone-crushing techniques.
atemi-waza Judo striking techniques, special blows taught only to
black belts. Deadly.
bo A wooden staff used as a weapon.
budo [BOO-doh] The proper spirit of martial art.
bushido [BOO-shee-DOH] The way of the samurai or warrior in
Japan; roughly equivalent to European chivalry.
daimyo A feudal lord.
dan A master grade in judo, karate, aikido, and other martial arts,
usually indicated by a black belt. The highest grade achieved
is Tenth Dan, or judan; there are no living judans today. Jason
Striker is a fifth-degree black belt, or godan; Roberto Fuentes,
coauthor of this novel, is a second-degree black belt, or nidan.
dojo [Doh-joh] The exercise hall in judo, karate, and aikido. The
equivalent term in kung fu is kwoon.
gi [GEE, hard G as in Good] Short for judogi, the judo costume.
hara-kiri Literally, "belly-slitting"; formal suicide, or seppuku, accomplished
by disembowelment with a short sword. An honorable
way to die, but most uncomfortable. The hara, or belly,
 
390
was considered to be the seat of the soul, the ultimate source
of strength.
ippon [ee-PONE] One point in a match, sufficient to win. In
judo an ippon is scored by a clean throw, a thirty-second holddown,
an armlock, choke, or strangle.
ippon seoi nage The one-arm back-carry throw in judo. Essentially,
you haul your opponent's arm over your shoulder and
heave him over you so that he lands on his back.
jodo [JOH-doh] The art of fighting with sticks or short staffs.
judo [JOO-doh] Literally, the "gentle way." A leading unarmed
martial art, consisting primarily of throws, holds, and chokes
but also employing atemi striking techniques and locks against
the joints. It is distinguished from most other martial arts by
its worldwide standardization: a first-degree black belt must
meet the same criteria of proficiency and attitude in America,
Japan, or Timbuktu. Jason Striker's primary proficiency is in
judo.
jujitsu An ancient martial art, the forerunner of judo. Also spelled
jiu jitsu or ju jutsu. It faded in Japan when the feudal system
ended there.
karate [kah-RAH-teh] Literally, "empty hand." A leading martial
art consisting primarily of striking with the hands or feet or
other parts of the body, so as to subdue opposition. Since direct
application of its techniques can be dangerous, some
karatekas specialize in breaking boards or bricks with strikes of
their bare hands. Such strikes against the head or body of an
opponent are often fatal.
ki [KEE] A special inner force or power, possessed by every person
but developed by few, associated primarily with the martial
art of aikido. Stories of ki, such as those represented in this
novel, are exaggerated, but there is no question that this remarkable
force exists.
kiai [kee-AI] A battle cry, used to add strength to a technique
while dismaying the enemy. Ear-splitting.
kyoketsu-shogi A ninja two-bladed knife attached to a rope made of
391

woman's hair with a ring at the other end.
kuji-kiri The ninja's hypnotic movement of the fingers.
kung fu The Western term for the family of Chinese martial arts
consisting primarily of strikes with the feet, fists, or fingers. It
is said to be the oldest of all martial arts, the forerunner of
karate. Recent TV coverage has exaggerated the scope of kung
fu, and motion pictures and fiction have made it into virtual
fantasy, but at the root it is a formidable fighting art.
kusarigama A weapon consisting of a chain with a sickle on one
end and an iron ball on the other.
kwoon The exercise hall in kung fu, equivalent to the dojo.
kyu A lesser or student grade in judo, indicated by belts of assorted
colors: white, yellow, orange, green, blue, purple, or
brown. Piers Anthony, coauthor of this novel, is a green belt,
yonkyu, a middle grade.
manriki-kusari A weighted chain used as a weapon.
maitta A cry of surrender: "I give up!"
ninja A practitioner of ninjitsu (or ninjutsu); an expert spy or
espionage agent. Ninjitsu incorporated the medieval bushido
warrior code as well as every form of martial art known. Fu
Antos, master of ninjas, is fictional (derived from FUenteS and
ANTHOny, coauthors); but the ninjas were real, and they
performed astonishing feats.
nunchaku [nin-CHA-koo] A weapon consisting of two clubs strung
together, sometimes three. Now becoming popular in America,
but illegal in many states.
o-soto-gari The "big outside clip" in judo, in which you catch
your opponent's leg behind yours and throw him back and
down. Easy for the beginner to learn, yet effective.
randori [rahn-DOH-reel Free practice in judo, like a mock match,
in which the players strike to overcome each other without
taking it too seriously or counting points.
ronin A masterless samurai warrior.
sake [SAH-keh] Japanese rice wine, very potent.
samurai [SAH-moo-rai] The Japanese warrior, or warrior class.
 
392
Equivalent to the European knight.
saya-ate Striking the scabbard of a samurai with your own; a deadly
offense, often atoned for by blood.
seppuku Ritual suicide; hara-kiri.
shogun Hereditary commander-in-chief of the Japanese army; the
true seat of power for some centuries.
shuriken Small starlike throwing weapons used by ninja.
tonki Small throwing knives or needles used by ninja.
ukemi [oo-KEM-ee] Breakfalls. It is important to be able to take a
fall without getting hurt, so this is practiced.

