JASON STRIKER
MARTIAL ARTS
SERIES VOLUME III
 
JASON STRIKER
MARTIAL ARTS
SERIES VOLUME III
Amazon Slaughter and Curse of the Ninja
Piers Anthony and
Roberto Fuentes
 
Copyright (c) 1976, 2001 by Piers Anthony and Roberto Fuentes.
Library of Congress Number:
ISBN #: Softcover
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission
in writing from the copyright owner.
This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places and incidents either are the
product of the author's imagination or are used fictitiously, and any resemblance
to any actual persons, living or dead, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.
This book was printed in the United States of America.
To order additional copies of this book, contact:
Xlibris Corporation
1-888-7-XLIBRIS
www.Xlibris.com
Orders@Xlibris.com
CONTENTS
AMAZON SLAUGHTER 9
Chapter 1:
Feeding the Fish .....................................................11
Chapter 2:
Fun in Rio .............................................................25
Chapter 3:
Gift of Tongues ......................................................40
Chapter 4:
Mirabal's Entertainments .......................................54
Chapter 5:
Spear in the Rear ...................................................74
Chapter 6:
Wrath of the God ..................................................92
Chapter 7:
March on the Black Castle ...................................131
Chapter 8:
The Love of Oba..................................................150
Chapter 9:
Animation of the Curse ........................................182
Chapter 10:
City of the Future ................................................197
 
CURSE OF THE NINJA
and others 221
INTRODUCTION: ................................................223
Chapter 1:
Dream of Red and White .....................................225
Chapter 2:
Strange Conquests ...............................................243
Chapter 3:
Sword and Stone ..................................................257
Chapter 4:
Roofer's Affair ......................................................271
Chapter 5:
EIGHTY PER CENT .........................................290
Chapter 6:

TWO PICTURES ...............................................310
SUMMARY OF THE REMAINDER:......................315
Author's Note: ...........................................................319
KI 323
BEAST OF BETELGEUSE 324
KIAI!-HOW IT BEGAN 361
WINDBREAKER 371
Chapter 1:
Cry For Help .......................................................373
Chapter 2:
Assignment ..........................................................378
Summary of remainder: .............................................385
SORCEX 391
BIOGRAPHY
OF A TERRORIST 401
Introduction..............................................................403
Chapter 1:
Return .................................................................413
Chapter 2:
Three Misses ........................................................427
 
AMAZON
SLAUGHTER
 
Chapter 1:
Feeding the Fish
They hung the captive ninja on a wooden frame in the jungle.
He was stripped to the waist, his arms spread-eagled, his legs securely
fastened. All he could do was scream-and he would not.
"Where is your leader?" the big bald giant demanded. He spoke
in Portuguese. He was six and a half feet tall, with the physique of
a weight lifter, and an ugly scar ran down his face. His neck was so
thick it made his head look shrunken. His whole aspect suggested
brutal and fanatical strength.
The crucified ninja did not answer.
"I hoped that would be your attitude," the interrogator said.
"I've never had the chance to flay a Jap." He gestured. His assistants
took small wooden mallets and pounded on the ninja's skin.
This was obviously painful, but hardly excruciating, and the victim
did not cry out. Instead, his face assumed an expression of
repose: he had invoked his ability to turn off pain no matter what
was done to him.
"Now while we undergo our preparatory massage," the giant
 
12
said with a twisted smile, "let us review the manner of our acquaintance.
You will correct me when I make an error in fact or
speculation?"
Still the ninja ignored him. The men pounded the captive's
skin all over, methodically, going over each area again and again so
as to miss no portion. After a time they took him down and rehung
him so as to have access to his backside too. Then they proceeded
to his legs, stripping off his remaining clothing. The job took some
time, but the interrogator merely paused in his monologue to smoke
an occasional cigarette and observe.
Eventually the skin had been so thoroughly pounded that it
was bruised purple, with blackish glints. The small blood vessels
within it had been broken. The entire body gradually became a
single extensive bruise.
"First the introduction. I am Fernando Mirabal, of Spanish
descent, but quite satisfied to settle here in Brazil. In fact I am a
member of the Brazilian diplomatic corps, and my brother Ramiro
is the Director of Petrobas, the Brazilian Petroleum Company. You
are an agent of the notorious Japanese outlaw Fu Antos." He paused

as though expecting agreement, but the ninja gave no sign.
Now the blades came into play. The instruments used were
not knives, but fine steel scalpels honed razor sharp. They sliced
easily into the flesh.
"Thus it is scarcely surprising that we should meet," Mirabal
continued pleasantly. "When my brother asked my help in investigating
the disturbances occurring in our newly discovered oil
fields, I thought at once of Fu Antos-and I am pleased to verify
that your ninja chief-scoundrel thought as readily of me." He contemplated
the victim, as though fascinated by every stage of the
slow torture. "I understand Fu Antos is old, extremely old. Four
centuries, some sources claim. Oh, yes, I have researched the matter;
that is my job! And I admit to being intrigued by the supernatural,
though I can't claim to be able to practice magic myself."
He chuckled. "I hope Fu is not so ancient as to be an inadequate
adversary. I much prefer a genuine challenge."
13
They started on the extremities, slitting the softened skin carefully
at the ends of the fingers, proceeding down across the hands.
They loosened the skin at the base of each finger and pulled toward
the ends, as though removing tight gloves. Care had been
taken that no bones were broken and no vital organs damaged, so
that the victim would not expire prematurely. The individual cuts
were shallow, performed with surgical precision, so that there would
not be a disastrous amount of bleeding. It was a bit like peeling an
orange without letting any juice leak.
The undersurfaces were raw, like hamburger, bleeding slowly.
They applied a special mixture of salt and vinegar to slow the
bleeding further, rubbing it in. The man's body writhed and
strained at its restraining straps in these moments, seeming almost
ready to break its bonds. The pain was evidently excruciating, despite
the victim's self-control.
"But I digress. I came to the oil camp, then visited the nearby
Pacifico, the pacified Indian village." He laughed. "Not pacified
enough, it seems! So I made a token demonstration. The usual:
shooting a few natives, taking some hostages, borrowing a couple
of the prettier maidens for passing entertainment, explaining how
readily such a village might burn if some accident occurred. I had
hoped someone would carry word to old Fu, and it seems I was
not disappointed."
After the fingers, they turned the ninja over and worked on his
back, the easiest place. They tore great sheets of skin away, slowly,
carefully. Then they returned to the front, flaying the chest and
abdomen. They did not touch his face or neck, afraid he might
die; instead they moved down. They stripped his arms and legs,
finally coming to the buttocks.
"Except in this: my little welcome was intended for the old
Jap himself, not his hireling. Oh, you sneaked in cleverly enough;
had it not been for our special American starlight amplifiers we
would not have seen you in your black suit. But I hardly expected
you to be so readily deceived by the ploy of placing an aide in my
own bunk. You stabbed your knife into an innocent employee!
 
14
But his death was not in vain, for we surrounded that tent, employed
the floodlights, and now we have you. Beg pardon?"
For now at last the ninja screamed, as they skinned his penis
and testicles, by applying a combination pull and slice.
Mirabal smiled, seeing the victim's amazing control breaking
down at last. "It was touchy for a moment, I admit. You very
nearly did succeed in killing yourself, after you disemboweled one
of mine and split the throat of another. But again, you had not
anticipated our anesthetic dart-guns. And the delay entailed in
cutting off the victim's head-that was foolish. I realize old Fu has

a fetish about collecting the heads of his enemies, but you had the
wrong head." Mirabal touched his own head with a gesture of pride.
"No, I'm afraid you were a disappointment to me. I expected more
subtlety."
The ninja subsided as the flaying was completed. He was now
a strange looking creature, but still alive and conscious.
"Now I can still kill you quickly," the torturer said. He held
up his pistol, a Spanish Astra 8-shot 9mm able to fire every type of
9mm and 38 automatic round. He aimed it at the victim's head.
"Your pain will be over, if you talk. Otherwise-well, I think we
have several hours work, yet. There is still the head: a more delicate
operation, fraught with risks to your sensory apparatus, but
surely worth the effort. After that we might begin to disconnect
the muscles. I have always been a student of anatomy, and there
are distinct advantages in working with living material. Don't you
agree?"
Suddenly an arrow swished over Mirabal's shoulder and struck
the ninja in the chest. He was dead instantly; the shot was through
the heart.
Mirabal whirled and dropped to the ground, pointing his Astra
back the way the arrow had come. But there was nothing. His
three cohorts scrambled for cover.
There was silence. "Bugger must have slipped out while his
arrow was airborne," Mirabal said disgustedly. "Wonder why he
15
didn't aim for me?" He got up, brushing himself off. The others
rose with him.
Then one screamed and fell forward. An arrow protruded from
his back. It was a very fine bamboo shaft a yard long with a stone
arrowhead and black feathers. Mirabal whirled again, getting off a
shot, but again there was nothing.
"Get under cover, and stay there!" Mirabal rasped. "It's an
ambush, and the bastard wants to play. I'll signal the camp for
reinforcements."
He reached for his walkie-talkie-and a third arrow struck it
just as his hand touched it. He jerked his arm back.
"Cono!" he swore. "We're exposed here; they can pick us off at
will." He reached out and snatched the third arrow. "Black obsidian
head with a glasslike edge," he murmured. "Excellent craftsmanship,
not local. It seems our ninja villain has arrived." Then he
raised his voice: "When I give the signal, we'll make a break for
better cover. Right?"
There was no answer. Irritated, he looked across, and saw the
reason. His companion had an arrow sticking out of his eye. He
was dead. The third man had disappeared, and was presumably
dead too.
Now Mirabal was alone. He jumped up, grabbed the other
man's body, and slung it over himself as a shield. He had a limp,
but was so powerful that the added weight was unimportant. He
ran for cover.
Panting, he flung himself behind a huge rubber tree. "Made
it!" he gasped.
"Congratulations."
Mirabal whirled again, dropping his burden as he raised his
gun. But all he saw was a boy. "Who the hell are you?"
"I am he whom you seek."
Mirabal's bark of laughter resounded through the jungle. "Well,
then; here's death for you!" He pointed his gun-and stopped.
The boy wasn't there.
Mirabal strode forward, peering around the tree. Suddenly a
 
16
cord looped his hand, jerking the gun away. The boy stood behind
him, holding the weapon. "As you have done to my man, so shall

I do to you," the lad said.
The man aimed a mighty kick at him, a savage shot to the
head. But suddenly the boy was gone again. The foot passed
through empty air, and then the lad's hands caught the heel of the
boot and pushed upwards. Mirabal, off-balance, tried to hop back,
but the boy's toe snaked forward and hooked that other ankle,
anchoring the foot. The torturer took a brutal fall on his back. The
air whooshed out of him and for a moment his consciousness faded.
When he opened his eyes, the boy was staring down at him.
"Now," the boy said, "I will question you." His eyes seemed to
become huge, and his fingers moved in a disconcerting way. Suddenly
Mirabal recognized the pattern: it was the notorious ninja
kuji-kiri finger-hypnosis.
Mirabal tried to get up, but his body was frozen in place.
Those eyes, those devil fingers were sapping his willpower, taking
over his mind. Now he believed: this was indeed Fu Antos, lord of
the ninjas!
Fernando Mirabal tried to fight. He concentrated in an effort
to break the hypnotic hold. Sweat ran in rivulets down his body,
and he felt he was winning. He moved his head a fraction of an
inch, slowly tearing his eyes away from that devil's gaze. Now he
knew his antagonist, and was on guard; once he regained his feet . . .
The sound of gunshots passed through the jungle. The distant
birds became quiet, the wild animals paused. Even the river
alligators and caimans seemed to listen. What was happening?
Fu Antos clenched his small fist and bared his teeth in a momentary
display of fury. "I told them to wait!" he gritted.
Mirabal was abruptly freed from the compulsion. "You were
going to ambush our camp, and those rascally Indians attacked
prematurely!" he said gleefully. "I could have told you that would
happen. Those savages have no discipline at all."
But he was speaking to air. Fu Antos was gone.
*
17
It galled Fu Antos to leave the butcher, but it would take time
to deal with him properly, and right now he had to get to the
camp and untangle the mess the Indians had made. The situation
was certain to deteriorate in minutes without his guidance.
He should have used his skilled ninjas for the job, instead of
the poorly organized Indians. Well, those Indians would very
quickly learn the meaning of their exuberance. Firearms were tough
opponents.
Meanwhile, he would have to see the chore through himself,
using what he had. There was no time to fetch his ninjas, who
were widely scattered on other missions. Maybe the first shock of
failure would make the Indians realize the importance of timing
and caution.
Too bad he had not arrived in time to save his advance scout.
But of course the man had not talked, and at least he was out of his
pain. Actually, he could have killed his ninja earlier, or rescued
him after only partial flaying. But he could not abide carelessness
or a bungled job, and so the ninja had deserved the agony he had
suffered. Had the man talked, Fu Antos would have tortured him
himself. And Mirabal's monologue had been of interest, as well as
his skinning technique. Fu Antos possessed a superior technique,
but it was good to compare styles.
He had been moving rapidly through the overflow forest, a
region near the river that became seasonally flooded. Here the trees
were of medium size: palms and wild rubber trees, with massive
drooping vines that rooted in the ground to become new trunks.
His fast passage startled a flock of macaws that flew screeching
with their brightly colored plumage flashing. He breathed the
ambient odor of the jungle, savoring its naturalness. Once Japan
had been primitive like this, pleasant. Alas, no more.

Now he came to a bluff overlooking the camp. It was in a
clearing beside the great river: a cluster of tents, with a few palmthatched
and board-sided dwellings. Separate shacks for radio and
equipment stood a little apart. There was also a wooden tower for
test drilling, flanked by a jeep and a heavy truck.
 
18
The Indians' wildcat attack had been repulsed. Several dead
braves were sprawled about, along with two white men. Now the
remaining Indians were in hiding at the edge of the forest, while
the surviving government men were holed up inside the main tent.
They kept up a steady rifle fire, preventing any safe approach.
No question about it: the damage had been done. What could
have been an easy, virtually bloodless takeover, was now a difficult
problem. The element of surprise was gone.
Yet Fu Antos smiled. The camp was vulnerable; he could redeem
the situation. His eyes traveled on to the river. A boat was
there, tied at an improvised dock: a fast launch guarded by two
sharp-shooting crewmen.
Yes, he would put the fear of the ninja into these people! It
would be long before another such party intruded in this territory.
And now two of his ninjas arrived, attracted to the commotion.
They had been reconnoitering nearby, and their prompt presence
showed they had been sufficiently alert. Excellent; he had
need of them.
He summoned the Indian subchief. "Maintain harassment,"
he said in the native tongue, for he readily mastered any language
he needed to. "Delegate two men to me for special instruction."
The chief frowned. "Many are already dead. We can not go
against the guns."
The Indians, downtrodden for centuries, had been eager to
cooperate with anyone who promised to lead them out of their
repression and misery. But they hardly trusted the ninjas yet. They
had been deceived and defrauded by outsiders too often. But Fu
Antos was different; so far they believed in his magical-seeming
powers, if not in his age or motive. And his skin was yellow, not
white. So the relation between ninja and Indian was as yet juryrigged;
it needed strengthening every so often, especially at stress
points. In time it would become so firm as to be unbreakable.
Fu Antos started to twine his fingers in the kuji-kiri pattern,
but stopped. He wanted to build a more enduring affiliation, not
one based on temporary compulsion. He seized the chief 's wrist,
19
and though he looked like a mere stripling his fingers were like
steel pins driving in. "Do you question me?" He twisted, making
the chief lean forward involuntarily. "I will lead your braves to
great victory."
Cowed by the ninja lord's power, and the stares of the two
other ninjas, the chief saved face by acceding. Two Indians were
delegated, while the rest kept up a barrage of arrows and stones.
"You two," Fu Antos said, gesturing with one hand to his
ninjas. "Go upriver, swim underwater with the current to the bottom
of the boat, using hollow reeds for snorkels. Use your knives
silently to make holes in the hull. Do not let the water enter. Stuff
those holes immediately with this." He showed them a concoction
he mixed from clay and red powder he took from a vial at his waist.
"But the water devils-" one protested.
"That substance dissolves in water," the other said.
Fu Antos gestured, compelling them as he spoke. Now his
own ninjas were questioning him. "Dung of monkeys!" he swore
gently in Japanese, smiling pleasantly so the Indians would not
catch on. "Have I trained you these last twenty years only to have
you grow feeble when there is work to be done?" But he knew
what was bothering them: though they well knew of his transformation

from decrepit hulk to childlike youth, they had trouble
really believing that he was the same man. They had not known
him in his vigorous manhood, for they lacked the secret of immediate
reincarnation. So they wavered. "Smear this salve on your
bodies; the water devils will not molest you. Do not be concerned
about the boat: it will sink-when the time is appropriate."
They looked at him, comprehending his meaning. This was
the old Fu Antos, master strategist, talking! He gestured again,
and they went.
He turned to the two Indians. "Fetch arrows," he told them.
"And fine cord."
Fu Antos took from another pocket a package wrapped in cloth.
Very carefully he unwrapped it. Inside were several small glass
vials containing an opaque substance. "Tie one vial to the shaft of
 
20
each arrow," he told the arrow-Indians. "Handle them carefully-
there are demons inside." Actually it was a secret ninja concoction,
akin to the old Greek fire, but more virulent. The vials would
break on impact, releasing and spreading their contents, and once
the stuff caught fire there would be no stopping it.
Confused but amenable, the two Indians obeyed. They prepared
the arrows.
Fu Antos walked down to the river. He threw in a small packet
of herbs. The packet fell apart as the water suffused it, and the
herbs spread through the water in a murky cloud.
Soon there was an odd rippling across the water, as though
great numbers of small fish were converging. He nodded, and
turned away with a small smile of satisfaction.
By this time the boat saboteurs would be completing their
job. They were ninjas; no need to be concerned about their competence.
In a few more minutes they would swim on downstream,
leaving the boat apparently unchanged.
He returned to the bluff. Their chore completed, the two Indians
looked at Fu Antos. Unconcerned, he took his bow from the
Japanese quiver slung at his side. The quiver was made of ornate
lacquered woven rattan, obviously a fine old possession. His bow
differed from those of the Indians: its shape was peculiar to Japan,
with its hand grip about a third of the way from the bottom.
There was a small arc of the lower limb and a large arc of the upper
limb.
The Indian arrows were not made for the ninja bow, but Fu
Antos made do. He fitted one of the special arrows to the bow and
loosed it, so quickly that the Indians were amazed. It flew high
and far, and plunged into the roof of the larger tent. There was a
loud explosion, and a fountain of white fire leaped from the point
of impact, quickly igniting the canvas.
The two Indians were silent, genuinely impressed by the competence
of the shot, for Fu Antos looked like a child incapable of a
man's effort. And the explosion strengthened their faith in his magic.
Indians knew about fire, of course, but these arrows had not been
21
tarred or lit before being loosed. There must have been demons in
the bottles, as the ninja leader had said. Impressive, yes!
Fu Antos loosed another fire arrow. It struck the radio shack,
setting fire to the thatch. Smoke curled up from the roof as the
blaze spread. The occupants did not realize the hazard yet, but
they were doomed.
In moments he had fired the other buildings. As the flames
shot up, the doors burst open. The men charged out, guns blazing.
Now they had to run the gantlet of arrows between the houses
and the boat. The men made an orderly trek. But now they were
exposed, while the Indians were under cover. That went far to
equalize the disadvantage of bows against guns.

Fu Antos thought briefly of Fernando Mirabal, who should
have arrived here by now. But of course the man would not care
about his workers; he would have made directly for a larger town,
seeking reinforcements. It was no sign of cowardice to stay clear of
an adverse situation; Fu Antos would have done the same, in
Mirabal's position. Meanwhile, the workers were leaderless, and
that would only hasten their doom. The doom that Mirabal himself
would be the first to confirm, as the only escapee. There always
had to be an escapee, to establish exactly who was responsible,
to spread the warning far more effectively than the perpetrators
could.
However, the workers were better disciplined than the Indians.
There were about twenty Indians against fifteen workers, but
the Indians' marksmanship was appalling. Fu Antos realized that
he had miscalculated: at short range the Indians could bring down
a running animal unerringly, but their bows and arrows and skills
were not geared for long range accuracy. The workers, perhaps
aware of this, maintained their fire from their American carbines
and M-2 automatic rifles, with occasional blasts from a shotgun.
Even though they were firing more or less blind, the sheer volume
of lead was enough to score randomly, killing several more Indians.
The two ninjas could have eliminated the entire formation,
 
22
but Fu Antos had wanted to test out his allies in combat. They
had a long way to go.
A dozen workers made it to the boat despite the best efforts of
the Indians. "Why didn't we cut it adrift!" groaned the chief.
"Because then they would not have run the gantlet," Fu Antos
responded, as though he were the man and the chief the child,
which was true enough in its fashion. "Had they charged the jungle,
we could not have contained them."
"But now they escape!"
Fu Antos smiled. "Many will." He watched the boat's engine
start. The craft nosed out into the rippling river.
Then it began to sink, as the plugs dissolved and popped out
of their holes, letting the water pour in. Perfect timing!
The men tried to bail it out, but the task was useless. The
launch was overloaded, and there were too many leaks.
They swam for it-and suddenly the water was alive. The men
screamed and flailed madly and went under the seething surface.
White froth danced above the surface. One man jumped high in
the water, exposing half his torso. Already, white bones were visible
where parts of his face had been. A writhing tail projected
from one socket where his eyeball had been eaten.
"The water devils!" the chief exclaimed gleefully. "I have never
seen them like this!"
"I summoned them," Fu Antos said. "Demons of fire, water,
trees-all answer to me."
And the chief looked at him, believing.
Two men made it to shore. Small silver fish clung to them:
piranha. One man's leg was a solid mass of them. He fell, unable
to walk, for much of the flesh was already gone.
"Salvage those two-alive," Fu Antos said.
The chief started to protest, then reconsidered. He saw how
brutally effective the ninja lord's campaign had been. Few Indians
had been lost since Fu Antos took over, and the enemy had been
wiped out. This man who controlled demons was a valuable ally
indeed. He dispatched two warriors.
23
The two prisoners were brought to Fu Antos. One was unharmed
except for the small bites of the piranha attack. The other
had to be carried, as his leg was useless.
Fu Amos surveyed them coolly. "Your companions escaped,"

he said.
"They're all dead!" one of the prisoners cried. Then his mouth
tightened as the implication of the ninja's words sank in. If death
were escape, what was waiting for the living?
"Food for the fish," the chief murmured appreciatively.
"This is not your land," Fu Antos said to the government man.
The prisoner looked down at him. "A mere boy!" he exclaimed.
"You directed this unprovoked massacre?"
"You do not deem the live flaying of a ninja as provocation?"
"We know nothing of that!" But it was apparent the man did
know. Mirabal's expertise had not developed without practice.
"Or the flaying of the land?" Fu Antos persisted.
The man shook his head, uncomprehendingly. "We're only
prospecting for oil. Setting up to drill a test well-"
"On Indian territory?"
The man looked nervous. "We have a permit!"
Fu Antos turned to the chief. "Did your people approve any
permit?"
"No! We approved none of this. They come in, scare our animals
off, kill the fish, take our lands, our women, our lives-"
"Not us!" the oil man cried. "We're looking for oil, nothing
else. I wouldn't touch a dirty squaw."
The denial was confirmation enough. "Why oil?" Fu Antos
asked.
"Why! The world is desperately short of oil. Its value has multiplied."
"So it is for money," Fu Antos said.
"More than that! Without oil, modern industry will grind to a
halt. It's a vital resource."
"Modern industry," Fu Antos said. "This is what pollutes the
rivers and the air, making villagers die of mercury poisoning, of
 
24
cancer, of lung disease. You do this for money, so that your people
may exist like emperors while the world starves."
"You're crazy!" the man exclaimed. "We need that oil!"
"I am sane. Your culture is crazy," Fu Antos said. "I employ
my skills for moral reasons, especially my tortures. You destroy
wantonly, for greed." Then, meditatively: "And if you are denied
oil, your culture will collapse."
Another ninja appeared, running smoothly. The man was in
full uniform: reddish-black baggy jacket and trousers, split canvas
shoes, and a hood that partially masked his face.
"Master!" the newcomer cried in Japanese. "A message from
Kan-Sen by carrier pigeon."
Fu Antos accepted the paper. The message was in Japanese
symbols. Kan-Sen was Chinese, but the written language was the
same. WEAPONS EN ROUTE BY WATER. JASON STRIKER
DISPATCHED AS COURIER.
Fu Antos smiled. He needed those modern weapons, for there
were limits to what spears and arrows could do, as this engagement
had shown. As for Jason Striker-he had special reason to
bring the man here. Kan-Sen was performing well.
Jason Striker should perform even better.
Chapter 2:
Fun in Rio
The plane started in Miami, with a stopover in Caracas, then
over the great Amazon basin and very briefly over the sea again. It
circled the city of Rio de Janeiro, on a bay surrounded by mountains.
There was a lovely white sand beach right along the waterfront.
I like white beaches; they remind me of pretty girls in bikinis.
As we came closer I could see that the sidewalks were gaily
painted in stripes and patterns. I got a good view of the 130-foot
statue Christ of Corcovado atop Hunchback Mountain, itself over
2,000 feet high. It loomed out of the shantytown that I understood

housed a million people. Rio, squeezed between the ocean
and the mountains, had no urban planning; it just sprawled. A
solid wall of apartment houses and hotels marched right up to the
sand. I had been told by tourist publicity that Rio had been
founded in 1567 as a fort and naval base. It had grown!
We had to circle over the field for an hour before landing. At
last I stepped down onto the tarmac of Rio's obsolescent Galeão
 
26
airport. There were no enclosed ramps or other modern comforts;
I was no longer in rich USA.
I caught a cab that took me right to my hotel, "La Estrella,"
which translated as "The Star." It was right on Avenida Atlantica,
on the beach: a huge Hilton-style edifice, with hot running water,
a huge bed, and a tremendous color TV set in my room. A sight
more than I had expected, after the airport.
There was a balcony on Atlantic Avenue, with a view of the
Guanabara Bay, the dazzling white sand, tall buildings and clean
blue sea. Just as in my fond imagination, the area was full of beautiful
young women in bikinis, yet nearby were also several fishing
boats getting their nets ready.
Kan-Sen, my enemy collaborator, would contact me here.
I was not familiar with Brazilian social etiquette and did not
speak Portuguese, so I took the coward's way and stayed in my
room. I wished I had a telescope to help view the lithe creatures of
the beach. I'm not really a voyeur; there just wasn't much to do.
The hotel personnel spoke English, so I was able to have supper
via room service. Then I took a long steamy bath, watched parts of
shows on each of the five local TV stations, and fell asleep.
Next morning I felt rested and restless. What about Kan-Sen?
I had found no message, received no call. He was supposed to
provide me with all the information I needed: where to go, what
to do, and what my mission was. Without him I was completely
in the dark, wasting my time.
I was hardly cut out to be a secretive agent, and it galled me
tremendously to have to take orders, as it were, from my bitterest
enemy. But Fu Antos needed me.
I couldn't stay in my room all day. That would look suspicious,
and bore me to the explosion point. I should be at my dojo,
teaching my judo classes. So I acted like the tourist I was beginning
to wish I was, and went out on the beach.
It was early, with the dawn sun just flashing off the water, so
there were not many people. And I still didn't speak their language,
except in the sense that appreciation for the splendor of the
27
sunrise is universal. I'd picked up a smattering of Spanish over the
years, but Brazil is a Portuguese-speaking country. Has to do with
a Papal decision, some time back: Portugal colonized to the east of
a line through South America, Spain to the west. The east became
Brazil.
Then I saw a language that is unfortunately as universal as
beauty: violence. A buxom girl had been walking along the beach,
looking for shells or something. I was dawdling nearer the water,
half-hoping to run into her "accidentally." Two cars drove up and
parked beyond her. Two men got out of one and approached the
girl. One of them told her to come-even I could grasp that
much-and she straightened up, brushing the sand off her voluptuous
body. They talked briefly-I assumed at first he was a relative
-but then her tone became more doubtful, his more peremptory.
She started to turn away from him, and he grabbed her behind
the head with one hand and pulled her in to him. That was
the point my interest shifted from the casual to the concerned.
She did not appear to put up resistance, but drew in quite
close to him, her bosom touching his chest. They were spectacular

breasts, and he was understandably distracted as she put an arm
behind his back. Suddenly she spun into a left o goshi hip throw,
and he was flying through the air to land hard on his back.
"Beautiful!" I breathed appreciatively. To me, the elegance of a
perfectly executed judo throw is the prettiest sight of all. In theory,
a person thrown with the force upon his back will not be inclined
to renew hostilities, and the theory became fact on this occasion.
The other man made the mistake of grabbing her from behind
with arms around her waist. She bent and caught hold of one of
his feet, lifting it. He had to fall on his back. She dropped heavily
on his knee, breaking it. He screamed.
The first man had by now recovered somewhat. He tried to
hit her with his fist, a blow to the face. She blocked it with her
hand, striking the outside of his wrist and weaving her face aside.
She went in behind him and put a hadaka jime standing naked
strangle on him, bending down her face and pushing against his
 
28
shoulder. Unable to believe that a mere woman could choke him
out, he resisted. He was turning purple.
But then three more men from the second car charged up.
One caught her with a kick to the rib cage just under her left
breast. Ouch-I knew that hurt, if it hadn't broken her ribs.
By this time I was on my feet and rushing into the fray. I had
not chosen to get involved before; the girl had seemed able to
handle herself, and I knew nothing of the situation. But there are
limits. Still, it took me a few minutes to get there. You can't make
good time in loose sand when you want to.
She rolled with the kick and turned to face this new antagonist,
but the next man slapped her hard across the face. Now it
was three against one, and the man she had been strangling was
recovering. Evidently they didn't see me, since I was between them
and the sun. She fell down, and one of them kicked her hard in the
buttocks.
Then I arrived. Faster than a speeding bullet, et cetera: say
what you will, but a lady in distress sets me in motion about as
rapidly as anything. I kicked the recently strangled man hard on
the shoulder from behind, probably breaking it and putting him
out for the duration. Not very sporting, but this was not a sportive
matter. If the girl had thrown him just a bit harder the first time,
she would have been in less trouble than she was now.
That left three active men. The one who had just kicked the
prone girl's bottom tried the same on me. But I had less of a target,
and I was on my feet. He came at me from the side, and I put
one hand on his upper thigh, the other on the ankle, and moved
up on him so that his kick did not have much force. I did a sasaetsuri-
komi-ashi lifting-pull throw on his supporting foot. That is, I
propped my right foot against his left ankle and levered him over
by his raised right foot. As he fell on his back I finished him off
with a straight punch to the middle of his face that smashed his
nose.
Two to go. One tried an uppercut, but I moved my head back,
grabbed his hand at the wrist with both of mine, and pushed it
29
upward. That continued its natural motion, making his effort work
for me. Then I turned and put it under my armpit in the wakigatame
armpit hold. This is a submission lock that puts pressure
on the captive elbow, and the only sensible thing for the man
caught in it is to yield immediately. But the fool tried to resist, so
I increased my force. In the excitement of the fray, and nervous
about the last man who was charging me, I misjudged it. His arm
snapped, and he screamed in agony. I let him go; that fight was
through.
The third man looked like an ex-football linesman. He weighed

all of three hundred pounds, and he tried a hard tackle. He rushed
in low, first attempting to butt me in the stomach. It could have
been most effective against an unprepared man. But I took both
his arms from above and snaked my hands over his shoulders and
under his chest, linking my own fingers. Then I threw myself backwards,
again utilizing my opponent's impetus. My head pressed
into his upper back, serving as a fulcrum, and he flew over my
back to land with terrific force on the sand. Fortunately for him,
he knew how to take a fall, but he had lost much of his incentive.
A three-hundred-pound landing is a rough one, no matter how
experienced the man is. He got up and staggered back toward the
cars.
Now, for the first time, I got a good look at the girl's face-
and suddenly I knew why she had seemed familiar. "Dulce!" I
exclaimed.
I had visited Cuba once, in my capacity as trainer of the American
judo team competing in Havana. I had met Dulce on the
beach, seemingly by accident. She was a militiawoman, perhaps
assigned to keep an eye on me, but she was also great company.
She was fascinated by judo and judokas, and by me too, if I had
not misread the signals. I knew she was a dedicated Communist,
but she had never imposed her political views on me, and I liked
her too. Not merely for her appearance; she was a smart, competent
woman with a good personality and a flair for language. She
could speak English like a native, as well as French and Spanish
 
30
and Portuguese and for all I knew several others. I could see that
she had also been working on her judo, for she had put it to good
use. Actually, I think judo is good for any woman. Maybe some
day the world will be completely safe, with no violence anywhere;
meanwhile it is smart to know self-defense.
Dulce and I had not had any love affair. Perhaps it would have
come to that, but our acquaintance had been abruptly terminated
by events not of our making. I had not seen her again-until now.
Male that I am, I immediately saw the potential for converting
my idle waiting time into real pleasure. But I approached the
matter with a bit of natural caution. After all, her interest in me
could have faded; my removal from the scene had been abrupt and
unexplained, and she might have harbored a natural resentment.
"Should we make a report to the police? An unprovoked attack like
this-"
"No-no police!" she said quickly. "These men are the police."
My jaw dropped. "What?"
"I will explain another time," she said. "Now I am afraid to
return to my room."
My face must have shown my too-good-to-be-true excitement,
for she took my arm, laughing. "You disappeared in a street brawl,
and you reappeared in one, like a genie of violence. It is coincidence,
our meeting here, but how glad I am to see you! I know you
would not deceive me."
"Never!" I agreed. "Our politics may differ, but-"
"I am on a private mission for my government, nothing to do
with you." She glanced sidelong at me. "Unless you were sent to
intercept me?"
"No," I said. "I'm here on business of my own, helping a-a
friend." Fu Antos was not exactly my friend, at any rate not in the
usual sense, but that was too complicated to explain. "I had no
notion you were here."
"I believe you. So we trust each other."
"Yes." And I did trust her. She would not be mixed up in dirty
31
politics-not the lying, killing kind-even though she did work
for the Communist government of Cuba. She would not lie to me,

because she was not that type of person. "About the manner we
parted, before-"
"Do not be concerned. Fidel told me you were breaking up an
international drug-smuggling operation, and could not blow your
cover."
Just like that, the Communists had covered for me! But I suppose
the cat will cover for the mouse, if the cat has reason. I knew
Fidel would as readily send an assassin after me, if it suited his
convenience. But we had no quarrel at the moment. So I took
Dulce to my room. No one seemed to notice or care. And it was a
real pleasure to speak English freely again.
But caution did not desert me. I knew she had a mission to
accomplish, and she knew I had one too. These missions obviously
could get us killed. It was just possible-not likely, but possible-
that my room was bugged. I didn't know how such things were in
Brazil, and could not openly inquire. So we had to pretend that
this was merely a pickup: girl is mugged on beach, man who once
knew her rescues her, man gets reward.
The irony was that I would gladly have settled for the script as
reality, and looking at her, I knew she felt the same. We would
have to do what we both desired-and thereby cheapen it distressingly.
What a waste!
But she was injured. There was the saving grace. A valid pretext
not to perform-until the time was right.
"Let me help you," I said.
"No-it is not bad," she demurred.
I drew her into the bathroom. "Come on. I'll take care of it."
The bathroom was huge, with a sunken black marble tub like
a small swimming pool and a deep orange rug on the floor and a
monstrous wall mirror. Last night all this opulence had embarrassed
me; now I was glad for it.
"I think I got hit here," she admitted, pointing to her left
breast.
 
32
"Brute kicked you; I saw it," I said. "Any ribs broken?"
"I don't think so," she said. But she winced as I touched the
place. Then I saw a small stain of blood seeping through.
She stood unresisting as I undid her bathing suit. It was one of
those tight one-piece affairs, so I had to peel it off her upper torso.
Her breasts were exposed, and as I had strongly suspected, they
were completely authentic. I favor breasts of any size, but these
were classics.
The bruise was on the left side just below the breast.
"You're lucky," I said. "His foot bounced off your rib, just
breaking the skin. A little higher and to the front-" I paused, for
this reminded me of a real breast injury I had once seen, a brokenbottle
savage, and that reminded me of Chiyako, the love that
would always be with me.
I shook off that memory. I could not bring the dead back to
life. I soaked a towel in hot water and sponged off the bruise. It
was ugly but not bad. To clean around it sufficiently, I had to wipe
off some of Dulce's breast, too, a necessary but delightful task.
She might have pulled away, expressing affront. She didn't.
She made a little sound that might have been pain but wasn't. "I
am here to contact the urban guerrillas," she murmured in my ear
as though they were words of love.
"You don't have to tell me," I whispered back. "In fact, I don't
want to know."
She shook her head, while her hands drew me down to the rug
with her. I realized that she was undressing me, and it had an
electrifying effect. This was hardly the ideal spot, but if that was
what she wanted-! "I must tell you, for now you have helped me,
and they will never believe you are not my contact."

"Mmmm," I agreed. I had become involved with her, in more
than one sense. Apparently she did not hold my sudden prior
absence against me, and was quite ready to pick up where we had
left off. Marvelous!
"I brought much money-half a million American dollars,"
she said, indicating her handbag, that I had not noticed before.
33
All women had handbags; why notice them? Especially when there
was so much else about a woman to notice.
"Half a what?" I yelped, abruptly realizing what she had said.
"Make love, not noise," she said, putting her forefinger across
my lips. We were both pretty well undressed now. In one way I
was surprised that she came on so warmly, so fast; in another way
I wasn't. She had thought a lot of me, in Cuba, and now we would
be together only briefly before our separate missions carried us
away as carelessly as they had brought us together. So she was
taking immediate advantage of the opportunity, as was I.
"Yes, that was what they were after," she said. "They must
have ransacked my room, looking for it, then come after me directly.
I was supposed to meet my contact on the beach, give him
the money, help the local group get properly organized. But he
was late, or maybe they got him before coming after me."
I saw it now. Pretty girl collecting shells on beach, young man
strikes up conversation. Only he hadn't showed. The police, evidently
tipped off by some informer, had come instead. I wasn't
really sorry to see the Communist plot broken up; Latin America
already had too much violence. But I had gotten involved.
"But if those were the police," I asked, "why didn't they just
arrest you? These things happen all the time. International incidents,
spying, deals. Don't they usually just usher the agent out
quietly?"
"Perhaps. But they wanted the money. If I were dead, they
could deny there ever was any money, and who should know otherwise?
My government would never admit to it, of course. It is in
American dollars so that they cannot be traced; they incriminate
no one, and can be spent easily. So the Death Squad-"
"Death Squad?" I whispered in her delicate ear as I slid my
knee along her smooth thigh. "What's that?"
Now her lips caressed my ear lobe. "You do not know about
them?"
I shifted position, kissed her on the mouth en route, and found
her other ear. If this were a game, I liked it; if it were only a cover
 
34
for shop talk, I still liked it. "All I know is that five thugs attacked
you, tried to kill you, or at least beat you up. You say they were
police."
She smiled, stretched, winced as she felt her bruises, then slid
her body across mine in amazing stages. First her leg twined over
mine like the lead-in for the yoko guruma sacrifice throw; then her
warm hips and abdomen rolled on mine in a simulated uki-goshi
hip throw (though that is normally initiated from a vertical position!);
then one breast followed the other in a pneumatic dance
across my chest like a tate shiho gatame four-quarter holddown. At
last her lips commenced their electrifying trek, kissing their way
from one side of my neck to the other in the most stimulating
strangle I ever experienced.
When she reached my ear, she let the rest of her body subside.
My own could hardly be described as doing the same. She snuggled
in for a paragraph-sized explanation. I tried-I really tried!-to
pay attention. To her words.
"Here in Brazil, many people commit crimes yet escape punishment.
Notorious gangsters get off because no one dares testify
against them. Corrupt politicians use their leverage to cover up

their foul dealings. Businessmen cheat the public and hire highpriced
lawyers to keep the law off. Everyone knows these things,
yet no one acts. Except the Death Squad. They-"
I heaved, unable to lie still any longer lest I burst. My mouth
caught her ear as another organ found other lodging. "Vigilantes!
Now I understand. They take the law into their own-"
But now she was moving too. Conversation ceased as our torsos
interlocked ecstatically. There was an obstruction, and I had
my verification that despite Dulce's proficiency and enthusiasm I
was the first to proceed this far with her. She was a "Senorita," a
maiden, and she had evidently saved it for me: a signal compliment,
considering she could not have known whether we would
ever meet again. She was so hot inside it was as though my member
were burning. "Wait! Wait!" she breathed. "Not now." But it
was now, and the barrier was down.
35
Her legs crossed over the small of my back as we rolled over, as
if she were trying a do-jime scissors strangle, and her heels kicked
an erotic tatoo over my kidneys. My eye caught the action in the
mirror, and it was some effect.
Deeper, deeper. I buried my face in her brown hair, so silky
and clean smelling, and wondered irrelevantly why she wasn't wearing
her glasses. She had always worn them, in Cuba. My mind
does that: summoning inconsequential distractions at times I least
wish it. "I never dreamed it could be so good," she said, and I felt
like a heel for my wandering thoughts.
Well, if this bathroom were bugged, I hoped the bugs were
getting a good eyeful. There was nothing fake about this. "It's
good, all right," I mumbled somewhat awkwardly, sounding insincere
when I damn well was sincere.
She blinked her eyes several times, and I thought she was starting
to cry. Had I blown it?
"Can you see if my contact lenses are in place?" she asked me.
"I haven't used them long, and this excitement-"
So that explained the glasses. I looked into her eyes. "I see a
little edge of something, transparent," I said.
"That's it. Just slipped aside." She laughed-which was quite
an effect, since I had not yet withdrawn. "In all that battle with
the death squad they stayed in place, but you were so energetic
that-"
"All right!" I mumbled, embarrassed.
In due course we dressed. Dulce rang room service and ordered
a meal for us both, since she spoke the language. Of course
it could have been done in English, but I was sure the food would
be better in Portuguese, if that makes any sense.
I was not mistaken. Dulce did it up proper. We started with a
plate of Brazilian appetizers: garlicky unshelled fried shrimps, white
hearts of palm, lettuce, tomatoes, black olives, Portuguese sardines
and sausages. I nibbled, knowing that I could stuff myself without
ever getting past the appetizers.
Then an entree of bossa nova crisp deep-fried chicken loaded
 
36
with garlic and served with flavorful white rice and a bowl of delicious
purplish black beans resting in their own souplike sauce.
There was also wine. I'm not a drinker, but at social events like
this I find it hard to decline. So I accepted what Dulce offered:
Portuguese Casals Garcia Vinto Verde, a clear, almost astringent
green wine. And of course black coffee, so popular in Latin American
countries.
For dessert we had guava paste with hard white cheese and
some fruit I didn't recognize.
Then Dulce clapped her hand to her forehead. "I forgot the
ice cream!" she cried.

I kneaded my full stomach. "Don't worry about it. I couldn't
eat another bite of anything."
"That's the problem!" she said, genuinely upset. "You love ice
cream, and now you can't eat any, even if I order it."
She remembered our days in Cuba, where my sinful weakness
for ice cream had manifested. They had had such good ice cream!
But it hardly seemed worth such fretting now. Then I realized
what was really bothering her.
Dulce didn't say so directly, but we both knew that our impromptu
date was ending. She was grateful for my help against
the Death Squad thugs, and glad for the chance to entertain me
her way, but she had a mission. She would have to try again to
make contact with her guerrilla group. And of course I was still
waiting for Kan-Sen's call. So this was it: we would finish our meal,
and perhaps spend the afternoon together, but that was all. Sad,
but necessary. But we couldn't talk about it openly, so we talked
about ice cream. Psychologically, I believe this is called transfer.
Now I felt dejected about missing that ice cream.
Dulce got up to go to the bathroom, and abruptly sat down.
"What's the matter?" I asked.
She passed her hand over her face. "Maybe I ate too much, or
drank too much. We don't get wine like this in Cuba, anymore."
"Here, I'll help you," I said, standing.
Then I felt it. An incipient dizziness, not that of wine. Some
37
sort of drug. It had hit me later than her, because I was larger; we
had eaten the same meal.
There was a forceful rapping on the door.
Dulce looked at me, realizing. "The Death Squad!"
"We don't know that!" I said, moving unsteadily to the door.
"Probably just a routine-"
The rapping came again, loud, peremptory. "Open up! It's
the police!" a voice called.
Suddenly I was nervous. Police-Death Squad. Much the same,
here.
"Don't open it!" Dulce cried, rising-and fell on her face on
the table, spilling her remaining coffee.
But in my drug-muddled state I felt it better to answer the
summons. If it were innocent, good; if not, I wanted to fight before
I passed out. I had no weapon, and surely they were armed. I
cast about, and spied a spray bottle of deodorant. Hmm-if it
worked for James Bond . . . I picked it up.
I steeled myself against the drug and opened the door. I half
hoped I would find Kan-Sen outside, or even Fu Antos, masquerading
as police. I was disappointed.
There were four men in police uniforms. They had drawn guns.
They did not stand on ceremony. "You are under arrest," one said
in passable English, and grabbed my wrist. He brought out a set
of handcuffs.
I was hardly in condition to resist effectively, but this did not
strike me as normal procedure. They hadn't even asked my name!
Then I got a look at the last man in line, and recognized him. He
was huge, with a scar on his face; I had fought him once before, in
New York City, and knew him for my enemy. I don't have such
sharp memory for faces, ordinarily, but he was something special.
The sight of him temporarily cleared my head; I knew my life was
in peril.
The bracelet locked in place about my left wrist. I grabbed
that wrist with my right hand, jerked it out of the man's grasp,
and struck upward with my elbow. I augmented the blow by push-
 
38
ing against my own closed fist, transmitting extra power to the
elbow. His chin received a considerable jolt.

Then I swung the loose handcuff like a flail across the second
man's head, making him drop the pistol. And up against the third
man's face. They had given me quite a close-quarters weapon.
Ordinarily I wouldn't try combat against armed men, knowing
the odds were greatly against me. But in this case I knew I was
in trouble, and the snapping of the handcuff on my wrist had
caused them to relax. Thus my instant, explosive action caught
them by surprise.
Now I came up against the giant, and I knew he was more
formidable than the other three combined. I discovered I still held
the spray bottle in my left hand; in fact I had pushed against it,
not my fist. Well-
I depressed the stud on top, aiming it at the giant's face. A
thin mist spurted out. In a Bond movie it would have blasted
forth to blind him; with me it merely made a small sweet-smelling
cloud that bothered no one. The pressure was low. Just my luck; as
a weapon it was ludicrous.
The giant looked at the feeble spray. His mouth cracked open.
Laughter erupted like gas from a volcano. Then he raised his gun.
I had no choice. I attacked. I feinted with the handcuff, so
that he jerked the weapon out of position, then I clipped him on
the chin with my open right palm. The slap was not hard enough
to do him damage. That put me in position, and I did an o soto
gari leg sweep on him. He stepped back, resisting-but he was on
the landing at the top of the stairs, and his foot came down on air.
He had to fall.
I had been lucky; I knew it. Probably the man had known I
was drugged, and had not anticipated effective action. He would
have been correct, had I not been galvanized by my sudden recognition
of him.
He cracked his head on the wall as he landed, and lay still,
strewn across the stairs.
My dizziness returned full force as the excitement of combat
39
abated. I staggered along the landing. I started to fall, saw the
deep well of the staircase before me, clutched at the rail. I started
down, missed a step-and the giant's leg tripped me. I twisted as
though brought down by a leg throw myself. But below me was
no practice mat. Just a fuzzy descent.
I saw the steps come at my face. I ducked my head, taking a
roll. It was an automatic reflex, a good one.
I never felt the impact.
 
Chapter 3:
Gift of Tongues
Dulce woke with a splitting headache. Her tongue felt so swollen
that there was hardly room for it in her mouth, and there was
a metallic taste. Her awareness was fuzzy, her muscles leaden, and
she could not coordinate well.
A man was slapping her in the face with a wet towel, bringing
her to. He was thin, pockmarked by smallpox, and wiry. His skin
was very dark; he was a Caboclo or copper-colored mulatto derived
from white, black and Indian ancestry. Probably a peasant from
the interior, she judged; illiterate, come to the more progressive
coast to make his fortune. And winding up as a typical Death
Squad thug.
"Wake up, bitch!" the man said in Portuguese. "I want you
alert and squealing for this."
She understood him. She had a certain gift of tongues, and
spoke and read English, Spanish, Portuguese, French, some Japanese
and some Russian. But she didn't care to advertise this ability
at the moment.
41
She looked about. She was in a modern wooden house, on a

big old wooden bed. This was evidently a domicile of the upper
middle class; the room was big and airy, but a bit rundown in the
furnishings. There was a window, and through it she could see the
branches of a tree, so she knew she was on the second floor. No
doubt this was a liberated house whose former owner had died of
indigestion: a mixture of too much anti-government politics and
lead. This was part of an estate; had there been near neighbors, she
would have been gagged so as not to alert them.
She was in the clothing she had worn while dining with Jason,
but now it was soiled and torn. A summer outfit: black skirt reaching
to her knees, white off-the-shoulder blouse. Not much protection.
The thug's hands were pawing over her body, tugging at her
waistband. "God, what boobs!" he panted, his breath hot upon
her face, smelling of Cachaca, cheap rum. His intent was obvious;
he meant to take what had been put in reach.
Dulce remained woozy from the drug despite her mental awareness.
She lacked physical strength; she would not be able to handle
him unless she could score a kick to the groin, and that was problematical
because her feet were tied. A rope bound her ankles together,
and another her wrists before her. It was a signal of her
drugged confusion that she had not noticed this before. She was in
a Death Squad stronghold, and she would be lucky if only one or
two men raped her and let her live. Yet she was so dopey that all
she wanted to do was go back to sleep. Every time she tried to
move her head she suffered the waves of pain of a migraine headache.
She could neither coordinate nor think straight.
The thug jammed one sweaty hand on her knee, forcing her
legs apart. She tried to bring them together again, levering against
the rope on her ankles, but he already had his knee there like a
doorstop. Her reactions were so slow! If only the lingering traces of
the drug weren't so debilitating!
She concentrated, trying to clear her head so that she could at
least consider alternatives. There seemed to be only two: relax and
 
42
accept it, or try to fight and get it the hard way. It was an even bet
that this man would prefer the latter. How could she struggle,
except by thrashing about, in the process making her breasts bounce
and her knees spread wide and her torso move against him? He
might hurt her to make her scream even if she tried to accommodate
him. Or rape her, then torture her, trying to get as many
kinds of kicks as he could.
Of course she could try to turn him, off by belching, blowing
snot out of her nose and wetting her skirt; some anti-rape authorities
(men, naturally!) recommended that. But the kind of man
who would rape a drugged and bound woman would be likely to
have other kinky notions, and might well be doubly excited by her
incontinence. In fact, the authorities who advised such things might
actually be catering to their own suppressed fantasies: the voyeurism
of the printed page, the scatological image.
In which case she might do best to take it easy, letting him do
with her as he would, hoping he took enough time so that her
body could throw off the remaining effect of the drug. She did not
want to get raped, but it was not, in the ultimate analysis, a fate
worse than death. She had accommodated a masculine member
before, a much better one than this lout's.
Jason, what have I brought upon you? she thought, knowing that
he too had been drugged and captured. She should have cussed
him out and sent him away, rather than betray him into the hands
of the Death Squad like this.
"Liven it up, bitch!" the man said, shaking her again. He was
frustrated because the rope that tied her hands prevented him
from getting her clothes off readily. He had her blouse ripped
open in the front and her skirt hiked up to her waist, but her

panties and bra resisted his clumsy, overeager fingers. He yanked
again at the bra, and this time it slid up so that her breasts popped
out below it, making him suck in his breath in awe. "Scream!
Fight! Think I want Alberto to think I'm a pantywaist, a Maricon?"
Unless there were after all a third alternative-
Now his sweaty fingers caught inside her panties and ripped
43
them open at the crotch, giving her a rasping goose in the process.
Too bad she had no teeth down there, she thought. But she forced
a smile to her face.
"What's your hurry, mister?" she murmured in Portuguese. "A
strong, handsome man like you . . ."
The man paused. Sometimes those least deserving of praise
were most susceptible to it. This ugly bastard was quite ready to
believe that he was God's gift to womankind, and that every vagina
longed to have his penis lodged in it. Still, he was naturally
suspicious of her sincerity. "So?"
He ran one callused palm up inside her thigh. Dulce writhed
and moaned in simulated pleasure. Her head was clearing nicely;
she was almost ready to act. "If you would only let my arms go so
I could hold you."
He brought out his hunting knife and brought it toward her
hands. But then he stopped. "You think to make a fool of me!" he
snapped. "You don't need arms for love. Legs, maybe, but not
arms."
Scratch one ploy. If he had released her arms-but perhaps
something could still be salvaged. "Legs, yes," she agreed.
But, canny still, he refused. "Just spread your knees; that is
enough."
Dulce spread her knees wide. His eyes almost popped as he
peered through her ripped panties. He poked his finger in as if to
see whether it was real.
"Kiss me, lover," she said, beckoning him down with her eyes.
He was happy to oblige. A kiss, at least, was no risk. Now he
had access to her crotch and breasts and mouth, all at once, and
she was still safely tied. A rapist's dream! His beard-stubbled face
dived onto hers for a hungry, smeary contact. His suddenly-heavy
body almost crushed out her breath.
"Hurry it up in there, Claudio!" a voice called from outside.
So there was another thug in range.
Prodded by that, Claudio took down his trousers and shorts
and dropped down to embrace her more fully. But her bound
 
44
hands got in his way, by no coincidence, half masking her breasts.
He got up angrily, drawing his knife again. "You Cuban bitch,
you are going to feel what a real man feels like! Your Cuban males
are way overrated as lovers." And he cut the rope between her
hands, freeing them.
He was of course a fool, but she could understand it. These
Macho Brazilians were tough men who did not believe any woman
could handle one of them. Obviously the ones she had fought at
the beach had not wanted to lose face by admitting her combative
skills; they would have laid the blame on Jason Striker, a known
martial artist. So this man had no warning, and the irony was that
the drug made her almost as helpless as he thought her to be. Even
with her hands free, she could not resist him very effectively. He
had been remarkably cautious until now, but the sheer lure of her
body had overwhelmed him.
What was it about men that made them such suckers for female
flesh? No woman would have acted this way. Well, at least it
was an equalizing force. She would play it for all it was worth.
"Call that a kiss?" Dulce demanded as she caught her gasping
breath. It was his weight, not his sex appeal, that made her breath

short, but she didn't say that. "Where's your tongue?" She wrapped
her weak arms about his neck.
"So you want it that way!" Claudio said. "I'll show you my
tongue!" And he thrust the slimy tobacco-stained thing deep into
her mouth.
Dulce's jaws closed. With all her strength she clamped her
teeth down on that tongue, savagely grinding them together as
though severing a chunk of raw meat. Which was exactly what she
was doing.
The man screamed: a strangled, stifled sound from the depths
of his body. He jerked back his head, but Dulce held fast, her
fingers locked together behind his head, holding it down while
she chewed remorselessly through that living morsel. His struggles
only magnified his agony. Blood welled from the expanding wound,
45
its warm and salty thickness passing into her mouth, forcing her
to swallow.
Claudio grabbed her by the shoulders and rolled desperately
off the bed. They both fell to the floor, but Dulce was on top of
him now, still crunching away at his tongue. With her hands weak
and her feet tied, it was the only effective hold she had, and she
dared not let it go. Now the blood was leaking down into Claudio's
own throat, choking him. He tried to scream again, but it was
hardly more than a bubbly gurgle.
"Hey, do not damage her too badly," Alberto called from below.
He thought the stifled screaming was Dulce's. "The boss wants
to interrogate her. You'll get us both in trouble."
She would be glad to give the boss a similar turn, if she could
arrange it, only hoping the boss's tongue tasted better. At last
Claudio's organ severed all the way. Dulce's head snapped back as
the strands of flesh parted. She spat out the tongue.
Claudio, half delirious with pain, got one hand up and hit her
in the face. He was too close, and his eyes were screwed closed
against his agony; he could not generate enough aim or momentum
to really hurt her. He grabbed, and caught her by one elbow.
He hauled her down, his eyes now opening, blazing with murder.
She was still too weak and hampered to balk him. She had hoped
he would lose consciousness so that she could get at his knife and
cut herself loose. No such luck. He got his hands around her throat
and squeezed savagely. The grip was so fierce that it cut off air and
blood together; in seconds she would succumb.
She drew back her hips, bending her knees so that her heels
touched her buttocks. Then she bucked her hips forward with all
the force she could muster. Her bony structure smashed against
his crotch. Because he was poised, now, half above her, having
wrestled her around while choking her, his genitals hung forward,
exposed. The impact felt like the flattening of eggs.
Claudio emitted one final scream of doubled agony and collapsed,
his hands falling away from her neck. He was unconscious,
finally.
 
46
His pants were draped across a chair. His gun was with them.
But right now she needed the knife, to free her legs.
"You've had enough time, Claudio!" the other yelled from outside
the door. "I'm coming in!"
Oh, God! If Alberto caught her now, she would be helpless!
No time to get the knife and cut herself loose; she had to have that
gun now.
She pushed herself to her feet and lunged for the chair. But
her dazed reactions betrayed her; she forgot her feet would not
separate. She crashed headlong into the chair, sending pants and
gun flying. She scrambled on hands and knees, pawing through
the tangle. Where was that gun?

The door burst open, showing a gross fat Branco da terra, a
dark-faced mulatto. He was proud and vain, with curly black hair
slicked down with perfumed pomade. He wore an open-necked
shirt with a golden Figa: a little model of a human left hand closed
into a fist, the thumb sticking up between the first and second
fingers. A good-luck charm.
He blinked; it was dark in here, and the sunlight outside was
bright. This was a break for her, but it would grant her only seconds.
Now her fingers found the metal, but she still had to get it
out of the holster, with her hands not cooperating, and then how
could she aim it? She had to steady herself.
"We are down here," she called. "I have a gift for you. Right
there on the floor before you."
Alberto did not know his companion was unconscious; he
thought this was merely the conclusion of a love scene so violent it
had finished on the floor. He stooped to pick up the object.
It was the bloody tongue.
"What is this?" he demanded, casting it aside and wiping his
hand off on his shirt.
"The tongue of an ass," she said. "See, your friend is dead."
"What!" He strode forward, his eyes adjusting. He caught hold
of Dulce and rolled her off Claudio's clothing, realizing the situation.
"Bitch, I'll kill-"
47
But as she rolled, the pistol she gripped came up. She pulled
the trigger. It fired. The bullet struck him in the leg, and he dropped
to his knee, cursing.
She was cursing too, inwardly. Damn this inadequacy of her
body! She had always been a dead shot, and now she was firing like
a duffer. She fired again, and this one caught him in the thigh. He
fell almost on top of her, and the third bullet plowed through his
stomach. Then his collapsing weight shoved the gun out of her
hands.
But the job had been done. Dulce squirmed around until she
got the knife. Then she severed her ankle bonds. She stepped over
the bleeding, writhing body of the mulatto to freedom.
What now? Her cover had been blown and her money was
gone. Not all of it, fortunately; half a million dollars was quite a
stack, even in twenty dollar bills. She had carried fifty packs of
fifty bills each with her, or $50,000. The rest was safe with a friend
who thought it was feminine baggage. But still, a formidable loss.
And because of her, her friend and lover Jason Striker had been
captured or killed by the Death Squad.
Dulce was not easily defeated. She did not collapse in tears.
She put herself together as well as she could, putting on Claudio's
pants and finding an unbloody man's shirt in the closet. Not a
good fit at all, especially across the hips, but it would have to do.
It wasn't as if she were in any fashion show.
The Brazilian Revolutionary Movement had never made contact
with her, but she still had a backup name. Maybe that too
had been betrayed to the Death Squad thugs, but she had to risk
it. Why would they have saved her for interrogation, if they had all
the answers already? And it was the only way she could help Jason
-if it were not already too late.
She headed for an address within one of the city's favelas, not
far from the Copacabana Beach where she had met Jason Striker.
The Revolutionists had been supposed to send a representative
from the urban guerrilla unit to the beach to pick her up, but the
 
48
Death Squad had stopped that. Now she would have to take the
initiative, and that was less pleasant.
Brazil was a marvelous land, and Rio de Janeiro was a lovely
city. But the striking contrasts in the country's geography, that

ranged from the magnificent mountain peaks to the burning deserts
to the rain forests of the Amazon Basin were mirrored in the stark
economic contrasts of its peoples. Brazil was a country of the very
rich and the very poor, and they were often in close proximity.
The favelas were the slums. They had begun around the turn
of the century when soldiers had found themselves without employment.
So they camped on a hill covered with the favela wildflowers.
When they came to Rio, these original "flower" soldiers
took over any land that wasn't occupied and settled in dense shack
colonies, bringing the name with them. Through the decades, the
vicissitudes of economics caused alarming growth in these slums.
In some cities, half the population lived in the sprawling favela
colonies. Even in new Brasilia, the fabulous capital city, slum
shantytowns developed faster than the ultra-modern buildings.
The poor workers could not afford to commute from distant suburbs
to their jobs in the center cities, so had to squat wherever
they could.
What Brazil needed, Dulce thought as she moved along, was a
People's Revolution, as in China and Cuba. Only then would the
wealth be redistributed, this abject squalor abolished. No longer
would starving children beg in the streets outside churches glittering
with gold. And of course this was her mission: to bring salvation
to Brazil, and eventually to all Latin America. One glorious
year, perhaps soon, Communism would dominate the Western
Hemisphere, as it did the East.
She smiled. Of course her friend Jason Striker might have a
different view. He was politically naive. So many western men were
like him, basically amateur in sex and economics. She had a certain
nostalgic fondness for that innocence. Well, when things were
finally righted in the Colossus of the North, the U.S. of A., she
49
would take care of Jason, and he would be happier and better
informed in both areas than ever before.
But first she had to save him from the much more immediate
threat posed by the ruthless contemporary capitalism. He was likely
to be tortured, and probably he would not even see the connection
between that and her mission: her cause would abolish torture
too. (Well, all but necessary torture.) But it was a lesson that
was all too likely to cost him his life, and she couldn't allow that.
Jason was ignorant, but he was a good man.
She came to the park in the southern section of the city, appreciating
its beauty. This was Rodigo de Freitas lake. Once this
very region had supported Rio's most notorious Favela of
Catacumba, where some five thousand poor families had lived.
Twenty percent of the residents had had criminal records, half of
all dope peddlers arrested lived there, and more children under
one year of age died in that single slum than in all the rest of Rio.
Yet many of the denizens had refrigerators and television sets.
Catacumba was cleared by the authorities in 1970-but though
some better housing was provided, it was up to 25 miles out of
town, making it impossible for the people to get to work in the
city. Thus they were unemployed, and had to be evicted, and new
favelas replaced the old ones, sprouting up like mushrooms. Nearly
a quarter of Rio's population still lived in them. The main difference
was that the favelas were no longer along tourist routes.
Dulce shook her head. The Capitalists simply refused to admit
the magnitude of the problem, or to do anything about it. It
was no answer to bulldoze a slum without providing a better and
realistic alternative lifestyle for the inhabitants. What was needed
was an entirely new social structure, as in Cuba.
She scouted the area carefully, decided she was not being
watched, and made an unobtrusive detour to her friend's house.
There she picked up another $50,000 in a shopping bag. She
spread some ripe fruit on top to conceal it. Her friend, having no

knowledge of Dulce's mission, insisted that she get better clothing,
and so she donned a conservative dress and bound her hair
 
50
into an almost masculine effect. She could not afford conspicuous
femininity, where she was going.
Now on to the favela. At first glance, from a distance, it was
like a pastel-painted jewel nestled into the mountainside, an enchanted
subcity; but as she got closer, the enchantment vanished.
It was a densely packed mass of hovels carrying the effluvium of
raw garbage. As she entered it she tried to avoid glancing up nervously
to spy advance warning of the slops that were tossed out the
windows. There was no sanitation here. Children played barefoot
amid the rubbish, stirring up great clouds of flies. Dogs and pigs
rooted through the mess, adding their dung to it. Women carried
cans of water on their heads from the single pump, much as in
Biblical days. Not that Dulce had any fondness for the Bible, being
a good Communist atheist, and if there were a God, how could
He have tolerated this human degradation?
"Well, now!" a voice exclaimed beside her. Dulce jumped nervously,
conscious of her bag of money. It was a man leaning in a
ramshackle doorway. He wore a big-brimmed hat, an oversized
sport coat, and he was cleaning his nails with a gleaming knife.
It was a Malandro, the favela's special breed of sharpie. Tough,
cynical, and completely unscrupulous, this type was sheer trouble.
Dulce went on without comment, affecting not to have noticed
him. But she couldn't get away with that; the man stepped
out, caught up, and reached one dirty arm around to block her
passage. "I don't know you, pretty doll; give me a kiss."
He thought she would be flattered by his pass. Many hovelwomen
were, knowing nothing better. It would be impossible to
turn him off gently.
She kicked backward, spiking his shin, then turned to catch
his black hair under the hat. She hauled his head down to meet
her rising knee with a hard crack. Then she shoved him back against
the shack and walked on as if nothing had happened, her bag of
money undisturbed. He would not follow her soon.
She'd better find her address quickly, or she'd be mobbed.
Nothing like this could remain secret very long in the favela. She
51
approached a little boy who was chewing on a stick as though to
extract some nourishment from it.
"Please, do you know where is the house of Maria Carolina?"
That was the code name for the contact, to protect her from the
authorities. Not that they were likely to be fooled long.
The boy merely stared.
Dulce took out a banana from her bag and proffered it. "It is
at the bottom of the hill, near the well, painted red," she said,
dangling the fruit before him. "Surely you know?"
The boy snatched the fruit and pointed. Dulce thanked him
and proceeded. She hoped she had enough fruit to get her there.
Sometimes food was more precious than money.
She did manage to find it, thanks to the color. Maria Carolina
was a Santauro, a female witch doctor, and her house was bright
red in honor of Santa Barbara.
Dulce hailed the occupant. "Yes?" a resigned woman's voice
answered. Dulce stepped through the filthy door curtain.
It was a typical slum residence: a one-room shack with a packed
dirt floor and a tiny wood-burning stove in the center. Light spilled
through the cracks in walls and roof. Flattened tin cans were tacked
over the worst of the gaps, but this was inadequate protection
from the weather. A naked child lay sleeping on a roach-infested
mattress in the corner, while two others stared at the intruder.
There were open sores on their legs. A bag in one corner probably

contained the woman's voodoo materials. It bothered Dulce to
think that money desperately needed for food for these children
was going to voodoo artifacts instead, but she was not here to
criticize her contacts.
"Yes?" the standing brown-skinned woman repeated. She was
dressed in rags, her feet bare. She was about 60, her hair gray,
steely-eyed. She had seen hard times.
Dulce could not speak at once. She had known it was bad in
the slums, but this was worse than she had thought. She was reminded
strongly of a remarkable literary event a decade or two
before: an uneducated Negress with three children to support had
 
52
made notes concerning her life. By day she rummaged in garbage
for food, and cruised the streets for wastepaper to sell, while carrying
her youngest child strapped on her back. By night she had
compiled her manuscript of horror, using the light of a candle.
Then, miraculously, her account was published, and became Brazil's
best seller. It was translated into English, too, and had more effect
on the favelas than an atomic bomb-burst. Suddenly concerned
citizens eliminated the pest-hole and retrained the people. But
the woman herself, unschooled in the use of her windfall income,
in due course was back in the street as before.
Then, with a start, Dulce realized: of course! That was the
origin of the code name: Maria Carolina, the authoress.
No, it would be pointless to give this woman, so like the illfated
namesake, this bag of money. Money was illusion, not the
real answer to this grinding poverty. Only a complete restructuring
of the society . . . But first she had to save Jason.
"I came for MR-26," Dulce said.
"If you are from the government, you are dead," a man said
behind her.
For a moment Dulce thought it was the Malandro who had
accosted her on the way in. But it was another man. "I am from,
but not of the government," she said. "I left two men of the Death
Squad lying in their own blood. No one followed me here. And I
brought-this." She reached into the bag and brought out a pack
of bills.
The man looked at them. "Counterfeit!" he snarled.
Dulce shrugged, knowing they would soon verify the legitimacy
of the money. "And I have information: a cache of weapons.
But first you must help me."
The children were looking into the bag now, more fascinated
be,. fruit than the money. They were starving, literally: pipestem
arms and legs, bloated bellies.
"What do you want?" the woman asked grimly.
"A jailbreak. My friend-"
53
The woman laughed harshly. "You dream, voluptuous foreigner!
My son is in jail."
Dulce realized that this was actually an asset. If this justifiably
bitter woman's son happened to be incarcerated in the same institution
as Jason-for Jason had to be there, or she would never
locate him. "Are many of your number there? Then we can free
them all. With C-3 plastic explosive, machine guns, we can fill an
ambulance, drive it in near the wall-"
"Where are these weapons from?" the man asked, still suspicious,
but with growing interest.
"They are safe. They were captured in Cuba from CIA agents;
they can be traced only back to America. Grenades, pistols, rifles-
but we must act soon. Tonight." Before they torture Jason, she
added mentally.
"We will alert our men, and the other groups," the man said,
obviously hungry for the weapons. "But it cannot be tonight; there

is no time to organize."
Dulce nodded. He was right; they dared not go into this raid
unprepared, or the guards and soldiers would tear them up. "Then
tomorrow-"
"No. Two days from now, when the festival is on."
She smiled, seeing his logic. They were in business.
 
Chapter 4:
Mirabal's Entertainments
I came to in a dungeon. That was the best description of it. It
was a huge cell lined with brick walls, and the ceiling was high.
My first impression was of a multitude of people, white, black,
and in between, most wearing shorts or cut-off pants and nothing
else. It was hot, and the ventilation was poor, and the stink of
sweat and grime and urine was intense.
There was a long line of three-decker bunks. The top beds
were close to the bright light bulbs, so that the men on them had
to shield their heads by spreading their shorts over them.
I sat up. The lingering effects of the drug made my head swim.
I was not in top condition anyway. I had taken a bad tumble down
the stairs. My automatic forward roll had alleviated the effect, but
there is no soft landing down a flight of steps! There were numerous
abrasions on my back, and bruises on my arms.
I stood, and cracked my head on the metal structure of the
bunk above mine. In my disorientation, I had not noticed it. I sat
down heavily. I felt about as bad as a man can feel who isn't sick or
55
badly injured. Probably the wine I had taken combined with the
drug to give me a real hangover. Alcohol: never again! I always
regretted it when I broke training.
Especially the morning after. Especially when I woke in jail.
A high-pitched torrent of Portuguese, or what I assumed was
that language, emerged from the upper bunk. Two thin brown
legs, barefooted and scarred, appeared over the edge. They dropped
down, followed by a lean, dirty body. It was a boy, perhaps fourteen
years old. It was hard to tell, as I knew many children went
hungry in Brazil; he could be older with retarded growth. His
sharp, wary eyes hinted as much.
The gist of his message needed no translation. I was an incompetent
fool who should watch where he put his stupid head, lest
he disturb the repose of his betters.
I made a gesture of conciliation. "Sorry. I don't speak Portuguese."
I didn't expect him to respond intelligently, but he did. His
barrage cut off. "You-'Merican?"
Well, well! "Yes, American."
"You have dollar?"
So that was it. He begged money from tourists, so had picked
up a smattering of the language-probably of many languages. I
patted my pockets, finding them empty, of course. My abductors
had cleaned me out. "No dollar."
"You smuggler?"
"You pickpocket?" I retorted.
He laughed. "Me thief. Hungry."
That I could believe. "Me fight. Death Squad."
His eyes went round. "Big trouble!"
I rubbed my head. "Right!" I decided to treat him as an equal,
and thrust out my hand. "I'm Jason Striker, victim of circumstance."
He took it. "Filho, of the favela."
"Favela?"
"My home," he said simply.
 
56
Oh. No doubt one of the residential sections of Rio.
A bell rang somewhere. The prisoners piled off their bunks

and began moving. "C'mon," Filho said. "Food."
Food. I wasn't hungry, but didn't know how regular meals
would be around here. "Thanks."
The boy led me out of the cell and into a central courtyard.
Apparently the cells were normally locked, so this represented an
extension of freedom I'd better appreciate.
We came to the end of the chow line. It was along one, as there
turned out to be a number of huge cells similar to ours, each with
over a hundred prisoners.
The food, when we finally got it, was bean soup, over which a
thick whitish powder had been sprinkled to give it the consistency
of thick gruel, ladled from a huge vat into dirty bowls. There were
also a couple of pieces of some kind of white hard tuber, and a cup
of thick black sugarless coffee. I tasted some and had to spit it out;
Brazil might be the land of coffee, but this was too strong for me.
Not a very tasty meal, and not enough; if I were to be here long,
I'd better eat it all, for I'd soon be hungry.
The bathroom, it turned out, was a bricklined trench at the
far end of the courtyard. The men stood or squatted over it as
necessary. The stench was horrible. A single tap in the corner provided
water for drinking; the prisoners took turns at it. "I get,"
Filho said to me. He had already gulped down his meal. He went
to stand in the water line while I finished my tuber. But in a
moment he was back. "You keep eye on me?" he inquired. "Some
men, they-" He made a face.
I didn't know what that face signified, but could appreciate
that life could be rough for a lad like this in a place like this. "I'll
keep an eye on you," I agreed, and he went back.
How was I going to get out of here? I had no notion of the
charges against me, assuming the Death Squad had bothered with
any. I had merely been entertaining my girl friend in my room,
surely no crime. No doubt in due course there would be an inquiry,
since I was an American, but I doubted much would come
57
of that soon. Bureaucracy moved slowly the world over. I was on
my own for the time being, but probably not in any serious trouble.
Maybe I was lucky they hadn't killed me.
The water Filho brought was dirty, and I was not that thirsty;
instead I used it for washing. The other prisoners stared at me
curiously, and I could fathom their thoughts: see the mad Americano
taking his daily bath! None of them bothered, obviously.
In due course we were herded back into our cells for the evening.
The men did not settle down right away, but milled about, conversing
in Portuguese. Since I had no way to share this dialogue, I
lay down on my bunk. After a time, in the night, the food I had
eaten had its natural effect, and I went to the smaller hole that
served as the cell's private bathroom to relieve myself. Again the
men stared from their bunks; did they expect my refuse to be
white, like my skin?
There was a commotion as I pulled up my pants. I looked up
and saw that Filho was in trouble. Two men had grabbed him; one
held his arms while the other hauled down his ragged shorts.
What were they doing? The boy was struggling and yelling in
Portuguese, but the men did not seem to be actually hurting him.
They were hauling him to another bunk. Then Filho's eye caught
mine. "Rape!" he screamed.
Then, shocked, I understood. They were yelling in Portuguese
and wrestling Filho face-down on the bunk. One of the men had
bared his member and was moving in on the boy's posterior. Here
in the tropics I had heard homosexuality was more common than
in the colder climes, and to some men a young boy was a more
tempting target than a beautiful woman. I don't claim to understand
it, and am not certain it is true; I just happened to read
about it once in Burton's Arabian Nights.

The other prisoners, amazingly, were taking no notice. Like
the residents of an American city, they preferred to ignore crime-
so long as it was not being practiced on them. To avoid involvement.
Well, I wasn't going to ignore it! This was blatant homosexual
 
58
rape, in public yet. I charged across the cell, swung around the tier
of bunks, and barreled into the trio.
First I took out the would-be rapist. I grabbed him by the
shirt, forced him off-balance, blocked his right knee with the sole
of my left foot, and threw him past me with a beautiful (if I do say
so myself ) Hiza-guruma knee-wheel throw. I knew he would not
get up in a hurry. Especially since he slid across the damp floor to
sprawl halfway in the privy-pit, his outflung hand involuntarily
grasping a handful of that brown slush.
Then I turned on the other. He had thrown the boy aside the
moment I attacked, and now faced me. He was a huge coal-black
Negro with shaved head, six and a half feet tall, and weighing
something like 240 pounds. No starving chronic inmate, this!
And he was ready to fight. I would have eased off once Filho
was safe, but it was obvious that this man would not let me go. I
was hardly in top condition, but as a fifth degree black belt in
judo with additional expertise in karate and kung fu I was well
able to take care of myself. So I waited for his attack, while the
other prisoners forsook their sleep to form a huge spectators' circle
around us. They hadn't wanted to get involved when a boy was
being attacked, but now they were happy to watch the fight.
Suddenly he moved. His right foot swept up and around in
hard kick. I shifted my weight to absorb it harmlessly on my left
thigh; kicks are fairly easy to counter if you anticipate them. Their
relative slowness is offset by their power when they score. Still, his
kick was fast and sure; he was a trained fighter.
Then I became aware of pain: not the ordinary bruise of a
kick, but the sharper sensation of a cut. I glanced at my hip-and
saw blood flowing. The kick must have opened a sore.
Sore? Immediately I realized it was more than that. I was wearing
my trousers, and the cloth had been ripped open.
Sensation and realization occurred quickly, for thought and
action are almost simultaneous during combat. They have to be, if
one wishes to survive.
My opponent skipped to the side and kicked again. This time
59
I jumped back. I caught a glimpse of the sole of his foot: small
shards of broken glass were taped there.
No wonder I was hurting! He had obviously come prepared-
and he was out for my blood. Literally. Any of these kicks would
have wounded me grievously, had they scored cleanly.
He kicked yet again, very fast. This time I managed to hook a
hand under his foot, catching him off-balance. With my free hand
I grabbed his calloused toes, lifted, and shoved him back hard.
The problem with kicking is that it restricts mobility at critical
times, especially when the opponent knows what he is doing. He
had to fall.
Thank God for the hours I had put in practicing the new
Kodokan self-defense kata! The katas are like little judo plays, emulating
street-fight situations. Now when I needed it, I had done it
without thinking.
I did not let go of that dangerous foot. This was no amateur!
And how had he arranged this trick-in prison? Surely he did not
walk on broken glass all the time. This thing smelled of a set-up.
So I bore down hard while I had the advantage. I twisted him onto
his stomach by using the leverage of the captive leg. Then I hooked
my own leg over his knee and tilted forward, putting pressure on
his leg and knee with my chest, using a forbidden (in contest

judo) Kawaishi submission hold, Hiza-hishigi. "Had enough?" I
inquired as I leaned into it.
But he was tough. He tried to escape. I increased the pressure,
knowing the agony would have to make him capitulate. I wasn't
doing this from sadism; I wanted to know why he had girded
himself for such combat and made a scene that would surely draw
me in. If he were an agent of the Death Squad sent to kill me, why
hadn't he simply done the job while I was still unconscious? It
seemed to make no sense to do it this way.
Unless the Death Squad wanted its hands to appear clean . . .
Now there was a commotion. Prison guards, conspicuously
absent until I gained the advantage, charged in. Not eager to be
caught fighting, for surely there were rules, against it, I started to
 
60
ease up. But a guard slammed into me, hurling me forward. That
impetus translated into pressure on the black man's knee, and it
snapped as I fell.
Then the guards laid hands on me, and I knew better than to
resist. The black man was writhing in agony; screams of pure anguish
wrenching out of him. There is no worse pain than that of a
broken knee. It would be long before he fought again.
I was surely in for it now! How could I convince the guards I
had stepped in only to rescue a youthful friend from rape? Especially
when I didn't speak the language?
The boy! "Filho!" I called. "Tell them-"
Filho appeared. He spouted a fluid stream of Portuguese. Thank
God I had a witness!
The guard-captain turned on me. "So you try to rape this
poor child, and beat up his friends who help him!"
What? "No, no! I tried to help him!"
But then I saw the boy's expression. His accusing finger pointed
directly at me. He was part of this ugly little trap. He was the
shill.
I looked desperately around at the other prisoners. They had
all been witnesses. But they had somehow returned to their bunks
and were sound asleep; obviously none of them wasted any love on
the Gringo, and they would not speak on my behalf.
I had been had. No doubt of it. But why?
Too late I saw the rifle butt coming at my head. I tried to duck
out of the way, but there was solid contact. The lights went out.
*
This time my awakening was less gentle than before. A bucket
of icewater drenched my head, making me choke. I was sitting in
a chair with my hands tied behind me and my ankles hobbled
with a short length of rope. I could tell by the feel that I was
expertly restrained; no use straining against the bonds.
A face loomed before me. It had a dramatic scar running down
from the short stiff crew-cut to the bull-massive neck. The man
had icy blue eyes and a big, reddish, square strong face, thick lips,
61
a bullet-shaped head, an irregularly set nose, a cauliflower ear, big
hamlike fists-in short he reminded me of a Nazi pugilist.
It was the man I had encountered on the stairs, the leader of
the Death Squad. But more than that, it was the man I had fought
in the Brazilian embassy in New York, when Hiroshi and I had
come to recover our diamonds. He was as tough as they come, but
I had bashed him pretty badly. Now he had me in his power, and
he wanted revenge.
"I see you know me, Jason Striker," he said. "By sight, at least.
I am Don Fernando Mirabal, Colonel of Army Intelligence. You
may call me Colonel. And it seems you are in trouble with the law,
now."
I didn't answer. It had already been apparent that the Death

Squad had connections with the police. They had been after Dulce,
and my involvement was coincidental-but I had given this man
Mirabal some lumps, and he certainly wasn't going to let me off
gently now.
"Why didn't you kill me?" I asked. It was not bravado so much
as resignation-and apart from everything else, I was curious.
"I had thought you would be more intelligent," Mirabal said
with satisfaction. "But I shall explain. We caught you in our net,
but unlike the girl, you are an American citizen, of some repute.
In fact, we anticipate demands for your release from both your
country and the girl's."
Why would Cuba demand my release? I had done Fidel a favor
once, through no particular choice of my own, and apparently he
had a long memory and good information. Better than his cigars,
certainly. Of course I had helped Dulce this time, and she was on
a mission for her country. Well, that was a complication that was
hardly going to do me much good here.
"But we had no reason to hold you. You had broken no law
here. Yet it was necessary to hold you." Mirabal smiled. "So we
turned you loose in temporary detention-and it seems you attempted
a beastly act and provoked a near riot. That is against the
laws of Brazil! Now we can keep you, and no other government
 
62
can object. You really were very foolish; did you not know we
frown on the raping of small boys?"
So that was it. I had been foolish; I should have smelled a rat,
and stayed out of trouble.
"Very clever," I agreed morosely.
"Now I would like the answers to certain questions, some very
simple questions," Mirabal continued. "But I hope you won't provide
them right away. I really would like to get to know you better
first. I am very curious to discover, for example, your tolerance to
pain. But I am a fair man; I will first give you a chance to answer."
I believed him: he'd rather have me balky, so he had a pretext
to torture me. Now that he could legally do so. Or maybe it wasn't
legal, technically, but I was sure he had ways to get around such
technicalities. I was already branded a troublemaker and a homosexual
rapist in prison, thanks to his cute little trap, so my interrogation
could be called legitimate. If I hadn't fallen into that snare,
there would have been something else; Mirabal was not about to
let me slip through unscathed.
"What mission brings you to Brazil?" he inquired politely.
I kept my mouth closed. I was not free to tell him my real
mission for Fu Antos, and the truth was, I had never found out
what that mission was. Thanks to Mirabal himself, I had gone to
jail before Kan-Sen had contacted me. Mirabal would never believe
that, though. So it was pointless even to try explaining. In
addition, the longer I kept him guessing, the better it would be
for Dulce, who I was sure was also in his power. Let him conjecture
at what complexities we were engaged in.
"You are silent," Mirabal observed mildly. "Good, good. I am
not disappointed." He rubbed his knee, the one I had crippled in
New York. He had evidently had surgery to repair the torn meniscus
ligament, for there was a big scar there, but the leg seemed to
be about as good as ever. He still limped a bit. "We have so much
to do together, you and I." He paused, considering. "But first, a
little tour. I know you will enjoy this."
He put out one hand and lifted me to my feet. I am not a
63
small man, but he hefted my weight as if I were a child. What
tremendous power! My bindings were really not unduly confining,
but the moment I was on my feet I felt woozy. The drug
followed by that crack on the head-I was in no condition to put

up a fight at this stage.
We walked to another cell. Here a pretty young woman in a
tight red print dress was strapped to what looked like a dentist's
chair, her head tied back to the headrest, clamped between metal
clamps, immobile, so that her mouth tried to pull open. Nevertheless
she kept it tightly shut. Beside her was a tray of metal
instruments. I did not like the look of this.
"Do you know her?" Mirabal inquired. Obviously he thought
I did. That gave me a clue: she must be a captive member of the
group Dulce was supposed to contact. If I had been associated
with them, I would probably have met her. It could have been a
nice meeting. She looked about eighteen and had a rather appealing
figure. Slender, but with well developed breasts and thighs,
and thick curly red hair falling down behind the chair. Her face
was quite freckled, and there was a gold Star of David hanging
from her neck. I concluded she was Jewish, perhaps a student who
had gotten involved with the Communist Revolutionary movement
that Dulce was trying to contact. What attraction did
Communism have for these pretty girls?
"Never saw her before in my life," I said honestly. And felt like
a liar, for I knew he would not believe me. Maybe I should have
shut my mouth grimly and refused to answer, so as to lead my
interrogator on a false trail. But that, too, would have been in
effect a lie. Too bad I wasn't a philosopher, to unravel these fine
points of ethics.
"Then you will not object to what happens," Mirabal said. He
made a gesture, and a man came forward. "One extraction for Ester,
for now," Mirabal told him. Then, to me. again: "Make yourself
comfortable."
Some humor! There was no other chair in the room, and if
there had been, I would have been hard put to it to sit without
 
64
assistance. Mirabal was not about to offer help, and I was not
about to ask for it.
The other man put on a white apron like a dentist's smock.
He picked up a pair of fancy pliers from the table. He moved to
the girl.
Then I caught on. "Now wait," I said. "You're not going to-?"
"So you do know the Jewess?" Mirabal inquired.
"I don't know her! But that doesn't mean I want to see her-"
I broke off, afraid I was only putting notions in his head, though
obviously Mirabal had plenty of notions on his own. His resemblance
to a Nazi now seemed stronger, for he even proposed to
torture a Jew. I didn't have to be Jewish to consider that an abomination.
"Proceed, Laureano," Mirabal said to the man. The assistant
was a cadaverous but evidently wiry-strong fanatic. His skin had
been burned by the sun to a leathery texture. I was sure he was a
virtual arm of Mirabal, never questioning his master's will.
Laureano put his left hand over the girl's mouth, pressing with
thumb and forefinger on the nerve complex on either side of her
bunched jaw. The immediate pain of that pressure forced her mouth
open. He then inserted the pliers into that open mouth, placing
his left hand against her forehead. Now she whimpered, knowing
what was coming, but unable to move. I saw the muscles of her
arms tighten, and the nipples of her breasts quivered under the
taut dress with her ragged breathing.
Laureano took hold of one of her back teeth and pulled. Ester
screamed piercingly, for of course she had had no anesthetic. Dentistry
is enough of a torture in the best of circumstances, and this
was the worst. A healthy tooth.
The muscles of the man's arms strained, hauling brutally at
that tooth, and the sound from the woman was appalling. The
tendons of her neck stood out and the force of her futile struggles

caused her dress to half-tear and pull open and drop down, exposing
her right breast. The purple nipple became big and bright
65
against the white. Her whole torso shook with the force of her
agony.
I launched myself at the beast-but Mirabal intercepted me
with a football-type straight-arm push that hurled me over against
the wall. My head cracked back, and for a moment I saw a field of
twinkling stars. My head still hurt from the bruise the gun butt
had made, and this aggravated it.
But the continued screaming of the girl brought me alert again
quickly. I tried again to reach her, but Mirabal's powerful fingers
caught my hair and twisted my head painfully, bringing me down
once more against the wall. Oh, the butcher was enjoying this, yet
I was helpless.
Then Laureano gave a final heave and jerked out the tooth.
Triumphantly he brought it up, blood dripping from its surface.
"Loosen her head, fool!" Mirabal snapped. "We don't want her
to choke on her own blood!"
No personal concern, this. He was just making certain the
poor girl didn't die before he was through torturing her. It was also
for my benefit, for he had spoken in English so I would be sure to
understand.
Her head was released and pulled forward. Blood and saliva
drooled from her lips and over her chin, to drip onto her pale right
breast. Her screams had stopped; now she was merely sobbing.
No, not even that; she had, mercifully, lost consciousness.
I sobbed for her, inside. This whole brutal scene had been
unnecessary, pointless, since I knew nothing that could benefit
Mirabal and the girl had not even been questioned. If Mirabal had
sought to show me that he was ruthless and depraved, he had
succeeded admirably.
"You see, that was not so bad," Mirabal said in a conversational
tone. "She still has twenty-seven teeth left."
I would have killed him in that moment, had I been able. But
I kept my face straight, refusing to give him the satisfaction of my
impotent rage.
 
66
"Now we shall visit with another anonymous outlaw," Mirabal
said, drawing me along with one hand. I had to move as he urged,
or fall on my face.
In the next chamber was an old man, naked, bound face up on
a table. He was shaking with fear; the girl's screams would have
been loud and clear here. As Mirabal had surely planned; he obviously
was expert at his specialty of torture, both physical and psychological.
"Another stranger?" Mirabal inquired, shoving me up for a
good view. The man was around sixty, with well-manicured, longfingered
pianist hands: evidently a white-collar worker, a cultured
man, one of the intellectuals one might expect to find supporting
the opposition to tyranny. I'm no Communist and never will be,
but if anyone offered me a way to fight tyrants like Mirabal, I'd ask
few questions.
Communism thrives where there is poverty and repression,
and it is easy to see why. What have the downtrodden masses got
to lose? Abolish the Mirabals and the Laureanos, and you are halfway
to abolishing Communism. Or so it seems to me.
I contemplated the white hair growing out from the onceshaved
head of the victim, and his silver whiskers. He had a strong
intelligent face, though his body was thin. Was there any way I
could spare this victim whatever torture was planned? Only if I
could convince Mirabal of the truth: that I knew nothing of the
prisoner. And how could I do that? "Does it make any difference?"
I asked.

"He looks thirsty," Mirabal said. He turned to Laureano, who
had followed us in. "Give the poor man a drink."
A drink? What kind of torture was that?
Laureano smiled, showing a row of gold teeth. The effect was
startling: on the one hand it suggested incredible poverty or debauchery
to have cost him all his natural teeth, and on the other
hand it showed equally incredible wealth to have them replaced in
gold. The man with the golden mouth.
He brought out a gallon jug of water and a kind of funnel. He
67
put the funnel in the prisoner's mouth and poured. The man
choked and spluttered, but the water kept coming; he had to swallow
or drown.
When about a quart was down, the torturer eased up enough
to let the victim catch his breath. "I think he is still thirsty," Mirabal
remarked.
Back went the funnel. This time the victim tried to clench his
teeth, but Laureano hit him in the belly and jammed the funnel
in as his mouth popped open to gasp. Then the victim tried to
refuse to swallow, but Laureano pinched his nostrils until he had
to breathe through his mouth-and then the water choked him
again. He had to swallow. The water was mercilessly forced, until
the man's stomach bulged like an unholy pregnancy. I had no idea
how much water the human torso could accommodate, but evidently
it was considerable, if health and survival was no consideration.
But soon no more would go; it just poured out of his mouth as
fast as it went in. It was evident the man was full; he was physically
unable to take any more, though he drown in the attempt.
His stomach was distended grotesquely, as though ready to burst
like a pricked balloon. I could not even contemplate what was
happening to his internal tissues and vital organs.
"Strange," Mirabal remarked as the torturer looked at him for
instructions. "I am sure he is not yet satisfied. Let us try another
aperture."
They released the clamps that held the prisoner's arms and
legs to the table and levered him over onto his stomach. I thought
the pressure of his own body on that distended stomach would
kill him, but somehow he was still breathing. Laureano attached a
longer segment of hose to a water tap, then forced the end into the
man's rectum and ran it far into the body, so that neither sphincter
nor stomach muscle could stop it or force it out again. Then he
opened the valve, letting the city water pressure ram the fluid into
the victim's posterior. There was no way to tell how much it was; I
 
68
could only watch with mounting horror. But at last the limit came;
water squirted out and around the tube and no more would go.
Laureano jerked out the tube. The poor man was like a paper
water bomb. He belched fluid weakly from his mouth, and it
squirted out of his anus with every shallow, shuddering breath he
took. The sheer compression of his lungs and innards could kill
him at any moment. The water torture was not as dramatic as the
tooth pulling, but actually it was worse.
Then he shuddered. His muscles strained as though he were
making a superhuman effort to break free of his restraints, though
at this stage the pressure within was far worse than that without.
But this was no conscious effort; he was going into convulsions.
The water that leaked from him now was turning red; it had burst
his intestinal wall, and he was dying.
"Shall we see the next?" Mirabal inquired with a pleasant smile.
I stared at him. He was completely unmoved by this horrible
death. What punishment, in this world or the next, could possibly
atone for the things he had done? But expression of my sentiment
was pointless. "You're wasting your time," I said. "I don't

know any of these people. I don't know anyone in Brazil. I can't
tell you anything."
"Now you know that is not true," he said. "I can name three
people you know. I am one, and Miss Planas is another."
Dulce! Oh, no! They had her too, and I knew this monster was
saving her for last. What would I do when he started pulling her
teeth and filling her gut with water?
"You will really appreciate the third room," Mirabal said.
The sadist!
But the next room was empty. What did this mean?
"Have a seat," Mirabal suggested, ever the perfect host.
Then I understood. I was the third person I knew in Brazil.
This torture was for me.
Such was my mood, I was actually relieved. They weren't going
to torture Dulce.
But they could still torture her anytime. Maybe they would
69
make her watch me, and when that didn't work, I'd have to watch
her. Yet there was nothing I could do.
Mirabal was watching me closely. He had certainly softened
me for this. I now had no shadow of a doubt that he would work
me over until he was satisfied, and that would mean a fiendish
death. And I had no way out.
"You think I am stupid," Mirabal said. "That I do this merely
to repay you for our prior encounter, or to wrest information from
you about connections you do not know."
"Yes," I agreed.
"But you do know the third person-the one whose place is
here in this chair." Now his face twisted into a grimace of hate.
"Fu Antos, boy master of ninjas."
My mouth dropped open. I had indeed underestimated
Mirabal; I had been sure he knew nothing of Fu Antos and wasn't
searching for such information.
"Tell me where he can be found, and you are spared this."
Fu Antos-who had cured me of the effect of the delayedaction
death blow, and thus saved my life when no one else could.
Who now required my service. Was I to betray him? I had no
notion where the Black Castle was, but if I gave away the nature of
my expected contact, Mirabal might be able to use that to trace
down the ninja master.
I hobbled over to the chair and tipped myself into it. My aim
was off, but Mirabal, still gracious, caught me and set me down
gently. No, he didn't want me getting bruised or knocked out on
my own; he had to do it his way. My only satisfaction was that I
hadn't groveled; I had taken the seat myself, or tried to.
Mirabal did not remonstrate with me. He was not about to
plead with a helpless victim for information. He was certain that
his technique would bring it spewing forth. And I was not at all
certain he was mistaken; I'm not good at this sort of thing. Once
Kan-Sen had tortured me with a thumbscrew-that same Kan-
Sen who was now my ally, to my shame.
They stripped off my shirt. This was some job, since they
 
70
wouldn't untie me-a nice compliment to my defensive skills-
they had to cut it away with a sharp knife. Then Laureano trundled
in a squat machine. It seemed to consist of a series of standard
automobile batteries, with wires running to a generator. There was
a black control box with dials on it, and long cords and clips attached.
The thing gave me the shivers.
"Are you sure you will not tell us what we wish to know?"
"You already know what I think of you." I had a little gas in
my bowel, and I forced it out with a loud ripping noise to emphasize
my point.

"If you maintain that attitude half an hour from now, I shall
be surprised," Mirabal said mildly.
That gaAftee a new set of shivers. He was so certain, and he
was not the kind to bluff. But even if I told him what little I knew,
he would still torture me. As he had candidly said, he had a grudge,
and didn't want me to capitulate too rapidly. And I would not
betray Fu Antos-I hoped.
Laureano put little metal discs on the nipples of my chest.
Wires trailed to the machine. He taped the disks in place so they
would stay. Then he turned a dial.
I lurched, straining against my bonds. A terrible electric current
was passing from one terminal to the other, wracking my
chest.
"I see the system is operative," Mirabal said. "Now do you
care to talk?"
Talk? I could hardly get my breath! I slumped, gasping, as the
current abated. What appalling pain!
"Turn it up a notch," Mirabal told Laureano. "And hold it for
a few more seconds."
The agony wracked me again. I jumped like a bucking bronco,
straining against my bonds. A hoarse scream tore from my throat.
My chest was on fire, my lungs fast becoming paralyzed. Like a
red-hot rod, the current seared through me. Could tooth extraction
be worse than this? Water torture?
"You respond very well," Mirabal remarked as the power sub-
71
sided again. "I shall be most interested to see how far your threshold
extends. We'll just try another intensification."
I couldn't take much more of this. Had the electrodes been
attached to some more vital region of my body, the surges would
have knocked me unconscious or even killed me, and it would
have been over. But Mirabal's torturer knew his business; this
machine merely caused intolerable pain.
Yet I had no choice. I had to endure this torture, or somehow
escape it. And not by turning traitor to Fu Antos.
"Perhaps we should attach an electrode to his genital," Mirabal
said musingly. "This has always been effective in the past."
God, no! I remembered now. I had heard of this. Pulverizing
shocks run through the victim's privates, not only wracking him
with ultimate pain but destroying his masculinity forever. No,
that was probably an exaggeration. The awful beauty of this electric
torture was that it left no telltale signs, no raw tooth-sockets or
ruptured guts. There would be no proof that I had been tortured.
No proof except my word-the word of an accused pederast. Electric
interrogation was a Latin American specialty.
But the bastard was only teasing me. He made no motion to
strip me further. Maybe he didn't want to abort my masculinity
until he had made me watch what he did to Dulce. It was enough
for the present that I realized the possibilities, and knew what
would be employed-at his convenience. Psychological torture
augmenting the physical torture, again, and a very effective job of
it.
I had to get out of this! But how?
Then I remembered a way.
I could not escape physically-but I had mental resources that
Mirabal was hardly in a position to comprehend. I could control
the pain my body suffered, to a certain extent. Pain, after all, is
self-generated; it is the system's warning that the body is being
damaged, and it is a strong inducement to stop. But when the
damage cannot be stopped, pain is superfluous, a counterproductive
effort. Then it has to be blocked out.
 
72
The current flowed again. I stiffened. But I fought to achieve

dominance of mind over matter. I can not feel it! I told myself. It is
only an irritation.
It didn't work. I knew the pain was real. Anything else was a
delusion. Yet I still had to resist it somehow.
Then I remembered the ki, that mysterious force that lay within
my body, more powerful than anything else I knew. It was not
under my conscious control, but was there when I needed it.
I needed it now! I willed it forth, hoping it would come. The
torture current flowed again. The pain was excruciating; they had
stepped it up another notch or two. I tried to scream, but my
chest muscles were knotted, cutting off my very breath.
Then the ki cut in. From my hara, my abdomen, the seat of
my being, it expanded-and where it went, pain abated. It crossed
the area of the electrodes on my chest, and the muscles relaxed. I
could breathe again, and my head was clear. It did not completely
eliminate the pain, but it was as though a powerful sedative had
been administered. Now I could tolerate it, as I did the pain of a
back wrenched in judo practice.
"Something's wrong," Mirabal said. "The current's not-"
Laureano checked. "It is going through; see the dials."
"I see him. He's not suffering. Look how he's relaxed."
"Maybe he is dead."
"No. He's breathing normally. Check the generator."
"I tell you, the current is there! Check it yourself."
Mirabal was evidently from Missouri, in the United States of
Brazil: he had to be shown. He put his hand on my chest, letting
the fingers touch the two taped terminals. He jerked it away, cursing
as the current pulsed through. He shook his hand. "It's there,
all right!"
Now he glared at me. I gave him a level gaze back. "Give it up,
Mirabal," I said. "You can't hurt me."
"Turn it up to maximum!" he snapped.
Laureano turned up the dial. I was aware of the increased power,
73
but it passed through me harmlessly. My ki had nullified it. Not
completely, but enough so I could stand it, smiling.
Mirabal stared at me, baffled. "He must have lost his feeling!
No one could withstand that current."
I shook my head, affecting sorrow. "I feel it; I just don't suffer
from it. Too bad you can't understand. You should meet my friend
Fu Antos; he really knows about ki."
"Fu Antos!" Mirabal grated. "So you do know him, just as I
suspected! You're one of his minions!"
Oh-oh! I had really spilled the beans, right when I thought I'd
won. Treachery of overconfidence. I had to distract Mirabal, before
he found a way to pry what little I knew of the ninja's situation out
of me. So I pursed my lips and wafted a shimmering globule of
spit at him.
It scored, right in the middle of his gloatingly open mouth.
Mirabal lost control, just as I had hoped he would. His fist
lashed out to strike my cheek. The blow didn't hurt me, for the ki
made me well-nigh invulnerable. But he had carelessly let his other
arm brush against the metal frame of the machine, and as his fist
made contact with me the current grounded through his body.
For a moment he stood transfixed as the full power of his devil
machine paralyzed him, his eyes staring in agony. Physical strength
is no hedge against electricity. Then the contact was broken, and
he fell back.
Quickly, horrified, Laureano turned off the machine. "Colonel,
are you all right?"
Mirabal had to maintain a front; I understood that, without
having to like the man at all. "I'm all right!" he snapped. "Get him
out of here!"
And so my siege of torture ended, thanks to the ki. I was hardly

conscious of being led back to the main prison cell, to be stared at
by my fellow inmates. The ki had drained from me when the threat
ended, and I was virtually unconscious on my feet.
They unbound me, and I fell on my bunk, too weak to do
more.
 
Chapter 5:
Spear in the Rear
The forest of the Amazon basin in South America is one of the
largest in the world, and it covers almost half of Brazil. The trees
grow close together: chestnut, mahogany, cedar, rosewood, kapok,
wild rubber trees, many varieties of palm, and of course Brazil
nuts. Hundreds of species can be found within a few square miles,
and many trees are over two hundred feet tall. They are overgrown
with lichens and vines, so that the deep jungle becomes a tangled
mass.
Through it all twines the Amazon River, largest (not longest)
in the world, with its myriad tributaries. It is the only feasible
access to much of the backwoods. Roads can quickly be overgrown
by the living carpet of foliage, so only the water remains clear.
Thus a watch on the rivers gives an insight into much of the human
activity of the region.
It was technically illegal to molest the jungle natives of Brazil,
but few of the authorities paid attention to this. If the Indians had
land that "civilized" men wanted, it was a simple matter to kill or
75
drive off the primitives. Professional Indian-killers were available
for hire at reasonable rates.
But this time the Indians, stirred up by intruders from Japan,
had had the audacity to strike back. A prospector's camp had been
wiped out, and Fernando Mirabal himself had barely escaped with
his life. Such a demonstration had to be dealt with.
Actually, Mirabal was sure the ninja camp was not here; Fu
Antos was too smart to give away his location so readily. But with
luck a ninja might be captured, and then perhaps truth serum or
a lie detector would bring forth the necessary information. No
more crudities like flaying; that took too much time, and was too
risky. Torture was ineffective against ninjas. But drugs-maybe.
Possibly some of the Indians knew where the ninjas were; for them
torture would be in order.
Colonel Mirabal himself was not along on this expedition; he
had business in Rio de Janeiro, following up another lead. But he
had given the task force leader specific instructions. The job would
be accomplished.
There were about 50 policemen collected from all the towns
of the neighborhood, and about a hundred volunteers. It was an
ill-matched, motley crew, in it strictly for the money and the chance
to indulge in a little harmless bloodletting. But they were well
armed and eager to collect the bounty on every dead Indian, plus
whatever pillage was available for free enterprise.
On the way upstream they had a little practice mission, nothing
serious. They encountered a small village of pacifico, pacified
Indians. About 25 old men, women and children were taking their
morning bath in the shallow waters. They stared at the convoy,
not knowing its purpose.
The lead craft went on upstream, machine-gunned some tapirs
drinking at the edge, hacked them into great chunks and threw
the bloody pieces into the center current. The blood suffused the
water, arousing the crocodiles and piranhas. Then a small party
went ashore and cut behind the Indian village.
When all was ready, a couple of launches came close and sprayed
 
76
the Indians with rock salt from sawed-off shotguns. The stuff did

not kill outright, but made numerous small wounds that bled and
hurt.
The Indians scrambled for the shore, terrified, uncomprehending,
helpless-and were met by the machine guns of the land
party. They could not escape, so had to stay in the water, and now
the killer fish attacked savagely, incited to a frenzy by the new
blood.
The two prettiest Indian women were hauled onto the boats,
mass-raped, and tossed back in for the crocodiles.
Temporarily sated, the men re-formed their convoy and pressed
onward. It had been fun, but it wasn't as though they had killed
any real men. The hunters' appetite, like that of the piranha fish,
had only been whetted for the real mayhem.
But Fu Antos, Lord of the Ninjas, had profited from his experience
with the oil-prospecting camp. He knew that the presence
of men from the coast meant trouble. Had they been content to
leave him alone, he would not have fought them; but he could not
tolerate a direct invasion of his territory, and he had promised the
Indians protection. So he kept his spies out, though this meant
slowed construction of the Black Castle, and he was well informed
of this expedition. The village massacre had caught him by surprise;
he had thought the Indians would be ignored. But the episode
had given him time to prepare, and a ninja did not need
much time, ever.
The lead boat was a modern police launch. It passed a bend in
the river near where the prior oil group had its doom, and entered
a narrow section. Suddenly it shuddered and halted, and began to
sink. Its bottom had been ripped open by submerged stakes, sharply
pointed and angled to pierce the hull of a fast-moving craft. Overloaded
by the number of men on its deck, it was helpless. Men
dived off from either side.
Immediately there was a stir in the water. From one side electric
eels approached, released from underwater cages by the shock
77
of the boat's collision with the stakes. From the other converged
caimans, reptiles related to the crocodile. The action was violent.
The second launch rounded the bend in time to see the last of
the first. It slowed, its .30 caliber machine gun coming to life,
raking the shore on either side. But there was only silence from the
jungle.
Then something arced high over the trees and fell on the deck
of the boat. It exploded into flame. It was a homemade thermite
bomb, a ninja formula like Greek fire. It spread across the deck,
burning relentlessly. The men dipped buckets of water from the
river to douse it, but the flame only spread faster. In moments it
had eaten through the deck and was taking over the boat, its terrible
heat driving back the men.
The remainder of the expedition now arrived. Six smaller boats,
bristling with armed men. Too many to nail with the thermite
catapult, they moved to the banks of the river, firing at anything.
They did not dare remain exposed on the water, and the caimans
prevented swimming. But they could take over the shores, and
now they knew the enemy was near. This was what they had come
for!
There was no resistance. All the boats beached without loss. A
hundred and twenty men spread out, beating the brush, firing up
into the trees, making sure there were no men in the area.
Then someone screamed. He had been bitten by a tarantula,
the huge hairy tropical spider. Such bites are seldom fatal, but
attack by such creatures can be terrifying. And suddenly there
were spiders all around, dropping silently from the trees. Not only
tarantulas, but also black spiders, larger than the black widow and
with a more poisonous bite. They had been cleverly anesthetized,
awakened by the commotion below, still too drugged to hide. So

they attacked.
The men charged screaming from the area, losing all semblance
of discipline. And as they dispersed, and became separated
from each other, and lost sight of their boats and officers, the silent
arrows began to fly. One by one the men fell, firing wildly into the
 
78
brush before their struggles were ended by well-placed ninja arrows,
nooses and spears. Some put their feet into miniature covered
pits filled with sharpened sticks smeared with human excrement.
Painful, disgusting, but not serious wounds, except that the
chance of serious infection was excellent. Others tripped over cords
stretched near the ground, releasing sprung saplings that hurled
spears forward. Or were caught in loops that lifted them high into
the air where they were easy targets. One man, lifted by such a
snare, whipped out his hunting knife and cut the rope-only to
land on his head, splitting his skull open.
Fu Antos was unsatisfied. He had organized the ambush so
that no ninja would be seen, and none killed. That caution had
prevented him from carrying through the eradication of the invading
party. The secret of the Black Castle was in danger of becoming
known, and therefore was in peril of complete destruction;
secrecy and security were virtually identical. He had to take immediate
steps to stop future excursions. Simple defense of the jungle
area would no longer suffice.
*
He was very high up in Petrobas, the Brazilian Oil Company,
literally. He was on the thirtieth floor of the modern skyscraper
that housed the oil bureaucracy in Brasilia, the futuristic capital of
the United States of Brazil. He was a highly paid executive in charge
of locating potential oil fields in the central Amazonian wilderness.
He was one of the few really intelligent bureaucrats. Given
the mere hint of oil in a given region, he would sniff it out relentlessly.
And he had the hint: special purchases of equipment, shipped
up the Amazon River. Someone was drilling for oil-not a mere
test well, but a producing one. Somewhere in the jungle of the
Amazon.
There were other evidences. An oil prospecting unit had been
attacked and wiped out by formerly acquiescent Indians. That suggested
that some private enterprise was operating in that region,
79
stirring up the natives with promises of wealth or whatever, acting
to keep their discovery secret. Fernando Mirabal, brother to the
Director himself, had narrowly missed being killed in that action.
The Mirabals were bad enemies to have; those Indians would be
sorry.
If he, Gal Costa, could locate that strike and verify it, he could
arrange to expropriate the site for the government petroleum company.
There were certain complexities involved, but that was his
business: to comprehend and manipulate the jungle of economics
and regulations so as to bring maximum profit to his company. He
did the brainwork, then turned the matter over to Ramiro Mirabal,
the Director, for the action. It was a good working arrangement.
Fu Antos, hidden in his half-built, largely underground Black
Castle in the jungle, thought so too. There was much dead-wood
in Petrobas, as there was in any government enterprise. But some
branches were live wood. It was necessary to prune those branches,
so as to render the giant oil company inactive, at least as far as new
oil fields research went. So a few select assassinations would alleviate
the problem with minimum fuss; there need be no more bloody
excursions up the river. The Mirabal brothers had proved more
formidable than anticipated. Fu Antos had hoped to nab Fernando
during the police raid up the tributary, but the man, wary of such
traps, had not come. It had been a bad mistake to let that man live

after their first encounter. But the lesser actions could not wait; if
he held them up pending the death of Mirabal, he could lose the
war.
This sort of thing was far from the mind of the executive Gal
Costa, high in his air-conditioned office in the capital city. Never
in his life had he been physically threatened. His concern, as he
stood hands linked behind him looking out the immense picture
window at the magnificent skyline, the almost purple sky above
the red earth beyond the modern building-his concern was only
with the evidence on paper. No one else had fathomed the pattern;
no one but he knew where the secret oil field was. There were
elaborate maps on his wall, and hefty tomes of statistics on his
 
80
shelf. By a process of perceptive elimination he had narrowed down
the possibilities to three, and two of these were questionable for
devious but convincing reasons. In the third there was probably
an extremely rich oil field awaiting exploitation. Now it was time
to make his report, significant not so much for its factual information
but, like a lawyer's summation, for its clear rationale and the
specific thrust of its recommendations. Costa was in his fashion a
creative artist; he could perceive and document that obvious possibility
that all others missed. Ramiro Mirabal would read this report,
act on it, and strike oil, and there would be a new world
power nexus right here in Brazil. This was potentially more significant
than the Mexican strike. And Costa would be well rewarded.
Ramiro was very good about things like that; he helped
those who helped him, so long as they were loyal.
Costa buzzed for his secretary. She entered, carrying her
notepad. She was a Meztiza, half-Indian-a small mousy-looking
girl, dark of skin and hair. No office ornament; he had chosen her
for her discretion, competence, and loyalty. She was an excellent
stenographer, and never spoke of company matters outside the
office. She lived in one of the favelas near the city, supporting her
aging parents and feebleminded brother. She was not well paid,
for then she might have become independent; as it was, she knew
that only absolute loyalty to the company would preserve her job
and therefore her livelihood. For if she were fired, she would be
blackballed, and her half-caste family would starve unless she turned
to drug traffic or prostitution-and she lacked the nerve for the
first and the figure for the second. Costa knew his employees well.
"Put a hold on all incoming calls, Candelaria," Costa snapped.
"Notify the switchboard that I am not to be disturbed for any
reason for the next two hours. Lock the door. I'm ready to dictate."
She returned to her desk to make the necessary calls. But the
first one was to an outside number. The phone was lifted at the
other end, but no one answered. "Time," she said, and broke the
connection. Then she took care of the other matters and returned
to her employer.
81
For an hour she took dictation. Then Costa grew hungry, as he
generally did when in the throes of creativity. "Fetch me a candy
bar," he said. "Quickly." It was not that his hunger was that urgent,
it was that he wanted the surge of food energy to guarantee
the continued high output of his brain, so that he could birth the
brilliant report at one sitting. Every minute's delay threatened to
dull the fine cutting edge.
Candelaria unlocked the door, went into her office and thence
to the hall with money from the petty change box. A man stepped
silently forward to meet her. He handed her a wooden box. She
accepted it with hardly a pause and carried it on down to the
candy machine, feeling a slight vibration within it. Perhaps it was
merely her nervousness.
The man stood waiting for the elevator down to the ground

floor. Modern as this building was, it still suffered delays. The
indicator showed the elevator was stationary on the second floor;
something was holding it up. After a moment the man moved to
the stairwell and started down. Thirty stories was a long way, but
he preferred not to wait.
Candelaria carried box and Hershey bar into her office. She
brought both all the way into the executive's office. She handed
him the candy, went back to the door, set down the box and opened
it.
"Candelaria!" Costa said, irritated. "What are you doing?"
"It will only take a minute," she said, drawing out a plastic
bag filled with something that quivered and hummed.
"I'm in the middle of dictation!" he protested.
"Dictate to this," she said, flinging the bag toward him. It
burst open, releasing a dark cloud that buzzed angrily. She stepped
quickly out the door, slammed it shut, and locked it.
"What on earth-" Costa exclaimed, furious at this unexpected
insolence. That girl had just lost her livelihood! Then he saw the
cloud and recognized it. "Bees?"
Years before, an enterprising beekeeper had imported small
honeybees from Africa, in order to crossbreed them with local,
 
82
strains and develop superior honey producers. The African bees
made half again as much honey as American bees. But they were
also ten times as fierce. The individual sting of a bee was no worse
than average, but these Africans were much more eager to sting.
Where a person might blunder into a nest and receive two or three
stings ordinarily, he would receive twenty or thirty from an African
swarm in the same time, and when he ran, they would follow
for as much as a mile.
In 1957 some of these killer bees were accidentally let loose
near the city of São Paulo, Brazil. Since then they had spread relentlessly,
killing or mating with local queen bees. Their vitality
and aggressiveness gave them a competitive edge against the natives.
Every year they increased the radius of their territory another
hundred miles or so, until they covered all South America.
The North Americans were viewing the approaching invasion of
their continent with growing alarm, unable to do much about it.
As with the stinging fire-ants, that flourished despite all the efforts
of modern technology, the bees progressed.
All this flashed through the executive's mind in an instant, for
he well knew the history and nature of the bees. It would take
perhaps 500 stings to be lethal to a man-but this confined swarm
could deliver that. There was no other living target in the room.
He hurdled the bag and charged for the door-and found it
locked. Fernando Mirabal could have bashed it down with his
mighty shoulder; he was a fantastic brute of a man. But not Costa;
he was soft and paunchy from years of desk work.
Now the bees were on him, striking like miniature dive-bombers.
Sting! Sting! Sting! Faster than he could perceive, let alone
avoid, they scored on his bare arms and face and neck. He shut his
eyes, but they stung through his eyelids. He screamed-and they
stung his lips and tongue. They were all over him, in his clothing,
crawling up inside the legs of his pants, through the sleeves to his
armpits, from his shirt collar down his back, stinging everywhere.
Maddened by the continuing pain, he picked up his heavy
swivel chair with hysterical strength and smashed it through the
83
picture window. Now there was an escape! He flung himself out
through the jagged gap and sailed through the air, knowing that
relief was at hand at last.
Costa's descent was more efficient than that of the ninja who
had brought the bees. By the time the ninja reached the ground

floor, a guard was there. The building was already being sealed off,
with all occupants suspect. "Stop!" the guard cried, aiming his
handgun.
The ninja walked quickly up to him. His lips parted lightly,
revealing a small wooden tube. From this tiny blowgun emerged a
poison-tipped needle, Fukumi-Bari , a special ninja dart. It pierced
the guard's right eyeball, carrying its serum directly into his brain,
and the man fell dead.
The ninja departed the building and the city swiftly, mission
accomplished. If Candelaria were lucky, she too would escape to
find sanctuary at the Black Castle; but even if she failed, she had
the satisfaction of avenging her situation.
*
The dwarf-ninja stood only three and a half feet tall, but size
was no indication of his prowess. He was, after all, one of the
original Japanese minions of Fu Antos.
He moved down the river in his miniature canoe, paddling
swiftly and silently until he spied the night lights of the town.
This was where the oil company troops were garrisoned. The town
itself had a population of about 5,000, and was the nearest substantial
settlement to the ninja camp: useful for minor supplies
and contacts. So normally the ninjas had left it alone. Now it had
become a liability, to an extent. The capitalist forces were moving
in, and it was necessary to blunt their encroachment by selective
pruning, as at Brasilia.
The dwarf beached his boat silently and tied it within the
high foliage of a tall overhanging tree: the last place a soldier would
think to look. In addition he left a band of poison on the handle of
 
84
its paddle, just in case a stranger did discover it and try to use it.
Stealing ninja equipment was hazardous business.
Now he slunk around the backs of the buildings, seeking the
army unit's temporary barracks. A battalion of troops had arrived
in the past week, some five hundred men under the command of
Major Albuquerque Lima.
The major was not the run-of-the-mill army man. He was
Nordic, of German lineage, his parents having settled in Brazil
and changed their name after World War II. His father had been a
career officer in the German military machine, one of the thoroughly
professional soldiers that had made the Wehrmacht the
finest fighting force in the world despite Nazi interference. He was
tough, fair, and tactically brilliant, prevented from rising to higher
rank solely by the conspiring jealousy of his less-qualified colleagues.
He had made a specialty of jungle warfare and felt quite capable of
handling a band of renegade Indians and any outside collaborators
who were stirring them up.
Fu Antos concurred with that assessment. Major Lima was
dangerous, and would become more dangerous as his successes in
the field forced his unwilling superiors to yield him increasing
authority. Without him, his battalion was merely another unit, its
guiding genius gone.
The town, like many in the central Brazilian wilderness, was
fairly new. It was near the river but not on it; instead it perched on
a small rise of the ground, built there because of the periodic river
floods. There were no paved streets; yellow dirt roads and crude
wooden houses served the people adequately. Few people lived in
central Brazil from preference; could they but afford it, virtually
all would inhabit the pleasure city of Rio.
The normal police post was small, about fifty men augmented
in times of crisis by volunteers. However, the local police had been
wiped out in the prior excursion upstream, and the army camp
had been constructed on the outskirts of town.
It was patrolled by armed guards, of course, but passing through

this perimeter was child's play to the ninja dwarf. He skirted the
85
main barracks, going instead to the Letrina. This was a simple
wooden housing constructed over a big hole in the ground. The
army was efficient about such things; no fooling with expensive
and water-wasteful flush toilet facilities. When the hole was filled,
dirt would be shoveled over the refuse and the shit-house moved
to a new pit.
There were two sections: one for officers, the other for men.
The dwarf observed the privy for some time, waiting until it was
empty, then entered the men's room. Here there was a board-seat
with four holes. A thin partition separated this from the officers'
facility.
He donned his tekaki, metal claws fastened to both hands and
feet, enabling him to climb vertical surfaces. He arranged a rope
and little screw-in hooks about his body for ready access, and fastened
his specialized weapons on his back. Then he mounted the
seat nearest to the officers' partition, put his hands down on either
side, lifted up his feet, and swung them back and down into the
hole. He let his body drop silently, performing an acrobatic feat
that would have been impossible for a larger or flabbier man.
The pit was deep, but even in a few days a battalion of five
hundred men can generate a lot of fecal matter. There was only
four feet clearance between the seat-board and the semi-liquid mass
of substance below. Since the seats were raised two and a half feet
above ground level, the pit was getting full, and the structure would
have to be moved in a few more days. The stench was intense.
The ninja clung to the wooden ceiling by means of his tekaki,
moving like a human fly toward the officers' section. One mishold
and he would fall, suffering a fate a good deal worse than
cleanliness. The partition extended down part way, terminating at
ground level, eighteen inches above the smelly stew. The dwarf
descended this, then froze as two enlisted men entered their section.
He watched, clinging to the wall as their meaty posteriors
plunked down on the seats and disgorged their contents.
The troopers, their rounds expended, departed. The ninja resumed
his journey. He brought his head down beneath the parti-
 
86
tion, so that he could see up into the officers' twin-holed evacuation
center. All was clear. He passed one arm through and jabbed
his claws into the wood, then followed with the other arm. Like a
snake, he completed the contortion, his forepart ascending the
wall while his hindpart descended on the far side. Somehow he
performed the maneuver noiselessly and faultlessly, never touching
the refuse below.
Now he mounted to the seat-board. There were fewer officers
than men, so that the twin seats represented much more adequate
accommodations than the four. But officers always had the best of
it; that was what they were paid for, even though their refuse stank
as bad as that of the common herd.
The ninja emplaced himself between the two holes, which
were more widely spaced as though to accommodate broader beams.
He hooked on firmly with both feet and one hand, then used the
free hand to bring up one of his screw-hooks. Carefully, laboriously,
he drove this into the wood. Silence was more important
than speed. Then he screwed in a second hook, and strung his
musubinawa, a special rope fashioned from woman's hair, between
them. At last he rested his back within the loop of this fine, light,
strong rope, and let go with his other hand. He unlimbered his
small, sharp, barbed spear and held it in his right hand. Now at
last he was ready for business.
This procedure had taken well over an hour, and it was now
two in the morning. He had a prospective wait of several hours.

No normal man could have stood it, suspended uncomfortably
above a pit full of shit-but this was a ninja. In perfect silence he
waited. The atmosphere infused his being and caused him an imperative
need to defecate-and, ironically, he was in no position to
do so.
Reveille sounded just before dawn, and the army camp came
abruptly to life. The troops piled into the men's section, dropping
an irregular avalanche of manure into the four mouths of the privy
and letting loose an exuberant fusillage of wind. In minutes the
level of odor rose appreciably, slopping under the partition in slow
87
waves to displace the lesser offerings of the officers. As though to
combat this intrusion, an officer came to make his own discharge.
Now came the ticklish part. The dwarf had placed himself so
that he could cover either hole, since he could not anticipate which
one his prey might use. But there were a number of officers, and
only one-Major Lima-was his assignment. There would be no
second chance; he had to be sure he scored on the major, not a
lesser man.
He had to look. The posterior that covered the right hole gave
no clues as to the rank of its owner. From this vantage, all men
were equal. Well, not precisely equal; General Napoleon of France
had spent so long wrestling with an evacuation complicated by
piles that he had been unable to commence the battle of Waterloo
advantageously. More of history was written in the outhouse than
all the texts cared to admit. At any rate, the ninja had a problem.
Had he been able to study photographs of the major's rear, he
could have identified it now, but there was little light, and no
such pictures had been available. Too bad that anal divination was
not a contemporary practice, like palmistry or forehead divination.
So he had to risk a peek through the left-hand hole.
He did this cautiously, not poking his head through but angling
his body so that he could glance slantwise through it and up
at the officer's insignia of rank. To do this he had to slide his legs
almost directly under the occupied hole-and they were quickly
soaked by the flowing urine. He paid no attention. His gaze traveled
up the sleeve, up the arm to the shoulder as he twisted about
in his sling, to command a view of the insignia of rank on the
collar.
At last he saw it: a simple single star of a second lieutenant.
Not his man. He swung smoothly back to his hiding place between
the holes as the stream abated and the man stood up, not
offering any solids to the pot this time.
A few minutes later a second officer entered. This one took the
left seat, and the dwarf swung the other way to spy his rank.
There it was: the three five-pointed stars, one with golden
 
88
sunbursts between the points. The major!
Now the dwarf hefted his spear, braced himself, and aimed it
at the anus opening like a black flower. Gas blasted out from that
orifice, like the firing of a blank-and the point of the barbed
spear thrust directly into that fart and up into the intestine, driven
by all the convulsed power of trained ninja muscles. The major
lurched up, but the shaft followed, and as gravity brought the
torso down again the tip pierced the beating heart and killed him.
The man slumped on the seat, his career over. The dwarf snapped
off the protruding shaft of the spear, leaving no visible cause of
death, not even flowing blood, then proceeded to make his getaway,
mission accomplished.
He clung to the seat-board with his claws, unhooked the support
cord, unscrewed the hooks, and let go. He dropped straight
into the septic pool below. As he slowly sank into the brown slush,
he placed a hollow reed in his mouth. Then he moved his arms

and legs to draw himself down under the surface. Soon only the
tip of the reed projected above, as the thick lumpy stew closed in.
It was several minutes before another officer entered the privy.
Then there was a commotion, audible to the dwarf despite the
insulation of substance. He was sure the leaderless troops would
not suspect the cause of the major's demise-not until the surgical
post-mortem was performed. By that time it would be night again,
and the ninja would silently emerge from his camouflage and make
his way to the river.
Quite possibly the soldiers would never catch on to the precise
mechanism of the assassination.
Ass-ass-in. Under his mask of shit, the dwarf smiled briefly, for
he knew the term for his act in many languages. An ass had received
a spear in the ass.
But he had reckoned without knowing the cadre of officers
and noncoms the major had assembled. In minutes these superior
men had deduced the nature and timing of the event. Preferring
not to wait on the tedious and uncertain process of formal justice,
they took direct and immediate action. A sergeant made a charge
89
out of three blocks of eight-pound military TNT, equivalent to
over fifty pounds of commercial dynamite. He cut off a five-second
length of fuse, dropped the mass through the privy-hole like a
huge turd, and ran outside.
There followed a spectacularly ugly and smelly scene. The explosion
blew the privy apart, followed by a rain of wood, dirt,
urine, feces, and fragments of the dwarf ninja.
*
Fu Antos learned of this vengeance very quickly. It made him
angry, for the dwarf had been one of the most valuable of his agents.
It also suggested that this army battalion was more formidable
than anticipated, for the cadre had reacted with very nearly the
insight and decision of a ninja. Simple elimination of its commander
would not suffice; the entire unit had to be destroyed.
But the battalion was now fully alert. Soldiers patrolled the
perimeter of the entire town, challenging all strangers, and troops
occupied many of the houses. The town was now under martial
law. The dwarf 's canoe had been found and burned; machine-gun
nests now overlooked the river. There was no way to infiltrate this
area without the risk of substantial losses, and the ninjas could not
afford further casualties.
Fu Antos chose a subtler approach. He waited until the major's
corpse had been put aboard a police craft with its honor guard for
transport to civilization, then sent another ninja to swim the river.
All eyes were dutifully on the funeral craft, making it easy; but the
ninja stroked well beneath the muddy surface anyway, breathing
through a tube to the air. The projecting part was concealed by a
small tangle of floating debris. There were many such items in the
river, so even the soldiers whose eyes strayed were not suspicious.
At the appropriate point the ninja held his breath and swam underwater
to the big pipe inlet where the river water was drawn into
the town's supply system. Well water was not good in this swampy
area, so the river was the cleanest source, bad as it was. The water
 
90
was pumped to a big tank where it was allowed to stand, so that
much of the sediment settled out and floating particles could be
skimmed off the top. It was passed through filters and piped to
the army camp and many of the houses, now fairly clean and safe
to drink.
The swimming ninja opened a packet of powder, carefully
kneading it so that it mixed with the water as it emerged. This
solution was sucked into the supply pipe.
The action took only a few seconds. The ninja swam back to

his drifting debris, now further downstream, and applied his mouth
to the tube embedded there. He continued on down the river
unobserved, following the major.
There was no immediate result of this mission. But the deed
was done. The powder was a secret ninja formula derived from
crushed mushrooms: a hallucinogen similar to LSD but more potent
because there were no safety standards. In short, a drug of
madness.
All day the dissolved drug sat in the tank, spreading through
the water. It was so powerful that even diluted thousands of times
it still was dangerously potent. It neither floated nor settled out; it
permeated the tank, being further thinned by incoming replacement
water. Its effect was thus diminishing, and would vanish in a
few days without trace. But that one day would be all that was
necessary.
Hallucinogenic mushrooms such as peyote have been used in
many parts of the world. In some cases their essence passes through
the human system without chemical change. Thus the shaman or
medicine man may take a potent dosage, and the tribesmen drink
his urine and suffer similar effects.
The ninja drug intensified the natural, usually-suppressed propensities
of people. A moody person would become so depressed
as to sink into catatonia or commit suicide. A violent one would
become a raving maniac, destroying everything around him. A
strongly sexed one would become a literal satyr, indulging in re-
91
peated and grotesque sexual acts, raping women and buggering
men.
A few hours after the ninja's passage, it began. Not all the
people drank from the tank; many poorer ones had to dip directly
from the river, and wealthier ones drank milk, wines and fruit
juices in lieu of water. But they were in the minority, and because
there were so many armed soldiers in the town, in such an atmosphere
of alarm, the sane people were swamped in the rising tide
of madness.
No ninjas or other outsiders were near to report on that awful
night. In the morning a river boat discovered the town burned to
the ground, its inhabitants strewn all about: some shot, some
stabbed to death, many strangled or clubbed. The women lay naked,
evidently sexually molested, and many children too. The few
survivors could offer no explanation; inexplicable madness had suddenly
descended on the population, and the town had become a
gruesome battlefield.
Only the sergeant who had blown up the privy had a reasonable
insight into the rationale of that destruction-and he had not
been there. He had been a member of the major's honor guard,
cruising down the river as the ninja swam in.
 
Chapter 6:
Wrath of the God
I don't know how long I slept. Maybe a couple of days, for
when I finally came to I was ravenous. In fact, it was the dinner
bell that woke me. I needed no shill of a boy to guide me to the
chow line this time, which was just as well, because Filho was
gone.
I fell in at the end of the long queue; it had taken me just
enough time to get my bearings to make the last. My shoes were
gone, and I was now in baggy prison pants with no belt, so that I
had to hold them up with one hand. So when I made it to the
front, I'd have trouble holding my meal.
But the man on the end protested. He spoke no English, but
pointed toward the head of the line. "Por favor. Almoco."
"Uh-uh," I said. "I don't believe in crashing. I'll wait my turn."
But now others saw me. Two men came back toward me. I

thought it was going to be more trouble, but they were smiling.
"Please, Mr. Jason," one said in recognizable English. "I am Honorio
Chagas. No one will eat until you do."
93
My brow wrinkled. "What's this all about?"
"It is all over the prison. How they put you under the shock
treatment, and you just laughed and told them nothing. And the
butcher Mirabal got burned by his own machine and had to have
a doctor come. And you never betrayed your comrades even though
they were tortured before your eyes."
"I had no comrades," I said. "Those were innocent strangers."
But I wished he hadn't reminded me of that lovely girl and that
poor old man, so brutally treated because of me. Mirabal was a
butcher!
"Just so," Honorio agreed approvingly. "You had no comrades,
and so the lives of many in the movement were saved. It is unfortunate
that brave old Carlos died, but at least he did not talk. And
you beat up the informers. Here is your food." For he had brought
me to the head of the line, and they were serving me. I decided to
go along with this; they were determined and I was hungry.
But now I had another problem. I couldn't take the food without
letting go of my baggy pants, and then they would fall, and
after what had happened before I was damned if I was going to
bare my rear. Accused of pederasty, indeed!
My new friend saw the problem. "Here-some string," he
said. He looped the twine about my waist and tied it with a bow.
"Thanks," I mumbled, accepting the food. It was a special
treat, my friend informed me: Picadinho, or ground meat with
okra and pimentos. Inpame and Xuxu, a pale green squash. Jilo, a
delicate variety of eggplant. And so on, an astonishing variety for
prison fare, I thought. Of course not everyone had every type;
there was not enough. But the fact that there was any choice at all
was remarkable. "What's the occasion?" I asked.
"Did you not know? It is the Carnival," he explained. "Even in
prison, we must celebrate, and we honor you especially, for your
courage."
"I was only trying to stop Filho from getting raped," I said. I
don't like rape, and the involvement of a child or young person
makes it worse, and homosexual rape of a boy-but it had all been
 
94
a setup, unreal. Someone had figured my reactions very carefully!
"Why didn't anyone speak up then? You all saw what happened."
"We did not trust you, sir," he explained. "We thought you
were another shill, that we would only betray ourselves by speaking
out. As for the boy-" and here he spat eloquently to the
side- "impossible to rape that kind."
That set me back. The clear implication was that Filho was
himself a homosexual, used to the act. A male whore. I had heard
somewhere that boys of a certain age were highly prized for this
purpose; indeed, that they had erotic nerves in the anus that-or
maybe it was a conditioned response-and I had charged to this
one's rescue! No wonder the other prisoners had been suspicious!
"I see you did not know," Honorio said. "We Latins hate sodomy
worse than you do, but this was a trap, and it smelled. We are
sorry we misjudged you; we apologize."
"First you thought I was a shill," I said. "Now you think I'm
one of the urban guerrillas. I'm neither. I really did not know
those poor people who were tortured. If I had known them, I probably
would have admitted it, to save them from-you know what
Mirabal did to them?"
"We know," Honorio said. He opened his mouth wide, to show
two teeth missing. "But even if you know nothing, you are still
Jason Striker. You would not come here to betray us."

Was he trying to pump me for information about my mission?
I could not afford to trust him. "I didn't want to come to Brazil at
all," I said. "As soon as I get out of here, I'm going straight home."
He nodded, not questioning me further. I finished my meal.
It wasn't enough; it left me still hungry. But I knew I had a generous
portion, and I was not about to complain.
The whole of the prison had changed. Now everyone was
friendly. I went for a drink of water at the lone tap, and someone
warned me to beware of the worms. I had not been able to read the
sign, in Portuguese. I didn't know what kind of worms were in
that water, but I was good and thirsty this time, and there was
nothing else. I drank.
95
I returned to my bunk, feeling better. The long rest had done
me good, and the improved mood of my fellow prisoners helped a
lot. I lay down to rest some more.
Several gunshots woke me. Honorio was with me almost immediately.
"Down, friend!" he exclaimed. "Take cover." We cowered
down by the bunk.
Then all hell broke loose. There was a terrific explosion, and
all the prisoners started running around and screaming. It was an
instant, full-scale riot!
Honorió grabbed my hand. "Follow me, Striker; it is for you
they come."
"What?" I was confused.
"The MR-26 blew up the wall of the infirmary. Now we all
escape, but especially you."
Still I resisted. "I don't know anything about the Mister Twenty
Six! It has to be a mistake!" Later I was to learn that it had been no
mistake. Dulce had escaped, made contact with the Communist
MR-26 Revolutionary Movement, organized them together with
the MR-8 and several other similar groups, and planned a fullscale
attack on the jail-all to free me. It was quite an irony, these
Communist revolutionary groups coming to spring a complete
capitalist like me.
They had filled a fake ambulance with C-3 plastic explosive
and TNT and driven it to the prison infirmary, telling the guards
they were coming to pick up a sick prisoner. The guards, celebrating
the carnival by imbibing 100-proof Cachaca, the colorless alcohol
that was Brazil's national drink, had not been suspicious,
and had let the ambulance into the inner courtyard, separated
from the prisoners' court by a fence of iron bars. The plan was to
explode the ambulance there, then charge in with a panel truck
filled with men and wipe out the surviving guards. Then they
would pick me up and their friends and scorch rubber getting out.
But, as with so many straightforward efforts, the actual attempt
had complications. The two men driving the ambulance
had faked papers; the idea was for them to enter the prisoners'
 
96
courtyard so that they would not be harmed when the ambulance
exploded in the guard's court. But one man lost his nerve and
started running when a guard challenged him. That had triggered
the exchange of shots that woke me. Then another guard had tried
to open the back of the ambulance. Booby-trapped, it had exploded
far more violently than the guerrillas, unsophisticated in
such matters, had anticipated. The bombing was heard all over
Rio, and a huge black cloud of smoke rose into the air above the
prison, signaling the location plainly. This meant that help for the
guards would be on the way much sooner than planned. The panel
truck, charging in, rammed into the wall and got stuck in the
gat asit was out of commission; and now it was every man for
himself. The MR-26 people tried to rescue their own number
from the cells, and the MR-8 theirs, forgetting any unified effort.

This was the chaos I now found myself in. No wonder I balked!
"Dulce," Honorio said.
Then I decided to go along. How she could have become involved
in any of this I could not guess, then, but no one in this
prison should know of my connection with her, unless she had
told him. Maybe this was another trap-but she did have something
to do with the guerrillas, and the explosion and riot were
real enough.
Honorio led me to the gate between the prisoners' and the
guards' compounds. Acrid smoke filled the area, and there was a
wrecked panel truck to the side, partially blocking the way. Bodies
were lying around. The explosion had blown the gate off its hinges,
but some guards had rallied and were trying to stem the breakout.
In the confusion we made it through the bedlam to the infirmary.
There was a smoking hole in the wall. Guards were trying to close
it off, but were held back by snipers firing from the buildings
beyond.
"We can't go there!" I protested. "We'll be shot too!" Honorio
raised his hand and yelled something in Portuguese. Prisoners
turned to look at him. Then they charged the guards near the
wall. There was shooting and a brief struggle; then the guards
97
were dead or unconscious. I was astonished at the number of homemade
weapons I saw the prisoners use. The helpless guards were
literally hacked to death by spoons honed razor-sharp, fragments
of broken glass, razor blades embedded in potatoes, homemade
blackjacks, even knives fashioned from metal from the bunks.
"Come!" Honorio called to me.
"What did you say to them?" I demanded, hanging back.
"I said, 'Here is Jason Striker whom you let go to the torture
on a false charge, and now his friends from the MR-26 Movement
have come to free him, and all of you can go too-if you only get
rid of those guards. This man whom you wronged so villainously
forgives you and gives you your freedom, for this one small favor!'"
"You didn't!" I said, aghast.
He smiled. "No. I said 'Kill the bastards and get the hell out
before the army comes!'"
I saw the girl Ester, her of the lost tooth, running with several
other female prisoners, apparently quite recovered from her ordeal.
Her plump buttocks jiggled with every stride she took. I was
glad to know she was free. Too bad the old man had died.
And then I wondered: how had Honorio known about the
death? Surely Mirabal would not have advertised the news over
the loudspeaker. But there was no time to conjecture about such
moot points.
Now we passed on through the hole. I was afraid the underground
Revolution snipers would fire on us, but they didn't. Instead
someone called: "Jason!"
I looked up-and there on the roof of the building across from
the prison was Dulce, waving. What a wonderful sight! She had
already been freed. That made my day complete-or so I thought.
I charged down the street and around the corner of the building,
hoping to meet her at the entrance. But I was one of a ragtag
band of hundreds of escapees. The other prisoners, wisely, were
eager to get as far away from the prison as possible, with no delay.
My bare feet were vulnerable; I had to watch my step, lest my
tender toes get trampled in the stampede. And my damned pants
 
98
kept falling down; somewhere in the rush the string had snapped
and been lost. I had no underpants, and-well, it was awkward.
So we swept pell-mell around the corner-and suddenly the
crowd was ten times the size. We were like a rivulet joining a stream,
our impetus merged with the larger body. A stream? Nay, this

crowd was the mighty Amazon! I tried to get to the door of the
building, but it was upstream and manifestly impossible in my
present state. I was carried along the opposite way, down the street
amidst the crocodiles, I mean the cheering throng.
What was this? It seemed as though the entire population of
Rio had disgorged into this one channel. Furthermore, the people
weren't walking, they were dancing, despite the press of bodies,
and they had a tremendous variety of weird costumes. Had the
city gone crazy? No, of course it was the Carnival.
I finally fought my way to the fringe and flattened myself
against a building, letting the main current flow past me. Then I
gripped myself, especially my sagging trousers, and forged upstream
toward the key building. I took advantage of momentary
eddies in the human stream, and clung to the wall when the tide
became too strong, making erratic but inevitable progress. Soon I
would recover Dulce!
But abruptly I stopped.
Because I saw two real predators on my trail, as crocodilian as
men could get: Laureano the torturer and the three-hundred-pound
football linesman of the original Death Squad that I had flipped
on the beach when I rescued Dulce.
I was in trouble. I might ambush them and knock them out,
but I couldn't be sure how the crowd would react. They might
turn against me, as had the prisoners during the homo episode.
Sure, the prisoners had had reason to be suspicious, but maybe
this crowd did, too. I was hardly a promising looking specimen,
with my sprouting beard stubble, sagging pants and bare feet. I
might be mistaken for a mugger or killer. Anyway, the last thing I
wanted was to make a big scene. Better simply to lose them. One
99
thing I dared not do was lead them toward Dulce; maybe that was
what they really wanted.
So I merged with the flowing crowd again, this time drifting
with the current, ducking my head to reduce my height. I was
taller than most of the natives, and it was a distinct disadvantage
now.
My strategy seemed to work. Not because I had any real expertise
at losing a tail, but because the surging and varied crowd
made keeping track of anyone practically impossible. I lost the
Death Squadders-but I also lost myself. Yes, I know that would
never happen to James Bond-but I was stuck. Wherever I looked,
there was a sea of gyrating bodies, gaudy costumes, smiling faces.
What an extravaganza! It was like being caught in an ocean storm,
as though I had now been washed all the way out to sea, with
dancing human flesh in lieu of the raging elements.
I fought my way to the fringe of the crowd again. And grabbed
for my pants again. Too late. They dropped down to my knees,
and passersby chuckled at my bare buttocks. If only the bastards
hadn't taken my belt, and if only I hadn't lost Honorio's string.
I bent over to get hold of my pants, and someone pinched my
buttock. I whirled around, but I couldn't tell who in that mass of
jiggling people had done it. What really got me was the fact that
the only ones within range were women. I guess the ladies like to
turn the tables when they have the chance. Can't really blame
them. But I got my pants back up in a hurry.
I struggled into a broad central avenue. Here there was a snarl
of traffic, and I do mean a snarl, because I saw what had to be the
mechanized units of the Brazilian Army on their way up the street.
Stalled. Several tanks were unable to move through the jam, and
just had to wait, while their crews smiled and waved at the passing
people and watched the slow-moving floats. No doubt these units
had been summoned to deal with the prison break. Fat lot of good
they'd do.
It was the carnival, all right. I saw floats very much like those

in American pageants, filled with pretty girls-and let me tell
 
100
you, the pretty girls of Brazil are just as shapely as anywhere else.
I'm sort of a voyeur; I admit it. In fact I'm even a bit proud of it.
One striking exhibit was like a giant beer bottle, with an almostnaked
girl sitting on the neck, and others dancing all around it to
Latin rhythms. I really enjoy this sort of thing, but would have
liked it even better if I weren't a hunted prisoner.
One strange thing I observed: there were quite a number of
men dressed up as women. There was no question of their sex;
some were big and muscular, and one had a mustache. After my
recent homosexual accusation-I just couldn't get that indignity
off my mind!-I found this transvestitism a queasy matter. Did
these men have repressed homosexual desires? I saw no, er, hankypanky
going on, though. Well, it wasn't anything I understood.
I forgot to hang on, and my pants dropped again. Damn! I
grabbed for them-and leaped as I felt a sudden burst of extreme
coldness, as if I'd sat down bare in a snowbank. Someone had
squirted a shot of ether between my legs, the rapid evaporation
making it icy. Another damned practical joke!
Actually, this was evidently the season of pranks. I saw people
pelting each other with confetti, serpentines, rotten eggs, flour
from bags, and something I learned later was called bombitas de
peo, literally translated as "little fart bombs"-filled, of course,
with the most appalling stench.
The afternoon was wearing on, and I was wearing out. The
scant prison lunch seemed far in the past, and my stomach was
growling. I felt like a fart bomb myself. I stumbled into an alcove
where, oddly, there were no people, and paused, getting my bearings.
I saw a little roadside shrine, evidently a monument to one of
the voodoo gods. It was a lump of brownish stone or clay or packed
dirt streaked with grease, formed into the shape of a grotesque
head whose eyes and mouth were formed with small seashells. A
parody, surely, a joke, like a gargoyle; it reminded me of the time
years ago when both Huntley and Brinkley broke down in chuckles
on the evening news, telling how people were sending gar-
101
goyles to friends for Saint Valentine's Day. Yet somehow this was
real and malignant, unnerving. Probably it was my guilty conscience
stirring for what I was about to do. The thing was on some
sort of wooden platform, covered by a cloth, with burning candles
set around it, and several big, beautiful conch shells, and some
dried-out pieces of coconut.
I had heard something about these. (I have a lot of funny bits
of information jumbled about in my head.) People left offerings of
food and clothing, much as they burned candles to saints. Apparently
the food just sat there until it spoiled, or some hungry animal
got to it.
Well, I was a hungry animal! I hoped the voodoo god would
not strike me down for my sacrilege, but hunger would certainly
get me otherwise. I picked up a huge banana and peeled it, or
tried to. I was so weak I had trouble even with that; the thing
resisted my efforts as though possessed. By the god, maybe. I finally
tore it open and took a bite-and it was so hard and fibrous
I had to spit it out.
No wonder. This was no banana, it was a plantain. The huge
cousin to the banana, so tough it had to be cooked. Served me
right.
I ate some stale bread, and an overripe mango, and they really
were good. There was also a little bottle of Cachaca, the ubiquitous
alcoholic beverage of Brazil. I was thirsty, so I picked it up,
considered the pale liquid inside, remembered my inevitable regrets
over alcohol, felt a redoubled thirst, opened it and took a

swig. And fired it back out in a blast like that of a blowtorch. It
seemed like almost pure alcohol. If the voodoo god drank that
firewater, no wonder he was such a grouch! I recapped it with my
eyes streaming and put it back. Instead I pocketed the handkerchief
full of black American pennies that also sat there. No kidding;
they were genuine Lincoln-heads, anomalous here in Brazil.
Genuine money, and I might need it. Not merely for money, but
for self-defense. The fact is, a stocking filled with coins is one of
the best blackjacks available. Hoods used this kind, and when the
 
102
police search all they find is loose change. I dare say it would be a
dandy way to dispose of a weapon, too: drop the stocking in the
trash, spend the money, and how would it ever be recovered or
identified? For that matter, a sack full of sand is pretty good too.
Anyone can arm himself if he really wants to. Anyway, there were
seventy-seven pennies-yes, I counted them as I ate-and I presumed
this was a magic number. A good mass.
There was a large floppy battered peasant hat beside the food,
another offering. I put it on my head. Finally I took a long red
scarf and wrapped it around my waist. That served in lieu of a belt,
and was a godsend. A voodoo godsend. Now I could keep my
white rear hidden as well as my face. "Thank you, voodoo god," I
said sincerely. "If I ever have a chance to return the favor . . ." And
it seemed to me that there was a momentary glint in the eye of the
grim statue. I shuddered.
I started to rejoin the throng, then had another thought; I
picked up the bottle of Cachaca and held it in my left hand. I had
no intention of drinking it, but it would do nicely for camouflage.
Now I looked just like a peasant on a spree; the Death Squad
would never identify me.
Well, there was one other thing. I squatted, scooped up a handful
of dirt, and smeared it over my hands and arms. This darkened
my skin and gave me that unwashed look of the illiterate farmer.
For good measure I put some in my hair too. Now at last my
costume was complete.
I merged with the crowd again, feeling better. I had little reason,
for I had no idea where I was. Even if I found my way back to
the hotel, I would not be safe, for the Death Squad thugs would
surely be watching it. That meant I had no way to get Kan-Sen's
message, and could not proceed with my mission. Dulce was my
only hope-and where was she now?
Somehow I would just have to get some more money and locate
the airport and take a plane home. Then I could check directly
with Kan-Sen, and start over.
Only two or three things wrong with that notion. First, how
103
could I locate the airport, let alone obtain the money for passage?
Seventy-seven cents would hardly cover it. Second, where would
that leave Dulce? Alone and hungry in these teeming streets? Third,
with no proper clothing and no identification, how could I get
back into my country? And wouldn't the Death Squad be watching
the airport and the other routes out of the country?
In short, I was nowhere. So why the hell did I feel so good?
I looked about, more or less free now from the pangs of hunger,
embarrassment over my bare-assment, and apprehension about
the pursuing Squad. So I could better assimilate my surroundings.
And they were impressive.
Brazil I had heard was as large and populous as all the other
South American countries combined. I could believe it! I had never
seen so many people, so packed, so hurried, going nowhere I could
fathom, but going there fast. Cars plunged through the multitude:
Volkswagens, Simcas, Mercedes, and big American cars, zooming
by each other, through red lights, squealing around corners

while the pedestrians drew aside just barely enough to avoid disaster.
Why hadn't I been aware of this suicidal streak in the natives?
Maybe prison had sharpened my sensitivities. Or, riding a taxi
and dining with Dulce, I hadn't paid proper attention.
Dulce, somewhere in this incredible city. I'd never find her!
A group of blue-faced, white-nosed-and I mean poster-paint
white, baboon-bottom blue!-black-foreheaded clowns went by.
They had huge bouffants of orange fuzz in lieu of hair. There was
a jangle of music, one might say tintinnabulation, as the pace of
frolic intensified. Children paraded by, their bare feet dancing in
the dust in rapid-Samba patterns. They carried drums, whistles,
musical triangles, and the cuica, a weird wheezing instrument.
Many adults wore brightly colored masks.
There were also elaborate costumes emulating the colonial rule
of the past: fancy laces, expensive satins, powdered curly wigs,
billowing hoop-skirts. Many outfits looked quite expensive, and I
wondered how the poor people could afford them. In contrast,
 
104
there were also a number of formal European suits, and near-naked
young women. And Egyptian slaves in short white tunics and
silver chains. Alpine peasants in thin white blouses and brief green
shorts. Sultans' concubines in gold brassieres and flimsy silk trousers
through which the panties showed. And so on; myriad and
delightful were the ways in which the girls showed off their unquestionable
charms. Anything, it seemed, went.
I passed a girl dancing on a bandstand. "Oba! Oba!" she squealed
as she gyrated. This was one of the words I was catching on to; it
meant "Wow!"
And suddenly I realized: the jailbreak must have been timed
for this carnival-time, so that the escaping prisoners could lose themselves
in the milling throng, just as I had done. Those army tanks,
bogged down in the mire of holiday traffic-beautiful!
Now the crowd parted to let a parade squeeze by with its
accompanying band and costumed dancers. They seemed tireless,
like the Oba-girl I had passed before, but my bare feet were hurting.
I wedged back against a shop window with its big sign saying
LIQUIDACAO-apparently a big sale.
A blowzy woman clutched my arm. "Boa tarde!" she cried exuberantly.
Evidently a salutation.
I looked at her, repelled by her fat, flushed, coarse face, and
tried to pull away. "I don't speak Portu-"
"Seu nome?" she inquired, tightening her hold.
Nome? Ah: Name. "Jason," I said. "But I don't-"
"Nao compreendo," she said. "Voce doente?"
I glanced back-and saw Mr. 300-lb. Football Linesman cruising
down the wide street, peering this way and that through the
crowd. I couldn't stay here; I was right in his path. Those Death
Squadders sure were after me.
I tried again to draw away from the woman, but she held my
arm in a grip like that of a wrestler. Suddenly I realized I was going
at it wrong; I could use her for camouflage. My pursuers obviously
were searching for a tall lone foreigner.
"Have a drink!" I said, offering her the bottle of Cachaca.
105
Her eyes lighted, and that was a good trick, considering how
bloodshot they were. She grabbed the bottle and popped the cork
with her teeth. She was obviously expert at this sort of thing; I had
twisted it off like a screw-on cap, in my ignorance. She tilted the
bottle to her mouth and gulped the firewater down. Then she
paused, with a half-glazed look of contentment, politely proffering
it to me.
Her slobber was on the rim, and I didn't want to touch any
more of that paint-dissolver anyway. But the Squad player was

closer yet, and now he seemed to have a couple of henchmen. I
became very uncertain of my camouflage; how could dirt and a hat
convert me into a native? So I had to do it: the smell of liquor on
my breath would be the finishing touch, for they surely knew I
didn't drink. I gulped a gulp, knowing that this time I had to
swallow, not spit.
And gulped. A river of fire coursed down my throat. I coughed,
my eyes smarting. The woman whacked me on the back helpfully.
"Oba!" I gasped.
When my eyes cleared and normal breathing was restored, I
spied the Squad leader almost on top of us. I had to hide my face.
I took the woman in my arms as though she were my girlfriend.
She giggled, pleased, jiggling all the way from her double chin to
her double kneecaps, while the D.S. man squinted suspiciously.
Did he recognize me? I had flipped him on the beach, and that's
the sort of thing a man remembers.
The woman was fifty years old, dirty, and sweaty from her
dancing. Not that I was in any position to comment, with my
own dirt and sweat and feet. Her hair straggled in sodden banks,
looking like a frizzy fright-wig. From her mouth came a strong,
bad odor; in fact her teeth were no more than rotten stumps. Her
breasts must have been marvels in her time, but now resembled
cow udders. She was some sort of mulatto with dark bronze skin, a
huge waist and a very wide mouth. But the Squadder was still
watching. So I nerved myself and kissed her. I had to squat down
 
106
somewhat to embrace her, as she barely came to my collarbone;
this added awkwardness to indignity.
Her lips were like liquor-spiked mush. Her huge breasts and
belly shoved into me like inflated cushions, reminding me distressingly
of the water-tortured man. What brutish things people
did to their own bodies, in the name of uncontrolled appetite! I
heard demonic laughter, and imagined for a moment it was that of
the voodoo god whose chapel I had robbed, but it was the D.S.
man, as he turned away. He couldn't see why anyone would want
to kiss such a monstrosity. If only he knew!
The crisis was over. I came up for air, and tried once more to
disengage, but now the bitch was hauling me into an alley. With
the sausage-thick fingers of one hand she was unbuttoning her
blouse, showing her ponderous mammaries jiggling on her barrelbelly.
Good God-she wanted the finale!
I remembered what Hiroshi had told me of Fu Antos's early
days: how he had made love to an ugly feebleminded woman,
before an audience. But I was not Fu Antos, and I had had enough.
I had to apply a simple wrist lock to free myself of her hold, and
even then she resisted determinedly. I broke away, dragging her
roughly forward in the process. She fell to elbows and knees, her
exposed breasts almost dragging in the dirt.
Her manner changed abruptly. She cursed me in Portuguese-
I could tell it was profanity by the pistol-shot explosion of syllables
-and swept up a broken fragment of a brick.
I turned and ran. The brick caught me between the shoulder
blades and fell down, split in half. What aim that woman had!
Then I was out in the crowd again, and safe; I would have a bruise,
but nothing bad.
The Oba girl was still dancing. I made my way toward her
merely because she served as an attractive landmark. She was petite
with a plump face, lovely red lips, and jet-black hair reaching
down to her buttocks. Her waist and hips were small but well
formed. Her handsome thighs flashed under her skirt and her neck-
107
lace of seashells bounced on her bosom. She had half the age of my
alley-bitch, but ten times the sex appeal; it was fun to watch her. I

really had nothing better to do.
Abruptly the girl stumbled and pitched forward off her stand.
I dived to catch her before she hit the pavement. I made it; she
landed neatly in my arms. A lithe, light morsel.
"You're okay, I think," I murmured, setting her on her feet.
"Just tired. Take a rest."
But she stared wildly around. "Umbanda!" she exclaimed.
"I'm sorry. I don't speak-"
"Umbanda!" she repeated. She started to walk, and stumbled
again. A second time I caught her. It was not a chore I objected to.
"Look-your legs are dead," I said. "Don't get me wrong-
they're beautiful legs! But how long have you been dancing here?
Two hours? You can't go-go forever. You've got to rest."
She looked at me with seeming comprehension, while the crowd
cruised by obliviously. Then she gestured toward the row of shops
fronting the street. "Umbanda!"
It must be a place, I decided. Maybe a hotel where she was
staying. She wanted to go there so she could rest and eat. "Okay,
I'll take you there," I said. Fickle as I am, I'll do anything for a
young pretty woman, and nothing for an old ugly one.
I picked her up by knees and shoulders and carried her through
the throng like a bride. It took time and effort, but every wave of
the crowd shoved that pleasant torso against me, and that was
fine. We made it to the edge, and I followed her gestures until we
came to the place she wanted.
It was a little shop with the word UMBANDA. A family business?
We entered. The shop was crowded with statues of Catholic
saints as well as voodoo replicas. The shelves were full of a variety
of herbs, powders, lotions, essences-as well as more modern aerosol
cans with printed labels.
The proprietor came forward. He was an old Negro at least
seventy, bowed down with those years, with frizzled white hair.
 
108
The girl spoke unintelligibly, and he nodded. He went to a shelf
and brought down a small package of powder.
I looked around and saw a voodoo statue just like the one in
the alcove whose offerings I had borrowed. This was a voodoo store!
The shell-eyes of the figurine seemed to be watching me. I
had taken its offerings; did it mean to punish me?
The proprietor said something, the girl answered-and I became
aware that something was amiss between them. Something
to do with the purchase. Haggling over the price?
The girl turned to me. "Por favor," she said pleadingly.
So she was out of cash. Inflation was rampant here, I knew;
prices could double in a few months. But of course that could
happen back home too. If I could put a strangle on inflation and
wipe it out-but no judo hold could do that, unfortunately.
I turned out my pocket and produced the seventy-seven black
pennies. "That's all I have-but if it'll help . . ."
The proprietor shook his head. Not enough. Not surprising.
The girl gave a little sigh of resignation. She picked up her
money, returned my pennies to me, and turned to go.
"Esperar!" the proprietor said. He held out the package. He
was agreeing to the price after all.
We paid our money and accepted the package. On the way
out, my eye caught that of the idol again, and it gave me the
shivers all over again. I was acutely conscious of the source of my
limited wealth. The voodoo god did know!
The girl saw my glance, and nodded knowingly. "Umbanda,"
she repeated.
Oh. Maybe that was the name of the voodoo god, my benefactor.
Ah, well. "Umbanda," I agreed. "Where to now, Oba?" I expected
her to return to her bandstand. It had been a pleasant little

interlude, and I was glad to have helped her, but I had other concerns
to attend to. Such as finding Dulce before the D.S. found
me.
The girl gave a start and glanced at me as if I'd goosed her. She
stood at the edge of the throng, looking across it at her stand. I saw
109
that another girl had taken it over. She looked down at her package,
then again at me. She shrugged, making a decision. "Vir," she
said, taking my hand.
It looked as though she had adopted me. Well . . .
We sidled along between the stores and the crowd. Now it was
dusk, and the lights were coming on. I had spent the whole afternoon
in my wandering.
The carnival showed no sign of abating. If anything, it intensified
into a seeming frenzy as the darkness enveloped the city.
Colored lanterns bobbed in bright waves, swung by dancers. Many
were on tall poles, and looked heavy, so the dancers had to be
strong and skilled. Down the street was a whole group of lights, an
organized band of dancers twirling them. Each person had a sort
of leather belt like an apron, with a place to catch the bottom of
the pole, and they swung it with their hands to make it twirl and
wave. Very pretty, singly and in concert. Despite my predicament,
I was getting to like Rio. But now my Oba-girl seemed to have lost
interest.
She led me through side streets, out of the noise of the crowd,
and finally into a dark building. I thought I was in for a private
tryst, and I was not loath. I'm a bit like the man in the musical
Finian's Rainbow who sings: "When I'm not near the girl I love, I
love the girl I'm near." I realize this makes me seem less heroic
than I'd like, but I'm really not a hero, just a judo instructor gone
astray, never cut out for the high life. Only one girl ever evoked my
outright love, and she died, and no woman since was able to touch
me deeply. It would have dishonored the memory of Chiyako for
me to love another woman, or so it seemed. So I took love where I
found it, not wanting any more lasting commitment. In judo I
was a yudanshai, a master; in love a mudansha, a dilettante. I followed
her into a gloomy passage, then into a dimly illuminated
room crowded with people. Not a tryst, but a meeting-or a mass
orgy.
I looked around the circle of faces, actually an oblong of faces,
as the people sat on benches near the walls. They were mixed,
 
110
ranging from white to black, and solemn: neither hostile nor happy.
They shared a common passive intensity, as though in meditation.
Many wore gaudily colored medals with mystic inscriptions, and
bright plastic-beaded necklaces of the sort I had seen at the store.
Some wore jewelry made of shells, animal teeth, tusks and ornately
carved wood.
Pottery burners set around the room contained fragrant incense;
some of it merely charred, but some of it sported colorchanging
flames.
Now I became aware of sound: weird chanting with an indefinable
melody and strong tom-tom beat. It was soft, not loud,
but the base harmonies had a compelling effect, like the massed
heartbeat of a sleeping giant. I spied the source of it: an old-fashioned
phonograph. Was this a fancy dance, after all?
Around the room, set in alcoves, and on tables in the center,
were painted plaster figurines-many strange, some shockingly
familiar. I recognized St. George on a white horse, a Buddha, and
Jesus Christ himself. But then I remembered: modern Latin mysticism
combined voodoo with Roman Catholicism, using the Saints
and conventions of both.
I had been brought to something very like a Black Mass.

Oba led me around the edge to a gap in the seating, and we
sat down on the end of a bench. Now I saw hooded objects in the
center, on the tables, hazy behind smoking incense. These shapes
were somehow menacing in their somber outlines, like malignant
ghosts. I don't consider myself superstitious, but there are times
when I get distinctly nervous about the supernatural, and this was
such a time. Something was brooding, menacing, unnatural, in
this room.
I don't know how long we sat there, with me trying to get up
nerve to walk out and never quite making it. Probably only a few
minutes, though even that was far too long for comfort. Why had
Oba brought me here? I had only tried to help her when she fell.
That damned music kept insinuating itself into the crevices in my
civilized armor, undermining my certainty that black magic had
111
gone out with the onset of the twentieth century. My eyes darted
guiltily around as if seeking some escape. Now it seemed that we
sat in some kind of pavilion, with hand-hewn poles supporting a
palm-thatched canopy. I had not noticed that when we entered,
but it must have been here, perhaps concealed by the gloom. It
now seemed as though we were in an isolated jungle temple rather
than a city building. I was reminded vaguely of Halloween. I
counted some fifty or sixty people and knew there were more I
could not see without making myself too obvious. All silent, all
somber.
The music stopped. Apparently that had been merely the introductory
piece; now the live show was to begin. A figure entered
and marched to the center. It was obviously the man in charge. He
wore a white suit, white shoes, white socks, white hat, and looked
like a businessman, except for the multiple rattling bone and shell
necklaces he sported. He was dark-skinned. Actually, three quarters
of the people in Brazil were some shade of dark, ranging from
off-white to solid black. He had short, dark, greasy hair that looked
as though it wanted to curl but couldn't. His face was pockmarked
from acne or smallpox and he had a gold tooth in front, but his
eyes were bright and compelling. He was neither tall nor young,
being forty-five or fifty and standing about five-two, and he was
thin-yet he had the subtle mannerisms of good breeding and
education. I was struck again by the contrast the largest necklace
made: it had a large crystal bead, followed by white, blue, red,
yellow, black, green and brown beads. Tasteless-I thought then.
The man spoke, and now seven young women traipsed in,
scantily clad in robes of many colors. So there was after all to be
entertainment of some sort; every time I thought I had it straight,
something happened to change the picture.
The girls formed a circle around the man. He went to the
tables and struck a wooden match. The sulfurous flare of light was
eye-stabbing in the gloom, making me wince. The master-of-ceremonies
touched it to a candle on the main table, pronouncing
strange-sounding words. I mean these didn't even sound like Por-
 
112
tuguese, but some litany from the hidden heart of the Dark Continent.
Then he brought out from a cabinet below another hooded
object and set it on the table beside the candle. He took a small
pitcher of water and poured some on the floor before the table,
three times.
Suddenly the candle was snuffed out as if by an unseen hand.
I jumped, though of course this was merely some magic trick or a
random draft of air. There was a general murmur of alarm; evidently
the spectators did not view this as coincidence.
The man lit the candle again, bowed his head reverently before
the covered figure, and spoke in that strange tongue again:
Ala le ele cupas ofago meco Eleggua ake boro ake boye, tori toru la ya fi

yoroure. Or something like that; I really did not catch it.
And the candle went out again.
Now there was a fair commotion in the room. Something was
definitely wrong.
The master-of-ceremonies seemed to realize it too. He whipped
off the hood-and there was the cement head of the god whose
offerings I had raided.
"Eleggua," the girl beside me murmured.
So that was the name of the god, my nemesis. I had misunderstood
when she said "Umbanda" before; the one was the cult, the
other the god. This was no entertainment, it was a genuine voodoo
ceremony. And why did that make me so nervous?
The witch doctor-for so I knew him to be now, despite his
mostly modern dress-spoke to the idol. He brought out a fat
cigar, lit it, puffed, and blew the smoke at the head. No insult, I
realized; evidently the god liked good cigars, and this was its way
of experiencing them. Then the man set the cigar still burning,
down beside the image as an offering.
Once more he lit the candle. But somehow his sleeve caught
it, and the candle tipped over to fail against the head. The grease
flared up, producing copious smoke, while the witch doctor stepped
back in alarm. Ignorant as I was, I knew that this was entirely
unorthodox, in fact, a sacrilege.
113
The blazing head exploded. Fragments of pottery, cement and
hard dirt fell to the floor. And underneath that heat-shattered visage
was revealed-a human skull.
"Exu!" many voices cried, shocked. And somehow I understood
that this was a new and terrible aspect of the god. This was,
in fact, Satan.
And the awful square hollows of those two eye-sockets stared
straight at me.
The witch doctor was quick to notice this fact. He pointed to
me. "Who are you?" he cried, whether in Portuguese, African or
English I could not tell in my confusion, but I understood him
well enough. "Who are you who has enraged our God?"
Now Oba was staring at me with horror. She had never suspected
she was harboring such a criminal.
There was nothing for it but to face the music. I stood up. "I
am Jason Striker of America. I took food and clothing and money
from this god's shrine in the city because I needed them. I faced
death otherwise, and did not know he would object so strongly." I
was really saying I did not know I would get caught.
Now all the people were staring at me as though I had broken
wind in church-as perhaps I had.
Suddenly I was on trial. Yet the witch doctor was fair. "Evidently
you do not know our customs," he said in English. "You
have insulted the most savage aspect of one of our most powerful
gods, and he will have his reckoning. Thieves are legion in Rio;
nothing is safe, especially during the carnival. But no one, no one
steals from the gods! Especially not savage Exu." And he looked
grim.
So that was why those items had remained untouched beside
the idol. I should have known that anything stealable would have
been stolen long before I got there. I looked around, bracing myself
for action, going down instinctively into a basic defensive position:
legs slightly spread for good balance, one arm high and the
other low for defense or attack. I was sorry I had offended these
people, but I wasn't going to submit myself to primitive voodoo
 
114
vengeance without a fight. I had already had my fill of Brazilian
custom in prison.
"Peace," the witch doctor said. "We shall not hurt you. Exu

himself will secure his reckoning in his own fashion. You cannot
escape it."
Oh. They believed, of course. Primitivism extended right into
the present, here in Brazil. Yet I was nervous. The way the god had
seemed to reject the offering, and changed its aspect to orient on
me-the witch doctor could not have known beforehand.
"I must ask the god what he wishes," the witch doctor said.
"We cannot proceed with our mass without the despacho, the ritual
offering to Exu. He must accept it, or we are lost. We must appease
him."
I didn't want any more trouble if I could avoid it. There were
too many people here for me to overcome; certainly I could not
escape without hurting someone. Besides that, I was in the wrong.
If the witch doctor was willing to be reasonable, I would have to
go along.
"I shall use the shells," he said. "The Table of Ifa is infallible."
He took sixteen small shells in both hands, rubbed them together,
then threw them on a straw mat. He studied the configuration,
then threw them again. Some landed on their "top", sides,
the serrations like little mouths, while others showed their hollows.
I was reminded of the I Ching of the Chinese, in which
yarrow sticks are thrown into patterns and interpreted by the books;
my friend Kobi Chija had used that method on occasion. Kobi,
the father of Chiyako, my lost fiancee.
That memory was painful, as always, and I concentrated on
what the witch doctor was doing. He threw the shells four times,
then looked at me.
"On the first throw of the caracoles only two shells were upright,"
he said. "This would be Exu speaking, and the proverb he
invokes is 'There is an arrow between brothers.' It is possible that
this is a warning, a curse he has placed on you, fomenting trouble
between you and-"
115
"I have no brother," I said.
"Or one close to you. The god does not choose to express his
sentiment in a single phrase, and we would not understand it if he
did, for we are merely mortals. The second throw showed nine
shells upright; this is a clarification by one of the other gods: 'Your
best friend is your worst enemy.' This strengthens the first warning."
"If that's the curse, it's a bad one," I agreed, uncertain how to
react. The man seemed perfectly sincere, explaining this to me as I
would explain a fundamental judo point to a new student. Why
did he bother? He could hardly have any good feeling for me.
Later I was to learn that in fact Santerios, as they are known in
Spanish, often do maintain a doctor-patient relationship, having
genuine interest in the welfare of their clients. A few are avaricious
and some are frauds, as with any profession, but most are honest
and competent. So this was in character for the man. This adventure
was to give me a lot more respect for the witch doctor. Once I
would have sneered at the very notion of voodoo. Not any more.
"You could not have chosen a worse god to offend," he agreed.
"I have been pai-de-Santo for many years, and I have never before
seen Exu so angry. We must resolve this crisis, or there will be
terrible trouble."
"For you as well as me?" I inquired, perplexed. I had the growing
feeling that I was dealing with a sincere man; he had a manner
about him that compelled respect.
"For us all," he said. "Your offense was from ignorance, but it
can be no accident that you came here. Exu summoned you, to
call you to account. Therefore we are obliged to work with you, to
help you expiate his anger. If we fail, that wrath. will fall on us, for
we are not ignorant."
I felt more and more like a heel. At the same time I wondered:
Oba had fallen at precisely the time I was there to catch her; could

the god have stricken her at his convenience? Then Oba had changed
her mind, as though guided by some voice in her head, and brought
me here, and that decision had happened under the eye of the
 
116
god, in the store. I preferred to call my presence coincidence, but
I had to admit there was a pretty strong case to be made the other
way. The way Eleggua had refused the candle and manifested as
Exu-well, there's a bit of the primitive in every man, and the
primitive in me was ready to believe. "I don't suppose just apologizing
and giving back the things I took would suffice?"
"I do not know," he said. "But I suspect it would not suffice,
for then others might have the notion that they could take Exu's
things and return them only when challenged. More likely he
seeks to make an example of you, so that never again will his chapels
be profaned. Exu may even have directed your initial offense
with that in mind; we can not yet know." If this complication
upset him, he gave no sign. "The third throw showed eleven shells
upright. This is Exu speaking again: 'Be distrustful; carry water in
a straw basket.'"
"Can't carry much water that way," I remarked. "Even I know
that!"
"Precisely. Do not depend on what you see, for it will slip
away like water through straw. The fourth throw showed twelve
shells upright: 'You are defeated through your own fault.'"
"But why should Exu curse me?" I asked. "I'm ready to make
amends. In fact, I planned to return the things when I had a chance;
I'm sure I said as much at the time. I never sought any quarrel
with him. It doesn't make much sense."
"Not immediately; not to you," he said. "Let us see whether
Exu's ire has abated."
I sat down again, and the ceremony resumed. This time there
were no hitches. Exu accepted the cigar and candy. There was a
sigh of relief through the hail. My own sigh was among the others.
Now the three drums started, making an intricate syncopation.
The seven girls danced. Their movements were symbolic, not
erotic; I soon felt myself swept up in the ascending beat of it. My
feet moved; my hands tapped. But I kept my seat, not wanting
any more trouble. Oba, beside me, had relaxed; I was no longer an
albatross.
117
On and on it went, the beat louder, more insistent, the girls
moving faster, their beads and shell-necklaces rattling rhythmically.
The others in the mass were as rapt as I. Voodoo this might
be, but it had its compulsion.
Suddenly one of the girls screamed and fell. She writhed on
the floor, but the others kept on dancing, as if hypnotized by the
drums. The fallen one wore black, and her necklace had triplets of
red beads alternating with triplets of black ones. From her mouth
poured a chanting stream of unintelligible sounds, out of which
leaped the electrifying words "Jason Striker!"
The witch doctor-or more correctly, pai-de-Santo- when in
Brazil, speak as the Brazilians do, I always say-listened intently. I
realized that the dancer had been possessed by the god she represented,
Exu, and that that god was not finished with me. And in
the throbbing pulse of the dance and the flow of the girl's words,
I felt an awful chill. I had entered this place an innocent skeptic;
now I was becoming a guilty believer. What a mouthful the god
had to say about me!
At last it stopped. The girl lay still for perhaps thirty seconds,
then climbed to her feet a bit shakily and resumed her dance. I
was sorry for her, for the brutish possession she had had to suffer
on my account; it had surely not been pleasant for her. Now flecks
of blood were on her costume where the spittle of her seizure had

landed.
The pai-de-Santo came to me, frowning. "It is very bad," he
said. "Exu accepted the dispacho only to enable the ceremony to
proceed, that he might make his ire properly known."
"Uh-oh," I said, and I was not being facetious.
"He has put a terrible curse on you. You will be slain by your
best friend, at the time you least suspect. Exu has spoken, and will
not be appeased."
So it was only a voodoo curse, by a god I didn't believe in.
Nothing to alarm me, yet I was alarmed. The drums, the dance,
the divination by shells, the speaking with tongues-there was an
authenticity and authority about all this that forced my unwilling
 
118
acceptance. I knew voodoo had an appalling hold over illiterate
superstitious peasants, yet this was a bustling big city, and many
in the audience wore expensive clothing. This Umbanda evidently
had an aducated clientele. They believed, but I was a more civilized
modern man-wasn't I?
"You may not believe," the pai-de-Santo said without rancor.
"But Exu is all-powerful. He can strike you anywhere in Brazil;
only by returning quickly to your homeland, where your own god
is strong, can you hope to escape him."
"I'd like to," I said. "But I couldn't stay out of Brazil. I have a
mission here."
"Then perform it quickly, if you value your life," he said. "Dead
men accomplish few missions."
"I can't promise to do it quickly," I said. "I'll just have to take
my chances."
"Chance is not a factor, with Exu," he warned. "He will manifest
his will despite all you can do."
I shrugged. "I appreciate your sincerity. But I must do what I
must do." Even though I had no idea what I had to do.
He shook his head. "You are like the man who does not believe
a car can hurt him, so he walks without regard to traffic. He is a
fool."
"I'd like nothing better than to leave Brazil forever," I said,
nettled. "But I have unfinished business, people I can not abandon.
I have never run from anybody, and I'm not starting now."
Not quite true, as I was fleeing from the Death Squad-but that
was a special situation. I could have doubled back and ambushed
the Squad any time-but what point, more killing?
He shook his head. "I admire your courage."
A small man came over. "Pardon my interruption," he said in
a husky voice. "But are you not, under all that dirt, Jason Striker,
who broke from prison?"
Trouble already! I tensed, ready to move the moment he did.
"Yes. And I know the Death Squad is after me. And now Exu has
cursed me, but I'm going to hell in my own fashion, if you please."
119
But he broke into a smile. "Do you not recognize me?" He
removed his hat-and lo, it was a girl, with a freckled face and
thick curly red hair. In fact, it was-
"Ester Behar, whom you tried to help," she said, poking one
finger into her mouth to draw the lip aside and reveal the clotted
socket of the back tooth that had been extracted. "I saw you when
Mirabal the butcher tried to make you recognize me, and I heard
you fight him and get knocked down. I heard your screams as they
tortured you, and when they stopped I thought you were dead,
and I was very sorry. Then the explosion, and my friends from
MR-8 came to free me, and I learned it was because of you. I owe
you my freedom, perhaps even my life. I came here to seek peace
for my soul, and only now entered the mass. I am Jewish, but so
many of my friends come here that I-" She paused, embarrassed.

I understood that her rabbi would frown on her attendance here,
but she had been through a truly horrible experience, and perhaps
her faith had been shaken. In times of severe stress, beliefs can
change. I knew! "And lo, you are here, as if the gods summoned
you," she concluded. "Now maybe I can repay you personally."
"Thanks," I said, relieved. "It's enough that you're free. But I
doubt you can do much about a god's curse."
"So? I regret I was not on hand to see what happened. Which
god-?"
"Exu," I said. "My best friend will kill me, because I robbed
the god's offerings."
Ester made a silent whistle. "Exu's like that! He is Satan in our
pantheon, you know. The literal devil. Another god might have
shrugged it off, comprehending your need, but not Exu. He'll
have your hide, if not your very soul."
"So I'm told. But I was hungry, and my pants were falling
down. The things were just going to waste, or so it seemed at the
time. I used the money to help this girl buy something at a voodoo
store, and she brought me here." I spread my hands.
Now Oba spoke in Portuguese. Apparently she had grasped
enough of the exchange so that she was able to verify my story.
 
120
The pai-de-Santo nodded. "She says she lost strength suddenly
after dancing six hours, and you helped her, and then she bought
an elixir of strength so as to dance some more, but was moved
instead to bring you here. She does not know why she decided
this, but it is evident the god cast his net for you. Does this not
seem beyond coincidence, even to a skeptic?"
"The god could have punished me better by poisoning the
food I took," I said.
"Strange that Exu should punish this man," Ester remarked to
the pai-de-Santo. "We know that sometimes ignorant foreigners
rob the gods, especially with things of value for their museums,
yet they are not punished."
"They are punished by being foreigners," the pai-de-Santo said.
Ester nodded dubiously. "This man has already been punished
much. He is marked, because he resisted the torture and
helped us all get free. He is a friend to the freedom fighters and an
enemy to Mirabal the butcher. He did not mean to insult the god.
We were all so desperate to get away before the army came-"
The pai-de-Santo raised his hands in a gesture of mock surrender
-curiously modern, in this setting-and nodded. "Enough.
It is evident that Exu's wrath is poorly chosen. Perhaps another
god will abate the spell."
He gave directions, and the dance changed. Six of the girls
retired to the sidelines, and one took the floor alone. She wore
white, with white beads, and carried a little white cotton flag, and
to my eyes was the most elegant of the group.
Ester sat down beside me on the right, while Oba remained
on the left, seemingly oblivious to our dialogue. The pai-de-Santo
moved back to the center tables.
"That is the dancer for Oxala, called Obatala in the Spanishlanguage
regions," she said. "I was raised across the border, and
this really isn't my religion, so sometimes I get the forms confused,
but the essence is the same." She hardly needed to make such
apology; I would never know the difference, and I was glad to have
her explanations. "Oxala is the chief of the gods, and his color is
121
white, signifying purity. If he helps you, you are saved, for he
alone is stronger than Exu."
"I had no idea there was such a hierarchy," I murmured. "It's
almost like an ancient religion."
She snorted. "Almost? Umbanda is a modern religion! It's one of

the Brazilian forms of Santeria, which is an amalgam of Black African
voodoo and Roman Catholicism." As I had recollected on my
own-but she evidently had much more specific information. "The
very term 'Santeria' means the worship of Saints. The voodoo gods
are really the same as the Saints. Santeria as a whole has more
actual devotees than any other religion in the Western Hemisphere.
Many people profess Christianity, but they practice Santeria." She
said this with a certain smug emphasis. She, of Jewish background,
could afford to sneer at the Christian foibles, of course. Yet she
herself was a kind of devotee, and she had evidently studied this
Santeria, or Umbanda, more than merely casually.
"But black magic-" I protested, upset that someone as intelligent
as Ester was should believe such nonsense.
"It is more than magic," she assured me. Then: "Look-Oxala
has rejected the appeal. It is not wise to express skepticism when
making such an appeal for help from the god."
Good point! Either I wanted voodoo help, or I didn't. A bad
attitude would get me nowhere. I couldn't see that any signal had
been made by the god, but maybe that was the point. No action
on an appeal is the same as negative action. Had I thrown away my
best chance?
Now the second dancer came forth. Her gown was red, and
her necklace was red and white. While Oxala's girl had been serene
and pure, this one was passionate. She carried a small doubleedged
axe in her right hand, and she waved it about with such
animation that I was afraid it would fly loose and hurt someone.
"That's Xango," Ester said. "Known in Spanish as Chango,
the most popular and colorful god of fire and thunder. There are
many fascinating legends about him; he is quite a lady's god, with
 
122
one wife and two mistresses for a start, and a roving eye. Perhaps
that is why he is known in the Catholic system as Saint Barbara."
"Saint Barbara!" I exclaimed. "A female saint?"
"Xango sometimes dresses as a woman," Ester said with a smile.
"It is to honor his sister and mistress Oya, who saved him from
prison. Actually, a number of men dress as women during festivals.
Haven't you seen them?"
I had, but that was not my immediate concern. "But a legitimate
Catholic saint," I protested. "And female, at that! Is nothing
sacred?"
"All is sacred," she assured me. "Haven't you noticed that Saint
Barbara has a small castle at her feet, and in her hands holds a
sword and cup? All these objects are sacred to Xango. And red is
the color of both saint and god. They say the castle is where Saint
Barbara was killed for her Christian belief, but still-"
"But a saint-" the enormity of it overwhelmed me.
"I see you still do not understand. The gods of Santeria came
with the slaves from Africa. At first these were suppressed by the
Christian masters, but then the slaves recognized behind the facades
of the saints their true identities, the ancient and venerable
voodoo pantheon of gods. And so their faith was restored, stronger
than before. They had the best of both religions. Is it any wonder
they have such conviction?"
"I suppose not," I said, shaking my head. Voodoo and Catholic
saints! Then something else occurred to me. "A castle." For I
remembered the Black Castle that Fu Antos was building deep in
the Amazon jungle; my mission was surely intimately linked with
this. Xango-Saint Barbara-Fu Antos-I knew so little, yet already
the network of intrigue embraced gods and saints.
The sound of the drums rolled forth like thunder, deafening
in this hall, and the candles flared high like flickers of lightning.
God of thunder, yes!
But like a storm that passes over with no more than gusts of

cold air, the dance crescendoed without response from the god.
Xango would not help.
123
The third girl came out, garbed in green with a brown and
black beaded necklace. She wore bright metal bracelets, anklets,
and headdress, with a polished steel girdle. Knives flashed in her
hands. The first dancer had been serene, the second passionate;
this one was militant, like an Amazon in her armor.
"Oggun, god of war and metals, especially iron," Ester said.
"He is Saint Peter in the Catholic pantheon. Very powerful in the
hunt. But he is a very close friend of Elegguo, whose aspect Exu
you angered."
"So he won't help me either," I said, disappointed.
"That is not certain. He is a bitter enemy of Xango, who took
away his wife Oya to be a concubine, and was not even faithful to
her. Thus his metal iron is a constant target of Xango's lightning
bolts."
"You really have these things worked out!" I exclaimed. "Adultery
and quarrels between gods."
But Oggun, too, declined to help. No one, it seemed, wanted
to go against the terrible Exu. Not for a mere gringo. I was getting
worried. Sure I was a skeptic, but I didn't want that curse hanging
over my head if I could avoid it.
The dancer retired, and the next came forth. She wore a yellow
and green costume with a golden necklace. She carried a mirror
in one hand and an elegant comb made of shells in the other,
and as she danced she ran that comb constantly through her flowing
blond tresses.
"Oshun, goddess of love, marriage, and gold-your Venus,"
Ester murmured. "She controls river waters, so if you plan to sail
on fresh water, her blessing would be invaluable. She loves to dance,
and is always much fun."
I could believe it. Despite her manifest vanity, preening and
combing her hair and constantly checking her face in the mirror,
this dancer exuded pure sex appeal. She had hips of perfect rondure
and she flung them about in a manner calculated to inflame the
masculine passion. Her large breasts seemed about to pop out of
 
124
her halter, and her gaze, seemed to fix directly on me with a "come
hither" appeal. She flirted shamelessly with the audience.
"Do not expect too much of her," Ester warned me. "She is
Xango's sister and his mistress. She once freed Xango from confinement
by flirting with the skeleton that stood guard. While she
aroused it, Xango escaped."
"She aroused a skeleton? Sex-uh, romantically?"
"That she did. She is remarkably desirable. But she is terrible
when angry."
"Women are," I agreed, remembering certain experiences.
"She is the goddess of money and all things yellow. If you
need money, do not eat a pumpkin, for that is sacred to Oshun.
She made the first lamp by hollowing out a pumpkin and placing
a candle inside it."
"A jack-o-lantern!" I exclaimed.
She shrugged. "At any rate, she also declines."
"Too bad," I agreed as the dancer retired. I was really disappointed,
and not just because of her beauty. My inconsequential
remarks were only glossing over my deepening conviction that there
was, indeed, something to this voodoo. Those people were too
serious, their ceremonies too well worked out. Their gods were
too-human.
The next dancer wore green and yellow, and her beads were
the same. She was neither serene nor passionate, neither warlike
nor sexy. She was intense, with staring eyes that seemed to see

entirely through me. My nervousness increased.
"Orunla, god of divination," Ester said. "Master of the past,
present, and future, owner of the Table of Ifa."
"The Table of Ifa," I repeated. "The shells-"
"Yes, the caracoles apply to the Table of Ifa. Orunla governs all
time. He alone can tell you your fate, and thereby enable you to
ameliorate the curse."
"Orunla, give me a sign!" I breathed prayerfully.
"That is the first step," Ester said approvingly. "When you
begin to believe in the gods, the gods begin to believe in you.
125
Perhaps it is your North American arrogance of skepticism that
really bothers Exu. When he has humbled you, he will be merciful."
"In a pig's eye!" I snapped, abruptly revolted at my descent
into superstition.
And the dancer returned, without any signal of aid. And I felt
sudden loss, as though salvation had been near at hand, but lost
because of my foolish obstinacy.
"Exu will never forgive you now," Ester said sadly. "When will
you Americans learn? There is more to life than hot dogs and big
new cars. The almighty dollar is powerless against the wrath of a
god."
"Sorry," I said contritely. This was these people's religion, and
I owed it the same respect I had for any religion. A little respect
could certainly do me no harm.
The sixth dancer came forth. She wore a blue robe, with a blue
and white necklace. She was older than the others, mature, yet
possessed of such sheer beauty and aplomb that all the others
seemed like mere children in comparison. They were girls; this
was a woman.
"Yemanja," Ester said appreciatively. "Goddess of the moon,
and of the sea. See how she moves her canoe."
Indeed, the dancer's hips swayed like rolling waves, the blue
of her costume rippling with a frill of white, like whitecaps. She
was a stately queen.
"Pray to her," Ester suggested. "In your heart as well as your
head. Abase yourself before her. She is your last hope; the minor
gods can not help you against Exu."
And I believed her. "Help me, Queen-Goddess Yemanja!" I
whispered.
The dance continued, and I knew with a sinking certainty
that my plea had not been heard. There was no way to balk the
curse of Exu. But it was almost worth a curse to watch the unearthly
beauty of Yemanja's ritual.
Then something dark crept out from under the table. It was a
 
126
huge black roach. It moved toward the dancing woman.
I lurched to my feet with an inarticulate cry like a kiai! yell. I
dived for that roach as if it were Mirabal himself, seeking to crush
it before it brought its hideous ugliness to soil the elegance of the
Queen. But the thing skittered sidewise, perhaps blown by the
force of my rush, and I rolled ignominiously on the floor. I was
aware that my antic had probably wiped out my last chance for
godly aid; I heard the shocked murmuring of the crowd. At that
moment the drums stopped.
In the sudden silence I lay on my back, looking up. It was
quite an experience, for my head was almost under the dancer's
skirts where she stood frozen, and I saw her marvelously well-formed
legs right up to their juncture, and that wondrous bush of golden
curls. I stiffened-and I don't mean sexually, though maybe that
was also the cause-for the roach was now climbing her left leg.
She stooped, reached around and under with one hand, and
caught the roach neatly between her fingers. She brought it struggling

to her round face, peered at it with her large, long-lashed
eyes-and popped it into her expressive mouth. She chewed, savoring
it.
There was a gasp from the audience. "It is the sign!" the paide-
Santo cried, in what language I knew not, cared not. "Yemanja
grants her favor!"
Suddenly the drums resumed. The dancer stepped out again.
I rolled giddily to my feet, my mind's eye still seeing that lovely
mouth consuming that horrible cockroach, but also seeing those
magnificent thighs beneath the skirt-no panties. What horror
melded to what bliss!
"The cockroach is sacred to the goddess, you see," Ester explained
as I approached the bench. She acted as if nothing special
had happened, which should have given me pause for thought.
Just what did they expect at these shindigs? "A person possessed
by the goddess will consume any roaches she finds, and they are
considered to be messengers."
The dancer whirled and gestured, and swooped near to me as
127
I started to sit, a bit dazed. She wiggled her fingers in a little
"Come hither" gesture, and I had to respond. I stepped toward
her again, and now the beat caught hold of my soul as though I
had stepped into the strong central current of a deep river, not a
river of carnival celebrants, but something much more vital and
subtle. I danced too, spinning and raising my bare feet in a crude
approximation of her movements. I could not help myself, though
a part of me felt like a complete buffoon. In her devious, horrible
fashion a goddess had smiled on me, showing me heaven where I
expected hell and vice versa, and I had to worship her.
Yet it was only the beginning. There was a cry, and the girl I
had dubbed Oba jumped to her feet, chanting. After her followed
others, until it seemed the whole congregation was dancing to
that compelling beat. Like the ponderous waves of the ocean it
swelled and faded, making us twitch in harmony with its devious
syncopations. On and on we danced, tirelessly, now in silence,
now crying out.
Again, how much later I do not know, the drums stopped.
The dance subsided. The pai-de-Santo occupied the center of the
floor. "Yemanja, mother of gods, shows her favor to this man," he
announced. "But we must ascertain the nature of that favor."
He brought out the divination shells again, and cast them.
After several throws he announced. "Yemanja will accept sacrifice.
But we must learn what type."
He brought out a coconut, set it on the table, and broke the
hard shell with one strike of a special hammer. There was no milk;
the coconut had evidently been dried so that the pulp was hard
and white. He broke it into four equal parts, inspected them carefully,
washed them in water, and tore seven bits off each. He
sprinkled these bits over the image of Our Lady of Regla.
"Seven bits, to invoke Yemanja," Ester explained. "It is different
for each god."
How nice: like dialing a telephone. Each god had his number.
The pai-de-Santo chanted strange words as he did this. Talking
to the operator? Then he held the four pieces of coconut in his
 
128
left hand. With his right hand he touched the floor three times,
and the image three times. Then he prayed, and the congregation
spoke in unison at certain intervals, as in a responsive reading. He
made the sign of the cross and finished the invocation. Finally he
threw the four pieces on the floor.
Each piece was white on the inside and brown outside, so
when they fell they showed white or brown. In this case, three
were brown and one white.

There was an immediate reaction among the spectators. All
around, people pulled at the lobes of their ears and opened their
eyes wide.
"Ocana-Sode, that cast is called, where I come from," Ester
said. "In any language, it means evil for you. The people are trying
to dispel that evil-but this is a bad sign." And she pulled delicately
at her own lobe.
"The goddess changed her mind?" I asked worriedly, and caught
my own hand going to my ear.
"Perhaps. Or maybe she is powerless to abate the spell of Exu,
who is stronger than she."
The pai-de-Santo looked up. "We must now make sacrifice,"
he said. "Only this can bring us help."
Now he fetched a live duck from an adjacent room. My skin
tightened, for I suspected what was coming and did not like it.
But Ester put a restraining hand on my arm. "It is necessary," she
said. "Do not, in your ignorance, insult another god."
Good advice! I kept silent.
The pai-de-Santo smeared honey and lard over the hapless bird,
then poured rum over it. He then used the coconut fragments to
inquire whether the goddess required the actual blood of the duck.
I chewed on my tongue, hoping she would decline, but the fall of
the throw was one brown and three white: a qualified yes. He
verified it with another throw.
Now he got a good grip on the duck's head, took out the
sacrificial knife, and cut that head off with a violent slash. I felt as
if my own head were coming loose. As a judo instructor I deal in
129
violence, but also in fair play; the notion of an innocent bird giving
its life without even a chance to fight back appalled me. Was I
myself a similar victim?
"Oggun killed it!" he stated loudly.
"Now that's a lie," I protested.
Again Ester restrained me. "Part of the ritual. All killing is
done in the name of the god of war, so that no blame will attach
for the act. Oggun doesn't mind, and it saves a lot of trouble."
I shut up. After all, I was the cause of all this.
The pai-de-Santo held the bleeding carcass before the image,
letting the blood drip to the floor. Then he wiped it up with a
handful of the bird's own feathers. Finally he placed the bird in a
burner and started it roasting. I thought of the ovens of Nazi Germany,
cremating innocents.
The dance resumed, and while it continued the fire consumed
the body of the sacrificial duck, until it was nothing but ashes.
And then, as if it were an instant, it was morning. The beat
stopped and the congregation dispersed. Ester had disappeared,
somewhat to my disappointment; she must have figured she had
thanked me enough by explaining everything. We had danced all
night!
The pai-de-Santo caught me aside for a private conference. "You
may not have understood everything," he said. "Exu laid a curse
on you, and Yemanja has abated it, but she could not nullify it
entirely. So she sends her daughter to protect you; as long as she is
with you, the thrust of the spell will be blunted. But if she becomes
separated from you, only the willing sacrifice of a loved one
will save you from death at the hands of your friend, and even
then, it is not certain. This is as far as the goddess can go."
"Tell her thank you," I said, and I meant it. I was too tired to
be very expressive. Then my brow furrowed. "Her daughter?"
"Goddess of an African river and wife of Xango," he explained.
"You have found favor with her-I do not profess to know why-
and so she cooperates with her mother to animate a human body,
and to guard you from evil." He winked. "Do not be concerned
 

130
about her married state; Xango has nothing to do with her, instead
preferring her sisters Oya and Oshun. He will not be jealous."
"Oshun?" I repeated. "Isn't she-?"
"Yes, she is the goddess of love and gold, whose dance you saw.
Perhaps it is because she turned you down that her sister helps
you. Oba was always jealous of her husband's mistresses, and perhaps
wishes to give him a certain taste of his own medicine."
Oshun-Miss Sex Appeal! I could see why a god would prefer
her to his homebody wife, and why that wife would be resentful.
Then I did a doubletake. "Who?"
"Oba," he repeated, gesturing. And now the girl I had called
Oba came forward and took my hand, leading me out of the building.
Stunned but hardly dismayed, I went with her.
Chapter 7:
March on the Black Castle
"Well, my dear," Mirabal said, smiling like Frankenstein's monster,
"you caused us much trouble. You made so neat an escape
from our private detention center that I am surprised we recaptured
you so readily. Why didn't you vacate the area immediately,
once you saw the prison break was successful?"
Dulce didn't answer. This was her first meeting with this man,
and she was apprehensive. The leader of the Death Squads-what
could she expect at his hands but torture?
"It could not be that you are stupid, for you are not," he continued
imperturbably. "You are one of the most brilliant and talented
of the Horse's spies." This was an unsubtle slur on the head
of the government of her own country; Fidel Castro was said by his
enemies-and some of his friends-to smell like a sweaty horse,
owing to his laxity about personal hygiene. But Dulce did not
react. "Yet I doubt it could be a plot to assassinate me or any high
ranking member of our government, for you are known to us, and
would never be given the chance to act. Of course you are very
 
132
capable with your bare hands, but you would require more than
that to overcome me."
Still she did not reply. Mirabal so far had been completely
accurate; Dulce was a trained fighter, but so was he, and he had
monstrous layers of muscle she lacked, as well as being completely
ruthless. Few, very few human beings could overcome Fernando
Mirabal in honest barehanded combat, and he was not one to
confine himself to honest methods.
"You could not have had anything to do with certain recent
assassinations," he continued. "You had already been taken into
custody when they occurred, and they were far away. Do bees
mean anything to you? Spiders? Privies?" Her gaze was blank. "No,
I thought not. So it would appear you have no connection to those
activities. You are a leftist agent, not a ninja."
He walked around the room, pondering aloud. "I always like
to know the truth," he said. "Illusion can be costly to those engaged
in counterespionage. We have already lost an entire town by
underestimating our opposition. So I ask myself why this luscious
Cuban plum, so difficult to grasp and hold, should now fall so
easily into my hand, and I must have an answer. Why should you
merely wait in a building facing the prison, until it was too late to
escape the tightening police cordon? One might postulate all manner
of reasons, but overcomplexity is treacherous. Better to explore
the simplest: that it was an accident, unintentional on your part.
Then why should you be so careless? And I have only one answer:
love."
Now her pert nose wrinkled as she made an inaudible sniff of
derision. She was absolutely lovely in that pose, though her hands
and feet were tied.

"Ah, my dear, do not disdain that tender passion," he chided
her, his soft words incongruous, coming from so huge and brutal a
man. "For the love of one man you roused the revolutionary groups
to attack the prison, and actually succeeded in freeing him. Jason
Striker-yes, I see it in your eyes! You would do anything to save
him from torture or death. Anything at all! Yet you dare not ex-
133
press it openly, for El Caballo would not approve." He chuckled.
El Caballo meant "The Top" in Spanish. In Cuba it was a term of
respect for Fidel, but Mirabal used it derisively. "I must admit the
Horse has good taste in some matters. And so you waited, heedless
of your own safety, waited to meet the gringo, lest he become lost
in the great city, and be recaptured because of his ignorance of our
custom and language. But he was swept into the festival crowd,
his pants falling down, and he was victim of that same distraction
you so prettily planned for the prison authorities, and could not
get back to you, and so it was my men who completed your liaison
instead. Such irony, that the prisoner goes free, while his rescuer is
made captive! Normally it is the prince who frees the lady at great
peril to himself, not the other way around."
Dulce made no sound, but her lips formed a word in Portuguese:
"Puerco," pig.
"You will be pleased to know that Striker remains free," Mirabal
said. "You need not have troubled yourself about him; I was about
to release him anyway."
Now at last she reacted overtly. "Liar!" she snapped.
"Why should I lie to you?" he inquired. "You are powerless. I
inform you only that you may understand what I wish you to
understand-when the time comes. You shall quite possibly be of
inestimable service to me." He paused, but she had no comment.
"I interrogated the American, and learned that he was on a mission
for Fu Antos, the chief of the Japanese ninjas, an old time
warrior cult who have recently infiltrated our inland forest region.
Striker's meeting with you was coincidence; that led me astray for
a time, for I thought it had to be by design. Since it is important
to me to locate and eliminate the ninja villain, I decided to allow
Striker to 'escape,' aided by one of my agents within the prison,
then watch where he went. If he led me to the Black Castle and its
oil strike . . ." He shook his head. "Alas, Fu Antos outsmarted me.
I could have sworn from his actions and reactions that Striker was
just a bumbling fool possessing no information of value. Therefore
I was sure he was a courier of vital news. And lo, he fooled me
 
134
completely, by being exactly what he seemed to be. He was merely
an ignorant decoy. While I wasted my attention tracing his aimless
wanderings through the city, the ninja was receiving a vast
shipment of weapons via the river." He shook his head in grudging
admiration. "Who would have thought a martial artist of Striker's
reputation would come all the way to Brazil merely to serve as a
distraction! I could not anticipate that, and but for chance, that
ploy would have been successful. But now I have no further need
of the American."
Dulce could no longer feign indifference. "You lie again. You
hate Jason. You are holding me to lure him into a trap."
"I do hate him. He injured me in our prior encounter in New
York, and for that his life is forfeit. Which is the beauty of it: the
ninja knew I would focus on Striker immediately, and so run the
risk of overlooking more important matters. So-"
"But it will not work. Jason will never do your bidding from
fear of my torture."
"Torture you?" Mirabal inquired, raising an eyebrow. It was a
minor gesture, but it displayed the type of bodily control that
made him a formidable fighter. Whether twitching a brow or hammering

with a fist, his coordination was perfect. "No, my dear,
you shall not be tortured. I would not have one bit of you disfigured.
And you are right: Striker would not be moved. He loves
you less than you love him, and neither knows nor cares where you
are. He is with a lithe young girl he met in the streets, a seamstress
and dancer, and now he sleeps off his night's endeavors in her
apartment." Dulce's eyes flared, but she did not dignify his taunt
by giving it the lie.
"Striker has in any event become superfluous," Mirabal said.
"I shall allow one of my squads to obtain the practice of the chase
this afternoon, after the American is suitably rested. There is no
sport like the pursuit of live prey! The men shall gain invaluable
experience as they track him down and make their kill, and the
unfit among them will no doubt be destroyed. Striker has a certain
talent in the rough and tumble; it makes up for what he lacks
135
in wit." And he rubbed the back of one knee reflectively, again
remembering his own initial encounter with the subject. Then he
returned to Dulce: "No, my dear, you need have no fears. You
shall have the very best, until I have need of you." And he shaped
his huge gnarl-calloused hands around the rope between her wrists,
tensed his astonishing muscles, and snapped it like so much string.
Then he did the same for her feet, freeing her. More than ever, he
resembled Frankenstein's monster, except that the monster had
been, at heart, innocent.
"You should have left me tied!" she cried. "You'll have to take
me by force! I'll never submit voluntarily."
"You misunderstand, my voluptuous beauty," he said. "I have
no personal desire for your body." But he loosened his belt and
dropped his trousers, uncovering his phenomenally muscled legs.
Dulce might have attacked him at that moment, while his ankles
were temporarily hobbled, but she knew he was alert and would
give her no chance. He could kill her with one blow of his horny
fist, literally, and would.
He removed his undershorts, revealing his elephantine genital
dangling like a python. Suddenly his left hand shot out, catching
her elbow. He hauled her into him, and like, a bird caught in the
coils of a deadly snake she suffered herself to be enfolded without
resistance. He drew her up, running his right hand over her breasts,
squeezing them through the cloth of her dress, inserting his fingers
into her cleavage. Then the hand traveled down over her abdomen,
across her swelling hip, and around to enclose her buttocks
in a firm pinch. His head tilted down; he lifted her by the
buttocks as though hoisting a child, and kissed her lips.
"No, my dear, I shall not place my tongue between your pearly
teeth," he murmured, giving her posterior a final penetrating goose.
Then he let her go and stood back.
His naked penis remained completely limp.
He had proved his point. He was physically unmoved by her
sex appeal.
"What do you want with me?" Dulce asked, half relieved, half
 
136
insulted. "I know nothing of Fu Antos."
"I am aware of that. We have virtually located the Black Castle.
I have maintained surveillance of all unusual traffic on the tributaries
of the Amazon River, a Herculean task. My agents pinpointed
the freighter carrying the weapons as soon as they were loaded on
it near Key West, and we have monitored its radio calls. We moved
in at the time of transfer to the smaller boats, but never hindered
the procedure. Thus we have located our quarry: a convoy of small
boats carrying weapons for the ninja. Already my men, posing as
itinerant workers, have eliminated the ninja representatives, quietly;
my own personnel now man the crafts. Thus we shall have

safe access to the Black Castle of the Ninjas, trusting them to guide
us in. Is it not beautiful?"
Dulce had no knowledge of the Black Castle or the ninjas, but
she was interested in another aspect. "Then I am of no use to you,"
she said, hoping he would let her go. She might yet be able to
warn Jason.
"On the contrary, you are my insurance," Mirabal said. "In
my researches into the history of the ninja cult-I always study
my enemy carefully-I came upon a truly remarkable coincidence."
He studied her for a moment. "Yes, you are perfect. The gods have
truly smiled on me this day."
Then he left her, carrying his trousers in one hand, his limp
member still proclaiming its disinterest.
"Maricon!" she exclaimed in her native tongue, with amazed
realization. "He is a homosexual!" Or at any rate, a sexually indifferent
man. Some were like that.
Still, she was unable to fathom the meaning of his other words.
For what was she perfect, if not for information or love? Yet she
had a gnawing certainty that she would not like the answer when
it finally came clear.
137
*
The captain of the lead boat kept his eyes open as the river
narrowed. He was on his own; Mirabal would not join the party or
indicate his involvement in any other way until the battle was
joined, lest his arrival by helicopter tip off the ninjas. No word of
this mission had been allowed out; even the troops did not know
where they were going or why. In fact, no one knew; there had
been neither time nor privacy to torture the prior captain for information
about the precise landing or identification codes. Probably
the man hadn't known anyway; the ninjas would intercept
the convoy at their convenience. That was when it would get hairy.
Was it really possible to outfox the foxes?
It was night. Slowly the boats moved on upriver, using only
those lights required for safety. There was no signal from the shore.
Then a voice spoke from the gloom of the dark cabin. "Captain."
A chill ran down the captain's spine. He turned. He could
barely make out a hooded figure. How it had come aboard the
boat without detection he could not guess, but its very presence
was all the evidence necessary. This was a living ninja!
"Yes," the captain said. If there were a secret password, he
would soon be dead, but he was under orders to take that gamble
and he knew better than to disobey. He had seen a few of the
victims of Fernando Mirabal's displeasure.
"To the right. Dock," the ninja said in bad Portuguese. The
captain turned the wheel. The boats behind followed. There was a
small, dilapidated-looking wooden pier half-concealed by the jungle.
It was just like a thousand others scattered along the Amazon River
system. The pilings were rotten and the planking was overgrown
by vegetation. But underneath it was strong, braced by new timber,
the exterior carefully preserved as a facade. It was, in a sense,
invisible: no one would have thought to use it or even approach it,
ordinarily.
A number of Indians were on hand with mules to help unload
 
138
the shipment. Many of the cases were small but heavy, containing
disassembled machine guns, bazookas, ammunition and grenades.
Many were sealed in oil drums or wrapped in tarpaulins. They
were not hard for one or two men to handle.
But soon the Indians grew suspicious. Certain code-signals
were not forthcoming. Hands went for weapons.
And there was a barrage of fire from the boats. "Get the ninja!"
the captain cried-and fell, a knife in his back. The men charged,

but already he was dead, the ninja gone. Obviously the ninja had
realized before that this was not the original crew, but had allowed
the unloading to proceed so that his people could ambush the
troops and recover the supplies. The less sophisticated Indians had
blown the whistle prematurely, and perhaps that had been fortunate.
A crewman used a radio. "They're on to us," he said. "We
killed the Indians, but the ninja got away. Move up the second
convoy fast; nothere point in secrecy."
For a few miles back there was another and larger expedition.
That one carried mechanized equipment the ninjas had never ordered.
Now it would see action.
Under the overhanging trees of the jungle a road had been
made. It was cleverly covered over by green turf and even a thin
layer of standing water in places, but underneath it was solid.
Someone had put a lot of work into this secret highway.
The armored column was on its way, using the ninjas' own
jungle turnpike. There was no longer any attempt at concealment;
the battle had in effect been joined. Without the prepared road, it
would have been impossible. This was the very heart of the continental
forest. The trees were large and close together, rising one
hundred, one hundred and fifty, and even two hundred feet above
the floor. Their upper foliage was luxuriant and interlaced with
vines and parasitic growth so that sunlight could not penetrate to
the level of the trail. There was therefore hardly any undergrowth,
except in occasional grassy gaps in the forest cover. This was the
forest primeval.
139
This was in fact a battalion of the Brazilian army, with eight
hundred men accompanied by select armored units. Unlike North
American troops, most of the men used their feet instead of riding.
There were five light old armored cars, carrying .30 and .50 caliber
machine guns, and eight half-tracked personnel carriers bearing
the most privileged troops. Five jeeps handled the officers. A
tank led the column, and another terminated it, with men riding
on each. The convoy moved at the pace of the foot-soldiers, however,
slow but sure.
Suddenly the lead tank bogged down. The road had taken a
hidden turn under the marshy terrain, and without a ninja guide
the machine had blundered off the built-up support. The other
vehicles halted, and the men got out, poking about to locate the
road. This was only a delay, not a setpped.
Then the arrows started flying. Each was tipped with deadly
nerve poison; the slightest scratch meant death. A dozen men were
dead before the others realized what was happening. Then the cry
went up: "Ambush!"
The men dived for cover of their vehicles. The turret of the
stalled tank spun about, its machine gun raking the jungle in a
semicircle. But it seemed to have no effect.
The arrows continued to fly. They were few but highly selective;
virtually every shaft scored on a soldier. The effect was disproportionate
to the damage: these weapons made no sound, so the
first evidence of their presence was the mortal strike. When the
men faced about and watched for the source, the arrows stopped,
only to rise silently from the obscurity again when attention wavered.
Some shot high into the morning sky, to plummet down on
those people taking refuge behind what little natural cover there
was.
"And we waited till morning to start our march!" a sergeant
gritted. He had known that was folly, but had been overruled by
the officers. He was Genaro Cabral, a leader of men, formerly of
Major Lima's battalion. He had dropped the TNT bomb into the
privy, destroying the dwarf ninja. "Well, we'll stop that! First pla-
 
140

toon, face out in a circle, watch the horizon, fire on the level through
the brush when and only when you see an arrow rise. We're bound
to nail some of them!" He hoped. This brushy clearing had evidently
been chosen by the ninjas because of the cover it provided
them; they were probably dug in.
The men of his platoon obeyed with alacrity. A sergeant is the
core of any army unit; when crisis comes, he acts.
No more arrows came. "All right," the sergeant bawled. "Second
Platoon, hitch a chain to that stalled tank and haul it; back
onto the road." Strictly speaking, he lacked the authority to give
such directives, but no one challenged him.
Now the disciplined troops began to function. The arrowambush
had seemed devastating at first, but there were actually
only twenty casualties, and the psychological effect was being dissipated.
Still, the spasms of the dying men had been unnerving;
the poison threw one big cramp, and some suffered broken spines,
writhing and screaming before their hearts failed. So there was
horror in the ranks, but a few primitively armed warriors could
not, it seemed, successfully oppose a modern army.
The tank was brought back to the road. Now soldiers went
ahead with poles, tapping the ground under the marsh, locating
the firm foundation. The convoy moved ahead again.
Unfortunately, the men now fell into the traps laid for the
vehicles. There were a lot of traps; evidently the ninjas had worked
all night, as the sergeant had feared they would. He had learned
something from his experience with the dwarf ninja, but he was
the only one here to whom that experience was firsthand. The
others thought the stories of the ninjas were exaggerated. Now
they were learning the hard way. Five of them dropped into a huge
pit, to be speared on the sharpened stakes below. But at least their
sacrifice saved the tank. Another masked pit contained a dozen
poisonous snakes, who quickly bit the unfortunates who dropped
in to visit. Trees had been felled across the road, their surfaces
covered with poison so that those who moved them suffered terrible
burns and lingering death. Further along, a huge tree toppled
141
right on top of one of the personnel carriers, ruining it; the tree
had been cut and propped so that a slight push would bring it
down. This sort of thing kept progress slow.
The column entered a thickly wooded section, where the trees
were smaller but so close together it was impossible to see far. Here
the ground was firm throughout. The vehicles picked up speed.
Then more arrows came-this time spearing the tires of the
jeeps. The tanks and halftracks were impervious, but the officers
weren't in them. The column slowed to a halt.
"Keep moving!" the sergeant yelled. "It's another ambush!"
He knew that it was possible to drive on flat tires, and that this
was much safer than stopping exactly where the ninjas wanted
them to stop. "Push for that hill! Make a circle at the top! We can
defend that better."
His leather-lunged volume made itself felt. The officers, concerned
for their health, kept their mouths shut and let the man on
the spot handle it. It was not that they were timid or inferior men;
they merely yielded to the exigencies of the situation.
The jeeps lunged up the hill, their deflated tires flapping and
bumping, while the troops clung tightly to the accompanying
vehicles. They lurched into a rough circle at the top, and the men
poked their rifles out.
Nothing happened. A crew got out to start fixing the tires,
and then a few arrows drove them back. "They're nickel-and-diming
us to death!" the sergeant observed in his own vernacular.
The officer in charge thought so too. Small but steady attrition
could bring them down in time; it was a tactic used in many
parts of the world, even humbling the mighty U S of A in Asia.

"Cabral, take a company and clear the area," he ordered. "We'll
take some casualties, but it's better than being struck sitting like
ducks for their arrows."
And so Sergeant Cabral moved out with his men, alert and
wary. They carried Garand M-l rifles at the ready, and some M-3
submachine guns shooting at anything that moved. They encoun-
 
142
tered no resistance. They did not realize yet that they were entering
the mouth of hell.
"Come out and fight like men!" the sergeant bawled. He was a
tough old veteran whose words were mainly to keep up morale.
He knew the ninjas would never attempt to match the firepower
of conventional troops in the open, but if he made them look like
cowards, his own meHo, uld gain confidence. As Major Lima had
stressed (and what a loss his death had been!): the key to success in
the jungle was not in the rifle but in the mind.
Amazingly, his challenge was answered. Abruptly green and
brown-splotched ninjas showed from behind trees, like so many
apparitions. Each loosed a deadly arrow. One of the arrows brought
down the bold sergeant; the others took out the remaining noncoms
of the company. The nervous soldiers let off a volley of shots-
but, confused by the number of targets and trying to duck the
incoming arrows, they missed. The figures disappeared; not one
had been hit.
Now the company was leaderless. But, aware that there was
no way out, the men dropped to the ground and aimed at the
trees. There had actually been no more than a score of ninjas, and
almost two hundred soldiers remained. "Try that again, why don't
you!" one yelled.
And the ninjas did. They manifested before their trees like
spirits of the wood. This time the troopers aimed more carefully.
Their rifles fired, and the bullets sang around each ninja.
Yet not one of the robed figures fell. Like ghosts they advanced
upon the soldiers. Ghosts with bows, for the arrows winged into
the faces of the prone men.
"It can't be!" one soldier cried, firing first at one figure, then
another. He knew himself to be a dead shot, yet his efforts had no
effect.
Now the ninjas opened their hoods-and gaunt skulls were
revealed. It was only paint, but it had demoralizing effect, for many
of the troops were superstitious. The shots stopped, giving the
ninjas time to close the gap.
143
The ninjas were upon the soldiers. The bows had disappeared;
other weapons took their place. Some were katanas, the Japanese
Samurai warrior swords. On the ground, in close quarters, the
troops were at a disadvantage. The swords slashed down, cutting
arms, legs and heads in half. The men raised their rifles as shields,
unable to take effective aim at such close range. But the finely
tempered swords sliced right through the metal barrels, rendering
the rifles useless even for this.
The soldiers, with the courage of desperation, rose up to grapple
their adversaries. But the ninjas were demons in close combat.
Their weapons moved devastatingly: spears, halberds, war clubs,
maces, tetsubi iron bars, a naginata like a spear with a blade in the
end, chained sickles-each ninja had his favorite death dealer. The
weapons were lacquered in black so as not to reflect light. But soon
a more deadly aspect manifested: the blades and clubs, like the
arrows, were poisoned. The slightest break of skin allowed that
potent coating to enter the body, and death followed in seconds.
Thus the ninjas were doubly dangerous, despite being outnumbered
ten to one. They spread a wide swath of death, merely by
nicking as many soldiers as possible. The two hundred became a

hundred and forty, then one hundred, and the odds were reduced
to five to one.
Among the ninjas was a small man, really a boy, who nevertheless
wielded two swords: one long, one short. Yet those two
blades were the most devastating of all. For this was Fu Antos,
Lord of the Ninjas. He had come late upon the scene, having been
occupied with the fortification of the Black Castle and the development
of the first oil well. But this subversion of his arms shipment
during his inattention had caused him to take a personal
interest in rectifying the situation, and to seek a bit of exercise in
combat.
Fu Antos whirled this way and that, a dervish of death. Here
he lopped off the face of a gaping man; half that face went flying
away. There he brought his blade down straight, cleaving a head
in twain like split wood. Another he decapitated with a single
 
144
stroke; the corpse stood there a moment spouting blood. Fu Antos
was a miniature berserker of slaughter, never tiring; his ki gave him
the strength of several grown men.
Now three men pressed in on him. With incredible power,
the ninja master brought his two swords together in truncated
arcs, cutting the two side men in half at the waist and meeting in
the torso of the center man. For an instant the tableau remained;
three surprised soldiers staring at the little ninja. Then the two
side bodies toppled, rolling apart, and the third sank down with a
kind of squish.
Another soldier was leveling his rifle at Fu Antos' head. The
ninja's two swords whirled. The short one lopped off the tip of the
rifle; the long one swished by the front of the soldier's face. The
man's nose flew off. A flick of the wrist, and Fu Antos speared that
nose in the tip of his short sword. Then he returned it to the man,
pinning it to his face by means of the blade. Ungrateful for this
cosmetic favor, the man collapsed and died.
The numerical odds were down to four to one. "Run!" someone
cried. The soldiers panicked. In a mass the survivors rose up
and charged through the jungle toward their convoy.
The ninjas did not follow. Instead they brought out their bows
again and loosed a shower of arrows at the fleeing body of men.
And by the time the troops made it back to the trucks, only twenty
remained.
"Ghosts with swords!" they gasped. "They cannot be killed!
Our bullets won't touch them!"
"Bullshit!" a lieutenant snapped. "They must be wearing bullet-
proof cloaks. All you have to do is grapple with them, smother
them in their own folds." But he looked nervous.
Meanwhile, the tires had not been fixed, and the convoy remained
stalled. It had a good defensive position, and the machine
guns and tank-mounted cannon could destroy ninjas no matter
what they were wearing.
"Radio for reinforcements," the officer said. "We need special
145
equipment to deal with this. Flame throwers, bazookas. We'll clean
them out, all right."
Again, Fu Antos agreed. The elimination of Major Lima had
blunted the Brazilian army's jungle-fighting capacity, but here
and there competent officers remained, and they tended to surface
at awkward moments. The bulk of the convoy sat tight; the battle
had only begun. Those six hundred soldiers could overrun the
Black Castle's incomplete ramparts, and there were reinforcements
coming for the army, none for the ninjas. They had to be stopped
here in the jungle. It was necessary to destroy the personnel, not
the equipment, so that the ninjas could use the weapons they had
expected to obtain.

The ninja leader, contemplating the convoy from his forest
cover, smiled. The infiltration of the ninja's own shipment by the
soldiers had been a brilliant tactical stroke. He should have anticipated
it and taken precautions, but he had been so busy with the
construction of the castle and related matters that he had not paid
proper attention to the opposition, and could blame no one but
himself. Once this youthful body grew to manhood, he would
make fewer such mistakes. And he had to give credit to the leader
of the opposition: Fernando Mirabal. That was the man who stood
most in need of assassination-and Fu Antos had let him go free
after having him in his power. Calamitous misjudgment!
Well, perhaps he would get another chance at Mirabal. If the
man showed up anywhere near the Black Castle, and he was bound
to. He would not escape the reckoning of the ninja. Though in a
way it was too bad, for in certain respects Mirabal had a mind that
was worthy of respect. In a curious way, that mind was similar to
Fu Antos's own.
But at the moment there was more urgent business: to wipe
out this formidable force before it came within range of the castle.
The cannon, mortars and bazookas could devastate the stoneworks,
once they oriented on a clear target. But they would be equally
potent in defense of the castle, if they could be captured intact.
Yet the soldiers might well blow up their own equipment rather
 
146
than turn it over. So a proper strategy was called for, to separate
men from equipment without damage to the latter.
It was time to initiate the sequence of the elements: Air, Earth,
Fire and Water. Air was gentle; it would accomplish this critical
separation. The other elements were more brutal, and would have
to wait upon the defense of the castle itself.
Fu Antos raised his hand in a signal: AIR. And a ninja runner
moved quickly to the ninja smoke-expert, who even now had prepared
a wagonful of fine, dry wood shavings. He would move his
wagon directly upwind from the convoy and proceed.
Soon it began, for the ninjas were always efficient. The flame
crackled up, then dampened as special potions were poured into
it. This infusion of Water into Fire had its effect on Air; the smoke
thickened, too heavy to gain much altitude. Instead it rolled like a
bloated python across the landscape, through the forest toward
the convoy. The wind shoved it along, making twists in the snake's
giant torso, but the thing kept growing from the muted fire. The
ninjas, alert to their own devices, gave that dark vapor a wide berth.
The head of it crossed the convoy: perfect aim. The long torso
slithered by, infiltrating the trucks and tanks, curling around the
soldiers. It had a sweet, tangy flavor, not unpleasant.
But the officer caught on. "Gas!" he cried.
He was right: this was a ninja form of nerve gas. Many of the
same mushrooms that had polluted the town's water supply, bringing
madness, were in this smoke. To breathe it was at first exhilarating,
but that was the onset of disaster.
There were few gas masks, for this tactic had not been anticipated.
Major Lima would have come prepared, but Major Lima
had been removed for that very reason. The officers and tank crews
had masks, but not the soldiers. A sergeant had a better alternative:
"Run!" he bawled. "Get out of the gas! Hold your breath-
don't breathe it!"
The men needed little urging. The tank and crews and officers
donned their masks; the others fled into the forest.
Then hell broke loose. Vicious animals charged among the
147
soldiers: wolflike dogs, jaguars, and boars. The beasts looked rabid,
for several of them foamed at the mouths. This terrified the
soldiers, who did not know that the ninjas had carefully squirted

foam into the animals' mouths as they were released. The men
fired wildly, but the creatures were already in their midst, and the
shots only brought down other soldiers. In addition, several men
had inhaled too much of the smoke, and now were enjoying themselves
firing right at the handiest targets: their associates. The animals
themselves slashed randomly with their tusks, teeth, and claws,
seeming to exist only to kill. It was a thorough melee.
Small bags flew through the air to burst at the feet of the men.
Small poisonous snakes emerged. They slithered around the feet
and legs of the men and started biting. Other bags loosed little
wasps, scorpions and stinging flies, with similar effect.
Then monstrous bat-forms swooped down from the trees. They
were ninjas, employing gliding kites. In moments they too were
among the panicked soldiers, slashing, hitting and mauling. Then
they were gone again, leaving many more soldiers dead.
Now only the gas-masked men remained with the convoy.
The ninjas ran toward it, and the vicious animals let them pass
because they wore a special repellent.
The turrets of the two tanks swung about as the ninjas approached.
But it was difficult for the men to orient well while
wearing gas masks, and vision from inside a tank is seldom ideal
anyway. The ninjas gestured at the tanks, drawing their fire, then
dropped out of sight before the aim could be adjusted.
But even a confused tank is dangerous. The lead one charged
forward, its treads crunching the ground where the ninjas had
disappeared, grinding up the turf. The ninjas could no longer be
secure in their invisibility; they had to scramble out of the way.
One was too slow, and the tank crushed his legs. Destroyed but
not dead, the ninja reached inside his uniform, grabbed a packet
of poison, and popped it into his mouth. Then he died, satisfied
that he could not be interrogated.
Meanwhile, Fu Antos quickly got in under the guns and clam-
 
148
bered onto the moving tank. He emptied a bag of itching powder
into the vent.
Like all ninja products, it was superior grade. The men inside
went wild as the fine material sifted down into their uniforms,
aggravating the skin intolerably. If there is anything worse than
ants in the pants, it is itching powder in a tank. In moments the
tank, too, was vacant, the masks off.
The second tank was orienting its cannon on Fu Antos. He
jumped down and used the other vehicles of the convoy as cover,
so that it could not fire. The other ninjas had already dispatched
the officers in the jeeps, but the tank crew could not know that.
Then he skated two tonki, little throwing knives, in through the
forward apertures of the tank. No other man could have made
such accurate throws.
The tank hesitated, while the crewmen inside shifted places,
the living and the dead. Fu Antos mounted it during that hesitation,
and poured liquid Greek Fire down the vent. Flame erupted.
Now the tank was dead.
Fu Antos's mighty ki protected him from the narcotic smoke,
but even he was not entirety immune. He moved out of it before it
affected his mind.
The battle still raged in the jungle. The soldiers, mobbing the
outnumbered ninjas, had at last brought down several. One ninja
was struck amidships by a bazooka shot, and simply disintegrated.
Another was caught close-range in the stream of bullets from an
M-3 machine gun. Though his cloak protected him somewhat,
the sheer impact knocked him over. Two other men emptied their
guns into him at point blank range. Each bullet hit close upon the
last, so that the effect was cumulative, and he was battered to
death without ever suffering perforation.

With ninja casualties mounting, it was time to break off. Fu
Antos made a signal, and abruptly the ninjas departed.
But now the wind shifted. The awful smoke rolled toward the
remaining men. Again they ran. But that meant the smoke no
longer covered the convoy.
149
The ninjas reappeared. They climbed into the deserted vehicles.
But they were not able to operate the tanks or personnel
carriers, lacking the knowledge. So they planted explosives and
blew them up after unloading the cases of weapons and ammunition.
Hidden in the forest, they opened the cases, so as to transfer
the supplies to more convenient carrying form. And they received
a shock. The first case, marked GRENADES, contained a jack-inthe-
box with a face like Mirabal's, its tongue sticking out. And a
note saying "Congratulations! You have just become the proud
owner of this box of rocks." And the rest was-stone.
Mirabal had outsmarted the ninja after all.
So far.
 
Chapter 8:
The Love of Oba
Now Oba took me to her apartment. Actually it was both
more and less than that. It was in a big two-story house in one of
the poorer sections of town, that had been partitioned into small
rooms, each occupied by a person, couple, or family. We passed
into a central courtyard, with a communal laundry, and thence up
to her room.
She opened a round red can of guava paste labeled Conchita,
cutting out some pieces and putting them on hard soda crackers
from a big square box. I didn't know what it was, so she put one in
my mouth. I chewed dutifully, and it was delicious. I gulped some
cool water, and that was delicious too. In fact, I was feeling very
good, riding an ebbing wave of euphoria. Then she showed me her
bed, and suddenly my day and night of action caught up with me,
and I lay on that bed like a felled tree.
It was late afternoon when I woke. Oba was gone. I was not
worried; I knew she had other things to do besides watch me snore.
She had left some more food on the table where I would find it: a
151
pot of black coffee, more crackers and paste, and some tasty soft
white cheese. Simple fare, but good. I checked the little ice chest,
but there seemed to be no milk. That's the difference between me
and the Brazilians: I'm a milk drinker. Ah, well: coffee, then, and
fresh-baked bread.
She had also left two big crumpled dirty blue and red l0-
cruzeiro notes for me. I was especially touched by this gesture; this
was probably all she could spare, though it was only about two
and a half dollars in American money. Well, I would repay her. I
pocketed the money.
I ate quickly, then cleaned up. God, I was filthy! I had forgotten
about the dirt I had smeared over myself yesterday. I must
have been a real spectacle, dancing in that black mass in my bare
feet and caked dirt. I found a razor and shaved, aware that the
instrument's normal use would have been on the legs of a pretty
girl. Odd that so many women shave their legs to silken smoothness,
but not their arms. Just which limbs do they expect to bear
the closest scrutiny?
There was a bidet in the room. You know, one of those strange
female saddle-shaped urinals they use in Europe. What the hell: I
straddled it as well as I could and relieved my bladder. I had encountered
one of those things when I attended the martial-arts
tournament in Nicaragua, and it really set me back. It conjured all
sorts of half-obscene visions-bare distaff posteriors squirting fluid,
that sort of thing-well, I never claimed to be sexually sophisticated.

I got a kind of kick out of using it, and had buquinish up
quickly before getting a masculine reaction. If I ever write my
memoirs, that sort of detail won't be in them, though. Don't we
all have thoughts we are ashamed of!
I looked around the room. I had been oblivious to its detail,
yesterday-actually this morning, but it seemed like yesterday-
but now I was rested and had idle time. The windows had heavy
red drapes, and from one of them I could see the big Maracana
Stadium. There was a radio but no TV, a big dresser with a mirror,
the table with its two chairs-and that was about it for furniture,
 
152
apart from the bed. Oba was obviously not rich. There were pictures
of Saint Lazarus, a leper with two dogs, and Saint Barbara
with a sword in one hand and a small castle behind her. That of
course reminded me of my remarkable evening.
There was an old Singer sewing machine, one of the non-electric
pedal jobs, and a clothing dummy, and bolts of cloth, patterns,
spools of thread and such like. She was evidently a seamstress
in her spare time, or maybe that was her main occupation.
There was a picture of a man, a rather handsome mulatto with
curly short black hair and a powerful jawline. Her boyfriend? Then
why had she been willing to pick me up? Could be she was merely
helpful, a nice girl; best not to presume too much.
Still Oba didn't reappear. What did I know of her, anyway?
Maybe she had gone to fetch the Death Squad. No, I had to have
some faith; I had tried to help her, and maybe she had a small yen
for me, so she helped me back. She'd be home in due course.
What the hell. I was no pimp, to lie around being served by a
woman. I needed money to buy my passage home, and to repay
Oba for her kindness. I had to go out and see how I could earn it.
I found a pencil and printed a note on some of the breadwrapper:
OBA-I WILL RETURN. J.S. That should reassure her.
I went out and down the stairs to the central patio. There were
a number of people around, and they stared at me, no doubt taking
me for Oba's lover. Well, let them take! I made my way to the
street and on to a broad avenue going by the stadium. I was careful
to note the address so I could find it again.
Soon I was back in the crowd. Again I rode the wave of it
knowing it would bring me to where the action was.
And it took me to a major martial arts festival.
Suddenly I knew how to get out of Brazil. Martial arts is my
bailiwick.
I entered a large open space. Further along were huge tents,
like a circus, and I could hear sideshow barkers calling. But what
interested me was up close: a trained fighting bear, and a sign with
153
the figure one thousand cruzeiros. Obviously anyone who could
beat the bear would win that prize.
I paused to do some crude calculations: 1,000 cruzeiros-I
had to refrain from thinking of them as "crud-zeroes"-would translate
into about one hundred and thirty dollars, if I had my exchange
ratio straight. An airplane ticket to America would cost me
about four hundred dollars-so it wasn't enough. Also, I would
need clothing, so the Death Squad spies wouldn't recognize me at
the airport, which they surely had staked out. Good Brazilian businessman
clothes, probably at least another hundred dollars. Plus
some for bribes-hell with that! So I needed a stake of five hundred
dollars, and I surely was not going to steal any of it from any
voodoo idols. This bear prize could be a start toward that total.
I approached more closely. Actually there were two animal
matches; the more popular one was a chimpanzee. It was the chimp
who paid one thousand cruz; the bear paid five thousand. That
was more like it; I could win my grubstake outright, over six hundred

dollars.
But first I watched the chimp. He wore red boxing pants and
red boxing gloves, and was much smaller than a man. But the
animal was tough. Many men tried it, paying the entry fee of ten
cruz-and the chimp beat them all easily. Chimpanzees, like all
apes, are much stronger than men.
No one dared even attempt the bear. I knew the odds were
much worse for it, but the prize was much bigger too. So I paid
the entry fee of twenty cruz-praise the voodoo god for Oba's
generosity!-and took the ring against the ursine champion. It
was a European black bear, six feet tall and over four hundred
pounds. Its claws were clipped and it was muzzled, but it remained
a monster. Had I not been desperate . . .
I came in fast with a tai otoshi body drop, hauling the bear over
my leg. It staggered but did not fall; its hind legs were too short
and its gravity too low for this to be effective.
It reared again on its two hind feet and tried to grab me in a
bear-hug. This time I went in deep with a ko-soto-gake small out-
 
154
side hook, going into sutemi by throwing myself down along with
the bear, carrying it across my hooking leg. This worked; it rolled
on its back. However, merely throwing it was not enough, in this
match; I actually had to subdue it. So I put a kesagatame scarf hold
on it, my arm circling its neck, holding it down. But again it was
too strong for me, and shaped wrong. I changed to another
holddown, katagatame, but still it was getting away. So at last I
went into a modified hadaka jime strangle from behind. In addition
to the pressure of my arms around its neck, I crossed my legs
around its waist in an illegal (in contest judo-but this was hardly
that!) scissors hold and squeezed as hard as I could. This was a
hold not even a bear could break readily, though it certainly tried.
I knew it was losing consciousness.
Then a bell clanged. Oh, no! The owner had called the end of
the round, and would not let me continue the strangle. I got up.
Now I realized that there had been some small print in the terms,
that I had not been able to read anyway, so that the bout had to be
finished within a short round. I could take my winnings of 1,000
cruz for lasting one round, or go for a second round. And I knew
the bear would not allow itself to be caught in that strangle again.
With ill grace I accepted my winnings. A few more seconds
and I would have won the full prize, but one fifth of a loaf was
better than none. I should have known that the rules would be set
up to favor the entrepreneur, not the client.
I continued on down the street to the big tents. There was a
sign at the largest one, printed in three languages: Portuguese,
Japanese, and English. It was a Sumo tournament and exhibition,
Japanese wrestling. Anyone could enter by paying the fee, but in
this case I knew the rules. Few were entering, for a professional
sumo wrestler is an impressive hunk of man, huge and fat and
strong.
I needed more money than the truncated bear purse had provided,
and that sort of cash was available for the sumo winners.
Judo is an excellent all-around martial art, overlapping the techniques
of karate, kung fu, aikido and wrestling. Many serious
155
judokas will study other martial arts, to increase proficiency in
judo. I had done the same, and one of the arts I had dabbled in
was sumo. In fact, one of the things I did in my own dojo was to
have my young students strip off their jackets and do sumo. It was
good exercise, it made for variety, and it was fun; the kids loved it.
Of course I would be at a disadvantage against a classical sumo
wrestler in his own specialty. But I knew there would be no topranked
sumotori here. Brazil had a sizable colony of Japanese settlers,

the largest in Latin America, about half a million, but this
was hardly Japan itself. So I figured I had a reasonable chance for
the purse.
Actually, I could make my money without reaching the finals.
Betting was legal here; all I had to do was bet on myself and win a
couple, and I'd have my money. Or, playing it safe, bet half my
money, or five hundred cruzeiros. That way if I lost, I'd still have a
stake. The five hundred cruz would be about sixty-five dollars, if I
won three times and doubled it each time, that would come to,
let's see, five hundred and twenty dollars. Just about right, without
even risking my other half of the bear winnings. That would
be reserved to repay Oba.
So I entered. What did I really have to lose? If I didn't enter, I
would be stuck here anyway.
The tournament was inside the big tent, on a raised platform
marked with a circle. All around the edges of the tent were hawkers'
booths and little sideshows; maybe I would have a chance to
look into some of them after the tournament. I'm a sucker for such
entertainments, and I was also hungry. The first thing I'd do after
this was buy some good ice cream.
But now my first match came up. The object in sumo is to
make any part of your opponent touch the ground-other than
the soles of his feet, of course-or shove him out of the ring. Kicking,
punching, hair-pulling and gouging are forbidden. In sumo,
the "ring" really is a ring, about fifteen feet across, with no ropes
around the edge, only a white ring on the floor marking the boundary.
The platform is supposed to be made from sixteen rice bales,
 
156
supported by four pillars at the four points of the compass, each
painted a different color. This platform was painted, but the floor
was wood, not rice. Too bad; I rather appreciated the niceties of
tradition.
I had to don a Fundoshi, the tight-fitting black loin cloth.
Around my waist was a fat cord of hemp; it was permissible to take
hold of this, and it gave good leverage. My opponent wore the
same. He was a veritable mountain of flesh; I judged he outweighed
me by 150 pounds. No wonder the local boys weren't having much
luck!
The judge, or gyoji, was dressed in a brocade kimono. In real
sumo there is also a jury of five men, but here it was up to the lone
judge.
There were normally a lot of formalities associated with sumo,
and combatants could take a long time preparing for a match,
though the match itself was usually short. But this was degraded
sumo, and the local Brazilian entries were generally so inept that
little preparation was required. My opponent had little way of
knowing I was different.
The signal for the start of the match came. The sumotori rushed
me, thinking to finish me off in the first hustle; after all, all he had
to do was grab me and shove me out. That was his mistake; a man
too intent on shortcuts is easily trapped. I grabbed his outstretched
right arm, braced my left foot against his right knee, and hauled
him over in a hiza-guruma knee-wheel throw. His forward impetus
sent him flying right out of the ring. So the easy victory was mine,
not his.
That trick doubled my money, at least the amount I had bet.
Now I had one thousand cruzeiros, plus my Oba's-newshoes reserve.
However, it had cost me the element of surprise. The other
contestants were quick to recognize my martial arts ability. An
amateur does not perform a perfect knee-wheel throw on a professional
-not by chance. They would be alert for me now.
My second match was proof of that. It was against another
man-mountain, but he did not charge me. He came in cautiously,

157
then suddenly grabbed my neck with both hands. These big men
were trained to move very quickly in the ring; never think of a
sumotori as a slow hulk.
He was trying to choke me into submission, a legitimate tactic.
But the strangle is fundamental to judo, as is the choke. A
strangle cuts off the blood to the brain, a choke the air to the
lungs. A strangle correctly applied will be effective much more
rapidly than a mere choke. I had had many years practice in resisting
more competent chokes than this. I tensed my neck muscles-
and they were formidable, if I do say so myself-hunched my
head down, and resisted his relatively crude effort. My wind was
cut off, even so, for he had great strength in his hands, but it
would take him two minutes to down me from asphyxiation. Meanwhile,
I clamped my own hands to his neck, going for the strangle.
I was ready to bet the match that I could outlast him in this particular
ploy.
I was right. He lacked the tough neck for this. My thumbs
sank in and put pressure on the two nerve centers at the sides of
the neck over the carotid arteries. A nerve-strangle is even faster
than a blood-strangle. That was it; he fell unconscious. I had my
second victory.
That brought my money to two thousand cruzeiros. One more
win would do it.
The sumotori of my third match neither charged nor choked.
He circled me warily, then reached out, and I caught hold of his
right arm. He thought I was going for another forward throw, and
braced himself to counter. But I trapped his right arm in my left
armpit and turned inward into a waki-gatame arm-lock. The sudden
pain made him fall on one knee, costing him the match.
Good enough. Now I could collect my winnings and get out
of here. The rapidity of my victories was not unusual; in sumo it is
generally settled very quickly. It is all geared to a quick heave utilizing
maximum effort, like weight lifting.
But a large hand clapped my shoulder as I walked toward the
 
158
partitioned changing-room. The strike was from behind, startling
me. "Jason Striker!"
I turned. It was another sumotori, 350 pounds-but this one
I recognized. He was a yokozuma, a grand champion of the art,
one of the genuine masters. "Kiyokuni!" I exclaimed. "What brings
you to Brazil?"
He lowered his eyes. "I am getting old, friend, past my prime.
My rank is for life, but my body fades. The competition in Japan,
the strong young ones-" He shrugged. "I had to win, for I had
gambling debts. Yet I could not."
"You were in debt, yet you traveled to the Americas?" I asked,
trying not to make it sound too critical.
"As an entrepreneur," he explained. "I was not ready to untie the
traditional knot." He meant the knot of hair tressed on his head. A
great champion, ready to quit, untied the knot in public, signifying
his retirement. "My friend, the Osensei Hiroshi of Aikido-"
"My friend too," I interjected. I had not realized that these
two knew each other-the huge sumo expert and the tiny Aikido
expert. Hiroshi had gotten me into this present adventure, as a
matter of fact, coming to plead Fu Antos' cause.
"Hiroshi suggested that I organize a troupe of wrestlers like
me-too old or too new or recovering from indisposition." Now
he meant drug addiction or alcoholism; that has happened to some
very good martial artists, unfortunately. One of the greatest judokas
of all time, Shiro Saigo, went that sad route. "I borrowed all I
could to set it up. Now we tour the world. Though we are not the
best Japan has to offer, we are better than any elsewhere. And we

perform a valuable service, promoting the art of sumo and educating
other people to the Japanese way. We give seminars on the
courtesies of martial art and proper technique, and we offer limited
instruction for those interested in sumo. Our fees are reasonable,
and a man past his competitive prime may remain at his teaching
prime much longer."
"That's great!" I exclaimed. "You are spreading a good knowledge."
159
"We like to think so," he agreed, inclining his head in a little
gesture of appreciation for the compliment. There is something
about the grave, automatic courtesy of the true martial artist that
always touches me.
"Well, you certainly helped me," I said. "I got in trouble and
lost my money, and now I have won back enough to get home
again. Without this tournament I don't know what I would have
done."
"But surely you are not leaving now!" he protested. "You have
won three matches in fine style. Two more will bring you to the
finals. Already the spectators have taken note of you, this strange
North American who makes the huge wrestlers whimper! You are
generating excitement, attracting people, and bringing us profit.
Please, I must insist that you continue in the tournament!"
I could not very well turn down this sincere plea of my huge
friend. I approved what he was doing, and I really was in no hurry,
now that I had my money. I did not need to bet any more-I
never gamble voluntarily anyway-and could finish out the competition
for the fun of it. "I'll stay," I said.
"But you must be hungry!" he exclaimed jovially. "You are
hardly more than a skeleton." Compared to him, I was, since I had
no fat on me. "Come, we shall prepare you for the remainder."
And he urged me forward into one of the smaller tents. The main
tent had no sides, just a top to keep the weather away, but the
smaller tents were complete.
As a matter of fact, I was hungry. I did not want to eat a large
amount right before the vigorous exercise of a match, but something
would be very good right now. So I joined him in a lovely
Island repast of raw fish, fried rice balls, a bowl of black bean paste
and noodles, and plenty of Japanese tea with no sugar.
Now it was time for the next match. Apparently Kiyokuni had
delayed the proceedings so as not to rush me. I knew this one was
going to be tougher, for my opponent treated me exactly like a
professional sumotori. I could not afford to grapple him in the
conventional sumo fashion, for he was much stronger and heavier
 
160
than I. I had to win fast, or lose, and I rather expected to lose. The
plain fact was that I was not a match for a good sumotori in his
specialty.
He grabbed my belt. I cut suddenly to the side, whipping my
hip sidewise and back in a taisabaki motion used in judo to counter
a forward throw. Because I was nervous, and recharged by the good
food Kiyokuni had shared, my action was extraordinarily powerful.
The sumotori's wrist jerked violently.
He gave a cry of pain and let go. The judge called a halt,
coming in to examine the man's hand.
Oh, no! I saw it now. The thumb was bent backward out of its
socket, wrenched or broken by my thrust.
"Here, let me-" I said automatically. The judge held the
sumotori's arm, and I took hold of the dislocated thumb and pulled
hard. The victim grimaced with pain, but in a moment the digit
settled back into its proper place. But that hand would be useless
for some time.
The judge indicated the victory for me, but I didn't care about
that. "I'm sorry," I told the sumotori, not certain he even understood

my language. "I did not mean to hurt you."
He controlled his pain like the man he was. "That hand was
weak from prior injury," he told me in English. "I was careless,
and you did not know." And he made a little bow.
There was nothing else I could say. I turned away, chagrined.
These things do happen; I have been injured many times in judo.
But that did not make me feel much better. How would that man
be able to make his way, now?
But my next match was upon me. Now I would be happy to
lose, and get out of this before I caused any more trouble. Yet I
had to do my best; never in my life have I thrown a match, for any
reason.
The sumotori grabbed me around the waist, trying to lift me
so that he could carry me out of the ring. I resisted, levering against
his own mass so that he could not get me up. So he used all his
strength and bulk to squeeze me and bend me backwards, literally
161
crushing me in his embrace. Let me tell you, the press of a sumotori
is no trifle; I could hardly gasp in enough breath to maintain consciousness.
Then I remembered a trick little Hiroshi had employed against
a huge wrestler at the Martial Open. No doubt it was the mention
of Hiroshi the Aikidoist in my discourse with Kiyokuni so recently
that brought this to mind. I tried that trick now. I put one arm at
the small (really a misnomer, on this monstrous man!) of his back,
and the other under his nose. I pressed upward and back on his
face while hauling him in from the back. The upper lip is sensitive;
he had to draw back to alleviate my pressure, but could not.
I kept pushing with all my might, forcing him to bend, and at last
he capitulated. The match was mine.
Now, to my surprise, I had made the finals. Only one wrestler
remained, and I would have to vie with him for the grand purse of
ten thousand cruzeiros, or about one thousand three hundred dollars,
that I didn't really want now. And-my opponent was my
friend Kiyokuni, naturally a competitor himself. No doubt he saved
his venture some money by winning many of the purses himself,
and this was legitimate, so long as he won fairly, as I was sure he
did.
I looked out over the crowd, seeing how huge it had grown,
inflated like the ponderous belly of a sumotori. There was a lot of
support for Japanese martial art here in Rio. Many of the spectators
were of Japanese descent, but many were not. It was a credit
to Kiyokuni's promotional ability.
Then I spied a too-familiar face at the fringe. It was Laureano,
head torturer for Mirabal. What was he doing here?
What else but searching for me? The same excitement that
had attracted the swelling crowd had brought him to investigate.
I had in effect blown my cover, and I had to get out fast. "I have
changed my mind,' I said to Kiyokuni. "I can not participate further."
He was shocked. "Jason, you can not do this! It is the final
match!"
 
162
"I-I am indisposed," I said, not wanting to get him involved
in my Death Squad problems. "I shall yield the match and purse
to you. Please use some of it to help the man whose hand I injured."
"Indisposed?" he repeated, and I realized I had made an unfortunate
choice of vocabulary. He thought I was pleading addiction
to some drug. Then he shook his head, refusing to credit that.
"But you have done so well! Everyone is waiting for this encounter!
It is a record crowd." Then he paused. "Ah, you worry about
Toshida! That is all right; we do not throw our injured troupe
members into the street to die! All of on this tour have problems;
all contribute to a common fund to assist those whom misfortune
befalls. Do not be concerned."

"You are my friend," I said. "I cannot fight you."
He smiled with understanding. "Ah, you seek to avoid embarrassing
me before this throng! I appreciate the thought, but I am a
warrior. I can take my losses as well as my victories, and I would be
privileged to lose to you, my friend. Come, I insist-the match
must continue."
Laureano was looking my way, and I was sure he had spotted
me. His eyes seemed to glitter insanely behind rimless glasses.
There were four or five men with him with their shirts hanging
out, covering their belts, surely concealing their weapons. Among
them was the big ugly football player/thug. Trouble galore! "You
misunderstand, friend. I can't hope to defeat you. It would be a
mismatch."
"Now you sound like a coward, and I know you are not!" he
answered. "Come, it is a fair match, and it would look strange if
you suddenly withdrew now. People would think I had bribed
you to forfeit, and my reputation would suffer." And he looked at
me with such a pleading sincerity that it was painful.
What could I say? He was honest, well-meaning, and correct.
He did not know about my problem with the Death Squad, and I
did not want him to know. I had to go through with it, and made
a good show for the spectators, many of whom I knew had placed
163
sizable wagers on the outcome. All I could do now was hope to
finish it quickly, one way or the other, and get out before Laureano
and his hoods reached me.
Kiyokuni and I approached each other slowly. I had not been
fooling when I pondered the strength of the sumotori; he might
consider himself over the hill in Japan, but he had been one of the
mightiest sumo wrestlers of all time, and was still a formidable
opponent. In a straight judo match I think I could have taken
him, for that was my specialty; no doubt I had better endurance,
and could nail him when he tired. But I was quite unlikely to beat
him in sumo, and was much more likely to lose rapidly than to
win slowly. He would not fall for the tricks I had used on the lesser
combatants. Furthermore, he knew me from Japan, and had seen
me fight there; he was wise to my techniques.
We grappled and pushed at each other, not trying for an immediate
win so much as a minor advantage that could be parlayed
into a winning combination. Yet I felt the tremendous musculature
under Kiyokuni's fat; he could bull me out of the circle any
time and knew it, but the showman in him wanted to make it look
tougher for the betting spectators, and the friend in him wanted
to spare me the ignominy of too-ready defeat. He would not throw
the match, of course, any more than I would, but there are kind
and unkind ways to prevail. Damn his kind heart; if he beat me in
five seconds and let me go, I could avoid murder or capture by
Mirabal's torturer!
I heard a cry. Now the Death Squad was right up to the platform.
Laureano's burning half-mad eyes were fixed on mine, his
right hand stroking the bump below his hanging shirt; he had a
gun there, all right. I didn't think he'd shoot me right there on
stage, in full view of the crowd, but seeing the lurking insanity
and lust for blood in his face, I wasn't sure. He'd probably do it
rather than let me slip away again. And if he tried, he very well
might hit my friend Kiyokuni. I had to break this off right now-
but how?
Suddenly there was a piercing scream. My gaze turned invol-
 
164
untarily that way. It was Oba, right before Laureano, who was
trying to push past her to regain a clear shot at me.
She screamed again, with marvelous volume. All heads turned.
She gesticulated wildly, a torrent of Portuguese emerging from her

pretty little mouth. She pointed at Laureano in a gesture very
similar to the one the boy Filho had used on me in prison. Nearby
faces scowled.
Then I knew what she was doing. She was accusing the Death
Squadders of attacking her, and the crowd believed her. In truth,
Laureano was innocent of this particular charge, but I wasn't going
to raise my voice on his behalf. Let him have a taste of his own
medicine, the false accusation and frame-up. Serve him right!
Now I had leeway. I freed my right arm, got clearance between
us, and let go with a mighty uppercut to Kiyokuni's chin. It
was a knockout blow-and an obvious foul.
There was an instant roar of outrage from the crowd as the
judge signaled the penalty. They could not know that I might
have saved Kiyokuni's life from a misplaced assassin's shot. The
sumotori fell back, losing consciousness, a surprised look on his
face; he had never suspected I would be capable of such a dastardly
deed. The judge, too, was shocked; he was yelling something at
me, but his voice was drowned out by the crowd.
Half a dozen sumotoris scrambled into the ring, furious. Instead
of freeing myself from a match, I had gotten myself into a
brawl! Why hadn't I simply confided in Kiyokuni and let him
help hide me from the Death Squad? Sometimes I'm not very
bright, sad to say. Kiyokuni was not only a fine fighter and the
employer of these men, he was their friend and benefactor. I could
well understand their anger and sympathize with their intent, but
could not afford to wait for it! They would beat me to jelly in an
instant, and if they didn't, the Death Squad would finish me off
instead. My own folly!
They converged. Surrounded by the dancing whales, I prepared
my escape. Fortunately they got in each other's way, being
so eager to get at me. I leaped up and delivered a flying kick to the
165
side of the face of the nearest, knocking him down. But another
grabbed me from behind with both arms. I jumped, using him as
leverage, and shoved with both legs at the chest of the one in front.
He fell back like a monstrous tenpin, bowling over the others.
Then I bent forward and gathered in the knee of the man holding
me, who was staggering backward from the recoil of my shove; I
encouraged that stagger with a backward kick to his abdomen that
incapacitated him without injury. I was not trying to hurt these
people.
What a melee it was! Oba was still screaming, the crowd was
closing in on the Death Squad and on me simultaneously, the
judge was appalled, sumotoris were sprawled all across the ring,
angry spectators further out were starting to throw stink bombs,
and one wrestler remained on his feet coming at me. Laureano's
gun was now in his hand, and the other Death Squadders were
reaching for theirs. I had generated a riot that might soon cost the
lives of a number of people-but had I saved my own life?
Laureano's gun came up, the muzzle centering on me as the
last sumotori charged me. The other wrestlers were getting up;
after all, they were used to taking falls. It was now or never.
I ducked down to meet the wrestler. Fortunately he was a light
one, a scant 300 pounds. I put my bowed shoulders into his midsection,
caught his right leg with my right arm, braced my legs
and lifted him in an unsteady kata-guruma shoulder whirl. When
I had him up, I turned around in the "airplane spin" of the television
wrestlers, letting his legs fly out to bash down the others.
Then I heaved him off the platform, directly into the Death Squad,
crushing them down beneath that awful weight.
I jumped off the platform, grabbed Oba's hand, and ran for it.
I had no time to pick up my money or even to recover my clothes.
I only hoped Kiyokuni would understand, once he thought it out.
Then I spied Laureano. The man was extricating himself from

the pileup, apparently having been on the fringe. He was bent
over, trying to rise despite part of the Football Player sprawled on
one of his arms, and his posterior was facing me. It was an oppor-
 
166
tunity I could not resist. I broke away from Oba, jumped toward
the torturer, closed my fist, and smacked him at the base of the
spine right between the buttocks with an Ippon-Ken strike. It was
an atemi blow, outlawed in karate competition because it could
injure the spinal nerve, interfering with the function of the legs
and the urinary system.
Laureano screamed and collapsed, and I knew my blow had
done the trick. It would be a long time before he walked normally
again, and he might lose control of his bladder. He would suffer
horribly-just the way he had made countless prisoners suffer.
Now Oba and I merged with the crowd. I felt naked in my
scanty Fundoshi, and no wonder, for it was really no more than a
tough jock strap. But the milling throng didn't seem to notice;
probably they assumed it was just a carnival costume. They didn't
know I was the cause of the riot.
Oba took the lead, smiling sunnily. And I realized that this
little goddess had indeed saved me from betrayal by a friend, voiding
Exu's curse. Kiyokuni had meant only well, but he had nearly
been the death of me; only Oba's timely distraction had foiled
that.
There was a cry. I looked back, and there was the big Football
Player, towering over the heads of the crowd, forging through like
a tank. He was waving his fist at me; he wanted me to know he was
back on my trail. He must have shown his badge or whatever and
freed himself, and resumed the chase, heedless of the plight of
Laureano. I certainly hadn't given him the slip long; he was like a
damned bloodhound. There seemed to be more Squadders with
him than before, too, seven or eight now. And they obviously had
caught on to Oba's connection to me; that particular ploy would
not work again.
"Vir," Oba said, tugging me on.
"I hope you know an escape hatch," I muttered, following her.
"Those bastards mean business." And how!
She led me to a door, and we ducked in. I hoped Football
hadn't seen us do it, but had no real confidence. It was some kind
167
of an exercise hall, with students working out. Not judo or karate
or Aikido; I couldn't place it at first glance, but it certainly had the
aspect of a martial arts dojo. For one thing, the pupils were in
armor. Did the Society for Creative Anachronisms have a Chapter
here?
The Master came up. He was at least sixty years old, stood five
foot six, with a substantial pot belly that brought his weight up to
perhaps 180 pounds. His eyes were watery, his beard wispy, and I
could see the somewhat trembly nature of his pulse. There were
big dark liver spots on his hands, a sure sign of advancing age.
Taken all in all, not impressive. Perhaps he had been a sharp martial
artist once, but no longer. He wore a samurai sword, and now
I recognize his martial art. This was kendo or iado, the science of
swordsmanship.
Oba spoke quickly in Portuguese. The Master smiled and
turned to me. "Jason Striker!" he exclaimed, though Oba had not
named me.
Uh-oh. If he knew me, would he give me away to the Death
Squad? No, I had to trust him; evidently Oba knew him, and
anyway I had no choice.
"Fuji, kendo," the Master introduced himself simply, so I could
understand. We exchanged bows.
Now I had to admire his school, for it would have been bad

form to allow minor matters like a Death Squad hot on my heels
to distract me from common courtesy. Chafing inside, I did so.
Most of the students were still working out. They were not
actually in armor, at least not the conventional kind; that had
been my error of a too-hasty glance. They wore cotton blouses and
ankle-length divided skirts, with bare feet. They had helmets similar
to baseball catcher's masks, with iron face grills and padded leather
side flaps, the whole cushioned by a towel underneath. The breastplates
consisted of bamboo slats, extended by a short leather plate
to protect the crotch. Shell gauntlets covered the arms from the
backs of the hands to the elbows.
Their "swords" were made of bamboo, with sixteen inches of
 
168
handle and thirty of blade-and that blade was split, tied together
by an interior cord. The result was to deprive it of its striking
power. But it could make a sound, and the judge could estimate
the power and cleanness of the blow by that crack. More advanced
students fenced without armor, and used more substantial wooden
swords.
It is foolish to judge by appearances, especially in martial art.
I knew that, but this time I forgot. I'm afraid my border-line contempt
must have been evident to Master Fuji, and in retrospect I
am keenly embarrassed. I had a lesson coming.
There was a sudden loud pounding on the door. We knew
what that was. Oba spoke again, urgently. The Master gestured
me to a curtain, and we hastened to hide behind it.
The curtain was semitransparent, with a coarse weave, so it
was possible to see through it by putting my face up close.
Now the men of the Death Squad charged in, a brutish crew.
Laureano was not among them, thanks to my knock on his posterior;
the Football Linesman led them. Despite the danger I was in,
my glance passed by them to the wall beyond, attracted to the
display of wooden swords.
Wooden swords. Fat lot of good they would do against thugs
armed with guns. And that must be a wooden sword Master Fuji
was wearing too, not a real one. He was virtually unarmed.
"Move aside, old man," Football snapped arrogantly, or something
like that in Portuguese; his peremptory tone raised my hackles.
I never did much like bullies, and these ones were worse than
most.
Master Fuji looked small and frail before these brutes, but he
stood his ground, answering softly but firmly. He would not permit
a search without a warrant, or whatever the formality was, and
of course the Death Squad hadn't bothered with that. I appreciated
his courage, but knew it was useless; they would simply shove
him aside and proceed, quite possibly ransacking the premises and
terrorizing the students while they were at it.
Yet the students continued their ritual postures as though
169
oblivious to the threat to their instructor. They surely knew he was
in danger, or at least embarrassment; were they disciplined, or
were they afraid? Some example for the field of martial arts! I flexed
my muscles, planning combat strategy, but I knew it was hopeless.
There were eight thugs, and all were armed; in one second
those pistols would be in their hands and blasting away.
Football spoke again, to his men, and they spread out to circle
the Master. The old man spread his hands, shaking his head. "No!"
he cried. "I forbid it!"
Football's left hand thrust out, shoving the Master back. He
staggered. Now the other thugs closed in for a bit of sport. They
encircled him completely, vulpine smiles on their faces, reaching
slowly for their guns. They wanted him to see what they were
doing, to make him cry out and try to resist or get away. A frantic

rabbit was always more sport than a passive one.
Now, in the Orient it used to be a crime punishable by death
for a visitor to draw a weapon in the host's house. Such an action
was never taken lightly; to draw was to challenge to the death. An
offender could be forced to commit seppuku, ritual suicide, even
when he was in the right.
This was Brazil, not the Orient, but a martial arts dojo is
really an extension of the Orient. I knew the Master would have to
act, or be shamed before his students, and therefore he would at
the very least get beaten up, and perhaps die. I had to get out
there and fight my own battle.
Yet this thought and this resolve were only halfway through
my brain, and my body had not yet responded, when the Master
exploded into the most phenomenal action I have ever seen. It was
so rapid and so devastating that at first I could not believe what I
saw. Only later was I able to work it out, re-creating what had
happened.
Here, then, is that re-creation. The Master was ringed by the
eight Death Squad thugs. Football was in front of him, the others
stepping in from all sides as their hands went for their guns. Master
Fuji drew his long sword from the scabbard-and lo! it was,
 
170
after all, razor-sharp steel, not wood-with his left hand. He
brought it up high to clear the scabbard, the hand reversed on the
hilt-seemingly an impossible grip for combat. But then he
brought it down and back, and stabbed the man directly behind
him through the gut, piercing the liver.
Then he drew the sword out, clapped the hilt into his right
hand, angled it up past his own head and whipped the blade across
the two thugs farthest to his right. The first, standing upright, was
slashed deeply across the chest, so that the blood and muscle blossomed
out. The second, leaning forward, had his throat slit. The
katana, having a blade as well as a point, and being slightly curved
so as to facilitate slicing, was well adapted to this motion.
The thugs had not yet quite realized what had happened. Seeing
is not the same as believing, not in the first instant. Not when
a rabbit metamorphoses into a tiger. They were still reaching in
leisurely fashion for their guns. Except for one man, the third from
the Master's right, who had drawn and was just leveling his weapon.
Master Fuji swung back, slicing open the skull of that man. The
thug's brains slopped out from that terrible forehead gash, tumbling
across his face as he fell.
Again the Master reversed his stroke, gripping the sword in
the classical two-handed Japanese way. With a kesagake movement
he opened the abdomens of the two on his left. Their entrails
spewed out like garbage from burst bags, and they too collapsed,
dropping their guns.
Only two remained standing at this stage. Both had their guns
out, and both had now caught on to what was happening. But the
sword reversed course again and severed Football's right arm, sending
it flying through the air still holding the pistol. Amazed but
not stupid, he turned to run, but collapsed as his blood pressure
dropped, for his stump was spurting wildly. Unless he received
prompt medical attention, he was likely to die from loss of blood,
and such attention seemed unlikely.
The last man managed to get off one shot. It missed Master
171
Fuji, who took care of him with a terrible do-giri stroke that almost
cut him in two at the level of the nipples.
Then the Master returned his katana to its scabbard without
looking; the guard on the handle made a faint click as it struck
home. The whole action had taken five seconds.
I stumbled out, unable to abort my attempt to participate

though the action was over. I must have been gaping, for the Master
faced me with a little smile. "Also Iado, 8th Dan," he said,
completing his self-introduction.
Oh. Iado was true sword fighting-steel, not wood-and 8th
Dan would be one of the highest grades in the world. No doubt
about that! It was the art of the quick draw, the swordsman's equivalent
to the old western American cowboy gunslinger's draw. Since
the action was brief, it did not require much stamina; even an old
man could be devastating, as we had just seen.
Master Fuji spoke to Oba, who was looking a bit faint. In
response she took me by the hand and guided me through the
classroom to a back hall, while the students came to clean up the
mess. We would not be bothered any more by the Death Squad
assassins!
My mind numbed, I suffered myself to be led. Oba took me
to a private room in back, and closed the door behind us. Then she
turned and collapsed into my arms, sobbing.
I held her, well appreciating her emotion. To see eight people
so suddenly slaughtered-it horrified me too. I had looked upon
the Master as a basically harmless retiree, a devotee of a martial art
that never had had much impact . . .
I became strongly aware of Oba's lithe body, trembling in my
arms. I felt a pang of guilt for thinking of sexual qualities in this
moment of relief and horror. Yet there is a relation between opposites,
whether it be male and female, or shock and acceptance, or
horror and love. My emotion had been roused, and so had hers,
and that extremely negative outward impression yet was a mutual
experience that drew us together. I don't know whether that makes
sense; I'm not much of a philosopher.
 
172
At any rate, I kissed her, and she kissed me back, fiercely. My
hands slid down along her silken hair to cup her firm buttocks-
and I drew back, unwilling to let her shock at the bloodshed set
her up for a seduction. I am, at the root, an amorous man, but
there are limits.
She stood alone, a lovely nymph. How I wished I could talk
with her!
Oba suddenly remembered something, her mood changing in
that mercurial way women have. She rummaged in her handbag
and brought out a little wooden item, handing it to me with a
smile.
I accepted, turning it over in my hand. It was a carving of a
human hand, the fingers closed, thumb sticking up between the
first two like a fouled-up fist. "What is it?"
"Figa," she said brightly.
"Figure?"
"Figa." And she strung it on a thin chain and hung it around
my neck, a necklace.
"I don't understand . . ."
So she explained, by gestures, making a little play of it. There
were several confusions, but gradually I came to understand.
The Figa was a good-luck charm, an amulet against the evil
eye. (Oba made the fiercest, cutest evil eye expression I ever saw.)
It symbolized passion and fertility, warded off envy and jealousy,
and kept evil spirits at bay. It must never be lost, for then all the
bad luck it had warded off would come crashing down on the
owner's head. It had to be bought and given as a present; anyone
who bought his own Figa would find it valueless, just an inert
object causing neither good nor harm.
It was a cute figurine, and a cute notion by a cute girl. "Thank
you, Oba," I said. And now my curiosity about her was aroused.
Yet how could I question her, with this language barrier?
Well, why not? Maybe she would comprehend a little. "Just

who are you, Oba?" I inquired. "A working girl? Secretary? Won't
you be missed from your job? Oh-or are you a seamstress? I saw
173
the cloth in your room. No wonder you dress so nicely. Or do you
have some connection with the voodoo, umbanda, or whatever?"
Her black eyes glowed, and I thought she understood. And
she began to dance.
It was beautiful. She had the lithe, slender dancer's body, with
muscular legs and perfect coordination, and she moved with such
grace I was entranced. "So you are a professional dancer," I murmured.
"I should have known."
But she continued, and it was evident that she had more on
her mind than showing off her form. Her gestures were stylized,
repetitive, not like the voodoo dance, but like pantomime.
That was it! She was telling a story!
I watched, and gradually it came clear. Nuances of gesture and
expression, and occasional spoken words, brought to life the story
of the gods of voodoo.
In the beginning there was chaos, a being without definition,
incomprehensible to the mortal mind. He was composed of three
spirits, one of whom created the heavens and the earth and all
living things, including man in his own image. But the man was
vain, so the god tried to destroy him. Yet the man was immortal,
and survived though all the earth was blackened by the scourge of
the god's lightning. Still, after that, he stayed out of sight.
The gods-the three aspects of the One God-then had mercy
on the earth, and re-created life on it. The aspect Olofi (Oba pronounced
his name for me) was put in charge of this chore, while
the others went away to continue creation elsewhere in the universe.
Olofi, mindful of the bad example set by the first man, gave
the second man eleven vital commandments: not to steal, kill (except
for food and self-defense), eat human flesh, make war, covet,
curse, ask too much, or fear death (but not to commit suicide);
and to honor his father and mother, respect the god's laws, and
teach these commandments to his children.
Poetic license, I thought: how could the first man honor his
father and mother? He had none, by definition. But I was struck
by the similarity to the Ten Commandments that our Judeo/Chris-
 
174
tian/Mohammedan God had handed down to the people following
Moses: Thou Shalt Not Kill, Thou Shalt Have No Other Gods
Before Me, and so on. Was there really much difference between
voodoo and conventional religion?
The dance/pantomime continued: the first man was Oxala.
(The first man? I had supposed from Ester's discourse that Oxala
was a god. Maybe the line between mortal and immortal was fuzzy,
at least in the beginning.) Olofi gave him a wife named Oddsomething-
or-other; it wasn't clear to my American/English-oriented
mind. Anyway-and I swear I don't know exactly how she
conveyed this information, unless I was picking up her mental
projection, telepathy, or had it by intuitive osmosis-Oxala was
represented as the original White Knight. I mean he was a tall,
handsome white man, in a white cloak and white armor, on a
strutting white horse. His wife Odd-etc. was a black woman, fair
(if that is the appropriate word) and voluptuous with the huge
breasts of maternity. The two mated-and wasn't that a spectacle,
in this lone-dancer pantomime!-and Odd's tummy swelled grotesquely
in rapid pregnancy. Then her pelvis moved forward, and
she came almost into a squat, opening her legs wide. In America
we think all babies must be born from a supine mother lying in a
hospital bed, drugged to alleviate pain. But elsewhere in the world
many babies drop into this world from the upright womb, gravity
assisting the undrugged effort. I saw it all, such was the power of

her suggestion.
She birthed a son, named Ag-something, and a daughter
Yemanja. "Yemanja!" I exclaimed, interrupting my own morbid
fascination with the dancer's pangs of parturition. "Goddess of the
Moon, my patron-" But why should I be surprised? Oba was
telling me her identity, as I had asked: not who she was in mundane
life, but her goddess-genealogy. I already knew the river goddess
was the daughter of the sea-goddess Yemanja; that was why
she was here, helping to abate the curse of Exu. Now I knew that
Yemanja was the daughter of the first man and woman in the
voodoo pantheon.
175
But there was more. Yemanja was a beautiful woman whose
skin was yellow. She married her brother Ag (so that's incest; and
whom do you think Cain, the son of Adam, married, if not one of
his sisters?) and they had a son Or-something-Orangutan? I could
not keep track of all these complex names; that would have to do!
When Orangutan grew up he had no sister to marry (sibling incest
seemed to be the rule with these gods; better than descending
to the common folk for mates, no doubt) so fell in love with his
mother. Now this was a scandal, even among gods. Ag became ill
with envy and disgust and died, and Yemanja resisted. But Orangutan
was handsome, talented, strong, persistent and, it developed,
ruthless. He raped her. (Hoo-boy, what a dance Oba danced!)
Yemanja cursed him, and he also died. But she was already pregnant
with his seed. She climbed to the top of a high mountain and
killed herself.
But even this was not the end. In fact, it was the beginning.
She died in one sense, but not in another, for she was immortal.
This ambivalence was also typical of this pantheon. Thus the world
faced the consequence of her suicide at the same time as it knew
her as the continuing goddess of waters; no contradiction. The
dead goddess's abdomen burst asunder, releasing the waters of the
universal deluge that drowned the world. Was there a Noah's Ark
in voodoo mythology? The dance didn't say. Fourteen new gods
were birthed in that torrent. And the first true man and true
woman-Adam and Eve in my framework-formed from Yemanja's
bones.
Among these posthumous gods were Xango, Oshun and Oba.
Now at last I had it straight!
And she told me about Oba herself, who I gathered is known
in the Catholic framework as Our Lady of Mount Carmel. She was
both sister and wife to Xango, but the god of fire and thunder had
a fiery and boisterous nature and a roving eye. Oba was afraid he
would take up with one of her more glamorous sisters, such as
Oya. So Oba went to another sister, Oshun, to seek advice, not
 
176
realizing that Oshun herself, goddess of love, was one of Xango's
interests.
"Well now," Oshun told her mischievously. "I know an excellent
magic spell to keep him home. All you have to do is cut off
one of your pretty little ears, cook it up in a pot of okra soup-
that's his favorite, you know-and serve it to him."
"But-" Oba protested, appalled, touching her ear. She didn't
even think to ask how her sister was so familiar with Xango's tastes.
"Don't worry; he always comes home ravenous. He'll eat it."
"But will it have an effect on our love life?"
"It certainly will! Guaranteed." And Oshun smiled with anticipation.
So naive, dutiful Oba stiffened her shapely spine, lifted a sharp
knife, and courageously cut off her left ear. She staunched the flow
of blood, clenched her teeth against the pain, and made the ear/
okra soup.
When Xango came home that evening, Oba put the soup before

him. He sat down to eat, dipped a spoonful, then paused,
looking at her. "Why are you wearing that stupid white handkerchief
over your head?" he demanded.
"Please eat your soup before it clots-uh, before it gets cold,"
she said evasively. "Why shouldn't I wear a kerchief if I want to? It
isn't as if you ever take me out anywhere where I need a hat."
Sore point! He couldn't take her out, for then she would find
out about the women he made time with during the day. "But
why a blood-colored rose over the ear?" he asked.
Uh-oh! She must be bleeding again, and it was soaking through
the kerchief. "I have my reasons," she murmured.
Xango would have pursued the matter, but he really didn't
care very much what his dull wife wore, and he was hungry. So he
muttered something about feminine vanity, and ate a spoonful of
the soup. And reacted. "What'd you put in this stuff?" he demanded.
"Tastes meaty-almost like human flesh."
"You know it is forbidden by the Third Commandment!" Oba
replied, affecting shock. But it did upset her, for she was tricking
177
him into a fundamental violation. If he ever found out! Her knees
felt weak, her stomach knotted. Still, his unwavering love, guaranteed
by the spell, would make it all worthwhile.
"You're acting awful funny today," he muttered. But he settled
down to eat, for he had a hot date with none other than Oshun,
and he didn't want to be late. He slurped it all down in short
order, including the ear. "That last pod of okra tastes more like an
ox's hoof," he complained. "Next time pick it fresher, and wash the
dirt off it."
Oba nodded dumbly, wondering how long it would take the
spell to act. Xango spruced up his hair and departed, paying her
no further attention.
"Sister, you'd better put out tonight," Xango said to the goddess
of love when he reached her. "My wife's been acting strangely.
I think she's suspicious."
"I know she's suspicious," Oshun said as he nibbled on her
perfect neck. "But I played a really cute trick on her today."
"What are you talking about?" the god of thunder rumbled as
he took hold of her classic left breast.
"I told her she could put a spell on you by feeding you her
ear." And Oshun laughed, sending remarkable ripples through
that breast.
But Xango tensed, crushing instead of squeezing. "You what?"
"The little dummy may even have believed it," Oshun continued,
shifting to alleviate the pressure. "Even though she's no romantic
expert, she really ought to know that it isn't a girl's ear a
man wants to eat." And she drew his head down toward her marvelous
body.
Xango was lusty but not stupid. "Her ear!" he ejaculated. He
jerked away.
"Hey, where are you going?" Oshun cried. She wanted him
coming, not going. But instead of bringing him closer to her with
the good laugh she had anticipated, she had only succeeded in
sending him stomping out. All she had for her effort was a hurting
 
178
breast. "Maybe I should cut it off and make soup out of it," she
muttered darkly, glancing down at herself.
Back home, Xango unceremoniously ripped the handkerchief
off Oba's head. There was her mutilated ear. He clutched his stomach,
knowing now what he had eaten. Thoroughly disgusted, he
stormed out of the house.
Oba remained Xango's official wife, but he never again cohabited
with her. But the scheming Oshun did not profit much either,
perhaps because of her complicity. Instead, her sister, Oya,

patroness of fire, Oggun's wife, became Xango's favorite mistress.
Subsequently it was Oya whom Oshun had to outwit by arousing
the lust of a skeleton, as Ester had already informed me.
"Now just a minute," I said. The truth is, I was burning with
godlike lust, completely aroused by the force of her dancing narrative,
and I was no skeleton. But there was something else. I approached
her and put my hands to the sides of her head, pushing
back the hair that covered her ears. I thought I had seen-but it
could have been my imagination, stimulated by the pantomime.
She had a cauliflower ear. Evidently it had been bashed once,
perhaps by a jealous lover. She, like the Oba she portrayed, had
sacrificed one ear to a man. And would probably give everything
to have that man back again. No wonder she had put so much
feeling into the story!
And do you know, that only redoubled my passion? "A goddess
should not go unloved," I said, certain now that it had been
her need for fulfillment that had motivated her, at least subconsciously.
Probably her boyfriend was a martial artist, or at least a
strong, brawling man, and she had recognized certain similar qualities
in me and been drawn in. At any rate, she was some girl. I have
never seen anyone else dance like that.
She met me as she had before, with matching passion. Maybe
her dancing catalyzed her as it had me, arousing her desire for the
things she had represented. There is a technique of acting, called
Method, in which the actor becomes his part, living it fully while
179
on the stage. The mortal Oba had become the goddess Oba-and
I had become Xango.
We kissed and kissed again, deeply. Then my mouth slid down
over her neck. Her blouse fell open and I ran my lips and tongue
over her firm free breast, fruit of a goddess. And she leaned over,
clutching me to her, climbing me, biting and sucking at the base
of my neck, and say, wasn't that stimulating! I got my hands down
around her thighs, cupping her buttocks under the skirt, snaking
in between panties and flesh, kneading those masses feverishly.
She was burning hot down there, and those dancer's muscles flexed
under my grip like living things-which of course they were.
Her hands also were busy. One clutched my shoulder, digging
in almost painfully; the other got hold of my Fundoshi and twisted
it around a bit to the side, uncovering what threatened to burst
out anyway. She grasped my swelling member and kneaded it in
rhythm with my pressure on her buttocks and mouthing of her
breast. Suddenly my urgency became incipient; if I didn't act
quickly, I would spurt into space.
But there was no bed in that room, and no time to fool around
with clothing; the need was too imperative. I put my two hands
under her arms, my thumbs pressing into the sides of her breasts,
and lifted her bodily. Her legs spread wide and hooked behind me
as her hot cleavage came down on my rigidity. I leaned back, supporting
her whole weight, shoving aside her panties, setting her
down directly on my member so that gravity forced the deepest
penetration as my piston slid into that hot oiled cylinder. Then I
slid my hands behind her back, pulling her upper torso in to me,
burying my face in her fragrant mass of hair.
I believe the position is known as "The Tree" with the trunk of
the man supporting the limbs of the woman as he stands erect in
more ways than one. But for me it was more like a diesel, the
maximum compression triggering the explosion.
Our climax was painful in its violence. On the one hand I had
the feeling that my member, supporting her full weight, would
break off; on the other, I pictured her flying up to the ceiling,
 
180
propelled by my irresistible jets. It was the most intense sexual

experience I ever had, yet not the most pleasant, because of the
muscle-deadening exertions required.
I sank back to the floor, bending my knees to do a judo breakfall,
such was my momentary exhaustion. But Oba clung to me, following
me down as it were in makikomi, maintaining the hold by
utilizing both her limber torso and her dancer's thigh muscles. It
was possible, I discovered, for a woman to clasp a man without
using her limbs.
"No," I said, realizing that she expected more of me than was
humanly possible. But, still joined, she found my lips with hers
and kissed me with all the passion of the first time.
And to my amazement, my hardness remained. Now she rode
me like a horse, bouncing on me so vigorously I was afraid she
would come loose and land on me crushingly. But she had excellent
control. And slowly she brought me to a second climax, longer
and harder but no less powerful than the first.
God, I thought. Never get involved with a goddess-or a
dancer! I was prostrate on the hard floor.
Yet even now she did not relent. She continued to move on
me, pressing me from outside and inside. "It's impossible!" I gasped.
"This is worse than Mirabal's torture!"
I was wrong. It seemed to take a thousand years, and may
actually have been half an hour, but in time her persistent stimulation
roused me to a third performance. Actually I was almost
completely acquiescent now; she did the lovemaking, drawing from
my gut the last dregs of my potential. It was slow, slow, slow, like
a quiet tide rising, yet in the end the volume of sensation was as
great as the prior peaks.
At last she was satisfied. Yet even now she did not actually let
me go. She settled on top of me, retaining my battered member
within her, and we both sank into a kind of placid trance.
I'll never forget the love of Oba, but I hope never to experience
it again. I'm not getting any younger, and that sort of thing takes
incredible stamina. I'd rather do fifty pullups, one-handed. It was
181
days before I was able to raise another erection; she had emptied
me.
But what a way to go!
 
Chapter 9:
Animation of the Curse
The Black Castle was on a rise in the middle of a roundish
swampy plain within an almost circular mountain valley. There
was an unnatural look about the area, as if it were a moon crater
overgrown by the jungle. Few trees grew here; most of the valley
was open except for low brush. In the center, in contrast, was a
cluster of enormous trees, and it was within this island forest that
the castle was taking shape. As yet the ramparts were hardly visible
above the trees. Thus it could not readily be spotted from the air.
Fu Antos looked out from the highest battlement. He had
won the battle but not the campaign, as he knew; he had a few of
the modern weapons, but they were only one factor, and his ninjas
were not yet conversant with their use.
It had been a job rescuing those supplies from their assorted
booby-traps, but ninjas had much expertise at that sort of thing.
One of the boxes had contained the severed head of Candelaria,
the girl who had delivered the bees to Costa of Petrobas. Unfortu-
183
nate, but it showed how quick Mirabal had been to make the
connection between that assassination and the ninjas.
At any rate, the ninjas now had fifty to a hundred M-3
submachine guns, fairly simple to operate: merely point and squeeze
the trigger, and the guns would squirt bullets. Also a fair number
of hand grenades, and some C-4 plastic explosive: white, odorless,

crumbly, like dry cream cheese. The plastic had already been specially
positioned, and they had only imperfect notions how to use
the other devices, preferring their primitive weapons. So they were
still at a disadvantage. These few ninjas could not hope to stand
for long against the might of the Brazilian army. So long as Mirabal
lived, the Black Castle was not secure.
Yet Fu Antos had resources. If he could trick Mirabal into
committing his full force into the fray . . .
He had not long to wait. The colonel had not bothered to
trace the tedious hidden road to the castle; he had sent his troops
sloughing through the marshes in such numbers that the jungle
animals had been routed. Human-sea tactics, suffering many casualties
even before contact with the enemy. No finesse, just raw
power. He had expected better of Mirabal.
Then he looked again. These were not government troops,
these were Indians! Had they joined their enemies?
No, now he saw the army men. Their guns were trained on
the Indians. The Indians were from several pacified villages, evidently
rounded up by force; they had to attack the Black Castle or
be shot from behind. They were armed only with bows, knives,
spears and similar native weapons, no guns.
Poor Indians! They had believed the promises of the government
for a better life if they adopted the ways of the white man.
Now they had been rounded up like cattle and driven to the slaughter,
men, women and children. The warriors were first, followed
by their families; the warriors knew that if they did not attack the
castle, their families would be shot down from behind.
And if they attacked, the ninjas would either have to slaughter
their friends or allow the Black Castle to be swamped. Very nice
 
184
ploy. Only a ruthless genius would have set this up, and only a
more ruthless genius would be able to nullify it.
"Meet the Indians under a flag of truce," Fu Antos said. "Explain
to them that we shall have to massacre them along with the
soldiers if they come near the Black Castle. We do not wish to do
this, for we regard them as our allies, and we know they are being
forced to fight. But if they join us, we will help them overcome the
soldiers, and many will survive."
The flag of truce was displayed, but snipers from Mirabal's
side shot all the parties meeting under that flag. The ninja representative
was unhurt, protected under his bullet-proof cloak, but
it was obvious that no truce negotiations could take place. The
Indians were obviously more frightened of the troops than of the
ninjas. That was unfortunate, for it doomed them all.
Even half finished, the ramparts of the Black Castle were formidable.
They could easily withstand the attack of the Indians.
But the tribespeople charged across the open portion of the valley.
It was pathetic, for the men could run faster than the women and
children, yet hesitated to leave their families isolated on the battlefield.
It would be a terrible thing to slaughter these victims of
circumstance, but that was what Mirabal was counting on. If the
Indians were allowed to overrun the castle, the government troops
would soon wipe out the ninjas, and probably the Indians too,
who would then only be in the way.
Fu Antos did not waste either ancient or modern ammunition
on the Indians. He let them get to the walls and attempt to scale
them with the crude ropes and wooden ladders they carried. Then
the waiting ninjas dumped pots of boiling water, oil and fecal
matter on their heads, along with plain old rocks. It was just like
old times.
Some ladders hooked over the ramparts, which as yet had not
been built very high. The ninjas simply used special hooks of their
own to shove the ladders off and over, to fall on the heads of those

below. The few Indians who actually made it to the top were met
by trained swordsmen. The Indians' crude knives, machetes, wooden
185
clubs, and stone-tipped spears were no match for the weapons and
expertise of the ninjas. One ninja used a kusarigama chained sickle
that he hurled through the head of one Indian, stuck into the
body of the next, drew him up close and dropped him over the
wall, throttled a third with the chain, and bashed in the forehead
of a fourth with the steel ball on the end of the chain. That was
typical of the action; it was one-sided, and the ninjas did not lose
a man.
There was, however, one injury. A crafty old Indian crept over
the top, lay down, and used a blowgun. The dart caught a ninja in
the left eye. It was not poisonous and did not kill him, but did
cost the man that eye. The ninja struck the old man's arm between
the wrist and elbow with a karate blow that splintered the bone,
then made a shuto block to the neck, breaking it. The corpse rolled
off the wall.
After that the Indian women and children came up the wall.
Now the ninjas did not even bother to use their weapons. They
attacked with bare hands and feet, parrying the feeble efforts of
the Indians and heaving them off the wall. The ninjas took some
more injuries in this hand-to-hand scuffle, for the children bit
them and the women had claws like tigers, but their fingers poked
out eyeballs, bashed in noses, and stunned nerve complexes with
devastating effectiveness.
Fu Antos looked on from his turret, seemingly aloof, but seething
inside. "Now we are killing women and babies," he murmured.
"For this shame there must be a penalty. Loose the animals."
Signals were made. Suddenly cleverly concealed trapdoors
opened near the edge of the valley and crazed animals charged out,
into the pitched tents of the army camp. Bats flew into the tents,
seeking darkness-but their bodies were coated with poison that
rubbed off on whatever they touched. Dozens of capybaras, the
world's largest rodents, scooted through with small torches tied to
their tails, setting the tents afire. And large snakes slithered among
the troops: anacondas up to thirty feet long, and boa constrictors
up to fifteen feet. They did not actually hurt many soldiers, but
 
186
they created a tremendous distraction that prevented effective dousing
of the flaming tents. And vicious monkeys dropped from the
trees: reddish howlers and spider monkeys, with poisoned teeth
and feet. And from other cages came stubby-legged bush dogs
with snub noses and short tails, standing only a foot tall at the
shoulders, but crazed and vicious.
In short, the government troops were suffering the same sort
of harassment as the ninjas. In due course all the animals were
killed or driven off, but many soldiers had been wounded, the
ranks were demoralized, and the tent camp was a smoking ruin.
Mirabal looked on the devastation with an expression very like
that of Fu Antos watching the dying Indians. Tit for tat!
Now, at last, Mirabal committed his own troops. The Indians
seemed to have fully occupied the ninja defense, so that nothing
could be spared for the fresh army. The troops charged across the
marsh, not even bothering to fire their rifles.
The colonel had managed to carry in and emplace half a dozen
mortars: fairly simple substitutes for cannon. Each unit was merely
a tube. The shell was dropped in the muzzle, and fired itself when
it struck the base inside. It lacked the range and precision of major
artillery, so lobbed the shells high, like a catapult. But a comparatively
small and light mortar could do the job of a howitzer if
appropriately emplaced and operated.
Now these mortars were set up in a line at the base of the cliffs

where there was a narrow but firm ledge. The region seemed to
have been made for mortars, a fatal oversight on the ninja's part.
They started lobbing shells at the castle, and each shell packed an
awful punch.
The first one missed the castle, overshooting it. A plume of
water and dirt appeared, pretty from a distance, awful from close
up. This was not bad marksmanship, but the process of zeroing in.
The first shell was normally fired long, the second short, and after
that bracketing the third would be right on target.
"Earth," Fu Antos said, invoking the second of his four major
defense elements. The first, Air, had been used with devastating
187
effect on the besieged army column: the narcotic smoke. A ninja
waved a black flag from another high turret, a signal to an unseen
associate.
Another plume manifested, short of the castle. The mortars
were zeroing in. Still Fu Antos stood on the battlements, waiting.
Now a round of six mortars struck. Three missed to the side;
two exploded in the castle's center court; one blasted a gaping gap
in the outer wall. The stones jumped and toppled, falling on the
few Indians still trying to scale that section, crushing them. But it
was obvious that the castle could not withstand many more such
strikes; there would be too many avenues of entry for the troops.
Now the mortar shells were pulverizing the castle with direct
hits, collapsing the bunkers where the ninja women and children
were sheltered. "Get to the ramparts!" one man cried in Japanese.
"That's as safe as any other place, and you can fight there." So they
moved out, as brave in their desperation as the families of the
Indians, while the terrible shells slowly demolished the castle.
Yet Fu Antos merely watched.
Then there was a muffled noise from the mountainside behind
Mirabal's army. The entire cliff shuddered and collapsed. An
avalanche formed, triggered by the carefully placed plastic explosives
the ninjas had captured. Rocks and dirt and trees tumbled
majestically down, onto the ledge where the mortars were emplaced.
The earth had swallowed that portion of the army. Yet a single
mortar escaped. It continued to bombard the castle, until a kiteflying
ninja made a kamikaze dive at it, blowing it up with a hand
grenade. Now the artillery was silent.
Still, the soldiers were committed. They plowed on toward
the castle. The ninjas were now using catapults to lob grenades at
the troops, but it was obvious that this was a mere nuisance to a
force of this size. Once the soldier's firepower was brought to bear
at close range, the men would be able to scale the half-built walls
or ram through the gaps made by the mortars with virtual impunity,
killing any ninjas who showed their faces.
"Fire," Fu Antos said. And now the ninjas manned huge pol-
 
188
ished-steel mirrors that caught the sun, focused it, and speared it
at the oncoming troops. Like lasers, the fierce beams bathed the
soldiers, and the men screamed, their clothing bursting into flame,
their ammunition exploding on their bodies like firecrackers. Grenades,
heated to spontaneous ignition, blasted holes in the advancing
line, until the soldiers in the front ranks had to throw all
their remaining explosives away. Some were only passingly touched
by the beams; they fell clutching their faces, blinded, hair singed.
But Mirabal, watching closely with his powerful field glasses,
gave orders. .75mm recoilless rifles were trained on the mirrors,
which were necessarily exposed. Expert snipers fired at will. One
mirror was hit directly; it blew up, the fragments raining down
like shrapnel. Another was put out of commission when the legs of
the ninja operator were struck; man and mirror crashed to the
ground. After the first shock was over, the mirrors lost much of

their effect.
Still, the troops had been decimated, and were in no fit condition
to storm the castle. Now Mirabal committed his reserves.
Another five hundred men charged over the bodies of their comrades
toward the castle. The ninjas had little left with which to
oppose these.
Yet a detachment emerged from the main gate of the castle.
Only a dozen men, but there was something odd about them.
They were swathed in white robes and mounted on old horses,
bearing lances. Strange cavalry!
The soldiers, thinking it might be a surrender mission, did
not fire immediately. The horsemen approached, their clothing
resembling nothing so much as tattered bandages.
Then one soldier caught on. "Lepers!" he screamed.
There was little in Latin America that carried greater horror,
for less reason, than leprosy. Leprosy is one of the least contagious
diseases known, but most people shun all contact with those afflicted.
The soldiers panicked.
The horsemen charged among them. Their lances bore blades
set lengthwise near the point that could cut open flesh without
189
getting stuck. Indeed, the riders were so feeble that any direct
strike of their lances would have unhorsed them; their gnarled
hands could hardly bear their weapons. But the soldiers were not
even trying to fight; they wanted only to get away, impelled by a
horror worse than death itself.
Mirabal snarled another order. His sharpshooters aimed, and
in seconds all the lepers fell. But it took some time to reorganize
the troops for battle; the bloom was off, and the men were shaken.
They would not pass anywhere near the fallen lepers.
Still, there were many more soldiers than ninjas. The last ragged
charge crunched forward relentlessly. The ninjas were now out of
arrows and had to use their captured rifles. Erratic as their aim
with these unfamiliar pieces was, this was a net increase in their
firepower. But they were so vastly outnumbered that they could
not hope to stop all the troops.
Several hundred men stormed the ravaged ramparts. The defenders
were out of hot oil, out of refuse, and low on ammunition.
Their numbers had been thinned by inevitable casualties; only a
dozen ninja men remained, and twice that number of women and
children, who now were doing much of the firing. All were shaken
by the mortar bombardment, many were wounded, and most were
dead tired.
Fu Antos remembered almost four hundred years before, when
the troops of Nobunaga, Shogun of Japan, had overwhelmed the
first Black Castle and slaughtered all its brave ninjas and their
families. He experienced a feeling of déjà vu. Those limited ninja
forces had withstood the siege of the mightiest army in Japan's
medieval history. Then it had been crossbows against Portuguese
muskets; now it was cross-bows, against Portuguese artillery.
Mirabal's army lacked the sheer numbers of Nobunaga's, but possessed
many sophisticated modern weapons. So it had been a fair
match and a great battle.
Certain mistakes had been made in the Japanese siege, and Fu
Antos had seen to it that those mistakes were not repeated. He had
prepared his defenses of Air, Earth, Fire and Water to eliminate
 
190
potential weaknesses. Modern technology and an intelligent, ruthless
enemy commander had strained the ninja position to the utmost.
But victory was assured, because this time Fu Antos had no
traitorous female within his walls to betray him to the enemy when
victory was within his grasp.
Mitsuko: after centuries, that name still stirred his gut with

rage and desire. Lovely treachery! The love of woman was ever the
undoing of man. This time he had no woman, and his enemy
Mirabal was said to be no lady's man.
But it was time to finish, lest the battle be lost while he reminisced.
"Water," Fu Antos said. A pigeon was released. It winged
swiftly across the valley toward the river.
The siege continued. Slowly the massed troops gained the
upper hand. The ninjas were now confined to individual towers,
firing from upper embrasures, while the enemy overran the center
court. It seemed to be all over but the mopping up.
Then water appeared. It welled up from vents within the castle,
poured out from sluices in the walls. The top blew off a centercourt
fountain; a geyser of water gushed up. The castle was perched
atop a massive subterranean conduit, and was now rapidly flooding.
The enemy saw the trap too late. The soldiers were caught
between sheer stone walls as the water rose. No way to climb out
of it, not with armed ninjas on guard.
The sluices in the deep mountain reservoir had been opened;
millions of gallons of water were rushing down to debouch within
the castle. Yet those outside the walls were no better off, for now a
giant wall of water was rushing down the valley, sweeping over
everything in its path. The reason for the strange aspect of the
valley was now apparent; it suffered periodic and devastating floods.
There was no escape.
Many of the soldiers and Indians could not swim. They were
caught by the developing current and spilled over the ramparts,
carried along involuntarily. Now the water turned red, and it was
lumpy with drowning bodies. Even those who could swim were at
191
a disadvantage, because they were trying to keep their rifles clear
and so could not use their hands. They had to disarm themselves
in order to survive.
Still the water rose. A strong impetus carried the soldiers along
toward the gap in the wall blasted by the first mortar strike. Those
who somehow clung to the ramparts were picked off at leisure by
the ninjas in the towers.
And of course there were now crocodiles in the lake forming
around the castle. And assorted snakes, large and small, excellent
swimmers. And giant electric eels.
The ninjas had won, thanks to the last of the elements, water.
Only the mopping up continued as the waters subsided. Only
one enemy remained with the resources and cunning to escape,
and that one was Fu Antos's special prey. For it was Fernando
Mirabal, instigator of the entire persecution against the ninjas.
Once he was eliminated, a minimum number of judicious assassinations
would preserve the secret of the Black Castle forever.
The colonel, of course, had fled the moment he saw the water
rising, knowing that it was over. But he knew better than to attempt
the booby-trapped ninja road alone. It was impossible to
drive through the virgin jungle, and anyway the ninjas had sugared
the gasoline of the remaining army vehicles and disabled the
helicopter during the animal-distraction. So Mirabal moved on
foot.
And Fu Antos followed. His ninja skill made the colonel's trail
easy to read; the man had concentrated on speed rather than concealment.
He was a powerful man, and had made excellent time,
but no one could traverse wilderness as swiftly as a ninja. Steadily
the gap closed.
Mirabal came at last to an old prospector's cabin. He had spotted
it in his preliminary survey of the area, circling about in his
helicopter, and made a mental note: just in case. Now it was the
case, and he had sought it out. It was almost over-grown by the
resurgent jungle: a good place to hide.
Fu Antos arrived shortly after. He too knew of this cabin, as he

 
192
was conversant with the entire area. His quarry was inside, unquestionably,
gun ready. But from its small window waved a white
cloth.
Mirabal wanted to parlay? Fu Antos raised an eyebrow. "Very
well," he called in Portuguese. "Come out unarmed. I will speak
with you." He did not need to add that any attempted treachery
on Mirabal's part would void the truce instantly.
The colonel came. He was gambling that the ninja would honor
the truce, at least long enough for the necessary dialogue. They
met under a tree before the door, an incongruous pair: the huge
man and the young boy.
"I have this place so full of booby-traps you'll never get me,"
Mirabal said. "And I am well armed. You might get through, but
the chances of saving your own life are only fifty-fifty. Is it worth
it?"
"I have fire-arrows," Fu Antos said.
And the cabin was dry wood. Set afire, it would force the man
out, easy prey to a ninja arrow. Mirabal did not even bother to
bluff further. He knew he was virtually helpless before this unimpressive
adversary, like a giant cobra before a tiny mongoose. Fu
Antos parlayed merely to savor his victory; had he had any doubt
at all of his command of the situation, he would have struck instantly.
Only the agility of the colonel's mind could save him from
the implacable vengeance he had earned, and his prepared ace-inthe-
hole. "I can be more useful to you alive than dead."
Again, no verbal parrying. The hopeless buzzing of the trapped
fly was music to the spider. "Continue."
"I have resources that can rebuild your castle within a month,
in complete secrecy. You have mental powers and raw materials
that could profit me immensely-diamonds and oil, for example.
Working together, we could achieve the dreams of both."
Fu Antos raised an eyebrow inquiringly.
"You want to know how you can trust me not to betray your
secrets the moment I am safe," Mirabal said. In effect he was groveling,
relieving the victor of even having to put the questions. "You
193
possess unparalleled hypnotic powers. Use them on me; verify my
sincerity. If I mean to betray you, kill me now. I offer no resistance,
only a new allegiance, penalty of my defeat."
The man had offered his services to the victor, in a time-honored
gesture. But the ninja only shrugged slightly. The offering
was insufficient.
So Mirabal played his trump. "And I have-this," he said. He
reached inside his jacket, brought out a waterproof envelope, opened
it, and held up the photograph inside.
Fu Antos looked, and froze. At the moment of his seeming
nadir, Mirabal had struck at the ninja's most fundamental liability.
"It is-her," the ninja whispered.
Mirabal bowed his head in mock surrender. "Now kill me."
The ninja was oblivious to the ploy. His intense interest had
been hooked; to kill the Colonel now would be to throw away the
compelling information he offered. "Tell me of her."
Mirabal had the grace not to gloat. His hook had lodged, and
through it he would not only save his life, he could achieve tremendous
wealth and power. Why hadn't he thought to cooperate
with the ninjas before, instead of fighting them? There was no
essential conflict of purpose. "She is Dulce, an agent of the Cuban
intelligence network. She is highly intelligent, trained in combat,
and absolutely loyal to her principles. She would foment an armed
revolution to save her man. All in all, a woman worthy of the finest
man."
Fu Antos hardly listened. For the image he stared at was that

of Mitsuko, his beautiful wife of almost four hundred years before.
The wife who had betrayed him to the enemy, bringing about the
downfall of the first Black Castle. In all the intervening centuries
he had cursed her, yet had been able to love no other. This was not
precisely Mitsuko, for the picture depicted a Western girl, but
still, the resemblance was remarkable.
"She is alive and well in my possession," Mirabal continued.
"The photograph hardly does her justice. But there is one complication."
 
194
"Bring her to me," Fu Antos breathed, in those words signifying
his capitulation. He was ready to trade his nascent empire for
mere possession of this one woman, exactly as Mirabal had anticipated.
"This is the complication. Oh, I can bring her here an hour
after I reach a telephone; she is confined in one of our offices in
Brasilia, not far by air from here. But her loyalty is to another
man. I would be delivering only her body; her heart would not be
yours, so long as that man lives."
"I will kill that man," the ninja said with cold finality.
Mirabal raised his hands in a gesture of incapacity. "Please do
not misunderstand, Lord Ninja. I do not seek to thwart you, only
to clarify certain awkward aspects that may have already occurred
to you. This woman Dulce is not a carbon copy of Mitsuko. Her
love is not negotiable. If you killed her lover, she would seek to kill
you, and I doubt even your hypnotic power could change her mind
for long. She is a superior creature; she must be won gently, not by
force, or she will be no better than your wife was. But, properly
cultivated, her loyalty to you would be unflinching. She would be
what Mitsuko should have been. It would be a mistake to-"
"Dare you preach at me?" Fu Antos demanded, his eyes blazing.
Suddenly he had no faintest resemblance to a child, despite
his size.
Mirabal bowed his head. "I apologize for my presumption. I
shall have her brought directly to you."
Fu Antos was mollified. "Rephrase your thought."
"Obviously it will be necessary to eliminate her lover. But you
should not do it personally. Rather you should side with her, and
help her to avenge her loss. Gradually her appreciation for this
support will convert to appreciation for you. It may take a few
years, but some things are best done slowly, properly, like the
maturing of fine wines and cheeses. Love must develop in its own
fashion, at its own rate; only then is it deep and complete. Your
body is growing yet; by the time it is ready, she will be ready."
Fu Antos nodded, impressed by the logic. His mind was cen-
195
turies old, but his body was a stripling, really inadequate to the
task of loving a voluptuous woman properly. He needed time.
"This is the first service I can perform for you," Mirabal continued.
"I will kill her lover, and let her escape to you. You and I
are known enemies; you will be guiltless. You will send your ninjas
out to kill me, though they may not have any more success than
they have in the past."
"Who is her lover?"
Now it grew ticklish again. "Jason Striker, the American judoka.
I believe you know him."
"Striker!" the ninja breathed.
"I realize he has been a friend of yours, or at least has performed
some small service," Mirabal said carefully. If the ninja was
prepared to dispense with Striker . . ."But I can show you that he
is the one she-"
"A ninja has no friends," Fu Antos said, his expression hardening.
"Jason Striker must die."
Mirabal nodded, his victory complete. "I shall intercept him.
He is now on his way to Brasilia, in the company of a lithesome

dancer, to meet your agent."
"You are well informed," Fu Antos said dryly.
"It is my business to be informed. Striker has been intimate
with her-" Mirabal paused, having a notion. "In fact, it might be
best if Dulce were to have concrete proof of his infidelity, before he
died. That would destroy her romance with him completely, leaving
her ripe for . . ."
"If you were on hand, she would know it was false," Fu Antos
pointed out. "She would suspect Striker had been framed."
"True," Mirabal said regretfully. "I did frame him before." He
pondered another moment, then brightened. "But there is always
an alternate method. It happens that the dancer's estranged husband
is in my employ. He has shown little interest in his wife, but
he has a jealous nature. He is proficient in capoiera, the great Brazilian
fighting art. On my orders, he could help Dulce break out,
 
196
he claiming to be a ninja agent with information where to meet
Striker."
Fu Antos nodded, smiling.
And so it was arranged: Jason Striker's best friend in the Amazon
collaborated with his worst enemy to have him slain, because
of the girl who loved him, exactly as the god Exu had decreed.
There was to be no escape from the voodoo curse.
Chapter 10:
City of the Future
The truck jounced along the red dirt road, northwest through
the highlands of Brazil. I saw endless fields of beans and rice, orchards
of coffee trees, and huge herds of cattle ranging square miles
of pasture. I had not really grasped before how big Brazil was.
The sun was hot, but we were pleasantly cool, for huge blocks
of ice surrounded the cargo: live crabs and lobsters from the coast,
bound for the gourmet restaurants of the capital city. Every so
often a lobster claw emerged from the slats of a crate and tried to
pinch me: one of the defects in the service I had to live with.
Near the river-I had no idea which river-we passed a series
of swampy lakes. The truck slowed to get around a wooden-wheeled
cart drawn by half a dozen slow oxen, and the mosquitoes were on
us in a swarm. We slapped and slapped; there was nothing else to
do. I had visions of malaria and yellow fever, though really had no
idea whether these were dangers this far south of the Equator.
Our transportation from Rio de Janeiro to the wilds of the
continental interior had been as abrupt as the rest of this crazy
 
198
adventure. Kan-Sen's message had finally come through to the hotel,
delayed by I knew not what bureaucratic snafu. It had been taken
by an employee who was in Umbando and had seen me at the
mass, so he took it to the pai-de-Santo, who delivered it to Oba's
apartment. When we returned there, after the Kendo school massacre,
we discovered it: orders to go to Brasilia, where a ninja would
contact me at a certain restaurant.
So here we were, Oba still protecting me from the wrath of
Exu. I had tried to suggest that she had fulfilled her assignment,
and that little danger for me remained now that the Death Squad
had been wiped out, but the language barrier had prevented her
comprehension. It had not, however, prevented her from understanding
that I had to go to Brasilia. So she had arranged transport
for us on this truck, that happened to be going to the very restaurant
I needed. That was either one hell of a coincidence, or there
really was something about voodoo assistance. I hoped I was not,
like the lobsters I rode with, heading for hot water.
Then at last, as the dawn came over the fringe of the huge
tropical forest, it hove into view: Brasilia, capital city of the future.

I could not see it all from the ground, of course, but Oba drew a
picture in the dust that put it into perspective like an aerial photograph.
The city looked like a modern swept-wing airplane, seven
miles from the golf club in its needle-nose to the railroad station
dangling from its tail, with a single highway traversing its entire
length like a ramrod through its metropolitan gut.
Even from the truck it was impressive, but perhaps not in
quite the way intended by the architect. For there were more favela
slums here, massive ones whose population rivaled that of the city
proper. Oba had explained something about the favelas, by gesture
and pantomime, as we had had plenty of time to exchange
communications. Quite an education.
We passed the airport and entered the city from the south: the
tip of its right wing. We drove three miles up the center of that
wing along a broad parkway, divided with triple lanes with green
gardens between.
199
Oba pantomimed more detail as we went: to the east, in the
nose section, were the ministries, courts, and towering congressional
office buildings, like the brain in the cockpit of the craft. To
the left, in the tail section, were some of the entertainment facilities:
the ovals of the racetrack and sports stadium. Oba made two
marks with her finger, clarifying the map. Somehow those smudges
in the tail reminded me of ovaries, and that suggested another
kind of entertainment, more of a participant exercise than football
or horse racing. But I quelled my one-track male mind. I still
hadn't recovered fully from our heroic triple indulgence in the
kendo school, and anyway, if I tried to make time with Oba now,
that damned lobster would pinch me in the ass.
Beyond the entertainments, at the very tip of the torso, was
the newspaper and printing complex. And again my unruly imagination
ran rampant, as I visualized scandal sheets and propaganda
being ejected from the feathered anus of this roc-like bird. I'm just
a natural lowbrow, I guess, especially when I've spent two wearing
days being rattled in a fish truck with an aggressive lobster and a
girl who doesn't speak my language.
But Oba was acting out an episode of the city's history. It
seemed there was a big contest, open to all the architects in Brazil,
with a large cash prize: to design Brasilia. The leading firms of the
nation spent months preparing designs and drawings and models
to submit to the judges. One person who was too modest to enter
was Lucio Costa, though he was known for his architectural brilliance.
But his friends coerced him to enter, and finally, reluctantly,
at the very last moment, he spent twenty-five cents for
paper and pencils and quickly sketched his plan, just to shut them
up. Well, at least it was an entry.
"Now, don't tell me, let me guess!" I said. "The winner-"
Oba smiled. Right: the Selection Committee, experts drawn
from all over the world, awarded first prize unanimously, to the
two-bit effort. And that selection was hailed all over the world as
an innovation in city planning, imaginative yet basically simple.
Costa's design became Brasilia.
 
200
I was impressed all right. We were now driving past the superblocks,
each containing a dozen trees and surrounded by gardens
and playgrounds. Each superblock, Oba let me know, was supposed
to be virtually self-contained, with its own stores and schools.
At least, that was the theory; I wasn't clear from her gestures and
my observations whether it had actually worked out. If it had, why
the favelas?
There was no traffic congestion, even in the high-rise center of
town. Of course; we had arrived at dawn, too early for slothful
government workers to be up. Later in the day it might be a different

story. Cloverleaf loops and ramps made stoplights unnecessary,
and the sheer geography of the layout facilitated movement.
We pulled up behind the monstrous theater and restaurant
section in the heart of the city where the load of seafood was to be
delivered. This was as far as our driver could take us.
We thanked him, inadequately, and moved out on foot. All
the way around to the front of the restaurant, where we entered in
order to make contact with the ninja.
Now I had to order a glass of fresh skim milk, and refuse to
settle for anything else. Feeling stupid, I did so. The waiter spoke
very little English, so there was a minor hassle, and it turned out
the closest they could come was canned milk. Brazilians were not
milk drinkers. I was adamant, though conscious of my seedy appearance.
Finally the waiter went for a consultation with the headwaiter.
Oba was staring at me with perplexity. I was, of course, being
quite unreasonable. I wondered what uproar I would have created
had I emulated Hiroshi and ordered something really exotic like
yak's milk.
The headwaiter approached, a forbidding figure of a man, and
I was daunted. Where was the ninja? Had there been a foul-up in
communications? "We have reserved our best private dining room
for you, sir," he murmured in English.
"Oh, we can't afford that!" I protested, uncertain how much
money Oba had and feeling like a pimp. I had no money, having
201
lost it all when I fled the sumo exhibition. Kiyokuni would have
given me my winnings, of course, but I had been ashamed to face
him so soon after the riot, and with the urgent message from Kan-
Sen. So I had taken off for Brasilia in my borrowed clothes. Oh
there are many things I would do better, if only I had proper time
to reflect. Half my problems stem from my own spot misjudgments.
"There will be no charge," he assured me. "Your friend will be
along soon; he asks you to eat well while you wait."
My friend, Fu Antos? Or one of his ninjas? Must be. "All right,"
I said. I'd certainly be glad when all this mystery was through. I'm
not temperamentally suited for intrigue or high living.
The private dining room was ornate, fit literally for a king.
There was a couch and several easy chairs beyond the huge banquet
table, and so many potted plants and even small trees that it
resembled a greenhouse. The waiter attended us, then discreetly
retired, giving us romantic privacy.
We were served crab cocktail with plenty of red sauce, onion
soup with thick cheese floating on it, a salad of heart-of-palms, the
hearts being tubular and white and probably very tasty; filet mignon
with black beans, and plenty of Brazilian wine. In short, an
elegant Latin American meal. I'm really no gourmet, either, how I
wished for a cheap U.S.A.-American type snack! I wondered uncomfortably
whether my friend the pinching lobster was buried
somewhere in this repast.
That started a disconcerting chain of thought. This was too
similar to the meal I had had with Dulce. Not in detail but in
atmosphere: strange, delicious dishes, in private with a pretty girl.
I had no reason to be suspicious, yet, when I contemplated all that
fancy food, my hunger left me. Also, for no reason I could fathom,
I remembered the Iado Master and the sudden slaughter of the
Death Squad. All that blood and guts. Maybe I was getting paranoid,
but I couldn't eat.
Oba had no such reservations. Even if I could have explained
my concern to her, I wouldn't have. I knew it was just my foolish-
 
202
ness, an overdose of suspicion; James Bond never suffered loss of
appetite, did he? And this was probably the best meal she had
been offered in a long time.

"Comer! Comer!" she urged me, gesturing with her fork. No
mistaking her meaning: Eat, eat!
So I did something I wasn't proud of: I faked it. I shoveled
bites of food into my pockets when she wasn't looking, and made
chewing motions. Messy as hell, but when I get hung up, I get
hung up all the way. I poured my soup into the big flowerpot
beside my chair, hoping it didn't kill the plant. Same with the
wine, the palm tree behind me drank that. I felt disgusted with
myself.
Actually, Oba wasn't paying much attention, or I never could
have gotten away with it. She ate with such gusto I wondered
whether she had ever had a chance at such a repast. And my forebodings
seemed less and less sensible, until I was chagrined at my
foolishness. Here I was with a soggy pocket, passing up a wonderful
meal.
Yet there is an ornery streak in me that sometimes just won't
let go. If I ate now, I would be admitting that I had been wrong
not to eat at the start, and it can be very hard to admit something
like that. So the nonsense compounded itself. I had started out
not to eat, and now I was perversely determined to finish out that
way, going to hell and hunger in my own fashion. I knew I would
regret it, for there was likely to be much work after I met the ninja
representative. I had not been summoned all the way here for nothing,
after all. There had to be some hugely important task, something
only I could do. Perhaps I would be instructing the ninjas in
special judo and karate techniques, so they could better defend
their secret Black Castle from intrusions. Yes, that must be it, and
I was glad to do it for Fu Antos, the unique man who had saved
my life from the effects of the delayed-action deathblow, not so
long ago. I owed him my life, literally. Though there were times
when I wondered about the ninja master.
Oba sank onto the table. Her nose pressed into the egg cus-
203
tard. Startled, she jerked up, wiping her face. But then she swayed
forward again.
Suddenly alarms were clanging stridently in my brain. She
had been drugged! Just as before, the food, the drink, the same pattern.
Someone knew about us and had arranged the same trap that
had suckered me before; only this time my subconscious had warned
me off. There are limits to how many times I will fall for the same
stunt, it seems. Sometimes my unconscious mind is smarter than
I am.
Who could have arranged this, except another Death Squad?
Mirabal's men must have intercepted Kan-Sen's message, and eliminated
the ninja assigned to meet me here. I had to get out!
But how could I get Oba free of this trap? She was an innocent
girl, not involved in my mission. She had only wanted to help me.
Well, I'd make do. I stood up.
Too late. Someone was coming.
I could fight, but suppose there was a whole crew, as before?
Oba would be sure to suffer, even if I got away. I couldn't desert
her; she might be tortured, having her teeth pulled out, or worse.
Then I had an inspiration. I dumped my platter of food on
the table near my place, knocked over my glass, and threw myself
to the floor half under the table. It would look as if I had eaten half
my meal, fought the drug, and succeeded only in making a mess
before losing consciousness.
I kept my left hand over my face, as if accidentally, so that I
could peek through my fingers, unseen. I wanted to know who my
enemy was, where he was, and how he was armed, before I made
my move. If it were Mirabal . . .
But it was only the headwaiter. Still, that was significant, for
he evinced no surprise at what he saw. That meant he was in on it.
He spoke to the waiter behind him. That was all, just the two

of them, and neither one armed. I could handle them readily.
But I waited. Surely these two men were not the conspirators.
They were employees of the restaurant. They might have been
 
204
bribed or threatened, but the ones I wanted hadn't shown up yet.
Useless to tilt at the flunkies.
The headwaiter spoke in Portuguese. How I wished I could
understand him! The two men came and dragged me out and
turned me over, and I remained limp, only groaning a little as if
trying to fight out of it. Too complete an unconsciousness might
be suspicious, assuming this was the same drug as before; I had
been able to fight it off for a while, then. Unconsciousness is not
necessarily total; it only seems that way in retrospect because of
memory blackouts.
They picked me up and dragged my trousers off. I didn't like
this, but allowed it; obviously they had something in mind, and I
doubted it was homosexual rape. Maybe they were going to dress
me in something else? Why? What if they discovered my pocket
full of food, already well mashed? But they didn't; they merely
hauled me over to an easy chair in the corner and went to work on
Oba.
They stripped her all the way naked, cleaned the custard off
her face, and carried her over to me. They lifted her up, bent her
knees, and set her in my lap, facing me.
What the hell? They surely knew-or thought-I was in no
condition to take advantage of this opportunity. I hoped my masculine
reaction would not give me away, but it was all right, because
her firm buttocks rested on my thighs and concealed that
region. The position brought mixed memories, though!
They propped her head on my shoulder and draped her arms
and hair around me as well as possible. An unconscious girl does
not hang on too well, so they had to draw me up a bit and pin one
of her hands between my back and the chair. Her handsome breasts
pressed against my chest, and I felt her bare abdomen swell rhythmically
against mine with her breathing. What a posture!
Then the two men quickly wheeled out the table and replaced
it with a fresh one. Presto, no more mess!
But what could it all mean? Eventually Oba and I would wake
up, and perhaps be under the impression we had made love. But
205
would that be so shocking? We had made love before-and how!-
so there was nothing shocking about that notion. Actually Oba
was as thoroughly lovable a creature as I've encountered, and I
don't mean just her fine dancer's body or her pretty face. So this
careful pose made little sense; left to our own devices, we just
might have assumed it on our own.
The waiters set an open bottle of liquor on a little table beside
us, after pouring out two glasses, half full. So it would look as if we
had left our drinks in favor of more intimate entertainment. But
still, that was only appearance. Unless someone else spied us.
That was it! We were being framed, just as I had been framed
on the homosexual charge before. Certainly the same sort of mind
had concocted this trap, the Death Squad mind.
Well, I could foil that. As soon as the waiters left, I'd get dressed
and take Oba out . . . and never find out who had engineered this.
Yet if I stayed, who knew what mischief was in the offing?
Too late, again. Someday I'll have to learn to make difficult
decisions fast, or I may not live to make more slow ones. The waiters
ducked out, and someone else was coming down the hall. No
time to get out. Well, nothing I could do now except to play it
through.
A figure appeared in the doorway. Two figures.
Someone screamed. A woman.

Through slitted eyes, peering past Oba's luxuriant hair, I saw
the people, and received my worst shock of the day.
Dulce!
She was staring at the two of us, so suggestively arranged, and
I knew there was only one conclusion she could draw. She was the
very last person I would have wanted to show up at this moment.
Beside her was a man. He looked vaguely familiar, but I couldn't
place him, and of course I didn't know anyone in this city.
It hardly mattered, for he screamed and charged. Instantly I
recognized the mode of the martial artist; his muscular development
and the manner he moved gave it away. And there was no
 
206
doubt of his intention. He was out to kill. I may be slow in some
respects, but in combat I catch on quickly.
I exploded out of that chair. Or tried to. Oba was in my arms,
and I had either to drop her or use her as a shield, and I balked at
either. So as the man's fist came down, I turned, catching the blow
on my shoulder. Then I set Oba in the chair, somewhat roughly,
but speed was of the essence. I straightened, about to whirl into
my antagonist, and he caught me with a hard kick to the side. It
scored right under my ribs, and his calloused toes smashed in with
appalling force, half stunning me. A man does not have to get
struck on the point of the chin to suffer disorientation.
I pitched forward. I was not unconscious, but at this stage it
was easier to take a fall than to fight the pain; in a moment I would
recover from the shock of the blow and be able to function better.
And it wouldn't hurt at all if he thought I was out for the count.
But as I landed, he kicked me again, in the small of the back.
And again the pain blossomed. A girdle of paralysis clamped about
my waist; I felt like dying. Something internal had ruptured, or
maybe a nerve was crushed; I couldn't tell, but it was awful. I was
really taking a beating.
A third time he kicked me. He didn't care whether I was awake
or asleep; he just wanted to bash me to death. And he was pretty
well succeeding. I knew then what I faced: this was a renegade
Capoiera fighter. Capoiera is a Brazilian specialty, said to be the
dirtiest martial art in the world. Anything goes; the glass-sharded
feet of the man I'd fought in the Rio prison had been an example.
This bastard would pulverize me if I remained a target.
I had no choice. I had to fight back or be demolished. I gritted
my teeth against the pain in my back, and when his fourth kick
came I whipped my arm about and caught his foot. That made
him stagger, and I was able to get to my knees.
He cuffed me on the ear, and I let go, hoping I didn't have a
cauliflower ear like Oba's now. The old schoolboy punishment of
boxing the ears was a painful one. As I stood up unsteadily, he
performed another Capoiera specialty: he fell back on one hand
207
and one foot, and then shot the other foot at my face. But I had
anticipated this, now that I had identified his style of combat, and
I countered instantly. I knocked his leg aside with my forearm,
then leaped forward, onto his body.
We crashed to the floor together, him underneath. A hitting
specialist is at a disadvantage when encumbered, which is one of
the reasons judo is such an effective all around martial art: it includes
striking and wrestling forms. He was like a python, whipping
his body back and forth, trying to shake me loose and get his
finger in my eye or his elbow in my throat or his teeth anywhere,
but I whipped with him, and used his contortions to my own
advantage.
First I got behind him, straddling his body, pressing him down;
he countered by heaving up violently, to throw me off. But as his
body cleared the floor, I hooked my left leg around his left arm,

slid my right arm around, his right shoulder and up to grab my
own lapel (lucky they hadn't stripped me of that, too, but actually
I know plenty of "naked" techniques too), and thus had both his
arms entangled from behind, with his feet out of the way. That's
the secret of judo, using your opponent's own strength against
him, so that the more he exerts himself the better off you are. He
didn't like that position, so he tried to buck me off, and again I
took advantage of his power. I took a forward roll, landing beneath
him, giving him the sensation of success, but it was illusory, for I
had not relinquished my control of his arms. He lay face up, his
arms pinned, his head on my belly. Not uncomfortable, but not
much for carrying the attack to me, either. But I had no such
restriction; I shifted my right leg to control his right arm, freeing
my left leg. That gave me both my left leg and left arm to work
with. I grabbed his collar and pulled across his throat, putting my
leg around his head for leverage. There was a lot of leverage in that
leg, too.
Now this may sound complicated, so I'll put it in simpler
terms: it was the Jigoku-Jime, or "Hell Strangle", so named because
it is hell on the victim. His arms were entangled, his legs thrashed
 
208
helplessly, and I was applying terrible leverage to his neck. Hercules
himself could not have broken that hold.
Meanwhile, Dulce had gone over to Oba and hauled her out
of the chair, probably intending some sort of mayhem herself. But
she had discovered the girl was unconscious. Dulce was not the
sort to beat up a helpless rival, no matter how angry she was. So
she was contenting herself with shaking. Oba violently, waking
her, still thinking it was the effects of the liquor.
Oba's eyes opened slowly; obviously the drug was still on her.
I hoped there would not be a woman-woman fight; I was in no
position to break it up promptly. But then Oba saw me with my
strangle on the struggling man, who was almost out though resisting
heroically. She made an anguished little cry and staggered to
her feet, fell, and crawled toward us on hands and knees, her handsome
breasts drawing down. I thought she had mistaken our position,
supposing I was the one getting wiped out, since I was on the
bottom, but it was not so. She threw herself on me, trying to
wrench my leg from the man's neck. She screamed something in
Portuguese.
Naturally her action was ineffective, and in a moment she collapsed
across the man. He, too, had had enough; his legs stopped
moving as he lost consciousness. She had succumbed again to the
drug, he to my strangle; ironically they finished in each other's
arms.
"Let go," Dulce snapped at me. "She said you are killing her
husband."
Actually I had already eased up. A judo strangle is a controlled
thing, quite safe when properly applied, and I hadn't gotten to be
a fifth degree black belt without knowing how to do it right. I was
subduing him, not killing him, despite his attempt to kill me.
"Her husband?" I demanded as I disengaged. Sometimes I'm
slow on the uptake; I have admitted that many times. Now I knew
where I'd seen this man before. The picture on Oba's dresser: him.
"He brought me to meet you. He helped me escape from
209
Mirabal, and here you are, like the tomcat you are, seducing his
wife! No wonder he lost control!"
"Fat chance," I said, rubbing my back, trying to alleviate the
continuing agony there. "The food was drugged, and we were posed.
Remember when you and I dined together? That's how the Death
Squad strikes."
Her eyes widened. Dulce was no dummy. "She is drugged.

And he tried to kill you without even questioning-" She paused.
"But you-why aren't you drugged?" And her suspicion of me was
strong again.
I explained tersely. Then: "Obviously this was another trap.
Someone wanted me dead, and wanted you to think I had betrayed
you. Just how convenient was your escape from Mirabal,
and how did you know where to find me?"
Her eyes narrowed. "Too convenient! This man had word from
a santerio or something, a note telling you to be here. He told me
he was a friend of the ninjas who wanted to make a deal with the
MR-26 Movement, so if I would come with him and meet with
Fu Antos-" She stopped, shaking her head at her own gullibility.
"Obviously he's no friend of the ninjas! He must be Mirabal's
agent, sent to track down the ninjas, using me and you. And his
wife is in it with him."
The man was beginning to stir. "I don't think she's in on it," I
said, getting into my pants. "But we'd better get out of here; she
obviously still loves him." Indeed, Oba was clutching the man
even in her unconsciousness.
Dulce smiled grimly. "Hurts your male ego, doesn't it."
"Yes." Better to let her think that than the truth, that Oba
and I had been every bit as intimate as the pose suggested, at
another time. But I certainly wanted no more to do with Oba
now; I don't like adultery. Let her return to her husband, whom
she still loved despite her injured ear, just like her namesake goddess.
If only I had been able to understand her whole meaning,
during the pantomime dance.
We moved out quickly, leaving Oba and her husband to come
 
210
to what terms they might. Maybe this time Xango would stay at
home a little longer. His wife had quite a bit to offer, if he cared to
try her out.
We sneaked out the back door, dodged around the building
and down the street, alert for pursuit, but there was none. It seemed
Mirabal hadn't figured his neatly laid trap would miss.
"So the colonel arranged to have me killed, in your presence,"
I said as we walked along, putting more distance between us and
the restaurant. "But why?"
"Obviously so I would panic and run to the Black Castle for
help, whereupon they would follow me and ascertain its location,"
she said. "I'm afraid I was naïve."
"You know where the Black Castle is?" I asked, surprised.
"Not exactly. But the ninjas did make an overture to the urban
guerrillas. That was why I believed the Capoeira agent. Before
we raided the prison, I learned that there was a ninja stronghold in
the jungle, and I know its location to within about fifty miles. I
did not know the connection to you, until Mirabal informed me.
If we contact the Indians in that region, they will put us in touch."
"And we can warn Fu Antos how far Mirabal has penetrated
his network," I said. "The ninjas are in terrible danger. Mirabal is
savage and smart, and he has the whole resources of the government.
Yes, we have to do it." Then I paused, startled, my hand at
my throat. "The Figa!" I exclaimed. "I lost my Figa!"
Dulce eyed me. "Don't tell me that doll even had you wearing
a native amulet!"
"It's bad luck to lose it," I said, my ears heating. "It must have
come off during the fight."
"We're not going back there!" she said sharply. "That would
really be bad luck."
"No, of course not," I agreed, chastened. After all, it was only
a magic charm, of no actual value. Maybe I was upset because it
had been all that remained to me of Oba, with her dancer's body
and dancer's stamina.

"Here's the bus," Dulce said. "We have a long ride."
211
"We do?" I hadn't realized we were taking a bus. But we were,
and we did. I snoozed off and on, and Dulce remarked how the
land here was no good for farming, the soil being thin and poor
under the seemingly luxurious canopy of trees.
And so we rode into the wilderness, heading away from the
city of the future, toward the castle of the past. We got off at a tiny
village, a mere cluster of huts, and walked into the dense tropical
forest.
We did not suffer from hunger. Huge, heavy nuts lay on the
ground under the big trees. Dulce found edible roots, and fruits
that hung on little stems poking out directly from the massive
trunks. I'm no nature expert, but I'm not entirely naive about the
wilderness; I had been a beret in Indochina years back, and learned
to forage from the land. But Dulce evidently knew more about
this particular locale than I did. She had pills to purify the water
and kill the liver flukes that infested it, and knew how to make a
fire. She spied an armadillo, and I killed it with a karate blow to
the head. I was sorry for the creature, but it was food.
We came across an abandoned patch of cultivated land where
the Indians had tried to grow some fruit. There were a few tubers,
plantains and mangos, guavas and avocados remaining.
I was ravenous, after my missed banquet, and afraid we might
not find as much food further along, so I stuffed myself. My stomach
rumbled as it encountered the roast armadillo, and all that
avocado didn't help, but I didn't want to waste anything. Dulce
only looked at me and shook her head. "Little boys and ice
cream . . ." she murmured. It was her way of remarking on my
gluttony, or perhaps she was bitter about something else. Like a
slender dancer, nude, in my lap.
We walked. The floor of the deep jungle was not bushy, though
there was a great deal of mossy growth. In fact, we could have
ridden bicycles through it, only watching out for animal burrows
and raised roots. My notion of tropical forest being dank and impenetrable
was completely false. Well, not completely; it was indeed
a tangled mass above, high in the canopy. Huge liana vines
 
212
climbed the trunks of the trees and hung everywhere, just as in the
Tarzan movies. We could not see the sun at all; every square foot
was covered by leaves. And the jungle floor was no crawling mass
of pythons, headhunters and carnivorous plants; there were animals,
but we knew of their presence mainly by their sounds and
traces. It really was quite peaceful.
The air was hot, for though this was the winter season in North
America, it was the height of summer here in South America, and
we were nearer the equator. Dulce, wiser than I, soon stripped to
the buff, and made me do likewise. "The earth is antiseptic here,"
she said. "It is the sweat-soaked clothing that brings smell and
illness. To be bare is to be healthy, only stay out of the sun."
Like Adam and Eve, I thought. Could it be that the innocence
of the first man and woman was the source of their health? That
when they emerged from the healthy shade of the forest and put
on grime-holding clothes, they put on disease as well? Then what
a paradise we lost when we gave up our nudity! I glanced sidelong
at Dulce. Her unfettered beauty threatened to raise the beast in
me, and I had to look away.
At night, fatigued from a long walk, we stopped in a moonlit
clearing. We gathered a mound of dry leaves for a bed; if it rained,
well, we were naked anyway, and would dry. It was a novel funfeeling,
this Adamic and Evian repose in the forest.
However, the obvious, un-innocent thought occurred to me,
actually it had been building ever since we went natural, and I

made it known to Dulce. Or rather, it made itself known, when
her thigh banged against it. It was a wonder she didn't get bruised,
for this particular serpent was rocklike. Would it tempt her?
But first I had to confess my relationship with Oba. "We were
posed, there in the restaurant, but before that, in Rio-"
"It is all right," she said coolly. "I do not own you. I am not a
jealous female. I know how men are."
Cutting words! I would have preferred to have been bawled
out. "She helped save me from the Death Squad," I continued
lamely.
213
"Men are polygamous. It is unrealistic to expect otherwise. I
do not have to love you to get in bed with you."
She meant that I did not have to love her. She was tightly
controlled, so I had only a hint of what was suppressed inside her,
but that hint was a glimpse into an awful chasm. She loved me,
unworthy as I knew myself to be, and what could I say? For me,
love was a many-fickled thing. Yet after my fiancee, Chiyako-
Dulce relented. She stroked my cheek in the dark. "I am sorry,
Jason. I know you loved once, and never again. The Chinese girl."
"She's dead," I said. And winced, feeling an internal pain. But
that might have been indigestion from all the unfamiliar jungle
food. Brazil nuts are pretty greasy and concentrated. Avocados had
a lot of fat, too. And that armadillo, well, my stomach hadn't forgiven
me for that yet, it seemed.
So we made love, but it was not as good as before. After that
we chatted a while, and decided that in the morning we would
make up some bits of bark to be like caracoles, the voodoo coconut
fragments, and try a throw to indicate the direction we should
take to find the ninjas. It seemed Dulce was not a complete skeptic
about such magic, and neither was I, now. Though the loss of
my Figa complicated that.
*
I woke in the night. I had a pain in my right side just under
the ribs. That lingering indigestion would not go away! I knew I
shouldn't have stuffed myself; why had I done it?
I got up and paced about, hoping to release a little gas pressure
and be done with it, but the pain only intensified. I leaned
over and vomited, and that seemed to help, but only for a little
while. The misery spread to my back, and became so bad I wanted
to cry out.
Dulce woke. "You're sick!" she exclaimed.
"Something I ate," I muttered.
"I ate the same, and I'm not sick." She looked at me worriedly
 
214
in the moonlight, and came to put her hand on my arm. "It can't
be your conscience, because you don't have much."
"Well, I did get kicked in the back pretty hard in that fight,"
I said, ignoring her unkind dig. "I felt something go, then, but I
had to keep going-"
"Lie down," she said. Obediently, I returned to the leaf-bed,
though that did not alleviate my condition. This was one hell of a
stomachache, not a kind I had had before.
She ran her hands over my body, squeezing here, pressing there,
and there was nothing sexual about it. She must have had medical
training in Cuba; she had marvelously gentle hands. I suppose the
Communists are good at such things, inculcating all the necessary
skills in their agents.
"I don't think it's appendicitis," she murmured as she turned
me over and probed my abdomen.
"Can't be," I said. "My appendix was taken out years ago."
When she poked into my stomach on the right side, I groaned
aloud. But she continued, gauging the locale by my reactions.

One particular spot seemed to generate pure pain at the slightest
pressure. "That's what I was afraid of," she said at last.
"What?" I gasped, relieved that she at last had some diagnosis.
"Gallstone."
"What?"
"You have a gallstone, by the signs," she said. "I have seen it
before. It usually does not develop so suddenly, but your recent
exertions may have accelerated it."
"Gallstone?" I repeated stupidly. "I told you I got kicked a
couple of times. In the side and back. It really hurt! Maybe something
was ruptured."
"Be quiet," she said, just like a nurse with a balky patient.
"The liver produces bile; that neutralizes the strong acids coming
into the intestine from the stomach and helps break down fat. The
bile is stored in the gall bladder until it is needed. Sometimes
stones form from parts of the bile that have settled out of solution,
and these stones can block the duct so that the bile cannot get out.
215
This interrupts the digestion, and can cause the most severe pain
the body can experience."
"Now she tells me," I moaned.
"It can be controlled for a while by diet and drugs."
"Here in the jungle?" I demanded.
"But the only real cure is surgery."
"Surgery!" Like most athletic men, I have a morbid fear of
"It is very simple, as these things go. Just to remove the stone,
surgery.
so the bile can go through. But-"
I knew: how could I undergo surgery, here in the wilds of the
Amazon?
"We will get help, at the Black Castle," she said.
"Yes! Fu Antos, he cured me before. He has terrific power. He
can use his ki to-"
"I was hoping they would have a surgeon there," she said.
"Oh, yes. But how can we get there, even if we find the way?
I'm not sure I can walk far."
"I'll carry you if I have to." And she wasn't fooling! But I thought
of being draped across her shoulders, all that pressure on my stomach
while she staggered along, and I quailed.
"I'll make do, somehow," I said. "If only we could stop the
pain."
"Your jacket!" she said, delving into our bundle of clothes.
"What?"
"The food in your pocket."
"I dumped that out. Anyway, I'm not hungry." The understatement
of the night! "And it's drugged."
"Yes. It will serve as an anesthetic, in small amounts. We can
scrape some from the cloth-"
"I'd rather not," I protested, remembering my prison experience.
"That drug has all sorts of bad connotations. And it might
aggravate my condition."
"That's true." She considered, then brightened. "I know! I saw
wild coca plants growing, back a mile or so. Wait here."
 
216
"I don't care for any cup of coca, either!" I objected. "Anyway,
it's pitch black. You can't-" But she was gone.
She was quite a girl, I thought. Evidently she could make her
way in the dark with confidence. She was certainly one worth marrying,
if I knew what was good for me. Was it really necessary that
I love her? But of course there was her Communism, that I doubted
she cared to give up, even for me. I had a fleeting little nightmare:
Dulce standing proudly, torch raised, like the Statue of Liberty,
declaiming, "I could not love thee half so much, loved I not Marx

more."
Before long she returned with what felt like a handful of leaves.
"Chew this," she said.
I was in no condition to argue. I don't even remember what
they tasted like, and it was too dark to see them. So I chewed. And
you know, in due course I began to feel better. My pain diminished,
and strength returned.
"Hey, this herbal remedy is great!" I exclaimed. "What did
you say it was?"
"Cocaine," she said succinctly.
I laughed. "No, I'm serious. This stuff really helps. What-"
"The coca plant. Not cocoa. A lot of people confuse the two.
The drug cocaine is extracted from it. It is an excellent anesthetic."
"I'm an addict!" I exclaimed, appalled.
"One dose does not an addict make, not in this form. The
natives chew it all their lives without much ill effect. Right now
it's better than being in pain from the gallstone."
I could not debate that. I kept on chewing.
Next morning I felt much better. In fact, I felt terrific. We ate
a little more fruit, then went on to discover a small stream with a
nice pool. I rinsed off, then stood on the bank and watched Dulce
with open appreciation as she bathed. She was like Venus. This life
could not last, but what an idyllic interlude!
It ended abruptly. Indians appeared. One brought his bow
217
up, aimed, and loosed an arrow at me. I reacted automatically: my
arm swept across and deflected the arrow just before it struck me.
I could not simply let it go past; it might strike Dulce.
A second Indian aimed. I was ready; I tried to catch the arrow
in midair, but only knocked it aside again. Still, I did it with a
flourish, trying to make it look easy. It wasn't easy; had I not had
some practice in this sort of thing, I would have been brought
down.
A third Indian, a big buck, charged me with his spear, screaming.
I screamed right back at him, a piercing kiai! yell, just as he
hurled his weapon. I caught the spear, reversed it, and poked it
between his legs, sending him into a jarring tumble. Then I held
the point to his throat, showing how easily I could kill him.
The other Indians, amazed, came up and kneeled before me.
Dulce emerged from the water. "That was beautiful, Jason," she
murmured.
She faced the Indians and addressed them in Portuguese. After
a brief dialogue, she turned to me. "They are headhunters, but
have decided to be friendly. We are invited to visit their village."
"Headhunters!"
"They don't practice it any more. And they will send a runner
to notify the ninjas. I believe we can trust them."
Just like that! I was glad I had gone out to impress them instead
of really fighting them. I didn't want to lose my head, on top
of my bodily problems. But of course I had known that the Indians
of this area were allies of the ninjas.
The village treated us royally. I had to make another demonstration
of arrow deflecting so everyone could applaud, and Dulce
and I made a mat and demonstrated some judo throws. Ippon seoi
nage, o uchi gari, koshi guruma, just the ones we could do without
clothing, since we remained nude. Many of the Indians were nude
too, so that didn't bother me.
That evening we feasted. Dulce tried to warn me to go easy,
but I was sure she had been wrong about the gallstones, and I was
feeling so good I pitched right in. The main course was some kind
 
218
of meaty stew, very good. I washed it down with plenty of native
beer. The water, you see, was not safe because of the flukes, and I

was thirsty as hell. But along about my third helping of stew, I
drew out of the pot what looked like a baby's hand. Horrified I
stared at this confirmation of their cannibalistic culture, but Dulce
explained it was only monkey meat. Nevertheless, I decided I had
eaten enough.
And that night I had another gallstone attack that made the
first seem mild. Dulce gave me more coca leaves, and warned me
that if the gall bladder burst I could die, unless I had surgery very
soon. I promised never to go off my diet again, and finally this
attack abated.
Fortunately a ninja came in the morning to lead us to the
Black Castle. I kept chewing coca leaves and made it, glad that my
ordeal was almost over. Even the notion of surgery did not seem so
bad, now.
*
After that my memory becomes sketchy. Perhaps it was the
recurring agony of the gallstone, or the mind-affecting coca I chewed
to alleviate it; more likely it was what happened next. I was entering
the most awful period of my life, physically, mentally and
emotionally. But that's another story, a tortuous one. I can provide
only snatches, with certain retrospective interpretations, and I can
not promise even these are completely accurate. So for what little
it may be worth, I offer these bits:
The Black Castle seemed to be in ruins, surely that's a mistaken
image, but I swear that's what I remember, with stones
tumbled about. The plain around it seemed to have been flooded
recently, though there was no river in sight, and there was a stench
as of a recent bloody battlefield.
Inside it was bare, but that was only the surface. Below there
was an incredible labyrinth of tunnels and chambers. Like an ice-
219
berg, nine-tenths of the castle was beneath the surface. The important
thing was that we had made it; we were safe!
Except-another horrible vision. The boylike Fu Antos, larger
than I remembered him but still a child, met me not with open
arms of welcome, but with a great sword. This memory is the most
nonsensical of all; it could never have happened that way! I was
surely delirious. But I report the snatch as I have it. I, crippled by
my physical agony and sheer astonishment, was unable to resist
effectively. Those terrible hypnotic eyes of the lord of the ninjas,
four hundred years old; the gleaming blade swinging at my head-
It was Dulce who threw herself between us, intercepting the
sword with a wooden chair. "Stop!" she cried. "Spare him, Lord
Ninja! Only let him live, and I will do as you wish."
And what could Fu Antos want of Dulce, whom he had never
met before? More of my delirium, of course; I must have run a hell
of a fever!
Yet I found myself alone on a crude wooden raft, drifting down
the mighty Amazon River, with only a few coca leaves for sustenance.
In my fevered vision, that I knew must be untrue, I had
been betrayed by my best friend, Fu Antos, at the time I least
suspected. With my lucky Figa lost, only the sacrifice of the girl
who loved me, Dulce, had saved my life.
All false, of course. But one thing was not false: I was dying.
For my gallstone had not been removed. My whole body was turning
yellow from the jaundice of this malady. I could not survive
long.
Something bit my hand, which was dragging in the water. I
jerked it out. Must be piranha fishes; they would get me in the
end. My whole life passed before me, as I have recorded it now. For
now the pain was starting again.
I hear the cry, the raucous scream of some hungry jungle bird.
It sounds like the gleeful laughter of a vengeful voodoo god. But it
fades as I lose consciousness . . .

 
CURSE
OF THE
NINJA
and others
 
INTRODUCTION:
This volume is only half a novel. We were writing it when
news came that the series was being canceled, and work abruptly
stopped. The first five Chapters, of a projected ten, are virtually
complete, with spot summaries of intended scenes near the end of
Chapter 5, and a little bit of Chapter 6, followed by a summary of
the remainder. Unfortunately it was the finale toward which we
had been building for two and a half novels that was aborted. We
were not pleased, but it was not our decision.
The volume has been filled out with several stories and sample
projects, showing what else we would have written had there been
any interest by a publisher. We trust this will have some interest
for readers. This is really a collection of pieces, filling out our collaborative
activity. We hope readers will enjoy it regardless.
 
Chapter 1:
Dream of Red and White
He was a middleweight, around 176 pounds, completely bald,
standing only five feet five inches tall but with his mass filled in by
solid muscle. He was in a deep defensive stance and clearly afraid
of me.
Good-I needed an easy victory! I took hold of his jacket with
my right hand, caught his right sleeve with my left, and whirled
into a powerful uchi-mata inside thigh throw. It was one of my
favorite techniques, and I was good at it. Very good. I hauled him
up on my back, and my right leg thrust back between his thighs
and up to sweep his legs into the air. He flipped completely over
and came down hard on the mat in front of me.
"Ippon!" the referee cried, making the signal, his hand straight
up. Wonderful gesture! That meant it was a clean throw, with my
opponent landing with speed and force on his back: my victory.
Judo is a martial art, a system of self defense, like karate, aikido,
kung fu and others. If I were attacked on the street, and threw the
thug like this on the hard concrete, he would not get up again in
a hurry. But of course in contest judo we don't want to hurt the
 
226
opponent-not that much, anyway-so we have a mat. We are
careful to use correct technique so that he falls harmlessly.
Immediately both judges got up. "Koka!" they cried, signaling
with their hands at chest level. That meant an imperfect throw, a
minor effort. An ippon is like a home-run in baseball with the
bases loaded, or a touchdown in the final seconds in football: a
game-winning score. But a koka is like a base hit or a first down:
nice to have, but not really enough by itself.
There was a brief conference, and majority ruled: I was awarded
a measly koka for my throw. Well, these things happen, and a
good judoka does not complain. He can think his private thoughts,
though; I would have rated that excellent throw better than a mere
base hit.
I returned to the match and moved Uke around a bit. In judo,
the man who performs a technique is always Tori, and the one who
gets techniqued is always Uke. That's pronounced OO-kee, two
syllables with, the accent on the first. The term derives from ukemi,
or "fall" in Japanese. Anyone serious about judo has to learn Japanese
terms and pronunciation.
Uke was still too nervous to attack me; he knew he'd been
well-thrown even if the judges didn't. So I spun into another uchi-

mata. Again he flew and landed, and again the referee signaled
ippon intelligently. And wouldn't you know it, again the two judges
overruled him. "Yuko!" they cried, hands slanting down.
Well, a yuko is like a double in baseball that knocks in a run, or
a field goal in football. Enough to win, if the other team doesn't do
anything, but not spectacular. I was frankly dissatisfied. I'm not
nearly as good a sport inside as I am outside. But I kept my face
calm.
I closed a third time. I probably should have varied my technique,
but at this stage I was determined to achieve the recognition
my performance deserved. I shoved Uke back, and when he
resisted I hauled him abruptly forward and off-balance, and rammed
into a third uchi-mata. It was explosive; he sailed up so high he
would have been thrown clear of the mat and into the lap of a
227
judge if I hadn't hung on to his right arm. He came down partly
on his side with a crash that shook the room. In fact, my throw
was so violent that I myself fell forward on my head, turning to
come down partly over him.
"Waza-ari!" the referee cried, hand going out to the side at
shoulder level. That's like a baseball triple with a couple of runs
scoring, or a football touchdown with no extra point. A good,
strong showing, but not enough to win outright. After twice being
overruled, the referee was being more cautious. These judobaseball-
football scores are not directly comparable, of course; it's
just an approximation.
Surprise! "Ippon!" the two judges exclaimed, grinning. It
seemed I had finally put enough oomph into it to satisfy their
savage tastes. The match was over; an ippon always terminates it
right there. That's one of the ways judo differs from other sports.
But I wasn't through. Not by a long shot. The moment the
first Uke bowed off the mat, a second one was bowing on. For I
was not in a tournament or contest; I was running the line. I had
to fight five yodans, or fourth degree black belts in Kodokan judo,
one after the other without respite.
A yodan is a tough customer. A black belt in judo signifies a
master grade, like a professional baseball or football player: the
pick of the martial art. A shodan or first degree black belt could
mop up any number of barehanded attackers in a street fight,
though judo is called the "gentle way" of fighting. A nidan or
second degree black belt could normally wipe out a shodan; only
about one in three shodans make nidan. And there is a steeper ratio
for each step up; one nidan in ten makes sandan, the third degree,
and one sandan in thirty makes yodan, the fourth degree. So a
yodan is one in a thousand black belts, roughly.
And I was running a line of five yodans. Me, Jason Striker, a
fifth degree black belt, or godan, one in a hundred thousand. Trying
for one in a million. Could I do it?
The first couple shouldn't be too bad-but as I grew tired,
 
228
those constantly fresh Ukes would become greater hurdles. And if
I lost even one match, I was finished.
But I had no time to worry about that. The first Uke had been
tense and stiff, knowing he was overmatched. This second one was
relaxed and confident. He was a large black man with a small
mustache and big belly and strong arms. He knew the odds were
against him, but with one break he figured he could take me, and
he was bound to try. He might not be as good as he thought he
was, but then again, he might. Maybe he was pushing for 5 Dan
status himself.
He let me grip his lapel with my right hand-then he went
for waki-gatame, the armpit hold. This consists, basically, of clamping
your opponent's arm under your own armpit and bending it

backward. The pressure on the elbow-joint will force quick capitulation.
But as with all armlocks, you have to be careful; too much
pressure can break the captive arm. The victim will normally surrender
long before that happens, so you give him a chance to tap
out, to yield, and nobody gets hurt.
This bastard didn't give me that chance. He grabbed my arm
and drove down to the mat, not caring whether it broke in the
process. But I was not exactly a novice; I somersaulted forward in a
judo roll, changing the angle and fouling up his leverage. Then I
broke his hold-but he moved with me and got on top with a
yoko-shiho-gatame side four quarter hold. His left hand circled my
neck; his right gripped my left leg.
"O-saekomi!" the referee cried, signaling the commencement
of a legitimate holddown.
Out of the frying pan . . . I had thirty seconds to get out of it,
or I was lost. Fortunately the hold was not absolutely tight; they
seldom are in matches, since they have to be applied despite resistance.
I used what room I had to maneuver. I grabbed his jacket on
the side with my right arm, then twisted, reached over his head
with my left hand, and grabbed his belt. This was tough to do, for
of course he was shoving me down, and time was passing. Fifteen
seconds, twenty.
229
I bucked, my back arching high with my head and feet touching
the mat. This is called bridging, and is a standard escape technique,
but I had prepared for my bridge by pushing with my left
hand as if to shove him off; naturally he resisted the thrust. Then
as I bridged I reversed it, pushing with my right and pulling with
my left, exerting a lot of torque in the same direction he had been
shoving. As he pressed down hard on my torso, I added to his
movement. I had a lot of strength in my arms; those hours of
weight lifting I had done while training for this sure came in handy.
Now for a human bench press.
I heaved him right up and over in a forward somersault, then
rolled on top of him in a yoko-shiho-gatame of my own. Now he
had to break the hold-and he couldn't. He struggled valiantly,
sliding across the mat, but I stayed with him. My hold differed
from his in two crucial points: it was not loose around his neck,
but so tight his head was shoved up painfully so that he could not
even think of bridging. And my chin dug into his chest, putting
pressure on his soft breastbone and further restricting his motions.
These little details make all the difference. In fact, there can be
just as much strategy and action and drama in the course of a
holddown as in a spectacular throw, though it is more subtle. In
thirty seconds I had my ippon for the holddown.
Why was I doing this? Because I was going for the biggest step
of my career: promotion to Rokudan, the sixth degree belt. This is
beyond the black belt stage; the colors are red and white striped.
Few men outside of Japan ever make this grade; I would be the
highest ranked Caucasian in North America. Truly a status worth
fighting for. 6 Dan was a worldwide elite; fewer than ten white
men in the world had made this rank, in all the history of judo.
I had already done the technical questions and the three classical
katas or stylized demonstrations. These covered the nage or
throws, the katame or grappling, and the kime or the ancient forms
of self defense. I had also done two more of my own choosing. This
five-man competition accounted for sixty percent of the examination.
I had to win at least three of the matches and lose none.
 
230
And these opponents were not about to lie down and play dead for
me.
The third man was big and strong. He was about 35 years old
and weighed perhaps 230 pounds and seemed to be of Japanese

extraction. That meant mass and skill and experience-a tough
combination. I was panting from the effort of overturning and
holding down my last opponent; not really tired, but the edge was
off.
So I tried for a quick win, much as the last had tried against
me. Uke went for me with his right arm outstretched and stiff; I
grabbed his sleeve with my left hand, my right hand going to his
wrist. I lifted my right leg and put my foot against the top of his
left leg. Then I fell back and to the side, pulling on that arm and
pushing on his leg.
When we were on the mat I passed my left leg over his captive
arm, over the elbow, to put pressure on it, while I bent the arm
back with bothnd shands. But this Uke was tough; he tried to
resist and pull his arm back, and he had a lot of power. He was
getting away, and I had to twist onto my side to hold him and
apply more pressure.
Two things happened then, both unfortunate. Our opposing
forces were so great that something had to go, and it did. His
arm-and my spine. I heard a tearing sound as the ligaments of
his arm tore, at the same time as pain shot through the twisted
muscles of my lower back. He screamed and tapped out, and I let
go, the victor.
He would not be able to practice for a while, and I was sorry
for that. But it had been his own fault for struggling so hard against
a potentially injurious hold; he could have yielded with honor and
without damage the moment I secured it. I had applied pressure
slowly, giving him opportunity to do just that, and instead he had
tried to fight out of it.
I had my own troubles. My wrenched back was not too bad,
but I could not afford to let it rest, and it would weaken my attempts
at throws in the two remaining matches and make me look
231
worse than I was. With good luck I would not aggravate it too
much; with bad luck, I could wind up with a serious injury and
lose my promotion to boot.
It takes a moment for one contestant to clear the mat and the
next to come on, for everything is formal in judo. In that moment
my eyes surveyed my surroundings. We were in a large dojo, or
judo exercise hall, with bleacher seats tiered in a huge oblong,
filled with spectators avidly watching the action. They were not
paying fans, but the friends and relatives of the judo players who
had come to participate in the tournament and the promotions.
Judo is one of the few sports where the players pay and the spectators
come free. Not always, but true in this particular case.
Crowded up as close to the demonstration area as allowed were
a number of my own students and associates. There was Illunga,
an almost-handsome, no, almost-beautiful black woman who instructed
karate at my dojo. And a tall, copper-bronze haired slender
woman, a brown belt, watching intently, one of my best students.
And of course a number of my friends and judo associates,
here to watch me try for the big one.
The next man was a giant, even bigger and stronger than the
last. He must have weighed 300 pounds, no fat. He took off his
glasses just before he stepped out, and peered myopically at me.
Some very powerful men have weak eyesight, but judo is hand-tohand
combat, so it hardly matters. A blind man could be a good
judoka; some blind men are. This one had a beaked nose and whiteflecked
hair, and seemed Italian. He would have power to burn,
while I struggled along on my tiring system and hurt back. This
was going to be bad.
We closed, took hold, pushed each other around a bit, feeling
it out. Then I leaped in for a morote seoi nage shoulder throw. My
right arm bent at the elbow and angled across his chest, heaving
up as I rotated to draw him up over my back. But my back gave a

stab of pain as I took the load, making me hesitate fractionally-
and Uke used that moment to recover his broken balance and
 
232
stand firm. His left foot swept forward as he hauled me backward,
going into a counter-throw.
I danced out of the way. But he followed up his advantage,
dropping into a left tai otoshi body drop throw, seeking to augment
my spinout right into a fall. However, avoiding such traps
was second nature to me. I jumped over his outstretched leg and
tried to counter him myself; a failed technique in judo is a golden
opportunity to initiate a counter technique. But he had the jump
on me and was carrying through a continuous attack. He was already
winding into a soto makikomi wraparound throw, passing his
right arm over my head and throwing himself to the mat, carrying
me along with him. It was a sutemi, or sacrifice technique, doubly
powerful because Uke's deliberate loss of balance was transmitted
to my body, bringing it down. When a heavy man does this, there's
an awful lot of pull. I was unable to resist it, but I did foul it up so
that the throw was imperfect.
"Yuko!" the referee called. It was a good call; the bastard had
taken me down. No doubt Uke thought it had been an ippon, but
now those hard-nosed judges were on my side.
Well, that put me behind, but not by much. This man was a
demon on his feet, but maybe not so tough on the mat. I, however,
was tough on the mat. It was part of being an all-around
judoka. Even as I fell, I wasn't just messing up his throw, I was
setting up for my own next technique. I twisted and hooked one
leg over his belly, gained leverage with that leg, reached around
him and literally climbed on the back of the giant. He got on his
hands and knees, trying to stand up. You aren't permitted to retain
a mat-hold once your opponent stands up, and wouldn't
want to; he could drop you hard, falling backwards and crushing
you beneath his weight. Remember that image of the concrete
pavement: no hold is worthwhile if in real life combat you'd get
your brains beat out while maintaining it. But naturally I acted to
keep him down. I rode his back as though he were a horse, and
pushed with my stomach and with my legs on his thighs so that
233
he sprawled on his belly; my weight and position would not permit
him to get his legs under him.
Then I slid my right hand around his neck, grabbing deep
inside his left collar. My left hand passed the opposite way, grabbing
his right collar. Then I pulled back, drawing the cutting edge
of my right wrist into his neck, shifting a bit to nudge the muscles
over the carotid arteries aside. It was the okuri-eri-jime strangle.
But Uke had a strong neck. He ducked his head down, his
chin blocking my wrists, and tried to buck me off. My hold slipped
a trifle, but I reapplied it immediately. Then he got his hands up
and pulled hard on my fingers when the referee wasn't looking.
This was an illegal tactic, and it hurt my fingers. But then the
referee looked, and gave the man a chui or half point penalty. I
tried to complete my strangle, but could not, and finally time ran
out.
Uke had a yuko for him and a chui against him. The penalty
was stronger than the positive score, and so he lost. My victory,
but hardly a proud one. And now I had a wrenched middle finger.
And one match to go.
Well, it wasn't the first time I'd fought in an adverse situation.
Back at the Martial Open, when top representatives of seven major
martial arts had competed against each other for a kind of world
championship, I had gone up against a devastating karateka, my
hand injured. I had been marked for death-but my ki had saved
me.

The ki-that mysterious inner force that emerged sporadically
to tide me through my worst crises. I had no real control over
it, and could not summon it at will, but it was terrific when it
came. But of course I would not use it in an ordinary judo situation
like this. It was my skill that was at issue here, not my paranormal
powers.
The last Uke was comparatively small, about 150 pounds,
and fast. Oh, was he fast! I reached for him but could not get my
grip; he avoided me, and there is no rule in judo saying you have
to let your opponent take hold. He was fighting me edgewise. I
 
234
stepped around, seeking a better position-and he caught my descending
foot with a de ashi barai foot sweep. It was like stepping
on a banana peel; my foot went out from under, and I went down.
I tried to turn out, to void the throw, but succeeded only partially;
Uke had been too fast, his timing perfect.
"Waza-ari!" the referee cried, and the judges concurred. And
so did I; it had been a very nice technique. But it boded ill for me;
I needed at least a tie, and so far I was losing.
Naturally I had no chance to bring him into matwork; he was
lightning on his feet, and not about to let me slow him down with
my grappling technique.
I was in trouble. The smallest man in the line had thrown me.
All he had to do was stay away from me for the rest of the match
and he would win. I had to catch him.
Easier decided than accomplished. I stepped in-and he tagged
me again with de ashi barai. I didn't go down this time; I learn
such lessons very quickly. But his motion was so neat that I did
stumble, clinging to him momentarily for support. Here his strategy
worked against him; he should have swung into another technique
while he had the advantage, perhaps finishing the match
with another waza-ari. Two such scores are the same as one ippon.
But he was geared to strike and withdraw, avoiding any countertechnique.
He was too defensive, and so he missed his opportunity.
There was my opportunity. I had less than a minute to go in
the match, but my greater experience was already translating into
a tactical advantage. He wanted to be defensive-let's encourage
him!
I feinted, trying for a big technique, and he drew his legs back.
I tried for a shoulder throw, and he ducked his head and shoulders
down, moving fast. I shoved him further down, reached my right
hand over his shoulder, grabbed his belt, and leaned hard on him.
As he tried to come up, I put my left foot between his legs, sat
down, and boosted him over my body in a sumi-gaeshi takedown.
235
For some reason referees don't score this kind of throw high; all I
got was a koka. But now I had him down on the mat.
I never let him go. I rolled on top of him as he came down,
still gripping his belt, and applied the kuzure kami-shiho-gatame
holddown, a variant of the upper four quarter hold, a good one.
Now he was mine; no matter how he jumped, he could not get
away. Ten seconds, fifteen, twenty, twenty-five-
Uke gave a sudden terriffic wrench, throwing his feet up and
over my head, jerking his whole body in a kind of back somersault.
There was no warning; he caught me counting seconds instead of
concentrating on the business at hand. His head slipped free and
he was loose.
Time was called. The match was over. I had been so close, so
close . . .
But then I remembered: twenty five seconds on a holddown
constitutes a waza-ari, matching his prior score. And I had made a
koka on my takedown.
I won the decision by the margin of one slim koka.

Now my injuries were as nothing. I had made rokudan! The
official was holding out the coveted red and white checkered belt.
I reached to take it.
And it faded. "No, no!" I cried, trying to hold it together-
but it was all only a dream, and I was falling awake.
*
I opened my eyes. I was sitting up in bed, reaching for the
footboard. It was gaily painted red and white, but it was no rokudan
belt.
I certainly had ambitious dreams. To be the highest ranking
white judoka in America, or some such-and I didn't know a thing
about judo! As far as I knew, I had never practiced it or any other
martial art at all.
Of course, I didn't know much about myself. I had been staggering
along the burning edge of a Florida highway, sick and half
 
236
starved, until a well-intentioned stranger had given me a hand.
He had thought I was drunk or spaced out, but when he talked
with me he realized I was an amnesiac. So he fed me and gave me
a place to stay for several days while we tried to find out who I was.
We had no luck; he offered to take me to the police, who might
identify me by my fingerprints, but I balked. Suppose I were a
criminal? I didn't like that notion at all. I wanted to remember on
my own, so I could make my own decision, rather than having it
made for me. Suppose, for example, I had been framed and conked
on the head? I could find myself in jail with no way to recover the
truth.
My benefactor was understanding, but felt he could not ethically
do more for me, in the circumstance. I don't blame him. He
did help me get a temporary job and a room of my own. So I
became the pole man on a survey crew, lining up my pole for the
transit man to orient on. Unskilled labor, but I still managed to
foul it up a few times. The pay was enough to sustain me, and it
really was not demanding work. Just as well, because I was a pretty
weak character. I weighed about 130 pounds at the start, which
was pretty thin for a man standing over six feet tall.
I seemed to be recovering from some sort of injury or operation.
There were scars on my stomach, and at times I suffered
dizzy/weak spells. And I had nightmares-inchoate, fevered things,
snatches of terror in some deep jungle, of being chased by someone
wielding a huge sword, or drowning in a river swarming with
crocodiles-that sort of thing.
But this last dream had been different. For the first time it had
been pleasant, in a violent, rough-hewn way, and I had been sorry
to awaken. True, I had been hard-pressed, even hurt in that experience,
but I had felt competent to handle it. I had been a real
man.
I'd be willing to go through a lot of pain to have that feeling
again, mine to keep awake as well as asleep.
Now all I had was the pain in my back and hand. The dream
was false, but my pains were real; they had been with me when I
237
found myself on the street. I had been roughly treated, somewhere,
somehow, somewhen. How ingenious of my subconscious
to build this into my fleeting dream of glory!
Still, if there was judo in my dream, maybe I had known something
about it once. Maybe I should look into that, in case it
offered any key to my lost identity. Probably wasted effort, but . . .
So that evening after work I went to the local club whose advertising
poster I had seen. It was Taizo Sone; they seemed to have
two or three clubs in the area, and this was the closest one.
I was in luck. They met in a community center, two or three
times a week, and I had come on the right night. Students in

pajamalike uniforms were putting mats into place. Someone directed
me to the instructor, whose name was Steve. He was a young
man, in his early twenties, and not large or muscular or roughspoken.
In fact not at all the way I'd expected a martial artist to be.
"Sure," he said. "Sit down and watch the class. If you want to
join, fill out this application form. It costs ten dollars a month."
"Thanks." I sat down and looked at the form-and hit a snag.
For the name I filled in the one I had taken to get me by until I
found out who I really was: CAESAR KANE. And my current
address. But age-I didn't know my age.
"How old do I look?" I asked Steve.
"Maybe thirty five," he said.
"That old?" I was shocked; I certainly did not feel middle
aged.
He shrugged. "That entry is mostly for the children. In tournaments
they are graded by age and size."
"Oh." So I gritted my teeth and filled in 35, sure it was wrong.
But amnesiacs could not be choosy.
"Time for class," Steve said. "Why don't you try it?"
"Why not?" So I stripped myself of liabilities like shoes, wallet
and keys, and went to join the line forming for class. Except that I
didn't really know where I belonged.
I must have looked as bewildered as I felt, because a cute little
girl took me in charge. She had long yellow braids and bright blue
 
238
eyes, and seemed three sizes too small for her uniform. "You have
to stand at the end," she explained. "You don't have a gi."
I took her word for it. The others were arranging themselves
by size and the colors of their belts, the darker belts seeming to
have more authority. The little girl's belt was white, and she was
the smallest of that color, so she was at the end, except for me. I
towered over her, feeling like the scarecrow of Oz. What was I
doing here, anyway?
"My name's Penny," she said brightly. "I'm six."
Introductions, yet! "I'm Caesar. I don't know how old I am."
Damned if I'd say thirty five!
She went into a giggle. "Everybody knows how old he is!"
From way down at the far end of the line someone called "RE!"
Everybody bowed. Belatedly I bowed too, a stiff little effort from
the waist. We were bowing to the instructor, Steve, in his black
belt, and a taller friend beside him, a brown belt.
"Move out, spread across the mat," Steve said.
We spread out. I had no idea what I was supposed to do, but
at least I could follow the leader.
It wasn't hard. Steve led us, so all I had to do was copy him.
First we just sort of jumped around, limbering up. Then we whirled
our arms around, twisting at legs and hips. If this were all there
was to it, I'd have no trouble.
Then Steve sat and spread his legs out wide. "Grab your right
toe, keep your knee straight, touch your forehead to your knee,"
he said, doing it easily. I tried it with confidence.
It felt as if the back tendons of my thigh were about to rip out.
I could almost hear the piano-wire sproing! as my head balked a
good foot from my knee. Touch? Not in a lifetime!
"Oooo, it hurts so good!" Steve remarked. I could agree only
with the first three words.
But my surreptitious glance around reassured me: a number
of the others couldn't do it either. Some children, like little Penny,
were limber and/or soft-boned, but others were groaning.
At last, after several similar contortions, we proceeded to some-
239
thing different. "On your backs!" Steve cried. "Hit it!" And he
slammed one hand into the mat beside him.

I was completely lost. What was the point of this? But in a
moment a green belt came over and explained it privately: "These
are breakfalls. You hit the mat to take the shock when you fall.
Your arm's a lot tougher than your gut. Like this." And he
whammed the mat with a sound like a pistol shot.
I copied his position and threw out my arm. It struck with a
sound like bubblegum popping, and my hand stung.
"Not like that," he cautioned me with a straight face. "Open
your fist, put your palm down, not up, and cup your hand. Make
the whole arm level." He demonstrated with another detonation.
Somehow, with the green belt's help, I got through the assorted
breakfalls, which proceeded from lying-on-back, to sittingon-
mat, to squatting, and finally to standing. But I was bruised,
my left elbow skinned, and I wondered how I was going to survive
the hour, let alone the course.
"Form two lines for rollouts," Steve cried next.
The students lined up off the mat and took turns doing forward
rolls on the main section. These looked like fouled-up somersaults
with crash-landings. I went out, put my head down,
pushed off as I had seen the others do-and plowed shoulder-first
into the mat. Ouch! It felt as though my collar bone had fractured.
But I guess it hadn't, because I could still move my arm.
After that I lacked the nerve to try it again.
"Tonight we'll start with the o-goshi, the big hip technique,"
Steve announced. "Watch as I throw Paul." And he took hold of
his friend the brown belt, whirled around, and heaved him over
his back. Paul went tumbling to the mat, striking it with bone-
sundering force. I winced; there went one friend! This class was
murder, in the most physical sense.
But the brown belt jumped right back up, smiling. Some how
he had survived that devastating crash unhurt.
Now Steve went through it slowly, stepping in close, bending
his knees, putting one arm around the victim's back and heaving.
 
240
Paul went over, landing with less of a smack. I watched every motion,
and it was completely clear. Anybody could do it, once he
knew how.
Nevertheless, Steve demonstrated it several times, explaining
the position of the feet, arms, head and knees, as though such
details mattered. I wondered why he went over it so much when it
had been obvious the first time.
"Now take your partner and throw it five times each," Steve
said.
The others paired off. I didn't know anybody, so I just stood
there awkwardly. Then a girl trotted up. She was small, pert, and
wore a kind of double pony-tail. The baggy gi masked her other
attributes, but I judged her to be in her early twenties. "You look
lost," she said. "Okay, you can throw me."
Anywhere but in a judo class, that would have sounded funny.
"Throw a girl?" It hadn't occurred to me that these exercises were
coed. At least, not in the adult division. Obviously they were,
however.
"Well, I can't throw you, because you don't know how to take
a fall yet."
That seemed to make sense, though how this maybe hundred
pound girl would throw a man my size even if he could take a fall
was unclear. So I stepped in to throw her, and suddenly discovered
that I had no idea how to do it. Steve's demonstration had made it
look so easy, as though there were no other possible outcome but a
smooth flip to the mat. But seeing and doing were vastly different
things. "I don't know this throw," I confessed.
"I'll show you," she said brightly. "By the way, I'm Vonnie."
"Bonnie?"

"Vonnie-with a V. Everyone confuses it."
"Caeser," I said. "I think."
She laughed without affectation. She was a very pleasant, open
sort. "Now you put your right foot across the front-there, that's
right-sort of half turn-put your arm around my waist-bring
your left foot back more-"
241
I followed her directions with a certain difficulty. It wasn't
that I had any wrong idea about where I was, but my natural
inclination when I had my arm about a girl was to draw her in
facing me, rather than across my rump. Vonnie was a good deal
shorter than I was, so my hand fell mainly across her back up near
her shoulders, and I knew that wasn't going to work for a throw.
"Bend your knees," she said. "You have to get down low enough
to pick me up. Pull on my sleeve with your left hand. Pull harder,
forward. Turn. No, the other way, away from me, look to your
left-that's right."
That was right? I was twisted up like a corkscrew, with her half
sprawled across my side and back. This would never work!
"Now, heave forward," she said. "No, go ahead, put some
oompth into it-that's it-straighten your knees as you go
around-there!" There was a slap on the mat. "You did it!"
I looked, astonished. She had just landed on the mat in front
of me. I had thrown her-and I had no idea how I had done it.
She bounced up. "That was very good. Now try it again, faster.
O-goshi."
"Oh, gosh," I echoed.
And about the third time I threw her, I began to catch on to
the nature of the throw. Instead of seeming impossibly awkward,
it became almost natural. "Wonderful!" Vonnie encouraged me. I
had learned the O-goshi hip throw!
There was more practice that evening, but I knew the high
point had been passed. I was tired, sore and confused by the multiplicity
of Japanese names and techniques, but I was actually learning
judo.
The class concluded with some practice with the instructors.
We formed two lines. Steve faced one line, and Paul the other. The
first students went out, bowed, and took hold of the instructors,
trying to throw them-whereupon the instructors threw the students
instead. I was near the end of Paul's line, so I had plenty of
time to watch. The students looked so clumsy I was sure they were
faking it, just going down to make the instructors look good. Yet
 
242
when little yellow-braided Penny hooked Paul's leg and pushed,
he went down on his back, slapping the mat, while she clapped
her hands for joy. Hmm.
Then my turn came. I stepped up to the edge of the mat and
bowed, and from the center Paul bowed to me. A nice formality,
this careful judo courtesy; I liked that. But now Paul looked like a
giant, there in the splendor of his brown belt, and my confidence
evaporated.
Well, nothing ventured, etc. We came together. I grabbed his
left sleeve and pulled-and he just looked at me curiously. I couldn't
even remember the proper grip.
"Here," he said after a moment. "Take my left lapel in your
right hand, like this, and my right sleeve in your left. Right. Now
go ahead and try a throw."
Smarting under my embarrassment of ignorance, I turned into
the o-goshi hip throw Vonnie had taught me.
Paul just stood there, unmoved. "Get down lower," he advised.
"Pull on my sleeve."
I bent my knees-I had forgotten that detail-pulled-and
fell over backwards. Paul merely shook his head sadly.

I got up and tried it again. I grabbed his lapel, pulled-and
he made a little motion with one foot, tapped me on the shoulder,
and I crashed down on my back again.
"You need to keep your balance," Paul said mildly, making a
little bow of dismissal.
Balance. Yes.
It seemed I still had a way to go for my 6 Dan dream.
Chapter 2:
Strange Conquests
I leaned back comfortably, my belly full of the crude but delicious
native repast. The monkey stew had been good, and the
roasted termites very tasty. The fermented-corn beer was weak,
but there was plenty of it, and of course it was safer to drink than
the water.
Dulce had given up cautioning me about indulging; she was
fed up in more than one sense and I was half-hypnotized by the
flickering fire and the relief of finding help after isolation in the
deep jungle.
The small, grizzled Chief spoke a few words in his native language.
I turned to Dulce, who had to interpret for me. "He says
the tribe wishes to honor the White God," she explained.
"Not by cutting off my head!" I protested, moderately alarmed.
"These are headhunters, remember."
"Reformed headhunters," she reminded me. Dizzy as I was, I
noted again what a voluptuous woman she was, and how pretty
her face was when she spoke. There were worse fates than being
lost in the jungle with such a companion. And she had taken good
care of me in my illness, too. I owed her a lot. "Anyway," she
 
244
continued, "they don't decapitate friends. Only enemies. It should
be safe for a White God like you." She smiled with momentary
malice. "See that you behave like a god, not a devil."
"What sort of honor is it?"
"I don't know. Probably something they just cooked up, an
instant ceremony to suit the occasion. They were quite impressed
by your combat performance, you know."
The Chief spoke again, smiling. "He says for you to go with
him," Dulce said.
I eased to my feet. "Okay, we'll come."
But the Chief barred Dulce. "It seems this is a stag party," she
said, just a bit nettled. "Go ahead, Jason; I'm sure it's safe. I'll relax
here." And she settled back with a determined complacency.
Stag party? My alcohol-fogged interest quickened. What
would these hospitable primitives have, a dancing native girl bursting
out of a nut-flour cake?
I accompanied the Chief, and a dozen warriors fell in behind
us. I was certainly glad the natives were friendly.
We came to a large hut on the outskirt of the village, that I had
not seen before. Its floor inside was covered by soft brush and dry
moss, making a bouncy, fragrant mattress from wall to wall. And
on this huge bed were five naked girls.
The Chief spoke, augmenting his words by a pantomime of
such suggestive nature that I could not fail to catch his meaning.
He made motions of grasping, hugging, kissing, stroking and
spreading, and he bucked his groin forward violently several times.
It seemed I was being invited to patronize the royal harem.
"Well, thanks, Chief," I said. "But I'm not really in the mood,
and Dulce would be jealous, So if it's all the same to you-"
The Chief grunted firmly, pointing at the nearest girl. The
torchlight was not good, but she was evidently the pick of the
tribe, maybe fifteen years old with heavy black hair, fine full breasts,
nice little buttocks and good legs. Small-she could not have
weighed more than a hundred pounds-but all the tribespeople

were small. They lacked the advantage of civilized nutrition; in
245
fact they probably went hungry often when the hunting was bad.
Regardless, this girl was very comely.
I looked around, squinting to see better in the irregular illumination
of the interior brands. "Well, if it's really that important
to you-" I did not regard myself as a promiscuous man, but
sometimes protocol requires special activities. "But not in front of
a crowd; we Caucasians prefer privacy."
It seemed they understood a bit of English, or at least my
tone, because the warriors shook their heads negatively and crowded
closer. They intended to stay. And from their attitude I got the
impression that this honor was not exactly voluntary; like the eating
of bread together as a sign of friendship, it was a necessary
formality. I had to perform in their presence, sharing my hero's
seed with their tribe, in this manner becoming part of them.
Well, there was nothing for it but to humor them. It was an
honor: they thought enough of me to wish to perpetuate me within
their tribe. And the girl was alluring, and I suspected something
aphrodisiac had been added to the food, because I felt its effect.
Or maybe it was the aroma of the scented torch. Supposedly primitive
peoples can be remarkably sophisticated about matters of the
flesh.
Okay, if I had to do it, I'd do it right. I'd give them a show to
remember. I might have felt otherwise if I had been sober, which is
why I normally don't drink. Alcohol has a very liberating effect on
me, to put it politely, perhaps because I am not used to it. But this
was a unique situation.
I stripped. After all, I entered judo matches in public; this
wasn't that different. I focused on the girl's nether bifurcation,
tantalizing in the flickering half-light, the shadows as suggestive as
the visible portions, and felt my member swelling in response.
There was a murmur of satisfaction among the men, then of awe;
my member was in proportion to my size, but I was substantially
larger than they were. Soon I was turgid as a blocked garden hose.
I almost leaped on that poor girl. No finesse at all; I got down
on her, thrusting between her widely spaced legs, holding her
 
246
shoulders to keep her from sliding out from under. My member
found the place and rammed home as her legs clasped about my
waist, her ankles crossing and locking behind me. It was well that
I wasted no time, for I came explosively the instant I touched
bottom, pumping spurt after spurt deep into her body, my hips
smacking into her thighs and buttocks with every urge.
There was something very like applause from the watching
warriors, as if I'd just performed a beautiful judo technique and
won the match with an ippon. Well, that was close enough. I'd
shown them what the White God could do, all right!
I relaxed, but the girl did not. She must have been hurting
inside from the sheer velocity and distention of my production,
but she clutched me to her. She hauled my chest down to her
breasts, flexing her thighs against me. And you know, my member,
that had partially softened after the climax, began to engorge
again. Maybe I was an exhibitionist at heart; ordinarily once was
enough. But think what an impression I could make if I fired off
two rounds in rapid order!
Something shoved against my shoulder, knocking me over to
the side. My contact with the girl was broken, and I fell on my
back with my tumescent member projecting up. One of the other
girls had done it, forcefully intervening.
Now that girl plumped down on my crotch, pausing only to
grasp my member and stuff it into her aperture. She was a solid
girl, almost fat, with big soft buttocks and bulging tummy but

still fairly good looking. She bounced on me, her big breasts slapping
audibly with every jerk.
I just lay there on my back, amazed, while she rode me like a
horse. The spectators began clapping in unison with her motion-
whomp, whomp, WHOMP! She rose so high and came down so
hard I was afraid my member would slip out and get crushed
under her pile-driving mass. I had a vision of it snapping in half,
like a stepped-on stick. In self defense I had to follow her motions,
bridging as she rose, keeping my lodging secure.
And slowly I peaked again, my organ filling with liquid, swell-
247
ing to huge proportion. The climax was not as sharp as before, but
overall it was as powerful: like a locomotive steaming into a station,
instead of a sport-car squealing to a stop.
So the second girl was satisfied, and I was limp. I nudged her
off, and she went.
And a third girl came, short but well endowed. She got down
to embrace me, her breasts dangling above my chin.
Now ordinarily such a position would be most stimulating.
I'm one of those males who regard naked breasts as natural playthings.
But these had arrived on the scene just too late. "Hey,
wait!" I protested. "I'm spent!"
But she protested, grabbing hold of my exhausted member as
though to knead it back to health and vigor. And the standing
warriors raised their spears and made performance-motions.
"Now hold on!" I said, forgetting that the girl was doing that
already. "You can't expect me to-"
They persisted. They expected. They had the spears. I was
supposed to run the line of all five girls. Some honor!
It seemed that when the White God honored this tribe, he
was expected to do the whole job. Or else.
What happened to gods who didn't make the cut? That was
no difficult conjecture: obviously they were no longer considered
to be gods. A fallen god become a devil, an enemy-and these
people were headhunters.
If I failed, it would not be from lack of initiative by the girl.
She really wanted that White-God elixir; she was just about pulling
the spigot out by the root.
The Chief stepped forward, scowling. He didn't like suffering
the embarrassment of presenting a fake god. He raised his hand in
an incipient signal of negation. I was in trouble.
Then I felt something strange but wonderful. It was a filling
and hardening, something intangible flowing from my hara, the
seat of my being in my belly, to my external member, suffusing it
with new strength and substance and confidence.
It was the ki, that mysterious force that imbued me with su-
 
248
perhuman power at my greatest need. I had no real control over it,
and had never anticipated its manifestation in this situation.
Nevertheless, it was here, and suddenly I was formidable. My
member swelled to such proportion and rigidity that it sprang out
of the girl's hands, startling her. She gave a little shriek, as of one
surprised by a striking snake, though that snake merely looked her
in the eye.
I rolled to my knees, caught her about the waist, and bore her
back. She fell, her two legs going straight up in the air, and I
pressed in from below, skewering her with my hugeness. The fit
was tight, in this position, and her legs pressed against my chest
and shoulders, pushing me back. But I thrust right on through,
reaming out the channel and pumping it full of fluid.
Ippon! Now the applause was deafening.
I didn't wait for the fourth woman; I whipped out of the third
one, letting her collapse like a punctured balloon, and dived for

the next. Caught by surprise, she was on her stomach. No matter;
I grabbed her by a buttock, heaved her up until she bent forward
at the waist, and took her from the rear. My ki kept me charged; in
moments I had filled her up, like a car getting gasoline. And the
spectators were staring, awed.
The last girl was the smallest, younger than the rest. In fact
she was barely nubile, her breasts very slight and pointed, but her
body was clean and firm. She looked about eleven, but that was in
terms of my culture, where girls are well fed and mature early; she
was surely several years older. I sat down, my legs spread straight
out as in a preliminary judo exercise. I picked her up by the elbows,
and set her down on me, dead center.
This one, unlike the others, was virginal; I tried to be gentle,
but my imperative would not be denied. I let her own weight
impale her slowly on the stake, and when the resistance of her
condition made her wince, I lifted her up again. I tried a second
time, forcing a way into that constricted aperture, and again had
to lift her up, while the warriors gaped. They'd never seen it done
249
this way, and my supercharged member was simply too big for
this child-sized girl.
Then she wriggled and my left hand slipped, depriving her
suddenly of support. She dropped hard, with a little scream, and
the impalement was complete. I climaxed again, almost fearing
that the force of my jets would shoot her through the roof, but of
course nothing of the kind happened. I waited until the orgasm
had spent its fury, all the greater for its confinement in that tight
channel, then gently lifted her off me. My member was still hard.
The tribesmen were exclaiming and slapping each other on
the backs. I knew they had never seen anything like this. I stood
up, my erection paramount. "Where's the rest of your women?" I
demanded.
"Jason!"
It was Dulce, who had forced her way through the throng,
alerted by the commotion. Shocked, she stared at me, seeing it all.
It wasn't that she was squeamish about sex; she certainly wasn't.
But she hated to see me make a complete fool of myself, and she
was concerned about my health. With good reason, on both counts.
Suddenly the ki drained out of me. My whole body went limp.
I felt as if a gallon of blood had been sucked from me, and maybe
it had. What had I been filling those five containers with?
I looked at the girls, and was appalled. One was picking lice
out of her long black hair and eating them; another had a set of
toothmarks on one breast-mine, I was sure!-and a third smiled
at me with her teeth filed to points. A piranha-mouth! Had I kissed
her? She was not mature, she was old! The fat one was consumptive,
hacking up phlegm. And the child-sized one was bleeding
profusely from the genital injury I had dealt her. The room looked
like a battlefield, complete with fat flies settling on the bodies.
I felt sick, and not merely in the body. I had an awful premonition
that I was about to suffer another gallstone attack. Dulce
didn't even have to say "I told you so."
I woke, sweating. This time I was glad to see the dull familiarity
of my bachelor room. If this episode had been sheer imagina-
 
250
tion, I needed to find better things to think about. If it was a
memory from my past life, I might have good reason for my amnesia.
Running a line of willing women in front of a cheering crowd
of headhunters? Impaling a childlike girl? It better be a dream!
Yet somehow I suspected that it wasn't, even though it had
gone like a parody of my prior dream about making the sixth degree
black belt. That woman Dulce, for example-it was as though
I actually knew her. And the jungle-almost it came back. I had

been there, somewhere . . .
No, impossible! Time to return to the real world, like Walter
Mitty.
*
The start of the second judo class was not so bad, as I now had
some notion how to do the breakfalls and knew better than to
attempt the forward roll. My shoulder still hurt, but I was able to
function. I had made the plunge and invested in a gi; it was huge
and stiff and baggy on me, and I felt like a walking sandwichbillboard.
"Don't worry, it'll shrink," Steve assured me. I hoped
so; it was hard to convince myself that the whole class was not
staring at my clown-like aspect. On top of that, it chafed.
"Back to back with your partner," Steve cried after the initial
exercises were done.
Huh? This was something new!
People paired off and sat on the mat, leaning back against each
other the way kids do at a picnic. Again I lacked a partner, and
wasn't really too eager to find one. Suddenly my shoulder seemed
to hurt worse; it had gradually intensified as the hours passed, last
time; nothing seemed to be broken, but I didn't want to aggravate
it.
But again I was approached by a girl-not Vonnie, but a wellconstructed
black-haired lass. She wore no gi; instead she had jeans
and a sweatshirt. She looked about twenty-two. Her name, it developed,
was Terry, and she had not been to very many classes
251
herself. That gave us a kind of camaraderie; we were both beginners.
With so many teen-age green and brown belts sliding so
easily through impossible contortions, it was a comfort to know
that other beginners existed.
We sat down back to back. "But what do we do?" I asked over
my shoulder, my nose banging into her loose long hair. When I
started out to learn judo, all of three days ago, the last thing I had
anticipated was to find myself sitting in clothing like starched
pajamas on a thirty-foot square mattress, leaning into an attractive
young woman. This was martial art?
"It's matwork," she explained. "Like wrestling. You try to get a
holddown."
"Wrestling?" I thought I'd misheard. But indeed, now all the
other couples were going at it vigorously, getting into all manner
of tangles, clutching heads to chests, throwing thighs over faces,
tearing jackets open, wedging forearms through crotches and lifting,
sending belts flying loose, crushing each other to the mat,
panting and groaning with effort.
I looked at Terry.
I just couldn't do it! First, and least important, I didn't know
any holddowns. Second, how could I wrestle with a girl? Anywhere
I grabbed her . . .
Maybe something similar occurred to her. "Okay," she said.
"I'll hold you down and you try to get out of it."
That suited me. Of course she would not be able to hold me
down, but at least I could find out what the hold was like.
I lay down on my back, and she put the kuzure yoko shiho
gatame, or variation of the side four quarter hold on me. No, I
didn't master its name until much later. All it was, basically, was
her kneeling beside me, leaning over my chest, and wrapping her
two arms around my far arm. There was very little weight on me;
I was conscious of her two breasts pressing into my torso, but they
were hardly burdensome.
Then I tried to break the hold. It was the strangest thing: she
had no real weight on me, but I couldn't get off my back. I don't
 
252
care what others may think, I really was trying. No matter how I

squirmed and struggled, she was right there, her hair flying across
my face. I had no leverage, no way to sit up or turn over. I thrashed
around for about two minutes, wearing myself out, before I finally
got a hand against her knee, pushed it away, and twisted out from
under.
Later I learned that if a judo hold is maintained for thirty
seconds, it's an ippon or victory for the holder. So I had really lost
four times over.
Suddenly I had a whole lot of respect for that hold.
Next we practiced turning over a prone opponent. I still working
with Terry. Steve demonstrated several ways to lever someone
over, and it really wasn't complicated; anybody could do it.
Then it was our turn. Terry lay down on her stomach, and I
tried to flip her onto her back. I started to slide my right hand
under her arm and around behind her head in the half-nelson
Steve had shown, but she had her arm tight against her side. I
couldn't get through without going lower down on her torso, beyond
her elbow, and moving up from below, and then I encountered
her, er, chest. Jamming my hand through there could be
subject to misinterpretation. She was a buxom girl.
So I tried the alternate method Steve had shown, taking hold
of her collar and putting my shoulder down against her side to
bulldoze her over. I shoved-and she didn't budge. Who would
have believed it could be so hard to turn over one feminine-type
girl! As with the holddown, I had greatly underestimated the problem.
But I tried. I braced my knees and shoved valiantly-and felt
an odd kind of tearing in my left side. It wasn't really painful, just
muscles sliding about over my rib-cage, making the area a little
numb. So I kept on trying to turn her over, and failing. She was
glued to the mat, smiling.
A young brown belt stopped by. The higher belts did this,
acting as assistant instructors. "I can't turn her over," I complained.
"Well, you slide your hand around like this," he said, happy
253
to show me the ropes. But he couldn't seem to get his hand in
either, perhaps encountering the same complex of problems I had.
Terry had her arms tightly clamped in good proper resistive style,
and of course she was supposed to resist. And a man just doesn't
grab a girl by the bust and roll her over. Not in public. (In dreams-
ah, in dreams! Jungle, White God, running the line-for shame!)
So far, our efforts had only tickled her.
Another brown belt appeared. "What's the matter?"
"We can't turn her," I said.
"No problem." He was a large, husky man. "You just take
hold of elbow and knee, like this, and haul her up-" He hauled,
lifting Terry abruptly a foot off the mat. She screeched and flailed
her arms, understandably startled-but dropped down on her
stomach again and clenched her elbows to her sides more tightly
than ever.
"Well, you do have to apply a little force," the husky brown
belt said calmly, picking her up again and twisting her in the air to
flip her on her back as she dropped.
Something in her clothing went SNAP!
"Oops," he said, taken aback. "Are you all right?"
"Quite all right," Terry said quickly, tucking herself back together.
Obviously she was unhurt. Woman wear elastic in various
places, of course; that's one of the intriguing things about them.
That ended turnover practice. I now had the unenviable distinction
of having been unable, even with the help of two brown
belts, to turn over one girl-and my increasingly sore side indicated
I had injured myself in the attempt. I was some judoka!
*
There were actually two classes, with a five minute break between
them. I had entered the beginning class, but as an adult I

was eligible for the Seniors class too. "Why don't you try it," Steve
suggested. "We go into self-defense techniques, chokes and armlocks
that the kids aren't allowed to do."
 
254
Well, why not? I wanted to learn judo, and this was a good
way, if I didn't tear myself up too much more. So I stayed. The
smaller children went home, including Penny who insisted on saying
good-bye personally with a hug; but a few more adults appeared,
so it was a group of similar size. As usual, I had no partner.
This time a man approached me. He was Mr. Campbell, an
orange belt who looked to be about my own age, and he was the
club treasurer. He seemed very nice-but the truth was, all the
people in judo seemed nice, and I knew I would want to continue
coming for social as well as physical reasons. Aspects of judo, such
the forward rolling breakfall, terrified me, but I liked the people. I
had not really expected such friendliness and helpfulness in a martial
arts class.
This time Steve demonstrated the seoi-otoshi technique, or
shoulder drop, in which he turned as in the o goshi but kept his
right hand on Uke's lapel-I remembered that the thrower was
always Tori, the other Uke-and stuck his right leg back. It looked
easy-as they all did, when Steve did them.
Mr. Campbell was familiar with the throw, so he threw me
first. Over I went, seeing the high ceiling spin by. Wham! right on
my hurt side, and I also scraped the skin off my left elbow again
and stung my hand and banged my head: a typical fall.
He helped me up. "Sorry-I didn't realize you weren't used to
the falls yet. Are you all right?"
"Fine," I said dizzily. "I seem to have landed wrong."
"It takes time to learn," he said. "I'll just load you next time."
"Load me?" That sounded bad.
"I won't complete the throw. Like this." And he went into the
throw again. My feet went up sickenly, and I tensed for the worst-
and then he set me down gently, upright. Hey, this was much
better! After this I would remember the key word: LOAD.
Then it was my turn. Following his directions, I stepped
around, turned, and heaved. My right wrist bent backwards painfully,
and he did not budge. A complete failure.
"Try it again," Mr. Campbell said. "This time bend your knees.
255
You have to get down low, to pick me up."
Oh, yes-I always forget that detail. The knees really didn't
seem very important. So I humored and spun around, bending
my left knee as I threw my right leg down almost to the floor
behind him. "Wrist stiff!" he warned, and I jerked my fistful of
lapel forward and heaved.
And he went up like a feather, over my shoulder, and landed
resoundingly on the mat.
"Beautiful!" he cried, getting up. He wasn't hurt at all. I wished
I had that secret of safe landing!
"You jumped," I said unbelievingly. I knew I couldn't have
done the throw all by myself.
"I didn't jump. You threw me."
So just getting down that extra couple of inches had made all
the difference. Another valuable lesson learned. Mr. Campbell was
shorter than me, so getting down really counted. And now I really
liked this throw, my first successful effort with a partner my own
weight. Seoi-otoshi.
Steve ended the class with some testing for promotion. He
looked down the line. "Angel," he said.
A girl came out. She chose a partner and stood before Steve.
"Ippon seoi nage," he said.
She took hold of her partner, whirled around, and threw him

over her shoulder. Wham! In the still hall, the landing was like a
crack of thunder. Steve made her do it twice more, and it remained
just as impressive.
"Morote seoi nage," Steve said.
Angel whirled into a throw that seemed just about like the
first one. Slam! The boy struck the mat. I was amazed at the repeated
impacts he withstood. I would have been crushed to a quivering
hulk, yet he took fall after fall without concern. It reminded
me of the dwarves bowling on the mountain, and I was Rip Van
Winkle watching their game of nine pins. Just one big human in
this instance, crashing like thunder again and again. Boom-boom-
 
256
boom, seeming to land so hard that bones must splinter, yet without
damage.
"Tai otoshi," Steve said, heedless of the carnage. "O soto gari. O
goshi." How could anyone even remember the horrendous names?
Yet Angel performed them all.
I was impressed and dismayed. Here was one nondescript girl
selected from the class (later I saw her in street clothes, and she
was quite striking; it was the gi that made all women sexless), a
mere white belt-and she seemed to know all the throws in the
book! How could I ever master all this? She even did three
holddowns I didn't recognize.
Angel made her yellow belt promotion. But I wondered
whether there was even any point in my remaining in the class. It
would take me years just to master the yellow belt techniques-
and I couldn't even take a fall yet!
Chapter 3:
Sword and Stone
I faded in and out as I floated down the Amazon River. At
times I was quite lucid, admiring the crocodiles that hopefully
paced my raft. At other times the pain was so bad that I wished
the reptile's hopes would be fulfilled. I was dying anyway; why
prolong the agony?
Something grabbed me. Instinctively I fought, knowing it was
useless and pointless; I could never overcome a crocodile in water.
But I wasn't in the water; human hands were holding me.
They were Indians, jabbering in their own language. I didn't
know whether that was good or bad; I didn't recognize them. They
might help me-or eat me.
They helped me. They portaged me overland for many days.
We could not understand each other, but it hardly mattered, because
I did not remember who I was or where I was going. Sometimes
I was able to walk; at other times I could only lie and moan.
A pretty maiden tended to me then, seemingly amenable to my
every need-except the need to be free of pain.
Then I found myself in the city of Manaus. How I got there
and how I left there-blanks.
 
258
Time, confusion, travel-whom did I meet, who helped me?
More blanks-and I was on a tramp steamer, and it must have
been in the ocean, for there was no land in sight, and the swelling
waves added to my discomfort. You might think that slow undulations
would lull me to sleep, but they made me feel seasick. Yet
I had to eat. The food was exceedingly greasy and overspiced, but
I had suffered illness and hunger on the route and lost much weight,
and now that food was plentiful I could not be choosy.
About three AM I woke with a sensation of fullness, heartburn,
indigestion, and general malaise. Not seasickness, for it had
happened often before I was on the boat, and this was worse. I
heard myself screaming. The ship's doctor was a drunk; he gave me
some sort of medicine and a shot of morphine, and I relaxed.

But next day it was back, the pain spreading from my right
side into my back and stomach. The skin over the region of my
gall bladder was swollen and sensitive. My body was turning yellowish,
and in the mirror I saw the whites of my eyes becoming
yellow too. This horrified me, as it reminded me of the dread
addiction to the drug Kill-13, where the whites turned red. I had
fought the purveyors of that drug, and thereby lost my fiancee;
the whole series of associated memories was anathema. But in this
case it was not addiction, but jaundice: the bile from my gall bladder
was blocked off, and spreading throughout the body instead of
the digestive system. Another symptom was in my stools: dead
gray, no brown. An ugly thing to contemplate, in more than one
way.
Half delirious with pain and morphine, I lay on my bunk and
heard the captain discussing my case with the doctor. "He's going
to die. You'll have to operate."
"Cap'n, I can't operate! I do not have a proper license or instruments."
"And you're a drunken bum. I know. But we don't have any
choice. We're not much as a ship or crew, but we're human."
"We don't have anesthesia."
"We have plenty of rum."
259
"I never did this kind of surgery before."
"You'd rather just weight him down and dump him over the
side? You know he can't live unless you operate. Now. What kind
of murder do you prefer?"
They were rough men engaged in illicit trade, but decent in
their fashion. And so the doctor agreed to operate, reluctantly. I
had no say in the matter, which was just as well. Because as he
anesthetized me by forcing me to drink cup after cup of cheap
Dark Bacardi Rum, he imbibed a fair quantity of that anesthetic
himself, and he told me his life story. It was not reassuring.
He was a slight fellow in his forties, with protruding eyes under
rimless glasses. He had a three day beard and a lot of hair
around his body, and his breath was bad. "I lived in Cuba," he
explained. "When the revolution came, I was in my third year of
medical school. I had trouble with the Minister of Agriculture of
the new regime, because I had taken his wife away from him, and
he had me jailed. I learned the rest of my medicine by practicing
in prison." He poured another round. He seemed to be determined
to keep pace with me, but I was drinking to get dead drunk
so I couldn't feel the knife. Had I been sober, I might have found
the situation more alarming. But I wasn't sober; that was the point.
"When I was freed," he continued, "I left the country, faked
papers, and won a job as ship's doctor. The captain knows this, but
he's satisfied, because it means I'll never tell the authorities about
his contraband. Where else could I get a job?" He sighed. "But I
don't know how I'll get through this time." He poured another
round. "I haven't operated on anyone since my prison days, and
even then it didn't matter much whether my patients survived. I
don't have any instruments, just kitchen knives."
I laughed. I thought that was very funny. Surgery with a kitchen
knife! Hilarious! Which meant I was just about drunk enough.
When the time came, four crewmen seized my arms and legs
and tied me to a bunk. One of them looked at the doctor and his
setup and had to go on deck to heave his own digestion over the
side. But I was crazy wild drunk, not afraid at all, thinking it all
 
260
one big game. After all, I didn't have to do the surgery, or even
watch it. But just to be sure, they put a funnel in my mouth and
nearly drowned me in more rum. I remembered seeing an old man
tortured by being funneled full of water-but then some censor in
my brain clamped down and all my past was blank again.

Then I saw the knife, and abruptly I was sober. The doctor
was trying to sterilize the thing in the flame of a guttering candle.
It was a common vegetable paring knife, not large, but a terrible
vision. The doctor's hand was shaking.
But he had guts, because he came at my guts. I would have
bolted, but I was securely tied down, my abdomen exposed. The
blade sliced into my quivering flesh. I screamed and bridged.
"Don't do that!" he exclaimed, backing off as I felt the hot flow
of blood down my side. "You'll make me cut up your whole intestine!"
After that I screamed, but did not move my torso much. My
mind sheered off into the vivid remembrance of other pains, other
tortures, physical and mental. The time Kan-Sen put a thumbscrew
on me . . . Illunga half-castrating me with a kick to the
groin . . . Mirabal's electrodes shooting current through my
chest . . . Chiyako.
Chiyako-that was the worst of all. My beloved Chinese-
American fiancée, daughter of Shaolin kung fu, brutally killed before
my eyes by the savage Kill-13 addict. That pain never ceased;
only its encapsulation had permitted me to function normally.
I had a terrible spasm, and then I was unconscious again. There
was blood all over my belly, soaking the sheets beneath me. But
there was also a tremendous sense of peace flooding through me,
as though that blood were carrying away the horrors trapped in
my body. The awful pressure was gone; the gallstone-indeed, the
whole gall bladder-had been removed. Dazed-looking crewmen
were mopping the blood out of the site of surgery, eyes squinting
so that they did not have to look at any more of me than absolutely
necessary.
"Thanks, fellows," I said.
261
"We're not through this yet," the doctor warned me. "You're
bleeding like a stuck pig, and I haven't closed the incision."
"Want me to stop the bleeding?" I asked. I didn't seem to be
joking.
"Si, Señor," he agreed absently as he prepared his suture materials.
Sweat dripped from his forehead into the wound.
I concentrated. The bleeding slowed, then stopped. It was the
ki, come to help me in my hour of dire need.
The doc stared. "It's the DT's! he exclaimed. "I'm seeing that
wound close up by itself!"
"I see it too," a crewman said. "Maybe he's dead."
"Just sew it up," I snapped. "I don't know how long I can do
this."
"He doesn't sound dead," another crewman said, awed.
Clumsily, the doctor sewed. I don't know what he used-maybe
a sail-canvas stitching outfit. But I felt it drawing the wound shut.
At last he was done. The operation was a success! I passed out.
I woke hours later with a raging fever. The surgery had been
performed under septic conditions, and infection had set in. I had
merely exchanged one doom for another.
The pain of the knife is sharp. The pain of contamination is
dull. But the knife is soon finished, while the infection ravaged me
for days. I couldn't eat, could hardly move; I hacked weakly on the
bunk, lacking the strength to clear my congestion more strenuously.
My remaining flesh withered away. I had lost a good deal of
blood before my ki clamped down, and had little reserve energy.
Slowly I spiraled toward the nether terminus. There was nothing
the doctor could do; he had no penicillin or wonder drugs.
I saw the four-armed black goddess Kali, the face of death.
Then that face shattered like mud-plaster and revealed the skulllike
visage of Exu, the Voodoo Satan. He had put a curse on me,
and every detail of that curse had been fulfilled. Yet Exu was not
my ultimate enemy. The enemy I sought was-blank. That knowledge
had been wiped from my brain. Even the incipience of death

would not conjure that essential information.
 
262
Yet I would not let myself drift into that dark abyss. I had a
mission, transcendently important-that I could not remember. I
had to live, whatever sacrifice it took.
At last the dark tide turned. My fever peaked and dropped,
down a little more each day. I recovered some energy and appetite.
"I prayed for you," the doctor said. "Don't laugh."
"I'm not laughing." It was still an effort to speak. I knew he
had saved my life, however precariously.
"Or maybe it was for myself I prayed. But I didn't think you'd
make it."
"You're a good doctor."
He swore vehemently in Spanish. "A foul lie!" But he was
pleased. And my statement must have been true, because how
could a poor doctor have saved me despite being in an alcoholic
stupor?
We neared the coast of America. "We helped you," the captain
told me. "It was a favor to one who loves you. I do not know who.
But we must not let them find you aboard our ship. There would
be questions, a search." He spread his hands apologetically.
"I understand," I said. Indeed I did. A search would turn up
their contraband cargo. "I will remember nothing."
We shook hands. "Perhaps we shall meet again," he said, "when
memory is feasible."
Delicately put. "I hope so."
So they put me ashore in a small boat without lights, at night,
and left me standing on the beach. Silently the craft returned to
the night. I waved once, knowing they could not see the gesture.
Then my memory faded.
I turned and tramped toward the lights of the nearby city.
There was nothing else to do.
*
One evening Mr. Campbell did not show up, and neither did
any of the girls. The thing about working with such people was
263
that they were less aggressive and more careful than the strong
young men. This meant that I didn't get exhausted to the point of
pain, or get hurt taking hard falls. It seemed to take forever for
injuries to heal, and it was very easy to re-injure the same places
before healing was complete. So my effective choices were either to
drop out of judo, or to work with those who didn't hurt me. Because
there was so much to learn, and skill took more practice than
muscle, I stayed in and practiced carefully. Slowly I was learning
to take better falls, though they frankly scared me, and I was mastering
the names of the techniques.
Tonight I knew I was in for it. The luck of random selection
matched me with a husky yellow belt named Jeff, seventeen or
eighteen years old, and we started with matwork. No way could I
match his strength; it took him about fifteen seconds to put me in
the kami-shiho-gatame or smothering hold, and it was aptly named.
His chest was pressing my head into the mat, and it was all I could
do to breathe. My struggles were useless; he seemed to weigh three
hundred pounds, and to be anchored by metal bolts driven into
the foundation. Might as well try to lift the building!
"Try to break the hold," Jeff told me, unconsciously adding
insult to injury. What did he think I was doing?
After a time he let me go. "You put the hold on me," he said.
So I put it on him, sliding my forearms under his shoulders from
above and gripping his belt. I shoved my chest down on his face
and clung so tight he'd never get out. Let him smother a while!
"Ready?"
He hadn't noticed my hold? He was teasing me. "Yes."

And he simply rolled over sidewise, and I was on the bottom
again. "You didn't spread your legs," he explained. "You had no
side stability."
Another forgotten detail! Why did it come so easily to him,
and so hard to me? Yet he was only a yellow belt. What did it take
to get beyond that?
"Where's Mr. Campbell?" I gasped when I was too exhausted
to make even a show of resistance. Oh, the resiliency of youth!
 
264
"Didn't you hear? He fell off the roof of his house, sawing a
branch from a tree. Broke his arm in three places. He's in the
hospital."
"Oh, no!" I exclaimed, almost as concerned for myself as for
Mr. Campbell. If I had to work much longer with Jeff, my arm
would get broken in three places. Or feel like it, anyway.
Right then I decided to undertake a program of exercise, for
self defense. Against judo class workouts. I could no longer depend
on someone like Mr. Campbell to throw me gently. I had to
be able to take a hard fall, or to prevent my opponent from throwing
me. At the moment I could do neither.
"Line up," Steve said. "Uchikomis, loading practice."
Uh-oh. If there was one thing worse than matwork, it was
loading practice. Because we didn't just load one or two times;
we'd do twenty five loads in quick succession, then twenty five
more with another technique, and so on, until our gis were sopping
with sweat and we were staggering like drunken folk.
Jeff had to go show a new student the breakfalls, so I was alone
again. I had only moments to take any partner available-and the
only one free happened to be little Penny.
You'd think it would be an unequal match, a grown man and
a six year old braid-headed girl. Yes indeed, but not quite as expected.
We loaded ippon seoi nage, the one-arm back-carry throw.
She just grabbed my arm and leaned forward; no trouble at all for
her as she was not tall enough to take any of my weight. But when
it was my turn, I had to squat down almost to the mat, in order to
get under her arm. She thought it was great fun, by my legs were
killing me.
Steve walked by. "It's good for you," he said. Yeah, sure; that's
what they used to say about cod liver oil and tetanus shots.
But maybe Steve had mercy, because then he had us change
partners. Some more people had come in; I hadn't seen them, but
how could I see anything with a face full of sweat and waves of
pain radiating from my knees? Penny got someone closer to her
size, which pleased her not at all, and so did I.
265
"O soto gari!" Steve announced, and started counting off that
impossible rapid Japanese cadence. "Sho! Ni! San! Yon! Go!" My
new partner swing into it without seeming difficulty while I took
my turn as dummy. I mean, as Uke. "Roku! Shi!" Twenty fine pulls
and sweeps, just like that.
"Other partner," Steve called, reminding me of a square dance.
Some of those exercises were indeed like dances, especially when
we had to move around in semi-randori style and alternate techniques.
I imagined music playing, couples circulating, only instead
of "swing your partner" it was "throw your partner." Might
be possibilities there!
In o soto gari you step out to Uke's right side, swing your right
foot up behind him, then sweep it back, knocking his right leg out
from under while you smack him down with good shoulder contact
and a yank on his right arm. It is a very effective throw if you
can ever get into position for it. In competition, Uke never lets you
get close enough. But in loading practice, he's not resisting, of
course; you sweep your foot back to the side of his foot so as not to

throw him, and give a good hard shoulder or chest-to-chest thunk.
Well, I tried it. I didn't do everything right the first time, of
course; I never do. I stepped across, swung my leg out, looked
down to see if I was doing it properly, and saw my partner's belt.
Up until now I had just sort of blissfully rested, eyes half closed,
while Tori buffeted me. You get that way in uchikomis pactice,
kind of shell shocked. So I hadn't actually looked at my partner.
The belt was black.
I blinked, faltering in mid effort. The film of sweat over my
eyeballs must've distorted my perception of a green belt. Gave me
a scare, there for a moment. I looked again, and it was definitely,
shockingly black, with a white stripe through it.
Now black belts are rather like the officer corps in the military;
they don't mix much with the peons. The only black belt I'd
seen was Steve. What was this one doing here? And why the added
decoration of the stripe?
Well, I was stuck in the middle of loading practice. I had to
 
266
carry through. But suddenly I had the shakes, knowing how utterly
clumsy I was. Now it was important that I do it right, somehow.
Step to side, sweep with leg, pull down with left hand, shove
with right hand, smack shoulder to shoulder, thunk!
Lo and behold, I did it right. Desperation must have given me
temporary skill. Only my shoulder contact was not a hard, bony
smack; it was more of a right chest to right chest collision that felt
wrong. I tried at again, and again it was wrong, more of a cushiony
contact. What was the matter?
I studied the situation, amidst the repeated loadings. Slowly
it came to me, despite the present dullness of my mind. I was
doing it more or less right, but my partner had a very soft chest
under the gi. In fact my partner was a woman.
A female black belt? I must be dreaming! I wasn't even sure
such things existed, and certainly they didn't do loading practice
with male white belts like me!
At last the count stopped; maybe Steven's voice was getting
tired. Breathless as I was, I still didn't want it ended. What in the
world could I say to my partner-"nice day"? Matter of fact, it
wasn't a nice day; it was night and it was raining. The water was
sluicing down the window panes.
"O goshi!" Steve cried. Nope, he hadn't lost his voice. Pity.
There was a crack of thunder almost overhead, and the lights
went out. It was a real storm!
Now it was pitch black in the dojo. There wasn't much to do
except wait it out; no doubt the power would return in a few
minutes. I had read that central Florida was the thunder and lightning
capital of the nation: more noisy weather here than anywhere
else. Could be; here was some evidence.
"How do you do?" my partner inquired. Her voice was low,
and for me it had an oddly suggestive quality. It must have been
the notion of a female black belt. I had worked out with female
white belts and yellow belts, one of each, but they were more or
less on my level. A black belt-obviously she had had a hell of a lot
of judo experience, though she didn't t an older than I. And a hell
267
of a lot of skill; I had felt her easy competence during the loading,
now that I thought back on it. I had in my innocence supposed
that only Steve did such things so well they seemed natural, but
probably it was a quality of all black belts. The thought of a young
woman with all that skill did something funny to me. What other
skills might she have?
"Are you there?" she inquired with the hint of a smile in her
voice. Obviously I was here physically; she had hold of my lapel.
"Uh, hello, I'm Caesar," I mumbled, embarrassed. What was I

doing, thinking like that about a woman I hardly knew? Who was
like an officer, while I was a lowly recruit.
"So it's Caesar, now," she murmured.
"What?" It almost seemed as if she knew me.
"I'm Susan."
Even a female name! Yet what had I expected, a Martian name?
Now I was aware of her presence in more subtle ways. She was hot,
too, after the exercise, but she wasn't drippingly sweaty as I was.
She gave off a gentle glow of warmth, and she smelled nice. The
darkness prevented me from looking at her, so I was more aware of
the non-visual aspects. Somehow they made her seem twice as
feminine as before. Of course I hadn't even noticed her gender at
first.
Still the lights did not come on. There were noises of impatience
around the hall, but I was hardly aware of them. Underneath
all my amnesia and inexperience I discovered that I was still
a male. This warm closeness in the dark, this alarming but exciting
concept of a female black belt who just might have known me
from somewhere before-no, I must have misheard or misinterpreted.
I tried to keep my thoughts in line, but I kept remembering
the feel of those o soto gari chest contacts, too soft.
"Let's finish the uchikomis," she suggested.
"In the dark?" I asked dully.
"Judo is balance and feel. You don't need to see." And she
stepped into me, put her arm around my waist, leaned forward
and lifted me off my feet.
 
268
Startled, I almost flailed the air. But she set me dawn again
with complete control. Then she swing into another o-goshi. At
first I was amazed at her strength, then I became aware of the fine
balance and limberness of her body. She could lift me because she
was doing the technique correctly, in contrast to my efforts. That
way it required very little brute strength.
"You try a few," she murmured.
"Okay." What else was there to do? I stepped into her, too
close, in the dark. She was almost as tall as I. "Sorry."
She did not deign to acknowledge my obvious clumsiness,
which made me feel even more awkward. If only this was some
other venue than judo!
I backed off and tried again. I stepped across, slid my right
arm around her waist, bent my knees, turned away, and lifted. Up
she came; she was feather light.
"Very good," she said. It was a verbal pat on the head. Had I
been a dog I would have wagged my tail. I felt like doing it anyway.
What do you know: I could do o goshi in the dark. Maybe
better than in daylight. I put her down, then tried it again. That
gave me a chance to note other details, such as the pleasing swell of
her hip as my hand slid across, and the supple accommodation of
her body to my effort. I had been able to lift her because she
cooperated perfectly. A white belt would not have known how,
especially in the dark. The lack of loading sounds elsewhere in the
dojo suggested that the yellow and orange belts were similarly
challenged.
I lifted her again-and it didn't work. "You have to bend your
knees," Susan reminded me.
Damn! I always forgot one of those details when I didn't concentrate.
She had corrected me exactly in the manner of any other
instructor. Right when I wanted to think of her in some other
vogue. I was probably blushing, hoping the light did not come
back on right now.
I tried once more, bending my knees-but this time my bal-
269
ance was all off, and instead of drawing her up, I fell back into her,

my head banging into her chest. Fortunately it was not a hard
landing; she was female, all right.
"Let me show you," she said, unperturbed. She must have had
eons of practice dealing with duffers like me. "Draw on Uke's right
lapel, bringing him off-balance. Duck down low, bring him close
across your hip, then straighten your knees." She demonstrated,
her posterior rising to catch me across the crotch.
The complete darkness made me dependent on touch, and
hyper-aware of bodily contact. There was something about that
smooth lifting pressure in that area by that pneumatic derriere. I
knew it wasn't supposed to happen in Judo, but I suffered a specific
reaction. It was necessary that we stop this practice before
that reaction became rigidly evident. I opened my mouth-
The lights came on. "O goshi!" Steve called immediately. And
Susan proceeded to load twenty five o goshis in rapid order, every
one perfect, every one catching me right where it counted. Ooooh!
*
My exercise program went reasonably well. The first time I
did pushups at home, I almost made it to nine, which was better
than I expected. Judo must have built me up some already. I found
a child's swing in the yard and did chins: the first three weren't
bad, but the fourth was uncomfortable, and I barely made the
fifth. My arms remained fatigued for an hour or more after each
exercise. I also did squat jumps, and fell over after twelve, my legs
knotting in agony. And sit-ups-after the twentieth the pain in
my stomach was so bad I had to quit.
But my body responded. Every three or four days I found
myself able to do another chin, and I recovered more rapidly from
the effort. In about six weeks I made it to fifteen, with the other
exercises increasing similarly. My weight increased, and it wasn't
fat; one day I stepped on the scales and discovered to my amazement
that I had gained thirty pounds. I still couldn't match Jeff in
 
270
matwork, but I could hold my own against women, children, and
white belts.
But meanwhile I was still learning things in class. One day I
worked with a big brown belt named Bo. We were doing randori,
but I had absolutely no chance to throw him. Yet he could throw
me without seeming effort; in fact, I seemed to throw myself. He
didn't actually throw me, knowing I was afraid of falls; he'd just
load me.
"How come I have so much trouble, while you do it so easily?"
I asked him, frustrated. "I know you outweigh me, and you're a
brown belt, but I can't even turn in for a throw unless you let me,
and can't perform it anyway."
"Kuzushi," he said.
"God bless you."
He smiled. "Kuzushi. You move your opponent about,
offbalancing him. That way he sets himself up for your technique.
Like this." And he guided me around with so natural an imperative
that it seemed pointless-until I found myself straddling his
leg in an o uchi gari reap. He had hardly moved; I had walked right
into it.
"Kuzushi," I repeated with new appreciation.
One day a new student came: a man about my own age. He
had no partner and looked lost in his brand new gi. I well remembered
the feeling, so I went up to work with him. I showed him
some of the breakfalls and talked him through the ippon seoi nage
throw the way Vonnie had done for me with o goshi. He was amazed
to discover that it worked; he had actually done a throw! And I was
able to take the fall all right because I knew he couldn't throw me
hard.
He was Mr. Taylor, and he made his living selling potato chips.

He became a regular judo student. I had a partner again.
Chapter 4:
Roofer's Affair
But much of my judo was no longer in the dojo. Because Susan,
the black belt, took an interest in me. Why, I had no idea. She
had an almost boyish figure, with small breasts and comparatively
lean muscular body, large hands and feet, but she was undeniably
feminine, with ample posterior and thighs. She was bronzed by
the sun and exuded health. A woman like her could have her pick
of black belts, and I was a stumbling white belt. But there it was.
Had I known what she had in store for me, I might have walked
out the moment she first entered the dojo. Then again, maybe
not. I'm a man, after all, and men are traditionally foolish about
women. It's in the job description.
She came to the club several times, and always worked with
me. Though her demeanor and judo were always proper, there was
something entirely female about her that always stimulated me
embarrassingly, and she could hardly have been ignorant of the
effect. Maybe it intrigued her.
I was a lonely man without a past, only a lot of fantastic dreams.
Here was an attractive woman showing an inexplicable interest in
me. How would any man in my situation have reacted?
 
272
So when she invited me to come help her on a weekend chore,
I accepted. It would give me a chance to know her better, and who
could say how far it might go? After all the suggestion of the judo
practice, I really wanted to find out the reality.
Saturday morning I reported to her address, and a princely
estate it was. She was evidently rich. But she didn't invite me in;
she had her car out front, a sporty Mercedes-Benz. It seemed that
the chore was not at her home. She was wearing a man's shirt,
some kind of tight brown riding pants, and boots. She looked
good in them; the pants molded the buttocks and the rest just
seemed to suit her.
We drove north out of town, the car purring like a contented
tiger. Half an hour passed without arrival. "How far are we going?"
I inquired.
"That depends on you."
What did she mean by that? I hesitated to ask for a clarification,
so was silent another half hour. Now we were well out of
town, in fact out of the county, still proceeding north at a good
clip.
She pulled into a drive-in eatery. "This is where the chore is?"
I inquired dubiously.
"No. This is where we get a bite to eat. It's a long drive."
I shrugged. "Just so long as we're back by dark. My landlady
worries."
She gave me a sidelong glance. "We may be. But you're a big
boy now. What'll you have?"
"Tell you in a minute." I struggled to get my wallet out of my
back pocket, which was hard to do with the seat belt holding me
securely down. I wasn't sure how much money I had, but knew it
wasn't much.
"My treat," she said with a smile. "I'm well off."
She must be. Her house had been palatial, and the car was an
import of luxury, not economy.
The carhop came up. Susan rattled off an order for hot dogs,
potato sticks, onion rings, and milk shakes, to go.
273
So we ate while driving, me handing her things as she needed
them. "Uh, if you have so much money," I began, balancing this
and that on my knees.
"Why do I gobble cheap food on the run?" she finished. She

sucked on her straw, swallowed, then continued. "Because at home
I can't get away with this. My cook would die of shock; she's a
nutrition nut. I get so tired of formal meals. This is the only chance
I have to eat on the run. Fun, isn't it?"
"I guess so. Just where are you taking me? or am I allowed to
know?"
"To my little cabin in the wood. To tack down the roof."
"Oh." So she had a satellite estate, as it were. Well, why not?
She could evidently afford it.
Susan hummed a tune as she chewed on onion rings that I
dipped in catsup for her. Surely an abomination to her fastidious
cook! The melody sounded half familiar, but I couldn't place it.
Probably it dated from my prior life, wherever that had been.
Then suddenly it came: "To the Woodland!" I exclaimed.
She glanced my way, raising an eyebrow in the way she had.
"You remember it?"
I pieced it out. "To the woodland-far away-longs my heart
forever. To the woodland longs my heart-This no man can sever.
In the woodland far away-there lives my darling loved one."
"Why Caesar, I didn't know you cared!"
I felt the heat of embarrassment coming to my face. "You were
humming it, not me."
"You don't care? I could have sworn otherwise when we did o
goshi in the dojo."
The bitch. She had been aware of my predicament, and now
in perfect judo style had brought me down by pushing in one
direction until I resisted, then abruptly reversing. "What is your
interest in me?" I demanded, partly to cover my shame. The truth
was, I would have liked to do with her as I had dreamed I did with
a jungle harem, but such thoughts could never see light. She was
playing with me.
 
274
"Oh, you remind me of someone I once knew."
Or was it possible that she had known me before? Then why
tease me instead of telling me? "Who?"
"All in good time."
I gave it up. She had me pretty much dancing on a string, and
knew it. I had to let her play her little game, because she might
have at least two things I desperately wanted. The second thing
was knowledge of my past.
In due course we entered Citrus County, Florida. The almostlevel
ground had given way to gentle hills, and now these hills
became more pronounced, and I liked that better. I must have
lived in hilly county, when I was myself.
At last we turned onto a gravel road, that gave way to sand,
then dirt, then grass, and finally to forest leaves. We bumped uphill
to a wooden cabin, about twelve feet by twenty four feet, set
on concrete blocks. Sure enough, its roof was blank knotty plywood,
with only the lower portions shingled.
"I don't think we can finish that today," I said dubiously.
"There are sleeping bags inside."
So I was to spend the night with her. Yet how much did I dare
presume?
"Here are the shingles," Susan said, indicating a pile on the
north side. "There are hammer and nails inside. Why don't you
start in on the roof, and I'll see what I can do about supper."
There was so much domestic suggestion in this setup that I
dared not let my imagination roam. I donned the workman's apron
she gave me, filled its pocket with roofing nails, took a hammer,
set the ladder and climbed up.
"You'll need more than that," she cautioned me. "Better take
up the box, and some shingles." So I ferried up the shingles, perching
them near the edge of the upper slope, just within reach from

the top of the ladder.
The Cabin was fourteen feet tall at the roof-ridge, and it stood
from one to two feet above the ground, depending on which side
of the hill I looked. That may not sound like much, but I discov-
275
ered when I reached the upper rungs that I was nervous about
heights. The roof had two slopes, like an old fashioned barn; the
outer one was steep, so that the ladder leaned against it, and the
inner one was only about thirty degrees off the level. But the ladder
did not reach quite up to the bend. So I had to go to the very
top rung and scramble up over the ridge, onto the slanting upper
surface, and it felt precarious as hell. Suppose the ladder slipped
out from under? Suppose I lost my balance?
Well, Susan was watching, so I grasped what courage I had
and scrambled up.
I made it, but I wasn't sure how I'd get down again. The slant
had looked almost level from below, but now it seemed dangerously
steep. I could not see beyond the bend in the roof; it looked
like a sheer drop-off. Wherever I set my feet and hands-and I
dared not get off all fours-that slant seemed to be shoving them
and me toward the dread edge.
"Start with the felt," she called from somewhere far below.
"Felt what?" I yelled back. For there wasn't anything to feel up
here, except nervous.
"The felt. The roll-roofing material."
Oh. Not felt as in feel, but felt as in hat. The tar paper. I had
a pre-cut segment up here with my pile of shingles. It was supposed
to go down first, under the shingles. Cushioning them,
maybe. I was learning to be a roofer.
I crawled to the end of the cabin with the roll. This was worse
yet: fifteen feet straight down. It was a horrifying, dizzy height. If
I fell-
Then a little gust of wind passed.
I hugged the roof, sprawled on my belly, my feet straddling
the peak. Oh, that wind tugging at me! It seemed like a hurricane
blowing me to doom. Oh, sure, I knew it was just a baby wind, a
zephyr, nothing to take seriously. But my feeling didn't believe
that.
So how did I move about now? Well, I did push-ups. Up, drag
 
276
knees along, down; up, knees, down. Suddenly my judo exercise
program had relevance to real life.
I flattened an end of the felt and tacked it down with a nail.
Ouch! Naturally I hit a finger.
Then I hooked one leg over the roof-ridge to counterbalance
the upper part of my body, lest I slide head-first off the roof. I
knew there really wasn't that much danger of sliding; had the roof
been one foot off the ground, I'd have walked upright readily. But
my fear did not abate. I scraped elbows, belly, ad knees doing it
the hard way. The only way for me.
If I had ever thought to impress Susan, I had certainly managed
to torpedo that. But the fact was, if she had been up there
with me, naked, I would still have had more concern for the dropoff
than for her. This exposed roof really had my number.
At last I got the felt tacked down. Now I started on the shingles.
They might look small from a distance, but up close they were
yard-long sections impregnated with ground stone on one side,
half green, half brown. And they were stuck together. They had
dabs of tar in the centers, so as to glue down the roof when the
heat of the sun struck them. Oh, yes, there was heat; I felt it now,
wafting up from the roof, bathing me, making me sweat.
I wrenched off the first shingle in the pile. It gave way suddenly,
giving me one hell of a fall-scare. After that I pried them

loose, carefully. As with judo, these seemingly simple things had
to be done just right, or there were consequences. I went to work
laying and hammering, placing each row so that it was staggered,
the edges of the shingles lining up horizontally but not vertically.
That was so rain could not find a crevice straight past the layers.
The job would have been tedious if I hadn't been so scared. I
might get this job done, somehow, but I'd never make a professional
roofer.
For an hour I laid down shingles, and I got about a quarter of
the job done. My right forearm was numbing with fatigue, because
I wasn't used to hammering, but I was no good with my left.
I made a mental note: practice hammering left handed, just in
277
case I ever needed to do this again, so that one hand could spell
the other. I had some scrapes on my knuckles from the sharp bits
of rock in the shingles. But I dragged on.
I finished another row, crawled back for the next shingle and a
reload of nails-and saw something skitter inside the nail box. A
bug of some kind, probably a roach. Something gave me a feeling
of deja vu; I remembered a roach from somewhere-crawling up a
divinely shaped leg? I was peering up under a skirt, seeing that
roach, and hearing the weird beat of fantastic music.
Ridiculous! What would I be doing on the floor, looking up
some dancing girl's leg? Male erotic fantasy of the kind I already
had too much of. I needed reality, not fantasy.
Well, I didn't like roaches. I wanted this one out of my nails. I
picked up the box and shook it. Out tumbled a scorpion.
It was only a little one, not much over an inch long. But the
sight of it gave me an ugly shock. Suppose I had put my hand on
it, grabbing blindly for nails? The sting of a scorpion, I knew from
somewhere, could kill. Maybe this little one wouldn't be fatal, but
the pain might send me toppling off the roof.
The scorpion hid behind the box. That was no good; I didn't
want to share the roof with it at all, and I certainly didn't want it
back in the nails. I twisted about awkwardly and shoved the box
with one foot.
The scorpion was gone.
Where was it? I hadn't seen it go inside the box, but it wasn't
outside either. Had it fallen off the roof? I didn't wish that fate on
it, though it probably could survive the fall better than I could.
Maybe slid under a shingle? Poor thing; I bore it no malice, I just
didn't want its company. Now how could I put my hand in the
box, not being sure?
"Something the matter?" Susan called. "You stopped hammering."
"Uh, nothing," I called back, ashamed to admit my timidity.
"Just tired." That was at least a half truth.
"You sure? You sound shaken."
 
278
Maybe the truth would do. "There's a scorpion."
"Ignore it; the local ones are harmless."
That information helped somewhat. "Thanks."
"Better get the felt up over the ridge before it rains," she advised.
"Get the crack covered over."
Rain? I looked at the sky. Huge gray/black clouds loomed to
the south. A storm, certainly.
I scrambled to unroll the felt. I still had a few nails in my
apron; they would do to tack it down. I bent the felt lengthwise
across the ridge and banged in several nails, then began unrolling.
There was an ominous swishing through the trees, as of a gale
approaching. A light spattering of raindrops fell. God, those southern
storms blew up fast!
I unrolled some more and hammered feverishly. I had to get it
down before the real rain hit.

But as I neared the far end, a big gust came. It whipped across
the roof, tugging at me, making me cower spread-eagled across the
ridge, my fingers scratching for purchase that wasn't there. I had a
mental picture of a mountain climber clinging to a near-vertical
face of rock a mile above the canyon, his fingers sliding as the
hurricane force wind savaged him. Sure my situation wasn't anywhere
near that bad, but that was the image. Imagination is marvelous
stuff.
The felt I had just tacked ripped out. It sailed past me. My
body was weighting down one part of it, but somehow I got off it.
I didn't want to be carried along with it. The whole roll rolled off
the roof. There was a pause, and then I heard the solid thunk as it
hit the ground. There, but for the grace of God-
Now the rain sluiced down in earnest. The entire roof became
slick. The wind buffeted me, not satisfied with the roll of felt. I
couldn't stay up here, but how could I get down? I couldn't even
see the ladder, assuming it remained in place. If I started down to
find it, and it wasn't there, I might not be able to halt my slide
down the steeper outer roof. I'd got to the ground with or without
the ladder.
279
"Over here!" Susan cried. She stood outside, getting splendidly
wet. She was not a large breasted woman, but her soaked
blouse clung to what she had, giving it perfect definition. A view
to remember. But I was here, and she was there, and I had another
concern at the moment: protecting my body.
"I can't get down!" I cried despairingly, knowing I lied; if this
storm got any worse I'd come down regardless, maybe headfirst.
"The ladder's here," she yelled, pointing. "Slide your feet down
toward it."
"I can't see it!"
"I'll tell you where. Trust me."
Shivering with more than cold, I twisted around and let my
feet slide over the bend. My fingers had no purchase; my whole
body began an inexorable slide, exactly as I had feared.
"Go right!" she cried. "Right!"
I pushed over my right foot, and felt nothing. My hands were
leaving the ridge, slipping in water. No traction; I could not return.
"It's right below you! Another inch!"
I dropped that inch-I had no choice-and my toe felt the
top of the ladder. It began to slide sidewise under my thrust. "Hold
it in place!" I screamed.
She held it. The ladder firmed. I slid down, my left foot finding
the second rung. Now I had support. But not until I got down
far enough to put my hand on the rung did I relax, and then not
much.
I stepped to the ground at last, and Susan was there, and we
fell into each other's arms. She was cold and wet, like me, and her
once elegantly coiffured hair straggled in dark rat-tails, but to me
she was warm and lovely and wonderful to hold.
"Let's get the hell inside," she said.
That was right: it was still raining. I had forgotten for the
moment, secure in her embrace. We disengaged and got inside.
Now the rain abated somewhat, having done its damage.
"This will never do," Susan said. "Get your clothes off."
 
280
"But-"
"Think I want you dripping all over the furniture?" she demanded.
Actually there was no furniture to speak of, just piles of
building supplies and boxes of this and that, and drips were descending
from the rafters. But it seemed to make sense at the time.
A lot of things make sense when you're shivering wet and nervous,
that don't add up when you're warm and dry and confident.

Still, I dawdled a bit. Susan gave a little sniff of disgust and
unbuttoned my shirt, stripped it off me, and wrung it out over a
bucket. I took off my shoes and poured them into the same container.
A lot of water had descended from the cloud in those few
minutes.
"Now the pants," she insisted.
"You're wet too," I pointed out.
"So I am." And she called my bluff by emerging from her own
blouse and skirt. She was slender, but fairly solid around the hips,
with firm thighs. The higher grades of judo tend to have strong
legs.
I took down my trousers, still feeling awkward as hell, and
stood in my underpants. I remembered the o-goshi loading, fearing
a similar embarrassment, and of course the very thought mad
it start to happen.
"Oh, come on," Susan said, unsnapping her wet bra.
"Everything's soaking."
Her breasts, like the height of the roof and the force of the
wind, were more impressive up close. Some generous-busted women
are overly padded elsewhere; Susan was lean enough so that nothing
detracted from what she did have. In fact, a slender woman
can be the very essence of sex appeal. It was certainly true in this
case. Her judo practice and skill gave a her a certain healthy grace
even when she was standing still. Despite my discomfort, I found
the situation extremely suggestive.
I didn't dare take off my underpants.
She fetched a towel from somewhere and began to dry me off.
281
"You've certainly lost a lot of weight, Jason," she murmured as she
rubbed my shoulders. "What happened to you?"
Actually I had gained weight recently, but I must have had
more before my amnesia. "I'm don't know. I'm an amnesiac; my
life dates back to only a few days before I started class. I think I
had an operation or something. There's a scar on my body, and I
was pretty thin."
"You don't remember anything?"
"Well, sometimes I think I remember, but the stuff is so fantastic
it makes no sense at all. Once I dreamed I was a black belt in
judo."
"Well, it happens." She dried my legs. Her touch in that region
did nothing to alleviate my condition.
"Another time I dreamed I was making love to-" I broke off,
and not only because of the delicacy of the subject. Susan had just
tugged down my underpants, without warning.
She eyed the result, which was impressive at this stage. "It
happens," she repeated, seeming pleased rather than shocked. She
brought up the towel to dry the remainder, paying special attention
to what was most in evidence. If I had thought o goshi was
bad . . .
Abruptly she stopped. "There's sleeping bags in the loft.
Come."
I had been about to, but perhaps not the way she meant.
Then again, maybe that was what she meant.
She climbed the ladder to the loft, and I followed, getting an
excellent view of that comparatively plush posterior of hers. No
view in the world like that! Again I had a fleeting memory of looking
up such legs. Had it been anticipation instead?
She glanced down at me, catching me looking. "Let's do it,"
she said as she cleared the ladder.
There were, indeed, sleeping bags spread out. She lay on top,
sunny side up, and I grabbed her, burying my face in those breasts.
Then I slid up to get on top of her. Nature took over; I climaxed
 
282

before I had even completed entry, which subtracted somewhat
from the experience.
She squinted at me. "Where'd you practice lovemaking? In the
Amazon jungle?
Amazon jungle! Could that have been where? It almost seemed
so. But I didn't say that. "Sorry. Did I hurt you?" Yet she was
clearly no virgin.
"That's not the point. As with a judo throw, you have to consider
your partner too."
I paused, not knowing what she meant. But she showed me.
She talked with me for a little while, explaining that women, too,
had sex drives, but that their expressions of them differed from
that of the male. More care had to be taken, the preliminary moves
done correctly, like turning in, placing the feet and hands, bending
the knees, and lifting for an o goshi. Art, rather than force, or it
fouled up. It was a good discussion, and I realized I had blundered.
Just as I did so often in judo.
But she was not condemning me, merely educating me. She
made her points delicately, without affront. Then she showed me
how. She stroked me, just so, and I turned on. Then I stroked her
similarly, getting it right, and despite the classroom nature of the
lesson, I saw that she was turning on too. Do a thing right, and it
works, regardless. She turned to her side, her back to me, and
guided my body and hand. Oh, that posterior! And so I remembered
that there was more than one direction from which to approach
a given destination, and that some positions are better than
others, when both parties are considered.
Because I had shot my wad the first time, there was less urgency
about the rerun. I was able to stimulate her in the way she
needed, as long as she required, and when she slowly worked into
her own climax I was ready to match it. Had to match it; her
pulsing interior would not be denied. And you know, it was much
better this time, not only for her but for me. I had learned something
valuable.
And in retrospect, my dream of the jungle harem seemed lu-
283
dicrous, for a whole new set of reasons. I had never even thought of
how the girls might feel about the matter. I had supposed I was
performing heroically, when in fact I had short-circuited the real
potential of the act. I hoped I would remember this lesson, next
time I dreamed of a harem.
*
We had cold bean sandwiches for supper; the rain had made
an outdoor fire impossible, and there was no electricity or gas.
When this rich girl roughed it, she went all the way, so to speak.
But I was hungry, and beans and milk from a thermos were delicious.
We took an evening walk out in the forest, marred only by the
barbed sandspurs that kept sticking to our legs. Our clothing was
still wet, so we went naked, like true children of nature; there was
no one here to see. And what is so indecent about such exposure?
There is nothing so beautiful as the unadorned human body in
good health. If you ask me, the indecency is merely in the minds
of those who scream about indecent exposure. But of course my
opinion wasn't worth much; I had, pretty close, been born yesterday.
About a quarter mile to the east there was an old railroad cut,
with three tracks running through a man-made chasm forty feet
from top to bottom. Much higher than the cabin roof, but it didn't
bother me despite the steepness of the slope. All in the perspective,
I suppose. We climbed down and up the other side, scrambling
four legged like animals, and I flipped down a little clod of
dirt that hit her on the left breast, and she chased me until we
both got grounded by the ubiquitous sandspurs. By then it was all
the way dark, and we limped back to the cabin.
We slept naked in the bag. I was so tired I conked right out,

believe it or not, before my hand got much farther than her left
breast. (She had washed the dirt off it.) As with everything else,
multiple sex sounds great from a distance, but in practice it be-
 
284
comes too difficult to be worthwhile. I know that's not the way
the male magazines would have it, but I wonder how many of
their writers and editors have actually tried it? An endless hunger
is generally endless because it is unsatisfied, not vice versa.
The last thing I remember before I faded out was belated confusion:
what was the name she had called me, earlier, as we undressed?
She had told me I had lost weight, which meant she must
have known me before. What had she called me? My fogged brain
would not bring it back, and I didn't care to inquire directly. I
feared she would get angry at the slip, and refuse to make love
again. I did not want to risk that. Tonight I was sated, but what of
tomorrow? Whereupon I slept.
In the middle of the night it rained again. I had not gotten the
felt to stay over the ridge, and so the roof leaked. Drip, drip-
right onto our double sleeping bag.
Susan woke up and said something unladylike. She scrambled
out and found a poncho in the dark; I felt her body sliding past
me. We spread the poncho over the sleeping bag so that the drips
ran off.
Now I had been recharged somewhat by sleep, and my interest
in her body was renewed. I ran my hands over her breasts,
stomach, and thighs, growing more excited. She murmured appreciatively.
Slow and mutually fulfilling-yes, that was the way.
And would you believe, I fell asleep again before coming to
the point. I think I heard her chuckle in my dreams. The white
belt had muffed another technique despite the cooperation of the
black belt. That's one thing that really gets me, in retrospect. There
was absolutely no excuse!
I woke before dawn, needing to relieve myself outside. I slid
out, found the ladder, went down quietly, and opened the door.
The night air was chill on my bare skin, but not too bad. I moved
out from the cabin, looked up between the trees, and saw the
stars.
They were magnificent. They shone like diamonds in the
cleared, washed sky, so many there was no counting them. I saw
285
the three bright lights of Orion's Belt, and up to the north the Big
Dipper. That exhausted my knowledge of the constellations, but I
must have stood for ten minutes admiring the splendor of the
heavens. It was an experience that reached right into my being. I
almost forgot to do what I had come to do.
When I returned, Susan was awake. "Now you hold the fort
while I go out," she said. Which set me back a bit; like many men,
I had sort of thought that women got along without natural functions.
It's that pedestal we put them on; we want them to be sexy
but nothing else.
As dawn came, I tried to get a fire going in the crude stone
hearth outside, but the wet wood made the effort as frustrating as
my latter sexual ones. So we had cold cereal and milk, and it was
really quite adequate.
"Oops, I forgot!" she said. "I have a bag of charcoal. Pour a
little kerosene on it from the lamp and get it started; we need a fire
to dry out our clothes."
So we had a fire of sorts after all, an almost flameless one that
we shrouded in hung clothing. With luck the sun would also be
out soon, and would help.
Meanwhile, that roofing job remained unfinished. I took a
look at the ladder, and realized that I had lost the courage to go up
again. Oh, I tried, but the moment I put a hand on the rung, I

thought of Mr. Campbell, falling from his roof and breaking his
arm in three places. If I went up again-
I went back inside, disheartened. "I haven't got the nerve," I
said, expecting to get bawled out. She had, in a fashion, already
paid me, and now I was reneging on the job. "I can't go up again.
I know the roof needs doing."
"Take it easy," she said. "When that felt thunked down last
night in the storm, for a moment I thought it was you. I could
never have forgiven myself. I was just glad to get you safely down."
"I'm a coward," I said glumly, not much cheered by her understanding
attitude. "I came here to help you do a job, and I can't
do it."
 
286
"You did a job," she said, smiling.
"Damn it, I'm going up!" I exclaimed, turning about. I went
to the ladder, put hands and feet on it, ascended-and balked at
the second run from the top. The nerve was drained out of me;
fifteen feet was too long a fall to contemplate. The stupidity of it
made me almost as mad as the fact of failure.
Then I had a small inspiration. I descended and approached
Susan. "Throw me," I told her.
"What?" She was washing dishes with a sponge and Kleenex-
another thing her cook would have bawled her out for.
"Three feet to a mat is nothing compared to fifteen feet to the
ground. I'd much rather take a controlled judo fall than an uncontrolled
roof fall. Throw me."
Bemused, she spread out the sleeping bags and threw me. I
took an imperfect fall, and bounced up. "It didn't hurt me!" I
exclaimed, rubbing my shoulder where it hurt, some. "Throw me
again."
"Here he has me alone in the woods," she muttered, "naked,
miles from help, and what does he want? To be thrown."
I had forgotten: we were still naked. But it didn't matter. She
threw me again with the ippon seoi nage, one of the few throws that
will work naked, and it was evident that I had lost much of my
fear. Whenever I started to worry, I visualized that roof, and that
made it all right. I had conquered another hurdle, of a sort.
After that I made myself useful working on the foundations,
mixing concrete and troweling it into the stacked concrete blocks
on which the cabin perched. The work was tedious but worthwhile.
Susan washed me off when I finished. Her attention caused
me to react again. "You know, I wish I'd been less sleepy in the
night," I said ruefully.
"You lost your turn," she agreed. "Now it's my turn."
"Your turn?"
"To do you. Passive mode. Lie down."
"By daylight?"
287
She laughed. "I love your naïveté!"
I lay on the impromptu mat, and she addressed me with slow
strokes and kisses. Before long she had me worked up to a fever
pitch, but she wouldn't let me act. Instead she spread herself on
me, tantalizing me, keeping me from taking any initiative, and at
her leisure took me in and milked me with her body. When I
finally came, it felt like a volcano erupting. What an experience!
She got up, having done me, and looked out the window.
"There was supposed to be a delivery by now. Must be late."
"Someone was coming?" I asked. "Suppose it had happened
when-"
She half smiled, and I realized with a certain chagrin that this
had been part of her game: the excitement of possible discovery. It
was just as well I hadn't known.
Near noon the clothes were dry and we made ready to drive

back after dressing. At that point a pickup truck pulled up. It was
a man from a lumber company, bringing a load of interior paneling
for the cabin. So the delivery had made it after all.
"Better get that roof shingled before it rains," he observed.
"Water will ruin this stuff."
"It already rained," Susan said. "Our ladder's really too short."
"That so? I've got a larger one."
"You know how to roof?" Susan asked.
"Sure. It's part of the business. But I have to unload this stuff
and tack it in and get back to the shop."
Susan delved into her purse and came up with a hundred dollar
bill. "Can they spare you a couple more hours? We could use
the help."
"We already been paid for the paneling job. Gotta do it."
"In addition."
"Lady, roofing labor ain't worth-"
She tucked the bill into his shirt pocket. "It is to us." She
smiled persuasively.
He melted. "You've got a deal!" And he took his ladder off the
truck, leaned it against the cabin, put a heavy bundle of shingles
 
288
on his shoulder, and proceeded right up. "Come on," he called to
me. "We can polish this off in an hour."
Seeing him so casual about it, there was nothing I could do
but mount the ladder. I hesitated at the top, and he put out a
strong hand to steady me. I crossed over to the roof-the thing I
thought I'd never do again.
"Lay out the shingles; I'll nail them down, soon's I get the felt
laid." He was down the ladder and back with the felt, and in a few
minutes accomplished what I had failed to in much longer time.
Then he started in on the shingles, holding with the soft side of
his fingers up so that a hit would not hurt as much, striking each
nail four time with perfect aim. I had had to strike a dozen times,
and I had lost numerous nails from bending or flipping out when
they struck impervious knots. Here was a real professional, every
bit as skilled in his area as the judo black belts were in theirs.
In his presence, surrounded by his confidence and competence,
I found my own fear of the roof diminished. I moved about
on hands and feet rather than by crawling, and I didn't even notice
the wind. I laid out shingles and he hammered in the nails. And in
an hour we had finished the whole top section of that roof.
"Thanks," I said. "You have no idea how relieved I am to have
that done."
"Glad to help. Not just for the money." He winked. "Girl like
that-you're lucky."
We descended the ladder, and as my foot touched the ground
I realized that I had been relieved of the charge of cowardice, and
had done what had terrified me before. All I had needed was a
longer ladder and a confident companion.
How many seemingly insuperable obstacles of life could be
overcome by just that formula? The proper tool and proper approach.
What of my worst one, the amnesia? My memory of my
past remained closed, but somehow I felt I was closer to the breakthrough
now.
The man finished the paneling with the same efficiency and
289
drove off. Probably the extra money had contributed to his positive
attitude; he could have a considerable party with that.
Soon we followed. It had been quite a weekend, and I had a lot
to think about.
 
CHAPTER 5:
EIGHTY PER CENT

Every month or so our dojo had a team tournament with one
of the other Taizo Sone dojos in town. Half a dozen of our students
would be matched with their students, and each winner got a
medal or ribbon. After the tournament there would be testing for
promotions.
I had watched these little tournaments with fascination, seeing
how different competition judo was from normal randori practice.
I had not entered any matches, however, knowing that would
be utter folly. Now I had learned the basic throws and holds, and
felt I was ready to try for the lofty eminence of Yellow Belt. So I
was present and garbed in my gi, and nervous as hell.
The students of the other dojo were there, with their instructor
Tom, a sandan or third degree black belt. Black belts didn't
compete in these affairs, but served as coaches and referees.
Tom and Steve got together and picked out one child from
each class, little white belts. They were carefully matched up by
size and skill, to make it fair. The idea was to give them experience
in matches, without the outcome being certain. Then two more,
larger boys, yellow belts. And so on up, sometimes matching yel-
291
low belt with a larger white belt so that it was skill against size. In
real tournaments, I understood, it was pot luck, and white belts
frequently came up against black belts, almost certainly doomed.
But here the emphasis was on good matches, or at least fairness.
"Caesar," Steve said.
Huh? I looked at him. Steve indicated a place on the mat
where the other contestants were sitting. Already a white belt my
size was coming from the other side.
I was going to compete in a match.
My mouth went dry. My knees felt rubbery. How could I go
out there and actually fight? I didn't know anything! I glanced
wildly around.
And caught Susan's eye. She was one of five black belts who
had shown up for the tournament. I remembered the cabin roof,
and the cabin loft. And I was more afraid of being a coward in her
eyes than I was of being a coward in fact.
I walked to the mat area and sat down beside my teammates.
It was amazing how deadly serious this innocent little meet had
become, merely because I was now a participant rather than a
spectator. I guess a lot of life is like that. A person pays a whole lot
more attention when his own neck is on the block.
Jeff came to sit beside me, and after him a green belt. They
didn't seem worried; why was my gut squeezed and squished like a
Rorschach blob? We were seven all told, and opposite us were
sever from the other dojo.
Nervously I watched the first match. Our boy was smaller
than his opponent, and that was bad, because size does count in
judo when skill is equivalent. The lighter player has to work harder
to lift the heavier one, and can more readily be lifted himself. Our
champion tried hard, attempting an o soto gari leg throw to the
rear, but the other boy pushed him back, grabbed him around the
neck, and fell on the floor. No art to it at all, and the referee, a
large black belt named Shawn, gave no score, but now the larger
boy got the kesa gatame or scarf hold. This was clumsily applied-
 
292
even I could see that-but decisive. In thirty seconds it was over.
The outlook was bleak; we were behind one match to nothing.
But lo! We won the second match, and the third, then lost the
fourth. It was two to two-and suddenly I was up.
I was scared stiff, which may have been just as well, because
otherwise my knees might have buckled. My opponent was smaller
than I, and a good deal younger, but he might as well have been a
giant. I only hoped I would not lose too quickly.

I grabbed his left lapel and right sleeve in approved manner,
and looked into his eyes-and realized that he was just as scared as
I was. It didn't help; now I was afraid we'd both make fools of
ourselves.
We moved around, neither daring to try anything. All my
confidence in the techniques I had practiced was gone; I knew
nothing would work. "Attack! Attack!" someone yelled, and I didn't
know which one of us he meant.
Shame, not courage, drove me to it: I attacked. I tried to turn
into an o goshi hip throw, but he had hold of my sleeve and I
couldn't turn. That never happened in practice throws. So it was
nothing, not even a spoiled attempt, as far as anyone could see.
But he had felt my effort. So he jerked me forward, and I stiffarmed
him, not meaning to but simply unable to make my arms
bend. That, as it turned out, was a good defense. At least at this
level. So all we did was move a little more.
We were both getting tired. I was panting, and so was he, and
his handsome long hair was getting in his face and God knows
how I looked-and we hadn't done anything.
Time was running out. I realized it was not going to end with
a bang but a whimper, a draw, and indecisive match. No credit to
either of us, no medal or ribbon. People on either side were yelling
up a storm of encouragement: "Throw him, Caesar!" "O soto gari,
Alan!" "Attack!" "Take him to the mat!" But we were stuck in a
morass of inability. We were too evenly matched, too inexperienced.
Never again would I watch someone else's match and think
293
myself superior; fatigue and uncertainty changed the whole picture.
Sure we had been taught the techniques-but this was real.
I saw the brown belt with the stopwatch lift the beanbag he
used to signal the end of the match. When he threw it onto the
mat, it would be over. A hell of a poor showing.
This couldn't be tolerated. One of us had to win, or we'd both
lose. I wrenched about and dropped into a seoi otoshi, the throw
Mr. Campbell had taught me, my last attempt. But I didn't have
my balance, hadn't used kuzushi to break his balance, and had my
right elbow in the wrong position. As a result the attempt was a
disaster. Alan resisted, hauling me back. His counter was better
than my effort; I fell backwards, my feet going up in the air-and
I came down on the back of my head, hard.
The room spun. I felt no pain. Just shame.
When my head cleared, Susan was mopping my face with a
wet paper towel. "Some breakfall, Caesar," she muttered disgustedly.
I sat up and stared at her. "Susan! When did you get your
black belt?"
Her eyebrow raised. "Beg pardon?"
"You were a brown belt in my class."
Now she stared at me. "Uh-oh. You remember?"
I looked down. "What the hell am I doing in a white belt?"
But as I asked, I remembered. I was a white belt-but also a black
belt. I had two sets of experiences, and for the moment I wasn't
sure which was real.
"What is your name?" Susan asked me.
"Jason Striker, of course." I paused. "No, Caesar Kane. No,
both."
"That blow to your head," she said. "It brought you back!"
"Did it? I still seem to have a gap. Between leaving my own
dojo up north and coming to this one. What happened?"
"If you don't know, no one else does," she said. "You disappeared
there, and reappeared here, months later. Emaciated and
amnesiac."
 
294
Alan came over. He had won the match, but didn't look happy.

"I'm sorry," he said. "I didn't mean to-"
"'Sall right," I said, shaking hands with him. "It was a fair
match. I have to learn how to take a better fall, is all." Yet maybe I
had gained a hundred times more than I had lost, for now I had
my past back. A significant part of it, anyway.
I shook my head, trying to get it settled. I saw Jeff doing throws
in the main area. Uchimata, for an ippon-was it only the next
match? No, the tournament was over; he was testing for promotion,
going for his green belt, skipping right over orange. No wander
he had been so tough. Tomoe nage, the stomach throw. Combinations.
Kids really had to work for their belts here.
Jeff made it, and I was glad for him. I wondered how he had
done in his tournament match while I was out. He must have
won, for it would have taken two victories to overcome my defeat
and put our team ahead-and there was the trophy cup, on our
side. I had missed some good matches. But you have to expect to
miss something if you insist on getting knocked out before the
tournament is over.
Now the black belts went out for some randori or free practice
among themselves: Steve and Tom, Shawn and Mike.
"Come on," Susan said. "Get your system going."
"Randori? I asked. "I can't go out there with all those black
belts."
"That depends," she murmured, "on who you think you are."
"Who?" I asked, not getting her drift.
"Are you Caesar Kane, who just lost a match to a fourteen year
old boy-or are you Jason Striker, 5 Dan?"
I pondered. "You know, I'm not sure. I've got both memories,
and always before I have woken up to find that-"
"So let's find out," she said, drawing me to my feet. "You're
going to throw me, or get thrown. Hard."
We moved out onto the mat. I saw some students staring at
me; obviously I should be home soaking my head, not going out
for randori after my injury. But the fact was that I had suffered
295
much worse bashes in the past, and fought through; this one was
nothing in comparison. I did want to know, as Susan put it, exactly
who I thought I was.
Susan wasn't fooling; she spun into a moroto seoi nage, lifting
so hard I would ordinarily have flipped right over her and whomped
into the mat on my barely-healed side. But I merely stood firm.
"How many times have I told you," I reprimanded her gently,
"kuzushi. You didn't break my balance." And I turned and swept
her feet out from under with a perfect okuri ashi barai assisted foot
sweep. "Timing and balance," I concluded as she struck the mat.
"Just like old times," she muttered as she got up. "You made
me look like a white belt, you prick."
I smiled graciously at her. "You asked for it."
She nodded. "I was glad to get it, Jason."
Then I walked over to Mike and Shawn. "Mind if I cut in?" I
inquired.
They looked askance at me, not having seen my action with
Susan, or perhaps assuming she had been teaching me an effective
counter. But they did not protest.
I took Mike, who had recently made his black belt by placing
high in the high school nationals, and moved him about. He was
young but highly skilled, probably destined to be a leading competitor
on the national scene in a few years. He thought, naturally
enough, that he was working with a white belt, so he didn't even
try to throw me. No black belt needs to prove himself against a
white belt; instead he acts as a teacher, helping the novice to improve
his skill.
So I lifted him with a hane goshi spring hip throw, not putting
too much force into it. He went over, but put his right hand down

and turned out neatly so that my throw counted for no score. A
very nice recovery on his part. He had a supple, smooth manner
about his randori that I liked. We resumed motion.
Now he was on guard. A white belt does not catch a black belt
twice, especially with the same throw. So I did another hane goshi,
a hard one this time, too fast and accurate for him to resist. My
 
296
right leg swept up his legs and he flipped over, this time taking a
perfect fall.
He sat up and stared at me. What I had done should have
been impossible, even for another black belt of his rank. He had
never before encountered efficiency like that, and was trying to
decide whether it had been a fluke. I made a little bow and went
on to the next: big Shawn.
Shawn was another high school prodigy. He had earned his
black best at age 15 by coming in second in the high school nationals.
He might have been first, but his opponent had fouled
him, and he had gotten mad and fouled him back-and the referee
had caught only Shawn's action. He was huge and strong, a
natural wrestler. Most people tried to avoid getting into matwork
with him-so I took him down with a sumi gaeshi, rolled over as he
started to get up, and flipped him into the jigoku jime hell strangle.
He had strong arms and a good neck, but I knew exactly what I
was doing, and he had to tap out before his lost consciousness. It is
considered very classy to take a man with his own specialty, but as
it happened, my specialty was matwork too.
Three down, two to go. Why did running a line of five black
belts seem so familiar?
Tom and Steve had stopped their randori and were staring at
me, as well they might. Susan might have let me throw her, and
Mike might have taken one fall for me. But Shawn would never
have gone voluntarily into the hell strangle, and a white belt hardly
knew how to apply it properly.
I bowed to Steve. He returned the bow, and came to meet me.
He hardly knew what to make of this, having seen me in all my
white belt inadequacy for several weeks, but he was not about to
take a fall for me. He found it difficult to take falls for any of his
students, perhaps fearing that they would lose respect.
I took hold of him-and had him almost helpless. I was no
stronger than I had been as a white belt, but now I had all the skill
of a godan. I knew precisely how to make my strength count, nullifying
his. It was similar in its way to holding a bird in one's open
297
palm and preventing it from flying away by countering its balance
in subtle ways. Before, Steve's skill had toyed with mine; now
mine toyed with him-and we had not even moved. There is as
big difference between a godan and a shodan as there is between a
shodan and a rokkyu. That is, 5 dan is to 1 dan as 1 dan is to a
white belt.
I eased up enough to let him attempt a throw, and he spun
into a tsuri komi goshi lift-pull hip throw But I kept my balance,
and as he went down low I stepped forward so that my legs straddled
him, holding him down and voiding the effort. He had to break
and scramble out from under. Next time we closed I threw him
with an uchi-mata. And went on to Tom.
Tom was a sandan, a third degree black belt who could probably
have made fourth degree any time he wanted to. He had been
given his belt by the club founder, Taize Sone, and valued it as
such. He was a skilled competitor, interested in making the national
Olympic team. His mode of action was deceptive; he wasted
no effort or motion in superfluous style. He took it so easy it seemed
he wasn't really trying. But just try to throw him or get him in a
holddown!

I moved him about, and he moved with me, retaining his
balance. I tried my uchi-mata, but couldn't get him over. So I did
a takedown and clamped an armlock on him-and he calmly braced
himself and lifted me clear of the mat, voiding my hold. This time
I had my work cut out for me, though Tom hadn't yet even tried
any techniques of his own.
"Now I recognize you," he said. "Only one person does uchimata
like that. Jason Striker. What are you doing here in a white
belt?"
"It's a long story," I said. "I'm wondering about it myself."
We stopped the randori; it had become pointless. "This is Jason
Striker," Tom said to the others. "Godan, former national champion.
I thought he looked familiar, but I couldn't believe it."
I understood, however. I had not faked any clumsiness as a
 
298
white belt; it had been quite genuine. My transformation had
been remarkable.
But I did have a headache. It was time to go home and recover.
Past time.
*
I was sad to leave the Taizo Sone judo clubs, but it was urgent
that I sort out my memories and get my affairs in order. I had been
out of circulation entirely too long, for all that I had needed that
time to fully recover my physical health. So my amnesia had its
silver lining.
First I phoned Ilunga, back at my own dojo. "Where you been,
White Master?" she inquired as though I'd merely checked in an
hour late. I visualized her strong black face; she was one hell of a
woman, this karate mistress. She was in charge in my absence,
quite competent, and probably smarter than I was. She had emotion,
but didn't show it.
"Florida," I said succinctly. "Where was I going?"
"South America," she said. "Maybe you better talk to Luis."
"Senor," Luis said immediately. She must have put him on the
extension. "Are you well?" He was a Cuban exiile, not at all like the
drunken doctor of my vision, but a 5 dan in judo. I had no concern
about the welfare of my judo classes while they were in his
hands. With Ilunga for karate and accounts, and Luis for judo, I
was superfluous, which thought did not please me quite as much
as it might have. Evidently they had managed just fine without
me.
"Well enough," I said, deciding not to go into the whole story.
Susan had loaned me a set of weights to enhance my exercise, and
I was recovering my optimal condition. "I lost my memory, only
just got it back, most of it. Ilunga said I was headed for South
America; that part's still blank, except for some visions of the Amazon
River. Do you know anything about it?"
"Only that it is dangerous, Señor," he said. "You received word
299
from your enemy Kan-Sen that the lord of the ninjas needed you,
and you departed. I urged against it, and Ilunga called you-
pardon the term-a honky fool."
"That's her way of saying that she loves me," I said, only half
joking.
"Si. But you went, and we have heard nothing more, until this
moment. We feared very much you were dead."
"Close enough," I agreed. "Obviously someone wants me dead.
But I have the feeling it's more important than that. I'd better run
it down before it runs me down. So don't let on that I'm alive. This
call is strictly private."
"Honky fool!" Illunga repeated vehemently.
"I want them to believe that I'm dead," I explained. "That
way I can catch them by surprise."

"Catch who by surprise?" Luis inquired.
"I wish I knew."
Illunga gave a derisive snort, but I knew she and Luis would
protect my secret. They both loved me, in their fashions, and would
keep the faith.
So I resigned from my survey job and cleaned out my room. I
had planned to sneak out alone, but Susan intercepted me. Women
have a knack for such things. "I know I'm less interesting now that
your memory's back," she said. "But there are still things I can do
for you."
She was more or less right on both counts. There had been
many women in my life, and I valued the memory of most of
them, especially my dead fiancée Chiyako. Susan when I knew her
had been no more than a promising brown belt student. I did not
as a rule date my students, though some had made that rule difficult
to honor. But Susan had left my dojo two years ago and I had
not seen her since. Evidently she had kept up with her judo and
retained an interest in me, so that when she discovered me as a
white belt . . . Well, she was no longer my student, and she had
made her point. I liked her more than somewhat, and she had
helped me considerably. I really knew her better now than I had
 
300
before, and not just socially. I had had no idea she was rich, not
that it would have made a difference. She had merely been one
brown belt among many, almost anonymous. She must have preferred
it that way.
"I have a motor home," she continued. "I can take you where
you're going, privately. I have money. I can shop for you. Alone,
you're just going to get yourself killed, as you almost did before."
Nobody seemed to have any confidence in my abilities outside
the dojo-especially those who knew me best. That was another
irritation, in part because it might be warranted. Obviously
I had fouled up badly, somewhere between here and South America.
"If you come with me," I pointed out, "you may get killed too."
"Yes. Isn't it exciting?"
I wasn't certain whether she was joking. There are things about
women I have never understood. They are not merely soft men.
This one had seduced me on the cabin floor in broad daylight,
knowing that a delivery man was on his way. Evidently she had a
hankering for innocent danger. But what I faced was ugly danger.
"I'll think about it," I said. Maybe I could sneak out alone.
"You'll think about it with me along," she insisted. "I want
you to tell me to my face, not copping out on the phone the way
you did with your dojo."
That was another thing: why did women always fathom me so
much better than I fathomed them?
Thus I found myself in her motor home. It was a Cruise-Air-
after a moment I fathomed the pun-looking like a yellow striped
box with oblong windows, small-seeming wheels, and a door in
the middle of the left side. But inside it was a luxury apartment
twenty two feet long, with padded couches, a dinette, kitchen,
bathroom, and whatever. No need to pay hotel or motel bills with
this; all the comforts of home traveling right along with you. All
except-
I looked at Susan, who avoided my gaze. That was a signal. All
the comforts of married life, really. That made me a bit nervous.
Just what designs did she have on me?
301
"I have credit cards for everything," she said brightly. "It can
all be done in my name, keeping you anonymous."
That was exactly the way I wanted it. Because I remembered
more than I had told Luis. It wasn't just the long journey down
the Amazon River, it was the background. Kan-Sen was my enemy,

true, but now he worked for Fu Antos, lord of the ninjas,
who was building his new Black Castle somewhere in the Amazon
jungle. My connection with Fu Antos went way back. He had
saved my life, and I had helped him reincarnate in youthful form.
I had assumed that if my enemy worked for my friend, he
became my friend, even if I didn't want it. Now it occurred to me
that my friend might have become my enemy. If that were so, I
was free to kill Kan-Sen, and there was nothing I'd rather do. For
he had killed my fiancée Chiyako. But maybe I was rationalizing,
trying to find a way to justify the vengeance I craved.
I might kill Kan-Sen. But first he would have to be interrogated.
For surely he knew what I needed to know about Fu Antos.
Someone had left me for dead in the Amazon. Had it been the
ninja, or someone who had tried to stop me from reaching the
ninja? I had to be sure, before I acted.
Because if Fu Antos was now my enemy, I had one hell of a job
cut out for me. Fu Antos was perhaps the most formidable warrior
of all time, and he had conquered death itself. I would never have
suspected him of turning against me, but he was the only one I
knew who had the power to wipe out a man's memory. He could
do astonishing things with his fantastic power of ki.
"I think I smell wood burning," Susan remarked. "Is it really
such an awful chore, traveling with me?"
I had to laugh. "I was remembering things I had forgotten,
trying to figure them out."
"You forgot our weekend in the woods? I can explain that very
simply. I loved playing with you when you didn't know who you
were. When I could be the instructor."
I had to laugh again. "Yes you were, and I appreciate it. This
was something else."
 
302
"You must tell me all about it. Maybe I can figure that out
too, for you."
I realized that it might really help to have her input, for my
question was intractable. Why? Why would Fu Antos summon me
to the Black Castle-to kill me? Or to wipe out my memory? That
made no sense at all. I had meant him no harm, and would not
have known he had left Japan had he not sent the aikido sensei
Hiroshi-armed with a bag of diamonds-to summon me. Fu
Antos surely had enough enemies, without wiping out his friends.
"Maybe you can," I agreed.
"I'm glad that's settled."
I hardly heard her. I would have to assume that one of the
ninja's enemies had intercepted me before I reached the Black
Castle. A powerful enemy, with brainwashing facilities-for surely
something had been done to my mind-but who still did not dare
to kill me openly. Maybe he had held me prisoner while he destroyed
my mind, and I had somehow escaped before the job was
quite complete. So now I had recovered maybe eighty per cent of
my memories, including all my prior life. Just the twenty percent
or less that related to the last several months remained lost.
In any event, I had a score to settle. I would have to make my
own investigation to discover why my real enemy was. And hope
that that enemy did not discover me first.
"Where to, sir?" Susan inquired with a smile. She was driving;
it was her vehicle and I had no license. I had been driving recently
of course; I didn't like breaking the law, but to get a license I
would have had to verify my identity, and I hadn't had an identity.
Now I had one, but my wallet and all its papers had been lost
along with my memory.
"Miami," I said.
*
We drove east, leaving the Suncoast. We passed some of the

non-tourist artifacts, such as a monstrously ugly phosphate mine.
303
Phosphate was the backbone of Florida industry, but its byproducts
destroyed the local soil and landscape and lead to increasing incidence
of cancer, and of course big money talked, preventing reform.
That was the ubiquitous shame of mankind, always putting
short range self interest before the welfare of the larger society or
the land itself.
"Reminds me of your attitude," Susan said, looking at the
desolate landscape.
"What?"
"Brooding. Ugly. Silent."
She had me there. "I'll try to reform."
"You'd better. This hasn't been much of a date so far."
"This is no date!" I protested. Then I realized that she was
teasing me. I was being socially clumsy, as usual.
We passed a sign advertising a large amusement park. "Let's go
there," Susan said.
"This is serious business, not a holiday."
"But it has to look like a holiday," she pointed out. "You don't
want anyone to know your real mission."
"Nobody's watching me now!" I snapped.
"Right," she agreed, turning into the park.
I tried to fathom the logic, but could not. Had I made a mistake,
traveling with her? If all she had in mind was distracting me
from my mission-
"They turned too," Susan said.
"Who?"
"The car that's been tailing us the last twenty miles."
"Who would want to follow me?" I demanded.
"Maybe we should find out. I'd guess the news of your return
spread pretty quickly. Why did you run the line at Taizo Sone?"
"You told me to-"
"It was a foolish feminine idea. You should have ignored it."
No arguing with that. I had destroyed my privacy at the outset.
I suspected that our alleged tail was coincidence, merely someone
headed for this park at our speed. But if it were not-
 
304
Well, it would not be hard to verify the matter. If anyone was
after us, they'd have to keep pretty close, because it would be
almost impossible to keep track in the hustle and crowding of the
park. Once we were sure we were not being followed, we could
resume our journey. Probably Susan had made it up, as an excuse
to have a good time. I evidently had not impressed her sufficiently
with the urgency of my mission.
"If we park and leave the vehicle, and somebody is after us,
they could plant a bomb in it," I said, hoping to shake her up so
that she would change her mind about stopping here.
"It's got a security system and a loud alarm," she said. "If
anyone breaks in, the whole neighborhood will know."
Sigh. She had countered my ploy without even trying.
We bought tickets at the grand entrance. It was a good thing
Susan had money to burn, because they weren't cheap. I felt a bit
like a gigolo, having her pay for everything. Maybe that was the
way she wanted it. Before, I had been short of memory, dependent
on her for judo knowledge. Now I was short of money. The feeling
was similar.
Park personnel challenged us at the ramp to the interior. "Any
food in that bag?"
Susan frowned. "No food." She turned to me. "Must be they
don't want any wrappings littering the premises."
"Must be," I agreed. I had thought it was an inspection for
weapons, like the checkout for boarding an airplane. Which showed

how a person can overreact to the mere notion of being followed.
But inside there was food being hawked everywhere. Paper
cups, straws, and similar items littered the walks and lawns. We
passed a stream, and it was so gray with pollution that most of the
trash in it was hidden beneath the murk. "Why did they try to
stop us from bringing in any food?" I marveled.
"Because we'd never pay their prices if we had any alternative,"
Susan said. "They need a captive market."
I glanced at their prices. They were sky-high. "I'll starve first,"
I said, disgusted. "What kind of tourist trap is this?"
305
"An efficient one. Don't grump; food's on me."
That didn't help. "Are we still being tailed?"
"Yes."
*
[Not yet written sequence here: it rains, and half the attractions
are shut down so that Jason and Susan can't use up their
tickets, and get soaked. They use the distraction of the rain to get
behind the men who are following them, and there is a fight scene
in a closed attraction. They demolish the thugs, but learn nothing,
as they are merely hirelings. Except for one name: Mirabal.
That triggers some more of Jason's missing memory. Susan, turned
on by the excitement, seduces Jason before they leave the site. His
extreme nervousness at the prospect of discovery in such a public
place delights her.]
*
It was late by the time we got out of the park, and I was tired.
But it was necessary to get well away from the scene of the action,
so that this mysterious Mirabal would not be able to trace our
whereabouts. He surely knew what our vehicle looked like, so even
being on the road was no guarantee of security.
"Hey!" I exclaimed. "I know a place near here. A friend of
mine has a dojo."
"First place your enemies would look," Susan said. "I like adventure,
but we're getting more than I bargained on this soon."
"I doubt it. It's a small dojo, and I've never been there. I knew
him up north several years ago, and promised to drop in if I were
ever in the area. I know people all over the country, so nobody'd be
able to guess that I'd visit this particular place. He can keep his
mouth shut, and would give us a place to hide the vehicle. By the
time they figure out where we are, we'll be gone."
"In short, you want to see him again, just as I wanted to go to
 
306
the park."
I sighed. "I guess so. The camaraderie of judo-"
"Well, no one can say I'm not fair about these things. What's
his address?"
So we pulled into the little dojo of Sensei Josef Fuentes, 3 dan.
He was a dark haired Cuban of about 40. There were a lot of
Cuban judokas in Florida, because of the sizable Cuban exile population.
It was late, and no class was in session. But my friend welcomed
me with a big Latin smile, and opened his dojo to us. So we
had a little workout of three. It may sound funny, doing active
judo practice when we were tired, but judo isn't work for me, its
life. I feel better after doing good randori than I do after taking a
nap.
After a while I sat down at the edge of the mat and let Susan
work with Josef. They did randori that was almost like a kata, or
judo playlet, alternating throws. It was very nice, almost too nice.
I began to grow restive. I was the one she was traveling with, after
all.
Then I caught myself. Was I getting jealous about a woman I
hadn't wanted to travel with anyway? Because of standard judo

courtesy? What was the matter with me?
I knew the answer: Susan had set out to impress me, and had
succeeded. I had always had a soft spot for female martial artists,
and I did like a relationship with an attractive and amenable young
woman. She had baited me like a fish, and the hook was halfway
set. I had to school myself to accept what she offered without
letting her lure me into a commitment I couldn't legitimately make.
Not while part of my life was missing. So she was working well
with Josef, and smiling at him, giving him pleasure. I should be
happy for him, not resentful. It was just a passing interaction.
Then we sat down and talked, reminiscing about old times.
We soon discovered that Josef had a serious concern of his own.
"Last month this man-I do not dignify him by naming him-
came and told me that whenever I hosted a tournament in my dojo
307
I must pay eighty per cent of the money to the Judo Federation. I
asked him why, and he said because otherwise my people would
never get promoted. My ikkyus would not make shodan, my shodans
would not make nidan, and I myself-!" He shook his head, bewildered.
I frowned. "That's impossible. Promotions are handled by the
Board and they are based on merit. No one pays for his belt; that
would be completely contrary to everything judo stands for."
"So I thought," he said. "I showed that man the door in a
hurry. But last week my best student went for his promotion, well
qualified, and they turned him down. And I talked with other
senseis, and they say the same. They don't like it, but they pay, and
then they have no trouble. I did not agree to pay, and-shall I
show you my student? Do you want to see what he can do?"
"No, I believe you," I said, troubled. I was privately certain
that he had overrated his students. It is a measure of an instructor's
success how his students perform, and naturally he believes in
them-sometimes unrealistically. But to try to blame the promotions
board-that was an ugly tactic, and it disturbed me fundamentally
to see my friend do this.
Josef perceived my skepticism, and said no more. The evening
concluded on a subdued note.
Back in the motor home, Susan spoke up. "That man was
serious, Jason," she said. "He's caught between honor and the welfare
of his students."
"He can't be," I snapped. "Judo doesn't work that way. I've
been in it long enough to know, and I've never seen such a thing."
"Maybe you just don't want to hear of it," she said. "I've seen
things happen, like tournament dates fixed to coincide so that
each tournament loses half its contestants to the other, and preferential
treatment by referees, bad calls-"
"Listen, I don't let anyone badmouth judo!" I said, whirling on
her.
She didn't budge. "So I notice. But if you want the truth-"
I was so angry I stomped out of the vehicle. But as I walked
 
308
alone in the dark, the doubt loomed larger. There are bad apples
in any profession, even, alas, judo. Could someone have tried this
kind of thing? The more I pondered it, the more it upset me.
Finally I returned to Susan. She was sitting up in bed in the
convertible dinette, looking so beautiful in her nightclothes that I
was sorry I had ever argued with her. "I need some change for a pay
phone," I said.
Wordlessly she handed me a fistful of quarters.
I phoned the secretary of the United States Judo Federation,
whom I knew only by reputation. I did not give my name. "I just
want to verify something," I said, and quickly sketched out the
situation as Josef had presented it.
There was a pause. "Who are you?" he demanded. "Who is

making this complaint?"
I started to answer, but froze. If I gave my name, the whole
judo world would quickly know where I was, and I already had
enough trouble. I had to keep my secret and get going on my
private mission before word spread further. Most especially, I didn't
want anyone knowing I was headed south. It might mean my life.
"I can't tell you," I said lamely.
"Well, what dojo was threatened?"
Again I could not answer, lest I give myself away.
"You expect me to believe an anonymous complaint?" the secretary
inquired, his voice cold.
Worse and worse! He was reacting exactly as I had, and I couldn't
blame him. "I just want to verify that-"
"There is nothing anonymous about my response," he said
firmly. "I state categorically that no ranks are bought in judo, directly
or indirectly. Not in America, not anywhere in the world.
Not in Kodokan judo. The situation you describe would not be
tolerated by the USJF. If anything of the kind were to come to my
attention, I would investigate and take appropriate action immediately.
I speak for myself and the USJF president. Send me a
letter providing al the facts-the names and dates-and you will
309
see how rapidly we satisfy you, if there is merit to your charge. But
I will not accept anonymous denigration of our fine martial art."
"Uh, thank you," I said, somewhat at a loss, but at the same
time rather proud. This was the sort of response I subscribed to.
In the morning I would tell Josef exactly how to resolve his
dilemma. One letter with the facts to the secretary, and the whole
sordid thing would be investigated. There would be a paper trail,
what tournament money went where, and they would rout it out.
Judo is an honest martial art; it cleans its own house. No 80%
payoff can be tolerated, ever. No payoff of any amount.
Meanwhile, Susan was waiting in that bed . . .
*
[Unwritten sequence: Jason and Susan go on to Miami, where
they get faked up papers and changed appearances and head for
Brazil, sneaking out of the USA so that enemies can't trace them.]
 
CHAPTER 6:
TWO PICTURES
Our Catalina flying boat landed in the river near the city of
Manaus. I saw the jungle close by, encroaching on river and city.
"Jog your memory?" Susan inquired.
"Not enough," I said. "I think I passed through here after the
critical part, after my memory had been erased, and I wasn't here
long, so it really doesn't count."
[Enemy pursuit develops.]
We fled up the Rio Negro, the Black River. I did not recognize
the area, but since sections of my journey down had been overland,
and much of my river travel had been while unconscious,
that indicated nothing.
[An airplane flies low to strafe them. The enemy is pulling out
all the stops. They dive into the crocodile or piranha infested water
and swim to shore, managing to make it through to an Indian
tribe they befriend with gifts.]
The Indians were wonderfully half primitive. The men had
some modern western clothing, but not enough to go around.
One wore trousers, with the top half of his body bare. Another
had a soiled shirt, with the bottom half of his body bare. Some
311
had loincloths, and most had tattoos in many colors covering many
parts of torso, limbs, and head. Red paint was dabbed to beautify
their genitals. They wore feathers in their hair.
The women, in contrast, were big-eyed, innocent, and bare.

The hair of their heads was long and black; they had no hair elsewhere.
They were not old in years, but age comes rapidly to primitives.
Women of 20 or so were already saggy of breast. Only the
dawningly nubile girls of thirteen or so were pretty.
Could this be the tribe whose harem I had-? No, impossible;
I didn't recognize any of them, and they didn't recognize me. Probably
the episode had never happened. I hoped it had never happened!
Yet it was one of my few leads to the Black Castle.
[But Mirabal's men soon catch up and invade the village, indiscriminately
slaughtering men, women, and children. In the
melee they save the life of a half-breed Indian who speaks English;
grateful, he leads Jason and Susan to shelter in a house in the
village of a secret tribe he knows, where no intruder can penetrate.
It seems that the only reason these two white fugitives are accepted
there, for now, is that it is clear that the military men want
them dead. The enemy of their enemy just might be a friend. If
not-it will be easy to kill the two. So the danger is hardly over.]
"This is horrible!" Susan exclaimed. "They don't care who they
hurt!"
"This is the way it has always been," the guide said grimly. "It
is what we expect from the white man."
"But you have a white parent," I said, perhaps tactlessly. "If
the natives hate the white raiders-"
He glanced briefly at me. "Such liaisons are not always voluntary
on the part of the natives."
"Not-?"
"Rape," Susan murmured.
Oh. Unable to figure out anything to say, I turned and looked
at the wall. There were two pictures on it, and they immediately
compelled my attention.
The first picture showed a young man with regular features,
 
312
handsome, distant eyes, in the uniform and helmet of a Brazilian
military officer. I was a amazed to see such a representation here,
obviously well cared for.
The second picture showed two ancient Indians seated side by
side with sunken eyes, deeply wrinkled faces, similar in their piercing
gaze.
"What do you make of them?" the guide inquired. Now there
were several armed natives with him. They seemed expectant, but
I wasn't sure about what. Something was in the offing, and I hoped
it wasn't a brutal game of turnabout, with Susan suffering the
rape. We could fight if we had to, but we were both tired, and
would be unable to find our way out of the jungle even if left
alone. We needed the support of these people, not their enmity.
Yet the Indians did not seem menacing, just waiting. I realized
that this was some kind of a test, and my reaction might have
serious repercussions, for good or ill. I had to say the right thing-
and I had no idea what that might be.
Honesty seemed to be the best policy. So I confessed my ignorance.
"I don't understand," I said. "The first could be one of the
soldiers who hunts you, rapes your women, burns your villages.
Though he has some Indian blood, I think. While the second-"
I broke off. "Wait, there is something-" I squinted at the second
picture. "Something familiar about one of the-he's part white,
isn't he! And he-the physique, the lines of the face-that old
man is the same as the young soldier!"
The Indians relaxed. They might not speak my language, but
they understood that I had made a key connection. That, it seemed,
was good.
"Marshall Candido Rondon," the guide agreed. "The greatest
man of the western hemisphere. In youth-and age."
I had never heard of him, and found myself embarrassed. But

I soon learned, for this man in the pictures had probably just
saved my life and Susan's freedom. Because I, an ignorant outsider,
had in my fashion recognized him.
Rondon was a half-caste Indian, born in 1865, died in 1958,
313
founder of the Service for the Protection of the Indians, SPI. He came
from the Mato Grosso, a huge jungle section next to Bolivia, served
by the twin Amazon tributary rivers, the Xingu or River of Gold, and
the Tapajos, River of Fevers, and bounded on the east by the Rio das
Mortes, the river of Death. Gold, fever, and death-apt terms!
Rondon's father had been a gold seeker, his mother a Guanas
Indian. Both died by the time he was two, and he was raised by
the Indians until adopted by his white uncle. He obtained an
excellent education. As an adult he undertook to plant telegraph
poles through the wilderness, so as to bring a measure of civilization
there. This was a formidable undertaking; they had to carve
paths through the jungle, and men died from disease.
But the worst threat was from the Indians. "My people had
been betrayed so often by the white man," the guide explained.
"It was safest to kill him on sight."
"But that would only bring more white men with guns," I
protested.
"Yes. But at least we died fighting."
But Rondon instituted a radical new policy. "Don't kill the
Indians," he said. And he enforced it. His men killed no Indians-
even though Indians killed his men. He tried to pacify them with
gifts and with great oaths of friendship. "I bring you peace," he
said. And gradually his sincerity registered, and the Indians trusted
him. He was, after all, partly of their blood.
In the process Rondon traversed twenty thousand miles of
jungle, learned ten Indian dialects, discovered fifteen new rivers,
and became known as one of the greatest explorers of all time. The
American president Teddy Roosevelt joined him in one adventure,
and the two became friends.
Rondon was a genuinely good man, revered by both the Indians
and the Brazilian Congress. He founded the SPI.
"The SPI!" another Indian spat, with the guide translating.
"Service for the Prostitution of Indians!"
I turned to him, confused. "If such a good man organized it,
why do you hate it?"
 
314
They told me: almost from the first, without Rondon's knowledge,
the SPI was perverted from its original purpose. Instead of
protecting Indians, it became the apparatus for destroying them.
Its three great principles were exploitation, starvation, and murder
-all under the guise of legitimizing, of helping the Indians.
*
[The text ends here, written December 7, 1975, with notes
for coming scenes of torture, rape, and massacre as Mirabal's troops
continue their pursuit. Jason Striker had not believed that mass
killing continued to the present day, but he sees it happen. This
was to be another example of honest history and sociology, included
as background for these adventure novels. But our research
stopped at this point.]
SUMMARY OF THE
REMAINDER:
Slowly, with much intrigue and violence, Jason Striker zeroes
in on the dread Black Castle. The ruthless but politically powerful
Mirabal has teamed up with the ninjas to monopolize the vast oil
deposits located in the Amazon, and so the ninja influence now
permeates both the jungle and the government of Brazil. In short,
Jason faces a thoroughly formidable complex of enemies. The closer
he gets to the Castle, the less his life is worth. Yet he persists.

When he arrives, his memory becomes complete, and he knows
at last what has been done to him, and the gigantic treachery that
has been fashioned against modern civilization itself. For Fu Antos
means to destroy contemporary society and reduce world population
to the medieval level, subservient to the ninja castle. This
project is well on its way to success. The Black Castle has been
built on the site of ancient ruins; there is evidence of alien visitation
from space, millennia ago. There are strange things here, and
Fu Antos is reconstructing the secret science of these aliens, augmenting
his own weird physical and mental powers fantastically.
But Jason arrives just before the arrangements are complete, and
now he knows Fu Antos to be his enemy, the one he must destroy.
The timing is very bad for Fu Antos, who has been preoccu-
 
316
pied with other matters. Yet the ninja master, so young in appearance,
has remarkable powers in his own right, and a shrewd four
hundred year old mind. The code of the ninjas requires him to
meet the man he has wronged in single combat to the death. But
it is no ordinary combat. Fu Antos uses his ki to evoke the finest
martial artists of all time to oppose Jason. They are mere simulations,
but their threat is genuine, for of course behind these images
is the highly skilled martial art of the ninjas. Jason must prevail
in the most formidable challenge of his career, for these are not
his equals but his superiors in combat. Only imagination, savage
determination, and his own erratic but powerful ki get him through.
Indeed, Jason's ki is one reason Fu Antos wants him dead, because
Fu knows its potential.
Balked on this level, Fu Antos pulls out all the stops. He evokes
Jason's lost fiancee, the only woman he ever loved in his prior life.
She tempts him and lies to him, unmanning him. And in separate
but devastating nonphysical ways Fu Antos destroys Jason's more
recent romantic interests, proving that they also have been deceiving
him. For example, Dulce sold herself to Fu Antos. She did it to
save Jason, whom she loves, but now it seems like a betrayal. And
Susan, who befriended and seduced him during his amnesia, didn't
tell him that she is a married woman, merely out for illicit adventure.
She likes him, but she was always playing a game with him.
They never had any future together, just dalliance that he would
never have agreed to, had he known. Faced with these seeming
betrayals, there seems to be no point in Jason's competing against
this monstrous mentality.
Now, in Jason's stunned confusion, Fu Antos deprives him of
his ki and all his black belt skill. He reverts him to Caesar Kane, in
effect, and has him completely at his mercy-and there is no mercy
in him. But he still must meet Caesar in physical combat; Dulce
insists on that, and she does have considerable influence, as she
closely resembles the one woman Fu himself loved. Nevertheless
the case seems hopeless for Jason. But Fu Antos makes one fatal
oversight: he forgets that Jason now has completely separate white
317
belt judo skills, learned during his amnesia in Florida. Even a white
belt can be dangerous, especially against an overconfident opponent.
Caesar overcomes Fu Antos by surprise. Then the subjugated
Indians rise up and destroy the Black Castle and all its secrets.
The curse of the ninja, like the curse of the voodoo god that
operates in this area, has been abated-but its scars will remain as
long as Jason Striker lives.
 
AUTHOR'S NOTE:
When the authors entered into this Ninja subset of the series,
they made it clear to the editor that the series should not be cut off
at this point, because there would be no proper conclusion. The
editor said there was no problem, because the series was selling

well. But then he moved on, and a new editor took over-and it
seems the first thing he did was decide that the series was not
selling well, and he cut it off. This is typical of the behavior of
editors; it's like the new ape male killing the offspring of the old
male, so that all the cubs by this female will be his own. In this
case there was more to it than that; the new editor had a grudge
against Piers Anthony, and bounced everything of his he could
reach, not caring about its quality or market potential. That attitude
finally caught up with him, and cost him his position, but
the damage was done.
Thus this novel was cut off, and never published. Piers Anthony
went on to best-sellerdom with Xanth and other fantasies,
and Roberto Fuentes went on to became an insurance salesman in
Miami. Now, more than a quarter century later, thanks to the
Internet and electronic publication, this portion of Curse of the
Ninja finally is available for readers.
Elements of the novel were drawn from our own experience,
adapted to the need. Jason's gall-bladder surgery derived from
 
320
Roberto's surgery of the time, except that Roberto's was a good
deal more sanitary. The roofing job was from Piers' experience;
when the roll of felt struck the ground, his wife thought it was him
falling off the roof. The white belt sequences were Piers', and the
instructors and other students were real people. For example, Piers
was the one who was unable to turn over the white belt girl, even
with the help of two brown belts. Piers' daughter Penny was in the
class, and played herself in the novel. Susan was from Roberto's
side, rather liberally adapted for story purposes; she never came to
that Florida class.
There was a lot of research for both of us. Here is an example
of a note Piers wrote to Roberto: "You want Manaus in the novel,
and I know why. Good place to show. But it is not on the Xingu
river, which is where you want the Black Castle. While reading
Green Hell [a research text on the area] I narrowed down the likely
locations for the Castle to two: up the Xingu, and in the Acre
province of Brazil. There are still-wild Indian tribes in each area.
But the Xingu has unavigable rapids, so our boat convoy could
not have approached the Black Castle as we described [in Amazon
Slaughter] unless the Castle was downriver, or on some other river.
Question is, is the Amazon/Jurua river navigable? There may be no
navigable rivers penetrating into the deep hinterland. But my main
reason for preferring the Jurua River is that up here, in Acre, not
only are the remaining Indians more numerous and savage, it is
also closer to the oil region and to the von Daniken Gold of the
Gods region. Daniken says that in Equador, near the Santiage
River-which is a tributary of the Maranon, which in turn flows
into the amazon-is a system of monstrous squared-off caves that
seem to have been fashioned by sobe ancient alien civilization.
Other research indicates that von Daniken must be taken with a
shovelful of salt; he never went to some of the places he claimed.
So we could conjecture similar tunnels, perhaps interconnecting
ones, that Fu Antos has discovered, and he has built the Black
Castle over the entrance to this system. Also, our scene with the
water flooding, in the last novel-there had to have been a higher
321
source, with a steep incline, for that water to be dammed up and
rush down. Near the Andes is best for that. So I argue for Acre."
This shows the way we hashed over settings and scenes throughout
the series; none of it was careless writing.
The question of the corruption of Judo by the demand for
most of tournament money was, unfortunately, a real one, accurately
described here. We made an unofficial query about it to the
American Judo headquarters, and got a response of exactly the nature

described. But those who were being dunned were nervous
about making a formal complaint, because justice is not always
served by those in charge, as politics demonstrate the world over,
and there could be serious consequences for any whistle-blower.
We hoped that publication of this novel would help blow the lid
off that scandal, but it didn't get published.
We tried various other notions, doing chapter and summary,
but none of them were accepted for publication. Accordingly, we
are filling out this partial-novel volume with those other projects,
in this manner completing our collaborative enterprises. Thus it
least will give readers an idea of what doesn't get published. Editorial
whim governs far more than most readers perhaps understand.
The first of these, "Ki" is a short story featuring Hiroshi, the
little aikidoist, in the time before the first novel, Kiai!, started. It
was published in the June 1974 issue of VERTEX, a science fiction
magazine. The second, "Beast of Betelgeuse," was accepted
for publication by GALAXY, another science fiction magazine. But
then the magazine was sold, a new editor took over, and of course
the story was dumped.
 
KI
Clap two hands, Hiroshi thought, and there is sound. He clapped
once, precisely, with two hands. There was sound.
But what is the sound of one hand clapping? He made the motion
with one open hand. There was no sound.
But one hand with ki extended . . .
Was there a ghostly sound?
Hiroshi listened carefully. No, that was not the clap of one
hand he heard. It was more distant, more urgent. It was the call of
imperative need.
0-Sensei, I go, he said in his mind. He stood, stepping into his
wooden sandals at the edge of the tatami. He let the pleats of his
black hakama skirt straighten, and walked serenely out of his dojo.
His students did not even turn from their exercises, for the ways of
their honored teacher were at times inscrutable.
He walked down the narrow street, his sandals making no
sound on the cobblestones. The houses were wooden, two and
three stories high, gay and clean and individual. Some resembled
pagodas, and here and there were small, pretty gardens with dwarf
trees and oddly shaped shrubbery. The way was crowded now; the
majority of the men and women hurrying by wore kimonos, but
perhaps two in five were in the ugly new Western dress. Street
 
324
vendors hawked their wares with piercing cries, selling fish, shrimp
and octopus.
He arrived at the Tokyo airport ten minutes before the great
jet was scheduled to take off. Most of the passengers had already
boarded. A phenomenally fat man was just emerging from a rest
room.
Hiroshi walked down the passage to the door to the airfield.
"Ticket, sir?" the guardian of the gate inquired.
Hiroshi shrugged. "I travel to New York City, in America."
"I know where New York is!" the man said testily. "But you
have to have a ticket! And you'll have to take another flight; this
one is sold out."
Hiroshi shook his head gently, touching his wispy beard. "This
flight is necessary."
"Not without a ticket!"
The huge man came up behind Hiroshi. The man was not
actually tall, but he dwarfed the little teacher, who stood just five
feet high and weighed one hundred pounds. "Kindly step aside,
sir," the ticket-taker said abruptly to Hiroshi. "You are interfering
with our last passenger, and the schedule-"

"I regret I can not," Hiroshi said politely but firmly.
"Old man-" the ticket-taker began ominously, not showing
the deference due to age. Then a massive arm reached over Hiroshi's
shoulder, and a fat hand oily with sweat balked the ticket-taker's
action.
"One moment, sir," the last passenger said.
Hiroshi turned to face him. The man's bulk was vast-perhaps
three hundred pounds-but he carried himself with power.
He wore a kimono to accommodate his gross musculature, and
sturdy sandals on his feet. He was in his middle or late twenties,
with long black hair tied in a topknot.
"I am Kiyokuni, sumo wrestler," he said.
"Hiroshi, aikido."
They bowed to each other formally, the large and the small. "I
thought I recognized you, O-sensei, but I did not expect to find you
325
in such a place as this," Kiyokuni said. "I have long wished to meet
a teacher of your eminence."
"On the contrary," Hiroshi demurred. "It is an honor to address
an esteemed young member of the Yokozuna, the very highest
league of wrestling. I have admired your career."
"Sir, you must board!" the ticket-taker said urgently to the
wrestler. "See, the fuel line has already been taken from the wings
of the plane."
They ignored him. "No career compares with yours, greatest
of teachers," Kiyokuni said, deeply flattered. "I am bound for Hawaii,
to give a sumo exhibition. But I would cancel it instantly to
visit with you."
"I regret I must travel to New York," Hiroshi said. "But another
time-"
There was the growing sound of the jet motors warming up.
"Sir!" the ticket taker cried desperately. "The flight will leave without
you!"
"This airplane continues to America," Kiyokuni said. "My
ticket is only to Hawaii, but if you would accept it-"
"This is most kind of you," Hiroshi said, accepting it.
"But your exhibition!" the ticket-taker cried over the roar of
the engines.
"Let it wait! I will take the next flight!"
Hiroshi presented the ticket-taker with the ticket and went
out to board the plane, cutting off further discussion. He found
his seat and was strapped in just as the machine began to taxi
down the strip.
*
They were airborne. He peered out of the window, intrigued
by the view of the city. The plane circled, gaining altitude, then
oriented east and moved out over the ocean.
"This-this is a skyjack!" a nervous voice said.
Hiroshi looked down the aisle. It was a Korean University stu-
 
326
dent, a short chubby swarthy peasant-type in a Mao jacket, holding
a Nambu automatic pistol. The gun shook, but it was no less
dangerous because of that.
"Tell the pilot to take it to North Korea!" the hijacker said in
bad Japanese. The side of his face twitched.
The stewardess, pale but composed, turned. "Wait!" the man
cried. He looked about wildly, and his gaze fell on tiny Hiroshi.
"You, old man! You're my hostage! If they don't turn the plane,
I'll-I'll shoot-stand up here!"
Gravely Hiroshi stood up and sidled past the man on the adjacent
seat, a horrified Caucasian tourist. Hiroshi was the least
impressive figure of a man on the plane, physically, yet there was
an aura of serenity about him that gave him stature. The gunman

should have noticed.
"You all see?" the hijacker cried, as though playing to an audience.
"I'll shoot-I'll kill this feeble old man! So you just tell the
pilot-and don't use the radio! North Korea!"
The stewardess walked slowly toward the pilot's compartment.
The gunman gestured violently to Hiroshi. "Right here in front of
me! Closer!"
Hiroshi came to stand facing him, looking very small and frail.
He extended his ki, but the student's deathwish was so strong that
no control was feasible at the moment. "It would be better not to
do this," he said gently.
"Shut up!" The gun jabbed at Hiroshi's chest.
"Innocent people could be hurt," Hiroshi said as though establishing
a point of order. "And I regret that I am unable to visit
Korea at this time."
"I'll shoot!" the man cried, jabbing again.
So swiftly that no one saw his hand move, Hiroshi placed the
fingers of his left hand on top of the pistol, pushing the barrel
back. It was a slide-action weapon, and could not be fired in this
position. Almost simultaneously his right hand shot forward, fingers
stiffly extended. They struck the man's solar plexus with a
force few would have believed.
327
The watching passengers gasped as the hijacker crumpled,
unconscious. The pistol was now miraculously in Hiroshi's hand.
"I regret the necessity," he said to the others. "Please take this
weapon to the pilot for safekeeping, and ask him to resume his
scheduled route. We shall have to make this unfortunate youth
comfortable."
Someone took the gun, gingerly. Hiroshi squatted to attend to
the injured man. He placed his hand on the hijacker's chest and
extended his ki. "The pain of dying is more than this," he murmured.
The eyes opened. "Then I don't want to die!"
Hiroshi nodded wisely. "You will remain in Hawaii. I have
need of your ticket."
The youth fumbled in his pocket and brought out his ticket.
It was to New York. "I-I never really wanted to go to Korea! It
was life I hated, and I thought I would get killed. But now even
jail seems sweet! Something inside me . . ." He touched his chest
where Hiroshi's hand had rested. "Some strange power-you made
me well!"
"I merely showed the way," Hiroshi said. He returned to his
seat as the ex-hijacker got up. There was a kind of glow on the face
of each, reflected in the faces of the passengers.
The copilot came down the aisle. "Who broke up the hijack?"
he demanded. "There'll he a reward."
People gestured to Hiroshi. "Please see that he is not punished
unduly," Hiroshi said. "He needs medical attention, and is sorry
for the misunderstanding."
The copilot looked down at him. "So you're the one!" he said,
not concealing his surprise. "Well, I can't promise, but I'll try.
What's your name?"
Hiroshi handed him his original ticket. "Kiyokuni," the pilot
read from the envelope, making a note. "This name will make
headlines all over the world, tomorrow!"
But Hiroshi was already entering meditation. I am hanging by
my teeth over an abyss, he thought, looking down into the level water
 
328
far below. He looked, and saw the ocean. "What is Zen?" a seeker
inquires. What shall I answer?
*
But long before he had the answer the smoggy spires of New
York, America, appeared. He put aside the problem with infinite

patience and stepped down to wintry Kennedy Airport.
"Your passport, sir," an official said in English.
"It is very kind of you to inquire," Hiroshi replied in the same
language, and walked on.
The official chased after him, blocking his way. "I must check
your passport!"
"I much appreciate the offer," Hiroshi replied with consummate
courtesy. "But I shall not put you to this trouble. I possess
no passport."
The man's mouth turned dour. "Then you'll go right back
where you came from, old-timer!"
Perceiving the man's distress, Hiroshi put a gentle hand on his
white wrist. He extended his ki. The officer's belligerent countenance
smoothed. Now he was at peace.
Hiroshi took Route 78 west, walked across the Brooklyn
Bridge, and went north on Broadway. He admired the glittering
signs and imperative traffic. How like Japan!
People stared at him, for it was a bitterly cold October afternoon,
with a cutting wind swooping down the street, and he wore
only his light shirt, dark skirt, and open wooden sandals. But the
ki was about him, making him impervious.
After three hours of walking, he turned into an alley. In
America, he remembered, men did not relieve themselves on the
public streets. It was always best to honor the foibles of the natives.
Garbage cans overflowed, broken glass littered the path, and a
stench rose from puddles of greasy water. This was a dark canyon
between tall buildings. The alley was restful after the continuous
329
blare and flash of the main street. And-his ki awareness guided
him this way.
A large black man jumped out from the shadow of a doorway.
His hands closed about Hiroshi's thin neck.
The little teacher calmly reached up and grasped the mugger's
two thumbs, one in each hand. Very gently he turned his hands
outward, carrying the thumbs along and breaking the choke. The
mugger swore fiercely and fought, but the pressure was inexorable.
In a moment the two thumbs broke.
The man screamed, but Hiroshi extended his ki again and
made the hands go numb. "Violence is unfortunate," he murmured
regretfully. "It is an insufficient response to the prior wrongs
done you and your people. Go to the police; they will treat your
injury and confine you until your drug addiction is gone. Do not
accept the first probationary position you are offered, or the second,
for they will lead you into inadvertent temptations. The third
will seem intolerable, a thing of no pride, but that is the one you
must take. In three years we shall meet again, in better circumstances."
He walked on down the alley, the mugger staring after him.
Hiroshi's students sometimes came to him by devious routes, but
he had not before recruited in a New York alley.
At dusk an hour later he reached the southern fringe of Central
Park. He entered it through the "Artist's Gate," passing under
the gaze of Simon Bolivar, to whom he made a little bow of greeting.
Inside he turned right, admiring the trimmed hedges near the
path like any other tourist. Despite the cold, there were some blue
and pink flowers. The lights were coming on in the buildings adjacent
to the park, giving the effect of a Chinese Wall of immense
proportion surrounding this lush valley, with illuminated mountains
beyond. There was not a prettier spot this instant in all Japan,
he thought appreciatively.
Now he came to the Pond, where great flocks of birds abounded.
He was thirsty after his hours of travel, so stopped to drink of its
 
330
water. There was no refreshment available to man to match that of

water after thirst!
A policeman riding a horse saw him. "Don't drink from that,
mister!" the officer bawled, alarmed. "It's polluted!"
Hiroshi stood up and made a bow. "I thank you for your gracious
warning. But there is no danger."
The policeman looked at him a moment. "Hey-don't I know
you from somewhere?"
Hiroshi spread his hands. "I am a visitor to your fair city."
The officer shook his head as if trying to nail an elusive memory,
then decided this was a harmless nut. He rode on, his beautiful
horse snorting in the chill.
Hiroshi had been aware of the toxicity of the water. But his ki
protected him, neutralizing the adverse bacteria and pollutants.
He would not suffer.
He continued on around the Pond, then north, not hurrying.
He passed the small zoo, now closed for the night, and came to the
Mall. He inclined his head to the bust of each famous man beside
it, politely. He came at last to the Lake, skirting it to reach the
Ramble, a wooded hill to the north. The night was now advanced,
and few people remained in the park. The aimless, hidden paths of
the Ramble were forbidding in the heavy shadows, but he walked
quickly into the thick of it, following his ki.
There was a feminine scream near at hand. Hiroshi stepped
toward it, unsurprised. Two white men were holding a struggling
black girl under a lamp. They wrestled her down as Hiroshi approached,
one sitting astride her head and pinning her arms while
the other pried at her legs.
"Please free the girl and depart in peace," Hiroshi said.
The man on her head looked up at Hiroshi, startled, then
contemptuous. "Get outa here you little queer before we do the
same to you!"
"I regret I must insist," Hiroshi said. "The young lady does
not wish to participate."
The other man got his hands on her panties and pulled
331
them down. The girl twisted her body desperately, and the top
man slapped her hard across the face. "Don't give me no trouble,
nig-"
Hiroshi had drawn alongside, extending his ki. He seized the
hair of the speaking man and turned the head upward. The rapist's
mouth opened involuntarily. Hiroshi delivered a knuckle blow to
the nerve center between the ear and the upper hinge of the jaw.
The man screamed in agony and fell away.
The other man jumped up, drawing a knife from a leg sheath.
He was naked below his flapping shirt, but that hardly inhibited
him. He lunged, the knife held low, going for the gut.
Hiroshi's left hand moved like the head of a striking snake,
sweeping the knife-arm outwards. His right hand, dangling open
and loose, whipped against the man's exposed anatomy. It was a
devastating strike that knotted the rapist into a ball of agony. It
would be a long time before he recovered either the ability or the
will to rape again.
The girl scrambled up, wide-eyed. Hiroshi bowed, unruffled.
"I regret I employed excessive violence in the presence of a lady. I
shall have to meditate upon that flaw in my nature. But I trust
you are well?"
She looked at his sandals, his skirt, and his oriental countenance.
She was terrified. "Please-let me go!"
Hiroshi extended his ki once more. "I am Hiroshi, humble
teacher of aikido, a system of meditation and self defense. This is
my practice costume, the dogi. I heard your distress and came to
help. I do not mean to alarm you; as you can see, I am an old man
and quite harmless."
That last seemed laughable. Hiroshi was sixty, but hardly harmless.

The leading specialists of the world's leading martial arts-
karate, judo, wrestling, kung-fu and others-had encountered the
little sensei in past decades and departed with thoroughgoing respect
for his physical and mental prowess. Aikido was no mean
discipline, and he was the leading practitioner of his time.
Nevertheless, what he said was true. He was a man of peace,
 
332
and considered himself primarily a teacher. When force was required,
he employed it, but only as a necessary resort, and then
with genuine regret.
The girl had no way of knowing this. But his ki reached out,
pacifying her, and her fear abated. "I-I'm sorry," she said. "I was
driving across the park on the transverse road, and my motor quit.
I-these men offered to help, but before I knew it-"
"We shall go to your car," Hiroshi said. "Perhaps it is feeling
better now."
It did not occur to her to argue. They walked north toward
the road. "I had to deliver some important papers, and my apartment
was just across the park," she said, her tension making her
speak rapidly. "They were for tomorrow's session-I work at the
UN-I just don't know what happened to my car-it wasn't out
of gas. You're Japanese, aren't you?"
"I am." Her car was just past one of the underpass tunnels
employed to keep transverse traffic clear of the park proper.
"It just stopped," she repeated. "And wouldn't start. I ran down
the battery trying to-"
Hiroshi put his hand on the hood. He extended his ki, seeking
rapport with the needs of the motor. "Please try once more," he
said.
"I told you-the battery's dead!" But she tried the starter.
Some power had regenerated during her absence. The motor
struggled over, once, twice-and caught.
"It's running!" she cried unnecessarily.
The sound of horse's hooves approached. The mounted policeman
came up. "Lady, don't park here!" he cried. "The park's
dangerous at night-don't you know that?"
She began to laugh, hysterically. Hiroshi walked around the
car and put his hand on hers, and she calmed. "It's all right, officer!"
she said. "It stalled, but he fixed it somehow. And-"
"Merely coincidence," Hiroshi said. "I know nothing of motors."
The policeman squinted down at him. "You again! If you're
molesting this woman-"
333
"No, no!" she cried. "He's my friend! Let me give you a ride,
Mr. Hiroshi!"
"I am most grateful," Hiroshi said. "But this is not the favor I
require from you. Please go your way."
"Get moving, lady!" the officer brayed.
She drove off.
The policeman stared at him. "Hiroshi, she called you. I know
that name! Thought I placed you! Aikido!"
Hiroshi bowed. "It is of no importance."
The man jumped down from his horse. "I'm taking you into
the station! Come along now-"
Hiroshi's motion was so slight as to seem insignificant, but it
was the policeman's arm that ended in the submission lock, not
the little teacher's.
"Hey-do that again!" the man exclaimed as Hirosbi released
him. "Slow motion!"
He reached for Hiroshi's arm again, slowly, and the sensei made
his move again, slowly. "You must use your opponent's ki against
him," Hiroshi explained. "Then he defeats himself."
"You are him! That's what I wanted to know! I saw your picture

in the book when I studied the comealongs. The top man
since the founder died! But we have so many kooks around here, I
just had to check. How come you're in New York?"
"I have minor business here," Hiroshi said. "I am glad you
have profited from my book."
"Hey, the chief 'll want to meet you! You're just about the
toughest fighter in the world, aren't you?"
"The mental discipline is far more important than the physical,
and the peaceful solution is always best."
"Not around here it isn't!" the officer said jovially. "These
muggers and perverts-oh, you mean the ki. Well, I never did
understand about that, much. But I heard you can do things with
your mind, like telepathy. That right?"
"I do no more than you could do, with proper training," Hiroshi
 
334
said. "Ki is inherent in everyone. I regret I can not visit your chief
at this time."
"Okay," the policeman said regretfully, remounting. "I sure
won't try to tell you what do do! But watch yourself around the
park, will you? It's a rough beat!"
Hiroshi bowed. "I shall do so, sir."
The man trotted off with a friendly wave. Hiroshi walked south
along the pleasant paths.
He came again to the little zoo, and climbed over its wall.
Inside was a large plaster whale with a wide-open mouth. Goldfish
swam in a glass aquarium inside it. He climbed in and curled up
on the whale's tongue, sheltered from the bitterly cold wind, and
relaxed.
I am hanging over a pit of wild tigers, he thought. Only the rope
about my waist sustains my weight. A beaver is gnawing on that rope.
I see some wild berries growing on the fringe of the pit, just within
reach. I pick one as the last strand parts . . .
His eyes closed and he felt warm all over as he drifted to sleep.
How sweet it tastes!
*
The sweet taste of the berry remained in his mouth as he woke.
Dawn was near; attendants would be arriving soon. He climbed
out of the whale, turned to make a formal bow to it, then climbed
nimbly out of the zoo.
He was hungry, despite the berry. He had not eaten since
leaving the airplane. But his business was now too urgent to permit
further loss of time, and fasting was good for the spirit. He
drank again from the Pond and proceeded on out of the park,
south on Fifth Avenue, admiring the glittering stores, then east on
42nd Street.
First he saw the massive Secretariat Building, with its phenomenal
expanse of glass. Then he saw the wide plaza and the row
of flags of all the member nations; Japan's was the most beautiful.
335
He entered the General Assembly Building's main lobby, locating
the Information Desk.
There was the girl he had saved from a fate worse than rape.
"Mr. Hiroshi!" she exclaimed, her dark face lighting. Then her
mouth tightened, for she did not want her employers to know
about the park incident.
"If it is not too much to ask," Hiroshi said, inclining his head
politely, "I should like to attend the General Assembly meeting."
"No trouble at all, Mr. Hiroshi!" she said, flustered. "We have
regular tours!"
"I do not wish the visitor's tour. I must attend with the delegates."
"You don't understand, Mr. Hiroshi!" she protested. "No visitors
are allowed on the assembly floor during a business session.
You would have to have a special pass." She paused. "Or is that

what you mean?"
Hiroshi nodded. "It is necessary."
She bit her lip. "After what you did look, I-please don't tell
anyone! I wouldn't do this for anyone else in the world, but-
here's a pass for the guest of a delegate. I'm sure this one won't be
used today. I'd lose my job if-"
"This is most kind of you," Hiroshi said, accepting.
He entered the main assembly hall with the delegates, his pass
clearing the way past the guard. It was like an amphitheater inside,
with many rows of chairs. He peered up at the huge, tall
dome admiringly. "What a magnificent dojo!" he murmured, thinking
of his own small practice hall.
He made his way to the Cuban delegation. "Please," he said to
the delegate in Spanish. "May I speak to the exile?"
The man faced him, displeased. "There is no Cuban traitor
here, señor! Only true Revolutionaries. And I do not believe I know
you."
"I must apologize for the misunderstanding," Hiroshi said
humbly. "I thought perhaps the man entered as your guest."
"No guest! If someone is using my pass-"
 
336
Hiroshi laid down his guest pass. The delegate's face became
grim. "This is mine! Who-?"
"I fear he means mischief. Would you be so kind as to contact
your office and ascertain-?"
"I shall certainly check it out!" the man said angrily, picking
up the pass. "This should never have been issued!"
Now Hiroshi moved to the Japanese delegation and took a
seat. The delegate looked at him and did a doubletake. "Are you
not Hiroshi, the aikido sensei?" he asked in Japanese. "What brings
you here?"
"This is not readily explained."
The man frowned. "Sensei, I have the utmost respect for your
motives. But you can not remain here. This is the United Nations,
and an important session is about to begin. If you will go to my
office in the Secretariat Building, I will speak to you as soon as I
can."
Hiroshi only smiled-and remained. Seeing that he would
not be moved, the delegate put the best face on it and let him be.
The President of the General Assembly called the meeting to
order.
A wild-haired man barged in, pursued by two guards. He
charged toward the Speaker's rostrum. Suddenly he stopped,
whirled about, and gestured at the guards. "Killers!" he cried in
high-pitched Spanish. "Shoot! You can't touch me!"
Both guards drew their guns and fired. The noise was deafening.
But the bullets went up into the dome-shot after shot, until
the guns were empty.
Then there was silence. Astonishment and dismay showed on
the faces of the two guards, and in the assembly.
The Speaker was furious. "What is the meaning of this?" he
cried in French. Hiroshi heard the English translation in his earpiece.
"Shut up!" the intruder cried, still in Spanish.
More guards rushed in. "Remove this man!" the Speaker said.
337
It was obvious that neither he nor the intruder understood the
other, but their tones made their meanings clear.
One of the first two guards hurled his pistol at the Speaker.
The missile missed, crashing into the glass-enclosed floor where
the press and translators worked with such force that it cracked
the unbreakable glass. Spiderwebs ran in all directions from the
center of impact.
The intruder climbed to the Speaker's rostrum. "Shut up, all

of you!" he cried again. "I am Mario Garcia! I am a slan, a clear,
and the true President of Free Cuba, and now you all listen to me!"
The delegates, shocked, listened to their earpieces, hearing his
words in one of the five official languages. But many did not get
the word, because the strike at the translators' booth had brought
a number of the translators to their feet, gaping. The six reinforcement
police stood unmoving, while the President and his staff
quietly cleared out. Only the news-hungry television camera crew
kept operating, broadcasting it all.
"I am the only sane man in the world!" Garcia cried into the
mike. He was a tall, thin, nervous young man with very light hair
and reddish white skin, almost albino. His eyes were blue and
seemed weak, not tracking properly, though he was not wearing
glasses. "I am the only one fit to rule, so you'll have to make me
King of the world!"
No one answered. Everyone seemed to be waiting for someone
else's initiative, with many shaking their heads in bewilderment.
Even the English translation was out of commission now; but that
made no difference to Hiroshi. He watched the wild young man
closely, studying his every move.
"I am a Doctor of Scientology!" Garcia cried. "And a black belt
in judo! And founder of the SLF! Now elect me King of the world-
or I'll destroy you along with the Communists!"
Still no one replied, and the guards remained strangely inactive.
There was an increasing murmur among the delegates. Hiroshi
rose and walked toward the Cuban delegation.
"See, I'll show you!" Garcia said, gesturing with both his arms.
 
338
"I control metal. I have telekinesis! I have telepathy! I am a slan!
You are powerless against me!"
The Cuban delegate spied Hiroshi and gestured him close.
"Señor, you were right!" he whispered, tapping his scribbled notes.
"I called my office, and we have a file on this madman. His mother
was a santera, that espiritismo cult. His mind became unhinged
when his family lost its ill-gained fortune, and he became a traitor
to his country and left Cuba. How did you know he was here?"
"The ki led me," Hiroshi said, not quibbling about definitions.
To the Castro government of Cuba, anticommunist was interchangeable
with traitor. "Please-more information?"
"You can do something?" The delegate paused, alarmed, as
the remaining guards fired a volley into the dome. "The madman
I comprehend; he is mad! But what is the matter with guards?"
"It is necessary first to understand Garcia," Hiroshi said gently.
"Yes!" The delegate brushed back his dark hair. "I made notes
from the telephone. Garcia is from a volatile family, but he is highly
intelligent. Good marks at Havana University, but he left in midterm
to study something called 'Scientology' and seems to have
done well there too. And judo, despite a sickly nature and bad
eyesight. First degree black belt, before dropping out. Some experience
with LSD, but he doesn't seem to be a drug addict. Apparently
he has tremendous drive, but little staying power-apart
from his madness."
Hiroshi nodded. "So the credits he claims are accurate. But
what is this 'SLF' he names?"
"There's something about that too. He is a science fiction enthusiast
-a 'fan.' He founded a club-" he leafed through his notes,
finding the place. "Here: 'Slans Lunatic Fringe,' devoted to the
works of A. E. van Vogt, L. Ron Hubbard, and others of the type.
Nonsense."
"On the contrary, señor!" Hiroshi said warmly. "This is relevant.
You have told me that he is honest, and has studied aspects
339
of the occult powers of the mind. Mad he may be, but his power is

real."
He moved up the aisle between the chairs, toward the dais,
leaving the confused delegate behind.
Garcia was still demonstrating his control. "All metal! All the
world runs on metal, doesn't it? So I am master already!" He glared
about. "You!" he cried, pointing at the delegate from Holland.
"You are convinced now?"
Someone whispered a translation. The man shook his head
scornfully.
"Your metal watch!" Garcia said. "I lift it, thus:" The man's
left hand jerked up. "And over-thus!" The man's fist smashed
into his own jaw. He fell back in his seat, his lip bleeding. "Now
do you believe?" Garcia yelled triumphantly.
The man looked at his watch, then back at Garcia. The shock
in his face was answer enough.
"I can as readily make the guns of the guards kill you!" Garcia
continued. "I can rip out the metal girders of this building and
bring the vault down about your heads! There is no limit to my
power! I am the world's first true Clear!"
Hiroshi extended his ki. It met the powerful, aberrant force of
the Cuban, related to ki but lacking its restraint. Ki was akin to
the force and goodness of the human spirit, while Garcia's variant
derived from frustration and insanity. In a more devious respect,
the two complemented each other as evil complemented good.
"Now make me King of the world!" Garcia cried again to the
group. "Before I destroy you all!"
Hiroshi approached him, knitting his fingers in the kuji-kiri
exercise. "I regret this is impossible," he said politely. "Please desist
and come with me."
"You dare?" Garcia demanded with a quiver, his eyes watering
as he focused on the little man. "I'll bash your head in with your
own watch!"
Hiroshi held up his wrists, continuing the hypnotic kuji-kiri
motions. He wore no watch, no bracelet, no ring.
 
340
"I'll shoot your own coins into your eyes!"
Hiroshi shook his head. "I have no money." He was very close
now, his fingers working in marvelously intricate patterns.
Garcia tore his gaze away from those fingers. "You'll still die!"
He gestured to a guard, and the man's gun leveled.
Hiroshi extended his ki. This was why he had saved it, using
the finger-hypnotism instead. He could not use his ki in two ways
simultaneously, and could not match the sheer raw power of the
youth. But he could begin to rein in Garcia hypnotically, while
using his ki to interfere with the man's paranormal control. Just a
little jog of the gunman's elbow, as it were, as he fired . . .
The gun went off. The shot went wide. It had worked! "I, too,
am a kind of clear," Hiroshi said softly. He was not familiar with
the term, but that did not matter.
Garcia stared-into the winding fingers. "You lie, you little
Jap!" But he must have felt the ki interference, and he sounded
uncertain.
One of the thrown pistols lay in the dais. Hiroshi picked it
up. "I control this metal. Take it-if you can."
Challenged specifically, Garcia concentrated. His force leaped
out, surrounding Hiroshi, tearing at his control. If he could take
over, Hiroshi was lost. But that power was untrained and unruly,
not focused to best advantage. Hiroshi hung on, his ki extended to
the utmost. He had never before braved an attack such as this!
The gun quivered, but did not leave his hand. He had withstood
the storm.
"Now I shall move it," Hiroshi said, as though he had never
felt the struggle. His hand flicked. The gun flew off to the side,

and struck the lifting weapon of another guard. Both guns dropped
to the floor.
With an incoherent scream, Garcia jumped at Hiroshi, his
hands stiffened for deadly blows. That was his mistake. No man
who knew Hiroshi would have tried such an attack.
The little sensei caught one arm, lifted it, and hit under Garcia's
341
armpit with his thumb. Then he applied a submission lock on the
man's arm.
Garcia screamed with pain. Guns, coins and watches flew up
all over the room, but Hiroshi's ki was spread out in a thin interference
pattern that prevented accurate attack from that quarter.
He held the grip.
All fight left the would-be king of the world. "You are a clear!"
he muttered brokenly.
"Merely proper discipline," Hiroshi said modestly, maintaining
the grip.
In a moment a crowd formed about them. "Congratulations!"
the President of the General Assembly exclaimed, an interpreter
standing beside him and rendering it into English almost simultaneously.
"You subdued the madman!"
Hiroshi shook his head. "Not mad, merely misunderstood.
He has no power over metal. Only over people. He did not realize
that himself, or he would have had far more power than he showed.
Still, it is a wonderful ki he employs, deserving of scrupulous study.
I shall see that this occurs."
"We'll throw the book at him!" a guard cried. "Making us
shoot up the assembly hail-"
But the Cuban and Japanese delegates interceded, Communist
and Capitalist standing shoulder to shoulder on this issue.
"This man deserves whatever reward he asks," the Cuban said.
"He saved our lives!"
"He is Hiroshi, the world's leading aikido sensei," the Japanese
said. "No lesser man could have stopped Garcia-and no police
can control Garcia now. Let Hiroshi take this man wherever he
wishes; what jail could hold him?"
No one could argue with that. "It was I who borrowed your
visitor's pass," Hiroshi confessed to the Cuban. "I regret the necessity,
and fear the information girl will be blamed."
"I shall demand her promotion!" the man said earnestly. "That
madman's plan was full of holes. He could never have been king of
 
342
the world, but he could have killed many of us and complicated
the international situation perilously, if you hadn't been here!"
There was the clamor of Babel as everyone tried to question
and congratulate simultaneously in scores of languages. The President
was trying to reestablish order, futilely. In the confusion,
Hiroshi escaped with his charge.
The trip to Japan was simplified by the complete cooperation
of governments and airlines, but complicated by Hiroshi's need to
maintain surveillance over Garcia. If the man ever realized the extent
of his power and used it effectively, he would never again be
confined. Only one place was secure, and that was where Garcia
had been destined from the moment Hiroshi responded to the
message of ki, could he have known.
They went to the Japanese Isle of Hokkaido, into chill mountainous
wilds. Fierce Ninjitsu warriors watched, but recognized
Hiroshi, and did not challenge him.
Inside an ancient castle, in a bleak bare chamber, a longbearded,
emaciated man of about ninety sat cross-legged. The eyes
were shrunken and sightless, the ears deaf, the movements so slow
as to suggest idiocy, and an odor of putrefaction rose from the
shriveled body.

Hiroshi bowed. "O-Sensei Fu Antos, I have answered your call,"
he said with unfeigned respect, though his action and words were
superfluous. "Here is a talent for study."
Ki reached out from the ancient, far more powerful than
Hiroshi's own. Garcia stiffened and looked about, frightened-
and the pressure of his containment eased. The blind dumb head
inclined. The talent was worthy.
Hiroshi bowed again and backed away, alone. The relief was
vast. What would he have done, had Fu Antos not acceded? Now
his mission was done.
A day later, still exhausted, he returned to his dojo. His students
crowded about, forgetting themselves in their eagerness to
learn of his adventures. They were powerful athletes and ranking
343
practitioners of the martial arts, but before him they were like
children.
"A few necessary errands," was all the weary sensei would say as
he sat on the floor in his accustomed spot.
One student held a newspaper whose headline screamed of
New York and paranormal talents. He looked at Hiroshi and shook
his head, resigned. Would any student ever master even a tiny
fraction of the spirit and power and humility this wizened little
mystic possessed? What was ki, after all?
It was a question Hiroshi himself longed to have answered.
Clap two hands, he thought, and there is sound . . .
 
BEAST OF BETELGEUSE
If a tree falls in the forest, and no one hears, what sound does it
make?
Hiroshi sat in the Lotus posture, meditating-on the daily
newspaper. The bold strokes of the Japanese symbols slashed down
the page, telling of the recent wave of crime. Illegal gambling,
prostitution, and narcotics were flourishing, and in seeming response
the stock market was roaring. What did it mean?
His eyes focused beyond the printed page, peering at the cause
behind the effect. For crime was an effect, the result of a chain of
indignities to the human condition, rooted ultimately in a seeming
defect in the nature of man. Hiroshi had meditated many
times on the paradox of imperfection flowing from perfection, a
perfect Supreme Deity creating imperfect man, and had come to
no conclusive answer. Perhaps man was put on Earth to earn his
redemption, as a good sword was tempered by the fire. If so, the
effort seemed to be failing.
But this was more than the usual corruption. Crime was becoming
powerful, organized, disciplined, imaginative. Where was
the guiding force?
Hiroshi perceived it now. It was the Yakuza, the long-time
criminal gangs of Japan. Somehow one of the gangs had multi-
 
346
plied its power in the last few months, emerging paramount. Now
it was extending its sticky fingers into formerly legitimate enterprises,
investing its ill-gotten profits in solid commercial ventures.
This process was already so far advanced that the Yakuza was on
the way to the financial domination of Japan itself-something no
gang had ever been able to do before. The takeover was proceeding
so swiftly, smoothly, silently, and efficiently that no one had
sounded the alarm.
Hiroshi was not a politician or business man, but he cared
about basic rightness and proportion. This was part of his philosophy
of Zen. Meditation was good, but sometimes it became necessary
also to act.
So he acted. He opened his mind to commune with his ancient
master of martial arts, Fu Antos, Lord of the Ninjas.

COME. The summons rang like the clarion of temple bells
inside Hiroshi's mind.
And so Hiroshi came. North from the great metropolitan area
of industrial Japan. He journeyed by fishing boat to the port city
of Sapporo, then by mule cart to the northern wilds of the interior
of the island Hokkaido. He was a little old man with a serene
countenance who paid scant attention to obstacles, to the perplexity
of those he encountered along the way. He walked through the
wilderness, climbing ever higher, his bare feet relishing the earth
and grass beneath. He wore only a thin black silk kimono with
trousers underneath; he had removed his geta or wooden sandals
lest they be damaged in the roughening terrain.
As he ascended, the warm fall weather became cold, the sky
darkened, thunder sounded, and a freezing rain started to fall. Yet
he continued, his lightly bearded face tranquil; his interior power
of ki kept him warm. He arrived, in a remarkably short time, at
the ancient, rundown Black Castle of the Ninjas.
It was a ruin, its cyclopean stones tumbled in disarray, its
once-proud moat half filled in. He negotiated the difficult causeway
through the surrounding marshes, entered the collapsing main
347
gate, and passed through the hoary dark halls until he penetrated
to the nethermost chamber.
Here the light of a single taper high on a wall cast a dim radiance
across the bleak dank stone. In the center, on a simple tatami
or reed mat, sat the incredible old Lord of the Ninjas, Fu Antos.
His legs were withered and useless; he had not walked in twenty
years, or moved from this self-imposed prison. He looked and
smelled somewhat like a week-old corpse. Yet there was an amazing
aura of power about him that made him the most remarkable
man of recent centuries. Hiroshi could actually perceive a faint
luminous field around the hunched figure, startlingly like the haloes
in Christian pictures of saints. Yet Fu Antos was no Christian,
and certainly no saint.
"O-Sensei," Hiroshi said respectfully.
Fu Antos acknowledged with twitches of his skeletal fingers in
the ninja kuji-kiri hypnotic pattern. Hiroshi entered the trance
willingly, for it was the old man's only remaining means of specific
communication. The chamber seemed to change, becoming darker,
as though night had fallen and deprived it of even the smallest
leakage of outside light. The lone candle glimmered low. That was
all, for a time; the decrepit man sat with his sunken orbs turned
upward as if staring through the massive walls and indeed the
entire castle to the stars beyond. Now those lights appeared, at
first a faint patina on the rough ceiling, then the full night sky.
The stars in their myriad glory bathed the chamber, and the great
Milky Way stood out bright and clear: so many stars, so distant,
that they became no more than a pale white wash. What secrets
lay beyond that awesome firmament?
Fu Antos contemplated the oneness of the universe, the great
nothingness. He had achieved Satori, or enlightenment, a oneness
with Buddha, and was immersed in the sheer beauty of it.
Suddenly a bright streak developed, much more than a shooting
star, much closer, like a bolt of lightning yet more disciplined.
This dazzling display illuminated the room as if it were day, though
there was no window. Immediately it faded, and there was a tre-
 
348
mendous impact that shook the castle and the entire mountain
range within which it stood. A sonic boom as of thunder passed
deafeningly. The few attendant ninjas woke in alarm.
Tanaka, in charge of the castle, also Fu Antos' chief jailer, rushed
down to check on his lord. "Yes I remain alive," Fu Antos said
through his fingers, irritably. "Almost I thought the bolt from

heaven had come to release me from this prison of a body in which
you hold me, but the joy of transformation is not yet."
Relieved, Tanaka made as if to bring food and a sanitary facility
(an old pot) for his master, but Fu Antos stopped him with the
peremptory lift of one little finger. "This is a thing of awful import.
Take three men and investigate."
"A meteorite," Tanaka protested, for he had had an education
in the outside world. "Impossible to locate at night-and for what
reason? It will not fly away again."
"Do you debate with me?" Fu Antos' fingers demanded. "It is
no meteorite. Go, before-"
There was a second burst of light, brighter than before, and
again the castle shook. A stone dislodged from the corner of the
ceiling and crashed to the floor, throwing off a spark of its own.
The sound of a colossal explosion reverberated through the castle
chambers.
"Too late," Fu Antos signaled. "Go, then, in the morning."
Tanaka bowed and hurried off to check the shaken castle. It
had been well constructed in Fu Antos' youth, almost four hundred
years before, but such jarring was not good for it.
*
Next day Tanaka led his three ninjas through the mountain
forest below the snow-line in search of the meteorite. It was fall, all
the more lovely for its brevity. The men walked silently, and their
fierce dogs were quiet too; they had reverence for both the living
and the dead. They had known much of each, for the ninjas of
Japan had been among the most effective agents of the medieval
349
world. Ninjas had excelled as spies and assassins, but the technological
age had reduced the need for their services. These days a
lone rifleman in a tall building could kill a President in a crowd,
and never even stand trial. Who had need of the lifelong training
and specialization of a ninja? The fine art of assassination had come
upon hard times. There were too many do-it-yourselfers in the
business.
Yet Fu Antos lived, and with him his diminishing cadre. The
world had forgotten the ninjas, and the ninjas had shut out the
world. Now that contact was in danger of being renewed, owing
to the intercession of an alien presence.
Tanaka's party found the meteorite on the far side of the mountain
range. It was a strange one, not round but bullet-shaped,
with a charred but basically smooth outline. One end of it terminated
in a half-melted tangle of metals. The explosion had destroyed
what must have been a large segment. Congealed drops of
alloy were spattered across the landscape like tektites, and lingering
heat still emanated from the remaining mass. The earth and
rock of the mountain had been gouged by both the impact and
the explosion, making a double crater.
They explored the fringes and discovered large, strange, hooflike
depressions that marked a kind of trail, as though a huge boar
had passed. But there were no pigs in this region; the ninjas had
hunted them out long ago, not from any aversion to the species
but to ensure that this prey attracted no civilized hunting parties
that might discover the Black Castle. In any event, there were no
pigs on Earth with hoofs exactly like these. They seemed to be in
pairs, not fours, as if this pig were traveling upright: an obvious
impossibility.
The prints pointed away from the meteorite cavities, and led
downhill into the deepest forest. A peculiar aroma was associated
with them, that made the dogs whine and growl nervously, and
where the trail crossed over rock there were droplets of some kind
of oil.
In a forest glade they found it: like a standing pig with a por-
 

350
cine snout and cloven hoof and formidable tusks, about seven feet
tall and six hundred pounds heavy. Any notion that this was an
ordinary boar was dispelled by the manifest intelligence of the
face. The snout was mobile despite the tusks, and the round eyes
possessed uncanny comprehension. The creature wore a bright,
tight suit over much of its torso, emblazoned with a design like
that of the Japanese flag, but with a bigger sun. The rest of the
beast was covered by hair, with very thick, stiff bristles, obviously
good protection.
It made an inquiring grunt and stepped forward, its nose questing.
Its manner was not aggressive; rather, it seemed curious about
the men, and unafraid, mirroring the ninjas' own attitude. But
the half-wild dogs laid back their ears, growled nervously, and
then in the fury of desperate fear, charged.
A metallic tube appeared in the creature's hand-hoof. A thin
beam speared from it to touch the lead dog. The animal gave a
yelp of surprise and pain and dropped, a disk-shaped spot smoking
on its forehead. Twice more the beam flashed, and the two
other dogs died. Then the death tube swung to cover the ninjas.
Tanaka's unerringly thrown shuriken, or small metal star, flashed
quicker than thought, knocking the tube from the thing's grip.
The pig-man squealed with frustration and dropped to all fours,
reaching for it. But the four ninjas were already loosing their arrows.
They had been trained to act without taking time to plan,
when the need arose.
The first shaft struck the creature on the flank, but only pricked
it despite being well-sent. The second clung momentarily to its
shoulder before dropping. The hide was like leather armor, almost
invulnerable to light weapons, and the clothing seemed to be missile-
proof. The third arrow winged toward an eye, but the head
ducked down and it bounced harmlessly off the impervious skull.
Now the ninjas charged, closing the gap before the beast could
recover the laser tube. Two went to the right side, one to the left,
and one came head-on with a bisento, a spear-like halberd. The
weapon struck first, but the monster hunched its head down and
351
took the thrust on the shoulder. The creature seemed to have uncanny
anticipation of ninja moves, nullifying their attacks even as
they started.
Then the head thrust forward and up. The left tusk drove into
the ninja's belly, snagged on his backbone, and swept him off his
feet. The mighty neck muscles hurled him into the branches of a
tree at the edge of the glade, where he hung, broken and dripping.
Now Tanaka, on the left, delivered such a powerful thrust to
the pig-man's gut that the point penetrated the softer armor of the
underside. With a roar of pain the thing's head swung about, jaws
gaping. The teeth closed on Tanaka's right arm and crunched together
irresistibly. The head twitched back-and Tanaka's arm was
ripped off. The ninja, his pain blocked off by shock, merely stared
in astonishment before collapsing.
Meanwhile, one of the remaining ninjas was attacking with a
kusari-gama, a chain with a sickle on one end and an iron ball on
the other. He swing the sickle at the beast, but somehow the pigman
avoided it and the chain wound around Tanaka's just-severed
arm instead. The beast then hauled the ninja in on his chain and
used the bloody arm to smash in the man's head.
The last ninja was working with a yoketsu shagi double-bladed
knife, one blade straight, the other curved. He plunged it into the
exposed neck, but there was only gristle and muscle, and the neck
was so thick that not much damage was done. The beast scooped
up a fallen spear between its teeth, actually employing its head in
preference to its hand-hoof, and shoved it through the ninja's chest.
Then its sharp rear hoofs finished off the fallen Tanaka.

"I begin to comprehend," Hiroshi said. "The beast-man-he
was an alien creature from another planet circling another star.
From-he paused to read the moving fingers carefully. "From Betelgeuse,
the red giant, six hundred and fifty light years from here.
He crashed, but he was suspended in a special bath of oil with an
oxygen mask, an impact-chamber. So he survived, and to cover his
traces he blew up the remains of the ship. Which suggests that he
 
352
was a criminal among his kind, a fugitive from justice. And now he
is among us."
But that was not all. The ninjas had covered up the site of the
crash because it was too close to the Black Castle. Hiroshi was not
in complete sympathy with the ninjas' single-minded determination
to protect the secret of their stronghold, but he honored their
ways, and so was trusted by them.
But now the Beast posed a real problem. It was from an advanced
interstellar culture and possessed some sophisticated technological
devices. It craved power, so it was setting out to establish
an empire here on Earth before its irreplaceable devices wore out
or malfunctioned beyond the point of repair. It was no scientist or
craftsman; it could not duplicate what it had saved from the ship.
So it had to use all its resources now to achieve its ambition.
This was the cause of the current crime wave. The Beast had
succeeded in making contact with a Yakuza gang, and had quickly
made it a far more formidable organization, and used it to control
the others of that ilk. It had either eliminated or absorbed all the
moneymaking rackets in rival hands, and would soon be a political
force to be reckoned with. In fact, the day was not far off when it
would take over the government itself.
"This must not be," Hiroshi murmured. "The Beast of Betelgeuse
must be nullified."
Fu Antos' hoary head nodded almost imperceptibly. He did
not care about the world, but he respected Hiroshi's humanitarian
concerns. Hiroshi was one of his few liaisons with civilization, and
one year Hiroshi would facilitate events that would enable the
ninja lord to free himself of this hulk of a body. Also, the Beast had
killed four of his ninjas and three good dogs, and that required an
accounting. He signaled again with his fingers. "Take Mario and
those ninjas you require. Bring the body to me. Do not let the
authorities know what has happened." Because, to Fu Antos, privacy
was more important than the welfare of the world. If news of
the Beast, alive or dead, got out, it might complicate the ninja's
secrecy.
353
"Surely it is not necessary to kill the Beast," Hiroshi protested.
Fu Antos dismissed that with a disdainful crook of one little
Then Hiroshi realized what he was up against. But the job
Fu Antos responded with the mere shrug of one withered
"It must possess secrets of immense value to the world."
finger. "It is criminal-and telepathic."
had to be done. "I will deal with it-my way."
knuckle.
*
Mario and the three ninjas closed in on the lair of the Beast of
Betelgeuse. This was a condominium in a quality residential district
of Tokyo. Criminals occupied every apartment, but they behaved
with such law-abiding decorum that they were a credit to
the neighborhood. It was amazing how little difference there was
between them and legitimate businessmen.
Then there were sophisticated electronic devices protecting
the building, for it is often the criminal mind that most fears crime.
Not merely the best equipment that the technology of Japan could
produce-which of course was the best in the world-but also

clever little robots constructed from plans the Beast had salvaged-
perhaps stolen-from its home system. They could lock onto the
life emanations of a given person, track him down relentlessly, and
destroy him with a laser beam to a vital area. the ninjas' misgiving
about the decline of the fine art of assassination were misplaced, at
least in this instance; the little robots were quality killers. They
were also good guards, incorruptible-and once the gang gained
control of a major electronics company, those machines would be
mass-produced. Then the Beast would be invulnerable. But at the
moment there were only three of them.
This was where Mario Garcia came in. He was a tall albino lad
with whitish blond hair, thin and nervous, a half-crazed Cuban
exile and self-styled "Slan" who had tried to destroy the United
Nations. He was also telekenetic-a freakish psi talent. He could
 
354
fix on metal objects with his mind and move them about. Because
he had used his talent wildly, and tried to hurt people, he had
been taken in charge by Fu Antos, the only man who could control
him. It would not be safe to expose him to the temptations of
the world long, as his mind was not yet completely pacified, but
this mission required his unique skill.
Mario's mind spread out to infiltrate the locks and alarms and
booby traps of the building and nullify them. All had vital components
of metal, so all were vulnerable. The little robots were
largely metal too. They were more of a challenge, being of alien
conception, but still subject to his domination. One, two, three,
they went dead. The young man nodded to his companions.
Now the ninjas infiltrated. Disdaining the usual entrance, they
employed their metal tigers-claws to scale the walls; they pried
open high windows with special tools. Silently they entered. An
internal sentry spotted one; the ninja silenced him with a strangling
cord and tied him up, unconscious. He did not kill, for
Hiroshi had forbidden it, and the ninjas obeyed him implicitly
despite his absence. This was the problem about working with a
humanitarian; he imposed unrealistic restrictions and reduced the
pleasure, not to mention the effectiveness, of the mission. A few
little killings would have done so much for morale.
The ninjas obeyed, but in Mario's mind was barely-suppressed
contempt for the little Aikidoist. He knew Hiroshi could fight, for
the man had originally subdued him and brought him captive to
the dank dull Black Castle. But he also knew that Hiroshi's vaunted
power of ki, that mysterious inner force that some martial artists
possessed, had only barely prevailed over Mario's own telekinesis.
Had the little ascetic not had Fu Antos to back him up-in fact,
Mario had learned enough during his bondage to overcome
Hiroshi's ki. But he couldn't make his break while Fu Antos lived,
for Fu had ki like the faith to move mountains, and toughness of
mind to match. Fortunately the Lord of the Ninjas was very old;
he could not survive much longer. Even that awesome ki could not
maintain life in a body rotting out from under it. Not indefinitely.
355
So for now Mario would do the jobs that the ninja master assigned
him, like the elimination of the pig-man. It should be no problem,
with the ninjas to do the physical chores, and Mario to control
the metals.
But the raiding party had reckoned without the telepathy of
the Beast. Deep in the heart of the building the alien was well
aware of the raid. It dispatched thugs to engage the ninjas and to
close in on Mario. This would take a little time, for now nothing
mechanical or electronic was operative, including the elevators and
intercom system, and the ninjas were expert fighters, and he wanted
Mario alive. Mario could be very useful to the Beast! There would
be no problem obtaining Mario's cooperation, after the ninjas were

out of the way, because the Beast could offer Mario exactly what
he wanted: power and freedom. Victory was sure, for neither Mario
nor the ninjas knew what they were up against. Their thoughts
were open books.
Alone, the Beast waited, monitoring the progress of both thugs
and raiders. This was a challenge, because its telepathy was shortrange;
it faded rapidly beyond a few feet, and was diluted by multiple
foci. As a man has difficulty distinguishing anything when
several people talk at once, so it had to work to make sense out of
any single mind in the jumble. But the Beast was of a telepathic
species, long adapted to this type of problem; it enjoyed the challenge
in much the same fashion Mario enjoyed the challenge of
disabling alien machinery. It skipped from mind to mind as a man
tunes a radio when looking for a weather forecast, catching tantalizing
snatches here and there, pausing occasionally, then moving
on during commercials.
Then the Beast became aware of something strange and alarming.
There was a dead spot nearby, a presence that was alive but
did not seem to think. Close, too close. In fact it was in this room.
The Beast cast about, using its physical senses that it had necessarily
tuned out to avoid interference with the telepathy. So it
saw and smelled the mental ghost: a small, whiskery old man
"How do you do?" Hiroshi inquired politely in Japanese, mak-
 
356
ing one of his little bows.
Amazed, the Beast reacted involuntarily. It charged the intruder.
But the little man moved with remarkable alacrity, avoiding
the ripping tusk.
The Beast, no fool, desisted at the physical level and concentrated
on the mental. Normally it scored accurately with its weapons
because it was aware of the intentions of its opponents. In this
manner it had killed four ninjas in the forest while still shaken
from the crash-landing. The ninjas had reacted almost without
thinking, so that they had been able to wound it, but ultimately
they had had to plan their attacks, and that had been their undoing.
Now-
The Beast paused, dismayed. This man had no mind!
"It is the ki, and my Zen mind training," Hiroshi explained
helpfully. "I can not duplicate your talent, but I can nullify its
application to me. You can not read my mind."
The Beast tired. To it, a person without a mind was like an
animal without a smell: baffling. But Hiroshi's ki surrounded him,
making him opaque to the creature's mind-probe. This was why
he had been able to sneak in here, under cover of the distraction
created by Mario and the ninjas, who did not know Hiroshi had
preceded them. Without that feedback, the guidance of the prey's
own mind, the alien was in effect blinded. It emitted a frustrated
blast of emotion as red and hot as its native star, Betelgeuse, two
hundred and fifty times as large as Earth's sun and three thousand
times as luminous.
"Ah, so you can broadcast too," Hiroshi remarked. "You are
very talented. Why do you abuse your powers?"
THINK YOU CAN BALK ME?! the savage thought came
through, piercing Hiroshi's aura of ki and entering his mind like a
spear through froth. Yet thought alone could not hurt the tough
little man, and that same froth so fuzzed his own emissions of
thought that they were meaningless to the Beast. I KILL!
But it was an empty threat. On the purely physical level, without
mind contact, the Beast was a clumsy monster, while the man
357
was a finely trained combat specialist. The martial art of Aikido
was recognized the world over as one of the most effective modes of
self defense known. Policemen used it to control criminals, and

even experts in karate, judo, and kung fu respected it. Hiroshi was
the leading figure in Aikido. Old and feeble as he seemed, he could
not be touched by the Beast-as long as he was on guard.
Of course, if the Beast kept him occupied long enough, the
thugs would have time to eliminate the ninjas-probably at great
loss, for ninjas were deadly in close quarters, like weaponed ghosts-
or get to Mario. When the machines resumed functioning, Hiroshi
would be caught in this trap. Then-!
"It would be better to talk," Hiroshi said mildly, seeming to
be unaware of the plots fulminating in the Beast's brain. His ki
did not interfere with his spoken voice, so the Beast could understand
him well enough. "You could do so much good in this world,
if you would. But you associate with criminals."
Sorry the Beast projected contritely. It could not speak physically,
as its snout and palate were not formed for this. I thought you
were an assassin, come to kill me. I must protect myself.
"I may be your assassin," Hiroshi agreed. "But not if I can find
a better way. My purpose is to save my world from disaster, for
there remains much good in it. If I can persuade you to use your
powers to facilitate that good instead of for your personal power,
then we shall have no quarrel."
Something like a sneer rippled through the Beast's brain. A
do-gooder! It had dealt with this kind before, in its home-system.
Too bad the home authorities had caught on.
Now the Beast projected its sad story. It was, it explained in
regretful mental tones, a refugee from a distant planet, no criminal
but a victim of circumstance. It had publicly criticized the criminal
government of its planet, and had had to flee that region of
space to avoid execution. The civilization of Betelgeuse was a marvelous
thing, with miracles of science, art, and philosophy, but the
wrong element had somehow managed to get into power. Much
as, it pointed out obliquely, had happened not so long ago in the
 
358
Earthly nation of Germany, precipitating global war, and even more
recently in America, and might conceivably happen in a more civilized
nation such as Japan itself some day. So the Beast-no beast,
but an important person, like a noble, had fled. But its ship had
malfunctioned six hundred light years out, and it had barely made
it a scant fifty more light years to a habitable planet. It survived
the crash, but when it tried to make contact with the nearby ninjas,
they had attacked it. So it had had to fight.
Hiroshi frowned. "True. You did not initiate hostilities. The
dogs could not be restrained."
So the Beast/Noble had avoided that type of savage and trusted
no one. Instead it had made contact with people it need have no
compunction about controlling: Japan's criminal element. The
Beast had made these criminals into good citizens. If it could rehabilitate
hardened thugs, think what it could do for ordinary citizens!
"Yet you are forming an empire based on crime," Hiroshi
pointed out gently.
Only to start, the Noble Beast explained. When it had taken
over all the criminals and made them honest, productive citizens,
it would proceed to the politicians and financiers and industrial
barons and make them honest. Then there would be good government
and good economics and the world would become a better
place for everyone.
"This is intriguing," Hiroshi admitted. "Yet I must mistrust
any person or thing who seeks such absolute power for itself, however
excellent the objective. Power tends to corrupt."
Not for myself, the Beast projected with strong emanations of
sincerity. This fool was taking the bait! Mario's thought had been
correct: Hiroshi was not really so much. He was an altruist, therefore
gullible. There were no mind readers on this planet to spill

the Betelgeuse beans. I will install the best possible man in the world
as Emperor, to rule wisely and well. It will be an iridium age.
Hiroshi shook his head, half convinced. "No man could do it,
especially not as your puppet."
359
No man but one, the Beast projected, stepping closer. The one I
have chosen is-you.
"Me!" Hiroshi exclaimed. "I am no-"
You are genuinely incorruptible, no figurehead. You care about the
world. You must be Emperor. The Beast nudged up another foot. Its
left tusk was now very near Hiroshi's head. The powerful neck
muscles tensed.
And Hiroshi flicked one finger at a spot on the Beast's forehead.
It was a hard strike, for the finger was braced by ki and years
of training to be like an iron bar. The Beast fell, numbed. Hiroshi
had scored on its one vulnerability, that spot where the juncture of
the two sutures of the skull bones conducted even the lightest
shock to the sensitive brain.
What gave me away? it projected weakly.
"Your assumption about the basic corruptibility of man,"
Hiroshi replied sadly. "You thought every man had his price, and
you tried to bribe me with the promise of power. This betrayed
the ultimate nature of your thinking. No fire will temper bad
metal into a good sword, alas. I am sorry I was unable to persuade
you."
So am I the Beast projected. Then a black hole opened up, as
of a giant red star collapsing into nothingness, and its life expired.
A great tree has fallen in the forest, Hiroshi thought sadly. What
sound might it have made, had it stood?
 
KIAI!-HOW IT BEGAN
Piers put his arm around Roberto's neck and slowly applied
pressure. Roberto's breathing became harsh and his eyes bulged as
the blood was cut off. It was the hadaka jime, or naked strangle.
Then Roberto applied a crushing ude gatame armlock, a submission
hold that can readily dislocate an elbow, making Piers yelp
with pain . . .
It all started almost five years ago with an irate post card.
Things often get violent in science fiction fandom, where professionals
and amateurs spar in a perpetual free-for-all. Novelist
Piers Anthony had skirmishes with several fanzines, which are smallcirculation
amateur magazines published for personal satisfaction.
One of these printed a letter by a critical reader, Roberto Fuentes:
"Piers Anthony is not my favorite author . . ."
Fighting words! But Piers, adept in his fashion at the principle
of ju, or yielding to gain an advantage, sent Roberto a card: "Are
you Spanish? I used to live in Spain . . ."
No, Roberto was Cuban. And soon the two collaborated on a
science fiction novel, Dead Morn, centered around the 1962 Cuban
Missile Crisis. It was a major work, that should have made
both authors famous.
That was in 1970-and the novel remains on the market.
Perhaps its 115,000 word length scares off publishers. Or the
 
362
graphic sex and violence. Or the authentic detail exposing the
manner Fidel Castro came to power. Or the new thinking in time
travel. One publisher has taken a year considering the manuscript,
and has not yet made a report. The editor says he is still reading it.
Another publisher was interested-but then fired 200 employees
and returned the novel. Publishing, actually, can be considered as
a form of martial art; writers have to be tough.
In 1971 Roberto brought his wife Graciela and seven year old
son Robertico to visit Piers in Florida. Piers lives in an old Spanish-

style house with his wife Cam and daughters Penny and Cheryl.
Roberto took Piers to see a judo class in Tampa. Roberto was 2
Dan, a second degree black belt in judo; Piers had never seen judo
in action. The instructor was Ed Maley, 5 Dan.
Piers sat and watched-and started writing a story, "Kiai!" It
featured a 5 Dan judo instructor who looked a bit like Ed Maley,
but was called Caesar Kane: Kane as in Kano, the founder of judo.
Roberto provided the judo action for the story, and the team was
launched in a new field: martial arts fiction.
"Kiai!" never sold. The world was not ready for competent
martial arts fiction. Undaunted, we built it into a novel, Kiai!,
incorporating a notion that intrigued us both: competition between
different martial arts, to discover once and for all which was
best. Naturally judo came out on top-but we feel this is more
than empty vanity, for judo incorporates the strikes of karate and
armlocks of aikido, making it the broadest barehand martial art in
the world. We believe that judo should win such a tournament.
Half a dozen publishers rejected the novel. Oh, it was well
enough done-but they said there was no reader interest in martial
arts. Who cared about judo or karate-and who had even heard
of kung fu or Thai kick-boxing? Forget it!
Then Kung Fu appeared on TV, a well-done martial art series,
and suddenly publishers were scrambling for martial art. Kiai! was
snapped up, and other publishers put their hack stables to work
turning out kung fu imitations. Our hero's name had to be changed
to Jason Striker; after all, who would believe we had "Kane" before
363
Kung Fu had "Caine"? But a typical editorial foulup allowed a
couple of references to Kane to slip through to confuse readers.
Roberto started as the judoka, Piers the author. But this collaboration
changed the lives of both. Roberto is becoming an author,
doing reviews and articles for JUDO TIMES and collaborating
with magazine editor Steranko on an atemi article and martial
arts poster. Piers has taken up judo, making his yellow belt and
having his first competition match at age 40. It was against a 14
year old boy, another yellow belt, and yes, Piers lost: waza ari, a
half point decision.
Who can say that the time will not come when Roberto is an
individual novelist and Piers a black belt? We all have to start somewhere.
At any rate, it was in this fashion that the two came to the
friendly practice described in our opening scene. Roberto was showing
Piers how to apply strangles and armlocks, and also what they
felt like. That knowledge would in due course be translated into a
scene in another book.
We are not unduly modest. We'll stack our collaborative fiction
up against anything else in the genre. In fact, much of the
competition does not seem to be written with much literary or
martial authority. You can't simply read a book on kung fu or
karate, go to a few practice sessions, and be an instant black belt!
We are prepared to defend that statement against the challenge of
any rival authors either on the judo mat or in the literary arena.
Roberto is the former black belt champion of Cuba, who retired
undefeated. He was for many years a teacher of judo with his own
dojo, and is the present Metropolitan Master champion. He recently
made 3 Dan, third degree black belt or San Dan, as a competitor.
Piers, a former English teacher, has sold 16 science fiction
and fantasy novels, several of which have been in contention for
best-of-year awards. His major novel Macroscope will have its sixth
printing in 1975.
Our four collaborative martial arts novels, Kiai!, Mistress of Death,
The Bamboo Bloodbath and Ninja (the one-word titles are ours;
the others are the publishers, so don't blame us) exploit our re-
 
364

spective skills. We have also had one fantasy/martial art story published,
"Ki," and are working on a factual history of judo. We do a
great deal of research, so as to make our work authentic, and try to
avoid formula plotting end stereotyped characterization.
But we are limited. Most editors have little notion of the meaning
of martial art. To them, it is just a current fad, a way to sell a
few more books. We have to compromise with this attitude, or we
will not be published. We were turned down by one publisher for
not having an oriental hero. So there is some junk in Kiai!, and
more in the sequels. Still, we feel that some of the other books in
the genre are fantastic and unreal. Some are entertaining and decently
written; some aren't. But the fact is, even the greatest fighter
in the world can not go barehanded against five men armed with
guns and come out alive. Even one armed novice is dangerous, and
as for machine-guns in the open-frankly our martial artist would
be cut to pieces. We do have group fights and gun scenes, but we
have tried for some credibility. A couple of our characters have
gone up against impossible odds-and died in the process. Jason
Striker is extremely wary of guns and other weapons, though it
makes him seem like a coward at times.
We have incorporated as much genuine martial art as we could.
We made our protagonist into a real man in today's world. He's 5
Dan in judo, 3 Dan in karate, with training in kung fu (actually
that's a misnomer for the entire complex of Chinese physical exercise;
it would make as much sense to talk about a black belt in
American PhysEd) and aikido. This is not extreme; there are a
number of 5 Dan judokas in America, such as our model Ed Maley,
and any one of them could match Jason Striker in competition, if
they are not too old. Many martial artists study several systems,
and hold black belts in each. In one novel Striker has a friendly
match with a lame Cuban judoka, and loses. That judoka, Luis
Guardia, is real. So Striker is not superhuman. He fights well, but
he gets tired, and he makes mistakes.
Sometimes Striker "runs the line" contesting with every student
in the class, one after the other. This can be devilishly diffi-
365
cult, because the instructor has no respite, while every student is
fresh and eager to pull an upset victory. This is drawn from experience:
Roberto visited the Gulfport, Florida Judo Club and ran the
line. One of the eager students he casually threw was Piers. Fortunately
Roberto made it through in good form: dead tired but victorious
in every match. It can be done, even by a man of forty.
Other episodes in the series are also drawn from real life, such as
accidentally strangling a too-ambitious student into unconsciousness,
or getting an arm broken in competition. Roberto's arm never
has mended completely.
Striker is also uncertain in love. More than one woman has
found him a bit naive, even stuffy. One kicked him in the crotch,
putting him in the hospital. He encounters all kinds: white, yellow,
black, Indian, slender, voluptuous, mild, murderous. Sometimes
it is romance, sometimes combat, or both at once. Yet here
too there is reality, for most of the women are drawn from life, as
are the love scenes. Roberto had a varied education before settling
down to marriage.
Many of the characters, while fictional, are representations of
real people. There is an American boxer modeled after Mohammed
Ali, who we feel was wronged by the political deprivation of his
world boxing title some years back; a karateka like Mas Oyama,
and aikidoist like Morihei Uyeshiba. Striker's arch-enemy Kan-
Sen in real life is Mockansen, no villain but a Cuban/Chinese master
of Kung Fu who instructed Roberto more than twenty years
ago, before that mode became popular here. The names of some
real people, like Diago, are used with fictional identities. The leading
fictional character, Fu Antos, lord of the ninjas, derives from the

authors' names: FUenteS and ANThOny.
The locales, too, are authentic. When Striker goes to Havana,
the city is described as though by someone who lived there, as
Roberto did. He also lived in others we use: Managua, Nicaragua;
Miami, Florida; even New York City, in many ways the strangest
of all. When Striker is in the jungle or Everglades, one of us has
been there before him, and we have supplemented our observa-
 
366
tions by extensive research. Roberto was a Cuban exile commando
in the same Central American jungles that are described in our
novels. When there is a bomb, we know how to build it, for Roberto
was active in the anti-Castro underground as an urban terrorist
and guerrilla, and he did make bombs and set them off.
But more important, we try to put something in our books
that is worth having. Judo is more than a system of combat; it is a
philosophy, even a way of life. Striker is hardly the perfect judoka;
there is blood on his hands, thanks to the demands of the genre.
But he believes in the ideals of judo, and tries to practice them,
and when he falls short he suffers. In that aspiration and failure we
try to show what judo is and should be.
We tackle significant issues. We analyze the drug problem as it
applies to martial arts, not as a plotting device (Superman come
quick! There's a shipload of heroin docking in Miami!) but to show
the harm drugs do, and what contemporary efforts are being made
to rehabilitate addicts. No, we haven't been hooked on drugs in
real life, but we have known those who were. Piers actually walked
into a juvenile drug rehabilitation center, telling them frankly why
he wanted information: that he was doing a book with an addict
character, and that one recommended treatment for his own hyperactive
daughter was to put her on speed. So he had both professional
and personal motive to learn about drugs. The interview in
which they refused to cooperate appears in The Bamboo Bloodbath,
except that Striker does, after all, get in. We don't think much of
outfits that preach love but operate in secrecy. Abuse is too easy,
not only of drugs, but of human civil rights.
We tackle racism: our criminal/heroine is a black karateka, raped
by white men, with vengeance in her soul yet justice in her motive.
While we can't claim to know what it is to be black, one of us
has mixed ancestry and both of us are immigrants from foreign
countries. One of us was raised in a society remarkably free from
prejudice, especially in boy-girl relations; the other resides in the
South. It does provide a hint.
We tackle pollution, as our ninja sets out to rid the world of it.
367
And history, with actual events adapted to our purpose.
In short, under the veneer of physical and emotional violence
and sex, we have a serious philosophy of creation. Roberto reads
English, Spanish and French, so that he can do more varied research.
(Piers knew Spanish as a child, but forgot it.) We have
assembled a martial arts library including expensive books and
backfiles of rare martial arts magazines, such as the French/English
JUDO KODOKAN REVIEW, and we read them.
It hasn't shown up much yet in the series-after all, there are
only so many pages to a commercial novel-but both authors are
in their separate fashions health nuts. Piers is a vegetarian who
uses massive doses of vitamin C to abate colds. It works, though he
spends about $100 a year on C. He stays clear of sugar and refined
foods, preferring breakfasts of rolled oats with milk, spiked with
wheat germ and nutritive yeast, and lunches of raisins, nuts and
cheese, plus salads from his own garden. He has cleaned the debris
from his neighborhood to make compost for the garden; the neighbors
are trained to dump their brush on his lot. Even complete
trees. There will soon be a natural foods and cheese connoisseur in

the series.
Roberto is a sun worshiper, frustrated by New Jersey climate.
He has his poor wife cooking odd stuff like hearts, brains and kidneys
all the time. He gives his son Robertico (who also appears in
Ninja) so much milk to drink (instead of soft drinks, which are
taboo) that some say the boy will one day urinate white.
Neither author smokes, both are extremely moderate drinkers,
and both go for high-protein, high vitamin and mineral diets.
Both believe in exercise, much of which is provided by judo. It is
hardly surprising that Jason Striker has similar attitudes.
Despite all this agreement, at times we work at cross purposes.
Roberto prefers big, hefty, hourglass-shaped women like the Cuban
girl Dulce, while Piers tries to slim them down to more petite
dimensions. Generally we compromise by including both types.
Sometimes things get fouled up in the course of negotiations, and
we find ourselves in print with a Chinese girl with a Japanese name,
 
368
such as Striker's fiancee Chiyako. Alas, we were paying more attention
to the size of her bust than to her locale. We'll have to make a
rationale for that error in a later novel.
In our actual writing, we discuss notions first in a general way,
then hammer out a plot to carry the elements we want to include.
There is always much more than we can use; both of us have fertile
imaginations, and the problem is always to cut it down to manageable
size. Sometimes we just split the idea into smaller segments;
that's how Ninja spread into four ninja novels now being
written. Generally Roberto dictates the story line; just about the
whole of Mistress of Death was his notion, except for the moderate
bosom of Chiyako, and the detail of what happened to that bosom
in a broken-bottle fight.
This preparation is slow by mail, and sometimes dangerous.
We once lost two weeks work via the mails. (Fortunately there was
a carbon. ALWAYS KEEP A CARBON COPY!) Since we meet
every year or so, we enter into hours-long dialogue a bit like judo
randori or free practice, bouncing ideas off each other, fitting them
together, amplifying, integrating characters with action. In a few
hours we can thrash out what might take months by letter, In
August 1974, sitting on the beach (Roberto edging toward the
sun, Piers toward the shade), we worked out four novels and the
judo history book-one day apiece. Of course, much remained to
be done, but the framework was set, so that we knew where we
were going, and were assured that there would be no major snags.
Not at our end, anyway; we are never assured that publishers will
take a given novel.
Roberto then goes to work on research, summarizing relevant
material and mailing it to Florida. Often he sends whole books.
Piers then does a first draft in pencil, integrating research notes,
outline, and theme in a readable narrative. This is his special skill
as a writer; lots of people have ideas and information, but few can
translate these into readable prose. When he has a chapter or so,
he types it in second draft, with parenthetical remarks set off by
brackets. These brackets can be one word or several hundred, and
369
they can trigger off pages of discussion by Roberto. [Hey, I'm stuck
for a good illustrative example here. Any ideas?]
"About the example: Do not forget mentioning my commando
days in Nicaragua. I lived in Managua for 6 months. Amalita, the
girl in the first two novels, was alive and well in Managua, at least
up till the earthquake, she and I used to go to her house and-"
[Roberto, I can't put that in print; they'd have to censor it out.
Anyway, I've already typed past that place in this piece.]
"Well, what about the time I was in jail, Cabanas Fortress in
Cuba, paredon the death wall, etc.-we could tie that into the

Brazilian prison scene we are working on. But we'll have to explain
about political prison, so the readers don't think I was a criminal."
And so it goes. When Piers hits a snag, he brackets it for Roberto
to sweat and goes on. No doubt these letter/manuscripts will make
fascinating reading for scholars at Syracuse University library, where
Piers's papers are eventually collected. Perhaps in the twenty-
second century A.D., when books are no longer written and the
science of writing has become a lost art. This article was done the
same way, so represents a capsule case-history of our system.
Roberto goes over the manuscript and remarks on both the
brackets and any other points that strike him. The result is a letter
of comment about the same length as the manuscript itself. Piers
plugs in all these corrections-a slow, tedious job, more like piecing
together broken pottery than creating-then types the submission
manuscript. After that the changes stop, for the publisher's
deadline is upon us and the book must get there immediately.
Unfortunately, some errors slip through. For example, in Mistress
of Death Roberto typoed "crowd" as "crow." Piers didn't question
it; he thought it was a nice touch. Thus we have crows clustering
around the shops in Chinatown. May the Chinese Americans
forgive us!
The truth is that collaboration is hard work. Each of us puts
about as much effort into a book as he would writing the whole
thing alone, yet each gets only half the money. And the result is
necessarily a compromise between our viewpoints. But we don't
 
370
argue much, not even about bosoms. It will be a long time, if ever,
before Piers can tell a judo black belt how to perform a given technique,
and perhaps as long before Roberto educates any English
teacher on the nuances of the subjunctive mood. In the vast majority
of cases we see eye to eye. And why not? We are both college
educated married males with a number of common interests.
Oh yes, we can be set off by outsiders. Once a bully started in
on a smaller man in a post office, making ethnic slurs, and Roberto
stepped in ready to fight. A version of that episode leads off our
fourth novel, Ninja. If anyone goes after Piers' little girls, he comes
running and ugly. The girls carry a whistle, just in case. But we
regard these as natural provocations; we try to get along, and the
last thing we want is trouble with each other. So we have none.
Which seems to be half the secret of successful collaboration.
But why bother to collaborate at all? Because we have complementary
skills, so that together we can produce material that neither
could alone. We don't care enough about the money to turn
out cheap work. We try to do our best, even when it is straight
adventure. We like to think that readers of discretion will recognize
and appreciate a superior product, even if many editors don't.
In the long run we believe that will pay-but even if it doesn't in
terms of money, it will in satisfaction. As this article shows, we
stand by what we do.
AUTHORS' NOTE: This article was published in the magazine
THE DEADLY HANDS OF KUNG FU, June 1975 issue. In
the ensuing quarter century some things changed, dating the piece
somewhat. Piers' daughters are no longer children, and the novel
Dead Morn did find a publisher, for a good price. Piers' 16 novels
became 116 and counting. Both authors now live in Florida,
Roberto in the Miami area, Piers in the backwoods, actually a tree
farm.
WINDBREAKER
 
Chapter 1:
Cry For Help
Jose woke alertly. The clock said 6 a.m., but it was already too
late. The door was opening, its warning buzzer expertly shorted

out, and a Beretta was trained on him. This was a professional call.
He sat up in bed, drawing the sheet up to cover his bulging
naked belly. Jose was a dark, swarthy man with a slight Chinese
look. "To what do I owe the pleasure of this visit, Señors?" he
inquired.
"Don't play cagey with me, spic," the gunman snapped. Two
large, grim men trooped in behind him. "The details-now."
Jose turned on him a gaze of bewildered innocence. He had
black eyes in a fat face that enhanced the effect. "Señor, I have no
comprehension!"
The man glanced at his gun. It was a .32 automatic with a
silencer attached. Then he used it to gesture to one of his companions.
That one drew a stiletto and approached Jose. The needle
point touched the fat of the belly through the sheet.
Jose sweated. He had an oily skin that made the sweat show
up rapidly. He scratched nervously at the pimple on his nose. He
smiled ingratiatingly, showing his prominent front gold tooth.
 
374
"Not the pot," the gunman said. "We don't have time for the
fine points. Make him talk fast."
The knifeman looked disappointed. He made a little gesture
with the knife. Jose got the message. He stood up, a dribble of
blood emerging from his navel where the point had lodged. The
sheet fell away, and he was naked.
The stiletto moved down to the exposed crotch. "First balk,
one ball," the gunman said. "Second balk, other ball. After that it
will get uncomfortable-but you will talk."
Jose knew they were not bluffing. These were professionals,
and the man with the knife was a sadist. The eagerness to carve
shone in his face. He wanted his victim to balk.
Jose smoothed back his greasy black hair. "Señors, the police
are on their way," he said, "The alarm is under the bed. It went off
when my weight lifted. If you leave right now-"
The third man bent quickly to check the bed. Neither of the
others moved; they watched suspiciously.
"Bastard's right," the man said. "There's a spring-release contact
under the front bedleg. Hand cutoff he didn't use. He suckered
us."
"I'll take his ears for that!" the knifeman snarled,
But the gunman shook his head, smiling. "We heard you were
sharp, spic. I'd have been suspicious if you hadn't pulled something
like this, You know we can't kill you and run, because we
don't have the info out of you yet. And you'd like us to try to haul
you out of here, with all your friends watching. We can't move
you, dead or alive." He looked out the window, sighting down the
alley. "And there's the police now, coming in quiet. One blocking
off the back exit. Very neat." He paused momentarily. "But I think
we'll bluff it out, this time." He nodded to the knifeman.
The knifeman straightened, reversed his blade, and expertly
sapped Jose above the ear. Jose pitched forward, his face crashing
into the floor, and lay still.
Then, rapidly, the men tied and gagged him. They did a competent
job of both, putting tape over the gag so that he was barely
375
able to breathe; his wrists and feet were tied together, with a cord
stretching up into a noose around his neck. If he tried to kick, the
motion would tighten the loop and strangle him.
As the heavy footfalls of the police came down the hall, they
propped Jose in the solid clothes closet, the hanging suits further
muffling him. There would be no sound from him.
Sergeant O'Brien entered. The three hoods were comfortable,
drinking Jose's rum over a hand of poker. Two sat in chairs, the
third on the bed. The radio played a jangly tune, a little too loud.

"What's the story?" O'Brien demanded, It was an impressive
opening, for he was a solid six-two with a red face, and spoke with
the authority of twenty years on the force.
All three looked up, startled, "You can't break in here!" the
leader exclaimed righteous indignation. "This is a private apartment!"
"Where's Juan Jose?" O'Brien snapped,
"He stepped out to fetch some girls," the gunman said. "About
ten minutes ago. He'll be back soon. This is his place, you know."
"I know. We got the alarm signal and I answered it personally.
What did do with him?"
"Do? Us? Officer, we're his friends, just in for a game of cards
and some fun." The man bounced on the bed. "He promised me a
real Chicano girl, know what I mean? I can hardly sit still."
Sergeant O'Brien looked at him, realizing that such bouncing
could have triggered the alarm, especially if Jose were not there to
neutralize it. Was this a false alarm?
For a moment the policeman stood perplexed. He didn't have
time to waste waiting around, and he didn't want to make a scene
for nothing. The alarm had gone off, but Jose did have many odd
friends, some distinctly thug-like. The chances were that this was
legitimate.
He turned-and heard a faint cry. "Help!"
Immediately his gun was in his hand, cautioning the three
men to silence and immobility. They were professionals in their
business-but so was he. No one moved. The outside policeman
 
376
came in to help while O'Brien walked around the apartment, listening,
He turned off the loud radio.
Again it came, more distinct this time. "He-e-lp!" The voice
was raspingly hoarse, and ended in a staccato croak, but the word
was plain.
The gunman went for his gun. It was a mistake. The officer's
bullet caught him in the shoulder.
O'Brien yanked open the closet door. There was Jose's posterior
under the suits. In a moment they had him out.
The sergeant got to work on the bonds, cutting the chokerope
and freeing the hands and feet. Then he removed the tight
gag and tape. Jose was purple from slow suffocation, and there was
blood on his lip where the edge of the gag had sawed in. He gasped
for air, then rubbed the circulation back into his hands and feet.
"Thanks, Mick!" he grunted. "I was on the verge of suffering discomfort."
"You were on the verge of ending all suffering," O'Brien said.
"You should have better taste in friends."
"Amigo, I shall heed your advice. Tomorrow."
The three hoods stared. "He was still tied and gagged," the
knifeman said, "He couldn't have called!"
"Sure he couldn't!" O'Brien agreed heartily. "Good thing I
imagined I was hearing a cry for help."
"But I heard it too!" the third thug said, "But how could he
have-?"
"All right, you three. March!" the policeman said. But there
was a brief delay while he saw to the bullet wound in the shoulder.
O'Brien drooped the banter and looked at Jose with concern.
"You okay now, Juan?"
"Fine-now," Jose said.
"Why were they after you? Or can you tell me that?"
Jose shook his head. "Amigo, I do not know. If I had anticipated
company, I would surely have been better prepared." He
gestured apologetically at his nakedness. "I was merely reposing
between assignments."
"God, the spic even lies to his friends!" the wounded gunman
said.
Jose looked at him. "Not at all, senor. I do not lie to my

friends-or my enemies. I did not lie to you. I do not know what
you wanted of me-but now I shall do my best to find out."
"Hey, none of that here!" O'Brien cautioned. "They're in police
custody now, and one's wounded."
Jose smiled. "Certainly, amigo. I meant only that I shall investigate.
If this man and I should meet again, after he is free on bail,
perhaps then I shall question him a trifle more firmly."
The gunman sneered. "Fat chance, fat boy!"
"The name is Juan Jose." Jose pronounced it the Spanish way,
'Wan Hosay,' "Kindly remember it, for I shall remember you."
"Hah! Flabby coward like you-"
But the policeman was already herding them out.
"How did he call for help?" the third hood echoed plaintively
as they left.
 
377
Chapter 2:
Assignment
Juan Jose rubbed his head where the butt of the knife had
struck. He had not been knocked out, but it had seemed best to
play dead. Amateurs could be tricked and overpowered, but he
would have been shot if he had tried anything fancy on these operators.
Well, perhaps not if he had moved quickly enough and neutralized
the gun first. But that would have been a calculated risk
that did not appeal. A man did not survive in this business long if
he took unnecessary risks-especially when the solution to this
particular problem had been so easy. One little cry for help!
Still, the blow had hurt, and the bonds had not been comfortable
Those men had really known how to tie a man so he stayed.
He went to the bathroom and mopped his face in cold water.
His fingers brushed over the wart on his cheek. It was smaller than
it had been a couple of weeks before; he would have to work on it.
He looked at his body in the full-length bathroom mirror.
Bad, bad-he was getting too lean and muscular. He would have
to do something about that, too. Another half inch of blubber on
his belly, some fat under the jaw-if he cocked his head back he
379
could still make a nice double chin, but it didn't look quite natural.
Jose sighed. There was no way around it: he would have to go
on a diet. Minimum of five thousand calories a day, mostly in
sweets and pastries, until he regained his proper rotundity.
Meanwhile he had dirt on his ass. He stepped into the shower
and rinsed it off in lukewarm water. Then he hefted himself on the
bar over the stall, doing pull-ups one-handed: six with the right,
six with the left. Sure enough, it was too easy; the solid muscle was
sheathed by only a thin layer of fat.
He shook himself dry like a dog, feeling his entire gut swing
back and forth with the motion. Then he stepped on the scale.
Two hundred and thirty pounds. He shook his head sadly.
This was sloppy as hell! At this rate his feet would hardly stay flat.
He dressed. His undershirt had five gold buttons, and he left
his topshirt halfway open so that those precious buttons would
show. He put an identification bracelet on his wrist, briefly polishing
the $5,000 diamond set into it. Two enormous rings graced
his fingers. He was now a well-dressed Latin American.
He slicked his hair back until it was a glistening black mass,
made sure the welt over his ear didn't show, and stepped out of the
apartment. A block away there was a small Mexican-American family
restaurant that was excellent for weiwas gaining. It was time for
breakfast.
Jose settled himself in a corner table with his back to the wall
and commenced his diet. His appetizer was a quart of sweet orange
juice. Then he had a double order of ham and bacon with
toast, with six eggs on the side. He washed these down liberally

from a jug of cafe-con-leche, a mixture of coffee and milk in 50-50
proportions. He then consumed a one-pound long loaf of Cuban
bread with plenty of butter by forming it into sandwiches with
round creamy yellow cheese and dunking these into the cafe-conleche
for every bite.
After the initial edge of his hunger had been blunted, he signaled
the waiter, "Señor-the telephone, if you please." The waiter
 
380
smiled and brought the phone on a long extension cord. This was
a fairly regular ritual.
First, a business call. He dialed the local police station. "Señor
Sergeant O'Brien, if you please, señorita," he said to their switchboard
operator.
"Right, Mr. Jose," she said, recognizing his voice.
In a moment Sergeant O'Brien was on the line, "Thought I'd
be hearing from you, Juan. How's your digestion?"
"The sound of your voice sweetens it considerably, señor." Then
Jose got down to business. "Is there any information from my
visitors of the morning? I am wondering why they called on me so
imperatively . . ."
"Juan, they've all got records a mile long," O'Brien said. "But
that's not what you mean, is it? You'll be glad to know that they
haven't spilled a word about your mission. Won't say who hired
'em or why. But they must have been well paid."
"Señor, I have no mission!" Jose protested.
There was a trace of annoyance in the officer's voice. "Juan,
you don't have to tell me anything! I know you get private international
assignments, and I'm not prying. I'm just reporting on what
these hoods-"
Jose raised his free hand and waved a chorizo, a thick Spanish
sausage, expressively before stuffing it into his mouth. "Señor, you
misunderstand! You are my friend! You save my life every day of
the week and twice on Sundays! I do not lie to you, I do not accuse
you. I have no mission!"
There was a pause. "Sure, Juan, that's true," 0'Brien said at
last. "Sorry I was edgy. We'll try to get something more for you,
but it looks as if they think you have a mission. Or their boss
thinks so. Unless it's some old enemy-"
"These did not come for revenge, señor. They came for information.
Which I sadly lack. It is a mystery,"
"Well, you're good at mysteries, Juan!" He disconnected.
Jose pondered for a full minute while he masticated his sausage.
It was a mystery. Finally he shrugged and dialed a long dis-
381
tance number, assigning the charge to his home phone. "St. Thomas
Military Academy," a secretary answered.
"Robertico, please, Señora," he said.
"Right away, Mr. Jose!"
In a moment Robertico was speaking. "Hi, Papi! Can I come
home this weekend?"
"Hijo, I think not," Jose said regretfully. "A matter of business
seems to have intruded itself,"
"Aw, Papi, I'll help you fight the thugs! I'm doing real good in
judo class, I could-"
"Judo is not always enough," Jose said seriously.
"Well, sure, you could pulverize my teacher with your vis-
vis-"
"Visceral control," Jose said. "I probably could-but do not
forget I also know and respect the martial arts, judo among them.
There is much for you to learn."
"But I could learn much better from you, Papi!"
"It is more than that, Robertico. I may be away for a few days,
and it is not good for a young boy to be alone."

"Papi, I'm nine years old! I can take care of myself!"
"Flesh of my flesh, you know that and I know that. But the
child welfare authorities, they don't know that! That is why I have
to leave you in that hole of a school-"
"Why don't you get married again, Dad? So I'd have-"
"'Dad'? What is this word?"
The boy ignored the interruption. "So I'd have a mother, and
I could stay at home all the time-" There was a tremor in the
young voice. Robertico really wanted a home.
"This is no life for a woman, Son. She would-"
"'Son'? What is this word?"
Jose smiled privately. Robertico Jose was becoming a real infighter!
"She would soon grow bitchy and jealous."
"No she wouldn't! I could pick you a real good-looking wench,
sort of stupid, who-"
"Hijo!" Jose snapped. But his grinning face belied his voice.
 
382
"It is not right for any woman, even a stupid one, not to know
where her man is, what trouble he is in. And you-you need a
mama, not a wench! A woman who can cook and make beds and
sing songs and sew and teach you manners."
"Yuck!" Robertico exclaimed. "I'm better off at school!"
"I will visit you soon," Jose said, smiling again. "Take it easy
on the poor teachers, hellion. They are only trying to earn a living."
"Adios, Papi," the boy said sadly.
Jose had spoken to his son sensibly, with many a Latin gesture
and smile. Now he was sober, and there was a shine in his eyes that
was not joy. He did want his boy with him-but marriage was too
complex. What would have happened this morning, had those
thugs found a woman in his apartment? Or his son? Jose himself
would not have told the hoods anything even if he had known
what they wanted. But if they tortured his only child-
He shook his head. If only he could be a sensible family man,
with regular hours and secure income. But he had tried that once,
ten years ago, and now what did he have to show for it?
He had Robertico. That made it all worthwhile. But he did
not care to go that route a second time. No more marriages, no
more serious involvement.
He had one more call, to his answering service. "Yes, señor,"
the girl said. "One just came in. I think it's an assignment. Call
555-5837 and use the code name 'Windbreaker.'"
"Thank you, señora." Jose put down the receiver and let out a
bellow of laughter that startled the other diners.
The waiter rushed up. "Are you well, sir?"
"Very well, despite your abominable chorizo," Jose chuckled.
"Bring me another link. One more call, señor-then I shall return
your poor tired telephone." The waiter left, perplexed.
Jose dialed the number the answering service had given him.
"Windbreaker," he said.
"Who?"
"Windbreaker. Warm sport jacket. Strong man who leads the
383
way into the storm. Hedge or wall to break the-"
"Enough, Jose!" the gruff male voice said. There was no other
introduction, no formality, and no questions, "You're our man.
Five thousand dollars plus expenses. You'll receive advance payment
and instructions by registered mail, Agreed?"
"No."
Now there was a pause. "Seven-five, then,"
"Negative. It is not the money, señor. I do not work for an
anonymous employer. Or one who lacks proper confidence."
"We have confidence! We know you're the best in the business.
Our type of business."

"Yet you tested me," Jose said flatly.
"No, Windbreaker. There was a leak."
"I do not work for leaky people. It is bad for my health."
"Not exactly a leak. We let slip to a certain party that we had
hired the most capable international agent available. We did not
identify him. In this manner we verified a suspicion, and located
the best man. The leak has been fixed-permanently-and we
now propose to hire the man. You. If our competition calls you
the best, that's good enough for us. And we rather like your style."
"Señor, my style stinks."
"Yes indeed!"
"Still, I must know you."
"Very well. Fifteen minutes from now, alone." The man reeled
off an address. "You have eidetic memory, don't you? See that you
are not followed."
Jose was not partial to either the man's attitude or his assumptions.
As though any professional would allow himself to be followed!
"Señor, I am not finished with my breakfast. You come here
to the La Campana restaurant, and we shall talk."
"Listen, I'm paying you a lot of money."
"Señor, wad that money into a roll one inch in diameter and
insert it in your-"
"All right! I'll meet you there. This time."
"And be prompt," Jose said. "See that you are not followed."
 
384
There was a stifled sound before the connection broke, Jose
smiled broadly. Presumption deserved what it received.
Still, he rather thought he would take the job. His prospective
employer had a devious and ruthless mind, and a certain arrogant
honesty. Jose liked that. He understood that type of mind.
The code-name had been the signal, of course. It was the
man's way of telling him that he knew about the contretemps of
the morning, and how Jose had summoned help. Hence the man
knew something of visceral learning.
Few people realized that the so-called involuntary reflexes and
systems of the body could become voluntary-with proper training.
Fewer still could actually practice such control. Hardly any
were adept at it. Juan Jose was one of these fewest.
It had been an elementary matter to disrupt his own digestive
processes so that gas formed. Then it was merely a matter of ejecting
it with sufficient force to create a noisy vibration, while bringing
certain muscles into play to shape the sound. The result: a
crude cry for help.
The resultant code name: Windbreaker.
But this was not an ability Jose normally chose to advertise. It
was not merely that many people found the notion objectionable,
but that it was one of a complex of unusual abilities whose main
virtue was surprise. Had the hoods known he could make that cry,
they would have made sure he was all the way unconscious.
Fortunately, they hadn't known, and O'Brien hadn't told them.
It seemed that his prospective employer had had the discretion to
keep his mouth shut on that matter, also.
Juan Jose finished his meal, burped contentedly, and waited
for the man to arrive.
SUMMARY OF REMAINDER:
Juan Jose's employer turns out to be an American gangster
who once operated a nightclub, hotel and casino in Havana. He
had four partners with whom he theoretically split the proceeds
evenly-but he cheated on them so that he actually amassed a
considerable fortune. There were no real taxes in Cuba, and he had
been adept at "skimming." Thus he amassed about five million
dollars "retirement money" in thousand dollar bills and diamonds,
buried in small watertight metal containers under a tree in his

garden.
But Castro came to power so suddenly that he was caught
short-and probably a suspicious partner betrayed him. He was
arrested, his apartment searched, and his worldly goods confiscated:
about half a million dollars worth of loot was taken over by
the state. They then deported him without realizing that they had
missed the main portion. But he had no chance to recover the
riches himself.
Now about fifteen years have passed, and things have cooled
off. The gangster has succeeded in eliminating his erstwhile partners,
but his type of business has not been as good in America as it
was in Cuba, and he needs that lost money. He can not trust any
criminal hirelings to recover it for him, and they would betray
him for it without qualm. He dares not show his own face in Cuba,
 
386
of course. So he is making a legitimate offer to Jose, who is known
to be scrupulously fair to friends and enemies alike (though not to
people who fit neither of these categories).
Jose is to go into Cuba, dig up the hidden treasure, and bring
it back. Perhaps a week's work, with all expenses paid, plus a fee of
$7,500. Juan turns it down contemptuously; he has more enemies
than friends in Cuba, and the government there does not like him,
and the fee offered is a pittance. He bargains for half the loot, and
settles for twenty percent: one million dollars. He doesn't need to
trust the gangster; he will merely turn over all the money in excess
of his million. With that money, Jose can retire and take proper
care of his child.
The mission, despite the gangster's description, is more than a
week's work. It is possible to get into Cuba, but it can be fatally
difficult to get out again, especially with five million dollars. Jose
must arrange it so that no one suspects his mission. He obtains
false papers and goes to Mexico, where he joins a guerrilla group.
This is no picnic; he must prove himself to the tough and suspicious
guerrillas by participating in a raid on a railroad station. He
does, but other guerrillas get drunk and kill a number of people.
They end up seizing the whole town and looting it, withdrawing
only when government troops come. Jose, not yet fully trusted, is
left to escape on his own. He does so by hiding in a refrigerator
truck. He is able to lower his body temperature to survive the
freezing interior.
The guerrillas then follow Jose's subtle suggestion and hijack
an airplane going to Mexico City, and take it to Havana. True
revolutionaries still are welcomed in Cuba. But they are not taken
on faith; they must prove themselves. This group is given a fair
choice: work in the cane fields, or undertake more training for
revolutionary activity in other countries. So they "volunteer" for
the training. Jose uses his visceral control to pass a lie detector test.
Actually, this training is exactly what he wants, because the training
camp is near Havana, and Havana is where the gangster's cache
is buried.
387
They are taught how to use special C-3 grenades. One explodes
prematurely and the instructor's head is blown off. The
entire party is badly wounded. Jose gets shrapnel his arms; his
right hand is wounded, and an artery in the left is cut. He can't
apply a tourniquet, so controls the rain and bleeding through his
unique talents and walks five miles to the militia post to get help.
Then he lets the blood flow and collapses-in the arms of a beautiful
Cuban girl-so that the authorities will not suspect his powers.
He is hospitalized in Havana, and touted as something of a
hero, because the help he summoned saved the lives of several
injured men. He cultivates the association of the girl, Perla, who
seems happy to be cultivated. Jose can be quite charming when he

puts his mind to it, and his sexual talents are remarkable because
of his visceral control. Perla thinks he likes her mind; the others are
sure it is her body he likes. The truth is that she lives in the woman's
dormitory that has been set up on the former estate of the gangster,
and to which he needs unobtrusive entry.
Actually, Perla does have a mind, and talents of her own. The
government has researched Jose's background and discovered his
real identity and abilities; the girl has been assigned to learn the
nature of his current mission. Jose, adept at reading body language,
suspects that she is a counterspy, but goes along with her
for several reasons. First, her mission means she can be very helpful
to him, because they can't find out what he is up to unless he is
granted some leeway; second, he is not out to assassinate Fidel, so
is innocent of their prime concern; third, he believes he can subvert
her to his side if he has to.
Perla catches him as he digs up the treasure. Now he has to
deal with her. It would be awkward to kill her, and he has a strong
aversion to that anyway. So he tells her the truth and offers to take
her out of the country with him if she will join him. She agrees. Of
course this may be part of her job as a counter-agent, but it gives
him a chance to get moving efficiently.
Unfortunately these negotiations take too long, and the other
 
388
girls of the dormitory discover them. Now there are no subtleties;
the two have to fight their way out and flee to the jungle. Castro's
troops pursue with much shooting. The two hide in the swamp.
Jose alone could have gotten away easily, but Perla's presence makes
it a narrow thing. They manage to board a patrol boat, naked and
dripping. They get rid of the occupants and take the boat to sea,
eluding further pursuit-only to run into a storm.
They take refuge at Cay Sal, a small island in the Bahamas
near Cuba that Cuba claims. The Cubans follow and there is a
battle between the gunboats, while the British, who have the authority
but not the will to break it up, look the other way. Jose's
boat, undermanned, is no match; it begins to sink. He jumps off
and swims with the money underwater. Such is his control, he is
able to stay underwater some ten minutes, avoiding discovery. But
once he is clear he reconsiders, drops the money in the deeps and
goes back to rescue Perla.
They escape-but the mission is now a failure. Jose reports
this to the gangster employer, who is furious; he does not believe
the money is really lost, and thinks he has been double-crossed. So
he kidnaps Jose's son Robertico, supposing this will make Jose
yield the fortune.
Jose has to raid the gangster's estate, which is well guarded by
sophisticated protective devices: vibration-sensitive attachments to
doors and windows, anti-intruder screens, pressure-sensitive wires
under carpeting, and electric-eye booby-traps. It requires all of
Jose's ingenuity to get through, and some help from Perla and
Robertico himself. He finally does prevail, though the gangster
gets killed in the process.
Now Jose has to sweat out the most difficult problem of all:
that of Perla, who naturally expects him to marry her. He is determined
not to remarry, especially not without money. But even
Robertico is against him on this issue. So Jose is in trouble again,
and as the novel ends his sweating is unfeigned.
[This is the first novel of a projected series of adventures fea-
389
turing the Windbreaker. Others will concern diamond mines in
Brazil, Amazonian Indian slave exploitation, and voodoo and blood
selling in Haiti.]
AUTHORS' NOTE: Remember, a quarter century has passed
since this piece was crafted. Today the corded phones have been

replaced by cell phones. Real numbers have also been replaced by
555 numbers, so we did update that. This project found no favor
with publishers; perhaps they didn't like the notion that a leading
character could break wind.
 
SORCEX
Sone is the bastard son of Togo, a veteran Samurai warrior. In
June, 1281, the two are practicing Kendo, with Sone employing
his fine sword against his father's staff. The old man fends off the
attack easily, his long wooden pole blocking every thrust of the
sword. "Are you a weakling? Strike harder! Harder! " he cries. Sone,
an extremely powerful young man, aims a devastating blow at
Togo's head, knowing that the sheer force of it will rock the man
back and impress him. But the staff, though reinforced with iron,
snaps in two, and the blade cleaves Togo's brain, killing him instantly.
Togo's legitimate son Kato charges in and spies the disaster.
He has little love for Sone, but it is plain that the killing was
unintentional. Thus they argue, not about Sone's guilt, but about
the diabolical cause of the accident. Kato claims that some magician
has put a spell on Togo's weapons, so that they betrayed their
master; Sone concludes that all weapons are innately perverse and
not to be trusted.
Both youths make oaths on the spot: Kato swears he will not
settle down to his father's estate until he has avenged Togo's murder,
while Sone swears never again to use a weapon. Kato demands
that Sone join the vengeance quest, but Sone refuses, saying there
is no one to wreak vengeance on. Kato is furious: "Not only are
 
392
you a bastard, you are too cowardly to avenge your own father,
even when your own arm was ensorcelled for murder," he shouts.
"Traitor! Get out of this house!" And Kato draws his own sword,
forgetting all Samurai ethics and caution, and charges upon Sone
with the blade uplifted. Sone, unarmed, defends himself by employing
what in later centuries will be described as a judo shoulder
throw, ippon seoi nage, and unfortunately snaps his brother's
arm.
After this second disaster there is nothing for Sone to do except
depart his sire's estate forever. "'When I recover, I will seek
you out and kill you!" Kato screams, and Sone, shamed, can not
even reply. He moves into a hut some distance away and sets about
farming turnips, choosing the lowliest of occupations to expiate
his grief and disgrace. But he is so strong that he accomplishes
much in a short time, and his turnips sprout in days as if magically
fertilized.
Soon a beautiful girl approaches him, saying she is Miho, traveling
from a distant land, who needs a place to rest for a few days
before going on. This is suspicious, as she could obviously find
much superior lodging; but Sone, mindful that his unknown
mother might have been just such a visitor to his father's house
twenty years ago, shares his hut. Miho shortly seduces him: no
difficult task, as he is as lusty as he is muscular, and she has remarkable
expertise. He obligingly marries her thereafter.
Next day she goes into the village and buys a baby boy, whom
she intends to adopt as their son. Sone is dismayed at the speed
and nature of his progression into marriage and paternity, but she
explains that it is all right: the baby is cursed with an incurable
disease and will soon die. It occurs to Sone that fate is generously
assisting him in his effort to expiate his shame through misery, so
he shuts up and makes the best of it.
Fate is indeed generous. Sone returns from a hard day's labor
in the field to discover the bloody carcass of his new son. Miho is
incoherent and can tell him nothing-but huge tiger tracks lead
away from the corpse. Sone sees his duty and sets off after the

393
animal. He carries only his pitchfork that he had been using to
farm, together with a resin torch and fire case so that he can travel
by night. The region is mountainous and the tracks head toward
the chill (even in summer) upper reaches, so he wears a thick cotton
jacket with leather underpadding: sturdy and warm.
The trail is a strange one: terror, horror and grief remain where
the creature has passed, but reports of its nature are inconsistent.
Some call it a tiger, others a mad ape, still others a terrible snake.
And the tracks vary accordingly. Sone suspects it is a demon creature,
that can change its form. He can certainly do the world a
favor by eliminating it.
He finally runs it down and brings it to bay, and his suspicion
is confirmed: it is a creature of hell. It assumes the form of a dragon
and charges him. Instantly Sone fires his torch and jams the brightly
flaring end into one of the dragon's eyes. Then be stabs it in the
underbelly-its only vulnerable place-with the pitchfork. It
changes into a tiger, breaking off the tines of the fork in the process.
Sone fends it off somewhat using the handle, then gets on its
back and applies a neck lock. The creature then changes madly
into a variety of awful shapes, but Sone will not let go, and finally
its struggles weaken and he breaks its neck, killing it.
Another man would be joyful at his success, but Sone is grim.
He has used torch and pitchfork as weapons; never again will he
take up these things, for his oath forbids it. He must find his way
home in darkness, and use some other tool for farming. And because
his arms and hands were used to choke the creature, they too
are weapons to that extent: be will not choke anything again.
He makes it home, but alas, his lovely wife is gone, and in her
place is a grossly ugly hag. She is able to tell him only that she is
his wife, but placed under a spell; she will not regain her natural
beauty until he has seduced a hundred beautiful women, each of
whom has to know he is married and each of whom must undertake
this humiliation because of envy of that wife. An impossible
mission: who in Japan would envy such a wife, and who would
 
394
yield her virtue to a married man who could not take any new
wives?
Sone has been misfortunate, but he is not stupid. He now
realizes that magic is involved, that has cost him his son and his
wife's beauty. So maybe magic did kill his father, and Kato was
right all along. In which case Sone must try to apologize to his
brother, and seek out the guilty magician. The same sorcerer could
have put a spell on his wife's tongue, so that she could not tell all
she knew.
Sone is slow to anger, but now he is angry, and even considering
his vow against the use of weapons he is a formidable antagonist.
If there is a magician behind all this trouble, that magician is
very likely to be sorry, once located. Sone seeks his brother, but
Kato has by now mended enough to start his own quest for vengeance,
and though each brother is looking for the other, they
miss each other.
Sone heads for the Emperor's palace, hoping the court magician
can give him some clues. The Regent of Japan at this time is
Hojo Tokimune, and his magician is so powerful he was able to
repulse the Mongol invasion of 1274 by summoning the demon
Typhun to the aid of the Japanese. A good place to start.
The journey to the capital is an eventful one, as Sone encounters
a number of demons, aggressive warriors, and beautiful women,
dealing with each as seems expedient. Sone doesn't much like
magic, and avoids it when he can; but hostile magic can be difficult
to nullify. And each time a warrior attacks him, Sone has to
become more ingenious, defending him self with some tool or

article never before used as a weapon. In this way a number of the
unusual weapons of the later martial arts are invented. And Sone
tells each girl that there is none in all the world quite like his wife,
and a number of those girls rise to the challenge with excitingly
novel techniques of seduction. Thus the so-called Hercules position
of love, and others. One samurai warrior even gets a notion,
and Sone is hard put to it to dissuade the man from his unfortunate
amours. And at one point Kato shows up, and immediately
395
goes after Sone with his sword, refusing to listen to any explanations.
Sone is unable to clarify the matter, and gets away only by
seeming like a coward.
Finally Sone wins through to Regent Hojo's court, but the
court magician is too busy to investigate his problem. The Mongols
are making ready to attack again, already sailing for Japan with a
huge armada and 165,000 warriors-and Kublai Khan's magician
has somehow chained the demon Typhun so that he cannot save
Japan this time. It will take a phenomenal effort of sorcery to loose
the demon in time, and of course the Mongol magician is constantly
making countermoves to prevent that. "Talk with Oichi,"
the magician snaps, dismissing Sone.
Oichi turns out to be the daughter of one of the Emperor's
wives. In the course of having his way with her-a perilous procedure,
because of the alert palace guards-Sone learns that she is
acquainted with much palace gossip. Her mother's closest friend,
another wife of the Emperor, once told a strange story of how she
had gone to visit her home-kingdom in Mongolia, for she was a
princess in her own right. She had been attacked by thieves, her
retinue slain, and she had barely escaped herself. But local villagers
would not help her, because she was Mongol and did not speak
their language. The nearby Samurai spotted her, half dead, and
carried her to his estate where she received help. But there was a
price on that help, and she had neither the power nor the inclination
to decline, as her host was a most impressive man. She remained
to bear his child, then had to hurry back to the Emperor's
palace with a made-up story of her marvelous visit home. If Hojo
had ever learned the truth, he would have slaughtered that bold
Samurai warrior, and the princess, and the bastard baby, and all
the household and maybe the nearby village too, bringing fire and
shame upon the entire region. So the secret had to be kept-but
before she died in a mysterious knife accident the princess confessed
all to her friend. That was only a few weeks ago, and Oichi
had overheard it, and now told Sone because he very much resembles
that dead princess.
 
396
Sone is not slow to grasp the import; that princess was surely
his mother, and now he knows his own lineage. And she died at
the same time and in a similar manner to Togo-as if the same
magician had struck. This is a strong hint where he should search
next. So he gets off Oichi and proceeds to Mongolia, having more
adventures on the way. He is in a hurry now that the trail is hot, so
enlists the aid of some mermen who haul him rapidly across the
sea. But he yields to the temptation to add a mermaid to his wiferedeeming
tally, and the situation gets ugly. He is lucky to win
through to the mainland with no more than some wounds and
some waterlogging.
When he reaches the Mongol kingdom-a land vassal to Kublai
Khan-he learns that this minor court had an extremely powerful
magician who served Kublai in war. This magician had a strikingly
beautiful and talented daughter-but both vanished not long ago.
They may have gone to the old Mongol capital of Karakorum to
aid in some top-secret magic related to the war effort against Japan
. . .

Sone conjectures that that magician, Mifune, had been so busy
serving Kublai Khan over the years, contributing to the Khan's
enormous success, that only recently had he thought to check into
the princess' situation and learned through his arts of her adultery.
Outraged, Mifune must have set out to kill all the guilty parties.
Naturally he would have kept the matter quiet, so as not to bring
shame upon his kingdom and perhaps incur the wrath of Kublal
Khan. That would explain the deaths of Toga and the princess.
But why hadn't Mifune killed Sone too? Because the magician's
specialty was enchanting weapons-and Sone had forsworn the
use of weapons! Still, Mifune could have sent a demon to do the
mischief for him. Sone realizes that this is what happened; the
hell-tiger had come and killed his son, before Sone searched it out
and killed it in turn.
So it all fits-yet mysteries remain. Where did Miho come
from, and why was she transformed? Why the hundred-seduction
mandate? That was hardly doing the job of getting Sone killed! It
397
was necessary to run down Mifune and get the truth from him-
before killing him to avenge Togo and the princess. Maybe he
could make Mifune explain Miho's transformation, or even undo
it, if he was more powerful than whoever had done that to her.
There is no problem about traveling across China and
Mongolia; the Mongols have so pacified the entire continent that
there is no violence or robbery apart from that practiced by the
conquerors themselves. Unfortunately, the Mongols do protect their
women, especially against handsome wandering Japanese! Soon
Sone is in trouble again, and the Mongol pursuit is grim indeed.
Nevertheless Sone wins through to Karakorum-only to discover
that Mifune has removed to Kublai's summer capital of Xanadu
(actually Shangtuho). Sone finally does locate Mifune in one of
the special palace retreats the Khan has set up, and finds the magician
quite ready to talk to him. Thus the full explanation:
When Mifune spotted that long-ago shame of the princess,
he did indeed set out to rectify the matter privately. But he was
very busy chaining the demon Typhun and countering the Japanese
magician's efforts to free that demon, so could only spare a
limited amount of energy for this private project. When Sone's noweapons
oath saved him, Mifune sent the hell-tiger. But Mifune's
daughter Miho, a distressingly self-willed girl, learned what he
was doing and decided it was unfair to punish the innocent child
of the illicit union. (Sone-innocent? They both have a laugh over
that.) So she flew to Japan to warn him, beating the demon by
several days. But Mifune in turn discovered what she was up to,
and laid a spell on her so that she couldn't betray any of his secrets
to any outside party. Thus she couldn't warn Sone that the tiger
was coming for his blood, that it had to taste before being freed.
But Miho found Sone such an attractive specimen that she refused
to give him up, so got him to marry her.
That was significant, for it made Sone Mifune's son-in-law.
Mifune, honorable to a fault (by his own admission), could not
murder his own relatives. So he was forced to tell his erring daughter
how to balk the demon: by providing it with the blood of
 
398
Sone's blood line, or his son. A technicality the demon was too
stupid to fathom, so it was satisfied.
But then Sone had gone after the demon himself. That didn't
bother Mifune unduly; if Sone got himself killed on his own initiative,
well and good! The problem was solved. Then Sone killed
the demon, and the problem was unsolved. Mifune, still preoccupied
with the ticklish Typhun situation, decided that he could not
accomplish anything useful in regard to Sone before breaking up
that marriage. To force a divorce from Miho, so as to get Sone

unrelated and therefore killable, Mifune transformed her and set
the terms of alleviation. If Sone didn't balk at her ugliness, Miho
would balk at his infidelity. A beautiful plan-except that it didn't
work.
Sone, knowing the facts, can now kill Mifune. But there is a
hitch: he, too, is honorable in his fashion, and he can't kill a relative
either. He realizes he is balked, and must leave his father
unavenged. But then half-brother Kato catches up, and Sone manages
between dodges of the sword to explain some of the situation
to him. Kato eagerly heads off to slay the magician. Both die in the
ensuing struggle. This takes place on August 15, 1281. The moment
Mifune dies, the storm demon Typhun is released, and
Typhun proceeds to destroy the Mongol fleet, saving Japan after
all. Thus Sone, through no special intent of his own, is his country's
benefactor.
Miho, too, is freed of the enchantment, though Sone has not
yet (quite) completed the roster of 100 women. She is prepared to
be tolerant about her father's demise, since she will inherit his
wealth and power, and transports herself to Xanadu to reassure
Sone. About to embrace her, Sone, who is not after all so smart
about certain things, confessed that the spell on her wasn't really
so bad. He rather enjoyed working it off with all those lovely girls,
and is a bit sorry he didn't get to go the full hundred.
Miho blacks both his eyes and bites a chunk out of his ear
before he gets her down and wrestles her into a turbulent lovemaking.
It is a very satisfying reunion.
JASON STRIKER MARTIAL ARTS SERIES VOLUME III
AUTHORS' NOTE-Novels can be marketed on the basis of
a straight summary, as this one was. To bad it didn't sell.
 
399
BIOGRAPHY
OF A
TERRORIST
(Chapter 2, "Three Misses," appeared as an article in the magazine
THE DEADLY HANDS OP KUNG FU, May 1976.)
AUTHORS' NOTE: This presentation was written in 1976,
so is dated by a quarter century. But though the details have changed
in 25 years, the essence hasn't.
 
INTRODUCTION
There is a rising tide of terrorism around the world. We see it
in Europe, Africa, Latin America, Asia-everywhere. The Irish violence
has made headlines for years, and so have the Arab-Israeli
exchanges between outright wars. There is the Basque separatist
movement in Spain, and the "Death Squads" are practically an
institution in Brazil. U.S. NEWS & WORLD REPORT estimates
that 1,000 people have been killed in the world by acts of terrorism
in the past ten years. Terrorism is big business.
America is safer than most parts of the world, but it is hardly
immune. From 1975 terrorism has been ravaging southern Florida,
with rape, killing and destruction of property proceeding with
seeming impunity. Recently a train carrying deadly chlorine and
propane was derailed by sabotage. The Patty Hearst case was an
example of another kind of terrorism, and so were the airline
hijackings. Our political history was changed when President
Kennedy was assassinated by a lone terrorist (though there may
have been a Cuban connection there), and changed again when
President Nixon engaged in the more subtle terrorism eventually
exposed by the Watergate investigation.
In fact, there are so many examples that individual cases are
hardly news. Terrorism is endemic. It costs us far more than lives
and property. It gnaws at one of the basic freedoms we believe in:
 

404
freedom from fear. The terrorist is not out for money or sexual
gratification or notoriety; his interest is in frightening the average
man into giving the terrorist power.
Why isn't it stopped? It isn't that no one cares. It isn't that the
police don't try. Terrorism is an insidiously difficult thing to control.
Any person can take a gun and shoot at the symbol of his ire.
He can take gasoline and a soft-drink bottle and fashion a devastating
bomb. Or he can simply make a telephone call to the police,
tipping them off about the massive bomb supposedly hidden
in a major airport, and chuckle in the comfort of his home while
havoc ensues. He has done almost as much damage to the system
as a real bomber could have, without real cost or risk to himself.
Terrorism: it takes many forms. Its practitioners range from
do-it-yourselfers to complete professionals. No one is safe from it.
The only way to begin to alleviate its menace is to understand it.
Blindly oppressive measures will not do the job. What motivates a
terrorist? How does he operate? Who helps him? What would deter
him?
Only one type of person knows the answers. That person is
the terrorist himself. He is not necessarily a criminal, or even a
violent man; he may be a fun-loving family man with a strong
moral code and an unshakable belief in the rightness of his cause.
In fact, he may be right, by the verdict of history, and the regime
he opposes may be wrong. The selfish or casual destroyer is a criminal;
the dedicated destroyer is a different and superior type, far
more dangerous because of the resources, intelligence, and motivation
he brings to his craft. A criminal is basically an amateur; a
terrorist is basically a professional. He has committed his life to his
cause. Idealism, not mere money, causes him to act.
The successful terrorist of today may be the respected statesman
of tomorrow. The Irgun terrorists who fought the British rulers
of Palestine entered the government of the new state when the
British departed; their last chief of operations became a member of
the Israeli cabinet. The Arab PLA terrorists who oppose Israel are
405
now treated with honor by the UN. Former terrorists now govern
the nation of Cuba. Oh, yes-the rewards of victory are great!
But these are long shots. For the average terrorist, the practical
outlook is bleak. He knows he is likely to wind up in prison, or
dead. Why does he choose to subject himself to the roulette that
this profession is?
Here is the story of a genuine terrorist. Roberto Fuentes, former
terrorist, has worked with Piers Anthony, writer, on five successful
novels of martial arts and several shorter pieces. The vast reservoir
of experience on which Mr. Fuentes drew for the realistic detail of
those books came from his other life-a life that entailed privation,
fear, torture, imprisonment, nightmare, execution and sex
for the former judo champion of Cuba.
His story illustrates another facet of the trade. The terrorist
may be an intellectual, at first reluctant to act despite the wrongs
he sees about him. His conviction that he is right and that someone
has to act draws him into a life he never anticipated or wanted. He
comes to the difficult conclusion that there is no recourse remaining
except violence; the orderly process of justice has broken down.
And so, with mixed emotions, he does act, hating the necessity.
Then, once he has tasted the water of violence, he becomes
addicted to it. He develops a perverse fascination for this life outside
the law, the sheer challenge of it. He is like nice Dr. Jekyll
turning into evil Mr. Hyde, trying to swear off but always doing it
again because of the fundamental human need he has tapped. His
original ends are distorted as he indulges in greater violence for
smaller reason. Sometimes, even, the means become the end.
He is now committed to the sheer excitement of the forbidden

life, the elite camaraderie he discovers there. His cause may be
lost-but he continues, finding another cause, unable to give up
this very special existence. The life he had before, as a staid lawabiding
citizen, has entirely lost its flavor. Innocent Dr. Jekyll has
been absorbed by the stronger personality he unwittingly loosed.
Actually, this is just a theory about one type of terrorist. There
are many motivations. The people involved are a highly mixed
 
406
bag. Many of them hardly comprehend their own drives. But
Roberto Fuentes fits this description. He is a member of MENSA.
the high IQ society, and he cares about human rights while also
loving the decadent good life. A study of his descent into terrorism
should provide an insight into the complex nature of this beast.
This biography has been fictionalized to a certain extent, necessarily.
Names have been changed to protect the identities of friends
who might still be subject to reprisals. The details of certain events
have been modified similarly; in some cases the accurate details
would void any pretense of anonymity for the participants. Some
material remains confidential for military reasons. The United States
government has on occasion sued persons who reveal certain types
of information too specifically. Therefore this biography must be
considered about 25% fiction, with a number of deliberately
planted errors. But the essence, and particularly the spirit, are
correct. This is the only way it can be done; as will be evident,
terrorism is not a gentle employment. Many of Mr. Fuentes' friends
are dead, and more are dying violently as time passes; he does not
wish to add himself to that total. He is already under sentence of
death by the Castro government of Cuba, for one of the exploits
covered in this book.
To deal with an enemy, one must first know him. The essence
of terrorism is similar wherever it occurs. Though the origins and
original incentives of terrorists are diverse, once they are committed
they are brothers under the skin. Roberto Fuentes was a Cuban
terrorist, but he operated in much the same fashion as a Communist
or fascist or splinter-group terrorist would in the United
States. In fact, he was trained in the U.S.A. A bullet or a bomb
knows no language but its own; it will do its job wherever it is
directed.
Roberto Fuentes' progress into terrorism began with idealism.
The background political situation is documented in some detail
here, to show that it was no casual whim that moved him into
such a life.
On January 1, 1959, Fidel Castro came to power in Cuba.
407
The seven year dictatorship of Fulgencia Batista had collapsed
abruptly, and the revolutionists were victorious. It was a time of
great expectations. At last the people of Cuba had thrown off oppression
and taken the reins of government into their own hands,
much as the people of America had done in 1776. There would be
a new age of democracy and individual liberty in the island nation;
Fidel had promised! The bearded charismatic leader stood for
everything that was decent in government, and the people believed
in him passionately.
The Constitution of 1940, a model for good government, was
going to be restored, and its precepts fully applied for the first
time. No more political prisoners, no more unjust confinements.
The death penalty was to be abolished. There would be justice for
all. The wealth of the nation would be shared among the people.
There would be a full and just Agrarian Reform, in which the idle
land would be turned over to the working peasants. There would
be complete personal freedom. Everyone would get a good education.
There would be free elections within six months, just as soon
as Fidel got things organized.

The Constitution? Once he was in power, Castro decided Cuba
didn't need it after all.
Political prisoners? Their heyday came in Castro's regime, with
hundreds of thousands of people locked away in old fortresses.
Executions? Well, first there were a few necessary trials of war
criminals-that is, those who had opposed Fidel by force of arms.
These trials were very efficient, and there was no foolishness about
the verdicts; they quickly justified the execution of the defendants.
Sometimes the sentence of death was posted even before the trial
was complete. In fact it became a blood bath, with people dying
in virtual assembly-line precision-more than three thousand
within six months as the result of trials. Somehow these "temporary"
executions stretched out over the years, and never did stop.
For a number of offenses, such as "crimes against the security of
the state," which was a marvelous catch-all, the death penalty became
mandatory.
 
408
But this was only the formal aspect. Informally it was worse.
As early as January 3, 1959, two days after Castro's victory, eighty
members of the Batista armed forces together with a number of
civilians were simply machine-gunned to death in Sto. de Cuba.
Justice for all? Castro had promised the armed forces of the
prior administration that only those guilty of war crimes would be
punished. Otherwise these troops might not have surrendered,
and the war would not have been over. But consider the case of the
43 airmen. Most Batista airmen escaped the country-easy enough
to do, since they had the planes-and so the few on trial included
transport pilots and mechanics who had not seen actual combat.
The prosecutor could not find evidence against then, since they
had committed no war crimes, so they were acquitted.
Acquitted? Fidel was outraged. He denounced the verdict in an
inflammatory television broadcast, and had them tried again. This
time the judges got the message; 29 airmen were given prison
terms of twenty years or more, and twelve received lesser sentences.
The presiding judge of the first trial, the one who had blundered
so badly as to find the men all innocent merely because there was
no evidence, was found dead; the authorities said it was suicide.
Perhaps it was.
Another case was that of Major Sosa Blanco, accused of the
crimes of another man, Mero Sosa. There was no proof; time and
again the government's case against him was shown to be fallacious.
Finally they had to stop televising the proceedings because
the whole thing was "a Roman circus," making the government
look ludicrous. But the case was not thrown out; it had gone too
far for that. So the Major was convicted and sentenced in decent
privacy.
Sharing the wealth? True, assets were taken away from the rich,
and the poor applauded. But somehow that wealth did not filter
down to the poor people, and a precedent was set that in the end
was ruinous. First the possessions of the remaining Batista supporters
were confiscated. Very well, that's called the spoils of war,
and it is customary around the world. It had not been Cuban
409
policy before, however. Then the very rich were deprived, and the
property of foreigners taken, especially Americans. Well, Americans
weren't very popular in Latin America anyway; served them
right. But after the spoils, and the rich, and the foreigners-who
would be next?
Agrarian reform? It became against the law to own more than
3,000 acres of land in Cuba. Then the limits were reduced. In due
course all private property-land, business, houses-was taken by
the government, and no one could own his own home. With whom,
then, was the land and wealth being shared?

Personal freedom? From the outset Castro began to restrict it.
He abolished gambling-yet doesn't freedom mean the right to
choose for oneself whether to gamble, rather than having the government
make the decision? Total press censorship was invoked. It
became a crime for any writer to criticize the government, and
citizens were sent to jail merely for listening to American radio
broadcasts. Political parties were abolished with one notable exception:
the Communist party. Unions were taken over, and strikes
forbidden. Most Catholic priests were expelled. "Voluntary" membership
in militia groups was required, and "voluntary" sugarcane
cutting duty, and contributions of salary to the government for
special purposes.
As a result, there was a phenomenal exodus from Cuba by
anyone able to move-until travel outside the island was prohibited.
Doctors, lawyers, University graduates, the rich and middle
class exited first; but as repression intensified it became a complete
cross section of the population. Fishermen departed in droves, using
their boats to cross the channel to Miami, Florida. To date, the
number of exiles approaches one million-of a total population of
six million at the time of Castro's takeover. In terms of per cent,
that is one of the great migrations of modern history. One sixth of
a nation, exiled.
Education? First the religious schools were banned, then the
private schools. Foreign magazines and newspapers were eliminated.
Every child had to attend the government schools where literacy
 
410
was achieved by studying propaganda texts. But at first the process
was subtle. Roberto Fuentes was a law student at the University
of Havana in 1959. A small Communist clique tried to take
over the University. Two of Fuentes' professors, Tony de Varona
and Aureliano Sanches Arango, made comments that they were
against Communism. An assembly was called, at which there was
an attempt made to drive out these professors. Fuentes and a few
others stood to rebut the Communists: "Since when is it a crime
to be anti-Communist in Cuba?" he demanded. "If it is then you
must expel me too, because I am also anti-Communist." The president
of the law school, Major Maximo, replied: "Fuentes, it is not
a crime." Then many others stood to declare their own anti-Communism,
and the expulsion effort failed. But this showed the trend
that was developing-and in due course, it did indeed become a
crime to be anti-Communist in Cuba.
Free elections? These were "temporarily" postponed, then abolished
as unnecessary. In fact, Fidel's government from the start was
hardly distinguishable from a dictatorship. He ruled by personal
fiat.
Thus it was scarcely surprising that Roberto Fuentes, who
had the background and training to appreciate the erosion of ideals
and practice that was happening in Cuba, evolved gradually
from a moderate skeptic into a confirmed enemy of the government.
His father's family properties were confiscated-a manganese
mine, tenement houses, and a small hotel in Sto. de Cuba-
and his mother's family farm of 1,000 acres. His uncle was jailed.
Roberto himself lost his job at the Havana tunnel, and his judo
teaching position-for he was the judo champion of Cuba-and
was expelled from the University of Havana. Oh, yes, Fuentes had
reason to oppose the new order!
But there was no freedom to protest the administration or to
vote it out of power. So the idealists who had actually believed in
the promises of the Revolution became disillusioned, and some of
them gradually hardened into anti-Castro guerrillas.
This is the story told in this book. It could happen to anyone
411
with the courage to stand up for his convictions as he sees his

country progressing into an alien philosophy, its traditions and
freedoms despoiled stage by stage, while the majority of citizens
merely accept it with sheeplike passivity. There are disturbing signs
that it could happen in America.
Such resistance is a hard course. Yet there is a certain psychological
appeal to terrorism, as Fuentes says: "It is the great Ego
booster. You might be a nerd, a failure at everything, but you
know you are superior to all those lawyers making $50,000 a year.
You can blow up twenty of them with a bomb, or you can change
the world like Oswald, Sirhan and so many others. While you are
doing it you are no longer a failure, no longer discriminated against,
no longer a disappointment. You are the greatest."
The authors hope that this book will help show the way to
make the world safe from terrorism. But not too safe-so long as
oppression remains.
 
Chapter 1:
Return
We stood on the deck of a small yacht, peering through the
night at the forbidden island. I was half-eager, half afraid; I wanted
more than anything to destroy the Communist usurpers of my
country, but I knew it was just as likely that they would destroy
me instead. Already some of my closest friends had been gunned
down, and I myself was marked by Fidel Castro's government for
death.
It really would have been easier, and a whole lot safer, to stay
home. But where was home? In exile in Florida? My heart was in
Cuba, so in a very real sense I was coming home.
It was cool in that pre-dawn darkness, but most of the chill
was in my mind. Beside me, Tomas and Nilo were impassive, even
confident; they did not seem to have any weak-sister doubts. Tomas
was to be our guide; I had been assured that he knew every inch of
this area, so why should he worry? Nilo, an illiterate peasant, had
stolen a gun and joined a guerrilla band the day his father's small
farm in Las Villas province had been confiscated for incorporation
into a larger "cooperative." If that was the agrarian reform that
Castro had promised, Nilo did not want any part of it! When the
 
414
guerrilla leader, "Black Thorndyke," was surrounded in a cane field
by 5,000 militiamen and burned alive, Nilo had led the surviving
guerrillas in a daring raid on a government patrol boat and sailed
it right into the Miami River with 25 men. He was extremely
lucky to have survived at all-yet here he was, once more ready to
give his life for his country. Nerve? He had proved he had it!
I tried to keep my face positive, though I knew they could not
make out my expression. My heart was racing, not exactly with
enthusiasm. Who in his right mind would volunteer for a suicide
mission like this? But there would be no backing out now.
I was returning: that was my overriding thought. I had some
fear, but as I explored it in my mind, I found it was not entirely for
myself, though I knew the danger we faced. About half the missions
into Cuba at this time were aborted, because of lights on the
coast, the presence of a strange boat, noises or something similar.
To my mind, these were flimsy excuses; the real reason was cowardice.
Oh, sure, people get afraid in the presence of danger. That's
natural; in fact fear is an essential human emotion. I have been
afraid many times. I don't like the sensation, but I don't let it
dominate me. So I had vowed to myself that no matter how afraid
I might get, I would keep going. If my companions tried to back
out, I thought I would pull a gun on them to make them go
through with it. Because I was the leader of this mission; it was my
responsibility.
Another complication was the fact that I was virtually a newlywed.

Just one month before, I had married the redheaded Nurmi.
By day I trained in radio operation; by night I-well, it was a very
busy time.
Now I was riding high, as if I were drunk or on some drug; I
felt like the most macho man in the world, the greatest, the bravest.
So what if I might be going alone against ten thousand militiamen?
Once I passed the test I would be a real man!
We lowered a small fiberglass boat called a "Boston Whaler"
415
and a rubber raft with a silent outboard motor. Five of us were
going in; two would remain with the boat.
Our mission was complex. On one level, it was to train guerrillas
and saboteurs on the island. Many people opposed the Communist
regime, but few were trained or equipped to act against it
effectively. The expertise we brought was vital. Oddly, we were not
to make contact with existing anti-Castro organizations. We had
been warned that they were riddled by Fidel's G-2 Intelligence
operatives and could not be trusted.
On another level, our mission was to go in and learn as much
as possible about a wild story concerning Russian missiles in Cuba.
I was to be alert for railroad tank cars transporting liquid oxygen-
"LOX"-which was fuel for large missiles. Of course the Soviets
wouldn't dare put offensive missiles in Cuba, so this was a wild
shot, probably dreamed up by some CIA man who fell asleep reading
science fiction. Nevertheless, I would check it out as well as I
could.
And I was supposed to journey on to Havana, and contact
some of my old collaborators there, men I could trust, and perhaps
bring one of them out secretly for special training.
We got into the rubber raft. My body performed automatically,
doing the things it had been conditioned to do. My mind
was still riding that high: we were committed, we were on our way
at last!
We were heavily laden. Besides the three of us in the raft, there
were about 100 pounds of explosives, and two big oil drums containing
twenty M-3 machine guns for the guerrillas we were to
train. This, after all, was a complete Cuban exile operation for the
MRR-Movement for Recovering the Revolution. We felt that
Fidel Castro had betrayed the revolution he fomented, and delivered
us all into a worse situation than we had before he came. So
now we hoped to recover the original purpose. The founders and
many members of the MRR had been in Fidel's "26th of July"
fight against Batista.
One of these founders was Captain Nino Diaz, who had been
 
416
a member of Raul Castro's column, before becoming disenchanted
by the ruthless character of Fidel's brother. Another was Jorge Sotus,
chief of the uprising against Batista in Sto. de Cuba in 1956, and
leader of the first group of reinforcements Fidel received in the
Sierra. Another was Sergio Sangenis, an anti-Batista guerrilla in
Matanzas province and for a while chief of Fidel's military intelligence.
And Manuel Artime, zone chief of INRRA in the Sierra
Maestra. And Rogelio Gonzales Corso, once chief of Agriculture
under Castro. These men had not intended to make the country a
Communist satellite! So now we all worked to reconvert the Revolution
into a Christian socialist movement for the benefit of all the
people.
We had substantial American help, of course, but no evidence
of that was permitted to show. The Americans had their own motives,
not necessarily the same as ours. The Bay of Pigs fiasco was
still fresh in their memory. But since they also had a hell of a lot of
money and equipment and know-how, we weren't in a position to
be choosy.

I dipped my hand in the water. It was pleasant, and its blackness
made it seem to be immensely deep. Somewhere down below
there would be fish, maybe sharks, sleek torpedoes of the sea. But
I knew that sharks seldom attacked groups of men. My mind was
mainly concerned with larger threats, such as thousands of militiamen
waiting on shore to nab us. Better the sharks than that!
And, in opposition to that threat, I had a vision of glorious victory:
riding into Havana on a white horse, with cheering throngs, beautiful
women such as Onelida in her white dress, saved especially
for this occasion-of course I was recently married, but I was never
much of a monogamist, and I knew some girls in Havana that . . .
but right now there was nothing but darkness and water and hope.
The real fascination was that these were the waters of home, that I
had swum in as a boy, when Cuba was free.
When Cuba was free . . .
A wind came up. "Oh-oh," Nilo said. He was a young man,
417
short and light but very strong. A killer with nerves of steel. A
good partner for a mission like this. "Squall."
He was right. I wish he'd been wrong. The last thing we needed
was a storm!
In moments the squall was upon us. These storms are called
Turbonadas in Cuba, short but violent. Rain pelted down, whipped
into our faces by the wind. It was just a little altercation of the
weather, nothing serious-to anyone in a closed house on land.
Here in an insubstantial rubber raft, overloaded on open water at
night, it was like a damned hurricane. The black waves loomed up
like traveling mountains, spraying us with their rabid froth, foaming
over the sides, soaking us.
Tomas grabbed a bucket. "Bail!" he exclaimed. I joined him,
scooping out the water. We couldn't capsize, really, but we sure as
hell didn't want to sit in a deepening puddle either. Supposedly
everything was waterproof, but you can never be sure. Our weapons
might have been damaged, and our maps and code books, and
our radio could have corroded.
I was wearing my poncho, but I was cold and miserable as the
water sloshed over my ankles and the waves drenched us completely.
Suddenly I needed to urinate; the suggestion can become
extremely powerful in such a situation. Not that it would have
made any difference, wet as my pants were already. I worried about
my glasses and my steel calendar watch, necessary to keep track of
the date when out of touch with civilization; the proper date was
essential to make closely-timed prearranged radio contacts with
the U.S.A.
I remembered what a squall had cost me once before. I had
been waiting in the Spanish Club in Havana with a BAR-Browning
Automatic Rifle-ready to assassinate Fidel Castro as he came
to a Chinese Exposition there. But just before Fidel arrived, a squall
had struck, and he had returned to the dry Presidential Palace.
But for that coincidence, I would now be safe and sound in the
city-or snug in a grave. Assassination is a tricky business, even
when successful.
 
418
So we bailed, while the fury of the tropical storm made our
efforts seem futile. At least the exercise warmed us a little. After
about fifteen minutes that seemed more like an hour, the squall
passed. We had lost some headway, but now resumed forward
progress. The Boston Whaler was just ahead. If this were the worst
we had to contend with-
Then our motor quit. "Singao!" Nilo swore under his breath.
He jerked the starter cord, but the thing was dead. The rain had
shorted it out. It was a five thousand dollar silent motor, supposedly
proof against such malfunction. Yeah, sure! Maybe a little spy

mission into the American manufacturing business was in order,
to find out who was goofing off in the motor department. We were
stalled on the ocean-and dawn was coming. We were running
out of time.
We were in the middle of some small keys that separated a
kind of bay, with mainland Cuba not far beyond. No help there.
The Boston Whaler realized our problem. It cut back, and
Oreja Mocha threw us a tow-rope. That was the purpose in having
it along: to make sure we got where we were going despite our
dependence on American equipment. I could not pull a gun on a
cowardly silent motor to make it perform! So now we were hauled
along at reduced speed.
But the delay was too much. It was getting light. Light was
our enemy; we would surely be spotted if we tried to go ashore
now. "We have to go back," Mario said. He was an old hand, about
sixty years old, white haired. He was an intelligent conversationalist,
in contrast to Nilo, but he had a yellow streak.
My hand moved toward my special 9mm assassination pistol
with the silencer. "No turning back!"
"But the light-"
"We'll hide out for the day in the largest key," I decided. "Tonight
we'll go ashore."
That was it. I was the leader, and I had the pistol. We were
down to basics. The islet I saw was mostly swamp and mangrove,
419
a good place to hide-except for one thing. It was close to a fishing
village.
We had no choice. We pulled in and anchored our two craft
amid the huge boles of the mangroves, hidden from view of the
mainland. Tomas, our guide, was an old man; we had to trust his
experience. He assured us that he had brought fishermen here in
the past, and that no one else ever came near.
We had to stay concealed from the air, too; an occasional helicopter
patrol could pass. But the overhanging trees seemed sufficient.
Now for the long wait. The sun came up. It would have been
nice to bask and get a tan, or at least to play a game of poker. But
we had to remain silent and alert. I wished half our number were
female; a lot can be done with a woman who has to keep immobile
and quiet all day. Instead I leaned against a tree and swatted mosquitoes,
snarling inwardly. We hadn't even started our mission,
and here we were stalled. I had to watch to see that Mario didn't
try to bug out, going back to the yacht.
About mid-morning a boat came by. It contained two fishermen,
and it was headed right for our island. We had nothing against
fishermen, but if they discovered up it would be disastrous. One
report to the authorities would bring Cuban gunboats swarming
like flies. Deadly stinging flies!
The boat stopped about 150 feet from where we were hiding
and began to fish. If they came no closer, if those men did not see
us, all would be well. Otherwise-
Tomas came to me in agitation. "One of the fishermen-he is
my nephew!" he whispered.
"Good. He won't give us away," I said.
"Not good! He is a rabid Communist, and the chief of the
fishermen's militia!"
Oh-oh. "You know what that means?" I asked him, giving
him a hard stare.
He nodded grimly. "He is no relative of mine any more-not
since he turned traitor to his people."
 
420
A good attitude. Still, I worried. No man likes to contemplate
the death of his own blood-kin. Could we trust Tomas now?
The two fishermen kept drifting closer. Apparently the fish

were biting better in our direction. Were they Communist fish,
trying to betray us? I stood behind a dead tree trunk, nervously
fingering my silent M-3 machine gun. How close could they come,
without seeing us? If only they would go some other direction!
Suddenly one of the fishermen turned. He gestured urgently
to his companion. He had seen something!
They started their motor and headed directly for us. There
was no question now; they had spotted one of our boats and were
coming to investigate.
I lifted my rifle and aimed, feeling a cold necessity. Was there
any alternative? I had experienced Fidel's prisons, and I had lost
friends to Paredon, the wall of death. In the hands of the militia,
my life would endure only long enough for their torturers to extract
the dregs of my information. After me, my friends-those
friends who were now waiting in Havana to help me. Some of
them were young women-oh, the G-2 would like to learn their
identities! Those sadists seemed to get an extra thrill from making
a pretty girl scream . . .
My rifle fired. The silencer worked perfectly; there was only
the noise of the gun carriage going back and forth. It was as though
the weapon had a mind of its own, and I was a bystander. First the
Communist nephew fell, then the other. But the rifle wouldn't
stop. The entire clip of twenty five bullets emptied into their jerking
bodies. Blood spurted and stained the water. There were messy
discharges from their bodily orifices. There is nothing pretty about
violent death!
It takes a special discipline to kill a human being. I had done
it before, so I was hardened somewhat-but the first time brings
nightmares for months. Those who like to watch violence on TV,
or read about killings in comic books, have little appreciation of
the real nature of it. It is not fun to take a man's life! But when it is
421
his life or yours, and you know that from bitter experience, it
happens. That's part of what combat is all about.
The other part, for me, was this: now at last the shades of
Virgilio and Antonino could rest in peace.
Virgilio: April 13, 1961, the second day of the Bay of Pigs
invasion. I was having breakfast in the house of Graciela, an elderly
lady who had given me shelter for the night, and I was looking at
headlines in the newspaper. Twenty-five counter revolutionaries
had been shot in the Cabanas prison, and among them were Virgilio
Campaneria and Alberto Tapia Ruano. They were former companions
of mine in the resistance movement, and very good friends. I
had broken down and cried over that newspaper, and in the grief
and fury of impotence I swore to avenge them. Somehow, somewhere,
sometime . . .
Antonino: six months later, in my first retraining camp run by
the DRE in Key Largo, I heard on the radio how my good friend
and fellow student of law, Antonino Diaz Pou, had been shot in
Matanzas prison. He had said goodbye to me a year before, leaving
for the U.S.A., but had returned to Havana as a radio operator
before the invasion. So we were both in Cuba again, but had not
met. He had entered the Venezualan embassy for sanctuary, but
left when the Movement needed him to maintain radio contact
with Miami. He was waiting on a Matanzas beach to be picked up
by friends-but was surprised by the enemy, wounded, captured,
and given Paredon, execution.
By my logic, I had now avenged my friends.
There was no place to bury the bodies on the key, as it was
mostly swamp and tree trunks. But we had to dispose of them
somehow, for the corpses could give us away as surely as the living
men.
Nilo had an idea: "Send the cadavers back with Mario and
Oreja. They can tow the fishing boat to the yacht after we land,

then have the Cuban Exile radio report that the two fishermen
defected and reached Miami safely in their small boat. No one will
know the difference."
 
422
Excellent notion! So we set it up that way. We were fortunate
that Tomas had recognized them, so we could give their full names.
That night we crossed to the mainland without event in the
Boston Whaler, leaving the rubber raft cached in the key. Tomas
pointed out the designated landing place: a small beach. In the
dark it looked just like a mud hole-but that was why we needed
a guide.
I got off the boat-and sank into the mud right up to my
armpits. "What the hell kind of a beach is this?" I demanded, not
in the best of humor.
I could not move. I was burdened with all my equipment, so
was quite heavy-but that is one of the problems on such missions.
You have to carry everything you're going to need right along
with you. I bore a radio set with batteries and hand generator-
and this was not a miniature transistor receiver, but a substantial
mass of equipment that covered my whole back, about fifty pounds
total. I also had a canteen of water, a submachine gun with silencer
and spare clips of ammunition, a .45 pistol, knife, five hand grenades,
$30,000 in freshly-minted Cuban 20-peso bills, gold coins
(good as gold anywhere!), first aid kit, maps, code books, compass,
poncho, hunting knife, food rations, vitamins and personal effects.
In short, I was so loaded down I could hardly move even in the
best terrain. Now that the supposedly firm beach had turned out
to be mush, I was really stuck.
"Well, move," Nilo whispered in the dark. "We don't have all
night."
"Cono tu madre," I snapped. No, I won't translate that; it was
an expletive calculated to make the ears of even a hardened terrorist
burn.
Nilo chuckled. "How lucky we are that Juan is in a good humor
tonight-and so sure of foot." Juan was the name I used for
this mission. We always used false names, so that we could not be
identified if caught, and could not give away our companions. It
also protected our families. I know this precaution saved my own
423
skin once, for the police were combing Havana looking for "Juan"-
who did not exist.
After Nilo and Tomas had finished with their unfunny humor,
they hauled me out of the gunk and back into the boat. I sprawled,
a muddy mess from the chest down. They might have muttered
something cute about that, but this was a serious mission where
any words might be overheard, so we worked mainly in silence.
We were too miserable and scared to engage in much light banter
anyway.
We floated further along the coast and landed again about a
third of a mile beyond the scene of my accident. This time the
ground was reasonably firm. The three men of our mission unloaded.
Mario was terrified; he had wanted to turn back as soon as
we hit the mud, but we wouldn't let him. Now he perked up; he
was finally returning to the security of the yacht. There were no
farewells; the boat left quickly.
We were on our own. But our problems were only beginning.
We started walking, following our guide. We tramped and
tramped. How far did we have to go to make our rendezvous?
We cached the radio in some forest bushes near the coast. That
lightened the load somewhat, but we still had trouble. We had to
cross a barbed wire fence. Nilo jumped over, then held up the
bottom strand for me to squeeze through. I got hung up on a
barb, wouldn't you know it, and had a hell of a time getting

unstuck. We passed through a freshly plowed field; that was another
mess.
Tomas's age began to tell. He had increasing trouble walking,
and finally we had to take his pack and half-carry him. Some guide!
Suddenly Tomas fell on his knees, sobbing. "Kill me! Kill me!
I lied, I am no guide, no guerrilla-I only came to bring my own
family out! We are lost, I don't know where we are! Kill me!"
No wonder we had landed in muck! Such rage boiled up in
me that I grabbed for my gun. I actually put it to his forehead and
took the safety off. It was my life the son of a bitch had finished.
 
424
Lost in enemy terrain-how would any of us survive? But Nilo
stopped me. "There will be time for that later!"
Some common sense seeped into my volatile temper. What
would another killing gain us? More work to bury the body! It was
understandable that a man would do anything to get his family
out of Cuba, after all. Tomas was no traitor, only a desperate fool.
So we let the matter drop, and we plunged ahead, more or less
hopelessly.
And for once we lucked out. We stumbled on the only part of
the region our fake guide was familiar with-his own farm-so
that suddenly we knew where we were. In the process, as we learned
later, we had skirted a group of government militiamen on patrol
-and we hadn't even known they were there.
I think ninety per cent of the success of such missions as ours
is just plain blind luck-and we can't always tell the good luck
from the bad. Had my landing in the mud delayed us just the
amount needed to make us miss the patrol?
We made our way to a thicket of thorns, a good hideout for
the day. These thickets can be massive affairs, impenetrable, that
nobody would fool with short of desperation; that was what made
this one so good. Nilo and Tomas went to a small farm to contact
the owner, who was a friend. I remained in the thicket, guarding
our equipment.
I had had a hard night, what with the mud and barbed wire
and the weight of the radio and helping Tomas along, and I was
tired. I tried to stay alert, but it was so nice being off my feet that
soon I found myself nodding. I lay down to sleep. I shouldn't have
done that.
Suddenly I heard voices: Nilo and Tomas must be returning,
looking for me. It was hard to tell one thorn thicket from another,
which was another good thing about this hiding place. I made
small clicking sounds that were our recognition code. The group
approached-and I saw it was a bunch of militiamen on their
rounds.
I froze in terror. Had my confusion brought the enemy down
425
on my head? But I was in more luck than I deserved. The militiamen
had heard the clicking, but they thought it was a cricket.
They passed me by.
I had just about used up my quota of good luck. I did not
sleep again.
Later my friends arrived, carrying some goat meat and guava
paste and fresh soft white cheese and Cuban bread in a bucket. It
was a slops pail, so that it looked as if someone were going to feed
the hogs-a good camouflage. Everything had to look innocent
and natural; our lives depended on it.
So at last we had good food to eat. Maybe guava paste from a
slops pail doesn't sound like much, but I'll settle for it any day.
Maybe I'm a hog at heart.
We stayed there several days, giving out money and getting
information from townspeople we could trust. I recovered my transmitter
and sent a message out. It wasn't a bad time, as such things

go. I remember walking to the edge of the thicket at night and
watching the full moon over the palm trees. By day the heavens
were an incredible azure, and the sun beat down on us; by night it
was just as pretty.
Of course there were some inconveniences. Natural functions
were a problem. Out in the key or in the boat, the entire ocean
was one big flush toilet; just poke your posterior over the edge and
make your offering to nature, and no backtalk about pollution.
But here on solid land it was no picnic. In the dark, amidst the
thornbush, with dried mud caking my pants, I could hardly tell
what was what. Mosquitoes zeroed in on my exposed anatomy like
darts on a bullseye; they knew what was what! That forced me to
slap on more repellent when I could find it. I had to wipe myself
with huge plantain leaves, and let me tell you, toilet paper is much
better! I buried my waste the way a cat does, for it was essential
that we leave no traces at all.
The routine life of a guerrilla is not exactly James Bond style
adventure. In fact, there are times when it hardly seems worth it.
Did you ever see James Bond using a plantain leaf?
 
426
Than we headed east at night-and stumbled on what we
later learned was a Russian missile base. This was just one of those
freaks of the trade; we hadn't really expected to find anything like
that, despite our orders.
The woods were full of trigger-happy militia. We had blithely
walked into a hornets' nest. For this was the secret of the early
1960's: the Soviet emplacement of intermediate-range nuclearwarhead
missiles in Cuba. That daring ploy was intended to shift
the balance of world power, and of course it was to precipitate a
sudden East-West confrontation of greater significance than any
other.
I was, I believe, the first American agent to send hard information
confirming this fantastic threat. I understand my report was
shunted straight up to President Kennedy. Maybe I was the key
link in the chain of events that saved the world from nuclear holocaust
in 1962.
At least, I like to think so. Call me terrorist, guerrilla or patriot:
few of these can claim as much.
Chapter 2:
Three Misses
My father was arrested on July 26, 1960-ironically the seventh
anniversary of Fidel Castro's own abortive first uprising and
arrest. So the "26th of July Movement" applied about as well to
me as to Fidel, for it started us both on our careers of anti-government
activism. Only my opposition was to Fidel's government,
which I felt was worse than the one he had overthrown in the
name of the People.
My father was no guerrilla, no terrorist. He was sixty five years
old, a retired lawyer. All he did was pass out leaflets protesting the
repression of the Catholic Church in Cuba. Young Communist
toughs had attacked the crowd of women and old men leaving the
Jesus de Miramar church after mass.
It was not that we thought the Batista government that preceded
Castro was good; it was notoriously corrupt. But Fidel made
so many fine promises, and reneged on most of them as he brought
Communism to Cuba. What had become of free speech, the free
press? Abolition of the death penalty? Open elections? Restoration
of the Constitution? Freedom of religion? My father's literature set
the record straight.
 
428
But in a totalitarian state, anti-government propaganda is a
serious offense, particularly if backed up by facts. Two waiters at

the Spanish Club at the Havana beach had seen my father give
some of the leaflets to a friend, and they called the G-2, or secret
police. The G-2 searched and found some of this incriminating
material at his house when they took him in.
For such a heinous offense, the indictment demanded thirty
years in prison. Considering his age, this was much the same as a
death sentence.
Of course the police were after me too, as I was my father's
son, and active in the same movement. They assumed I would be
guilty of the same offense. Guilt-by-association is one of the tenets
of this type of government. They were mistaken: I was guilty of
much worse.
Before they came, I got my gun, gathered all the incriminating
papers I could find, and gave the bagful of literature to the
mother of a friend of mine for safekeeping. "Don't look inside!" I
cautioned her. But she did look-women are that way, curious as
cats-and almost had a heart attack, poor thing. Worse than pornography,
that addictive literature of freedom!
Of course another time I did worse than that: I left a shoe box
containing live hand grenades with a girlfriend. Girls, despite appearances,
are good for more than one thing. She didn't sleep a
wink all night, but she kept them safe!
So now I went into hiding, but all my friends knew where I
was. I stayed at another girlfriend's house, of course. Disappearing
does have its little rewards.
When I learned the identity of the two informers who had
gotten my father arrested, my hot Latin blood boiled up. I headed
for the Spanish Club with my gun, determined to shoot those two
waiters immediately. But my friends intercepted me and persuaded
me to wait until my father's trial. Wise counsel; I might have made
things worse for my father.
All right. I waited. But that didn't mean I was letting it rest. I
went to the club several times, and such was my temper I would
429
probably have gone after them with my bare hands if I had seen
them. I was then a nidan in the martial art of judo, a second degree
black belt, champion of Cuba. It would have been a gross
abuse of my skill, for judo should be used only for self defense, but
I was young then, 25, and peril to a member of my family set me
off. I'm older now, but I haven't changed. Fortunately the informers
always hid in the kitchen when I showed up, except once when
I saw one of them serving another customer. I went to him and
said: "You know who my father is," and I turned away. He almost
soiled his pants.
I sent them a message, gentle enough considering my sentiments.
"If my father is condemned, you are dead." I am not a very
subtle person. To make sure it sank in, I had a friend burn their
lockers with phosphorus. Phosphorous is nasty stuff; it burns so
ferociously that nothing will put it out, and it starts suddenly like
a Fourth of July sparkler. Very pretty, throwing living sparks in
every direction, with white glaring light tinged with green from
impurities. It makes clouds of acrid gray smoke, stinking of sulfur.
It didn't melt down their lockers, but it destroyed their street
clothes and everything else in there.
They got the message. At the trial they recanted and testified
that they had not actually seen my father do anything, and that he
was a good man. Of course he was a good man-but not in quite
the way they implied. So the case against him collapsed, and he
went free.
Naturally the authorities soon caught on to my part in the
matter. A stenographer of the court who was a friend of our family
later reported to me that a prominent member of the five man
court had said "Let the old man go-it is the son we want." So? I
wanted him, too!

I disagree with Fidel Castro's politics, but I can say this about
his ability: he organized one hell of an efficient police state. Because
there were powerful opposing forces, like the Catholic
Church, dissidents were not taken in as boldly as in Nazi Germany
or Russia. A person would be summoned for questioning-
 
430
and not return. No noise, no violence, no shooting-nothing anyone
could really point to. Nothing to justify a violent protest or
uprising.
So when, a week after my father's trial, my friend Pepito told
me I had to go to a meeting, I was suspicious. "No thanks," I said.
"That's the classic setup for an arrest. An informer sets up a meeting
and the police ambush it."
"No problem," he assured me. "This is a small group that
always gets together to play dominoes. They know each other. You
have to go, because you are SAC's military coordinator."
SAC in this case did not stand for the American Strategic Air
Command, but for something even more important-to me. Salvar
a Cuba, "Save Cuba," a clandestine resistance movement, small
but effective for its size. We were planning an attack on a naval
base near Havana. We would raid the ten-man garrison and take
their weapons to the Escambray mountains, where we would set
up as guerrillas. I looked forward to that; I had not yet discovered
the hardships of real country warfare. SAC was made up mostly of
University students, my kind of people-those that were supposed
to be the most ardent supporters of the Revolution. Ha! Did Fidel
assume that to be educated was to be stupid?
Pepito was right: I had to brief this group. It was risky-but
counter-revolution is a risky profession. I was learning that the
hard way.
"We'll go fast, and get out fast," I said.
We went. I was nervous, and I looked all around as we entered
the house. There were half a dozen people playing dominoes and
drinking beer-an innocent enough setting, but I was not reassured.
In fiction, the hero may be supremely confident-but a
real-life guerrilla is understandably jittery. He has no series-contract
with a publisher to keep him alive indefinitely. I thought I
heard noises outside. For a moment I was ready to bolt for it,
diving out the window and running. But it was probably just my
nerves. Why make a fool of myself?
Then a man entered. He carried a Springfield rifle and ten
431
militia uniforms we planned to use on our mission. I thought he
was our contact-but he was a government man, who had found
this incriminating evidence. "The house is surrounded," he announced.
"Please come with me, quietly."
We were outnumbered and unarmed. Any attempt to fight
would have gotten us shot. The G-2 always brought overwhelming
strength to bear in arrests. Why hadn't I thought to bring my
gun? In my inexperience I had stupidly walked into the trap, and
now there was nothing I could do.
And so I was arrested-in the classic manner.
I still hoped I could bluff it out. After all, we hadn't done
anything very serious that they could prove, and the main arsenal
of six or eight Belgian-made FALS rifles, several revolvers, two sawedoff
shotguns, and some cartridges prepared with heavy buckshot
and cyanide for assassination attempts-all this was safely hidden
in another place. Oh, we might be given token sentences, but
nothing serious. I hoped. Provided nobody cracked under questioning.
But when we got to the G-2 offices, the first thing we saw was
a long table loaded with weapons. My friend Tony went white.
"My God-they found our cache!
Then I knew we had had it.

I was put in the "cold room" where the air conditioning was
turned up so high I thought I would freeze to death. Maybe that
doesn't sound like so much of a torture, compared to thumbscrews
or hot irons or electric shocks through the genitals, but believe
me, a week of such cold makes confession seem very attractive. A
man can stand pain for a short period, but the long, slow, subtle
debilitation of simple cold can wipe out much of his will to resist.
I was dressed in only a light short-sleeved sport-shirt and summer
slacks, since Havana ranged from 70°F at night to 85° in the day.
I didn't crack. It wasn't that I was tough, it was that I knew
that nothing they were doing to me as a suspect would approach
what they would do to me as a confirmed enemy of the state. The
G-2 is not a backward organization in this respect; if they had
 
432
thought I was important, they would have trotted out techniques
of interrogation that would have made me crack in a hurry. I was
better off shivering, and I knew it. Better to freeze as a small fish,
than to roast as a big one.
After that I was taken to the Cabanas, the fortress prison. It
wasn't like an American penal institution, where cells are restricted
to two to four inmates each. There were fifteen long Galeras or
corridors hewn in the stone of the walls, like railroad tunnels, dank
and cold at night. Each contained about 90 men in triple-decker
bunks when I arrived, but later there were more. They were served
by two toilets and wash bowls and showers. We had to turn in our
original clothes for prison uniforms with the letter P on the backs.
At the door new arrivals were greeted with the shout "Carne Fresca!"
meaning "fresh meat!"-hardly reassuring.
Meals were simple. They didn't starve us, but one time the
meat was bad, spoiled. Our Galera was overcrowded then, and
150 men had to use the two toilets all at once. Many had such
indigestion they could not wait, and had to relieve themselves
where they stood. The stench was terrible.
The prison was a community in itself, with all sorts of ups and
downs and personal interactions. Much of the life was brutal; some
had its humorous aspects. One thing you have to realize about
political prisoners: they do not consider themselves to be criminals,
but men of conscience. They are the high officials who happened
to back the wrong side, the reformers whose good works
were not appreciated by the evil State, the innocent who were
drawn in by random arrests or mistaken information. Or so they
claim.
The truth is that some are criminals, but many more are not.
Some of the very best resources of a nation are in the political
prison. A lot of political opportunists, too-counting on a change
of government to provide high office for them on the strength of
their imprisonment. It is a unique atmosphere, completely different
from the conventional penal institution.
When I was there, roughly one third of the prisoners were ex-
433
Batista soldiers, another third were ex-Castro men, and the rest
were civilians: lawyers, engineers, students, doctors, artists, Cuba's
leading astrologer, the heavyweight boxing champion of the country,
University professors, jewelers, chess players, and of course
me, the judo champion. In short, an elite society, eclectic as it was.
We tried to entertain ourselves with chess, checkers, dominoes,
poker, Parcheesi, Monopoly, and exercises in the yard. Practice
in self defense or martial art was of course forbidden. But
interesting as these diversions may seem for a few weeks or months,
the notion of continuing that life for twenty years or so was appalling.
Yet even the short haul was no picnic. There were fights and
beatings and riots, with virtual warfare between the Batista men
and the Revolutionists. Yes, each group carried its loyalties right

into prison. And always the awful pall of the approaching trials.
We knew many of us would die at the wall, Paredon, but always
hoped selfishly that it would be someone else.
Actually, my experience was far from unique. In Latin America,
political prison is often a stepping stone for political power. Perhaps
half the leaders are graduates of this type of school. Fidel
himself served two years in Batista's prisons, and Batista's predecessor
in power had also been in prison. Batista himself had the
wit to skip the country fast with his money when his regime toppled,
or he would have been in prison too-for the little while until he
was executed.
My watch was stolen. My two friends, Eduardo Bringas and
Juan Pla, let it be known that if my watch were not returned in
one hour, they were going to take action. Such was their reputation,
even in prison, that my watch reappeared within the deadline.
Another friend, Ricardo Cruz, started beating up an informer.
There are informers inside as well as outside, and they can make a
lot of trouble. Once we made a tunnel through the wall of the
prison, from the infirmary. We were almost through, when an in-
 
434
former spilled the news. Potential freedom, wiped out just like
that. So tempers can flare when an informer is discovered.
When I got to that fight, the soldiers were just coming to
break it up. I got in the way, not exactly accidentally, and saved
Ricardo from getting struck by a rifle butt, and it ended with
Ricardo and me both getting arrested. Technically we were already
under arrest, since we were prisoners-but as I said, this was like a
community, and we were left pretty much to our own devices if we
stayed out of trouble.
We were taken to Teniente Manolo, the chief of the prison. He
hated us, because he thought students were supposed to be more
in favor of the Castro Revolution than the average citizen. Those of
us who opposed Castro were thus doubly traitors, in his eyes. He
was so furious I thought he was going to strike me across the face.
I'm no hero, but my temper was ragged, and if he had touched me
I would probably have thrown him against the wall and tried to
beat him to death. You can do a lot of damage to a man in a very
short time, if you know how, and I happen to know how. But that
would have been the end of me, of course. Such heroics are much
safer in fiction.
Manolo must have heeded my expression and thought the
better of it. He had much more to lose than I did. Instead he sent
us to the Capillas. These were dark, cold, barren stone tunnels
under the castle, a kind of solitary confinement cell-complex. Prison
was bad, but the Capillas were worse! I would certainly be more
careful in the future; I didn't want to be sent there again.
Back in the main prison a week later, I found the mood changed,
tense, ugly. The prison authorities feared that mood, so they started
having sudden trials. Five people would be summoned at a time,
and only one would return. "They gave me thirty years!" that one
would cry joyfully. "Thirty years! Thank God!" This was not a
strange reaction-for the other four had gone to the execution
wall.
We were all sweating now. They could shoot us all if they
wanted, just to clear the cells. Justice in Cuba was at such a state in
435
Fidel's brave new order that all they needed were the bullets. In
three short hours thirty men were condemned to death, including
many of my friends. All but one of those were commuted to thirty
years, however. Excellent psychological strategy: the black mood
lightened, now that the axe had fallen, and there was no riot.
But the single one who was shot was my friend Ricardo Cruz,
my companion of the Capillas.

When my own trial came, I was convinced I would get at least
three years to nine years, while a part of me hoped for a lighter
sentence, and another part carried the awful vision of Paredon. Oh
God, not the Wall! Yet Ricardo had gone . . .
My trial was around three in the afternoon, but the results
were not announced right away, and at six we were returned to our
cells. We did not know how long it would be; maybe in a couple of
hours, maybe in a week. There was no point worrying about it,
though of course we did worry; how could we stop it? I went to
sleep early, around eight, my emotions played out-and at ninethirty
they gave the results over the speaker system.
The names of three of my friends were called out for release.
Lucky bastards! Then someone woke me up: "Roberto, get dressed.
You are free!"
But I knew about that cruel joke. Wake someone, tell him his
name has been called for release. A dream come true! His hopes
rise sky high, he runs to the gate-and there he learns the truth.
Everyone laughs heartily. Ha ha! Excruciatingly funny. For everybody
but him, with his dashed hope. Maybe next day he goes to
the Wall. How nice that his last day was brightened by this humor.
So I didn't believe this news. But the chief of the galley in our
cell told me it was true, and he wished me luck. Then I believed.
And so I went home, incredibly, a free man.
Death had missed me, once.
 
436
*
Some people might have given up counterrevolution after that
experience. But I had tasted the water, and had been through too
much. The blood of my friends was on the hands of the Fidelistas.
I was more determined than ever to overthrow the Castro regime
in Cuba. Maybe I would have been wiser to leave the country for
Miami, as my friend Pepito did-to return four months later as a
parachuter in the Bay of Pigs invasion. Ah, well, hindsight . . .
The day after I got home, I went into hiding and started contacting
my former associates. We were involved in terrorism-at
least that was what the government called our activities. But for
us, what we did was the first step in the process of freeing Cuba. A
year and a half before, our pursuers had been doing exactly the
same thing; then they were the terrorists. They had been the ones
doing the bombings and shootings, trying to assassinate high government
officers and averting disaster only very narrowly. Strange,
isn't it, how last year's terrorist becomes this year's law-and-order
man. Maybe next year I would be a high government official of
Free Cuba, on my fine white horse, adored by lovely young girls,
trying to suppress the nefarious Communist counter-counter-revolutionaries!
I, the patriot! Ah, dreams . . .
There was to be a patriotic dance in a small town near Havana,
Guira de Melenas. If there was one thing I was not, right now, it
was patriotic. Not for the Castro regime! So I welcomed the chance
to break this up.
A local boy knew the key electric post: the one that, if destroyed,
would blacken the entire town. Beautiful! Just let them
try to hold the dance, without any electric power. No light, no
radio, no music-nothing that depended on the current. Maybe
it wouldn't do much to topple Castro, but what a satisfaction to
mess it up!
Maybe James Bond type agents deal exclusively with worldshaking
missions-but I was merely a garden variety protester.
Later my horizons broadened. But at this time, darkening a village
437
dance was my level of expertise. We all have to start somewhere,
you know.
The boy did not have the nerve to plant the bomb himself,

and there was no one else with the critical knowledge, so it fell to
me. We went in a car painted like a taxi, with Jorge, another friend
of mine, driving. Friends are a great comfort to a terrorist. We got
to the entrance of the town, and saw about ten militiamen with
rifles stopping the incoming traffic.
"God, they are searching the cars!" I exclaimed. There I was, in
the front seat, with the bomb in my lap like a picnic basket. It
consisted of five pounds of C-3 plastic explosive wrapped in newspaper.
Five pounds may not sound like much, but it was equivalent
to ten sticks of commercial dynamite: enough to destroy a
house, let alone our carfull.
I was eating Pan de Caracas, a dry cornbread, and my mouth
got so parched the stuff stuck in my throat. The Chinese used to
have a test of guilt: if a handful of rice held in the mouth remained
dry, the suspect was guilty. I would have failed that test, for sure!
I clutched my gun under my shirt. I looked out at the militiamen
in front of the car. I will never forget his mustached face or
the FAL rifle he carried. If he asks me what I have in the newspaper,
or makes me get out of the car, I thought, I'll shoot him in the stomach
and make a break for the woods! I was not being brave; I was terrified,
but I knew I would never get out of prison alive a second
time, because all of those caught with explosives were sent to
Paredon. My temperament was such that I preferred to die fighting;
I did not have the nuts to stand before the firing squad bravely
defiant to the end.
But Jorge, thank God, had a face of iron. "Companero," he
said to the militiaman, "want me to open the trunk?"
The man nodded. "Yes, please." This was routine, for him; he
didn't expect to find any plastic explosive wrapped in newspaper
like fresh fish.
Jorge opened the trunk-and of course it was empty.
"All right-go on," the militiaman said, bored. We were
 
438
through-but I'd had the worst scare of my life.
We continued on into town. We found the pole with the transformers,
wrapped the bomb around it (you can shape plastic explosive;
it is very versatile, the bomber's best friend), tightened it
with a belt, and touched a match to the three minute fuse.
The fuse would not light.
Of all the-! We tried again-and again. Once it started to
burn, but it was only the outer casing, not the powder trail, and
nothing happened. I had to go back, cut off the end, and try with
a much shorter piece. I swear it took five excruciating minutes to
ignite that thing, with us sweating all the time. Any chance discovery
by tll bilitia-
Finally it caught. Now all we had to worry about was getting
blown up! We piled into the car and took off. I know we made it
out of town within three minutes, because as we left we heard the
explosion behind us and saw the lights go out. Success!
Later I learned that one man, Tomas, who had helped us, had
been caught and sentenced to 30 years. I had been tried in absentia
and sentenced to death. That didn't bother me much; the sentence
was meaningless so long as they didn't catch me. But how
well I still remember that mustached militiaman who stopped our
car: my second miss with death.
*
Berty Andino, the MRR Action and Sabotage chief, called me
one day; he had 20 pounds of C-3 explosive already made into
bombs, and he wanted me to test a new kind of detonator. Would
I do it?
"Sure," I said. I like bombs. Watching a real blast is almost
like a religious experience. "But can I keep the bombs until tomorrow?
My brother is Christening his second son this afternoon, and

I'm to be the Godfather."
He paused. "No, it can't wait. I'll get another person." I knew
he thought I was going to die soon-after all, I had been con-
439
demned to death, and my luck couldn't hold out indefinitely-
and he wanted me to have this one moment. This nice little family
ceremony might well be my last.
Maybe Berty would not have been so nice about it if he had
known my other reason for begging off: I had lined up three luscious
girls for a party with two friends that night. One was Hilda,
one of the most beautiful black girls I have known: petite with
lovely silky shoulder-long hair; another was her friend Toby, and I
have forgotten the name of the third (a rose by any name would
smell as sweet), but she had soft cloudy black hair and other attributes
best left to the imagination.
Terrorism has a strong effect on the personality, because of the
constant threat of death. Some people turn religious; others develop
an inordinate craving for sex. I was not religious.
So I did not go on the bombing mission. Instead I attended
my nephew's Christening, and my private party. My friend Enrique
went to pick up our third man, Barreto, and for one whole glorious
hour I was alone with all three girls. What a party!
Suddenly we heard a tremendous explosion, that shook the
buildings in a wide area. That would be Berty's crew, doing the
job; for a moment I was sorry I was not in on it. But there are other
things in life than bombs, and I was enjoying three of them right
now; my regret was minimal.
Next day I learned: the new detonators had been faulty. The
two men had put the stuff in a car and driven toward their mission
-and the plastic had gone off prematurely. Twenty pounds of
C-3! Pieces of men and car were scattered across a hundred yards
of street, so mangled that nothing could be identified.
Except for the Christening and my hot party, that bang would
have been Enrique and me. My third miss with an appointment
for death, because I was too busy making time with three lovely
misses . . .
 
SUMMARY OF REMAINDER:
The following chapters will detail the life/death crises and complications
of the protagonist, gradually filling in more of the background
of the Cuban situation and clarifying the motives and philosophy
of the terrorist.
Roberto Fuentes was involved in several secret missions for
Cuban exiles and the United States, and twice escaped Cuba by
seeking refuge in a foreign embassy. Even that was not the sanctuary
some might imagine; the Castro government knew how to
bring a lot of pressure to bear to get him out, even trying to remove
him by force. He was the only one to receive asylum from
Castro twice in different embassies, those of Mexico and Uruguay.
Several times he tried to kill Fidel Castro. One attempt was
foiled by a sudden storm; another by Fidel's last-moment change
of plane. He blew up a hotel Fidel was to visit, the Hilton-Havana
Libre, almost catching an occupant who was later to become his
wife, Grace. Another occupant was one of his best friends, counterrevolutionary
leader Manolito Baro. Roberto also tried to kill two
of Castro's top officers, again being balked by freak luck, such as a
shotgun misfiring at point-blank range.
He was involved in the Bay of Pigs fiasco, as a leader of the
Cuban underground ready to start a concurrent insurrection in
Havana. He shows why that effort failed, owing to incredible mis-
 
442
management. Had he followed the fouled-up script, he would have
been dead-again.

He tells how the assassination of President Kennedy stopped
the next major effort to free Cuba. It is not known whether Fidel
Castro had any part in the assassination-but the CIA tried to kill
Castro, and Fidel was not a man to take that sort of thing lightly,
and was himself an expert in such matters. Later, Bobby Kennedy
was reviving part of the anti-Castro plan-when be too was killed.
A grim coincidence-perhaps.
Roberto also had a varied sex life, sleeping with white, black
and brown women both pro and anti-Castro. One of them was the
sister of a major in Castro's escort. Another was the wife of a major
in Batista's army, and another the wife of a Cuban baseball star,
and still another was a beauty queen. He shows how he turned
from an apolitical intellectual hedonist who cared more about his
next girlfriend than who was ruling his country, into a dedicated
counter-revolutionist, a fanatic man of action. The kind of man
the modern terrorist elsewhere in the world is all too likely to be,
who will not be stopped by repressive measures.
Roberto became one of that small minority who does the really
dirty work and pays the penalty-if caught. He underwent
deep psychological changes that still affect him today. His accomplices
underwent similar changes; some of them remained active
in America, and were among the original number whose arrest
sparked the Watergate investigation that finally toppled the Nixon
presidency. One of these men, Rolando Martinez, had taken
Fuentes to Cuba several times on secret missions, risking his life
many times. In this manner it is shown how the foreign exploits of
the United States returned to make mischief in its own government.
Another way in which these U.S.-trained killer-chickens have
come home to roost shown in the recent rash of killings in Miami;
done by professionals, they leave no hints for the police. But the
Cuban community knows. Today some of these terrorists are turn-
443
ing to drug traffic; they are good at that too. The drug problem
will not be solved until the terrorist problem is solved.
Thus the story of Roberto Fuentes campaign to free Cuba
shows the devious but enormous ramifications that have affected
not only Cuba, but all Americans. Patriots of other nationalities
have similar modes of operation, and hardly a day passes without
news of their actions. If we do not want the assassination of one
American President and the resignation-in-disgrace of another to
be merely the beginning of a wave of real terrorism, it would be
wise to understand the message Mr. Fuentes brings.
 

