 

 1 
 
 

 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Tom Doherty Associates Book New York This is a work of fiction. All the characters and 
events portrayed in this novel are either fictitious or are used fictitiously. 
THE SECRET OF SPRING 
Copyright © 2000 by Piers Anthony Jacob and Jo Anne Taeusch All rights reserved, 
including the right to reproduce this book, or portions thereof, in any form. 
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
A Tor Book Published by Tom Doherty Associates, LLC 
175 Fifth Avenue New York, NY 10010 www.tor.com Tor  is a registered trademark of Tom 
Doherty Associates, LLC. 
Design by Lisa Pifher ISBN 0-312-86464-7 
First Edition: March 2000 
Printed in the United States of America 0987654821 

 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This book is dedicated to the memory of my Mother, who loved life, 
laughter, and me. 
-J. T. 

 4 
Contents 
1       Playmate 
2       Secret 
3       Sharing 
4       Gabriel's Trump 
5       Palli Parlour 
6       New Moon 
7       A Tangled Vine 
8       Kamalot 
9       Discovery 
10     Unsuitable Suitor 
11     Down the Hatch 
12     The Visitor 
13     Lies 
14     And More Lies 
15     Double Trouble 
16     Lady Be Cool 
17     Fast Friends 
18     Ant We Got Fun 
19     Time and Again 
20     Snow Job 
21     Inner Struggle/Outer Bruises 
22     Jasmine's Castle 
23     Child's Play 
24     Zygote 
25     Truths 
26     Secrets 
AUTHORS' NOTES  

 5 
The Secret of Spring 
 
1 
 
 
 
Wiping the perspiration from his brow, Herb Moss looked with admiration 
at Holly, the beautiful, fresh green Veganette resting next to him. She was 
a busty blossom, with luscious strawberry lips and long, thick emerald hair 
that fell enticingly to her hips. It had been tied up out of the way for 
greater freedom of movement, but the ribbons had worked loose with 
exertion. Now she was busy knotting a tighter bow. Finishing up the small 
task, she whirled around to grace Herb with a winning smile. His heart 
pounded faster at the flash of even white teeth. 
Infertile pollination? Was that all life meant to him? And yet, why else 
had he travelled to this remote and expensive resort? It had seemed like a 
good idea at the time, but like so many of his spontaneous decisions, it had 
resulted in much less than he had anticipated. Herb knew he wasn't above 
a little discreet Ip, given the improper circumstances. And Holly was more 
than another attractive girl, she was quite a woman. 
Her soft voice brought him back to reality. "Let's do it again!" she said 
breathlessly. 
"Again?!" he protested. "Wasn't five times enough?" 
"Oh, I know! But, you are so good, Herbie! The best! Why, I've never 

 6 
known anyone like you before!" 
Herb flushed at the generous praise; he couldn't deny he was flattered, 
but a man could only go on for so long. 
He hedged. "Thank you, Holly. But aren't you feeling a little bushed?" He 
hoped! 
"Me? Oh, no! I could go on like this all day! Just try me!" 
Herb's hopes of an honorable out wilted in the hot afternoon sun. He 
sighed audibly. 
This was Holly's signal to wheedle. She put her arms around his neck, 
heedless of the fine view of her bust this afforded Herb. Herb was not 
heedless. He heeded for all he was worth. 
"Please Herbie," she said with the sweet pout her lips formed with such 
expertise. Her fresh breath tickled his ear, and his firm resolve melted 
down to a watery puddle that seemed to form in his knees. It was all over. 
"You win," he said weakly. "But this is the last time today-or at least until 
after lunch." He braced himself. "Take your position!" 
Holly squealed with girlish glee and scampered to the other side of the 
nets to retrieve her stringed bat. "My serve!" she called gaily, giving the 
small yellow ball a swat. It bounced neatly up and across to meet Herb's 
bat for a quick return. Their sixth match of the day was on. 
Holly was one of several playmates Herb had met since coming to the 
city of Avocado for an extended vacation. Elite Club Algae was a small 
resort spa by Sea Weed for the idle, rich, and bored of this part of P#23. 
Herb added "the confused" for his category, for now that he was here, he 
hardly knew why. 
The club had been touted in the colorful brochure as a hot bed for 
singles, but the actual selection, in his opinion, left much to be desired. 
First there was Rosy, who had attached herself to him the first day he 
arrived. While she was a sweet, friendly girl with a pretty face, she also 
happened to be there for the serious purpose of dropping over a hundred 
and fifty pounds at the exclusive spa. Clearly, too much woman for him. 
Then, there was the dark exotic Flora, a winsome widow, who kept 
dropping hints of Ip. Tempting, yet he had the uncomfortable feeling that 
she regarded the resort as a shopping center for husband number four. Or 

 7 
was it five? And what had happened to the other three anyway? There was 
covert talk of poison ivy. Probably just pool gossip, but why take chances? 
True, she was mysteriously attractive, yet there was something in her eyes 
when she looked at him. Something unsavory that reminded him of the 
hungry glance of a big garden spider patiently awaiting the right moment to 
pounce. 
Most of the others he had met had been the usual garden-variety types 
one would expect to meet at a singles resort. Just pretty, pleasant girls, 
hoping to meet a cute boy they could take back home to meet their 
parents. They claimed to be there for the moment, for a good time, but 
Herb was not deceived. He had seen that look before, on girls at home. On 
the face of one girl in particular. Those girls were just like her. Herb was 
getting thoroughly disgusted with his big adventure. If he had wanted a 
"nice" girl, he would have stayed at home and dated Lily. 
He had left to find more. Whatever that was. Since his arrival a couple of 
weeks ago the wildest thing he had swung with had been a gourd club on 
the neatly mown greens. Holly had been the most promising of the group. 
Had been. Just his luck, that she had turned out to be a ten nets nut. 
These daily marathon matches had to stop! By the time he satisfied her 
insatiable lust for the silly game he was too tired for more pleasurable 
recreation. A thing like that could stunt a man's growth. 
He had Ip with Holly only once after a long, romantic boat cruise 
beneath the misty tri-moons, and that had been almost a week before. 
They had stopped into the Algae Bar afterward where she had quaffed 
down more than a few drinks of distilled water before Herb had noticed the 
effect they were having on her. Oh, they looked harmless enough with their 
carrot sticks and little umbrella trees, but cumulatively they packed quite a 
punch. 
By the time he realized what was happening, Holly was wilted. Like the 
gentleman he was, he had guided her back to her own bungalow and put 
her to bed with every intention of fading quietly away until morning. 
Holly, however, had different ideas. Unused to strong drink, she 
implored Herb to remain until she fell asleep, but somehow she never did, 
and eventually nature took a fascinating course. Herb felt only mild guilt, 

 8 
which had soon faded to a fond memory, and progressed to outright lust as 
he looked forward to more of her company. Not letting any grass grow 
under his feet, he called the next morning. They met for a game of ten 
nets, and his beauty turned into a back-hand beast. There had been, 
regrettably, no rematch of their night game. 
Herb had come to the end of his rope, deciding to give it just one more 
day. If there were no improvements, he planned to push on down the coast 
and catch the Party Grass Festival at New Oleanders. There should be 
profusions of wild flowers there. 
A ball whizzed by his ear, as his bat swished impotently in the air. "I 
win!" Holly exclaimed triumphantly, crisscrossing through the nets toward 
him. "Got that one right past you!" Then she frowned slightly. "Oh, you 
didn't let me win, just to be a gentleman, did you? I want a rematch!" 
"Blight, no," Herb muttered, thinking how tired of the stupid game he 
was, in more than one way. "I mean, of course I wouldn't do that, Holly. 
You won because you're a good player, that's all." 
And because his mind had wandered. She was enthusiastic, but he had 
all the moves; a pity, considering that she cared more about it than he did. 
Looking at her bosom heaving from the combination of happiness and 
exertion, he was glad she was the winner. Herb watched that lovely 
structure quiver beneath the thin material of her ten nets suit as she 
continued to bask in the glory of her victory. 
"That's what I love about playing with you, Herb. You are a real natural 
at this game, and I knew if I could beat you, I would really have 
accomplished something. So I said to myself, 'Holly, you are going to play 
until you win, or drop.' " 
Herb cursed silently. That was all it would have taken? He would gladly 
have thrown the match long before if only he'd known. 
But no, his male ego sprang up like an ugly weed, and what had 
happened? Nothing, that's what. How was he to know she hadn't expected 
him to win all the time to impress her? She was always going on about how 
great he was. Women. Did they never mean what they said? 
Herb looked into her beaming eyes and felt a tinge of guilt. After all, 
men didn't always mean what they said either. Hadn't he been the one to 

 9 
say how he loved ten nets, while in reality he wanted to play a more 
intimate game? 
"Congratulations," he said wearily. "How about that lunch now? Nice cool 
melon?" 
Holly ventured a coy smile, lowering her long green lashes. "Are you 
really hungry, Herb? I'm still so excited over winning the game, and hot, 
too!" She stroked a manicured hand across her bust line. "Before lunch, 
wouldn't you like to relax? Come back to my bungalow for a nice shower?" 
A cold shower would be in order at the moment, Herb thought. What 
was going on now? He was beginning to warm up from more than the 
game. 
"On second thought, no shower. Why don't we make use of that hot 
tub? I'm paying enough extra for it. It's cozy, but roomy enough for two," 
she said huskily. 
Herb decided that the Party Grass Festival could wait another day. 
Maybe two. 
Indeed, things finally were going right. This time Holly wasn't intoxicated 
on distilled water, but she was actually more ardent. The excitement of the 
ball game translated nicely into enthusiasm for the bedroom game as 
played in hot water, and Holly was a real delight. 
"Too bad we didn't think to do this sooner," she murmured. "It's even 
more fun than balling!" 
Herb didn't answer. His sentiments about timing were mixed. If only he 
had caught on to the key days ago... 
Later that evening, Herb Moss was a mildly contented being. He'd 
reluctantly put Holly aboard the last transporter home. Her vacation was 
over, but she had left him with at least two nice memories. 
There was nothing more for him at the resort, however. The time had 
come for him to move on. But not to the Party Grass Festival. Whatever he 
had been searching for was definitely not to be found in yet more places 
like Club Algae. The interlude with Holly had been fun, but he still wanted 
the elusive "more." It was time to go home. 
Snuggling down within the cool cotton sheeting, he drifted off to sleep 
with dreams of ten nets that were more like hot tubs, and a most 

 10 
accommodating Holly. He did not dream that in less than ten days he would 
become a pawn in a far deadlier game. 

 11 
2 
 
 
 
Spring was perplexed. "Father, you want me to what?" Magician Gabriel 
made an ineffective pacifying motion with his hands. "Just to help me test 
my equipment, my dear, as you have before." 
"Your equipment is fine, father. Nothing's happened to it. Meanwhile, I 
have all these crystals to catalog. Can't your routine tests wait?" 
Gabriel looked pained. "I don't think they can, dear. Something has, um, 
come up." His hands twisted together in the way they had when he was 
disturbed. 
She looked sharply at him. "Father, is something wrong?" 
"Oh, no, no, no, of course not, dear." But his hands continued to writhe. 
Spring realized that she would have to humor him, and try to find out 
what was bothering him. She loved her father deeply, even if he did annoy 
her on occasion. "Of course I'll help," she said. 
"Very good." He sounded relieved, though his hands still quivered. "If 
you will just sit in the testing chair, and I will adjust the helmet-" 
She didn't remind him that she was well familiar with the routine; she 
had occupied this chair many times before. She set aside her collection of 
crystals and took the seat. She looked around while he somewhat 
fumblingly adjusted the helmet and connections. It was important that her 
emotions be neutral while the monitors were being placed, or the baseline 
settings would be slightly wrong. So she pretended that she was a first time 

 12 
client, to whom this was a novelty, and ran her father's job description 
through her mind as if it were an announcement: 
This was the office of the Magician Gabriel, one of Planet New Landers' 
more prestigious healing practitioners. Not only did he enjoy a thriving local 
practice and the respect of his peers, but he had recently received wide 
acclaim for his work in Crystallography from both magical and scientific 
communities. His name was becoming known over the planet, and many 
new patients were arriving for the special treatments they believed only he 
could provide. His was a most profitable practice, to say the least. 
Given the present circumstances he should have been a happy man. But 
she knew he wasn't. Because his wife-oops. That would foul the setting for 
sure! So she carefully neutralized her thoughts again, thinking of pretty 
crystals, and soon he had things set. 
"Now it is ready," he said unnecessarily. "Except for a blip when you 
thought a naughty thought." He forced a chuckle that only increased her 
concern. What was bothering him? It had to be pretty serious, for he was 
not a temperamental man. "If you will just recite some ancient history of a 
routine nature-" 
So he hadn't completely zeroed it in yet, and needed more ground 
neutral mental activity. Spring smiled, and recited the ancient canon, using 
a singsong voice: 
"Lightships, Freezers, and Floaters faded in the sunlight of a former 
ultra-society that existed in those earliest of days when man had sown his 
seed from the Milky Way to the constellation Corona Borealis and beyond to 
galaxies now unknown." 
"Very good," he said. "The registration is perfect. Continue." 
Perfect? Then why did she need to do more mindless recitation? The 
equipment should not take this long to get tuned. But she smiled, and 
spoke the next paragraph of the standard history lesson. "Earth, renamed 
New World at that time, had one great Central Government, utilizing the 
finest combination of scientific minds available from all former nations. 
They banded together, achieving breakthrough after phenomenal 
breakthrough. That union was in many respects, more feared than the 
gargantuan military machine. For all their might, it was no secret that the 

 13 
real power of New World rested in the hands of the super scientists." 
"Yes, yes, excellent, excellent," Gabriel said, wringing his hands again. 
"Just a bit more-" 
"Father-" she started, allowing some annoyance to show in her tone, 
though it was really concern that motivated her. 
"Oh, no, quite routine, quite routine, very good, no problem at all, just a 
tiny-a little-nothing to be concerned about, no need to inquire. Merely a 
trace aberration in the-the attunement. Don't be concerned." 
Spring sighed mentally. She had better recite some more mind-numbing 
rote material, to calm her rising concern for her father's state of mental 
health. 
"The entire island of what was once called Japan was designated as the 
NWSL, or New World Science Lab. It was so for several generations after 
the Great Migratory Act was rigorously enforced. Separate countries ceased 
to exist. Mandatory integration throughout many centuries eliminated most 
physical racial differences as New World became one large Family of Man." 
She glanced at Gabriel again, covertly. He was watching the indicators so 
intently that she knew something was amiss. Had the equipment suffered a 
software virus infestation? 
Rather than challenge him on this immediately, she continued the 
recitation, though her limit of tolerance was approaching. "Individualism 
was ostracized as differing cultures were assimilated into the whole, with 
none taking precedence above another. This did not come about from any 
ideal of brotherly love, but by decree from a firm dictatorship, determined 
in its zeal, that might would make right where morality had failed." Even as 
a child she had questioned that, though her classmates had seen nothing 
wrong with it. Thus she had become aware that she was different, 
intellectually, from ordinary children of New Landers, and not just because 
she was the daughter of the planet's leading magician. And there was the 
charged concept: magic was an accepted aspect of reality, but there were 
still those who looked askance at it, as if there were something wrong or 
strange about it. So she had felt the dawning isolation of her heritage. 
But she preferred not to dwell on that, so she resumed the oration. "New 
World language became Unispeech, a simplified mono-phonic pattern of 

 14 
sounds based on mathematical equations. A child of three could 
communicate fluently in six weeks when aided by a computotech implant." 
She herself had learned to speak that way, of course, and had become 
mistress of many other disciplines similarly, thanks to equipment simpler 
than what they were testing right now. By the same token, there was 
nothing extraordinary about it, and there was no need for a prolonged 
testing session. She glanced yet again at Gabriel. 
He remained fascinated by the indications. Enough was enough! "Father, 
something is amiss. I know it. What-?" 
"No, no, no, please, please, no problem," he babbled, his hands 
threatening to twist their own fingers off. "Just a little more, and it's done, 
it's done." 
So she yielded, one more time. "The average life span increased to 
approximately two hundred and sixty years. Most women waited well into 
their seventies to bear children, and a woman of fifty was as attractive as a 
young girl in ancient times. Thus, the planet did not populate more rapidly 
than before, and with the last phases of the Great Migration in progress, 
natural resources were replenished by discoveries on bountiful distant 
worlds." Of course the old technology had been mostly lost now, but 
lightships still transported beings to the more distant stars. Perhaps in a 
few more centuries the ancient techniques would be rediscovered; 
knowledge seemed to grow in patterns, ebbing and flowing in the tides of 
time. 
But she had had enough of this. "Father, I demand to know what this is 
all about. Why are you so upset, and what does it have to do with this 
equipment? I won't recite another paragraph until you tell me." 
"Quite all right, quite all right," he said, looking quite all wrong. "It's 
done now, and everything is in order. Now you must emigrate." 
"Emigrate? What are you talking about? I have no intention of-" 
"Please, we must be off immediately. Do you have your purse?" 
"My purse! Father, girls haven't carried purses for centuries! What's this 
all about?" 
"There should just be time to catch the last ship out. We must hurry." 
Now she put her foot down, literally. "Father, I will not move one single 

 15 
solitary step until you tell me what is going on! What's wrong with the 
equipment? Why do I have to leave the planet I've always lived on? Why 
are you so disturbed? Look me straight in the face and answer." 
He gazed at her. Then she saw something that completely unnerved her. 
His eyes were bright with tears. She had never before seen him like this. 
Something was terribly wrong. 
"Very well," she said, shaken. "I will go, if you want me to. But please, 
father, tell me why." 
"If I must," he said reluctantly. "But on the way to the lightport. Time is 
of the essence. I must dial a taxi." 
"But why not use your own car?" 
"I fear my private car could be under surveillance." He fumbled with the 
vidphone, but his hands were shaking so much that all that showed on the 
screen were the symbols for planets, numbers, and punctuation. It was as 
if the screen were swearing at him-which it was, in its way. 
"I'll do it, father," Spring said, having mercy on him. She punched in the 
code for a rental portacar, immediate use. Then she took what she 
suddenly realized might be her last look around at the office, suffering a 
siege of nostalgia. She knew that Gabriel would never boot her out like this 
without compelling cause, and that she had given him no such cause. 
Something had happened, something awful. 
Then they hurried out to the arriving taxi and piled in. She was about to 
touch the LIGHTPORT symbol on the panel, but he stayed her hand; 
"Random course," he said. 
So she closed her eyes and touched a button blindly. The vehicle lifted 
and flew across the surface of the planet, going nowhere she cared about. 
"Now tell me," she said. She had known the research they were doing 
was highly secret and probably dangerous, but most of the time she had 
not understood anything beyond the surface procedures he gave her to 
complete. 
"Until this day, I have not felt it necessary to reveal the entire truth of 
the project to you," he said. "Now I fear I must, with deepest regret. Do 
you remember Zygote?" 
"Zygote! He's involved with this?" The mysterious magician named 

 16 
Zygote had been coming around to speak with her father, but she was 
never allowed to remain during their discourse. She knew that he was no 
friend by the loud voices emanating from the lab. Whenever she questioned 
her father about him, he had told her not to be concerned, that it was only 
professional disagreement. Yet, when she had been alone with Zygote 
during times her father was detained with a client, he had shown an 
uncommon interest in her personal life that made her flesh crawl. 
Once, during one of those unfortunate times, Zygote had pressed the 
limits of her patience. Though he had not said it in so many words, she was 
certain he was trying to discover whether she was a virgin! Small difference 
that could have made to him; he was her father's age, but resembled 
Gabriel in no other way, aside from the power of his magic. He struck her 
as malignant, not benign. The very notion of those long, swarthy fingers 
touching her made Spring recoil with disgust. 
It was not that he was ugly or so old, for she did not regard her father 
as ancient; in fact mature men could be quite interesting. Though Zygote 
was neither handsome nor young, he had a charm that would appeal to 
most women. No, it was just an uncomfortable feeling that she got 
whenever near him. He was not a man to be trusted, of that she was 
certain. She couldn't imagine the nature of business her parent could 
possibly have with such a creature, and was doubly careful to make herself 
scarce when he appeared thereafter. 
Gabriel had given her time to reflect. Now he changed the car's route 
again, randomly. "Yes, unfortunately. He is very much involved, and your 
suspicions of him are amply justified. He seeks power for its own sake, 
without regard to the harm it may do. And I have found a key to power. 
What I have discovered has the potential for tremendous mischief in the 
wrong hands, and I have no intention of allowing Zygote to obtain the 
information." 
"Well, of course not," Spring agreed emphatically. "What is this thing, 
father?" 
Gabriel shook his head. "I have no time to elaborate on the actual nature 
of the information, but it is the gate to great riches, absolute power, and 
forbidden knowledge. Reason enough for any number of ambitious, would-

 17 
be tyrants to become interested in my project." 
"Such as Zygote," she agreed. "But how does this concern me? I know 
nothing of it." 
Gabriel's smile was chillingly compassionate. "You do know it, my dear-
and you do not. That is your secret." 
"Father, I assure you I haven't snooped on your-" 
"Spring, I have used you, perhaps more cruelly than any man could 
have. I used a magically enhanced form of hypnotic spell to project secret 
information too sensitive for my files into your subconscious mind. It now 
contains the awesome knowledge which will activate only under certain 
conditions. Brainwashing or other forms of extortion will not gain access to 
the secrets, though they would most likely leave you mindless. You will not 
be aware of the buried knowledge at any time, as I feel the burden is too 
great." 
"I have the secret to absolute power?" she asked, dazed. "But if it can 
never be revealed, even to me, what's the point?" 
"There are two ways to release the secrets. Either I could say a code 
spell that would trigger a transference, or someone else could receive the 
information another way." 
"Another way? How?" 
"It, ah, um, I, that is to say-" 
"Out with it, father! I need to know." 
Gabriel struggled to voice the concept. "When you find a suitable young 
man, and are interested in, er, in a manner of speaking-" 
"What are you trying to say, father?" 
"When a young man and a young woman, the bees and the birds, 
romance-" 
"What does love have to do with it?" 
Gabriel made a supreme effort. "The secrets will activate and transfer 
telepathically to your partner when you make love for the first time." 
Spring was shocked. "Carnal knowledge?" 
Gabriel blushed. "Very nicely put. But, knowing you, I feel confident with 
this safeguard." 
"Because you suppose I'm too unattractive ever to get that close to a 

 18 
man?" she demanded indignantly. "Thank you so much, father!" 
"Oh, no, no, no, Spring, no!" he protested, flustered. "I believe you are 
supremely attractive! It's that I trust your judgment. I did not do this 
without some long and careful thought. If anyone but myself is to activate 
the secret, it must only be by the permission of my most trusted daughter." 
Suddenly Spring understood Zygote's attentions. It was not her body he 
was interested in, but her mind. Or rather the secrets it contained. 
Somehow Zygote had discovered she was the key. If he caught her away 
from the protection of her father, it was doubtful he would be gentle in his 
extraction. 
"And now you fear that Zygote will try to kidnap me," she said, not even 
phrasing it as a question. 
"Yes. I have reason to believe he intends to strike soon. There-fore I 
must hide you, until this threat has passed." 
It did make sense. "Where am I going?" 
"I would prefer that you not know, until you are actually aboard the ship. 
That should help protect your location from discovery." 
That, too, made sense. So she let it be. But as they zipped randomly in 
to the lightport, she inquired about one other thing. "Why all the business 
with the equipment, today?" 
"I was verifying that the information remains in place, together with its 
guardian routines. My equipment will no longer access the information 
itself, but does attune to certain marker keys I implanted. They are all in 
order. I had to be sure that no error had developed, no unprogrammed 
access. I am only approximately pleased that all remains in order, because 
of the threat to you it represents." 
"I'm like a bomb wired to detonate if anyone tries to disarm it," she said 
with a wry smile. 
"An unfortunately apt analogy." Then he kissed her, and she saw the 
tears in his eyes again as he gave her the coded ticket. "I hope that some 
year you can forgive me for what I have done to you." 
"Of course I forgive you, father! I would have done anything you asked 
to be of help in your quest. I know it is all you have lived for since my 
mother's passing." She knew of the circumstances, yet still felt an 

 19 
unreasonable guilt as the destroyer of their happiness. She had always 
hoped he would find another woman to replace his loss, but he had not, 
saying there had been only one such as she. Spring found that touching 
and hoped to one day be as fortunate. To find that one true love, as he had 
felt he had in his Laurel. 
That would have to wait, now. Perhaps forever. "Beware of whom you 
trust," her father warned. "Zygote's spies are everywhere, and they will 
stop at nothing." She promised to be alert, and then they embraced, saying 
a last farewell until they met again. But she feared that was not to be. 
Nevertheless, she held her chin high as she entered the port and 
boarded the ship whose code matched that of the ticket. No one would 
know that her heart was breaking. 

 20 
3 
 
 
 
     Thousands of solar years after the Age of Light, and for as  many 
more before the descent of the Great Darkness, in those wondrous days 
when men traversed the distant galaxies, not in spaceships, but as one with 
the energy of light itself, was P#23 born!" 
Thus spoke the ancient Vinese Elder, his vines trembling both with age 
and pious fervor as the rapt congregation of Vinese, Treeple, and 
Veganoids clung, boughed, or knelt respectfully in separate rows. 
The sacred sowing season was upon them, and it was on Founder's Day 
at sunrise that the most holy of all the spring rites were performed. On that 
day alone did all three species of intelligent life inhabiting the small 
planetoid 
come 
together, 
leaving 
the 
temples 
of 
their 
diverse 
denominations to meet in the Great Hall on common ground. There, ethnic, 
cultural, and personal differences were put aside as all gathered as one for 
the Sharing. 
The Great Hall, a huge outdoor temple, was resplendent with fragrant 
spring foliage and blossoms. The sandalwood trees exuded a musky scent 
while the muted sound of reeds played lightly on the breeze. It was truly a 
majestic and inspirational setting for the most hallowed of days. 
Herb Moss squirmed in his secluded spot on the fifty-third row. He hoped 
neither Elder nor fellow worshiper would notice, but the truth was he had 
been kneeling in one position for so long that his knees were asleep. It was 

 21 
hard to concentrate on lofty matters of the Light with tingling joints. But 
that was only one of his problems. 
Herb regarded himself as an ordinary Veganoid and was not particularly 
religious. He felt awkward as always when suffered to attend these days of 
commitment. First came the interminable sermon, The Reminder, hailing 
the Founder and recounting the long history of their small planetoid. The 
sacred rites of Renewal followed. Another long and clinging ceremony. 
It was not that he was a disbeliever. On the contrary, he had much 
respect for the Founder. It was these organized theological pantomimes he 
objected to, with their rigid, greener-than-thou attitudes. Let each grow in 
his own way! That was Herb's motto. And at Herb's age, spring after 
spring, it was all worn soil by now. He could quote the history of his home 
planet by rote. 
Herb ceased pondering his beginnings as a young Treeple passed cups 
down his row for the Sharing ceremony. He accepted his, observing a 
bunchy Vinese female as she rolled to the pulpit. The rite of Rebirth was 
about to begin. 
The Elder extended his vines, assisting her onto the hard earthen 
mound, and then led the faithful in the first of the traditional chants. 
"Praise the Light! The Light is life!" He opened his leaves in acceptance 
as the congregation mimicked the gesture, repeating the chant in unison. 
The Elder raised the cup and poured the clear cool liquid over the tender 
leaves of the female. 
"Praise the Water!" he began. "Water is life!" 
The female quivered with emotion, her blossoms losing a few soft petals. 
She was in full bloom, as was the proper state for the ceremony. 
The congregation deposited their cups over their foliage in like manner 
as all chanted away. Herb hoped no one had seen him as he quaffed his 
down instead. He was terribly thirsty. 
Reaching into the earthen mound, the Elder gathered and threw a scoop 
of soil onto the female's roots, signifying growth. 
"Praise the Soil!" chanted the believers, dipping their own limbs into the 
tilled rows before them. 
At last the Elder reached into the center of the Vinese female's foliage, 

 22 
clipping gently with his shears. He held the tender green cutting up for the 
congregation to admire. It was a strong and healthy shoot. Carefully, he 
placed the cutting into the soil, poured water, and extended the Founder's 
Day blessing, "Grow and flourish!" 
The ceremony ended with an invocation, and many went forward, 
reaffirming their belief. At last it was over. 
"Amen," said Herb, slapping his thighs in an attempt to bring life back 
into his aching limbs. Growing pains were nothing compared to this! 
Yet Herb was glad he had observed the rites. They were a pain in the 
nether section, but they did serve to refresh his heritage. But for an 
unusual series of past events, his kind would not exist. It was proper to 
appreciate this. 
Just previous to the forming of the Human Conception, as it was dubbed 
by the devotees, Dr. Ni Gell, one of New World's foremost genetic 
programmers, made a tremendous breakthrough by creating intelligent life 
hitherto believed impossible: the successful grafting of plant and animal 
tissue. 
The doctor believed the new form could possibly inhabit those planets 
with a large carbon dioxide-based atmosphere. With time, the new life 
would flourish, giving out sufficient amounts of its waste, oxygen, to 
transform the environment, eventually changing the inherent atmosphere 
of such planets to a breathable ratio for Earthlings. Herb had only an 
elementary grasp of the theory, but it had been hoped that the forms 
would adapt through evolution, and in that way open new worlds to future 
generations. 
It was a long-term project at best, but one considered feasible enough 
to gain support from Central. When words of the NWSL experiment leaked 
out, however, Humanite followers screamed heresy, denouncing NWSL and 
the doctor as a vile blasphemer. But Dr. Ni Gell did deserve credit. If not for 
his lone sacrifice, Paradise would be just another green ball in space. 
After the return of the other humans to New World, only Gell had 
remained to carry on. The few plant/humanoid mutations he had 
successfully developed which had somehow managed to survive the terrible 
blight, served as his assistants and companions. 

 23 
Without a fresh supply of cells, for all the inventory had been stripped 
and returned along with the other scientists, he had been forced to use the 
only tissue available to him: that of his own body. He had feared, after 
deliberately contracting the blight, what such contamination would mean 
for the future strain. 
He need not have. Miraculously, his cells when injected into a living 
mutation proved to be the very vaccine he needed to exact a cure. By 
reinjecting those same cells into himself, he was able to arrest its progress 
for longer periods of time, though never achieving a total cure upon his 
human system. 
Years later at the time of his death, he had left prototypes of sufficient 
health and intelligence to carry on his work. His greatest contribution, 
however, was of a more personal nature. He had taken one of the female 
prototypes as a companion and she had successfully born him a son. 
Spiritually and physically he was truly the father of them all. 
Eventually, three main intelligent offshoots came to inhabit the green 
sphere: Treeples, Vinese, and Veganoids such as Herb. 
Treeples were of a dark wooden hue, with supple bark-textured skin. 
Their general appearance was that of a young maple, with eight branches 
spreading above a face which was inset into the upper portion of the trunk. 
Leafy branches served the same purpose as arms, and twigs as fingers. 
From a distance the foliage gave the appearance of a great head of hair 
towering above the small face. 
Their trunks were divided into two sections for legs beneath the torso, 
allowing for upright locomotion on a strong root foundation, the equivalent 
of human feet. Females grew small mounds approximating human breasts, 
which contained sap during gestation or arousal. Depending from which 
branch they descended, Treeples reproduced by cuttings, buds, or seeds. 
Vinese had the least overt human properties of the three species, 
resembling a large green tumbleweed. Hundreds of leafy vine tendrils grew 
from a round ball body, covering it completely. They moved by rolling, 
clinging, or climbing, spoke from an elongated mouth tube in the upper 
region of their sphere, and peeped out through narrow slits of golden eyes. 
Male and female Vinese had the same overall appearance except during 

 24 
gestation, when the female blossomed. They reproduced by the sole 
method of cuttings. 
Veganoids like Herb most resembled their human ancestors, following 
the normal human pattern except for a few modifications. While Veganoids 
had human skin, it was a pleasing shade of green, as was their hair which 
grew to great lengths in both sexes, but usually kept trimmed to ear level 
by the males. Some females let it twine to their ankles, but this was 
uncommon, since it was impractical to care for. There were other 
differences as well. For example, fingers and toes could extend to root into 
the soil for energy in case of emergency. This was a throwback to the time 
before their kind had evolved into the human habit of eating rather than 
absorption. 
Herb's predecessors had been equipped to pollinate in much the same 
fashion that insects pollinate flowers. It was a short cut to bypass a missing 
element, for there were no insects on Paradise at that time. Until NWSL 
introduced new varieties, plants depended upon the winds to carry drifting 
seeds. 
In those days, the prototype ate by absorbing nourishment from the soil 
and procreated by means of a retractable stamen in the mouth. Through 
years of experimentation and evolution, the sexual function came to be 
served by a fleshy root located in the usual human region. Veganoids still 
had the stamen, though it came to be considerably smaller and located far 
back in the upper roof of the mouth. It was employed only under certain 
questionable conditions, and was no longer capable of reproductive 
qualities. Otherwise, Veganoids had standard mouth equipment, and 
consumed nonsapient vegetable matter. 
Female Veganoids were also cut from the general pattern of their human 
ancestors, with the same inherent differences. Female sex receptacles were 
positioned in the proper junction of the legs, but opened like the blossom of 
a lovely flower when aroused. Naturally they did not possess the stamen; 
that was strictly a male property. 
And so Herb had been strongly reminded again of the origin of his 
subspecies. The ceremony bored him, but it did instill in him the pride of 
being a Veganoid. Surely his kind represented the best attributes of both 

 25 
animal and plant. 
The ceremony having concluded, Herb moved slowly along with the 
departing throng toward the exits. A smaller figure stepped quickly, 
pushing through the crowd toward him. 
"Herb! Herb Moss!" 
He turned to see who had called out his name, and felt a dainty female 
hand caress his arm. It was Lily, a sweet blossom, but a rather strong-
willed young Veganette. They had been childhood friends, growing up 
together, and later keeping close company for several seasons as 
prospective union mates. All their friends and family had naturally assumed 
they would eventually put down roots together, but Herb had not been 
ready for a permanent commitment. 
He had left the parental garden to go out on his own to grow up a bit. 
He was hardly the green sprout she had known, yet he realized how he 
must have hurt her with his abrupt departure. He did not regret leaving, 
but knew he could have let her down more softly. He had departed without 
any goodbye, simply because it was easier that way. 
Time had not changed much. He was still at a loss for words, but a 
confrontation could not be avoided this time. The least he could do was try 
to explain why he had done it. Of course, that might prove as difficult. At 
the moment, he was not sure he understood it himself. 
They walked out through the rock gardens beside the Hall for a short 
while in silence. 
"Herb-" 
"Lily-" 
They had spoken in unison, then laughed nervously together. 
"Please, you first!" said Herb, gesturing for her to speak. At least she 
had something to say, perhaps. 
Lily looked up at him, nervously twisting a leaf of her woven skirt in her 
hands. It was the custom of Founder's Day to dress in natural fibers. Herb 
had compromised with a grass shirt over cotton trousers. 
"I was surprised to see you in the Hall, Herb. It has been half a season. 
Of course, I am glad to see you again." 
Had it been so short a time? It seemed much longer to Herb. A lifetime 

 26 
since they had been this close. Physically, yes, but emotionally he 
suspected they were as far apart as ever. If he should reach for her now, 
would she intertwine or pull back? Did absence make the heart grow 
fonder? Or only wiser? 
Herb found he was too much the coward to test it. Without moving he 
sensed the invisible barrier that was still there, holding him at arm's length. 
Was it worth it? He could not look directly at her, but concentrated upon 
the patterns of the rocks. If he met her gaze, he was afraid he would still 
want to tear down the barrier, and doubted he had the strength for the 
siege. The quiet of the moment seemed to roar in his ears. 
She was waiting for him to say something. "The Sharing," he said. 
"Ah yes. Obligatory attendance. Otherwise you would not have 
returned." It was a statement, not a question. 
Herb colored. He knew it was true. He would not have returned home 
this soon just for Lily. It was the timing that seemed right. She had not 
come into it. But he did not want to hurt her feelings, so he said nothing at 
all. 
"You weren't always so reticent, Herb. I can remember when you had 
quite a bit to say on the subject of you and I. But to go without a word! I 
kept believing that I would hear from you day after day, but eventually I 
saw the light." She had almost exploded in her sudden vehemence. Then 
abruptly, in a softer tone, almost a whisper, she asked, "Why, Herb? Why 
did we grow apart?" 
Herb felt a rush of anger toward her for making him the villain. He 
wanted to hurt her back. "How can I explain it to you, Lily? I felt stunted! I 
couldn't go on seeing you as things stood. You wanted roots, a unionized 
status. I wasn't ready for that then." 
"And now?" Lily said, green tears gathering at the edge of her eyes. 
"You have been away to see more of the sphere, to encounter new 
varieties, to taste strange nectar. Tell me, in all your travels, was there ever 
a quiet moment when you contemplated our situation? No, I suppose you 
were much too busy to-" 
Lily stopped speaking as Herb suddenly shook her. "Stop it!" he 
snapped. "Of course I thought about us! That's all I thought about. That, 

 27 
and my life here. Where it was all leading. Frankly, I didn't like what I saw." 
Lily had composed herself somewhat. "But Herb, all young men have 
doubts. It's a natural part of the growth process. You can't just pull up and 
leave each time things aren't the way you imagine they should be." 
"I know. That's the reason I've returned." He rubbed a hand across his 
forehead. He was getting a headache. He hadn't had one since-since the 
last time he saw Lily, as a matter of fact. 
"Oh Herb, let's forget all this foolishness. Why don't we see each other 
again, and go from there? I know it will be better this time." 
She was grasping at straws. Herb hated seeing her this way, doing this 
to him and herself. Yet he couldn't walk away. She meant more than that. 
He suddenly realized his anger had been directed toward himself, not at 
her. Perhaps it always had been. Lily was a lifelong friend. She was a 
wonderful girl, and he was undoubtedly some breed of loco weed for 
turning down her offer. But something about their proposed union had 
never grown quite true. He wanted to care for her as much as she 
obviously did for him, but he simply didn't. 
Looking away, Lily asked, "Is it someone else, Herb?" She paused. "Or 
was it because I don't believe in preunion pollination?" 
"No!" Herb quickly replied, taken aback. "I respected your feeling about 
that. I still do. And, in answer to your question, no, there is no one else. I 
am still unready to plant a commitment with you. Or with anyone." 
The tears sat in the corner of her eyes, but did not run. They caught the 
morning light and sparkled like sad emeralds. 
"I still work at the Mothers Day Nursery, Herb. If you should wish to 
speak with me about anything, well, you know where to reach me." 
With that, she turned and walked swiftly away, then stopped short and 
called back over her shoulder without looking. 
"Grow and flourish!" 
It was the Founder's Day blessing. "Grow and flourish!" Herb returned as 
she disappeared around the corner. He suspected that she had not turned 
because she didn't want him to see that her tears were now falling. Indeed, 
he had hurt her, and she didn't deserve it. He felt like a ripe stinkweed. 

 28 
4 
 
 
 
Gabriel was depressed as he returned to his office. He loved Spring as 
he had loved no other since Laurel, yet he had had to send her away, and 
he doubted that he would ever see her dear face again. But there was 
nothing to be done about that, so he did his best to distract himself with 
sedate thoughts about his profession. The alternative would be to brood on 
the likely disaster he feared was coming, and that was pointless. 
After the setback of the Great Darkness had isolated so many worlds of 
the galaxy, recovery had been sporadic and uncertain. The new order, as it 
gradually emerged, was not the same as the older order. Science had not 
sufficed to maintain civilization; now a number of disciplines of magic 
buttressed it. Thus, the current scene had spaceships and sorcery, in a 
sometimes uneasy association. 
Medicine had advanced once again to a comforting level, but the occult 
arts had also achieved a new status, being revered by the general society 
as much or more as science. Both such establishments often existed side by 
side with equal respectability, as many of the planets regarded the ancient 
practices a science in their own right. Many wondrous works were 
performed that could not be explained away by the strict scientific 
standards of the past, and what cannot be readily explained must 
necessarily be magic. 
Astral projection tours were conducted for those adventurous enough to 
crave something beyond mere planetary travel. Channeling and 

 29 
reincarnations clinics were available for others interested in genealogical 
research. There were any number of Forecast centers which dealt with the 
fundamental teachings of tarot, I Ching, palmistry, handwriting analysis, 
astrology, numerology, and all the lesser divinations. This did not include 
foreign institutes specializing in Egyptian magic, Celtic Runes, Voodoo, and 
alien based future castings so numerous and obscure that it would be 
impossible for any student to become proficient with more than a few. 
Schools of Witchcraft were also in evidence on a few planets, but not as 
popular as they used to be with the new spoilsport galactic regulations 
forbidding sacrifice, human or alien. Most of the so-called "old religion" 
establishments were now more cultural than magical in nature. Of course, 
there were stories of unexplained disappearances, but none had been 
directly linked to known witchcraft universities. There was one planet said 
to "overlook" many of the regulations, but it was not a member of the 
Galactic League and therefore not open for visitation by the general public. 
Within the circle of healing artists were White Witches, herbalists, yogis, 
visualists, color therapists, mentalists, experts in all fields of meditation, 
and psychics. Medical men often relied upon the mystical powers of these 
healers as backup for harmonizing the physical and mental balance of their 
patients. The mind/body connection was an established fact, and often was 
the thin line between death and recovery. MD stood as often for Magical as 
Medical Doctor. No longer were such ideas or their proponents considered 
to be lunatics. It was an era of free belief. 
He arrived at the office, and stepped out of the cab. The charge for his 
travels would be debited from his account. With luck, no enemy would have 
spied the particular destination, or realized that his daughter had not 
returned with him. Above all, he wanted her to be safe, and not just 
because of the precious information she carried. 
It was no longer safe for Spring to remain with him on New Landers, so 
he had decided to send her away to New Moon where she would be 
cloistered among the secluded Companions of Comfort Society. They were 
a peaceful female meditation order, located in a remote sector of the Moon 
known as the Crater Tycho. She was to travel there by a roundabout route 
under an assumed identity. He hoped it would be the last place Zygote 

 30 
would ever think to look for her. 
Gabriel didn't know how much Zygote had learned about Spring's 
involvement, or how much he only guessed, but it would hardly be in his 
best interests to spread his suspicions. No, if anyone was searching for 
Spring, it was only Zygote, he was certain. One formidable enemy was 
more than sufficient, however. 
Gabriel regretted having used her at all, but in the event something 
should happen to him, he needed to be certain that she would have the 
information. It was his legacy to her. Now that word had leaked out, all he 
could do was attempt to protect her and hope that she would come to 
forgive him one day. Of course she had said she had forgiven him already, 
but that was her sweet impulse; she had not yet fully appreciated the 
gravity of what he had done to her. 
He looked warily around, but saw no sign of intrusion. But surely it was 
coming. He had been afraid that it would strike before he managed to get 
Spring clear; his arts had shown its malign incipience. Now all he had to do 
was await its arrival. Meanwhile he would continue business as usual, so as 
to pretend that he suspected nothing. He resumed his musings. 
Some planets were freer than others, naturally, and it was the wide 
diversity of cultures and faiths which made travel in this age so rich an 
experience. New Landers was a pleasant planet, with strong, Old World 
roots. It had been inhabited by a conservative group of Free Thinkers 
following the great purge on New World. They brought some of their 
radical democratic ideals to their new home and they had stood well 
against the test of time. 
Fair Dale was an average small metropolis. It had a centralized 
downtown district with shops and public establishments, surrounded by a 
wide scattering of homes and farms. New Landers was one of several 
planets in orbit around one central sun, with a rotation time providing 
approximately thirty-hour days. Seven or eight were spent working, and the 
remainder used for sleep and recreation. Not so different from the old Earth 
days. Earth, or rather New World, was of course now little more than a 
grey molten cinder. 
His residence was nice enough. At Number Thirty Bay Lane the early 

 31 
morning sunlight filtered down through the stained glass windows in 
colored beams. They reflected softly off sparkling clusters of amethyst and 
quartz, causing multicolored dots to dance around the bare walls. 
Shelves filled with clear dishes contained sprinkles and chips of jaspers, 
sapphires, agate, and garnet. Darker colors of onyx, turquoise, and emerald 
shone with a rich luster in shallow trays on the table. Soft pouches with 
more precious stones were hidden from sight in a wall safe. 
But now he couldn't stop the personal memories. Well, perhaps it was 
time to indulge himself, for even the painful ones were precious in their 
way. 
Gabriel's wife had died in childbirth less than two decades before; a rare 
occurrence even then. Although he had known many satisfactory liaisons 
with beautiful and accommodating companions, he had yet to find her like. 
Even so, he had been content with his life; he enjoyed his chosen 
practice, and doted upon his only child, Spring. Less generous men might 
have felt ill disposed toward such bitter fruit, blaming the child for the 
demise of the mother, but he had a firm grasp of reality. 
His wife Laurel had been a beautiful but delicate girl. The doctors had 
advised them against having children, fearing for her health. Yet, so great 
had been Laurel's desire to bear a child that she had foregone her birth 
control prescription and become pregnant. Even then, it could have been 
aborted, but she had willingly chosen to risk her own life in the hope that it 
might live. Gabriel loved her too much to stand in the way of her decision, 
and agreed to gamble against the odds. In the end, they had lost, for 
Laurel had not the strength, and he was left with Spring. To disown such a 
gift would have been to disown Laurel and their love as well. That he would 
never do. 
Gabriel did the best he could to bestow enough love for the both of them 
upon his motherless child, and he could honestly say that he'd never found 
cause for regret. He had taken in Tete, a native of Vertro, as housekeeper 
and nanny for Spring. She had remained with the family until Spring's 
thirteenth birthday, when she decided it was time to retire and return to 
her home planet to have a litter of her own. Tete's kind were an intelligent 
race of lovable teddy bear creatures. They were understandably popular for 

 32 
positions in the child rearing field. 
When she left, Gabriel decided he was sufficient to the task of raising his 
daughter alone. Spring never ceased to be a joy to him, though he was still 
uncertain if he had raised her or the other way around. She was ever a 
precocious child and had stepped in to help out almost as soon as she 
could walk. At the age of five, she took a serious interest in her father's 
work with the crystals. The colors and sparkles fascinated her so that she 
could not learn fast enough. By ten, she was capable of reading the 
chakras with surprising insight, and could select exactly the right gem to 
prescribe for most ills. 
Yet, as complete as was her understanding of the stones, her greatest 
talent lay in a different field as an herbalist. That had been her mother's 
great love. Spring had discovered Laurel's thick book of pressed leaves and 
flowers and began to make a deep study of herb medicine and botany. 
There was hardly a plant in the League of Planets she could not now 
identify at a glance. When she was fourteen, she had set up a small corner 
area in Gabriel's shop with vials of dried herbs she had gathered and 
prepared herself, and soon had her own loyal clientele. 
Gabriel had joked that she was stealing his patients away. Spring 
protested it was nothing against the crystals, but only a supplemental help 
for the most difficult cases. So serious, so loyal, even then. What a 
treasure! 
When Gabriel began to delve deeper into his metaphysical studies with 
the crystals, she had been an able research assistant, working long hours 
without a murmur of complaint. He was well aware he owed much of his 
progress to her devotion. 
Now he pondered his wisdom regarding his daughter. Were those pangs 
of guilt he felt for not insisting she get out more with young people of her 
own age? A bit late, if so. He knew he should have encouraged her to enjoy 
her youth more, to have been less serious, more carefree, to see young 
men more often. She was not too young to think of marriage. Oh, he knew 
that marriage was an antiquated custom on many planets these days, but it 
was still alive and well on New Landers, and he was thankful for that. 
His short but precious union with Laurel had meant quite a lot to him 

 33 
through the years, and he was certain Spring would feel the same once she 
had found the proper young man. Whenever he had broached the subject, 
however, she usually laughed in that impish way she had, and said he was 
the only man in her life that mattered. That she had lots of time for that 
later on. 
No, Gabriel had not encouraged her, and he regretted that now. Didn't it 
please him to have a devoted and lovely daughter by his side? Didn't she 
honestly enjoy the work they did together? And time did not go on forever. 
Who should know that better than he? He had been so intent on perfecting 
his discovery that it soon became all he could think about. He had referred 
many of his patients to an associate, to give more time to his research and 
it had paid off. He had discovered a way to tap secrets from the crystals, 
secrets that could change the world. 
Cursed secrets! If he had only seen where it was leading, had only 
known then what it would mean for them now, he would have done many 
things differently. Would he not? Would he not? That question frightened 
him, for he still was not certain of the answer. 
Lovely Spring! She was the very image of her mother at the same age; 
lithe and small with soft amber tresses that turned golden in the sunlight. 
He missed her immensely, his lovely shadow. But the secret-now that 
Zygote's spies were beneath each rock, behind every tree, she was far and 
away safer where she was. Spring's wellbeing was all that was important to 
him now. He could not bear to lose her as well. It would be like losing 
Laurel, all over again. 
Gabriel reached for a small piece of polished lepidolite and pressed the 
cool ridged surface against the proper chakra, hoping to restore some 
peace to his nerves before the next client arrived. 
Looking down his list of appointments, he proceeded to assemble the 
necessary stones and wands he would shortly be using. This was a sad 
case. A young man traumatized by a Turbocar accident. Those vehicles 
were dangerous and should be recalled, in his opinion. Both the client's 
parents had been killed instantly, but he had escaped unharmed, physically. 
Emotionally, it was another matter. It would be a long road back for him. A 
complete cleaning would be called for, followed by daily visualization. 

 34 
Gabriel wished Spring were there to consult about some medicinal teas to 
relax him, but he could probably find some mention of them in her record 
book. 
He set out the cleansing stones, then selected several others. Red jasper 
should improve the immune system, jade would help dispel negativity, a 
moonstone for calming, and rose quartz for love. That young man would 
have to learn to love himself again; grief and guilt were terrible burdens for 
one so young to bear. For anyone to bear. Gabriel paused, remembering. 
As he held the chunk of pink quartz in his palm, his thoughts returned to 
a day not so long ago when he had commissioned a jeweler to carve an 
especially fine piece into a heart shape to be mounted and hung on a 
golden chain for Spring's sixteenth birthday. She was so delighted, and had 
sworn never to take it off. She had been wearing it today. 
Gabriel started in surprise to hear the door chimes ring so soon. The 
client was early. Laying aside the quartz, he paused long enough to pull on 
his silk robes and adjust the golden half-framed glasses upon his nose. He 
took time to survey his appearance in the mirror. 
He was an imposing figure with his six foot frame, and touches of grey 
at the temples. Even at his age, he could turn a lady's head for a second 
glance. Clients tended to respond better when he was properly attired for 
their sessions. So much of healing depended upon faith, and they felt a 
doctor should look like a doctor and a magician should look like a magician. 
He did indeed look every inch the magician. 
Parting the inside curtains, he went out into the front of the shop to 
unlock the door. It was not his girl's regular day off, but she had called in 
claiming illness. He had offered to help, but she assured him it was a 
mundane problem best looked after with bed rest. He deduced it was most 
likely her time of the month and did not press for details. Since his schedule 
was lighter these days, he had decided not to cancel any appointments. He 
was capable of opening a few doors by himself, after all. 
Gabriel reached for the lever and swung open the door. He was 
immediately hurled across the room into his secretary's work station, 
knocking off most of the contents and overturning a large potted plant. 
His glasses went flying from his face, lost in the action, and he winced 

 35 
from a sharp stabbing pain in his left side where his body had violently 
connected with the corner of the desk. He had just enough time to orient 
on his attacker before going down. It was gratifying to know it was not his 
client, but shocking to see the hulking form of a huge yellow Martian 
amazon crouched above him. 
The woman gripped him at the collar and yanked upward, slapping him 
hard across his face with the back of her free hand. It was the size of a 
ham, and felt like a rock. Martian females were no dainty breed, but the 
dominant sex on their home turf. No strangers to physical violence, they 
easily kept their less robust men in line. The Men's Liberation League had 
sent emissaries to Mars for several years, but to no avail. At least that was 
the conclusion, since none had ever returned. Such events were the subject 
of crude jokes, but it was hard to see the humor in his present situation. 
Gabriel's head was ringing from the savage blow as he slumped down 
thankfully into the seat where she had flung him. His sight was bleary from 
more than the loss of his spectacles, but he finally made out that his 
assailant was not alone. Standing behind her were two more foggy forms, 
one tall and angular, the other smaller, almost effeminate. He hardly 
needed much vision to recognize that nefarious pair. It was the mad 
Magician Zygote, and his strange Ki companion, Elton. 
"Zygote," Gabriel said slowly, trying to focus. "Welcome to my 
establishment. You must excuse me if I don't rise." He wiped away a trickle 
of blood from his split lip, his expression feigning apology. 
"We will soon cure you of your insolence, Professor Gabriel," whined the 
small young man beside Zygote. It was, of course, presumptuous to refer 
to Elton as a man. He/she/it was neither, being a Ki. Kis were multisexed, 
being capable of mating with male or female or most alien species. They 
were simply whatever they wished, and adapted accordingly. Since Elton 
had dressed in male attire when Gabriel had met "him," he tended to 
regard the Ki as male for convenience of reference. 
Elton's facial features were rather neuter as well; what one might 
describe as sensitive. That was delusion, of course, for there was no 
sensitivity in the distorted creature as he addressed Gabriel. He accented 
the magician's name as if it were a slur of the vilest sort. It was not hard to 

 36 
imagine the nature of service he performed for his master. 
"Never mind, Elton," Zygote said. "I'm sure the good doctor realizes this 
is not a social call." He pulled out a folder from the inside of his robe and 
held it up for Gabriel to view. "Does this look familiar to you, Doctor?" 
Gabriel stared back in stunned horror. It bore his personal seal. "Where-
where did you get that?" he gasped. His private research papers, kept in 
his secret files under lock and key and protected by a confidence spell of 
the strongest potency. No one could have possibly gotten in unless they 
knew the magic code. Debubrah? He had trusted her implicitly. 
"Yes, I see you've figured it out already, Doctor," Zygote said. 
"Your little secretary. But she's off today, isn't she? Shopping, I imagine. 
Bribery is so old fashioned, but still effective. She wasn't cheap, you know. 
Still, I tend to believe it was the love spell that did it. Young women remain 
romantics at heart, despite their independence, don't you agree?" 
Elton snorted in derision. Zygote, suddenly bored with light conversation, 
spoke coldly. "But enough small talk, Doctor. You know why we're here, 
and what we want." 
Gabriel sighed with the resignation of a man who knows what he says is 
not going to be popular. "You won't get it." 
Zygote raised a brow quizzically. "Oh? I think I shall." He nodded to the 
Martian who had been glowering none too patiently in the corner. Now her 
face contorted in a smile, exposing ugly yellowed teeth, a healthy color for 
her kind. 
"Augah!" she snarled, moving in. Conversation was not her forte either. 
She obviously adhered to the maxim that actions spoke louder than words. 
The sounds of hard brutal punches rang out clearly in the quiet office. 
They drowned out the sharp words of Zygote, or perhaps it was Elton, as 
all sounds became garbled to Gabriel after a few moments. All that was left 
was the pain. 
Gabriel was no longer a young man, nor was he well. When the giantess 
reluctantly ceased her battering, he lay limp and bleeding across the cold 
surface of the office floor. His breathing came in shallow, painful rasps as 
he tried to speak. 
"Zygote-my heart. Can't take this," he said, clutching at his chest. "My 

 37 
medication. In the cabinet in my office. Green label." 
"Get them!" Zygote snapped to Elton. 
"No, make him talk first," Elton said sadistically. 
"Get them!" repeated Zygote. "He can't say anything if he dies, you 
imbecile!" 
Elton sulked off into the other room and returned with the bottle which 
he flipped to the prone magician. Gabriel fumbled with the cap and finally 
managed to slide one tablet beneath his tongue. 
"Feeling better, I trust, Doctor?" asked Zygote. "This sort of violence 
appalls me. I am a physician, too, you know. Come, give me the 
information and we can surely work something out like civilized beings. 
There is enough in this for both of us. We can work together." 
Gabriel eyed Zygote contemptuously, if blearily. "You shall never have 
the Secret. Never!" The blood had gathered in his throat, forcing him to 
cough violently. He tried to stand, but slid back down the wall, closing his 
eyes against the pain. Then, realizing that there could be no compromise 
with such ilk, he played his trump. He swallowed the rest of the pills. It was 
a relief. The pain faded, leaving only his hearing, for a while. 
"Talk, you doddering old fool!" Elton screamed, kicking him viciously in 
the rib cage with his pointed shoes. "I can make you talk!" 
Zygote gave an exasperated sigh and shut his eyes momentarily before 
glaring at his companion. "I seriously doubt that, Elton," he said dryly. "This 
man is dead." 

 38 
5 
 
 
 
Herb had been wandering aimlessly, trying to focus his swirling   
thoughts   into   a  coherent  pattern.   The encounter with Lily at the Hall 
still weighed heavily on his mind. He wondered if he would find himself 
returning to her to propose a union after all? All this time that he had been 
so certain that it was over between them, Lily had been patiently biding her 
time, not giving up on him. 
Herb began to lose conviction. Seeing her again had triggered a chain 
reaction. See Lily, want Lily. There had been a time he had not thought her 
so unsuitable. Even though he had been the one to transplant, deep down 
he knew she would be waiting should he decide to commit. Not fair, but 
true. Was that the real reason he had never officially ended it? Had he 
wanted her to wait? 
From their last conversation, it was plain the door was wide open, the 
ground still fertile. Lily was a nice girl. Perhaps too nice for her own good. 
Herb would choose to remain friends, but knew in his heart that was 
impossible. Lily was a union-or-nothing girl. 
Herb felt suddenly lonely. It was growing late. The tri-moons were rising. 
He had been walking without noticing where his feet had taken him. It had 
seemed important only to keep moving. Now as he turned the corner, he 
saw it was one of several streets in a seedy part of town. Potted plants 
leaned against doorways of disreputable establishments or sat along the 

 39 
curbs talking to each other. One specimen came toward Herb from the 
opposite direction, wobbling uneasily on his feet, and reeled into him as he 
passed. 
"Par'n me-" he slurred, weaving drunkenly onward. 
Herb moved aside to give him ample passing space, then continued on. 
As he approached one of the local polli parlours, a top heavy female 
Treeple boldly beckoned with her branches and called out to him. 
"Evening greetings, Sugarcane. Come on in." Her leaves waved most 
enticingly. 
Herb paused, amused, but shook his head. He had never been inside 
one of those places, considering them a haunt of last resort for males 
unable to satisfy their needs within normal relationships. 
"Oh, come on. Don't be so shy," she coaxed. "There's a free show inside, 
and you don't have to spend a scent. Costs nothing to look." She stuck out 
her mounds, which were blatantly outlined beneath the tight, thin garment. 
"You do like to look, don't you?" 
Herb allowed curiosity to overcome embarrassment for the moment. 
"What type of show?" he asked. 
The Treeple girl beamed. She could tell when she had a ripe one on the 
vine. "No, no, you have to see for yourself, Hot Pepper," she said, pushing 
him inside with her branches and closing the door behind him before he 
realized what had happened. 
Herb decided to look around, since he was there. On the surface it 
looked like an ordinary book store, but on closer examination of the stock 
he realized he'd never seen books like those in the Public Botanical Library. 
There were rows and stands of books and magazinias with lewd 
photosynthegraphs of all Paradise varieties in every imaginable pose. "Ip! 
Ip! Ip!" read the covers. Herb blushed deeply as he opened a zinia 
portraying his own Veganoid species in graduating steps of infertile 
pollination, or Ip, for short. A lovely green Veganette lay with her limbs 
fully spread, tied up to stakes, revealing the open blossom. He slammed 
the zinia shut and put it quickly back on the shelf. He was no prude about 
Ip, as his recent vacation had proved, but there was a better way to 
express it than in these degrading zinias. 

 40 
He almost fell into the stands as a young Vinese girl sidled up to him, 
allowing some of her tender firm vines to brush against his leg. He moved 
back, thinking he was in the way. She repeated the action and he realized it 
was intentional flirting on her part. 
"Greetings, Green God. Want to go get potted? Afterward, we can roll 
together. Wouldn't you like that?" she asked seductively. 
The strong fragrance of her blossoms assailed Herb's senses. He had 
never cross-pollinated, but she was alluring in a strange, foreign sort of 
way. It was a temptation, but he reflected sensibly that he probably 
couldn't afford her anyway. His prolonged vacation had depleted his 
savings, if not actually rendering him financially barren. 
"How much?" he asked, more from curiosity than intent. 
"Only five merrygolds," she purred, wrapping her slim vines possessively 
around one leg. 
Herb wished she hadn't done that. Even though they were quite different 
in appearance, he had chlorophyll in his blood. Her close proximity was 
evoking automatic male reactions he wasn't prepared to handle. 
"Sorry. I'm unscented," he said apologetically. 
Her scent faded as she abruptly removed her vines, shrugged, and 
moved on to better prospects. She was a working girl with no time for dead 
beets. Herb watched her roll away with a sigh of regret. He saw her attach 
herself to an aging Treeple with dried leaves. The old bark pulled some 
yellow coins from his trunk and they left together. 
Herb wandered over to the counters containing union aides. There were 
hoes and spades of all sizes for every need of each species. Sprinkling cans 
and small bags of "Fertilize Her" were piled high. Rubber plants were also 
popular items. Herb had never seen so many varieties. He reached out 
curiously, stretching a leaf. It snapped back with a loud pop. He looked up 
to see the eyes of nearby customers leering at him. Ducking his head, he 
moved quickly to another part of the store, his ears glowing emerald. 
Pausing at a new counter, he discovered he was no better off there. It 
was devoted to appliances for self-pollination, or Sip, as it was crudely 
termed. Narcissus powder, kissing tulips, clinging vines, sweet-scented 
potpourris, and leaf wax lay blatantly beneath the bright lights of the 

 41 
display. Herb's color expanded to his lower regions. How could anyone find 
the nerve to purchase such items he wondered. 
Just then an attractive Treeple woman reached past him and gathered 
up a variety of the tulips and other items in her branches. She winked at 
him. 
"Polli Party tonight," she explained, and looked Herb up and down 
appreciatively. "We can always use an extra male, if you're free?" 
"Uh, sorry. I have a date," he lied. 
She sighed with regret and carried her selections off to the clerk. She 
was joined by a couple of her friends who helped carry the purchases. Herb 
noted their attire and decided they were Ippies, members of a sexual cult 
that believed in free Ip, roaming from place to place in brightly painted 
conveyances, smoking weeds and using potting soil. His friend, Cling Ling, 
had joined such a caravan briefly, and told him all about it. 
He started to leave, then noticed a concession stand at the back of the 
shop. Wandering over, he saw it sold potting soil and distilled water, 
though he doubted seriously if they had a license for it. The Patrol were lax 
these days. Maybe he should buy a pint of water and save a trip to the 
liquor shop. 
"Finding what you need?" asked the proprietor, appearing at his elbow. 
He looked as if he didn't care for browsers. It was a hard business and 
those who ran it had thick stalks. 
"The girl outside," Herb stuttered, "Uh, she mentioned a free show. No 
obligation." He felt ridiculous and out of place. He wished he had kept 
walking. 
The manager became more friendly. "Sure, we have two shows tonight. 
Good for business." He blew the smoke of his suspicious-smelling leaferette 
into Herb's eyes. "The shows put the customers in the mood. Know what I 
mean?" He winked. 
Herb didn't know, but he winked back. He didn't want to seem like a 
sapling. 
"I know what you want," the manager said, putting a finger to his lip, 
and looking around cautiously before reaching beneath the counter for a 
small zinia. He handed it to Herb, winking again. 

 42 
Curious, Herb accepted it and flipped open the cover. He gasped in 
disbelief. It was a seed catalog! The Patrol might be tolerant of most of 
these establishments, for sex played a large role in many of the new 
imported offworlder religions, but this was incredible. Child pollinography 
was an instant cancellation of license and closedown. Herb handed it back, 
disgusted. 
"No?" The owner took it back, disappointed that his top draw had come 
up losers. "Just don't talk it around, huh, Sprout?" 
Herb grimaced. As if he'd tell anyone he had looked at that filth. He 
turned to leave. The clerk grabbed him by the sleeve. 
"Hey, you haven't seen the show yet. Two tender young sprouts, hardly 
out of the hot house." He noted Herb's frown. "Oh, wait. The second show 
is just the ticket for a sophisticate like yourself, sir. Vivacious Violet is 
performing in the Orchid room." He grabbed Herb around the shoulders 
before he could speak and guided him down a dimly lit corridor and shoved 
him through a curtain of wallflowers. 
Herb was left at the back of the small dark room with hard chairs filled 
with different varieties of males. He took a seat near the exit and slumped 
down, hoping no one there knew him. But if they were there, he was 
seeing them too, he reasoned. Even so, he kept low as the strains of the 
Chlorophyll Harmonica orchestra began. The harmonicas whined in rhythm 
as the main attraction entered and began her bump and grind. 
Herb's eyes popped out on stems, figuratively speaking. He had never 
seen anyone like her. Not only was she a fully matured Treeple, but her 
leaves had been pruned, revealing the smooth dark bark of her branches. 
They swayed wantonly above her head in a scentual rhythm. Sap oozed 
from her exposed mounds and ran down the torso of her bare trunk. Her 
hips moved wildly to the music as it ended in a building crescendo. The 
crowd of males cheered and stomped while Herb sat in shock. 
And then it happened. Herb gasped as the Treeple peeled back the bark 
opening from the center of her trunk to display the tender bud beneath. 
Never had he been exposed to such lasciviousness! Even as he was 
repulsed intellectually, he could feel his stamen unrolling. Herb clenched his 
teeth together and swallowed, forcing it to the back of his mouth, and 

 43 
stumbled out into the bright light of the store front. 
The manager, swift to observe the effect his acts had upon the 
customers, offered him a private room upstairs with one of several 
passionflowers, retained for such purposes. Herb almost wished he had the 
merrygolds, but declined with a shake of his head. It was difficult for him to 
speak at the moment so he shrugged and gestured to his pockets. The 
manager got the message but wasn't ready to give up yet. 
"Then how about a booth? You know. For a green thumb," he said, 
leering. 
Herb was appalled. It was a long walk home, but self-pollination was not 
something to be indulged in public houses. He had heard about such 
booths in school. They called them Sippers. They were provided for the 
exclusive use of unruly stamen. The practitioner would place the distended 
member over his thumb and blow until the yellow pollen erupted in a cloud 
of ecstacy. It could happen to the best of Veganoids, but was not 
something one spoke of in mixed company. 
"These are class A booths. For a little extra we can run a hologram show 
while you enjoy your privacy," the clerk pressed. 
It was a sick proposition, and more than he could stand. Herb shook his 
head violently and dashed through the front door. All he wanted was to get 
out of that hot house. 
Easier said than done. Two seedy pollitutes latched onto him as he 
descended the steps outside. One was a plump Vinese, the other a Treeple. 
The Treeple brushed her branches against him. Not again! 
"Ever had it with a Treeple, Veggie? Eight limbs give a crazy massage," 
she cooed. 
Herb drew back in disgust. Her rings betrayed her advanced age and her 
leaves were withered. Dried sap clung to the material over her mounds. 
"No!" he snapped, and ran before she could get a better grip. She probably 
had root rot. 
"Up your Aster," she yelled after him, and rejoined her sister by the 
shop. 
Herb felt sick to his stomach. What had he been thinking of to get mixed 
up with that bunch? Was that the life he preferred to an arrangement with 

 44 
Lily? As he turned the comer, he saw the symbol of a Vegetarian Temple 
ahead. On impulse, he went inside where an old Treeple Elder was standing 
by the altar. 
"May I, uh, make admission, Elder?" he asked. 
The Treeple nodded him toward the booth. Entering, he sat facing the 
Elder with a curtain of wallflowers between them. He began the ritual. 
"Forgive me, Elder. I have erred." 
"In what manner, my son?" asked the Ancient. 
"I was wilted this past week," he confessed. 
"Is it your habit to indulge in potting soil, or in distilled water?" 
"Not usually, Elder. I mean, no, I never use potting soil. But I did absorb 
the water." 
"What caused you to err?" 
"I've been depressed. Lonely." 
"Nonhabitual. Absolved." 
"Tonight, Elder, I don't know why, but I visited a polli parlour. Infertile 
pollination establishment," he added for the Elder's clarification. 
"I see. How do you feel about that?" asked the Elder. 
"Low. I didn't mean to. I was walking by and a pretty Treeple called out 
to me. I was weak." 
"Not premeditated. Absolved." 
"Wait. I watched a show there. A bare-limbed passionflower. My-my 
stamen was unruly," he blurted. 
The Elder sighed a long sigh. "If you plant the seed, you must harvest 
the fruit." 
"Oh no, no harvest. But, my mouth was full," he admitted. 
"Unforeseen circumstances. Absolved." 
"Thank you Elder. I feel much better now." And he did. The dirt of the 
polli parlour seemed to wash away, leaving him cleansed as after a spring 
shower. 
"Perhaps you should consider putting down roots, my son," the Elder 
suggested. 
"I had a girl, but we grew apart. I don't know if she is the right 
Veganette for me." 

 45 
"Must it be a Veganette? Cross pollination is no sin within a compatible 
union. I have grafted many such couples in my time. True happiness can 
be found in variety." 
"That is not the problem, Elder. I have not limited my interest on the 
basis of species." He thought of the young Vinese girl he had met in the 
polli parlour. "I just don't know if I'm ready to plant a commitment yet." 
"You will be sure when the time comes, my son. My advice to you is to 
plant your seed in a sanctified union, raise a family, and take vitamin C." 
Herb went on his way, vegetating on the Elder's words of wisdom. He 
would turn over a new leaf. He would certainly try! 

 46 
6 
 
 
 
Spring dried her eyes and accepted the cup of hot clear broth from the 
gentle servant girl standing solicitously by her bedside. 
"Thank you. What is your name?" asked Spring, waiting for the broth to 
cool. 
"Companion Iolanthe, my Lady." The girl smiled shyly. Her dark straight 
hair was tied back primly, and she was dressed in the long loose tunic 
uniform of all the Companions of New Moon. Spring guessed her age 
somewhere between fourteen and sixteen. She was a humanoid, and a 
rather pretty one, at that. Spring wondered what such a young woman 
would be doing devoting her life to service in this secluded Order? Well, 
they all had their reasons. 
"Iolanthe," Spring repeated. "Yes, Flower." 
"You know the meaning?" the girl asked, pleased. "It's an Old World 
name, from the ancient times." 
Spring nodded. "Greek. I've made a study of botany, plants, and flora. 
It's sort of a crossover study, though most of the scientific names are in 
Latin. Another ancient language from that era." Spring sat down the cup 
and leaned back against the pillow. 
"I should not be taxing your strength with questions.  
Companion Alma is always admonishing me for my glib tongue. You 
need solitude after your ordeal. I will return later for the cup." She turned 

 47 
to go. 
"No, stay. Actually, I would appreciate some company. My father was 
the only family I had, and I feel so alone now." Iolanthe looked at the older 
girl with compassion. "Have you had any sleep?" she asked. 
"I don't know. Yes, I think so," Spring answered. Awake, asleep, what 
was the difference? Nothing would change, she thought. 
"I don't think you have slept at all. I am going to request some 
medication for you right now," the young girl said, and opened the door. 
"No, please don't do that," Spring said. "I don't like to take drugs of any 
type. But, if you will hand me the small pouch from the tray on the table, I 
will do some relaxation exercises with my crystals. That works just as well." 
Iolanthe brought the pouch, and stood by curiously while Spring removed 
several small stones and held them in her palm. 
"Jewels!" Iolanthe exclaimed, obviously impressed. 
Spring smiled. "Not exactly. These are healing stones. They aren't worth 
all that much monetarily. Their value lies in their application. My father-my 
father was a renowned crystallogist. I assisted him in his practice on our 
home planet until-until I came here," she finished, tears glistening in her 
eyes. 
"How do the stones work?" asked Iolanthe, hoping to take Spring's mind 
off the sad subject for a few moments. 
Spring held up a small purple gem. "This is an amethyst," she explained, 
pressing it to the small space on her forehead between the eyes. "I place it 
here, on my sixth chakra. Chakra is a term for an energy center. Some 
people refer to this spot as the third eye, because it is the center for 
intuition and spiritual awakening. I don't want to confuse you. Let's just say 
there are chakras that correspond to various parts of the body, and 
different stones work for each." 
"But, what do they do for you?" Iolanthe pressed, glad to have Spring 
expressing an interest in anything again. For days, she had stayed alone 
and silent in her room, hardly acknowledging Iolanthe's presence. 
"To put it simply, they contain energy, and so can project thought, heal, 
protect, whatever the intent of the user. Now I will visualize a peaceful 
scene, and attempt to sleep." 

 48 
"Yes, that is good," Iolanthe said. She stayed for a short while watching 
as Spring shut her eyes and breathed deeply, closing out her surroundings. 
The servant girl walked quietly through the door, closing it behind her. 
Spring tried to concentrate on the visualization, but all she could see was 
her father's face. Her father. He had always been her strength. How was 
she to go on alone without him? The deep sorrow swelled up to sweep over 
her again as she remembered the last time they had been together. 
Word had reached her through the Society that her father was dead. The 
official version was that he had been fatally injured in a Turbocar accident, 
but a trusted source revealed that his office had been found in shambles 
and traces of blood were definitely his. Spring knew it had been no 
accident. 
It had to be Zygote. He had friends in high posts who could have easily 
initiated a cover-up. Of course, her father had friends also, and that was 
why she had learned the truth despite their efforts. But his friends could 
not help her now. No one was to learn the secret, so that left it all up to 
her. Zygote would never profit from her father's death! 
She needed no warnings now. Her father need never fear she would 
betray him for one foolish night of passion. Love was the last emotion she 
was capable of feeling at this point. 
It was late when Iolanthe completed her rounds and remembered to 
look in on Spring to retrieve the cup and see how the young lady was 
resting. It was with surprised consternation that she found Spring not only 
wide awake, but pouring through some questionable reading matter spread 
across the bed covers. 
"You promised to rest," she scolded gently. 
"Rest?" Spring laughed mirthlessly. "Yes, I will rest, but not until-" she 
stopped abruptly, finding the page she wanted in the index. "Here it is." 
Flipping to the page, she read hastily, then spoke. "Will you post a letter 
for me, Iolanthe?" 
"You know the rules, Lady. No outside communication while under the 
sanctuary of the-" 
"Yes, yes. I've heard all that before. But I also know you have posted 
letters for others here at the sanctuary." Actually, she didn't know this, but 

 49 
felt it likely from observation of the kind hearted girl. Her bluff turned out 
to be correct. 
"I should not have done so," Iolanthe answered contritely. 
Spring scribbled on the sheet of paper and copied the magazine's 
address onto the sealer. She tucked in the paper along with some standard 
Planetary Payment notes and sealed it, passing it over to Iolanthe. 
"Lady-" the girl began to protest. 
"Please, Iolanthe. This is important. I know you don't understand, but 
my life may depend on the answers I receive from this letter. This is no 
time to balk." Iolanthe sighed, but tucked it into her tunic, then looked with 
disapproval at the lurid magazines scattered across the bed. "I don't see 
how anything sent to that type of publication could be so important." 
"And how would an innocent young thing like yourself know about such 
magazines? Don't tell me you Companions have your own secret library? I 
found these here, under the bed." Iolanthe looked scandalized. "Here? I 
don't know how they came to be. This room was that of a former 
Companion." 
"Could be why she's former," Spring teased. 
"That is not for me to say," Iolanthe answered primly. "But I do know 
that no good can be coming from this." She patted the sealer beneath her 
tunic as if it were tainted, and excused herself. 
Spring looked after her departing figure, thinking aloud. "I hope you're 
wrong, Iolanthe. I'm betting my life on it." 

 50 
7 
 
 
 
The tri-moons were just peeping over the horizon. It was a peaceful 
summer evening with only the sound of the soft warm breeze playing in the 
trees. A lone dogwood barked in the distance. It was a night made for 
romance in Paradise. 
Herb and Lily sat entwined in the swinging vine on her parent's front 
porch. His arm rested comfortably around her shoulder. Her head reclined 
against his chest while they swung gently to and fro in thoughtless 
pleasure. Lily was the first to break the silence. 
"It feels so natural being with you again, Herb. I missed you while you 
were away. All my dreams were tied to you. My heart withered, and I 
simply went to seed." 
Herb shifted and sat up straight. "You weren't-!" His heart plunged into 
his stomach. 
"Of course not; don't be silly." Lily smiled in embarrassment. "You know 
as well as I that we never," she paused, "never." 
"Yes, I know," Herb said, but he still felt a wave of profound relief at the 
negative confirmation. At the time, it had been a major source of 
annoyance to him, but now he was honestly glad they had waited. What if 
she had become with child? Lily was an innocent, and probably didn't even 
know about proper prevention. It very well could have happened. Thank 
the Founder for her high morality. 

 51 
"I thought we should see if we could grow together again," Herb said. 
"But, union is a serious step, and I don't think we should plant in haste. 
You do understand, Lily? I wouldn't have suggested we see each other 
again if that wasn't understood?" 
He was babbling and knew it well, but he had no intentions of being 
pushed into something again. 
"Yes, Herb, you've made that completely clear. It's just that we've 
known each other for so many seasons, and if you don't know how you feel 
about me by this time, I don't see how another season will change that." 
Herb could see that strong will beginning to surface again. "It's not the 
situation which must change, but me," he said. "And who can say? You 
may be the one to call it off. You may grow tired of waiting." 
"I will wait, Herb. I believe the fault was mine that you felt you must 
transplant. I was raised to hoe a straight row. There are many wild flowers 
out there to tempt a man, and if you have wandered, I must accept my 
share of the blame." She sighed. 
"No," Herb said uncertainly. "That was not the only reason." 
"Then you admit it was a reason," Lily exclaimed, pouncing upon his lack 
of conviction. 
"It was," he reluctantly admitted. Herb hated to think he was so shallow 
as to discard seasons of a good relationship simply on the basis of sexual 
frustration. "I always admired your strong principles. It proved to me that 
you were a nice girl." 
An odd look came over Lily's face. Herb wondered what he could have 
said wrong now. After all, he had just paid her a compliment. 
"You mean," she pondered briefly, "if I didn't bed with you, then you 
knew I wasn't bedding others?" 
She certainly had a way of getting to the root of the matter, Herb 
thought. "Yes, I guess go. That is what I meant." He was beginning to feel 
decidedly uncomfortable with the turn the conversation had taken. 
"And, what if I had bedded another?" she asked softly. 
Herb looked surprised. That notion had never crossed his mind. He had 
always assumed she was unsoiled. The arrogance of the male ego had 
dismissed any possibility that she might simply have preferred someone 

 52 
other than him. 
"I see. Well, that makes no difference to our friendship now, Lily," he 
managed to say. He noticed that odd look was still on Lily's face. 
"Oh," she said. "You forgive me?" Was the tone slightly sarcastic? 
"No. I mean, yes. I mean, there is nothing to forgive." What was she 
trying to do? 
That answer seemed to satisfy her at last. "Yes, Herb, that is so, for I 
have not bedded with any other." 
That stripped away the last of his patience. "Then why the blight did you 
even bring it up?" he asked in exasperation. 
"Because I know as a man you must have bedded others, if not before, 
then in your absence. It also makes no difference to me. But, I didn't know 
if that was an issue still between us. Now I see it is not. We can make a 
fresh start together." 
She smiled possessively and squeezed his hand in hers. Herb began to 
see light dawn. It was her way of saying that she would overlook his past, 
but now expected fidelity since she was pledging hers. Smart girl. 
"We can begin fresh," he agreed, acceding to their unspoken pact. Lily 
smiled up at him with a pleased expression. She had neatly won her case. 
He took both her hands in his and gave them a kiss. Lily was a good 
woman, and if she was willing to take him back and wait upon his decision, 
the least he could do was give their relationship every chance to flourish. 
Herb did not stay long after their talk. Though her family was 
prosperous, she was a dedicated working girl who had to be at the Nursery 
early the next morning. Herb felt a bit drained from the emotional 
confrontation, and decided to make an early night of it himself. 
He was soon home in his small apartment, stretched across his water 
bed, thumbing through the swimsuit issue of Play Plant magazinia. The 
photosynthegraphs of scantily clad passionflowers leaped out at him from 
the scented pages. He almost regretted his promise to Lily. While not prone 
to hop from one flower bed to the next, he did regard himself as a normal 
young Veganoid. His magazinias were a far cry from the raunchy trash he 
had seen in the polli parlour, but they still had lovely blossoms, and were 
not helping matters. 

 53 
He flipped to the classified section instead, and browsed through the 
personals; the seed of answering one was growing in his mind. Why not? 
Responding to an ad would fill up a dull evening, and it wasn't as if he 
would actually meet the girl. Just writing a letter could hardly be considered 
disloyal to Lily, especially if she didn't know about it. It might be amusing to 
see what kind of reply he got. 
Some of the ads were blatant, while others were obscure. He wanted to 
know something about whom he was contacting, but was put off by the 
aggressive ones. An ad near the end of the page at last caught his eye. 
"Attractive, human Moon Maiden with botanical background seeks 
correspondence with interesting male. Species no obstacle. Object?" 
A botany student? Herb thought girls in these magazinias were more 
interested in body than mind games. He was certain she had never studied 
his species of plant. Paradise was off the beaten path for vacationers, not 
without good reason. "Moon Maiden." He liked the sound of that. It was 
romantic, rather than sexy. "Object?" probably meant friendship, but the 
door was open for exploration. Herb decided he would answer this "Moon 
Maiden." Anything to relieve the monotony. 
On New Moon, Iolanthe slid another letter beneath Spring's door and 
walked quickly away. If any of the Companions saw her do such a thing, it 
could mean expulsion or at the very least, solitary penance. 
The Companions were quite strict about some of their precepts and 
outside communication was one of them. It would not matter that Lady 
Spring was only in their temporary care; she was still expected to abide by 
their tenets. It was, after all, for her own good. Hadn't her father made it a 
matter of extreme importance that none were to discover his daughter's 
presence? He did not explain why, but that was of small matter. The 
Companions were not curious. They wished only to lead a quiet life away 
from distracting outside influences. What he had requested was no more 
than they required. 
Under ordinary circumstances, Iolanthe would never have agreed to such 
complicity. It was only that the sad-eyed young woman had been through 
so much and now had no one at all since her only parent had passed away. 
If this covert communication afforded her a measure of peace, then who 

 54 
was she to deny that request? Peace and comfort were the goals of the 
Companions, were they not? And it was plain the letters she had smuggled 
in to Lady Spring did provide her with a strange comfort. 
She also admitted to herself that the harmless intrigue spiced up an 
otherwise too peaceful existence for Iolanthe. She went on down the 
hallway, reminding herself to do extra kitchen duty for the worldly thoughts 
she had been plagued with of late. And perhaps there would even be the 
chore of discarding the extra portions. 
While Iolanthe contemplated pudding, Spring was thinking of her dearest 
enemy. "What is on your mind tonight, Zygote? Are you warm and secure 
in your mad magician's bed, or can it be you will toss and turn, wondering 
where the daughter of Gabriel has eluded you? 
"Do you dare dream of holding her in your thin arms, penetrating her 
soft young body even as you penetrate the deepest secrets of her mind? Or 
could the ways of the flesh hold any allure for one such as you? I think not. 
"No, a woman's heart is but an organ. To know a heart, you must 
possess one, and yours is cold hard lead. Power is your love, wealth your 
desire. How could a mere woman compete with that?" 
"Dream on, Zygote, and sleep well. All your fond desiring, anxious 
waiting, patient planning, will avail you nothing. Yet, we will meet. But at a 
time of my choosing, and I fear, your dreams will become a nightmare." 
The sound of the letter thrust beneath the door jarred Spring back to 
reality. Her face still reflected the hatred for the man who had destroyed 
her father, as she retrieved the missive. Another of the growing assortment 
she had received in answer to her ad. 
Most were from smut-mouthed aliens looking for thrills with a pretty 
human female. They minced no words detailing descriptions of their 
incredible desires. Many were unintelligible to her, of course, as she had no 
idea what it meant to "gibrate with her dorlinta as she comarited his 
nobila." Or to "swing the ten patos to contact her ba ba." But one could 
imagine a full stomach would be a no-no. 
She had assembled three piles of replies to go through. The truly 
depraved were tossed aside, the mixed bags sorted through, and the 
handful of best possibilities carefully considered. She went through these 

 55 
again, noting they came mainly from lonely males on distant or rural 
planets without many females of their own age or status to choose from. 
They seemed genuinely interested in forming a friendship. She lingered 
over one in particular. 
It was from a tiny planetoid called P#23. Wait-it stood for Paradise. How 
quaint. It was very secluded. A point in its favor. The young man who was 
writing called himself a Veganoid, a part human, part plant person. As a 
student of botany she found that concept intriguing rather than repelling. 
She had a vague recollection of such beings, but as the plant folk were not 
space travellers and of comparatively noncompetitive technology, they were 
largely unknown. Certainly she had never met one nor knew of anyone who 
had. Interesting. 
Spring set the letter aside and ripped the rest up, tossing them at the 
bathroom disintegration unit. Considering their foul content for the most 
part, it was an appropriate way to dispose of them. 
Reading through Herb's letter again, for that was the plant man's name, 
she discovered he had mentioned enclosing a picture. Could she have 
overlooked it when sorting? Probably he had intended to, and then 
forgotten before posting it. Now she was more curious than ever. What 
would a plant man look like? A walking bush? 
Taking out a sheet of floral-scented note paper, a nice touch, she wrote 
thoughtfully for a few minutes, then placed the note in its sealer and 
tucked in a photograph of herself in swim apparel. While it was common on 
many planets to swim in the nude, body suits were still used on her home 
world. She had on such an outfit in the photo, a transparent affair except 
for big daisy designs at the proper places. It was actually quite concealing, 
but the illusion was otherwise. She had had quite a discussion with her 
father over that selection. How she wished he were still with her to argue! 
Sighing wistfully, she closed the sealer. 
 
The object of her interest, Herb Moss, sat in a shady bower in the 
Paradise Public Gardens reflecting on his life. He and Lily were getting on 
well. At least, they never disagreed. Maybe that was because Lily always 
deferred to him whenever the least hint of discord threatened. 

 56 
While it was all very well to have one's way all the time, such a 
relationship lacked stimulation and exchange of ideas. She was giving in for 
the sake of peace, not because she agreed with him. Now that he thought 
of it, they didn't discuss much of anything outside of their upcoming union 
plans and his work at the firm, or other safe subjects. 
Lily's family had forgiven him for his temporary transplant, and his father 
had offered him a good position at the firm of Moss and Ivy, Inc. It was an 
old company with a spotless reputation and would assure them a good 
financial future. It was uneventful work, but secure, with his father for his 
boss. 
Herb was just the sort of steady young man most parents hope their 
daughter will meet, and Lily's parents were thrilled that he had at last 
decided to plant a union with their daughter. Financial considerations aside, 
they had always felt he was right for her. Likewise, Herb's family approved 
of Lily and felt she was the proper type of girl for Herb. One who would 
stand him in good stead as a company wife. She came from strong roots, 
her family had run a thriving cottonwood plantation for several generations, 
and they were frequently mentioned in the local society column at this or 
that charity function. His father thanked the Founder that Herb had not 
taken up with any of those spa blossoms he'd spoken so fondly of. 
The families were happy, Lily was happy-well, that was two out of three. 
Everything was coming up roses and he still could not feel right about it. He 
had it all, and yet something was missing. 
True to his unspoken word, Herb had not strayed from the narrow path. 
It took some getting used to, but he had faithfully confined his interest in 
the opposite sex to lofty thoughts of Lily, and the not so lofty thoughts to 
the pages of some men's zinias he had picked up on a whim from the 
corner newsstand. 
Lily might not exactly approve of National Galactic Girl, Interstellar Stud, 
or Spicy Aliens as reading material, but he was certain she wouldn't like the 
alternative. Yet, compared to his long distance friendship with the Moon 
Maiden, she might not care at all. 
One bright spot in his life had become his secret correspondence 
following the answer he'd sent on impulse to a personals ad one night. He 

 57 
saw no reason to discontinue it yet. He and Lily had not set the final date 
for their union ceremony. She agreed with him it was wise to wait until they 
could afford a down payment on a home. Now that she was certain of him, 
there seemed no end to her patience. 
The Moon Maiden had enclosed a photosynthegraph with her first letter, 
revealing she was well grown and as pale as her namesake, yet every bit as 
lovely as any normal, green Veganette he had known. Lily was also a fine 
grown woman, but something about Moon Maiden caught his eye as never 
before. The human girl was, in essence, forbidden fruit, and he was sorely 
tempted. 
It was more than her beauty that held such allure for him, however, for 
he found her letters as enticing as her form. More than once he found 
himself recalling the Elder's words to him about cross-pollination. But that 
was only foolish fancy. What matter how intelligent or pretty she was since 
they were light years apart? 
Plant folk were not disposed to planet hopping, and even had he the 
unlimited merrygolds required for such a trip, other societies were not 
generally compatible with his kind. Most did not even recognize them as 
people. Herb recalled horror stories of past visitors who had actually 
uprooted saplings. It was nothing less than the murder of innocents, yet 
those who committed the acts claimed all ignorance of wrong doing, saying 
they had only "picked a few flowers." 
Because they were protected by the code of Intergalactic Immunity, 
there had been no punishment for the heinous crime, but the government 
had made entry to Paradise difficult to obtain thereafter. A native had to 
vouch for any visitor that set foot on P#23 soil. 
With the new restrictions in force, interest in the small sphere as a 
vacation spot soon waned, and the little planetoid eventually shrank from 
public notice. No one appeared to mind very much. The few offworlders 
that did venture here, did so mainly on business. The home grown 
atmosphere was tame for more adventurous travellers. 
Moon Maiden was cut from a different vine, Herb was convinced. For one 
thing, she had studied all manner of plant life and respected it greatly. A 
pity more of her kind did not share her open-minded views. Not only was 

 58 
she extremely interested in hearing about Dr. Gell and the history of 
Paradise, but she urged Herb to reveal more about himself, as she thought 
he was "fascinating." 
Lily had never told Herb he was fascinating. In fact, she was not the 
type of woman given to ready compliments. The nearest thing to flattery 
she had ever said was that he was "tall, green, and healthy." But that was 
so cliché, anyone could say that. "Fascinating." He liked that. 

 59 
8 
 
 
 
The planet wasn't always known as Kamalot, nor was it actually a planet, 
but a large meteorite of some hundreds of miles in diameter that had been 
trapped in orbit around Tarnaria, one of the obscure stars near the Cone 
Nebula. 
A pheric generator had been placed in the core, making a breathable 
atmosphere. This was a device of enormous expense, and only a few large 
companies would go to such extremes for exploration, most still preferring 
more economical life suits or oxy bubbles. It was considered a waste of 
money and resources; therefore, no such company had done so. But the 
local Tarnarian government had. 
It was their theory the meteorite would be useful as a combination 
observatory and military base, and they had stationed troops there for a 
short time. As closer moons were later made available, they discovered it 
was unnecessarily wasteful to maintain, and all in all, there wasn't that 
much to observe either. Eventually it was abandoned and placed on the 
market. 
The pheric generator was left intact as the base wouldn't be worth much 
without it, and once installed, such units were virtually a part of the planet 
with all the underground connectors. The cost of removal was prohibitive. 
The new administration had all but given up hope of finding someone to 
appreciate the property's unique possibilities, when a very rich, eccentric 

 60 
magician made an offer that was ludicrously low. But it was an offer. 
In order to erase the blot of the previous administration's foible, it was 
quickly and quietly sold to one Zygote, who was of unknown origin. In 
matters of that sort, in effect cash in hand, it was not prudent to pry too 
deeply. Doubtless he would put the base to good use. 
Zygote set about using all the scientific and magical powers at his 
command to decorate his new home, and they were considerable. He was 
rather traditional in taste, and built a fine medieval castle for his home and 
headquarters, making it resplendent with tall towers and secret passages. 
He landscaped the exterior with loving care, adding a forest here, a 
mountain there, and tied it all up with rocks and rills for a flawless fairy tale 
setting. Just the right sort of environment a magician could comfortably 
wave his wand over. 
Zygote's planetoid was peopled with unusual beings, some from far 
planets, and some from imagination. He envisioned a world of his own 
where all were loyal subjects, ever ready to do his bidding at the drop of a 
spell. It might have been strange, odd, eerie, and even extravagant, but to 
Zygote it was simply "home." 
Magic could take one only so far, he soon discovered. An undertaking of 
that magnitude also required a certain amount of hard, cold cash. Magically 
produced Planetary Payment notes were regrettably detectable. Every 
establishment was equipped with a Forgery Scanner for all incoming notes. 
Zygote had been forced to travel extensively, from planet to planet, plying 
his trade, and earning an honest living. A sorry lot for one of his talents. 
Now it was there on Kamalot, in one of the high towers containing the 
library of his magical tomes, that Zygote sat gazing out the window, master 
of all he surveyed. There was a great deal he could not survey, of course, 
but that small deficiency was taken care of by the two large eyes set into 
the front gate of the castle walls overlooking the moat. No one could enter 
unseen, as that was the only access to the castle. The surrounding moat 
was filled with beasts and unpleasant spells that made it undesirable for 
swimming. Zygote felt ever so secure. 
Now he thumbed thoughtfully through some of Gabriel's papers stolen 
from the late magician's files. Most of the files were protected by 

 61 
confidence spells and written in magical codes. Some were protected by 
curses as well. It was not an easy task to pry into another magician's 
private papers. He reflected for a moment on that challenge. 
Once, Zygote had invoked a counterspell, thinking the code broken, only 
to have a vicious wasp fly through the tower window and attack with 
supernatural fury. Fortunately for him, he had been wearing a protective 
amulet, rendering the stings painless and impotent. 
Another time, he almost had one seal broken when it suddenly burst into 
flame, destroying the entire document. He made a note to be far more 
careful in the future, or the valuable information he sought would disappear 
into smoke before his eyes. 
If it wasn't so annoying, he could almost admire the late Gabriel's efforts 
to protect his secrets so zealously; it was hard to properly appreciate such 
steps when one was dodging balls of fire, hosts of ghosts, and tar and 
feathers. Gabriel had been a cunning old devil despite his angelic 
namesake. In fact, Zygote was sorry that the ornery cuss had rebuffed his 
offer of friendship and cooperation. He was truly sorry that the man had 
died rather than yield. Because he really did respect what Gabriel had done. 
Zygote had fallen upon news of Gabriel's work by a stroke of sheer luck. 
When attending the last New Landers Magicians and Medical Doctors 
conference, Gabriel had been so secretive about his projects, he had 
inadvertently piqued Zygote's interest. If it was that good, it had to be 
profitable. He had tried to worm his way into the good doctor's graces, but 
to no avail. 
While rabbit's feet and four leaf clovers were all well and good, a well 
concealed microphone in Gabriel's lab had yielded a far better harvest than 
expected. It was in that way he had detected that the doctor's daughter, 
Spring, was somehow connected with the vital information he sought. 
Unfortunately, Gabriel discovered the technical device, and that tipped 
his hand. He managed to spirit her off the planet before Zygote had a 
chance at her. He regretted not using a magical device instead, a spy 
spider, for instance. But no, that fool Elton had installed the microphone 
without his instructions, and it was too dangerous to go back. 
Too bad Gabriel was no longer around to lend assistance, but that 

 62 
heavy-handed female he hired had gotten carried away with her duties. 
Then Elton had finished the job. He was young, and the young always grew 
impatient. Now he was attempting to make up for his blunder by tracking 
down Gabriel's elusive daughter to return her for interrogation. 
Zygote had made it clear he would brook no violence in her case. If the 
key to the information was as he had surmised from pieces of broken 
codes, it might be the most pleasant interrogation he had ever conducted. 
Zygote ceased his reverie and bent once more to the task of removing 
the troublesome spells, cursing anew as a three-headed snake slithered 
across the floor toward him. He took off all three heads with one quick slice 
of his enchanted sword. Preparation. That was the key to a magician's long 
life. Smiling, he replaced the sword in its scabbard as the snake puffed into 
smoke and disappeared. 
His smile was replaced by an expression of surprise as he felt a sprinkle 
of wetness. A sudden storm brewing? He glanced to the window but no 
rain was blowing in. The sun was shining as brightly as it always did unless 
he decreed otherwise with a rain spell. 
He looked upward, then brought out a kerchief and wiped some sticky 
residue from his eyelid. He held the cloth beneath his nose and sniffed. 
Really-Gabriel had pressed the boundaries of good taste this time. Zygote 
pulled an umbrella from beneath the table and sighed as he opened it 
above his head. There was nothing to do but wait out the shower of bird 
dung. 

 63 
9 
 
 
 
Spring paced the floor of her small room awaiting Iolanthe's return. She 
had another letter to send and knew the lightship had landed. There 
wouldn't be another one for three months, so timing was critical. It went on 
alternate cycles of coming every other week for three months, then 
skipping three. 
She had been lucky to have timed her first inquiry on the frequent cycle 
because it allowed her to have answers quickly. It was vitally important 
that Iolanthe smuggle this last one out. 
Spring had decided to visit Herb of P#23 in three months when the ship 
returned. That would give him time to prepare for their meeting and for her 
to plan her departure so that Zygote would be none the wiser. 
She had pushed her luck by remaining in one place for so long. Now that 
her father was gone, for all she knew Zygote might have found clues to her 
hideaway among Gabriel's papers. That wasn't too likely, as he had been so 
intent on strict secrecy, but there was nothing more she could accomplish 
by staying on with the gentle Companions of New Moon now. 
It was time to be getting on with her plan of revenge. Zygote had been 
spared her wrath far too long. There was not a moment of the day that she 
did not feel the bitterness of her father's loss. Zygote must be made to 
suffer as she was suffering. It wasn't much to live for, but it would have to 
do. 

 64 
Yet, Spring did not feel right plotting such mayhem among the peaceful 
people of New Moon. They had granted her refuge when she was in need, 
and in return she had defied their rules and betrayed their trust. Now she 
was corrupting poor little Iolanthe by having her post letters to the outside. 
And she must do it again one last time. It was necessary the letter to Herb 
get to that lightship. 
By mid-afternoon Spring began to worry in earnest. Where could 
Iolanthe be? It was not like the girl to be absent for so long. Spring began 
to have premonitions of disaster, but tried to push them aside. Nerves were 
her worst enemy. If she began to worry about her safety she would never 
get the job done. Poking around in the small pouch of crystals, she brought 
out a polished white moonstone. She must calm down. 
It was not until the dinner hour that Iolanthe entered, carrying a tray of 
fresh bread and vegetable chowder. She seemed distraught. 
"Where have you been?" Spring exclaimed accusingly. "I was frantic. I 
was afraid the lightship would leave before you posted my letter." She 
pulled it from her pocket and thrust it at Iolanthe. 
The girl took the letter and sat down beside Spring at the small table. 
"Oh, Lady. What a day this has been. Usually, we only have supplies from 
the ship unless there is a Pledge." 
"Pledge? Oh, you mean a new Companion?" Spring said. 
"Yes, but-" Iolanthe sighed. 
"What happened? Is something wrong?" Spring asked worriedly. 
"Yes and no. There was a man, a visitor." 
"A man?" Spring said in surprise. "I understood no men were allowed to 
enter the Companion's sanctuary?" 
"Yes, that is so. Companion Alma explained and explained to the captain 
of the lightship that it is not permitted, but the visitor was a very important, 
rich person and he kept insisting. Still, Companion Alma refused. She did 
agree, however, to meet with him at the lightport where the supplies are 
unloaded." 
Spring took a spoonful of the thick white soup and a bit of the bread. 
Simple fare, but delicious. "And did that satisfy the visitor?" she asked. 
"No, but it was the best he could do. You know Companion Alma. When 

 65 
she says a thing, she means it." 
"Oh yes, I know," Spring agreed, smiling. Companion Alma was a short, 
little white-haired woman in her late sixties. She had rosy cheeks and the 
face of an angel, and had never raised her voice in her lifetime as far as 
Spring knew. Yet, all the Companions jumped to her least command as if 
she were Attila the Martian. "So, was she able to help him?" she asked. 
"Not really. He said he was seeking his cousin, a young woman who had 
journeyed here about five months ago. He said her mother had fallen 
gravely ill and it was needful for the daughter to return home before it was 
too late. A sad story." 
An uneasy feeling began to come over Spring as she picked at the food. 
"Did Companion Alma know this girl?" she asked. 
"No, she couldn't be of any help. Obviously, that girl must have gone to 
some other retreat. No one has joined us since you. Until today. We had 
one new Pledge aboard, also. But Companion Alma is aware that your 
mother is deceased and now your father, so of course, it could not be you." 
Iolanthe babbled on about how rude the visitor became at not being 
allowed to come see for himself, and how Companion Alma made short 
work of putting him into his proper place. Spring felt a chill run down her 
spine. It was odd timing that a stranger, a man, would come asking 
questions... 
"Iolanthe," she interrupted, "Do you know what this man looked like? 
Was he an older man? Tall and thin with a sharp grey beard?" Iolanthe 
laughed. "Oh no, Lady." 
Spring breathed easier. Perhaps she was unduly nervous. For one awful 
moment she had been fearful that Zygote had managed to find her. Still- 
"How do you know? Were you there?" Spring asked. 
"Well," 
Iolanthe 
said, 
scooting 
her 
chair 
closer 
and 
looking 
conspiratorially at Spring. "I really should not mention this." 
"Go on. You have me curious now," Spring urged. 
"It could not have been such a man as you describe because I did see 
him. Companion Alma was so long at the lightport that some of us grew 
worried and went down to join her. This man was not old at all. He was 
youthful and clean shaven. Yet, we could not help but laugh at him, though 

 66 
that was surely not a kind thing to do." She laughed again in remembrance, 
and quickly put her hand over her mouth. 
"I don't understand," Spring said. "A young, clean shaven man. What 
was so funny?" 
"Well, he was so upset. He would not believe Companion Alma at first. 
He was absolutely positive that his cousin was here." 
"Oh, he made a scene, did he?" 
"And how. But, he was so funny. He had such a high voice for a man, 
and even went so far as to stamp his feet. He was a small, little man, yes, 
but he acted more like a girl. One of the Companions, Leah, said she had 
seen such men, and that they really aren't men. Or women. They come 
from a distant planet-Oh." Iolanthe stopped and reached out to catch the 
water glass as it tumbled from Spring's hand, crashing to the floor. It broke 
into scattered fragments as Iolanthe cried out and jumped back, but Spring 
had not moved. She sat staring straight ahead as if she didn't even notice. 
"Why, you're as pale as a ghost, Lady," Iolanthe exclaimed. 

 67 
10 
 
 
 
 Are you certain that little man is as evil as you say?" Iolanthe asked. 
"He was strange, but seemed harmless." 
"Yes, well. So did Dr. Jekyll until he turned into Mr. Hyde," Spring said. 
"Who?" Iolanthe asked, puzzled. 
"Never mind. It's an old story. I have to get away before he finds me," 
"But the only way out is on the lightship, and he is on it too," Iolanthe 
protested. 
"But if I don't go, he'll be back. Probably with goons like the ones who 
killed my father. Somehow they'll find a way to get in, now they suspect 
I'm here. I don't- want anyone else hurt on my account, and they aren't the 
sort to care who they have to step on to get to me." 
"We will protect you." 
"No, you can't. I've already imposed on the Companions far too long 
anyway. I won't endanger you. There has to be a way to get past him." But 
what way could there be? Iolanthe thought for a moment; then a 
mischievous smile spread across her features. "Maybe there is." She 
clapped her hands. "Companion Alma would put me in solitary a month!" 
"Why, Iolanthe," Spring said, smiling. "Just what did you have in mind?" 
 
Spring took her seat on the lightship toward the rear of her 
compartment, trying to look unobtrusive and fade into the woodwork. 

 68 
There was no wood on lightships, of course, but it was the thought that 
counted. 
The dark stain on her arms had blended in beautifully and her face was 
painted in blue with white stripes in the custom of Tyranian males. The 
hood partially covered her face, and her hair was wrapped tightly in a 
turban-like swath of cloth beneath it. 
It was a little hard to breathe naturally after Iolanthe had bound her 
breasts flat with more cloth and adhesive strips, but it would be worth it all 
if she could pass for a man until reaching her destination. Iolanthe had 
sewn the costume using a photo from one of the magazines Spring had 
found under her bed. They picked out the Tyranian because it was the 
most concealing look they could find. Many of the offworlder males wore 
little or nothing to conceal their muscles, but for Spring's purpose, the less 
revealed, the better. The shoulder pads gave her body a more masculine 
look, and the boots added height. The hardest part was when they had 
painstakingly cut and glued on a moustache from the milk goat's tail. All 
things considered, it was not a bad disguise. 
She had to remember not to cross her legs in a ladylike manner when 
sitting, and to watch how she walked. The natural feminine swing of her 
hips could easily betray her gender if she wasn't on guard. Spring hoped 
she had entered with a proper male swagger as she slumped down in the 
seat, unconcernedly letting her legs fall apart. It would almost be fun if it 
weren't so serious. One slip and all would be lost. 
Elton might be slime, but he was no dunce. He might even suspect she 
would try to escape on the ship after his attempt to enter the sanctuary. 
She had not seen any sign of him so far; he was probably in one of the 
expensive compartments. That was the main reason she had opted for 
simple accommodations in the budget section. All she needed was to be 
stuck in the same compartment with him all the way to the next stop. 
There was an attractive redhead in the seat next to hers giving her the 
once-over. In theory, it was easier to deceive a man about her sex than 
another woman. A female might recognize another however well she 
contrived to conceal herself. Spring averted her eyes and closed them as if 
resting. 

 69 
This lightship, like many others of its ilk, concealed a modern technology 
in a shroud of nostalgia. The USS Orion, Universal Star Ship, resembled a 
luxury coach train, an archaic mode of transportation employed by the 
wealthy ancients who must have had much time to spend in travelling to 
their destinations. 
Quaint it might be, but it presented another unwanted aspect to the trip. 
She would have to go to a common dining facility for her meals. That would 
put her on display before more people than she cared for. Perhaps even 
Elton. 
While that was one confrontation she relished, the timing was not yet 
right. She needed time to formulate the method of her retaliation, and she 
would have none should he discover her true nature now. She was 
confident he would be travelling with a goon or two to do his dirty work for 
him. 
Spring avoided the dining area for as long as possible, but a gnawing 
hunger finally forced her to risk it. She ordered what she hoped was a fast 
preparation dish from the robot menu at her table. When it came, she ate 
without pause so as to vacate quickly. She finished and had entered the 
narrow corridor leading back to her compartment when someone came 
bolting around the corner, stopping just short of crashing into her. 
The young man muttered a quick and insincere apology, then looked up 
scowling to see who had caused his inconvenience. Elton. The one person 
she hoped to avoid. She was not a tall girl but with the boots she was 
almost on an even eye level with the small Ki. 
"Sorry," she muttered roughly, hoping her voice would not betray her. 
She had managed to avoid all speech until now, even to punching in her 
dinner order on the robot to bypass a waiter. Elton did not move aside, 
however, but stood looking at her appraisingly. Spring perspired beneath 
the paint and costume. Her heart was pounding like a hammer. All this 
trouble and he knew. 
"Oh, not at all, young Sir," Elton said. "It was clearly my own fault, 
charging through these narrow passages like a rocket." He laughed and 
gave her an odd look. Suddenly she realized. He was flirting with her-him. 
She had forgotten he had no gender preference, so anyone was fair game. 

 70 
She tried to look indifferent, and moved aside to let him pass. Still he 
lingered. 
"You know," he continued, "there aren't many passengers aboard of our 
age, and these trips can grow monotonous after a bit. What say we meet in 
the Smoker later, since you've had your meal and I am about to have 
mine?" 
A date with Elton? Swallowing her fury and revulsion, she opened her 
mouth to decline. "I-" 
"Now, I won't take no for an answer. You can't have anything better to 
do in that cramped compartment." He had noticed the ID badge labeling 
her for the economy section, and evidently knew what space that allotted. 
Hardly any. "I will even share my Havanoz with you," he offered 
magnanimously. 
Havanoz. That was a brand of very good, very expensive, very hard to 
obtain cigar, much prized throughout the system. Even Spring, a 
nonsmoker, had heard of them. 
"How-kind. But I couldn't allow you-" she began again, and was again 
cut off. 
"Oh, but I insist. What pleasure do the finer things afford any of us, if 
we cannot share them with others?" He smiled sickeningly. 
Spring was in a quandary. Elton was determined to share her company. 
If she protested too much, he might get suspicious and look for other 
reasons for her rejection. Reluctantly, she chose the lesser of two evils. 
"Very well," she agreed in her fake voice. 
"Splendid. Shall we say in, oh, an hour?" 
Spring nodded and pushed by him, escaping with relief to her tiny 
compartment. The girl had stepped out and she was alone. That was also a 
relief. She wished no further testing of her disguise for the moment. 
The time flew by on sonic wings and before she had fully assessed the 
situation, it was time for the meeting with Elton. Elton, the loathsome little 
snake who had in all likelihood been a part of her father's murder. 
She wished she had her crystal pendant to touch and calm down with, 
but Tyranian men did not wear jewelry. Painted symbols on the face were 
their only adornment. The pendant was packed carefully away in a small 

 71 
travel bag along with her other stones. It was the first time in many years 
that she had been without it, her favorite gift from her father. The image of 
his face now flashed before her, giving her new incentive. She decided to 
get the unpleasant meeting over with. 
When Spring arrived in the Smoker, she spotted Elton seated in a booth 
toward the rear of the large compartment. She sauntered over with her 
best male gait and bowed slightly to him in greeting. He rose and politely 
motioned for her to take the seat across from him, then drew out an 
elaborate case from inside his apparel. 
Opening it, he offered her first choice of his prized cigars. She looked at 
them dubiously. Did he actually expect her to smoke that ugly thing? 
Naturally, as he had said as much earlier, but she had been so concerned 
with her close proximity with him, that she had completely blocked out the 
pretext for their meeting. 
"Don't be shy, my friend. Your choice." He shoved the case under her 
nose. She looked them over and selected the smallest and thinnest among 
them. They were all hand rolled, so differed slightly in size, but it was still a 
brute. 
Spring was not a smoker, even though tobacco had been refined to a 
non-lethal version of its ancient ancestor. There was no danger of cancer or 
lung disorders, but it remained a questionable occupation in her mind. She 
had studied tobacco as well as other recreational plants, but considered 
smoking to be a silly, rather nasty habit, used to waste time by those with 
nothing better to do than light a fire beneath their nose. She observed as 
Elton picked out a somewhat fat one, wet the end, and bit off a tiny piece. 
She tried to emulate his actions, then paused as he offered her a light 
from his golden case. Spring wasn't sure what to do, but drew in the flame 
and puffed out the smoke as she recalled others doing. Elton then lit his, 
miraculously not noting how awkward she was with the process. At least 
she didn't have to converse while puffing on the abominable thing. 
Elton took the lead in conversation, however, remarking on the service 
of the lightship and mentioning that although a seasoned traveller, he 
missed the companionship of friends and how glad he was to have met 
Spring. 

 72 
This brought on late introductions, as they had not done so in the 
hallway. She gave a typical one syllable name of the Tyranian man from the 
magazine, Mank. Elton introduced himself as "Zygote, the Great. Magician 
extraordinary." 
The little twerp! He was trading on his master's notorious reputation to 
make himself more appealing to her. Fat chance. Neither of that distasteful 
duo could have been more repulsive if they had been Venusian devil fish. 
"Magician?" She smiled insincerely. "How impressive." Liar. "How is it 
you came to be on this voyage?" 
"I had some unfinished business to conclude on New Moon," he 
answered suavely. 
She just bet he did. "And did you conclude it successfully?" 
"That's hard to say. I may have. Time will tell." 
Yes, thought Spring. He was probably running home to Zygote to report 
she was stranded at the sanctuary, then would return with a force of goons 
to take her by force, if need be. 
"How fortunate for you," she said insincerely. 
"Yes," he agreed, smiling. "And unfortunate for others. But I am more 
interested in you. Care for another smoke?" 
Spring hadn't noticed how fast the thing had shrunk with her constant 
puffing. "No. I mean, no thank you. It was, uh, excellent." Actually, it was 
like sucking on a burnt dish rag. 
"I am so pleased you enjoyed it," Elton said. "The aroma is delicious, is it 
not?" He blew a puff her way. 
Trying not to gag, she inhaled, and forced a smile. "Ah yes. Indeed." For 
those who liked the smell of fried cat fur, she thought. 
Spring listened vacantly as Elton talked on and on, finally hoping she had 
spent sufficient time with him in order to leave gracefully. She was 
beginning to feel a bit woozy, and attributed it to tension. Even so, she 
would feel better back in her own compartment, away from the little toad. 
It wasn't his sexual adaption that appalled her: after all, aliens had 
different standards of morality that could not be fairly compared with her 
own. No, Elton earned her disgust as a slime sucking lowlife on his own 
merits. As she arose to depart, she felt herself sway slightly and reached 

 73 
out to grip the side of the booth. 
"Are you ill?" asked Elton, solicitously, reaching for her arm. 
"I do feel somewhat strange. I did not have my usual rest last night," 
she said, concerned, "and am doubtless fatigued." 
"Then I must see you to your compartment." He beamed. 
Wonderful. "No, it is nothing at all," she protested, turning abruptly and 
causing her head to swim violently. Elton steadied her so she did not fall. 
"Now, I must insist, dear fellow. In fact, why don't I take you to my 
private compartment instead? It's such a long way back to yours, and I 
know that I could make you," he paused, "very comfortable." 
Spring panicked at the thought. Venusian devil fish were looking better 
all the time. This meeting had been disastrous. The last thing she needed 
was to be incapacitated and alone at the mercy of that little leech. 
If he tried making a pass, and it was inevitable under the circumstances, 
she wasn't sure she had the strength to fend him off in her condition. Her 
mind was racing, but she could think of nothing to stop the chain of events. 
Suddenly, she felt another hand touch her shoulder. It was the redhead 
from her compartment. 
"You seem ill, Sir," she said. "I would be glad to assist you back to our 
compartment as I go." 
Blessed break for the home team! Spring opened her mouth to accept. 
"No need, young woman," Elton said, looking daggers at her. "I am 
taking my friend to my compartment, as it is much closer." 
"Oh, but I am a trained nurse. I think he should go straight to bed for 
the night." She tugged Spring in the opposite direction. Now Spring knew 
how a wishbone felt. 
But she had to assert herself, or she would be lost. "I think that is wise. 
I should turn in. But I thank you, sir," she said, holding on to the redhead 
like a lifeline, hoping not to swoon before she could exit. 
There was nothing more Elton could say, but his tone betrayed his 
annoyance. "Very well. Perhaps we could meet tomorrow, after you have 
rested?" 
"Perhaps," answered Spring. And perhaps she would run naked through 
the corridors juggling oranges, but the chances were just as remote. She 

 74 
clung gratefully to her rescuer as they proceeded at a slow pace toward 
their mutual compartment. 
"You don't look good," observed the girl. "I think you shouldn't smoke 
any more of those weeds you were puffing like a smokestack." 
The cigar. They might no longer be a health risk, but they did have side 
effects for the uninitiated. No wonder she felt so awful! 
"I'm not a smoker," she confessed. 
The girl opened the door and led her inside. Spring looked up in surprise. 
"This isn't our compartment." 
"No, it's a private lounge. You know, for businessmen and rich old 
biddies to meet and gossip." 
"Then why are we stopping here?" she asked. 
"That little priss was right about one thing. You need to lie down." She 
led Spring to the narrow chaise lounge, where she collapsed, thankfully. It 
did feel good to get her head out of the sky. She turned onto her stomach 
and shut her eyes. 
"How did you get mixed up with that Ki anyway? It's obvious he had 
designs on you, but you don't strike me as one to prefer that type." 
"I don't prefer him, or her, or whatever it is. He disgusts me." 
"I thought so. That's why I horned in like I did. I have a confession. I'm 
not a nurse at all. And I will take you back to our compartment when you 
feel a little steadier on your feet." 
"Thank you," Spring said, shutting her eyes again. "I'm sure it will pass." 
Suddenly, she felt two feminine hands at the back of her neck, 
massaging her padded shoulders. Spring's eyes popped open. "What are 
you doing?" 
"Just trying to relax you," said the girl. "You know, you have small bone 
structure for a man." 
It did feel good, but she couldn't risk discovery of her phony muscles. 
"Thanks, but I'd rather you didn't-" She didn't finish the sentence for at that 
moment she felt not hands but lips kissing the back of her neck. 
Leaping from the chaise lounge, head reeling, she turned on her 
companion with wide eyes flashing. 
"You kissed me," she accused. 

 75 
The redhead stood bemused for a moment, then burst into laughter. "I 
don't know what your game is, but you are no man, sister," she said. 
"Maybe not, but I do prefer them," Spring said, backing toward the door. 
"Yeah? Me too," said the girl. 
"But, if you knew I wasn't a man, why did you do that?" she asked, 
confused more than ever. 
"To test your reaction, I guess. I thought there was something different 
about you when you first came on the ship, but I couldn't figure it out. 
Aliens are different, so I could have been wrong. But I wasn't, was I?" 
"I guess this disguise wasn't such a good idea," sighed Spring. 
"Oh no, you make a great Tyranian. You sure fooled that Ki creep, right? 
It's just that I am the suspicious kind. I like to know what makes people 
tick. It's kind of a hobby of mine, human nature." 
"Can I ask you to keep your discovery private? It's very important," 
Spring said. 
"Are you in trouble? Or maybe you just want to avoid male attention on 
a long trip?" 
"Yes," Spring said. 
"That's a definite answer. Well, I don't believe you're a criminal. Too 
naive. Tell you what. If your unwelcome Romeo comes calling again, just 
signal and I'll come running." She smiled and held out a hand for a shake. 
Spring accepted gratefully. It could be the edge she needed to get past 
Elton until she could reach her plant man. 
True to her offer, the girl stayed close by Spring for the remainder of the 
trip, keeping an eye out for Elton. It looked as if he had lost interest, for he 
didn't approach her in her compartment, nor had she run into him in the 
dining room. 
But one evening when she was returning from the evening meal her luck 
took a sudden dive. 
Elton was coming straight down the narrow corridor toward her. His eyes 
were glued to papers in his hands so he had not yet spotted her, but there 
could be no escape this time. Her friend usually accompanied her, but was 
resting this evening with a headache. Spring had given her a gemstone 
with directions to help eradicate the pain. 

 76 
Spring knew she would be hard pressed to put Elton off a second time. 
Especially when he had her cornered alone. And of course, if he was 
expecting a male reception, there was no way she could comply, even had 
she so strangely desired to do so. The fact was, her disguise wouldn't go 
that far. She lacked the basic equipment, and he would find that out quickly 
and then realize who she really was. The fox hunt would be over. 
He was still engrossed in whatever it was he was reading, so was 
advancing very slowly. There was no time to run back, though, and that 
was his destination besides. 
Suddenly, she spied a small hatch at the side of the corridor. Spring 
shoved and it gave. Bending down, for it was only about three feet from 
floor level, she pushed against it and ducked inside. Instead of stepping out 
on the opposite side as expected, however, she plunged straight down into 
darkness. 

 77 
11 
 
 
 
It was a shaft. Now she'd gone and done it. "Out of the frying pan into 
the fire," as her late father was fond of quoting. It was an Old World saying 
that until that moment she had never fully appreciated. 
Fortunately, it wasn't a straight drop. It slanted forward toward the 
center of the ship, causing her to slide down, rather than plunge the 
descent. 
She came to an abrupt stop on something soft. It was alive. Giving an 
indignant squeal, it scurried off into the dark with scratchy feet. With the 
unquestionable intuition women have about such things, Spring 
immediately identified it as a smouse. Those were small, fuzzy rodents 
considered more as pests than a danger, but the thought of touching one 
still gave her the shivers. 
Where in the universe was she? Her eyes were slowly growing 
accustomed to the darkness. Objects began to come into focus as her night 
vision increased. It didn't especially help. It looked as if she had landed on 
top of a huge room full of junk. 
Paper and debris of all kinds made a sort of mountain upon which she 
tried to stand. It wasn't easy, for the footing was slippery, and worse, she 
nearly slid down between a loose section. If not careful, she could end up 
buried under all that trash. Trash? Had she mistakenly jumped into a 
garbage bin? How brilliant! The question was, how to get out of it. 

 78 
More smouses rustled in the loose papers nearby, but seemed as content 
to avoid her as she was glad to have them do so. She tried yelling at the 
top of her lungs, but realized no one would hear her in there. Who would 
be listening to a pile of junk? 
Besides, the noise of the ship's mechanics were rumbling like thunder at 
the moment. It would be virtually impossible for anyone to hear over the 
din that the machinery was- 
Machinery? 
Spring was no expert in the dynamics of spacecraft, but she did know 
that lightships were practically soundless. They ran on waves or something. 
There should be no rumbling engines to make those kinds of sounds. But if 
it wasn't the engines, then what was it? And more than that, what was 
happening? 
Added to the present noise was the sound of swirling papers. Looking 
upward, she saw some of the top layer of the junk begin to rise. It followed 
a spiraling pattern upward toward the center of the high ceiling where it 
was being sucked into some type of-shredder? No, it would have to be a 
disintegrator. So that was how they disposed of all the garbage in space. 
Interesting. And if she didn't find a way to escape very soon, she would see 
its workings close up. 
The lighter materials and papers were drawn up first; it was probably put 
on a lower suction to start, and then given more power for the heavy debris 
like packing cases, old furniture, and stupid people. 
That meant there was still a little time to try forming a plan. There might 
be a way to climb back up into the chute, at least until the machinery 
abated. It must run in cycles since it wasn't running when she first landed. 
If she could avoid this cycle, it might be several hours until the next began 
and that time would give her a fighting chance to escape. 
Spring finally located the small opening she had tumbled through, but it 
was now far over her head. The level of the mountain was slowly 
diminishing while more papers flew up into the giant vacuum. How to reach 
it? 
The suction increased again with a roar, and papers flew violently by her 
toward their demise. She had to bat them from her face as they swarmed 

 79 
around like angry bees. They stung, too. Her hands already showed tiny 
beads of blood from the sharp edges. It was a slow process, but given 
enough time, she could probably die from paper cuts. 
Spring tried vainly piling up armloads of the trash to rebuild her 
mountain beneath the opening. It was futile, for the suction undid her work 
as fast as she built it up. What she needed was more heavy material, but 
that was buried under the lighter papers, their weight sliding them down as 
they lost support. There was simply no easy way of reaching the portal. 
Well, maybe not that particular one, but the ship was on several levels. 
It should have chutes at each. There were two more levels beneath the 
dining area, so if she positioned herself directly beneath the present 
opening and rode the mountain downward, eventually she should find a 
second shaft to dive into. 
The roar of the machinery was growing deafening as the suction 
increased for a third time. Some of the lower debris flew up and around the 
center, resembling an indoor tornado. It was all she could do to keep her 
position next to the rim as the papers beneath gave way. 
At least the suction kept new arrivals of trash from falling on her head, 
as they were quickly sucked up into the swirling torrent. Fortunately it had 
all been lightweight trash. 
Pieces of boxes and broken dishes slammed into the walls around her. 
She squatted as low as possible while most of the rubble was drawn above 
her head. She took a blow to one arm from the edge of a box, but it would 
leave no more than a nasty bruise. The worst part was that her support 
was disappearing and she was beginning to feel lighter. She needed more 
weight. 
Squatting and digging about desperately, her hands struck something 
solid. It was an ugly old chair, dirty and natty, with the fibers hanging out. 
It was beautiful. Spring wrapped her arms around and under the sides of it 
and ceased her assent. It had worked. 
For a while. She descended faster, but the suction grew stronger and her 
position more precarious with each passing moment. Suddenly, she felt 
herself beginning to rise. Her foot struck a hard object at the side. It was 
an old nutrition robot. 

 80 
Holding on to the chair with her left arm, she slid her right one into the 
ejection slot of the robot. Ugh, she touched something fuzzy. A smouse. 
Spring dropped the unit as the rodent leaped out, landing near her foot and 
scrambling off. She shot suddenly upward. 
Quickly kicking out with her foot, she jammed it into the slot before it 
was out of reach. Bending back down, she replaced her foot with her right 
arm again, and this time there were no resident rodents to chase her out. 
The upward thrust had ended. 
Safe once again, she reoriented on the now distant hole above, making 
sure she was still on target. According to her calculations she should be 
nearing the second chute, if there was one. But what if they weren't evenly 
aligned? What if it was in a completely different spot? She should have 
been watching the other walls as well. What if she had already passed by 
it? 
"Spring, this is not the time to panic," she said aloud. Inwardly, she 
realized there was probably not going to be a better one. All at once, she 
stopped her downward slide as one of the chair legs caught on something 
at the side. The chute. She had almost missed it in her panic. 
Crawling past the chair into the shaft, she gave it a kick and it joined the 
nutrition robot in an upward spiral as it succumbed to the now fierce 
suction. When she had a house of her own someday, she would get a chair 
just like that one, and damn the decorator. 
It was a relief to be in out of the trash storm, but it was time to begin 
the next challenge, the climb up and out of the shaft. It should not be too 
hard. It was at a slanting angle, and not straight up until the very end. 
Removing her shoes and letting them fall down through the slot, she 
braced her toes against the hard metal. They gave a better traction than 
her thick-soled slickers. Good name for them. 
Progress was slow, but with patience and proper positioning, she made a 
steady headway. Then there was a distant scraping sound from above. 
Sound? Maybe the exit was closer than she thought? Spring strained her 
eyes in the darkness. There was a darker shadow closing in with the noise. 
No. That was the source. A looming shape sliding directly for her. A huge 
unit of some type-a cooling unit? Some of the reflective light tubes were 

 81 
still working. Those things weighed a ton. 
Hardly thinking, she edged back to the wall of the shaft and turned on 
her side, pressing in as closely as she could. In seconds it whooshed past, 
missing her by centimeters. She stayed frozen for a minute. It was a 
miracle it had missed. It could have sent her flying back down into the junk 
heap, probably crushing her skull in the process. She lay trembling, 
realizing how close she'd come to a senseless death. 
Spring moved carefully forward, listening for sounds as if her life 
depended on it. Because it did. No more missiles came shooting from 
above, though, and with slow deliberation she at last reached the opening 
and pressed outward. 
It wouldn't give. 
"Idiot," she screamed. Of course it wouldn't open. It needed pressure 
from the outside, but was static from the back. 
She banged with frustration on the inside of the small door as hard as 
she could with only one hand. She needed the other one to grip the edge 
of the shaft, while scotching her feet against the sides. The drop was 
straight down from the entrance. 
She tried yelling, then screaming. Even Elton would be welcome at this 
point. It was soon evident no one could hear her, and she couldn't hear 
anything from the outside either. What if it was sound proof? To have come 
so close to escape and gain nothing. Tears of frustration and fear began to 
form, running silently down her cheeks in the darkness. 
She winced as light flashed brightly through the open door, almost 
releasing her tenuous grip on the edge. Luckily, she was holding with both 
hands, having given up on banging. Two strong male arms reached down 
and drew her up and out into the ship's corridor. Her redheaded friend 
stood looking on anxiously as the maintenance ensign helped to steady 
Spring on her feet. 
"How did you know?" she asked the girl, while holding tight to the 
ensign's sleeve and bracing against the wall. Her knees still wanted to 
wobble. Her bare toes cramped as they straightened. 
"When you didn't return to the compartment, I searched for you 
everywhere. I even knocked on the door of a mutual friend," she said, 

 82 
giving Spring a knowing look. "There was just no place else to try. Then, I 
found this gem next to the trash bin upstairs." She held out a small 
glistening bit of quartz in her hand. 
Spring remembered absently placing it in her pocket after finding the 
healing stone for her friend's headache. 
"I knew it was part of your collection," the girl continued. "Since I 
couldn't locate you, I asked where the chute led and learned that the 
disposal unit was in progress. Then I just panicked and notified the 
maintenance crew. They shut it down, but you weren't there. So much had 
already been disintegrated that we were afraid." She swallowed hard. "But 
I knew you were resourceful, so we decided to check all the openings on 
the chance you'd clung on and not fallen the entire way down. I see we 
were right." 
"Not exactly. I did go down, but managed to climb out," Spring said. 
"But sir! That's impossible. The suction," the ensign exclaimed. 
Spring was now able to stand on her own two feet again. "Improbable, 
Ensign, but not impossible, for as you see, I am living proof." 
"Sir, I do not wish to pry at such a time, but how did this accident occur? 
These chutes are well beneath head level and must be pushed forcefully to 
open wide enough for something, someone, as large as yourself to squeeze 
through. I only wish to avoid any more such, uh, accidents to our 
passengers, you understand." He wasn't buying it. 
Spring drew herself up to full height, wishing for the built-up slickers. "As 
you say, it was an accident. I dropped something. My jewel, there. Very 
valuable. I was looking for it, and bending over. I leaned up against the 
wall. The chute. And well, that's the way it happened." 
The ensign still looked dubious. "Sir, that is highly unlikely-" 
"Yes, isn't it?" she interrupted. "But that's an accident for you. Don't 
worry, Ensign. I have no intentions of pressing charges." She'd give him 
something to think about. 
The ensign's face fell. "Charges, sir?" 
"Why yes. For negligence." 
"But, but-" 
"No, not at all. Accidents do happen. Why cause innocent parties such as 

 83 
yourself additional hardship?" 
The ensign backed off. He had not considered that turn of events. "Yes, 
of course. Right you are, sir. Clearly an accident. Thank you, sir." 
Spring took her friend's arm and walked quickly away while the ensign 
was sufficiently grateful for his narrow legal escape. She needed to get 
private before she collapsed from fatigue and reaction. 
The rest of the voyage seemed destined to pass uneventfully, thanks to 
Spring's providential companion. They had yet to exchange names, since 
Spring could not truthfully reveal hers. They simply referred to each other 
as Friend. 
There was only one last incident with Elton, which took place in the 
dining area. Spring was finishing her meal, when he suddenly appeared 
from nowhere and seated himself beside her without an invitation. 
"May I?" he said, not waiting for the answer. 
Spring was so shocked she could say nothing. Before she had to, 
however, her watchful friend arrived and seated herself on the other side, 
placing a possessive arm around Spring's shoulders. She followed the 
gesture with a swift kiss to Spring's cheek. 
"So here you are, my beloved," cooed the redhead. "I couldn't bear to 
stay away a moment longer. What a night we had," she said, wiggling 
closely next to Spring. "I can hardly wait for a repeat performance." 
Spring looked at her friend in amusement. Were she a man, she might 
have blushed at such a declaration, but as it was, she just wanted to 
giggle. 
Elton took in the implication as he was meant to. His romantic hopes 
dashed, he bit his lip and quickly arose. "I regret I have business 
elsewhere," he said curtly, departing in a huff. It was all the girls could do 
to keep from bursting out in laughter while he was still within earshot. Free 
at last! 

 84 
12 
 
 
 
Herb's life had proceeded uneventfully. Each day he reported to his 
father's firm of Moss and Ivy, Inc. and went through the motions of 
corporate life, Paradise style. It was as good a job as any, and paid better 
than most. He would soon have the necessary merrygolds for his union to 
Lily. The work was not hard, though that may have been partly due to the 
fact he was the boss's son, and his immediate supervisor had no desire for 
complaints. But Herb had no complaints. Not really. 
In the evenings he usually stopped by Lily's where they would sit in the 
swinging vine on the veranda or go for long walks down the garden path, 
observing the sub-sapient plant life. 
Lily loved the roaring dandelions, tiger lilies, screaming wild flowers, and 
smoking snap dragons. His own taste ran more to the domestic varieties of 
dogwoods and pussy willows. They would look them over and speculate 
which sort of pet they wanted to buy once their union was settled. 
Lily preferred pussy willows, saying they were happy with just a saucer 
of milkweed, while dogwoods ate too much and were noisy. Herb argued 
that their bark was worse than their bite, and insisted the first choice 
should be a puppy plant. Lily gave in as usual, and so it was decided. 
His only diversion from the set routine had been an occasional letter 
from his secret correspondent, "Moon Maiden." Secret, because Lily would 

 85 
never understand why he wanted contact with any other female, even on 
an intellectual level, and he had no wish to hurt her. 
Also, he felt a bit juvenile about the whole thing. Pen pals were for 
sprouts, not full grown Veganoids. Yet, he had to admit the correspondence 
had grown increasingly important to him. Only that morning he had 
received one Special Star Ship Delivery. Unfortunately, he had been in a 
rush, so tossed it aside for later. Lily had met him at the firm after work 
and they had eaten dinner at a new place she'd heard about. 
It was pleasant enough with simple fare. He had chosen the breadfruit 
and honeysuckle, with jumping beans and eggplant. The beans were good, 
but the devil to keep on the plate. 
Lily had only ordered corn flowers and buttercups, wondering that he 
could consume so much. She teased Herb about his appetite, saying it 
would be a full time job feeding him, envisioning herself chained to the 
garden. 
For dessert, they both had the tapi okra pudding with sugarcane sauce, 
followed by steaming cups of coffee beans and tea roses. They capped off 
the evening with a lazy garden walk. 
It was still early when he arrived home, but it had been a full day all the 
same. All he wanted to do was kick off his shoes, have a drink, and take a 
nice hot shower. He went into the kitchenette and took down a bottle of 
distilled water, pouring a small amount into his glass. To that he added a 
dash of watercress and mint, stirring it with a celery stick. He carried the 
concoction back into the combined bed and living room, flopped down on 
the bed and sipped. 
Herb began to wonder. Was this how it was going to be for the rest of 
his life? First work, then Lily, then bed. Well, after the union it would 
change a little. First, work. Then home to Lily. Don't forget the dogwood, 
man's best friend. Then bed. Perhaps there would be little seedlings later 
on, as well. He would never be lonely. Or, would he? Sometimes with girls 
like Lily who had waited so long, they really had no interest in-no. It 
wouldn't be that way at all. Lily wanted a family, and she cared for him. 
Still- 
"Oh," Spring squealed, bursting into the room from the shower stall. She 

 86 
hadn't heard him come in and was attired only in a small towel which now 
fell to the floor in her surprise. 
Herb was surprised, too. Who was this vision? He knew it must be a 
vision. She wasn't even green like a real girl. 
True enough. Spring had used one of her father's magic keys to gain 
entrance to Herb's apartment, and had taken advantage of the bath to 
wash away the dark stain of her Tyranian disguise. She stood revealed for 
the moment in her natural color. She had come out of the shower to towel 
dry her long hair, when she discovered the apartment was now occupied. 
Herb could not avert his eyes from the lovely intruder. She was certainly 
well grown, and her skin was as soft and pale as a moon. Moon Maiden. 
Now he recognized her from the photosynthegraph she'd sent. Of course, 
he had not been privileged to view as much as of her then as now. He 
might have recognized her more rapidly if his eyes had made their way up 
to the region of her face sooner, but they had had difficulty getting past the 
intervening terrain. 
Spring had regained her composure and grabbed up the towel, blushing 
with a slight pinkish tinge that Herb found delightful. 
"Moon Maiden?" he asked. 
"Yes." She wrapped the towel tighter and backed toward a chair. As her 
upper calf struck the edge, she lost her balance, sitting down abruptly. The 
action caused the towel to slide from the upper portion of her torso. Herb's 
eyes lost their purchase on her face and got lost again amidst the 
marvelous hills and valleys below. 
Spring retrieved the errant towel, this time tucking it securely. "Peeping 
Tom," she accused him. 
"No, my name is Herb." 
"I meant, you didn't have to stare that way. Haven't you ever seen a 
naked girl before?" 
"No. I mean, not like you. I mean, there's nothing wrong with- I'm sorry. 
Uh, why are you here?" 
"I wrote you a letter," she exclaimed, squirming in the chair, trying to 
keep everything concealed, with delightfully imperfect success. 
"Oh. Yes." The letter he had not opened. He found it on a table and 

 87 
ripped it open, reading swiftly. "Yes," he nodded. "It says you will arrive for 
a visit. In three months." 
"Oh. Well, there was a slight change in my itinerary. I hope you don't 
mind too much?" she asked, still struggling with the unruly towel. 
"Well-" He hesitated, distracted yet again by the towel. Or whatever. 
Herb hadn't even thought of such a thing happening. Writing was one 
thing, but a strange girl here in the flesh-and what flesh it was! 
Spring noticed his reticence, but she wasn't ready to be kicked out into 
the streets yet. She allowed the towel to slip down just a bit more. 
The subtle gesture had its effect. "That is, of course I don't mind. And if 
you don't mind my asking, how did you get in here?" 
"Oh. That. You must have forgotten to lock up," she said with wide-eyed 
innocence acquired from dealing with Elton. "I just walked in. It was a long 
trip. I didn't think you'd mind if I had a shower?" 
Herb made a note to double check that lock in the future. "I, uh-" It was 
so hard to focus on anything other than that slowly sliding towel. 
"So, Herb. I hope I didn't come at a bad time? Do you mind if I rest here 
a bit until I can find somewhere to stay?" 
"No." 
"No?" she repeated, disappointed. Drastic times called for drastic 
measures. She dropped the towel. 
"I meant, no, I don't mind at all," Herb said, putting his eyeballs back in 
their sockets. She was amazingly clumsy, but he liked that in a woman. 
"Would you care for a nap? I only have this room, and the kitchen, and the 
shower." 
Spring sighed with relief, retrieving the towel. "That would be wonderful. 
I'll just go slip into a robe now." 
Herb watched as she minced out into the shower stall. She must have 
put her belongings in there. Moon Maiden in his apartment. She was even 
more lovely in person, he thought, recalling those quick, illicit glimpses. 
She returned in only a moment, having dried her hair with a towel. It 
tumbled in a golden brown profusion over her shoulders, and she had 
changed into a robe of clinging material in a pale pink shade that 
complemented her fair complexion. 

 88 
"Herb," she began uncertainly. She badly needed a place of refuge, but 
had done a bit of flirting in her letters and now after that towel business, 
well... She didn't want to risk him becoming overly attentive while she was 
vulnerable. He was probably very nice, but after all, he was a man. It was 
possible he could be anticipating more than she was willing to offer for a 
night's lodging. 
"Yes, Moon Maiden?" 
"Herb, I feel as if we are friends. I must tell you up front, so you won't 
think there can ever be more than friendship between us, that there was 
someone else very close to me. He, uh, lied to me, and now we are 
separated, but I still think of him. So I'm not ready for another attachment 
yet, and I can't fully trust another man because of that. Do you see? I hope 
you do." She paused to see how he was taking it. 
She had thought it would be safe enough with a plant man, but he 
wasn't that different from a human. If she had seen his photo, she might 
not have come. He was not only human looking, but darn good-looking, 
human or otherwise, and his reactions were exactly typical of a garden-
variety human male. "Herb, you don't look the way I expected," she said 
accusingly. 
"You are disappointed? But I sent a photosynthegraph," he said, taken 
aback by this declaration. 
"I didn't receive it. Either it was lost or you forgot to put it in. I don't 
know. I didn't mean it the way it sounded. You look very attractive. I was 
just expecting someone more-more bushy." 
"A Vinese," Herb agreed. "They look like bushes. We have Treeples here, 
too. They look like trees. But Veganoids are the most human. There are 
differences." 
"And I want to know everything for my thesis. And of course, about your 
planet as well," she added. 
Herb brightened. "I will be glad to help. But, is something bothering 
you? You seem agitated." 
"I just wasn't expecting to have to worry about us. Herb, I can't sleep 
with you." 
"Oh. You thought when I asked you to have a nap-?" Herb blushed. "No, 

 89 
I just thought you might be exhausted." 
"I'm sorry. I misunderstood. It's just that, the other man, I haven't 
gotten over him, and all his lies. Lies. Trust is everything in a relationship, 
don't you agree?" 
And that was all lies, naturally. She wasn't carrying a torch for anyone. 
As long as she carried that dreadful secret, she could never allow herself to 
care for anyone that way. Whoever she touched would become another 
target for Zygote. 
But she couldn't spend the rest of her life running, either. It was time to 
make a stand. She hadn't figured out how to do that yet, but with some 
time to think, perhaps she could ensnare Zygote in his own trap. He might 
be a magician, but she was a magician's daughter and that magician was a 
hundred times the caliber of Zygote. Why else would he try to steal from 
her father? Now the thief was a murderer as well. But he would pay. 
Herb mistook the anguish on her face for the pain of losing her human 
lover. There was no misreading heartache. 
Spring climbed upon the water bed and settled down on one side. "Oh. 
Where will you sleep?" 
"Sleep? Oh no, I'm a night person. You rest. I have some, uh, reading to 
do." He only had to be up at the crack of dawn, after all. 
Spring shut her eyes, and relaxed. Herb strode awkwardly over to the 
only chair in the small room and settled down, reaching for the letter again. 
Why had she decided to pay a visit if she had no interest in encouraging a 
romance? Not that he could afford to be encouraged. There was Lily. Still, 
not even to be considered? Male pride was not easily put to rest. 
He found the answer on page two. "Your letters have made Paradise 
come alive for me, Herb, with your wonderful descriptions of the plant life 
there, not to mention the chance of meeting someone as nice as you. I 
have some time and have decided to work up my thesis there. I know this 
will assure me a confirmed place at the Jupiter Science Institute next year." 
Nothing strange about that. Paradise would be a botanist's dream to 
study. Naturally, he would have wanted to meet her, and been glad to find 
accommodations for her. 
Accommodations. He checked the time. It was too late to hunt for a 

 90 
room tonight even if they left immediately. 
He looked toward the bed. She was sound asleep. It would be a shame 
to waken her. What the harm if she stayed the night? He could sit in a chair 
for a few hours. Not the most comfortable way to spend a restful night, but 
the only sensible solution. She would sleep right through, poor girl. She 
looked totally exhausted. He went over and pulled the light coverlet over 
her exposed limbs. Much as he enjoyed viewing them, he didn't want her to 
catch a chill. 
Herb then went quietly about preparing for the night, taking a quick 
shower and returning in a loose robe. He clicked out the flowerbulb and 
settled back in the darkness. It wasn't all that bad. In the morning he could 
give her directions to a nearby boarding home or two. So few visitors came 
to Paradise that they didn't have conventional rooming for vacationers, but 
certain families would provide accommodations for a small fee. He would 
explain all that to her in the morning. 
The light from the tri-moons shown through the window, casting a beam 
across the bed where Spring lay. She was quite lovely, Herb thought. He 
would show her the Crystal Gardens. She would love that because of her 
interest in such stones. 
Perhaps they could go to the Sandal Woods. They could lie beneath the 
sunflowers enjoying a pinecream cone. Maybe she would wear that fetching 
bathing suit she wore in the photosynthegraph? And they said daisies don't 
tell! 
What was he thinking of? Naturally he would be helpful, but she was not 
there for his enjoyment. He could not squire her about town. What would 
Lily think? He must think of something to do about all that in the morning, 
though. He was very tired now. 
Herb had not been asleep very long when the insistent tapping at the 
front door awakened him. For a moment he wondered where he was until 
remembering that Moon Maiden was in his bed. But first, he had to answer 
the door. Who would be knocking so late at night? He went quickly and 
opened the door a crack, not turning on the bulb, as he didn't want to 
disturb Moon Maiden. He peeped through the crevice. It was Lily, of all 
people. 

 91 
"Lily! Of all people," he exclaimed nervously. "What are you doing here?" 
She held up a small black case. "Your briefcase. You left it at the house." 
She smiled. "I saw it when I got up for a drink of water. I remembered you 
had that important meeting in the morning and knew you'd need it." 
"That's right." He had forgotten all about the meeting, what with 
everything else that had happened. Moon Maiden! Lily must not see her. He 
took the case and began to close the door again. "Thank you for the case. I 
don't know what I'd do without you, dear." 
The bulb snapped on behind him, flooding the room in bright light. 
Spring sat up in bed, sleepily rubbing her eyes. "Herb? Is that you? What's 
wrong?" she asked. 
Lily pushed the door open, then stood perfectly still, wide eyes taking in 
the scene over Herb's shoulders. Herb in his night robe; a strange, foreign 
girl sleeping in his bed. She looked at Herb angrily, tears beginning to seep 
out the corners of her eyes. "It looks as if you do very nicely without me," 
she snapped, running away into the night. 
Herb called after her. "Lily! Wait!" 
"Herb?" Moon Maiden said again. "Is something the matter?" Her first 
thought was that Elton might have found her again. "Herb!" she called, 
upset. 
Herb shut the door and returned to her. How would he ever explain this 
one to Lily? 

 92 
13 
 
 
 
These are lovely flowers," Elton said. 
"Children," Lily said, wondering who the off planet visitor was and what 
business he had at the nursery. "I don't mean to be rude, sir, but it is 
obvious you are new to our sphere. Do you seek directions?" 
Elton looked nonplused. "No, I know where I am. Actually, I wished to 
speak with you, if you have a few moments?" 
"Me? Yes, there is time before the next feeding. Step into the office, 
please," Lily said, more curious than apprehensive, now. 
Elton pulled a picture from his coat and presented it to Lily. "Have you 
ever seen this girl before?" he asked. 
Lily drew in a breath. It was the passionflower! Who was she that so 
many men were drawn to her? 
"Who is this girl?" she asked casually, examining the photo with 
trembling hands. There could be no doubt. She would know those pale 
limbs anywhere. 
"My wife," Elton answered. 
Lily almost dropped the picture. "Your wife?" 
"Yes. She is missing, you see. This is somewhat embarrassing to admit, 
but we were on vacation and had a silly quarrel. When the starship landed, 
my wife got off without telling me. I discovered she wasn't aboard only 
moments before take-off." 

 93 
Lily listened in shocked silence. Herb bedded a unionized woman? How 
could he do such a terrible thing? 
"It was a disagreement over nothing, really," Elton continued. "But my 
wife is a very impulsive individual. That was always part of her charm for 
me, of course. But I'm sure she must be frantic by now, alone here on a 
strange planet with unfamiliar ways." 
"I'm sure. But why ask me?" Lily hedged. His wife was impulsive? She 
looked settled in last night! 
"Oh, not only you, dear lady. The lightport is near this area, and I have 
since discovered that rooms are not easy to come by. I thought to inquire 
at the local business places, in case she had asked information there. You 
see, I fear I took your establishment for a flower shop," he added 
apologetically. 
"Yes, most offworlders aren't familiar with how our different species 
reproduce young. This is indeed a nursery, but not in the way you 
thought," she explained. "We raise the offspring of working mothers while 
they are at their jobs." 
"My sincere apology for the error. I have no wish to offend anyone, I 
assure you. I wish only to locate my wife." 
Lily was torn. While she had no love for the young woman in the photo, 
she was sure her husband would not be pleased to learn that his wife had 
bedded with another. A unionized woman. She certainly did not take her 
union vows very seriously. True, off-worlders had different values, but how 
could she tell this to the off-worlder? 
He might even hurt Herb. She had heard stories of how violent 
foreigners could be. While not approving of what Herb had done, Lily did 
not want to be responsible for him being beaten or even worse. In spite of 
it all, she still cared for him. 
She pondered going to Herb and explaining what she had learned. It 
was possible he did not even know that the woman was unionized. If she 
was so impulsive and charming, she may have pressed herself on him. 
Forcing him beyond what any man could reasonably endure. Men were only 
human. And Herb was half human. She could have easily taken advantage 
of poor Herb. Lily began to realize what a jealous fool she had been to 

 94 
storm off in Herb's time of need. 
"I see you recognize the photograph," Elton said. "Do you know where 
she has gone?" 
"Recognize it? Oh, no. Forgive me if I gave you the wrong impression. I 
was only looking so intently because I have never seen a pale offworlder 
woman before. I will ask some of the others in this neighborhood for you, 
and if they have seen her I will let you know. Come back this evening." She 
was trying to buy time. 
"That is very kind of you," Elton said, tucking the photo back into his 
pocket. "Until then." He made a slight bow and left. 
Once outside, Elton smiled broadly and gave himself a mental pat on the 
back. He could tell she believed his story; he could see it in her eyes. 
Spring had eluded him aboard the starship, but he would soon find her out. 
He had almost believed she was not at the Moon sanctuary until one of 
Zygote's other spies had successfully infiltrated the compound and found 
proof that a girl of Spring's description had been there until the day the 
ship left. True, they did not admit him, but they were quick to accept a new 
"Pledge." 
The spy had searched the girl's room, discovering part of a torn 
photograph in the bathroom. Spring had probably tried to destroy all 
evidence of her destination. It was a photo of a male Veganoid, native of 
P#23, Paradise, one of the stops of the starship. 
The spy had wired it and the information to Elton aboard the starship via 
photogram. He had searched the ship from top to bottom without result, 
but knew she had gotten off on P#23. Luck was running out for Gabriel's 
unfortunate daughter, Elton thought smugly. 
Still, the search had not been without effort. Elton had no idea of the 
true identity of the plant man, and could hardly wander the sphere, 
searching aimlessly for him. The direct approach was sometimes the best. 
Therefore, when he entered the government building for his Visitor's Pass, 
he made other inquiries as well. 
Claiming to be a business acquaintance, he said he had lost the man's 
name and address. It turned out that the government of Paradise kept 
scrupulous census records, complete with current photographs. A quick 

 95 
check through the Identimatch machine with his torn picture, and he 
learned the man's name was Herb Moss, son of a prominent local 
businessman. He was given an office address, but the home address was 
protected by the Privacy Act. 
Elton had gone directly to the firm and asked to see Herb. It was his 
intention to say he was Spring's brother and needed to see her on urgent 
family business. He learned that Herb had taken the day off for illness. 
They would not release his home address either, but one of the secretaries 
he had gone out of his way to flirt with saw fit to mention that Herb's 
fiancé, Lily, worked at the Nursery uptown. She might be willing to pass 
along his message. 
Naturally he could not come right out and ask Lily where Herb lived. He 
didn't know how much she knew. If they were in it together, she would 
only put him off. Yet, she was no friend to Spring. He could see that from 
the way she eyed the photograph. 
There had been recognition, though. He was certain she knew 
something and he was going to find out what that certain something was. 
All it took was a little patience. 
Fortunately for him, he did not have long to wait. Just as he had 
suspected, Lily was going to lead him to the elusive Herb Moss. He watched 
as she slipped outside the back door of the Nursery, pausing to look 
surreptitiously about before proceeding swiftly down the street. Elton 
followed at a safe distance. His trap for Spring was about to be sprung. 

 96 
14 
 
 
 
It was sweet of you to take the day off to help me find a place to stay, 
Herb, but won't you get in trouble with your boss?" Spring asked. 
"The boss is my father," Herb said, laughing. "Besides, I called in sick. 
No one should try to communicate, but just in case, I have looped the 
communiline. It will give off a busy signal to anyone who tries." 
"What about that meeting you had this morning? Your poor secretary 
even made a special trip last night to bring your case," she protested. 
Herb had thought it the better part of discretion not to mention his scene 
with Lily. It would only upset Moon, and one distraught female at a time 
was all he could handle. Besides that, he had also failed to mention his 
upcoming union in correspondence with Moon. An unfortunate oversight. 
How would she feel now to learn she had travelled all that way to visit a 
man who wasn't even free to escort her in broad daylight? Would she think 
him as despicable as that other man who had lied to her? Who had left her 
so broken and untrusting? Herb could not risk her reaction. 
Lily had stormed away by the time his overnight guest had fully 
awakened, so she remembered only the sounds of voices and the slamming 
door. Herb had assured her it was nothing to worry her pretty sleepy head 
about, and sent her back to bed. When Moon inquired about the incident in 
the morning, he had contrived the secretary story to quell her curiosity. 
The best thing now was to find proper lodgings for her, so she could 

 97 
work on that thesis for her entry to the Jupiter Institute. Herb would try to 
arrange his schedule so he could show her around without disturbing Lily. 
It was obvious what his intended believed she had seen. While he might 
think of some explanation she would accept, he knew she would never 
forgive him should she discover him in Moon's company a second time. Lily 
was usually a trusting woman, but there were limits to her credulity. 
Much as Herb admired the pale girl, he now wished he had never 
answered that ad. Even an exchange of letters was more than Lily would 
countenance. The vine grew more tangled with each new event. 
Moon, as he now called her for short, had offered no other name. She 
had currently disappeared into the shower room and busied herself with the 
items he had shopped for earlier. Herb jotted down the addresses of homes 
that might be willing to take her in. She returned quietly and tapped him on 
the shoulder. Herb turned and almost dropped his pen and lily pad. 
"Lily," he exclaimed, startled to see his girlfriend. 
"Who's Lily?" asked Spring. "Do I look like someone you know?" 
Herb felt like a fool. Of course it wasn't Lily. "No, that is, you don't look 
like you, Moon." 
"Good. That's the idea. So, how do you like me?" she asked twirling 
around, causing the floral patterned skirt to lift, revealing slim, shapely 
legs. 
"They're nice. That is, you look nice," Herb babbled. He could hardly 
ignore the well grown limbs of an attractive girl, despite having seem them 
before. Each time sent him into a new spin. "You look just like a 
Veganette." 
The transformation was remarkable. The spray-on hair coloring gave her 
tresses a lovely dark shade of green. The makeup completely covered over 
her pale skin, changing it to a normal light greenish hue. The dress was 
typical of one a smartly dressed Veganette would choose. 
The dress! Now Herb realized why he had thought Moon was Lily. Lily 
had a dress exactly like that one. Probably that was why it had caught his 
eye so quickly in the shop. He had always liked that style on Lily, and it 
looked just as good on Moon. In fact, Moon perhaps filled out the top a bit 
fuller, though it was the same size as Lily's dress. 

 98 
"No one will know me from a native," Spring exclaimed, pleased with her 
new disguise. At least here, she could be her own sex. 
"I thought you looked lovely the way you were before," Herb 
commented, almost too sincerely. 
"Thanks, but I feel people will open up to me better if I don't look so 
different," Spring said. "You told me how many people are wary of 
strangers. I think this is best." She also thought Elton would have a tougher 
time tracking her down if she blended in with the locals. Her white skin 
made her conspicuous among all the green folk. 
Herb didn't fully understand why she felt it was necessary, but if it made 
her happy, he had no objections. He knew how she really looked 
underneath. He would never forget it. But he shouldn't dwell on that. He 
had just decided to tell her about some of the homes on his list, when 
there was a knock at the door. 
Both jumped, but for personal reasons unknown to the other. Herb 
wondered if his father had sent someone over to check on him after all. 
Spring feared Zygote's spies. 
Herb peeked through the small viewer in the door and saw the top of a 
woman's head below. Then she looked up and knocked again. Lily. 
Herb's heart plunged into his stomach. Why was she back? She didn't 
even look angry. Why couldn't she behave like a normal woman and never 
speak to him again? Of course he didn't mean that, but her timing was 
incredibly bad for him. He signaled for Moon to leave the room. 
"It's my secretary again," he whispered. "Hide in the shower. If the 
office sent her, they might not understand why I have company if I'm sick." 
Spring nodded and exited the room, pulling the wallflower partition shut 
after her. 
Herb opened the door cautiously, not knowing what to say. "Lily. What a 
surprise." 
"Not half the one I had last night," she said dryly, pushing past him, and 
looking around. "Sleep well?" 
"I, uh, didn't expect to see you today," he said lamely, closing the door. 
"No, I imagine not. Herb, I must know. Are you having an affair with 
that-that passionflower?" 

 99 
Clearly Lily was upset. She never used such language. "Affair? Ha. Of 
course I'm not having an affair with anyone. I know what you thought. But 
it wasn't that way at all. It was perfectly innocent." He was dying on the 
vine. 
"Buttercup. I knew it. I knew you had an explanation," cried Lily, 
throwing her arms about his neck, nearly strangling him in the process. 
"You did?" he gasped, trying not to choke. "What is it?" 
She released her hold, and he took a deep breath. 
"I knew all along it had to be that girl's doing. She is unionized." 
"What?" Herb was certain his hearing was going. He thought Lily said 
Spring was married. 
"Yes, it's true. A unionized woman, acting that way," Lily said 
disapprovingly. 
Herb was shocked. What nonsense was she sprouting? 
"I see you are as shocked as I was," Lily said. "Her husband came to the 
nursery today looking for her. He showed me a photosynthegraph. It was 
her all right. He said they had a quarrel and she left the starship in a huff. 
Now he's looking for her everywhere. I didn't tell him that she was here last 
night. I didn't know what he might do to you." 
Herb was more shocked. Moon had a husband? He sat down in the chair. 
"Are you absolutely sure of this?" he asked weakly. 
"Yes. They were on vacation. He said she was very impulsive. I thought 
about it, and I knew you would never bed a unionized woman. Not 
intentionally." She looked at the floor forlornly. 
"I didn't bed anyone. She just needed a place to spend the night. You 
must believe me!" 
"I do. I really do," Lily said, hopping into his lap. "And I am so sorry for 
jumping to all the wrong conclusions. Can you ever forgive me?" 
Herb cleared his throat, and spoke righteously. "Yes, I think we can let it 
go this time, Lily, but if we are to have a good union you must trust me in 
the future." He remembered an old Earth story, and wondered whether his 
nose would sprout a few inches. 
"Yes, Herb," Lily said docilely. "She is gone now?" Her eyes darted about 
like an eagle's, searching for tell-tale signs of her rival. 

 100 
"You can see for yourself," Herb said nervously. "Now, you run along like 
a good girl so I can get some rest. I had to call in sick today because I 
barely got a wink of sleep sitting up in that hard chair all night." That part 
was true. 
"Oh, poor Herb," Lily said, hopping up and opening the door, pausing 
only to blow him a kiss. "I promise never to doubt you again." 
Herb smiled and waved, and slammed the door. And locked it. He sat 
back down. So much to vegetate on. Could it be true? Had Moon lied to 
him? He had only her word for her life on New Moon. Could she be just a 
bored housewife looking for alien playmates for new thrills? Well, Herb 
Moss was nobody's joy toy. 
"Moon Maiden. Come here," he called firmly. "Now." 
Spring emerged from her hiding place behind the shower curtain. 
"What's wrong, Herb?" 
"Never mind. I want the truth. Are you in Union?" 
"I don't have a job," she answered, confused. 
"Married. Are you married?" he shouted. 
"What are you shouting about?" 
"I am not shouting," he yelled. "I want to know if you are married. Are 
you?" 
"But why ask such a thing?" 
"Because Lily, that is, my secretary, told me a man claiming to be your 
husband asked for you at the Nursery, uh, office. Why would someone say 
that if it wasn't so?" 
Why indeed, thought Spring. She sank down upon the bed, her sudden 
pallor showing through the makeup. "A man asked for me? How would he 
know where to find me this soon?" she asked, more to herself than Herb. 
"So. You were lying to me from the start," Herb stated angrily. Never 
mind how he had lied to her. That was different, naturally. 
"I didn't mean to mislead you, Herb. I just haven't told you everything. 
And I can't. I don't want to put you in danger as well. But believe this. I am 
not married. Whoever that man is, he is certainly not my husband." 
Herb's anger left him, to be replaced by concern. "You said something 
about danger. Is that man trying to harm you? Please Moon, I want to help 

 101 
you, but you must tell me the truth." 
Spring sighed. "I suppose I have to tell you now. If he saw your 
secretary, he must have an idea where I am." She suddenly realized what 
that meant. "Oh-I have to get out of here fast!" She jumped up and ran 
about gathering all her things from the shower and throwing them into the 
bag from beneath the bed. 
"Wait! Are you hiding? What's going on? Tell me," Herb demanded. 
"No time to explain everything. That man, or other men may be looking 
for me. They-they killed my father. And now they want me," she panted, 
trying to force the bag shut. 
"Someone killed your father?" Herb knew offworlders were violent, but 
actually killing someone? "Why? What have you done?" 
"Done? Nothing. And I don't intend to do anything," she said, thinking of 
the sexual requirement of the transference. "I have some information, and 
they want it, but to get it, they have to-oh, I don't know how you say it." 
She was floundering. "You know, the sex act." 
"They would bed you against your will?" he breathed, shocked and 
amazed. 
"Exactly. So you see, Herb, I can't let them find me here." 
"An abomination!" Herb exclaimed. Such acts were virtually unheard of 
on Paradise. For one thing, it was impossible for most of the species to 
pollinate without cooperation. Perhaps once in many seasons, some loco 
weed would grow wild and attempt it, but that was a biological defect. To 
do such a thing on purpose was unthinkable. "Moon, I don't understand." 
"Much better that you don't," Spring agreed. "This trouble is not for 
you." She had finished packing and tucked her small rock pouch into a 
pocket of her skirt. "Well, that's everything." 
"But where will you go?" asked Herb. "What will you do?" 
"I don't know. Maybe I'll try to get back on the starship. Or hide out 
here. I don't know, but for your own sake, please don't try to find me. I 
know it wasn't much of a visit. I wish we had more time to know each 
other." She smiled, fleetingly. "Who knows? We might have liked that." She 
stood up on tiptoes to plant a lingering kiss on his lips. 
Dazed, Herb stood aside as she went to the door. Her touch had been 

 102 
pleasant. Very pleasant indeed. He was sorry this pale Moon Maiden had 
beamed into his life for so short a season. He was about to protest this 
mad departure-but instead stiffened along with Spring at the sudden violent 
banging at the door. 

 103 
15 
 
 
 
Spring retrieved her case and dashed quickly into the shower closet 
while Herb advanced cautiously toward the door. 
"Who is it?" he called, hoping he didn't sound half as scared as he felt. 
There was no answer. Herb pressed his ear against the frame, but could 
detect no sounds outside. He could see no one out the viewer, but they 
might be hiding at the side away from his vision. Gathering all his failing 
courage, he released the lock and slowly opened the door. First a crack, 
then all the way. There was no one there at all. Only a crumpled paper 
lying at the middle of the entrance where someone had hastily shoved it. 
Herb picked it up and read the scrawled message: "We have your green 
girl, Lily. If you want to see her in one piece again, bring us Spring Gabriel. 
Don't call the authorities or you will regret it. We will be watching. Wait for 
instructions." 
Herb stood in the doorway, baffled at the message. What could it all 
mean? Someone had taken Lily? And who was this Spring person they 
mentioned, and why did they think he knew anything about it? It was all 
some terrible mistake. He closed the door behind him in a daze. 
"Herb? What is it? Who was at the door?" asked Spring, returning as 
soon as she heard the door shut. 
Herb handed the letter to Spring. He was still too confused to speak. 
As she read, dismay clouded her features. It had already begun. 

 104 
"They've kidnapped your secretary? I'm so sorry Herb." 
"No. No," Herb said slowly. He was still trying to sort it all out. "I must 
be truthful with you now, Moon. Lily is not my secretary. She-she is my 
fiancée." 
"Oh. I see," Spring said. Evidently she had not been the only one 
keeping secrets. 
"I know I should have told you about this before, but it just didn't seem 
that important when we were only corresponding by mail. I never 
expected-" 
"That I would end up on your doorstep." 
"In my bed," Herb corrected her. 
"Whatever," Spring said, dismissing the subject. "I have a confession to 
make, too. I haven't been completely honest with you about who I am and 
why I'm here either. You see-" She swallowed. "I am the Spring Gabriel in 
the note. I am the one they're after." 
"Then, these are the same men. But what about Lily? They say they will 
harm her unless they get you. But I can't let you go now. They will harm 
you instead!" 
"It's a trap. I'm convinced that once they have me, they won't let any of 
us go. I know that slimy little Ki behind this outrage. He has no scruples." 
"We should call the Patrol," Herb said. "Ask them what we should do." 
"Wait, is that the same thing as the Police? I don't think that's a great 
idea, Herb. Zygote's men will be alert for any double-cross. They could 
disappear so fast we'd never find them again, and I hate to think of what 
might happen to Lily if we disobey them." 
"No, nothing must happen to Lily," Herb said, blanching. He replaced the 
communiline speaker in its slot. 
"Do you love her?" Spring asked quietly. 
Herb hesitated, his eyes showing the inner turmoil. 
"I'm sorry, that doesn't deserve an answer," Spring said, angry at herself 
for saying such a stupid thing. "You've just said you plan to be married. Of 
course we can't let anyone harm her. We won't," she said emphatically, 
trying not to let Herb see how hopeless it was to prevent it at the moment. 
She sank down on the bed in despair. 

 105 
Spring could not deny she had been surprised by the news that Herb 
was engaged, but after all, it had nothing to do with her. She had come to 
Paradise to hide, and make plans. Certainly not for romance. Herb wasn't 
for her. He wasn't even human. Not that she held that against him. He was 
very nice, and sweet, and different from any of the boys she had met on 
New Landers. There was a naiveté that made you trust him right away. 
Well, of course that was a crock. He wasn't all that innocent. He 
managed to hide a fiancée well enough. What else had he been hiding 
behind that honest, good-looking face of his? Those big green eyes and 
thick lashes that any woman would envy were not going to make her forget 
why she was there. But, all this trouble wasn't his. It was hers. She felt bad 
that he and his friend had been dragged into it through no fault of their 
own. Herb was a nice person, and it had been nice when they kissed, too. 
He didn't deserve this. 
Herb sat reading the note over and over again. What could they do to 
help Lily? Paradise was a peaceful planet. They had their share of native 
law breakers, but violent crimes were a rarity. It was simply not the nature 
of things there so he did not have the background to prepare him for 
something of this magnitude. 
"What are you going to do?" he asked. "You might still escape if you told 
the Patrol. They could protect you. At least get you safely off the planet." 
"You know I wouldn't," Spring said, a bit hurt. "You know I couldn't do 
that to your girlfriend. It's bad enough it happened. Do you think I go 
around leaving a trail of bodies in my wake?" 
"No, but-" 
"But I have a darn good track record so far?" she said sarcastically. 
"I don't blame you. I just wish you had trusted me and told me about it 
from the beginning. We could have gone off some place where you'd be 
safe. And Lily would be safe." 
"Ha. Don't give me that, Herb Moss. If I had said, 'Hello, I'm on the run 
from some powerful men who want to rule the universe. How about risking 
your life to help me out?' What would you have said to that, eh?" 
"I-" 
"I'll tell you what you'd have said. You'd have told me I was crazy. To go 

 106 
fly a rocket." Her defiance crumbled and she turned away to hide the tears. 
Herb stood by helplessly as she cried and agreed inwardly that he 
probably would have thought she was unbalanced if she had told him such 
a story. "It's been hard for you. Alone," he said sympathetically. 
"I've managed," she said briskly, in control once more. "The note said to 
wait for instructions. They have to tell you where to deliver me. All we can 
do is wait, but if we learn where she is, maybe we can think of a plan. A 
way to rescue her." She tried to sound encouraging. 
"Yes, we can find a way," Herb agreed, grasping at hope once more. 
"They won't hurt her while they still believe we will trade. We have time." 
They settled down to an uneasy wait. Herb made a path to the door 
every few minutes to check for notes, but found nothing. Time crawled. 
They had a light meal which neither did more than pick at, and Herb took a 
short nap on the condition that Spring wake him at the first sign of contact. 
The evening was interminable. It grew late and both grew tired. Herb sat 
nodding in the chair while Spring perched with legs drawn beneath her on 
the side of the bed. 
"Herb, they may not even call tonight," Spring said. "They may be 
waiting to be sure we haven't contacted the Patrol. Why don't you come to 
bed? You had no sleep last night and only a nap today. Here, I'll take the 
chair tonight. I refuse to chase you out of your own bed another night." 
"No, I don't want you to sit up," Herb protested, ever the gentleman. 
"Then come over here," Spring said firmly. "We've already slept 
together, if that's what you're worried about," she added mischievously. 
Herb's face registered confusion. He might have overlooked a lot of 
things about Moon, but that would not be something he would forget. 
"I meant during your nap, Herb," she clarified. "When I came back from 
the kitchen, you were asleep and I sat down on the side of the bed. You 
threw your arm around me and I didn't have the heart to move and waken 
you." She smiled. 
Now he remembered. His dream. Green hair on the pillow, and the 
sweet scent of honeysuckle. Moon's perfume. In the dream, it was Lily. He 
thought he had found her. 
"Lily," he said. 

 107 
"All we can do is wait, Herb. When they want us, they will get our 
attention, you can be certain of that. They won't give up until they have 
me," Spring said. 
Whether from loss of sleep, or anxiety over Lily, Herb felt incredibly 
tired. He looked at the beckoning bed sheets and agreed. 
"You're right. We need our rest. Not that I will sleep until we know 
something," he added. "But it would feel good to stretch out." 
He went to the opposite side and lay down stiffly at the edge, careful not 
to touch any part of Spring's apparel. 
"Oh for Pete's sake," exclaimed Spring, grabbing his arm and pulling him 
toward the center beside her. 
"Who is Pete?" asked Herb. He had a cousin, Pete. Pete Moss. 
"Never mind. Relax. You feel like a stick. I promise I won't break if you 
touch me, and I seriously doubt if either of us feels romantically inclined 
tonight. Try to get some rest now, okay?" 
Herb recalled how different it had been when he last lay in bed with a 
beautiful girl. He had not been shy with Holly, his playmate on Avocado. 
What was it about Moon that made him so uncomfortable? 
True, she had not come looking for a romance, but he enjoyed her 
letters and thought she was very beautiful. He was strangely attracted to 
her, despite all the problems she represented, and despite the fact he was 
in no position to be. There was Lily, his fiancée. And for Moon, there was 
the memory of that other man who had been untrue to her. In a way, she 
also had ties, if only in her heart. 
He stole a sideways glance in her direction and saw that she reclined on 
her back with an arm flung over her head. She was breathing evenly in 
sleep. As he lay noting the rise and fall of her breasts, he wished he could 
fall asleep. He never would with that distraction! 
Reluctantly, Herb turned over and away from the pleasant view. Much 
better with his back toward her. He shut his eyes and counted pussy 
willows. 
The shrill buzz of the communiline broke the silence. Herb awoke 
abruptly, realizing he had indeed fallen asleep. Groggy, he reached for the 
speaker, afraid of what he would hear. "Yes?" he said. His voice sounded 

 108 
strange and hollow in his ears. The sound of fear. 
A muffled voice spoke thickly. "I won't repeat this Moss, so write it 
down." 
Herb groped about the bed stand for a writing quill and lily pad. Spring 
sat alert at his side and handed him what he needed. The voice gave him 
an address in a seedy side of town. 
"Daybreak. Got it?" the voice said. 
"Got it," Herb agreed, swallowing as he replaced the communiline. 
"What did they say?" Spring asked. 
"We go there at daybreak," Herb said, indicating the address. 
"Smart. Gives us no time to change our minds about the Patrol. But 
Herb, the more I think about everything, I don't see how we can do it 
alone. Don't you have some other private organizations, like detectives? Or-
" she paused as she read the confusion on Herb's face. "No, of course not," 
she said in disgust. "This is such a law abiding planet." 
"No, wait. I do know someone who might help us. He isn't a professional 
in the way you mean, but he is a friend and runs a Julep-so school." 
"Julep? Like Mint Juleps?" she asked, perplexed. 
"No, Julep-so. He is very proficient in that ancient art of defense. We are 
not a violent people, but this is a weaponless form of combat with throws 
and holds. It is more for exercise, and he is very fit. We've known each 
other since university." 
"He sounds perfect. But-" She hesitated. "Do you think he would help?" 
"I don't know, but I think so. He likes adventure. He is always watching 
Vision Plays." 
"Vision Plays? Oh, yes, I know about those. Hologram tapes you play on 
home viewers, only in these you can enter astrally with the action and 
experience the story with the images. But there was a problem with 
addiction. An electronic drug. Many users could not tell fantasy from reality 
after a while. I thought they were outlawed." She raised a fine brow. 
"They are," Herb agreed. "But my friend is, well, adventurous. There is 
not much of an outlet on this planet for that sort of nature. He knows all 
about offworlders, too." 
"You've convinced me. Call him now." 

 109 
Herb punched the communiline and was soon speaking with his friend. 
After Herb explained the urgency of the situation, it was agreed that his 
friend would assist them. Perhaps he thought it was a chance to participate 
in a real life adventure instead of a hologram? Herb gave him the address 
where they were to go. It was decided Cling Ling would go now and look it 
over. They would meet later and determine how to proceed from there. 
There was still a few hours until dawn. 
"Cling Ling will help," Herb said to Spring. "He looks like the bush people 
you were expecting to see when you arrived here. He is a full Vinese." 
Spring laughed in spite of herself. "A Vinese named Cling Ling? Do you 
have plant folks of Irish descent as well? Sharon Begonia? A bit of the Old 
Sod?" 
Herb looked at her blankly. That only served to send her into additional 
peals of laughter. Herb decided not to comment. 
"Sorry. This is no time for jokes. When I get nervous, I get giddy. But I, 
more than anyone, realize the danger we face." 
Herb was certain she meant no disrespect to Lily. It was a trying time for 
both of them. Also, the sound of her laughter had fallen pleasantly on his 
ears. 
"I understand, Moon. We may as well return to bed. I will set the timer 
so we can meet Cling. It is not far from here." 
Herb turned out the flowerbulb and they were left in darkness once 
again. He shut his eyes but all his thoughts were on the morrow and what 
it would bring. 
Spring's voice broke the silence as he turned over. "Herb?" she 
whispered. 
"I'm sorry. Did I wake you? I'm just so restless. I'll get up so you can 
sleep." He moved to rise, but her hand clutched at his arm. 
"Don't be ridiculous. Do you think I could sleep any more than you? 
Come here." She pulled him against her breasts and cradled him in her 
arms. 
"Spring," he protested, shocked. 
"Oh, quiet. Shut your eyes. You don't have to sleep. Just shut your 
eyes." The fingers of one hand wandered to the back of his neck and 

 110 
caressed with small round strokes. 
Herb basked in the warmth of the embrace. It did help to be with 
someone. Perhaps she was just afraid as he was. She always seemed so 
independent that he took her strength for granted. She really was a caring 
girl. 
He adjusted to put his arms around her as well, but he didn't feel the 
way he usually did in a similar situation. It was just a contented feeling. 
Just to lie there and nothing more. It was complete the way it was. He 
sighed deeply and slept. 
The next thing he knew the timer rang. The quiet moment had ended. 
Spring was already up, bustling about, putting on her Veganette disguise. 
She did it very well. Even though Herb knew what she really looked like 
underneath-did he ever!-he would not have known the difference seeing 
her with the eyes of a stranger. 
Herb splashed water on his face, and drank a hot cup of coffee beans 
that Spring had brewed for them. She was becoming quite handy in his 
little kitchenette. In a few minutes they were ready to leave the safety of 
the apartment and venture into the darkness toward their rendezvous with 
Cling Ling. 
The address turned out to be an old deserted greenhouse. The glass was 
cracked and dirty, and it had not been used for many a season by the look 
of it. It was a setting tailor-made for kidnappers. 
As agreed, they met Cling Ling a short way down the street. He had 
scouted the area and climbed onto the roof of the fragile structure to look 
for signs of Lily. He reported that there was only one guard attending her, 
and that the other parts of the building appeared empty for the present. If 
they could entice the guard outside for a minute, someone could sneak in 
through the back way and free Lily. 
Their loosely conceived plan was to have Spring bait the guard. Herb 
would then go to get Lily, while Cling Ling covered him in case of trouble. 
In her Veganette disguise it was unlikely anyone would recognize Spring as 
the girl they were seeking. She would simply knock at the front door and 
pretend to be lost. 
The plan would fail if the guard decided not to answer the door, but they 

 111 
were betting he wouldn't want undue attention called to the hideout, and 
would attempt to quiet whoever was there. 
They guessed correctly. The Vinese signaled from his post on the roof to 
let her know the goon was approaching the door. As agreed, Spring 
removed a shoe and used it to bash in some of the glass, covering the 
noise of Herb breaking in from the opposite direction in back. 
The guard opened the door and glared out. He looked about eight feet 
tall. 
Spring tried to act innocent and smiled up at him sweetly. "Oops. Guess 
I knocked too hard," she laughed nervously. "Is this the residence of Mr. 
Smith?" 
The guard stared at her in disbelief. "How did you get out?" he growled, 
reaching for her with his hairy arms. 
"Hey. What are you doing?" she gasped as he pulled her inside and 
slammed the door behind them. That wasn't part of the plan. How could he 
have possibly recognized her? She was totally green. Struggling in vain to 
escape his grip, she saw Herb making good his escape with Lily out the 
back. And now she understood. 
For some reason, she and Lily were dressed exactly the same. No 
wonder this idiot had grabbed her. He thought she was Lily. Damn that 
Herb Moss. He had dressed her up like his girlfriend. She should have 
known the outfit showed too much taste for a man to have selected on 
such short notice. Just her bad luck that Lily had chosen to wear it that 
day. 
The goon thrust Spring down in the chair Lily had just vacated and 
began binding her wrists. At least Lily was free and Spring took satisfaction 
from that. The plan had worked like a charm except for that one little flaw. 
"Looks like our day for unexpected company, Trog." 
Spring looked up as a well-dressed woman entered, herding Lily and 
Herb ahead of her with the deadly vapor gun pointed at their backs. 
"Miss Eloise," Trog said. "You're back." 
Eloise? Spring looked directly into Elton's steely eyes. The Ki was dressed 
like a female now, but she would know "him" anywhere. 
"Elton," she corrected for the others present. Make that two little flaws. 

 112 
16 
 
 
 
Elton had great timing and a big gun. It was hard to argue with a 
winning combination. Spring and Lily looked each other over with cool 
appraisal. Herb looked upward to the heavens, but no miracle was 
forthcoming. 
"Don't bother with the rope, Trog. Throw them in the cage," Elton 
ordered, "her" manicured hand motioning with the slim handle of the vapor 
gun. 
"Uh-huh," answered Trog, typical of Elton's intellectual hirelings of late. 
He yanked Spring up roughly and pushed the others ahead of him. They 
were quickly routed out into a small room at the back of the greenhouse. It 
really was a cage. 
Herb explained to Spring that it was where the wild flowers had been 
kept at one time; they tended to wander about unless confined. Then the 
goon locked them inside and positioned himself on an old crate nearby. 
Elton stood gazing at the two identical green ladies. 
"Twins. How very original. But your warpaint is wearing a bit thin, my 
dear," he sneered to Spring. 
It was true. There were long smears of white skin showing through the 
makeup where his goon had grappled with her. The stain she'd used for the 
lightship trip had been much more reliable. It seemed the masquerade was 
over. Not to mention the party. 

 113 
Lily had begun to realize who her look-alike was, as well. 
"The foreigner," she exclaimed, looking nettles at Herb. 
"I'll explain later," Herb said miserably. If there was a later, he thought. 
The shock of capture had worn off at last and Spring spoke up now. "Let 
the others go, Elton. I'm the only one you need. They don't know anything 
about all this." 
"How noble," Elton said sarcastically. "But you should have thought of 
that before you chose to involve innocents. Master Zygote has plans for 
you, so I can't take the chance. You could be right about the little flower 
there, but you've been cozied up with your boyfriend for several hours now. 
I'm sure he knows the score, right hero?" 
Herb only glared. 
"You're wrong. I didn't tell him anything," Spring protested. 
"Perhaps. But Master Zygote wants that secret kept a secret." 
"Zygote. He killed my father. He'll get nothing from me," Spring spat. 
"I fear you've little choice in the matter. Better get used to the idea, my 
girl. After all, he will soon be your first love," Elton laughed. 
"That bag of bones touch me? I'd rather die. Why, I would as soon sleep 
with you-Eloise," she said with loathing. The remark was meant as the 
ultimate put down, but caused a surprising reaction. 
The Ki stood pondering, a strange look coming over "her" face. "Would 
you really?" said the Ki thoughtfully. "Now, what an interesting notion." 
"What?" Spring said with disgust. What kind of game was the Ki playing 
with her now? 
"Yes, indeed," said the Ki, warming to the possibilities. "Why should 
Zygote be the one to gain all the riches and power? Why not-me? Haven't I 
always done his dirty work? Where is my compensation?" The Ki smiled 
meanly to itself, lost in thought. 
"You can't," Spring exclaimed in horror. 
Herb began to catch his drift and was appalled. "You can't," he repeated. 
"You're a-a woman." 
"At the moment. But we Kis are adaptable. I just need a little time to 
change into someone more comfortable. Trog!" he called out impatiently. 
"Where did he go?" 

 114 
"Here," called the goon, emerging from another room. "Have message 
from Master." 
"Give me that," Elton said, snatching it from the goon. His face 
registered annoyance and fear. The message was definitely not to his 
liking. "Trog, bring the girl in to me when I call." 
"Girl? Which girl?" the creature asked dumbly. 
"Look at the arms, man. Bring the one with the white on her arms. 
That's easy to remember, isn't it?" 
Trog looked at the girls' arms. "Easy," he answered. 
Elton exited into the other room adjoining them. Trog returned to his 
packing crate and sat down to wait. The troubled captives huddled at the 
far corner of the small cell. Lily looked from Herb to Spring, from Spring 
back to Herb. 
"All right," she said, "Who wants to go first?" 
Herb didn't want to, but knew he could no longer avoid an explanation. 
He began by revealing his connection to Spring, how they had become pen 
pals before she came to their planet to work on her school thesis. He 
finished with the account of how the strange, dangerous aliens began 
chasing her and how they plotted the ill-fated rescue. 
Spring in turn, had to explain that was what Herb had believed since it 
was what she had told him, but that she had never been married to Elton. 
That the Ki had been searching for her ever since her father's death, so she 
had sought to hide on P#23 until devising a plan to bring Zygote to justice 
for his crimes. She assured Lily that there was nothing between her and 
Herb but friendship and that he had behaved as a perfect gentleman 
throughout their time together. 
Lily had remained silent through the alternate explanations, and listened 
compassionately at the events surrounding Spring's father's death, and how 
the evil magician, Zygote, wanted the secret that would pass to him when 
Spring lost her virginity. At last she spoke. 
"There's only one solution," she said. 
"One? I can't think of any," said an amazed Herb. 
"As I see it," continued Lily, "the most important thing for us to do now 
is prevent anyone from, uh, molesting Spring." 

 115 
"Yes," agreed Herb emphatically, "No one must touch her." 
Lily looked at him sharply, but said nothing. 
"I don't see how we can stop them," Spring said, despondently. "That 
disgusting weasel is determined to have the secret. It's in there now, 
preparing." 
"It is terrible for you," Lily said, "but it will affect all of us in the long run. 
If what you say of these men is true, I do not think they will confine their 
greed to one planet. What could such men do with unlimited power?" 
"She's right, Herb. Both Elton and Zygote are power hungry. They won't 
stop at anything less than ruling the universe." 
"The secret you possess? It is that powerful?" Herb said in awe. 
"In evil hands, yes, I think it could be," Spring said. "Don't forget that 
Zygote is no ordinary man, but a magician. With those additional powers 
there would be no stopping him." 
"This Zygote, is he truly that evil?" asked Lily. 
"Yes. He killed my father. He's heartless. Old. A conniver. A thief and a 
murderer. Does that answer your question?" 
"I am sorry. Of course you would hate him. I only wanted to understand 
what we were up against. This Elton?" 
"Two peas in a pod," Herb said. The idea of these aliens wanting to 
place their nasty hands on Spring was more than he could tolerate. "We 
have to stop them." 
He shook the bars of the cage in futile anger. The goon reached out and 
shoved him backward. He went flying and slammed against the window 
behind them. It also had bars. 
Lily reached into her pocket and took out a small object. It resembled an 
eye shadow case, but Spring recognized it as the makeup kit used by the 
green-skinned women of the planet. Lily edged behind Herb and passed it 
across to Spring. 
"Repair the smears on your arms," she whispered. 
"What for?" asked Spring. It hardly mattered what she looked like now. 
The disguise had failed. 
"Just do it," Lily hissed. 
Spring did it, but she was still perplexed. In a few moments, she was as 

 116 
green as Lily again. She returned the case and Lily opened another section, 
smearing her own arms with some white cream. Suddenly, Spring 
understood. 
"No. You can't," Spring whispered. 
"I must. I wanted to have a union with Herb and raise our family more 
than anything else, but I don't know if that will be possible. They won't let 
us go. I know that now." 
"But you can't fool Elton. He'll know you're not me. If not before, then-
afterward." 
"But we have to try. We need time. Don't forget Cling Ling. He probably 
went for the Patrol. They may be surrounding this greenhouse right now," 
Lily said hopefully. 
"That's right," Herb said. He had been listening to the confusing 
conversation about makeup. He never realized what a good mind Lily had 
before. Perhaps because he had never given her a chance. No wonder she 
had become so passive. She thought that was what he wanted from a wife. 
They had both made so many mistakes! 
"The Patrol? I doubt that," Spring said. "Remember Herb, you told me 
the story of how the offworlders were never punished for murdering your 
children. Elton has immunity. More than likely the Patrol would be only too 
glad to help Elton claim his wayward 'wife' and vacate the planet. They 
would hasten the process just to get rid of undesirable elements as soon as 
possible." 
Herb realized she was probably correct, but he had difficulty in thinking 
of Spring as undesirable. 
Herb sighed. "Yes, I suppose the Patrol would be no help after all. But 
Cling Ling may realize that. I know he wouldn't desert us now." 
"Then I must buy that time. I must make Elton believe I am Spring," Lily 
said firmly. 
Herb couldn't believe his ears. Lily was actually volunteering to bed with 
Elton in place of Spring? In all the years he had known her, she would 
never let him near her that way. A strong social conscience was one thing, 
but surely there were limits. 
"Lily, you can't actually-" he began. 

 117 
"Try to understand, Herb. I wanted the first time to be with you, 
naturally. I see now how foolish I have been, denying our pleasure until it's 
too late. If we get out of this, I will understand if you no longer wish union 
with me. I will be-soiled." 
"Don't say that. Cling Ling will help us before that happens," Herb 
exclaimed, hoping it would be true. 
"Trosh," Elton's slurred voice called from beyond the door. "Bring Sping, 
uh, Spern, ah, bring the girl in." 
"Too late," sighed Lily. 
"Wait. He's sloshed," exclaimed Spring. 
"What?" asked Herb. 
"Drunk. Maybe he was looking for some manhood in the bottle." 
"Oh, you mean he drank distilled water?" Herb asked. 
"Yes, and too much of it from the sound of him. This could be a lucky 
break for us. Maybe Lily can fool him, after all." 
Trog had moved to the cage and was looking over the two girls to see 
which was which. Lily stepped forward to keep him from examining them 
too closely and discovering the deception. 
"I'm ready," she said to Trog, exiting before him. Trog slammed the door 
shut again, and Lily was ushered off to the room where Elton awaited her. 
Meanwhile, Spring was pacing up and down in the cage, consumed with 
guilt. The notion that Lily should submit to that evil little twerp was more 
than she could bear. They could hear loud voices issuing from behind the 
door, mainly Elton's. Why was he shouting? Poor Lily, she must be terrified. 
If only they could understand what they were yelling, but the walls were 
too thick. 
Herb had retreated to the cell window, overlooking an alley. He assumed 
it was an alley; they were on a split-level at the back of the building, but 
the window was so caked with dirt, it was impossible to see. 
Then, as he watched, some of the dirt began to flake away from the 
outside glass. A small circle appeared and the pointed tip of a leaf. It was 
Cling Ling! At last! 
His vine pointed to the guard, then beckoned to the window as he made 
a striking gesture with his leaf. Herb understood. 

 118 
Moving slowly so as not to attract attention, Herb leaned against Spring 
and whispered for her to stand away from the window. She didn't know 
what he had in mind, but at that point, any kind of plan was welcome. She 
obeyed without hesitation and watched to see what would happen next. 
With a sudden motion, Herb beat his fists against the bars of the window, 
the vibration causing the glass to break and fall down to the street below. 
As expected, the goon unlocked the door and rushed to silence Herb. As 
he entered, Herb grabbed for his huge, hairy arm, pulling him toward the 
window. Caught by surprise, the guard fell back exactly as Herb hoped he 
would. 
Cling Ling was waiting. Quick as a flash, his strong vines shot out and 
flew through the bars to wrap around the guard's thick neck. They 
tightened and jerked. Trog groaned and fell in a slump to the floor of the 
cage. He did not get up. 
Spring gasped at the sudden altercation. "Is he dead?" she whispered. 
"No, merely out," answered the Vinese. He had used a paralyzing grip 
that worked on the nerves in the neck region. "It should keep him out of 
our foliage for now, however." 
Herb and Spring dashed from the cage and slammed the door, locking 
the lummox inside. That would slow him down if he came to. Then Spring 
ran to the front and opened the door so Cling Ling could enter. He rolled 
along behind as they stormed the door where Elton had taken Lily. It was 
not even locked. 
The room was totally dark. Spring fumbled for a switch and soon the 
room was flooded with a bright light. The three stood staring at the scene 
on the broken down old sofa. Only Elton lay sprawled out, clutching an 
empty bottle in his hand. He looked up with swimming vision at Spring and 
sputtered in confusion. 
"You? You're gone. Zygote sent the Freesher," he babbled. 
"Freezer, you mean?" asked Spring. 
"He thinks you are Lily," Herb said. 
"You are Lily. Spring is gone. She's on ice," he giggled foolishly. 
"You vile excuse for a man. You've raped her," yelled Herb, reaching for 
him. 

 119 
"Rape?" snorted Elton. "Did you hear any screams?" 
"Only yours," admitted Herb, "But I know she didn't want to be with you, 
so it was still rape even if she submitted." He tried to yank Elton to his feet, 
but the Ki fell down again; the drink had taken its toll. 
"Stop," pleaded the Ki. "It wasn't that way. I tried to change before 
Zygote's men came for her, but there wasn't enough time." 
"The message Trog gave him. They were coming to make the pickup!" 
Spring said. 
"Yessh. I tried. I tried. But it takes time to change sex. I took this 
stimulant to help accelerate the process, but too late. They came before it 
was completed." 
Herb let go of Elton's hair and allowed him to fall back on the sofa again. 
"Are you saying you never touched her? Why should I believe you? You'd 
say anything to save your miserable skin." 
"Ish true. That privilish has been saved for Master Zygote after aaall." 
The sentence trailed away as Elton passed out cold. He had overdone the 
stimulant. Herb tried to shake him awake but it was no use. 
"Herb, forget about Elton," Spring said. "It just registered with me what 
he said about Lily. He put her on a Freezer." 
"So? They're taking her to Zygote." 
"You don't understand. It wouldn't harm me, but Lily isn't me. She's part 
plant. Extreme cold doesn't preserve plant life in the same way it does with 
flesh. She'll wither. It's like frost falling on a fragile blossom." 
"She's right, Herb," Cling Ling spoke up. "If she isn't put at the proper 
setting, she could die." 
"But, they think Lily is you, a human!" Herb cried. "We have to stop 
them!" 
"The ship port," Cling Ling said. "They may not have gotten clearance to 
take off yet. We must get there immediately, or-" 
He didn't have to finish the sentence. Herb knew they had to get to the 
nearest transport trolley leaving for the ship port, but that was blocks 
away. By the time they reached it and the trolley shuttled them the few 
miles to the port, the ship could be light years away. 
Herb had always liked the natural pace of life on P#23, free from the 

 120 
combustible engine transports of other planets whose residents choked on 
the fumes from their filthy exhausts. Now, he cursed the environmentalists 
who controlled the number of vehicles a city could support. Certainly 
neither Herb nor Cling Ling owned a private transport. Spring looked at 
Herb in despair, knowing what they both were thinking. It was absolutely 
hopeless. 

 121 
17 
 
 
 
 Cling Ling had rushed them out the door and across the street where 
they stood by watching as he spoke to a shady looking Treeple. He 
accepted some merrygolds from the Vinese and motioned them to an old 
warehouse. The Treeple raised up the wide door and pointed inside. 
Spring gasped in surprise. "A Turbocar. I didn't think any of those still 
existed!" She hurriedly explained to Herb that they were an outlawed 
conveyance used on hers and some other planets until recently. They were 
practically indestructible. It was their passengers that met early demise. A 
quirk of construction that enabled their great speed also crushed the 
inhabitants on impact since there was no safety device in the universe able 
to protect them in a crash at that speed. 
They had all been recalled, but only speed reduction would correct the 
problem. Unfortunately, that was what had made the Turbos popular in the 
first place. Special destruction plants had been set up for the demolition. 
Evidently not all had met that fate. 
"You are familiar with the operation of this machine?" Herb asked. 
"Well, yes, but-" She hesitated. She did not like to drive a recalled 
vehicle. She looked around but saw the Treeple had already disappeared 
with his merrygolds. 
"I think it wise to depart now, Miss Moon," Cling Ling said. "You see," he 
confessed, "this vehicle is not the property of the seller." 

 122 
"A hot car," exclaimed Spring. That made sense because no one could 
legally own a Turbo. 
"I arranged for transportation before we arrived. I felt we might require 
a fast means of escape with Lily. I did not know the nature of the vehicle, 
but it was all our friend could do on short notice. You are an offworlder. I 
thought you would be able to operate it." He climbed inside. 
Herb had already taken the back seat. It was a four seater, one directly 
behind the other for the sleek line the fast Turbo was known for. It 
resembled a small rocket in more ways than one, as Spring demonstrated 
by turning the car about and shooting out onto the road toward the ship 
port. 
The ship port was next door to the commercial lightport, so she needed 
only minimal directions. They careened down the narrow byways at 
breakneck velocity. She had succeeded in reaching the outskirts of the 
community when they heard a high pitched hum coming from a bright 
green vehicle she passed. 
"That's the Patrol," cried Herb. "Slow down." 
"This is no time to worry about speeding tickets. Hang on," Spring said, 
accelerating and pulling back all the way on the throttle. "I'm taking her out 
of second." 
Herb shut his eyes. He had never ridden in anything so fast. The small 
vehicle seemed to almost glide on air. He opened his eyes cautiously and 
decided to peek back to see if the Patrol car was still there. It was. About 
thirty feet below them. And they were still climbing. 
"Spring," Herb gasped. "We're flying." 
Spring pressed a little harder on the pedal and suppressed a smile. 
"Didn't you know, Herb? Second gear is for ground travel, first is for flight." 
She looked below to spot the Patrol car swerving wildly, barely missing a 
tree in the center of the road. Obviously, they didn't expect their speeder to 
take to the sky. The tree was shaking his branches angrily as the official car 
screeched to a stop. It would take some explaining. The Patrol was 
supposed to protect pedestrians, not run over them. 
"That should keep them busy for a while," Spring laughed, looking back 
to Herb. He was sitting very still, and had turned an unhealthy shade. 

 123 
Spring sympathized. Flying must be unnerving on a species bred for rooting 
in the earth. "Cheer up, Herb," she encouraged him, "I think that's the ship 
port just below us." 
Making a wide circle, she brought the car down for a landing. Sparks 
flew as she switched gears and drove into the port on firm ground again. 
The Vinese rolled out of the car and into the terminal like a ball of green 
lightning, and returned a short while later. 
"Too late," he reported. "There was only one Freezer in port today, and 
it left just minutes before we arrived." 
"Oh no!" Herb groaned. "Lily." 
"I have taken the liberty to inquire about private transport, Herb, and I 
should have my answer in a moment," said Cling Ling, dashing back toward 
the terminal. 
"Then we still have hope, Herb," Spring said. "It will be cutting it close, 
but with a fast ship-we could still revive her. I assisted my father in his 
practice and I know a lot about plant life. I'm certain I can help." 
"Then I will not give up," Herb said gratefully. 
Cling Ling was motioning for them from the entrance. They abandoned 
the Turbo where it stood and ran toward the terminal where Cling Ling 
hurried them through the big dome toward a dilapidated Txnghc ship. 
Spring's eyes widened. "Uh, Cling." 
"I know, Mistress Moon, but it was the only ship available, and they are 
very fast, once launched. They have light propulsion and limited timewarp. 
We could do worse." 
That was hard to believe on the face of it, but what choice did they 
have? The Txnghc pilot looked like a giant larva; clear goo oozed from his 
upside down eyelids, his six hands waved frantically in the air as he spoke 
gruffly with the Vinese. Neither Herb nor Spring spoke Txnghcian, but it 
sounded none too friendly. 
"What's he saying?" Spring whispered. 
"He has another passenger," Cling Ling said, "that must be delivered 
first. I could not convince him that we require priority delivery." 
"But we'll be too late again," despaired Herb. 
"Perhaps not. He thinks we can make the time window for entry to 

 124 
Kamalot. The Freezer had a head start, but this ship is faster, and it is, 
after all, all we have." 
The Txnghc spoke harshly again. 
"He says we must leave now or stay behind," Cling Ling said. He looked 
questioningly at the other two. 
Herb surveyed the pile of strange pipes and knobs with dismay. The 
thought of going up into space in that curled his tendrils. 
"I'm not sure," he said, fighting the cowardly urge to scream "No!" 
"Yes. Tell him yes," Spring said, looking over Herb's shoulder into the 
terminal behind them. "We'll go now." She shoved Herb ahead of her and 
up the boarding ramp, never pausing until they had slipped down into the 
hatch with Cling Ling close behind. 
"Hey. Wait," Herb protested as he was propelled forward. He looked up 
as the heavy hatch door slammed shut like the lid of a coffin. "Spring!" 
"We have no choice, Herb," she said breathlessly. "I saw the Patrol 
coming, and you get one guess who they're looking for. Maybe we should 
have hidden the Turbo. If we get tied up with them, we'll never reach Lily 
in time." 
Herb sighed with resignation. She was right, of course. They had to go. 
Two days ago he had been a simple workaday Veganoid, dating a normal 
girl, heading for a normal future. Now he was in a garbage can with a grub 
worm at the controls, preparing to hurl his body into outer space to the 
castle of some mad magician to try saving his fiancée who would probably 
freeze to death if they didn't find her in time. Under the circumstances, it 
seemed appropriate that the Patrol should be after him as well. 
Herb seemed to step outside himself. Now he could really see who he 
was-a pervert. "Yes, you can't deny it, Herb Moss. All of this happened 
because you wanted to write a couple of innocent letters? Don't give me 
that, Moss. They weren't all that innocent. A nice girl wasn't good enough 
for you. No, you had to go looking around for some exotic little blossom 
with a foreign fragrance to spice up your ho-hum life. 
"Well, congratulations. It's spicy now, old man. Lily may die, killers are 
after you, you have one girl too many, and your face will probably end up 
on the wall of the Paradise Post Office. There goes your promotion. So 

 125 
what if you feel guilty about kissing Spring? You liked it. You liked it a lot." 
Spring shook him. "Are you all right? Snap out of it, Herb. We're outside 
the hanger and ready for blast off. We have to strap in." 
Herb stepped back into his body. His sleazy, pervert body. Ah well, it 
was the only one he had and he would have to learn to live with it, he 
thought, as Spring's touch sent tingles down his thighs. Pervert. 
Cling Ling translated the take-off procedures, which involved lying down 
and inserting themselves into long sacks like cocoons. This seemed a trifle 
extreme at first, but when the ship suddenly lurched upward and began its 
jerky roll and thrust into the atmosphere, accelerating as it twisted like a 
snake in a cactus patch, they reconsidered. Perhaps, just perhaps, the 
precautions were warranted. They slunk deeply into their sacks, glad they 
could not see what their stomachs were feeling. 
Herb had thought nothing could be worse than the Turbocar ride, but 
quickly retracted that premature assumption. He felt like a tossed salad. No 
wonder Paradise natives had chosen not to be space travellers. If he lived 
to plant his feet on solid earth, he would dig in roots and never dream of 
such adventure again. He wondered how his companions were faring, and 
dared to crack open one eye. 
The Vinese seemed to be taking it in his usual leafy stride, eyes closed in 
peaceful vegetation. But then, Cling Ling had taken many journeys in Vision 
Plays. Perhaps this was not that different? Herb envied such composure. He 
took comfort from the thought that at least poor Lily did not have to endure 
such a harrowing trip. Freezers did not use such energetic contortions to 
propel themselves. The Txnghc engineers must be mad. He shut his eyes 
tight and tried not thinking at all until jolted awake with the tremendous 
sound of crushing metal, and another body slamming into his. 
Spring lay squashed against Herb with Cling Ling's sack pressing her 
from the other side. She wiggled up and out of the bag. "I think we've 
landed," she said. 
Herb and Cling Ling extricated themselves from their own sacks. Herb 
leaned against the still rocking walls, trying to steady himself. He had not 
yet acquired his space legs. 
The Vinese stretched out his long vines tautly, a lengthy process. Herb's 

 126 
eyes popped as Spring reached her arms above her head to stretch, 
causing her top portion to lift and expand. He ripped his attention from that 
view and shifted it to the porthole where all he saw was lots of red, sandy 
dirt. It was a considerable letdown. 
"I don't think this is Kamalot," he said. 
"Of course not. The pilot had to deliver his other passenger first, 
remember?" Spring said. 
"Oh. Yes, now I do," Herb groaned inwardly. That meant they would 
have to go through another mad take-off and landing. 
The inner hatch to their compartment popped open. "Everybody out," 
came the voice from the cockpit. 
"Well, why not? Let's go outside and stretch our limbs," Herb said, 
standing aside for Spring to climb up first. Maybe she would do that 
interesting gesture again. 
"Wait," Cling Ling said. "He was speaking Unispeech, not Txnghcian." 
"That's right," Spring said, puzzled. "Why didn't he use it before so we 
could understand him instead of having to translate through you?" 
"Because I think that is not our pilot," Cling Ling said. 
"Then, where is our pilot?" Herb said. 
The Txnghc's head poked through the hatch door and was followed 
swiftly by the long body. He plopped face first to the floor below and lay 
there, very still, looking very dead. Spring screamed. 

 127 
18 
 
 
 
Herb listened to Spring's scream, wanting to join her but knowing it 
would hardly be the manly thing to do. Plantly, either. Cling Ling wasn't 
falling apart. He was putting his vine against the alien's midsection. Was he 
listening for a heartbeat or pulse? Did a Txnghc have either? Cling Ling 
withdrew his tendrils and stood vegetating in silence. 
The voice boomed again. "Passengers will vacate this ship at once." This 
time there was heavy emphasis on the "will" and "at once." Whoever it 
was, was short of patience. 
"I think we should obey for the present," Cling Ling said, mounting the 
ladder. 
Spring looked around anxiously to Herb, who offered her his arm and 
guided her up and out onto the outer hull. He was climbing out behind her 
when a small voice called from inside the cockpit. 
"Hey. Wait for me." 
"Is that a child?" Spring said in astonishment. "The other passenger!" 
"I'll get him," Herb said, backing down into the ship again. He emerged a 
moment later holding a small boy of perhaps six years, and lowered him 
down to Cling Ling. Then Herb slid down to join the others. 
"Halt," came the command. It was the same voice they'd heard earlier. 
It came from a huge red creature at the back of their ship. It looked like a 
giant ant. The ant stood upright; it wore a helmet and carried a pipe-like 

 128 
weapon slung about its upper section. It stood wiggling its antennae and 
moving its mandibles. 
Herb gave an involuntary shudder. There were no harmful insects on 
P#23 but he knew something of the species. Most of them ate plants. Of 
course, so did Herb, but he doubted creatures of that size worried about a 
little thing like sapience and nonsapience. He also noted that Cling Ling 
appeared nervous for the first time. That was not comforting. 
Spring had taken charge of the child and held him by the hand as she 
advanced on the big bug with a bravery born of the maternal instinct. 
"Just what is the meaning of this outrage?" she exploded. "What have 
you done to our pilot? How dare you terrorize women and children." 
The ant was momentarily cowed by her verbal bombardment, but quickly 
recovered. "We know nothing of your pilot. As for terrorist action, it is you 
who have invaded our territory," he counter attacked. 
Snapping out orders to the others of his kind in his own chirping 
language, they came forward to escort them from the ship across the soft, 
shifting red dirt. It was a strange landscape, with the same reddish 
covering as far as they could see. 
"What is this place? Where are you taking us?" Herb demanded despite 
his fear. 
"To the Commander. It is he who shall decide your fate, Invaders," the 
head ant answered. 
"We aren't invaders," Spring protested. "Let us go and we will gladly 
depart this planet." 
"Quiet, spy!" barked the ant, clicking his mandibles loudly. "March." 
They marched. Eventually, they came to a small opening in the dirt and 
were pushed through the entrance down long, winding tunnels to a small 
cell of a room. 
It was dark and cool like a cave. The only light came through a ceiling 
opening where thin rays of sun beamed through. They were alone except 
for one guard at the doorway. The other had left, to report to this 
Commander, no doubt. Army ants. Where in the universe were they? 
"Intolerable," the young boy said. "It will not bode well for them when 
word of this reaches the High Council, you can bank on that, my friends." 

 129 
They all stared at him. 
"Oh. Allow me to introduce myself. I am High Commissioner Pat Tikakes 
of the planet Tetrahedron, at your service." He clicked his little heels 
together and kissed the hand that had been holding his for so long. 
"Patty Cakes?" Herb asked, astonished at the small child's manner. 
The smile faded from his little face. "That's Pat Tikakes. And may I 
inquire of the rest of you?" 
"Oh. Uh, we are your fellow passengers, on our way to Kamalot on a 
mission of mercy," Spring said, coming out of her trance. "Do you mean to 
imply by what you said earlier, that you know where we are?" she asked. 
"I do so imply, for I know only too well. This is Formicidae, a primitive 
planet under military law. The whole planet is one giant anthill. They are 
presently engaged in warfare with the Cracks, another species of mutant 
ants inhabiting this dreary world. They have been in conflict for eons over 
racial superiority. The Cracks are more Beetle than Ant, and the Army ants 
more so than Beetle. Both have a slight touch of Arachnoid-notice the 
mouth?-but both tend to ignore that. They have obviously mistaken us for 
spies of their enemy." 
"But we don't look anything like ants," Herb said. 
"Ah, but they'd be expecting that, wouldn't they? In any case, I hope to 
dissuade them from this regrettable misapprehension." 
"You know a lot for such a young man," Spring remarked, smiling. 
"I am a duly appointed diplomat," he sniffed. "I am returning home from 
an important mission. It would be unfortunate if I did not know my job, 
young lady." 
"Children can be diplomats?" Herb exclaimed in disbelief. 
"Naturally not. I was a grown man then," he returned impatiently. "No 
doubt you are from one of those backward planets where time moves 
forward. Try to comprehend. We of Tetrahedron live our physical lives in 
the opposite direction from most of the universe. It does make travel 
difficult, but such is the price of an advanced culture." 
Cling Ling took a sudden interest in the conversation. "Are you saying 
you possess the body of an adult when a child, and vice versa?" he asked. 
"As you put it, yes. It is quite a bit more complicated than that, however. 

 130 
I am now in the advanced period. I reached puberty yesterday. I am on my 
way home to my parents to experience birth, so you can see it is imperative 
that I return at once." 
"Ah," Cling Ling said. He had much to ponder. 
"Do you mean you were a teenager yesterday and now you are a child? 
Isn't your life span exceedingly short?" Herb asked tactlessly. 
"Quite long enough," snapped the boy indignantly. "I have completed a 
lifetime of achievement in this cycle. In previous ones I have been a 
warrior, a politician, and wealthy businessman. I expect to experience 
many more cycles if I do not miss my birthday." 
"Why, that's instant reincarnation," Spring said in amazement. "But what 
about your families? Do any of them still live? Doesn't it cause confusion?" 
"That is a personal question, but I will answer it in the interest of 
coexistence. The birth party returns in differing bodies from his former 
cycles. Such members would not recognize him. There is an emotional 
death as well. No attachment remains. It would be an impossible situation 
to cope with were that not so." 
"Yes, I see that it would be. Still, it seems sad," Spring said, thinking of 
her father. "There is pain in losing a loved one, but so many precious 
memories as well." Memories were all that sustained her at times, Spring 
thought. She would never want to forget her father. 
"Our society is so interwoven that any missing piece could cause untold 
chaos. It is almost time for my birth and I must be there. If not, events 
leading to that birth would be altered, causing unknown repercussions. 
Perhaps even the end of civilization." 
He considered himself pretty important, Herb thought. "Surely," he said, 
"there have been other times, accidents, unforeseen circumstances that 
prevented births." 
The diplomat glared at him. "Never. We live our lives reversed so what 
happens had already occurred. We know how it is to be. We have-" he 
paused, groping for the right word. 
"Hindsight?" suggested Spring. 
"Just so. Ordinarily, I would never have left my planet during such a 
critical period of the cycle, but I am a diplomat and the mission was 

 131 
essential. It was all proceeding on schedule until the pilot timewarped and 
went into-" 
He was interrupted by the arrival of the helmeted guard. "The 
Commander will speak with you now, Spies. Choose your spokesman." 
"We aren't an army. We aren't spying. We aren't even ants," protested 
Herb. 
"Never mind. I will handle this," said the diplomat, toddling across the 
floor. He seemed to have grown a bit younger during their confinement. 
The guard looked down dubiously at the small figure, then shrugged. 
The ways of aliens were unfathomable. He gestured for the child to 
precede him, but the diplomat held up his little arms and asked to be 
carried. As it was the most expedient means of transport, the guard 
complied, hurrying away with the little child in his first set of arms. 
"It's all grown wild," moaned Herb. "Lily is freezing to death and we are 
trapped in some alien ant farm." 
Spring put her hand on his shoulder to comfort him. He always felt more 
than comfort when she touched him, but he appreciated the gesture. He 
placed his hand over hers and would have left it there, but she stiffened 
and removed hers. Herb could not fail to note the reaction. Of course she 
had only meant to give him sympathy; he was a fool to think she felt 
anything more. 
For that matter, what did he feel about her? He didn't even want to think 
about it, since he had no right. What must she think of him now? He was a 
pledged man and she respected that kind of commitment. Lily was the 
hapless victim of his long-distance flirting. He had deceived both women, 
and they were being remarkably decent about it. The least he could do was 
behave himself. He touched the place on his shoulder that she had 
touched. It was still warm. 
"I recall this planet from Vision Plays," Cling Ling said. "It is not that far 
from our destination. If we could return to the ship now-" 
"What good would that do?" Herb asked despondently. "We can't fly it. 
The pilot is dead." 
"I wonder," said Cling Ling, stroking his stiff leaves like whiskers. 
The other two gave him looks of surprise. 

 132 
"But we saw him. He fell down lifeless," Spring said. 
"If you recall the words of our young diplomat just before he was 
interrupted, he mentioned that the Txnghc timewarped. I think he did it to 
allow all of us to reach our destinations on time. In doing so, he 
unavoidably moved the diplomat's cycle ahead, but he still should have 
sufficient time to make the birth." 
"He moved ahead? But shouldn't he have gone back instead?" asked 
Herb. 
"I expect he would have, once he had gotten closer to the planet. That 
way, he could skip this part of the flight by moving ahead of it; that is, it 
would have already taken place. Then before landing, he could move back 
and arrive before the birth. At least, that is my theory," explained Cling 
Ling. 
"I see. I think," Herb said. 
"Then what went wrong?" Spring asked. 
"I believe for some reason, the pilot did not take his own problem into 
account. Thus, this unexpected detour." 
Herb frowned. "What problem?" 
"The pilot had a transformation of his own pending. Probably he had no 
way of knowing it would be that soon, for like us, he does not live 
backward and cannot read the future." 
"So he changed, too. He's not dead, just in metamorphosis, like a 
caterpillar," Spring said excitedly. 
"If my suspicion is correct, yes. Theoretically, we could remain here for a 
year, yet go back in time and still arrive to connect with the landing of the 
Freezer," Cling Ling said. 
"Do you think that's possible?" Herb asked doubtfully. "What about in 
between? Wouldn't other events cancel out our attempt?" 
"It depends on the events, but we should be able to override. Naturally, 
the sooner we get on our way, the better," he agreed. 
"Then we do have a chance," breathed Herb. "We have to go. Attack 
them. Escape." He started for the door. 
"Herb, slow down," Spring said restraining him. "There's a whole army 
out there. I haven't wanted to mention this, but you may have noticed that 

 133 
they are insects and they could, well, hurt you badly," she finished lamely. 
"Eat us, you mean," retorted Herb. He certainly had noticed, and had no 
desire to be masticated to death by some overgrown ant. 
"Not just you and Cling," Spring said. "Some insects like ants are 
scavengers. They wouldn't turn up their noses at a little protein either." She 
pinched her arm. 
"She's right, Herb," Cling Ling said. "Besides, we can't leave without the 
diplomat. And who knows? Perhaps they will listen to him. This sort of thing 
is his forte after all." 
"Sure, Herb. He's a diplomat. They know all about wars and incidents 
and stuff like that. They'll listen to him, I'm certain of it," Spring said, 
attempting to bolster Herb's spirits and keep him from doing something 
foolish they might all regret. 
A guard stalked through the entrance at that moment, thrusting a small 
bundle into Spring's arms. It looked up at her and said "Goo." It was the 
diplomat. 

 134 
19 
 
 
 
Spring cradled the infant in her arms. The ants had provided some 
make-shift diapers and a baby bottle. She was not experienced with small 
children, but had figured out the basics well enough. 
It was unnerving to realize that intellectually it was a grown man she 
was dandling on her knee. Perhaps he gave it no thought or simply 
accepted it as the way of his kind? 
She looked into his pudgy little face, seeking some answer to their 
dilemma there. 
"Were you able to speak with them at all?" she asked. The baby only 
gooed and smiled. Probably gas. Spring sighed. "I'm sorry. I know you 
understand me, but I can't speak baby talk." She tilted him onto her 
shoulder and patted. The diplomat burped. 
Herb watched Spring with her small charge. It was a pretty enough 
picture, young mother and child. If she were his wife-but of course she 
wasn't, and never would be. If by some miracle they survived the fix they 
were in, Lily would become his life mate. Lily was a fine woman and would 
be a wonderful mother, he was positive. 
Lily had grown up quite a bit from the silly hot house blossom he had 
known. The trials they had all gone through had changed them, making 
them somehow stronger. He saw Lily in a new light, and felt more 
confident about their union. He only hoped they would have that chance. 

 135 
"He is regressing swiftly," Cling Ling commented. "Soon, he will 
disappear altogether if we do not get him to his planet." 
"Shhh, Cling," Spring chastised him. "Not in front of the B-A-B-Y," she 
spelled. 
"Spring, he can spell, too," Herb said, amused. 
"Oh. I keep forgetting he's not a real baby. But we have to do 
something. We can't just sit here and let him vanish. Oops. Sorry, 
Diplomat," she apologized. 
Before they had time to worry further, an escort of Army ants entered, 
commanding their party to accompany them immediately. Spring hastily 
gathered her baby paraphernalia and trotted along beside Herb. Cling Ling 
rolled behind them, followed by more ants. 
The strange group trekked down one long passage after another, around 
and through the deep labyrinth beneath the hill, stopping at last in a large 
cavernous room. 
There was an odor in the air of cooking vegetables originating from a 
huge iron pot in one corner with hot coals beneath. The cook stood stirring 
the steaming soup with a long ladle. He looked up and smiled, which was 
hard to decipher with a sideways mouth, while the guards indicated a long 
bench where the group was to sit. 
It had been some time since they had eaten, and Herb found his mouth 
beginning to water in spite of his fear. Perhaps it was a new type of 
torture. 
Spring leaned close to Herb and whispered, "Now what?" 
Cling Ling answered. "It appears to be the mess hall for this camp." 
A guard addressed the cook in Universal so they all understood him. "Do 
you need anything else before you serve?" 
"Not anymore," the cook replied, smiling. "All I needed was a nice green 
herb-" 
"Oh no you don't," Herb shouted, rushing across the floor before the 
guards could stop him. "You won't put me in any pot." 
He gave a kick and the huge kettle overturned. Hot soup and veggies 
flooded the hard dirt floor in every direction. Those nearest yelped in pain 
and jumped quickly away. Cling Ling had already gone into action, thrusting 

 136 
and twining his vines in a fine exhibition of Julep-so, clearing a path to the 
exit. 
"Run," he yelled to the others, but they were already heading out the 
tunnel as the burned ants fell over each other in confusion. 
"Halt! Halt!" one cried out as they raced for topside and freedom. 
"Which way?" Spring panted at the junction of tunnels. 
"Any," Herb yelled. 
"That one has light at the end," Cling Ling said, pointing with a small 
branch. 
They could hear the shouts and cries of ants as they got organized 
behind them. They ran faster until at last they spotted the opening to the 
outside. It was good to see daylight again. 
"This way," Cling Ling called out, rolling ahead. "We must get to the 
safety of the ship." 
Herb looked back and saw that several ants were close behind them, 
and more were crawling out of the tunnel. It was hard to run in the loose, 
sandy dirt, and Spring couldn't navigate too well holding the baby. Herb 
took the child from her and made her run ahead. 
The ants were gaining fast. This was their element and they could revert 
to all six legs for speed. Cling Ling reached the ship first, stretching down 
his vines to pull Spring aboard. Herb slammed against the side and held up 
the baby for his friend to take, then climbed in after. He managed to slam 
the hatch closed just as the first ant crawled up the side of the ship behind 
him. They couldn't have cut it any closer. 
Inside, they heard a steady pitty patting sound against the portholes. 
"Rain?" Spring asked, frowning. 
They descended the ladder into their compartment and looked out. The 
ants covered the sides of the ship and were tapping furiously against the 
windows with their feelers. 
Cling Ling quickly lowered the covers so they couldn't look in. "I think we 
are safe for the moment" he said. 
Spring let out a blood curdling scream. Everyone looked to see what the 
new crisis was. She had spotted their pilot in the corner, but now he was 
covered with a thick, squishy substance that seemed to be slowly 

 137 
hardening. Cling Ling poked at it with a leafy finger. A small bit came off 
like cold batter. 
"It's only his cocoon," Cling Ling explained. "It is as it should be. I must 
locate the ship's flight manual if we are to escape." He climbed topside, and 
returned a short time later with an octagon shaped object. It had numbers 
and symbols engraved on all sides and looked like translucent plastic. 
"It looks like a giant dice. Can you actually translate that thing?" asked 
Spring. 
"It has diagrams. I need a minute to absorb it," he said, rolling to the 
side to study his find. 
The steady rapping continued, and the baby awakened, adding his voice 
to the melee. He had slept all through the mad race out the tunnels, 
unbelievable as it seemed. He was so tiny now, he looked like a newborn. 
"Oh. He's shrinking again," cried Spring. "Please hurry and get us out of 
here, Cling." 
Abruptly, the rapping noise ceased, and the silence was deafening. 
"I wonder what they're doing out there now?" whispered Spring. 
Herb climbed to the upper hatch and listened, but there was no sound. 
"Maybe they're gone?" he said, climbing back down the ladder and lifting 
the cover from one of the portholes. "Uh-oh!" 
"What?" Spring asked, pushing close to peep out. Her breasts jammed 
against Herb's side. He moved away so she could have the view to herself. 
Close proximity was too much to bear. It seemed even at a time like this he 
was susceptible to her feminine charm. He cursed his male weakness and 
deliberately forced thoughts of Lily to the fore. How she would despise him 
if she knew. How both of them would despise him! 
"We're surrounded," Spring wailed, as she observed the circle of ants, 
each holding one of the long, tubular weapons. Who knew what damage 
those things could do to the ship? At one side of the circle stood a large 
one, resembling a cannon. Primitive it might be, but surely effective at that 
range. It could probably rip a hole in the side wide enough to walk a 
whalephant through. "Cling," she called nervously. 
"Yes, I am aware of developments, Mistress Moon." He had been 
watching from his porthole. "I think I can manage the ship now, but we 

 138 
can't achieve take-off before they could fire upon us. It is a dilemma." He 
returned topside with the flight manual. 
"Now what are we going to do?" she cried, clutching the tiny baby to her 
breast. 
"What else can we do," Herb said in disgust, "except surrender?" 
"We can't do that either," Spring said. 
"No. Not all of us. But, if one went out and distracted them, perhaps 
drawing their fire away from the ship, the others might have a chance to 
escape," he said. 
"But Herb, who?" she asked. 
He pushed her aside and bounded up to the cockpit, unfastening the 
hatch. 
"No," she screamed, realizing his intent, and quickly scrambled up the 
ladder to stop him. 
"Get her out of here, Cling," Herb ordered, crawling outside and 
slamming the hatch shut beneath him. 
Spring tried to follow, but Cling Ling quickly fastened the latch and 
gently pulled her away from the door. "It is best," he said, and began to 
man the controls, pulling levers and pushing buttons. The Txnghc ship 
jarred to life. 
"But you can't leave him," Spring said in disbelief. She raced back down 
to the compartment and tucked the baby into one of the sacks, then 
pressed her nose to the nearest porthole. 
There was Herb, out in the dirt now, and walking purposefully to the 
Commander. He was saying something she couldn't hear, then two of the 
guards came forward and escorted him to one side of the circle. The ants 
began to form two lines behind each other, raising their weapons. 
"Cling. It's a firing squad. No! Not Herb!" she sobbed. 
A sudden lurch of the ship sent her reeling backward, falling to the floor 
just as the thunderous sound of the weapons exploded in her ears. 
"No," she screamed. Hot tears burst forth to stream down her face. The 
rocking of the ship made standing up impossible. She crawled on hands 
and knees to the ladder to pull herself up, then began to climb up it. 
She had to get off the ship and see about Herb. Another lurch dislodged 

 139 
her hold from the railing and she fell back to the second level, striking her 
head against one of the metal rungs. She was out before she hit the deck. 
When she awoke, they were in deep space and she was tucked neatly 
into her sack. Slowly, memory returned, and with it, more tears. 
Herb, brave, good, kind, innocent Herb. He deserved much better than 
that ending. Now Spring had two deaths on her conscience because of 
Zygote. Perhaps three if they couldn't reach Lily in time. Poor Lily. She 
would have to be told about Herb. So many victims in this trail of terror. 
She had to find a way to stop it. 
A small hand wiped away the moisture from her cheek. She opened her 
eyes and saw the young diplomat. He wasn't an infant anymore. The 
timewarp must have worked. Cling Ling must have taken them backward 
again. That was good. The baby had almost shrunk into nothingness before 
she passed out. Spring put a hand to her forehead and felt a big goose 
egg. "Ouch." 
"Excellent. You have returned to us," said the young diplomat. "How do 
you feel?" 
"Miserable," she answered, remembering Herb. "But I'm relieved to see 
you are well. That was a close call for you, Diplomat." 
"Thanks to your excellent care and our bush pilot, I have survived. Soon 
we will be warping forward and I will regress once more. I may need to 
impose one more time." 
"I am glad to help. I know this has been hard for you," she said. 
"Actually, it has been rather exhilarating. I think in my next cycle, I must 
consider becoming a space pilot," he said, smiling. 
"Our pilot," Spring said, looking around. The Txnghc was gone. 
"Yes, he is functional now. It happened as surmised by your Vinese 
friend. Going back reversed his metamorphosis as well." 
"And we will go forward to deliver you?" 
"The pilot will go into his cycle, but now we have Cling Ling to take over, 
so it should be safe this time." 
"Yes, it's all working out just wonderfully-" Her composure suddenly 
crumbled. Spring pulled herself from the sack and walked to the porthole, 
stopping to hold the ladder for support. 

 140 
"Are you unwell?" asked the diplomat solicitously. "Your injury?" 
"It's not that. It's just a bump. I just can't believe Herb is gone. I didn't 
even get to say goodbye to him." The tears began to flow again and she 
hid her face behind her hands. "Oh, Herb!" she cried. 
"Yes?" he answered, coming down the ladder. 
Shocked, she turned, hardly believing her eyes. She launched herself at 
him, kissing him and hugging tightly as if she would never let him go. 
Herb returned her embrace and they stood entwined for a long, 
wonderful moment. Suddenly, Spring pulled away and punched him in the 
stomach with her fist. 
"Ouch," Herb said. "What's that for?" 
"For lying to me. I thought you were shot." 
"I never told you I was dead," he protested. 
"But, I don't understand," she said, walking to the porthole and gazing 
out into the darkness. "The last time I saw you, the ants were preparing an 
execution. I heard the gunfire." 
Herb looked sheepish. "Well, things are not always as they seem," he 
said with embarrassment. "The diplomat had already reaped the harvest." 
"My talk with the Commander went very well," the diplomat interpreted. 
"I reminded them of their trade agreement with my planet. It is one they 
would not wish to disrupt. They agreed to release us with all proper respect 
due a personage of my rank. That went for my companions as well, 
naturally." 
"Then you were able to speak with them before you regressed to an 
infant," exclaimed Spring. 
"Yes indeed. Previous to our, ahem, 'escape,' we were being ushered to 
the banquet hall for a proper feast. The ants are not used to feeding 
humanoid guests so it took them some time to gather what they needed. 
We were about to be treated to the first course when our friend, Herb, 
panicked. And, as you humans say, the rest is history." He smiled. 
"Then we weren't going to land in the soup, after all," Spring said. 
"No. It was just that I had heard so many frightening rumors about 
insects and when I heard what I thought was my name as an ingredient-" 
Herb shrugged. 

 141 
"At least you didn't spill the beans," Spring laughed. 
"What?" 
"Nothing. But what about those guns? I know I heard them fire." 
"They fired all right," Herb said, "but not at me. The ants were really 
upset when I dumped their soup. You see, they thought I was rejecting 
their pact with the diplomat. They had no way of knowing we could no 
longer communicate. When they ran after us and banged on the ship, they 
just wanted us to come out so they could make it up by the honor of a 
twenty-two gun salute. By the time I returned to the ship with the good 
news, you had injured yourself. So you see, I am no hero." 
Spring turned and faced him squarely. "Herb, when you left the ship, 
you didn't know you would return. That was quite a sacrifice. If that's not a 
hero, then I've never seen one." 
She threw her arms around him once again and this time did not let go 
until Herb broke the embrace. He knew she was grateful to him, but he 
was not going to take advantage of that gratitude this time. He changed 
the subject. 
"We will go forward soon. Right now we're in Drift and that's why we can 
walk about. It's necessary to give the propulsion units a chance to cool. 
Timewarping takes its toll on these old ships. We better strap in, though," 
he warned. 
All passengers except for Cling Ling battened down for the rough ride. 
Herb glanced over to Spring, but she had her eyes shut. He thought her 
cheek was damp. He worried that her head hurt more than she had let on. 
The noise began like someone shaking broken glass in a tin can. A two 
ton can. Over they rolled, shaking and rattling, gathering speed until the 
ship was a streak in the empty space of time. A last huge vibration rocked 
the ship as they crashed down for a landing. 
Cling Ling climbed down the ladder to help the others out of their sacks. 
Spring took the diplomat, now a baby, in her arms and they all exited past 
the Txnghc who was tucked into his cocoon once more. 
An impressive assembly was on hand outside the ship to greet them. 
The diplomat had given Cling coordinates where to land before he was 
reduced to baby talk, and Cling Ling had hit the mark squarely. 

 142 
The dignitaries were dressed in formal tie and tails with tall, black silk 
hats. Red sashes and ribbons adorned the vests of the men, and women 
were in long gowns, decked in heavy jewelry. One couple moved forward to 
receive their group, a distinguished looking man, and striking woman. 
Spring thought she detected something familiar about them. Of course: 
they were the child's parents! 
Following proper welcomes, handshakes, and introductions all around, 
Spring presented the mother with her child. As she lifted the blanket of the 
bundle away from her breast, it fell empty to the ground. She gave an 
involuntary scream of horror. He had disappeared. 
The mother's eyes widened momentarily as she gave a slight gasp. 
"I'm so sorry," Spring said. "I thought we were in time." 
A slow smile began to break across the mother's face. She placed both 
hands upon her stomach and gave a small exclamation of joy as it 
expanded. 
"All is well, my dear," she assured Spring, opening her cape to expose 
her bulging form. 
"That's him," Spring exclaimed happily. 
"We've always wanted a boy," said his father proudly. 

 143 
20 
 
 
 
 Once the elation of the family reunion had worn off, the group settled 
back soberly in their sacks, battened down for their original destination. 
Although Cling Ling assured Herb no time had been lost which could not be 
regained, it was difficult for Herb to grasp emotionally. With each minsec 
that passed, he envisioned Lily withering away, calling his name in hopeless 
sobs. 
He knew that was ridiculous, since if she really were to expire on the 
Freezer, she would feel no pain, and certainly not be aware of her plight. It 
would be rather like dying peacefully in sleep. If it had to happen- 
"Herb, nothing will happen to Lily," Spring said, from her sack next to 
him. "We won't let it." 
Herb smiled at her gratefully. The Founder. Could she read his mind 
now? No, of course not. She was simply a sensitive, kind person. Simply 
Spring. 
The warning light for warp-out blinked. It was time. The Txnghc pilot 
touched the control. 
The group stood in the huge ship port terminal looking at each other in 
shocked astonishment. 
"What happened?" Herb asked, surveying the familiar surroundings in 
confusion. "Why did we return here? We should be in Kamalot." 
"Wait. Wait a moment," Spring said. "I don't remember landing, do 

 144 
you?" She put her hand to her head. "I feel odd. Dizzy," 
"I believe I see what has happened," Cling Ling said with a concerned 
look overtaking his foliage. "We have returned to Paradise." 
"We know that," Herb snapped in annoyance. "That idiotic pilot-" 
"No, you misunderstand," Cling Ling said patiently. "Not by flight, by 
time. This is our past. The ship must have malfunctioned at a critical 
moment." 
Spring looked across the terminal, her eyes widening as Patrol officers 
entered, running toward them. "He's right, Herb. We're back where we 
started. Quick. Into the ship before those cops get here," she said, pushing 
him forward. 
"Halt in the name of PPA," came the stern warning from behind them. It 
was clearly too late to run any place. They halted. 
"Cling," Spring whispered, "If this is our past, why didn't we escape?" 
"We must have arrived a minsec or so off. Time has not changed. We 
are the ones out of step," he explained. 
"If I'm not interrupting," said the ranking officer, none too patiently, 
"there is the small matter of an arrest here?" 
"Of course, officer," Spring said sweetly. "You go right ahead." 
He gave her a withering look and her smile shrank. She bit her lip and 
zipped it as well. Police or Patrol, whatever they were called on whatever 
planet, were famous for their lack of humor. To tell the truth, she didn't 
much feel like a bundle of giggles herself. 
"We haven't done anything wrong, officer," Herb interjected. "We are 
trying to stop a crime." 
The patroller looked at him as if inspecting an aphid. "And what crime 
might that be, sprout?" 
Sprout. Herb colored in anger. That was typical. Give some small town 
cop with an over grown ego a uniform and he turns into an aster. Cling 
Ling answered for him before he had a chance to protest. 
"My friend is telling the truth, officer. A young lady has been abducted 
from our planet." 
"Uh-huh. Why hasn't the Patrol been informed of this?" the patroller 
inquired skeptically. 

 145 
"Uh, well, that's a long story," Spring said, impatiently. 
"Aren't you lucky? We'll have all the time in the universe to discuss it 
where you're going. Charges," he bellowed to his fellow officer. 
The uniformed Treeple pulled out a small lily pad and read aloud. 
"Receiving stolen property." 
"We didn't steal anything," Herb said. 
"He means the Turbo," whispered Spring. 
"Possession of an unlawful vehicle," he continued, "consorting with 
known offenders, speeding, flying without a license, contributing to an 
accident-" 
"Wait a minute," cried Spring. "What about our rights? Don't we get a 
chance to defend ourselves?" 
"Naturally, you will be met by your defendant upon arrival at the 
Tribunal. You know that," the officer said with irritation. 
"No, she doesn't," Herb said. "She's not a real Veganette. Let her go 
back to her own planet." 
"Herb." Spring elbowed him. True, he was only trying to help, but it 
looked as if he had just added fuel to the inferno of troubles they were 
already roasting in. 
The officer's face lit up with undisguised glee. 
"Impersonating a native? Entering the planet without a pass? I haven't 
seen such a variety of charges since-never. I may be up for promotion for 
this one!" He sneered. 
"Oh really? Well, what about Intergalactic Immunity?" Spring challenged. 
He didn't look so smug now. 
The smile faded from the officer's face to be replaced with his usual look 
of hostility. "That's for the Tribunal to decide. I just bring 'em in. Move 
out," he barked briskly, as they were escorted to a Patrol car, and 
transported to a waiting booth at Tribunal Hall. 
The three sat alone in the small room debating their fate. 
"Cling, what do you think they will do with us?" Herb asked. "We don't 
have time to be prisoners. We have to get to Lily." 
"Yes, it is essential for us to return to the Txnghc ship and reverse this 
timewarp," Cling Ling agreed. 

 146 
"We must have hit a bump and been sent back too far by mistake," 
Spring said. 
"A bump?" Herb yelled. "There aren't any bumps in space. I may not be 
a hot shot space traveller like you, Spring, but even I know that." 
"I was speaking metaphorically. Calm down, Herb," she said defensively. 
"We all want out of this as badly as you do." 
"I agree. We must not rustle our leaves needlessly. In a way Mistress 
Moon is correct. I believe the timewarp was properly executed. Yet, some 
physical interference such as a magnetic storm may have thrown us off 
course for a moment. A moment is quite a lot when time is to be 
overlapped. This is a slightly altered history. If we could but return to the 
exact point we erred, this would be cancelled out. But if we must go on 
from here-" Cling Ling trailed off, looking very unhappy about the prospect. 
Spring completed the miserable thought. "We cancel out the other. I'm 
beginning to catch on. We can remember the other future because it has 
actually become a part of our past? This is too confusing. Let's go." 
"We can't just walk out," Herb snorted. "We've been arrested, 
remember?" He lowered his voice. "Besides, even if we tried, what about 
the patrollers?" 
"Spring has the right idea, Herb. If we don't return within the hour, it will 
be too late. The Txnghc will leave with his other fare, minus us," Cling Ling 
said. 
"He may be gone already," Herb said in dismay. 
"No, while you two were bantering with the patrollers, I asked the 
Txnghc to give us an hour to return and he agreed. Since he was with us, 
he shares our memory," Cling Ling explained. "He isn't anxious to repeat 
the entire journey. Even without us, he could still end up with the ants, and 
who would fly him out of there? But there are limits to the time window, so 
we cannot delay." 
"You mean, we have to do everything all over again?" Herb asked in 
amazement. 
"Not if we get back on track and find our former notch in time. We can 
then proceed as planned." 
"Then we have no choice. We have to escape," Herb said with calm new 

 147 
determination. "Any suggestions as how?" 
Just then their counselor entered and introduced himself. He was a thin 
Vinese with waxed leaves. As he saw it, they could not be held over until 
the Tribunal met, and Spring could not be held at all. Intergalactic 
Immunity did indeed cover all charges against her. She would be deported 
as quickly as the arrangements could be made. 
As for Herb and Cling Ling, since the main onus fell upon Spring as the 
driver of the outlawed vehicle, they could be charged only as accessories. 
With their clean records, however, and in Herb's case, prominent family, 
their dismissal was all but assured. 
"Then, we are free to leave?" Herb asked, considerably perked by the 
news. 
The counselor confirmed that was so. All they had to do was pay the 
routine Assurance fee that they would appear for the next Tribunal and 
they would be out on their own recognizance. 
"You mean bail?" Spring asked. 
The counselor handed Herb the appearance ticket with a schedule date 
and the fee amount. Herb blanched white. "That much?" He passed it over 
to Cling Ling. "I have enough to cover our expenses, Cling, but I can't meet 
this." 
Cling Ling shook his foliage. "I regret I cannot find sufficient funds to 
cover it either." They looked at Spring. 
"Well, don't look at me," Spring said. "It took everything I had to pay my 
fare on the lightship. I have reserves on New Landers, but that would mean 
going back in person. I'm sure Zygote has a watch there. Anyway, most of 
it is tied up in legalities since Father's death. It would take time." 
Herb frowned. "We don't have that either." 
"If I may suggest?" said the counselor, handing them a small card. It 
read: THORN AND THISTLE-PERSONAL LOANS. 
"A loan. That's what we need," Herb agreed. "Quick. We need a 
communiline to call them." 
"Would they lend us that much?" asked Spring, doubtfully. 
"Ahem." The counselor cleared his throat for attention. "Mr. Moss's 
father is not unknown in this community. I feel confident his name would 

 148 
suffice to secure your fee payment." He smiled ingratiatingly. 
"That's right. Your father. He's rich, isn't he? Why don't you just call 
him?" Spring asked. 
"Because I don't care to explain how I landed in jail for stealing hot 
cars," he snapped. "Not to mention what's happened to Lily." 
"Oh. Yes. I see your point," Spring said, biting her lip. 
"I agree for other reasons," Cling Ling said. "The fewer others we involve 
in this hopefully temporary history, the fewer loose ends we have to 
contend with upon return. However-" 
"Then get the loan quick," Spring interrupted. 
"Mistress Moon-" Cling Ling said. 
"Please, Cling. We have no more time to waste," Herb agreed. 
"I shall be honored to handle the transaction for you, Mr. Moss," the 
counselor said, smiling his oily smile and rolling out of the room. 
"I can't believe it's that simple," Spring said with a sigh of relief. "We're 
actually getting out of here." 
"Yes, and I won't even have to pay back the loan when we return 
because all of this will be erased," Herb said. 
"Herb, I must speak with-" Cling Ling began. 
But before he could finish, the door opened and the counselor returned 
in the company of a shady looking Treeple. Perhaps that wasn't a fair 
assessment, 
Spring 
thought, 
considering 
most 
Treeple's 
natural 
appearance. She was later to have more faith in first impressions. 
"This is Mr. Thorn," their counselor said. "Because of the considerable 
amount of the loan involved, he wishes to consult with you in person. If 
you will excuse me?" He rolled out, securing the door behind him. 
The Treeple leaned across the desk and spoke in a raspy voice. It could 
have been natural, or it could have come from an addiction to raspberries. 
Herb frowned and began to wonder what sort of company they were 
dealing with. 
"Why should I fork over three G's on a bunch that's going to skip 
planet?" he asked. 
They all looked at him in surprise. How could he possibly know they 
were planning to leave? 

 149 
Spring asked, "How did you know that?" 
The Treeple snorted coarsely. "One of my boys did a deal with the bush 
face, over there." He jerked a branch toward Cling Ling. "Got him a unique 
vehicle, you might say." 
"I thought you looked familiar," Herb said, remembering the Treeple 
from the garage. 
"My cousin, Leafty. There's a slight family resemblance. But I digress. 
You're on the wind-you're blowing planet. I can't hand out three goldenrods 
when I may never see them again. Mr. Thistle wouldn't like that." 
"But we'll repay you. We're good for it. We just don't have it at the 
present time," Spring pleaded. 
"I know. Herb's old man is goldleaf. Why not ask him for it?" Thorn 
asked. 
"I have my reasons," Herb answered, avoiding eye contact. 
"And goodies they are, no doubt. So it's like this. You need G's, and you 
need them fast." 
"Right," Herb and Spring said together. Cling Ling said nothing. 
"I know you're good for it. But who says you'll return?" 
Spring opened her mouth to protest, but the Treeple held up a branch. 
"No offence, Little Blossom. In space, there's no guarantee. Ah shucks. 
Maybe I have soft roots, but there might be one way we can deal. 
Something that wouldn't upset Mr. Thistle. You wouldn't even have to pay 
us back." 
Herb and Spring looked at each other in amazement. It was too good to 
be true. There was a Founder looking out for them. 
"That is, you wouldn't pay in goldenrods. Our firm would accept a small 
service for the fee." 
"Service?" Spring said, wrinkling her forehead. "I don't know. What sort 
of service?" 
"Do we have a deal?" he pressed. 
"First, tell us what the service would involve," Herb said. 
"Deal or no deal?" he repeated as if Herb hadn't spoken. "My final offer." 
"Deal," Herb said, quickly. 
"Herb!" Spring and Cling Ling chorused together. 

 150 
"What choice do we have? We have to get to the space port. Whatever it 
is, it can't be worse than losing Lily," he blurted in anguish. 
"True," Spring agreed. "I'm not sure I like this, but what else can we 
do?" She looked at Cling Ling. 
Cling Ling only shrugged, being outnumbered. He had tried to warn 
them about these Loan Barks, but they wouldn't listen. Now, the decision 
had been made. 
"You've done the smart thing," Thorn said with a prickly pear smile. "I'll 
pay your fee and take you straight to the space port in my Traveller. We 
can discuss everything on the way," he continued jovially, slapping Herb on 
the back with a hearty branch. Spring shrank back from his grasp, but went 
along meekly. Cling Ling rolled glumly behind them. 
It went like clockwork. Thorn's fast transport took them straight to the 
waiting Txnghc's ship with a minute to spare. The pilot was clearly relieved 
to see them. They were aboard in no time, sacked up and cringing for take-
off. 
It was another gut wrencher. Several woozy stomachs later, they were 
idling in Drift, getting set for the time warp to the future they had left 
behind earlier. Cling Ling and the Txnghc were in conference, calculating 
their destination to the nth degree. No one wanted a repeat of the last 
fiasco! 
Everything had moved so fast, they hardly had time to discuss their 
bargain with Mr. Thorn, but it seemed simple enough. All they had to do 
was deliver a small package to planet Snowball. So called, because the 
temperature never rose above zero, and the entire surface suffered 
constant blizzards. 
Herb wasn't thrilled about going there, but it turned out to be only a hop 
and jump from Kamalot, so distance shouldn't present a problem. Indeed, 
the Txnghc ship seemed at its most adept when flying in hops and jumps. 
Herb's stomach was still doing somersaults. 
He knew Cling Ling had not approved of the transaction, but it seemed a 
small enough task in exchange for their huge Assurance fee. The package 
was actually a small, thick, metallic container like a square bucket, which 
felt rather warm to the touch. 

 151 
When Spring inquired the nature of the package, Thorn had only replied 
that it was a valuable shipment of perishable goods. That was why it was 
necessary to find a quick means of delivery and why he was willing to take 
their service for the fee. The goods had been prepaid so all they needed to 
do was deliver it. 
Perhaps it was a gourmet feast for some rich snowman, Herb mused. He 
hoped it was nothing illegal, but asked no more questions lest he discover it 
was. It was none of their business, and in any case, the deal had been 
made and they were stuck for it. Herb secured it at the bottom of his sack 
to keep it from careening about the ship during take-off. 
Spring sat at the side, talking to the diplomat. He had returned in this 
time frame, although they had already delivered him to his home to be, uh, 
delivered. Some birthday. But that would be corrected as soon as they 
timewarped properly this time. She knew Herb had no desire to see those 
ants again, even though he had come to no harm. Reasonable or not, 
insects bugged him. 
Cling Ling stuck his leafy face down the hatch from above. "Sorry to 
delay, but we had to be certain of our coordinates this time," he explained. 
"Here, here," concurred the diplomat. "Popping in and out of my 
mother's womb is an unnatural act, to say the least. Hopefully, this will be 
my last attempt." 
"Warp out in ten minsecs," Cling Ling said, shutting the hatch. 
Everyone sacked up. Spring helped the child into his, and then slid inside 
her own. Herb checked them both before climbing into his, scooting well 
down to the bottom. 
"Yeow," he yelped, leaping back out and grabbing for his burning feet. 
Spring watched as Herb hopped ludicrously around the small room. 
"Hot foot," he yelled in explanation, flopping down upon the floor to peel 
off his smoking socks. 
Spring was already out of her sack, looking to see what had caused his 
sudden leap. A smoldering hole was burned through the end of his sack, 
and there across the way where it had slid, was the container with its lid 
ajar. It must have popped open. She bent over it to peep inside, then let 
out a piercing scream. 

 152 
The top hatch was flung open immediately, and Cling Ling slung himself 
down the short ladder. "What's wrong? It's almost time for warp-out." 
"Look," Spring cried, pointing a shaky finger toward the glowing 
container. "Squiggly things." Herb had limped over beside her at the 
scream, and held her protectively in his arms. 
The young diplomat was at their side now, peering down into the open 
box. His eyes opened wide as he looked back to Herb. "My stars," he cried. 
"You've got a bad case of the HOTS." 
Herb stumbled as he released Spring and backed away, coloring deeply. 
"Yes, it's HOTS, all right," he said to Cling Ling. "I have seen these once 
before on a dead planet." 
Cling Ling looked closely. "Yes. I agree. They are Hybrid Oxalic 
Taproots," he said in horror. 
"Hybrid Oxalic-Oh. HOTS," Herb said, realizing the diplomat had not 
been commenting on his behavior with Spring after all. 
"I've read about those in some of the material Herb sent me about plant 
life on P#23. Aren't they extremely dangerous?" Spring asked. 
"Dangerous hardly describes them. What do you suppose killed that 
dead planet where I saw them?" he asked. "They must be properly 
contained or they will bum right through this ship. There is hardly a more 
acidic substance in the universe than HOTS." 
Herb could vouch for that. He had touched it for only a second and his 
scorched feet were barely cooling off. 
Cling Ling raced back up to consult with the Txnghc pilot who had been 
busy with the final machinations of the controls. He rolled back, slinging a 
thin metallic sheet over the HOTS box. It was a sheet from their Cold 
storage, he explained, and should help to cool the box until they reached 
their destination. Once there, it should be safe enough, since the freezing 
temperatures would be in their favor. 
"No wonder Thorn was willing to take this delivery in lieu of our debt," 
Spring said, looking aghast at the smoke curling up from beneath the 
sheet. 
"He did say it was perishable," Herb said. 
"Not as perishable as us," Cling Ling said. The ship gave a preliminary 

 153 
shudder. "Hurry and sack up. The warp-out's beginning," he shouted, 
flinging himself back through the upper hatch and slamming it tight. 
Everyone was inside sacks, waiting. Herb's sockless foot stuck through 
the hole at the end. Luckily, he had removed his shoes or he would have no 
footwear at all. 
He should have known there would be a catch to it for that much 
money, and he had literally put his foot into it this time. 
They warped. The noise was deafening, the speed incredible. It was 
indescribable. The nearest analogy Herb could find was a vision of ten nets 
balls banging inside an ancient washing unit at translight speed. The group 
of them, of course, were the ten nets balls. As suddenly as it began, the 
ship was spit out and splashed down into an icy sea. They had arrived on 
Snowball. 
Cling Ling quickly joined the others in inspecting the shipment of HOTS. 
They had ceased smoking, and that was encouraging. Using the end of the 
Cold sheet, Cling Ling secured the lid and lifted it by the handle, carrying it 
out through the hatch. 
The Txnghc was topside breaking out Snuggies for them. The garments 
were paper thin and looked like shiny pink foil, but once on they proved 
toasty warm. 
Before emerging into the raging snow storm outside, they fortified 
themselves with nutrition pellets from the Txnghc's larder. Not too tasty, 
but surprisingly filling. Herb stuck a few extra in his pockets. 
The pilot had also dropped a dinghy outside into the choppy waters and 
helped lower Cling and Herb down the side. Spring slid down last with 
Herb's help. He caught her at the sides of her waist as she landed, and felt 
his breath intake as her breasts pressed up against him. Even through the 
foil material, she was soft and warm. Spring returned his gaze as he looked 
helplessly into her eyes. 
"Please to sit," Cling Ling instructed. "We must not rock this craft. The 
water is frozen." 
It certainly was. It was practically a sheet of ice, with only a few cracks 
here and there of dark, churning water. 
"How did he ever find a space safe enough to land?" gasped Spring in 

 154 
awe of the surroundings. 
"He didn't. Heat jets. They melted a place as we landed. Now we need 
to hurry to shore before the water freezes over again," Cling Ling said. "We 
wouldn't wish to be caught inside this glacier." 
"No, I have no desire to turn into a Burr Side," Spring said. "That's a 
frozen sweet," she explained to Herb. 
He smiled. It was an apt analogy. 
"Our pilot landed close to the delivery point," Cling Ling informed them, 
as he consulted a screen on the dinghy control panel. He pointed out a red 
blip. "If I am not mistaken, that is our destination." 
"How can we see? This snow storm is getting worse," Herb complained, 
as Spring snuggled closer. Well, it was an ill wind that boded no one any 
good. 
"I will home in with this instrument," Cling Ling said, guiding the small 
vessel with his covered vines. After a bit, they saw the faint glow from 
buildings ahead. The storm had let up in intensity and Herb gaped in 
disbelief. Buildings made from ice? But why not? There was certainly plenty 
of it available, and no danger of melting in this frozen world. A sensible use 
of a natural resource. 
Cling Ling had run their craft as far as the crack in the ice extended. 
They pulled it ashore and pressed forward on foot. Fortunately, as they 
reached the "road" to the buildings, they discovered the walk way was 
heated. Only a bit of stubborn ice melted and refroze here and there as 
they approached the entrance of the main building. 
Herb's foot found a slick piece and he slid through the door on one foot, 
dragging Spring with him. It was an outer portico, with a large door at the 
side. Cling Ling pressed the bright red lever and it opened to reveal an 
efficient, official looking business office waiting room. 
"It looks so normal," Spring said. 
"I know what you mean," Herb agreed. "After seeing an ice building, I 
thought we might be greeted by Polaris bears or snowmen." 
"Good day," said a voice as soft as drifted snow. "I'm Miss Frosty, Mr. 
Zeroid's secretary. So sorry to keep you waiting." 
Herb's eyes bulged. That was no snowman. Snow bunny, perhaps. He 

 155 
ogled the tall, statuesque, platinum haired, incredibly well-grown female 
with skin so white it was lustrous. This ice maiden was definitely hot. 
"We just arrived," he squeaked. 
Spring's eyes narrowed as she pushed ahead of Herb to speak, since for 
reasons she didn't care to think about, he seemed to have lost his voice. 
"We have a delivery from Mr. Thorn," she said coldly. 
"You are most welcome. We have been expecting you," the vision 
beamed. 
"You have?" Herb croaked. 
"Oh yes. Mr. Zeroid has been most anxious. I will let him know you have 
arrived safely. Please make yourselves comfortable, and if you should need 
anything before I return, just press this button," she said, indicating its 
location, "and call me." She smiled at Herb. "I am Frigidda." 
"I don't believe that," Herb said under his breath. 
"What?" Spring asked as the icy beauty departed through another door. 
"Uh, nothing. I just wondered how they knew we were the ones 
delivering their package," he said stupidly. 
"I imagine the Txnghc has been in communication from the ship, and 
even had he not been, just how many green snowmen do you think they 
see around here?" she said testily. 
Herb decided to remain quiet. For some reason he didn't understand 
Spring had lost her usual good nature. He heard her make a barely audible 
snorting sound. Women could be so moody. 
The three of them sat in strained silence until Miss Frosty returned to 
smilingly announce that Mr. Zeroid would see them now, indicating the 
doorway. 
"Why, thank you, Miss ah, ah-" Herb stammered, awed for the moment 
by the brilliance of her sparkling white teeth. 
Spring sprang to the rescue, taking his arm and tugging him along. "We 
mustn't keep Mr. Zeroid waiting, Herb. Besides, I'm sure Miss Frostbite has 
work to do." 
They entered with Cling Ling moving ahead of them with his burden of 
HOTS. Mr. Zeroid rose from behind his desk to greet them. He was a large, 
rounded gentleman with the same snow-white coloring as his secretary. He 

 156 
did indeed resemble a jolly, plump snowman. 
"I'll relieve you of those," he said to Cling Ling, placing the box on his 
desk. "You've arrived just in time, too. Our power is nearly exhausted. I've 
already notified our engineers. They'll be right up for those." He sat back 
down after indicating chairs for the trio. He seemed clearly relieved that the 
shipment had arrived safely. 
"What were you saying about your power?" Spring asked politely. 
He looked surprised. "You don't know what they're for? They are the 
only power source feasible for our planet. Even they don't last forever. The 
extreme cold, you see. Our sector had only a few more hours' heat and 
then, well, we are certainly glad to see you." He laughed nervously. 
"But why did you wait so long to get replacements?" asked Herb. 
"You really aren't aware of our situation here, are you?" asked Mr. 
Zeroid, amazed. 
"Please be most kind to explain," Cling Ling said. 
"Certainly. Hybrid Oxalic Taproots are only grown on P#23 under certain 
specialized conditions. They are not only rare and expensive, they are 
difficult to ship because they-" 
"I think we already know why," Spring interrupted wryly. 
"Yes," he continued. "We do order them well in advance, but variables 
such as bad crops, budget problems, or transportation can always cause 
hazardous delays." 
"One must ask. Why rely on such questionable sources of energy?" Cling 
Ling asked. 
"Because Hybrid, er, HOTS, are virtually the only heat and power source 
that won't freeze up on our world. Before they were available, we were 
more or less an isolated chunk of ice. They have enabled our civilization not 
only to interact with our own kind, but to open communication with the 
outside universe. Without them, we'd lose everything." 
"Ah, indeed," Cling Ling agreed. 
"I'm afraid persons such as Mr. Thorn realize our desperation and it's 
become tougher to meet his price. Oh, not that we don't want to do 
business," he quickly added, obviously fearing he had said too much. 
"That is terrible," Spring exclaimed, outraged. "We have no loyalty to 

 157 
Thorn, Mr. Zeroid. This is a one time job. So don't worry, you may speak 
freely. There must be something we could do to help, Cling? This is a 
matter of survival." 
"You see the situation exactly," agreed Mr. Zeroid, relieved he had not 
spoken out of turn. 
"We must bring this to the attention of the diplomatic services," said 
Cling Ling. 
"Yes, Patty Cakes will know what to do," joined in Herb. 
"Rest assured we shall apprise the proper officials, Mr. Zeroid. I know 
Paradise would not wish your planet to be exploited in this manner. There 
will be an inquiry, and no doubt, new regulations will follow," Cling Ling 
said. 
"Well, that is just wonderful. Thank you all," Mr. Zeroid said, gratefully 
reaching out to shake hands all around. "It was our lucky day when you 
folks arrived on the scene." 
"And a very bad day for one Mr. Thorn," grinned Herb. 
"And Thistle," added Spring, giggling. "Serves him right for trying to trick 
us." 
A short time later, they were aboard the dinghy and safely away from 
the dazzling Miss Frosty. They had wrapped up tightly in their Snuggies and 
braced against the storm as Cling Ling headed back to the ship. Their 
passage route was showing signs of icing despite the heat jets from the 
Txnghc craft. The snow had become so heavy no one could see anything. 
Cling Ling had to rely solely on the dinghy's instruments to guide them 
back. 
Suddenly, the vessel came to a dead stop. "Why are we stopping here, 
Cling?" Spring called from beneath her hood. The snow was almost 
blinding. 
"We have not stopped. It has stopped us. The heat jet must have 
dislodged some larger ice fragments and one is blocking our path through 
the glacier." 
"Great. Could we get out and slide the boat over it?" Herb asked. 
"Not advisable. This vessel has a heated flooring. The temperature of 
this ice and water are far below anything we could survive. One step 

 158 
outside and you would surely lose a limb," Cling Ling warned. 
"We can't just sit here. Heated bottom or not, we'd freeze to death 
soon." 
"I must agree with you, Mistress Moon," Cling Ling said. 
"We have to do something," Herb said. "Call the Txnghc. Maybe he can 
help us." 
"Regretfully, I have tried to alert the ship of our predicament without 
success. I fear the instruments have frozen." 
"Wait," Spring said. "I hear something. Maybe he's seen us anyway. 
Maybe he's coming out to get us." 
"I hear it, too," Herb said. "Funny, it doesn't sound like another dinghy 
motor. It's more of a-crunching sound." 
"You're right. Like something breaking off chunks of ice. Crunch-crunch," 
Spring said puzzled. 
The snow fall had noticeably abated while they discussed the mystery 
sound, which was getting considerably closer. Spring turned to look out the 
back of the small craft and screamed. 
It was definitely a screaming situation, Herb agreed as he saw the 
source of the loud noise. 
"Ice Eater," Cling Ling gasped. "Hit the deck," he yelled, as the gigantic 
jaws of the huge monster loomed above them. 
Herb pulled Spring down and fell prone across her. If they were doomed 
to be eaten by the horrific beast, at least they would meet their fate 
together. He felt the small craft rise up on a giant wave and then plunge 
flatly down into the water, splashing them with liquid so cold, it seemed to 
burn through their foil clothing. Then, all was calm. 
"We're alive," breathed Herb through chattering teeth, as he helped 
Spring up from the floor of the dinghy. Cling Ling was working the controls 
and announced they were moving again. As they watched, the monster 
ploughed straight ahead. If he kept to his course, he would pass directly by 
the ship. Cling guided the dinghy straight down the wide path made by the 
monster. They would soon be safely aboard. 
"But why didn't he eat us?" asked Spring, basking in the warmth of the 
ship's compartment. Herb basked in the warmth of Spring. He was still 

 159 
shaking inside from their close call. 
"It was an Ice Eater," Cling Ling explained. "There was never any danger 
of its devouring us intentionally, as its sole diet is ice. But if it had capsized 
our craft, which it nearly did by swimming so close, we would now be 
resting in an icy grave. Fortunately, that did not happen." 
Cling Ling had given the information about Snowball's HOTS situation to 
the Txnghc pilot to relay to the authorities. It was useless to tell their 
diplomat friend since he would soon become a new person, returning to his 
proper place in time with the next warp. As would they all, it was to be 
devoutly hoped. 
Herb could hardly believe it, but the warp was successful and they had 
connected with the illusive point which restored all to a present reality. 
They had reached Kamalot, Zygote's private moon. 
Per instructions, the Txnghc pilot navigated to a secluded spot near a 
dense forest for touch down. The Vinese had been correct. The ship was 
fast, the pilot proficient. The only real danger was that the ship might have 
fallen apart. It had certainly been through a rough time lately. The Txnghc 
seemed unconcerned, however, and bidding them a fond farewell-for 
doubtless he was used to far more peaceful flights-he lifted off in a red blur 
toward the distant stars. 
Herb had mixed feelings. While he didn't relish being stranded on some 
alien, artificial planet, neither had he the stomach for stepping foot in that 
rattle trap ship again. He stood staring forlornly into the silent forest. He 
was so tired. How could he go on? Spring joined him and took his hand in 
hers. Suddenly, he knew he would, even if he didn't know how. 

 160 
21 
 
 
 
The magician undoubtedly has some transportation at his disposal. For 
all his power, I doubt he can jump from planet to planet on his own," Cling 
Ling said. 
"Don't ever underestimate him," Spring warned. "He's an unscrupulous 
viper, but a fair magician. This whole world is his handiwork, remember." 
"In any case, our Txnghc friend could not wait. He had to return home 
to complete his transformation in safety. Mistress Moon, you are the most 
familiar with this world. Where do you think Zygote would take Miss Lily to-
to interrogate her?" 
"Cling, I've heard only secondhand stories. Zygote spoke more to my 
father than me, and I avoided him whenever possible. I only know he lives 
in a huge castle, but as to where it's located-" She shrugged. "But I would 
assume he would take her there." 
"But, we'll still be too late!" Herb cried. "If we don't even know where 
she is, how can we possibly save her now?" 
"Because we shall find this castle," Cling Ling said calmly, "and be there 
when she arrives." 
"When?" both Spring and Herb asked in astonished confusion. 
"But-but-I thought she was here," Herb exclaimed. 
"You forget the last timewarp. Due to our pilot's own personal problem, 
he had to back up, so we are here earlier than we would originally have 

 161 
landed," Cling Ling explained. "He needs the time to complete his journey 
home. This is to our advantage. It gives us needed time to locate Zygote 
and plan our rescue." While Herb and Spring were left to mull these things 
over, he decided to scout the area. 
The two found a hidden spot at the edge of the forest to wait for Cling 
Ling. They both had so much to think about now that they were actually 
here. Herb leaned against the wide trunk of a huge oak, while Spring sat 
cross legged on the ground upon a bed of colored leaves, examining some 
tiny purple flowers peeping through. 
Herb felt at a disadvantage. Cling Ling knew so much more of the ways 
of the universe than Herb did from his studies and his Vision Plays. Even 
Spring was a seasoned space traveller. Right now, the ordinary family life 
of an ivy covered cottage sounded wonderful to him. 
Lily was the obvious choice. They were the same kind, they shared a 
common culture and outlook, and they had grown up from the same roots. 
It was a natural union. 
Spring, on the other hand, was a woman of the universe. She could 
never thrive in the quiet surroundings of Paradise while the grass grew 
greener elsewhere. They were from two different worlds: his a peaceful, 
green, pastoral one; hers a teeming city life, full of magicians, fast cars, 
and scientific wonders. With her botanical background, she would plant a 
name for herself, of that he was certain. 
"Why are you staring at me that way?" Spring asked, perplexed by his 
intense gaze. 
"What? I must have been lost in thought. About Lily," he lied. 
"I understand," Spring said quietly. "I was thinking about my father. And 
Zygote," she added with hatred. "Now that I'm here, there are so many 
plans to make, and-" There was a loud rustling sound from the bushes 
behind them. "Oh, here comes Cling." 
"That was a short trip," Herb said as he turned expectantly to see his 
Vinese friend. "Find anything?" 
"Yeah. We found us two little green men from Mars. Right, Charlie?" 
That was spoken by one of two rough looking characters seated on 
horseback. Herb stared up in surprise while Spring recoiled from their 

 162 
unsavory appearance. She could be mistaken, but they looked like trouble. 
Maybe more than the two of them could handle. 
"You apologize to that there lady, Samuel," laughed the other one. "She 
might be green, but she sure ain't no man." His eyes crawled across her 
body like lice. There was no misunderstanding that evil look. 
"Herb," Spring said nervously, moving close beside him, "I-" 
"You her man?" Samuel asked, and snorted derisively. He had discolored 
teeth and scraggly whiskers. 
"We are-together. What do you want from us?" Herb asked with more 
bravado than he felt. He hoped Cling Ling would be back soon. 
"What do I want?" Samuel said with a dreamy look. "Oh, just what every 
man wants. A big, fine, castle with lots of buxom wenches to pass my time 
'o day. And gold. Lots and lots of gold. You can't keep fancy ladies without 
the gold, my friend. And, say. That brings us to the business at hand 
betwixt you and me, lad. Hand over 'yer booty." 
"Booty?" Herb asked, swallowing. 
"He means money. Valuables. They're outlaws." Spring glared. "And I 
don't think they're part of Robin Hood's merry band." 
Charlie gave a hoot and slapped his knee. "Robin Hood? Why, that's just 
what we are. We take from the rich and give to poor us." He laughed at his 
own joke, drool oozing from one side of his mouth. 
Spring wrinkled her nose in disgust. These oafs stank, too. 
"But we have no merrygolds," Herb protested. 
"Guess that means he don't have no money, Sam," Charlie said in mock 
surprise. 
"Well," Samuel said, scratching his filthy beard, "if they don't have it, we 
can't get it." 
"What we going to do now, Samuel?" Charlie asked with exaggerated 
earnestness. 
"If they don't have money, guess we just have to take something else," 
Samuel answered brightly, leering at Spring. 
"That is a sure 'nuff fine idea," Charlie agreed, dismounting and moving 
toward her with undisguised lust. 
"No!" Herb said, angrily, suddenly understanding their confusing 

 163 
conversation. Were all offworlders animals? No one was going to molest 
Spring. Leaping for Charlie, he took him off guard and wrestled him to the 
dirt. 
The larger Charlie recovered quickly, and slammed a fist through Herb's 
middle, sending him rolling to the side in pain. But it didn't matter; he had 
to protect Spring. 
Before Herb had reached his feet, Charlie grabbed him at the collar and 
followed with a right cross to his chin. Herb went down in a sprawling heap, 
head reeling from the explosion. 
Spring flew to his side, cautiously examining his jaw. It was bloody, but 
no teeth were lost. He would surely have a fat lip for several days to come, 
though. 
Charlie looked up at his companion who hadn't stirred an inch from his 
saddle during the fight. "You didn't help me a bit, Sam," he said in a hurt 
tone, rubbing his fist. "Just look how he got my duds all dusty, too." He 
made a big display of brushing himself off. 
"Never mind. You're a working gentleman. And still a handsome fellow, 
ain't he, gal? That little greenie was spunkier than he looked," he said to 
Spring, as if paying her a compliment. 
Charlie grunted. "I don't like spunk." He lifted his boot and shoved Herb 
over. 
"Leave him alone," Spring snapped, finding her courage. "Haven't you 
done enough to him? Go away. We don't have anything for you." She 
cradled Herb in her arms. 
"Aw, I can't agree with that. You're a fine looking filly," Charlie said. "We 
goin' to have us a good time." He grabbed her and dragged her squirming 
and kicking back to his mount. 
Herb's dizziness was finally subsiding. Looking through aching eyes, he 
spied one of the bandits manhandling Spring, to get her onto his horse. He 
felt desperately about in the dirt and finally found his weapon, a large 
jagged rock. 
Herb drew back and aimed, but something shoved at him just as he let 
the missile fly, causing it to fall short. Sam had run his horse against him, 
spoiling the throw. 

 164 
Now Charlie was angry. The rock had missed his head, true, but 
ploughed cruelly into his shoulder blade. He released Spring and turned for 
Herb, his whole arm swinging to connect for a sound blow to the belly. 
Herb went down, tried to rise, then collapsed face first in the dirt. 
Charlie reached down and shoved Herb's face into the soil, cursing. 
"Stop it, you slime," Spring screamed, leaping on his back to beat 
fruitlessly. It was like pounding steel with a feather. She couldn't make a 
dent. 
Samuel rode over to peel her off Charlie and held her at arm's length, 
where she struggled helplessly. He called to Charlie. "No sense beating a 
dead horse," he said, giving Spring a shake. 
"He ain't dead. Yet," Charlie growled. 
"We better make tracks out of here. All this ruckus might have roused 
some of their friends. They thought we was somebody else when we found 
them," Samuel reminded him. 
"Well, I ain't goin' empty handed," Charlie said, looking at Spring. He 
was beginning to drool again. 
"Never said we was. Here, strap this wildcat to your saddle. My arm's 
gettin' tired from tusslin' with her." 
Charlie hauled Spring up and flopped her onto her stomach. Her head 
was facing downward, and her legs dangled off the other side. After tying 
her wrists together, he mounted behind her and slapped her bottom. The 
final indignity! When Spring tried to bite Charlie's leg, he pulled off his dirty 
bandanna and crammed it into her mouth. She gagged, but ceased 
struggling. They were just too strong for her. 
Satisfied, Samuel kicked his mount and galloped off. Charlie and Spring 
trotted close behind. 
Herb came to just as the cloud of dust was settling around him. His eyes 
were dull with despair. They had taken Spring! He had let her down when 
she needed him most. 
"Spring," he called weakly, falling back to his knees. He had to find her! 
His head flashed with yellow pain, and then the darkness came again. 
"Herb?" Cling Ling said. "Can you hear me?" 
Herb felt the cool wetness run over his face, his tongue hungrily 

 165 
swallowing the water. He opened his eyes. Oh, they hurt. He looked into 
the concerned foliage of Cling Ling's bushy face, and took more water. Now 
he remembered. 
"Cling," he said thickly through swollen lips. "They took her. Spring." 
"I saw them riding away just as I came back, but I had to attend you 
first. I don't think any limbs are broken. How do you feel?" 
"Like I've been run through a lawn mower. But forget about me. Go after 
them, Cling! Find Spring!" 
"They cannot get far," Cling Ling said confidently. "At the risk of 
immodesty, I remind you it is doubtful a mere horse could outdistance a 
Vinese at full roll. They shall not harm our Mistress Moon." He rolled off 
with all the speed a Vinese could muster, which was considerable. 
Herb pulled himself up against a tree trunk and gulped down a few more 
swallows of the water Cling Ling had brought him. Luckily, they had taken 
canteens and rations from the Txnghc's ship. Herb washed down a nutrition 
pellet from his pocket. He had to recover his strength and follow Cling. 
For now, all he could do was wait. His head was too unsteady to allow 
him to stand. He had to believe Cling Ling would find them, and stop them 
from- 
The Founder! he swore mentally. Could they have been sent by Zygote? 
Somehow, he didn't think so. Zygote might lose his precious Secret after 
all. Herb wouldn't cry about that, but about Spring. To have to submit to 
those filthy-At least Zygote was only interested in her from a scientific 
viewpoint, but who knew what those two might do! 
This could never happen on P#23. Maybe he could persuade her to 
come back with him, just as a friend, and stay for a while. Surely Lily 
wouldn't mind that. Not after all that had happened. No. That was crazy. 
After all this was over, he would never see Spring again, and that was for 
the best. For everyone. 
Meanwhile, the horsemen had not gone far before they came to the 
stream where Cling Ling had filled their canteens earlier. Samuel set up 
camp while Charlie watered the horses. Spring was tied to a tree limb at 
the edge of a wooded area. Every now and then, Charlie would call back to 
her, describing what he intended to do with her after he had some "grub." 

 166 
One sleeve of the floral dress had been torn off her shoulder, revealing 
the true pale color of the skin beneath. Charlie was fascinated by the 
discovery, and promised to "take her skinny dipping to see what else was 
under all that green paint." 
Cling Ling's vines reached from behind the tree trunk and began 
meticulously undoing the ropes that bound her. Spring gasped and looked 
back with her frightened eyes. A hopeful smile briefly creased her lips when 
she saw Cling, but she did not dare to move or speak. 
Charlie looked toward her once, but she remained stiff as if still bound. 
He looked right past Cling Ling without seeing him. If he had noticed 
anything, he must have thought him part of the shrubbery. 
Having freed Spring, Cling Ling took full advantage of his natural 
camouflage, and flattening out his vines, inched forward toward the two 
men seated at the campfire. 
Sam glanced over his shoulder toward Spring. She held her breath, 
certain he would spot Cling Ling, but he didn't notice anything out of the 
ordinary. She breathed again as he turned back and reached down for the 
coffee pot, first filling his own tin mug, then offering some to Charlie. 
Charlie held out his cup, then yowled in pain as the hot liquid sloshed over 
him. 
One of Cling Ling's vines had tripped up Sam just as he lifted the pot. 
For a brief moment they all stood comically suspended, the two men trying 
to figure out what was going on. Then Cling Ling pressed a nerve on the 
injured Charlie's spine, sending him crumbling into the ashes of the fire. 
Samuel reached for his knife. "An enchanted weed," he bellowed, 
wielding the weapon at Cling's foliage. Unfortunately for him, he hesitated, 
trying to find where the bush was vulnerable. It was a split second too 
long. One of Cling's vines shot out to snatch away the blade, sending it 
sailing off into the creek. It sank with a small splash. 
"My father's silver handled stabber," Samuel cried. "Why you bloody 
bush! I'll break you to kindling!" He reached wildly, picking Cling Ling up 
and squeezing him in a tight bear hug against his chest. 
It was probably the worst possible move he could have made. Cling's 
vines wrapped around the man's bull neck and contracted. Sam let go to 

 167 
clutch at his throat. He tried to speak, but the air was gone. He turned a 
motley shade of blue and dropped to the ground, taking Cling Ling with 
him. The man was done for. 
Slowly, Cling unwound his vines and rolled back to Spring. She was up 
and watching the struggle from a distance. When Cling brought the last 
man down, she had untied the horses and given them a sound smack on 
the backsides, smiling with satisfaction as they galloped away down the 
stream. 
Cling nodded approval. "By the time they recover and round up their 
horses, we shall be long departed." 
"Herb?" she whispered. She knew he would have come with Cling Ling 
were he able, so she was almost afraid to ask. 
"Roughed up, but he will recover," Cling Ling said. "He put up a valiant 
fight for your honor, Mistress Moon." 
"I have no honor left," she scoffed, thinking of all the trouble she had 
brought down on them. "Please, let's hurry, Cling Ling! I want to tell him 
how much-how much I appreciate what he did for me," she finished 
quietly. 
Without another word, the Vinese led her back through the woods to the 
place where Herb lay, hardly moving since his friend had left. His head still 
throbbed, and his lips felt the size of Freezer wheels. 
"Herb," Spring gasped, shocked at his appearance now that the bruises 
were in full color. Even on green skin, they were beauties. 
"Spring," he said weakly, trying to smile and wincing at the attempt. "Are 
you well? They didn't-they didn't harm you?" he asked fearfully. 
"How could anyone harm me with you and Cling to protect me?" she 
asked in return, smiling. "Oh, Herb. You were wonderful!" Then she hugged 
him soundly. 
"Ouch," he yelped. 
Spring quickly released him. "Sorry. Is there any place it doesn't hurt?" 
She leaned forward and cautiously, carefully placed a kiss on an unbruised 
spot of forehead. "There," she said. "That's for defending me." 
"They beat me to a pulp!" Herb snorted. 
"Well, yes. But you were outnumbered," she reminded him. 

 168 
"I suppose I didn't do too badly under the circumstances," Herb agreed, 
grinning through his pain. "But I couldn't let anything happen to-to the 
Secret." He caught himself. Damn the damn Secret! It was Spring. She was 
all that mattered, but she certainly didn't want to hear that kind of crazy 
talk from him. 
"I see," Spring said, some of the enthusiasm fading. "Well, just so you 
know. I am very grateful." 
"Where are the bandits?" asked Herb, trying to sound matter-of-fact. 
"Oh, dreaming sweet dreams," she answered. "Cling Ling took care of 
them." 
"Speaking of Cling, where is he?" he asked. 
"I don't know. Around, I imagine. You know Cling Ling. He doesn't leave 
much to chance." 
"Yes. Yes, we are fortunate to have him with us," Herb agreed, 
wondering why suddenly all they could talk about was Cling Ling. Why did a 
barrier always pop up just when they were getting-close? 
Why? He knew very well. Lily. Zygote. Spring's long lost lover. If those 
weren't reasons enough, he was sure he could find plenty more. 
Cling Ling returned shortly bearing news. He had rolled some distance 
earlier that day searching for any sign of Zygote's castle. The area they had 
landed in was mainly forest and largely uninhabited. This time out, 
however, he had met up with a hunter. The man could not, or did not want 
to give him any information about Zygote, but he did let slip that they were 
not far from a castle. Cling had continued to search until he made a 
discovery. 
"I found the castle not far from here, but I suggest we proceed with 
caution," he said. "We will be no assistance to Miss Lily if we become 
prisoners as well." 
Lily, Herb thought. How long ago and far away the two of them seemed 
now. Just a memory, like a picture on a postcard. 
Only none of them "wished they were here." 

 169 
22 
 
 
 
They waited as long as they could before starting out. Cling Ling needed 
a breather after his workout with the bandits, and hike through the woods. 
Herb was still recuperating, but it was vital to press onward if they hoped 
to reach the castle Cling Ling had found, before nightfall. 
They moved quietly through the woods, as the dusk turned too soon into 
darkness. It was not the wisest course to wander about at night in a 
possibly enchanted wood. They proceeded with caution, but the only 
sounds came from the dry leaves cracking beneath their feet, and the 
occasional rustle as small woodland creatures scurried from the 
trespassers. The stillness itself was eerie, and as they came to a clearing, it 
was with relief that they spied the tall, dark walls of the castle looming 
ahead of them. 
Just then, a dark shape swooped down, causing Spring to give a muffled 
cry, but it was only a night owl. It flew away as suddenly as it had 
appeared. 
They followed Cling, who guided them to a pathway leading close to the 
castle. The tall peaks of the towers gleamed in the moonlight, making dark 
blue and purple shadows along the path. It was beautiful and frightening at 
once, like a child's dream. As they drew nearer, entering through garden 
gates, lights from the tall windows above gave off a soft, golden glow. 
"There seem to be an uncommon number of statues in this garden," 

 170 
Herb commented. "Is your friend Zygote a patron of the arts?" He gazed at 
the form of a muscular young soldier, sword raised high above his head as 
if to strike. 
"I don't know," Spring answered. "But you're right, it is a bit busy." She 
looked across the ornate lawn at the profusion of sculptures. There seemed 
no pattern to their placement, and they appeared to be all male likenesses, 
as well. She advanced to the nearest and stroked the smooth surface, 
giving a small cry at the touch. 
"What's wrong?" Herb asked anxiously. 
"I can't believe it. I wish I could see better, but Herb, I think all of these 
statues are carved from gemstones." 
"Crystals? The sort of stones your father used for healing?" he asked. 
"Some crystal, probably, but others too," she said excitedly, examining 
another. "Emeralds, and diamonds, and rubies. Incredible. How could 
stones of this size exist?" 
"They are very valuable, then?" 
"Yes, depending on the kind they are, of course." She looked with a 
trained eye to another beside them, and drew in her breath. "If this really is 
one emerald, I couldn't begin to calculate its worth." 
"But if this Zygote is so wealthy, why would he care about your secret? 
He could have whatever he wants anyway," Herb said. 
"Power, Herb. Riches are nothing to some men compared with that." 
Cling Ling had left them momentarily to roll about the grounds. He had 
just returned when a brilliant light suddenly lit up the garden, bright as day. 
The scene was breathtaking. Statuary of every kind of stone stood 
glistening like giant jewels. They were all colors, emerald green, ruby red, 
sapphire blue, and delicate shades in between. It was like standing in the 
center of a rainbow. The light seemed to come from no specific area, but 
magical or scientific, it provided a beautiful spectacle. 
It did mean, however, that someone knew they were in the garden. 
There was nowhere to run, so they tried concealing themselves behind the 
statues. But as it turned out, they were too late. 
Through the center of the stones glided a lovely young woman who 
called out sweetly to them: "Please Travellers. Be not afraid. Welcome. 

 171 
Enter and rest within. The nights be not safe to fare abroad." 
The girl's hair was long, full, and jet black, set with a circlet of gold. Her 
color was deep olive, her form fair and slender. She was attired in a flowing 
gown of rich, dark red, with midnight lace at the sleeves and low bodice, 
and golden ornaments encircled her wrists. A single, perfect crystal hung 
from the delicate chain at her neck, nestled in the V of her breasts. 
"Fear not, strangers," she entreated kindly, her arms opened wide in 
welcome. "You are safe here." 
They stood in silence. Even Spring had been struck by the strange girl's 
beauty. "What do you think?" she whispered to the others. 
"Does Zygote have a daughter?" asked Herb. 
Spring gave a snort. "Who would marry Zygote? Either it's a trick to lure 
us in, or-this isn't his castle." 
They looked to Cling. "It could be a trap, but I must agree with Spring's 
supposition. I have seen no signs of the magician here. There may be more 
than one castle in Kamalot. Given a choice between staying the night here 
and venturing through the dark to an unknown destination, I believe I 
would select the lesser of risks." 
The others saw his point. They stepped forward into the light. 
"Why bid strangers such a warm welcome?" Spring asked suspiciously. 
"I have no reason to fear," answered the girl, "but certain strange 
creatures walk the night. 'Tis no place for the innocent." She smiled, her 
beauty intensifying. 
And perhaps you are not as innocent as you seem, Spring thought. 
"We thank you and accept your hospitality," Cling Ling said. "We seek 
the castle of Zygote." 
"The magician? Nay, his abode be much too far to journey this night. I 
am Jasmine, and this is my castle. Please follow me." She led them inside 
through a corridor lined with marble pedestals, which held small statues of 
animals and flowers, carved of the same precious materials as the statues 
outside. 
Spring was enthralled. Never had she seen such a grand display of 
gems. "Jasmine, if I may ask, how can such large pieces of precious stone 
exist? The artistry is fantastic." She paused to examine a small rabbit of 

 172 
sapphire, and pyrite flowers. "They are even cut to scale." 
Jasmine glowed with pleasure. "This is a magical world; many facets of 
natural law do not apply here." 
That was the only explanation, Spring agreed. 
Jasmine showed them to a group of rooms along another long hallway, 
inviting them to take their choice. The castle was so large, a few overnight 
guests could hardly burden their hostess. She then bid them goodnight with 
a promise to send refreshments to their quarters, and departed. 
The guest rooms were sumptuous. As Herb lay on his comfortable bed, 
he reflected how good it felt to be resting on something that wasn't hurtling 
though outer space. 
True to the lady of the castle's word, a tray of wine, fruit and rolls was 
delivered to each of their rooms. Herb was too restless to eat very much, 
and soon found he was more than a bit lonely for company. He wandered 
out into the hallway, intending to see if Spring was still awake. 
The swish of a feminine skirt sounded behind him. He turned to find 
Jasmine at his side, smiling sweetly. She had lovely features, no doubt of 
that, and her dark coloring was closer to that of his own Veganoid race. 
Before he could speak, she placed a well-manicured fingertip to her lips, 
motioning him away from the other doorways. 
"My servant says the lady was fatigued and requested an herb tea to 
help her sleep. Needs must you disturb her rest? May I be of assistance?" 
"Oh, I was just looking for company, nothing important. Of course, she 
needs her rest and I won't bother her. I apologize for keeping you up as 
well. I will return to my room." 
"Thou art restless. That is understandable after a long journey. Why not 
join me for a walk in the garden? 'Tis a fine warm night with a full moon." 
"But I thought you said it wasn't safe to go out at night here," Herb 
reminded her. 
"My grounds be secure. None would dare to trespass the garden now. It 
is protected," she assured him. 
"Oh, do you have guard dogs?" asked Herb. 
"Dragon. But thou needst not fear him. We shall be together," she said, 
taking his arm and guiding him down the hall. 

 173 
Herb knew he should decline and return to his room. What if Spring 
should awake and need him? She might be afraid all alone. It was out of 
the question. 
"Yes, a walk would be pleasant," he said. Wait, was that what he had 
intended to say? He couldn't seem to recall now, but no matter. There was 
no reason not to go. None at all. 
Such a lovely night. The sky was a deep velvet blue with distant stars 
twinkling like diamonds. A full moon hung suspended just above the tops of 
the trees. A moon orbiting a moon? How could that happen? He asked 
Jasmine. She seemed amused and explained that magic indeed had its 
uses, and could produce beautiful results. Herb couldn't argue with that. 
The garden reminded him of his own world, fresh and green, filled with the 
sweet scents of night bloomers. 
Herb was glad to answer all of Jasmine's questions about who they all 
were and the purpose of their journey. He trusted her completely. He could 
not believe such a beauty would be aligned with Zygote to do them harm. 
They drifted past several of the fine statues to a low, rocky fence 
surrounding a fountain where they paused to rest. Herb put the fingers of 
one hand down into the trickling water, letting the peace and serenity of 
the night wash over him as well. How relaxed he felt! 
Jasmine's soft hair brushed against his arm as she moved closer, looking 
deeply into his eyes, capturing them in her spell. Her eyes seemed to glint 
like the crystal around them. The reflection of the moon, Herb imagined, 
but beautiful. Something deep inside tugged at him to look away, but he 
ignored it. Such a vision of loveliness! Why should he not drink it in? 
Her full red lips parted slightly as she looked deeper into his eyes. She 
had said nothing, yet he interpreted the message. She was no stranger to 
the silent language of love between woman and man. 
Meanwhile, Spring paced fretfully in her room. She had napped and 
eaten a bite of the repast, but remained keyed up. Thinking she had heard 
voices, she'd gone to Herb's room, but gotten no answer to her knock. 
Possibly he was a sound sleeper. She had returned to her room and tried to 
do the same, but to no avail. She needed to talk. And the truth was, she 
had grown accustomed to Herb always being there. She missed him. 

 174 
The soft knock at her door caused her to jump. She hastily opened it, 
expecting Herb, but it was only a servant inquiring if she needed anything 
more before retiring. 
Spring replied in the negative, but asked if the servant knew whether 
Herb was asleep. The servant informed her he was not in his room a few 
moments before as she made the rounds of their guests. 
Spring waited until the servant disappeared down the corridor and ran to 
Herb's room. Still no answer. It occurred to her he might be in with Cling, 
discussing plans for tomorrow, so she knocked at his door as well. Also no 
answer. That settled it. They were together. 
But where? They wouldn't depart without her, unless-unless there was 
trouble. She turned and ran along the hall and down the steps to the 
outside. She paused at the entrance and looked out into the darkness. She 
began to have second thoughts. They might be only stretching their legs, 
with nothing amiss. They would think her foolish to come crying after them 
in that case. 
The garden. That was the logical place to look first. She slipped quietly 
out, and headed for the moonlit garden gates. 
It was a bright night, so there was no problem in finding the way. The 
statues sparkled in the distance like a gathering of fireflies. Herb and Cling 
might be standing among them. It was difficult to tell which was stone and 
which flesh from a distance. They were all so lifelike. 
At last Spring saw Herb, seated near the fountain ahead. He was closely 
examining a statue. No. That was no statue, it was Jasmine. Why had they 
come to the garden together? Why were they bending so close? 
Oh, why indeed? Spring turned and ran back toward the castle blindly, 
for unreasoning tears had begun to blur her vision. How could he do it? 
What about Lily? What about-she didn't want to finish the thought. Oh, 
Herb! 
Something grasped her wrist at the garden gate, halting her flight from 
the shattering scene. She gasped in fear and surprise, starting to cry out. 
A soft leaf clamped across her mouth. "Shh. Mistress Moon, it is I, Cling 
Ling." 
"You frightened me," she whispered, trying to compose herself, wiping a 

 175 
stray tear from her cheek. 
"I must speak with you and Herb. It is a matter of some urgency, for you 
see, I have discovered the secret of the crystal statues," he stated 
ominously. 
That hardly seemed important to Spring at the moment in face of recent 
events. "Oh?" she said with disinterest. 
"Yes. It is sometimes an advantage to possess this form," he said, 
indicating his leafy visage. "I positioned myself outside the servant's 
quarters near the potted plants. It was most interesting. Most interesting," 
he repeated. 
Spring sighed inwardly. All she wanted to do was find her room and 
throw herself across the bed and cry. She had thought Herb truly cared 
about Lily, and maybe even her, as a friend. That they would confront 
Zygote together. Now she was alone again. 
"Very well," she said, since Cling Ling seemed determined to tell her 
anyway. Let him get it over with, and then she could go. "What did you find 
out?" 
"They are not crystal," he said. 
"Of course they are," she said a bit too sharply. "If there's one thing I 
know about, it's precious stones. So, take my word, they are crystal, and 
fine works of art as well." 
"Yes. Very realistic. Very lifelike." 
"Incredibly so," she agreed, wondering why Jasmine's statues had so 
fascinated him. 
"Because they are alive." 
"What are you trying to say?" Spring asked. Really. Would this inane 
conversation never end? 
"That is, they were. They are all human victims of our lovely hostess. 
She is a beautiful version of the legendary Gorgon creature." 
"Gorgon? Medusa? I always get my myths mixed up. You mean, the 
ugly, snake-haired sisters who turned men into stone?" 
Cling Ling was nodding in the affirmative. "It is not just her look, for the 
servants were saying she had the kiss of death. So, it is different, but-" 
"You're serious, aren't you?" Suddenly, it all became so clear to her. "Oh, 

 176 
no," she exclaimed. "Herb is out there, in the garden with her. I thought-
Oh! What an idiot I am. If she kisses him-We have to stop her!" She turned 
and ran toward the spot where she had last seen them. Cling Ling rolled 
after, and passed her by with no time to spare. 
At the other side of the garden Herb stood gazing helplessly into the 
deadly Jasmine's eyes. They swirled with the depths of a maelstrom, 
drawing him in, deeper and deeper. And why should he fight it? 
She was a beautiful woman. He could see she wanted him to kiss her as 
much as he wanted to do it. As much as he ached to kiss her. His desire 
burned like a torch in his center, now. It had to end, he had to touch her. 
Inclining his head toward hers, he saw her moist, red lips tilt upward, 
awaiting his caress. 
Spring reached them first. She grasped Herb by the shoulders and spun 
him around, intercepting his kiss on her own lips. The spell was 
momentarily broken. 
"Spring?" he asked, still dazed. 
"You foolish female," screamed Jasmine, advancing on Spring. "You dare 
oppose my will?" Her lovely features were twisted with the rage within her, 
and Spring knew the meaning of fear as the being held up one hand from 
which a brilliant light glowed. It leaped from her fingertips to Spring, and a 
strange sensation rushed down her body. She stood as if frozen. Try as she 
would, she could not move so much as an eyelash. She stood in helpless 
horror, watching as Jasmine turned to Herb once more. He was still 
beneath her evil spell. Unresisting, his lips sought hers. 
Suddenly, Jasmine screamed, and stood unmoving. Spring felt life course 
back into her body. Something had happened to remove the spell, but 
what? 
Cling Ling stood between Herb and Jasmine, holding a smooth piece of 
crystal in his vines; it was the shield from the soldier statue. It now caught 
the full light of the moon which reflected brightly into the face of the evil 
sorceress. 
"I don't understand. What's happening?" Spring cried. 
Herb shook his head at the sound of her voice. He was still confused, but 
unharmed. Jasmine had not budged an inch. Nor was she ever likely to. 

 177 
Spring put out a hand and touched the smooth surface of Jasmine's face. 
She was a perfect statue of priceless ruby. 
"Regrets for the delay," Cling Ling apologized. "I had difficulty removing 
the shield, but needed it to imitate the myth. The crystal surface acted as 
our mirror. I thrust it in her line of vision just as she prepared to kiss Herb, 
so she kissed her own reflection instead. It worked in much the same 
manner as the legend. That was only a story, while this was reality, but I 
counted on the same result. Fortunately, Zygote stuck to the basics. She 
was one of his magical creations, you see." 
How like Zygote to create monsters to do his dirty work! But right now, 
Spring was more concerned about Herb. She rubbed his hands in hers. He 
seemed to be coming out of it at last, and was looking at his surroundings 
in bewilderment. 
"Why are we all in the garden?" he asked. 
"Don't you remember?" Spring asked. 
"Yes-I think so. Yes. I wanted to see you, Spring." He turned to her. "But 
Jasmine said you were sleeping. She invited me to come with her, but I 
didn't want to at first, and then she looked and-" He blushed furiously, 
remembering. 
"And she led you down the garden path," Spring quipped. 
"Yes. Is that her?" Herb asked, noticing the statue for the first time. 
"Yes," Spring said with the satisfaction of a job well done. "And may I 
say she never looked lovelier." 
The three decided to remain at the castle for the night, and though there 
was no longer anything to fear from their hostess, they took the precaution 
of sharing one chamber. The night passed uneventfully, but as they 
prepared to depart the next morning, they heard a commotion taking place 
in the garden. They had hoped to slip away unnoticed, but as they paused 
by the gateway, that was not to be. Several of the servants surrounded 
Jasmine's statue. It was obvious they were in an emotional state. One of 
them spotted their small group by the gate and alerted the others. 
"The strangers," another cried. "This must be their doing." 
"Uh-oh," Spring said. 
The way out lay through the garden where the servants now gathered, 

 178 
blocking their exit. Spring recognized two of the women who had attended 
them the evening before. They had been joined by three more strong men. 
Would they attempt to exact vengeance for their Mistress' demise? 
"Good morning. We'll be on our way now. Appreciate your help," Spring 
said, smiling, trying to bluff their way past. No one moved. 
"You did this?" asked the youngest servant girl. "It was your magic 
which turned her to stone?" 
"It was unavoidable," Herb said, putting a protective arm around Spring. 
"Jasmine tried to turn me into one of those things. We had to protect 
ourselves. Surely, you can understand? We had no choice." 
"She's dead," said one of the men, stepping forward. "She is cold and 
lifeless like the stones of the earth." 
Cling Ling moved in, assuming a defensive stance. "I must warn you. I 
am expert at the art of Julep-so." 
The older woman turned to the others. "We be free," she cried. "Slaves 
no longer. Free!" 
"Yes! Yes!" the others joined in. 
The young girl made a deep curtsey to Spring. "We be forever in thy 
debt, Mistress." 
"You aren't-angry?" Spring breathed, relieved. 
"We be glad. Yet, 'tis so hard to believe. We never thought ever to be 
free." 
"We must repay the great magicians," agreed one of the men. 
"You owe us nothing," Herb said. He was just happy not to have to force 
their way out. The memory of his last fight still lingered heavily on his 
mind, and in his sore limbs. 
"If I may ask one favor?" Cling Ling interjected. "Please to tell. Where is 
the castle of Zygote?" 
A hushed silence fell upon the group, then the young girl spoke. "Ye be 
friends of the magician?" she asked hesitantly. 
Spring wasn't sure what they should say to that. If these people were 
loyal to Zygote, they would be foolish to trust them. Trust had proven folly 
the night before. Yet, it went against her grain to lie again, especially to 
feign friendship with that monster, Zygote. She looked to the others, but it 

 179 
was plain they were leaving it up to her. 
"He has something," she said, swallowing, "that belongs to us. We've 
come to take it back." That was no lie, but even though the servants 
seemed grateful for their new freedom, she was not certain where their 
allegiance lay. 
"Ah," answered the girl, relaxing once more. "Jasmine was a conjuration 
of the magician. She paid him service. He be not pleased to lose her, 
methinks." 
"We must be wary," Cling Ling agreed. "Zygote has peopled his domain 
with many such creatures as Jasmine. We may not have encountered the 
last of his magical traps, I fear." 
"Wait," Herb said, intrigued. "You said something about Jasmine doing 
'service' for Zygote. Are you saying they were, uh, lovers?" 
"Oh, no!" laughed the girl, finding that idea most amusing. "He be old 
and not interested in such diversion. Besides, one kiss of Jasmine and he 
be stoned. She entertained many guests at the castle. All sent by Zygote, 
and all remain. Her kiss be forever binding." She indicated the garden. 
"Horrible," Spring shivered. Herb had almost joined their ranks, and as 
for her? Who could say? Perhaps it would have worn off. There were no 
females in the garden. Jasmine would have had to dispose of her by other 
means, but that was not any more appealing. 
"Zygote be not generous with his enemies. Be therefore careful if thou 
goest to the castle. Mayhap thy loss be not now so dear that thou knowest 
now the nature of the magician?" asked the girl. 
"I know his nature only too well," Spring said coldly. 
"It is more important than you can imagine," Herb said, grimly, thinking 
of Lily. A man who could sanction turning flesh to stone would hardly be 
kind to a strange, alien girl, masquerading as his prey. Herb feared for her 
now more than ever. And for Spring. 
"Zygote. He we must away from this place," said one of the men, 
fearfully. 
Most of the group seemed to agree, and scurried off leaving only the 
young servant girl. The older woman waited at a distance. 
"My sister," she explained. "But truly, Zygote will not look kindly upon us 

 180 
now. We must depart also. First, needs must I direct thee to thy heinous 
destination. Methinks it poor thanks for thy deed." With that, she scratched 
a map in the dirt with a stick, and hurried to catch up with her sister. 
The directions were simple, and they made swift progress until they 
came upon a narrow swinging bridge stretched across a wide chasm with a 
small stream below. It did not look dangerous since it hung only a few feet 
above the water, but such bridges were difficult to navigate if a person 
wasn't accustomed to them, and one could find oneself tumbling off the 
side into the wet. 
"I suggest we proceed one at a time," Cling Ling said, testing the ropes. 
"More risks upsetting the balance, though I think it is strong enough to 
bear the weight of two." 
"Why take chances?" Herb said. "Ladies first," he added, sadistically. But 
he had trouble suppressing his smile; he intended to take the first risk 
himself. 
"Thanks." Spring smiled wryly. She suspected he would enjoy seeing her 
swaying hips as she progressed over the bridge. Yet, that thought was not 
too unpleasant. She made a playful face at him, and stepped on, gripping 
tightly to both sides of the rope handles. They felt firm. 
"Wait-I didn't mean-" he protested, too late. 
"I know," she said. 
She walked forward at a steady pace, neither fast nor slow, lest she 
bounce or swing. She had just passed the midway point above the deepest 
part of the stream when the ropes jerked sideways. Spring cried out as she 
lost her balance and stumbled toward the edge. 

 181 
23 
 
 
 
Spring had good reflexes, so was not thrown. She steadied herself, then 
looked to see what could have caused the action, but could see nothing. 
How mysterious! And then again, maybe not. If Herb Moss thought dunking 
her in the water was a joke, she would soon fix him. It would be just like 
him to jerk on the ropes once her back was turned. 
Spring continued across, planning her revenge. Perhaps a good tickling. 
It would be an excuse to get really close to him, and-and what? What was 
she really thinking of? 
Suddenly, a horrible hairy monster arm appeared at the side of the 
bridge. It could easily pull her into the chasm with him if it tried. 
Herb and Cling Ling could see the scene from where they stood. Herb 
started to run for the bridge, but Cling Ling restrained him. The monster 
was in charge of the bridge now, and could shake Spring off into his 
clutches before they could ever reach her. Yet he had made no other move, 
so they should plan how to help her. 
Herb might wade out as close as he dared and attract the monster's 
attention, while Cling Ling scurried onto the bridge and caught Spring 
before she fell. It was not far, but there could be unknown dangers, jagged 
rocks, and so forth. 
But now the monster was actually speaking. 
"Who is crossing over my bridge?" growled the gruff voice. "I must teach 

 182 
you a lesson by eating you up." 
A talking monster? Why not, thought Spring. This was a fairy tale world 
created by Zygote, so- 
Of course. No wonder the lines sounded familiar. This was a child's story. 
Another myth like the Gorgon incident. If she played along correctly, she 
might escape unharmed after all. 
"Oh, please, please, Mr. Monster, please don't eat me," she begged, 
speaking loudly so both Herb and Cling Ling could hear. "I am so small. But 
my friend Herb, who is to follow soon," she almost shouted, "is much larger 
and meatier. Don't spoil your appetite on me. He's a real meal," she 
concluded, warming to the part. 
"What?" Herb blinked. He knew she was afraid of the monster, but to 
throw him to it seemed a bit unkind. 
Cling Ling noted his expression in amusement, chuckling through his 
leaves. 
"Really, Cling Ling. I see nothing humorous in this situation. We have to 
do something." 
"So sorry. It is but another legend. A story for children. An Old Earth 
nursery tale of three goats who must cross a bridge to eat grass, and how 
they tricked the Troll, another monster, to achieve their goal. Mistress 
Moon is aware of this story. She is trying to tell us." 
"Oh," Herb said, abashed. He should have remembered that story, 
himself. Paradise was derived from New Earth and had the dubious benefit 
of much human culture. His personal favorite had been "Jack and the 
Beanstalk." He hoped they wouldn't encounter any giants here. 
Spring had made it safely to the other side of the chasm and stood 
waving to them from the bank. Cling Ling gestured for Herb to go next. 
"You are the middle goat, my friend. I fear the Troll and I may have to 
wrestle, but I feel I am a match for him," he said confidently. 
Coached in his part by Cling Ling, Herb stepped onto the bridge and 
proceeded dubiously toward the center. The monster appeared as if on 
cue. 
"Who's that tromping over my bridge?" he growled. 
Though shaking within, Herb followed through with his lines and was 

 183 
soon stepping off the other side to join Spring. They watched as Cling Ling 
approached the center. This time the monster leaped upon the bridge and 
engaged the traveller in combat. 
First, he attempted throwing the Vinese off balance into the water, but 
Cling Ling clung on with several of his tendrils, countering the lashes and 
swipes of the monster with his Julep-so holds and thrusts. He gave a fine 
account of himself, and in the end, it was the monster who tumbled into 
the water. 
Cling Ling raced quickly across with a combination of rolling and 
swinging his vines. He was on the other side before the monster could 
swim up again. 
"I congratulate you on your perceptiveness, Mistress Moon," Cling Ling 
said. "It was a simple problem to overcome once we knew the rules." 
"Easy for you," Spring laughed. "I don't know how Herb or I would have 
defeated him alone." 
Herb blushed with shame, realizing that was probably true, but no man 
liked to feel a woman had so little confidence in his abilities, especially a 
woman whose admiration he valued. 
Spring couldn't help noticing Herb's color transformation, and saw she 
had erred. In trying to praise Cling Ling, she had inadvertently insulted 
Herb. Oh, men and their stupid egos! He should know how much she 
thought of him by now. 
"Of course, I was only speaking for myself," she quickly added. "I know 
Herb would have thought of something." 
That made it a little better. Herb said nothing, but Spring could tell it had 
taken the sting off. When she reached for his hand to help her over a large 
branch that blocked their path, he kept holding it as they continued on their 
way to Zygote's castle. Spring smiled with relief, for now she knew all was 
forgiven. 
In the deceptively idyllic setting, it was almost possible to forget why 
they had come there. Herb felt Spring's hand in his, realizing he had been 
holding it longer than necessary. She hadn't objected. Could it be she 
enjoyed his company as much as he did hers? 
Stealing a glance at her face, he saw she was deep in thought, walking 

 184 
along automatically as he guided her. That explained it. She probably 
wasn't even aware of their contact. He, however, was only too aware. 
A part of him wished that time could stand still, so he wouldn't have to 
relinquish the moment. Yet time could not, and he felt guilty for even 
thinking about it. Lily needed him more than ever. There was no place for 
dalliance while her life remained in peril. Or, thereafter, he reminded 
himself, sharply. It was this place that sent his notions wandering. So 
unreal. Things would be right when he was back on Paradise where he 
belonged. He was sure of it. 
Cling Ling left them alone again, while he forged ahead. Because of his 
leafy camouflage, it was easier for him to scout unnoticed. After the bridge 
incident, he wanted to check out the route, so as to be apprised of any 
more potential dangers. 
Now they sat waiting for his return in a small clearing. Spring surveyed 
the pleasant surroundings. The morning walk through the forest had been 
delightful, once the Troll was behind them. Golden beams of sunlight 
pierced through the tree tops, sprinkles of colorful wild flowers and 
mushrooms dotted the lush carpet of grass, and butterflies fluttered and 
honeybees buzzed. The serenity of nature confronted them at every turn. 
Too bad it had to end. 
"This is lovely," Spring said. 
"Maybe," Herb said. 
"Why? What are you saying?" she asked, puzzled. 
"Only that Cling Ling is right. After that ugly bridge monster, we have to 
stay alert for others. I recall many an Old Earth fairy tale took place deep in 
forests just like this one." 
"Um. The cookie children and the old witch woman. The little blonde girl 
and the bears," she agreed. 
"Bears? 
Let's 
see, 
aren't 
those 
fur-bearing 
animals, 
like-like 
chippermunks?" 
Spring laughed. "Herb, it would take about a hundred of your 
chippermunks to make up one small bear. If you see one, you'll recognize 
it. But I hope not. I've had enough monsters for one day." 
"Yes, me too. I hope Cling Ling hasn't run into any ogres or giants out 

 185 
there. He should be back soon." 
"Does my company bore you?" Spring asked teasingly. 
"No. I mean, I just wish we could get there. To the castle. To Lily, I 
mean." 
"Yes, I know exactly what you mean," she said soberly. Fairy tale it 
might be, but would there be a happy ending? Soon, they would know. 
Was Lily alive? Could they defeat Zygote? Reality would come crashing 
down all too soon. 
"Sit back, Herb, and I'll tell you a tale," she said grimly. 
"A fairy tale?" Herb smiled, not noticing her change of mood. 
"Of course, a fairy tale. I'll tell you The Dragon's Bride.'" 
 
THE   DRAGON'S   BRIDE 
As told by Spring Gabriel 
 
A dragon's breath can melt a good knight's armor at twenty paces. Is it 
any wonder many a fair damsel has grown to old age awaiting rescue by a 
handsome hero? Princess Qwendell did not intend to be counted among 
their number. 
In case of a dragon attack, she had sewn two small vials in the bodice of 
her royal gown within her royal cleavage. It had cost several pieces of gold, 
not to mention a questionable reputation, but she finally managed to 
persuade the wretched Wizard Supreme to part with a magical potion to 
disguise herself. 
One drop on the tongue would instantly transform her into the very 
likeness of a large beastly dragon. In such way, she fully expected to 
escape by posing as a dragon herself. 
Sure enough, one fine day, a wandering dragon stumbled upon the 
princess's castle and left it a fine pile of rubble. As he searched amongst 
the debris for the princess, she swallowed the potion and turned into the 
most ravishing female dragon the other had ever beheld. The dragon forgot 
all about searching for a mere princess, and proposed marriage to her upon 
the spot. 
Life was not working out the way she'd planned. "Ick," said the princess. 

 186 
"You are no ordinary dragon, Lady," her suitor said, so excited that he 
blew smoke rings. 
"Quite correct, tall and scaly," she said, trying to leave for a safe spot to 
turn back into her royal form. 
"I shall woo you," said the dragon, and pounced to woo in the forthright 
way that dragons do. 
"Woo. Woo," said the dragon. 
"Woah," said the princess, quickly thinking of a way to rid herself of the 
creature long enough to drink her antidote from the second vial and return 
as a princess. Many the times as a princess, she had demanded a knight 
slay a dragon to prove his worthiness. That was it. 
"No, no, no," she said. "First you must slay a knight. No slay, no play!" 
Now this particular dragon had kidnapped many a princess, but he had 
never slain a knight. It simply had not come up. He decided to secure his 
lady in a cave while he went off to consult his best friend, another tall, 
green, scaly dragon. He rolled a big rock across the entrance and left his 
lady love to breathe fire in anger. But, huff and puff as she might, the rock 
would not roll. 
The dragon's friend listened carefully and decided what with the recent 
shortage of available knights, they might have to resort to sorcery to win 
the fair dragon lady's claws in marriage. 
It so happened that he also knew of the same Wizard Supreme and 
demanded a disguise potion to turn a dragon into a knight. Taking the 
potion, he returned to his lovesick friend, and they set out to the cave to 
perform a play in which the dragon suitor would pretend to slay the dragon 
now disguised as a knight. 
When the rock was rolled away, the princess saw what she believed to 
be a real knight, drank down the antidote, and reverted to her own regal 
form. She raced to the knight and promised her hand in marriage if he 
would but slay the ugly old dragon. 
Enraged with jealousy, the dragon slew his friend, and stole the potion 
from him. Even though the princess was no longer a dragon, she had 
stolen his heart. 
Quickly gulping down the potion, he became a knight and returned to 

 187 
the princess. She had been fooled the first time, but had since wised up. 
As he approached, she took the remaining disguise potion and became a 
dragon, whereupon she slew him with one blast of her hot breath. Then 
she took the antidote, and became a princess. A handsome prince found 
her and fell madly in love, and they lived happily ever after. 
 
The End  
 
"But, that's a terrible story," Herb said. He felt sorry for the dragon. 
"How like a woman. And after he had turned himself inside out to please 
her." 
"That's the whole point, Herb. No matter how much you may wish it to 
be otherwise, some loves were never meant to be," Spring said. 
Herb decided to change the subject. "It's hard to comprehend that the 
man who created this world with all its beauty, could at the same time be 
so evil." 
"You'd better believe it," Spring snapped. Her disposition had 
deteriorated considerably during the telling of the story. 
"Sorry," Herb said. "I know how you feel about Zygote. With good 
reason." 
"No, I'm the one who's sorry," she apologized. "It's just that I know how 
horrid he is. You and Cling have had have but a very small taste of his 
cruelty. Kidnapping Lily was all in a day's work. A man who could sanction 
the death of a wonderful, brilliant person like my father is- beyond words," 
she finished, as her voice failed. Sometimes the pain came rushing back at 
unexpected moments. This was one of them. 
Herb pretended not to see the tears. It was so hard to keep from 
hugging her in his arms, but he knew there was no place for him in her life. 
It would be wrong to encourage feelings that could not, and should not, be 
returned. 
Even so, his heart went out to her, and his arms would surely have 
followed, had not Cling Ling returned soon. 
Spring hastily wiped her face and went behind Herb to meet the Vinese. 
"There is a fresh water well not far from here," he announced. They had 

 188 
exhausted most of their supply, so this was good news. They still had 
several of the Txnghc's nutrition pills, so food was not a problem. 
They had not gone far until they came upon a small pathway leading to 
the well. It was a covered redwood one with ivy growing up the sides and 
smooth decorative stones around the base. 
"It's just like a picture card, or a wishing well," Spring said. 
"Well, I wish only to drink," Herb said. "I just hope the water tastes as 
good as the well looks." He lowered the wooden bucket until it splashed 
down, sinking beneath the surface. He turned the crank to draw it back and 
tied off the rope. 
Spring handed him the pewter dipper that hung from a peg at the side 
of one post. He plunged the dipper into the water and offered the first 
drink to Spring. She tipped it and drank deeply, spilling a little from the 
sides. 
"Umm, cool." She dipped it again and held it up for Herb this time. "For 
my Knight in Shining Armor," she teased. 
"From the loveliest princess in the land? How can I refuse?" he replied, 
drinking with relish. He hadn't realized how thirsty he was. Much better 
than the tepid water left in the canteen. 
Spring reached for the dipper to serve Cling Ling next. "Cling-" She felt 
strangely disoriented and blinked her eyes. The dipper seemed to slip from 
her hand. 
Everything around her was swimming together, her vision was so 
blurred. She closed her eyes and when she opened them again, she looked 
for Herb and Cling Ling, but all she saw were walls. Walls? Where did the 
others go? Where was the forest and the well? And most of all, where was 
she? 
Spring climbed out of the huge four poster bed and ran to the single 
window in the small, round room. She looked out and down. She was up in 
a castle. Leaning out as far as she dared, she looked across the tree tops. 
There was no castle. Just a high tower, like a rook, the chess piece. 
A spectacular view of the forest was spread before her. Perhaps she 
could spot Herb or Cling out there somewhere. But it was no use; there 
was just the wide expanse of green, and both Herb and Cling were green. 

 189 
It would be impossible to spy them from this height. She would have to go 
down and look for them. 
Spying the small door, she ran to it and pulled hard on the knob, but it 
wouldn't open. Locked! Someone had locked her in! Rummaging about the 
room, she searched for a key, but found none. If only she still had her 
things, with the magical key of her father's. She looked beneath the bed, 
but there was no sign of her belongings. Mysterious. How could she have 
gotten here without knowing it? 
Sitting down on the bed, she went over everything that had happened 
before she appeared here. They were walking through the forest on the 
way to Zygote's castle. Cling Ling had found the well. They drank, and 
then-this. Nothing else had happened. So there had to be a connection. 
Had they evoked some spell without being aware of it? What had they 
said? Now she remembered. They had been talking about fairy tales while 
waiting for Cling. She had told him her story about the Knight and Dragon 
and Princess, and then they had been joking about it at the well. They-of 
course. That was it. It really was a wishing well. 
And if it was active? Probably so. Even if it was artificial, it was still 
Zygote's magic realm. If they had only thought, they could have simply 
wished themselves to Zygote's castle then. 
No, wait. They hadn't been making wishes, exactly. Yet maybe the well 
was set up to take wishes with a drink, so anything a person thought about 
while drinking was considered a wish? The well couldn't tell the difference. 
But what had they been saying? She had been teasing Herb. Calling him 
her Knight in Shining Armor. But it didn't make sense. Herb wasn't there. 
 
Herb wished he wasn't there. He stood cowering at the back of a narrow 
ravine, his gauntlets held firmly over the mouth of the horse, trying to keep 
him quiet. There was a dragon out there. 
Herb had no idea just how he had gotten to wherever he was, but he 
sure wished he could leave. Where were the others? He had awakened as if 
from a dream to find himself in the strange setting. More of Zygote's evil 
doings, no doubt, but what was he to do? 
He had been standing with Spring and Cling Ling at the well talking, and 

 190 
the next thing he knew, galloping full tilt across a grassy plain toward a fire 
breathing dragon. That had limited appeal. 
Herb had pulled on the reins and turned the charger in the opposite 
direction. You would think a dragon would be happy to be rid of him, but 
oh, no. It had to pursue him. Herb had plunged his steed down into the 
maze of ravines in hopes of losing his fiery friend. It could still work if the 
annoying nag would only be still. 
He had handled the horse amazingly well for someone who had never 
sat upon horseflesh in his life. If this was some sort of story scenario, such 
as the Troll at the Bridge incident, he would probably be equipped to enter 
into whatever plot it foretold. And if it was only a story, perhaps he had 
nothing to fear, after all. That is, if he could avoid becoming a one man 
feast until discovering the plot line. 
The horse pulled away, reared up and whinnied, giving Herb a look of 
stern disapproval. No doubt it was used to jousts, and dragons, and bold 
goings on, and Herb had somehow offended its sense of valor. Well, tough 
grass. He was no Knight of Olde and he wanted to grow older. 
Suddenly, the horse broke free and scrambled back up the side of the 
ravine. Herb rushed up after it. The last thing he needed was to be caught 
out in the open without a steed. He wasn't quite sure how he knew that, 
but he was certain it would be the end of him if he was. 
Puffing up after the wandering mount, that was now standing still, 
naturally, since it was in full view of the dragon, he put his foot in the 
stirrup and tried to hoist himself up. It wasn't so simple in armor. 
How did those Knights do it? Now he remembered. They had help. It 
was bad news for any Knight who fell off his steed during battle. A full suit 
of armor was hard to get up in. 
Herb looked around the landscape and got inspired. He led the animal 
over to a large clump of rocks and climbed up to mount. The dragon was 
there, but seemed occupied in thought. Maybe it had found someone else 
to eat while he had been in the ravine. 
If Spring could only see him now, he thought, as he mounted. Only 
today she had called him her Knight in Shining Armor. Herb looked down at 
the shine on his armor. He could comb his hair in its reflection. 

 191 
Spring. Somehow, she had done this to him. Oh, would he love to get 
his hands on her. And this time, for a very different reason. 
 
Spring had put two and two together at last. Their "wishes" had worked 
on each other. Right now, Herb was probably in some King Arthur tale, 
while she was, where? What would Herb have thought about? He called her 
a Princess, but fairy tales were full of princesses trapped in towers. That 
was it. Trapped. A Prisoner. 
She turned quickly to the window, and tripped. Her foot had caught on 
something. Looking down to see what it was, she gasped to discover it was 
her own hair. But that was impossible. Her hair was not that long. Until 
now. 
She reached back and pulled, watching the braid uncoil like a rope. Well, 
one mystery solved. She was Rapunzel, the girl with the long golden hair! 
It figured. If any story would have appeal for Herb, it was one centered 
on a woman's lengthy tresses. Hadn't he always managed to put his hands 
on hers whenever the occasion presented itself? And the story of a 
beautiful girl, held captive in a tall tower for his exclusive pleasure was just 
the sort of thing he would conjure up. Based on a child's story perhaps, but 
many a grown man's fantasy. 
Spring made another search of the room, this time for scissors or a 
knife; anything to cut with. If she could whack off the thick braid, she 
would try tying it to the window and climbing down. Even as a child, this 
possibility had occurred to her and she wondered why the silly Princess had 
never thought of it. 
Well, she wasn't vain, and this hair wasn't really hers. In fact, it was a 
rather brassy shade of blonde. So much for Herb's taste. Freedom was of 
higher priority than sex appeal at the moment. She kept on searching. 
"Rapunzel, Rapunzel, let down your long, lovely hair," came a call from 
below. Who could it be? It didn't sound like either Herb or Cling. 
She leaned out and looked down. Oh no. She had forgotten about the 
other part of the Rapunzel story. A bent old hag in a long, black cloak stood 
gazing up at her. A witch. 
What to do? If she didn't go along, the witch could suspect something. 

 192 
She couldn't afford to distort this reality yet. Best to play along and see. 
Spring gathered up the long rope of hair and tossed it out, taking a firm 
grip from her side. There was a slight tug, but nothing as uncomfortable as 
she'd expected. Thank goodness this witch was skinny. 
Suddenly, the witch's ugly face was at the window, her long nose 
twitching over toothless lips. Her eyes were cruel and beady. 
"Who's been here since I've been gone?" she hissed. 
"No-no one," stammered Spring, jumping back. That was true. Or, was 
it? Now she remembered. Rapunzel had a boyfriend. He had been climbing 
in to romance her. And if she could see him when he came again, he might 
help her escape. 
"That's my good girl," cooed the witch. "Come. Sit with me, and I'll comb 
out your hair." 
What was there to do but go along with it? Worse could happen than 
getting her hair done. 
The witch combed and rebraided the long length of silken hair while 
giving Spring sage advice on men. The funny part was, it was actually good 
advice. She remembered to behave like a docile doe and say "Yes, Mother" 
a lot. Satisfied, the witch climbed back down and left Spring alone again. 
She was still hunting for a cutter when the call came again, this time 
from a male voice. Herb? She rushed to the window and looked out. There 
was a man, but not Herb. He was dressed in a pastel pink tunic over 
lavender tights and had a pointy feathered cap on his head. Rapunzel's 
guy. 
Quickly she threw down her hair and he climbed up, reaching through 
the window for her. She backed away, tripping again. 
"Wait. I'm not who you think I am," she exclaimed. 
"What game be this, lass?" he laughed, chasing her around the small 
room. 
"But I'm not Rapunzel. It's all a mistake," she gasped, dodging his 
hands. "We have to get out of here before the witch returns. Do you have a 
knife? Cut off my hair and we can climb down it together." 
He stopped dead in his boots. "Cut your wondrous hair, my beauty?" He 
looked aghast. "Better to ask me to cut out my heart." 

 193 
"But, it's the only way. I don't have a key." 
"The witch has done this. She has spun some evil spell to make you 
speak such words, my dove." 
"Okay, okay, forget I mentioned it," she said, holding a chair in front of 
her. This man was beyond it. Obviously, these characters went by only one 
story line and could not be deviated. She would have to try another tack. 
"My hero!" she emoted. "You slay the witch for me. You can hide and 
attack her when she returns. Save me, you-" she paused, gazing at his 
pastel outfit, "you, big strong man." 
"Yes," he agreed. "I shall free you and we will live happily ever after." He 
seemed elated at the prospect. 
"Yeah, I thought you'd go for it. I mean, yes, my hero! The witch 
probably has the key on her. Good. Now all we have to do is wait," she 
said, sitting down on the side of the bed to rest. 
"Nay, not all, my lovely," the Prince said suggestively, approaching with 
outstretched arms. This time he was too quick, and caught her fast. 
"Prince. Down, Prince," she panted. "This is a bad idea. While the witch 
is loose, I mean. She might come any moment." 
The Prince was busy kissing upwards on her arm, stopping at the 
shoulder. "Don't be coy with me, you saucy wench. Many the time we have 
lain together. I know thee too well." He leered. 
Oops. She hadn't thought of that part of it when reading Rapunzel's 
story as a child. What did she think they were doing up there on those 
visits? Playing pat-a-cake? 
"Oh. You weren't playing checkers, were you?" she cried, trying to free 
herself from his grasp. 
"Thou speech be strange, but thy lips sweet. I must taste their nectar," 
he proclaimed as his lips crushed hers. 
She pulled away and ran to the opposite side of the bed. 
"No! No!" she cried, exactly like a Damsel in Distress. 
"But, yes, yes," he said, ripping off his garments and flinging them to the 
floor. As Spring had suspected, he'd nothing to hide. 
"This new game doth please me. Thou hast spirit, wench," he said, his 
eyes attempting to do to her clothing what his hands had done to his own. 

 194 
"But I don't want to play anymore," Spring wailed. 
He lunged across the small bed and caught her at the waist, ripping 
open the lacy bodice of her gown. It came loose with dismaying ease and 
she tumbled out. Spring looked down in amazement. 
"Where did those come from?" Of course, they weren't hers, they were 
Herb's idea of Rapunzel's. There wasn't a mirror, so she had just assumed 
she looked like herself, but she must have looked like the Rapunzel the 
witch was used to, or she would have been discovered. She looked down 
again. How did the girl tie her shoes? No wonder the Prince was so 
determined! 
"Help! Help!" she screamed, back in Damsel in Distress mode. D&D for 
short. But who would hear? 
A big black bird landed on the window ledge and flew into the room. It 
disappeared in a puff of smoke and became the witch. 
"Swine," she screamed at the Prince. 
"Yeah. Swine," agreed Spring, beating him off. 
The witch pointed a long dirty fingernail, and the Prince was turned into 
a lizard. He went scrambling across the room and out the window. Spring 
could not feel too sorry for him under the circumstances. 
"You nasty little girl," the witch said, turning on Spring now. 
"Hey, wait a minute, here. He attacked me," she protested. "I'm the 
injured party. He's not even my type." 
But the witch was not listening, she was conjuring up a terrible spell, if 
Spring knew her kind. Quickly, she lunged and pushed the witch through 
the open window. Instead of falling, the hag turned back into the bird and 
flew off, cawing. Spring wasn't about to wait for her to return. 
A shiny object had caught her eye when the Prince was disrobing. It was 
still there among his rumpled clothing. Quickly, she pulled the knife from 
the scabbard and slashed it through her braid. 
The room bent in half and began to swirl around, faster and faster. Was 
she going to faint? Ridiculous. She had never fainted in her life. She 
fainted. 
"Idiot horse," Herb yelled. But to no avail. They were right back where 
they started from, the horse's hooves beating a tattoo back toward the 

 195 
waiting dragon. It was as if he had been waiting, knowing Herb would 
return to his proper role. If this were one of Zygote's preordained tales, 
there was no escaping the inevitable. 
Herb raised his sword and prepared for the conflict. The dragon reared 
upon his back haunches, fire issuing in a roaring inferno toward him. Herb 
knew he would be fried before he could get in one good swipe. 
How did Knights beat that problem? A lucky thrust? Herb knew his luck 
had just run out. As the charger closed in, he lashed out, and missed by a 
mile. Worse than that, the force of his thrust threw him off balance and 
sent the sword flying from his hand. Herb shut his eyes to wait for the end 
to come as he fell from the horse. 
Herb waited. He felt odd, but not scorched. He opened his eyes to see 
Spring and Cling Ling standing over him next to the well. How had he 
returned? 
"Oh Herb," Spring cried, throwing her arms about him. "You're back." 
He was back. He wasn't going to be a dragon barbecue. But he was less 
than grateful. "You and your Knight in Shining Armor! I was almost 
devoured by a dragon!" he shouted, looking daggers at Spring. 
"Oh excuse me, but that was no vacation you sent me on, either, Herb 
Moss! I was Rapunzel, locked in with a witch and a rampaging Romeo. It's 
tough all over, okay?" She glared at him. 
"Oh," Herb said, remembering his own fantasy. "We must be more 
careful. How did we escape?" 
Spring was still pouting, so Cling Ling had to answer. "When you two 
vanished, I surmised what the properties of this water must be. It was a 
simple matter of drinking and wishing for your safe return." 
"I apologize, Herb," Spring said, having calmed down in that mercurial 
way she had. "I'll bet you were handsome in your armor!" she giggled. 
"I cut quite a figure," Herb said grudgingly. But her change of mood was 
contagious. "How did you like yourself as Rapunzel?" 
"Well, I was a lot of woman, Herb. A lot of woman." She smiled as she 
looked down at herself, seeing much less. 
Cling Ling would have raised his eyebrows, had he had them. 
"Shall we continue our journey?" he asked. 

 196 
"Wait, I thought of something while I was in the tower. Why can't we 
use the well and just wish ourselves there?" Spring asked. 
"Oh no! That thing is too dangerous," Herb said. 
"A moot point," Cling Ling explained, "since we only get one wish." 
"Stingy old Zygote. Anybody knows it's supposed to be three," Spring 
said. 
"Three between us. Must suggest we continue without further delay." 
Herb and Spring grinned at each other like two naughty children. They 
had been very fortunate to have Cling Ling along to keep them in line. As 
they followed through the forest, the memory of the frivolous moment 
slipped away to be replaced by the seriousness of the task at hand. They 
had not really forgotten, but sometimes, it was just too painful to 
remember. 

 197 
24 
 
 
 
The top of the towers peeped over the tree tops ahead. The castle was 
set upon a rise surrounded by dense woods and a protective moat. 
Herb and Spring stayed out of sight at the edge of the woods while Cling 
Ling elected to scout the area. Certainly, he would be the least noticeable. 
Even if he were spotted, he would likely be taken for just another magical 
conjuration of the Master's. 
Spring had heard that Zygote had done extensive experimentation upon 
both plant and animal life to create his mythical creatures. He had done 
well creating the illusion of a storybook world, and she had to admit it was 
impressive. 
White, fleecy clouds positioned themselves next to the perfect points of 
the high towers. A perpetual rainbow hung across a vibrantly blue sky, and 
the beautiful backdrop of the distant, hazy mountains and green forest 
completed the idyllic scene. 
"How ironic that this monster should reside in such an innocent setting," 
she commented. "Perhaps that is why true evil is so seductive." 
"Yes," Herb agreed, "the most beautiful of flowers may conceal the 
stinging bee." 
Spring smiled ruefully. "Guess I opened a hornet's nest for you, Herb. I 
am truly sorry that I ever involved you or poor Lily in my troubles. I know 
you wish you'd never answered that ad." 

 198 
Herb realized she had taken his analogy personally. That wasn't the 
intention, but he could see it did apply. There was a time not long ago he 
had wished exactly that. Life had grown in a straight row then. 
By this time, he and Lily might have formed their union, for the seeds 
had been sown for their well-arranged life together. His father was 
considering him for a promotion, so pleased was he with the way Herb had 
conformed to the work of the firm. 
"A man has nothing, if he doesn't have roots." That was his father's 
motto. He was gratified that his only son had at last planted his feet firmly 
in the ground. 
Yet, had Herb not answered the ad, he wouldn't have met Spring, the 
Moon Maiden. He still recalled the first time he saw her. Her surprise at 
finding him at home, and how she had dropped her towel. Herb sighed. As 
he pondered upon these things he knew that in spite of it all, he could 
never regret meeting Spring. 
Then there was Lily. Naturally, he would not have her harmed for the 
universe. She had been the true innocent party in all this madness. She 
must not be made to suffer for his indiscretions. Aside from her innocence, 
she had shown herself to be a strong, brave woman, revealing a side to her 
nature he had scarcely known existed. 
Because she was strong, he knew she would understand. When all this 
was over, Founder willing, he would have to explain why they could not 
proceed with their union. He knew now that Lily deserved a better man 
than he. One who truly loved her in a way he never could. 
Herb knew that he had fallen in love with Spring, and that could never 
have happened if he loved Lily in the way he should have. It was not her 
fault. He would always care for Lily in a special way, as a dear friend, and 
yes, more than a friend. But his heart belonged to Spring. 
Spring, Moon, by whatever name she chose, filled his very veins with 
their life's blood. Before her, he had merely existed. Now, he lived. It was 
awkward not only because of Lily, but because of the way Spring felt. 
There was that other man. The one who had betrayed her. Would she ever 
get over him sufficiently to love again? 
There was the loss of Spring's father, and the hatred she felt toward this 

 199 
magician Zygote. Even if they somehow rescued Lily, Herb knew that was 
not the end of it for Spring. She would not rest until the evil magician was 
brought to justice, and how could they accomplish that as well? 
He could not be so brutal as to force his attentions upon her at this 
trying time. Perhaps the time would never come. But he had to hope. 
Spring mistook his prolonged silence for agreement. "I don't blame you 
for feeling as you do, Herb," she said. 
Feeling as he did? If only he could tell her! But before he could gather 
his courage, Cling Ling was rolling back to them. 
"The cooling unit is there. It means the Freezer made its delivery," he 
reported. "Our misadventures on this planet have delayed us more than I 
anticipated." 
"And Lily?" asked Herb, fearing the worst. 
"Alive. I am certain of it. I overheard a maid mention the 'Master's 
patient' in the kitchen. It must be she." 
Both Spring and Herb were heartened by the news. Lily alive! Then there 
was hope. 
Cling Ling believed Lily was being held in one of the tower rooms, 
possibly a medical laboratory. He had observed the maid coming from there 
with her tray. She did not appear to be guarded, but in her condition, it 
would hardly be necessary. And besides, where could she go? 
He had seen only one grounds patrolman, but he was a giant of a man. 
If they timed it correctly, however, they might invade the castle before his 
round was completed, and then escape the same way. It was decided Herb 
and Spring would enter the castle alone, and Cling would remain close by 
to watch and act as backup as he had at the greenhouse, though they 
hoped with more success. They had learned from that fiasco not to take 
chances. This rescue had to succeed. 
Herb realized his declaration to Spring would have to wait, and perhaps 
that was best, after all. They followed closely behind Cling Ling as he led 
them over the lowered moat bridge, inside the castle walls. The imposing 
front gate had two huge eyes painted at the top. It gave the otherwise 
lovely castle an eerie look. So much for good taste, Spring thought. 
Cling Ling pointed out a small window that was unlatched, and took up 

 200 
his own vigil as look-out near the entrance. Herb boosted Spring up and 
through the window by clasping her waist and lifting, while she caught the 
ledge and pulled up. His heart quickened at the movement of her hips as 
she gained entry and dropped to the other side. He gave a jump and 
caught onto the ledge, following after her. 
Fortunately, they found themselves alone in the big hall. It was typically 
medieval in decor, with much armor and woven tapestries around the walls. 
They crept stealthily down the side, into a narrow passageway. 
"Which way now?" whispered Spring. 
"The tower's on the left, so that way and any stairs, I guess." 
They opened several doors, but none seemed to lead upstairs. The first 
floor was strangely deserted, a fact which began to disturb Herb, but he 
didn't want to upset Spring. So far, they had met no opposition, but how 
long could their luck hold? 
"Herb?" Spring asked, gesturing to a couple more doors at the side. 
"Just keep looking until we find Lily, or get caught trying," Herb said. 
"That's what I'm afraid of. One session with Elton was enough." 
"I agree. And I had a bad thought. If the Freezer has arrived, it's 
possible Elton isn't far behind. He could be here now, for all we know." 
"We'll just have to chance it," Spring said, spotting one last door, and 
cautiously opening it. At last! It was a winding stair. "This has to lead to the 
tower." 
Herb nodded agreement, and closed the door quietly behind them. Small 
torches lit the way up the treacherous steps. 
They climbed cautiously and carefully to the top, stopping outside on the 
landing. Spring edged the door slowly open. Seeing no one inside, she 
nodded to Herb, and they rushed inside, latching the door behind them. 
It wasn't a torture chamber, at least. In fact, it was more like a ritzy 
hospital room, Spring observed. There were cabinets with all sorts of 
medications and bookshelves, and there at the corner was a built-up bed of 
medieval fashion with thick curtains draped along the sides, obscuring the 
view of whoever was inside. Could it really be? 
"Lily!" Herb cried. 
"Herb!" she answered. "Is it you?" 

 201 
Herb pushed aside the curtains as Spring stood beside him. Lily! She was 
alive! Herb sank beside her on the edge of the bed, taking her hand. It felt 
so cool. 
Spring reached for her bag of stones and selected a large, violet piece, 
placing it upon the vital center chakra. 
"How do you feel, Lily?" she asked. 
"That feels nice. Like energy going into me. Is it magic?" 
"Magical science. I'll be glad to explain it to you in detail if we manage to 
escape from here. Do you feel strong enough to walk yet?" 
"I don't know. I'm so confused. I was much better, and then when I 
heard you call, I awoke here-I-it doesn't make any sense." 
"Don't worry. It's probably just the effects of the medicines Zygote has 
given you. I have to admit, he's worked a miracle! Try to stand," Spring 
urged. 
"I'll try," Lily said. 
"Zygote helped her?" Herb asked. 
"He must have. Look at her," Spring said. 
"Yes, the Freezer," Lily said. "Now I remember. The units have built in 
alarms. When my demise grew imminent, the attendants were alerted. 
They transplanted me to another unit more suited to my needs. I was 
wilted, however, and am still very weak. I would not have survived if not 
for Zygote's magic. But-" 
"I don't know why he helped you, Lily. Probably to hold you as a hostage 
as Elton did before, but in any case we can't lose any more time. We have 
to get you out of here. Cling Ling is waiting for us outside." 
"She's right, Lily. Here, lean against me." Herb put a supporting arm 
around her waist and guided her as Spring led the way to the door, 
opening it. She jumped back with a small cry, gasping "Zygote!" 
The tall, wizened magician entered and closed the door behind him, a 
benevolent smile playing at the sides of his mouth. "Yes, my dear Spring. 
We meet at last. But then, I have been expecting you for some time," he 
said. 
"No one saw us enter," Herb said. 
"No? It is said the walls have ears. Here, they have eyes as well." He 

 202 
smiled. 
"The front gate! Those ugly, painted eyes! It was one of your tricks," 
Spring said. 
"Yes, they are a bit unsettling, but what they lack in beauty, they 
compensate well in usefulness. I observed your every move from the 
moment you entered these walls." 
"Then, you knew from the start that Lily wasn't me?" Spring asked. 
"Oh, yes dear. I was quite aware we had received a substitute in your 
stead. You are forgetting, I too, am a physician. I know nonhuman 
physiognomy when I perceive it, and the Freezer ride did little to aid her 
disguise." He observed Spring's green makeup. "But you look charming." 
Anger surged up in Herb. He released Lily and rushed Zygote. He 
bounced off harmlessly into the wall, a foolish surprised expression on his 
face. Spring went to his aid. 
Zygote looked on patiently. "As a magician I have a multitude of 
defenses at my disposal much less pleasant than that, young man. You 
would do well to remember it." 
Herb got to his feet scowling. Only his pride was injured, however. 
"Be careful, Herb," Lily cautioned, leaning against a shelf for support, 
since Herb had left her. 
"She's right, Herb," Spring agreed. "He's dangerous as a scorpion. Don't 
provoke him." 
Herb had no notion what a scorpion was, but he had some ideas of the 
powers magicians possessed. Of course Zygote would be protected. Herb 
had acted by reflex, allowing his emotions to rule over judgment. It was 
clear they could not win by force alone. He stood sulking, but said nothing 
more. 
"A wise attitude," Zygote commended Spring. "My powers have served 
me well in the past, and with your added knowledge, I doubt there is a 
force in the known universe that could successfully oppose me." 
"Then-Lily-you 
haven't?" 
Herb 
ventured, 
knowing 
Zygote 
fully 
understood his meaning. 
"Molested this charming young woman? Hardly." He turned a paternal 
eye to Lily. "But this is an outrage. You should not be allowed to stand like 

 203 
that." He led her to a nearby chair and saw her seated. "Forgive my 
neglect, but as you see, pressing matters required my attention. Your well-
meaning friends may have cost you the strength we have worked so hard 
to regain." 
Lily accepted the chair quietly, leaning back with obvious exhaustion. 
Herb felt guilty for taxing her strength in the weakened state, but there 
was no avoiding it if they were to escape. She probably would not have 
made it outside the castle even if Zygote hadn't intercepted them. Her 
infirmity was an element they had not fully anticipated. Their mission had 
been doomed from the beginning. 
Zygote returned his gaze to them now. "As I was saying, I realized you 
had slipped from my trap when I first saw Lily. But I have great respect for 
all types of life forms, as you would know if permitted the run of my 
extensive grounds. Alas, it is not possible to extend such courtesy. I admit 
realizing you would probably come to retrieve her, but I have no desire to 
harm such a lovely creature." 
"We met one of your creations, Zygote," Spring interjected. "Sorry to 
inform you, but your friend Jasmine, is now just another lawn decoration." 
The magician's brow went up in genuine surprise. "You nulled Jasmine? 
Truly, I have underestimated you." 
"Well, don't get all broken up about it," Spring said, sarcastically. "I 
suppose you can just conjure up a replacement." She did not bother to 
conceal her disgust. 
"Hardly. No, I'm afraid the lovely Jasmine was one of my failures. We all 
make mistakes, you know. Once she had her full powers, she was quite 
uncontrollable. We had an uneasy truce between us, but I never turned my 
back. She did so enjoy practicing her talent." 
"But all those statues. People. The servants said she silenced them by 
your command," insisted Herb. 
"My command? She would take no order from me, dear boy," Zygote 
scoffed. "It would be just like Jasmine to place the blame elsewhere, and 
perpetuate her innocent act. I suppose it helped keep the servants in line." 
Herb reluctantly agreed with the line of reasoning. She did seem 
innocent. It was not likely she would worry about using Zygote for an 

 204 
excuse. Herb knew only too well how she enjoyed her power for its own 
sake. The memory of his close call brought on an involuntary shudder. 
"I would believe him, Spring," Lily said, revived by her brief rest. "He has 
treated me well, except for my confinement." She looked around the small 
room. 
"To keep you from harming yourself, only, dear Lily," Zygote answered. 
"I assure you, you are still too weak to wander very far. It was best you not 
try." 
"I'm glad you've been less the monster than we supposed, Zygote," 
Spring said. "But the fact remains that you caused my father's death." 
"That," Zygote said grimly, "was an unfortunate affair, which I deeply 
regret. The overly zealous bitch I hired to induce your father to cooperate 
became carried away by blood lust. Yet, I believe he would have survived 
had not young Elton lost his temper." He looked genuinely chagrined. "I 
needed your father's help to implement the information you store. If only 
he had been more reasonable, he would be yet with us. I had great respect 
for him, whether or not you believe that." 
Fury swept over Spring's face. "So it was Elton! But it was your fault. If 
you had left my father alone, it would never have happened!" Her rage 
turned to despair as she remembered. 
"Yes. I concede that much. Still, however I regret the means, there 
remains the end to accomplish," Zygote said meaningfully. "Else, all has 
been for naught, and that would be hideous, considering the price." 
"I won't let you touch her," Herb exclaimed angrily. He grabbed up a 
glass container and threw it at the tall magician's face. It, too, hit against 
the invisible barrier, shattering to the floor as the others dodged the sharp, 
flying bits. 
"Really, Herb," Zygote sighed. "This becomes tiresome. I can see if you 
keep this up, you'll succeed only in harming the ladies, and probably 
yourself." He snapped his fingers and the door clicked behind him. He 
moved aside to admit a fierce giant of a man. Probably the guard Cling Ling 
mentioned roaming the grounds earlier. 
Herb was thankful Cling Ling retained his freedom. Perhaps even now he 
had conceived some plan to set them free. The last time they had tried to 

 205 
rescue Lily, they had met with the same lack of success. History had a way 
of repeating itself in discouraging ways. 
"Show our friends to one of the guest rooms downstairs, Larg," Zygote 
ordered. 
Large? That was an apt name for the monster. They were hassled back 
down the narrow stairway, but did not emerge on the first floor. Instead, 
they continued on through a different door leading farther down. This time 
they ended up deep beneath the castle walls in a section of dungeons. 
Lily was not among their number. Zygote evidently still considered her as 
a patient under his protection. Though they had to be separated, Herb was 
thankful that Zygote seemed to bear her no ill will for her part in the 
deception. 
They were abruptly thrust into separate cells in the darkness. The 
closing doors clanged loudly behind them. 

 206 
25 
 
 
 
Spring screamed. Herb pressed against the adjoining bars of their cells, 
extending his arms and reaching frantically in the darkness for her. 
"Spring, where are you? What's wrong?!" he called out. Then his hand 
made contact with her body. She was soft and warm there. She grasped his 
hand in hers and moved it. 
"I'm all right. Something ran over my foot. I think it was a smouse. It 
frightened me! I'm not fond of smouses," she said, remembering the ones 
back on the lightship. 
"Smouses? Oh, yes. We have a kind of smouse on P#23. They are 
partially plant, green, and resemble pine cones." 
"How funny." 
"Not to Veganettes. They are harmless pests, really, but the feminine 
gender seems to get overly excited whenever they see one." He laughed 
softly. 
"Oh really? What about men? No one likes smice. Admit it!" 
Herb smiled to himself. Naturally, Spring would say that. She had already 
declared herself to be one of the liberated species of female. She claimed 
that on her home planet, the women were exactly like men. That had 
greatly puzzled Herb, who knew Spring was nothing at all like any man he 
had seen. 
It was probably a joke; that was one source of her great attraction for 

 207 
him. Her playful nature, along with good looks, strength of character, 
intelligence, and honesty. Not necessarily in that order, either. There had to 
be more to a woman than well-grown limbs to please him. And the longer 
he knew Spring, the more she had pleased him. 
He wanted so much to help, but each time he tried, it had been a 
colossal failure. Now they were prisoners. Again. 
"I'm glad you're here with me, Herb," Spring said, holding his hand 
tighter. "I mean, no! Of course I'm not." 
"Yes," Herb said, misunderstanding. "You wish it was that-that other 
man you knew. I don't blame you. He could probably have protected you 
much better than I have." 
"Herb! No!" she said sharply. 
Herb released the hold of her hands. He should never have presumed 
such liberties. The misery in his voice was apparent. "I'm sorry." 
"Herb! You don't understand anything, do you!" Spring said in 
exasperation. "I am the one who is sorry. Listen to me. What I said about 
that man, well, it was just talk. So forget it, okay? I made that up. There's 
no other man." 
Hope, confusion, and anger all collided in Herb's brain. "But why did you 
say that? Why did you lie to me?" 
"Because. Because when we were writing, I didn't really know you then. 
When I showed up at your house as I did, you might have thought that I 
wanted to-that I was a-a-" She floundered. 
"A passionflower?" suggested Herb. 
"That sounds nicer than what I had in mind, but yes. That's the general 
idea. I thought if I made up a story, you wouldn't try anything. You 
wouldn't want me," she explained. 
"Whether I wanted to or not, is beside the point. I would never have 
tried forcing you into anything like that. No male on Paradise would." 
"I know that. Now. But not then. I didn't know about your culture. I 
didn't know how nice you were. And-wait a minute. What about you, 
anyway? You were reading those sexy zines. That's how you saw my 
advertisement," she said accusingly. 
"Well, yes, but-" he began defensively. "But, I wouldn't have seen it if 

 208 
you didn't write it. What about that?" 
"That's different. I found those zines at the retreat. I found them when I 
dropped a crystal. Never mind. They were a way for me to escape. What's 
your excuse?" 
"I don't need one. I'm a man. Men like to look at pretty girls. What's so 
terrible about that?" 
Spring sighed. "Nothing at all, Herb," she answered quietly. "This was 
supposed to be an apology. I don't know why I picked a fight. Guess I'm 
feeling guilty for deceiving you. You've been wonderful all the way, and I 
know I could never have made it without you. I am so sorry I ever lied to 
you." 
"I know you only did what you had to," Herb said, mollified. 
"Another lesson in how lies never pay, even well intentioned ones. In 
trying to protect both of us, I only hurt us more." 
Herb had assimilated everything she'd said, but only one thing was that 
important. There was no other man. His chlorophyll was surging. If only he 
had known that before! 
"Anyway," she continued. "Another reason I didn't say anything later 
was because of Lily. If you two planned to marry, you were in love. It 
would have been tacky of me to intrude, to come on to you just for a 
hiding place. Just because I found you attractive, after all." But her 
thoughts were ironic. She found Herb attractive? Only if gorgeous eyes, a 
slim body, and rakish smile were just attractive. True, his skin was green, 
but that only made him more special to her. And he was so kind, so 
genuinely nice, that he'd passed "special" a long time ago. 
"Tacky?" Herb asked. That was a term he'd never heard. 
"Inappropriate. Besides, I like Lily. Now she's in undeserved trouble, all 
because of me. I owe her," Spring said, meaningfully. 
"Lily is a good person," Herb agreed. "I'm thankful that nothing has 
happened to her." 
"Herb. Everything has happened to her!" Spring exclaimed. "She just 
hasn't been killed. Yet. Who knows what that crazy old man will do to get 
to me? I've been thinking about that, too. If I agreed to cooperate quietly-" 
"No!" Herb shouted. The thought of Zygote laying just one of his bony 

 209 
fingers on Spring filled him with rage again. 
Spring squeezed his hands in hers. "Herb, we can't stop him now. I may 
as well do what good I can under the circumstances. If I go along, maybe 
he will agree to let you and Lily go home. After all, once he has the secret, 
what harm could anyone do him? If what he suspects is true, he will be 
virtually invincible." 
Herb was torn. "If it comes to that, you know I want Lily to be free, but I 
couldn't stand for you to-to do that. Not with him!" 
"Dear Herb," Spring said, pulling him up against the bars, her flesh 
pressing his in alternate spots. "You are so sweet to care what happens to 
me, after all I've done to you." 
Herb knew it was a lot more than being understanding. It was all over 
now anyway, so why not confess? "Spring, about Lily-" he began. 
"Yes, you and Lily must be together. After all you both have suffered for 
me, I couldn't bear to be the cause of anything else happening. The love 
you share mustn't be destroyed by Zygote." 
"But Spring. I-" 
"Shh. Listen. Someone is coming," she whispered. 
Torchlight illuminated the darkness, casting long shadows. They were 
still holding hands when the giant came to bring them food. Zygote did not 
intend to starve them, at least. 
Larg opened Herb's cell and gave him a small bowl of thick stew, some 
bread, and a jug of liquid before relocking the door. He then unlocked 
Spring's and repeated the motions of handing in the dishes. Before she 
could accept the last one, it flew from his hand and crashed onto the dirt 
floor. The giant went down with a heavy thud and did not get back up. A 
round shadow rolled back to them. 
"Cling!" Spring cried happily. "You found us!" 
He had subdued the giant in the same manner as the goon in the 
greenhouse on Paradise. Plucking the key from the giant's belt, he tossed it 
to Herb, who quickly opened his cell. He looked down at the sleeping hulk. 
"That's amazing," Herb said. One didn't have to be a giant to defend 
oneself if one knew the right moves. "You have to teach me how to do that 
when we get out of this!" he exclaimed. Herb was tired of feeling helpless. 

 210 
"So sorry to be delayed, but much magic in this castle to avoid," Cling 
Ling explained. 
The trio moved carefully past the small human mountain and up the long 
stairway. Prepared to fight, they opened the door to the tower room, but it 
was empty. Where had Zygote taken Lily? 
Cling Ling decided to do what he did best, and slipped out the open 
window to creep along the castle walls. If Lily was anywhere in the castle, 
he would find her. 
Spring and Herb went back down to the first floor to check out the 
rooms there. For a large castle, it was oddly deserted. They did not see a 
single servant. Yet Zygote had no family that Spring knew of, and in his line 
of work he would hardly desire many house guests as witnesses. Still, it 
must be a lonely life, even for someone like Zygote. Spring quickly 
upbraided herself. Pity for Zygote? Never! 
After searching the entire lower floor, they ascended to the second, 
starting just below the tower. They were coming to the last few rooms 
when Spring put a finger to her lips, signaling Herb to silence. She thought 
she heard faint voices coming from the next room. 
Cautiously, she shoved against the door and peered through the tiny slit. 
A small gasp escaped her lips. Herb pushed past her to look inside. 
There was Lily reclined upon a bed, and there was Zygote. He was 
embracing her. After he had sworn he had never forced himself on her, the 
liar! Blood boiling, Herb burst into the room despite Spring's attempt to 
restrain him. This was no time for stealth! He no longer cared what powers 
Zygote might use against him; he couldn't let Lily be raped by that mad old 
man. 
"Let her go, Zygote!" he shouted. 
"Herb!" Lily exclaimed, her eyes wide with surprise and fear. Naturally 
she was afraid, Herb thought. Who wouldn't be, with that beast pawing 
her? In her weakened condition, too. 
Zygote rose from the bed and faced Herb. Herb dashed forward, but 
surprisingly, made no headway. Another huge minion of Zygote's had 
appeared from behind him and clutched Herb tightly about the arms and 
chest, totally immobilizing him. 

 211 
Lily looked at Zygote with tears in her eyes. "Please don't hurt Herb," 
she implored. 
Just then, the stained glass of the window broke away as Cling Ling 
flung himself into the room. One strong roll brought the goon to his knees, 
breaking the grip on Herb. 
"Run!" yelled the Vinese, and taking his own advice, rolled quickly out 
the doorway. Julep-so he might know, but he was no match for Zygote's 
magic. The wisest course was to put a wide space between them and the 
magician before he took action. It was not long in coming. 
They dashed down the steps to the floor below, flying out the front 
entrance toward the gate. The drawbridge had been raised. 
"We'll have to swim for it," Herb called. "We'll return for Lily when we 
can." He removed his shoes and advanced to the water's edge. 
"No, don't!" Spring screamed. 
Herb looked where she was pointing and withdrew his toes just as a 
huge, warty, moat creature snapped at it. Sea serpents in a moat? He 
should have anticipated as much. It was right in line with Zygote's mythical 
world. Well, mythical it might be, but those jaws were real enough. Zygote 
did no shoddy workmanship. 
Shoving his feet back into his shoes, Herb and the others fled around the 
side of the castle. Suddenly, they heard the unearthly cry above them. 
They looked up. It couldn't be, and yet it was. A mammoth lavender 
dragon with huge silver wings, bearing down upon them, fire issuing from 
its toothy mouth. 
They needed cover fast, but there was only one place. Back into the 
castle they tore, the heat of its hot breath scorching their backsides. 
"Where can we hide?" Spring gasped, as they stopped to catch their 
breath in the doorway. 
"Hold it right there," came a voice they all recognized. A thin form 
stepped out from the shadows brandishing a vapor gun. Without pausing, 
he aimed and fired. A chunk of the marble floor in front of them 
disappeared into smoke. He laughed coldly at their fright. 
"Elton!" Spring cried. 
"Yes, Spring, I have finally arrived. Apparently none too soon. I trust you 

 212 
enjoyed your little charade, for it's all over now." He fired another shot, this 
time finding a mark. Cling Ling lost a few leaves. 
"Stop it. You're insane!" Spring screamed. "I am the one you want. Take 
me to Zygote. Just put down the weapon." 
"It's too late for that, Spring, don't you see? Or shall I call you Lily? How 
about Mank?" he added with contempt. 
"You knew?" asked Spring in a small voice. 
"I finally figured it out. How else could you have hidden from me on the 
ship, except in disguise? You must think you're very clever. I may not be 
able to have your secret, but neither will anyone else. In another moment 
you'll all be dust, my dearest." 
He fired another blast, ripping a gash from the front of her skirt. Herb 
grasped Spring in his arms, spinning around to protect her with his body. 
"That won't help, hero," Elton said. "This baby can take out a dragon at 
twenty feet." He smiled insanely. 
Spring struggled to free herself from Herb's arms. "Don't. I don't want 
you to be hurt." 
"Whatever happens, Spring, we'll face it together," he said. 
Elton rolled his eyes to the ceiling. "Oh please. Spare me. What is this 
power you have, Spring? One at a time, or two, it makes no difference to 
me. As long as you die." He raised the weapon again and took careful aim. 
They knew this was the end. He had only been playing with them before, 
making them suffer, but knew better than to delay too long. 
The vapor gun fell harmlessly to the floor as a huge cockroach went 
scurrying away. The foot of the giant came down to smash it with a 
horrible cracking sound. 
Zygote stood behind him. "A fitting end. He was always an insect at 
heart," he said coldly. 
The others stood looking on in shock. Zygote had turned Elton into a 
bug? There was only a greasy smear on the floor where he had stood 
moments before. Hideous. And yet, he would have left even less of them. 
Herb came suddenly to life. Grabbing for Spring, he bolted toward the 
stairs and down into the darkness. Cling Ling rolled shakily behind, the loss 
of his leaves throwing him off balance for the moment. 

 213 
"There's no escape!" Zygote called out from behind them. That might 
very well be, but they would elude him for as long as possible, Herb 
thought. He was grateful for Zygote's intervention, but knew it was only to 
further his own vile purpose. To obtain Spring's secret. 
Down past the cells they raced with the slower giant lumbering a small 
distance behind them. Zygote seemed to have told the truth, however. 
There were no more doors at this level. Cling Ling had rescued the giant's 
torch and used it to illuminate the dead end before them. The goon's 
footsteps grew nearer. 
Herb spied a narrow cleft between the two walls at one side. Probably 
just bad construction, but if they could squeeze between, they might be 
able to hide for a while longer. Spring tried it first. It was a tight fit, but 
pressing as flat as possible, they edged inward, one behind the other. 
"Oh!" Spring said, tumbling through and out into the other side. A 
hidden room. Herb entered, followed by Cling Ling. They stood holding 
their breath as the heavy footsteps of the guard stomped outside. More 
footsteps joined his. More guards? They did not notice the slit in the wall, 
so far. Because they were so large, it probably didn't occur to them that 
anyone could fit through it. After a bit of grumbling around, they heard the 
giants retreating in the opposite direction. They had bought time. 
Cling Ling crept around the walls feeling for secret doors as another exit. 
His wound was not serious. He had lost leaves and tendrils before and they 
would grow back. It only hurt a little and the sap had already ceased to 
ooze out. 
"I can't find another way out," he reported. "It would appear our respite 
is only temporary. Perhaps the guards will conclude we doubled back. While 
they search elsewhere we could attempt to slip back into the castle." But 
from his tone, it didn't sound as if he had much conviction of it working. 
"It's worth a try," Herb agreed. They couldn't give up hope. He guided 
Spring toward the dim slit of light in the other room where they had 
dropped the torch, but stopped short as more footsteps pounded toward 
them across the dungeon, stopping outside the wall. The pursuers had 
posted a guard. Then they heard lighter footfalls. It was Zygote! 
"I don't know where you are hiding, but it's only a matter of time until 

 214 
we find you," the chillingly familiar voice called. "You may elude us for now, 
but consider. You have no food or drink, and are weakened from the 
exertion of this futile escape attempt. I know your gifted friend has 
overpowered my guards on two separate occasions, but he is wounded. 
Even if he were not, I seriously doubt he could handle two or three. Think it 
over. Oh, and Spring, I promise you this. I will be as gentle with you as I 
would with my own love." With that, he departed. The guards did not. 
"Gentle!" Spring scoffed, leaning against Herb's chest. His hand touched 
her face, finding wetness. 
"It will be all right," he said softly, enclosing her in his arms, offering 
whatever small comfort they could afford. 
"I'm sorry to be a crybaby," she sniffed. 
"Shhh," Herb whispered, burying his face in her hair. She had been so 
brave throughout her ordeal, but emotions could not be blocked forever. 
Herb didn't want her to cry, but it felt good to have an excuse to hold her. 
She seemed to melt inside his arms naturally, as if she were where she 
truly belonged. 
"Spring, this is impossible," he whispered. "If we give up now, he may 
keep his word. He may treat you kindly. Perhaps even release Lily. There's 
no way to prevent it now. You know I would give my life if I could." He 
released her and moved to the opening to call out for the guards. 
"No!" Spring hissed, grasping him. "We can't let him have the secret! I 
know that now. Even Lily was willing to sacrifice herself to prevent it, and 
she was right. It isn't just me. If he gets that secret, everyone will lose." 
Herb took her gently by the shoulders. "Spring, you know I despise the 
thought of him touching you, that way, but-" 
"It's not that. If it would appease him and free the rest of you, I'd do 
anything with him he wanted. Only, I can't because there's the secret to 
protect. He can't get it Herb, he just can't!" 
"There's no other way, Spring," Herb said in despair. 
"No, you're wrong. There is one." 
He was horrified. "You mean death? Oh, Spring, I could never-" 
She smiled, somewhat quizzically; he could tell the expression by the 
tone of her voice. "A fate said by some to be worse." 

 215 
"Worse? But that's what Zygote means to-" 
"With you, Herb. I know it's a gross imposition, considering your 
relationship with Lily, but perhaps she would understand. I want you to 
have my knowledge." 
"To-?" He stared at the place her face should be. "Surely you can't 
mean-" 
"That is exactly what I mean. So as to make it impossible for Zygote to 
get it. Since it seems I shall have to give it to someone very soon, I want it 
to be to a good man, and you are that man." 
"But you and I aren't-" 
"We aren't a couple," she agreed. "But we are united in our desire to 
keep Zygote from getting this power. Herb, I don't think you would abuse 
it. I think my father would have approved of you, of your having it, in the 
circumstances. So, perhaps, if you could just think of me as a-a passing 
fancy, then we can stop Zygote. I wouldn't suggest this if there were any 
other reasonable alternative, and I apologize for imposing on you like this, 
but desperate straits require desperate remedies. So if you can force 
yourself to-" 
"Stop talking as if you're a loathsome creature!" he cried. "You're not. 
You're a lovely person, in spirit and in body. It would be easy to-in fact, too 
easy to-if things were otherwise. But-" 
"Pretend they are otherwise," she said. "Please." 
"But I have no desire to become a superbeing. I want no power." 
"That is precisely why I feel I should release it to you," she explained. "It 
would be safe with you, though for your sake, I wish there were some 
other way. There isn't." 
He realized that she was right: this was the best way out of their 
dilemma. He had to do it. "I will pretend you are-Holly, my playmate on 
Avocado. My only interest in her was-this." 
"Your only interest," she agreed. "And mine is to stop Zygote." She 
moved in close to him, and kissed him. 
Suddenly he was very much aware of what he had tried to ignore: she 
was a beautiful creature and a desirable one, in more than one respect. In 
more than several respects. She was, in a sense it wasn't proper to dwell 

 216 
upon, his ideal woman. But he had to tune that out, and focus only on her 
purely physical presence. To pretend that the marvelously sexy creature he 
had discovered one day emerging from his shower was an Avocado 
playmate fresh from an invigorating victory in ten nets, to be enjoyed and 
let go. 
But that didn't quite work. It was not his way to dally with a mere body; 
he had to know the whole person. He had mentioned Holly, who had been 
but a passing dalliance-but she had also been a complete person of her 
type, enthusiastic about netball, in fact enthusiastic about everything. But 
Spring was not Holly, and his effort to pretend she was fell flat. In more 
than one respect, perhaps appropriately. 
"Herb, I don't want to rush you, but we haven't much time," she 
whispered in his ear. "Is there anything I can do to encourage your 
interest? I-I am not experienced in this." 
"The fault is not yours, it's mine," he said. "I was trying to pretend that 
you are Holly, and it just isn't-" 
"I know. Maybe-Lily?" 
He tried to pretend she was Lily, with no better success. Meanwhile he 
heard the sounds of the pursuit-search coming closer. She was right: they 
had very little time. 
"I wish I could help you," Spring said. "You're such a decent person, you 
don't like doing this, and I understand that, but-" 
"You're decent, too," he said quickly. "And you are you, no matter what I 
try to imagine. That's the problem." 
"I'm sorry," she said, her tears beginning to flow. "It was a bad idea." 
"It's a great idea. And you're great, too. I'm the one who is fouling up." 
"Maybe-I hate to ask this-maybe if you just, well, pretend it's me. I 
mean, that you and I really care for each other, as we would if we were a 
couple." 
"I'll try." She had given him leave to involve her directly in his pretense. 
He thought about how it would be to truly love her, without having to 
pretend he didn't. 
Suddenly everything was there, including a passion so great it was as if 
it had been damned for weeks. He kissed her, and paradise was on her lips. 

 217 
The oddest thing was that there seemed to be just as much emotion on her 
part, as if she felt exactly the same about him. She was saying and doing 
all the right things, with the ring of conviction, just as if they stemmed from 
wildly overflowing love. Then the dam burst around her and within her, 
making a tremendous flow that wasn't merely emotional, and it was done. 

 218 
26 
 
 
 
Herb released Spring and moved away, his face flushed from exertion 
and shame. Under other circumstances he would have rejoiced, but this-
this was an abomination. 
He could hear Spring breathing beside him in the darkness. He put out a 
hand to brush away the locks of hair that had tumbled over her face during 
their encounter. 
"Thank you, Herb," Spring said primly as she reassembled her clothing. 
"Do you-feel anything yet? What's it like?" 
What was it like? The greatest experience of his life! But that was the 
wrong aspect. "I don't know. I don't feel any different. I don't feel 
anything." That was true enough; his senses seemed numbed at the 
moment. "Except for my overwhelming wish that it could have been-" But 
he could not continue, because it was no proper thing to say to her. 
"I, too, wish that, well, that it could have been for love instead of for 
business. Your pretense was most convincing. But you're right; that's not 
what we're looking for at the moment. There's nothing else?" 
Perhaps he was afraid to let himself feel for fear of what it would be. "It 
might take a few minutes to start?" he suggested. 
If the information was as powerful as everyone thought, they could use 
it somehow to escape and bring Zygote to a well deserved justice for his 
crimes. It had been the only reasonable solution to their problem. Spring 

 219 
knew that Herb was a good man, and would never abuse the power, 
whatever it might be. She knew it was the right choice, so why did it feel so 
wrong? 
Cling Ling had made himself as scarce as possible under the conditions 
of their confinement. He had squeezed back into the thin crevice as far as 
he could to give them privacy, his body blocking the opening to leave them 
in a blanket of darkness. It was a courtesy. 
Even if Zygote destroyed them, the secret would die with Herb. He had 
gone through the motions of lovemaking as quickly as he could to 
accomplish the deed before they were discovered. What had gone on in his 
mind wasn't relevant. Already the guards were banging on the walls, 
possibly looking for secret panels or hollow spots at Zygote's command. 
Now Herb lay awaiting the revelations of the secret, whatever it was. 
And he felt nothing of that nature. That was not strictly true. He felt an 
abject emptiness. Was it because of the way they had approached it? Sex 
without love was nothing new to him. How many times had he raised his 
stalk with a strange flower? Could he ever find pleasure in such an act 
again? He had changed, but not in the way either of them expected. 
Spring sat up in frustration. "I don't understand it. My father said the 
transfer would happen the first time I made love. You should be bursting 
with knowledge. I know my father wouldn't lie to me. Not about this." 
"Stand back," cried the Vinese, thrusting himself inside just as the outer 
wall crumbled. 
The giants had finally discovered their hiding place and battered down 
the wall. They stood huddled at the back as one giant threw the light of his 
torch upon them. There was no escape. 
Resigned, they crawled over the rubble and were marched back upstairs 
to face Zygote. Lily stood beside him in the comfortable sitting room. 
"Lily. Are you well?" asked Herb, referring to more than the state of her 
health. 
She averted her eyes. "I grow stronger," she answered. 
Herb wondered what Zygote had done to her. Perhaps she had given in 
to his lusts willingly, assuming it would help the rest of them if she 
appeased him. She had volunteered to do as much before with Elton. There 

 220 
was no shame in such sacrifice. 
If anyone should be ashamed, Herb realized it was himself. He had 
vacillated for months about his commitment to Lily, finally admitting he 
simply did not love her the way he should. It was a hard truth to swallow. 
Zygote turned to Spring. "I would not have you harmed, but there is no 
other way to obtain the secret. Give me your word you will cooperate, and 
afterward you may leave with your friends in safety." 
"It's too late," Spring blurted. "Please forgive me, Lily, but Herb and I, 
we-I am no longer a virgin." 
Lily's eyes widened with understanding. Zygote looked from Spring to 
Herb, and back to Spring. "I can test you. I can tell if you're lying. You 
forgot, I'm a physician as well," he said coldly. 
"I'm not lying. We were together. Downstairs, while you searched for 
us." 
"I believe her, Zygote," Lily said. "Spring would not lie about something 
like that. Not to me." Her eyes met Spring's, now red from tears. 
"Lily-" Spring said. 
Lily moved forward to hold Spring in her arms, like a comforting mother, 
though in age they were not that far apart. 
"Your eyes. Let me see your eyes," Zygote interrupted, his voice 
betraying his fear that it was true. He whipped an instrument from his robe 
and approached Herb, peering through the glass. "You seem normal." 
"You're a good physician. I am normal. There is no secret," Herb said. 
"Impossible!" Zygote exclaimed. He looked at Spring. "Unless you were 
lying after all." 
"Then examine me, if you wish," Spring said evenly. "There was no time 
to-" she blushed, thinking of the blood that must still stain her garments. 
They had not even had time to properly disrobe. At the time she had been 
aware of none of those complications; there had been only love unfettered. 
Zygote turned away in consternation. It would be easy enough to check; 
even the girl knew that. No, she was telling the truth. 
"Perhaps there never was a secret," Lily said. 
"My father wouldn't lie to me," Spring objected. 
"Well, no, but have you considered that his process may not have been 

 221 
complete? Or simply not worked? He may indeed have programmed some 
information, but-" 
"I think I see what you mean," Herb said. "You are saying there was 
only one way to test it, so no one could be sure about it." 
"Yes," Lily said, warming to her hypothesis. "It was surely a desperate 
move. He must have felt that Zygote or someone else would discover his 
normal records before he could perfect it. If it was completed, he would 
have implemented it himself. Why bother to pass on information another 
could obtain? He could not have expected you to remain celibate 
throughout your life, Spring." 
"No, he wanted me to marry. To have someone to love," Spring said, 
more confused than ever. 
"So-the information you were given was probably preliminary," Herb 
said. "Yet, in the wrong hands, could have led to the true breakthrough, 
given time, and luck, and knowhow. In other words, information that would 
be useful only to your father and perhaps some other trusted person, such 
as your chosen lover and yourself. His family." 
"I suppose. But, in that case, why didn't he just tell that to Zygote when 
he was being attacked? That the information would be useless without 
him?" Spring asked. 
Lily pondered. "I think he was protecting you then, not his secret. After 
all, he had not expected Zygote or anyone else to know you had any 
knowledge at that time, consciously or otherwise." 
Zygote turned. "Of course. What a fool I've been! I didn't think he was 
hurt that badly. Your father must have deliberately-" He paused, 
remembering. "The choking, the medicine he asked for. It was poison." 
"He committed suicide," Lily said. "But not for any great secret. For you, 
Spring. He must have known that even if Zygote found you, the information 
would do him no good, yet he was determined not to put you through that. 
Zygote wouldn't have believed him if he'd told him. He would have-tested 
for the truth." 
"So he died rather than reveal where you were," Zygote breathed. "He 
knew I could make him talk through magical means, if necessary. That's 
always dangerous with another magician. He would put up blockades. It 

 222 
could have destroyed his mind, but in the end, I would have won." He 
turned to Spring. 
"Well, my dear. It appears your sacrifice was also in vain, since the 
information you possessed, if it had taken, would be of no use to me 
without your father. I have lost. You are all free to leave, of course." He 
seemed to forget they were there then, and went away to the window 
where he stood gazing out, his dreams of glory dashed forever. Zygote's 
shoulders sagged, and he looked all of his age. Herb almost felt sorry for 
him. 
Spring gave a small cry of anguish. "Then I betrayed you for nothing." 
She looked miserably to Lily and Herb. "Can you ever forgive me?" 
Lily shook her head slowly and looked from Spring to Herb. "Forgive 
you?" 
Herb intervened. "Lily, please don't be hard on Spring. It was as much 
my doing as hers." 
"Indeed?" Lily said, an amused smiled crossing her face. 
Herb colored. "You know what I mean. We only did it because it was the 
only way. Or so we thought." 
Lily placed her fingertip over his lips for silence. "I cannot defer to you 
this time, Herb. I cannot forgive what needs no forgiveness. It is obvious to 
me that you two were meant for each other from the moment you met. I 
was jealous on Paradise, but now I have had time to reflect. You love each 
other." 
Spring looked dismayed, but did not speak. Herb looked to Spring, but 
could no longer truthfully deny the depths of his feelings for her, even to 
spare Lily. His pretense of loving Spring-had been no pretense. Now he 
could admit that, to himself and others. 
"Lily, I never meant to hurt you," he said lamely. 
She smiled patiently. "And so you haven't." 
Both Herb and Spring registered confusion now. 
"Herb, you don't understand even now, do you? I insisted we begin 
seeing each other again. You were my only love ever since we were 
saplings. I was certain you cared for me." 
"I did. That is, I still do, but-" Herb said. 

 223 
"But not as lovers," Lily finished. "I mistook those feelings for romance. 
In reality, we have a special friendship, akin to a brotherly and sisterly love. 
That's only natural since we grew up together, I suppose. And I believe 
that is the true reason that I could never bring myself to-to give myself to 
you, Herb." 
"But I thought-" 
"That it was my high principles?" She smiled. "I did like to think so. But 
now I know, when a woman is truly in love with a man, principles are very 
cold comfort." 
"I tried to leave," Herb said, "but I couldn't. Something always drew me 
back, even though I knew in my heart it wouldn't work." He looked at 
Spring. "I never knew what love was, until now." 
Spring's eyes began to melt. Herb reached for her, but Lily intercepted 
him. "A last kiss," she said, giving him a warm hug, and kiss. On the cheek. 
Then she took Spring's hand and placed it in Herb's. "I hope you will be 
happy in your new love, as I hope to be-with mine." 
Flabbergasted, they watched as she went to Zygote and put her hand 
upon his shoulder. The magician turned about slowly, facing her. She took 
one of his hands in hers, and placed her other to his cheek. "One door has 
closed, yet another may open," she said. 
"Lovely lady." Zygote smiled sadly, pressing the soft green hand to his 
lips. 
Spring and Herb looked at each other in shocked astonishment. Evidently 
they had not only mistaken Zygote's relationship to Elton, but his attentions 
to Lily as well. 
"Lily!" Herb exclaimed. "Earlier, upstairs?" He recalled his wild 
accusations in the bedroom. Rape, indeed! 
"But-Zygote?" Spring said with disgust. "Oh, Lily! How could you?" 
Lily turned to her with understanding. "Spring, I know it is hard for you 
to accept after all that has happened between you and Zygote, but he has 
shown me only kindness since my arrival. I have seen a side of him that 
you haven't." 
"Evidently." Spring didn't bother to conceal the irony. 
"You see," Lily continued as if Spring hadn't spoken, "I know you did 

 224 
something to change the time so you could arrive to save me, but for some 
reason, it did not affect my memory when reversed." She addressed Zygote 
now. 
"Zygote, I know and retain all the memories of what happened during 
those long days until their ship's arrival." 
Zygote visibly blanched. "That-that was to be but an interlude," he said, 
shaken. "I, of course, knew of the timewarp through my magic. But, when 
they arrived, that part of it should have been erased as if it never happened 
to you." 
"To us." She addressed Herb and Spring again. "You see, Zygote 
attended to me during my weakness, and no one could have been more 
gentle. Then, a young man began visiting me. He was also kind and gentle, 
and warm. He evoked something within me. Something that had been 
missing from our relationship, Herb. We talked, exchanging our feelings, 
and after those days, those wonderful days, I knew that I had fallen in love 
with him. More than that, I knew he loved me, too." 
"A young man? Who? Where?" Herb asked, bewildered. So much had 
happened so fast! 
"He was wonderful. I've never felt that way about anyone before, and 
that's why I do understand how you and Spring could have become so 
close. He-he made love to me, and I have never known anything so 
beautiful. Then, you arrived, and I was confused because at first it all 
seemed like a dream-" 
"A dream," Zygote said. "You were ill. There is no young man here." 
"But there is. I can't go on without him now," she protested. 
"You should not have remembered," Zygote said rubbing his thinning 
hair with one hand. "I would not have you suffer a loss." 
"I'm glad I remember. And I feel no loss. Do you think a woman does 
not know the man she loves?" Lily smiled, embracing Zygote warmly. 
"Lily," Zygote said, seeming appalled. "You don't know." 
"Oh, but I do. I know that young man was you, Zygote." 
"A spell," Herb cried. "He used a spell on you, to have his way." He 
moved in to punch out Zygote. The man was unspeakable! 
Lily blocked his way. "Only to change his appearance. He didn't expect 

 225 
me to remember any of our time together. What we felt was in need of no 
spell. From the time your ship arrived, he put all that behind us. He has 
treated me as an honored guest and nothing more." 
"What about what I saw upstairs?" Herb asked, referring darkly to the 
incident in the bedroom. "I saw his arms around you." 
"He was helping me into bed. To rest. I am the one who embraced him. 
I was determined to reveal my memories and ask him to release you, but 
then you burst in to save me." She smiled. 
"But, this is too crazy!" Herb said. 
"Herb, you never needed me. Zygote does. He's been a lonely man 
despite his power. Would you begrudge me happiness now that you've 
found yours?" 
"No." Herb was torn. He wanted Lily to be happy, but how could she find 
that with a man like Zygote? 
"I think our love could flourish. The love of a good woman has brought 
forth the good in many men; I know many women who would envy a fairy 
tale life with a brilliant, reformed, mad magician." She looked at Zygote 
questioningly. So much depended upon his answer. 
Zygote raised an eyebrow and considered. It seemed that he was being 
proposed to by a beautiful young woman. And at his age. His age! Quickly, 
he cast a silent spell and looked younger as the lines began disappearing. 
"Quite reformed," he affirmed, his eyes glistening with a slight moisture. 
"But not too much," Lily said, noticing the character lines fading from his 
features. "I love you just the way you are," she said, tracing a smile line 
with her fingers. 
The process stopped abruptly, and they stood gazing into each other's 
eyes with a silent communication, forgetting the other three. The magician 
enclosed Lily in his arms-where she seemed quite content to remain. 
"Let's leave," Spring whispered to Herb and Cling Ling. "We aren't 
wanted here now." 
Herb looked at the unlikely couple lost in their embrace, then shrugged 
and went along with the others. This time no giants pursued them; no 
dragons dive bombed from the skies. Cling Ling wandered away to search 
for transportation. 

 226 
"We can't just leave her here," Herb insisted. "Zygote is too old for her. 
And besides, he's evil. Look at everything he did to you." 
"I'm not forgetting, Herb. I have no love for Zygote. True, he didn't kill 
my father, but he caused that death. Zygote's failure has been a small 
punishment. But, I do owe Lily, and crazy as it is, if she wants to stay with 
Zygote, I won't deny her that choice. I have to go on. I want my life back." 
"Why do you think she retained all those memories? It shouldn't have 
been possible. It's not-not scientific," Herb muttered. 
"I don't have an answer, but this is a magical realm. If anyone deserves 
to live happily ever after, it's Lily," Spring said. 
"Yes, but-" 
"Shh," Spring said silencing him with a kiss. "Love casts its own spell. 
That's all we need to know." 
"I think I feel some of that magic now," Herb said, kissing her again. And 
again. And again. 
The noise of a throat being cleared sounded behind them. Cling Ling had 
returned. He had rounded up a sleek spaceship with a robot pilot at the 
modern, private port behind Zygote's castle. The magician might have 
preferred days of old, but he wasn't a fool when it came to modem comfort 
and convenience. 
The new ship was nothing close to the bucket of bolts they had travelled 
in with the Txnghc. It had luxurious accommodations with good food from 
well stocked nutrition units, and even separate sleeping compartments. 
Cling Ling sat in the front of the ship with the metallic pilot while Spring 
and Herb shut their compartment door for long awaited privacy. 
"What did your father say when you called to tell him you were bringing 
home a bride?" Spring asked. "Was he disappointed it wasn't Lily? Does he 
know I'm not-green?" 
"My family loves Lily, but they understand. They are happy for us, so 
don't be afraid. Cross-pollination is not unknown on my planet, after all. 
You are beautiful, and they will love you as much as I do." He took her in 
his arms and squeezed to make this point. And also because he enjoyed it. 
Spring snuggled close on the small bunk, and reminisced. "Lily was a 
beautiful bride. I'm glad she came after us. I never thought I'd be married 

 227 
in a double ceremony. Especially with Zygote as one of the grooms." 
"Love conquers all," Herb said. 
"Did you just make that up?" Spring teased. "So much talk. What kind of 
honeymoon is this, anyway?" 
"This kind," Herb said, with an immediate demonstration. Spring heartily 
endorsed the suggestion. This time around there were no giants pounding 
on the walls. There was no need to rush, so they went slowly, getting to 
know each other as lovers, as well as friends. "But you know, it was almost 
better when we were pretending, there on Kamalot." 
"Who was pretending?" she demanded with a mock frown. 
He laughed. "When we pretended we were pretending." 
At the wonderful moment of union, Spring cried out her deep love for 
Herb. As Herb reciprocated the sentiment, he felt a tremendous wave of-
knowledge. 
"Spring! Oh, Spring!" he cried. "It's working!" he gasped as his mind was 
filled with-practically everything. 
"Is it ever," Spring sighed, misunderstanding his meaning. 
"No. I mean the transference. The secret. Don't you see? The first time, 
we held back our true feelings. We pretended it was just sex. But now it's 
love. No pretense. Love is the answer!" 
"It always was, darling," Spring said, covering his face with kisses. She 
relaxed in the afterglow, feeling truly happy for the first time since the loss 
of her father. She wanted to stay in Herb's strong arms forever. 
"You don't understand," Herb said gently. "I have all the information 
now. All of it. And Lily was only partially right about your father and why he 
did this. This secret is your legacy. You see," he continued, assimilating this 
aspect, "your father loved you very much Spring, but he-he was dying. Of 
an incurable malady." 
"Dying? No!" 
"This was the only way he knew to be sure you would have this 
knowledge, in the arms of someone you loved. He knew you would need 
someone." 
"I never-" She swallowed, still in shock. "I never even suspected that 
anything was wrong. He would have left me anyway." She tried to 

 228 
remember if there had been any signs, but there hadn't been. He had 
spared her even that. "Then, it wasn't Zygote at all? It would have ended 
the same way, even if he hadn't taken the poison. I've been so wrong 
about so much! Lily-somehow she sensed it." 
"I feel better about Lily, knowing this. Perhaps now it will be easier for 
you to-to let go, Spring," Herb said, knowing how close she had been to 
her father. It was still a lot to ask. 
Spring looked at Herb and realized that he was right. The old life was 
over. It was time to move on. Her father had been a wonderful man, but 
now she had another. "Kiss me Herb," she implored as if they had never 
done it before. "Kiss me." 
Herb gladly complied, and another shock wave of information rocked his 
brain. "Spring! Every time we kiss, I learn something new. You wouldn't 
believe some of the things I know how to do now." 
"And I can't wait to find out," she said mischievously. "Tell me, is it true 
what they say about plant men?" She cupped her hands and whispered in 
his ear. 
Herb blushed a bright lizard green but smiled broadly. Some secrets 
were better when shared. As for the rest, it would take time to learn, but 
he was an eager student. 

 229 
AUTHORS'   NOTES 
 
Piers Anthony I have known Jo Anne Taeusch since 1987, when we met 
at the World Fantasy Convention in Nashville, Tennessee. She really didn't 
make much of an impression on me then. As I recall, she was a tiny figure 
under a mass of orange hair who came to one of my autographings and to 
my reading. It wasn't until she started sending me cute letters that I delved 
into the recesses of my cranium to reconstruct the lost memory. She also 
sent me cards for holidays, always clever, and sometimes little gifts. 
I should clarify that I try to discourage too many letters from readers, as 
I have been answering an average of 150 a month for several years, and it 
strains my time. I especially try to discourage gifts, because I really have 
everything I need, and feel that my contact with readers should be via the 
printed pages of my novels. I seldom give gifts, other than the words in my 
fiction, to any of my readers, as part of a similar principle. But Jo Anne was 
one of three who would not be gainsaid in such respects. I am not the 
fastest study in such matters, but eventually I realized that something more 
than mere generosity was motivating these three, all married women, in 
this respect, and concluded that it was best to let the matter be. So I have 
a growing collection of gifts in my study, some of significant value, and 
they do remind me of their donors. I have met each of them, at some 
event. And I do use the novel solar calculator Jo Anne sent (it had blue 
fluid saturating its works; eventually that evaporated, leaving it empty, but 
it still works nicely), and the Samurai sword letter opener on those 
hundreds of other letters that pile in. This year it was a toy computer that 
blinks MERRY CHRISTMAS. 
So I was there, as it were, during Jo Anne's ups and downs, watching 
somewhat helplessly from the sidelines as her marriage failed, debts she 
hadn't incurred bankrupted her (our legal system is at times an ass), and 
illness led to depletion and surgery. But her cute outlook remained. Once 
she remarked that she had just turned forty, and was still mad about it. I 
watched as she slowly put her life together again, though it was clearly no 
joyous existence. I hear from many whose lives are, as I put it, subdivisions 
of Hell, and many more who seem to be skidding on thinning ice over a 

 230 
threatening abyss. I'm depressive; I felt that my own life was not a 
pleasant one, until success came by luck and tenacity and drove the wolf 
from my door. But it has become clear that I never faced the trials some of 
my readers endure. 
When Jo Anne asked whether I would critique her failed fantasy novel, I 
knew it was payback time. I don't claim to know a lot about much, but I do 
know something about commercial fantasy. So I gave her my usual warning 
about the likelihood of having to tell her all the ways she was going wrong-
maybe there are those who enjoy that, but I don't-and agreed to read it. 
Thus came The Secret of Spring. Therein I found all the cute cleverness 
formerly evident in her letters, plus a pretty good entertainment science 
fantasy novel. It did need work, and I told her what I felt it needed. But I 
also advised her that I was doing an experimental series of collaborative 
novels, and could do the work I recommended myself, if she wished. I'm 
not eager to get into more collaborations, as I have more than enough of 
my own writing to do, but I judge each case on its merits, and I felt Spring 
deserved her chance. 
Thus this volume, my 21st collaborative novel, and 104th overall book. 
I've done two collaborative anthologies, too, but on reconsideration I 
decided that they don't count, because they represent the work of other 
writers. This will be Jo Anne's first published novel, but perhaps not her 
last. I think there is a place in Parnassus for cute, clever stories like this 
one. 
So why am I talking about Jo Anne, instead of myself? Well, my life is 
dull; all I do is sit in front of a red screen with yellow print and type fiction. 
But perhaps one interesting thing is happening to me now: I'm being sued. 
No, it's frivolous; someone is trying to get the commissions I paid my 
literary agent. But the legalistic vilification in the suit is something to 
appreciate. There must be a fiction writer in the works. 
Remember, those interested in more of my works can call the troll-free 
1-800 HI PIERS for a sample Newsletter. And no, they won't give you Jo 
Anne's phone number. 

 231 
Jo Anne Taeusch 
 
I had a lot of fun writing this story, which was one reason why I did it; 
there hasn't been nearly enough of that in my recent history. But that 
aside, I believe, like most folk who do this, I wrote because I had to. 
There's still a soft callous on my middle finger from holding a pencil so 
often as a child. 
Due to family illness and other circumstances I was encouraged to be 
quiet and entertain myself. Thus began a lifelong love affair with books; 
even the means of earning my living has revolved around them, as I've 
been in library services for more than thirty years. 
The Secret of Spring is my first published work, but not my first effort. 
Over the years I've penned poetry, written short stories and even puppet 
plays, but when going through an especially difficult period around the time 
I met Piers Anthony (no connection) it was time to tackle "The Book." 
It served me well as therapy and although not published, has proved 
profitable, since it was from a minor character came the notion for the 
plant people. So while I'd love to claim a green thumb and say inspiration 
came naturally from my great storehouse of knowledge about plants, the 
truth is that grass turns brown where I walk. I also wanted to explore 
communication differences between the sexes without losing the humor, 
and this story seemed a natural vehicle. 
Some have said the pun is the lowest form of humor, but I've always 
enjoyed them; the worse, the better. I truly believe that Piers Anthony's 
Xanths are the highest form of pun-ishment. Whenever I've needed a lift, 
his wonderful books have been there to turn to, and he has been my 
favorite author for many years. In spite of the pest (I read his Author's 
Note) I've made of myself, when I asked for an opinion of my story he was 
kind enough to look it over. 
The result has been an opportunity beyond any I could have hoped for 
or expected. Spring is here! 

