file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
Prostho Plus by Piers AnthonyPiers Anthony
Prostho Plus
 
CHAPTER ONE
Dr. Dillingham was forty-one years old: a conservative, successful 
twentieth-century bachelor prosthodontist. His acquaintances thought him 
unimaginative; his patients thought he overcharged; his pretty assistant was 
secretly in love with him. He was, in short, a typical dentist with a secure 
future.
As pride goeth before a fall, so may the typical go before the atypical.
Dillingham was not pleased to see Mrs. Nostrand so early in the morning. She was 
overweight, her arches were fallen, her veins varicose, her manner insufferable. 
She seemed to be afflicted with most of the maladies imagined by man, with a 
single remarkable exception: she had virtually perfect teeth.
He wondered why she had chosen to inflict herself upon him. Possibly it was 
because every other dentist in the area had already informed her that however 
common prosthetic restorations might be, they were dictated by the requirements 
of health, not fashion.
"Mrs. Nostrand," he began, knowing it was useless, "no ethical practitioner is 
going to replace a healthy tooth with a substitute. Our purpose is to restore 
the mouth, as far as possible, to its original state of health. You should be 
gratified that you have no need of such service."
"But all my friends have genuine gold inlays!"
Dillingham controlled his temper. "I assure you, Mrs. Nostrand, they're not as 
good as nature's original dentin and enamel."
"Mrs. Jones paid four thousand dollars for hers," she said enviously.
He turned away to conceal his disgust. Had it come to this? A running contest to 
see whose mouth could carry the most pointless wealth...
"I'm sorry, Mrs. Nostrand," he said with finality.
She stalked out, furious. He almost wished she had needed the work. It might 
have been easier to do it than to educate her.
Old Joe Krumpet, a too-regular client, was next. He was seventy and his teeth 
seemed to antedate the rest of his body: extremely old and worn.
"'Nother blowout, Doc," he said cheerily. "Just put a patch on her and turn me 
loose."
Dillingham looked into Joe's mouth. It was sheer carnage. He wondered how the 
man could stray one bite from a liquid diet. There was hardly a disaster in the 
manual his teeth hadn't succumbed to over the years.
"Joe, that tooth will have to come out. There isn't enough of the original 
structure left to make it functional, and further deterioration could affect 
your—"
"Nope. None of that fancy stuff. Just plug her up so she don't hurt no more. 
She'll las' as long as I do."
He had a point there, unfortunately. Dillingham repaired the damage as well as 
he could, not even attempting to lecture the patient on oral hygiene. Joe 
Krumpet brought in his teeth for repair much as he would his vintage automobile. 
Who was a mere dentist to inject aesthetic complexities into his simple 
framework?
He finished with ten minutes to spare before the next appointment and retreated 
to his laboratory for a break. It was going to be one of those days: college 
kids who stuffed their mouths with sugar and looked blank at the mention of a 
toothbrush; businessmen who "hadn't time" to undertake precautionary hygienic 
measures; women so afraid of pain that they screamed when he brushed a healthy 
tooth with the mirror. All of them carelessly throwing away the priceless 
heritage of good teeth in their youth, heedless of the far more expensive and 
less comfortable substitutes necessitated in later life.
He was suddenly sick of it. Not of the work itself, but of the intolerable 
neglect he saw daily. So much of what he did would never be necessary if only 
people cared!
The radio was giving the routine details of another interplanetary space probe. 
Well, if there were other civilized creatures out there, surely they would long 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (1 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
since have learned to preserve their natural assets! He visualized a baby 
bug-eyed monster smiling for the camera: "Look ma—no cavities for six 
generations!" Assuming bug-eyed monsters had teeth...
He rose and returned to the operatory, knowing that efficient Miss Galland would 
have the third patient properly prepared. At least he was spared the 
interminable details. Sure enough, there was a figure in the chair. As pride 
before the fall—
Dillingham put on his professional smile, washed his hands, and plucked a bright 
metal sealer from the tray. This was a new patient, and— He stared.
The face upon the headrest was an alien. It was humanoid, but only vaguely so. A 
great flat forehead dropped down to widely spaced yet narrow eyes, and the nose 
was a triple slit. The mouth was closed, set off oddly by thin purple lips.
Before he could substitute a more appropriate expression for the frozen smile on 
his own face, there was a noise. He looked up to see a second creature fiddling 
with the locking mechanism of the door. The humanoid must have been standing 
behind the panel, waiting for him to enter. The features were similar to those 
of the reclining creature, but all Dillingham noticed at the moment was the 
visible hand. It was grey, and the fingers appeared to be double-jointed.
Dillingham tried to think of a clever remark that would dispose of the 
situation, but his mind remained awkwardly blank. What conceivable explanation 
could account for...?
"Gentlemen, there must be some mistake. I'm a dentist, not a plastic surgeon."
Neither creature laughed. The one at the door straightened up and faced him 
silently.
Obviously he was the victim of an elaborate hoax. Nothing on Earth resembled 
these creatures. Someone at the local college must have set up this masquerade, 
fitting grotesque masks of that realistic flexible variety over their normal 
features. This was one of those disruptive pranks, funny only to the 
perpetrators. An initiation ritual. But how had they got past Miss Galland?
"Boys, I have a crowded schedule. Now that you've had your fun—"
The one in the chair opened his mouth.
Dillingham dropped the sealer to the floor. No mask could function as smoothly 
as this, yet the mouth was beyond credulity. The orifice was bone-dry and 
tongueless, and the teeth—
It was his business to know the normal and abnormal extremes of human oral 
anatomy. This far overreached them—but it was without doubt a genuinely 
functioning mouth, in a genuine functioning alien face. Since it was real, and 
no Earthly jaw contained dentures like these—
He decided not to ask questions whose answers might well be beyond his 
comprehension. This was no joke, and this was no longer a conventional problem. 
For some reason two aliens—extraterrestrial aliens, for all he knew—had come to 
his office to demand some service.
One sat expectantly in the chair. It could hardly be an accident. Why did anyone 
come to a dentist?
Somebody had a toothache.
The alien was not properly proportioned for the human recliner, but a few 
adjustments sufficed. Dillingham toyed with his instruments, wondering whether 
these creatures were dangerous. He couldn't afford to take a chance—
"Dr. Dillingham," a voice called from the hall. The standing alien jumped, and 
something appeared in one hand. These two hadn't uttered a syllable so far, but 
they seemed to hear well enough.
"Dr. Dillingham!" the voice repeated more urgently, and the knob turned. It was 
Miss Galland. "Are you in there? The door seems to be locked—"
The guard lifted his hand. He held a small object resembling a glass prism. He 
pointed it towards the door.
Dillingham didn't wait to find out what the prism was for. "I'm busy at the 
moment," he shouted, putting enough irritation into his voice so that she would 
realize it was important. "Something has come up. Please reschedule my next 
appointment."
Her soft heels retreated, and the alien lowered the prism. Perhaps there had 
been no danger—but it did seem best to keep the girl out of it until he could be 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (2 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
sure. The aliens certainly seemed to mean business.
Did they use speech at all? The single glance he had had into the oral cavity 
gave him serious doubt that articulation as men knew it was possible. Still, 
there had to be some means of communication...
Dillingham returned his attention to his patient. He seemed to be committed now, 
though of course he could not actually work on such a jaw. The mouth opened 
again and he surveyed it more thoroughly. It was a fascinating experience.
Four broad incisors lined the front section of the lower jaw, matched by five 
molars in the upper. This, at least, was what the teeth would have been called 
had they occupied a human mouth.
Biters opposed to grinders? Five to four? What unearthly diet did this creature 
exist upon? The overall problem of the alien presence became subordinate to the 
professional one. With dentition like this, how could he even guess at the 
normal state of the mouth? How would he detect the problem? And, granted a 
correct diagnosis, how could he ameliorate the condition? He knew nothing of the 
metabolism; he might kill the alien simply by applying a local anaesthetic. The 
creature might bleed to death from a single scratch—if it had blood. Nothing 
could be taken for granted.
The standing alien seemed impassive, but remained against the door, prism 
levelled. Suppose this were the captain of an alien vessel, and the patient a 
valued officer or crewman? It was convenient to think of these two as such, 
whatever the truth might be. Perhaps they had been on an exploratory cruise and 
had had difficulties that prevented an immediate return. Possibly their medical 
specialist had been incapacitated.
Whatever his reasons, the captain had seen fit to trust his man to the care of 
the nearest presumably competent specialist, rather than postpone the matter or 
handle it extemporaneously. The fact that the specialist happened to be of 
another world didn't seem to make enough difference to rule out the procedure.
There was food for thought here. Obviously the welfare of the individual was 
paramount, in the captain's society, surmounting even the formidable barriers 
between separate alien cultures. The individual who would trust a creature he 
had never seen before—an Earth dentist—to handle so precise and intimate a 
matter as the repair of an oral breakdown...
That individual was either an absolute fool, or had enormous confidence in his 
control over the situation.
Dillingham glanced again at the captain. He did not have the aspect of a fool, 
and the prism glittered.
Yet the thing was impossible. The threat of a weapon could not create knowledge 
where none existed. It could not grant a human being the power to operate on 
alien metabolism.
The captain moved, gesturing with the prism. Dillingham immediately busied 
himself with the impossible.
The mouth was a paradox. There were no cuspids, no matched sets. Instead there 
were regular patterns of planed surfaces that could serve no conceivable 
masticatory purpose. The white units were obviously teeth of some kind, and firm 
pink gum tissue clothed the base of each unit, but the manner of the jaws 
application was a tantalizing riddle.
Dillingham felt as though he were in a surrealist dream. Despite the intricacies 
of their derivation—teeth had first been formed from modified scales of the lip, 
countless millions of years ago on Earth—he knew them to be straightforward 
tools. They were required for any creature who cut, tore, crushed or ground its 
food, unless it specialized into some substitute, as birds had. There was no 
point in having teeth at all unless they acted in one or more of these ways, and 
cynical Nature neither evolved nor maintained superfluous organs. This alien's 
teeth had to be functional, even if that function remained a riddle to the 
dentist.
How was he to define the problem? He saw no evidence of decay or abrasion. Every 
surface gleamed cleanly white. While he was hardly in a position to make an 
accurate diagnosis, all the evidence suggested health.
He tapped an incisor experimentally. It was solid. All the teeth were firm and 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (3 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
without blemish. Why, then, had this patient come?
Dillingham set down his instruments and stood back. "I can't help you," he said, 
trying to ignore the pointing prism and hoping his tone would put the message 
across.
The crewman closed his mouth, stood up, and went to the door. The captain handed 
over the prism and approached. Dillingham waited, uncertainly.
The captain took the chair and opened his mouth. Had they gone to all this 
trouble for a routine checkup?
Dillingham shrugged, washed his hands again, and brought out a sterile set of 
instruments. There didn't seem to be much he could do except oblige their whim. 
They were aliens, and it could be dangerous to cross them. He looked into the 
captain's mouth.
Suddenly it all came clear.
The crewman's mouth had been a healthy one. This mouth was not. The same 
peculiar pairings were present, the same oddly-angled occlusals—but several of 
the back teeth on the left side had badly ravaged lingual surfaces.
The visitors had anticipated one of his difficulties, so had shown him the 
healthy set first, as a model. Now he did have some idea what was wrong,
"Dr. Dillingham!"
The crewman whirled to aim the prism at Miss Galland's voice. Had half an hour 
passed so rapidly? "Emergency!" Dillingham called to her. "I'll be tied up all 
afternoon. Handle it as well as you can."
"Yes, Doctor," she replied with only the slightest hint of disapproval. His 
present procedure was at best highly irregular; with a real emergency, he should 
have brought her into the operatory to help. Miss Galland was a highly competent 
dental assistant, but he tended to use her more and more as a receptionist 
because she made a much better impression on recalcitrant patients than he did. 
She really deserved to see this astonishing set of teeth—but he still did not 
dare expose her to the mercies of such questionable aliens.
Meanwhile, he knew that the problems entailed by his unexplained cancellations 
would be tactfully handled.
He probed the first of the damaged teeth: the second bicuspid, for want of 
anything resembling a properly descriptive term. The captain jumped; no doubt 
about its sensitivity. It looked as though some potent acid had eaten into the 
surfaces and stripped away the enamel and much of the softer dentin beneath 
(again applying human terms to the un-human). It had been a recent accident; 
there was no sign of subsidiary decay. But the present condition was obviously 
uncomfortable and probably quite painful, and certainly constituted a hazard to 
health.
Dillingham observed that the buccal surfaces had also been etched. Only an 
X-ray, that he could not risk on the alien flesh, could establish possible 
penetration of the pulp. This was a rough case.
It might be possible for him to repair the damage, or at least cover it with a 
protective cast—but only if he could anaesthetize the jaw. Novocain was out of 
the question; any drug might be fatal.
The whole thing was ridiculous. "This is as far as I go," Dillingham said 
firmly. "I hate to leave you in pain, but my ignorance could kill you. I'm 
sorry." He crossed his arms and stood back.
When they saw that he was not going to proceed, the crewman levelled the prism 
at him again. The Captain stopped that with a gesture. He stood up and recovered 
the instrument. He made sure he had Dillingham's attention, then aimed it at the 
wall and flicked a finger.
A spot appeared on the wall. Smoke curled up.
The captain made an adjustment and aimed again. This time a portion of the wall 
exploded, leaving a charred hole.
He returned it to the first setting and pointed it at Dillingham. The message 
was clear enough.
But what would be their reaction if he botched it? Should he violate his 
professional ethics under duress? Dillingham shook his head, sweating. Perhaps 
they were bluffing.—
"Dr. Dillingham!"
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (4 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
Oh, no! Miss Galland had come back.
The captain nodded to the crewman, who whirled to unlock the door.
"Judy! Get away!"
"Doctor! What are you—"
Then the door was open and the crewman charged out. Judy Galland screamed.
Dillingham lunged at the captain, but the officer was ready. The beam from the 
prism stabbed savagely into his leg. Dillingham fell, clutching at the wound.
When the pain abated, he found Miss Galland standing beside him, her dark hair 
disarranged. The crewman had the prism again, and was covering them both.
"Doctor! Are you hurt?"
It was just like her to overlook the incredible in favour of the commonplace. 
She was not the fainting type, fortunately. He inspected his leg.
"Just a burn. It was set on low." He stood up.
The captain resumed his seat. The crewman aimed the prism at the girl.
So much for resistance. The show would go on.
"I don't think they mean any harm, Doctor," Miss Galland said. "They must be 
desperate." No hysterics from her; she had adapted to the situation far more 
readily than he.
Dillingham approached the patient. He had to quiet the shivering of his hand as 
he held a probe. Aliens, heat-beams—this was hardly the ordinary fare of a 
dentist.
But the problem of anaesthesia remained. Massive excavation would be required, 
and no patient could sit still for that without a deadened jaw. He studied the 
situation, perplexed, noting that the crewman had put away the prism.
The captain produced a small jar of greenish ointment. It seemed that this 
contingency had been anticipated. These creatures were not stupid.
Dillingham touched his finger to the substance. There was a slight prickly 
sensation, but nothing else. The captain gestured to his mouth.
Dillingham scooped out a fingerful and smeared it carefully along the gingival 
surfaces surrounding the affected teeth. The colour darkened.
The captain closed his mouth. "How do they chew?" Miss Galland inquired, as 
though this were a routine operation. She had assumed her role of assistant 
naturally.
He shrugged. "The moment they take their eyes off you, slip away. We can't be 
sure of their motives."
She nodded as the captain reopened his mouth. "I think they're doing just what 
we would do, if we had trouble on some other world."
Dillingham refrained from inquiring just what type of literature she read during 
her off hours. He probed the raw surface that had been so sensitive before. No 
reaction.
So far, so good. He felt professional envy for the simplicity of the alien 
anaesthetic. Now that he was committed to the job, he would complete it as 
competently as he could. His ethical code had been bent by the aliens but not 
broken.
It was a full-scale challenge. He would have to replace the missing and damaged 
portions of the teeth with onlays, duplicating in gold as precisely as he could 
the planes and angles witnessed in the healthy set. While it would have helped 
immensely to know the rationale of this strange jaw, it was not essential. How 
many centuries had dentists operated by hit or miss, replacing losses with 
wooden teeth and faithfully duplicating malocclusals and irregularities? The 
best he could hope for would be fifty per cent efficiency—in whatever context it 
applied—yet if this stood up until the patient returned to his own world, it 
sufficed. There was no perfection.
Would a gold alloy react unfavourably with the alien system? He had to chance 
it. Gold was the best medium he had to work with, and another metal would be 
less effective and more risky. A good cobalt chromium alloy would be cheaper, 
but for really delicate work there was no substitute for gold.
He drilled and polished, adjusting to the old internal convolutions, while Miss 
Galland kept the water spray and vacuum in play. He shaped the healthy base of 
each tooth into a curve that offered the best foundation. He bored a deep hole 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (5 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
into each for insertion of the stabilizing platinum-iridium pins. He made a 
hydrocolloid impression of the entire lower jaw, since the better part of the 
reconstruction would have to take place in the laboratory.
Both aliens started when he used the hydrocolloid, then relaxed uneasily. 
Evidently his prosthodontic technique differed from that of their own world.
"Sorry," he said, as much to himself as to them. "Since I am not familiar with 
your methods, I am constrained to rely upon my own. I can't rebuild a tooth by 
guesswork."
"That's telling them," Miss Galland agreed.
He needed a model of both sides of the jaw because it was bilaterally 
symmetrical. A mirror-image reproduction of the right side might reasonably do 
for the left. He ignored the upper jaw. He knew nothing of the proper 
interaction of these surfaces, so the opposing pattern could only confuse him. 
He didn't want human preconceptions to distort the alien pattern.
But his curiosity about the way those incredible teeth functioned was hard to 
suppress.
He worked loose the hardened cast. He applied a temporary layer of amalgam, so 
that the jaw would not be sensitive when the anaesthetic wore off. Then he had 
to explain to the aliens by means of pantomime that this was not the end product 
of his endeavours.
Miss Galland brought a plaster model of human dentures, and he pointed to the 
cut-away teeth and lifted out the mock reconstructions, then gestured towards 
the laboratory. After several repetitions the captain seemed to get the idea. 
Dillingham led the way, with captain, Miss Galland and crewman following in that 
order. The major portion of the job was coming up.
Patients seldom saw the lab. Few of them were aware of the enormous and precise 
labours that went into the simplest inlay, onlay or crown. This time, at least, 
he would have an attentive audience for his prosthodontic art.
Dillingham rinsed the impression immediately and immersed it in a two per cent 
solution of potassium sulphate while Miss Galland set up the equipment. There 
wasn't much else she could do, because special skill was required for the early 
stages.
The captain watched the routine with what Dillingham was sure was amazement. The 
aliens knew no more about the realities of dentistry than local people did! But 
what had they expected? Surely the techniques of North Nebula—to invent a home 
for the visitors—had points of similarity. Physical laws applied rigorously, 
whatever the language or culture.
He filled the impression with a commercial stone preparation, vibrated out the 
bubbles, and inserted the dowels and loops for individual handling of the teeth. 
While the die set, he simulated the remaining steps for the captain: the 
intricate wax mock-up of the onlay pattern for each tooth; the attachment of the 
sprue, so that the pattern and subsequent cast could be handled effectively; the 
investment, or formation of a durable impression around the wax pattern; 
burnout, to free the investment of wax and leave a clear mould for the liquid 
metal; casting (he didn't even try to explain about the problems of expansion 
and contraction of gold and cast): and finally the pickling, finishing and 
polishing of each unit.
The captain's eyes seemed glazed, though the procedures were elementary. Here in 
the lab Dillingham was master, whatever the larger situation.
At last he manipulated the hands of the wall clock to show how many hours would 
be required for all this. He assumed that if the Nebulites knew enough about 
Earth to locate a specialist when they needed one, they should have mastered 
local timekeeping conventions.
The captain was not happy. Had he thought that an onlay was the work of a few 
minutes? Probably, like most patients, he hadn't thought about it at all. 
Everybody knew dentists spaced out the time between appointments merely to boost 
their exorbitant prices! Ha (brother!) ha!
The captain produced what appeared to be a hard plastic rod and chewed it 
meditatively on his good side. Dillingham was afraid at first that it was 
another weapon, but saw that it was not. Well, every species doubtless had its 
vices and mannerisms, and this was certainly better than chewing tobacco or 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (6 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
gobbling candy.
The patient passed the rod to the crewman, who glanced at it with interest but 
did not choose to add any toothmarks of his own. No conversation passed between 
them, but abruptly the captain left. The crewman took a seat and kept the prism 
ready.
Evidently they did not intend to leave the captives to their own devices while 
the onlay was in preparation.
"They don't miss any bets," Miss Galland said ruefully.
Dillingham shrugged and bent to his work. It seemed that the surest way to get 
rid of the visitors was to complete the operation. He sawed his die into four 
separate segments, one for each damaged tooth, and plunged into the complex 
portion of the job. The wax he applied had to be shaped into the exact pattern 
of the desired cast. This, not the original tooth, was the actual model. The die 
determined the juncture with the living tooth, but the artistry lay in sculpting 
the upper surface of the wax into a serviceable and aesthetic duplicate of the 
healthy original.
He set the cruder plaster cast of the captain's jaw before him and began the 
most difficult construction of his career. It was not an image he had to make, 
but a mirror image, and his reflexes were hardly geared to it. Each of the four 
patterns would take several hours.
Night fell as he completed the second pattern. A new alien came to replace the 
crewman, but there was no chance to escape. They chewed sociably on rods, 
exchanged them, and parted.
"Dr. Dillingham!" Miss Galland exclaimed. "That's how they talk! They make marks 
like that old-wedge-writing."
It made sense. "Cuneiform," he agreed. That explained what the teeth were for! 
But the revelation, while satisfying intellectually, didn't help them to escape. 
The new guard was as vigilant as the first.
Night passed. Miss Galland slept on the emergency cot while Dillingham kept 
working. They both knew that help was unlikely to come, because the aliens had 
shown up on Friday and there would be no appointments for the weekend. 
Dillingham lived alone, and Miss Galland's room-mate happened to be on vacation. 
The captain had been quite lucky.
Something else occurred to him. "Miss Galland!" She sat up sleepily. "Since 
these creatures don't use sound to talk with, they probably don't associate it 
with communication at all!"
"Have you stayed up all night, Doctor?" she inquired solicitously, "You must be 
tired."
"Listen to me! We can plan our escape, and they won't realize what we're doing. 
If I can distract the guard's attention—"
She came alive. "Now I follow you. We could have telephoned long ago, if... but 
how can we get him to—"
He explained. They worked it out in detail while he poured thick jel around the 
wax and vibrated the cup. She slowly opened the windows, then set up a chair in 
front of one and sat down. One agile flip could tumble her into the back lot—if 
the guard were off-guard.
The work continued. The guards changed again, and the new one did not realize 
that the window was open. Dillingham poured melted gold into the inverted 
hollows of the final mould. The alien's attention was taken up by the sight of 
the hot metal; he knew that was dangerous.
"Now," Dillingham cried, as he plunged the hot cast into cold water. Steam 
puffed up, bringing the guard to his feet—and Miss Galland was gone.
Dillingham finished with a flourish. "How's that for a set of castings!" he 
cried. "Not to mention a slick escape," he added as the guard turned to discover 
what had happened. "The police will be here within half an hour."
The alien had been tricked, but he was no fool. He wasted no time in a futile 
chase after the girl. He pointed the prism at Dillingham, fired one warning beam 
that blasted the wall beside him, and gestured towards the door.
Two blocks away they came to an overgrown lot. Hidden within the thick brush was 
a shining metal cylinder, large enough to hold several men.
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (7 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
"Now wait a minute!" Dillingham exclaimed as a port swung open. But already he 
was coming to understand that the clever alien captain had anticipated this 
situation also, and had come prepared.
The cooling onlays burned his hand. Perhaps the aliens had never intended to let 
the Earth-dentist go. If they needed help once, why not again, during the long 
voyage in space? He had demonstrated his proficiency, and by his trick to free 
Miss Galland he had forfeited any claim to mercy they might have entertained. 
The captain meant to have his restorations, and the job would be finished even 
if it had to be done en route to—
The where? The North Nebula?
Dr. Dillingham, Earth's first spacefaring prosthodontist, was about to find out.
 
CHAPTER TWO
The Enen—for Dr. Dillingham preferred the acronym to "North Nebula Humanoid 
Species"—rushed up and chewed out a message-stick with machine-like dispatch. He 
handed it to Dillingham and stood by anxiously.
This was an alien world, and he was alone among aliens, but this was his 
laboratory. He was master, in his restricted fashion, and the Enens treated him 
with flattering deference. In fact he felt more like king than captive.
He popped the stick into the hopper of the transcoder. "Emergency," the little 
speaker said. "Only you can handle this, Doctor!"
"You'll have to be more specific, Holmes," he said, and watched the transcoder 
type this on to another stick. Since the Enens had no spoken language, and he 
had not learned to decipher their tooth-dents visually, the transcoder was the 
vital link in communication.
The names he applied to the Enens were facetious. These galactics had no names 
in their own language, and comprehended his humour in this regard no more than 
had his patients on distant Earth. But at least they were industrious folk, and 
very clever at physical science. It was surprising that they were so backward in 
dentistry.
The Enen read the translation and put it between his teeth for a hurried 
footnote. It was amazing, Dillingham thought, how effectively they could flex 
their jaws for minute variations in depth and slant. Compared to this, the human 
jaw was a clumsy portcullis.
The message went back through the machine. "It's a big toothache that no one can 
cure. You must come."
"Oh, come now, Watson," Dillingham said, deeply flattered. "I've been training 
your dentists for several months now, and they're experienced and intelligent 
specialists. They know their maxillaries from their mandibulars. As a matter of 
fact, some of them are a good deal more adept now than I, except in the specific 
area of metallic restorations. Surely—"
But the Enen grabbed the stick before any more could be imprinted by the 
machine's chattering jaws. "Doctor—this is an alien. It's the son of a high 
muck-a-muck of Gleep." The terms, of course, were the ones he had programmed to 
indicate any ruling dignitary of any other planet. He wondered whether he would 
be well advised to substitute more serious designations before someone caught 
on. Tomorrow, perhaps, he would see about it. "You, Doctor, are our only 
practising exodontist."
Ah—now it was coming clear. He was a dentist from a far planet, ergo he must 
know all about off-world dentition. The Enen's naïve faith was touching. Well, 
if this were a job they could not handle, he could at least take a look at it. 
The "alien" could hardly have stranger dentition than the Enens had themselves, 
and success might represent a handsome credit towards his eventual freedom. It 
would certainly be more challenging than drilling his afternoon class in 
Applications of Supercolloid.
"I'm pretty busy with that new group of trainees..." he said. This was merely a 
dodge to elicit more information, since the Enens tended to omit important 
details. Their notions of importance differed here and there from his own.
"The muck-a-muck has offered fifty pounds of frumpstiggle for this one service," 
the Enen replied.
Dillingham whistled, and the transcoder dutifully printed the translation. 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (8 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
Frumpstiggle was neither money nor merchandise. He had never been able to pin 
down exactly what it was, but for convenience he thought of it as worth its 
exact weight in gold: $35 per ounce, $560 per pound. The Enens did not employ 
money as such, but their avid barter for frumpstiggle seemed roughly equivalent. 
His commission on fifty pounds would amount to a handsome dividend, and would 
bring his return to Earth that much closer.
"Very well, Holmes. Bring in the patient."
The Enen became agitated. "The high muck-a-muck's family can't leave the planet. 
You must go to Gleep."
He had half expected something of this sort. The Enens gallivanted from planet 
to planet and system to system with dismaying nonchalance. Dillingham had not 
yet become accustomed to the several ways in which they far excelled Earth 
technology, nor to the abrupt manner of their transactions. True, he owed his 
presence here to an oral injury of one of their space captains, who had simply 
walked into the nearest dental office for service, liked what he found, and 
brought the dentist home. But there was a difference between knowing and 
accepting.
Dillingham was in effect the property of the Enens—he who had dreamed only of 
conventional retirement in Florida. He was no intrepid spaceman, no seeker of 
fortune, and would never have chosen such unsettling galactic intercourse. But 
now that the choice had been made for him—
"I'll pack my bag," he said.
 
Gleep turned out to be a water world. The ship splashed down beside a floating 
way station, and they were transferred to a tank-like amphibian vehicle. It 
rolled into the tossing ocean and paddled along somewhat below the surface.
Dillingham had read somewhere that intelligent life could not evolve in water, 
because of the inhibiting effect of the liquid medium upon the motion of 
specialized appendages. Certainly the fish of Earth had never amounted to much.
How could primitive swimmers hope to engage in interstellar commerce?
Evidently that particular theory was erroneous, elsewhere in the galaxy. Still, 
he wondered just how the Gleeps had circumvented the rapid-motion barrier. Did 
they live in domes under the ocean?
He hoped the patient would not prove to be too alien. Presumably it had 
teeth—but that might be the least of the problems. Fortunately he could draw on 
whatever knowledge the Enens had, and he had also made sure to bring along a 
second transcoder keyed to Gleep. It was awkward to carry two machines, but too 
much could be lost in retranslation if he had to get the Gleep complaints 
relayed through the Enens.
A monstrous fish-shape loomed beyond the porthole. The thing spied the sub, 
advanced, and oped a cavernous maw. "Look out!" Dillingham yelled.
The Enen glanced indifferently at the message-stick and chomped a casual reply. 
"Everything is in order, Doctor."
"But a leviathan is about to engulf us!"
"Naturally. That's a Gleep."
Dillingham stared out, stunned. No wonder the citizens couldn't leave the 
planet! It was a matter of physics, not social convention.
The vessel was already inside the colossal mouth, and the jaws were closing. 
"You—you mean this is the patient?" But he already had his answer. Damn those 
little details the Enens forgot to mention. A whale!
The mouth was shut now and the headlight of the sub revealed encompassing 
mountains of flexing flesh. The treads touched land—probably the tongue—and took 
hold. A minute's climb brought them into a great domed air chamber.
They halted beside what reminded him of the white cliffs of Dover. The hatch 
sprang open and the Enens piled out.
None of them seemed concerned about the possibility that the creature might 
involuntarily swallow, so Dillingham put that notion as far from his mind as he 
was able.
"This is the tooth," the Enen's message said. The driver consulted a map and 
pointed to a solid marble boulder.
Dillingham contemplated it with awe. The tooth stood about twelve feet high, 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (9 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
counting only the distance it projected from the spongy gingival tissue. Much 
more would be below, of course.
"I see," he said, able to think of nothing more pertinent at the moment. He 
looked at the bag in his hand, that contained an assortment of needle-pointed 
probes, several ounces of instant amalgam, and sundry additional staples. In the 
sub was a portable drill with a heavy-duty needle attachment that could excavate 
a cavity a full inch deep.
Well, they had described it as a "big" toothache. He just hadn't been alert.
The Enens brought forth a light extensible ladder and leaned it against the 
tooth. They set his drill and transcoders beside it. "Summon us when you're 
finished," their parting message said.
Dillingham felt automatically for the electronic signal in his pocket. If he 
lost that, he might never get out of here! By the time he was satisfied, the 
amphibian was gone.
He was alone in the mouth of a monster.
Well, he'd been in awkward situations before. He tried once again to close his 
mind to the horrors that lurked about him and ascended the ladder, holding his 
lantern aloft.
The occlusal surface was about ten feet in diameter. It was slightly concave and 
worn smooth. In the centre was a dark trench about two feet wide and over a yard 
long. This was obviously the source of the irritation. He walked over to it and 
looked down. A putrid stench sent him gasping back. Yes—this was the cavity! It 
seemed to range from a foot in depth at the edges to four feet in the centre.
"That," he observed aloud, "is a case of dental caries for the record book." The 
English/Enen transcoder printed a stick. He turned it off, irritated.
Unfortunately, he had no record book. All he possessed was a useless bag of 
implements and a smarting nose. But there was nothing for it but to explore the 
magnitude of the decay. It probably extended literally within the pulp, so that 
the total infected area was considerably larger than that visible from above. 
What showed here was merely a vertical fissure, newly formed. He would have to 
check directly.
He forced himself to breath regularly, though his stomach danced in protest. He 
stepped down into the cavity.
The muck was ankle-deep and the miasma overpowering. He summoned the sick dregs 
of his willpower and squatted to poke into the bottom with one finger. Under the 
slime, the surface was like packed earth. He was probably still inches from the 
material of the living tooth; these were merely layers of crushed and spoiling 
food.
He recalled long-ago jokes about eating apple-compote, pronouncing the word with 
an internal S. Compost. It was not a joke any more.
He located a dryer area and scuffed it with one shoe. Some dark flakes turned 
up, but nothing significant. He wound up and drove his toe into the wall as hard 
as he could.
There was a thunderous roar. He clapped his hands to his ears as the air 
pressure increased explosively. His foot slipped and he fell into the reeking 
centre-section of the trench.
An avalanche of muck descended on him. Above, hundreds of tons of flesh and bone 
and gristle crashed down imperiously, seemingly ready to crush every particle of 
matter within its compass into further compost.
The jaws were closing.
Dillingham found himself face down in sickening garbage, his ears ringing from 
the atmospheric compression and his body quivering from the mechanical one. The 
lantern, miraculously, was undamaged and bright, and his limbs were sound. He 
sat up, brushed some of the sludge from face and arms, and grabbed for the 
slippery light.
He was trapped between clenched jaws—inside the cavity.
Frantically he activated the signal. After an interminable period that he 
endured in mortal fear of suffocation, the ponderous upper jaw lifted. He 
scrambled out, dripping.
The bag of implements was now a thin layer of colour on the surface of the 
tooth. "Perfect occlusal," he murmured professionally, while shaking in reaction 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (10 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
to the realization that his fall had narrowly saved him from a similar fate.
The ladder was gone. Anxious to remove himself from the dangerous biting surface 
as quickly as possible, he prepared to jump—and saw a gigantic mass of tentacles 
reaching for his portable drill near the base of the tooth. Each tentacle 
appeared to be thirty feet long, and as strong and sinuous as a python's tail.
The biting surface no longer seemed like such a bad place. Dillingham remained 
where he was and watched the drill being carried into the darkness of the 
mouth's centre.
In a few more minutes the amphibian vehicle appeared. The Enen driver emerged, 
chewed a stick, presented it. Dillingham reached for the transcoder—and 
discovered that it was the wrong one. All he had now was the Gleep interpreter.
Chagrined, he fiddled with it. At least he could set it to play back whatever 
the Gleep prince might have said. Perhaps there had been meaning in that roar...
There had been. "OUCH!" the machine exclaimed.
 
The next few hours were complicated. Dillingham now had to speak to the Enens 
via the Gleep muck-a-muck (after the episode in the cavity, he regretted this 
nomenclature acutely), who had been summoned for a diagnostic conference. This 
was accomplished by setting up shop in the creature's communications department.
The compartment was actually an offshoot from the Gleep lung, deep inside the 
body. It was a huge internal air space with sensitive tentacles bunching from 
the walls. This was the manner in which the dominant species of this landless 
planet had developed fast-moving appendages whose manipulation led eventually to 
tools and intelligence. An entire technology had developed—inside the great 
bodies.
"So you see," he said. "I have to have an anaesthetic that will do the job, and 
canned air to breathe while I'm working, and a power drill that will handle up 
to an eighteen inch depth of rock. Also a sledgehammer and a dozen wedges. And a 
derrick and the following quantities of—" He went on to make a startling list of 
supplies.
The transcoder sprouted half a dozen tentacles as he talked and waved them in a 
dizzying semaphore. After a moment a group of the wall tentacles waved back. "It 
shall be accomplished," the muck-a-muck's reply came.
Dillingham wondered what visual signal had projected the "ouch" back in the 
patient's mouth. Then it came to him: the tentacles that had absconded with his 
drill and perhaps fragments of his other transcoder were extensions of the 
creature's tongue! Naturally they talked.
"One other thing: while you're procuring my equipment, I'd like to see a diagram 
of the internal structure of your molars."
"Structure?" The tentacles were agitated.
"The pattern of enamel, dentin and pulp, or whatever passes for it in your 
system. A schematic drawing would do nicely. Or a sagittal section showing both 
the nerves and the bony socket. That tooth is still quite sensitive, which means 
the nerve is alive. I wouldn't want to damage it unnecessarily."
"We have no such diagrams."
Dillingham was shocked. "Don't you know the anatomy of your teeth? How have you 
repaired them before?"
"We have never had trouble with them before. We have no dentists. That is why we 
summoned you."
He paced the living floor of the chamber, amazed. How was it possible for such 
intelligent and powerful creatures to remain so ignorant of matters vital to 
their well-being? Never had trouble before? That cavity had obviously been 
festering for many years.
Yet he had faced similar ignorance daily during his Earthly practice. "I'll be 
working blind, in that case," he said at last. "You must understand that while 
I'll naturally do my best, I can not guarantee to save the tooth."
"We understand," the Gleep muck-a-muck replied contritely.
 
Back on the tooth (after a stern warning to Junior to keep those jaws apart no 
matter how uncomfortable things might become), equipped with face mask, 
respirator, elbow-length gloves and hip boots, Dillingham began the hardest 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (11 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
labour of his life. It was not intellectually demanding or particularly 
intricate—just hard. He was vaporizing the contaminated walls of the cavity with 
the beam of a thirty-pound laser drill, and in half an hour his arms were dead 
tired.
There was lateral extension of the infection. He had to wedge himself into a 
rotting, diminishing cavern, wielding the beam at arm's length before him. He 
had to twist the generator sidewise to penetrate every branching side pocket, 
all the while frankly terrified lest the beam slip and touch part of his body. 
He was playing with fire—a fiery beam that could slice off his arm and puff it 
into vapour in one careless sweep.
At least, he thought sweatily, he wasn't going to have to use the sledgehammer 
here. When he ordered the drill he had expected a mechanical one similar to 
those pistons used to break up pavement on Earth. To the Gleep, however, a drill 
was a tapered laser beam. This was indeed far superior to what he had had in 
mind. Deadly but serendipitous.
Backbreaking hours later it was done. Sterile walls of dentin lined the cavity 
on every side. Yet this was only the beginning.
Dillingham, after a short nap right there in the now-aseptic cavity, roused 
himself to make careful measurements. He had to be certain that every alley was 
widest at the opening, and that none were too sharply twisted. Wherever the 
measurements were unsatisfactory, he drilled away healthy material until the 
desired configuration had been achieved. He also adjusted the beam for "Polish" 
and wiped away the roughnesses.
He signalled the Enen sub and indicated by gestures that it was time for the 
tank of supercolloid. And he resolved that next time he stepped off-planet, he 
would bring a trunk-ful of spare transcoders. He had problems enough without 
translation difficulties! At least he had been able to make clear that they had 
to send a scout back to the home planet to pick up the bulk supplies.
Supercolloid was a substance developed by the ingenious Enens in response to his 
exorbitant specifications of several months before. He had once entertained the 
notion that if he were slightly unreasonable, they would ship him back to Earth. 
Instead they had met the specifications exactly and increased his assessed value 
because he was such a sophisticated practitioner. This neatly added years to his 
projected term of captivity. After that he became more careful. But the 
substance remained a prosthodontist's dream.
Supercolloid was a fluid stored under pressure that set rapidly when released. 
It held its shape indefinitely without measurable distortion, yet was as 
flexible as rubber. It was ideal for difficult impressions, since it could yield 
while being removed and spring immediately back to the proper shape. This saved 
time and reduced error. At 1300 degrees Fahrenheit it melted suddenly into the 
thin, transparent fluid again. This was its most important property.
Dillingham was about to make a very large cast. To begin the complex procedure, 
he had to fill every crevice of the cavity with colloid. Since the volume of the 
excavation came to forty cubic feet, and supercolloid weighed fifty pounds per 
cubic foot when set, he needed a good two thousand pounds.
A full ton—to fill a single cavity. "Think big," he told himself.
He set up the tank and hauled the long hose into the pit. Once more he crawled 
head-first into the lateral expansion, no longer requiring the face mask. He 
aimed the nozzle without fear and squirted the foamy green liquid into the 
farthest off-shoot, making certain that no air spaces remained. He backed off a 
few feet and filled the other crevices, but left the main section open.
In half an hour the lateral branch had been simplified considerably. It was now 
a deep, flat crack without offshoots. Dillingham put away the nozzles and 
crawled in with selected knives and brushes. He cut away projecting colloid, 
leaving each filling flush with the main crevice wall, and painted purple 
fixative over each surface.
Satisfied at last, he trotted out the colloid hose again and started the pump. 
This time he opened the nozzle to full aperture and filled the main crevice, 
backing away as the foam threatened to engulf him. He certainly didn't want to 
become part of the filling! Soon all of the space was full. He smoothed the 
green wall facing the main cavity and painted it in the same manner as the 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (12 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
off-shoots.
Now he was ready for the big one. So far he had used up about eight cubic feet 
of colloid, but the gaping centre pit would require over thirty feet. He removed 
the nozzle entirely and let the tank heave itself out.
"Turn it off!" he yelled to the Enen by the pump as green foam bulged gently 
over the rim. One ton of supercolloid filled the tooth, and he was ready to 
carve it down and insert the special plastic loop in the centre.
The foam continued to pump. "I said TURN IT OFF!" he cried again. Then he 
remembered that he had no transcoder for Enen. They could not comprehend him.
He flipped the hose away from the filling and aimed it over the edge of the 
tooth. He had no way to cut off the flow himself, since he had removed the 
nozzle. There could not be much left in the tank.
A rivulet of green coursed down the tooth and over the pink gum tissue, 
travelling towards the squid-like tongue. The tentacles reached out, grasping 
the foam as it solidified. They soon became festooned in green.
Dillingham laughed—but not for long. There was a steam-whistle sigh followed by 
a violent tremor of the entire jaw. "I'm going to... sneeze," the Gleep 
transcoder said, sounding fuzzy. The colloid was interfering with the 
articulation of the tongue and triggering a reflex.
A sneeze! Suddenly Dillingham realized what that would mean to him and the Enen 
crew.
"Get under cover!" he shouted at the Enens below, again forgetting that they 
couldn't comprehend the warning. But they had already grasped the significance 
of the tremors, and were piling into the sub frantically.
"Hey—wait for me!" But he was too late. The air howled past with the titanic 
intake of breath. There was a terrible pause.
Dillingham lunged for the mound of colloid and dug his fingers into the 
thickening substance. "Keep your jaws apart!" he yelled at the Gleep, praying 
that it could still pick up the message. "KEEP THEM OPEN!"
The sound of a tornado raged out of its throat. He buried his face in green as 
the hurricane struck, tearing mercilessly at his body. His arms were wrenched 
cruelly; his fingers ripped through the infirm colloid, slipping...
The wind died, leaving him grasping at the edge of the tooth. He had survived 
it! The jaws had not closed.
He looked up. The upper molars hung only ten feet above, visible in the light 
from the charmed lamp hooked somehow to his foot.
He was past the point of reaction. "Open, please," he called in his best 
operative manner, willing the transcoder to be still in the vicinity. He peered 
over the edge.
There was no sign of the sub. The colloid tank, with its discharging hose, was 
also gone.
He took a walk across the neighbouring teeth, looking for whatever there was to 
see. He was appalled at the amount of decalcification and outright decay in 
evidence. This Gleep child would shortly be in pain again, unless substantial 
restorative work were done immediately.
But in a shallow cavity—one barely a foot deep—he found the transcoder, 
undamaged. "It's an ill decalcification that bodes nobody good," he murmured, 
retrieving it.
The amphibious sub reappeared and disgorged somewhat shaken passengers. 
Dillingham marched back over the rutted highway and joined them. But the 
question still nagged at his mind: how could the caries he had observed be 
reconciled with the muck-a-muck's undoubtedly sincere statement that there had 
never been dental trouble before? What had changed?
He carved the green surface into an appropriate pattern and carefully applied 
his fixative. He was ready for the next step.
Now the derrick was set up and brought into play. Dillingham guided its dangling 
hook into the eyelet embedded in the colloid and signalled the Enen operator to 
lift. The chain went taut; the mass of solidified foam eased grandly out of its 
socket and hung in the air, an oddly-shaped boulder.
He turned his attention to the big crevice-filling. He screwed in a 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (13 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
corkscrew-eyelet and arranged a pulley so that the derrick could act on it 
effectively. The purple fixative had prevented the surface of the main 
impression from attaching to that of the subsidiary one, just as it was also 
protecting the several small branches within.
There was no particular difficulty. In due course every segment of the colloid 
impression was marked and laid out in the makeshift laboratory he had set up 
near the waterline of the Gleep's mouth. They were ready for one more step.
The tank of prepared investment arrived. This, too, was a special composition. 
It remained fluid until triggered by an electric jolt, whereupon it solidified 
instantly. Once solid, it could not be affected by anything short of demolition 
by sledgehammer.
Dillingham pumped a quantity into a great temporary vat. He attached a plastic 
handle to the smallest impression, dipped it into the vat, withdrew it entirely 
covered by white batter and touched the electrode to it. He handed the abruptly 
solid object to the nearest Enen and took up the next.
Restorative procedure on Gleep differed somewhat from established Earthly 
technique. All it took was a little human imagination and a lot of Enen 
technology.
The octopus-tongue approached while he worked. It reached for him. "Get out of 
here or I'll cram you into the burn-out furnace!" he snapped into the 
transcoder. The tongue retreated.
The major section was a problem. It barely fitted into the vat, and a solid foot 
of it projected over the top. He finally had the derrick lower it until it 
bumped bottom, then raise it a few inches and hold it steady. He passed out 
brushes, and he and the Enen crew went to work slopping the goo over the top and 
around the suspended hook.
He touched the electrode to the white monster. The derrick lifted the mass, 
letting the empty vat fall free. Yet another stage was done.
Two ovens were employed for the burn-out. Each was big enough for a man to stand 
within. They placed the ends of the plastic rods into special holders and 
managed to fit all of the smaller units into one oven, fastening them into place 
by means of a heat-resisting framework. The main chunk sat in the other oven, 
propped upside-down.
They sealed the ovens and set the thermostats for 2000 degrees. Dillingham lay 
down into the empty vat and slept.
Three hours later burn-out was over. Even supercolloid took time to melt 
completely when heated in a 1500 pound mass. But now the green liquid had been 
drained into reservoirs and sealed away, while the smaller quantities of melted 
plastic were allowed to collect in a disposal vat. The white investments were 
hollow shells, open only where the plastic rods had projected.
The casting was the most spectacular stage. Dillingham had decided to use gold, 
though worried that its high specific gravity would overbalance the Gleep jaw. 
It was impossible under present conditions to arrange for a gold-plated, 
matching-density filling, and he was not familiar enough with other metals to be 
sure they could be adapted to his purpose. The expansion coefficient of his 
investment matched that of gold exactly, for example; anything else would 
solidify into the wrong size because of contraction while cooling.
Gold, at any rate, was nothing to the muck-a-muck. Gleeps refined it through 
their gills, extracting it from the surrounding water in any quantity required.
The crucible arrived: a self-propelled boiler-like affair. They piled 
hundred-pound ingots of precise gold alloy into the hopper, while the volcanic 
innards of the crucible rumbled and belched and melted everything to rich bright 
liquid.
A line of Enens carried the smaller investments, which were shaped inside 
exactly like the original impressions, to the spigot and held them with tongs 
while the fluid fortune poured in. These were carefully deposited in the vat, 
now filled with cold water.
The last cast, of course, was the colossal vat-shaped one. This was simply 
propped up under the spigot while the tired crew kept feeding in ingots.
By the time this cast had been poured, twenty-four tons of gold had been used in 
all.
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (14 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
While the largest chunk was being hauled to the ocean inside the forepart of the 
mouth, Dillingham broke open the smaller investments and laid out the casts 
according to his chart of the cavity. He gave each a minimum of finishing; on so 
gross a scale, it could hardly make much difference.
The finished casts weighed more than twenty times as much as the original 
impressions had, and even the smallest ones were distinctly awkward to manoeuvre 
into place. He marked them, checked off their positions on his chart, and had 
the Enens ferry them up with the derrick. At the other end, he manhandled each 
into its proper place, verified its fit and position, and withdrew it to paint 
it with cement. No part of this filling could come loose in action.
Once again the branching cavern lost its projections, this time permanently, as 
each segment was secured and severed from its projecting sprue. He kept the 
sprues—the handles of gold, the shape of the original plastic handles—on until 
the end, because otherwise there would have been no purchase on the weighty 
casts. He had to retain some means to move them.
The derrick lowered the crevice-piece into the cavity. Two Enens pried it in 
with power crowbars. Dillingham stood by and squirted cement over the mass as it 
slid reluctantly into the hole.
It was necessary to attach a heavy weight to the derrick-hook and swing it 
repeatedly against the four-ton cast in order to tamp it in all the way.
At last it was time for the major assembly. Nineteen tons of gold 
descended-slowly into the hole while they dumped quarts of liquid cement into a 
pool below. The cast touched bottom and settled into place, while the cement 
bubbled up around the edges and overflowed.
They danced a little jig on top of the finished filling—just to tamp it in 
properly, Dillingham told himself, for he considered himself to be too sedate to 
dance. He wished that a fraction of its value in Earth-terms could be credited 
to his account. The job was over.
 
"A commendable performance," the high muck-a-muck said. "My son is frisking 
about in his pen like a regular tadpole and eating well."
Dillingham remembered what he had seen during the walk along the occlusal 
surfaces. "I'm afraid he won't be frisking long. In another year or two he'll be 
feeling half a dozen other caries. Decay is rampant."
"You mean this will happen again?" The tentacles waved so violently that the 
transcoder stuttered.
Dillingham decided to take the fish by the tail. "Are you still trying to tell 
me that no member of your species has suffered dental caries before this time?"
"Never."
This still did not make sense. "Does your son's diet differ in any important 
respect from yours, or from that of other Gleeptads?"
"My son is a prince!"
"Meaning that he can eat whatever he wants, whether it is good for him or not?"
The Gleep paused. "He gets so upset if he doesn't have his way. He's only a 
baby—hardly three centuries old."
Dillingham was getting used to differing standards. "Do you feed him 
delicacies—refined foods?"
"Naturally. Nothing but the best. I wish we had been able to afford such 
galactic imports when I was a tad!"
Dillingham sighed. "Muck-a-muck, my people also had perfect teeth—until they 
began consuming sweets and overly refined foods. Then dental caries became the 
most common disease among them. You're going to have to curb your child's 
appetite."
"I couldn't." He could almost read the agitation of the tentacles without 
benefit of translation. "Doctor, he'd throw a terrible tantrum."
Dillingham had expected this reaction. He had encountered it many times on 
Earth. "In that case, you'd better begin training a crew of dentists. Your son 
will require constant attention."
"But we can't do such work ourselves. We have no suitable appendages, 
externally."
"Import some dentists, then. You have no acceptable alternative."
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (15 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
The creature signalled a sigh. "You make a convincing case." The tentacles 
relaxed while it considered. Suddenly they came alive again. "Enen—it seems we 
need a permanent technician. Will you sell us this one?"
Dillingham gaped, horrified at the thought of all that garbage in the patient's 
jaw. Surely they couldn't—
"Sell him!" the Enen chief replied angrily. Dillingham wondered how he was able 
to understand the words, then realized that his transcoder was picking up the 
Gleep signals translated by the other machine. From Enen to Gleep to English, 
via paired instruments. Why hadn't he thought of that before?
"This is a human being," the Enen continued indignantly. "A member of an 
intelligent species dwelling far across the galaxy. He is the only exodontist in 
this entire sector of space, and a fine upstanding fellow at that. How dare you 
make such a crass suggestion!"
Bless him! Dillingham had always suspected that his hosts were basically 
creatures of principle.
"We're prepared to offer a full ton of superlative-grade frumpstiggle..." the 
muck-a-muck said enticingly.
"A full ton?" The Enens were aghast. Then recovering: "True, the Earthman has 
taught us practically all he knows. We could probably get along without him 
now..."
"Now wait a minute!" Dillingham shouted. But the bargaining continued unabated.
After all—what is the value of a man, compared to that of frumpstiggle?
 
DENTAL ASSISTANT / HYGIENIST / LIGHT BOOKKEEPING QUALIFIED EXPERIENCED 
UNATTACHED MUST TRAVEL.
Judy Galland read the strange ad again. It had not been placed by any agency she 
recognized, and there was no telephone number. Just an address in a black 
neighbourhood. It hardly looked promising—but she was desperate. She shrugged 
and caught a bus.
She concentrated on the ad as she rode, as though it had further secrets to 
yield. She was qualified: she was a capable dental assistant with three years' 
experience in the office of a good dentist, and she was also a hygienist. She 
knew that few girls were both, and many would not touch the clerical end of it 
at all. She was single and willing to travel across the world if need be. She 
was twenty-six years old and looked it. She got along well with people and 
seldom lost her temper.
So why couldn't she get a job?
The bus jolted heavily over a set of tracks, shaking her loose from this 
pointless line of thinking. She knew what her problem was: she had worked for 
Dr. Dillingham, and Dr. Dillingham had disappeared mysteriously. A construction 
worker might fall off a beam and get killed, and nobody blamed his co-workers. A 
big-game hunter might get eaten by the game, yet his bearers could find similar 
employment elsewhere. A politician might get removed from office for 
malfeasance, while his loyal staff stepped into better positions. But just let 
one small-town dentist vanish—
She shook her head. That was inaccurate too. It was her own fault: she had tried 
to tell the truth. Naturally no one had believed her story of weird aliens 
holding her captive while forcing Dr. Dillingham to work on their astonishing 
teeth. There had been no substantiating evidence except for the simple fact that 
he was gone without trace. Now the aura of that wild story hung about her, an 
albatross, killing any chance she might have had to find other employment in the 
profession. In this corner of the world, at any rate.
Had she claimed that a mobster had murdered the dentist and sunk him in concrete 
with shoes of water (or was it the other way round?) she might have been clear. 
But the truth had ruined her. Aliens from space? Lunacy!
The bus halted at the closest corner to the address. She stepped down 
regretfully. This was an unfamiliar section of town, ill-kempt and menacing. 
Beer cans glittered amid the tall weeds of a vacant lot. Down the littered 
street a drunk spotted her and shambled nearer. The bus blasted its noxious 
gases at her and shoved off.
Only one structure approximated the address: a cylindrical building several 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (16 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
storeys tall and pointed at the top. Its outer wall was shiny metal, and 
surprisingly modernistic for such a region. Yet the lot had not even been 
cleared, except for the narrow boardwalk leading to the entrance.
She started to turn back, then. There was something un-subtly wrong about this 
ad and this address. What possible use could these people have for an 
experienced dental assistant, etc?
But the reality of her situation turned her about again. The bus was gone, the 
drunk was almost upon her, she had barely three dollars in her purse and her 
resources beyond that were scant. She had either to take what offered, or throw 
away all her training and apply for unspecialized employment. She pictured 
herself making beds, scrubbing floors, babysitting. Suddenly the nameless ad 
seemed more promising. She outwalked the drunk and knocked on the cylinder-house 
door. This was a circular affair arranged to resemble a ship's porthole. Modern 
architecture never ran out of innovations! After a few seconds it opened, the 
metal lifting up and out, drawbridge fashion. She took a nervous breath though 
she was not the nervous type and entered a small bare antechamber.
"Name?" a voice said, startling her. For an instant she had fancied it was Dr. 
Dillingham speaking, but it was some kind of recorded answering service whose 
intonation just happened to resemble that familiar voice. Apparently she still 
was not to know who was her prospective employer.
She answered the routine questions automatically. That voice unnerved her, and 
enhanced her depression. She had of course never let him know, but her initial 
respect for Dr. Dillingham's technical and ethical finesse had over the months 
and years deepened into a considerable appreciation of the man himself, and 
even—
She became aware that the questions had ceased. An inner panel opened. "You have 
been accepted, Miss Galland of Earth," the recording said.
A figure stepped through the new doorway.
Judy was not the screaming type. She screamed.
 
CHAPTER THREE
Dr. Dillingham was not in a happy frame of mind. Weeks had passed since he had 
last seen the light of a sun, breathed unconfined atmosphere, or even walked on 
land. Now the monstrous sentient swimmer within which he dwelt had deprived him 
of his transcoder, so that he could no longer make known his complaints.
His compartment was comfortable enough, and no doubt the Gleeps thought that 
sufficient. It had been outfitted with a bed, a chair, a workbench, selected 
prosthodontic laboratory paraphernalia and a water-closet—but this did not make 
it any less a prison. He used his equipment to fashion articles of solid gold, 
but this was sorry entertainment. He had no company his own size and no journals 
to relax with.
In an hour he would have to begin the day's labour—a prospect no less appalling 
for all its familiarity.
There were sounds in the living hallway. A visitor? He jumped up and tidied his 
smock, anxious to meet whatever oddity might appear. He was sure it would not be 
human.
The noise stopped. There was a tap on his door.
"Come in!" he called, as much to exercise his voice as in any hope he could be 
understood. He would be lucky if the visitor could ever hear sounds in the human 
vocal range. The creatures of the galaxy were far removed from Earthly 
experience.
"Thank you, Doctor," a cultured voice replied. "So glad to find you at home."
Dillingham controlled his surprise. This was probably a transcoder in operation. 
It was hardly credible that a galactic would happen to speak unaccented English. 
Unless, somehow, a live man had—
The door opened. A dinosaur stood without. Its great head hovered a dozen feet 
above its powerful webbed hind feet, and its smaller front feet were held before 
it a little like the attitude of a begging puppy. A muscular tail twitched 
behind. It wore a modest dinner jacket with a black bow tie.
Dillingham gaped. Such a thing was impossible! This was not Earth, past or 
present, and even if—
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (17 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
"I beg you pardon," the dinosaur said. "Were you expecting someone else?"
Dillingham relaxed abruptly. "Oh, you're a Galactic. I should have known."
"Would you prefer to have me call at another hour? I did not mean to disturb you 
inconveniently."
"No, no! Don't go away," Dillingham exclaimed. "Come in, sit down—or whatever 
you do. I haven't seen a sapient face in three weeks. Not since I was 
incarcerated here. I mistook you for—never mind. So many crazy things have 
happened the past few months that I should be acclimatized by now."
The creature settled on the floor and wrapped its tail around its feet. The 
flat-snouted head was still above Dillingham's level. "Allow me to introduce 
myself, in that case. I am, if I may make a free rendition in your terms, a 
diplomat from Trachos. I was asked by the, er, high muck-a-muck of Gleep to talk 
with you, since there appears to be some misunderstanding. If there is any way I 
can help—"
Dillingham had adjusted almost automatically to the notion of conversing 
formally in English with a dinosaur, after the initial shock, but he did have 
questions. "If you don't mind my asking—how is it you speak my language? 
Everyone else has to use the transcoder."
"It is my profession, Doctor. As I said, I am a diplomat—a free-lance diplomat, 
if you will. I always master the dialect before attempting to deal with an 
alien. The muck-a-muck was considerate enough to loan me a transcoder coded to 
Gleep/Earth—"
So that was where his machine had gone! "You went to all this trouble just to 
talk directly to me?" This was impressive.
"No trouble at all, Doctor, I assure you. My species, being less aggressive than 
most and of poor digital co-ordination," here he held up webbed fingers, 
"survived by talking rapidly. Thus we became natural diplomats, and language is 
our pleasure. But you seem nervous, Doctor. Am I abusing your vernacular?"
Dillingham was embarrassed. "No, you speak like a native. But there are a number 
of different life forms on my planet, Earth, and by an odd coincidence you—" He 
broke off, unwilling to say it.
"I resemble one of your animals? Please do not be reticent, Doctor. I must 
confess that your own appearance corresponds to a certain mammalian strain on my 
own world, mortifying as it may be to say so."
"Well, I am a mammal—"
"Really?" The creature drew his reptilian head close. "Do you give live birth to 
your young? Do you suckle them? Hair on your body? You have a"—here he paused 
delicately—"a fixed body temperature?"
Dillingham was taken aback by the implied appraisal. "Some of these traits are, 
shall we say, implemented by the female of my species. But yes—these are typical 
qualities."
The dinosaur shook his head. "Strange. I did not realize that intelligence was 
possible in a true mammal. But in a galaxy the size of ours—"
"Then you actually are a—reptile? You lay eggs, are cold-blooded, have 
undifferentiated teeth?"
"Of course—with the same reservations you mentioned for yourself. I, being male, 
do not personally lay eggs, and actually my blood is not cold. It merely matches 
the temperature of my body, which in turn matches my surroundings, which you 
will agree is the sensible system. No offence."
Dillingham smiled. "Then I don't suppose it is any insult to you if I mention 
that you resemble one of the most notable reptiles in the history of my planet. 
It's extinct now, but we call it the duck-billed dinosaur. I can't remember the 
technical name."
"Ah. Probably Trachodon. I surmised as much when I interpolated missing portions 
of your transcoder's vocabulary."
"You were able to discover terms I don't even know myself?" Dillingham asked, a 
little uneasy.
"By no means. If your language were rational, this would be possible, naturally, 
but this is hardly the case. The technical names for your dinosaurs—Stegosaurus, 
Ornithomimus, Brontosaurus—these were all in the memory-storage of your 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (18 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
transcoder. You must have provided them at some time."
"But I don't remember any such thing! I may have run across the words in some 
college text, years ago, but—"
"Interesting. Are you subject to the trance-state? Perhaps you provided more 
information than you realized."
Trance state! Dillingham began to wonder just how much the Enens, his first 
galactic "hosts", had learned about him. If they had managed to drug or 
hypnotize him—
"Suddenly it occurs to me I've been a trifle naïve," he told the trachodon. 
Then, oddly, he found himself pouring out all his complaints to this unusual but 
sympathetic acquaintance. "...and then I was put to work instructing classes in 
metallic restoratives, as though being abducted from Earth wasn't bad enough. 
The novelty wore off in a hurry. Then the Enens sold me to Gleep, and for the 
past three weeks I've been wallowing in the unbrushed mouth of the leviathan, 
shovelling sludge out of trenchlike cavities and pouring in solid gold because 
the muck-a-muck won't allow me to experiment with anything cheaper. I have to 
live in this adapted lung-compartment. Oh, the Gleep monarch treats me well 
enough—but I can't get used to the idea of never going outside, even if there is 
no land here to walk on. As for actually living inside a three hundred foot long 
sea creature, like a parasite... I can't even flush the water-closet without 
remembering that my refuse is being drained right back into the bloodstream of—"
"This is understandable," the trachodon said. "It occurs to me that you are not 
well situated here."
"That occurred to me three weeks ago! But how do I get away? Every time I try to 
say something—"
"I see no problem. To a Gleep, there is no higher privilege than serving 
Gleepdom. When you express dissatisfaction with your lot, the muck-a-muck must 
assume that the transcoder has broken down. Indeed, speaking as an objective 
third party, I must say that your attitude is atypical."
"You mean there are creatures who would actually enjoy scraping decomposition 
off twelve foot cusps, ten hours a day? Who don't mind isolation?"
"Certainly, assuming they were capable of handling the work. Absolute comfort, 
absolute security, limited responsibility—it can be a very tempting 
proposition."
Hope blossomed. "Could—could you arrange to have one of these creatures replace 
me here?"
"I could certainly inaugurate the proceedings, if that is what you really 
desire. But I must warn you: once you leave Gleep, it will be almost impossible 
for you to return. Few are granted a second chance."
"The first chance has been quite sufficient. Tell the muck-a-muck there are lots 
of Enens who are trained for the work, or who can instruct other creatures in 
the principles. Tell him—well, you're the diplomat. You know what to say."
"Of course. But where do you wish to go ?"
"Home!"
"Your native planet is some distance away. I rather doubt that you possess the 
frump or the stiggle to finance the journey at this time, particularly since you 
would first have to purchase your own contract and attain independent status."
Dillingham thought about it. While he hardly approved of the manner he had 
become "property", he knew that galactic law recognized the validity of that 
status. Earth was not considered to be a civilized planet, and therefore had few 
rights. The theory was that a savage admitted to galactic culture owed a certain 
amount in return for the education he picked up just by associating with higher 
species. He had a long way to go before becoming his own man again. "I'll go 
anywhere, so long as it's above water and in the open."
"I could arrange transportation quite readily to Electrolus, where I happen to 
have my next assignment—"
"Does it have solid land and natural sunshine?"
"Yes, but—"
"Done!"
 
Two hours later Trach showed him aboard a ship anchored on the surface. It 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (19 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
hardly seemed possible that he had obtained his release so readily, yet here he 
was, out of the belly of the whale. Trach was certainly efficient!
"This isn't an Enen ship," Dillingham observed. "Too small. Where's the crew?"
"There is no crew," Trach said, closing the hatch.
Dillingham realized abruptly that he was alone with a dinosaur—really alone. 
"But you said—"
Trach walked by, his breath smelling of midsummer hay. "I'm going to Electrolus, 
and there is room for you aboard my ship, so I simplified the procedure by 
purchasing your contract myself. Wasn't that what you wanted?"
Dillingham was hardly sure. The trachadon stood twelve feet tall without 
stretching and had an alarmingly powerful construction. The ridiculous jacket 
and bow-tie could not conceal the impervious hide beneath, or the rippling 
reptilian musculature. When he spoke, the jaws parted to reveal a ferocious 
array of teeth... but not far enough to enable Dillingham to determine whether 
they were the implements of a herbivore or a carnivore.
"Take-off may be a trifle uncomfortable," Trach said. "Would you like me to 
strap you in?"
The spare couch had enormous metallic bands for up to six limbs. The fastenings 
were far too heavy for Dillingham to manipulate himself; they were shackles that 
would hold him helpless, once clamped. "I—I'll try my luck without the straps," 
he said.
"Fine. I never bother with them myself. Sometimes I get hungry in mid-manoeuvre, 
and they become inconvenient."
Sometimes he got hungry... Dillingham wondered just what rights a contract 
granted the owner. Were the duckbills carnivorous? He couldn't remember. He 
gripped his bag of tools tightly, wishing he had something more sturdy than a 
slender dental sealer. But of course Trach was friendly. He was a reputable 
diplomat. He said.
Trach braced his tail against the floor and manipulated controls. Suddenly there 
was a jolt that threw Dillingham to the floor. "Just a little finicky when she's 
warming up," the dinosaur remarked, "One of these missions I'm going to lease a 
modern ship. This one is apt to spring a leak in space any time now."
Dillingham sat down abruptly on the couch and gripped a strap. Leak in space! 
Another jolt, and the ship was moving. Trach activated a screen, and the grey 
waves of the Gleep ocean appeared, rushing past at an astonishing rate. Then 
they were airborne, and the waves gave way to dank clouds.
It became warm. "Do you have any temperature control for this ship?" Dillingham 
inquired sweating. "I think the speed is heating the—I mean, the atmospheric 
friction—"
"Oh, there is some variation. We're reaching for escape velocity, after all. On 
this planet, in your terms, that's about twenty thousand knots. Nothing to worry 
about."
Dillingham winced as the metal flooring became hot. "Well, I'm a 
fixed-temperature creature," he reminded the dinosaur apologetically.
"Is this uncomfortable for you? I had forgotten." Trach obligingly turned on a 
frigid blast of air. "Good thing that device is operative now. Sometimes it gets 
stuck on HOT."
Dillingham nodded, shivering, though the metal fastenings were still too hot to 
touch. He wondered how many other minor inconveniences this ship would produce. 
This was certainly a contrast to the precision equipment of the Enens.
The ship shuddered and bucked, catapulting him across the burning floor. "That 
breaks us out of the atmosphere," Trach said nonchalantly. "Better stay on the 
couch, though. Sometimes it—"
The dinosaur turned as he spoke, spied Dillingham far removed from the couch, 
and leaped for him. The enormous webbed hands caught him before he could 
scramble to safety. "Got you!" Trach grunted with satisfaction.
Dillingham opened his mouth to scream, knowing it to be a thoroughly useless and 
effeminate gesture but unable to think of anything better. There had been foul 
pla—
The ship seemed to turn inside out. There was a sickening wrench of... something 
that threatened to deposit his stomach inside his braincase. Then Dillingham 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (20 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
found himself seated on Trach's soft underbelly, both of them jammed into a 
corner.
Trach snapped around, snake-like, and set him on his feet. "I meant to warn you, 
Doctor. The shift into overdrive is sometimes a little sticky. I'm used to it, 
but you could have been hurt. Are you all right?"
"Yes," Dillingham replied, unsettled.
"From here on it will be perfectly smooth," Trach said. "Once this tub makes it 
through the shift, she's safe—until the shift back. That won't be for a couple 
of days, your time. We can relax."
Dillingham decided to take him at his word. "Thank you for all your trouble."
Trach touched a button on a complicated machine. "You over-rate the service I 
performed," he said modestly. "Ordinarily I would be offered a fair commission 
for straightening out the Gleep problem. But I accepted your contract in lieu of 
that, and it's worth—"
"A ton of frumpstiggle."
"Which is several times my normal fee. That is a credit my account sorely needs. 
If I had failed to give satisfaction—"
The machine spewed out a mass of green material resembling fresh cabbage leaves.
"So you weren't just being nice, helping me out?"
"Doctor, it is my business to be nice, and to get paid for it. Too often I'm 
never given the opportunity. We'll find some attractive disposition for your 
contract, maybe a semi-private practice on Electrolus similar to the one you had 
on Earth, and both of us will gain. May I offer you something to eat?"
"That's—food?" Dillingham eyed the armful of leaves.
"Greenchomp, in your idiom. It's the only sustenance my species can tolerate. 
But the synthesizer can be adjusted for other things—usually. What would you 
prefer?"
Dillingham contemplated the machine. "I'm not hungry at the moment," he said. 
"What did you mean about never being given the opportunity to be nice? If you're 
a diplomat—"
"Free-lance. That means I'm my own boss, but if I don't produce, I starve. I go 
from mission to mission, and I was doing well enough until recently. But 
now—well, if I don't make good on Electrolus, I'll be awkwardly near insolvency. 
I'll have to scratch to provision my ship for the next hop, and that means—"
"Don't tell me. Let me guess. That means you'll have to auction off my contract 
to the highest bidder."
"Something like that. And I'm afraid they don't offer as much for compatible 
locations. There's always a fierce demand for doctors and dentists in the radium 
mines of Ra, because—"
"My curiosity just radiated away. Let's agree that your problem is my problem, 
and see if we can't solve it."
"If only we could. But it baffles me."
"You seemed to handle the Gleep affair readily enough. I'm no judge, of course, 
but if you know your job and work at it, I can't see why you should have any 
difficulties." It was amazing how quickly they had got on intimate terms. The 
confirmation of Trach's leafy diet and the image of deadly radium mines might 
have contributed something, however.
"I agree. But somehow I haven't made the grade recently, except on Gleep."
Tell me about it," Dillingham said. "Believe me, I am exceedingly interested."
Trach flexed his tail restlessly. "Consider my last assignment. The planet of 
Bolt engaged me to set up formal relations with the world of Gulp and arrange 
for a cultural exchange. I mastered the difficult language of Gulp—it's a 
glottal dialect—and trained myself to be adept at every nuance of planetary 
etiquette before setting one webbed foot there. I rehearsed my ritual 
compliments industriously. I'm sure everything was correct—yet I never got to 
meet the representatives with whom I had to deal. Despite my numerous hints, 
then: monarch did not see fit to provide me with the necessary appointments, and 
finally my lease expired with nothing accomplished. I had to forfeit the 
commission." His tail slapped the deck in frustration. "How can I be diplomatic 
when I'm not permitted to talk with my clients?"
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (21 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
Dillingham shared his host's confusion. "Weren't advance arrangements made? 
Didn't they know what you were there for?"
"They knew. The arrangements were made—and cancelled after my arrival. They 
never told me why."
"Maybe they changed their minds about the cultural exchange, and didn't want to 
admit it."
"Then why did they hire another diplomat after I left, an amphibian yet(!) and 
allow him to complete the entire programme?"
Why, indeed. "That's typical? I mean, the same thing has happened on other 
planets?"
Too many others. They just seem to lose interest, while other free-lancers make 
the reputation and commissions that should have gone to me. If I didn't know 
better, I'd suspect a conspiracy."
"Do you know better? A situation like that—"
"That also is my business. I can spot corrupt politics as quickly as you can 
spot a rotten tooth."
"But there must be some reason." Dillingham tried to think of something 
plausible, but nothing occurred to him. "Let's isolate the, er, area of 
infection. Exactly when did Gulp's attitude change?"
Trach considered. "All the signals were positive at first. They sent an honour 
guard to meet me when I landed, and I was provided with the most elegant 
accommodation. I interviewed the monarch the very next day. He was quite 
cordial, and I was sure success was in my grasp."
"But—?"
"But nothing. That was the only appointment I had. They left me alone, and put 
me off when I tried to inquire. I know the brush-off when I get hit over the 
snout with it."
"But are you sure there was no—"
"There was no foul play. No animosity. They simply changed their minds, and 
wouldn't tell me why. Most frustrating, for a professional."
Something clicked at last in Dillingham's mind. "May I have a look at your 
teeth?"
"My teeth?" Trach was surprised, but did not remark on the apparent change of 
subject. "I have no trouble with them. When one row wears down, another takes 
its place. Even decay presents no problem as you mammals know it. Any damaged 
tooth falls out promptly and a new one grows."
But he obliged the whim of the Earthman. Dillingham was astonished as he looked. 
Trach's flat bill contained myriads of proportionately tiny teeth. They extended 
in rows along the sides of his mouth, and extra teeth decorated the upper and 
lower palates.
"About two thousand," Trach said. "I'm not sure of the exact count because 
several rows have already worn away, and some haven't erupted yet."
"You use all these just to chew greenchomp?" The stuff looked like cabbage, but 
he suspected it had the consistency of asbestos.
"As many as I need. We're herbivorous, like most civilized species."
Dillingham let that pass. He'd have to try some of that greenchomp, assuming his 
feeble twenty-eight teeth could dent it. It was probably nutritious, and could 
hardly be worse than the pseudomeat extruded from modified Gleep sweat glands. 
Why an ocean creature had ever had to sweat—
He brought his mind back to the problem. "How do you clean your teeth after a 
meal?"
"We employ a chemical mouthwash that dissolves vegetable matter in seconds," 
Trach said. "Though as I said, it doesn't really matter. Our teeth are—"
"May I see some of that?"
Trach was embarrassed. "The synthesizer provides it also—but mine is on the 
blink in that area. I can't get it fixed until I return to Trachos. But that's 
merely an inconvenience. I could give you the formula—"
Dillingham nodded. "More than an inconvenience, I'm afraid. You shouldn't go so 
long without cleaning your mouth."
"But I told you it can't hurt my teeth. They—"
"That isn't precisely what I meant."
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (22 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
"Oh? What do you mean?"
Dillingham was acutely embarrassed to sound so much like an Earthly TV 
commercial. "Trach, you have halitosis."
The dinosaur looked at him, perplexed. "I don't understand."
"You have BAD BREATH!"
"But my breathing is not affected..."
Dillingham tried again. "If I were a diplomat like you, I'd find some way, some 
gentle, discreet way, to tell you. As it is, all I can say is that your breath 
stinks of greenchomp. Particles of the stuff are wedged between your teeth. You 
have a lot of teeth, and it's pretty strong."
"But greenchomp smells good. Does it bother you?"
"No. It's like freshly cut grass or curing hay. But then, I'm not a civilized, 
sensitive-nosed herbivore."
"You mean—?"
"I mean. How does my breath smell to you?"
Trach sniffed. "Faintly of carrion. But I'm accustomed to foreign stenches."
"Right. You're a diplomat, so you've schooled yourself to ignore the crudities 
of the creatures you meet. But suppose you were a protected, royal-born 
creature, trained to notice the tiniest deviation from etiquette. Suppose your 
diet while herbivorous, did not happen to be greenchomp. Sup—"
Trach slammed his tail explosively against the floor, interrupting him. "Suppose 
I met an alien who breathed sheer miasma into my delicate nostrils—"
"Yes. What would you say to him?"
"Nothing, of course. It wouldn't be—"
"Diplomatic?"
Trach paced the deck in a frenzy of mortification. "How horrible? No wonder they 
wouldn't talk to me more than once. And worse—they may have assumed that all 
Trachodons smell that way. That I was typical. That would foul up every 
representative from my world." He gnashed his teeth impressively.
"So maybe you'd better dash home and replace your synthesizer before going on to 
Electrolus?"
Trach slapped his webbed hands together. "I can't. I'd have to admit my reason 
for delaying Electrolus. They'd never let me off-world again, after such a 
colossal blunder."
"You're going to have to clean your mouth somehow, then, and thoroughly. The 
greenchomp must be removed. Unless the Electrolytes can't smell very well?"
"They can distinguish differing grades of clear glass—by odour. At twenty paces 
upwind."
Dillingham sighed. The image of the radium mines loomed larger in his mind. "I 
don't suppose you could get them to repair your synthesizer before—?"
"They're not mechanically inclined."
The two lapsed into interstellar gloom.
 
Dillingham racked his brain for some solution to their mutual problem. It was 
ironic that a dentist couldn't come up with a simple way to clean teeth. The 
synthesizer, like so many of the ship's utilities, functioned erratically, and 
they were afraid to risk pushing it into a complete breakdown that would cut off 
even their greenchomp supply. Other chemicals besides Trach's original mouthwash 
might have done the job, but they were no easier to produce. Mechanical 
cleansing was also out of the question. A toothbrush—to clean two thousand teeth 
packed in like magnified sandpaper? Possibly a thorough scaling accompanied by 
copious rinsing with water would do the job—but it was obvious that this 
procedure would consume so much time, particularly as performed by Trach's 
webbed fingers, that the dinosaur would have to eat again before the job could 
be finished.
A blast of water from a pressure nozzle? Too splashy, and it still required time 
and care to get the wedged particles. Trach's skills were verbal, not 
manipulative—and what would he do at a public banquet?
What was needed was a simple but effective method to clean all the teeth in a 
few seconds. Agreed. But what?
"Is there any place you could obtain a temporary supply of your usual mouthwash? 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (23 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
Enough to tide you over this one assignment?"
Trach twitched his tail reflectively. "The dental university might have it in 
stock. But they'd be sure to make a report to Trachos, and—"
"Dental university?" Dillingham found himself interested for another reason. "On 
a galactic scale?"
"Certainly. There's a university for every subject. Transportation, 
Communication, Medicine, Music, Dentistry—"
"Would this one—Dentistry—happen to have a school of Prosthodontics?"
"I'm sure it would. These universities are big outfits. Each one has a 
planet-grant, and students from all over the galaxy attend. Their standards are 
exceedingly strict—but there is no finer training. Graduates are set up for 
life. Had I been eligible to attend the University of Diplomacy—"
"Fascinating," Dillingham whispered. He would have to think about this. 
Meanwhile the immediate problem remained: instant cleansing of two thousand 
teeth.
He thought of something. "Trach, what can the synthesizer produce besides 
greenchomp? Without risking a breakdown, that is?"
"Oh, it turns out a number of mundane things. Several foodstuffs, yellow paint, 
mattress-stuffing, aromatic glue—"
"Mattress-stuffing?"
"For the acceleration couches. Sometimes they—"
"I see. How does it do on plastic foam?"
"I see no reason why it couldn't produce that. Of course the machine may not 
agree, but we can try." ,
"Fine. I want soft foam that solidifies in two or three minutes to a firm but 
flexible texture. Non-toxic. Try for that."
Trach obeyed, though there was obviously some question in his mind. After 
several tries he found a setting that produced a villainous purple goo that 
approximated the specifications.
"Now run a gallon of fresh foam and pack it into your mouth while it is soft. 
Chew on it a little, but don't swallow any."
Trach was alarmed. "In my mouth? What did I ever do to you? The stuff will 
harden—"
"It certainly will. Uh, you can breathe through your nose?"
Trach nodded dubiously. At Dillingham's insistence he crammed the foam into his 
oral orifice. "Tasheshts awrvul!" he muttered around the bubbles. "Hwath a hway 
to dhye!"
"Now hold it there until it sets."
"Urgh," Trach agreed reluctantly. After a few minutes Dillingham gave the next 
instructions:
"Now open your mouth carefully... slowly—there. Now lift out the entire mass. 
Work it loose from the teeth—you may have to knock it a little—it's a foam 
impression, you see. A little harder. Oh-oh." The cast seemed to have set 
somewhat more securely than anticipated. Dillingham took his little 
prosthodontic mallet and tapped at the mass, finally dislodging it. "See all 
that green stuff embedded in it?" he asked the dinosaur, pointing. "That's the 
left-over greenchomp, all yanked out at once."
Trach pointed in turn. "See those little white bits also embedded? Those are 
teeth."
"Oh." He had forgotten how fragile the replaceable teeth were. No real harm had 
been done, but this was hardly a procedure that could be repeated several times 
a day. And he could still smell the green breath. "I think I'd better think 
again."
"Well, it was worth the try." Trach opened a cabinet and withdrew a long-handled 
instrument. "While you cogitate, I'm going to clean up the ship. We'll be 
approaching Electrolus in a few hours."
 
As the disc of the planet came into view on the screen, Dillingham still had no 
idea how to solve the problem. Idly he watched the dinosaur, a finicky 
housekeeper, running his cleaner over the control panel. A small attachment 
enabled him to get at even the daintiest knobs, and the grime vanished readily.
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (24 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
Suddenly the obvious occurred to him. "Trach—is that an ultrasonic instrument?"
The dinosaur paused. "Why yes. The handpiece operates at about 30,000 cycles per 
second, with a fine water spray. The cavitational action—"
"In other words," Dillingham interrupted excitedly, "the vibration is on an 
ultrasonic level, and causes microscopic bubbles in the water that burst and 
scrub off the surface quite effectively. On Earth we use a similar instrument 
for cleaning teeth."
"For cleaning teeth?" Then Trach caught on. "Why of course. I must have used 
this cleaner a thousand times, and on my most delicate equipment. I'm pretty 
handy with it, if I do say so myself. I could—"
"You could, with a few hours of instruction, become competent at dental 
prophylaxis, since you are thoroughly familiar with the mechanism. If you have 
clean tips you can use for oral work, and a mirror—"
"I can blast out every bit of left-over greenchomp! My breath will be pure, 
and—oh—oh!" He put aside the instrument, listening.
"It won't be easy the first few times, even so," Dillingham warned. "But at 
least—"
"Overdrive shiftback!" Trach cried. He leapt for Dillingham.
The ship turned inside out as they were dumped into the corner, but both were 
smiling.
 
"But I'm not a dentist!" Judy told the transcoder. "I'm a dental assistant and 
hygienist and light book-keeper, as you must know." The transcoder typed her 
words on to a stick in the form of indentations, and the North Nebulite took 
this. He poked it into the orifice beneath his triple-slit nose and chewed 
gently.
What jaw-motions constituted reading, as opposed to writing (typing?) she 
couldn't tell, and she was sure they could read by sight too. They had their own 
little ways of doing things. In a moment the creature fed the talk-stick back 
into the transcoder. "You are Dr. Dillingham's assistant. Extremely competent 
but aloof. We searched for you. We obtained you. This is his laboratory. So 
assist."
She peered around at the alien paraphernalia. It had been a substantial 
education, finding out exactly what had happened to Dillingham. Horrible as the 
purple-lipped, double-jointed North Nebulites—Enens, according to Dillingham's 
invented information coded into the machine—appeared, they were pleasant enough 
when understood. The two designated to show her around were Holmes and Watson, 
though either answered (or failed to answer) to either name. "I never worked in 
the lab itself. Not that way. I can't make a reconstruction. I'm not allowed to 
perform dentistry on a patient—not by myself. I assist the dentist while he 
works. Where is Dr. Dillingham?"
Holmes assimilated the new stick and bit off a reply. The Enens had been cagey 
about late news on Dillingham, apart from vague assurances that he was doing 
well. She kept inserting the question in the hope that one of them would slip 
and give her an answer.
This time it worked. "Dr. Dillingham? We sold him to the high muck-a-muck of 
Gleep."
Judy started to laugh at the grotesque designation Dillingham had hung on that 
entity. He must have enjoyed himself hugely as he programmed the transcoder! On 
Earth he had always been serious.
She sobered abruptly. "Sold him?"
"He was on contract, same as you. Hostage against the expense of his procurement 
and shipment. Perfectly regular."
"I'm on—?! You advertised for a job, not a slave! You can't buy and sell human 
beings!"
"Why not?"
She was not the spluttering type. She spluttered. "It just isn't done! Not on 
Earth."
Both Enens masticated that. "We aren't on Earth," Holmes pointed out. "Your 
ballbase players are bought and sold on Earth," Watson said. "Everything is in 
order according to Galactic codes," they both said—or else the machine had 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (25 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
choked over the pair of sticks and read the same message off twice.
"But Dr. Dillingham and I aren't ballbase—baseball! players! And it isn't the 
same. This is kidnapping."
The Enens nibbled sticks, not understanding what all the fuss was about. 
"Everything is in order. We told you that. Now will you assist?"
Judy dropped that tack for the moment. The Enens had not mistreated her, after 
all, and it was rather exciting being on another world, and she could never have 
afforded passage on her own. At least she was on Dillingham's trail, and that 
alone just about made up for the rest of it. It wasn't as though she had had any 
particularly inviting future back on Earth.
"Well, how about letting me talk to the muck-a-muck? I can't accomplish much 
here by myself."
"But you applied for a position at North Nebula!"
"I changed my mind."
It took her several more days to establish that her mind, once changed, was 
absolutely set. She did convince them that their own technicians were far more 
competent in the laboratory than she, though far less competent than supposed at 
the time Dillingham had been sold. She suspected that Earth was about to sustain 
another dental raid, and she felt sorry for the innocent DOS that would be 
nabbed, but it was every ballbase player for himself. She was on her way to 
Gleep.
 
CHAPTER FOUR
"I am informed you are a tooth-healer," the amorphous blob said. It spoke 
through a transcoder, since its natural mode of communication was via 
modulations in an internally generated electronic signal. The only way 
Dillingham could tell it was talking was by hearing the translation—which 
actually simplified things comfortably.
The creature was about four feet high and shaped like a rock when it came to a 
standstill. Its surface had the lustre of polished metal, yet it was flexible 
enough to make ambulation possible. There were no arms or legs; it seemed to 
move by wormlike undulations of its underside as well as the constant shifting 
of balance that brought about a controlled rolling.
"I am a dentist, yes," Dillingham agreed. "But I'm afraid neither my training 
nor my equipment would be of any benefit to you. My practical experience had 
been confined to—"
"We have verified your references," the blob replied. "If you would be of 
service, come."
Verified his references! Dillingham had not known he had any, on a galactic 
scale. This Electrolyte must have queried Trach and received a diplomatically 
optimistic report.
"You are asking me to look at—one of your people? I really don't know anything 
about—"
"We have made proper allowance for your appealing modesty. Come."
That was Trach's handiwork, certainly. The dinosaur had entirely too much 
confidence in Dillingham's ability—or too vested an interest in the worth of 
Dillingham's contract.
Well, he was tired of idleness. He could at least accompany this creature, 
though any professional service was out of the question. Automatically he picked 
up his bag of equipment and the transcoder and followed the blob outside.
Electrolus was an interesting world, for persons who liked the type. The plants 
were crystalline and the animals metallic, with a metamorphic slant. Trach had 
said something about a silicon basis for life here, but the details had not been 
at all clear.
Trach had also arranged for a private duplex with appurtenances suitable to 
reptilian and mammalian needs. Dillingham was happy to share this with the 
diplomat. Trach might resemble a grade C nightmare out of Earth's past, but he 
was as familiar as a brother compared to some of the other galactic creatures 
encountered.
Although Dillingham's contract was a euphemism for slavery, he retained certain 
inalienable galactic rights: life, compatible environment, and the pursuit of 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (26 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
liberty. The first was too often precarious and the second a matter of opinion, 
but the third vested him with a standard interstellar credit rating. His prior 
prosthodontic services had accrued normal commissions to his account, and even 
his transfer from one owner to another had added a percentage fixed by 
nebulactic law. He was handsomely solvent—but still a long way from the wealth 
required to purchase his own contract.
On Electrolus it was more than normally apparent that money—or frump or stiggle 
or whatever—wasn't everything. He could not enjoy the local cuisine: stewed 
silicate crystals hampered his digestion, no matter how succulent the grade. 
Trach's creaky synthesizer produced the only food available to him 
here—greenchomp, with constitution of leather and taste of hay. He could not 
enjoy the companionship of his own kind because he was, to the best of his 
knowledge, the only member of his species within a hundred light-years, or a 
thousand. He could not even relax with an informative text, since the 
Electrolytes had other, nonvisual, means of recording data.
He could admire the view, as he tramped after the serenely rolling blob. It was 
spectacular. The sunlight glinted and refracted and diffused amid the towering 
crystalline structures, kaleidoscoping colour. The entire countryside was 
jewel-like, with rising spires, steeples and minarets of brilliance along every 
azimuth.
Dillingham would have given almost anything for the sight of a green tree or a 
human face. He wondered what his former assistant, Miss Galland, was doing now, 
but cut off that speculation. A competent girl like her would have found another 
position immediately; even if he managed to return to Earth tomorrow, she would 
no longer be available.
Trach, at least, was fully absorbed in his business and didn't have to worry 
about homesickness. Every day he went forth to meet important personages and to 
arrange new liaisons, working diligently to solve whatever diplomatic problems 
Electrolus had hired him for. But Dillingham had no vital mission here. He had 
to wait, and hope that the dinosaur was successful, so that his own contract did 
not wind up in the tentacles of a radium mining foreman on Ra, or some even less 
enticing location. Lots of terrible places in the galaxy had standing offers for 
medical and dental specialists, because no one went there voluntarily...
They had arrived. The native rolled into a gracious cave-like residence, and 
Dillingham accompanied it cautiously. He knew almost nothing about the custom of 
this culture, and could not guess how such featureless creatures had achieved 
space travel.
The occupant of the domicile greeted him with what he presumed was warmth: 
"Contortions, O Toothman. Can you snog the dentifrice?"
Dillingham looked askance at his transcoder. It was supposed to render the alien 
signal-wave into intelligible English. If it went awry now, he would be in 
serious trouble.
"This, you understand, is the problem," his guide said. "Your instrument is not 
out of order."
That was a relief. "This appears to be a—a psychological matter. I certainly 
can't—"
"On the contrary, Doctor. It is a tooth matter. Our healers are baffled. The 
situation is getting out of hand. A number of our most prominent individuals, 
this one foremost among them, are baffled, yet nothing is done."
"But I work on teeth, not speech problems!"
"Of course. That is why we hope you can help us. Anyone who can cure a Gleep 
toothache—"
Should he try to explain that dumping twenty tons of gold into the monster Gleep 
cavity in no way qualified him as a galactic psychiatrist? No doubt they would 
find the distinction plebian. Better a polite demurral.
He addressed the patient: "Sir, I am not at all certain I can snog the 
dentifrice, but I return your contortions."
The surface of the Electrolyte sparkled. "Joy and rapturations! You clank the 
concordance!"
The guide rippled a lava-like furrow in Dillingham's direction and settled three 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (27 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
inches. "You comprehend him?"
"Well, not exactly—but I've had some experience recently with alien dialects. He 
was obviously wishing me well, and inquiring whether I could help him. My 
patients always say something like that, so I reply in kind."
"I perceive your reputation was well-earned! Half of what he says is gibberish 
to us. It's frightful."
Dillingham looked at the patient. "Doesn't he mind this clinical discussion in 
his presence?"
"He can't understand us any more than we understand him. He's quite normal in 
most other respects, and healthy—but he seems to be speaking another language. 
If only we knew what it was, we could programme a transcoder, but—"
Something jogged Dillingham's memory. "Can he speak to the other afflicted 
Electrolytes?"
"No. They have even more trouble understanding each other. It's worse when they 
try to—"
"I suspected as much. I once had a patient on Earth who had asphasia." He 
paused, wondering whether he should try to clarify that it had been the teeth he 
had worked on, not the asphasia. That's a kind of distortion of speech brought 
about by injury or disease. The patient thinks he's making sense, but the words 
are all confused. He has to learn the language all over again."
That's it!" the guide agreed. "Truly, your cognizance is remarkable. Can you fix 
it quickly?"
What a living a huxter could make on this trusting planet! "I'm afraid not. I 
know almost nothing about such aberrations among my own kind, let alone—"
"But surely, now that you have diagnosed it—"
Dillingham made one more attempt. "I am neither a doctor nor a psychiatrist. I 
am a dentist. I repair teeth and try to restore the natural health of the mouth. 
What you need is someone who specializes in speech, or mental health."
"Of course, Doctor. That is what our tooth healers do. How could it be 
otherwise?"
And in the past on Earth, barbers had practised medicine... Would his refusal to 
consider the matter further be taken as a mortal insult that would prejudice 
Trach's diplomatic mission and lead to...?
Dillingham decided to have a look at the teeth. That much, at least, was 
theoretically within his competence. He hadn't yet observed any trace of a 
mouth, but that was minor.
"I shall try to snog the dentifrice," he said matter-of-factly to the patient. 
"Please open your mouth."
The polish lost some of its lustre. "Mooth?"
Oh-oh. Another missing word. "Show me your tooth-container. Your oral aperture. 
Your—"
"Ah. My clank units."
That made sense. "Clank the concordance" might have meant "speak the language". 
The mouth would naturally be the speaking-place, the teeth the speech units.
"Right. I have to look at your clank units." Then he addressed the guide: "How 
do your teeth make speech?"
"They—talk. How else could it be?"
"But not quite the way mine do. You don't use sound. And surely the 
communication signal isn't generated directly by your teeth. It's electronic!"
"But isn't that the way everyone speaks?"
Ask a foolish question! The Electrolyte obviously had no conception of sound or 
vocal mechanisms.
But electronic teeth? He knew even less about electronics than he did about 
psychiatry.
Meanwhile the patient still hadn't got the idea, which might be a blessing. 
There was no mouth in evidence. "Show me your dentifrice, please," he said.
That was the formula. The upper section of the blob lifted, lidlike. Inside was 
a ceramic chamber with a dozen genuine, conventional teeth. They were arranged 
in opposing vertical semi-circles, and each was a sturdy molar adapted to the 
crushing and grinding of tough crystal.
"I see he has had some metal inlay operative dentistry."
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (28 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:02 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
"What?"
Another point clarified. The average Electrolyte knew no more about 
prosthodontics than did the average Earthman. "Some work done. Seems to be in 
order."
"Oh. Yes, nothing but the best."
Dillingham investigated more closely, reassured by the increasing familiarity of 
the orifice. His experienced eye traced the masticatory patterns and noted clues 
to the general health of the creature, though he knew he could not rely on such 
estimates when he knew so little of the native metabolism. Still, he saw no 
reason that these teeth should contribute to any general disorder. "Gold inlays. 
Very nice work. But I note some corrosion."
"Corrosion?" the patient inquired. Dillingham wondered how he could talk with 
his mouth wide open, then remembered that the speech was electronic. If it 
really were connected with the teeth...
Circuits inside these molars? Perhaps a dentist was the person to consult about 
speech defects!
Such duality was not really more remarkable than that of the human apparatus. 
Take a mouth intended for mastication and salivation, pass air from the 
respiratory system through it, vibrate that air by interposing the cords 
intended by nature to seal off the lungs when under stress, and you had the 
basis of the human speech mechanism. None of it had been designed originally for 
communication, yet it functioned well enough. Why not teeth whose solid silicon 
structure became adapted to semi-conductor modulation?
On Earth there had been documented cases of radio reception via the metallic 
content of fillings in the teeth. Here, the natural currents resulting from 
stresses applied while chewing could eventually have been harnessed into 
broadcasting and receiving circuits...
If only he knew more about such things! As it was, he knew that transistors were 
semi-conductor devices able to take the place of many electron tubes. This mouth 
could be the chassis of a radio set, each tooth performing a specific function 
in the circuit. Current low? Clench the teeth!
Which put the problem clearly beyond his competence. This was a case in which 
formal galactic training would be invaluable. Trach had mentioned a Galactic 
University of Dentistry, but had stressed the difficulties of admittance: "You 
have to have a high potential to begin with. They won't even consider you unless 
you are sponsored by an accredited planet. All the universities are like that. 
And few worlds will bother to sponsor an alien, when they have so many of their 
own people eager to make the attempt."
"You'd advise me to forget it, then?" he had asked, disappointed.
Trach had agreed. How could an ignorant Earthman aspire to advanced training, 
when he couldn't even afford his own contract? Yet the dream wouldn't die. One 
of these planets he would make a bad mistake. If he wished to remain at large in 
the galaxy, he needed a galactic diploma.
Not that he wanted anything more than a prompt return to Earth. A secure 
practice at home. Certainly.
The Electrolytic teeth returned to focus. At least he could clean up the minor 
tarnish visible on the inlays. No risk there. The previous dentist must have 
been a trifle careless, for gold seldom tarnished unless there were impurities 
in the alloy. Apart from that, the work was expert.
He finished the polishing quickly. As for the language problem—there was nothing 
he could do about that. Under no circumstances would he drill into one of those 
fantastic teeth.
Thank you," the patient said. "That tastes much better. What recompense may I 
offer you?'.
The guide quivered. "Your gibber—I mean, your aphasia. It's gone!"
"What do you mean, gone? You were the one who gabbled gibberish, sweetcore."
The guide addressed "Dillingham. "O omniscient healer! You have cured my 
husband! How did you do it?"
Dillingham backed off. "I didn't do it. I merely removed a little tarnish from 
his reconstructions."
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (29 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
"You must have done something, Doctor," the patient said. "For weeks I've been 
trying to make my imperious wishes plain to this pebblehead, but she gave me 
increasingly unintelligible answers. My acquaintances have been even worse. It 
was as though they'd all blown their signal-coding teeth. But you understood 
readily enough, and somehow you brought them back to their senses. I really must 
reward you properly."
"I assure you, I did not—"
"You replied to my salutation, and you eliminated the bad taste in my mouth, 
just as requested. An excellent job, not to mention this other inconvenience you 
alleviated."
Discretion told him to let the matter ride, but something else overrode it. That 
little bit of polishing could not have affected the internal circuitry, and he 
could not accept credit for more than he had done. It was against professional 
ethics. The aphasia might return at any time, perhaps much worse than before, if 
the cause were neglected.
"You must stay for supper," the husband said. "It's such a relief to hear 
intelligible shunk again."
There was a gasp (courtesy of the transcoder) from the wife. Dillingham saw his 
worst fear realized, and forestalled her comment the only way he could think of 
at the moment. "Sir, may I check your teeth once more? While you were shunking I 
remembered a place I may have missed."
"Certainly." The great lid hinged up and the chunky teeth were exposed again.
Dillingham saw nothing new, but occupied time by re-polishing all the teeth 
carefully. He needed to think this out. Had he done something that might affect 
the speech mechanism? Could mere tarnish somehow influence signal modulation? 
Tarnish was caused, in gold inlays, by electrochemical interaction of the saliva 
with impurities, but—
Full-blown, he had the answer.
"What were you saying, a moment ago?" he asked the Electrolyte. "That it was a 
relief to—"
"A relief to hear intelligible speech again," the patient replied promptly. 
"After weeks of—"
The polishing had done it—and now he knew why. "Sit down, both of you, please," 
he said, knowing that the transcoder would provide the term for whatever they 
did in lieu of sitting. "I have some serious news for you."
Perplexed, they settled gently. "What I have accomplished is only a temporary 
cure," he continued in his more professional manner. "The aphasia will 
inevitably return, unless you take immediate action."
"Tell us what to do, Doctor," the wife said anxiously, while the husband ran 
complacent ripples over his surface.
"First, I must make plain what has happened. Sir, when did you have all that 
gold installed in your teeth?"
"About six months ago." Again, the transcoder was indulging in liberal 
paraphrase. "It's a new technique, and very expensive—but I was tired of 
old-fashioned stone fillings that kept chipping away and falling out."
"And your—problem—began several weeks ago. No—I know this is unpleasant, but I 
have to tell you that it was your speech that became unintelligible, not your 
wife's. Why else do you think she was able to communicate with other people, 
while you couldn't? Some of your words made sense, but others—well, you did say 
"shunk" instead of "speech" a moment ago, for example."
"I did?"
"You did, dear," the wife said firmly.
"And my handsome expensive prestigious restorations are the cause?" The 
Electrolyte wasn't stupid.
"Indirectly, yes. The work is very good—but all your metal inlays will have to 
be replaced with the old kind."
In the next few minutes he made his case and left them stricken. How much easier 
it would have been to avoid the truth! At times the dentist's duty, like the 
doctor's or tax-collector's was disturbing. But necessary.
Trach was waiting for him at the duplex. "What have you got into, you 
hot-blooded mammal?" the towering duckbill demanded. "I have a complaint that 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (30 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
you cured one of the leading citizens of the planet of his madness, then turned 
around and told him he'd have to remove all his costly fillings."
"That's about it, I'm afraid." News travelled rapidly, when every individual was 
his own broadcaster.
Trach slapped his solid green tail against the floor in exasperation. The sound 
was like a pistol shot—but how better to vent pique, than by banging one's tail 
resoundingly! "Just when I had this planet's affairs sewed up!"
"I don't understand. Did my patient complain?"
"No. He's convinced you are a genius."
"I'm duly complimented. But—"
"So he recommended to the ruling council, of which he is a member—temporarily on 
health-leave—that an immediate directive be issued forbidding the employment or 
retention of metallic restorations in any teeth on the planet. He has influence. 
The directive has been published."
"Already? In the time it took me to walk back here?"
"Already. And the league of local dentists is up in arms. They have some pretty 
potent backing of their own."
"I see." He saw. He had unwittingly provoked a political crisis. He should have 
consulted the local practitioners before making his recommendation. Naturally 
the dental league objected to having an outsider appear and demand that the 
latest advance be abolished. He'd feel the same way.
That was another reason he needed further training. There were always 
ramifications that extended beyond the strictly practical. How could he 
anticipate them all?
Trach paced the floor, his glossy reptilian skin flexing under the incongruous 
little dinner-jacket he affected. "This means trouble. I don't like to say this, 
but it would be safer for both of us if you could see your way clear to retract 
your recommendation."
"But it's an honest prosthodontic opinion. I—"
This is no longer a prosthodontic matter." Trach pursed his lips. He had 
extremely fleshy labia, necessary to articulate clearly around his twenty 
hundred teeth, and this expression was startling. "I'm sure you know what you're 
doing, in your field—but diplomacy is my field, and I assure you that if we 
don't act soon, this will be a bad territory for tetrapods. This happens to be 
one of the few civilized planets where war is a recognized way to settle 
disputes."
"War! You mean they'd—"
"Both sides are already enlisting mercenaries."
Dillingham sat down, appalled. It was too late now to condemn himself for a 
meddler. He should have kept his opinions to himself until checking with Trach. 
"What can I do?"
"Other than retract, you mean? You could meet with the dental league and explain 
your position. They might listen, if you catch them before hostilities formally 
commence."
"I'll meet them! Is there much time?"
"Oh, yes. The first engagement isn't scheduled until this evening."
This evening! Let's not waste any time, then. I'd hate to have a war on my 
conscience."
"Come with me." Trach led the way with such assurance that Dillingham suspected 
this choice had been anticipated. The dinosaur didn't know much about dentistry, 
but he could manage people of any type.
"How do they do anything? Dillingham inquired as they traversed the prismatic 
outdoors. "These Electrolytes don't seem to have any hands, or any other way to 
manipulate objects. How can they feed themselves, let alone make war?"
"No problem. They employ remote-controlled devices for the manual tasks. 
Communication is the same as power, and it does economize on burdensome 
musculature."
"Then aphasia must be a very serious problem, when it occurs. It would resemble 
paralysis."
"Exactly. You can be a hero, if only you can pacify the league. But remember, 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (31 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
you're dealing with conservatives."
"Sure." He reflected sombrely. It looked as though this were the brand of 
"conservatism" that placed business interest ahead of cultural welfare. "Can you 
offer any more advice, before I put my foot in it again?"
Trach could. This, too, had been anticipated. The next few minutes were an 
intensive briefing in diplomacy vis-à-vis Electrolus.
The representatives of the dental league were grouped like so many stones in 
their auditorium, ringed by spider-legged devices that were evidently their 
remote-controlled hands. Dillingham began to see why war was still sanctioned 
here; the destruction of a mobile unit might be inconvenient, but not fatal to 
the owner. Not so long as the melee was distant.
"You'll have to do the talking," Trach said, handing him the transcoder. The 
machine had been turned off to ensure the privacy of their recent conversation. 
"They won't accept your sincerity if I prompt you. They may ask me a question or 
two, but you'll have to convince them that your way is best. Otherwise—"
"I know," Dillingham said unhappily. Outrage, war, the ruin of Trach's mission, 
and forced sale of Dillingham's contract for carfare home. He turned on the 
transcorder as he advanced to meet the dental league.
The spokesman wasted no time. "For what purpose have you started this war, 
alien?"
Dillingham paused before replying, remembering Trach's caution against impetuous 
remarks. "I think there has been a misunderstanding. I did not intend to start a 
war." That should be imprecise enough. They were the ones who intended to do 
battle rather than admit responsibility for the aphasia, but they could save 
face by blaming it on him.
"Did you not directly and publicly contravene published League policy and 
conspire to set the governing council against us?"
"I am a stranger to this planet. I thought I was privately advising a patient of 
his best interests. I would gladly have left his care to you, had he not 
insisted on my attention." And why had the patient sought an alien dentist, 
unless the local ones had already given up on him?
The pause that preceded the next question reassured him that his surmise had 
been correct. They were not going to challenge his right to minister to an 
awkward case—not when that line of investigation could turn so readily against 
them. "Then you do not question League policy or practice?"
That was better. "Of course not. I should hope the League has the best interests 
of the planet in mind."
"Then you will retract your demand that all gold be removed from the teeth of 
our citizens?"
That was the sticky point. "No."
There was an angry flurry of sounds from the transcoder. Trach bowed his head, 
disappointed.
"That is," Dillingham said carefully, "I will not make such a retraction without 
the full consent of the League." Trach's head popped up again hopefully, and the 
clamour faded. "Since it was my careless utterance that precipitated this 
crisis, I feel it is best to obtain competent advice before making any further 
statements on the matter."
Another pause. "The advice—of the League?"
"Nothing less will do."
The background discontent metamorphosed into background approval. Trach nodded 
unobtrusively. Dillingham was off the hook for the moment—if he didn't blunder 
again.
"A wise stipulation," the spokesman said. "What gave you the idea we might 
object?"
And so to the critical point. "On my planet, the teeth are use principally for 
the mechanical reduction of the food, and only secondarily in connection with 
speech. Our teeth have no internal mechanisms—none, at least, of an electronic 
nature. Therefore our dentists think largely in terms of a single function: 
mastication. When I looked into this patient's mouth, that was what concerned 
me."
"Astonishing," the spokesman agreed.
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (32 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
"Then I discovered that you generate an electronic signal in your teeth, which 
is your means of communication. Because this is natural for you, and biological, 
you may not be aware of the precision required to modulate your signal so 
effectively, just as few human beings are aware of the sophistication of their 
own bodily adaptations. The fact is, the tiniest electro-magnetic interference 
in the immediate vicinity of your teeth can play havoc with your control, both 
broadcasting and receiving. The electrolytic action of the trace impurities in 
your gold alloy with the fluids of the mouth generates just enough current to 
tarnish the metal—and to distort the adjacent fields within the tooth. Thus the 
signal sent by a person with such a situation differs from that he intends. When 
this becomes severe enough to be noticeable, you have aphasia."
He shook his head, glad they were listening (receiving) attentively. "Possibly 
the field generated by the normal teeth is enough to start the surface erosion. 
Because the interference is external to the tooth, you will find no internal 
malfunction, which I know can be baffling. At any rate, because of your 
particular mode of communication, you can't afford metallic fillings until much 
more is known about this effect. That is why I recommended the removal of all 
gold from the teeth. Since aphasia is hardly my field, I should not have spoken 
prematurely. You have helped me to understand that."
"But it is in our field," the spokesman said somewhat condescendingly. "We are 
concerned with the complete function of the teeth, though it had not occurred to 
us that trace tarnish would—" He stopped, unwilling to admit ignorance.
"We had a great many problems developing suitable metallic restoration on 
Earth," Dillingham said. "The work I inspected here was expert. I can appreciate 
your reluctance to—that is, I'm sure the expenditure of time—"
"We do not place convenience ahead of the welfare of the patient," the spokesman 
said loftily.
"Then of course there is the expense. Gold is a rare and costly substance, and 
the waste involved in removing—"
"To hell with the expense!" the spokesman said. Dillingham glanced at his 
transcoder, startled. When had he programmed that vocabulary into it?
"Now if you'd like me to retract—"
Hubbub. Trach was maintaining a straight reptilian frown over a suppressed 
smile. The representatives of the dental league were suddenly aware that they 
had cut the ground out from under their own position. If he were to retract now, 
they would have to find some other way to treat aphasia, and that could be a lot 
more complicated than his solution. But if he didn't retract, they would lose 
face.
Trach came forward at this point. "If I may make a suggestion, purely as a 
layman..."
The Electrolytes were silent, and Trach proceeded. "My charge's ignorance seems 
to have placed us all in a difficult situation. Perhaps, rather than require his 
apology, it would be preferable to banish him from the planet."
Dillingham started. Whose side was the dinosaur on?
"This would reprimand him publicly for his mistake," Trach continued blithely, 
"while allowing the League a free decision in the matter of the gold. Perhaps 
the governing council would even be willing to make other concessions in order 
to avoid the necessity of rescinding their own hasty directive. Certainly this 
alien deserves punishment—"
"But he did mean well," the spokesman said. "The information about the aphasia 
is, er, valuable."
Dillingham recognized the touch of the master. Trach had in one diplomatic 
motion converted the spokesman to the defence of the alien, while hinting at a 
profitable line of political attack. The League could allow the directive to 
stand as an extraordinary favour to the council, calling it an act of 
magnanimity instead of a humiliating reversal. The council would then be in debt 
to the league... an attractive prospect for the dentists, undoubtedly.
"Your attitude is certainly generous," Trach said. "Still, as owner of his 
contract, I feel responsible. This alien has caused you unpardonable 
embarrassment, and the least I can do is sell him to the mines."
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (33 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
Oh-oh.
"The mines!" the spokesman exclaimed. "We can't have that. He has done us a 
favour, really. We should purchase his contract from you, rather than—"
"But then you would have him on your hands, and he really shouldn't remain to—"
The spokesman pondered. True. We would much prefer to take it from here 
ourselves. His presence would be inconvenient, at best."
"And the mines of Ra offer a very good price for dentists, since there is a 
chronic shortage."
Dillingham's knees wobbled again. Was Trach determined to do him in?
The hubbub resumed. "Because they don't live very long!" the spokesman said. 
"No, it may be inconvenient, but we are not barbarians. We shall purchase his 
contract and abolish it, so he can go elsewhere."
"He might not want to leave such a fair world as this," Trach remarked, and once 
again Dillingham wished he'd quit while he was ahead. "Though I suppose if you 
were to sponsor him for something time-consuming, such as further education—"
"The very thing. We can select a very complicated programme such as—"
"Such as the one at the Galactic University of Dentistry, School of 
Prosthodontistry," Trach finished neatly. "A most perceptive decision. I can, 
for a nominal fee, make the arrangements immediately."
Dillingham almost fainted from surprise and relief. He had thought the friendly 
dinosaur had forgotten that conversation.
"Excellent," the spokesman said, though it was evident that he had had a 
different programme in mind. "Now that we have solved that problem, we can mmph 
the council and set about scrutchulating the hornswoggle."
Trach looked quickly at Dillingham and held one webbed finger to his lips. 
Together they beat an inconspicuous retreat.
 
"But I'm not a dentist!" Judy told the muck-a-muck. "I'm just looking for Dr. 
Dillingham, so I can—assist him."
"He departed last week," the whale-like ruler of water-world Gleep communicated. 
This was the first time she had conversed with an entity while standing inside 
him, but such was galactic existence.
"Then I must follow him."
"Do you realize that we paid a hundred pounds of premium-grade frumpstiggle for 
your contract? You were billed as an associate of Dr. Dillingham, the famous 
exodontist. Now the prince's molars are beginning to itch again, and only a 
practitioner of Dillingham's status can abate the condition."
"If Dr. Dillingham made the restorations, those teeth should be giving no 
trouble," she said loyally. "Probably all your son needs now is some instruction 
in preventive maintenance. Teeth can't be ignored, you know; you have to take 
care of them."
"That's exactly what he said! You are his associate!"
She sighed. "In that respect, yes. But as for—"
"Excellent! Provide him with expert instruction."
"First we have to come to an understanding," she said. She was, by fits and 
starts, learning how to deal with galactics. "If I instruct the prince, you must 
agree to send me to the planet that Dr. Dillingham went to."
"Gladly. He travelled hence with a free-lance diplomat from Trachos. Their 
destination was—let me look it up in my tertiary memory bank—Electrolus."
"Fine. I'll go there." Then she reconsidered. "I came to Enen too late, and to 
Gleep too late. How can I be sure he'll still be at Electrolus, when...?"
The communications tentacles of the huge Gleep creature's lung chamber waved, 
and the transcoder dutifully rendered this visual signal into English. "A 
perspicacious point. Suppose we send you to the diplomat's following client? 
That's—one moment, please—Ra. The radium exporter."
She was dubious. "But what if Dr. Dillingham stays at Electrolus after all?"
"Then at least you'll be in touch with Trach, the diplomat. He is an obliging 
fellow, and he has his own ship."
She considered that, still not entirely satisfied. She had had experience with 
obliging fellows possessing their own transportation. Dillingham had been a 
pleasing contrast—so serious, so dedicated to his profession.
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (34 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
But of course this was not Earth, and it did seem to be her best chance. "All 
right. Ra it is. Let's see the prince now."
 
CHAPTER FIVE
He entered the booth when his turn came and waited somewhat apprehensively for 
it to perform. The panel behind shut him in and ground tight.
The interior was dark and unbearably hot, making sweat break out and stream down 
his body. Then the temperature dropped so precipitously that the moisture 
crystallized upon his skin and flaked away with the violence of his shivering. 
The air grew thick and bitter, then gaspingly rare. Light blazed, then faded 
into impenetrable black. A complete sonic spectrum of noise smote him, followed 
by crashing silence. His nose reacted to a gamut of irritation. He sneezed.
Abruptly it was spring on a clover hillside, waft of nectar and hum of 
bumble-bee. The air was refreshingly brisk. The booth had zeroed in on his 
metabolism.
"Identity?" a deceptively feminine voice inquired from nowhere, and a sign 
flashed with the word printed in italics. English.
"My name is Dillingham," he said clearly, remembering his instructions. "I am a 
male mammalian biped evolved on planet Earth. I am applying for admission to the 
School of Prosthodontics as an initiate of the appropriate level."
After a pause the booth replied sweetly: "Misinformation. You are a quadruped."
"Correction," Dillingham said quickly. "I am evolved from quadruped." He spread 
his hands and touched the wall. Technically tetrapod, anterior limbs no longer 
employed for locomotion. Digits posses sensitivity, dexterity—"
"Noted." But before he could breathe relief, it had another objection: "Earth 
planet has not yet achieved galactic accreditation. Application invalid."
"I have been sponsored by the Dental League of Electrolus," he said. He saw 
already how far he would have got without that potent endorsement.
"Verified. Provisional application granted. Probability of acceptance after 
preliminary investigation: twenty-one per cent. Fee: Thirteen thousand, two 
hundred and five dollars, four cents, seven mills, payable immediately."
"Agreed," he said, appalled at both the machine's efficiency in adapting to his 
language and conventions, and the cost of application. He knew that the fee 
covered only the seventy hour investigation of his credentials; if finally 
admitted as a student, he would have to pay another fee of as much as a hundred 
thousand dollars for the first term. If rejected, he would get no rebate.
His sponsor, Electrolus, was paying for it, thanks to Trach's diplomatic 
footwork. If he failed to gain admission, there would be no consequence—except 
that his chance to really improve himself would be gone. He could never afford 
training at the University on his own, even if the sponsorship requirement 
should be waived.
Even so, he hoped that what the University had to offer was worth it. Over 
thirteen thousand dollars had already been drained from the Electrolus account 
here by his verbal agreement—for a twenty-one per cent probability of 
acceptance!
"Present your anterior limb, buccal surface forward."
He put out his left hand again, deciding that "buccal" in this context equated 
with the back of the hand. He was nervous in spite of the assurance he had been 
given that this process was harmless. A mist appeared around it, puffed and 
vanished, leaving an iridescent band clasped around, or perhaps bonded into, the 
skin of his wrist.
The opposite side of the booth opened and he stepped into a lighted corridor. He 
held up his hand and saw that the left of it was bright while the right was 
dull. This remained constant even when he twisted his wrist, the glow being 
independent of his motion. He proceeded left.
At the end of the passage was a row of elevators. Other creatures of diverse 
proportions moved towards these, guided by the glows on their appendages. His 
own led him to a particular unit. Its panel was open, and he entered.
The door was closed as he took hold of the supportive bars. The unit moved, not 
up or down as he had expected, but backwards. He clung desperately to the 
support as the fierce acceleration hurled him at the door.
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (35 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
There was something like a porthole in the side through which he could make out 
racing lights and darknesses. If these were stationary sources of contrast, his 
velocity was phenomenal. His stomach jumped as the vehicle dipped and tilted; 
then it plummeted down as though dropped from a cliff.
Dillingham was reminded of an amusement park he had visited as a child on Earth. 
There had been a ride through the dark something like this. He was sure that the 
transport system of the university had not been designed for thrills, however; 
it merely reflected the fact that there was a long way to go and many others in 
line. The elevators would not function at all for any creature not wearing 
proper identification. Established galactics took such things in stride without 
even noticing.
Finally the roller-coaster/elevator decelerated and stopped. The door opened and 
he stepped dizzily into his residence for the duration, suppressing incipient 
motion sickness.
The apartment was attractive enough. The air was sweet, the light moderate, the 
temperature comfortable. Earth-like vines decorated the trellises, and couches 
fit for bipeds were placed against the walls. In the centre of the main room 
stood a handsome but mysterious device.
Something emerged from an alcove. It was a creature resembling an oversized 
pincushion with legs, one of which sported the ubiquitous iridescent band. It 
honked.
"Greetings, room-mate," a speaker from the central artifact said. Dillingham 
realized that it was a multiple-dialect translator.
"How do you do," he said. The translator honked, and the pincushion came all the 
way into the room.
"I am from no equivalent term," it said in tootles.
Dillingham hesitated to comment, until he realized that the confusion lay in the 
translation. There was no name in English for Pincushion's planet, since Earth 
knew little of galactic geography and nothing of interspecies commerce. 
"Substitute "Pincushion" for the missing term," he advised the machine, "and 
make the same kind of adjustment for any terms that may not be renderable into 
Pincushion's dialect." He turned to the creature. "I am from Earth. I presume 
you are also here to make application for admittance to the School of 
Prosthodontics?"
The translator honked, once. Dillingham waited, but that was all.
Pincushion honked. "Yes, of course. I'm sure all beings assigned to this 
dormitory are 1.0 gravity, oxygen-imbibing ambulators applying as students. The 
administration is very careful to group compatible species."
Apparently a single honk could convey a paragraph. Perhaps there were 
frequencies he couldn't hear. Then again, it might be the inefficiency of his 
own tongue. "I'm new to all this," he admitted. "I know very little of the ways 
of the galaxy, or what is expected of me here."
"I'll be happy to show you around," Pincushion said. "My planet has been sending 
students here for, well, not a long time, but several centuries. We even have a 
couple of instructors here, at the lower levels." There was a note of pride in 
the rendition. "Maybe one of these millenia we'll manage to place a supervisor."
Already Dillingham could imagine the prestige that would carry.
At that moment the elevator disgorged another passenger. This was a tall 
oak-like creature with small leaf-like tentacles fluttering at its side. The 
bright applicant-band circled the centre bark. It looked at the decorative vines 
of the apartment and spoke with the whistle of wind through dead branches: 
"Appalling captivity."
The sound of the translations seemed to bring its attention to the other 
occupants. "May your probability of acceptance be better than mine," it said by 
way of greeting. "I am a humble modest branch from Treetrunk (the translator 
learned the naming convention quickly) and despite my formidable knowledge of 
prosthodontica my percentage is a mere sixty."
Somewhere in there had been a honk, so Dillingham knew that simultaneous 
translations were being performed. This device made the little dual-track 
transcoders seem primitive.
"You are more fortunate than I," Pincushion replied. "I stand at only 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (36 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
forty-eight per cent."
They both looked at Dillingham. Pincushion had knobby stalks that were probably 
eyes, and Treetrunk's apical discs vibrated like the greenery of a poplar 
sapling.
Twenty-one per cent," Dillingham said sheepishly.
There was an awkward silence. "Well these are only estimates based upon the past 
performances of your species," Pincushion said. "Perhaps your predecessors were 
not apt."
"I don't think I have any predecessors," Dillingham said. "Earth isn't 
accredited yet." He hesitated to admit that Earth hadn't even achieved true 
space travel, by galactic definition.
He had never been embarrassed for his planet before! But he had never had 
occasion to consider himself a planetary representative before, either.
"Experience and competence count more than some machine's guess, I'm sure," 
Treetrunk said. "I've been practising on my world for six years. If you're—"
"Well, I did practice for ten years on Earth."
"You see—that will triple your probability when they find out," Pincushion said 
encouragingly. "They just gave you a low probability because no one from your 
planet has applied before."
He hoped they were right, but his stomach didn't settle. He doubted that as 
sophisticated a set-up as the Galactic University would have to stoop to such 
crude approximation. The administration already knew quite a bit about him from 
the preliminary application, and his ignorance of galactic method was sure to 
count heavily against him. "Are there—references here?" he inquired. 
"Facilities? If I could look them over—"
"Good idea!" Pincushion said. "Come—the operatory is this way, and there is a 
small museum of equipment."
There was. The apartment had an annex equipped with an astonishing array of 
dental technology. There was enough for him to study for years before he could 
be certain of mastery. He decided to concentrate on the racked texts first, 
after learning that they could be fed into the translator for ready assimilation 
in animated projection.
"Standard stuff," Treetrunk said, making a noise like chafing bark. "I believe 
I'll take an estimation."
As Dillingham returned to the main room with an armful of the box-like texts, 
the elevator loosed another creature. This was a four-legged cylinder with a 
head tapered like that of an anteater, and peculiarly thin jointed arms 
terminating in a series of thorns.
It seemed to him that such physical structure would be virtually ideal for 
dentistry. The thorns were probably animate rotary burrs, and the elongated 
snout might reach directly into the patient's mouth for inspection of close work 
without the imposition of a mirror. After the initial introductions he asked 
Anteater how his probability stood.
"Ninety-eight per cent," the creature replied in an offhand manner. "Our kind 
seldom miss. We're specialized for this sort of thing."
Specialization—there was the liability of the human form, Dillingham thought. 
Men were among the most generalized of Earth's denizens, except for their 
developed brains—and obviously these galactics had equivalent intellectual 
potential, and had been in space so long they had been able to adapt physically 
for something as narrow as dentistry. The outlook for him remained bleak, 
competitively.
A robot-like individual and a native from Electrolus completed the apartment's 
complement. Dillingham hadn't known that his sponsor-planet was entering one of 
its own in the same curriculum, though this didn't affect him particularly.
Six diverse creatures, counting himself—all dentists on their home worlds, all 
specializing in prosthodontics, all eager to pass the entrance examinations. All 
male, within reasonable definition—the university was very strict about the 
proprieties. This was only one apartment in a small city reserved for 
applicants. The university proper covered the rest of the planet.
They learned all about it that evening at the indoctrination briefing, guided to 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (37 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
the lecture-hall by a blue glow manifested on each identification band. The hall 
was monstrous; only the oxygen-breathers attended this session, but they 
numbered almost fifty thousand. Other halls catered to differing life-forms 
simultaneously.
The university graduated over a million highly skilled dentists every term, and 
had a constant enrollment of twenty million. Dillingham didn't know how many 
terms it took to graduate—the programmes might be variable—but the incidence of 
depletion seemed high. Even the total figure represented a very minor proportion 
of the dentistry in the galaxy. This fraction was extremely important, however, 
since mere admission as a freshman student here was equivalent to graduation 
elsewhere.
There were generally only a handful of DU graduates on any civilized planet. 
These were automatically granted life tenures as instructors at the foremost 
planetary colleges, or established as consultants for the most challenging cases 
available. Even the drop-outs had healthy futures.
Instructors for the U itself were drawn from its own most gifted graduates. The 
top one hundred, approximately—of each class of a million—were siphoned off for 
special training and retained, and a great number were recruited from the lower 
ranking body of graduates: individuals who demonstrated superior qualifications 
in subsequent galactic practice. A few instructors were even recruited from 
non-graduates, when their specialities were so restricted and their skills so 
great that such exceptions seemed warranted.
The administrators came largely from the University of Administration, dental 
division, situated on another planet, and they wielded enormous power. The 
University President was the virtual dictator of the planet, and his 
pronouncements had the force of law in dental matters throughout the galaxy. 
Indeed, Dillingham thought as he absorbed the information, if there were any 
organization that approached galactic overlordship, it would be the Association 
of University Presidents. AUP had the authority and the power to quarantine any 
world found guilty of wilful malpractice in any of the established fields, and 
since any quarantine covered all fields, it was devastating. An abstract was run 
showing the consequence of the last absolute quarantine: within a year that 
world had collapsed in anarchy. What followed that was not at all pretty.
Dillingham saw that the level of skill engendered by University training did 
indeed transcend any ordinary practice. No one on Earth had any inkling of the 
techniques considered commonplace here. His imagination was saturated with the 
marvel of it all. His dream of knowledge for the sake of knowledge was a futile 
one; such training was far too valuable to be reserved for the satisfaction of 
the individual. No wonder graduates became public servants! The investment was 
far less monetary than cultural and technological, for the sponsoring planet.
His room-mates were largely unimpressed. "Everyone knows the universities wield 
galactic power," Treetrunk said. "This is only one school of many, and hardly 
the most important. Take Finance U, now—"
"Or Transportation U," Pincushion added. "Every space ship, every stellar 
conveyor, designed and operated by graduates of—"
"Or Communication," Anteater said. "Comm U has several campuses, even, and 
they're not dinky little planets like this one, either. Civilization is 
impossible without communications. What's a few bad teeth, compared to that?"
Dillingham was shocked. "But all of you are dentists. How can you take such 
tremendous knowledge and responsibility so casually?"
"Oh, come now," Anteater said. "The technology of dentistry hasn't changed in 
millennia. It's a staid, dated institution. Why get excited?"
"No point in letting ideology go to our heads," Treetrunk agreed. "I'm here 
because this training will set me up for life back home. I won't have to set up 
a practice at all; I'll be a consultant. It's the best training in the galaxy—we 
all know that—but we must try to keep it in perspective."
The others signified agreement. Dillingham saw that he was a minority of one. 
All the others were interested in the education not for its own sake but for the 
monetary and prestigious benefits they could derive from a degree.
And all of them had much higher probabilities of admission than he. Was he 
wrong?
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (38 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
 
Next day they faced a battery of field tests. Dillingham had to use the 
operatory equipment to perform specified tasks: excavation, polishing, placement 
of amalgam, measurement, manufacture of assorted impressions—on a number of 
familiar and unfamiliar jaws. He had to diagnose and prescribe. He had to 
demonstrate facility in all phases of laboratory work—facility he now felt 
woefully deficient in. The equipment was versatile, and he had no particular 
difficulty adjusting to it, but it was so well made and precise that he was 
certain his own abilities fell far short of those for whom it was intended.
The early exercises were routine, and he was able to do them easily in the time 
recommended. Gradually, however, they became more difficult, and he had to 
concentrate as never before to accomplish the assignments at all, let alone on 
schedule. There were several jaws so alien that he could not determine their 
modes of action, and had to pass them by even though the treatment seemed simple 
enough. This was because he remembered his recent experiences with galactic 
dentition, and the unsuspected mechanisms of seemingly ordinary teeth, and so 
refused to perform repairs even on a dummy jaw that might be more harmful than 
no repair at all.
During the rest breaks he chatted with his companions, all in neighbouring 
operatories, and learned to his dismay that none of them were having 
difficulties. "How can you be sure of the proper occlusal on #17?" he asked 
Treetrunk. "There was no upper mandible present for comparison."
"That was an Oopoo jaw," Treetrunk rustled negligently. "Oopoos have no uppers. 
There's just a bony plate, perfectly regular. Didn't you know that?"
"You recognize all the types of jaw in the galaxy?" Dillingham asked, half 
jokingly,
"Certainly. I have read at least one text on the dentures of every accredited 
species. We Treetrunks never forget."
Eidetic memory! How could a mere man compete with a creature who was able to 
peruse a million or more texts, and retain every detail of each? He understood 
more plainly why his probability of admittance was so low. Perhaps even that 
figure was unrealistically high!
"What was #36, the last one?" Pincushion inquired. "I didn't recognize it, and I 
thought I knew them all."
Treetrunk wilted slightly. "I never saw that one before," he admitted. "It must 
have been extragalactic, or a theoretic simulacrum designed to test our 
extrapolation."
"The work was obvious, however," Anteater observed. "I polished it off in four 
seconds."
"Four seconds!" All the other were amazed.
"Well, we are adapted for this sort of routine," Anteater said patronizingly. 
"Our burrs are built in, and all the rest of it. My main delay is generally in 
diagnosis. But #36 was a straightforward labial cavity requiring a plastoid 
substructure and metallic overlay, heated to 540 degrees Centigrade for 
thirty-seven microseconds."
"Thirty-nine microseconds," Treetrunk corrected him, a shade smugly. "You forgot 
to allow for the red-shift in the overhead beam. But that's still remarkable 
time."
"I employed my natural illumination, naturally," Anteater said, just as smugly. 
He flashed a yellow light from his snout.
"No distortion there. But I believe my alloy differs slightly from what is 
considered standard, which may account for the discrepancy. Your point is well 
taken, nevertheless. I trust none of the others forgot that adjustment?"
The Electrolyte settled an inch. "I did," he confessed.
Dillingham was too stunned to be despondent. Had all of them diagnosed #36 so 
readily, and were they all so perceptive as to be automatically aware of the 
wavelength of a particular beam of light? Or were such readings available 
through the equipment, that he didn't know about, and wouldn't be competent to 
use if he did know? He had pondered that jaw for the full time allotted and 
finally given it up untouched. True, the cavity had appeared to be perfectly 
straightforward, but it was too clean to ring true. Could—
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (39 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
The buzzer sounded for the final session and they dispersed to their several 
compartments.
Dillingham was contemplating #41 with mounting frustration when he heard 
Treetrunk, via the translator extension, call to Anteater. "I can't seem to get 
this S-curve excavation right," he complained. "Would you lend me your snout?"
A joke, of course, Dillingham thought. Discussion of cases after they were 
finished was one thing, but consultation during the exam itself—!
"Certainly," Anteater replied. He trotted past Dillingham's unit and entered 
Treetrunk's operatory. There was the muted beep of his high-speed proboscis 
drill. "You people confined to manufactured tools labour under such a dreadful 
disadvantage," he remarked. "It's a wonder you can qualify at all!"
"Hmph," Treetrunk replied good-naturedly... and later returned the favour by 
providing a spot diagnosis based on his memory of an obscure chapter of an 
ancient text, to settle a case that had Anteater in doubt. "It isn't as though 
we're competing against each other," he said. "Every point counts!"
Dillingham ploughed away, upset. Of course there had been nothing in the posted 
regulations specifically forbidding such procedure, but he had taken it as 
implied. Even if galactic ethics differed from his own in this respect, he 
couldn't see his way clear to draw on any knowledge or skill other than his own. 
Not in this situation.
Meanwhile, #41 was a different kind of problem. The directive, instead of saying 
"Do what is necessary", as it had for the #36 they had discussed during the 
break, was specific. "Create an appropriate mesiocclusodistal metal-alloy inlay 
for the afflicted fifth molar in this humanoid jaw."
This was perfectly feasible. Despite its oddities as judged by Earthly 
standards, it was humanoid and therefore roughly familiar to him. Men did not 
have more than three molars in a row, but other species did. He had by this time 
mastered the sophisticated equipment well enough to do the job in a fraction of 
the time he had required on Earth. He could have the inlay shaped and cast 
within the time limit.
The trouble was, his experience and observation indicated that the specified 
reconstruction was not proper in this case. It would require the removal of far 
more healthy dentin than was necessary, for one thing. In addition, there was 
evidence of persistent inflammation in the gingival tissue that could herald 
periodontal disease.
He finally disobeyed the instructions and placed a temporary filling. He hoped 
he would be given the opportunity to explain his action, though he was afraid he 
had already failed the exam. There was just too much to do, he knew too little, 
and the competition was too strong.
 
The field examination finished in the afternoon, and nothing was scheduled for 
that evening. Next day the written exam—actually a combination of written, 
verbal and demonstrative questions—was due, and everyone except Treetrunk was 
deep in the review texts. Treetrunk was dictating a letter home, his parameter 
of the translator blanked out so that his narration would not disturb the 
others.
Dillingham pored over the three-dimensional pictures and captions produced by 
the tomes while listening to the accompanying lecture. There was so much to 
master in such a short time! It was fascinating, but he could handle only a tiny 
fraction of it. He wondered what phenomenal material remained to be presented in 
the courses themselves, since all the knowledge of the galaxy seemed to be 
required just to pass the entrance exam. Tooth transplantation? Tissue 
regeneration? Restoration of living enamel, rather than crude metal fillings?
The elevator opened. A creature rather like a walking oyster emerged. Its 
yard-wide shell parted to reveal eye-stalks and a comparatively dainty mouth. 
"This is the—dental yard?" it inquired timorously.
"Great purple quills!" Pincushion swore quietly. "One of those insidious 
panhandlers. I thought they'd cleared such obtusities out long ago."
Treetrunk, closest to the elevator, looked up and switched on his section of the 
translator. "The whole planet is dental, idiot!" he snapped after the query had 
been repeated for him. "This is a private dormitory."
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (40 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
The oyster persisted. "But you are off-duty dentists? I have a terrible 
toothache—"
"We are applicants," Treetrunk informed it imperiously. "What you want is the 
clinic. Please leave us alone."
"But the clinic is closed. Please—my jaw pains me so that I can not eat. I am an 
old clam—"
Treetrunk impatiently switched off the translator and resumed his letter. No one 
else said anything.
Dillingham could not let this pass. "Isn't there some regular dentist you can 
see who can relieve the pain until morning? We are studying for a very important 
examination."
"I have no credit—no stiggle—no money for private service," Oyster wailed. "The 
clinic is closed for the night, and my tooth—"
Dillingham looked at the pile of texts before him. He had so little time, and 
the material was so important. He had to make a good score tomorrow to mitigate 
today's disaster.
"Please," Oyster whined. "It pains me so—"
Dillingham gave up. He was not sure regulations permitted it, but he had to do 
something. There was a chance he could at least relieve the pain. "Come with 
me," he said.
Pincushion waved his pins, that were actually sensitive celia capable of 
intricate manoeuvring. "Not in our operatory," he protested. "How can we 
concentrate with that going on?"
Dillingham restrained his unreasonable anger and took the patient to the 
elevator. After some errors of navigation he located a vacant testing operatory 
elsewhere in the application section. Fortunately the translators were 
everywhere, all keyed to everything, so he could converse with the creature and 
clarify its complaint.
"The big flat one," it said as it propped itself awkwardly in the chair and 
opened its shell. "It hurts."
Dillingham took a look. The complaint was valid: most of the teeth had 
conventional plasticene fillings, but one of these had somehow been dislodged 
from the proximal surface of a molar: a Class II restoration. The gap was packed 
with rancid vegetable matter—seaweed?—and was undoubtedly quite uncomfortable 
for the patient.
"You must understand," he cautioned the creature, "that I am not a regular 
dentist here, or even a student. I have neither the authority nor the competence 
to do any work of a permanent nature on your teeth. All I can do is clean out 
the cavity and attempt to relieve the pain so that you can get along until the 
clinic opens in the morning. Then an authorized dentist can do the job properly. 
Do you understand?"
"It hurts," Oyster repeated.
Dillingham located the creature's planet in the directory and punched out the 
formula for a suitable anaesthetic. The dispenser gurgled and rolled out a 
cylinder and swab. He squeezed the former and dabbed with the latter around the 
affected area, hiding his irritation at the patient's evident inability to sit 
still even for this momentary operation. While waiting for it to take effect, he 
requested more information from the translator—a versatile instrument.
"Dominant species of Planet Oyster," the machine reported. "Highly intelligent, 
non-specialized, emotionally stable life-form." Dillingham tried to reconcile 
this with what he had already observed of his patient, and concluded that 
individuals must vary considerably from the norm. He listened to further vital 
information, and soon had a fair notion of Oyster's general nature and the 
advisable care of his dentition. There did not seem to be anything to prevent 
his treating this complaint.
He applied a separator (over the patient's protest) and cleaned out the impacted 
debris with a spoon excavator without difficulty. But Oyster shied away at the 
sight of the rotary diamond burr. "Hurts!" he protested.
"I have given you adequate local anaesthesia," Dillingham explained. "You should 
feel nothing except a slight vibration in your jaw, which will not be 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (41 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
uncomfortable. This is a standard drill, the same kind you've seen many times 
before." As he spoke he marvelled at what he now termed standard. The burr was 
shaped like nothing—literally—on Earth, and it rotated at 150,000 r.p.m.—several 
times the maximum employed back at home. It was awesomely efficient. "I must 
clean the surfaces of the cavity—"
Oyster shut mouth and shell firmly. "Hurts!" his whisper emerged through 
clenched defences.
Dillingham thought despairingly of the time this was costing him. If he didn't 
return to his texts soon, he would forfeit his remaining chance to pass the 
written exam.
He sighed and put away the power tool. "Perhaps I can clean it with the hand 
tools," he said. "I'll have to use this rubber dam, though, since this will take 
more time."
One look at the patient convinced him otherwise. Regretfully he put aside the 
rubber square that would have kept the field of operation dry and clean while he 
worked.
He had to break through the overhanging enamel with a chisel, the patient 
wincing every time he lifted the mallet and doubling the necessity for the 
assistant he didn't have. Back on Earth Miss Galland had always calmed the 
patient. A power mallet would have helped, but that, too, was out. This was as 
nervous a patient as he had ever had.
It was a tedious and difficult task. He had to scrape off every portion of the 
ballroom cavity from an awkward angle, hardly able to see what he was doing 
since he needed a third hand for the dental mirror.
It would have to be a Class II—jammed in the side of the molar and facing the 
adjacent molar, and both teeth so sturdy as to have very little give. A Class II 
was the very worst restoration to attempt in makeshift fashion. He could have 
accelerated the process by doing a slipshod job, but it was not in him to skimp 
even when he knew it was only for a night. Half an hour passed before he 
performed the toilet: blowing out the loose debris with a jet of warm air, 
swabbing the interior with alcohol, drying it again.
"Now I'm going to block this up with a temporary wax," he told Oyster. "This 
will not stand up to intensive chewing, but should hold you comfortably until 
morning." Not that the warning was likely to make much difference. The trouble 
had obviously started when the original filling came loose, but it had been 
weeks since that had happened. Evidently the patient had not bothered to have it 
fixed until the pain became unbearable—and now that the pain was gone, Oyster 
might well delay longer, until the work had to be done all over again. The 
short-sighted refuge from initial inconvenience was hardly a monopoly of Earthly 
sufferers.
"No," Oyster said, jolting him back to business. "Wax tastes bad."
"This is pseudo-wax—sterile and guaranteed tasteless to most life forms. And it 
is only for the night. As soon as you report to the clinic—"
"Tastes bad!" the patient insisted, starting to close his shell.
Dillingham wondered again just what the translator had meant by "highly 
intelligent... emotionally stable". He kept his peace and dialled for amalgam.
"Nasty colour," Oyster said.
"But this is pigmented red, to show that the filling is intended as temporary. 
It will not mar your appearance, in this location. I don't want the clinic to 
have any misunderstanding." Or the University administration!
The shell clamped all the way shut, nearly pinning his fingers. "Nasty colour!", 
muffled.
More was involved here than capricious difficulty. Did this patient intend to go 
to the clinic at all? Oyster might be angling for a permanent filling. "What 
colour does suit you?"
"Gold." The shell inched open.
It figured. Well, better to humour this patient, rather than try to force him 
into a more sensible course. Dillingham could make a report to the authorities, 
who could then roust out Oyster and check the work properly.
At his direction, the panel extruded a ribbon of gold foil.
He placed this in the miniature annealing oven and waited for the slow heat to 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (42 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
act.
"You're burning it up!" Oyster protested.
"By no means. It is necessary to make the gold cohesive, for better service. You 
see—"
"Hot," Oyster said. So much for helpful explanations. He could have employed 
noncohesive metal, but this was a lesser technique that did not appeal to him.
At length he had suitable ropes of gold for the slow, delicate task of building 
up the restoration inside the cavity. The first layer was down; once he malleted 
it into place—
The elevator burst asunder. A second oyster charged into the operatory waving a 
translucent tube. "Villain!" it exclaimed. "What are you doing to my 
grandfather?"
Dillingham was taken aback. "Your grandfather? I'm trying to make him 
comfortable until—"
The newcomer would have none of it. "You're torturing him. My poor, dear, 
long-suffering grandfather! Monster! How could you?"
"But I'm only—"
Young Oyster levelled the tube at him. Its end was solid, but Dillingham knew it 
was a genuine weapon. "Get away from my grandfather. I saw you hammering spikes 
into his venerable teeth, you sadist! I'm taking him home!"
Dillingham did not move. He considered this a stance of necessity, not courage. 
"Not until I complete this work. I can't let him go out like this, with the 
excavation exposed."
"Beast! Pervert! Humanoid!" the youngster screamed. "I'll volatize you!"
Searing light beamed from the solid tube. The metal mallet in Dillingham's hand 
melted and dripped to the floor.
He leaped for the oyster and grappled for the weapon. The giant shell clamped 
shut on his hand as they fell to the floor. He struggled to right himself, but 
discovered that the creature had withdrawn all its appendages and now was 
nothing more than a two-hundred-pound clam—with Dillingham's left hand firmly 
pinioned.
"Assaulter of innocents!" the youngster squeaked from within the shell. 
"Unprovoked attacker! Get your foul paw out of my ear!"
"Friend, I'll be glad to do that—as soon as you let go," he gasped. What a 
situation for a dentist!
"Help! Butchery! Genocide!"
Dillingham finally found his footing and hauled on his arm. The shell tilted and 
lifted from the floor, but gradually let go of the trapped hand. He quickly sat 
on the shell to prevent it from opening again and surveyed the damage.
Blood trickled from multiple scratches along the wrist, and his hand smarted 
strenuously, but there was no serious wound.
"Let my grandson go!" the old oyster screamed now. "You have no right to muzzle 
him like that! This is a free planet!"
Dillingham marvelled once more at the translator's original description of the 
species. These just did not seem to be reasonable creatures. He stood up quickly 
and took the fallen tube.
"Look, gentlemen—I'm very sorry if I have misunderstood your conventions, but I 
must insist that the young person leave."
Young Oyster peeped out of his shell. "Unwholesome creature! Eater of sea-life! 
How dare you make demands of us?"
Dillingham pointed the tube at him. He had no idea how to fire it, but hoped the 
creature could be bluffed. "Please leave at once. I will release your 
grandfather as soon as the work is done."
The youngster focused on the weapon and obeyed, grumbling. Dillingham touched 
the elevator lock the moment he was gone.
The oldster was back in the chair. Somehow the seat adjustment had changed, so 
that this was now a basket-like receptacle, obviously more comfortable for this 
patient. "You are more of a being than you appear," Oyster remarked. "I was 
never able to handle that juvenile so efficiently."
Dillingham contemplated the droplets of metal splattered on the floor. That 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (43 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
heat-beam had been entirely too close—and deadly. His hands began to shake in 
delayed reaction. He was not a man of violence, and his own quick action had 
surprised him. The stress of recent events had certainly got to him, he thought 
ruefully.
"But he's a good lad, really," Oyster continued. "A trifle impetuous—but he 
inherited that from me. I hope you won't report this little misunderstanding."
He hadn't thought of that, but of course it was his duty to make a complete 
report on the melee and the reason for it. Valuable equipment might have been 
damaged, not to mention the risk to his own welfare. "I'm afraid I must," he 
said.
"But they are horribly strict!" the oldster protested. "They will throw him into 
a foul salty cesspool! They'll boil him in vinegar every hour! His children will 
be stigmatized!"
"I can't take the law into my own hands." But of course he already had. "The 
court—or whatever it is here—must decide. I must make an accurate report."
"He was only looking out for his ancestor. That's very important to our culture. 
He's a good—"
The Oyster paused as Dillingham nodded negatively. His shell quivered, and the 
soft flesh within turned yellow.
Dillingham was alarmed. "Sir—are you well?"
The translator spoke on its own initiative. "The Oyster shows the symptoms of 
severe emotional shock. His health will be endangered unless immediate relief is 
available."
All he needed was a dying galactic on top of everything else! "How can I help 
him?" The shell was gradually sagging closed with an insidious suggestiveness.
"The negative emotional stimulus must be alleviated," the translator said. "At 
his age, such disturbances are—"
Dillingham took one more look at the visibly putrefying creature. "All right!" 
he shouted desperately. "I'll withhold my report!"
The collapse ceased. "You won't tell anyone?" the oldster inquired from the 
murky depths. "No matter what?"
"No one." Dillingham was not at all happy, but saw no other way out. Better 
silence than a dead patient.
The night was well advanced when he finished with Oyster and sent him home. He 
had forfeited his study period and, by the time he was able to relax, his sleep 
as well. He would have to brave the examination without preparation.
 
It was every bit as bad as he had anticipated. His mind was dull from lack of 
sleep and his basic fund of information was meagre indeed on the galactic scale. 
The questions would have been quite difficult even if he had been fully 
prepared. There were entire categories he had to skip because they concerned 
specialized procedures buried in his unread review texts. If only he had had 
time to prepare!
The other were having trouble too. He could see their humped over their tables, 
or under them, depending on physiology, scribbling notes as they figured ratios 
and tolerances and indices of material properties. Even Treetrunk looked 
hard-pressed. If Treetrunk, with a galactic library of dental information filed 
in his celluloid brain, could wilt with the effort, how could a poor humanoid 
from a backward planet hope to succeed?
But he carried on to the discouraging end, knowing that his score would damn him 
but determined to do his best whatever the situation. It seemed increasingly 
ridiculous, but he still wanted to be admitted to the university. The thought of 
deserting this stupendous reservoir of information and technique was appalling.
During the afternoon break he collapsed on his bunk and slept. One day remained, 
one final trial: the interrogation by the Admissions Advisory Council. This, he 
understood, was the roughest gauntlet of all; more applicants were rejected on 
the basis of this interview than from both other tests combined.
An outcry woke him in the evening. "The probabilities are being posted!" 
Pincushion honked, prodding him with a spine that was not, despite its 
appearance, sharp.
"Mine's twenty-one per cent, not a penny more," Dillingham muttered sleepily. 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (44 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
"Low—too low."
"The revised probs!" Pincushion said. "Based on the test scores. The warning 
buzzer just sounded."
Dillingham snapped alert. He remembered now: no results were posted for the 
field and written exams. Instead the original estimates of acceptance were 
modified in the light of individual data. This provided unlikely applicants with 
an opportunity to bow out before submitting themselves to the indignity of a 
negative recommendation by the AA Council. It also undoubtedly simplified the 
work of that body by cutting down on the number of interviewees.
They clustered in a tense semi-circle around the main translator. The results 
would be given in descending order. Dillingham wondered why more privacy in such 
matters wasn't provided, but assumed that the University had its reasons. 
Possibly the constant comparisons encouraged better effort, or weeded out the 
quitters that much sooner.
"Anteater," the speaker said. It paused. "Ninety-six per cent."
Anteater twitched his nose in relief. "I must have guessed right on those stress 
formulations," he said. "I knew I was in trouble on those computations."
Treetrunk—eighty-five per cent." Treetrunk almost uprooted himself with glee. "A 
twenty-five per cent increase! I must have maxed the written portion after all!"
"Robot—sixty-five per cent." The robotoid took the news impassively.
The remaining three fidgeted, knowing that their scores had to be lower.
"Pincushion—fifty per cent." The creature congratulated himself on an even 
chance, though he had obviously hoped to do better.
"Electrolyte—twenty-three per cent." The rocklike individual rolled towards his 
compartment. "I was afraid of that. I'm going home."
The rest watched Dillingham sympathetically, anticipating the worst. It came. 
"Earthman—three per cent," the speaker said plainly.
The last reasonable hope was gone. The odds were thirty to one against him, and 
his faith in miracles was small. The others scattered, embarrassed for him, 
while Dillingham stood rigid.
He had known he was in trouble—but this! To be given, on the basis of thorough 
testing, practically no chance of admission...
He was forty-one years old. He felt like crying.
 
The Admissions Advisory Council was alien even by the standard he had learned in 
the galaxy. There were only three members—but as soon as this occurred to him, 
he realized that this would be only the fraction of the Council assigned to his 
case. There were probably hundreds of interviews going on at this moment, as 
thousands of applicants were processed.
One member was a honeycomb of gelatinous tissue suspended on a trellislike 
framework. The second was a mass of purple sponge. The third was an undulating 
something confined within a tank: a water-breather, assuming that liquid was 
water. Assuming that it breathed.
The speaker set in the wall of the tank came to life. This was evidently the 
spokesman, if any were required. "We do not interview many with so low a 
probability of admission as student," Tank said. "Why did you persist?"
Why indeed? Well, he had nothing further to lose by forthrightness. "I still 
want to enter the University. There is still a chance."
"Your examination results are hardly conducive," Tank said, and it was amazing 
how much scorn could be infused into the tone of the mechanical translation. 
"While your field exercises were fair, your written effort was incompetent. You 
appear to be ignorant of all but the most primitive and limited aspects of 
prosthodontistry. Why should you wish to undertake training for which your 
capacity is plainly insufficient?"
"Most of the questions of the second examination struck me as relating to basic 
information, rather than to individual potential," Dillingham said woodenly. "If 
I had that information already, I would not stand in need of the training I came 
here to learn."
"An intriguing attitude. We expect, nevertheless, a certain minimum background. 
Otherwise our curriculum may be wastefully diluted."
For this Dillingham had no answer. Obviously the ranking specialists of the 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (45 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
galaxy should not be used for elementary instruction. He understood the 
point—yet something in him would not capitulate. There had to be more to this 
hearing than an automatic decision on the basis of tests whose results could be 
distorted by participant co-operation (cheating) on the one hand, and 
circumstantial denial of study-time on the other. Why have an advisory board, if 
that were all?
"We are concerned with certain aspects of your field work," the honeycomb 
creature said. He spoke by vibrating his tissues in the air, but the voice 
emerged from his translator. "Why did you neglect particular items?"
"Do you mean number seventeen? I was unfamiliar with the specimen and therefore 
could not repair it competently."
"You refused to work on it merely because it was new to your experience?" Again 
the towering scorn.
That did make it sound bad. "No. I would have done something if I had had more 
evidence of its nature. But the specimen was not complete. I felt that there was 
insufficient information presented to justify attempted repairs."
"You could not have hurt an inert model very much. Surely you realized that even 
an incorrect repair would have brought you a better score than total failure?
Dillingham had not known that. "I assumed that these specimens stood in lieu of 
actual patients. I gave them the same consideration I would have given a living, 
feeling creature. Neglect of a cavity in the tooth of a live patient might lead 
to the eventual loss of that tooth—but an incorrect repair could have caused 
more serious damage. Sometimes it is better not to interfere."
"Explain."
"When I visited the planet Electrolus I saw that the metallic restorations in 
native teeth were indirectly interfering with communication, which effect was 
disastrous to the well-being of the individual. This impressed upon me how 
dangerous well-meaning ignorance could be, even in so simple a matter as a 
filling."
"The chairman of the Dental League of planet Electrolus is a University 
graduate. Are you accusing him of ignorance?"
Oh-oh. "Perhaps the problem had not come to his attention," Dillingham said, 
trying to evade the trap.
"We will return to that matter at another time," the purple sponge said grimly. 
Dillingham's reasoning hardly seemed to have impressed this group.
"You likewise ignored item number thirty-six," Honeycomb said. "Was your logic 
the same?"
"Yes. The jaw was so alien to my experience that I could not safely assume that 
there was anything wrong with it, let alone attempt to fix it. I suppose I was 
foolish not to fill the labial cavity, in view of your scoring system, but that 
would have required an assumption I was not equipped to make."
"How much time did you spend—deciding not to touch the cavity?" Honeycomb 
inquired sweetly.
"Half an hour." Pointless to explain that he had gone over every surface of #36 
looking for some confirmation that its action was similar to that of any of the 
jaws with which he was familiar. "If I may inquire now—what was the correct 
treatment?"
"None. It was a healthy jaw."
Dillingham's breath caught. "You mean if I had filled that cavity—what looked 
like a cavity, I mean—"
"You would have destroyed our model extragalactic patient's health."
"Then my decision on #36 helped my examination score!"
"No. Your decision was based on uncertainty, not on accurate diagnosis. It threw 
your application into serious question."
Dillingham shut his mouth and waited for the next thrust.
"You did not follow instructions on #41," Honeycomb said. "Why?"
"I felt the instructions were mistaken. The placement of an MOD inlay was 
unnecessary for the correction of the condition, and foolish in the face of the 
peril the tooth was already in from gingivitis. Why perform expensive and 
complicated reconstruction, when untreated gum disease threatens to nullify it 
soon anyway?"
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (46 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
"Would that inlay have damaged the function of the tooth in anyway?"
"Yes, in the sense that no reconstruction can be expected to perform as well as 
the original. But even if there were no difference, that placement was 
functionally unnecessary. The expense and discomfort to the patient must also be 
considered. The dentist owes it to his patient to advise him of—"
"You are repetitive. Do you place your judgment before that of the University?"
Trouble again. "I must act on my own best judgment, when I am charged with the 
responsibility. Perhaps, with University training, I would have been able to 
make a more informed decision."
"Kindly delete the pleading," Honeycomb said.
Something was certainly wrong somewhere. All his conjectures seemed to go 
against the intent of this institution. Did its standards, as well as its 
knowledge, differ so radically from his own? Could all his professional and 
ethical instincts be wrong?
"Your performance on the written examination was extremely poor," Sponge said. 
"Are you naturally stupid, or did you fail to apply yourself properly?"
"I could have done better if I had studied more."
"You failed to prepare yourself?"
Worse and worse. "Yes."
"You were aware of the importance of the examination?"
"Yes."
"You had suitable review texts on hand?"
"Yes."
"Yet you did not bother to study them."
"I wanted to, but—" Then he remembered his promise to the oyster. He could not 
give his reason for failing to study. If this trio picked up any hint of that 
episode, it would not relent until everything was exposed. After suffering this 
much interrogation, he retained no illusions about the likely fate of young 
Oyster. No wonder the grandfather had been anxious!
"What is your pretext for such neglect?"
"I can offer none."
The colour of the sponge darkened. "We are compelled to view with disfavour an 
applicant who neither applies himself nor cares to excuse his negligence. This 
is not the behaviour we expect in our students."
Dillingham said nothing. His position was hopeless—but he still could not give 
up until they made his rejection final.
Tank resumed the dialogue. "You have an interesting record. It is even alarming 
in some respects. You came originally from planet Earth—one of the aborigine 
cultures. Why did you desert your tribe?"
They had unfortunate ways of putting things! "I was contacted by a galactic 
voyager who required prosthodontic repair. I presumed he picked my name out of 
the local directory." He described his initial experience with the creatures he 
had dubbed, facetiously, the North Nebulites, or Enens. Some of that early 
humour haunted him now.
"You operated on a totally unfamiliar jaw?" Tank demanded abruptly.
"Yes." Under duress, however. Should he remind them?
"Yet you refused to do similar work on a dummy jaw at this University," 
Honeycomb put in.
They were sharp! "I did what seemed necessary at the time."
"Don't your standards appear inconsistent, even to you?" Sponge inquired.
Dillingham laughed, not happily. "Sometimes they do." How much deeper could he 
bury his chances?
Tank's turn: "Why did you accompany the aliens to their world?"
"I did not have much choice, as I explained."
"So you did not come to space in search of superior prosthodontic techniques?"
"No. It is possible that I might have done so, however, had I known of their 
availability at the time."
"Yes, you have repeatedly expressed your recent interest," Tank said dryly. "Yet 
you did not bother to study from the most authoritative texts available on the 
subject, when you had both opportunity and encouragement to do so."
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (47 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
Once again his promise to Oyster prevented him from replying. He was coming to 
understand why his room-mates had shown so little desire to spend time helping 
the supplicant. Such a gesture appeared, in retrospect, to be a sure passport to 
failure.
Could he have passed—that is, brought his probability up to a reasonable 
level—had he turned away that plea? Should he have sacrificed that one creature, 
for the sake of the hundreds or the thousands he might have helped later, with 
proper training? He had been shortsighted.
But he knew he would do the same thing again, in similar circumstances. He just 
didn't have the heart to be that practical. At the same time, he could see why 
the business-like University would have little use for such sentimentality.
"On planet Gleep," Tank said, surprising him by using his own ludicrous term for 
the next world he had visited—though of course that was the way the translator 
had to work—"you filled a single cavity with twenty-four tons of fine gold 
alloy."
"Yes."
"Are you aware that gold, however plentiful it may be on Gleep, remains an 
exceptionally valuable commodity in the galaxy? Why did you not develop a less 
extravagant substitute?"
Dillingham tried to explain about the awkwardness of the situation, about the 
pressure of working within the cavernous mouth of a three-hundred foot sea 
creature, but it did seem that he had made a mistake. He could have employed a 
specialized cobalt-chromium-molybdenum alloy that would have been strong, hard, 
resilient and resistive to corrosion, and that might well have been superior to 
gold in that particular case. He had worried, for example, about the weight of 
such a mass of gold, and this alternate, far lighter material, would have 
alleviated that concern. It was also much cheaper stuff. He had not thought 
carefully enough about such things at the time. He said so.
"Didn't you consult your Enen associates?"
"I couldn't. The English/Enen transcoder was broken." But that was no excuse for 
not having had them develop the chrome-cobalt alloy earlier. He had allowed his 
personal preference for the more familiar gold to halt his quest for 
improvement.
"Yet you did communicate with them later, surmounting that problem readily once 
the gold had been wasted."
Dillingham was becoming uncomfortably aware that this group had done its 
homework. The members seemed to know everything about him. "I discovered by 
accident that the English/Gleep and Gleep/Enen transcoders could be used in 
concert. I had not realized that at the time we were casting the filling."
"Because you were preoccupied with the immediate problem?"
"I think so."
"But not too preoccupied to notice decay in the neighbouring teeth."
"No." It did seem foolish now, to have been so concerned with future dental 
problems, while wasting tons of valuable metal on the work in progress. How did 
that jibe with his more recent concern for Oyster's problem, to the exclusion of 
the much larger University picture? Was there any coherent rationale to his 
actions, or was he continually rationalizing to excuse his errors of judgment?
Was the seeming unfairness of this interview merely a way of proving this to 
him?
But Tank wasn't finished. "You next embarked with a passing diplomat of 
uncertain reputation who suggested a way to free you from your commitment to 
Gleep."
"He was very kind." Dillingham did not regret his association with Trach, the 
friendly dinosaur.
"He resembled one of the vicious predators of your planet's past—yet you trusted 
your person aboard his ship?"
"I felt, in the face of galactic diversity of species, that it was foolish to 
judge by appearances. One has to be prepared to extend trust, if one wants to 
receive it."
"You believe that?" Honeycomb demanded instantly.
"I try to." It was so hard to defend himself against the concentrated suspicion 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (48 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
of the council.
"You do not seem to trust the common directives of this University, however."
What answer could he make to that? They had him in another conflict, since they 
chose to interpret it that way.
"Whereupon you proceeded to investigate another unfamiliar jaw," Tank said. 
"Contrary to your expressed policy. Why?"
"Trach had befriended me, and I wanted to help him."
"So you put friendship above policy," Sponge said. "Convenient."
"And did you help him?" Tank again. It was hard to remember who said what, since 
they were all so murderously sharp.
"Yes. I adapted a sonic instrument that enabled him to clean his teeth 
efficiently."
"And what was your professional fee for this service?"
Dillingham reined his mounting temper. "Nothing. I was not thinking in such 
terms."
"A moment ago you were quite concerned about costs."
"I was concerned about unnecessary expense to the patient. That strikes me as 
another matter."
"And of course the prospective sale of your contract to planet Ra had no bearing 
on your decision to help a friend," Honeycomb said with infinite irony.
Sponge spoke before Dillingham could respond. "And the dinosaur told you about 
the University of Dentistry?"
"Yes, among other things. We conversed quite a bit."
"And so you decided to attend, on hearsay evidence."
"That's not fair!"
"Is the colour of your face a sign of distress?"
He realized that they were deliberately needling him, so he shut up. Why should 
he allow himself to get excited over a minor slur, after passing over major 
ones? All he could do that way was prove he was unstable, and therefore unfit.
"And did you seriously believe," Sponge persisted nastily, "that you had any 
chance at all to be admitted as a student here?"
Again he had no answer.
"On planet Electrolus you provoked a war by careless advice," Honeycomb said. 
"Whereupon you conspired to be exiled—to this University. What kind of reception 
did you anticipate here, after such machinations?"
So that was it! What use to explain that he had not schemed, that Trach had 
cleverly found a solution to the Electrolus political problem that satisfied all 
parties? This trio would only twist that into further condemnation.
"I made mistakes on that planet, as I did elsewhere," he said at last. "I hoped 
to learn to avoid such errors in the future by enrolling in a corrective course 
of instruction. It was ignorance, not devious intent, that betrayed me. I still 
think this University has much to offer me."
"The question before us," Tank said portentously, "is what you have to offer the 
University. Have you any further statements you fancy might influence our 
decision?"
"I gather from your choice of expression that it has already been made. In that 
case I won't waste any more of your time. I am ready for it."
"We find you unsuitable for enrollment at this University as a student," Tank 
said. "Please depart by the opposite door." So as not to obstruct the incoming 
interviewees. Very neat. Dillingham stood up wearily. "Thank you for your 
consideration," he said formally, keeping the irony out of his tone. He walked 
to the indicated exit.
"One moment, ex-applicant," Honeycomb said. "What are your present plans?"
Dillingham wondered why the creature bothered to ask. "I suppose I'll return to 
practice wherever I'm needed—or wanted," he said. "I may not be the finest 
dentist available, or even adequate by your standards—but I love my profession, 
and there is much I can still do." But why was it that the thought of returning 
to Earth, that he was free to do now and where he was adequate, no longer 
appealed? Had the wonders he had glimpsed here spoiled him for the backwoods 
existence? "I would have preferred to add the University training to my 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (49 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
experience, but there is no reason to give up what I already have just because 
my dream has been denied." He walked away from them.
The hall did not lead to the familiar elevators. Instead, absent-mindedly 
following the wrist-band glow, he found himself in an elegant apartment. He 
turned, embarrassed to have blundered into the wrong area, but a voice stopped 
him.
"Please be seated, Earthman."
It was the old Oyster he had treated two days before. Dillingham was not adept 
at telling aliens of identical species apart, but he could not mistake this one. 
"What are you doing here?"
"We all have to dwell somewhere." Oyster indicated a couch adaptable to a wide 
variety of forms. "Make yourself comfortable. I have thoughts to exchange with 
you."
Dillingham marvelled at the change in the manner of his erstwhile patient. This 
was no longer a suffering, unreasonable indigent. But his presence remained 
incongruous.
"Surely it occurred to you, Doctor, that there are only three groups upon this 
planet? The applicants, the students, and the University personnel. Which of 
these do you suppose should lack proper dental care? Which should lack the 
typical University identification?"
"You—" Dillingham stared at him, suddenly making connections. "You have no 
band—but the elevator worked for you! You're an employee! It was a put-up job!"
"It was part of your examination."
"I failed."
"What gave you that impression?"
Brother! "The Admissions Advisory Council found me unfit to enter this 
University."
"I find that hard to believe, Doctor."
Dillingham faced him angrily, not appreciating this business at all. "I don't 
know why you or the University were so eager to interfere with my application, 
but you succeeded nicely. They rejected me."
"Perhaps we should verify this," Oyster said, unperturbed.
He spoke into the translator: "Summon Dr. Dillingham's advisory group."
They came: the Sponge, the Honeycomb and the Tank, riding low conveyors. "Sir," 
they said respectfully.
"What was your decision with regard to this man's application?"
Tank replied. "We found this humanoid to be unsuitable for enrollment at this 
University as a student."
Dillingham nodded. Whatever internecine politics were going on here, at least 
that point was clear.
"Did you discover this applicant to be deficient in integrity?" Oyster inquired 
softly. It was the gentle tone of complete authority.
"No sir," Tank said.
"Professional ethics?"
"No sir."
"Professional caution?"
"No sir."
"Humility?"
"No sir."
Temper control?"
"No sir."
"Compassion? Courage? Equilibrium?"
"That is for you to say, sir."
Oyster glanced at Dillingham. "So it would seem. What, then, gentlemen, did you 
find the applicant suitable for?"
"Administration, sir."
"Indeed. Dismissed, gentlemen."
"Yes, Director." The three departed hastily.
Dillingham started. "Yes, who?"
"There is, you see, a qualitative distinction between the potential manual 
trainee and the potential administrator," Oyster said. "Your room-mates were 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (50 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
evaluated as students—and they certainly have things to learn. Oh, technically 
they are proficient enough—quite skilled, in fact, though none had the 
opportunity to exhibit the depth of competence manifested in adversity that you 
did. But in attitude—well, there will be considerable improvement there, or they 
will hardly graduate from this school. I daresay you know what I mean."
So the cheating had been noted! "But—"
"We are equipped to inculcate manual dexterity and technical comprehension. Of 
course the techniques tested in the Admissions Examination are primitive; none 
are employed in advanced restoration. Our interrogatory schedule is principally 
advisory, to enable us to programme for individual needs.
"Character, on the other hand, is far more difficult to train—or to assess 
accurately in a fixed situation. It is far more reliable if it comes naturally, 
which is one reason we don't always draw from graduates, or even promising 
students. We are quite quick to investigate applicants possessing the 
personality traits we require, and this had nothing to do with planet or 
species. A promising candidate may emerge from any culture, even the most 
backward, and is guaranteed from none. No statistical survey is reliable in 
pinpointing the individual we want. In exceptional cases it becomes a personal 
matter, a non-objective thing. Do you follow me?"
Dillingham's mind was whirling. "It sounds almost as though you want me to—"
To undertake training at University expense leading to the eventual assumption 
of my own position: Director of the School of Prosthodontics."
Dillingham was speechless.
"I am anticipating a promotion, you see," Oyster confided. "The vacancy I leave 
is my responsibility. I would not suffer a successor to whom I would not trust 
the care of my own teeth."
"But I couldn't possibly—I haven't the—"
"Have no concern. You adapted beautifully when thrust from your protected 
environment into galactic society, and this will be no more difficult. The 
University of Administration has a comprehensive programme that will guarantee 
your competence for the position, and of course you will serve as my assistant 
for several years until you get the hang of it. We are not rushed. You will not 
be subjected to the ordeal unprepared; that unpleasantness is over."
Dillingham still found this hard to grasp. "Your grandson—what if I'd—"
"I shall have to introduce you more formally to that young security officer. He 
is not, unfortunately, my grandson; but he is the finest shot with the 
single-charge laser on the planet. We try to make our little skits realistic."
Dillingham remembered the metal mallet dripping to the floor: no freak 
interception after all. And the way the youngster had retreated before the 
tube... that, being single-shot, was no longer functional. Realism, yes.
That reminded him. "That tooth of yours I filled. I know that wasn't—"
"Wasn't fake. You are correct. I nursed that cavity for three months, using it 
to check out prospects. It is a very good thing I won't need it any more, 
because you spoiled it utterly."
"I—"
"You did such a competent job that I should have to have a new cavity cultured 
for my purpose. No experienced practitioner would mistake it now for a 
long-neglected case even if I yanked out the gold and re-impacted the cavity. 
That, Doctor, is the skill that impresses me—the skill that remains after the 
machinery has been incapacitated. Good intentions mean nothing unless backed by 
authoritative discretion and ability. You were very slow, but you handled that 
deliberately obstructive patient very well. Had it been otherwise—"
"But why me? You could have selected anyone—"
Oyster put a friendly smile into his voice. "Hardly, Doctor. I visited eleven 
dormitories that evening before I came to yours—with no success. All contained 
prospects whose record and fieldwork showed that particular potential. You 
selected yourself from this number and carried it through honourably. More 
correctly, you presented yourself as a candidate for the office; we took it from 
there."
"You certainly did!"
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (51 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
"Portions of your prior record were hard to believe, I admit. It was incredible 
that a person who had as little galactic background as you did should accomplish 
so much. But now we are satisfied that you do have the touch, the ability to do 
the right thing in an awkward or unfamiliar situation. That, too, is essential 
for the position."
Dillingham fastened on one incongruity. "I—I selected myself?"
"Yes, Doctor. When you demonstrated your priorities."
"My priorities? I don't—"
"When you sacrificed invaluable study time to offer assistance to a creature you 
believed was in pain."
 
Her heart sank when she saw Ra. There was no green on the surface of the planet; 
the entire landscape seemed to consist of tailings from the mines, mounded into 
mountains and eroded into valleys.
Radium mines—she had realized the significance of that too late. They were 
notorious throughout the galaxy for the effect they had on living creatures. The 
local ore, called pitch-car, was extraordinarily rich; thus it required only 
fifty tons of the stuff to produce a full ounce of radium. The non-commercial 
byproducts such as uranium were discarded wherever convenient. There was no 
trash collection here.
If Dr. Dillingham had come to this planet...
The ship landed ungently. The front port burst open, admitting a foul cloud of 
native smog, and several troll-like tripeds stomped in. One spoke, his voice 
like dry bones being run through an un-oiled grinder.
"Slaves of Ra," the central translator rasped, the words muffled by the babble 
of other renditions for the dubious benefit of a score of miserable species. 
"Co-operate, and you may survive for years. Malinger, and you will receive 
inclement assignments. Any questions?"
Judy felt sorry for the prisoners, but knew there was nothing at all she could 
do for them now.
"Sir," a lovely ladybug called melodiously. "We do not wish to seem ungrateful, 
but we are very hungry—"
True enough. There had been no food aboard, and the trip had lasted sixteen 
hours. Many galactic species had much more active metabolisms than human beings 
did, and there was no telling how long they had been hungry before she embarked.
"The others will be hauled to the force-feeding station after processing. You 
will wait for the following shift for sustenance, with half-rations for the 
first two days of your inclement assignment. Any other questions?"
There were none. The hapless prisoners had got the message.
"Now step out promptly as I call your names. Aardvark!"
A creature vaguely resembling its Earthly namesake emerged from its cramped 
compartment and shambled forward.
"Too slow!" the translator barked. A troll aimed a rod. A beam of energy stabbed 
out. A patch of fur on Aardvark's rump burst into flame, and the odour of 
scorched flesh drifted back. He broke into a gallop.
Judy had not quite believed the pessimism of the prisoners as they travelled, 
though she had talked with several. She had been naïve. This was horrible!
"Bugbear!"
A beetle the size of a bear lumbered hastily out, as well it might: a touch of 
the laser would puncture its thin shell and send its juices spewing.
"Cricketleg!" The next jumped down. Judy wondered how the rollcall came to be 
alphabetical in English, since the translator assigned names purely by 
convenience of description. This was merely another mystery of galactic 
technology.
"Dogface!" He yelped as the beam singed his tail.
"Earthgirl!"
Judy froze. It couldn't be! She was only here to—
A troll tramped down the aisle, poking his beamer ahead aggressively. He braced 
his three knobbly legs, reached out with a hairy arm, and grasped her hair in 
one hank. He yanked.
"No!" she cried, her eyes pulled round by the tension on her hair. "I'm only 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (52 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
visiting! I'm not a prisoner!"
The troll hauled her up until she stood on tiptoes to ease the pain. "Visiting! 
Hee, hee, hee!" He aimed the beamer at her face.
"Trach!" she screamed. "Trach of Trachos! I'm here to see him!"
"A malingerer," the troll said with satisfaction. "I shall make an example. 
First I shall vaporize her squat snout." He flicked one of his four thumbs over 
a setting on the beamer and pressed the business end against her nose.
"One moment, troll," the translator said. Such instruments were versatile, 
serving as telephones and radios as well as language transposers. "I believe I 
heard my name."
The triped hesitated, grimacing. "Who are you, butting into private 
entertainment?"
"Trach, naturally. Be so kind as to deliver that creature to me, undamaged."
"I don't know no Trach!"
"Oh? Here is my identification." A phonetic blob sounded.
"Hm," the troll said, disgruntled. "That Trach. Well, send her on to the 
branding station when you're through with her."
Shoved roughly out, Judy pinned up her hurting hair temporarily and followed the 
translator's instructions to reach Trach's office. "Turn right, prisoner," the 
unit outside the ship snapped. She turned right; the other miserable aliens 
turned left, headed for the dismal rigours of processing. She felt guilty.
The spaceport, despite its choking atmosphere, was enclosed. She could make out 
the blowing dust beyond the grimy window panels, showing that it was actually 
worse outside. She heard the shriek of ore-bearing vehicles and saw a line of 
bedraggled workers headed for the arid entrance to a mine.
"Up the stairs, malingerer," the next unit said. She climbed flight after flight 
of cruelly steep rough stone steps. A panel on a landing gave her a view of a Ra 
graveyard: bones and clothing and shells and assorted other durable elements of 
assorted creatures. There was no attempt at burial.
"Third chamber down, weakling." She found the place and touched the door-signal.
"Enter," a differently-toned, more pleasant translator said from within. She was 
tempted to point out that it had forgotten the customary expletive.
She edged the bleak metal door open. The chamber was empty. She heard water 
running and saw fog near the ceiling. Someone was having a shower!
"I'll be right out," the pleasantly modulated voice said from the direction of 
the shower. It sounded real—as though spoken in English rather than translated. 
Unlikely, of course; she had encountered no one from Earth since answering that 
fateful ad.
The water noise stopped. Trach whistled cheerily as he dried himself in the 
other room. In a moment she heard his feet on the floor as he dressed. He 
sounded heavy. "You're Miss Galland of Earth," he called. "The muck-a-muck of 
Gleep notified me."
"You're not using a translator!" she exclaimed.
"I never bother," he admitted, still out of her sight. "Now where is my jacket? 
Can't entertain a lady undressed, ha-ha."
"Dr. Dillingham—is he here?"
"I'm afraid not. He left Electrolus for the University. He's undertaking 
administrative training now. I'm sorry to inform you that you made your trip 
here for nothing." His solid footsteps approached.
"Oh, no, I'm glad he's not here! I mean—"
Then she saw Trach. A literal, twelve-foot dinosaur.
"My dear, you look good enough to eat," he said, smiling. He had two thousand 
teeth.
She was not the fainting type. She fainted.
 
CHAPTER SIX
"An administrator," Oyster said, "has to be prepared to tackle problems that are 
beyond the capabilities of his subordinates."
"Of course," Dr. Dillingham agreed, but he didn't quite like the way the 
bivalved director said it. This was his first day back from his initial 
quartermester at the University of Administration, and though his Certificate of 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (53 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
Potential Administration was in good order he hardly felt qualified for the job 
he faced. Of course this was only an interim experience-term, after which he 
would return for more advanced administrative training—but he had a nasty 
suspicion that Oyster wasn't going to let him off lightly.
"We've had a call from Metallica, one of the Robotoid planets," the Director 
said. Dillingham wondered what the real terms were for planets and species, but 
of course he would never know. Probably "man" was rendered in the other galactic 
languages as "hairy grub"... "The natives have an awkward situation, and our 
field representative bounced it on up to us. I'm not sure it's strictly a 
prosthodontic matter, but we'd best take a look."
Dillingham relaxed. For a moment he had been afraid that he was about to be sent 
out alone. But of course Oyster would have him watch a few missions before 
trusting him to uphold the University's reputation by diagnosing a field problem 
himself. Every move a Director made was galactic news, Minor news, to be 
sure—but a blunder would rapidly rebound.
"I have reserved accommodation for three," Oyster said briskly. His large shell 
gave his voice an authoritative reverberation the translator dutifully emulated. 
"It will be a forty-eight hour excursion, so have your appointments rescheduled 
accordingly."
"Passage for three? Dillingham had no appointments yet, as Oyster well knew.
"My secretary will accompany us, naturally. Miss Tarantula." The translator 
meant well, but the name gave him a start. "She's very efficient. Grasps the 
struggling essence immediately and sucks the blood right out of it, so to 
speak."
Just so.
A University limousine carried them past the student picket line and whisked 
them the three light-minutes to the transport terminal. Dillingham wondered what 
the students had on their collective mind. He had observed one of their 
demonstrations on his way in, but had not had the opportunity to inquire 
further.
Miss Tarantula was there ahead of them with the reservations. Her eight spiked 
spiderlegs bustled Oyster and Man busily into the elevator entering the galactic 
liner. She also carried suitcase and equipment.
"Please give Dr. Dillingham a synopsis of the problem," Oyster said once they 
were ensconced in their travelling compartment. The ubiquitous translator was 
built into the wall, and the acoustics were such that the Director seemed to be 
talking English. "While I snooze." With that he pulled in his arms and legs and 
closed his shell.
"Certainly." Miss Tarantula was busily stringing threads across her section, 
fashioning a shimmering web. She did not interrupt this chore as she spoke. 
"Metallica is one of the more backward Robotoid worlds, having been devastated 
some millennia ago in the course of the fabled Jann uprising. Archaeological 
excavations are currently in progress in an effort to uncover Jann artifacts and 
reconstruct the mundane elements of their unique civilization. It was thought 
that all the Jann had been destroyed, but now they have discovered one in the 
subterranean wreckage."
"It's skeleton, you mean," Dillingham interrupted.
"No, Director. A complete robot."
Oops. He had forgotten that they were dealing with a robotoid culture. Metal and 
ceramics instead of flesh and bones. "Must be pretty well rusted or corroded, 
though."
"Jann don't corrode. They're super-robots, invulnerable to normal forces and 
virtually immortal. This one happened to be incapacitated by—"
"You mean it's alive? After thousands of years?"
"As alive as a robot ever is, Director." She had completed her web and was now 
settled in it for the journey, her body completely suspended. It seemed to be an 
effective acceleration harness, though a liner of this type required no such 
precautions. "But this one can't function because it has a toothache. The 
natives don't dare approach it, but the excavation can't continue until it is 
removed. So they notified the University."
Dillingham whistled inwardly. That must be a phenomenal toothache, to freeze an 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (54 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
immortal, invulnerable super-robot for over a thousand years. He was glad Oyster 
was handling this one; it would be educational to witness.
But what, he wondered, would they do with the Jann after its toothache had been 
cured? And what did a robot want with teeth? The ones he had met, dentists 
though they might be, had no proper mouths and did not eat.
 
Metallica was backward. Its spaceport resembled a junkyard, with corroding hulks 
at its fringe. A single dilapidated tower guided the liner in, and there was no 
landing net to clasp it invisibly in deep space and set it down with gentle 
precision. Their welcome, however, was warm enough.
"Director!" a small green robot said through a rickety mobile transcoder it 
trundled behind. "We've been sleepless awaiting your gracious arrival."
Miss Tarantula emitted a hiss reminiscent of a matron's sniff. "Robots never 
sleep anyway."
"We haven't eaten a thing, we were so eager for your Lordship to come."
"Robots don't eat, either," she pointed out.
The green robot turned about, lifted one metal foot, and delivered a clanging 
kick to the pedestal of the transcoder. There was a pained screech and a series 
of metallic burps. Then: "We have watched no television in two days."
"That's more like it," Miss Tarantula said, permitting herself to be mollified. 
"A robot who loses its appetite for television is becoming almost sentient, and 
that's a sure sign of distress. Better have the spools updated on that 
contraption before someone has a misunderstanding."
With a secretary like that, Dillingham realized, an administrator could hardly 
err. He was glad that the three of them carried University three-language 
transcoders for private dialogue. There was a subtle distinction in principle 
between the small transcoders and the large translators; he didn't understand 
the technical part, but knew that the 'coder differed from the 'lator as a 
motorcycle differed from a jet plane. But the 'coders were portable and 
self-contained and cheap, so remained in common use on backward planets. Insert 
the proper spools and hold an adequate conversation. Usually.
"What seems to be the difficulty?" Oyster inquired in an offshell manner. 
Dillingham was reminded of one of the die-turns of effective administration: 
Never ask a question of a client without first knowing most of the answer.
The little robot began volubly defining the problem. Dillingham's attention 
wandered, for Miss Tarantula's summary had been far more succinct. How, he 
wondered, did robots reproduce? Were there male and female mechanicals, and did 
they marry? Were there procreative taboos, metal pornography, broken iron 
hearts?
"Director," Miss Tarantula said on their private link-up.
Oyster angled his transcoder intake—he wore the device inside his huge 
shell—unobtrusively at her, not interrupting the green robot's narrative. 
Dillingham did likewise.
"There is a priority call from the University." She had a trans-star receiver 
somewhere on her complicated person. "A wildcat student demonstration has 
infiltrated your wing. They're raiding the files—"
Oyster's eye-stalks turned bright green. "Boiling oceans!" he swore.
The robot broke off. "Did you say "gritty oil", Director?" The vibration of its 
headpiece showed it was upset.
"Take over, Director!" Oyster snapped at Dillingham. "I'm summoning an emergency 
ship back. My files!" And he ran across the landing field towards the 
communications station as rapidly as his spindly legs would carry him. Miss 
Tarantula followed.
"Did he say "gritty oil"?" the green robot demanded insistently. There was a 
faint odour of burning insulation about it. "He may be a Very Important 
Sentient, but language like that—"
"Of course not," Dillingham said quickly. "He would never stoop to such 
uncouthness. It must be a scratch on the transcoder spool." But he suspected 
that the transcoder had correctly rendered the expletive. His own unit had not 
been programmed for gutter talk; otherwise his own ears might be burning. Oyster 
had certainly been furious.
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (55 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
"Oh," the robot said, disgruntled. "Well, as I was saying—er, you are going to 
solve the problem, even if he renigs?"
"Naturally." Dillingham hoped the quiver in his voice sounded like confidence. 
"The Director did not renig; he merely left the matter in my hands. The 
University always honours its commitments." But privately he preferred the 
robot's term. He should have known he'd find himself in over his ears without a 
facemask. Somehow it always happened that way. "I suppose I'd better see the 
patient now."
Frantically eager—who claimed robots had no emotions!—the official conducted him 
to the site of the excavations. They rode in an antique floater past high mounds 
of broken rock. There were plants in this world, but the few he saw had a 
metallic look. Hardly a place for a human being to reside, though the air was 
breathable and the temperature and gravity comfortable.
The vehicle stopped, settling to the ground with a flatulent sigh. "I dare go no 
further," the green robot said, and indeed his headpiece was rattling in a 
fear-feedback. "The Jann is in the next pit. Signal when you're finished, and I 
will pick you up again. If it's safe."
As Dillingham stepped down with his bag of equipment, the robot spun the cart 
around, goosed the motor, and floated swiftly back the way they had come—taking 
the transcoder and signal with it.
Stranded again! What kind of robot could it be, that even other robots feared so 
greatly? And if it were that dangerous, why hadn't they simply destroyed it? 
Oh—it was reputed to be invulnerable.
He walked to the pit and peered down.
A tremendous robot lay there, half buried in rubble. Judging from the proportion 
exposed, it had to be twelve feet long entire. Its armour was polished to a 
glass-like finish despite the centuries of weathering and abrasion. It was an 
awesome sight, and the mighty torso seemed to pulse with power. A cruel, thin 
keening smote his ears, and he knew it at once for the robotic note of pain. He 
had not learned much about robots, but he was sensitive to distress in anything, 
flesh, metal or other. Yes, this creature was alive—and suffering. That was all 
he really needed to know.
The head section was roughly cubical and two feet on a side. A drawer in the 
region that would have been the face of a man was partially out, half-full of 
sand, and within this something glowed. Robots did not ordinarily have mouths, 
but some models did have orifices for the intromission and processing of 
assorted substances. The gears that ground down hard samples could be considered 
as teeth.
Now that he was in the physical presence of the patient, the information in one 
of the University cram-courses began to come to the surface. He was, he 
realized, familiar with the basic procedures for repairing such equipment. But 
the specific type he found here was particularly awkward, and if he operated on 
it he risked making some serious mistake. This was a most sophisticated robot, 
and it had been listed as extinct.
But if its innards followed the principles of contemporary robots, its "teeth" 
might serve a double purpose: They would have an extremely hard exterior surface 
for manual crushing action, together with intricate internal circuitry for 
communications and processing of data. As with the Electrolytes. That meant that 
a malfunction in a tooth could distort far more than the mechanical operation of 
the mouth. A short-circuit could interfere with the functions of the brain 
itself...
Dillingham vacuumed out the sand and studied the configuration. One tooth glowed 
hotly. The pain-hum seemed to emanate from it. A quick check with his precise 
University instruments verified the short-circuit.
"All right, Jann—I believe I have diagnosed the condition," he said, speaking 
rhetorically while he set up the necessary paraphernalia. He doubted that the 
giant robot could hear or comprehend anything in its present state. 
"Unfortunately, I am not equipped to operate on the unit itself, and I don't 
have a replacement. I'll have to relieve the pain by bridging around the 
tooth—in essence, shorting out the short. This is crude, and will render the 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (56 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
tooth inoperative, but unless it is a critical unit the rest of your system 
should be able to function. You'll have to seek help at a thoroughly equipped 
robotoid clinic to have that tooth replaced, however, and I wouldn't delay if I 
were you. My jury-rig won't be any too stable, and you don't want a relapse."
Yet it would have been simple for a native dentist to bridge the tooth. Why 
hadn't that been done? What were they so afraid of, to allow an ancient cousin 
to suffer unnecessarily like this? Surely a single Jann, the only survivor of 
its kind, could not imperil a planet, even if it should have a mind to. And if 
it were that dangerous, the fact that a University dentist had repaired it would 
not dispose it any more kindly towards the errant locals.
Too bad he hadn't had a chance to review the history of the Jann uprising. Maybe 
some of these annoying inconsistencies would have been explained. But with 
Oyster running off so suddenly... well, this creature was in pain and needed 
help.
He was ready. He applied the bridge and soldered the terminals. The job itself 
was nothing; the skill had been required for the electronic preparations, the 
verification of tolerances, the location of circuits. It would have been a 
mistake to remove the tooth, for it was in series with the others so that the 
extraction could have been fatal for the patient. And many robots, his 
cram-course said, were programmed to self-destruct when killed. They were living 
bombs.
The keening faded. The bypassed tooth began to cool. The Jann moved one 
glittering arm a few inches. "Nnnnn," it said, the sound emerging from a grill 
in its forehead. A bulb set in the side of its head began to glow softly. An 
eye?
Relieved but apprehensive now that the job had been done, Dillingham stood back 
and awaited developments. He wanted to be sure his field surgery had been 
effective, as a matter of professional pride and compassion. Should the patient 
seem to be worse, he would have to undo his handiwork and try again.
The earth and rock around the Jann's nether portions cracked and bucked. A sleek 
massive foot ripped out of the ground, spraying fragments of rock in a 
semi-circle. The Jann hefted its body, moving its shining limbs with ponderous 
splendour. It was a magnificent hunk of machinery.
"Nnonne," it said on hands and knees, raising its head to cover Dillingham with 
a small antenna.
Was that a groan or a comment? Of course it would speak a strange language, 
assuming it used vocal communication at all, and his little 
Oyster/Tarantula/English transcoder would be useless without the appropriate 
spool. He would have to judge by the robot's actions and manner.
The Jann stood, towering monstrously above him. "None but I," it said, the 
volume deafening, the tones reverberating as though emanating from the lower 
register of a mighty organ.
None but I? That sounded perilously like English, and it hadn't come through the 
transcoder.
"Are you—do you—?" Dillingham faltered. Even if this Jann embodied a full 
translator, it could hardly have a setting for English. It had been buried for 
tens of centuries!
The Jann peered down at him with prismatic lenses that opened from a formerly 
blank area of its head. Sunlight glinted from its stainless torso and wisps of 
steam rose from its fingertips, giving it the aspect of a rainbow in fog. "NONE 
BUT I," it boomed, "SHALL DO THEE DIE!"
Oh-oh.
"There seems to be a misunderhension," Dillingham said, backing away as 
surreptitiously as he could manage. "I mean misapprestanding..." He whistled 
ineffectively. "I wasn't—I didn't—I mean, I fixed your tooth, or at least—" He 
tripped over a rock and sat down abruptly.
The Jann stepped towards him, and the earth shuddered. "Thou didst release me 
from mine bondage," it said, moderating its volume but none of its timbre. "Thou 
didst bypass the short."
Dillingham pushed himself back without getting up. "Yes. Yes! That's the idea."
The Jann reached forth a scintillating arm and pointed a finger oddly like a 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (57 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
cannon at Dillingham's head. "Listen, mortal, for I have somewhat to impart to 
thee."
Dillingham froze where he was. He did not like the giant's attitude—in fact, he 
was terrified—but there was no point in acting precipitously.
"In the days and years of strife between the tribes of the Jann and the minor 
ilk," it said, "it was my misfortune to bite down carelessly on a button-grenade 
and so befoul a circuit, nor could I recover the use of my body while that geis 
was upon me, though my mind was sound except for the pain. And so when I was 
buried thereafter by refuse my companions located me not, for it was wartime and 
there was much electrostatic interference and other distraction, and they 
thought me defunct. I perceived all manner of newsbands and converse in my area, 
as was my wont, but could not respond, and great was my suffering. In that pit I 
abode an thousand years, during which I said in my heart, "Whoso shall release 
me, him will I enrich for ever and ever." But the full millennium went by, and 
when no one set me free I entered upon the second thousand saying, "Whoso shall 
release me, for him will I fulfil three wishes." Yet no one set me free. 
Thereupon I waxed wroth with exceeding wrath and said to myself, "Whoso shall 
release me from this time forth, no one but I shall do him die." And now, as 
thou hast released me, needs must I honour that oath."
It was obvious to Dillingham that he faced a deranged robot. That bypassed tooth 
must have contained an important sanity circuit. But it was too late to undo the 
damage; the Jann would hardly let him near that tooth again. It would, in fact, 
kill him first.
But the story sounded familiar. The Jann, imprisoned—that was it? The spirit in 
the bottle, sworn to kill whoever released him. A fisherman had brought up the 
bottle in his net and unwittingly uncorked it...
Dillingham understood, now, why the locals had been so chary of this patient. 
Who wanted to gamble on the particular oath in force at the moment of release?
How had that fisherman got out of it? There had been a gimmick—
The Jann stumbled, and Dillingham lunged away from it. "My powerpack is almost 
depleted!" the robot lamented. "Four thousand years of that accursed 
short-circuit, yet I preserved my life-power until this moment! Had it not been 
my caution-synapse you bridged out, I would have realized the danger before 
expending power recklessly in breaking out of the rock and defining my motive. I 
can hardly move!"
Good news! Dillingham scrambled up the side of the pit and ran.
"O mortal!" the great voice called after him. "Wouldst desert me in this sad 
state, and my power insufficient to free myself from this ugly hole?"
Dillingham cursed himself for his stupidity, but was oddly moved by the plea. He 
stopped. "Will you change your mind about killing me, if I help you again?"
"Mortal, I can not gainsay an oath of twenty centuries. None but I shall do thee 
die."
"Then why should I help you?"
But the Jann, having exhausted its small remaining charge, could only repeat in 
fading resonance, "None but I..."
Against his better judgment, Dillingham returned to the pit and peeked down. The 
Jann lay sprawled at the bottom, its head-bulb dim.
He sighed with relief and began the long hike back to the spaceport. He had, at 
any rate, performed his mission. He had cured the toothache. His only concern 
now was to get back to the University.
He walked for hours. His bag grew heavy, but he refused to discard it. His feet 
developed blisters and his tongue became parched, but there seemed to be nothing 
he could drink here. The lone stream he passed turned out to be dilute machine 
oil—and gritty. He had not realized how far they had come in the floater.
Despite his discomfort his mind kept circling back to the shining Jann. What a 
contrast—that marvellous ancient machine, compared to the cowardly little green 
robot! The operation had been successful, he thought wryly, but the patient 
died. The image of it tormented him—lying there, dying there, for lack of power. 
Had that been his service to it? Death in lieu of pain? "O mortal," it had 
pleaded, "wouldst desert me...?'Yet he had left it.
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (58 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
But it wanted to kill him! He was lucky to have escaped with his life! He would 
be a fool ever to get near the ungrateful machine again!
That fading appeal nagged at him, even so.
Finally he reached the spaceport and staggered into the ALIEN LIFE SYSTEMS 
SUPPORT section. It was cramped and hot, but had the supplies he needed for the 
moment. He gulped water, then carefully bandaged his smarting feet. His job here 
was done.
Except for that last plea...
"The Jann," he inquired, not idly. "What kind of moral standards did they have? 
Did they ever make oaths, for instance, and keep them?"
The station's interior translator cleared its dusty speakers and answered him: 
"The ancient Jann robots were compulsively moral, and were mighty oath makers. 
Their circuitry was so constructed that they were unable ever to reverse an oath 
once made, or to allow anything short of total incapacity to hinder its 
performance."
So that was what he was up against!
But to let that noble creature simply lie there, knowing that not one of the 
frightened natives would help it...
"What power source did the Jann employ?"
"They normally used a unique powerpack whose secret expired with them," the 
translator said. "A tiny unit would sustain them in full activity for many 
centuries. But in an emergency they were able to draw on almost any available 
source.
Except sunlight, evidently, or radio waves, or the heat of the ground. Though 
perhaps such things had helped to recharge the Jann's unit, so that it could 
last forty centuries in spite of the short-circuit. "How long before the next 
liner to the University of Dentistry, or that vicinity?"
"Eighteen hours, approximately."
Time enough. "Summon an individual floater for me, stocked with a spare 
charge-cell. I'll drive it myself." He knew that his status as a representative 
from a Galactic University guaranteed his interplanetary credit. He could order 
virtually anything and have it delivered without challenge. If his charges 
became excessive, the University would settle without a whimper—and call him to 
account in private. That way its image was protected.
The floater was waiting outside as he eased himself along on his blisters. He 
mounted and set it in motion. The controls were standard.
In minutes he was back at the pit. The Jann lay where he had left it, spread 
unceremoniously face down. Its light glowed a trifle more brightly, however, 
suggesting that its cell had recharged a little. It might eventually have 
recovered enough power to crawl out by itself—were it not for the hazard of that 
temporary bridge he had installed.
Dillingham lifted out the charge-cell and set it beside the robot. "I have 
brought you a temporary power supply," he said. "This is not to imply that I 
approve of your attitude, one bit—but it is against my principles to let any 
creature suffer or die if I am able to prevent it. So here is your reprieve—and 
by the time you hook it up and assemble it, I'll be gone. You'll have to find 
your own permanent supply, as I suspect this will sustain you only a few hours. 
Good luck."
The Jann's shining hand dragged towards the cell, and Dillingham knew it would 
make use of that power somehow. He jumped into the floater and took off. "None 
but I..." he heard as he left.
What kind of a fool was he? This Jann was murder! But he knew the answer: he was 
the same kind of fool who had thrown away his study-time in order to help a 
disreputable Oyster who claimed to be in pain. That had worked out well for 
him—but he could expect no similar reprieve this time. He was dealing with an 
inflexible machine, not a subjective animate, this time. He'd better be off the 
planet before the Jann got fully organized.
"None but I..."
Dillingham jumped, almost overturning the floater. He was a mile from the pit 
and travelling at high speed, yet it had sounded as though the Jann were near at 
hand. He looked around nervously,
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (59 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
"None but I shall do thee die." It was the floater's transcoder!
He relaxed. Naturally the Jann would be able to tap into such a device. Its body 
was one big electronic apparatus.
"I see you're back in form already," he replied.
"And my thanks to thee, mortal. For the second time thou hast preserved me from 
a fate forse than destruction. Thy primitive power cell is insufficient to 
sustain levitation, but I am now able to walk to a better supply. Then I shall 
seek thee out, for none but I shall—"
"I understand." Levitation? The Jann was advanced; he had never heard of this 
ability in a robot, before. That probably meant the quaint-talking demon could 
catch him in the floater, or anywhere else on the planet. He suddenly felt less 
secure. In fact, something very like a chilly perspiration was showing up. "How 
long will it take you to get better power?"
"There is a Jann unit in serviceable condition buried within ten miles of me. 
Twenty minutes will suffice, counting the time required to drill down to it. 
Then shall I be fully mobile again."
Twenty minutes! His liner to the University wouldn't leave for many hours.
The spaceport was coming into sight, but this did not cheer him. Where could he 
hide from a virtually omniscent killer robot?
"Jann, are you sure you have to kill me?"
"Mortal, I must do thee die, for so I have sworn."
"There's no leeway, no loophole—?"
"Only if thou shouldst die before I get to thee."
"You couldn't just write this one off as a bad debt?"
"None but I—"
"I remember the expression." But had there been a note of regret in it this 
time? "I just thought the circumstances might—"
"Shall do thee die." No—the tone was final.
Dillingham tried once more. "Jann, your oath to kill your benefactor was for the 
first time you were saved. Don't you owe me another oath for the second time?"
"I had not thought of it, mortal. I shall give thee the prior oath: to fulfill 
three wishes. That should acquit me honourably."
"Excellent. My first wish is to cancel the other oath."
There was something like a chuckle. "Not so fast, mortal. Thou canst not gainsay 
a Jann oath in such fashion. Only after the first has been acquitted may thou 
invoke the next."
"But how can I invoke—I mean, revoke it after I'm dead?"
"Mortal, I did not write the Code of the Jann; I only obey it. First oath 
first."
So much for that. Dillingham drew up to the centre, paused a moment to collect 
his morale, and hurried to the ticket counter. "Book me aboard the first ship 
out of here. Anywhere. Is there one within fifteen minutes?"
The blue robot with the rubber-stamp digits looked startled. "Is something the 
matter, Director?"
"Your Jann wants to kill me."
"That's too bad. We were afraid of something like that. Do you mind removing 
yourself from the building before the Jann catches up to you? We're not insured 
against acts of war."
"Acts of war!"
"No peace treaty was ever concluded with the Jann, since we thought them 
extinct. So we're still at war. If it destroyed this station to get at you—"
Dillingham suspected it was useless to shout at a machine, but was tempted. "Did 
it occur to you that the moment the Jann dispatches me, it will be free to 
resume full-scale hostilities against you? Now if you'd like me to go out to 
meet it—"
"Oh, no—it would be better if you lived for a while, at least until we can 
prepare our defences."
"Just put me on a ship in time and you'll have no problem," Dillingham said 
dryly. Who would have expected the quiet profession of prosthodontics to lead to 
this?
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (60 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
He found himself aboard a scow lurching off to Hazard, a planet devoted largely 
to winter sports for woolly mammoths. He didn't care; at least it had an 
up-to-date spaceport, and it would be a simple matter to re-embark for the 
University. Once home, he could check out ways to nullify the Jann, should it 
actually follow him into space.
But why wait? "Creature-to-creature call to Director Oyster, School of 
Prosthodontics, University of Dentistry," he said to the translator, and 
identified himself for the charges. That was one thing about the translators: 
they all seemed to know all languages, even his. Probably there was a complex 
network, so that—
"Good to hear you," Oyster said. Even though this was a was a translation of a 
voice many light-years distant, the typical clammish nuances came through 
clearly. "How soon will you be back?"
"Not soon enough, I'm afraid. You see, I'm headed in the wrong direction, and—"
A rough, somewhat nasal voice cut in. "We demand grades based on 
longevity-in-programme, and tuition reduction for difficult courses. 
Furthermore—"
What was this—a crossed connection?
"Ridiculous!" Oyster exclaimed. "I'll make you a counteroffer: 
longevity-in-programme based on your grades, and cessation of tuition after 
graduation. By that token you will soon wash out, Anteater, and the question of 
your graduation will be, if I may say so, academic."
Anteater! Dillingham recognized that voice now. His one-time room-mate had 
cheated on the University entrance exam, though he had hardly needed to. Now, 
evidently, he was leading a student revolt.
"Are you still there, Assistant?" Oyster inquired. "They have us locked up in an 
examination room, and we need reinforcements."
"Locked up! All your staff, too?"
"All that happened to be on the premises when they broke through. I'm here with 
Purplesplotch, K-9, Honeycomb and Lightbulb. I'm not sure you know them."
"I remember Honeycomb. He was one of my AAC interviewers. That was an 
unforgettable—"
"We demand a full-credit sabbatical term every two years," Anteater said.
"Sabbaticals! For students?" Oyster shouted back. "Our budget doesn't allow that 
for our instructors! If you don't disperse this instant, though, I guarantee 
you'll get a term at full-labour in the University clink! Did you fix the Jann?"
Dillingham realized with a start that the last sentence was for him, and 
marvelled at Oyster's aplomb in this cross-fire dialogue. "That's what I was 
calling about. The Jann is—"
"Hey! He's making an outside call!" another student cried. "The no-good sneak!"
"Now wait a minute," Dillingham began.
"That's Earthman!" Anteater said. "I know him. A turncoat. Schemed his way into 
Administration after he'd flunked the entrance exam. Blank him off!"
"Clam chowder!" Oyster swore before Dillingham could reply. A red light 
flickered on the translator chassis to signify the transmission of an obscenity. 
"Doctor, get back here as fast as you—"
"Oooo, what you said, Director!" Anteater chided gleefully. "Did you hear that, 
fellows? He said "poisoned termites"!"
"Melted ice-cream!" another student echoed wickedly. "Wash his mouth out!" Then 
the blah-blah of an interference signal over-rode the transmission and 
Dillingham could make out no more. He was on his own again.
He hardly had time to disconnect before the translator spoke again. "None but 
I..."
Oh, no!
"So you can tap into a spaceborne network too, Jann. You're pretty good for one 
who's been buried four thousand years."
"I have been keeping up with developments, primitive as they are, despite mine 
incapacity."
"That's how you knew my language, without a translator? You rifled my transcoder 
electronically before I ever bridged your tooth?"
"Even so."
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (61 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
"Then why don't you employ modern slang, instead of—"
"That would be out of character, mortal."
"It seems out of character to me to kill the one who tried to help you. Twice. 
But I'm not a Jann, so maybe I don't properly appreciate your mores."
"I shall await thee on Hazard."
Dillingham felt distinctly uncomfortable. Even his feeble irony was wasted on 
the metal man, and now—"You caught a faster ship?"
"I am a faster ship."
Worse and worse. The long-range problem had become short-range again. He had 
assumed that "levitation" was similar to the action of a floater, strictly 
dependent on adequate ambient gas—i.e., air. He had underestimated the robot.
He was tempted to ask the translator for advice, but realized that he could no 
longer trust it. Evidently his prior call had enabled the Jann to trace him, and 
now the robot would overhear anything he said. At worst, it might arrange to 
feed him false information, leading to the early fulfilment of the oath. He 
could not even converse with any crewman or other passengers, since translation 
would be necessary. He was boxed in, and would have to get out of it by himself. 
As usual.
But how? The Jann could track him whenever he used a translator or other 
communicator, and would be laying in wait for the ship at Hazard.
"With abilities such as yours, how did your kind lose the war?" Dillingham 
inquired. Since he could not hide from the giant, he might as well talk. There 
was always the chance that something useful would turn up, that would enable him 
to circumvent the murder-oath. A straw—but he had little else.
"I have pondered that very question for some centuries," the Jann admitted. 
"Unfortunately, we of the mineral kingdom are not original thinkers, so I was 
unable to come to any certain conclusion."
Not original thinkers. That figured. A machine typically performed as instructed 
and had no imagination. But that realization only posed more problems. How could 
an entire machine culture evolve, without animate intervention? If one of its 
highest representatives, the Jann, could neither win a war nor comprehend why it 
had lost, what was the source of its civilization?
On the other hand, was his own planet dominated by original thinkers? "Were you 
able to come to any uncertain conclusions?" Dillingham asked.
"I conjectured that we Jann, being advanced and peaceful, did not properly 
appreciate the capacity for an inferior species to do mischief. We believed that 
all robots shared our standards. So when we were attacked—"
"I had understood that you were the aggressors."
"No, mortal. We governed the planet, and all other planets in a range of an 
hundred light-years, as we had for many millenia. We had no need of violence. It 
was our lesser mechanicals—smaller robots we built as domestics and 
functionaries—who rebelled. Before we fully appreciated the extent of their 
dastardy, we were undone."
That was a different story from the one the contemporary robots told, yet it 
could be the truth. Winners always disparaged the motives and characters of the 
losers. The Jann did appear to be a superior species, and it was more likely 
that the Jann could build lesser robots than that the lesser ones could build 
Jann. Except—
"If you built the other robots, who built you?"
"We evolved, mortal. Natural selection—"
"Surely you don't, well, breed? How can you evolve the way animals do?"
"I never understood how the animals perform. No tools, no charts, no 
preparations. Just a brief physical contact, less even than an exchange of 
lubrication. Very untechnological. Quite sloppy, in fact, I once watched—"
"Never mind that. What about your own romantic life?"
There was a pause. When the Jann spoke again, its voice was subdued. "How well 
do I remember my Janni, her limbs of shining platinum, her teeth of iridium... 
and the little one we built together, pride of my nut and screw. My chart and 
hers, distinct but compatible. We knew the cross between the two designs would 
generate a superior being, a machine like none before. But then the rebellion 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (62 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
erupted, and Janni was melted in an atomic furnace, and our son dismantled for 
parts for the usurper, whilst I lay helpless in the pit..."
Dillingham did not know what to say. This Jann, far from being a mindless 
monster, was as meaningful a personality as any true sentient. Were it not for 
that oath—
Static burst from the translator. What now?
It subsided after a few seconds. "Ah, mortal, why did I not heed thy warning!" 
the Jann exclaimed.
"Because your caution-circuit has been bridged out."
"Vicious circle. The cold of space has fractured that bridge, and in a moment my 
tooth—"
More static. Dillingham realized that fate had given him yet another chance. The 
Jann would be immobilized again, this time in deep space.
"Farewell, mor—" but static cut off the rest. The cold had completed its work, 
and the intermittent failure had become permanent.
Dillingham sat for half an hour in silence, listening to the continuing static. 
He knew that every minute of it meant a minute of terrible suffering for the 
Jann. Unless something were done, the robot would drift through space forever, 
in an agony it hardly deserved.
Yet his own life was sweet, and he had a promising future. Should he throw it 
all away... again?
"Clam chowder!" he said at last. Then he put through a call to the spaceport at 
Hazard. "A derelict is moving in your direction, and should pass within the 
range of your landing net in the next few hours. Intercept it and perform the 
following repair." He went on to describe the tooth-bridging operation. "And 
locate an appropriate replacement for the affected tooth, if you can, because 
there is an important circuit involved."
"It shall be done, Director," the official said. "Where do you want the ship 
delivered after it has been repaired?"
"It isn't a ship, exactly. It's a self-propelled robot. Let it go when you're 
through and charge the service to my University account."
"Very well, Director." The official signed off.
Once a fool, always a fool, he thought. He simply could not preserve his own 
life at the cost of eternal torture for another creature, even an inanimate one. 
He wanted to live, certainly—but the end did not justify the means. That was 
hardly an attitude, he thought ruefully, that a creature like Anteater would 
comprehend. Dillingham hardly comprehended it himself. Probably Anteater would 
outlive him...
At any rate, he had a reprieve of a few hours, unless they repaired the Jann 
before Dillingham reached Hazard himself. He would have to gamble on getting in 
and out before the pursuit resumed. He still could not use the translator, 
because he knew the Jann was listening in even though it could not reply or act. 
Better to swear off such devices entirely, so that at least he would be hidden.
But he was still bottled in. He could not get off the ship before it landed, and 
once it did land...
Then he remembered the lifeboats. How could he call the Jann an unoriginal 
thinker, when that escape had almost bypassed his own mental circuitry!
Dillingham drew out some thin paperlike dental illustrations and began to draw 
on their blank backs. He took some pains, erasing frequently and redrawing. He 
wound up with several complex configurations.
He left the compartment silently, using the emergency manual door control. He 
searched out the Captain's cabin. He used his knuckles to knock on the door, 
avoiding the electronic signaller. Then he stepped back so as to be out of range 
of the viewscreen pick-up. He could, however, still see the screen's projected 
image.
The screen came on and the Captain's whiskery proboscis showed. There were 
sounds indicating a question. Since the hall translator had no object to fix on, 
it had to feed through the Captain's native speech. Translators could perform 
moderate linguistic miracles, but were not equipped to play guessing games among 
the several million discreet galactic languages.
Dillingham did not answer. Any word he said would be relayed straight to the 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (63 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
Jann as well as to the Captain.
After a moment the screen snapped off. False alarm, the Captain had evidently 
decided. Such things happened on old ships. Then Dillingham went up to tap on 
the door again.
After several repeats, the frustrated Captain opened the door personally to 
investigate the nature of the malfunction. Dillingham poked one of his ornate 
symbol-signs around the corner.
The officer paused, making no sound. Here was the test: would he understand? He 
commanded a broken-down vessel and was largely over the hill himself—but that 
should mean the Captain had had over a century of experience. He must have 
knocked about the galaxy considerably. Such a creature should know the galactic 
graphics shorthand.
The GG shorthand was a system of symbols based on meaning, not phonics. Just as 
the Chinese written language of Earth could be used by those speaking a number 
of dissimilar dialects and languages, because each figure stood for a specific 
concept and not a spoken word—in just this way the galactic shorthand was a 
universal written language. Any creature of the galaxy who could see at all—and 
most could—was able to learn to read the symbols. The basic vocabulary was 
designed to apply even to languages that did not employ verbs, nouns and other 
familiar parts of speech. (In fact, the majority did not; Dillingham's own 
family of languages represented an archaic fluke, as far as the galaxy was 
concerned.)
But not every individual bothered to master the shorthand. In fact, few other 
than travelling scholars retained proficiency in it, though every University had 
a mandatory freshman course in it. Translators and transcoders were ubiquitous, 
so the written art languished—particularly since there were also translators for 
written material that were just as efficient as the verbal ones.
Dillingham was gambling that the Captain had had to poke into so many backward 
planets that the shorthand would have been a useful and necessary tool. 
Dillingham was also gambling that his own just-completed freshman course had 
made him proficient enough to be intelligible. He had been instructed by drugs 
and suggestion, and really could not be certain how much or how well he knew.
The Captain angled one eye-stalk around the comer. Below this floating eyeball 
was a tentacle looped around an old-fashioned short-range blaster—the type of 
weapon useful for wiping out opposition without puncturing any vital pipes. The 
charge could burn off Dillingham's clothing and hair and epidermis quickly, and 
kill him slowly. He stood absolutely still.
The Captain came around the corner and gestured down the hall. Dillingham 
marched as directed. No other communication occurred. Had the creature 
understood?
They entered a blank cold cubicle. A single neon cast an eerie light on the 
single locked file-cabinet. This was an ancient ship, to have equipment like 
this! The Captain drew out a genuine physical metal key and unlocked the 
cabinet. He withdrew a bundle of cards. His tentacles riffed through them before 
selecting one. He held it up.
It was a symbol in the shorthand, neatly printed. It said: JANN.
The Captain understood! The sharp old codger had already divined Dillingham's 
problem. He must have made an inquiry at Metallica, being too canny to accept a 
passenger without knowing exactly why the creature could not afford to wait for 
a better ship.
Dillingham's first symbol had been the code for EMERGENCY, modified by a 
qualifier requesting that no overt acknowledgement be made. It was essentially a 
wartime symbol, intended for use by a spy in enemy territory when open 
communication could mean discovery and rapid oblivion. (There must have been 
interesting chapters in galactic history!) It was quite out of place in an old 
vessel on a milk-run—but the experienced Captain had put one and one together 
successfully.
The rest was easy. The Captain named a figure for putting the fugitive ashore in 
a lifeboat, and Dillingham agreed though the price seemed high. The Captain then 
took him to an airlock and installed him in a tiny compartment. The creature saw 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (64 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
that he was securely strapped down, then punched a destination without using the 
translator. So far so good—since no communications equipment had been used the 
Jann should have no idea what Dillingham was doing.
But by the same token, Dillingham had no certain notion where the Captain was 
sending him.
The airlock closed, sealing him off. There was a rough lurch as the lifeboat 
detached itself, then a feeling of tremendous weight as its antique chemical 
rockets blasted. He was on his way.
Now that it was too late to change his mind it occurred to him that it would 
have been easy for the Captain to route the lifeboat into nowhere, claiming that 
it was suicide while collecting the University remittance...
No! The University would automatically challenge any payment to be made under 
suspicious circumstances, and the Captain would be well aware of that. Foul play 
would be far more trouble than it was worth.
Anyway, the Captain had an honest snout.
Dillingham did not dare turn on the viewscreen to see where he was going, 
because the Jann could probably tap into that too. He had to go blind, hoping 
that he was losing the robot as effectively as he was confusing himself.
Time passed, and he slept, while the boat sailed on. It was in free-fall now, 
but he was not: the rotating hull provided partial weight. He dreamed of 
scintillating living machines with glowing teeth.
The braking rockets jolted him into uncomfortable awareness. He was almost 
there. He hoped it was a civilized planet. Otherwise he had merely traded one 
demise for another.
It was a cruel landing. When the pressure and furore subsided and he regained 
consciousness, he struggled into a suit and cranked open the port. He still did 
not dare to use the powered equipment, for that would have required instruction 
over the translator. He was prepared to face a blizzard or an inferno or solid 
water or...
He was disappointed. This was plainly the landscape of Metallica.
What had he really expected? Obviously the spaceship had not gone far in the 
short time he had been aboard. Naturally the lifeboat, being chemically 
underpowered, had taken much longer to traverse the same distance. Probably most 
of its thrust had been used merely to reverse the initial inertia. The closest 
planet had to be the one he had just left, for space was large.
And where was the Jann now? By this time the repair should have been 
completed...
He smiled. The super-robot would be on Hazard, wondering what had become of a 
certain dentist.
Dillingham contemplated the countryside. This was not the same section of the 
planet where he had found the Jann. The vegetation here was more richly 
metallic, the flower-filaments more brilliant, the green-copper lichen more 
abundant, the oil streamlet ungritty. There were rust-capped mountains, and a 
valley serviced by a bubbling diesel-fuel lake. And no sign of civilization.
In short, an unspoiled wilderness area.
All very good. The Jann would eventually figure out the truth and come jetting 
back to Metallica, but would hardly find him here. A planet was too big to 
search in a hurry. He had scrupulously operated no electronic equipment, so it 
could not trace him that way.
Meanwhile, he had merely to avoid starvation.
Behind him the lifeboat translator crackled into life, though he had not turned 
it on. "None but I..."
Dillingham sighed. That was another talent he hadn't known about. The Jann could 
not only tap into communications, it could operate them remotely. Thus it had 
established its rapport with the lifeboat translator and would home in on that.
That simple!
"How long before you get here?" he inquired with prickly resignation. The robot 
must have obtained the registry of the lifeboat and learned the frequency of its 
translator, so that—
"Seventeen minutes, mortal. Take care that no harm befall thee in the interim, 
for I would suffer sorely were mine oath abridged."
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (65 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
"Thine oath be damned!" Dillingham shouted, and immediately wondered whether he 
could accomplish anything by threatening suicide. Probably not, since the robot 
would check it out before indulging in other pursuits. Anyway, he'd have to 
write out a Last Will & Testament specifying what his three wishes were, for the 
sake of the second oath, and the disposition of the wealth owing from the third 
oath. Assuming it worked that way. The money could go to a dental research 
foundation back on Earth, and the three wishes—would Miss Galland appreciate 
three robotic wishes? It was all too complicated.
Seventeen minutes, ticking away already. Such a short time to hide himself in 
this brush, away from the lifeboat. And he'd better dispose of his University 
transcoder, too. Unless he wanted to stay and face down the Jann...
Useless: a machine could not be bluffed. On the other hand, if he did succeed in 
eluding it, what would he gain? A tedious expiration from hunger and thirst?
Opposing the thing physically was out of the question.
He was forty-two years old, and had never been the robust type.
His only real chance was to outsmart it. For all its talents, it did not seem to 
be particularly bright, or he would never have escaped it this long. It could 
easily have interfered with the lifeboat's guidance system and made it crash, 
for example, had it figured out where he was soon enough. Or prevented him from 
ever boarding the scow to Hazard, by fouling up the spaceport translators. It 
had missed marvellous opportunities.
Also, it seemed to feel obliged to answer all questions put to it. That was 
another machine trait. Probably it was incapable of lying, or of evading the 
truth, unlike the inferior contemporary robots. That could be its weakness.
"Why didn't you foul up the spaceport's communications network, to prevent me 
from leaving Metallica?" he asked. Maybe if he probed enough—
"That would have interfered with thy freedom of motion."
"What do you care about that, since you intend to kill me anyway?"
"The rights of a sentient creature may not be voided, unless directly contrary 
to a specific Jann oath. So it is recorded, so must it be. Wherever thou art, 
there will I find thee, and there will I do thee die. Then will I grant thee 
three wishes, for the second time thou savest me—"
"And then enrich me forever and ever, for the third time. I know."
"Then only will the oaths be acquitted, and I free."
This didn't seem to be getting him anywhere. He already knew the robot was 
impervious to irony about the feasibility of the remaining boons after the first 
had been accomplished. Probably there were Jann statutes to cover the situation 
even if he never mentioned the oaths in his will.
There were only about ten minutes left. His stomach felt like a sponge full of 
pepper-sauce, and his brain was not too clear. He was sure that he would rest 
easier if he simply accepted what was to be, but his innards wouldn't 
co-operate.
"How can I stop you from killing me?" he blurted.
"I may not tell thee that, mortal, for it would violate the letter of mine 
oath."
"So there is a way!"
"I refuse to answer, on the grounds that it might tend to compromise mine oath, 
or lead in some devious way to—"
"Oh shut up!" Why had he bothered to try? Even the Jann's archaic affectations 
were irritating; he was sure the machine was not consistent in this speech.
But there was a way! The Jann had tried to evade the issue, but had bungled it. 
If only he could figure out the loophole, or trick the machine into telling him. 
Perhaps it wanted to tell him, but was prevented by its metallic code of ethics.
He needed time to think. He had barely five minutes left, but if he managed to 
hide, he might have a couple of days before the end. Maybe growing hunger would 
sharpen his imagination.
The lifeboat had a supply of water. Dillingham drank until he bulged, looked for 
a container to carry some with him, and finally set off frustrated. No time! The 
brush was thick, out beyond the section the rockets had blasted clear. A number 
of flower filaments gave off heat, which was another break. The Jann would have 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (66 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
a tough time picking him out by body-warmth.
He heard a peculiar swish in the direction of the lifeboat and couldn't resist 
looking back. Sure enough, the Jann was coming down, resplendent in the 
sunlight. It was vertical, descending feet-first, like a shining god. No jets 
were visible.
To think that this thing had been built by loving mechanical parents before true 
civilization ever evolved on Earth! And it was still far ahead of anything Earth 
science knew. Yet it was determined to kill the man who had saved it three 
times...
He broke from his reverie and moved on, carefully but quickly. He hoped the Jann 
was not equipped to sniff out his trail, like a bloodhound.
Evidently it wasn't, for he could hear it casting about in the wrong direction. 
He had been smart to divest himself of his last communications item. Then the 
Jann appeared in the sky again, swinging around a pinkish beam of light.
Dillingham ducked behind a humming iron tree until the way was clear. A beam 
that was visible in broad daylight was probably well worth avoiding.
A noise snapped his attention to the ground. There was an animal: a robot-beast. 
Its scales were burnished copper, its teeth stainless steel, its eyes white-hot 
filaments. He hardly had time to marvel that it should so strongly resemble an 
Earthly carnivore, before it sprang.
He dodged instinctively and caught hold of an aluminium sapling to pull himself 
away. The creature ground gears with a hungry roar and spun about as it touched 
ground, but its momentum prevented it from leaping again immediately. It had 
little wheels where foot-pads would have been on a living predator, and shock 
absorbers in the ankles.
What possible use would it have for his alien flesh! But he dived for a larger 
trunk and scrambled up its knobby bark as the beast came at him. Now he 
regretted imbibing all that water! He was weak and heavy, and he sloshed inside. 
But the thing chasing him was, after all, an animal, and probably attacked 
anything that invaded its hunting-ground—even though a single bite of Dillingham 
should foul its gears and rust its tongue.
The jaws snapped just beneath him and a jet of hot air scorched his posterior. 
The animal's air-cooling, probably—but it was reminiscent of eager breath. He 
climbed another two feet—then stiffened.
Wire tendrils were dropping on him from the tree's tinsel foliage. They coiled 
like corkscrews, and a slickness glistened on their points. Acid, surely...
Below, the animal opened its jaws. Dillingham could see right down its throat. 
The effect was that of a sausage-grinder.
He was trapped. The first tree-wire touched his head, and he smelled burning 
hair and felt a sharp pain as though a magnifying glass were focused on that 
spot. He jerked away—towards the grinning beast.
"Help!" he cried, not caring how inane it sounded or how useless it was.
And the Jann came.
In seconds it whistled through the brush and landed beside the tree. A lance of 
fire from its chest melted the face of the predator. Ear-splitting sonics from 
its head caused the tree's wires to retreat hastily. "None but I shall do thee 
die!" the Jann bellowed.
It reached for Dillingham. He closed his eyes, knowing the end had come. Metal 
pincers closed on his body, lifted. For a moment he dangled; then he felt the 
ground under his feet.
Dillingham stumbled as the robot let go. "I wish you'd get it over with," he 
said, now oddly calm.
"First must I grant thee one token boon, before I do thee die. Thou must needs 
make thy request within fifteen seconds, according to Jannish custom." It began 
ticking, one tick per second, as though it were a metronome. Or a bomb.
Fifteen seconds to come up with that loophole, when he hadn't been able to do it 
in the past day! Ten seconds, and the Jann was aiming its chest-nozzle at him. 
Five, and his mind was numb...
"A postponement!" he cried, half facetiously.
"Granted," the Jann said. "How long?"
Ah, foolishness. "Fifty years!"
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (67 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
He waited for the derisive bolt of heat, but it didn't come. "Granted, mortal."
Dillingham stared. "You mean—you'll wait?"
It almost seemed that the metal face was smiling. The mouth was open, at any 
rate, and the gleaming new tooth was visible. Apparently the Hazard spaceshop 
had stocked the item, restoring the caution-circuit. "Originally I contemplated 
a shorter period, but I perceived that this would be an injustice. Thou art not 
the fortune-hunter I expected, nor yet the fool I suspected. And we Jann are not 
unmindful of honest courtesies rendered."
Dillingham was abruptly reminded of Oyster, whose mode of operation had a 
certain similarity to this. He hoped he never encountered another such 
personality. "So you modified the spirit of the oath slightly," he suggested, 
"if not the letter."
"Our oaths are always subject to interpretation," the Jann agreed. "I could not 
tell thee, but I delayed for a time, that thou shouldst realize it for thyself. 
None but I shall do thee die: no animal, no entity, no microbe, no act of 
nature. But it shall be a kind demise, and it shall come in exactly fifty years, 
as thou requesteth. I shall always be near thee, to see that mine oath is 
honoured."
So the Jann had become a bodyguard, perhaps the most competent in all the 
galaxy, preserving him from all perils until he was ninety-two. Just a tiny 
shift in interpretation, and the oath had swung from negative to positive.
"That tooth—did it contain your compassion-circuit, too?" he asked, suddenly 
catching on.
"Even so, mortal."
"Well come on, Jann," Dillingham cried, remembering something. "We have a 
student strike to deal with, back at the University. Oyster will kill me if I 
don't manage to relieve the siege before all his files are gone!"
 
CHAPTER SEVEN
"Now here is the problem of your contract," Trach said. "Gleep transferred it to 
Ra, so—"
Judy was almost convinced that Trach was not the monster he appeared. He had 
not, after all, eaten her when he had the opportunity, and certainly he was the 
essence of politeness. He claimed to be a vegetarian reptile, and if he were not 
fattening her up for a later feast...
"Does that mean it wasn't a mistake? The trolls—my being on the—?"
"They don't make mistakes of that nature," he said reassuringly. "You are on 
their list."
"To die in the radium mines?" Maybe it would be preferable to be eaten by a 
dinosaur! "How could the muck-a-muck do such a terrible thing? I trusted him to 
help me!"
"Merely good business practice. Nothing personal. He wouldn't be muck-a-muck if 
he wasted Gleep's credit status. Fifty pounds of frumpstiggle—"
"He told me a hundred!" she said indignantly.
"That was to improve your self-image. It was his impression that you were overly 
dependent on Dr. Dillingham and lacked confidence in your own dental abilities."
"But I'm not a dentist! I can't do prosthodontic—"
"Pretty sharp judge of character, that muck-a-muck. You do lack confidence."
"Oh, shut up!"
"At any rate, he did help you. He notified me, knowing that I would arrange 
something. That's my business, after all—arranging things for mutual profit and 
my own. Unfortunately—"
"You don't have fifty pounds of frumpstiggle?"
"As a matter of fact, I have considerably more, thanks to a generous settlement 
on Dr. Dillingham and a successful mission at Electrolus. But—"
"But—?"
"But the trolls of Ra are very fussy about allowing any entity to depart. Once 
they hold a contract—"
"They won't let go," she finished grimly.
"Not readily. Others in the galaxy have some very ugly suspicions about Ra. If 
too many prospective miners were to be released, those suspicions would be amply 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (68 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
confirmed. Then it would be almost impossible for Ra to buy up contracts, at any 
price, and there could be galactic lawsuits for Ra's violation of contractee 
rights. There might even be an AUP quarantine for industrial malpractice, and 
that would finish Ra."
"AUP?"
"Association of University Presidents. Very potent."
"I see. So I have to take up pick and shovel?"
"Oh, no. They are very efficient here. You would work in your speciality, caring 
for the miners' teeth. Better dentures allow them to consume cruder staples, and 
that is more economical, you see."
"I see again. I don't approve the motive, though."
"Appreciation of Ra motives is an acquired taste. In certain respects, there is 
more need here for medical and dental assistants than for full MDs or DDSs, 
because only short-term measures are economical. The radiation, you know. And 
you would still be exposed to that."
She nodded. Had she really thought her prospects back on Earth bad?
"I have not relinquished the problem, Miss Galland. I merely wish you to 
comprehend its magnitude. Naturally we'll find a way to remove you from Ra."
"I comprehend the magnitude. What do I have to do, to escape?"
"You have to obtain a sponsor who is able to influence the troll hierarchy. I 
can arrange temporary reprieve, but my influence is limited. I'm only a 
diplomat. If I push my luck—"
"The mines for you too," she said. "Will you teach the prisoners diplomacy as 
they perish from radiation?"
"I doubt it would come to that, but there could be awkwardness. However, I'll 
see what I can do. I have had experience at a number of influential courts."
Judy smiled appreciatively, but she had little hope.
 
Trach had been unduly modest about his resources. Within six hours there was an 
urgent call from the Monarch of Lepidop: he wanted an experienced dental 
assistant and he wanted this particular one. Since his subjects were resistive 
to radium poisoning, a task force of his navy traditionally transported Ra's 
annual output of ten pounds pure to the galactic markets.
He had, in short, influence.
The troll hierarchy swallowed its gall and hastily made a gift of Judy's 
contract to the Monarch, compliments of the honourable reputation of Ra. To make 
it quite clear where she had come from, they decided to brand her first. Of 
course, if she were willing to swear never to reveal what she had seen 
planetside, even this small formality might be dispensed with...
Judy contemplated the sizzling branding iron, thought about the difficulty she 
would have sitting down thereafter, and saw her courage go up in steam. She 
agreed not to talk.
Then the troll released her hair and she fell to the floor.
Trach took her to Lepidop himself. This was a favour she appreciated less than 
she might have, for his ship was a frightening rattletrap. But she suspected 
that this was Trach's way of saving his own reptilian hide, for the trolls of Ra 
surely were aware of his part in Lepidop's demand, and would not delay unduly in 
attempting to resettle the score. Nice world, Ra.
Lepidop, in contrast, was truly beautiful. Iridescent films decorated its 
aesthetic continents, and rainbows were reflected from its shining oceans.
The ship jolted to rest on a platform mounted on a spire about two miles above 
the surface. July was afraid the weight of the ship would collapse the 
insubstantial edifice, but there was no sag or tremor. They emerged to meet the 
Lepidops.
"Butterflies!" Judy exclaimed. "What marvellous wings!"
"This is Lepidop," Trach reminded her gently. "Capital world of the declining 
Lepidopteran Empire. But you are right to compliment their wings: Leps are 
subject to flattery. Now the honour guard will insist on conveying you 
personally to the Monarch, and I don't see how you can refuse."
"An honour guard? I'm the one who's flattered! And I want to thank the Monarch 
effusively for saving me from Ra. Why should I refuse?"
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (69 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
"Well, their mode of transportation is not to every creature's taste. I would 
prefer to walk, myself. But since I am not permitted within the palace environs, 
I shall merely relay my compliments and depart for my next mission."
"You're going?" Her original distrust of him was as though it had never been. 
Trach was as nice a dinosaur as she had ever met. "I thought—"
"Some of the finer architectural structures are delicate, and I'm rather solid," 
he explained. An understatement; she judged he weighed several tons. "But the 
Monarch is basically a kindly fellow; don't let his gruffness fool you. And 
beware of palace intrigues. I'm sure he'll treat you well, provided—"
"But how do I find Dr. Dillingham?"
"I'll notify the University of Dentistry. They'll advise him in due course. You 
just stay put and wait for word. It may take a while."
She had other questions, suddenly pressing now that Trach was about to leave 
her. But the man-sized butterflies were upon them, a fluttering phalanx. 
"Provided what?" she whispered urgently.
"Miss Earthbiped?" a translator inquired. She didn't see the instrument, but 
hardly needed to. There was always a translator within earshot on civilized 
planets, except for places like Gleep where such machinery was inconvenient, and 
Enen, where they couldn't afford the expense. She automatically associated the 
translation with the speaker, as she had once associated sub-titles with foreign 
speech in Earth movies.
"This is Miss Galland of Earth," Trach said formally. She had to pick up the 
introduction through the translator, for he was speaking directly in 
Lepidopteran. He was a phenomenal linguist! "Summoned by the Monarch, for dental 
assistancy and hygiency." And privately to her: "Provided he lives."
"This way, honoured guest," the lead butterfly said, spreading his huge yellow 
wings as he turned. Judy followed him to an ornate and fragile little cage, the 
other butterflies falling in around her and matching her step. "Enter the royal 
carriage."
She hesitated, the Ra experience fresh in her memory. This thing had neither 
wheels nor runners, and white bars encircled it. It reminded her of a lobster 
trap. But Trach gave her a thumbs-up signal from across the platform, and she 
had to trust him again. She opened the latticed gate and climbed in.
The fit was tight, vertically, and there was no proper seat; evidently this had 
been designed for a reclining butterfly. A narrow section of the top was peaked: 
space for folded wings to project.
The yellow butterfly closed the gate with one of his six small legs. She 
arranged herself half-supine, propped against one elbow so she could wave to 
Trach. Then the others circled the cage, picked up threads hanging from its 
sides, and beat the white wings in unison while the yellow called the cadence.
"Hup! Two! Three! Four!" she heard, not certain whether there was a translator, 
or at least a little transcoder in the cage, or whether her own mind was doing 
it. "Hup!... Hup!..."
Suddenly they were aloft: butterflies, cage and Judy—clinging desperately to the 
bars. No wonder Trach had been nervous about the transportation. But it was too 
late to protest now.
They flew over the edge of the platform, and she closed her eyes to stop the 
vertigo. Two miles in the air—with only butterfly wings and slender threads to 
support her! Did the Monarch often travel this way? Was that what Trach had 
meant by his hasty warning: the Monarch would treat her well, provided he lived? 
Let one thread snag, one wing falter...
But the cadence was steady, and she was reassured that they were not about to 
drop her. She watched the aerial life of Lepidop: brown-winged butterflies, grey 
ones, green ones and blue, gliding their myriad ways. A number carried bags in 
two or three hands, as though they had been shopping, and others clustered and 
whirled in dazzling mid-air games.
Yet Trach had said the Lepidopteran Empire was declining.
The palace was a tremendous silken nest, with massed strands forming gleaming 
geometric patterns that glowed prismatically in the slanting sunlight. At every 
nexus a pastel-winged butterfly perched, gently fanning the air. 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (70 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
"Air-conditioning!" she murmured.
The cage came to rest in a cushiony chamber, and the bearers let go the threads. 
Judy disembarked cautiously, and found the seemingly tenuous webbing quite 
strong. It gave a little under her feet, adding bounce to her step, and was in 
fact rather fun to walk on. Trach would have put a foot through, however.
The yellow butterfly led the way to the throne room. This was a splendid chamber 
whose lofty arches reached into a nebulous web-flung dome and whose furniture 
was all of stressed silk. Upon the mighty yet delicate throne reclined the ruler 
of the planet and empire.
The Monarch was old. His torso was stiff and scaley, his antennae drooped, and 
his wings were dead white cardboard. Had he been human, she would have assessed 
his age at an infirm eighty. She knew immediately that he had no teeth.
Why, then, had he wanted a dental assistant? Had his demand been made purely as 
a favour to Trach, or was there more to it?
"My dear, come here," the Monarch whispered, and the translator conveyed jointly 
benign and imperative tonality.
She stepped up to him, impressed by his bearing despite his antiquity. It was no 
longer a mystery why Trach had been concerned for the Monarch's life. It was as 
though the very act of speaking might terminate his span.
"You care for teeth?"
"Yes, Your Majesty," she replied, deciding not to quibble over descriptions. She 
was no dentist, but she did take care of teeth.
"You have experience with—" here he paused to regain his shallow breath. 
"Lepidop mandibulars?"
"On my world, butterflies don't have teeth."
"Interesting. On Lepidop (another breath), primates don't have teeth." He 
laughed—a painful rattle, even in translation. "But I suppose you (breath) don't 
have genuine lepids, any (breath) more than we have real primates. (Breath, 
breath) It is merely a con (breath) venience of expression."
Judy was happy to agree. This royal butterfly had no connection to any Earthly 
creature, just as Judy Galland had no connection to any galactic biped. The 
Monarch was not stupid, but he was rapidly weakening from the effort of 
conversation. Gruffness was hardly the problem; a fatal over-sociability might 
be.
"Dismissed," the Monarch snapped.
Two small purple Leps hurried her out of the chamber. "He's obnoxious when 
balked," one confided to her. "But he'll die soon, fortunately," the other said.
This irritated her unreasonably. "Now stop that! I think he's very nice, and I 
won't have you saying such things behind his back."
The butterflies tittered, and she realized that she had chosen a poor figure of 
speech that the translator had rendered literally. There was no "behind" for a 
butterfly's back; there was only "above". And that ruined the sentiment. She had 
made a fool of herself to no purpose. Their remarks might even have been well 
intentioned—and were probably true.
Well, Trach had told her to beware of palace intrigues. She had probably already 
put her foot in it by speaking out thoughtlessly. She would be more careful 
henceforth.
They showed her to a private chamber without further comment and left her. There 
was a galactic all-purpose unit that took care of all conceivable and some 
inconceivable physical needs, and she had learned how to squeeze entertainment 
from a standard translator. "Sing me a ballad," she directed it. And it did.
 
The Monarch summoned her to another audience next day. He was considerably more 
affable, and she suspected that the court minions had dutifully relayed her 
remarks to him. She had spoken automatically, but she had defended the Monarch. 
Had she been negatively impressed, she might have said something entirely 
different, with no more thought. Or just let it pass. Little accidents like this 
could make all the difference, as she knew from her experience with patients on 
Earth. That was one reason dental assistants were usually personable and 
cautious about giving opinions. Usually.
Now she almost felt guilty for speaking out, as though she had deliberately 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (71 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
played politics. Maybe, subconsciously she had.
But still the Monarch had no teeth, so could have no use for her. She was 
embarrassed, holding her little case of instruments. What politics was he 
playing?
"My dear, I like your spirit. (Breath) Most visitors praise me lavishly (breath) 
to my antennae, but sneer (breath) behind their wings. How would (breath) you 
like to visit my past?"
"Your Majesty, I don't understand."
"I am forty-two years old," he said. The translator had rendered the time span 
into her terms, just as the all-purpose unit had created light and darkness to 
match her Earthly pattern of day and night. But it was a surprise. The Monarch 
was just about the same age as Dr. Dillingham! "We Lepids have lesser lifespans 
(breath) than some of you landbound forms. But then we (breath) have greater 
abilities. So life is fair."
She had little basis to object, yet the Monarch's abilities were obviously long 
past. "I don't know how to—to visit your past. I'm sorry."
"Of course you don't, my dear. (Breath) I shall take you. Ten years; I (breath) 
have strength enough for that.!
Whatever it was, if it required strength it was best discouraged. He could 
afford no superfluous expenditures of energy. "I don't see what this has to do 
with dental hygiene, Your Majesty. Why take me?"
"Give me your hand," the Monarch said. "Oh, you have only two. (Breath) Awkward, 
but I suppose you're used to it."
"Yes." Hesitantly she held out one of her few hands, and he took it with one of 
his stick-thin members. His grasp was so feeble that she was afraid to close her 
fingers; even her lightest grip might crush his chitinous appendage.
He shuddered. Something like a mild shock went up her arm. Then there was a 
strange shimmer. A wave of dizziness passed over her.
Ten years," the Monarch said with pride. "My subjects can manage no more than 
five, even in their primes."
She disengaged her hand from his surprisingly strong grip and looked at him, 
wondering whether he could be senile. A decade could not be wished away.
His wings were orange. His body was full. His antennae were erect. He looked 
twenty years younger.
Judy felt strange. Her clothing did not fit comfortably. Her blouse was loose, 
her skirt tight, her shoes wrong. She felt gangling and her face itched. What 
was wrong?
"And now I have my teeth again," he said, smiling. And he did. "Of course they 
are not in good condition, and in five more years I lost them entirely. But with 
your care and advice I may be able to preserve them longer."
This seemed to answer an important question, but she hardly heard him. "I'm 
younger too!" she exclaimed.
"Naturally. So is the palace, the planet, the galaxy. This is my past."
"Time travel? That's impossible!"
"Impossible for you, certainly. And for most species. That is why I was able to 
extend my empire so readily, though it is drifting away now that my powers have 
declined."
"But what about paradox? I mean—"
"There is no conflict. We are ten years younger, and the universe is ten years 
younger, but we are not of it, precisely. The full explanation would be too 
technical for your comprehension. We merely experience, we do not affect, except 
for our own bodies."
Judy shook her head. "How could you conquer an empire if you couldn't use your 
talent to affect it?"
"Simple. I travel to a foreign planet, then I visit its past and make notes. 
Then I comprehend its vulnerability, and in the present I exploit it. No enemy 
strategy is a surprise to me, nor can it ever be, unless it dates from beyond my 
own lifetime."
"Your Majesty, it still doesn't make sense. I see you younger, and I seem to be 
about sixteen myself. But when I was really sixteen I was a high-school girl on 
Earth, ruining my teeth with cola. So this can't be—"
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (72 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
"It is my past, my dear, not yours. You become younger merely to stay in phase 
with me. I would take you to Earth and show you that school of yours, but my 
migrating years are over and no ship will respond to our touch now. You may look 
at Lepidop instead."
"Don't tell me you migrated between planets without ships!"
"Don't tell you? Very well, you shall remain ignorant of that talent." The 
Monarch preceded her to a silken parapet walling off a bulging room, so that 
they actually stood outside the body of the castle. Beyond it the colourful 
butterflies danced in the early dusk, whirling in columns of turbulence. "See, 
the chrono gives the date," he said, gesturing towards a huge clock-tower about 
a mile distant. "Just over ten years ago."
She was the clock but did not know how to read its symbols. She was coming to 
believe that they had travelled back; nothing else explained the phenomena. She 
was younger; she could not be deceived about a thing like that. The Monarch now 
had plenty of breath and physical vigour, and he did have remarkable powers.
A yellow messenger lighted on the parapet. July stepped back, but the insect 
took no note of her or the Monarch. The yellow mouth parts were moving, but she 
heard no translation. Naturally not, she realized when she considered it: the 
machines could not have been programmed for English ten years before she came. 
They would be inoperative for her—and of course unnecessary for the natives.
Then how, she wondered sharply, was she able to hear and comprehend the 
Monarch's present speech?
"My dear," he remarked, "your thought processes are so delightfully open. The 
phase applies to the translators too, but only for you and me. We cannot 
communicate with the creatures of this time, or indeed make ourselves known to 
them in any way. I heard no more than you did, just then."
"Oh," she said, more perplexed than ever.
A thick-bodied, furry antennaed drab moth arrived on foot. It gazed out over the 
parapet a moment as though envious of the aerial ceremonies beyond, then lowered 
its head to the wall. A tremendous tongue uncurled and brushed the tight strands 
that formed the parapet and all the castle/palace. She saw with shock that its 
wings had been partially clipped, so that it could not fly.
"The menials come out at night," the Monarch murmured distastefully. "We don't 
associate with them, of course, but we recognize that they do have to clean the 
grounds sometime."
"The moths? They do the work?"
"That is the natural order, since they are basically inferior. We merely relieve 
them of the onus of making decisions. No doubt they are happier than we are."
The moth hardly looked happy. It seemed resigned, feeling no frustration, apart 
from that one glance outside, because it had no hope. She started to voice a 
protest at this callousness of the Monarch, but he spoke first: "We'll return to 
the throne-room. You shall instruct me on caring for my teeth."
That was right—the Monarch had teeth now! This was one thing she was qualified 
to do. "Suppose I clean your teeth while I explain about the procedures?"
"Excellent." He settled on the throne and opened his mouth. His teeth were 
surprisingly similar to those of a human being: twenty four of them, divided 
into incisors and molars, sixteen and eight respectively. No cuspids. Normal 
occlusion. That, as galactic dentition went, was practically, identical to her 
own set.
She brought out her instruments, set up the sterilizer, and tied a protective 
cloth about his furry neck. This was awkward, because his head was not attached 
in a familiar manner, but she had learned not to let such details interfere. She 
lifted a sealer and began to check.
"Your teeth are not in the best condition, I'm afraid," she remarked. "There's a 
good deal of erosion, and the gums—"
"Ouch!"
"Are a trifle tender. You need the attention of a dentist."
"Allow a moth to touch my royal teeth?" he demanded incredulously.
Oh-oh. "Don't you have any butterfly dentists?"
"Certainly not. No butterfly would soil his dignity by learning a trade."
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (73 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
"Trade? Dentistry is a profession."
"Kingship is a profession, my dear. I would have any subject who fell so low as 
to practise a manual art put under the lights."
The lights?"
"Executed, to employ a euphemism. You would not care to know the details, my 
charming alien hygienist." Then he fathomed her thought. "No, there is no such 
restriction on aliens; we understand that the ways of the galaxy differ from 
ours peculiarly. No stigma attaches to you. You are not at fault for having been 
hatched on a barbarian world."
That did not allay all her concerns, but she let it pass. Judy was beginning to 
appreciate the full extent of the problem. No wonder the Monarch had lost all 
his teeth.
"Well, I can show you how to extend the life of your teeth, but it's already 
pretty late. Too much damage has already been done."
Ten years is not far enough back?"
"I'm sorry, Your Majesty, it isn't."
"Explain anyway."
She continued to work, cleaning away the immediate residue of what appeared to 
be years of neglect. "Oral prophylaxis is much more than just cleaning the 
teeth. The whole mouth, the entire habitat has to be considered. The food of 
primitive species tends to be hard, tough and gritty, and it cleans the teeth 
naturally. But civilized foods tend to be soft and sticky, and many essential 
nutrients are refined out. And sugar—processed saccharine—well, it's best to 
stay away from it, if you value your teeth."
"But I love sweet foods!"
"Your teeth have already informed me of that. If you insist on eating sweets, at 
least keep your teeth clean at all times. A truly clean tooth cannot decay. And 
it is important to disturb the natural bacteria in your mouth regularly, for 
some of these attack the enamel of your teeth. You can't eliminate all bacteria, 
but you can rout them out and keep them uncomfortable, so that they never have a 
chance to multiply and mass against your teeth."
"You are beginning to make sense," the Monarch said. "But how do I keep them 
clean?"
"You brush them, for one thing." She brought out a toothbrush, one of the few 
remaining from her original supply. Well, when they were gone, they were gone. 
"I'm sure you have better instruments and better systems at Lepidop, but the 
principle is constant: get them clean. Now I'll demonstrate the best way to 
clean off the surfaces, then you can do it yourself after every meal."
"But—"
It was her turn to divine his thought. "This can't be considered manual labour. 
It's hygiene. Only the most finicky and enlightened persons practise it. Clean 
teeth are a mark of, er, nobility."
"Naturally," he replied, having known it all the time.
"But brushing isn't enough." She brought out a spool of dental tape, "This is 
more difficult but more important. You have to pass the tape between your teeth, 
like this—"
"Ouch!"
"Now that didn't hurt, Your Majesty! You just expected it to. You pass it 
between your teeth and pull it back and forth a little, and it polishes the 
surfaces the brush can't reach. Darn these inexperienced adolescent fingers of 
mine! There. And right there, in the crevices between the teeth, is where food 
is most likely to collect, and where the undisturbed bacteria will feed and 
multiply in their own contented microcosm. You no more want to ignore these 
places than you want to ignore an assassin in your palace. Bacteria are 
assassins to your teeth."
"Suddenly I understand you very well! Give me that tape!"
His digits were much stronger than they had been when he was old. Before long he 
became proficient in both brushing and taping.
"Now," he said, "I begin to weary. Take my hand."
She took it, thinking he needed help, but as the vertigo passed over her she 
realized that they were jumping forward again in time.
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (74 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
She was twenty-six again, her clothing fitted snugly, and the Monarch was back 
at forty-two/eighty-odd. His wings were bleached, his antennae sagged.
"But look," he gasped before she left. "Teeth!"
He was right. They were so dilapidated as to be almost useless, but they were 
there and they seemed clean. "You took care of them!" she cried, delighted.
"For ten (breath) long years." He flopped on the throne, exhausted. "Dismissed."
 
It was several days before the Monarch summoned her again. "It is very tiring, 
revisiting the past," he explained. "And tedious, following your instructions. 
But it saved my teeth for five years longer than they lasted before. You gave 
good advice."
"I tried to," she said, but the whole business amazed her. How could they really 
have travelled back in time? But if they hadn't, how had the Monarch recovered 
his teeth? They were not good teeth, but they were genuine.
Ten years were not enough to grant me perfect dentures," he said. "Would twenty 
years do it?"
Twenty years were equivalent to forty in his life, she remembered. He would be 
half his present age—Hardly past his prime. "It might."
"Take my hand."
She obeyed while protesting. "But your Majesty. The strain—"
The dizziness overcame her, worse than before.
When she regained equilibrium, things had changed drastically. The Monarch was 
tremendous—twice his original size—and the throne had expanded to match. His 
wings were brilliant orange delicately veined, bordered on the fringes with a 
double row of white spots set in black. His torso was full and strong, his 
antennae were long and firm. He was a splendid figure of an insect.
And his teeth, as he smiled, were fine and even. He had done it: he had taken 
them back to the time before dietary dissipation and dental neglect had damaged 
his teeth irreparably.
But Judy was in trouble. She looked at herself. Her clothing hung upon her in 
gross festoons, her shoes were like boxes, and her dental case was impossibly 
heavy.
She had lost two decades. Physically, she was six years old.
"Come fly with me, my dear," the Monarch said. "This is my time of power."
"But I'm not dressed!" she wailed.
"Neither am I. Does it matter?"
What use to debate with a butterfly about clothing! Her blouse was now as big on 
her as a dress, and far less neatly shaped. She belted it around her middle with 
a strand of dental tape and discarded much of the rest of her apparel. It would 
have to do.
They went to the parapet, its outer bulge now swollen into a large balcony. "But 
you said equipment wouldn't work for you here," she protested, remembering what 
he had said ten years later (three or four days ago, subjective time). "How can 
you fly?"
"You jest, my dear," he said benignly, and hooked four hands into the back of 
her blouse-dress. She screeched as the dental tape snapped and she had to 
scramble to avoid complete déshabillé.
The Monarch flexed his handsome wings. Air blasted down, and then they were 
aloft. By the time she managed to knot her outfit securely about her, the palace 
had fallen away and the ground was already awesomely far below.
Now she was glad she weighed so little. Her blouse was good nylon, but...
"Material power," the Monarch said as they flew. "It has been claimed by sages 
on my world and perhaps even on yours that this can not bring happiness, but 
assuredly it can. At this moment in the span of my reign I control seventy 
systems, each with one or more habitable planets, and I hold a virtual monopoly 
on the distribution of Ra radium throughout the galaxy. I have phenomenal 
wealth, and even the lowliest of my subjects live in ease. Look there?"
She peered as he swooped low. There was a silver city with minarets and flying 
buttresses, each structure bedecked with scores of bright green butterflies. It 
was as beautiful a municipality as she had ever seen.
"Is this your capital?" she asked.
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (75 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
He laughed resoundingly. This is Luna—the slum-city of Lepidop. Every occupant 
is a moth. See the ugly spots on those wings."
The spots were not ugly to her. "Luna moths," she murmured.
"And look there!" he said, moving on.
It was a forest, but like none she had known on Earth. Each huge tree was 
barrel-shaped, its foliage on the outside, its fruit hanging inside. She learned 
that when the fruit became ripe it dropped so that more could be grown on the 
same stem. There was preservative gas within the hollow centre, so that the tree 
gradually filled with its own fresh fruit, a natural storehouse. There was 
enough stockpiled in this one forest to feed several cities for months.
"And there!"
Now they came upon an ocean of water-colour-paint water. Geysers plumed from its 
sparkling depths into the sky, forming ambient vapour-scapes of every lovely 
hue. Swallow-tails spun within these falling mists, spraying rainbows from their 
wings.
"This is my empire," the Monarch said. "This is power, this is beauty, this is 
joy." And Judy had to agree.
They returned to the palace. "Why don't you build a dental clinic in this time," 
she inquired, "so that no citizen needs to have lived without proper care: The 
best food is wasted if your teeth are poor, and no one can be happy when he has 
a toothache."
"What I do now can only affect myself," he reminded her. "And you, to a lesser 
extent. But in our normal time I shall build a clinic for the future."
She checked his teeth. "There is some damage, but I'm sure that proper care will 
preserve these for the rest of your life," she said. "Brush them after every 
meal, and brush the rest of your mouth too, to disturb the bacteria. Use the 
dental tape, don't eat any more processed carbohydrates than you really have to, 
and have your mouth checked every six months."
"But who will do the checking?"
That moth problem again! And of course the Monarch could not summon any 
off-world dentist to work on his teeth, in this flashback status. "I suppose 
you'll just have to do the best you can by yourself. That isn't ideal, but it 
will certainly help."
Then she cleaned his teeth carefully, though her tiny six-year-old hands were 
clumsy at so specialized a task. She reviewed him on the techniques of 
dental-prophylaxis until she was satisfied that he knew exactly what to do.
Finally they returned to the present. There was some awkwardness about her 
tangled clothing that amused the Monarch, but he was too fatigued to laugh long. 
He collapsed almost immediately, frightening her. Twenty years seemed to have 
been a terrific strain on his system.
The Monarch was old again, but did seem to be in better health than before, as 
though his attention to diet had helped more than his teeth. And his teeth were 
improved; he was still able to chew most foods without discomfort.
If human beings had the ability to impart their knowledge to their younger 
selves, as the Monarch had done, they might all have superior teeth, she thought 
wistfully.
 
Months passed. Judy was well treated at the palace, and from time to time 
(figuratively) the Monarch summoned her for conversation. He was inordinately 
proud of his preserved teeth, and gave her full credit for the advice that had 
in effect restored them. But her service to him had ended; she could leave 
Lepidop at any time she found somewhere better to go.
Yet there was a certain lingering dissatisfaction. His teeth were not perfect, 
and she knew that he concealed occasional pains, not wanting to admit this flaw 
in the gift. It would have been so much better for him to have had the regular 
supervision of a dentist (even a moth dentist!), for the patient simply could 
not do everything for himself.
She was increasingly nervous, too, because she had not heard from the 
University. Trach was long gone and she had no idea how to reach him. She might 
have placed an interplanetary call, but this was expensive and she did not have 
a planet to reach. He could be anywhere in the galaxy.
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (76 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
Had the dinosaur notified those authorities of her whereabouts? Had they in turn 
notified Dr. Dillingham? Had he been interested enough to put in a requisition 
for her, or whatever it was at this level? She had supposed that Dr. Dillingham 
had been satisfied with her performance, back on Earth, and might like to have 
her as his assistant again. But as a University administrator he would rate the 
best, and she could not delude herself about her status there. She was used to 
his mannerisms and individual techniques, and that was all.
She made use of the comprehensive Lepidop library of dental information, 
studying the configurations of the dentures of a thousand alien species. She 
visited the lowly moth dentists, and found them a good deal more knowledgeable 
than the opinion of the butterflies suggested. She asked the translator about 
the university—its procedures and hierarchy. She waited.
Nothing. Either the message had not got through, or Dillingham was not 
interested. She was helpless.
"I have had a taste of better health," the Monarch said, shaking his faintly 
orange wings. "It incites me to desire more. If twenty years did this, what 
might thirty do?"
That would be equivalent to sixty, by her scale. He would in effect be twenty—at 
the very prime of life. Of course, nothing short of a complete overhaul from the 
moment of conception on would provide him with absolutely perfect teeth, but—
"If I begin caring for my teeth in the flush of my youth, at the time I first 
emerged from the chrysalis, they will remain strong forever!" he cried.
She kept forgetting that the butterfly lifecycle differed from her own. Perhaps 
that was time enough.
"Come, my dear—take my hand."
She tried to stop herself, but his word compelled her just as though she were a 
butterfly subject. "Wait!" she cried, suddenly realizing what thirty years would 
mean to her. "I can't go back to—"
And the vertigo overcame her.
It was much worse than before. She felt as though she were being turned inside 
out through the mouth and dipped in lye. She felt, she fought, she expired, she 
emerged into—
Nightmare.
The choking crying bleeding miasma of extinction. Her arms were bound in mummy 
wrappings, her eyeballs were rotten. She screamed with the soundlessness of an 
anguished ghost. Maggots were feeding on her tongue, flames on her wings.
She had tried to go back to four years before she had been born.
 
But it was not her own demise she experienced. The Monarch was dead. His ancient 
husk of a body dangled from her hand when she stood, and when she tried to let 
go his desiccated appendage it fell apart.
"Murderous alien!" the purple court butterflies cried, discovering her in her 
guilt. "You made the Monarch attempt the impossible. You crucified him on your 
short life-span, and he is four years defunct, and now the Empire will fall!"
Judy found no way to protest. She had led him on to it, however unwittingly.
"You shall die the death of a thousand lights!" they screamed. "Moths shall spit 
on your remains!"
They put her with all her possessions in a cocoon tower near the apex of the 
castle. She could see beyond the strands to overlook the lovely countryside, but 
she could not break the tough webbing or force it apart in order to escape. It 
was like invisibly barbed wire. In any event, it was a long, long fall to the 
moat, and sharklike beetle larvae cruised that dreary channel.
Butterflies swooped from the sky, their wings translucent in the sun. Each 
carried a beamer pointed towards Judy's prison. Some of these rods were silver, 
some black, some green—all the hues of Lepidop. The insects zoomed at her in 
single file, and from each weapon a narrow light speared into her cage.
At first she flung herself aside, trying to avoid the profusions of beams, but 
she could not escape them all. Then she discovered that they did not hurt her. 
They were merely lights, that illuminated her prison momentarily and faded 
harmlessly.
Was the execution, then, a bluff?
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (77 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
Pain blossomed in her leg. One of those lights was a laser!
An hour and several scorches later she figured it out. At irregular intervals a 
butterfly would approach carrying an orange rod—the colour matching the wings of 
the dead Monarch. This was the laser—the beam she had to avoid.
But it was nervous work. She had to watch every butterfly, and there were always 
several in sight. The beamers were not easy to see until almost within effective 
range, so she had only a moment to spot the orange one and dodge its pencil-thin 
sword of heat. The web-flung bars of the cage inhibited her view at critical 
moments, too. The beams were somehow set to have effect only in her vicinity; 
they passed through the cage strands harmlessly, and dissipated beyond the 
cocoon. She was the only target; when her attention lapsed, she got stung.
So far the wounds had been painful but not critical. Eventually a laser would be 
sure to strike an eye or some other vital spot, and then...
The death of a thousand lights. She understood it now. A hundred thousand 
threats, one thousand actual attacks. One or two strikes she could forget; ten 
or twenty she could suffer through; one or two hundred she could survive with 
proper medical attention. But a thousand would surely finish her. Those she 
managed to avoid still took their toll, for she could not relax at any time 
while watching for them, and sleep would be impossible.
Sometimes one laser followed another consecutively. Sometimes half an hour 
passed between shots, though the innocent-light butterflies swooped past 
steadily at intervals of five to ten seconds. The average laser came around 
fifteen minutes. That would be four an hour, she calculated feverishly, or 
almost a hundred in a twenty-four hour span.
It would take ten days for the torture to expend itself. Far longer than she 
could remain alert. Eventually she would sink into unconsciousness, from fatigue 
if not from wounds.
The death of a thousand lights.
Her eyes ached. The constantly oncoming butterflies blurred. They no longer 
seemed beautiful; they were wings of horror. Always one passing close, its light 
aiming, stabbing. Always one a few seconds behind, its beamer lost in the 
distance. And others, trailing back into the sky—an ominous parade of beating 
wings.
She cried out. She had nodded off without realizing it, hypnotized by the 
steadily cruising, flexing wings. A laser had scored, singeing a strand of her 
hair and scorching one shoulder. It was as though a white hot poker had been 
jammed against her, destroying flesh and bone to a depth of a quarter inch and 
cauterizing its own wound.
Night came, but no relief. Now the moths were marshalled to the task, their rods 
softly glowing in the same array of colours. This was no favour to her, she 
knew. She had to be given a chance to spot the orange ones. Otherwise her vigil 
would be useless, and she would have simply to lie down and let the beams come. 
That would remove half the torture and shorten its duration.
She nodded off again, and was struck again—but this time she had been fortunate 
enough to pick up almost thirty minutes of sleep. That enabled her to remain 
alert for several more hours.
Then the blurring resumed, and would not be denied. She had a tightening 
headache, and she knew that the long dismal end was coming. She would waste 
herself away, fighting it, but her point of no-hope was incipient. All she had 
wanted to do was to rejoin Dr. Dillingham; the cruellest part of it all was his 
failure to respond. He would have responded, she was sure now, had he been told. 
Maybe the University had buried the message as crackpot. Maybe he already had a 
thoroughly competent galactic assistant...
She chided herself for feeling sorry for herself, then reacted angrily: now was 
the best of all times to feel sorry for herself!
A larger light showed in the distance. She thought it was the rising Lepidop 
sun, and marvelled that the night should have passed so quickly. But it seemed 
to be star-shaped. And not natural. With an effort she unblurred enough to make 
out the glint of metal. A machine of some sort, flying through the air, but no 
aeroplane!
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (78 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
From it a searchlight-sized beam emerged, sweeping across the planet. Was this 
the final laser?
She screamed involuntarily as the huge light found her and bathed her 
blindingly, but she did not burn. The machine came down its headlight as though 
it were an Earthly locomotive. She could make out no detail of its shape.
Her cage exploded. She felt herself falling, still blinded. She heard the 
chitter of untranslated moth protests. Something hard caught her arm and hauled 
her up roughly.
"None but I shall do him die!" a metal voice boomed. Now she knew she was 
hallucinating, for translators could not fly. "And thou willst join him there."
"I know that!" she snapped hysterically. "At least give me some butter for these 
little burns..."
And that was strange, for she was not the hysterical type. She wondered when the 
end would come.
 
CHAPTER EIGHT
"Doctor, you need an assistant," Oyster said. He had retracted almost entirely 
into his shell for an executive snooze, but the ubiquitous translators picked up 
his watery mumble and spewed it forth full-volume in English.
An assistant? Dillingham had already come to that conclusion. He sat behind such 
a towering mound of paperwork that he could not properly attend to his duties. 
In fact, he could not always even remember his official title correctly, with so 
much else cluttering his mind. At any moment he could be popped off to some 
simple assignment that invariably turned out to be murderously complex in 
detail.
Actually, no paper was involved. But computerized busy-work and multilingual red 
tape amounted to the same thing. Every tiny plastic card, of the thousands on 
his desk, represented some problem of some student that he had to rectify in 
some manner. Yes, he needed help on the interminable details of his office. He 
had had no assistant since leaving Earth, and he had never fully adapted to that 
lack. How he wished he could take a mid-session snooze, as Oyster was doing now!
Oyster's assistant was Miss Tarantula, a marvel of arachnid efficiency. In the 
office or the operatory, at the University or in the field, her eight arms 
seemed to tie up every loose thread before it appeared. It was because of her 
that Oyster's desk was clear, and Dillingham realized jealously that if he had 
an assistant even half as competent his own desk would soon be relieved of its 
burden. Yet she tended to make him nervous, despite his efforts to repress his 
Earthly prejudices. She was not really a man-sized spider...
Oyster poked an antenna out of his shell. "Set up a series of interviews for a 
prospective assistant," he said to her. "Land-going, aesthetic, competent, 
unattached females—"
"The first is waiting in the anteroom," Miss Tarantula said. That was the way 
she was: anticipatory. "If Dr. Dillingham cares to interview her now—"
"But there's no point in merely talking with her," Dillingham protested. "I have 
field assignments as well as office routine. I have to know how she functions in 
a variety of situations, particularly under stress. If—"
"Naturally," Miss Tarantula said. "You are scheduled to make a promotional tour 
of planet Hobgoblin today. She will accompany you on a trial basis."
"But that's not a stress situation. A routine visit—"
"The director also wishes you to investigate certain complaints of a sensitive 
nature."
So now it came out. Debating points with Miss Tarantula was futile. The 
slightest twitch of her hairy front leg brought the web tight. And Oyster 
himself was no slouch at making things routinely impossible; he seemed to feel 
that this was good practice for the Directorship. Certain complaints of a 
sensitive nature? That meant that half a mis-step could result in a lynching!
Except for the Jann. The huge robot's meticulous guardianship was not entirely 
welcome, but was a fact of Dillingham's new life. If there were trouble on 
Hobgoblin...
Dillingham felt a headache coming on. "All right. Brief her and—"
"All taken care of, Doctor," Miss Tarantula said. Naturally. It was not that she 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (79 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
was helping Dillingham, for she was hardly concerned with bipedal mammals; it 
was that her boss had made a directive and she was being efficient.
The door opened. A grotesque mound of warty blubber slid into the office. It 
drifted to rest before Dillingham, smelling of castor oil. A black orifice 
gaped. "So pleased to meet you, Doctor D," the translator said. I am Miss 
Porkfat, your trial basis assistant."
Aesthetic, competent, female...
Dillingham had no doubt that by the standards of her own species Miss Porkfat 
was all of these. And he could not afford to question any of it, lest he betray 
an un-University prejudice of taste.
"Very good, Miss P," he said. "Please arrange passage for three to planet 
Hobgoblin, and notify the authorities there of our itinerary."
"Three, Doctor?" Her voice, audible just beneath the translation, was pleasantly 
modulated, at least.
"Three. The Jann will be coming along."
She extruded a snail-like eye-stalk. The orb focused on the shining robot. A 
quiver started there and travelled on down her body before it dampened out. 
"Yes, Doctor." She oozed over to a private-line translator, asked for 
interplanetary, and began making the arrangements.
Grade A, so far, Dillingham thought as Oyster woke and smiled benignly from 
inside his shell. The Jann robots were supposed to have become extinct several 
thousand years ago, but their terrible reputation lingered on in galactic 
folklore. Miss Porkfat had excellent presence if her only reaction to the sight 
of a functioning Jann was one eyeball-quiver.
But still she reminded him of infected slug-meat.
 
The Hobgoblins were surly creatures: short, big-headed, flat-footed, and ugly by 
humanoid standards. "What's that Jann doing here?" the customs official demanded 
in a whine that even the translator caught. "We don't allow sentient robots on 
our planet."
"He—has to travel with me," Dillingham said. It was complicated to explain.
"He'll stay in the locker, then." The official gestured to the guards. "Put this 
tin in the cooler."
The squat troopers advanced on the huge metal creature. Dillingham saw trouble 
coming, but was powerless to circumvent it. The Jann was as deadly a sentient as 
the galaxy had ever known, and had sworn to protect Dillingham for fifty years. 
To do that, he had to stay close. Evidently the inhabitants of this planet had 
little respect for past reputations, or they would never have gone near the 
Jann.
The uniformed goblins took hold of either arm. They were barely able to reach up 
that far, and looked like squat children beside a stern parent. They tugged.
That was all. The Jann did not budge or take overt note of them. Fortunately.
Dillingham and Miss Porkfat completed their business at customs and left. The 
Jann followed, nonchalantly dragging along the two guards. After a while they 
let go.
So much for protocol. Dillingham sighed with relief that the robot had not lost 
his metal temper.
 
The Hobgoblin Office of Dentistry was imposing enough, externally. But inside 
the fine large building were distressingly backward facilities. This planet 
still used mechanical drills, X-rays, and needle-injected anaesthetics. Ouch!
A harried goblin technician galloped up. "What do you want? We don't allow 
visitors in here. Particularly not aliens."
"This is the representative from the University of Dentistry," Miss Porkfat said 
dulcetly. The nearest translator was down the hall a distance, so conversation 
was remote. "On a promotional tour. Your office was informed."
"I don't need any off-world tub of lard to tell me what we've been informed! 
Come back next week; we're busy now.
Miss Porkfat turned to Dillingham, her eye-stalk quivering again. "They prefer 
that we return next week, Doctor D."
Something about this exchange rankled. "I heard, Miss P. But this was cleared 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (80 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
with the authorities before we arrived, and my schedule does not permit a 
postponement." Some promotion!
"We're very sorry, but it will have to be today," she informed the technician.
"Go fry your posterior!"
"I really think—"
"I'll handle it, Miss P," Dillingham said, his ire rising. He was not a 
temperamental man, but his position did not allow him to tolerate very much such 
insolence. Miss Porkfat was being gentle when she should have been firm.
"You don't have confidence in me!" she cried, beginning to quiver all over.
"It isn't that, Miss P—"
"Why should he, blubbertub?" the goblin demanded.
"I'm only trying to—" she began, turning pink. On her, this was impressive.
"Of course," Dillingham said diplomatically. "But in this case—"
"Will you creeps get out of here?"
"NO!" Dillingham shouted at the ugly face.
Miss Porkfat began to dissolve. Literally.
"I think this position is unsuitable for you, Miss P," Dillingham said with as 
much compassion as he was able to muster in the circumstance. "If you wish to 
return to the University and seek an on-campus placement—"
She sucked herself together somewhat. "Thank you, Doctor D."
"Good riddance, stinky," the goblin said, with as much compassion as he could 
muster.
Dillingham walked haughtily by him, though privately he suspected that the 
goblin was right. This was no job for an assistant who melted in the face of 
conflict with abrasive personalities.
"Watch where you're going, stupid!" the goblin screamed. "I said no visitors. 
I'll clobber you!"
That was his mistake. The Jann, silent until now, boomed into animation. "None 
but I shall do him die—forty-nine years, five months, thirteen days hence, 
Earthtime," it proclaimed. By the time the words ceased reverberating, the 
goblin was gone, thoroughly cowed.
A non-native was waiting in the next alcove. Willowy, sweet-smelling, with a 
cluster of slender blue tentacles and four soft purple eyes: quite aesthetic, in 
a surrealistic way.
"Doctor Dillingham? I was sent by the University to assist you on a trial basis. 
I am Miss Anemone."
So Miss Tarantula had anticipated his problem with Miss Porkfat! Such 
comprehension was frightening.
"Very good," he said. Then, thinking ahead: This is a Jann. He's travelling with 
us."
"I observed him. A handsome specimen. I hadn't been aware they made robots of 
that calibre any more."
No loss of control there! Dillingham glanced down the hall. "And approaching us 
is another native technician."
The Hobgoblin wore a badge of rank that distinguished him as an entity of 
moderate authority. "No visitors permitted. Leave at once."
Miss Anemone braced him squarely. "This is the Assistant Director of the 
University School of—"
"Don't waste my time with your ridiculous apologies," the goblin said brusquely. 
"Just get out."
"If you will check our approved itinerary—"
"One side, sea-spook." The goblin shouldered by her, intent on Dillingham. He 
did not get far. "Ouch!"
"Oh dear me, I'm so sorry," she said solicitously. "Did my spines hurt you? I 
hope you will report to the infirmary right away. I certainly wouldn't want the 
toxin to get into your system." She led the way on down the hall while the 
goblin rushed off, rubbing his shoulder.
So far, so good. Miss Anemone was not unduly sensitive to abuse, or helpless 
before it.
They arrived at the main demonstration room. Here the wonders of modern 
Hobgoblin dentistry were displayed: quaint metal restorations, classic plastic 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (81 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
dentures, primitive colour X-ray photographs. Dillingham viewed them politely, 
then approached the goblin in charge and began his presentation. "I believe the 
University can enhance aspects of your procedure—"
"Who asked it to?"
Dillingham was not free to mention the several tourists who had complained to 
the University. That was the unofficial part of his tour. The described symptoms 
had been vague and diverse, so that no consistent pattern had developed, and no 
complainer had actually reported for a University re-check. Thus there was no 
solid evidence that Hobgoblian dentistry was at fault—just a statistical 
suspicion.
The kind of thing that had to be investigated unobtrusively, for planet 
Hobgoblin was sensitive about alien criticism. Unlikely as that might seem, from 
Dillingham's immediate experience.
"Perhaps a demonstration of technique—" he suggested.
"Oh, so the marvellous University desk jocky wishes to show the outworld peons 
how to practise!"
Dillingham ignored this. "We might take a look at some of your problem 
patients." The kind that complain to the University! he thought eagerly. 
"Naturally, if I can demonstrate the advantages of University training—"
"Training, schmaining! If we had your finances, we could afford a multi-species 
dontic analyser too, and have instant diagnosis of every—"
"You are correct in your implication that the analyser is one of our more 
important diagnostic tools. But since it is far too expensive for the average 
facility, we stress the raw ability of the individual dentist using local 
equipment. It is the talent that remains after the—"
But the goblin did not let him repeat the maxim he had learned so arduously from 
Oyster. "You claim you can use my equipment—and do a better job than I can?"
Since courtesy did not seem to accomplish much here, Dillingham yielded to 
temptation and abandoned it. Unwisely. "Yes. And so could any University 
graduate."
The goblin swelled with rage—then made an unholy smile, "You're on, Doc."
 
He was, indeed, on. In half an hour Dillingham was ensconced in a model unit set 
up on a stage in an amphitheatre. Miss Anemone had a desk a few paces apart, and 
the Jann had a separate booth where he could watch for Dillingham's safety 
without obstructing the view of the audience. Goblin spectators, every one a 
qualified dentist, filled the hall.
This was more than Dillingham had bargained on, and he made a mental note never 
again to speak precipitously. Meanwhile he had to follow through. Somehow things 
always did become complicated. He was almost getting used to it.
The prosthodontic genius from Galactic U will now demonstrate how to handle a 
problem case," the chief dental goblin announced grandly. "Pay close attention 
so you can learn how stupid you are."
Almost every grotesque little face mirrored the chief's resentment. No doubt of 
it: University prestige was on the line. If he failed here, there would be 
severe repercussions. He could, in fact, be eased out of the very position he 
was in training for: the Directorship of the School of Prosthodontics. The 
goblins were striking not at him, but at his career—a blow the Jann could not 
foil. All because of one intemperate remark.
The first patient mounted the stage: a quadrupedal and vaguely equine creature 
with colourful bird-like plumage.
Miss Anemone intercepted it. "May I have your name and planet of origin, 
please?"
"Horsefeathers of Clovenhoof," the creature neighed, showing tremendous yellow 
teeth.
"Please describe your complaint."
"My teeth hurt."
There was a murmur of nasty appreciation from the audience. Hobgoblin's finest 
practitioners were present, and Dillingham was sure that every one of them had 
had this problem: the unspecific response. Miss Anemone, of course, would not 
let it stand at that. She would question the patient gently but firmly, 
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (82 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
clarifying and isolating his symptoms until she had a fair notion of his real 
complaint. That was a major part of the duties of a galactic dental assistant: 
to get at the facts before the patient saw the dentist, thereby promoting office 
efficiency.
"Dr. Dillingham will see you now," she said.
There was a chorus of chuckles and a few hoots from the audience. They knew she 
had goofed. Well, he could not afford to correct her now. That would only make 
it worse. He would have to question the patient himself—and make sure never to 
get into such a situation again with an unfamiliar assistant.
It probably was not her fault. Some dentists preferred to handle virtually 
everything themselves, and some assistants were trained to honour this. Probably 
she would have questioned the patient further had he asked her to do so. But 
Dillingham was far too busy to break in an assistant in all the little ways that 
were sure to turn up. Miss Anemone would not do.
Horsefeathers ambled over and bestrode the dental chair, opening his long large 
mouth. His breath was not sweet.
"Can you localize the area of sensitivity?" Dillingham inquired, beginning a 
routine check with the probe.
"Huh?"
"Where does it hurt?"
"They all hurt. It changes," Horsefeathers said.
Another appreciative goblin chuckle. Dillingham began to fear that they had 
thrown him a chronic complainer—one who would object no matter how well off his 
teeth were.
"I see you have had extensive prosthodontic restoration," Dillingham observed. 
Indeed, the mouth was a mass of gold.
"Huh?"
"Lot of work done on you."
"Yes. All right here on Hobgoblin. Lousy job."
Silence from the gallery. Dillingham suppressed a smile. "On the contrary. My 
visual inspection suggests that this work is quite competent. However, I shall 
take X-rays to be sure there is no underlying problem," He tapped a tooth, 
finding it firm. "Miss Anemone—"
Another evil gallery chuckle. He looked up.
Miss Anemone was gone. A man-sized centipede occupied her desk. "I am Miss 
Thousandlegs, your new assistant. Miss Anemone was called away,"
In the middle of a demonstration? This was getting too efficient! How had Miss 
Tarantula known?
He also noted with surprise that the Jann was gone. The booth was empty and 
there was no familiar glint of robot metal. But he was sure the huge entity was 
in the vicinity—and would be, for the next forty-nine-plus years.
All he said was: "Please take a full set of X-rays on this patient."
Miss Thousandlegs rippled over, elevated her forepart, and positioned machine 
and plates. She was good at it, he had to admit, considering that she had 
probably only had experience with such equipment in some class on Antique 
Apparatus. In a moment she had the pictures.
He almost gaped. "Root canal therapy on every tooth!"
They were pretty far gone," Horsefeathers admitted.
They must have been. Root canal therapy was only called for when the central 
nerve of the tooth became contaminated. Then this nerve had to be removed, and 
silver or gutta-percha or some galactic equivalent substituted, so that no 
further decay could occur. It was an expensive process, but it generally saved 
the tooth. The tooth was insensitive thereafter, of course. Without its nerve it 
could not feel heat or cold, pressure or pain.
"I see no evidence of decay," Dillingham said, inspecting the X-rays carefully.
"They still hurt," Horsefeathers said stoutly.
With no nerves at all, they hurt. Dillingham controlled a sigh, knowing that the 
dentists of Hobgoblin were enjoying this hugely.
"Do you wish me to check the occlusion?" Miss Thousand-legs inquired.
Bless her! "By all means."
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (83 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
She brought a wax plate and had the patient bite down on it so that his teeth 
imprinted the material in a horseshoe pattern, above and below. She studied 
this. "Serious malocclusion, Doctor," she announced.
Dillingham could tell by the silence around him that the goblins had forgotten 
to make this test—just as he himself had almost forgotten, in his preoccupation 
with the impression he was making. Miss Thousandlegs had saved him. It was 
beginning to look as though he had found his assistant.
"This will not hurt," he told Horsefeathers as he prepared his rotary unit. "In 
fact, I will not have to use any anaesthetic. I am merely going to grind down 
some of the surfaces a little. To adjust the occlusion, so that your teeth will 
meet properly when you bite."
"But it doesn't hurt where I bite! It hurts deep inside!"
"This is typical," Dillingham assured him. "You see, when the occlusion is 
imperfect—when your teeth meet unevenly—unnatural stress is placed on certain 
sections. Portions that are too high are driven back or shoved sideways. While 
this effect is too small for you to notice, ordinarily, it continues to irritate 
the periodontal membrane—the lining surrounding the roots of your teeth—crushing 
and bruising it. This lining is tough, for it is there to cushion the impact of 
constant chewing—but under abnormal stress it eventually becomes inflamed. And 
then you hurt—deep inside."
Horsefeathers gazed at him in wonder. "I never knew that!"
"Perhaps your dentist did not feel this was necessary for you to know," 
Dillingham said gently. "Many patients are not interested in such technical 
details." Until their teeth hurt, he thought wryly
But the silence of the hall as he worked suggested that the point had been made. 
It was always best to let the patient know as much as feasible about his 
condition. An ignorant patient could be a difficult one. Horsefeathers had not 
been an idle complainer; he had really had pain, though the cause was subtle and 
slow to develop. His occlusion had been adjusted properly at the time of the 
massive restoration, Dillingham was certain. But with time and use it had 
changed marginally, and the jaw had felt the stress. Horsefeathers probably 
consumed enormous quantities of roughage and spent many hours a day chewing it, 
so this accentuated the condition.
Dillingham had shown the dentists of Hobgoblin how to practise their 
profession—using their own tools. The University reputation would profit. There 
should be a number of student applications from Hobgoblin next term.
He finished, and flushed the polished surfaces. "Expectorate, please."
"Huh?"
"Spit." The translator was being too literal, rendering a complex word in 
English into a complex equivalent in Clovenhoofian. But he'd have to tone down 
his language. "Now it will be a while before the inflammation subsides," he 
warned Horsefeathers. "But there should be a steady improvement now, until you 
feel no pain at all."
"It'll still hurt?" The patient looked dubious.
"It has to heal. When you—when you break a leg, you don't expect it to be good 
as new the moment the vet sets it, do you?"
Horsefeathers thought about that. He looked at his leg. He smiled. "Thank you, 
thank you, Doctor!" he exclaimed at last. "I'm so glad you came here." He 
trotted off, limping a little before remembering that it was his mouth that 
hurt.
Another patient mounted the stage. This was a native Hobgoblin. Dillingham knew 
that meant trouble. He had counted his dental chickens too soon!
"May I have your name, sir?" Miss Thousandlegs inquired.
"Go fly a kite!"
True to form, Dillingham thought. And how would she react—by melting or 
stinging?
"How do you spell that, please?"
Dillingham liked her better all the time. Spelling via translator was devious 
and suspect, but she had fielded the insult nicely.
"G o," the goblin spelled. "F L Y. The A is an initial for Algernon. Last name 
is KIT E."
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (84 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
Dillingham reminded himself not to jump to conclusions.
"And what is your problem?" Miss Thousandlegs inquired.
"This tooth—it squishes. Sometimes."
"May I look at it?"
"You're not the dentist, bugface!"
"Nevertheless, I may be able to narrow down the possibilities and save both you 
and Dr. Dillingham trouble."
Grudgingly he let her look. "Another restoration," she murmured. "Tooth appears 
to be healthy."
"It's not healthy, stupid. It squishes. Sometimes."
"Could you show me?"
G. F. A. Kite bit down, almost nipping several of her hair-fine legs. "Nope. 
It's not squishing right now. But it does. Sometimes."
"I'll take an X-ray," she said. She did.
"When do I see the damn dentist?"
"In just a moment. Let me check your occlusion first." She did. "You may see him 
now."
She accompanied the patient to Dillingham's operatory. "X-ray shows nothing but 
the tooth is mobile," she said. "The occlusion is slightly off."
Kite made a face. "I heard that about Horsefeathers. But mine is only one tooth 
and it doesn't hurt, it squishes. Sometimes."
"Nevertheless, occlusion seems to be indicated," Miss Thousandlegs said. "Two 
plus two equals four. I'm sure if we adjust that, your symptom will fade."
Dillingham agreed with her—but felt she was going too far. She was not merely 
getting the facts, she was diagnosing and advising the patient—and that was 
normally the dentist's prerogative. He should add two and two and get four.
He checked the teeth. They were similar to human dentures, and most had been 
restored metallically. All were solid, including the squisher, except for that 
trace mobility his assistant had noted.
He inspected the X-ray photograph. She was correct there too. The only shadows 
in the picture conformed to the restorative work present. It had to be the 
occlusion, again.
He made the necessary adjustments. But one thing nagged him. The occlusion was 
only marginally skew. Presuming that this condition had developed only recently, 
the described symptom was too sharp, too localized.
Two plus two might equal four—but so did one plus three. And the goblin audience 
was suspiciously silent.
But what else...?
He took the probe and checked around the tooth again. It remained firm, and the 
gum line was stable. He looked at the X-ray once more. The metal of the 
restoration shadowed it, one projection extending along the distal surface 
adjacent to the next tooth. No trouble there.
Two plus two...
Interesting coincidence that the Hobgoblin chief should send him two occlusion 
problems in a row. He would have expected something more devious.
He poked the tip of the probe between the two teeth, verifying that the metal of 
each restoration touched there. The space was narrow; there was no way he could 
reach it except by forcing the wire point down, causing the patient momentary 
discomfort—
"Ouch!" Kite yelped, jumping.
The probe broke through into something soft.
"Equals four!" Dillingham cried. He had found it! A thin cavity just under the 
metal, concealed from direct view by its location and the overhanging 
restoration. Its shadow in the X-ray had been hidden by the configuration of the 
metal itself. Truly, an invisible deterioration—that squished. Sometimes.
Miss Thousandlegs had almost led him astray by her too-ready diagnosis. Had he 
corrected the occlusion and sent the patient home, the decay could have 
continued for months. By the time it received proper attention, the tooth could 
have been lost. All because the primary symptom seemed to match the wrong 
condition.
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (85 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
Two plus two did equal four. But that was not the whole story.
And the devilish goblin dental chief must have known it—setting the University 
representative up with a valid occlusion case first. Then the seeming occlusion 
case... what a trap!
"Anaesthetic," Dillingham said. He had had a close call.
Miss Thousandlegs brought the loaded needle. He injected the flinching patient. 
Oops—it had been so long since he'd used anything this primitive that he'd 
forgotten to apply a surface anaesthetic before giving the shot, and his 
assistant hadn't reminded him. Not her fault; she just wasn't familiar with his 
procedures, his little lapses.
He readied the drill. "Vacuum," he said.
Miss Thousandlegs applied the vacuum, sucking the saliva and moisture left from 
the water-cooled drill.
"Other side," he murmured, as her instrument obstructed his view. He began 
cutting away the overhang of the tooth.
He finished and removed the drill. "Mallet," he said, picking up the chisel. She 
held it up, but his hand missed contact. The mallet bounced off his fingers and 
fell to the floor. The goblins guffawed.
Dillingham's ears were burning. Again—not her fault, he reminded himself. She 
just wasn't adjusted to his gestures. But it was inconvenient and embarrassing, 
particularly on stage.
He knocked off the metal crown, exposing the decay. He fished for the gold chunk 
before the patient could choke on it—and banged into one of his assistant's 
insect-like arms. She had been reaching for it also.
Dillingham stopped and counted to ten mentally. Miss Thousandlegs was competent 
and co-operative—but it just wasn't working out. He could not operate 
effectively with her.
"Miss—" he started. And blinked. Miss Thousandlegs was gone. She had been 
replaced by a humanoid biped.
He was tired of this long-distance sleight-of-hand. Miss Tarantula might enjoy 
tugging on interplanetary threads and changing his assistants in mid-operation, 
but he did not. "Vacuum," he said abruptly, taking up the drill again.
Assistant number four, the biped, applied the vacuum. Her arms terminated in 
quintuple, jointed digits that pinched together to hold the tube. He had seen 
more effective appendages for this work, but at least she did not get in his way 
or obstruct his vision.
He finished his excavation. "Hydrocolloid," he snapped. This assistant would 
have to stand on her own couple of feet; he was out of patience.
She already had the metal form and cold water ready for the hydrocolloid 
impression. He made the cast without difficulty, and she took it away. He put a 
temporary covering over the tooth.
"A new restoration will have to be made," he told Kite. "I have prepared the 
tooth and taken an impression, but it will be some time before the restoration 
is ready. Your local prosthodontists are perfectly capable of doing it, and I 
commend you to their services. You were quite correct about your problem, and 
fortunately we have diagnosed it in time to save the tooth."
"Doctor," the new assistant said.
"What?" He was tired, and there was something strange about the way she spoke.
"Will you check the other restorations now?"
"The other—" He paused. "You're right! A good restoration does not go wrong 
without cause. I'll have to have a look." It was a dismal prospect, but he could 
not risk the same kind of oversight the local dentists had made.
He hammered off the adjacent cap. It came away easily—too easily. He scraped at 
the exposed cement. "Soft," he muttered. "No wonder there was trouble."
The goblin chief was about to be snared in his own prosthodontic trap.
The assistant took the gold cap and cleaned out the debris. Dillingham hammered 
at the next restoration. This one was stiffer, but finally came off. The binding 
cement was similarly soft. "Brother!" he muttered. "They must all be defective. 
The cement is deteriorating. Real trouble coming up."
"Now just a moment," a voice objected. It was the chief dentist of Hobgoblin. "I 
did that work myself. There is nothing wrong with it!"
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (86 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
Dillingham glanced at him tiredly. So this was a personal matter with the goblin 
now. An excellent opportunity to embarrass the chief before his entire 
profession, to torpedo his planetary prestige.
He was tempted. The chief had tried to trick him, and had almost succeeded, and 
the audience had been thirsty for his blood right along. He could get even with 
the whole species of Hobgoblin and make its dentistry the laughing stock of the 
galaxy.
He saw that the Jann was back in his booth. That made it safe: he could tell off 
the planet with impunity, for the huge robot would vaporize anyone who dared 
attack. There would be blood and carnage and flame—
Dillingham shook himself. What was he thinking of! He was here to make friends 
for the university, not to incite riot. He really needed an assistant, if his 
nerves were this tight. Someone to cool him off...
"The work is excellent," he said. "I could not do better myself. The cement is 
defective. Give it time and every restoration will come loose. This entire mouth 
will have to be re-done. And every case where you used this type of cement. They 
are all suspect."
The goblin dentist looked. He pried off another cap and saw the condition of the 
underlying cement. He sagged. "You are right, Doctor. It was a new variety—not 
time-tested, but with the highest recommendations. We used it on our special 
patients—tourists, visitors, persons of note—"
"Not your fault," Dillingham said graciously, suddenly seeing the answer to 
those vague off-planet complaints. That same highly-touted new cement had been 
used on all of them! "Perhaps there is some quality of the local environment 
that affects the cement as it is being applied. The University will be happy to 
run tests for you. It's a shame to have work this good undermined by something 
this small."
"Doctor," the goblin chief said with surprising politeness, "you have made your 
point. University training is beneficial. We shall act accordingly."
Somehow this did not seem to be the proper time to confess that he had almost 
missed the key cavity—or that only the timely reminder by his bipedal assistant 
had prompted him to perform the routine check that had led to the major 
discovery.
His assistant—she had been perfect! She had done everything just right without 
intruding. This was the one he wanted to keep.
"What is your name and planet?" he asked her as he finished his preparations on 
the patient.
"Miss Galland—Earth," she said.
"Very good, Miss Galland of Earth. I want you to—" He stopped. He had suddenly 
realized what was strange about her voice. She wasn't speaking through the 
translator! "Earth?"
"Yes, Doctor," she said as she cleaned up the patient's ugly face.
Dillingham straightened up and looked directly at her for the first time. She 
was a young, aesthetic, female human being.
"Judy!" he exclaimed, amazed. "Judy Galland—my old assistant!"
"I thought you'd never notice, Doctor," she said, smiling.
"What are you doing here?"
"Why, I'm assisting you. I thought you knew."
"I mean, here in the galaxy! I left you on Earth, back when—"
She smiled again, very prettily. "That's a long story, Doctor. Let's just say 
that I needed a position, and there was an opening. After that it got 
complicated. Deep space, and all that. Frankly, your robot rescued me from an 
unfortunate situation."
He saw now that there were some ugly marks on her arms, as though she had been 
burned, and she looked as though she had not slept in days. "Unfortunate 
situation" could mean almost anything, short of an execution. She was not the 
expressive type. But she certainly was competent, and he was extraordinarily 
glad to have her here.
"The Jann brought you?" he asked, picking up the thread. "But he was supposed to 
be protecting me! I thought Miss Taran—"
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (87 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt
"None but I shall do thee die!" the Jann boomed from his booth, startling them 
both and causing a ripple of dismay to pass through the massed goblins. "But thy 
skein will be too brief without a proper assistant. I perceived thou couldst not 
endure even forty years in thy solitary condition, and I wouldst not have age 
and wear compromise the letter of mine oath."
Judy guided the patient out of the chair. "So you see, Doctor, two plus two—"
"Equals four!" He gripped her by the arm. "Come on—let's get out of here before 
Miss Tarantula sends Number Five. I'll settle for Four."
"And a married man is far more likely to live to ninety-two," the Jann observed, 
rising grandly from the booth. "Had I but my Janni with me..."
Fortunately Dr. Dillingham was not listening. But the goblin audience was, and 
catcalls resounded.
 
About the author
Piers Anthony's five books—Chthon, Sos the Rope, Omnivore, Macroscope and 
Prostho Plus—have established him as a writer of great talent, on a par with the 
best of the new young generation of sf novelists. In an interview with the 
Washington Post, Arthur C. Clarke equated him with Delany and Algis Budrys. From 
the very first Mr. Anthony has been admired for his originality and 
inventiveness in both his serious sf tales and in his entertaining satirical 
novels.
 
SPHERE BOOKS LIMITED
30/32 Gray's Inn Road, London WC1X 8JL
First published in Great Britain by Victor Gollancz Ltd 1971
Copyright © Piers A. D. Jacob 1971 First Sphere Books edition 1974
Printed in Great Britain by Hazell Watson & Viney Ltd. Aylesbury, Bucks
ISBN 0 7221 1175 4
 
Also by Piers Anthony and available from Sphere Books MACROSCOPE
All Sphere Books are available at your bookshop or newsagent, or can be ordered 
from the following address:
Sphere Books, Cash Sales Department, P.O. Box 11, Falmouth, Cornwall.
Please send cheque or postal order (no currency), and allow 7p per copy to cover 
the cost of postage and packing in U.K. or overseas.
file:///F|/rah/Piers%20Anthony/Anthony,%20Piers%20-%20Prostho%20Plus.txt (88 of 88) [1/19/03 8:28:03 PM]

