
Balook
Piers Anthony
Balook
Illustrations by Patrick Woodroffe
 
CONTENTS
Chapter 1: BREAKOUT
Chapter 2: PURSUIT
Chapter 3: THERIA
Chapter 4: FREAKS
Chapter 5: TREK
Chapter 6: CHASE
Chapter 7: TROUBLE
Chapter 8: TRIAL
Chapter 9: MIOCENE
Chapter 10: POWER
Author's Note
 
 

Balook
BREAKOUT
1
THOR NEMMEN CLIMBED the steps of the high stile and looked over the fence. The top strand was 
electrified, and was six meters above the ground—almost twenty feet in the old measure. That had once been a 
daunting height.
Thor always paused at this point, aware of his vulnerability. Today there was a moderate wind that tugged at his 
clothing, as if to nudge him off his perch. Nearby stood the pretty trees of the estate: small poplar, with the 
leaves shimmering; taller birch, with the white bark that looked as if it had been carelessly painted in horizontal 
swipes; and still taller pine, the seeming monarch of this forest. The whole region was growing up, now that all 
trees of all types were protected species, and it was good.
But the trees beyond the fence were in poorer state 
than those on the side from which he had come. They 
were relatively lean, their lower branches pruned well 
back. New growth was showing on some, but it 
would be long before their foliage was normal. Only 
above the level of about eight meters was it full.
"Balook!" he called. No point in climbing down 
inside, when he could ride instead.
There was no response. Concerned, Thor peered 
across the forest pasture. He hoped his huge friend 
wasn't sick. Ordinarily Balook came galloping 
eagerly, nose lifted, tail trailing, shaking the ground 
with his solid hooves. But this morning the landscape 
was vacant from pond to pines.
Quickly Thor swung himself over the top and trotted 
down the inner ramp. He jumped the last meter to the 
ground and ran along the fence toward the distant 
stable. "Balook!" he called again.
Half a kilometer along, he came across disaster. A 
tremendous hole had been ripped in the fence, as 
though a juggernaut had smashed through, two meters 
above the ground. The topmost cable was all that 
remained of the upper two-thirds of the barrier.
Thor stopped and stared, aghast at the damage. He 
had not believed that anything short of a runaway 
construction tractor could break that fence. That would have left treadmarks on the ground and taken out the 
bottom section, not the top. Anything except—
Then the significance of the break came to him. Suddenly he was running at top speed, shouting. "Balook! 

Balook
Balook's broken out!"
Breathless, he rushed up to the ranch house and pounded on the door. "Skip! Skip! Balook's gone!"
The guest-screen in the door lighted and the burly foreman's face appeared. "Shut up and make sense a minute!" 
the face snapped, seeming gruffer than it was.
"Skip, Balook broke out!" Thor cried.
The door sprang open, propelled by an imperative foot. The foreman ran his thumbnail along the crease of his 
plastic shirt, sealing it shut. Obviously he had been interrupted while getting dressed; his feet were bare, his 
thinning red hair tousled. "Don't talk nonsense, lad! That fence is anchored by twenty-thousand-pound cable."
Quickly Thor translated the man's old-fashioned measurement into familiar terms: twenty thousand pounds 
would be about nine thousand kilograms, or nine metric tons. "How much does Balook weigh, now?"
"Nine tons," Skip said, spraying on temporary slippers. Then, as he waited a few seconds for the porous plastic 
to set, he did a doubletake. "By jingo, lad, you're right! Balook could break out, if he had a mind to! I keep 
thinking of him as the little tyke he was when we started." Skip's tons were only nine tenths as big as Thor's, but 
hardly made a difference in this case. "But why would he want to?"
Thor hadn't thought of it that way. Now he felt an unfamiliar lump in his throat. "He doesn't want to! He likes it 
here!"
"And why no alarm? You say the fence is broken, and mind you, I'm not questioning your word, lad, but the 
current must have been interrupted, then. Are you sure—?"
"I'll show you the place," Thor said quickly. "The power strands are still in place. He must have shied away 
from them."
Skip followed him down to the fence. The break was in the forest section, so they had to get quite close before it 
was visible. Thor was perversely afraid it wouldn't be there, now that he had announced it, and that he'd be 
shown up for a fifteen year old wolf-crier. But then they saw it. "There!" he cried.
Skip inspected the break with professional competence. "He broke it, all right! The force was from the inside. 
Must've ducked his head and pulled up his feet and hurtled through. I should have known he was getting too big 
for this compound."
"But why?" Thor cried, seeing it as a personal betrayal. Then his lip curled, as he got a notion. "Someone must 
have been teasing him again—peppering him with buckshot—"
Skip reached across and tousled Thor's hair—an action Thor had never much liked, yet had not been able to 
protest. Their hair was the same color, but Thor's was much thicker. It seemed that this gave Skip a proprietary 
right. "You've been reading westerns again, lad. Citizens don't carry guns any more, remember? Not unless 
they're deputized for some emergency. Not since those assassinations of the Sixties and Seventies—"
"And Eighties and Nineties," Thor agreed. "I know. But Balook just wouldn't have done it on his own!"
Skip shook his head. "He's a big, big animal, lad. Largest hoofer ever. Twice the size of an elephant. Now he's 
filling out, maybe feeling his oats."
"Balook doesn't eat oats!"
Skip half-smiled. "Lots of males feel 'em that don't eat 'em, lad. You will too, soon enough. We don't know 

Balook
what's going on in his long head."
"But he wouldn't leave me!"
Skip didn't answer directly. "Remember," he said grimly, "he's big, but he's not smart. He could be hurt or lost 
already—and it'll take at least two days to requisition a copter."
Thor's anger turned to apprehension for Balook, then back to anger. He was furious at this seemingly callous 
appraisal, for he loved Balook better than any person. But he was also angry at the animal for walking out on 
him in the night. It wasn't just the matter of breaking out; it was that Balook had gone alone, not waiting for 
Thor.
Gone where?
Skip looked at the tracks. The footprints were so heavy that the soft ground remained depressed, and the huge 
three toes showed separately. "No one forced him, looks like. See, lad—the spoor leads straight up to the break, 
and straight away from it. Little blood... and that's from the broken wires as he went through. He knew what he 
was doing, all right. He had somewhere to go." Then, before Thor could make another meaningless protest: 
"Come on, lad—we'd better have a huddle with the boss."
Thor followed the foreman, numb. How could Balook have done this? The huge, friendly animal had always 
sought Thor's company, and mourned when Thor was absent. Balook knew that Thor always came for a visit in 
the morning, and so he was always near the stile. To take off like this—it just didn't make sense!
They met with the Project Manager, Don Scale, in his crowded office. Scale was in his fifties, and somewhat 
pudgy and short; he looked incompetent, but probably wasn't. Thor had never really gotten along with him.
Manuals and papers were piled up on the desk, and pictures of the Project layout were on the near wall. At one 
edge of a side table lay a portable self-powered lie detector that had always fascinated Thor. Its technical name 
was complex and irrelevant, and it wasn't intended as a security measure anyway. Every day Scale used it to 
take a reading on Balook, to determine the animal's overall state of health and tension; if Balook was nervous or 
in minor pain, the needle swung off the TRUE marker toward FALSE. The stronger the upset, the farther over 
the needle went.
Thor smiled to himself. There were years' worth of readings in the Project files, but they were meaningless. 
Balook did not like Scale and was always tense when the man came near. When Scale had been away for some 
conference, Skip took the readings—and they were much different, much closer to TRUE. Scale was in effect 
taking his own pulse. Somehow the man had never quite caught on to that.
Skip quickly filled Scale in. "No sign of foul play," he finished. "Must've wanted to get out and explore the 
neighborhood."
"And maybe that curiosity will kill him!" Scale snapped. "He must be recovered at all costs!"
"He may not want to be recovered," Skip said. "He's basically a wild animal, come of age—"
"He's tame!" Thor cried.
"Tame around you, Nemmen," Scale said. He always used Thor's surname, which was one of the reasons Thor 
disliked him. Scale had never approved of Thor's participation in the Project, and seemed to be constantly trying 
to depersonalize him. "Less so around the rest of us. And as for strangers—"
"He's wary of them," Thor agreed. "But any animal would be. Especially when they tend to see him as a freak."

Balook
"There is a tremendous amount of money and skill invested in this project," Scale said. "The beast is unique. 
We must take all feasible steps—"
"Money!" Thor cried contemptuously. There was yet another thing about the man that annoyed him: his 
preoccupation with money. To him Balook was not a living creature so much as an investment. Beast, indeed!
"Listen, young man!" Scale said sharply, for once forgetting the surname as his fat jowl tightened. "You're only 
here on sufferance—"
Skip put a cautioning hand on Scale's arm. "Easy, boss. The lad's got as much invested as anybody, only not in 
Caesar's coin. And he's the only one of us Balook really trusts."
Scale grudgingly calmed himself. "Still, he ought to appreciate the gravity of the situation. If that animal kills 
one human being—"
"Balook would never harm a person!" Thor cried. He had to fight back unmanly tears at the notion of such a 
charge. He could debate an issue about any other animal with vigor, but Balook was special. "He's gentle and 
shy—"
"He's a rhinoceros," Scale said. "Rhinos are ornery—especially the big ones. He could turn ugly."
"Not intentionally," Skip said, answering compassionately. "I've got to agree with the lad, sir—Balook is 
basically gentle." He returned to Thor. "But his sight is weak, especially in daylight. And he's big, mighty big. 
The way he broke that fence—well, he'd be hard put to it to stop in time, if he saw a man in the way. If he 
stampeded—"
Thor put his face in his hands. He knew that Balook could stampede, and in that state crush anything in his path. 
Then he would have to be killed, for that was the law. Visitors were warned away from the ranch, nominally for 
their own protection, but actually for Balook's. Now Balook was loose in human territory; all bets were off.
"The money is extremely close," the Manager said. "If we lose Balook, it will be all over for the Project."
To that much Thor could agree wholeheartedly, though without gaining any respect for Scale.
The men continued to discuss pros and cons in practical terms. Thor was unable to keep his mind on such 
things. Balook was gone!
He remembered how he had first met Balook, back when the Project had first taken over this forest ranch. He 
had been a child of nine then, a neighbor's boy with time on his hands and boundless curiosity. He had never 
gotten along well with children his own age, so was alone much of the time.
Unlike some loners, he was lonely. He had craved companionship, but not really of the human kind. His pet 
pony had foundered and been put away, making it worse. He had related to that animal better than to any human 
being. He had learned early that he could not afford to be open about his attachment, because others simply did 
not regard such a thing as significant. An animal dead? Too bad, and get another as good or better than the first. 
It was a nice animal? Surely so—but it was after all only a horse. Now stop whining and do your homework.
So he had wandered alone. The fence around the compound had not been as high and strong then, and the 
grounds had remained in a state of natural wildness, rather than the cultivated wilderness of contemporary 
fashion. It had been easy for a child to sneak in and poke about.
He had been amazed to discover a small zoo. Several female rhinoceroses were penned in what was now the 
tremendous stable. They were not particularly friendly, and though their noses had been de-horned they 

Balook
remained dangerous brutes. He stayed clear of them.
But one was different. It was naturally hornless, 
and skinny and young—a year or less. It weighed 
several times as much as the boy, but was 
obviously a baby. It was grotesque even for a 
rhino, yet also cute in the manner of any young 
animal. In fact, it could be thought to resemble a 
deformed pony. And it was lonely.
Thor had not realized just how remarkable that 
ungainly calf was. It nursed on the mother rhinos, 
who tolerated it only because they were confined 
and drugged, but it was of a different species. 
None of them could have birthed it naturally; 
none would lick it or comfort it, this homely 
pseudo-rhino. This ugly duckling creature.
The thing was miserable. Men took care of it, 
cleaned its pen, washed its body, inoculated it, 
exercised it, protected it... and the rest of the time 
it stood in its isolated pen and bawled until it 
slept.
Thor recognized the tone; he had often felt that 
way himself. The calf was emotionally isolated. 
When Thor extended his hand to it through the 
slats, it had first shied away in fright, then come 
close to sniff and lick eagerly, making little 
sounds of gratification. It seemed that no one had 
come to it before, just for company.
All it needed was a friend.
Thor had a similar need.
They had become associates, surreptitiously. 
Thor would hide until the keepers went to the 
back shed for private beer and poker. Then he would join Balook, petting the calf, talking to him, brushing 
down his soft fur, being his friend. The calf was comforted, and so was the boy.
It was, really, the only friendship either party had, that asked for nothing in return except acceptance and 
companionship.
But Thor got careless, after several weeks, and did not allow for random variations in the Project schedules. One 
of the men caught him in the pen. Don Scale was summoned. The Project Manager was appalled that his 
invaluable charge was subject to the intrusions of a neighborhood brat. He reprimanded the boy severely and 
banned him from the premises.
It was a blow to Thor, for there now seemed to be no use for his life. The long happy hours in the warm stable 
had given meaning to his existence. Without Balook there was nothing.

Balook
Balook, too, languished. He was five hundred kilograms of helplessness, bawling plaintively in his pen. After a 
few days he gave up and lay there whimpering, lacking the initiative even to feed. The joy of companionship he 
had learned was now cruelly denied, and he had no way to understand. The lie-detector needle remained 
steadily on FALSE, confirming that Balook was really in trouble.
Don Scale was not a stupid man, or an unduly arrogant one. He recognized the situation and resolved to make 
the lesser evil of it. Young Thor Nemmen received a formal pass and was added to the payroll at a nominal rate, 
with the title "Companion."
That had been six years ago. Ever since, Thor had visited Balook daily, playing with him, climbing all over him, 
sharing his food in a fashion, snoozing with him. The animal had grown enormously, even after allowing for his 
nature; Scale's charts showed above-projected gains. Thor taught the rhino how to heed his directions when he 
rode, so they could share more fun by exploring the compound. Balook was never allowed to run loose within 
the "business" section of the Project, but when he was with Thor it didn't count. Balook was no genius, even for 
a rhino, but he was quick enough to learn that he had greater freedom when playing Thor's game than he did 
otherwise. Besides, exploring was fun. There were green growing trees out there, his favorite food after he was 
weaned from milk.
During school season they had to make special arrangements, for Balook could not understand the reason for 
Thor's absences. Thus Thor was permitted to attend TV classes—with the set in Balook's pen. This was an 
unforeseen blessing, for though Thor was willing to learn anything, he hated being crammed into a classroom 
with his peers. Boys his age tended to be loutish. They respected only those who had the muscle or skill to 
knock heads, and Thor was of barely average physical stature and had indifferent coordination. Some few boys 
had the compensation of intellect; Thor was not competitive there either. As a person he was rated at sixes and 
sevens; nobody found him worthwhile. Balook had freed him of that. To Balook, he was the greatest person in 
the world.
The animal seemed to enjoy the programs, too, 
though he could hardly have understood them. 
Probably it was merely the rhino's feeling of 
participation with his friend that gave him pleasure. 
Once Thor had dreamed that he had dropped in on 
Balook unexpectedly, and caught him doing 
differential equations with his hoof in the dirt while 
the TV had a college math class on. 'I didn't know 
you could do that!' he exclaimed. 'Well, you never 
asked,' Balook replied. Then Thor had caught on, 
and woke up laughing. It was a foolish dream; 
Balook was the most remarkable creature on earth 
as he stood; he didn't need to be a genius too.
Once Balook had fallen ill, despite the precautions 
of expensive veterinarians. Thor had to make special 
arrangements to stay with him day and night; the 
animal had little incentive to live without his friend. 
While Thor would never have wished any misery on 
Balook, it still gratified him to be so strongly needed.
Then there was the time Thor himself had surgery 
for a small pollution-tumor on the lung. Air standards were strict, but violations occurred, and there was 

Balook
considerable residual effect from the old days of uncontrolled waste. He was twelve then, and Balook was four. 
They had to let Balook visit him, for the animal was unmanageable otherwise. Balook no longer bawled, he 
bellowed. No stall would restrain his super-elephantine bulk when he sulked. But the truth was that Thor 
himself did not prosper alone; that visit by the rhino was as necessary for his well-being as his had been for the 
rhino. He liked to think that Balook had understood that, and had raised his fuss for that reason.
Thor smiled, remembering how the tremendous humped nose had poked into the second storey window, 
horrifying an unwarned nurse. The special rhino smell had percolated through the building, generating 
consternation in the staff and delighted comments from the children, who were reminded of the zoo or circus. 
That first visit had done him much good—and so had the laugh. The other children at the hospital had been 
thrilled by the strange event, and thereafter Thor had been very popular with them. That, too, had been an 
unusual pleasure. Balook had made Thor a person of momentary distinction.
"What are you grinning about?" Scale demanded testily. "You don't seem to appreciate that this is a serious 
business, Nemmen! Five hundred million dollars on the line, and if he balks—"
Evidently they had made some plan, that Thor should have been paying attention to. "I wasn't laughing about 
what you said, sir," he admitted. "I just remembered how Balook scared that nurse when I was sick—"
"You weren't paying attention to what we said?" the man demanded ominously.
Thor made an embarrassed shrug. "I guess not."
"Listen, Nemmen, even a person of minimal intelligence—"
Skip interceded for him, as he often did. "The lad's 
honest, Don. Balook trusts him. That's what counts, 
isn't it? You know the farrier couldn't even trim his 
hooves if Thor wasn't there to tell Balook to lift his 
feet. So Thor thinks about Balook in off moments; 
that's what he's here for, not high finance. He's 
Balook's friend."
Which was about as good a summary of Thor's 
place in the Project as could be offered. Skip had 
made Thor's inattention seem like an asset!
Scale sighed windily, blowing out his cheeks. It 
was a natural enough gesture, typical of him. Scale 
was always a bit grumpy. But this time it triggered 
an odd alarm in Thor.
For Scale's left hand came down to rest on the side table, on the trailing leads of the lie detector. And the needle 
shot over to FALSE. Thor's peripheral vision caught the motion; he had the sense not to look directly, but there 
was no question what it was. The needle normally rested on TRUE; motion could be only one way.
Scale was hiding something.
No—the man was merely tense because of Balook's breakout; naturally that tension registered on the detector. 
Thor cautioned himself about being too eager to blame the man he didn't like anyway.
"And that nurse incident was funny," Skip continued. "Also the way Balook left droppings all over their 
ornamental lawn, with all the patients watching. Great fertilizer; we should've charged them for it! Can't think 

Balook
why the administrators weren't amused. Remember how that obnoxious hospital-ground bulldog went after him, 
and a pellet fell right on its head?"
Thor choked, and Scale finally had to smile. "Served that canine right," he agreed. When it came to any threat 
against Balook, no matter how minor, Scale was one with Skip and Thor. "Lucky Balook didn't step on him." 
He removed his hand from the table, and the needle moved back to TRUE.
Sure, Scale was worried. But who was more worried about Balook's absence than himself, Thor wondered. He 
couldn't resist a comparison. Without looking, he put his own hand on the table, across the leads of the lie 
detector, as though by accident. His eyes flicked over to the meter.
The needle was holding steady about halfway toward FALSE.
Either Scale was twice as worried about Balook as Thor was—surely impossible!—or Scale had some guilty 
knowledge. It had to relate to Balook, for that was the subject of discussion.
Or, could it relate to Thor himself? Skip had just vouched for Thor's honesty, and Scale had sighed and touched 
the leads... and the needle had given him the lie. Did that make sense?
Skip turned to Thor. "As we see it, lad, you're our best hope. Balook will pay attention to you when he won't to 
us. He's too big to transport by truck; it would take a flatcar to carry him—"
"You can't put him in a box!" Thor cried. "Balook hates confinement. He's never—"
"That's what I'm saying, lad," Skip said gently. "Anything smaller than a barn makes him nervous, and his 
nervousness is like the rumble of a volcano. He has to come back under his own power, and nobody can lead 
him on a tether! He's stubborn as—"
"As a rhino," Scale said. "And not one whit smarter."
"Sure he is!" Thor protested loyally.
Scale scowled. "Very well. One whit."
"So you'll have to ride him in," Skip concluded, overriding Thor's objection to Scale's comment.
"I ride him all the time! He guides perfectly!"
"Around the pasture, sure. But what about crosscountry, watching out for people and traffic? It's a hostile world 
out there, lad—hostile for him and maybe for you too. If he spooked, you'd be finished."
"Balook would never hurt me!"
"Not intentionally," Skip said soberly.
"I'll bring him back!" Thor said. "Just as soon as I can find him!"
"He's naturally shy of people, and that's good," Skip said. "There's quite a bit of forest land around here, thanks 
to the ecology splurge of the Seventies. If he stays out of trouble a few more hours, maybe you can do it."
"But you'll have to run him down cross-country," Scale said. "A copter would spook him, even if we had one 
ready. So would a car, if it could get close."
"I know," Thor said eagerly. "I'll go on foot. I'm in pretty good condition, and he can't be far—"
"Lad, he walks at fifteen miles an hour, and runs at twenty-five or better," Skip said. "You'd never have a 

Balook
chance."
Again Thor had to convert to more familiar terms. Balook walked about twenty-four kilometers an hour, and ran 
at forty. Yes, that was fast, too fast for a man on foot to maintain, cross-country.
"Can you ride a bicycle?" Scale asked.
"Who can't?" Thor returned, surprised by the question. "I've got one at home. But how would I make it cross-
country on wheels, let alone across streams and limited access routes?" Even as he spoke, he wondered why the 
man had brought it up. Scale could not be so far out of touch with reality as not to know that everyone rode 
bikes, and that Thor, like most others, had traveled thousands of kilometers, cumulative, in his life that way. It 
was excellent exercise for an isolated boy.
"I mean a high-tech bike," Scale said, frowning.
"Oh, sure, if I had one. Principle's the same."
"We've got a lightweight with boosters," Skip said. "Been saving it for an emergency—and this is that. Think 
you could handle it?"
Thor's eyes went round. "That must be a thousand dollar machine!"
"Eight hundred and seventy-nine dollars, including booster fuel," Scale said. He knew the price of everything.
"Come on," Skip said. "We can't waste time."
The bike was beautiful. It had thin foam-metal tires and a twelve speed gearshift, and it weighed fifteen kilos. 
Two V-thrust boosters were mounted fore and aft, and there was a tube of energy syrup clamped to the frame.
"Remember," Skip warned. "The boosters are for emergency use only. They're warranted for fifteen minutes' air-
time, and you can't count on more than a couple minutes beyond that. Don't waste them!"
Thor nodded, licking his lips. What a machine! He had had dreams of riding a bike like this, but the reality was 
hard to assimilate so suddenly. In fact, it seemed too convenient, having this fabulous machine here. If Scale 
knew something, something that Thor might find out, and if he had known the appeal that such a bike would 
have for any boy—could the bike be somehow booby-trapped?
No, he was veering into paranoia! He did not much like Scale, and the feeling was mutual, but Scale was not out 
to get rid of him, because Scale knew Thor was good for Balook. The bicycle made sense. Only a copter could 
locate Balook rapidly, and the two-day delay for requisitioning made that pointless. Naturally they wanted little 
publicity, for that would alert the curiosity seekers. Balook was a tremendous curiosity!
Skip had known about the bike too. So it hadn't just been brought in for this occasion. Skip would never betray 
anyone. So the safest assumption was that the bike was legitimate, and that Scale's guilt, as shown by the 
FALSE reading, was about something else.
Was Scale himself in some way responsible for Balook's breakout? That seemed crazy, yet it could account for 
his secret reaction. Scale's whole effort to recover Balook would be a lie, if he wanted the animal loose, perhaps 
even dead. But he would have to seem to do everything to save Balook.
Thor shook his head. It was all too complicated, right now. Scale was an honest man, and devoted to Balook's 
interests; he had proved that long ago. In fact his job depended on Balook. Maybe the lie detector had somehow 
miscued.

Balook
Probably Don Scale would put out a private police alert. But the police could not bring Balook back alive. Only 
Thor himself could do that—and he had to approach the huge rhino alone.
"Get moving, lad," Skip said.
Thor mounted the bike. It was a little large for him. Skip lowered the seat and handlebars and made other 
adjustments, quickly. "Here," he said. "You'll need a credit key. Take mine."
"Thanks," Thor said, gratified at the man's trust. "But it'll only be a couple hours—"
"Maybe. But we'd better play it safe. Here's a phone—you know how to operate it?"
Thor glanced at the instrument—and did a double-take. It was a ring-transceiver, the kind that buzzed or glowed 
to signal an incoming call, and had a button setting for two-way dialogue. It could call out only to the preset 
station, but was otherwise a competent phone.
Awed, he slipped it on his ring finger, but found it too large. He tried the middle finger, and that was better. 
"Yes, I can use it."
"We'll notify your folks," Skip said. "In case you don't catch him soon. Just keep going, and keep us posted." 
Then Skip gave the bike a starting push, and Thor was on his way.
 

Balook
PURSUIT
2
THE BICYCLE WAS so smooth-riding that at first Thor thought something was wrong. He was used to a 
middleweight machine, twice as heavy as this, with inflated composition tires. The foam metal on this one 
flexed away from ground irregularities, providing a special spring that made bumps a pleasure. The guidance 
was so light as to seem automatic; he could steer entirely by shifts of his body weight, even on rough ground, so 
that his hands were free for other tasks. That was a trick his regular bike could not do, not cross-country; he had 
the memory of old bruises to prove it. The gears were pressure coordinated, so that changing pedal force 
adjusted the ratio for maximum efficiency; he could turn it off when his definitions differed from those of the 
machine. The brake was American style, with optional hand brakes; he could have it either way.
Thor was in love with the bike before he had covered the first five hundred meters. It was a boy's dream 
machine.
He was at the break in the fence so quickly he was surprised. Now he could test the first special feature. He 
approached the gap broadside and touched the booster switch. The hot gas fired out instantly, down and back 
and to the sides, lifting the bike high while maintaining its balance. Too high—he was heading for the unbroken 
top strand!
He cut the boosters. They diminished slowly, not dousing entirely, so that he first leveled off, then slowly 
descended. He passed safely under the wire and glided to the ground beyond. He was elated; the boosters had 
worked perfectly, being fail-safe and foolproof. But he knew he would have to be more careful in the future; he 
could have caught his neck on the wire and been knocked right off the bike, six meters in the air. He could have 
broken something, and had a nasty electrical shock in the bargain. Those wires were paired; it was not necessary 
to make contact with the ground to receive the current. Birds stayed clear.
Had Scale been hoping for some such miscue? No, Thor couldn't believe that! Scale was concealing something, 
but he was no murderer. In fact, Thor knew that Scale no longer wanted to be rid of Thor, because of Thor's 
value to the project. So the mystery remained: why had the lie detector given him the lie?
Now it was time to be alert for Balook's traces. They were clear enough: broken branches, huge footprints in the 
soft ground, and occasional swatches of shed hair. It was no longer the fine, soft fur of calfhood; today Balook's 
hair was sparse and bristly, more like pine needles than fur. In fact, the huge animal used the spokelike hairs of 
his legs to sense obstructions; it wasn't always convenient to look. This was surely one reason he was able to 
move and forage well at night; his legs took care of themselves.
There was no visible damage to the upper foliage. The fallen branches were from the lower branches, torn off 
by the animal's massive torso. Balook was traveling, not browsing, and that was ominous. Usually he could not 
resist high, fresh leaves and twigs. He had to consume tremendous amounts each day, to maintain his vigor. 
That was why he required a formidable forest pasture; the trees of a small one would soon be denuded.
Was Balook sick? That could account for erratic behavior and the loss of appetite. There could be some special 
malady; there were volumes they had yet to learn about Baluchitherium. But Thor had always been the first 
person Balook turned to in time of distress. Also, this direct route away from the ranch was not that of a 
confused, ill animal. There was purpose in it.

Balook
Balook was going somewhere. His trail was neither meandering in the fashion of exploration nor arrow-straight 
in the fashion of a stampede. The wide spacing of the giant three-toed prints showed he was traveling at cruising 
velocity: about forty kilometers per hour. As fast as Thor could ride this bike across this terrain! But of course 
the animal would not keep it up; Balook was really not a running creature, and soon overheated when he put out 
too much energy. He had ways of handling that, but seldom drew on them.
Yet obviously Balook had already traveled faster and farther than normal, and the trail showed no sign of 
easing. This was something new to their experience, this motivation to travel. Balook was the only creature of 
his kind man had ever seen alive. He had put on a lot of muscle recently, especially in the legs and chest—more 
than he seemed to require for the normal routine. Maybe this was an aspect of his maturity. Maybe now he 
could sustain a rapid pace. The physical situation was less perplexing than the rationale: why was Balook doing 
it?
The barricades of the freak zoo loomed ahead. Of course that wasn't its real name, and it wasn't a zoo at all. It 
was part of the Project, though it lay beyond the pasture. There had been abortive experiments on animal tissue, 
preparing the way for the final success that was Balook. This was the original laboratory.
Balook was a strange creature, in more senses than one or two, and the freak zoo helped show why. Computer 
technology had merged with genetics to make it possible. Theoretically any animal, real or imaginary, could be 
formed. But there had been surprises, for the genetic code was complex beyond man's imagination. Some of the 
failures had been gut-wrenchingly grotesque, and even the successes, such as Balook, had had astonishing 
aspects.
One of the more significant surprises had been the way Balook handled heat. In cold weather he had little 
trouble, as he achieved his grown mass; he simply exercised, and his body and hide hoarded the heat. But in hot 
weather, when he overexerted himself, he had more of a problem, for he did not sweat. He tended to forage at 
night, when the heat generated by his motion compensated for the cool of the evening. But he could handle day 
too. He kept his body mostly in the shade of the trees, avoiding the direct sun. But even so, he grew hot—and it 
turned out that this was part of his makeup. When he was conserving heat, his outer body cooled, much as did 
the hands of a man, but more extensively; snow could actually fall on his back without melting rapidly. He had 
a blubbery layer of fat that could cool almost to freezing without damage. In summer this same layer could heat 
to well above the danger point for man, so that the hide felt burningly hot, and radiated heat efficiently. Balook 
could also conserve that excess heat, as night approached, and use it as a buffer against the developing cold. It 
was a sophisticated mechanism for survival—all hidden there in the small print of the genetic code, not 
understood until it manifested in life.
How was it that Balook's kind had become extinct, when it was so much better equipped to survive than the 
cousin rhinos that did carry on to the present day? That was one of the mysteries that remained unresolved.
But Thor had a more immediate concern. Could 
Balook have come to meet his soul-cousins in the 
zoo? No, his trail skirted the barricades, and nothing 
was broken. Thor heard a grunting inside that was 
probably the six-legged pig. Once it had been 
thought that creatures like this would prove the gene-
splicing technique, but opponents had claimed that 
fetal surgery accounted for the extra legs. Indeed, it 
could have, for that aspect of medicine had 
progressed too. So the pig, an actual success, was a 
practical failure; it was too easy to disbelieve.

Balook
The majority of the experiments had been true failures, even those that lived. It was illegal to kill any wildlife, 
so these had to be maintained for their full natural spans. Rather, their unnatural spans. Thor had never been 
inside the compound, and could only speculate what other monsters were hidden from public view, the shame of 
science.
Thor rode on, glad that Balook had passed by the zoo. Balook was no freak! The proof of the technique could 
not be in the recreation of an existing animal, for there would always be the suspicion that a natural embryo had 
been substituted for the laboratory specimen. Indeed, the process started with natural tissue, whose genetic 
blueprint was then modified by radiation and laser surgery and chemistry.
Thus the decision had settled on the past: the recreation of some long-extinct animal, perfect in every detail. No 
slight-of-hand could explain that away, or make it smell of freak or fluke. To make it impressive, for that 
inevitable day the Project would face appropriations cutbacks, they chose a large animal. Not a dinosaur; the 
reptilian environment would have been too difficult to duplicate on that scale. Not a sea creature, for that would 
not have been suitably visible.
So it was Baluchitherium, the hornless rhinoceros of the Miocene Epoch, thirteen to twenty million years ago. 
The experts had used a battery of computers to analyze the rhinoceros chromosomes, then had done the laser 
surgery on the living tissue: the fertilized rhino egg. A few small changes, meticulously scripted to make it 
conform to the pattern derived from painstakingly analyzed Baluchitherium bones, and the sample was ready.
It died. They made adjustments. There had been a series of seemingly minor options, choices between settings 
that seemed to make no difference. Evidently this was not the case. They made changes, and tried again.
That one also died. So did the next. And the following efforts, as they changed the pattern desperately, seeking 
the key to survival. They added larger sections of what had been assumed to be counterproductive elements, and 
tinkered with those. More deaths. But the failures were showing signs of progress, hanging on longer before 
expiring.
A hundred or more expensive cultures failed—but in the end five of them formed embryos, of which three 
developed imperfectly. What distinguished the survivors from the non-survivors was unclear. One of the 
successes was dispatched to another laboratory for study. The other became, at last, Balook.
Thor had named him, actually. The nine year old boy had found the full proper name too cumbersome. 
Baluchitherium, derived from the place where the first fossil bones of the original creatures had been found: 
Baluchistan, Asia. Present-day Pakistan and Iran. A related type was called Indricotherium; there was some 
question which was the most accurate designation for this re-created creature. But now everyone used Thor's 
nickname, and Balook answered to it, at least when Thor called. Ba-look, with the accent on the second syllable, 
to rhyme with "spook." Ba-LOOK-i-THER-ium. Few folk had ever heard of this creature, the largest mammal 
ever to walk the earth. One day that ignorance would change.
Now Balook was seven years old, dating from the time he should normally have been born. Of course he had 
never been born; he had just grown from test-tube culture to incubator item to laboratory specimen to stable. He 
was not yet mature; he would fill out slowly for several more years.
Just as Thor himself would, he reflected as he pedaled along the haphazard trail. It wasn't bad traveling, so far, 
because the forest land in the vicinity of the ranch was kept clear of underbrush, and Balook naturally chose the 
firmest footing. One misstep could kill an animal that size, because the height and mass of the body were both 
so great. Balook took care never to misstep.
The tractor-trails passed through at regular intervals, for the trees were constantly thinned, trimmed, watered 

Balook
and fertilized. Balook's spoor was following one of those trails at present.
Suddenly Thor was facing a moving tractor. The machine was just heaving over the rise that had hidden it, and 
the hum of the electric motor was scarcely audible even at close range. It was robot controlled, of course, and 
not programmed to stop for intruders.
The machine came on so swiftly that Thor had to career off the path to get out of the way. The solid machine 
moved on past, dragging a parcel of trimmings behind it, taking no notice of him.
Suppose Balook ran into such a tractor?
Thor smiled. That was no problem. Balook would either avoid the thing or step over it. Balook distrusted 
machinery, perhaps because it vaguely resembled an animal but had no proper smell or manner.
Now he came to a stream. Balook had crossed and gone on. Thor knew he should dismount and carry his bike 
across, but he couldn't resist using the boosters again. He touched the switch, moving it only slightly so that he 
did not get too much lift. Even so, he caught a glimpse of distant power line towers, like skeletal giants 
marching across the horizon. What would the world do without power! He sailed across the rocky water and 
landed neatly on the other side. Actually, this maneuver saved time, and used only a few seconds of boost; he 
hadn't really wasted it.
Why had Balook broken out? It didn't make sense!
Suppose someone had intruded, and fired at Balook? Skip had pooh-poohed the notion of someone shooting at 
the huge animal. But Skip knew it had happened before.
Private guns were outlawed, true—but the law was violated widely, and only enforced when someone got hurt. 
Unauthorized people did not carry guns openly, but could have concealed weapons. Many outsiders resented the 
resources used in the Project. They felt that the development of an extinct animal was wasted effort, since the 
world was already pinched and overcrowded. Some of those same people, oddly, also objected to the "waste" of 
unoccupied national forests. It seemed that they had a low tolerance for any land or any thing that did not 
contribute directly to their comfort, and they took no comfort in nature. That might have accounted for the old-
timer who had one morning fired a .22 bullet into Balook's shoulder.
The man had been arrested and fined, and of course his gun had been confiscated. Balook recovered; he was too 
massive to be seriously hurt by that caliber. But he still carried the tiny scar, and remembered the pain. He was 
afraid of the sound of gunfire, or any similar noise. Once workmen had used a power riveter for an addition to 
the stable, and Balook had gone wild. He had knocked down the stable walls faster than the workmen were 
putting them up. So if anyone had come near the fence this time and made a loud noise, even firing blanks...
Could Don Scale have set off a firecracker behind Balook, making him leap through the barrier? No, no, the 
suspicion was paranoid! Scale simply would not do that, ever. Even if someone else had done it, this would not 
explain why Balook had kept on going. He might have crashed out and run for a distance, yes, but not this 
purposeful journey west.
Thor was breathing hard, now, though he was an experienced biker. The terrain was becoming rougher as the 
trail neared the edge of the cleared forest. There was a road a kilometer or so ahead; Thor was familiar with this 
section. Why would Balook head for a highway?
Balook did not know the motor-vehicle road was there, of course. Maybe he had stopped when he saw it, and 
Thor would find him waiting, bewildered. Mission accomplished?
Thor condemned the destructive ignorance of the pot-shotter, but he knew that the evil was more than one man 

Balook
or one gun, and could not be eliminated by one arrest. Even now there was a legislative narrowness that 
condemned the Project as an inflationary waste. Skip had spoken of this attitude often, spitting deliberately on 
the ground as if there were a bad taste in his mouth. Indeed, Balook had cost a lot of money. Don Scale had 
mentioned five hundred million dollars, but Thor was sure that was only a small part of it.
The truth was that Balook was significant, not only as a living unextinct animal and the largest land mammal 
who ever lived, but as the key to the creation of new forms of life. All the failed experiments, the mutated 
animal fetuses—these had led up to the first real success. Balook had shown the way, so that it could be done 
for other creatures or even human beings without the same horrible mistakes. This would surely benefit man 
and save many times its cost of development, in the long run. Skip had discussed this, too, and Thor had pretty 
well assimilated the entire dialogue. This was one type of study at which this poor student had had real 
motivation to succeed.
But he did not need intellectual reasons to help Balook! He loved the big animal, and that would have sufficed 
even if nothing else mattered.
Balook's trail intersected a bicycle route, which was not surprising, as these trails crisscrossed the nation as well 
as the region. The prints followed this. Excellent; Thor could make real time along this stretch. He was lucky he 
lived in a time when self-propelled vehicles— human, not motor propelled—were the main form of private 
transportation. Even ten years ago there had been more cars than bikes!
He cocked his head, hearing a noise: a kind of thud-thud-thud! Could that be Balook? It was off the trail, but the 
rhino could have circled back, losing the way. It really didn't sound like Balook; still...
Thor left the path and pedaled across, orienting on the noise. The closer he got, the less familiar it sounded. 
There was something sinister about it. What could Balook be doing?
Then he broke upon the source—and was shocked. It wasn't Balook. It was a tree poacher.
The man was pounding in the last of four anchor-stakes, using a muffled sledge to stifle the noise. The tree was 
already guyed by three slow-stretch springs, the kind that would let it down no faster than a meter in five or six 
seconds, if the anchors were secure. A silent felling, and a careful coverup—so that after the theft there would 
be nothing but uninterrupted forest floor. With luck, the crime would not have been discovered until the next 
tree inventory survey.
Except for the coincidence of Thor's search for Balook.
Fury blinded him. "Stop, thief!" Thor cried—and realized instantly that he was being melodramatic and foolish. 
For this was no petty unpremeditated violation like casual mayhem; this was wilderness despoilation.
The poacher whirled around, raising his sledge. Thor knew he was in trouble. The poacher would be 
reconditioned if caught, and was ready to kill to avoid that fate. To many people, death was hardly worse than 
reconditioning; both processes destroyed a person's present individuality.
Thor's hand jumped to the booster control. He shot upward as the slow sledge swung. It caught his rear wheel, 
glancingly, knocking him out of control. He hadn't cleared in time!
But the very distortion of his travel helped him, for as the bike wobbled in the air, the booster jets intersected 
the body of the man below. They were strong and hot at this close range, as they had to be to maintain the 
weight of bike and rider. They pushed the man back, burning him. He cursed, scrambling clear.
Now Thor remembered the phone. He pushed down its button. "There's a poacher here!" he gasped to Skip.

Balook
"Oh there is, is there!" Skip answered grimly. "Okay, lad—we've got a fix on it. We'll catch him. You go on 
about your business."
Thor returned to Balook's trail, shaken by the episode. He had just sent a living man into reconditioning! The 
police would be landing within a minute. No copters were convenient for a five hundred million dollar 
Baluchitherium search, but poachers at a fixed location were another matter. No chance for the man to flee 
undetected.
The poachers were getting bolder, to operate right here in protected forest land! He had known they existed; the 
newscasts mentioned such outrages frequently. But to actually encounter such a criminal in the flesh—that left 
his heart pounding unpleasantly.
He knew why they did it. Fresh wood brought a phenomenal price on the black market. Still...
Sometimes Thor wished he had been born sooner, so that he could have seen the incredible squandering of 
resources that continued even after everyone knew to what disaster it was leading. Maybe he could have done 
something about it. Certainly he would never have been so stupid as to use pure water to flush high-grade 
sewage into the sea, thus destroying all three elements: water, recoverable wastes, and ocean environment. 
Today water was for drinking, sewage for fertilizer, and the sea for fish. Today was civilized. Once he had 
visited a sea-floor farm and seen the swimming crops, and touched the tentacle of a tame octopus. The huge 
squid were penned separately, as they could never be trusted, but the octopi could be handled.
Still, there was room for improvement, and Balook was showing the way. Other worlds could be explored, 
worlds hostile to man, because the techniques that had fashioned Balook could in due course remake man 
himself. A strain of human being adapted to cold and low oxygen could colonize Mars; another strain adapted to 
heat and darkness could settle on Venus, if a way were found to handle the enormous atmospheric pressure 
there.
But Balook would help most right here on Earth. Meat was scarce and expensive now, but wonderful meat-
producing strains could be developed, not in decades or even in years, but in months—once the bio-computers 
tackled the problem. People could be fed at a fraction of the present cost per food-pound. Why not a bacon bush 
or a steak tree, when it came down to it? Or a steak-snake; that sounded better.
A mosquito stung him on the arm. Thor slapped at it. One thing about the pesticide moratorium: the pests 
survived. Theoretically biological warfare against the insects kept them under control, but nature was always a 
jump or two ahead. However, the Balook technique could produce special insectivores, bug eaters supreme.
He smiled. Bug-eyed monsters—with an eye for bugs.
Then he realized that his flight of fancy was unrealistic. Insects and arachnids had their place too; they were 
needed for fertilization of many plants, and as food for birds. He had been too narrow. Perhaps it would be 
better to develop a kind of human being whose blood made mosquitoes sick. That made him smile; he had a 
mental picture of a mosquito turning green in the snoot and buzzing anxiously for a basin.
Maybe there could even be life forms that fed on contaminating radiation, improving the environment further. 
The prospects seemed endless. But all the local folk seemed to worry about was Balook's size and the "waste" 
of funds.
Thor shook his head—and realized that he had just lost Balook's trail. He had been blithely zooming along the 
bikeway, and had missed the place where Balook turned off. Damn!
He slowed and turned about, furious with himself. He would have to stop thinking to himself so much. That was 

Balook
a bad habit he had gotten into in the course of his years of semi-isolation from people his own age. If Balook got 
in trouble in the extra time made by this needless delay—
The radio buzzed. Thor jumped guiltily. He turned it on. "Right here," he said.
"Skip, again. We got the poacher. Mean customer! This will clear up a number of unsolved thefts in this 
neighborhood. Congratulations!"
"That's great!" Thor said, relieved that Skip hadn't found out about his losing the trail. But how could Skip have 
learned? It was a pointless concern.
"Now about Balook. You're way off—"
Thor gulped audibly.
"No fault of yours, lad," Skip continued. "He's been sighted thirty-five miles west of the ranch. That's about a 
two hour start on you, at your rate through the rough. Not as bad as I figured, but bad enough. Can you catch 
him?"
Thor spied Balook's trail again, going west, into high brush. Balook was tall enough to step over most of the 
bushes without flattening them. That meant an almost impenetrable wall of foliage barred Thor's way. No 
wonder he had missed it!
"Not a chance," Thor said. "I'll have to carry the bike through this mess, or boost over. Unless I go around. But 
that would add a lot of mileage."
"Don't waste your boost!" Skip said, alarmed. "Look, lad—that was a chance sighting. A housewife who 
thought she was dreaming, but called the police anyway, just in case. They told her the perspective must have 
made a stray horse seem bigger than it was. Not many outsiders know much about Balook, you know."
Thor hadn't known. He had assumed that his knowledge was common, and that the criticism of the Project 
relayed to him was from the general public. He should have known better. He had become insular, locked 
mainly in the world he shared with Balook. Yet a news blackout could have suppressed even such episodes as 
the hospital visit, so that only vague rumors circulated. But he hardly cared to discuss that now. "What 
happened?"
"They called us. They've been alerted, and warned to stay clear, but you know how snoopy folk get. They aren't 
going to stay clear long, especially if anybody gets hurt. You've got to get over there now. We're sending a car 
around to give you a lift."
"But a car will spook Balook!"
"Not if it lets you off a mile or two from him. We've got to take that chance, lad! Now you put your signal on 
and scoot over to the nearest motor vehicle lane, and the car will find you in a few minutes."
"Okay," Thor said, slightly disturbed at this change in plans. Was Skip subtly letting him know that there was a 
lack of confidence in his abilities? He found the "Signal" setting on the ring radio and left it on. There was no 
audible response; there wasn't supposed to be.
He turned his bike about again and pedaled north. Actually he'd be glad for a rest; he wasn't used to this 
strenuous and extended effort. A cross-country pursuit was different from a few kilometers on an established 
bikeway.
The car was prompt. It rolled up as he intersected the motor lane. It was an automatic electric: no driver.

Balook
He folded the bike and set it in the rear rack, then climbed into the car. The motor whined smoothly as the 
vehicle accelerated down the lane, achieving a speed no human driver would have trusted.
Thor hardly had a chance to relax, before the car 
slowed. Sixty kilometers—in twenty minutes!
He got out and unfolded the bicycle. The car moved 
smoothly away. Balook's trail was visible where it 
crossed the lane. Good enough.
The land was more open here, and Thor was not 
familiar with it. It was not easy pedaling, for there 
were rocks and holes in the ground; a semi-
wilderness park. Balook's trail was harder to follow, 
because there were fewer trees to show damage and 
the hard terrain hardly showed his imprint. Also, the 
path was no longer straight, for Balook was now 
traveling from tree to tree. Not to eat; he was seeking 
partial shade and concealment, for he liked neither 
the sunlight nor the open range.
Again Thor marveled at Balook's imperative. For a 
primarily nocturnal, forest-shade creature to charge 
out into unshaded territory by day, with the problem 
of heat dissipation that brought, and keep going—he 
had to have some truly compelling reason. But what 
could it be?
The animal had to be close, for this was where he 
had been sighted. Within a couple of kilometers. 
How far could he have strayed in twenty minutes?
Confidently Thor went on, traversing the difficult 
landscape. He felt much refreshed by the brief rest, 
and by the knowledge that he was now close. The 
foam metal wheels absorbed much of the constant jarring, and the shock absorbers helped too, but the pedaling 
was still stiff. At any moment, now, he would spy Balook's hulking body...
Yet several kilometers passed, with no more direct sign of the quarry. Finally Thor touched his ring. "Skip, are 
you sure he's here?" he asked when the man answered. "I can't find him."
"No, I'm not sure," Skip replied worriedly. "We don't know how long it took the woman to report, and there 
may have been delay in relaying the message. Don't forget Balook's moving right along, too."
"He's slowed down," Thor said. "He passed this section in sunlight, so it can't have been too long ago."
"How do you know that?"
Thor explained about the tree-to-tree pattern of the trail. Skip whistled. "You're a regular Sherlock Holmes, lad! 
Smart thinking. But the sun's well up now; he could still be an hour ahead of you, which means several hours to 
catch up. Sorry, lad; I misjudged it."

Balook
Thor sighed. That action reminded him of Scale's sigh, and the movement of the lie detector's needle. Had 
something happened to Balook, and this was a false trail, complete with false sightings? Ridiculous, yet... 
"Well, at least I'm sixty kilos closer than I was."
"I wonder where he's going?" Skip mused.
"If we knew that, I wouldn't have to chase him!" Thor snapped. The idea of Balook going without him still hurt
—if Balook had gone of his own accord. Yet who could have forced the animal?
"Sure, lad." Skip paused. "Okay: suppose we give you another lift, since that's the way he's going."
Thor's legs were tiring again from the rough pedaling. "Might as well," he agreed, as if it were an incidental 
decision.
The car took him west ten kilometers, and he found the trail. Then it took him twenty more, and he lost the trail. 
He had to backtrack, cursing. The reason became plain: Balook had changed course. He was now bearing 
northwest. So Thor hopped in that direction—and lost the trail again.
Balook was wandering, going now north and now south, but averaging west. He still wasn't eating. The oddity 
of this travel was increasing.
Then another eyewitness report came in, and the car took Thor to that spot. This sighting was recent; Thor knew 
he was only fifteen minutes behind Balook now. It was late in the day, two hundred fifty kilometers west of the 
Project grounds. Balook had to be tired, hungry, and hot; now was the time to catch him!
Thor pedaled furiously, aided by another bike path parallel to the trail. There was a large river a few kilos north, 
so he knew Balook would not drift far that way. The animal had never been exposed to deep water.
This time he was in luck. He heard the thud of great hooves ahead, for Balook shook the ground when he 
walked swiftly. Thor doubled his effort, heedless of the pain in his thighs and calves, racing along the path. The 
noise of Balook's progress grew louder. But it was hard to gain on him, because the beast's pace was almost as 
swift as the bike's. Thor raced a good two kilometers without actually catching sight of his quarry.
Things could have been worse, he thought breathlessly. Now there was a lot of parkland and cultured 
wilderness, thanks to the current land administration policies. So Balook had been able to survive, so far. But 
sooner or later the huge rhino would blunder into a major highway or residential development, and then it would 
be disaster.

Balook
Thor topped a small rise and came into the clear 
section beside the river. The pretty water spread 
ahead. And there, at the edge, just rising from a 
drink, stood Balook.
He was like a heavyset, powerful, huge-footed horse
—twice the height of any equine that ever lived. His 
massive shoulders towered over five meters above 
the ground. His head, a meter and a half long, looked 
tiny compared to the huge body and massive neck. 
The great humped nose was lifting to sniff the air, 
and the fleshy, almost prehensile upper lip was 
extended to help. The little ears were cocked, 
listening.
The rays of the declining sun reflected off the surface 
of the water and silhouetted the magnificent figure, 
making the brown hide glow. Balook was no ugly 
duckling now. He was the largest and most beautiful 
creature ever to walk the earth!
"Balook!" Thor cried gladly. He really was crying, 
for there were tears on his cheeks, tears of admiration 
and relief. He had found Balook, and Balook was all 
right. They were together again!
Balook heard him. The high head swung around, the 
thick skin of the neck creasing. The little tail 
swished, in that way it had. The tails of horses were 
formidable fly-swatters, always in motion in summer, 
but Balook's hide was too tough for most flies, and at 
this time of day too hot for them too. Thus the tail was used more for expression than for business, though it 
could strike hard if motivated.
The animal took a step toward Thor, then halted, lip quivering, nose elevated. Then Balook turned and plunged 
into the river.
Amazed, Thor pulled up and watched. "But you can't swim!" he protested. But he quickly saw that this was 
irrelevant. Balook splashed across, his legs so long that the water never touched his belly. Was he trying to use 
it to cool himself? No, for then he should have ducked down into it. The river was a good twenty meters across, 
but soon Balook was stepping into the forest on the other side.
Thor stood gaping. Why had Balook run? He had heard and recognized Thor!
Angrily Thor touched the booster setting. The jets fired and the bike rose—almost straight up. He had forgotten 
that he had no forward motion, no inertia to carry him across. The slant of the jets was set to maintain forward 
progress, not to initiate it. Quickly he adjusted the tilt of the jets.
The bike looped about in the air and flung him off, five meters over the river.
Thor hit the water on his back with a monstrous splash. He sank, but fortunately he had landed in deep-enough 

Balook
water. In a moment he stroked to the surface, gasping, his nose stinging with sucked-in fluid. His back was 
smarting, but he wasn't really hurt.
The bike was bobbing along in the gentle current, its hollow tubing causing it to float. Thor swam over and 
recovered it, then sidestroked for shore, hauling it along. He found his footing, stood, and waded out.
The machine was intact, since the same blind luck that had saved Thor's neck had plunged the bike into the 
water instead of the hard ground. The booster jets had been extinguished; there was no way to tell how much 
boost had been wasted before the fuel cut off. There would have to be several hours of drying before the jets 
worked, and then they might be unreliable. Still, it was a better outcome than he felt he really deserved.
Bedraggled, dripping, and suddenly cold, Thor gazed across the water. He could never catch Balook now. He 
would have to resume the chase tomorrow. But that was not what bothered him most.
He was Balook's friend, his only real friend, the one person the huge animal really trusted. Always before, 
Balook had come running at his call, eager for companionship and the interactions of the day. No power on 
earth should have been able to sever that years-long bond of friendship and need. Not while they both lived.
Yet Balook had seen and recognized Thor—and fled.
 

Balook
THERIA
3
"I THINK YOU had better give up the chase, lad," Skip said. "You're lucky you didn't kill yourself—"
"No!" Thor cried. "I know I can catch him, now!"
"But if, as you say, he's deliberately avoiding you—"
Thor shook his head, more in dismay than negation. That still hurt, even after his troubled night's sleep at the 
hostel. "I just have to go after him, that's all."
Skip's sigh carried through the ring radio. "That's what I told Don."
Thor sat up straight, alarmed. "You've been talking to Mr. Scale?"
Now Skip laughed in that easy way of his. "Sure, lad. He's my boss, you know."
"Is he there now?"
"No, he's out seeing about the break in the fence. Why?"
Thor's hands were suddenly clammy. "He—I didn't want to say this, but—"
"Sounds like something you'd better have out, lad!"
"I guess. He—you know that lie detector? The one he uses to—"
"I know it."
"His hand touched it, when we were in the office, and—and the needle went straight to FALSE. I—"
"I saw it too, lad."
"I don't know what he—" Thor paused, doing a doubletake. "You saw it too?"
"Listen, lad, Don Scale's an honest man. He wouldn't hurt Balook. If he's hiding something, and I would guess 
he is, it's because he's been ordered to hide it. Don't go getting any ideas about him letting Balook out; he cares 
for the rhino the same way you do, only he doesn't show it. So he covers up with talk of money and such. He's 
with us—you believe that."
"I know that, I guess. But—"
"But you keep your mouth shut about that meter reading. Maybe Don does know something about what 
happened to Balook. But we've got to work with him and trust him. I trust him, and I know that when the truth's 
out, he'll be all right. Now you just go on after Balook, and maybe we'll find out the whole story."
"Okay, Skip," Thor said dubiously. But the knowledge that his friend had also seen the movement of the needle 
on the lie detector encouraged him; Skip was better equipped to know what to believe.
"We'll keep the car handy, in case he's moving during the night again."

Balook
"He's got to sleep sometime!" But they really did not know how long the huge animal could keep going, when 
he wanted to. Ordinarily, night would be Balook's preferred time for traveling.
They played leapfrog again, all day, and still didn't catch up. Balook was moving rapidly ahead, into a mild 
west wind. Thor's muscles were sore despite the help of the car.
What was wrong with the animal? It was as though Balook was running faster, now that he knew Thor was on 
his trail. The rhino had traveled almost two hundred kilometers this day, through field and forest, across 
highways and rivers, going—where?
And what was Scale's secret? If Skip said it was okay, then it was okay, but it remained as mysterious as 
Balook's flight. If Scale knew something...
But his questions had no answers. As Skip said: he would just have to find Balook and get his answer.
On the third morning that answer abruptly materialized. Balook's tracks went up to a large fenced yard and 
through a gaping hole. It would have been easy for the animal to circle around the fence and go on, for this farm 
was in a pleasantly forested region. But Balook had broken in.
There was something here he wanted. But what?
Thor walked his bicycle through the gap, following the trail. But soon he lost it; there were too many tracks 
pointing in too many directions. What had Balook been doing here? Trampling down the whole farm?
Then he heard it: the sound of branches breaking as a huge animal browsed. Balook was eating again!
At last he caught up. "Balook!" he cried.
The animal turned, the folds of skin changing. The great head came into view.
Thor stared. It wasn't Balook!
But it was Baluchitherium. A different one, smaller, under five meters tall at the shoulders, and less heavily 
muscled. But definitely the same breed.
Which was impossible. Balook was the only one of his kind.
Suddenly the image of the lie detector returned, the needle reading FALSE. Balook—unique? Don Scale must 
have known there was another one!

Balook
"Well, hello!"
Thor looked toward the voice, startled. It was a girl of about his own 
age, rather pretty, with flouncing brown curls and eyes to match.
"You're a bit off the bikeway," she said. "This is private property."
"I was looking for Balook," Thor said, out of sorts.
"This is a Baluchitherium," she said, gesturing to the animal. "But 
you can't have her, you know."
Her? A female Baluchitherium! "So that's it!" Thor cried. "He must 
have smelled her from all that distance, when the wind was right!"
The girl approached the animal, putting her arm across the 
tremendous nose that descended to meet her. "I take it you're 
associated with the one that broke in here this morning?"
"I am. Where is he?"
But no reply was necessary. Now Balook's head rose beyond the 
female.
"Satisfied?" the girl asked.
"I came a long way to find him!" Thor said defensively.
"I'll bet," she agreed. "We didn't know there was another 
Baluchitherium. Mine's called Theria."
"Mine's Balook. I'm Thor. Thor Nemmen."
"I'm Barbara Hartford. Call me Barb. C'mon, you'd better come 
inside and clean up. You're a mess."
"But Balook—"
"He's not interested in you. He's not going anywhere."
"He's my friend!" Thor said hotly.
"Very well. Call him."
Thor called. "Balook!" But Balook paid him no attention.
"See?" Barb said. "Theria's the same way, now. Yesterday she was eager for my call, today she's got other 
concerns. She only noses me in passing. Why didn't you keep your animal penned?"
"How?" Thor asked sourly.
"I was being facetious. Come on."
Thor came. There really wasn't much else to do, and he was grimy from the morning's chase.
There followed a rush of introductions, as he met the personnel of Theria's domain. It was very like Balook's. 

Balook
Now he knew: this was where the second successful embryo had been taken. It had not been destroyed in 
laboratory experimentation, as he had supposed; it had been saved, and raised with the same care as Balook.
But why? And why hadn't anyone been told? So much trouble and anguish could have been spared!
"C'mon, let's walk," Barb said abruptly. Thor complied, uncertain what else there was to do. He didn't like this 
situation, the strangeness of two Baluchitheriums, the hurt of being ignored by his friend, of being lied to by—
someone.
She guided him out across the field and pasture and into the healthy forest of beech and oak, the intermediate 
foliage of the big trees pruned well back. Balook liked beechnuts and acorns; evidently Theria did too. They 
came to a grassy glade surrounded by young fir trees, where the sunlight slanted down in the center.
Barb flopped on the warm grass. She was a tomboy, lanky in her jeans and plaid shirt. Her brown curls fell 
across her face, half hiding it as she peered up at him.
Thor stood beside her, awkwardly. "C'mon," she said. "Join the crowd. Sit down."
"Okay." He sat down.
"You aren't much for conversation, are you!" she exclaimed.
"You wanted to talk, not me."
She rolled over on her back, looking at the sky. "I figured you'd have something to say."
"Damn it, what's there to say!" Thor cried angrily.
She smiled. "Now that's more like it! Why are you mad?"
"I chased all this way after Balook, and now he— Thor broke off, exasperated. "Why did I bother?"
" 'Cause you love him," she said.
"I didn't say that!" But he realized he should have said it. Now he was stuck on the wrong foot.
"Why, then?"
"Oh, forget it!"
"I think it's sort of great," she said. "The two of them have been alone, all these years, and now they're together."
"Balook wasn't alone!"
"You know what I mean. Every creature needs its own kind. You wouldn't want to spend the rest of your life 
with only Balook for company, would you?"
"Yes I would!"
She rolled over again. "You're hung up, know that?"
"Yeah? What are you doing with Theria, then? Don't you care?"
"Sure I care! I love her. I love her more'n anything, and I'm not ashamed to say it. But I want her to be happy, 
too."
"Well, I want Balook happy!"

Balook
"He's happy now," she said.
Thor shook his head. "Oh, damn, what's the use!"
"You sure are great at swearing! Know any other words?"
"No!" Thor snapped, flushing. How could he have gotten so firmly on the wrong foot, without even trying?
They were silent for a while.
"Oh, c'mon," she said at last. "We're in this together. We should get to know each other. That's why I asked you 
here, you know."
Thor had cooled off, and was sorry for his gruffness. "I guess so."
"I mean, we're probably the only two people who ever existed as official companions for Baluchitheria. There 
weren't any people around in the Miocene period."
"Epoch."
"What? Oh—Miocene. Epoch. Yes, if you want to be technical."
"No, I don't care. It was a long time ago."
She changed the subject. "How did it start, with you?"
"I was just a nosy kid, poking about. I found Balook, and he was lonely."
"Like you."
"Yes, like me!" he snapped. "What's it to you?"
"I was lonely too," she said. "Still am."
"Oh." He considered for a moment, his emotions fuzzed. "Well, they tried to break it up, and Balook wouldn't 
let them. I was the only one he cared for. Then."
"Theria was having trouble too. I guess when they saw how it was with you—how good you were for Balook—
they knew what to do. So they looked for someone for Theria, here, and they set it up. All they needed was a 
lonely girl."
"You don't look lonely."
"Why should I? It's not becoming." Her head was in her folded arms, on the ground, so that her voice was 
muffled.
"It's not funny," he said, annoyed. "Lonely is not a fashion!"
"Not always," she said, her shoulders shaking.
"Are you teasing me?" he asked suspiciously. He was frustrated enough without getting laughed at.

Balook
For answer, she raised her face. Her eyes were red, 
and strands of hair were matted across her cheeks, 
wet from her tears.
Amazed, he stared.
"She was all mine," Barb said. "And now, suddenly, 
this morning, out of the blue, it's over. Over."
"I thought you knew—"
"No, I didn't know!" she screamed. "I thought you 
knew."
"Me! I thought Balook had been tortured or 
something, afraid of me, afraid of everyone! I 
chased him—"
"Oh, hell, why fight," she said. "I'm sorry."
"Sorry? For being lonely?"
"For trying to make you admit you knew."
"Admit I—"
"Well, somebody knew! Not that it matters, now."
"You mean all that camaraderie—just to—?"
"Pointless, isn't it," she said wryly. "I thought you were putting on an act. I just couldn't keep mine up. I'm not 
the type."
"The type?"
"Social. With boys—you know."
"I—" He hesitated. "Know."
They found themselves staring at each other with suddenly intense understanding. Both flushed, and looked 
away, embarrassed.
"Scale knew," Thor said after a moment.
"Who?"
"You said somebody knew about the two Baluchitheriums. He—"
"Baluchitheria."
"Do you want to hear this or don't you?" he snapped.
She smiled, abruptly pretty. "I apologize."
She understood about being alone. About needing a friend. She was his age, and a girl. She was like him, in 
mirror image. That was abruptly appealing.

Balook
"You aren't going to tell me?" she asked.
"What?"
"The man who knew."
"Oh." He had allowed himself to be distracted, foolishly. "Don Scale knew about Balook and Theria. He's our 
Project Manager. I knew he knew something, but I didn't know what. He knew about the second Project, and 
didn't tell anyone. If he hadn't been so damned secretive—"
She nodded. "Maybe he thought we wouldn't cooperate if we knew. And maybe we wouldn't have."
"Why not? They could have had the two rhinos together from the start."
"And had them mate early, and maybe die of complications, and ruin the whole thing," she said. "No, I can see 
keeping them apart. What I can't see is not telling us. What is this—a military secret so that nobody can help 
anybody else no matter what is wasted in inefficiency?"
"I think Mr. Scale has a military background. 'Need to know' and all that."
"Need to know!" she snorted.
"What makes you think they'd mate? Too soon, I mean?"
"Don't you know anything? Theria's in heat. Was, anyway. That's why Balook came all that distance. But by the 
time he got here, she was over it. Just as well, maybe."
In heat. Why hadn't he realized? No wonder Balook had battered down all obstacles! Thor had seen the 
neighborhood transformed when some animal was in heat. Dogs, cats—the female gave out a smell that carried 
wherever the wind went, and every male of the species responded. Docile pets became unmanageable, until that 
odor faded.
So all the pieces had fallen into place. Balook had grown up. Thor was superfluous. So was Barb, as far as 
Theria went. Nothing they could do could change that. He should have known his life with Balook could not 
last forever, just as childhood could not last forever. Everyone had to grow up.
Still it hurt.
"Have they done it yet?" he asked.
"Done what?"
Was she teasing him, or truly perplexed? "You know. Mated."
"I told you: she was out of heat by the time he got here."

Balook
"Which means she might not be interested. But he 
didn't travel all the way for a cold shoulder. Heat 
isn't like a switch that suddenly clicks off. He'll be 
interested in her for days, until the last trace of it is 
gone."
"I suppose that is the way males are," she said, with 
a partial smile to show she did not quite mean it. "It 
does lead to trouble. But no, there hasn't been 
anything. Yet. I—I think they really don't know how. They might have the urge, but—"
"I have a notion what that's like."
"There's no manual for them. They can't even pick it up from others of their kind."
"Maybe when her next heat comes."
"Maybe. But it may still be too soon for them. I guess the two projects were going to be joined in another year 
or two, when both were all the way mature. They're like teenagers now."
Teenagers. Like himself and Barb.
She scrambled to her feet, dusting off bits of grass. She seemed recovered from her emotional malaise. "C'mon. 
We can still be friends."
"What for?" he asked bitterly. "We're just extras now."
"Friends with them, I mean." She walked back toward the stable.

Balook
She was right. Balook still recognized Thor, and did 
not run from him now. But when Thor called 
"Down!" for the rhino to lower his head so the boy 
could climb up in his massive neck, Balook would 
not obey. He would not be ridden; he had another 
interest now.
There was no question of trying to take Balook back 
to his own ranch. He possessed the rhino 
stubbornness in full measure. They would have had to 
drug him and carry him, which would have been an 
extraordinary task, and he would not have stayed. 
Balook was here with Theria, and here he would 
remain. Until he figured out how to do what he had 
come for.
 
THOR MOVED INTO a spare cabin on the premises 
and became part of the Theria Project, for the 
moment. There seemed to be little point in staying, as 
the personnel here were fully competent. The gap in 
the fence was fixed, and the two great rhinos were 
happy. But there was Barb. Thor had had little 
experience with people his own age, and less with 
girls. Barb was approachable; she had similar interests
—namely, huge extinct animals—and she was pretty. 
She could carry the conversational ball when he 
faltered. He was often annoyed at her "C'mon" 
pushiness, but he liked her. He liked her a lot, and 
could not say so. He felt the enormous attraction of a girl who truly understood about dedication to animals. 
Barb would never, ever tease him about Balook. But beyond that, there was a void. He had no better notion 
what to do about it than Balook did.
"C'mon, let's have a picnic," Barb said one afternoon. "We'll put some hardtack in the bikes and loop out to the 
lake."
There it was again. She had already set it up, knowing he would go along. He went along, because it was 
awkward to say no. He would have liked the idea better if he had set it up—if he had had the courage to—if he 
had even thought of it. Which bordered on another irritation: the suspicion that Barb was smarter than he was. 
He now knew that she was a year younger than he, though she was at his level in school.
They followed the local trails out. Barb's bike was less sophisticated than his, lacking the boosters, but they 
weren't going cross-country anyway. She pedaled ahead, showing the way, long-legged and energetic. Her curls 
flopped back and forth in the wind, and her jeans were tight across her rear and thighs. She would not pass for a 
tomboy much longer. He felt guilty for noticing, but he kept watching.
The lake was beautiful. It was ringed by dark green pines, and the water was glassy clear. Fish leaped 
occasionally, making sudden splashes. It was exactly the kind of setting Thor had come to love, and it was 
evident Barb did too. Nature, unspoiled.

Balook
Barb spread a cloth over the pine needles and set out sandwiches. Thor saw they were handmade; she had put 
them together herself. It had probably cost more to buy the makings than it would have to order them whole, but 
it was her notion of independence. He liked it.
But before they started eating, she looked out over the water. "C'mon, let's go for a swim, work up a proper 
appetite."
She just couldn't go long without stirring things up! "Can't. No suits."
"Oh." She considered momentarily. "Well, we could—"
"No." He wasn't going to let her tease him into an embarrassing situation.
"No one would see."
"We would see," he said, feeling a flush developing: exactly what he had sought to avoid.
"Yes, but we know each other."
Thor turned the idea over in his mind. Its appeal grew, perversely. Why not, after all? He would never have 
suggested such a thing, but now all he had to do was go along. He had never seen a girl nude. Not a real one. It 
was bound to be a fascinating experience.
But she would see him, too...
Well, hell. What was the difference? "Okay," he said, his heart pounding in a fashion he hoped didn't show.
"Oh, you're always so stuffy!" she exclaimed.
"I said 'Okay'."
"You—" She paused. "You agreed?"
"Sure. Do us good to cool off in the water." He knew he would have to hurry, because already the masculine 
reaction was stirring. If he stripped rapidly and jumped into the cold water before it showed, good enough. 
Otherwise he'd be in trouble.
She seemed flustered. "But I thought you—"
He caught on. "You thought I wouldn't do it? Why did you suggest it, then?"
"No, I—"
Now he was intrigued, made bold by her hesitation. "So I called your bluff. So let's go swimming!"
"Oh, all right," she said, disgruntled. "You first."
"Ladies first. You suggested it, you know."
"Women are equal now. 'Sposed to be, anyway. You don't have to defer to me. Go ahead. Undress."
She was trying to bluff him out after all. Thor discovered that he was rather enjoying this game. It would have 
been different with a truly self-possessed girl, but now he knew that Barb had no firmer social base that he did. 
One part of him was shocked; another part wanted to be naked with Barb. That gave it the lure and threat of the 
best competition.

Balook
"All right, me first, then you," he said, putting his hand to his belt. His masculine reaction was being held in 
abeyance by the tension of the situation; he could get through if he avoided thinking about it too much.
"Not here!" she squealed.
"Here is where we're going to swim, isn't it?"
"Yes, but you don't change in public. Go behind a tree or something."
"I'm not changing, I'm undressing. What difference does it make where I do it?" But of course it did make a 
difference, though he wasn't sure why.
She sighed. "I guess you're right. I started it. Might as well do it here."
Was she trying to bluff him again? He felt as if he were boosting over the lake, heedless of his landing. "Right."
Thor loosened his belt and pulled out his shirt. He took off his shoes and socks. Then he held his breath and let 
down his trousers. He realized now that it was not the notion of his own undressing that made him react; it was 
the notion of hers. He would have to head for the water the moment she started.
 
"Wait!" Barb cried.
Thor paused in his undershorts. "What now?" Ha! he thought.
"I can't do it. So I guess you shouldn't, either."
He had won, but he was disappointed. Having come this close to doing something he had thought he could not, 
something he might remember for the rest of his life, he preferred to seize the moment and go all the way. 

Balook
"Come on, Barb—let's do it. No one will know."
"It's not what you think," she said miserably. "I'm not a prude. I really would like to swim. Swim with you, I 
mean. I just can't."
"Okay," he said, embarrassed for her. He had pushed it too far, he realized. He pulled up his trousers. "Forget it."
"No, I've always been honest. Not popular, but honest. I'll tell you exactly why. It's because I'm—I'm not 
developed. Yet. I'm fourteen, and behind in my—it just takes longer for some girls—"
"I said forget it!" This was too complete a victory.
"I look like hell in a bathing suit, and worse nude. I don't want you to see me—"
"It's okay, Barb. I was just bluffing, myself."
"I don't think so. Not at the end."
"And you're not—" He hesitated, at a loss for a socially acceptable way to phrase it. "Your—your legs look 
nice, and—"
She glanced down at herself. "I guess I'm starting low and working up," she agreed. Her gaze stopped at her 
chest. "My—they haven't—"
"It doesn't matter. Let's eat."
"Next year I won't have to be ashamed. I—"
"For God's sake, stop it!" he shouted. "I understand! I'm no Adonis myself."
"I don't think you do, quite." She was blushing harder. "I want to look good—for you. Because you're the only, 
you know, the rhinos. And a decent person. I don't want you to have a bad image of me."
Again, Thor had mixed emotions. Her confessional candor embarrassed him, but he was deeply flattered and 
gratified by her feeling. It was Barb's way to tease him with banter or provocative remarks, then suddenly drop 
into some expression of true emotion. Perhaps it was her way of working up to something serious. But he found 
it awkward to cope with. She would put him in one mood, then hit him with material for another mood. This 
confession of hers had abolished his resentment of her ready wit; she was just as vulnerable as he, and needed 
that wit to compensate. The fact that she liked him enough to tell him her shame stirred him as strongly as the 
thought of her nudity had, but at a more fundamental level. They were hovering at the brink of something 
serious.
He wanted to kiss her, but the situation was wrong. He knew that the wrong move now could turn her 
ferociously against him. He had to play it carefully, so that his own social clumsiness would not destroy their 
relationship. "Why don't we make a date for next year?" he asked. "Same place. Same—you know. If we want 
to."
"It's a date!" she exclaimed, abruptly smiling. "Same uniform." She had found the word he lacked.
Thor nodded, tremendously relieved. He had succeeded in navigating the rapids and holding on to the gains they 
had made in their relationship. It was already clear that they were meant for each other; their shared isolation 
from others and their community of interest with the Projects had perhaps made that inevitable. But they were 
both too young to handle the full experience, as with Balook and Theria.
The truth was, Barb's nudity could have shown him little that her clothing had not already betrayed. She had a 

Balook
pretty face and a good mind, but portions of her body just had not yet done their thing.
He climbed back into the rest of his clothing. He had, at least, learned how much she liked him. That was well 
worthwhile. The heavy beating of his heart had settled into a warm heat in his chest. There were ways in which 
this was better than the nudity would have been. She had bared her feelings instead of her body.
She pushed a sandwich at him. "Wouldn't it be simple if people just went in heat, like the animals. No worry, no 
concern, no talking—just give with the smell and it's done!"
The idea appalled him. "People—in heat!"
"Well, it makes life easier for the animals."
"Who wants that kind of simplicity! Anyway, they haven't—"
"But they will, maybe next cycle."
"Yeah. And next year we'll swim."
She shrugged, relaxed again. She had in effect recovered her emotional clothing, and was back in charge. "You 
know, Balook and Theria are about our age, in rhino terms, I think. Do you think they'll have a calf?"
The parallel bothered him. "No way to know. They were both androids—created animals. They might be sterile, 
like mules."
"Only one way to find out," she said.
"Yes, let them try it and see."
"That's what they'll be doing." She looked about. In the course of their conversation they had finished eating. 
"Well, let's go home."
But they had forgotten that this was a scheduled rain afternoon, and they both got soaked. They might as well 
have gone swimming in their clothes.
 
"WE CAN'T EXTEND it any more, lad," Skip said apologetically. "Now that Balook's moved out, you'll have 
to go back to regular school. No more waivers."
Thor turned away from the TV phone. He had known that the Department of Education would catch up with 
him sometime. Barb retained her waiver, because the Baluchitheria were here, but Thor was officially out of 
work.
He had no choice. He had to go home.
He packed his things and put them in the car. It was programmed for the other Project; all he had to do was get 
in. But first he had to say farewell to Balook.
It was impossible, he thought as he walked. He had known Balook practically all of Balook's life. They had 
been inseparable, in sickness and in health. How could Balook desert him now?
Maybe if he called to the rhino, reminded him...
The animals were in the giant stable, standing side by side. They were not confined there; indeed, they would 

Balook
have broken out if they felt squeezed. They merely preferred it to the bright sun. In the evening they would 
meander out to crop the forest-top. They did not seem to sleep very much, but of course it could be hard to tell, 
because they were capable of settling by a big tree and eating its leaves in their sleep.
"Balook!" Thor called, walking up behind.
There was no response.
"Balook! I'm going back to the Project. Our Project," Thor said.
Balook leaned over and nudged Theria with his bent nose.
Thor remembered how the animal had suffered when left alone as a calf. Now he was not alone, and those years 
of human association seemed to mean nothing.
"Balook!" Thor stood beside the pillarlike foreleg, his head not even reaching the junction of leg with body. He 
was impressed, as he had been so often before, with the sheer mass of Balook's parts. Even to call this limb 
"elephantine" was a misnomer, for no elephant had a leg this large.
Thor put his hand on the tremendous knee. The skin hung loosely here, like the folds of a heavy leather jacket. 
Above it there was sparse hair. Modern rhinos had little hair, but Baluchitherium was of more primitive stock. 
Thor liked Balook better this way; he would have looked naked without his fur.
Naked... He remembered the afternoon with Barb. Maybe if human beings had retained thicker body fur, they 
would not be so sensitive about exposure of their torsos. Yet that exposure could be exciting, too. Now he 
wished they had indulged themselves in that swim; he thought about it often, and sometimes dreamed about it. 
In retrospect it seemed like a phenomenal opportunity squandered.
That failure mirrored this one with the rhino. Closeness denied. "Balook," he said once more, pinching a 
handful of the heavy skin.
Balook only shook his skin in the way that animals could, as if to dislodge a stinging fly.
Something snapped. "Damn you!" Thor cried, insulted. He made a fist and struck the leg as hard as he could.
"I saw that!" Barb exclaimed, standing in the entranceway. "You hit him! You hit Balook!"
"I'll hit him again!" Thor shouted, blinded by rage. "The ungrateful slob!"
Balook had not even seemed to notice the blow, and it was obvious that nothing Thor could do could harm the 
animal. Those great legs routinely knocked sizable branches from trees. But Barb was outraged. She ran up and 
grabbed Thor's arm. "Get away from him, you monster!"
Thor, maddened by the hindrance, threw her aside. It was not unconscious; he reacted to her as an aspect of the 
animal's betrayal, and flailed against it. She was part of it, and he was losing her association as surely as 
Balook's. The burgeoning feeling he had for her inverted and became black wrath. He knew it was wrong of him 
to react this way, and was horrified, but still he did it.
Barb stumbled into Balook's leg herself, but also hung on to Thor's arm. She was no fainting female, but a 
healthy and committed person. Thor tried to shake her loose. She slid farther down, still clutching his arm—and 
she bit him.
The sudden pain sobered him. Thor was free, now— but it was too late to make amends. Not with Barb, the way 
she was.

Balook
"Get out of here!" Barb screamed, slumping on Balook's foot, her face against one of the three enormous hoof-
toes. "Go away! Don't ever come back!" Her rage was as ferocious as his, but it had more justice.
Thor got out. It was over. Not only Balook—but Barb. Before it had started, really. He didn't even know what to 
feel.
 

Balook
FREAKS
4
IT LAY DEAD: white, fluffy, and innocent. "I'm glad 
for you, fella," Thor said. He picked it up, looking at 
each head in turn. It was a rabbit, with the head and 
forepaws tapering into a round body—whose 
posterior was another head and forepaws facing the 
other way. It had no hind legs, no bunny-tail. It had 
lived a normal rabbit span in an abnormal manner. 
With no regular means to eliminate bladder or bowel 
refuse, it had had to vomit out whatever remained in 
its gut, whenever the toxic level became too great. 
Eat, digest, vomit; eat, digest, vomit. It had urinated 
through a tube set in its belly, implanted there 
surgically just after its grotesque "birth."
Life had been torture for this creature, but the law had required the Project to maintain its existence as long as 
possible. Thor had watched it slowly decline, and shared the agony of its tedious terminal illness. How much 
better for it, if it had never lived!
And who was responsible for its life in this state? Thor himself was, to a degree, for he was part of the Project, 
supporting its researches. That guilt never quite left his awareness. He had tried to ease it by devising cute 
names for the uncute creatures, such as Pushmi-Pullyu for this one, but had known all along that one swift 
smash at each head would have served the creature in better stead.
He put the emaciated body in a freezer locker, and made a note on the record card: precise time of expiration. 
He went to the next hutch.
Pooh, the miniature bear, looked alertly up at him. Thor reached in and picked up the creature; it stood some 
twenty centimeters tall at the shoulders and weighed only a few kilograms: the size of an average cat. It was 
friendly, because Thor had befriended it. But for the secrecy regulations, it could have been given to some 
family as a pet. Instead, it spent its time in this bleak cage, lonely.
Lonely. How well Thor understood! He glanced at his right forearm, where the faint scars of teeth marks 
showed. Barb's bite, not serious physically, but horrendous emotionally. They marked the onset of his own 
loneliness.
Holding the tiny bear, stroking its fine fur, Thor thought of Balook. After almost two years, the memory still 
hurt. One sniff of that female, and the big lummox of a rhino had walked out of Thor's life forever.
Oh, there had been contacts. Barb had phoned several times, but Thor had refused the calls. Talking with her 
would only have made it worse; better for both of them to let it die.
After a while she had sent letters. He had a little pile of them on his desk, unopened, unanswered. He couldn't 
bring himself to destroy them, so they just sat there, mute reminders of his loss.

Balook
It had been especially bad after the first year—the time they would have had their date to go swimming, nude. 
He wondered what she looked like, now. She had probably forgotten all about that date. He hadn't—but he 
hadn't kept it.
Instead he had gotten involved in what remained of the Project, here: the freak zoo. He had learned how to care 
for the forlorn creatures here. These would never leave him; they couldn't. Except by dying. Like the Pushmi-
Pullyu bunny.
He carried Pooh with him as he continued his rounds. The little thing needed every bit of comfort it could get, 
and it was never any trouble. A real bear might have been ornery and unmanageable, but this one's personality 
differed from the large wild ursines as much as Balook's nature differed from wild rhinos.
There it was again. He could not forget Balook. These animals of the zoo needed him as much as Balook ever 
had, and more than Balook did now—but it wasn't the same. Balook had not only needed him; he had needed 
Balook. He had not deserted the rhino, the rhino had deserted him.
Now he entered the invertebrate section: cool, damp pits for experimental boneless animals. He let Sluggo out 
for a slide around the interior garden. The monstrous two meter long slug moved with respectable velocity, 
about two kilometers per hour under full steam. But it had too many reflexes of its smaller cousins, and thought 
it could ascend vertical walls. It could not; size made a difference, and it was confined to the level. But it would 
hurt itself trying, if he didn't watch it.
Thor checked the toothed worm. To do this, he had 
to pour water on its patch of soil, forcing it to come 
up for air. If it didn't rise within a minute, he would 
have to dig it out. It might be dying, or merely 
balky; it was his job to be certain it was all right.
It came up, the ring of teeth clattering angrily. 
Those teeth could abrade rock, but progress was so 
slow it wasn't worth it. So Wormgear was a failure
—like the rest of the inmates here. No fault of its 
own.
"Sluggo! Get down!" Thor yelled as the slug nosed 
into the retaining wall. Too late; the sticky slime 
gave way and the creature fell over on its back, 
squirming.
Thor hurried over, pushing at the spongy hide with 
his foot. This was not queasiness on his part; he was 
still holding Pooh and didn't dare put him down in 
this region. Also, the slime on Sluggo's skin was an 
irritant to human skin; gloves had to be worn for 
handling. Finally, he had more power in his foot, 
and it took power to roll Sluggo over, for he 
weighed almost two hundred kilograms.
Thor pushed, and Sluggo twisted, and slowly, 
together, they got the slug on his underside. There 
did not seem to be any damage, this time; the fall 

Balook
had been short, no more than half a meter, and 
Sluggo's body was resilient. "Now watch your step!" Thor said reprovingly. "You can go back in your cell for 
the day, you know."
The slug paid no attention. It was big, not bright, and Thor wasn't sure it could hear him. It had eye-stalks, but 
they did not project far because of the inhibition of gravity, and probably touch was the main sense that guided 
it. No slug this size could function like an ordinary one; the liabilities of scale made it impossible. Without a 
controlled environment and special food this one would soon have expired. For all that, Thor rather liked 
Sluggo; the creature was quiet and not at all vicious.
The same could not be said for Dino, in the next section. Dino looked like a dinosaur, with large scales all over 
his body, but he was a mammal. He was derived from the pangolin, the scaled mammal, but was much larger. 
He stood Thor's height, and walked on two hind legs, and he would have eaten Thor and all the other denizens 
of the zoo if he had the opportunity.
Still, Thor liked Dino too. The animal was no 
more responsible for his condition than any of 
the others were, and illustrated the other side of 
the project—and of man's nature. For every 
sweet-tempered creature like Pooh, a nasty brute 
like Dino. Each showed his true feelings, and 
each was reflected in Thor's own inner passions.
"Thor!"
He turned. It was Skip, now also active at the 
zoo. Without Balook, it was that or dismissal. 
"Trouble?"
"Could be. Call from the Western Project. For 
you."
"You know I don't take those calls!" He was 
locked in that prison of his own making, and 
hated it, but could not escape.
"It's not her," Skip said compassionately. "It's the 
boss. And he's serious. You'd better hop to it, lad."
Thor sighed. "Take Pooh." He handed over the tiny bear and went to the office to answer the phone. He could 
not refuse a call from authority; not if he wanted to keep his job.
It was the Project Manager, Don Scale's counterpart at the Theria Project. He was a portly, serious man, not 
given to minor pleasantries. "Nemmen, we need you."
Thor looked at the image in the screen, surprised. "How so, Mr. Duke?"
"The Baluchitherium Project is being cut back. We're low on funds now, and next year will be worse. We have 
to take measures."
That figured. Now that Balook and Theria had proved it could be done, governmental interest was waning. The 
significance of the successful re-creation of an extinct species was phenomenal, but now those perfected 
techniques were being applied to other things. Super-beef, super-hens, super-fish—the livestock problem was 

Balook
being solved by manufactured breeds. Even super-rats, useful for reducing certain types of garbage efficiently. 
Balook was merely one stage in a long chain; he was no longer needed. As far as the government was 
concerned, he could relapse back into extinction.
"Measures," Thor echoed as these thoughts flowed through his mind.
"We're faced with the necessity to cut down on equipment and personnel."
That sent a shock through Thor. Now he appreciated the relevance! He was about to lose his job! "I—
understand, sir," he said, dry-mouthed.
"We're closing down the Western Project, as it is largely cropped out now. It was never intended for continuous 
forage by two adult animals. We'll move them to the Eastern Project."
"But it's not in shape!" Thor protested. "The stable's been dismantled, the personnel are gone—"
"We have sold the Western Premises to a developer for a large apartment complex. It's prime land in a good 
zone. The funds will be used to renovate the Eastern facilities."
"Oh." That was Duke's way of saying that the Project had made an excellent business deal, and had money to 
use. The government, in its bureaucratic fashion, probably would not realize what had been done until too late 
to pre-empt the money. Projects, like laboratory animals, had to fend for themselves at times. "But where do I 
come in?" For he was evidently not to be fired after all.
"You know how to mount and ride one of the animals. It is necessary to walk them across."
"Oh," Thor repeated. "Well, I'm not volunteering."
"Naturally not," Duke said. "You are being assigned. You have two hours to organize your affairs; the car has 
already been dispatched."
"Now wait a minute!" Thor protested.
Duke met his gaze, unperturbed. "You do wish to retain employment, Mr. Nemmen?" He faded out, certain of 
the answer. He was a man who got things done.
Thor started an angry retort anyway, but knew it would have been futile even had he remained connected. Mr. 
Duke did not joke; what he said, he meant. He was not in Thor's direct line of command, but he could have Thor 
fired. And would, if he saw the need. Ah, well. Now that he was committed, Thor discovered that he was 
relieved. He wanted to see Balook again—and Barb. For two years he had tried to deny this; he could do so no 
longer. Even though both would probably meet him with contempt.
 

Balook
"I'M SORRY FOR what I said to you," Barb's first 
letter said. "I didn't mean it. I mean I did, then, but 
when I cooled down and thought about it, I realized 
how you must feel. There was this time when 
Theria kept doing something, I don't even 
remember what, now, but it made me so darned 
mad I finally hit her on the knee. I hurt my hand 
and she didn't even feel it, but I felt so guilty! I 
guess that was what made me overreact when I saw 
you do it. It was myself I was mad at, more than 
you. I was yelling at the part of myself I hated. I 
wish I had understood, before I opened my mouth. I 
know you love Balook, and hated to leave him, and 
it just overflowed. It's exactly the way I am, too.
"Please call me..."
Thor set the sheet down, his vision blurring. He had 
never answered, of course, because he had never 
opened the letter. If she had apologized to him in 
the first letter, what had she done in the later ones?
He had only an hour left, and he was supposed to be 
getting his things in order. But at the moment it was 
more important to get his mind in order. He had to 
know what Barb had been saying to him, before he 
saw her again. If only to assess the depth of his 
guilt.
He nerved himself and opened the next, scanning 
down its lines. She expressed hope that he would at least write back to her, even if he didn't forgive her for her 
intemperate outburst. Then: "Balook stands forlornly in the corner of the pasture, facing east. Theria's long out 
of heat, now, and things are back to normal, so I guess he has time to think. We have to remember that they are 
animals; they can't handle more than one important notion at a time. When Theria was in heat, or in the last 
stages of it, Balook just couldn't be bothered with anything else. It wasn't that he didn't care, just that for him it 
would be like one of us trying to solve a trigonometric problem in the head while reciting Shakespeare aloud on 
stage. He just couldn't do it. But now it's different, and he remembers. Balook misses you terribly..."
And Thor hadn't even answered. Hadn't even known, thanks to his oikheaded refusal to read her words. His guilt 
was worse than even his projections of it!
He went to the last of the six letters. "...I guess I've alienated you, and I can't blame you. Maybe you're burning 
these letters without reading them. So I won't bother you any more. I'll just say, for the last time, that if you ever 
change your mind, the door is always open. Balook loves you, and I'd like to, if." There was no ellipsis, no 
further qualification; her implication was left as open as the offer.
If he ever came to his senses.
He was seventeen years old, too old to cry. It made no difference. Blindly, he jammed the letters into a pocket. 
What was the use? He would face the music soon enough!

Balook
A comely young woman came out to meet the car. Thor scowled. The Project was not yet out of funds, he 
thought, if it could afford such decorative secretaries. This was definitely the Project, though details had 
changed; he could tell by the distinctive rhino odor, that brought back so many memories.
"Hello, Thor," she said.
He looked at her again. Her brown hair was tied back in a neat bun, and she was immaculately dressed in a 
conservative gray blouse and black skirt and small gray shoes. Probably she had been given his name on a 
routing slip. He did not like being treated like baggage. "Have we met before?" he asked somewhat coldly.
"Thor, you broke our date!" she said severely.
"Lady, I don't know what—" He paused, the realization belatedly dawning. "Barb!"
"Idiot!" she said. "You didn't recognize me!"
He considered her a third time. "You've changed." An understatement! Two years had wrought far more 
physical change in her than they had in him. She was sixteen now, and had been transformed. The lanky angles 
had been replaced by thoroughly feminine curves, and her face had matured subtly. She had been pretty before; 
now she was beautiful.
It was like meeting a stranger. Worse, perhaps, because this was a stranger who knew him. There was no parity 
in the relationship.
"C'mon, I'll show you your room," she said. And suddenly she seemed familiar again. The professional young 
woman showed as a veneer covering the same girl. That made him feel better.
She hardly gave him time to set down his bag before she had him out in the stable. "Wait till you see!"
"See what?"
"It." She smiled knowingly.
First he saw Balook. No, not Balook—this was Theria, standing as tall as Balook had before. And beside her, 
almost beneath her, stood a tiny, big-headed, long-legged thing that could not have weighed more than a 
hundred kilograms.
"They made it!" Thor exclaimed.
"Yes, and she calved," Barb said proudly.
She put her hand on the calf's head. "We saved him as a surprise for you. Isn't he darling?"
"Yes." Thor's throat was tight. It was like seeing Balook again, that first time, eight years before. The rhinos had 
successfully mated; Baluchitherium was now a viable contemporary species. But all that seemed unimportant at 
the moment; what counted now was the reality of this ungainly calf. This one would never be lonely!
"You're wonderful, Blooky," Barb said, putting her arms around the calf. The humped nose nuzzled her face.
Thor watched, still remembering his first experience with Balook. By human standards, the creature was ugly, 
with great folds of skin and a misshapen body. But obviously Barb considered it beautiful, and that made her 
beautiful, quite apart from her other attributes. He knew it again: there could be no other woman for him. What 
a fool he had been to cut her off these two years!
"You can touch him," she said. "He knows that anyone his mother tolerates is okay, and she knows anyone I 

Balook
tolerate is okay." She leaned down to kiss its wrinkled snout. "Isn't that so, Blooky!"
Thor reached out cautiously to stroke the sparse fur. "Yes," he repeated. If he had only known!
"Here's Balook!" Barb said brightly, glancing up.
Now he showed in silhouette in the giant doorway: twelve tons of superbly powerful rhino, almost six meters 
tall at the shoulder. The most majestic land-walking animal to tread the earth since the dinosaurs passed from 
the scene. Absolutely beautiful. Balook!
Would the huge rhino remember him? Thor stepped forward uncertainly, awed by this creature three times his 
height and well over a hundred times his mass. "Balook..." he said.
The lofty head descended. The small eyes peered. The monstrous nose came close, like the scoop of a steam 
shovel. It touched Thor, sniffing. The large, mobile lips quivered. The ears, far back on the skull, twitched.
Thor stood still. He was not afraid, though he knew that one twitch of that colossal nose could hurl him through 
the wall. His apprehension was emotional: was he friend or stranger?
Balook's head moved. The side of his jaw nudged Thor's hip. It was a familiar gesture, Balook's way of saying 
"I will pick you up."
"You remember!" Thor cried, throwing his arms around Balook's nose, as far as they would reach. The head 
was a meter and a half long, far more massive than Thor's whole body. "Oh, Balook!"
Suddenly he was in the air, dangling precariously as the head went up. Thor scrambled to catch hold of the ears, 
getting the anchorage he needed to save himself a six meter fall. His knees were clamped over Balook's two 
eyes. There was no harm there; the rhino's eyelids were so tough that only a deliberate kick would hurt, and 
sight was not his most important sense. "Oh, Balook!" Thor repeated joyfully, two miserable years vanished.
Thor dug his toes into the available crevices of the rhino's massive skull, grabbed a double handful of heavy 
skin on the neck, and squirmed about to bestride the neck, facing forward. His good traveling clothes were 
getting creased and soiled, but he didn't care. It was just like old times!
"You look a sight!" Barb called.
"A happy sight!" he called back.
She turned away. He wasn't sure why. She couldn't be jealous of his restored rapport with Balook. Maybe it was 
that she was too formally dressed to do the same with Theria at the moment.
 
SO THEY WERE reunited, and more, for now Balook had a family, and Thor was part of it, like an uncle. It 
was not that the rhino didn't care who played with his calf; the approach of any stranger, human or animal, 
brought a warning snort, and ominous stomping of the heavy feet. These were signals it was wise to heed. 
Balook's attitude had matured with his body and status; now he was dangerous in the way that any bull or stag 
was, when crossed. Thor was riding Balook once when a stray dog came near, and he felt the muscles of the 
rhino's powerful shoulders tense. The compound was not tight; small animals like dogs could squeeze through 
gaps and sneak in to raid the food. These were tolerated as long as they kept their place. But this dog looked at 
Blooky, and Balook was abruptly taut. Suddenly Thor was made aware of the juggernaut of destruction that this 
animal could become when aroused. Balook was still gentle, but now it was a selective gentleness, 
complemented by a new male pride. Push him the wrong way, and Balook would fight—and there was nothing 

Balook
living that could conceivably stand against him.
The dog took the warning and hurried away, though Balook had never moved. Animals often understood each 
other in ways that human beings did not. Had Thor not been in close physical contact at the time, he would not 
have known of the interchange. But it was genuine; had the dog made a single threatening gesture toward 
Blooky, he would have been in instant peril for his life.
Abruptly it was clear why Thor had been summoned. He could control Balook; no one else could. Balook might 
have followed where Theria, guided by Barb, led—but that was by no means certain. On the grounds of the 
Project it didn't matter; this was a controlled environment. On a trek between locations—potential disaster.
Of course it was stretching things to believe that Thor controlled Balook. Even in the old days, Thor had only 
guided the rhino. It was a perpetual game Balook had loved to play. But he had always had a mind of his Own, 
and on occasion asserted it. Now that assertion was stronger. But Balook still did accept Thor's guidance, when 
there were no conflict. Now that the imperatives of mating and fatherhood had been honored, Balook was 
satisfied to be with Thor again. Thor remembered Barb's comment in the letter: how Balook had stood for hours 
at a time in the pasture, facing east. The bond between them had never been sundered; Thor had merely denied 
it for a time, to his shame.
If Balook had forgiven Thor his absence, Barb had not. She hardly spoke to him now. She had been open at the 
start, but then shut down. The way she had turned away from him—now he understood. She had done her duty 
by welcoming him back to the Project, introducing him to Blooky, and seeing him reunited with Balook. She 
owed him no more. Thor could not argue with that; he knew he deserved it. In a way he was glad; it gave him 
more of a chance to get used to her as she was now. Oh, it stung; but it was right. Once he worked his way back 
into her favor the hard way, he would know it was genuine. Perhaps the effort would allow him to expiate some 
of his guilt.
The process of closing down the site went on, while little Blooky gained his walking legs. Thor and Barb took 
turns exercising the baby rhino. This might have led to pleasant contacts and increasing intimacy between the 
two human beings, but Barb rebuffed any overtures Thor made. In fact she sniped at him with increasing rancor, 
for decreasing reason.
Thor was irritated, but he was older than he had been, and he had a better basis for understanding. Two years 
ago he had lost his rhino, and Barb had kept them both. He had been frustrated and unreasonable. Now Barb 
was losing Theria, and Thor was gaining the entire family. Jealousy, loss, despair—whatever it was, Thor well 
understood it. He had traveled the full course himself, isolating himself until forcibly drawn back by events. 
Balook was being restored to him, through no virtue of Thor's. He was in no position to judge her.
He understood—but still it wasn't fun, having Barb continually at his throat. She was an attractive girl, more 
than attractive, with a lot to offer—everything to offer. He had to work with her. She had tried to reach him 
while he sulked, before; now he had to try to reach her.
"Barb," he called one day as she brought Blooky back from his circuit. "C'mon, let's talk!"
"Don't get smart!" she snapped.
"Look—I know I was a heel to refuse your calls and not to read your letters. I was mad. I don't blame you. But 
we've got to work together now."
"Sure," she said acidly. "Just like that!"
"I know how you feel. I felt that way for two years. Please—I apologize for the way I was. I was a freak! I'm 

Balook
sorry."
"You're sorry!"
"Let's go out to the lake and talk."
"And skinny-dip. You'd like that!"
Thor considered. "Yes, I suppose I would."
She turned away. "Forget it!"
He caught hold of her arm. "I don't care where we talk! Just so we get this straightened out. We can't—"
Barb whirled, her free hand swinging up. She slapped him across the cheek.
It was no weak stroke. She was a vigorous, healthy girl, as she had always been, accustomed to brushing down 
Baluchitheria and hoisting herself on Theria's back. Thor's head rocked back, and for a moment he saw red. He 
was surprised to discover that there really was an optical effect; it was not merely poetic license.
But he was older than he had been, and had learned the futility of violence. He grabbed her again, turned her 
about to face him, and pulled her close. She struggled, but he had grown a bit physically too, and was stronger. 
She lifted her hand to strike him again—but before she completed the motion, he kissed her.
For a moment she was stunned, unresponsive. But only a moment. Then she reacted. She shoved him violently 
away.
"Of all the nerve!" she cried. "What do you think you're doing?"
"Something I've wanted to do for two years," he said soberly. "Only I didn't know it."
"You think I'm going to play up to you just because you've got them all now!" she said furiously. "All the 
Balooks!"
"No, I—"
"You think I'm in heat or something, and—"
"No!"
"You've got the rhinos but you're not satisfied! You want everything!"
Now it was coming into the open. She was jealous in the same way he had been, and was close to admitting it. 
"I guess I do," he said. "I thought all I wanted was Balook, but now—"
"One amateurish kiss!" she snorted disdainfully.
"I sort of hoped you'd like me a little for myself," he said. "I think you're a great girl, and I wish I'd answered 
your—"
"Oh, shut up!" She took Blooky and marched off.
Thor shook his head. "You sure are pretty when you're mad," he muttered inaudibly. "You're pretty anytime!"
Perhaps the kiss hadn't shown Barb anything, but it had shown him something. Thor had never been in love—
not with a human being—but suddenly it was easy to imagine the condition.

Balook
Except that it was obviously a one-sided sentiment.
 
THINGS WERE NOT perfect between the rhinos, either. Now that Thor had opportunity to work closely with 
all three of them, he saw that there were times when they got snappish with each other. When Blooky became 
too venturesome, Theria would nip him so it hurt. He would go crying to Balook, in his fashion playing one 
parent off against the other.
All three of them seemed fussier than they should be. Thor wasn't certain whether this was because the stress of 
the incipient move was communicated to them, or whether it was simply that they had some empathy for the 
problem between him and Barb. If it was the former, there was little that could be done; if the latter, then it was 
another reason to straighten things out.
But it did require two to straighten. Thor himself had been foolishly adamant for two years; evidently it was an 
example Barb intended to follow. He wished she was not so like him, in this respect! But he could hardly 
condemn her for it.
Next day Barb came to him. Her hair was loose, her tresses longer and less curly than they had been two years 
before. She wore close-fitting blue jeans and a bright green halter. It was obvious that she suffered no 
embarrassment of underdevelopment any more. "I'll go to the lake, now," she said tightly.
Thor realized that this constituted an apology. He was more than ready to accept it. "We don't have to go there," 
he said. "All I want is to see you smile."
She looked at him, her brows furrowed. "You've changed."
"I guess I have," he agreed, thinking of the creatures he had seen in the freak zoo. What was Pooh doing now? 
The bear would be well cared for, of course, but surely it missed Thor. His loyalties had become to a degree 
divided. Balook was not the only animal that required companionship. "I have suffered for my attitude. I 
brought it on myself; I know that. I don't want to do that any more. There is too much unavoidable suffering 
already."
"Sometimes I dream—daydream—about Theria," she said, changing thoughts as was her way. "I go into some 
kind of trance, and it's as though she and I go home. Home to the Miocene Epoch, I mean: her home. I see the 
animals as her kind knew them, maybe twenty million years ago. It's all—" She shrugged. "Then I come out of 
it, and I'm so sad."
"Me too," he said. "It was a better world, in its way. No people, no freaks."
"I never did go in for pro-style romance," she said. "I'm sort of amateur myself." Then she smiled, and it was 
well worth it.
They were friends again.
 

Balook
TREK
5
AT LAST THE trek began. They rode astride the giants, guiding them on what was to be a five hundred 
kilometer haul. Thor was on Balook, Barb on Theria, with baby Blooky tagging along behind his mother. It was 
Blooky they were most concerned about; the little rhino was small enough to carry on a truck, but would not 
leave his mother for any extended period. The hustle and bustle of the trek excited him, making him stay closer 
than usual to Theria. Theria, like Balook, distrusted machinery.
They could have drugged Blooky and trucked him across in a few hours. But Theria's journey would require 
several days, and she was not about to let her calf go that long. When she became upset, so did Balook. Whereas 
Theria could balk when annoyed, Balook was liable to attack. So it was essential that the rhinos be kept 
satisfied, and the entourage was limited by Blooky's pace. The grown animals would have to be given foraging 
time in the evenings, too; they existed mainly on high green leaves and twigs, and ate hugely.
All of which meant a long, slow journey, with many rests. Thor looked forward to it, because there was nothing 
he liked better than being with the rhinos and Barb; the other Project personnel did not. As it turned out, their 
wisdom was greater than his.
Balook led the way, stepping out as though proud to show himself outside the compound. Thor perched lazily 
on the massive shoulder, every bit as proud. The route had been carefully planned, and a yellow line had been 
painted on the ground to make quite sure no one got lost. A billion dollars had been invested in the 
Baluchitherium family; no one wanted to expose the rhinos to any unnecessary hazards.
Thor waved to Barb, and she waved back. The other Project personnel stood behind; they could not come with 
the animals because Balook and Theria were not so tolerant of them. They normally did routine work around 
the rhinos: when the rhinos were in other areas of the compound. When one had to approach an animal directly, 
Thor or Barb served as escorts, even for the vet. It would be pointless to have others along on the trek; they 
would serve only to aggravate the rhinos. This was just the five of them: two human, three Baluchitherium.
As soon as they cleared the compound, Balook swerved to nibble foliage. "Uh-uh!" Thor said, nudging the neck 
with a knee. "There's no end to that, and you know it! Keep moving."
Balook made a little grumbling snort, and his back muscles tensed. But he returned to the yellow line. He knew 
the rules of this game. The relationship between them was not that of master and servant, it was more like weak 
and strong, with the latter humoring the former. Balook wanted Thor to be happy, perhaps concerned that he 
might disappear for another two years if affronted. So Balook made small sacrifices, however nonsensical they 
seemed. Such as passing up perfectly good greenery in order to walk along a barren path.
That was why Thor had had to come. Balook would not have obliged anyone else. As the male, Balook had to 
lead; Theria would follow him. But even Barb could not have controlled Balook; she had not associated with 
him during those critical formative years. He would tolerate her as a rider, but would not obey her.
The pace was measured. What a contrast to the headlong rush toward this site, two years before!
 
BLOOKY HELD UP well, the first day, and by nightfall they had progressed thirty kilometers. A good start!

Balook
They camped in a forested region with a clean stream, marked by the Project personnel for this purpose. The 
stream was vital, for the rhinos had a huge thirst after exertion. Everything was perfect, so far. The worries of 
Mr. Duke seemed groundless.
Thor and Barb ate supper from their packs, washed in the stream, and settled down in warm sleeping bags next 
to Blooky. The big animals were out foraging; Blooky, too small to reach the edible treetops, lived mostly on 
Theria's milk. He eagerly accepted tidbits from their supplies, but this was more entertainment than sustenance 
for him. So Blooky lay down and relaxed, happy to have company.
"That's why they tolerate us," Barb murmured. "We're baby-sitters."
Thor chuckled. "There's no better job." Indeed, it was a significant signal of trust on the part of the adult 
animals; they would never have left Blooky alone unguarded, but knew that the human beings would guard him. 
That freed them to forage and sleep at night, and therefore to travel by day. Had any other human beings been 
present, they would not have done so. Thor knew that the personnel of the Project were keeping anxious track 
from a distance, unable to participate. Traffic had been rerouted and the local folk warned away; this trek was to 
be as isolated as possible. If any creature, human or animal, approached in the dark, Balook and Theria would 
close right in; they were browsing but alert, and they could both hear and smell very well. They could see well, 
too, at night—perhaps better than they could by day.
Blooky, aroused by their voices, came over to 
nuzzle Barb. She reached her arms up to encircle 
his head. "Yeah, you big baby!" she murmured. 
"You get your rest; we've a long way to go 
tomorrow!"
"Say—are you giving out free hugs?" Thor asked.
"Only to babies."
Thor gazed up at the dark sky. The Baluchitherium 
family had brought him and Barb together, and that 
was all that kept them together. Maybe if he had 
not sulked for two years, he would now be in a 
position to associate with Barb on his own merits. 
He had brought it on himself. She was being polite 
to him, working with him, but showed no 
inclination to be more than friends. "I guess I was 
one," he muttered disconsolately.
There was a pause. He was afraid she had heard, and that he had angered her again. He wished he could 
apologize for those two years, but he couldn't, because he had already done so, and it would seem like 
belaboring a point. He cursed himself yet again for his past intransigence.
"Maybe we'll pass a lake," Barb said.
A lake! Thor remembered their ancient date to go swimming. Was it still on? The more he thought about it, the 
less he dared inquire. There was no doubt that Barb's prior objection no longer applied; she had certainly filled 
out.
"Because you certainly need washing off," she continued.

Balook
What? He remained tongue-tied.
"You have dirt all over your face."
Thor surreptitiously felt his guilty face.
"And on your fur, Blooky," she concluded. "Now get to sleep."
Thor blushed in the night. She had been talking to the rhino all the time!
 
NEXT DAY THEY had to cross a major highway—and they had a surprise. A score of curious people had 
collected to watch the passage of the great animals. Their bicycles were parked on either side, and more were 
pedaling in. This was not supposed to happen; these must be ones who were deliberately violating the guideline, 
and had sneaked by the authorities.
Balook tensed up immediately, not liking the strangers. "Easy, Balook!" Thor said, patting the neck. "I don't like 
them either, but they're harmless."
Balook relaxed. Thor was not sure whether his words had the effect, or whether the animal was responding to 
Thor's empathy. Perhaps if Thor was angry, Balook didn't have to be; the situation was under control.
In a minute they were across, Blooky walking between the two grown rhinos, shielded from the spectators. 
They plunged into the brush, leaving the people behind. There had been no incident, but this was clear warning.
"We've got to keep the crossings clear of people," Thor called to Barb. "Balook was ready to bolt; he doesn't 
like them."
"Right. I'll radio Mr. Duke." She put through the call immediately on her mobile unit.
After a dialogue with the Project Manager, Barb was grim. "They didn't anticipate this, Thor," she said. "They 
planned the most direct route that included enough suitable forest. But they can't police every meter of it, and 
where they don't, the gawkers can get in. Somehow news of this trek has spread to everybody despite the news 
blackout. That yellow line shows them exactly where we'll pass."
"We need that line," Thor said. "Balook is following it; it's a game to him. And I sure wouldn't know the route 
without it."
"There's a thirty kilo stretch along a truckway," she continued. "They'll cordon it off, but it's too late to change 
it. And we'll pass right through the center of one town."
"The center of a town!" Thor yelped.
"It has to do with the conjunction of a rail line with a large river; impassable for them and impossible for 
Blooky. A detour would avoid that but get us into worse development. So we have to use the town, where they 
have a multi-level tunnel big enough for—"
"A tunnel! Balook'll never—"
"It's the only way!" she cried. "I don't like it myself! The Project has already paid a five thousand dollar toll—"
"Five thousand dollars!" he exclaimed, outraged anew.
"Because they'll have to close it to all traffic for at least an hour. Duke says it was either that or a suspension 

Balook
bridge—"
Thor was appalled. "Balook would jump off a bridge!"
"That's right."
"We'd have been better off with a random route!" Thor exclaimed. "Balook picked his own route, coming over, 
and it had no problems."
"He was lucky. What did he eat?"
"He didn't eat. He—" Thor realized what he was saying. "That's right—it'd never do this time. Still, they 
could've avoided the city!"
"They should have," she agreed. "But it's too late to change it now. We're stuck with it. That's the price we pay 
for paying more attention to the rhinos than to the Project people."
"And I thought this trip was going to be fun!" Thor said, shaking his head glumly. Too late he realized the folly 
of leaving all the details to others who did not relate as closely as he to the foibles of the rhinos. He should have 
assumed far more responsibility. Actually, it had not only been the rhinos that had taken his attention; it had 
been Barb.
Responsibility: that was an adult quality. In certain ways the Project had been like a parent to him, 
automatically taking care of his needs as well as those of the rhinos and freak animals. He had grown dependent 
on that. It was time he grew up and made decisions for himself.
The freak zoo—that gave him a notion that—
"Why, am I such bad company?"
"Hey, I didn't mean—" Then he saw her smiling, and realized that she was teasing him. He had exclaimed about 
the developing horrors of this trek, and she was pretending that it was her he objected to. Well, he could fix that. 
"Look, I didn't hold you to that swim in the lake. I could change my mind, you know."
She assumed a look of sheer terror. "No, don't do that! Please don't do that!"
"You think only women can change their minds?" he inquired evilly.
She glanced sidelong at him. "Is there dirt on your fur?"
Thor opened his mouth, but his reply was lost in a logjam in his brain. Had she been talking to him in the night? 
Or had she realized his confusion, and now was rubbing it in?
She laughed. "I think I won that one."
"I think I'm overmatched. But it won't be funny if we have trouble in this trek."
"Most of it's okay," she said. "Just a few bad hurdles."
Thor didn't answer. He was thinking of that tunnel, and the center of town. Of the gawking spectators, and 
Balook's nervousness around people. And he was trying to remember the intriguing thought he had had about 
the freak zoo. There was something about it that might solve a significant problem—but the distraction had 
caused him to lose the thread.
 

Balook
WELCOME TO EAGLE STREAM the sign said.
It wasn't a town. It was a city. Now it was clear why 
the yellow line followed so many kilometers of 
highway: the entire neighborhood was so developed 
that there was no other safe route through. 
Decentralization had spread the population more 
evenly, but some industrial centers remained, and this 
was one of them.
All vehicles and pedestrians had been cleared from 
the roadbed, but in this case it was impossible to 
exclude the curious citizens from the region. At the 
fringe of that right-of-way they pressed in by the 
thousands. Bicycles, rickshaws, adult tricycles and 
electric cars jammed the accesses. Blimps and 
sailcraft hovered above. Balook grew increasingly 
nervous as the kilometers passed, and more irritable. 
Any little thing could set him off. Thor could tell by 
Theria's reactions and the tight lips of her rider that 
she was little better off. Only Blooky enjoyed 
himself; to him the massed faces were curiosities.
Another problem developed: the hot, hard pavement 
was uncomfortable for the rhinos' feet, which were 
made for treading the variable forest floor. Short 
stretches of concrete were all right, but this was a 
long stretch. The Baluchitheria were generally of 
amiable disposition, but every kilometer on this hard, 
hot highway eroded that.
If only there were some way to get them off this concourse, to take a break. But the throngs of gawking people 
filled every exit—and in any event, there were only more roads and houses to the sides. A city was such an 
awful place!
At last they came to the tunnel. Balook was so eager to get away from the sea of faces and hot pavement that he 
hurried into the shaded aperture without hesitation. To him it was a cave, a refuge. Where Balook led, Theria 
and Blooky followed.
Then some idiot turned on the tunnel lights. Balook halted so suddenly that Thor almost slid off his shoulder, 
and Theria nearly collided from behind. "Douse the lights!" Thor cried. "They want the shade!"
Barb got on her radio. Thor, thoughtlessly, had left his in his pack, where he could not immediately reach it. 
Another lesson in foresight! "Will you ask them to turn off the tunnel lights, please?" she said dulcetly, though 
her face was set in something very like a snarl. Thor would have admired that, if he had not been so concerned 
about Balook's reactions. "Yes, the rhinos can see very well in the darkness. They like the night. There will be 
no trouble. Please turn off the lights." She was almost grinding her teeth.
She got through. The lights went out. Balook relaxed, and so did Thor. "Thanks, Barb," he called.
"The morons!" she muttered angrily. "Those lights were supposed to stay off."

Balook
They proceeded forward in the darkness. The half-oval of the tunnel entrance receded behind. This was a big 
tunnel, built to accommodate the largest rigs. The ceiling was ten meters above the street surface: ample even 
for Balook, whose head was normally carried at an elevation of six and a half meters when he wasn't reaching 
up for leaves. Thor had feared the animals would suffer claustrophobia, but it was possible for them to walk 
abreast. Thor was vastly relieved; instead of being a hazard, the tunnel was a respite. Perhaps the rhinos thought 
of it as a kind of nocturnal forest, with continuous tree trunks at the sides and overhanging branches.
But they could not tarry within it. The toll covered an hour, but that included the time it had taken to clear the 
traffic and the time it would take to restore it. To be sure that the total interruption fell within that limit, they 
had to pass through in fifteen minutes or less. That was no problem, as the distance was only two kilometers, 
but it left little time to dawdle. The light of the far end showed as the light of the near end faded; they were 
passing the slight curve at the middle.
Now Thor discovered that someone had thoughtfully put a mat of synthetic turf on the roadbed. Probably its real 
purpose was to protect the surface from the strike of the huge rhinos' hooves, but it also gave relief for their feet. 
If only they could have that on the road outside the tunnel!
Emergence was a shock. The sunlight was brilliant, and there was the noise of concentrated traffic on adjacent 
streets. The crowd was horrendous; it seemed as though the entire city had turned out to witness the show. They 
were treating it like a parade, cheering and pointing and jostling each other. Police kept order, but Thor could 
hardly blame Balook for disliking it. Thor could almost feel his own feet heating on the pavement, and his own 
sensitive ears affronted by all the noise. His own temper fraying. "Easy, Balook, easy," he repeated, over and 
over. "We are headed out of town, back to the forest. Just keep steady, keep walking. Ignore the freak zoo out 
there." Balook seemed to understand.
Then it happened. They were approaching a major intersection, and though it was cordoned off, cars were 
moving just beyond the ropes. The moment the animals passed, this crossing would be opened for traffic again, 
so that the vehicles could feed into the tunnel.

Balook
A boy ducked under the rope and ran out into the street. He 
threw something. The object landed just behind Balook and 
exploded loudly.
It was a firecracker.
Balook, already near the breaking point, jumped. His head 
swung around, and his body jerked so violently that Thor was 
almost dislodged. Thor knew why: Balook thought it was a 
gunshot.
Blooky also spooked; the noise had occurred closest to him. 
He broke away from Theria and ran toward the boy, not 
realizing that the child had been the real cause of the bang. 
The boy scooted to the side, laughing so hard he could hardly 
stand up. Now there was a murmur of laughter in the crowd, 
too. They thought it was funny to tease the huge animals.
"Easy, Balook!" Thor cried. The rhino heard him, trusted 
him, and settled down. Thor knew it was largely because of 
confusion; Balook didn't know what to do, so he accepted the 
only guidance offered. Thor saw that Barb had had the 
presence of mind to clap her hands over Theria's ears, 
perhaps muffling the sound of the firecracker, and certainly 
making it harder for the rhino to orient for action.
But Blooky was still running, bleating piteously while the 
mirth of the crowd increased. The firecracker boy capered 
beside him, playing up to the audience. "Stop it!" Thor cried. 
But they ignored him, intent on their cruel fun, and he dared not dismount from Balook. The big rhino was 
barely under control as it was.
Blooky, terrified, careened into the barrier-rope. He now weighed a hundred and fifty kilograms. The rope 
spanged, and several people leaning on it tumbled to the ground. One young woman landed with her skirt 
whipped up over her head, to the delight of nearby voyeurs. The cries of surprise, glee and dismay alarmed 
Blooky further. He bounced off the rope and staggered on toward the intersection. Then he saw an opening in 
the crowd, leaped over the rope, and ran into the traffic beyond.
"No, Blooky!" Thor and Barb screamed together. But the animal kept going, blindly. He ran out in front of a 
slowly moving car. The car struck him, knocking him down. He gave a bleat of anguish.
Balook obviously had not seen precisely what had happened; his daytime sight was not sharp. But Blooky's cry 
electrified him. Thor's alarm flared too; he had noted the way Balook regarded any potential threat to his 
offspring. Balook normally did not seem to pay Blooky much attention, reacting mainly to Theria's signals. But 
now every muscle in Balook's back went taut. Theria, oddly, seemed more relaxed; perhaps she was deferring to 
Balook on this matter. Violence was mostly male business.
"No, Balook!" Thor cried—with no more effect than before. Balook lurched into motion, enraged. He charged 
the car.
The firecracker boy was still dancing about, reveling in the attention of the crowd. Balook's lifting forefoot 

Balook
struck him, hurling him aside like a plastic doll. Then the rope snapped as the rhino plowed through it. All Thor 
could do was hang on, knowing he was amidst ongoing disaster; he had lost any semblance of control.
The car that had hit Blooky had stopped. Balook reared like a stallion. Thor grabbed a double handful of skin 
and fur and hung on desperately, nine meters high as the massive shoulders lifted. His feet dangled. The supply 
pack swung around. Then the expansion of Balook's muscles snapped the pack's strap, and it dropped to the 
street. Thor didn't dare try to grab for it; he had to maintain his hold, lest he fall too. He could be crushed if he 
fell.
The rhino's two forefeet came down on the roof of the car. The metal crumpled like tin foil, and from inside 
came an awful scream and crackle of shorted electricity.
Now the police had appeared, and they were drawing guns. That was all that was needed to complete the 
disaster! The moment a gun fired, Balook would go berserk, striking at anything that moved. Thor knew it, and 
knew he could do nothing to stop it.
Except—to get Balook out of here! It was the rhino's natural instinct to stampede when alarmed. If he could just 
start Balook going—
"Run, Balook, run!" Thor cried, kicking the huge shoulders. How often they had played this game as 
youngsters, he and the rhino. Charging about the Project...
It worked! Balook, seeing the open road ahead, ran. The pavement shook under the impact of his mighty feet, 
and small cracks radiated. People scrambled out of the way, and cars screeched to the side to make a clear 
passage. Balook was larger than he had been, and more powerful, and more aggressive, and he moved faster: a 
good fifty kilometers per hour in the charge. Thor hung on.
At least he was getting Balook out of immediate danger. Already the houses were thinning, and the open 
countryside was manifesting. Balook had forgotten Theria and Blooky for the moment; that was the limited 
advantage of limited intelligence. By the time he remembered, he would be safe, and Barb would be seeing to 
the other two.
But how would the five of them get back together again, and back on the yellow trail? Thor had done what was 
necessary, what was expedient at the moment, to prevent Balook from doing any more carnage in the city. But 
already he was sick at the thought of the consequence of what had already happened.
 

Balook
CHASE
6
BALOOK COULD RUN, and swiftly, but not forever. Gradually he slowed. By this time the city was behind, 
and the countryside was back: fields, farm, and islands of trees. Thor relaxed, no longer in danger of being 
shaken loose.
But now that he was able to think, Thor found little comfort. People had been hurt or killed—he wasn't sure 
which—and that could mean that Balook's life was forfeit. They could cut cross-country to intersect the yellow 
line and in due course reconnect with Barb and Theria and Blooky—but what use would that be now? The 
authorities would set up a posse and come after Balook, and that would be that. Outside folk wouldn't care that 
Balook was special, or that he had not been at fault; he was an animal, and therefore had few if any rights.
He brooded on that. Why didn't animals have rights? Was the human species so selfish that it could afford to 
consider no welfare but its own?
Thor had no radio; that had been in the pack. He could not call Barb to learn the worst. Was Theria all right? 
Had Blooky survived? He had seen Blooky struck, seen him fall, but the car had been moving slowly; it should 
not be serious. But how could he be sure? There was no way to find out except to go back— and he couldn't do 
that until he knew the nature of the charges against Balook. He was not going to deliver Balook into execution, 
or even into doubt!
So they walked on, staying off the road and away from farmsteads. Thor was hungry, but food was secondary. 
How could he save Balook from whatever threatened him?
By hiding him, he realized. But how could he hide a creature whose head rose seven or eight meters above the 
ground? Balook was as tall as small trees; he had to be, to graze on them! But he did not look remotely like a 
tree! How, then, could he be hidden among trees?
Thor considered, and decided that it was possible. After all, deer and other wild animals hid pretty successfully 
in the forest. The trick was to leave little or no trail, and to be where the pursuers were not. One tree could not 
hide a huge animal, several trees could not, but a forest full of trees could.
"Let's go another way, Balook," he said, kicking gently on the side from which he wanted to turn. Balook 
obeyed. Thor guided him along the hardest ground he could spy, so that he left few clear prints. Dogs could 
sniff them out, and probably experienced woodsmen could follow the spoor, but the average posse would 
perhaps soon lose it. That was the best he could do.
They approached a power line. Tall metal towers extended in a straight line across the landscape. Was this part 
of the same corridor he had seen two years before, when searching for Balook? Possibly; those lines extended 
all over the continent, and were interconnected, so they could be considered all parts of the same monstrous 
system. The giant rhino of wires, the biggest of the big! The corridor was fenced off, but Balook merely stepped 
over the two-meter fence and proceeded to munch the foliage within at the six and seven meter elevation. For 
the moment he seemed to be satisfied to remain away from Theria and Blooky, but Thor was not sure how long 
that would last.
He crawled down Balook's sloping back, slid along the broad rump, and caught hold of the tail. He handed 

Balook
himself on down, using the tail like a rope. Balook was of course used to this, and tolerated it; it would have 
been a different matter with a stranger. The tail's tassel hung about two meters above the ground, which made it 
quite handy as a ladder.
They were safe, for a while. There had been no evidence of pursuit, and much of the ground had been hard 
enough to make Thor's effort of obscuration successful. Who would suspect Balook of hiding in the corridor of 
a power line? In fact it offered fair concealment, because the high wires would screen the view somewhat from 
above.
Balook seemed calm now. If he missed his mate and calf, there was still no evidence of it. That seemed to be a 
difference between the animal nature and human nature: the human worried about his absent friends and 
relatives. There was no doubt that Balook cared, as his attack on the car that hit Blooky had shown, but he 
simply did not concern himself about absent rhinos. Unless they happened to be in heat, so that the smell alerted 
him. Awareness was immediate. Probably the animal lacked the ability to visualize distant things, or to make 
theoretical constructions.
Could that account for Baluchitherium's extinction? If family members got separated from each other, and saber-
toothed tigers attacked one while the other was peacefully grazing elsewhere... or if a baby fell in a hole and 
disappeared, and the mother didn't hear, so had no concern. A fatal flaw in the species, perhaps.
Thor shook his head. He was no paleontological scholar; probably the reason the species died out was 
something comparatively mundane, like insufficient foraging room when the climate changed. If there were a 
blight on suitable trees, the species would be in trouble in a hurry, because of its huge feeding demands. It was 
dangerous to make assumptions based on comparisons with human beings, whose lifestyle was quite different. 
Few animals needed the ability to theorize!
But right now, Thor almost wished the human mind were the same. Then he would not be bothered by 
phantoms. If anything had happened to Barb...
He found a stream crossing the power line aisle, about a kilometer along. He flung himself down and drank 
deeply. Water had never tasted so good!
Balook heard him and moved to the stream. When he drank, the river threatened to dry up!
There were a few wild berries growing beside the fence. Thor walked along, picking the ripe blackberries and 
popping them into his mouth. It was a slow way to get a meal, but it was sure. When he came to a particularly 
plentiful patch, he sat down and cleaned it out. He realized that he would have been out of luck in winter, while 
Balook—well, the big rhino preferred deciduous foliage, but could handle pine needles, and of course much of 
his sustenance was derived from the twigs and branches and bark. So yes, Balook could survive in winter, in the 
wild. If left alone.
Thor heard something. It was now midafternoon, and he happened to be sitting in shadow. Balook was on down 
the line, out of sight for the moment. Thor froze, listening and watching. Something was coming through the 
field beyond the trees bordering the power line corridor.

Balook
It was a man—and he carried a rifle.
Suddenly Thor's heart was pounding. Nobody carried a 
rifle or any gun openly, unless authorized—and only the 
police and military personnel were authorized. There was 
only one good reason the police would be walking out 
here.
They were after Balook!
It had been sheer luck that Balook had run so far along the 
highway before diverging into the fields and forest, 
because no footprints showed there. Thor had done his 
best to eliminate traces, once he realized the danger they 
represented. So the police didn't know exactly where to 
start looking, and were combing the area. This was slow 
and wasteful and probably spread thin—but before long 
they would surely discover the few tracks Balook had left, 
and then they would orient and close in on the rhino 
himself. That would be the end.
Thor waited until the rifleman dropped out of sight in a 
gully. Then he ran for cover behind the power line brush. 
It was like a thin strip of forest between the fences; rabbits 
scooted out of sight as Thor ran, and birds fluttered in the 
line of trees. But it was too thin to hide Balook, especially 
considering the noise the rhino made, tearing branches off 
high trunks and crunching them up. Even the rhino's 
tumultuous noises of digestion could be heard at some 
distance, and when he broke wind the sound could carry 
distressingly far.
Breathless, Thor ran up to Balook. "Trouble!" he gasped. 
"We've got to get out of here!"
Balook cocked his head, dangling a mouthful of brush. Leaves, twigs, wood, bark—here was the proof that it 
was all much the same to this monster appetite! But it had to be stifled now. "Balook, this is a matter of life and 
death. Your life and death! We've got to move out in a hurry!"
Balook, of course, could not understand the words. But he caught the urgency of the tone, and lowered his head 
so that Thor could mount. Thor scrambled over the mouthful of brush, for the rhino, like other animals, was 
unable to conduct two conscious operations simultaneously, and chewing stopped when attention was 
distracted. They stepped over the fence opposite the side the rifleman was approaching, and moved out at 
cruising speed. Thor hoped they would get away unnoticed.
If they were spotted, Balook could probably outrun the police vehicles, because he could maintain velocity 
cross-country while they would be confined largely to roads. Unless there was a copter—but copters were 
scarce, and it normally took days to requisition one.
A car shot across the field ahead. "Oh, no!" Thor groaned. "That's a floater!"

Balook
The floaters traveled on a cushion of air. They floated over the terrain at respectable velocity, requiring no 
pavement. Rocks and ridges hardly affected them, and they could traverse level water too.
Thor pondered feverishly. How could they avoid this pursuit? The floater's main weakness was thick forest, 
because it required space to pass between the trees; close-set saplings could balk it. But here there was no 
suitable forest. Another problem was hilly country. The floater lost power when too steeply tilted, because the 
air cushion depended on proper balance. But there were no mountains in the immediate vicinity, or even any 
good hills. Still, if they could lead it through a gully—
"Head for the stream, Balook!" Thor cried. But it was the pressure of his knees, not his words, that made the 
command clear. Balook swerved, and soon was tramping down toward the little stream they had drunk from.
The car followed. There was no doubt it was after them; it reoriented unerringly when their route changed. It did 
not enter the gully, but moved along the edge. Its driver knew better than to charge that steep incline. Too bad.
Thor saw something glint from the car window. A gun! They could shoot Balook down from a distance! The 
gully was too small to get the rhino out of range; the car would keep following the rim.
They had to put the car out of commission. Thor knew only one way. A floater could not function when tilted—
or turned over. Like a turtle, it was helpless on its back.
If Balook could kick it over...
But someone might be hurt in the car, or even killed. Could he afford to risk that?
He saw the glint of the gun again. It was taking aim! If he didn't stop it, Balook could be killed!
"Charge!" he yelled, urging Balook up the slope, directly toward the car.
This was another game Balook understood. He turned and charged. Stones and dirt spewed out of the bank as 
his giant hooves pounded through.
There was a shot. Balook jumped, and Thor knew the animal had been hit. But no ordinary bullet could bring 
down a creature this size. "Keep going, Balook! Knock that car over!"
Balook closed on the car. Now the vehicle dodged, trying to avoid him—and too late Thor realized his mistake. 
Balook's freshest memory of cars was the one that had struck Blooky. Now a car was attacking Balook himself; 
he had had experience with firearms, and knew the significance of the noise from the car and the strike of the 
bullet. There was murder in the rhino's pain-tormented mind.
Balook reared, lifting his forefeet. "No!" Thor cried, knowing that what happened would be his fault.
But the car zipped aside, and the terrible hooves missed. The ground shook, and a fallen branch sailed into the 
air, levered up by the force of the strike. Balook's great mass made his attack slow, and the driver knew how to 
maneuver.
There were no more shots. Evidently there was only one man in the car, and he had to concentrate on his driving 
now, and could not get oriented for another attack. But the moment Balook let the car go, that gun would speak 
again.
How could they get out of this? They could afford neither to smash the car nor to flee it.
Balook, maddened by pain and memory, had his own notion. He reared again—and again the car dodged out of 
the way. This time a hoof caught part of a fallen, rotten trunk, and there was a spray of water and vapor. Balook 

Balook
had power, yes—but that approach was hopeless. The rhino could not catch the vehicle.
"Your nose, Balook!" Thor cried. "Lift it over!" But again his words were useless. How could he make the rhino 
understand? Balook's neck was so strong he could readily overturn the car, and it would be an unexpected move 
that might work.
But Balook was unable either to understand or to reason it out for himself. The survival of his species had been 
based on size, not intelligence. He reared again—and again the car dodged.
The wrong way. It dropped into the gully, tilted, and lost power. By accident Balook had done the right thing! 
He had disabled the car without touching it.
"Run!" Thor cried, and now Balook ran. This command was in his repertoire. He had seen the car fall and die; 
vengeance had been achieved. Soon they left the police behind.
Thor guided Balook along a road, so as to hide his hoofprints. But there were two things wrong with this 
strategy. There was traffic on this road, both pedal and electric, making concealment impossible—and Balook 
was bleeding from the gunshot wound. Huge drops of bright red blood splattered on the pavement, leaving an 
obvious trail.
So it had to be cross-country again—and how were they to escape? It was now late afternoon; if they could 
avoid direct pursuit until dark, maybe...
But Balook slowed, limping. The wound had seemed minor in the throes of battle with the floater, but now that 
excitement was over, and much blood was being lost.
They stopped in a patch of forest, and Thor looked at the wound. It was in Balook's huge belly. Blood streamed 
from it. A man would have been dead already, but Balook's mass was so much greater that it was less serious 
for him. Obviously it had been no BB gun in that car; more like an elephant gun.
"God, Balook, that's bad!" Thor exclaimed, appalled. "There's no telling how much damage it's done inside. 
We've got to stop the blood!"
He ripped a handful of leaves from a bush and approached Balook. But the injury was well out of his reach. 
Balook could lie down, but Thor didn't want to ask him to do that. For one thing, it might aggravate the wound; 
for another, it would interfere with the animal's eating. After the long trek and run, Balook should be ravenous.
Assuming that the wound had not messed up his gut and his digestion. If that was the case—
Thor shook off the grim thought. He found a rock and several pieces of fallen wood. He piled them up, so that 
he could stand half a meter higher. This brought him just within range. He mopped at the wound.
The leaves came away caked with blood. A huge partial clot fell into his hand, and the bleeding increased.
Horrified, Thor stared at the red mass. "I'm making it worse!" he said. He had seen blood before, but never in 
this quantity. He felt nauseated and dizzy. This was Balook's life that was pouring out!
Thor steeled himself. This was no time for faintheartedness! He had to keep his wits about him, so that he could 
help Balook.
First, he had to stop meddling with the wound. There was no way he could bandage it, and it might succeed in 
clotting itself closed if he just let it alone. Second, he had to think this thing through and decide on a course of 
action.

Balook
Item: Balook was eating well. That meant that the intestinal system had not been badly damaged; his fear about 
that had been premature. Balook also moved readily, so the muscles were all right.
Item: there was no hole opposite the wound, so the bullet had not passed all the way through Balook's body. The 
metal was lodged somewhere inside. That wasn't good, but it might after all be that the bullet was small, and 
had made a much larger and more ragged puncture because it was moving slowly. Balook was so massive that 
penetration might have been slight, relatively. So maybe this amounted to a flesh wound: painful, gory, but not 
serious.
Thor felt better. Now he had things in better proportion. Balook could lose several liters of blood, and it would 
be no worse than a few grams for a man. No immediate worry.
But suppose there were infection, or metal poisoning, from the embedded bullet?
Thor struggled with the notion for a moment, then dismissed it. There was nothing he could do except hope.
As night came, Thor mounted Balook again and hung on, so that he would not become separated from the 
animal. Balook might feed the better part of the night, and this was good, because he needed plenty of nutrition 
to make up for the loss of blood and to restore his vitality. But he might move several kilometers in the course 
of his browsing, and the police could catch up at any time. Thor had to be with him when that happened, for 
Thor now represented Balook's intelligence. Thor might know what to do in an emergency when Balook didn't.
So he laid his head against Balook's flexing neck, and hooked both hands into the loose skin of the shoulders. 
He could sleep this way, so long as Balook moved slowly. He had done it before, years ago, when Balook had 
been lonely. Balook himself would take care that he didn't shake Thor loose.
He nodded off, his left ear against the base of Balook's great neck. In this position he could hear the sounds of 
the animal's feeding: the crunching of the huge teeth transmitted along the bones of the column of the neck, the 
big masses of masticated foliage being swallowed, the more distant rumblings and gurglings of the digestive 
process. It was a comforting cacophony; it meant that all systems were functioning.

Balook
Thor dreamed of Barbara Hartford. Only she wasn't 
called that any more. She was Barbara Hartford 
Nemmen, in a lovely bridal gown, smiling, saying 
"C'mon, let's swim!"
He woke, shaking with the realization: he loved her. 
He wanted to marry her. Perhaps he always had, 
since their first meeting, when he had seen how well 
she understood about Balook. He just hadn't been 
able to admit it, so had cut himself off from her as 
well as from Balook. He found it hard, now, to 
imagine how he could have been guilty of such 
colossal folly.
But as his head cleared, the passion faded. They 
were too young, really, to marry—and Barb had 
shown no such inclination. She worked with him 
because she had to, to get the rhinos moved to the 
Eastern Project site. She was civil because it was 
better than being bitter. But love? Why should he 
fool himself!
He wished there were some way to make it up to 
her, so that they could start again, all-the-way fresh, 
so that romance would be possible instead of mere 
friendship. Then, abruptly, his lost notion of the 
prior night returned. The freak zoo—
Balook stumbled. Alarmed, Thor called out. "Hey, 
Balook—you okay?" It was still dark, so Thor couldn't see the wound. But now he realized that the animal had 
stopped eating, and was moving slowly. The skin of the neck felt hot against Thor's face.
He lifted his head, alarmed. The infection, the loss of blood—they had gotten to Balook!
No, maybe the rhino was just tired, ready to lie down and sleep. Of course his body was hot; it was always hot 
in late day and early evening, because of his mechanism of temperature modulation. It was practically 
impossible to tell when he was running an abnormal fever, because he so often ran normal fevers. Still, an 
infection-fever could not be ruled out. It might not be detectable at skin-surface, but could be ravaging the vital 
inner organs.
Balook often slept standing, but this time it might be better lying down. "Sure, Balook; I'll get off!"
He scrambled along the back and slid down the tail and stood aside. Balook kneeled, then lay. That was all, 
thank God!
Thor walked around to Balook's head, patted his nose, and leaned against the big jaw. He settled down, braced 
against the monstrous head, one arm half encircling an ear, providing what comfort he could. In that position 
they slept the rest of the night.
 

Balook
THE MORNING WAS pleasant, but what it revealed was not. A silent blimp was hovering hardly two 
kilometers away, and there could be no doubt about its mission. Thor stood at the edge of the forest and 
watched it slowly move back and forth.
The police had to know Balook was in here, and the blimp was there to make sure he could not escape 
unobserved. Since fields surrounded these trees, that ploy would work. The patch of forest was smaller than he 
had supposed yesterday evening; its broadest width was no more than a kilometer.
Thor went back to inspect Balook—and found to his dismay that the rhino had not yet gotten to his feet.
"Balook, are you all right?" Stupid question; a better one would be "How bad is it?"
At Thor's urging, Balook struggled to raise himself, sank down again, lifted, and finally made it to his feet. The 
wound came into sight. It seemed to have scabbed over somewhat; there was some oozing from it, but the flow 
of blood had stopped.
Yet Balook was staggering like a newborn calf, hardly able to keep his balance. Thor stepped back, afraid the 
rhino would accidentally step on him. What was wrong?
He knew what was wrong, when he unblocked his resistive mind. Infection!
No—if that were the case, Balook should have a raging fever, and he didn't. Thor had slept against him all 
night, and verified that in the morning the fur was warm only where Thor's own body had rested against it. If 
there was any fever, it was slight. Balook had cooled overnight in his normal fashion.
Then what? With no fever, and no more bleeding, and several hours' rest—
Bleeding? Thor struck the heel of his hand against his forehead. This too he had thought of before, and too 
eagerly dismissed. There was bleeding—but not where it showed! Balook could be hemorrhaging internally, 
filling his bowel with blood, liters of it! Now he was out on his feet, weak from that tremendous night's loss. A 
loss that might still be occurring.
Then Thor heard something ominous. It was the baying of a dog.
The police were on the trail now, and in minutes they would be here. This time there would be no escape, for 
Balook was too weak to run.
And even if he could run, and got away—how could Balook survive? Thor was no doctor; he could not do a 
thing about the hemorrhaging. Balook would die anyway. There was no way out.
Balook had heard the dog too. Now that sound was 
augmented by human voices, and several motors. All 
getting louder.
Balook tried to run. "Wait for me!" Thor cried, 
lifting his arms. Balook halted, swinging his head 
down toward him—and lost his balance.
Down he came, falling as only twelve tons could 
fall. Thor barely jumped clear in time to avoid being 
crushed by the tremendous body. But his horror was 
for the damage he knew that fall was doing to 
Balook's internal organs. Even an elephant could be 

Balook
killed by a fall of only one or two meters, and Balook was twice that size. His guts could burst.
Thor looked at the fallen giant, appalled. Balook moved his head weakly. He was in pain, now; perhaps he had 
been in pain all along, but not shown it. That pain had now progressed too far to be ignored—and there was 
nothing Thor could do.
How could all this have come about, because of one brat with a firecracker? Mixed with Thor's grief for Balook 
was sheer, blinding rage at that capering boy. At that moment he hoped the boy was dead.
There was the crashing of brush as men tramped through the forest, closing in. It had not been much of a chase, 
after all, and there had been only one possible outcome. Balook would die—whether captive or free.
Suddenly Thor's rage overcame him. They had no right to do this! Balook was innocent; he should not suffer for 
what heartless ignorant people had done!
The men were coming with guns. He could tell where they were by the clumsy sounds, though they did not yet 
see him or Balook. Thor could overcome one of them, get his gun, drive them off...
"I'll take care of you, Balook!" he said. "Trust me!"
Balook's head dropped slowly to the ground, reassured. Despite the disparity of their sizes, Thor had always 
been the one to protect Balook in the human world.
Thor ran to a large tree and scrambled up it. If he were lucky, they would pass this way. Like a panther, he 
waited, alternately savage and afraid. If only there were some better way out—but there wasn't.
The first man came—from the wrong direction. He held a dog on a leash. Thor despaired.
"Hey, we found it!" the man cried.
"On my way!" another called. In a moment he walked directly under Thor's tree. He carried a rifle.
Thor jumped. He was no panther; his takeoff was clumsy, and his shirt hung up on a broken limb. It ripped 
loudly, and he was jerked off his course. He fell behind his prey, landing heavily on the ground.
The man whirled around, rifle ready. Thor lunged at him, grabbing for the weapon. He had no balance and no 
plan, except to get that rifle. His hands caught hold of the barrel, and he yanked as hard as he could.
The man jerked back. Thor, offbalanced, fell—but he had it! He had the rifle! He rolled on the ground, but got 
his finger on the trigger. "Stop where you are!" he cried.
The two men stopped. "Why, it's just a boy!" one said.
"Get out of here!" Thor said, pointing the rifle at the nearest man. "Leave Balook alone!"
"Put it down," the man said. "The animal is dying."
There was no way to argue with that. Already other policemen were approaching.
"Will you promise to help him?" Thor pleaded. "He didn't really do anything!"
The men exchanged glances. "We can't promise," one said.
"But we'll do what we can," the other added.
What choice was there? Thor dropped the rifle and stared into the ground. Then he walked back to Balook and 

Balook
hugged the prostrate neck as well as he could manage. "Somehow, somehow..." he whispered to the nearest ear, 
the tears coming unashamedly.
 

Balook
TROUBLE
7
"OH, THOR!" BARB cried. "What happened?"
"Balook got shot..." He shook his head, sickened by the whole thing. "What happened to you?"
They were in the forest, not far from Balook. Thor could not leave the rhino—not now. He had promised to take 
care of Balook, and Balook trusted him, and he had to carry through somehow. Two veterinarians were working 
on the wound. Balook was unconscious, under sedation. The loss of blood had put him most of the way out 
before the medication started.
"Blooky broke his leg, but he's all right," she said. "It was more of a bend than a break, actually. He's got a 
splint, and he's young enough to think it's just part of life. Theria stayed put. We're all right. But you—"
"The man in the car! Did they—?"
"He escaped with severe bruises. The driver's compartment was specially braced. Still, it was lucky Balook 
didn't hit it one more time!"
"The firecracker brat!" Thor demanded. "He started it!"
"I don't know! They took him away so soon—"
Thor didn't push it. They both knew that the boy was either dead or critically injured. Thor would have been 
satisfied to see the boy in hell, but then Balook would be guilty of murder. So he had to hope grudgingly that 
the brat survived.
"How did Balook get shot?" Barb asked anxiously. "The police were under orders to shoot only in self defense."
"We didn't know that," Thor said, horrified anew. Had he brought it on Balook by his own action? "I saw the 
glint from the gun, and thought they were going to shoot him right away. We charged the floater..." He trailed 
off. What was the use in talking about it?
"I've got to get back to Blooky and Theria," Barb said. "She gets nervous without me. But first I've got to know 
about Balook!"
They walked over to the downed animal. Open surgery was in progress. "We're fishing for the bullet," one vet 
told him.
"How—how bad—?" Thor asked, finding himself squeamish. It was not the sight of the blood and instruments, 
but that it was the body of his friend. It could as readily have been an autopsy...
"The intestine has been damaged, but no vital organs were hit. The main problem is loss of blood and 
exhaustion. Maybe some infection. If we can get the bullet out and keep him quiet, he should pull through."
"Thank God!" Barb breathed.
The vet looked at her. "You'd better hope that boy has similar luck," he said. Then he plunged his hand back 
into Balook's gut, searching for the bullet.

Balook
They didn't answer. There was no answer to make. They walked toward the car that was waiting for Barb.
She stopped outside it. "Thor—"
"Yes?" He was so concerned about Balook that he wasn't really paying attention.
"Thor, when I thought—that is, when you were gone, and the dragnet was after you—I didn't know whether you 
were alive or dead. Anything could have happened! I—"
"Balook's still in trouble," he said. "We still don't know."
"Not Balook. You. I mean, Balook too, of course. But—"
"I'm okay. Tired, that's all. Balook took good care of me." He tried to smile, but the humor was vacant.
"Will you shut up and listen a moment?" she flared.
His eyes jerked from the rhino to her. "What's the matter, Barb?"
"Can't we go somewhere and talk?"
"I can't leave Balook. Not while he's sick."
"Well, here, then. Thor, I—well, it's crazy, but I—" She stamped her foot in frustration. "Oh, I can't say it!"
"Barb, did I do something? I'm sorry. It's just that I'm so concerned about Balook I hardly know what else is 
happening."
"So am I," she said. "It's not that. I'm glad you're concerned."
There was an awkward silence. "You know, Barb," he said at last, realizing that she needed time to work out 
what she was going to say. "I dreamed about you last night."
"You did?" she asked, taking his arm. "What kind of dream?"
"It's foolish. Nothing to it," he said, embarrassed.
"So I'm nothing?" she asked with mock ire.
"No, not that at all!"
"What, then? C'mon, tell me." She smiled, mocking herself.
"I'd rather not say. You'd laugh—or be mad."
"No I wouldn't. Tell me."
He met her gaze. Her face was beautiful, as lovely as his dream. He threw caution to the wind. "That we were—
man and wife. Or about to be. At least, you were in a bridal gown. And you said 'C'mon, let's swim!' "
She remained silent. Her expression did not change.
He felt the flush rising. "I warned you it was foolish," he said defensively. "Just a crazy dream. I shouldn't have 
told you."
"Yes, it's foolish," she agreed. "We're too young, we have so much to learn, so much growing to do. But sort of 
sweet. Did you really dream that, or did you make it up?"

Balook
"I really did dream it." He had not yet fathomed her reaction. Was she amused—or not amused? "It— it's pretty 
transparent wish-fulfillment, I guess. That swim—it's all tied up with—I wish I'd—I don't know." He wished he 
had never opened his mouth!
"Me too," she murmured.
His head whipped around. "What?"
"That's what I was trying to tell you. I dreamed we were at the lake and—swimming."
"That's not the same." But his heart was beating.
"To me it is." She glanced sidelong at him. "And to you too, I think."
"I guess so." His chagrin was converting to relief and even to joy. "I just didn't want you to think that I just 
wanted to see you—you know."
"I do know, Thor. I feel the same. The symbolism is obvious. To see each other without shame—the way 
married people do. We already know how similar we are, the good and the bad."
"We have to keep it in perspective," he said, addressing himself as much as her. He felt as if he were sailing 
over a river on the bike, aware how quickly and devastatingly he could flip out of control if he lost his balance. 
"It's a time of stress, of crisis. Maybe we're just reacting to that."
"We probably are," she agreed. "No sense getting carried away and maybe making a bad mistake."
"No sense at all," he said, longing for her. But then he looked at Balook, and knew that nothing made any sense 
while the rhino's fate was in doubt.
"C'mon, kiss me," Barb said.
Was it another dream? Thor set that question aside and seized the moment. He kissed her, not hard.
For a moment it was strange, a repeat of the first kiss, and he feared she would push him away again, that she 
had been joking, that he had missed the point and ruined it by his eagerness. But then her arms came up to wrap 
around his neck, to draw him in closer, and it was like orbiting in space, disembodied except for that miraculous 
contact of their lips and the clasp of her arms.
At last they broke. The entire forest seemed brighter, richer, like the beauty of dusk when colors were enhanced. 
Barb was so lovely it was almost painful to look at her.

Balook
"I won't say I love you," she said. "But I guess I don't have to."
"I think you just did," he remarked wryly. "Barb— can't you bring Theria and 
Blooky out here? So we can all be together? I can't leave him, and I don't want to 
leave you."
"I'll try," she promised.
"Damn it, I will say it!" he exclaimed. "I do—"
She jumped to put her hand over his mouth. "No— no! We can't say anything we 
might regret."
"I'll never regret it!"
She quirked a smile. "Have you never done something you regretted?"
"For two years!" Which brought home to him the validity of her caution.
"Wait until we know about Balook."
She was right. He nodded. "Come if you can," he said, turning away. He did not 
dare remain with her longer, lest he make a scene that would embarrass them 
both.
He heard the car door close. Then the car hummed slowly along the path cleared 
for vehicles, headed for the nearest road. Thor turned to wave, then walked on 
toward Balook.
Then he remembered that notion about the freak zoo. They had been operating 
under the assumption that they would separate after the rhinos were delivered to 
the Eastern Project site, and that there would no longer be a job for her. But the 
zoo needed people who related well to strange animals, and if Barb—
"Got it!" one vet cried, holding up a bloody something. "Bullet's out. I believe he'll pull through, with proper 
care."
"I'll stay with him!" Thor said.
"He'll need more than that," the man said. "We'll have to put him on special feed, and he'll need a lot of it. 
Nourishment that won't aggravate the intestine. And he'll have to be kept warm."
"But Balook doesn't have any trouble with the chill of the night," Thor protested. "He has his own ways to 
handle both heat and cold."
The man glanced at him. "Such as?"
"He allows the excess heat to accumulate in the outer layers by day, then draws on it at night. His body 
temperature varies far more widely than ours does. His mass is so great that it changes slowly anyway."
"And how does he build up this heat?"
"Why, mostly from exercise—" Thor broke off, finally getting the vet's point. Balook was sick, and could not 
move about and forage while he recovered from the injury. He would slowly cool off, and not be able to 

Balook
recharge his heat in his normal manner. "Maybe blankets—"
The man shook his head. "Never work. Animals don't understand blankets. We'll have to put up a tent."
Thor realized that this was going to be expensive. "I don't know if we can get a requisition in time."
"You had better call your Project Manager and impress upon him the need," the vet warned.
"That's not the problem. He will know the need. It's that it takes days to requisition anything out of the ordinary. 
The bureaucracy just doesn't move any faster."
The man considered. "There may be another way. I'll ask the Mayor."
"Mayor?" Thor asked blankly.
"Mayor Caldwell of Eagle Stream."
"You mean the town we just—?"
"I'll handle it," the man said. He went to his truck and began talking on the radio.
Soon he was back. "A tent's on the way, along with the other equipment and supplies we need. Be here in an 
hour."
"But how—?"
"The Mayor's coming out with the first load. He'll talk to you."
"To me?" Thor was baffled by this development.
"He'll update you. He's good at that."
Thor did not pursue the subject. He could think of no optimistic reason why such a personage should make a 
personal call. Was the city going to sue the Project—or merely jail Thor and Barb on suspicion of homicide?
Balook was sleeping. Thor realized that it must have taken a lot of sedation to put twelve tons to sleep, and it 
would take time to wear off. But the first crisis was past; the vet said the rhino would make it.
All too soon the Mayor arrived. He was an old man, but still spry. He reminded Thor somewhat of his 
grandfather; he had the same gray mane, and similar lines about the face.
"Thor Nemmen?" Mayor Caldwell inquired heartily, shaking hands. "Don't worry about a thing. We have the 
report on what happened; your animals were not at fault. Eagle Stream will take care of you."
Already the tent was going up: an inflated-wall type of considerable size. It wouldn't fit in the forest, so they 
were pitching it in the field.
"Thank you, sir," Thor said, looking for the catch. "But this must be very expensive—"
"Yes, and we shall take care of that, too," the Mayor said. "The people want to see your animals. We'll rope off 
the area and charge admission—"
"Charge admission!" Thor cried, shocked.
"Now don't misunderstand, son. We're sorry about what happened, and we feel responsible. That boy should 
never have gotten into your right of way. But I would soon be out of office if I didn't protect the taxpayer's 

Balook
interest. We'll control entry, and post warnings; troublemakers won't get near your animal."
"Balook's no freak!"
"Of course not, son, of course not. But he is impressive. Long time since the citizens of Eagle Stream have seen 
a horse that size."
"He's a rhino, not a horse!"
"Of course. We'll explain that the fee goes directly to the support of the animal. That way, the town can make it 
up to you."
"This is ridiculous! Balook doesn't like crowds!"
"Son, you've got to understand. The citizens are sorry, and they want to help. My phone's been busy all 
morning. Give them a chance to salve their consciences. Your animal will like them, when he sees how decent 
they are."
The prospect appalled Thor, but beneath the Mayor's homey manner there was a genuine financial imperative. 
Balook did need help, and needed it now, not days from now when the Project authorization came through. The 
Project personnel had not even been able to get here yet; they were evidently helpless.
"Could you bring the others here—Theria and Blooky?" Thor asked.
"We intend to. Is the calf amenable to petting? That would be a great attraction for the children."
"Look, Mayor Caldwell—if someone hurts Blooky, the same thing will happen all over again!"
The Mayor looked Thor in the eye. He had a remarkably level gaze. "Son, trust me. No one will hurt any of 
your animals. There will be no trouble. I know how to organize these things. Just sign this release—"
"I already saw how you organize things! That's why Balook's hurt!"
"I see we have a slight misunderstanding," the Mayor said. "Several, in fact. First, I did not organize your 
journey through Eagle City; I was against it, for reasons that are obvious now. But I was overruled by the City 
Council, some of whose members may discover themselves seeking new employment before long. Second, you 
need the help I'm offering; your animal will surely die if left untended, and your Project is unable to make the 
necessary arrangements quickly enough. Third, you lack legal status; your animal is trespassing on private 
property. Fourth, there are certain criminal charges—"
"I'll sign the paper," Thor said. He wasn't certain how binding his signature would be, because he was only 
Balook's guide, technically, as well as being underage, but he had lost his taste for quibbling. The Mayor had 
evidently thought things out better than Thor had.
"A very reasonable attitude," the Mayor said, presenting him with a pen.
 

Balook
AS IT TURNED out, the Mayor was right and Thor's 
worries wrong. The cordon about the area prevented 
random intrusions, and unarmed police kept the 
sightseers subdued. There were many children, but 
they were well behaved. Hours of visitation were 
limited, with regular breaks for the rhinos. Barb 
stayed in a little pen with Blooky, who was wearing a 
plastic cast on his leg. The little rhino took quite a 
liking to the attentions of the children, who invariably 
brought treats. (The Treat Concession was adjacent; 
the city was making money there, too.) Even Theria 
condescended to give rides when properly bribed by 
flavorful leafy branches imported for the occasion, 
though only when Barb was aboard with the children. The animals were in danger of becoming spoiled.
Balook was left alone in his heated tent, except for the attention of the vets. In a few days he was on his feet 
again, supplementing the concentrated feed with selective browsing. Spectators were permitted reasonably 
close, and Balook became accustomed to them. Adults and children goggled at the dispatch with which the huge 
rhino crunched whole branches as his digestion mended.
Things were looking up. Soon Balook and Blooky would be well enough to travel again.
Then the firecracker boy died.
"They're going to put Balook on trial for manslaughter," Barb said. "You know what that means."
"It means they'll kill him," Thor said.
"Not if we put up a good enough defense!"
"You know the law," Thor said grimly. "If a man kills an animal, the man is fined or imprisoned. If an animal 
kills a man, the animal dies."
"But it was an accident!" she cried. "The boy was tormenting them! Everyone saw it!"
"Everyone saw Balook hit him. That's evidence enough."
"Look," she said determinedly. "Balook never saw that boy. He was running toward Blooky and the car, and the 
boy just got in the way. If a man drives a car too fast and hits someone in the street, it's just an accident. 
Manslaughter."
"Like a car..." Thor said, something nagging at his mind.
"Balook's not a car!" Barb snapped. "I just meant—"
"Oh, now I've lost it," Thor said, frustrated.
"Lost what?"
"The thought. Something about Balook."
Barb shrugged. "We'd better do more than think about Balook. He needs a lawyer."
"We can't hire a lawyer. Our funds have been frozen, pending the trial. Mr. Duke's been going crazy!"

Balook
"I know that!" she retorted sharply. "The State will provide one. Only—"
"That's all we need. A third-rate assignee."
"Give him a chance," she said, but her defense lacked conviction. "We don't even know who he is, yet."
"Do we need to?"
Her look was dismal. "What can we do, Thor?"
He shook his head, seeing no real solution. If the senior personnel of the Project were unable to act, how could a 
pair of penniless teenagers? This incident had ruined everything. "We can pray for a miracle, maybe."
"C'mon, kiss me."
"Despair makes you romantic?" he asked, dismayed.
"We're stymied with Balook. We're not stymied with each other. Let's do something about what's possible. 
Maybe the other will work out, somehow."
Thor wasn't sure about the rationale, but hardly cared to argue. He kissed her, and then things did seem more 
optimistic.
 
THE LAWYER WAS Mr. Twild: small, old, bald, and he carried an aura of incompetence about him. He took 
down every detail of the episode, but did not seem to have any dramatic notions for the defense. "We'll let the 
prosecution present the facts," he said.
"Their facts will wipe out Balook!" Thor protested.
"That depends on interpretation," Twild said mildly.
"Interpretation!" Thor shook his head unbelievingly. "We can't interpret away that brat's death!"
Twild merely looked at him, unmoved.
Thor said no more. It was obvious that the miracle they had prayed for had not come to pass.
 
THOR WENT TO the stable to check on the Baluchitheria. As he entered, his tension and concern seemed to 
slide off. He felt at ease with the huge animals. It wasn't just Balook; Theria and Blooky accepted him too, and 
made no demands beyond what he freely gave. How much better this world of the ancient animals seemed than 
the complex, deadly world of the human species!
"I hope we can save you, Balook!" he said.
He had arranged with Barb to have one of the two of them always with the animals, and the other watching the 
trial. That way they could be on top of both aspects of the situation. They had their radios, so they could keep in 
touch with each other, but it did mean that they were usually separated.
There were Project personnel here, by court injunction. Apparently the judge was afraid that an adult would find 
a way to spirit Balook away before the trial, in effect jumping bail. Of course that was nonsense; only Thor or 
Barb could make the animals travel. Therefore no one associated with the Project said a word; they remained 

Balook
clear, physically and legally, lest the local authorities catch on that the surest way to confine the animals would 
be to remove Thor and Barb. If the worst came—but they never discussed that.
All they really knew was that they were in the midst of love and death: the burgeoning love between the two of 
them, and the threatened death of the animal that had brought them together. It was a devastating combination, 
and trouble.
 

Balook
TRIAL
8
IT WAS AN old-fashioned jury trial. Most trials these days were handled by computer, dispensing with the 
complicated paraphernalia and rituals. The evidence was assembled and analyzed and the verdict presented in 
rapid order. The months- or years-long waits of the past were gone; the moment the cases were assembled, they 
were decided. But in special cases, the archaic system could be requested and invoked. This was as special as a 
case could get!
Barb sat in on the long, dull empaneling of the jurors, and radioed regular reports. Thor sat in the stable, 
watching the sightseers come and go. He had thought interest would slacken, but with the publicity of the trial it 
intensified. There were fewer children, more adults—and they came to stare at Balook. They seemed to be 
harder-eyed, less friendly. The death of the firecracker boy had transformed the atmosphere. Thor didn't like it 
at all.
"Twild is challenging every prospect," Barb said on the radio. "He asks them if they feel an animal who kills a 
man should be executed, and when they say yes, he dismisses them for cause. The judge doesn't like it, but can't 
stop it. But they're all saying yes!"
"They're against us," Thor said. "Now that the brat is dead, they think he was a poor innocent child, and 
Balook's a ravening monster. We can't get a fair trial here."
"That's what I think. The public is fickle; they saw Balook as a terrific curiosity at first, then they were mad at 
him, then when Mayor Caldwell set up the sideshow they were positive, and now they've swung back the other 
way. I asked Twild why he doesn't petition for a change of venue, but he says that would not help, and not to 
worry."
"Sometimes I wonder which side he's on," Thor muttered.
"Twild is all we've got," Barb said dispiritedly. "I guess he knows what he's doing."
"He's nailing Balook's coffin!" Thor retorted.
She did not argue the case.
Later, the news got worse. "The judge has called a halt," Barb reported. "He says they've got to empanel a jury 
before he dies of old age, and that no more jurors can be disqualified for believing an animal that kills a man has 
to be killed."
"But that means a stacked jury!" Thor protested.
"Twild says he's made his point, and there are other ways to defend Balook."
"I hope so!" Thor said. "But is Twild looking for them?"
Again she did not answer.
Next day Thor took his turn in the courtroom. The jurors were there, and the prosecution presented its case. The 
lawyer for the State was a sharp young man with eloquent mannerisms, and seemed to know exactly what he 

Balook
was doing. Methodically he brought out witnesses to establish that Balook had run wild, had struck the boy, had 
stomped the car, had attacked the police floater and had fled the scenes of all these outrages.
"But I made him do it!" Thor protested to Twild. "I made him run, so he wouldn't smash any more cars, I made 
him attack the floater because it was shooting at us—"
"Were you in control when the boy was hit?" Twild asked him mildly.
"No, not then. He had been spooked by the firecracker and everything. But—"
"The prosecution's main case rests on that act. The rest is merely corroborative. All you could do would be to 
implicate yourself; you could not help the animal."
Thor shut up, chagrined. Twild was right; the boy was Balook's responsibility, and the rest was more or less 
irrelevant.
But there was no question about Balook's guilt in that one case. He had struck the boy, and that had been the 
cause of the boy's death. State experts were confirming that point now. Even Thor, if he should have to testify, 
would have to agree to that.
Yet Twild seemed unperturbed. What sort of defense did he have in mind—if any? Thor's stomach was 
beginning to hurt.
When the prosecutor finished presenting his case, it looked airtight. Balook had killed. The law was clear. 
Balook must die.
Desolate, Thor left the courtroom. The trial was not over, but it seemed that it might as well be.
 
NEXT DAY BARB took the courtroom again, while Thor perched on Balook, clinging like a lost soul to the 
huge neck. But it was the rhino's soul that was at stake. How lucky the animal was that he couldn't know the fate 
they were fashioning for him!
"Thor!" Barb said urgently on the radio. "Twild's putting on a good case. You should be here."
"How can I leave Balook? I may never have the chance to be with him again..."
"All right, I'll tell you. Twild's showing that it was an accident. Films prove Balook never even saw the boy. It's 
like a car hitting a pedestrian in the right of way. If the pedestrian was at fault—"
Hope flared. "Do you think it'll work?"
"Well, Twild is coming across with a lot more moxie than we expected. It seems pretty convincing. I think we 
underestimated him. Maybe that's the way he likes it."
But on cross-examination the prosecutor established that Balook did not have the right of way. He had stepped 
over the guide rope at the same time as he struck the boy; the guilty foot was across, the other forefoot caught 
behind the rope. The boy had been in the reserved channel, but had just gone out of it, and was just outside it 
when struck. Balook was technically at fault, not the boy.
"But the boy was dancing all around Balook's path!" Thor cried indignantly.
"Not at the moment he was struck," Barb said glumly. "The film shows he had just ducked under the rope. It's 
just chance, but that's the way it is."

Balook
So that defense had come to nothing. But Thor had to admit that it had been a good try. Had Twild carried it off, 
the charges against Balook would have had to be reduced. Maybe they had misjudged the man.
"I don't understand this," Barb said later. "Twild's putting in evidence a lot of data about the Project. How it was 
organized, how the rhino egg was modified, the number of failures. How the real rhinos were used to nurse—"
"I know all that!" Thor snapped. "What's the point?"
"That's what I'm saying!" Barb snapped back. "I don't see the point—but that's what he's doing."
"Well, I hope he knows what he's doing!"
"Ditto here."
In due course it became clear that Twild did know what he was doing. He made a strong case to show that the 
Baluchitheria were unique. There was no other grown male except Balook; no other female except Theria; no 
baby except Blooky. In all the world there were no others of this species, and had not been for millions of years. 
The diminished finances of the Project guaranteed that this would not be done again; the tide of experimentation 
had moved on.
Barb held the radio up so that it picked up the lawyer's words directly.
"Kill this animal," Twild said, his voice assuming new authority, "and you are not punishing an individual 
entity, whatever his technical guilt may be." He made it sound as if the prosecution had made a lot of fuss about 
nothing. "You are eliminating a unique creature. One that can not be replaced. You are eradicating an entire 
species. You are committing genocide." The last word sounded unutterably foul.
"Genocide!" Thor echoed as he heard. "God, yes! There is no other Balook!"
It was a stroke of genius. There were laws against the taking of life unnecessarily, animal life included. There 
were stronger laws against taking the last life of a species. To kill a man was wrong; to kill all men was worse. 
To kill one Baluchitherium was permissible in certain circumstances; to kill the last Baluchitherium was not. 
The reason for the inability of the Project to create more members of this species might be as much political and 
economic as scientific; that did not matter. If Balook died, so would the species. No species could deliberately 
be rendered extinct. Not legally.
The perfect defense! Balook could have killed a hundred boys, yet be immune to execution. He was unique.
"Except for one thing," the prosecutor pointed out. Balook was not the only one of his kind. He was one of two 
males. The other was Blooky.
"But the species can't reproduce that way!" Thor objected. "Theria is Blooky's mother!"
He knew that Barb was shaking her head at the other radio. "Incest means nothing to animals—or man either, 
when it comes right down to it. They can reproduce—theoretically."
"But even if it were desirable to breed Blooky with his mother when he grew up, she would by then be too old," 
Thor said.
"The court doesn't care about that," she returned darkly. "There would be one male and one female left. Legally, 
Balook is expendable."
Was Blooky's life to be the forfeit of Balook's? It seemed so, ironically.

Balook
Twild, seemingly undismayed, continued with another defense. He played up Balook's magnificence, his stature 
as an animal—and his limitations too. An animal could not comprehend murder; if he was dangerous, he should 
be restricted, not killed. A strong enough enclosure...
Thor thought about that. No ordinary enclosure could hold Balook when he really wanted to get out. They 
would have to build something like the Chinese Wall— and the Project no longer had the funds. Balook 
couldn't stand to be tethered; he would break any chain, or break his leg trying. Which meant they would have 
to hamstring him, so that he could never run again...
"No!" Thor cried aloud. Balook would be better off dead!
To Barb he said: "I'm going to have to talk with Twild. He doesn't understand Balook."
"All right," she agreed dubiously.
Thor biked into town, using the machine he had rented for the duration. It was about as much as the Project 
could afford at the moment. It felt good to ride a bicycle again, and to share the paths with other bikers; it made 
him seem normal.
He reached town and quietly entered the courtroom. Twild was showing slides of Balook, Theria and Blooky in 
various activities. They were magnificent animals, and Thor was sure the jury was being swayed. It would be 
easy to condemn a ravening monster, but hard to wipe out the magnificence of living Baluchitherium.
But before Thor had a chance to talk with Twild, a woman entered and approached Thor. She was middle-aged 
and undistinctive; he did not recall seeing her before, though it was possible she had been among the thousands 
of visitors to the stable.
"Mr. Nemmen," she whispered urgently. "You don't know me, but I went out to see your animals just now, and 
something's wrong. I think you'd better get out there, immediately."
"I just left them," Thor said, irritated. "They were all right. Balook remains weak, but is healing nicely."
"I mean the people," she said. "They're gathering a couple of kilometers away, carrying gasoline—I just 
happened to go by. When I saw that, I turned right about and drove here. Those beautiful animals—I'm afraid 
something's going to happen!"
"Gasoline!" Thor was shocked. He knew what gasoline was; it was an old-time fuel once used in motors. Now it 
had only specialized applications. It was highly flammable, and even explosive when ignited in confinement. If 
it were spread about the stable region and lit, there could be a terrible conflagration. "They're going to lynch 
Balook!"
"I don't know about that," the woman said. "But since that boy died, there's been strong feeling, and now that 
your lawyer's getting him off—"
"We can't be sure," Barb said. "It might be coincidence. Maybe an old-fashioned motor show—"
Thor doubted that. "Thanks for telling me!" he said to the woman. "I'll get right out there!"
"We aren't all chameleons in our feelings," she said. "I think the majority of us would be satisfied to see the 
rhinos exonerated, but there's a violent minority that knows no law."
He didn't even stop to see Twild. The woman was right: he had to check on it immediately. But Barb was right, 
too: he could not make any accusations until he was sure. If he cried "lynch" in court, and it was a false alarm—

Balook
He fairly sailed along the road, making the best time ever. He was lucky that there was little traffic, for he did 
not want others to note his mission. He reached the compound without event.
All was quiet. Only a few sightseers were there: a light day. The Baluchitheria were contentedly pulling down 
foliage in the pasture area. The trees of this region had been pretty much denuded below the nine meter level; 
soon the animals would have to be moved. No bad men were in evidence. Apparently it was a false alarm.
Still, he wanted to be sure. He poked around—and discovered a barricade blocking off incoming traffic. A sign 
said CLOSED FOR REPAIRS.
But the exhibition was not closed! The sign was a fake. It explained why there were so few visitors: as the 
earlier ones cleared out, they were not being replaced. But who had set it up?
He checked the area the woman had mentioned, hiding as well as he could in the brush. It was there: gasoline in 
assorted containers, as though many people had scrounged for it. There were hard-eyed men standing guard.
It added up. Get the sightseers out, then move in, dousing the stables with gasoline and setting them afire. 
Suddenly—no animals! And no proof, for the perpetrators would be gone as soon as the flames started.
But still he lacked proof. If he called the police, it could turn out that there really was an antique motor exhibit 
being set up nearby. He had to wait until the lynchers made their move.
At least he could prepare for it. If they were going to douse the stables with gasoline and burn them down, he 
could make sure the Baluchitheria could get out. No doubt the lynchers planned to make this seem like an 
accident; they would not shoot or do anything else to give themselves away. They would just sneak in, douse, 
light, and sneak out—while Balook burned. Then the outcome of the trial would be academic.
But they surely knew that the animals were always attended. Were they planning to burn Thor too? Somehow 
he didn't think so. It would not be because of squeamishness, for obviously these were completely unscrupulous 
characters. It was that a human death would bring a much more thorough investigation, and they couldn't risk 
that. No, they would probably try to lure him off on some spurious pretext.
How could he foil it? He had to remain with Balook, to guide him out, leading Theria and Blooky. If he tried to 
remain, they might shoot him with an anesthetic dart and bring him out unconscious anyway. In fact, they might 
do the same to the animals, to be sure they could not escape the fire by making desperate rushes. Mere darts 
could not put down Balook or Theria, but Blooky could succumb, and then the others might not leave. He had to 
play the seeming innocent—but then their plan would work!
First, he could notify Barb. Their radio was on a private channel, and coded, so the message was unlikely to be 
intercepted. "Barb, I think that woman's right. They're planning to lynch Balook!"
"I was afraid of that," she said grimly. "I'll call the authorities."
"But I don't have proof. We can't risk a false alarm. Not with the emotional climate here."
"We can't risk a lynching, either!" she retorted.
"Right. So I'll fasten my radio on Balook and leave it on. If you hear anything suspicious, you notify the 
authorities. Fast!"
"Why can't you just call me when anything starts?"
"I'm afraid it won't be obvious." Quickly he described what he had already observed. "So if anyone calls me 
away on some pretext—well, I've got to go along. I want to spring this trap now—or next time I may not have 

Balook
the chance."
"Why spring it at all? I think we're going to win this case! Twild is really bearing down now. If we can keep 
Balook safe—"
"That's it," he said. "They think Balook will get off in the trial, so they're going vigilante—just to make sure he 
dies. That's how mobs are. If they can't get their victim fairly, they'll get him unfairly. If one thing doesn't work, 
they'll try another. They're lawless zealots."
"I'd like to exterminate them instead of Balook!" she said darkly.
"Maybe we can do that! We've got a much better chance of stopping them if we spring their first trap, and foil it
—and catch them in the act. Then they'll be exposed, and maybe confined, and Balook'll be safe."
"Sounds risky to me," Barb said. "Balook could get destroyed, if we don't stop them!"
"Don't I know it! But we've already seen that we can't just let justice take its course. We won't stop them unless 
we expose them. This is our best chance, because they don't know we know."
"Just the same, it's not worth Balook's life! I'm calling the police."
"No! That will scare off the lynchers and we won't catch them. Then they'll strike tomorrow or some other time, 
and the police won't believe us, and that'll be the end."
"I hope you're making sense to you, because you're not making much sense to me!"
"Just promise me you won't say a word—until we're sure."
She sighed. "All right, Thor. But I think it's a mistake."
"I'm fixing the radio now. I don't think anybody'll notice it here on Balook, and you'll be able to hear anything 
loud. If I have to, I'll just yell."
"Thor, be careful!" she said. "I don't like this at all. Balook's not the only one I care about, you know."
"I know. Theria and Blooky are at risk too. I hate it, but I've got to do it."
"Them too," she agreed.
"Right. Bye." He scrambled down Balook's back and let himself down by the tail.
Only when he hit the ground did the significance of her last comment register. She cared for Balook, Theria, 
Blooky—and whom? He felt a warm surge. To have his love for her returned—it was still so new that he tended 
to assume it wasn't so.
The stable doors could be barred from the outside, so as to contain the big animals. They were pretty solid; this 
was no longer the jury-rigged tent setup, but a prefabricated structure of surprising solidity. Balook might be 
able to crash out if he really tried, but Blooky certainly could not. Also, if the animals were dazed by anesthetic 
darts—there was pretty potent stuff available, he now remembered, so that even the largest animals were not 
entirely immune—they would not be able to make much of an effort.
He walked up to the doors and checked the barring mechanism. Could it be dismantled, so that the doors would 
not hold? Then the rhinos could get out quickly in an emergency.
Thor saw that there was no simple way to sabotage the bar; it had been designed to resist abuse. He would have 

Balook
to get a screwdriver and remove the big screws embedded in the door; then the framework would not hold.
He knew where the tools were: in a shed by the side of the stable. He headed for them.
A man was standing there. "Come with me, boy," the man said as Thor approached.
"Sorry, I'm busy," Thor said nervously.
"I insist." The man's hand shot out and grabbed Thor's upper arm.
Charged like a power cell, Thor exploded. He threw off the man's hand and punched him hard in the stomach. 
He was a good twenty kilograms lighter than the man, but he caught his opponent by surprise. Air whooshed out 
of the man's mouth and nose, and he bent forward. He had been struck—largely by accident—in the solar 
plexus, the central complex of nerves.
Fevered plans flitted through Thor's head as he saw the man stagger and struggle for breath. Knock him out, 
take his clothing, infiltrate the lynch network, subvert their plot... but he knew these were phantoms. The man's 
clothes wouldn't fit him, he couldn't knock the man out anyway unless he hit him on the head with a wrench, the 
lynchers would surely know each other by sight. Also, their plot was too direct to be subverted: dump gasoline 
on the stable, ignite it, scram.
So Thor did what came naturally. He grabbed his tools and sprinted back toward the stable. He'd have to break 
Balook out now!
The stable door was open. Had he left it ajar? He charged inside. "Barb! Barb!" he called loudly, so that the 
radio on Balook's neck would pick it up. "It's started! Call the police!"
Balook's head swung toward him. Then Thor saw the blood on the animal's neck. Just above that blood was a 
jagged mass of plastic and metal.
The radio had been smashed. Apparently someone had come in the door and fired a shot at the radio, and the 
impact had wounded Balook again.
But he had heard no shot, and Balook had not been spooked. How could that be?
A silencer! A device to make a gun relatively quiet, so as not to attract attention. Of course they would use 
something like that for this.
"Oh, Balook!" Thor cried. He jumped on the lowered head and scrambled up the neck.
The injury was minor; just a series of scratches and bruises and some lost hair. Nothing like the earlier wound, 
from which Balook was now almost wholly recovered. Best to let this one bleed, clot, and scab over; though the 
damaged area was several centimeters across, it was no more than a pinprick to Balook.
But the radio was a complete loss. He had no way to warn Barb. Whatever happened, he would have to fight it 
through on his own.
Thor sniffed, becoming aware of something. Balook sniffed too. "You can smell better than I can," Thor said. 
"What is that odor?" But of course the animal could not tell him.
The fumes became stronger. It was an odd, pungent smell, a little like new oil-base paint, but with less flavor. 
Thor was sure he had run across it before—but where, when?
He sniffed again, and again. Suddenly it came to him: an exhibit. And old-fashioned boat show, with sails and 
motorboats. The type of thing used before the modern electrics took over. Gasoline motors.

Balook
It was gasoline. He had known it was coming, but had seldom actually smelled it.
"We've got to move, Balook!" he cried, alarmed. "Go on out that door!"
But the door had swung closed. As Balook nudged against it, Thor realized the truth: they had been locked in. 
By the very bar he had sought to disable. While he had been checking the radio and Balook's wound, the trap 
had been closing. What an idiot he had been, to let it happen!
"Break it! Break it down, Balook!" Thor cried, urging the animal forward.
But Balook balked. It was not that he lacked the power; it was that he was normally a gentle animal, not given 
to destruction. They had encouraged that trait at the Project. In nature there could have been few if any 
predators on his kind; Baluchitherium was simply too big. It was easy for a big animal to be peaceful, if it had 
nothing to fear. Only for extremely pressing reason would Balook become violent. Therefore he could not 
understand Thor's urgings. Perhaps he assumed that Thor was directing him back, away from the door.
Then a new smell came: smoke. Someone had ignited the gasoline, and it was burning explosively, setting fire 
to the stable.
Balook could never have smelled such smoke before, but generations of rhinos had experienced prairie fires. 
The effect was electric: Balook snorted, and all his huge muscles tensed.
"Out! Out!" Thor cried. Now he was glad he was here with Balook, because at least he knew how to direct the 
rhino's great force.
This time Balook understood him perfectly. He ran at the barred door, put one massive front hoof forward, and 
struck it. This was the kind of motion Balook's kind must have used in the Miocene Epoch, to knock down 
small trees whose upper foliage remained too high to reach. Certainly it came naturally to the animal. The door 
burst apart, the bar fastenings snapping. What had there been to worry about! Thor, like the lynching party, had 
seriously underestimated the rhino's power. They were out.
Flames engulfed the stable. The gasoline must have been spread all around the outer walls. The smoke was 
awful: roiling black and red clouds of it rose into the sky.
"Theria! Blooky!" Thor screamed. "The other stables!"
Again, Balook understood, for this was natural to him. He charged the other stable, reared, and plunged both 
forefeet against the flaming wall. It was like a ten-ton battering ram, for most of Balook's weight was behind 
those hooves. The wall collapsed inward.
Thor choked on the awful smoke and buried his face against Balook's neck to shield himself from the heat. 
Balook had greater resistance, thanks to his insulative layer. The way had been cleared; now Theria and Blooky 
could get out.
But they didn't. "Move! Move!" Thor cried, and paused to cough. "The whole thing will collapse on us—"
But Balook merely stood, waiting for Theria—and Theria would not leave the burning building.
"For God's sake!" Thor cried. "What's the—"
Then he saw what was the matter. Blooky was tethered. He had been restrained while he wore the splint; the 
splint was now gone, and his broken leg healed— it had been a minimal break—but he was still restrained. He 
could not get away—and Theria would not leave without him.

Balook
Thor scrambled forward. "Down, Balook!" he yelled as he passed the animal's ear. Balook obligingly lowered 
his head, and Thor slid across the bent nose and dropped to the floor. He ran to Blooky and grabbed at the knots 
of the tether.
The job seemed interminable. Blooky wanted to get out; he was bucking about and bleating pitifully. That was 
what made it so hard. Thor didn't have a knife to cut the rope; he had to untie it. And he couldn't—not with this 
constant jerking.
Meanwhile, the heat was increasing, and both breathing and seeing were becoming harder.
"Balook!" Thor cried, and the animal came, trusting his friend to solve this riddle and get them out. "Take this 
rope in your teeth! Chew it, snap it!" He put the length up to Balook's fleshy lips.
But this was too complicated. Balook merely sniffed the rope inquiringly.
"Okay, then—your foot!" Thor cried. "Foot!"
Balook was familiar with this command, because of all the times he had had to lift his feet in turn for the farrier 
to trim the hooves. He lifted one forefoot, and Thor took advantage of a momentary slack in the rope to make a 
loop and pass it over the thick ankle. Then Blooky jerked away again, and the loop pulled tight. It could not slip 
off, because of the enormous spread of Balook's hoof.
"Now break it!" Thor cried. "Kick, Balook, kick!"
Feeling the tether, Balook did just that. Balook had never been tethered; he tolerated no bindings. He backed off 
and yanked hard.
Blooky was hauled roughly across the floor. But the rope held. Instead, another section of the wall ripped loose. 
More fire flowed in.
But Blooky was now free of the wall—and tethered instead to Balook. "Run! Run!" Thor cried, unable to worry 
about the tether when the fire was closing in.
Blooky got up and ran. Theria followed. But that brought the loop tight about Balook's ankle again. As soon as 
he felt its restriction, he kicked again. Blooky was thrown to the floor a second time, his two hundred kilograms 
no match for Balook's power.
"God, he's going to be dragged to death!" Thor cried, horrified.
But this time the rope slackened as Blooky rolled over against his sire's foot. Thor leaped for it, enlarging the 
loop, letting it fall free. Blooky still was tied, but now the rope dragged loose.
Blooky got up and ran again, apparently unhurt. Balook followed. Theria followed Balook. And Thor was left 
behind.
He had no choice. He launched himself after Theria, grabbed her tail and hung on. Her moving hind legs 
battered him, but she hauled him out of the blazing building.
Now there was nothing to do but ride Theria. He hauled himself hand over hand up her tail. She could have 
dislodged him with a single kick, but was used to people climbing her tail. Barb looked like a softly feminine 
girl, which she was, but she had hefty muscles in her arms, as did Thor, because of this constant climbing 
exercise. Now he realized that the rope-climbing exercise he had done during his two year hiatus was because 
he wanted to return to his friend and climb his tail again. That much of his wish had come true.

Balook
He clutched the thick folds of Theria's skin over her hindquarters. This was an excellent way to get killed, 
mounting a moving rhino, but it was the only way. He scrambled to her back.
Theria did not like it. Now she realized that it was not her mistress on her back, and she was every bit as finicky 
as Balook about such details. But her concern for her calf distracted her, and she tolerated Thor with only minor 
twitchings of her skin.
Blooky, meanwhile, was desperately dragging the 
rope and one burning patch of wallboard. He was 
afraid to stop, though the weight might have been 
as much as a hundred kilograms, because he 
thought the fire was chasing him. Balook thought 
so too, and wanted to attack the fire—but every 
time he stomped it, the rope went taut and Blooky 
was jerked up short, cruelly. Theria hovered 
between the two, not knowing what to do.
Thor didn't know what to do either. The situation 
was uncomfortable, but at least they were moving 
away from the blazing buildings. He wanted to get 
far from the fire and the compound, because the 
assassins might be lurking with guns, ready to 
finish the job they had botched.
Whereupon he saw two men with guns. Balook 
charged them, and they scrambled to safety behind a tree without shooting.
Why hadn't they shot? Immediately, Thor thought of the answer: if they killed Balook here, they would have no 
way to move his twelve tons back into the stable, and their "accidental burning" would be discredited. A bullet 
was not a fire!
But he still had to do something, for soon the police, ignorant of the true nature of the fire, would be out after 
the Baluchitheria. How could Thor protect them, until he had a chance to explain? The average person was 
terrified by the sight of such huge animals on a seeming rampage.
It came to him in a marvelous flash: he could take Balook to his own trial! Surely the animal had the right to be 
represented in person!
The burning wall fragment sluffed off parts of itself, and the flame reached the rope. Suddenly the main mass 
was severed, and Blooky had only the length of tether to drag. One problem solved!
"Whoa, Balook!" Thor called, and Balook halted. Theria halted behind him, and Thor was ready to transfer. 
"Head down, Theria!" he called.
But he was not her mistress. She would not lower her head for him.
"Oh, good God!" he exclaimed. "Theria, you know me! All I want is to get off you and on Balook. Then 
everything'll be just fine. But you have to let me down."
That logic was too sophisticated for her. Obdurate, she stood.
"All right, I'll slide down your tail," Thor said, irritated. He moved back. But as he crossed her rump, still some 
four meters high, she gave a little stomp with one rear foot. Not a kick, just a minor gesture. He knew that 

Balook
gesture; he had seen it on occasion. It was her signal that she was losing her patience with indignities. Such as a 
stranger climbing down her tail.
Thor perched, exasperated. He could not ignore Theria's warning; she had a mind of her own, and about eight 
thousand kilograms to back it up. Beside Balook she looked relatively petite, but he could break his leg jumping 
down her side. She had to let him get down— and she refused.
But in due course, when she got sufficiently annoyed, she might simply throw him off. One irate sweep of her 
nose across her back would finish him. He could not afford to wait for that!
"Come on, brain—there must be some way!" he said, pulling at his hair as if to loosen the gray cells beneath.
Balook approached, sensing Thor's distress. He wondered why Thor was choosing to ride Theria instead of him. 
The big nose came to nudge Thor's shoulder. "Careful, Balook, you'll shove me off!"
Too late; Balook was used to nudging Thor when Thor was firmly planted on the ground, and a meter's worth of 
shove didn't matter. Here, it was disaster.
"Balook!" Thor cried as he lost his purchase. He flung out his arms to grab Balook's nose, his feet dangling 
helplessly between the two great animals.
Balook lowered his head slowly, as was customary when someone was riding it, and Thor's feet touched. But 
Thor did not let go. "I'm across!" he exclaimed, surprised. He scrambled on up the massive neck. Why hadn't he 
thought of it before?
"On, Balook!" he cried, rejuvenated. There was such a difference between mounts!
 
HE GUIDED BALOOK cross-country toward the town, until there was no alternative to the road. Then the 
parade pre-empted one lane of a car route. There was some commotion and staring, of course, but not nearly as 
much as the first time. Too many thousands of these people had seen the great rhinos; they were no longer such 
a novelty.
He located the court building and guided Balook up the broad pseudo-marble steps. Theria and Blooky followed 
dutifully.
Fortunately the court building was palatial: one of the town's few concessions to old-fashioned conspicuous 
grandeur. The main doors were ten meters tall, framed by gothic columns, and even the internal doors on the 
ground floor had clearances of seven meters. The court rooms had commensurate domed ceilings. It was as 
though it had been built with Baluchitherium in mind.
They tromped down the royal hall to the court room where the trial was being conducted. The door was closed, 
and Thor had no way to open it; he had to stay on Balook so as to guide him. "Push it open!" he cried, urging 
the rhino into it.
The door did not open. Instead it tore off its hinges and slammed down to the floor beyond. There was a 
collective gasp from the audience inside as Balook burst into the chamber.
The judge and jury turned amazed faces toward the animals. As Balook strode into the center of the chamber, 
judge, jury, bailiffs and lawyers scrambled unceremoniously for the far side. This was just as well, because by 
the time Thor managed to bring Balook to a halt the judge's bench had been overturned. The rhino was not used 
to precise maneuvering within a building.

Balook
"We've only come to attend our own trial!" Thor called. "They tried to lynch Balook..."
He thought it was a moment of triumph, but suddenly he realized that he had made a ghastly mistake. The 
lawyer for the defense, Twild, looked horrified. Twild might have been well on the way to winning the case, but 
that was over now. Both judge and jury were staring at the monstrous animals with shock, fear and revulsion. 
Nothing, now, would convince them that Balook was just a harmless, misunderstood animal.
 

Balook
MIOCENE
9
THE JURY WAS out, the rhinos were in new temporary stables, and Thor was under virtual house arrest. 
Because there really had been a fire, and Thor had no apparent motive to have started it, he had not been 
formally charged with breach of the peace. But while the arson investigation was going on, he was restricted.
The worst of it was, he was separated from Balook. The judge had noted that all of the trouble Balook had 
gotten into in this region had been while Thor was with him. Again, there was no formal charge, but Thor was 
forbidden to join Balook until the facts had been ascertained to the judge's satisfaction. The judge, it seemed, 
was not an easy man to satisfy.
Barb tried to cheer him, but there was little anyone could do to alleviate his gloom. He had been apart from 
Balook for so long, and then so actively rejoined, and now to be apart in the hour of crisis—the distress drove 
him relentlessly. He lost his appetite, he had trouble sleeping, and his entire existence seemed bleak and 
meaningless.
"Is there anything I can do?" Barb asked worriedly.
"No!" he snapped. "Just leave me alone!"
She did not snap back. "I know how you feel. I've been through it myself. Without those lovely creatures, we 
aren't anything." She moved to the door.
Thor looked up. "You do understand," he said. "Balook means more to me than anything. More than you. I 
guess you could hate me for that—"
"Or love you," she said. "If you aren't true to your first loyalty, what else is worth anything? If you didn't love 
Balook, and I didn't love Theria—"
"There wouldn't be anything between the two of us," he finished. "I guess most people would forget about the 
animals—"
"Don't ever do that!" she exclaimed. "Then I'd hate you!"
"I'm sorry I snapped at you," he said. "There is something you can do for me. Two things."
"I know them both," she said. "First—" She pulled his head down and kissed him.
"That was one," he agreed.
"Second, I'll go talk to Balook for you."
He nodded. "Tell him I miss him."
"I will. Third—"
"Third? You're not going to try to break me out of here!"
"A gift for you. I thought it might help."

Balook
"A gift?" He took the small package she presented.
"A statue of Balook—maybe."
"Maybe?"
"That's right. Bye." She departed.
He opened the package. It was a block of brown tallow.
Thor shook his head. "A statue of Balook?" he asked the air, baffled.
The box said SCULPTOR'S WAX.
Then Thor smiled. A statue—if he could make it! What better way to spend his lonely hours, than to fashion a 
replica of his best friend, Balook. It would certainly give him something to do—something that was both a 
challenge, for he had never tried sculpting before, and a blessing, for the effort would surely occupy him for 
many hours.
There was an instruction leaflet in the box. It told how this hard wax would soften when warmed by human 
hands, so that it could be worked. It could also be carved by a knife. But its main property was its ability to melt 
away cleanly when subjected to appropriate heat, leaving no residue. Thus it could be used as the base for the 
"lost wax" process of metal sculpture. This was a method by which the wax carving was enclosed in a kind of 
cast, and the cast was heated, and the wax melted and flowed out a hole, leaving only its shape inside the cast. 
Then the hot metal was poured in, and cooled and solidified, and the cast was broken open. Result: a metal 
sculpture just like the original wax one. Few sculptors actually carved metal these days; wax was easier, and of 
course this process made it possible to make many replicas.
Thor was abruptly fascinated. A metal statue of Balook! Why not? He could have it with him forever, even if—
He stifled that thought. Balook had to live, somehow!
He took out the block of wax and ran his hands over it. The surface did soften, but not much. This was not clay, 
that could be scooped and kneaded readily!
He took the knife that came with the set and carved a shaving from a corner. It was not wood, either, or soap. It 
had its own texture, distinct from anything else. It was intriguing, but took time to adjust to.
Well, he would just have to plan his statue carefully, so as not to have to make any change in the main mass of 
wax. Part carving, part molding—it could be done, with patience. The great mass of the torso here, and the head 
here, and the legs—no, he'd better do them separately, and attach them after the rest was done, so that they 
would not break. And the head—attach that too. Otherwise there would be too much wax wasted, and the figure 
would be smaller than it had to be.
Thor contemplated the wax for some time, judging how to use it economically, figuring out ratios. He tried to 
visualize the form within it: a rhino waiting to be expressed. Balook, in miniature, as if seen through a window. 
At last he decided he could make a statue six inches tall at the shoulder—inches, not centimeters— for a ratio of 
one inch to three feet. Skip would love such a ratio, for he used the archaic measures. Thor did not, but it just 
didn't work out so neatly in the metric system. He needed something simple, so that he could match it up readily 
by eye, and not have to bother with fractions. An inch a yard was simple. Call it an inch a meter, a compromise 
between systems. Just as Balook himself was a compromise between epochs.
First he had to carve out the main torso, headless and legless. But he had to do it in such a way that the head 

Balook
could be conveniently formed from the largest cut-out chunk of wax.
He assessed the situation, reconsidered, judged, and decided that his assessment was good. He proceeded to the 
carving, using first the knife for the broad outlines, then a dental pick Barb brought him for the finer work. The 
hours passed like phantoms.
The body took shape, seeming almost to form itself from the wax. The separate head assumed character, guided 
by the same imperative. The legs began as crude sticks of wax, but became four stout, sculptured columns; he 
carved each to its proper proportions before attaching any. He made the tail similarly, and set it similarly aside.
Now he focused on the detail of the head, making the ears perk up, the nostrils flare, the lips part. He drew 
down the folds of skin at the neck, and made the lines around the eyes. The character of Balook emerged from 
the wax, as if Thor were merely cleaning away a covering on the figure that had been present all the time.
When all seemed right, he commenced the job of assembly. The head and neck attached to the body, and the 
line of their joining disappeared. The legs and tail attached to their respective moorings while the statuette lay 
on its side; the wax was stiff enough to maintain them this way without bending. He secured them as well as he 
could; it would not do to have Balook weak on his feet!
At last he stood the assembled statue on its legs.
They were uneven; he had to make adjustments. He made them, getting the footing firm. He removed his hands, 
and the statue stood alone for the first time.
The figure of Balook seemed to waver. Thor shook his head violently. He couldn't fall asleep now; it was almost 
finished!
But soon it wavered again. "Balook, stand still!" Thor exclaimed. "How do you expect me to fix your foot when 
you keep moving about?"
Balook twitched his skin indifferently.
"I wish you could talk," Thor said. "We'd have such a conversation!"

Balook
But of course the rhino could not talk. Instead he 
reached up for a branch and tore it down with one 
good wrench of his neck. There was a small scar on 
that neck, where the smashed radio had been, and 
another on the belly.
"Balook, we've got to go away. Far away. Where 
they can never catch us."
The animal merely browsed.
"Come on." Thor walked beside him, tugging 
urgently at a fold of skin on the leg. "We don't have 
much time."
Now Balook paid attention. Thor guided the huge 
hornless rhino through the big trees. Slowly the 
nature of the vegetation changed, and Thor headed 
directly into that change, still on foot, still leading 
Balook.
The terrain became marshy, with many water plants. Balook didn't like it; his huge bulk needed solid footing. 
"Right; we'll turn back," Thor said. "Look for a way around this bog."
Abruptly he stopped. Before them, rooting in the soil, was the strangest elephant Thor had ever seen. It had a 
normal proboscidean or elephantine body and head—but its trunk was so broad and flat it was as though the 
creature had been squashed by some horrendous accident. Its lower jaw was almost as long as the trunk. The 
two tusks, though about half a meter long, were dwarfed. Two tremendous shovel-like teeth projected from the 
tip of that jaw.
Thor was back, away, and up on Balook's back before the first shock faded. Then he suffered a second shock, 
less horrendous, more profound. The shock of recognition.
This was no elephant, but a weird extinct offshoot he had seen illustrated in paleontology texts. Platybelodon—
a swamp-rooting relative.
A contemporary of Baluchitherium, in the Miocene Epoch.
He remembered Barb's reference to her dreams about Theria. About going back to the Miocene Epoch, meeting 
Baluchitherium's contemporaries. That was what he was doing now—with a vengeance!
Did Balook see the same thing?
From up on Balook's shoulder, Thor did not find the Platybelodon as imposing. It stood perhaps three and a half 
meters tall at the shoulder. He seemed to remember that they got larger later in the epoch. Anyway, they weren't 
aggressive. After looking briefly at Thor and Balook, the creature went back to its foraging. It used the two 
great front teeth to slice through water, vegetation and turf with singular dispatch, scraping up huge mixed 
mouthfuls that it then strained and sorted in its mouth. Its tongue, tusks and long lips separated solid from 
liquid, and organic from inorganic with marvelous facility. Watching it operate, Thor almost felt his own mouth 
watering for a taste of rich swamp muck.
Actually, it was not so strange to see this elephantine cousin foraging in the swamp. The elephants had been 

Balook
swamp-dwellers first, and had gradually moved to drier pastures as the climate changed and the swamp dried 
out. Some of them had even become mountain dwellers, in America; those had survived almost until the coming 
of the white man. Their extinction was theoretically a mystery; actually man was responsible, as with so many 
other innocent species. Man was the worst scourge to come upon the animal kingdom since the devastation of 
the dinosaurs. It was a mistake to assume that the present distribution and habitat of any species represented its 
paleontological evolution. There had once been woolly mastodons and woolly rhinos, as well as the tropical 
species.
Just as there had once been very large hornless rhinos like Balook. Could man also have—?
No, that was before man's time. That was one crime Thor's species could not be charged with. That was a relief!
They moved on, skirting the swamp. Thor swatted a mosquito; the insects did not seem to have changed much! 
He saw birds flitting through the foliage. He was no ornithologist, but they seemed familiar too, at least in 
general type. So did the trees and plants. All of which fitted together: the insects had evolved with the flowers, 
and the birds that preyed on insects followed right along.
Now the forest thinned. Piglike animals trotted out of Balook's way, unhurriedly. There was a snarl, and Thor 
saw a cat with tusks: a sabertooth. It had been ready to pounce on a porcine straggler, being hidden downwind, 
until Balook had disturbed the herd. No wonder the big feline was angry!
Farther along there was a huge dog, stout and muscular. In fact it was a bear-dog, for the bears had not quite 
separated from the canines in the early Miocene, and the raccoons had only just branched off. Thus these 
doglike carnivores were a very broad and important group.
Thor felt nostalgia for this world that had existed twenty million years before he was born, and faded ten million 
years ago. Balook's world...
"Let me down," Thor said. "I want to touch this realm, to experience it directly."

Balook
Balook obligingly lowered his head, and Thor 
climbed down. He walked among the trees, just 
looking and breathing. Behind him, Balook reached 
up to crop a high branch.
There was a surly grunt. Thor stopped. Before him a 
pig stood at bay—but what a pig! It was about one 
and two thirds meters tall at the shoulder, and three 
long. Thor placed it: Entelodon, another Old World 
Oligocene specimen. Part of Balook's world, of 
course. The trouble was, the monstrous swine was 
making ready to charge!
The pig advanced. Thor retreated. Those tusks were 
not large, in proportion, but the animal itself was so 
big that Thor wanted no part of it. He scooted back 
to where Balook stood.
But Balook was gone. He had wandered away, 
browsing. It had not occurred to him that there could 
be any threat to his small friend; after all, there was 
none to Balook.
Now this Oligocene-Miocene world seemed less 
delightful, more menacing. The huge pig had given 
up the chase, satisfied to have driven the intruder 
away from its territory. But what other animals were 
roaming nearby?
Thor hurried nervously along the trail of broken 
branches and hoofprints Balook had left. He had to 
catch up! With Balook he would be safe, for the rhino had no natural enemies here. Alone, Thor was in trouble, 
for there were many pigs and saber-toothed cats and bear-dogs ready to do him in.
How could Balook have gone so far? It had been only a few minutes!
A few minutes! Thor remembered the chase he had made on the bicycle, when Balook had winded Theria and 
traveled across the countryside to join her. Balook could move, when he chose!
He burst into a glade, and almost under the tusks of something huge. Another elephant, or Platybelodon— no, it 
was yet another variation. These tusks pointed downwards and back, as though the creature's jaw had been 
turned upside down. This was Dinotherium. He remembered that these creatures had achieved enormous size—
over four meters tall at the shoulders— second only to Baluchitherium. But that was later, in the Pliocene 
Epoch; this one was only three meters. Still too big for comfort!
Thor retreated, and the elephantoid did not pursue. These herbivorous animals who had never known man were 
basically peaceful; they only looked horrendous! Still, he would not want to cross one during mating season, or 
debate territory with it. Thor was struck by the complete similarity of the bodies of these creatures, with only 
their jaws and tusks differing; it was as if an elephant had interchangeable heads. Yet it was much the same for 
man; the basic human body had been perfected before the head, so that Australopithecus, Neanderthal, Cro-
Magnon and modern man could be distinguished only by their heads. And not always then!

Balook
On he went, past numerous deerlike animals: "even-toed" ungulates, ancestors to the cattle, sheep, goats and 
modern deer. Still he did not find Balook. Belatedly he realized why: he had been following the trail of broken 
branches, but in this framework many large animals fed on the trees. Any of the elephant types could have done 
the damage. Balook might be far away, his trail having diverged long ago.
Now Thor really was lost.
He forced himself to stop running. He reminded himself that he was not really threatened here. There was 
hardly anywhere in the world, in all its history, where a man could not have walked with fair security. Few 
animals attacked man, and fewer could overcome him.
He peered through the forest, and saw a line, strung up high. He went to it.
Sure enough: it was the power line. The same one he had stayed under when they had fled the city. Oasis of 
peace!
No wonder he was breathless. He had come all the way out here on foot. But his running could not avert 
Balook's fate. If only there really were a hiding place, here in the thousand kilometer narrow oasis of vegetation!
Then he saw it. Not only the power line, but the thing it stood for. More than high voltage electric current, more 
than an advanced technology world.
He saw Balook's salvation.
If only he could make the authorities understand in time...
But at the moment he had a more immediate problem. He had evidently dozed off, or gone into some kind of 
trance, and wandered in a realm of his own making, of fantasy. A realm where Balook was safe! In the process 
he had not only deluded himself, he had violated his restriction, and would be in trouble with the court.
How had he done it? Surely there were guards or something in the building who should have challenged him! 
And the city—was it possible for him to have sleepwalked through that unobserved? And the time— he could 
not have come this far in the few minutes he had been afoot!
Ah, but he had been riding Balook! The rhino could have traveled that distance; after all, he had done it before.
Except that Balook was confined to the compound. It had been the scale model statue of Balook Thor had 
mounted. That of course was even less likely.
There was only one answer: he had fallen asleep, and was still dreaming. That dream had brought him to the 
answer that must have been lurking beneath his consciousness.
All he had to do was wake up.
With that realization, he relaxed—and fell into a deeper sleep.
 
HE WOKE AT the sound of the door. He was lying on his bunk beside the statue. Blearily he looked up. Barb 
was there, her face tragic.
That could mean only one thing. "They found Balook guilty?" he asked.
"Of manslaughter," she agreed. "They have sentenced him to—"

Balook
"To death," he said. That was the penalty for an animal who killed a man, whatever the circumstances.
Suddenly his revelation of the night seemed inadequate. He had been looking for a way to convince the jury and 
the public that there was a place for Balook in the contemporary world. Perhaps there was—but the decision had 
come too soon. Now it was too late to present his idea, too late to make the jury understand.
While Thor had slept, Balook had lost.
Now Barb saw the completed statue in wax, standing there so proudly. "It's beautiful!" she breathed—then sank 
down, sobbing.
Thor got up and put his arms around her, trying to comfort her. But it was a hollow effort. They both knew that 
Balook was done for.
Then Thor's eye fell again on the statue of Balook. It seemed to waver. Was he going back into his dream?
No, it was just a reminder of the revelation he had suffered during that vision. Maybe there was still a chance!
"Barb," he said into her fluffy hair.
She lifted her tear-wet face. "I'm sorry; I shouldn't have—"
"I have a crazy notion."
She paused, considering. "Not here. Not now."
That made him pause. What was she thinking of? "A way to save Balook."
"How I wish!" she said fervently. "But I just don't see how."
"Balook showed me, in a dream. Only they decided against him too fast. But maybe it will work anyway. Can 
you get Twild to get a stay of execution?"
"I can try. But what—"
"I'd better not tell you. I don't want you to get in trouble if it doesn't work. But you can help. I'm locked up here, 
but you aren't."
"Do you really have a way?" she asked, daring to hope.
"I think so. It's wild and bold, but it might work. First I'll need a map—"
"A map of what?"
Thor did some fast thinking, his options expanding. "Maps of everything! An atlas!"
"An atlas! What does that have to do with saving Balook?"
"Everything, maybe! And a telephone."
"They'll monitor any calls you make, and intercept anything long distance," she warned.
"Local is fine. And some research. Or a book on electro-magnetic waves."
"Are you teasing me?" she demanded.
"No, honest! It all connects. But we've got to act immediately."

Balook
"I'll do what I can," she said, looking doubtful.
In a few minutes she fetched him a telephone and the first map she could find: one of the local county, including 
an expanded street directory of Eagle Stream. It was useless for his purpose, but he thanked her anyway. "But if 
you can find an atlas too—and the information on—"
"I'll try, Thor," she said, perplexed. She departed again.
Thor checked his watch. It was noon; he had slept the night, and had not yet eaten, but wasn't hungry. If this 
only worked!
He turned on the phone. "The power company," he said.
The screen flickered. Then a plush front office showed. "May I help you?" the decorative secretary inquired 
dulcetly.
"I'd like to talk to the president of the company, please," Thor said.
She did not crack a smile. "Do you have an appointment?"
"No, I'm just calling in."
"I am sorry, but Mr. Turrell requires an appointment. I can make one for you—" she checked her listings "—
next Thursday at eleven fifteen. Will that be suitable? If you will give me your name and the nature of your 
business—"
"That's too late!" Thor protested. "I need to talk to him now!"
She frowned. "Is it an emergency?"
"Yes! It's a matter of life and death!"
"In that case perhaps an exception can be made. Now your name is—"
"Thor Nemmen. It's about Balook. The Baluchitherium who's on trial."
"Yes, I have seen that on the news," she agreed. "But surely you realize that Mr. Turrell has no business with—"
"Please, just let me talk to him. He can save Balook's life!"
Her mouth tightened, but her voice remained calm. "I shall query his office." There was a brief pause; then she 
said: "Mr. Nemmen wishes to speak with you now, Mr. Turrell. He has no appointment. It's about the big 
animal that's been in the news; he says you can save its life."
The response was so vehement that even Thor could hear it, though it was not on his line. "That animal tore up 
our corridor! Thousand dollars' worth of damage! Deserves to be put away! Don't bother me again with such 
nonsense!"
The woman glanced up at Thor. "I am sorry; Mr. Turrell declines to speak with you. Have a nice day." She 
faded from the screen.
Stunned, Thor turned off the phone. He had put all his hopes on this contact, and it had soured before it started. 
What was he to do now?
He gazed at his statue of Balook. Again it wavered, as if trying to come to life. It would not let him give up.

Balook
He knew, intellectually, that he had worked so long without sleep that he remained behind, even after the night. 
His fatigue was making his vision blur, and probably distorting his judgment too. Even so, that statue compelled 
him. He had to act!
So the president of the power company wouldn't talk to him. What he needed to do was go there in person and 
barge into the man's office and make him listen! But it was folly to think he could do that; he couldn't even get 
out of this room without being challenged; the judge was keeping him confined until the business was done, and 
the business was the destruction of Balook. Of the tiny Miocene Epoch enclave in the contemporary world.
He looked at the only other thing he had. The map of the county. It, too, wavered. Then he saw how he could 
use it.
He spread it out and pored over it, tracing the route of the power line corridor. Yes—there was where Balook 
had foraged, before the pursuit caught up. And there was the power company, well out of town but within the 
county boundaries. The line passed through it, skirted the town, and went on to the next county. It was part of a 
grid that covered the continent. Each local company produced its own electricity, but all were linked, so that if 
one or several failed, the power came across from the others. Thus the local company could drop offline, and 
the power was never interrupted. In that sense, the connecting lines were more important than the company. 
That was what he counted on.
He focused on the town. Here was the court building, and here was the building in which he himself was being 
held prisoner. They didn't call it that, of course; he wasn't under arrest, just in protective custody. But they 
would not let him out until too late.
He checked another region. Here was the compound where Balook and Theria and Blooky were being held. It 
was a thickly wooded region outside of town, which was just as well, because they had to let the rhinos feed, 
and they could destroy trees in short order if there were not enough of them available. That was part of what the 
townsmen had against Balook: the damage to local trees. Thor couldn't really blame them for that. But if that 
fool capering brat had not started it all, the rhinos would have been through the town and gone without 
significant damage to the local foliage.
He continued to pore over the map, virtually memorizing the key aspects of it. Instead of being useless, this was 
now exactly what he needed!
Barb returned. "I couldn't get a book on electro-magnetism, but here's an atlas," she said. "Now will you tell me 
exactly what you are going to do with it?"
"No. It's not safe for you to know. But you can go to the library and look up the information there. Did you get 
the stay of execution?"
"Twild says he's appealing the decision, because the jury was biased. Remember, the judge overruled him on the 
matter of killing animals. That's why he didn't take it hard at the time; he knew he could use it to challenge the 
legitimacy of the trial if he lost. He's a lot sharper than we thought. So the execution's on hold until there's a 
decision on the appeal; if they turn it down, then Balook's done for, but Twild says it should keep things in 
stasis for several days. Is that enough?"
"Should be, if my notion works. If it doesn't, then no time's enough. How fast can you get the electromagnetic 
information? I don't need everything, just the health hazards of the waves."
"Thor, if you'd only tell me why—"
"I don't dare, Barb. I want to keep you innocent, so you can honestly tell them you had no idea what I had in 

Balook
mind. That should keep you out of jail."
"Thor Nemmen!" she exclaimed indignantly. "If you're going to do something that gets you in jail, I want to be 
with you!"
"That would be fun, but I don't think they'd allow it. Anyway, you need to be with Theria and Blooky, if—"
The reminder struck her visibly. She looked as if she were about to cry, but she headed it off by grabbing his 
head and kissing him savagely instead. Then she hurried out.
Thor thought to use the phone to order himself a lunch. His appetite was returning. If he was as busy as he 
thought he might be, he wanted to be well fortified.
While waiting for it to arrive, he sauntered to the window and looked out. He made it seem casual, because it 
occurred to him that he might be under observation.
The window was fastened by a simple clasp. He opened it, and the breeze wafted in. He glanced down.
He felt dizzy. He was on the fourth storey, and the face of the building was completely blank except for the 
other windows—and all of them were closed, and set flush with the wall. There was no way for him to climb 
down, or even to scramble to another window. If he tried, he would fall to the concrete below, which was a 
good ten meters. So much for his notion of escape by that route!
But he knew he would not be able to do it by the door either. There would be laser guards set across it, or across 
the hall outside, invisible but certain to trigger the alarm.
Well, as long as the stay remained on Balook's execution, he could afford to bide his time. Maybe he would find 
some other way to escape.
He closed the window and returned to the map and statue. Then his meal arrived. He and the statue studied the 
map again while he ate. Then he got into the atlas, tracing the routes of the power lines that crisscrossed the 
continent. They were everywhere; there must be hundreds of thousands of kilometers of lines. That was 
excellent for his purpose.
Late in the day Barb returned. "I got some information on the electromagnetism," she said. "But Twild says the 
appeal may be decided much faster than usual, because of the notoriety of this case. It could be denied 
tomorrow."
"They're so eager to kill an innocent animal!" Thor said.
"Your crazy notion," she said urgently. "How can I help?"
Thor realized that he would have to tell her, at least partially. "I didn't want to involve you. I—I have to get to 
talk to the president of the power company. He can save Balook, if he wants to, and I think he'll want to, if I can 
only get him to listen. But he won't talk to me by phone. So I have to get there, brace him personally so he can't 
hang up. That means I've got to make a jailbreak. If you can find a way to turn off the laser alarms tonight—"
"I don't think I can, Thor. I don't know anything about electronics, except what I learned in the library today. 
There is a health hazard, but the power companies cover it up—"
"That's what I thought. That's what I'm counting on."
"Counting on!" she exclaimed indignantly. "What on earth are you talking about?"
"It won't count for anything if I can't get out of here! Isn't there some way?"

Balook
She became thoughtful. She walked to the window and looked out. "Maybe there is."
"I can't climb down from the window," he said. "Even if I hung a sheet out and climbed down it, I'd still be way 
too high for a safe fall. But if you could get me a long, strong rope—"
"I'll see," she said. "Keep alert after dark."
"What do you—?"
"I'd rather keep you innocent, so you can say you didn't know about it," she said, smiling wickedly.
"But I've got to know, so—"
She cut him off with a kiss. Then she left.
Thor stifled his mixed emotions. After all, she was only doing back to him what he was doing to her. Tit for tat.
He could not settle down to rest, so he made the assumption that he would get out, and rehearsed his actions and 
speech once he got to the power company. He would probably have to go there on foot, as there might be an 
alert out for his borrowed bike. That way he could hide better. Then, in the morning, he could sneak into the 
president's office and catch him there. The man would not be eager to listen, so Thor's case had to be good. It 
was good, but his presentation had to bring out its potential. He would have to capture Mr. Turrell's attention at 
the outset, and hold it until the logic registered. Until the man saw how the Miocene related to modern times. 
Balook's life depended on it.
 

Balook
POWER
10
AN HOUR AFTER dark, he heard a commotion outside. There was distant shouting, and the sound of vehicles 
accelerating, and a kind of crashing. What was going on?
A distraction, he realized. Barb must have arranged something, so that no one would notice when he went out 
the door, triggering the alarms!
He hurried to the door—and found it locked. They were taking no chances with him! How could he open it 
before the distraction faded? He had no tools, and the door was too solid for him to break down barehanded. 
Desperately he cast about; his gaze passed the window—
And saw a familiar shape in the mixed night lights of the town. Balook!
He dashed to the window and opened it. Balook was coming down the street, looming high in silhouette against 
the lighted windows of other buildings. What a sight that was—like a nightmare, only the monster of the night 
was his friend, and he was the monster's friend. Barb had broken him out, and now Balook was coming to break 
Thor out; that was her secret strategy!
But he couldn't get through that door! Was it all to be wasted? And what would happen when the townsmen 
rallied from their surprise and organized an effective pursuit? There was no way they could escape cleanly and 
be free.
He stared out the window, his emotions warring with each other. Part of him wished that this total foolishness 
could somehow work, and save them all. The rest knew it was disaster that could put all of them in deeper 
trouble than before. How could Barb have acted so rashly? She really wasn't the type!
No, obviously she was the type, for here was Balook. She was a lot like Thor himself, temperamental, yielding 
to the passion of the moment, willing to undertake desperate measures when the life of one she loved was 
threatened. She was the only other living person who cared about the Baluchitheria the way Thor did. He 
understood that aspect of her perfectly. But that meant that she could get into just as much trouble as he. They 
really could both wind up in prison—but probably not in the same cell.
Balook was charging on during Thor's amazed ponderings; the great rhino was at home in the darkness. He 
came up to the building, his head reaching up almost to Thor's level. "Balook!" Thor cried, heedless of all else 
in his joy at this momentary reunion with his friend.
There was noise behind him. Someone was at the door, still locked. Friend or foe?
Now a second rhino came up. Theria—with Barb aboard. "Thor!" she cried. "Mount! Mount!"
"But—" he protested, appalled. How could he—?
The door opened. Men jammed into the room.
"Here!" Thor called to Balook. "Reach here!"
Balook's head came up, seeking the familiar voice. Now it was only a meter below the level of Thor's floor. 

Balook
Thor scrambled out the window, hung on, let his feet dangle, then dropped.
He landed on Balook's massive head. The head lowered with the added weight, but was in no trouble. Thor 
scrambled to catch hold of folds of skin, and then backed down the neck to the solid shoulder. Now he was 
ready to ride!
"Lead the way!" Barb called. Her hair was flaring wildly as she rode Theria; she looked primitive and lovely.
Thor kicked Balook, directing him down the appropriate street. The map was clear in his head; he could take 
them right to the power station. It had to be fast, before the townsmen rallied. Balook was fresh, having 
recovered during the trial, and ready to run.
They charged through the town, avoiding those few cars and bicycles that were abroad. Soon they were in the 
country, the wind gusting past. There seemed to be no organized pursuit, only the lights of a few cars that 
remained a discreet distance behind. Perhaps they were only tracking the rhinos, so that a party could close in 
on them by day.
Well, he could take care of that. Once they got clear of the suburb, they could leave the road and cut through a 
forested region. The cars would have trouble following there.
They coursed on through the diminishing settlement. Trees became more common. Balook seemed to 
understand that his life was at stake; he did not pause to snatch foliage, and maintained a swift pace, his feet 
handling the darkness well. Theria followed, with Blooky scrambling to keep up. It was like old times, except 
that times never had been like this, charging through the night as a family.
How had Barb broken them out? She must have opened the gates, then led the way with Theria, and by the time 
the authorities caught on, it was too late. Who would have suspected Barb of such a thing? Thor felt a warm 
surge of feeling; she was certainly the girl for him!
But first he had to do his part, and that was no easy thing. His strategy was a desperation ploy, and not just 
because of this second breakout of the rhinos.
Balook's ears perked. There was something ahead. Had the police set up a roadblock?
Then Thor saw it: a tiny figure standing in the road. A child! That was all they needed: another mischievous 
brat, like the one that had started all this. "Get out of the way!" Thor yelled.
But the child remained unmoving, even as Balook approached and came to a halt, looming tremendously over. 
It was a boy of about five years, in pajamas, standing with his arms outspread and his eyes screwed tightly shut. 
He looked terrified.
Theria drew up beside Balook. "What's a child doing out here alone at night?" Barb called.
"He must be lost," Thor called back.
"We can't just leave him here!"
"We can't just pick him up and take him along, either!"
Then Blooky, curious, moved forward. He had been petted by many children recently, and had lost his shyness 
with them. He sniffed the boy, then nuzzled him, hoping for a biscuit.
The boy jumped and opened his eyes. He stared at Blooky. Then, hesitantly, he reached out to pet the baby 
rhino on the nose.

Balook
Meanwhile, Thor was dismounting. Balook lowered his head, and Thor slid down his neck in the fashion of a 
banister, and finally across his broad nose and to the ground. "Who are you?" he demanded of the boy. "What 
are you doing here?"
The boy's mouth worked. "F-Fudgie," he said after a moment.
"That's your name?"
Gravely, the child nodded.
"Where's your home?"
The boy turned and pointed. There was a small side road that intersected at this point; Thor had not noticed it 
before, in the darkness.
"Your house is down that road?"
Fudgie nodded again. He was shivering.
"You had better go back home," Thor said. "It's cold and dangerous out here at night."
The boy nodded affirmatively, but made no motion toward his home.
Barb joined them. She knelt and put her arms around the child. "You're freezing!" she exclaimed.
"We can't stay here," Thor said urgently. "They'll have cars surrounding us!"
"Why are you here?" Barb asked the boy.
This time he answered intelligibly. "To meet the monster."
"The monster rhino?"
He nodded yes.
"Well, these are the rhinos, all right," she agreed. "But now you must go home before your folks miss you."
"Can't."
Thor saw a set of headlights approaching slowly from ahead. "They're coming! We've got to get off the road!"
"But the child!" she protested, for the boy was now clinging to her. "He could get run over in the dark!"
"Then bring him along!" Thor snapped.
She pondered only an instant. "Yes, we'd better. For one thing, it's warm on the rhinos. But I can't lift him up 
alone. We'll have to go on Balook. You take one hand; I'll take the other."
"But—" Thor started.
"Hurry!"
Bemused, Thor took one of the boy's arms. "Ready, Balook!" he called.
Balook brought his head low. Thor climbed on the nose, bracing himself by an ear. Barb followed, anchoring on 
the other ear. The rhino's ears were relatively tiny, but tough; they made excellent footholds and handholds. 
Between them they hauled up the boy, who straddled Balook's forehead.

Balook
"Up, Balook!" Thor said.
The head lifted. The boy whined with fright and screwed his eyes closed again.
When they were up, Thor left the boy in Barb's grasp and slid to Balook's shoulder. Then he hung on with one 
hand, reached forward with the other, and got hold of the boy's free arm. Barb let go, and Thor hauled the boy in 
to him. Then Barb slid down.
Now they were all at the broad shoulder. Thor was behind, Barb ahead, and the boy securely between them.
"Hang on," Thor said. "We're taking evasive action!" He kicked Balook, directing him nonverbally.
Balook turned and plunged into the forest at the side. Theria immediately followed, and of course Blooky 
followed her. In a moment they were out of sight of the road, and the vehicles were unable to follow.
Barb turned about so that she was facing back. "Now tell me why you can't go home," she said to the boy.
" 'Cause I was bad," he explained. "Broke a lamp. Monster going to get me."
"You were punished?" she asked. "For breaking a lamp?" Thor was concentrating on the escape, trying to direct 
Balook, but he was listening too. Barb was making progress with this incidental mystery. He had not known that 
she was good with children.
"Played too hard. It fell. Mom told me the monster would stomp me."
"The monster rhino?"
"Yes. Then I saw on the teevee the monster coming, so I went out to meet it."
"But why didn't you hide?" she asked.
"Didn't want it to hurt the house."
"You were afraid the monster would break down the house, just to get you?"
The child nodded.
"So you went out to meet it alone."
He nodded again.
"That was a very brave and generous thing you did, Fudgie!" she exclaimed.
"No, I was bad."
"Maybe so, but you paid for it. Now the monster is giving you a ride."
"A ride?"
"For being brave. The monster doesn't stomp brave children."
"It doesn't?"
"It doesn't. It's got better things to do."
The boy thought about that. Then, slowly, he smiled.

Balook
"I knew you'd understand," Barb said, hugging him. "Now you enjoy the ride, and look around, but don't fall 
off. Get a good hold, because sometimes it gets bumpy." She showed him how to hang on to the loose skin and 
hair, so as to be secure.
Then she oriented on Thor. "How are we doing?" She sounded grim.
"It occurs to me that we shouldn't let them know exactly where we're going," he said. "They'll be setting up 
roadblocks or worse. And if we get to the power company too soon, Mr. Turrell won't be there."
"So we need to hide for the night and some of the day," she said.
"Yes. But they can track us readily enough. I don't know if we can stay clear long enough."
"They won't close in too fast," she said.
"Why not?"
"Because we have a hostage."
"What?" Thor asked, shocked.
Fudgie took an interest. "What's a hostage?"
"It's a brave little boy who takes rides on monsters," she explained.
He liked that. "Is it 'portant?"
"Very important. Nobody can do anything until you finish your ride. Are you ready to go home yet?"
"No. I like riding."
"We'll let you ride with us as long as you want."
Thor realized that Barb had had reason to bring the boy along. The authorities would be helpless, because there 
was no safe way to get the boy down without the cooperation of the rhino, and Thor and Barb were the only 
ones who could guarantee that. They weren't really holding the child hostage, but his presence was exactly what 
they needed. They were already in so much trouble that a charge of kidnapping would not make much 
difference.
"What about the electromagnetic hazards?" Thor asked. "I have to know before I brace Mr. Turrell."
"How can something like that save Balook?" she demanded. "He's not a human being; he doesn't care about 
magnetic fields!"
"Precisely. What can you tell me?"
"All right," she said wearily. "Here is the short course; stop me when you get bored. The electromagnetic 
spectrum includes waves of all frequencies, ranging from X-rays down to ELF waves. Those aren't little men; 
that's an acronym standing for Extremely Low Frequency. Some waves are definitely dangerous to living 
things; some aren't. Microwaves affect a slew of things—I'd have to read my notes to remember them all—but 
there's genetic damage, loss of memory, cataracts, malformed fetuses—how much do you want?"
"What about power lines?" Thor asked.
"That's uncertain, but interesting. They generate the ELF. Fields of similar frequency are generated by the earth
—the magnetic field—and the human brain. The theory is that when living things formed, they adopted the 

Balook
electrical environment, borrowing it from the earth, just as they adopted the nature of the sea water to make 
salty blood. So there's obviously a connection. If people are shielded from the earth's magnetic field, their 
biological cycles foul up. When the magnetic field reversed 25,000 years ago, several animal species became 
extinct; we don't know whether that's coincidence, but it's alarming. If it affected their brains—" She shrugged. 
"But of course most of the world's species, including ours, survived nicely. So we just don't know."
"What about the power lines? What do they do to people?"
"There isn't much information. The power companies have rallied to suppress studies, because there's no getting 
around the fact that civilization needs power. If we stopped the transmission of electricity, we'd be in a 
relatively primitive technological state, I think."
"But I've heard stories. C'mon, Barb, it's important!"
She sighed. "I certainly don't see how! Some experiments indicate that a strong ELF field near a human head 
induces anesthesia and affects the chemical balance in the brain, blood and liver. Bone tumors can occur. It may 
stunt growth. Bees in such a field can go crazy, sealing themselves up and dying. But it's inconclusive; other 
studies don't show these effects. So it's all one big question mark, and I can't tell you anything for sure."
"So the power lines generate ELF waves," Thor said. "There's a lot of power in the air; you can light a 
fluorescent bulb without plugging it in."
"Yes; the power isn't just running through the wires; it's traveling a corridor thousands of meters in diameter, 
guided by the wire. But we normally can't even feel it. Thor, what is the point?"
"Would you take a full time job next to a power line?"
She laughed. "Not now! I don't know how much of the suspicion is true, but I wouldn't care to take the chance. I 
don't want my brain zonked out!"
"So how do you think the workers feel who have to stay close to those power lines?"
"Well, you know there aren't too many. Once the wires are connected, those lines are pretty much left alone. 
They use big clumsy machines to prune back the encroaching trees."
"Because they can't get enough human workers to do it!" Thor exclaimed triumphantly.
"I suppose. But I repeat: what is the—"
"Pruning back the trees," Thor said.
Then she caught on. "Oh, Thor, do you really think—?"
"We've got the world's best tree-pruners."
"But—"
"If I can just persuade the power company to hire them."
"But Balook can't prune anything if he's dead!" she cried.
He laughed humorlessly. "That had occurred to me."
"I think you're crazy!" she flared. "If the ELF is that bad for people, maybe, can it be good for Balook?"
"He was hours under those lines, and they never bothered him. It's a risk we'll have to take."

Balook
"I don't know. All this—this—"
He reached around Fudgie and caught her shoulders. He brought her face into him and kissed her. She met him 
warmly, then reconsidered and pulled back, then re-reconsidered and kissed him again.
"Gee," Fudgie said, wedged between them.
Barb tousled his hair. "I kissed him," she said. "Don't tell."
Fudgie knew about secrets. He agreed not to tell.
"There's something else," Barb said. "The Project—this publicity has been bad for it. The funds have been 
impounded."
"But the sale of the Western site—" Thor said.
"Yes, those funds. And an Act of Congress may shut down the Eastern site too. We may have nowhere to go."
"But the rhinos have to be somewhere!" he protested.
"Not if they are executed, because they have been judged a hindrance to the welfare of mankind." Now the 
reason for her grimness was clear. "That's why I broke them out, instead of just bringing you a rope. We're at 
the end of the line, no pun."
"They're going to hang the rhinos?" Fudgie asked.
"Same thing," Thor said. "They weren't really coming after you; they were fleeing from bad people."
"But they're nice monsters!" Fudgie said, beginning to cry.
"Yes, they are," Barb agreed, hugging him for comfort. But she was crying too.
Thor stared bleakly into the starry sky. Now his wild notion was truly their last resort!
 
THOR VERIFIED THAT cars were patrolling all the adjacent roads, and he was sure that all exits from the 
county were barricaded. But the authorities did not dare come into the forest after the rhinos during the night. So 
Barb took Fudgie to the ground to handle natural functions, then brought him back to be with Thor while she 
rejoined Theria. In the interim the little boy and the little rhino got together, seeming to like each other's 
company. Balook and Theria seemed not to notice; that was their way of signaling that they had decided that 
Fudgie was not a threat. In due course the human folk slept, while the rhinos browsed.
Then it was dawn, and two problems manifested. First, the three human beings were hungry. Second, there was 
a cordon around the area, impossible to pass unnoticed.
"Time to show our hostage," Thor said. "You understand what we're doing, Fudgie?"
"Making them leave us alone!" the boy said brightly.
"Yes. But we want your folks to know you are all right. You may stay with us until we talk to the man at the 
power company; then we'll all have to get down. I think by then your folks will have forgotten about the lamp. 
And after this, if a monster comes for you—"
"I'll pet it on the nose!" Fudgie said zestfully. His attitude about monsters had undergone a complete 

Balook
transformation during the night. He was enjoying himself now.
They rode out to the highway.
"You are surrounded!" a speaker blared from a police 
car. "Don't make us use force!"
"What force?" Thor called back. "Do you want a dead 
rhino here? You can't do that until the appeal is 
denied." But he knew that that wasn't all of it. They 
did not want to shoot one rhino, and perhaps have 
Thor killed in the fall, and the other rhino go berserk 
and complicate things further.
"Wave to them, Fudgie!" Barb called from Theria.
Thor braced the lad with his hands, and the little boy 
stood up on Balook's six meter high shoulder and 
waved vigorously.
A ripple of dismay went through the assembled 
forces. Apparently they had not realized that the boy 
was with the rhinos. The stakes had abruptly risen.
"Now we want food and water," Barb called. "Delivered in standard containers, with no tricks."
"Donuts and chocolate milk!" Fudgie cried enthusiastically.
"Within the hour," Barb said. "I will come down for them. The others will remain on Balook. If anything goes 
wrong..."
It seemed to Thor that such a barefaced bluff could hardly work, but the men below were evidently daunted. 
They could not afford to have the hostage hurt—and they knew that if Balook got out of control, with the boy 
still on him, disaster was likely. It was an impasse, for the time being.
The supplies were brought. Barb collected them, took a share up to Thor and Fudgie, and then carried her own 
onto Theria.
"Now make way," Thor called. "We want a better pasture." He guided Balook slowly forward, and the men and 
cars got out of the way.
They crossed to the forest on the other side of the road. There was a scramble behind as the authorities sought to 
reform their cordon. But it hardly mattered, because the cordon was no longer a barrier to the party's passage. 
Thor let the rhinos forage, taking no particular direction, while the riders ate their own meal. It was like a picnic.
Then in midmorning he abruptly started the party moving. The men of the cordon were caught off guard as 
Balook forged purposefully to the highway. "Make way! Make way!" he cried.
"Make way!" Fudgie echoed gleefully. This was high adventure!
Now the rhinos proceeded down the road, directly toward the power station. Again there was a flurry of motion 
and much confusion as the authorities tried to reorganize. They were not apt at this; they had not even tried to 
negotiate. Thor had seized the initiative, and it stood him in good stead.

Balook
They made as if to pass the power complex—then abruptly veered into its open main gate. "Where's the 
president's office?" Thor demanded of the astonished attendant at the gate.
"Third floor, west side," the man said. "But you can't—"
"Thanks." Thor guided Balook to that portion of the main building. He saw amazed faces staring out of the 
windows.
He went to the fanciest window. "Push, Balook!" he directed. "Slowly!" Mostly he spoke with his foot signals, 
which the rhino understood better than the verbal ones.
Balook put his blunt nose to the window and shoved. The window broke inward, its plastiglass bending but not 
shattering. Then the frame collapsed, and a hole opened in the wall.
"Stay here, and hold on, Fudgie," Thor told the boy as he scrambled up on Balook's head. "Hallo!" he called into 
the window. "Anybody home?"
There was a portly man at an ornate desk. "This is an outrage!" the man exclaimed.
Balook poked his head into the open window, carrying Thor along. "Mr. Turrell, I presume? I must talk with 
you."
"What on earth could you want with me?"
"Well, you wouldn't talk to me by phone, so I had to come in person," Thor explained. "I really think what I 
have to say will be of interest to you." It had to be, or all was lost!
"This is preposterous!"
"I agree. But this whole situation can be relieved, if you will just give me a reasonable hearing." Thor was 
amazed at his seeming poise. It stemmed from desperation; he knew this was their only remaining chance, and 
he had to play it properly.
The man seemed ready to huff up until he exploded, but his voice was even. "Suppose we talk for fifteen 
minutes? Will that satisfy you?"
"That's fine," Thor said, and slid off Balook's head. "Go find a good tree, Balook," he said. "But don't shake 
anyone off." He had already warned the boy about holding on; Fudgie had been delighted by the prospect of 
riding the monster solo. He had gone rapidly from terror to overconfidence.
"Now what do you think could be of such interest to me that you find it worthwhile to endanger the public, 
destroy property, and kidnap a child just to inform me about it?" Turrell demanded.
"I want to save the life of a unique and innocent creature," Thor said evenly. "You want to make money. We 
may have a common interest."
"I want to serve the public interest," Turrell said angrily.
"That, too. So do I. I don't think that the public interest is well served by throwing away a billion dollar project 
without cause. Certainly it isn't by killing an animal who never tried to harm a man. Balook is no more guilty of 
manslaughter than is a car that slips its brakes and runs over someone who charges into its right of way."
"You may have a point, but that decision is neither yours nor mine to make. Exactly what are you getting at?"
"Suppose you had an efficient, reliable crew to prune back the vegetation that impinges on your power lines, 

Balook
that charged nothing for its services except maybe a drink of water every day?"
"Power transmission is a special problem," Turrell said. "We can't get reliable crews, so we use machines, 
inefficient and costly as they are."
"I know. But if a living crew offered to do it for nothing, and you knew that crew would never go on strike or 
leave for higher pay, what would it be worth to you?"
"I just told you: the matter is academic, because of the superstition against electromagnetic radiation. We have 
tried in vain to educate the public—"
"Just look out your window," Thor said. "See what my workers are doing to your trees."
Turrell looked. "Those animals are destroying those trees!" he exclaimed. "At this rate—" He broke off, 
astonished. "You mean those rhinos?" Suddenly the numbers were percolating through the man's head; he had a 
sharp eye for costs and savings.
"Put them in one of your power line corridors, install high electrified wires above the containing fences so the 
rhinos aren't tempted to stray, and they'll eat their way from one end to the other, leaving nothing within reach 
of the lines from a height of nine meters down. They don't require human guidance, except between corridors; 
they're a family. I think that pretty well covers your need. They could proceed right on to the neighboring power 
corridors, clearing them out too, and their manure fertilizing the grass below. It would be years before those 
trees encroach again, by which time—"
The door burst open. Armed men crowded in.
Turrell turned to face them. "Can't you see we're having a private conversation?" he snapped.
Abashed, the men retreated.
Turrell returned his attention to Thor. "You were saying?"
"It would also be a nice public gesture," Thor continued. "Most people like the rhinos; they just want them kept 
out of the way of human beings, so that nobody gets hurt. Your power corridors are private property, all fenced 
off. You could run pictures of the big rhinos doing this public service that human beings won't touch, and I 
think it would be pretty good publicity. The company with a heart, and a terrific mascot. And you would be 
helping science too, because—"
Turrell peered out the window. "But the danger! They trample children! We can't risk the liability suits if—"
He had broken off because Fudgie, perched on Balook's back, had grown too bold. Now the child was standing 
up and doing an impromptu dance, wowing his audience.
"Damn!" Thor breathed. "I told him to sit still and hold on!"
"He doesn't look like a captive."
"He's not. He came to us voluntarily, because—" Then Thor stopped. He had given away the secret of their 
hostage! Once the authorities knew that there was no threat to the child, they would have no reason to hold back.
"Get down, Fudgie!" Barb called, alarmed.
Too late. The little boy lost his balance, teetered a moment, and fell. Screaming, he slid down Balook's side.
In a flash, Thor saw everything destroyed. A second injury to a child, or a second death—that would seal 

Balook
Balook's fate no matter what Mr. Turrell decided.
Then Balook brought his head about, surprisingly quickly. He caught the child on his big humped nose. The boy 
grabbed on automatically, though his body continued to slide down. But Balook's head was lowering toward the 
ground, and by the time the boy dropped off, he was only a meter from the turf. He landed screaming but unhurt.
"He saved that boy's life!" Turrell exclaimed.
Thor realized that Balook had probably reacted to the sensation of the boy's slide down his side, and nosed him 
more from curiosity than aid. But he wasn't sure, because Balook had accepted the child as a rider, and did have 
a protective attitude toward those he accepted.
Blooky was there, nuzzling the crying boy. Fudgie reached up to hug the little rhino, taking comfort. People 
were gaping from the nearby parking lot. Light flashed. Some fool was taking pictures!
"Those rhinos are no danger to children!" Turrell said.
"Not when they see them coming," Thor agreed, immensely relieved.
Now Barb had dismounted and was with the child. It was all right.
"Young man, I believe we can deal," Turrell said. "I believe those pictures, and the testimony of witnesses, will 
satisfy the Mayor that a pardon is in order. I shall suggest that to him."
A pardon for Balook! There was the answer! The verdict of the judge could be set aside, and Balook would be 
free! But even as the joy of his success buoyed him, he felt the start of the great sadness of separation. Now 
neither he nor Barb would be needed; the Baluchitheria were to be self-employed.
But as he approached Barb, after having Balook rescue him from the office, he remembered his notion about the 
freak zoo.
"Balook and Theria and Blooky won't need us any more," he told her. "The power company is hiring them, and 
Balook will be pardoned. But there are other animals who do need us. We call it the freak zoo, and—"
"The freak zoo?"
"The failed experiments. I worked with them for two years while—" He shrugged. "There's Pooh, the miniature 
bear. He really needs a friend! Also Wormgear, the toothed worm. Nobody cares for them, because they aren't 
normal or pretty or smart. Even the regular personnel of the project really don't—"
"Are you suggesting that I join you there, to work with those creatures?"
"Well—" he said, suddenly uncertain. He had assumed that she would want to, 
and to be with him, but of course that was a big assumption.
"Is there a lake there?" she asked.
Then he knew it was all right.
 

Balook
AUTHOR'S NOTE
This short novel has a long history. It started with a picture in THE ILLUSTRATED LIBRARY OF THE 
NATURAL SCIENCES, a four-volume set of popularized geology, zoology, paleontology, botany and 
anthropology that has fascinating and not very complicated articles on just about anything in the natural realm. 
One article is titled Giant Animals, with pictures and commentary on the extremes of reptiles, mammals, birds, 
fish and such. The biggest reptiles were the dinosaurs; the biggest bird was the Elephant Bird, twelve feet to the 
top of the head, but of course it didn't fly; the biggest flying bird was an extinct vulture with a twelve foot 
wingspread. But this was dwarfed by the reptile Pteranodon, with a 27 foot wingspread. I am foolishly 
fascinated by such items. There was a drawing, made to scale, showing the extremes of mammals, with a six 
foot man for comparison. Dwarfing even the largest fossil elephant was Baluchitherium, whose head was about 
as long as the entire body of the man, and far more massive. Wow!
The thing that struck me about this drawing, upon reconsideration, was the pleasant expression on the face of 
the monster rhino. It looked as if it would be a nice creature to know. That nagged at me, because rhinos 
generally have a bad reputation. The truth, as another article explains, is that rhinos really aren't that mean when 
treated decently. So I formed this mental image of a really nice, huge rhino, who might be unfortunately 
misunderstood by ignorant folk of today. I carry such concepts around with me, and often that's as far as they 
go, just part of my private intellectual baggage, of no interest to sensible folk.
Then in 1966 Data Processing Magazine sponsored a contest: $1,000 first prize plus publication in the 
magazine, for the best computer fiction entry. Three of the six judges had done science fiction writing, so it 
seemed legitimate. As it happened, my wife was then a computer programmer, a ready source of information, so 
this contest seemed made to order for me. With her information and my writing skill—well, it seemed well 
within the realm of possibility that I could win it, and that would be very nice. All I needed to do was to write 
the story. I needed something interesting to go with the computer detail; what could I draw on? Well, suppose 
computers were used to help formulate some extinct species of animal? Perhaps an impressively large creature.
Thus "Balook" the 5,000 word story came to be. It featured Thor Nemmen, a computer programmer who 
worked with a computer system whose acronym was BLOOK, and his introduction to a young woman who 
looked just like my wife and just happened to have a background in genetics (it's amazing how such 
coincidences occur!), and their project to recreate Baluchitherium with the help of computer technology. But it 
also had a moral. It started with a quote from Mathew Prior, Solomon on the Vanity of the World: "Who 
breathes must suffer, and who thinks must mourn; and he alone is blessed who ne'er was born." The opening 
was the yelp of a dog, to whose tail laughing boys had tied a string of cans, terrifying it. There was part of the 
theme: man's cruelty to animals. I am a vegetarian in part to protest such cruelty: the cruelty of killing animals 
for meat. Thus this story was close to home in several ways, for me.
They crafted Balook, intended to promote the capacities of the computer. But Balook was a living creature, and 
they had not properly allowed for his nature in the modern world. A mean man saw him and took a potshot (I 
don't much care for hunters, either), injuring him. Mean children laughed. That made them realize the enormity 
of the social problem. They had collaborated with a computer to play God, resurrecting an extinct animal. What 
price would Balook pay for their success? Had they really done more than tie tin cans on a living creature's tail? 
It concluded: "Had they forgotten the human responsibility man owed to the mechanical genius of the machine? 
Thor rested his arm against the guiltless nose of Balook, and was afraid." I felt it was a fine story, moral and all.
Indeed it must have been, because Data Processing held it nine months and returned it with a rejection slip. 

Balook
That gives you a notion of computer efficiency in those days. My wife and I have made babies in no more time 
than that! The magazine published the winners of the contest, and I read the top three. You want sour grapes? 
I've got them in bunches! All three were poor. The first was essentially "I Love Lucy" cast in a computer 
framework, the computer running the household to the frustration of the occupants. The second was a power-
failure problem whose author did not even know how to paragraph; it was all in big mixed-text blocks. (Didn't 
the editors know, either?) The third was better, as I recall, but unmemorable. Were I an editor, I would have 
bounced all three.
I tried it on the regular science fiction markets, hoping for more sensible reaction. There, at least, there was 
supposed to be some knowledge of literary and story values. The story bounced there too. But at least I got 
some comment—which is instructive in another fashion.
Anthony Cheetham of Sphere Books in England wrote: "Perhaps I have a more optimistic view of human nature 
than you do but I feel that the two small boys in the story would have been more likely to treat [Balook] as a 
favorite pet rather than stone him because of his size."
John W. Campbell of Analog wrote: "Sorry—the story doesn't seem to me to accomplish anything. Your hero 
might be pure ivory-tower-intellectual enough to be so naive as not to know what human beings are like—i.e., 
what the huge numbers on the lower slope of the distribution curve are like—but the heroine, as a psychologist-
geneticist should have.
"Jack Schoenherr, our artist, who's an ardent and competent amateur zoologist, well known and respected at the 
Bronx Zoo, was in on the autopsy of a hippo that died there suddenly two years ago. The autopsy revealed that 
somebody had tossed it a can of lye.
"Must have made that guy feel real heroic to tear out the guts of a great big animal like that with a can of caustic.
"Zoos have trouble with flamingos too. They have bright pink knees in long, thin legs. Boys like to try to hit 
them with stones. It breaks the flamingo's leg."
This nicely demonstrates one of the problems writers have with editors: the same piece can be rejected for 
opposite reasons. Neither editor questioned the competence of the story; each bounced it because it did not 
conform to his ideological perspective for fiction. Not true enough to life—too true to life. I suspect we need 
less ideology in editing and more attention to straight story values. This was one of the reasons I finally left the 
story market and oriented almost wholly on novels. The book editors, while by no means perfect, were more 
tolerant of individual variance. Once I was able to express myself with less censorship, my career flourished. 
This, I think, is true for many writers: they have a better notion what the readers want than many editors do.
Obviously there are all types of people in the world. Some would make a pet of Balook; others would act 
exactly as I showed in the story. My point was not to establish or question the existence of such people; it was 
to show that all types have to be considered before an innocent but unusual creature is thrown among them. 
With the best of intentions, my characters committed a crime against nature—because they failed to consider 
the human environment Balook would face.
Ten editors found the story "Balook" unworthy. Did any of them understand it? I would say that Mr. Cheetham 
and Mr. Campbell came closest; both offered helpful commentary. I considered this commentary when I 
novelized it.
I, you see, am ornery. When I have what I deem to be a worthy notion, I am reluctant to accept rejection. When 
it became evident that the story magazines simply were not going to let Balook see the light of modern day, I set 
about trying it on the more liberal novel editors. I have done this with "Omnivore" and "A Piece of 
Cake" [TRIPLE DETENTE] and "Ghost" and others. I work relentlessly not only to write a good story, but to 

Balook
bring it to print. Sometimes it takes many years, even decades, but gradually I am catching up on the backlog. 
Now it is Balook's turn.
In 1967 I bought a British book, THE AGE OF MONSTERS by J. Augusta and Z. Burian, published by Paul 
Hamlyn of London. This had lovely pictures of the giants of the past. The seven foot tall Diatryma bird was the 
inspiration for the main character in my novel ORN. One picture showed a small herd of Indricotherium, the 
alternate name for Balook's species. Ah, joy! I set out to expand Balook into a family for the novel.
As part of this effort I set out to sculpt a statue of Balook. I am a prolific writer, and because of this some 
readers condemn my work on the grounds that it must be hack, ground out without regard to quality. These 
readers are ignorant of the nature of the writers of this genre. Science fiction and fantasy are among the most 
creative and exacting of the literary genres, and not the natural refuge of lazy or indifferent writers. I'm here 
because I love the genre; it alone allows me the latitude to explore my farthest notions. I have a wide spread of 
interests, and most of them can be accommodated here. I turn out a lot because writing is my way of life. 
Garden variety folk may relax by watching television or vacationing on the beach or dining in restaurants or 
simply snoozing on the couch; they want to forget their paying work. I can't blame them; I tried a number of 
mundane employments, and certainly these are well worth forgetting. My dream was to be a writer; to spend my 
time in the realms of farthest imagination, and to shape the products of my interests into stories that others 
would appreciate, so that I could thereby earn my living. Once that dream was realized, I remained 
wholeheartedly in it; who, upon entering Paradise, will turn about and return to mundane life? (Come to think of 
it, that could be why you don't see folk returning from Heaven after they die. Those in Hell have no choice, of 
course.) Thus I relax by reading things like THE AGE OF MONSTERS, and I turn on by writing about them, 
animating such creatures for my readers. I do whatever I need to do to make those creatures come alive. A man 
who did nothing but drink beer would consume a lot of beer; I do almost nothing but research and dream and 
write, and so I turn out a lot. None of it is careless or primarily for money. Money is a means, not an end.
I love Balook. I love writing. Anyone who reads this novel and perceives only hackwork is welcome to return it 
for his money back; obviously he does not understand what I'm doing. Part of that love was expressed in the 
sculpture. It happened that at this time I met Sterling Lanier, another writer and a former editor—he was the one 
that fought to put Frank Herbert's novel DUNE into print after other editors rejected it because of its length, and 
he gave up editing when the resistance of publishers to such fine projects became too extreme. He's a fine writer 
in his own right. But few can earn a living exclusively by writing; he was also a sculptor. He carved fine little 
figures in wax and used the lost-wax process to have them rendered into metal statuettes. He had a fine spread 
of paleontologic representations, but none, I think, of Baluchitherium. He was active in the preservation of the 
environment. He also had a little girl the age of mine, and a wife the age of mine. In short, he was a good man.
Lanier showed me how to work with sculptor's wax, and I started in on Balook, pretty much as described in the 
novel. I had once aspired to be an artist, but gave it up in favor of words, the better medium for me. I had never 
really tried sculpting, but my dream of Balook hungered for more than words. I spend many hours on it, slowly 
shaping the figure from the wax while I wrote the novel. It was to be a huge statue for this process, six inches 
tall at the shoulder, and I hoped, if I could afford it, to have it cast in copper or silver, so that it could be with me 
relatively untarnished for all time. I can't justify this effort commercially; it was just something I had to do.
Meanwhile I marketed the novel on the basis of the first two chapters and a summary of the remainder. It 
happened that I had met another writer at this time, Dave van Arnam, who showed me how to market this way. 
(Dave also had a little girl the age of mine. It is easy to relate to such folk.) I had been writing my novels entire, 
and the book editors were being almost as persnickety about submissions as the story editors. It was also a time 
of recession, and I was also being blacklisted by some publishers because I had started legal action against one 
in order to obtain royalties owed me. Thus I piled up eight unsold novels. Comments by another writer, Ted 

Balook
White, and Dave van Arnam showed me the error of my ways. By marketing on the basis of summaries, I could 
recover the leverage. If no publisher bought a project, I simply would not write it. That single change in 
marketing strategy tripled my income. I have been condemned by the ignorant for writing for money; I like to 
quote Samuel Johnson on that: "No man but a blockhead ever wrote except for money." I love to write, but if I 
don't get paid for it, I starve; that's why I now pay attention to the commercial side of it. You who condemn that
—do you also condemn the plumbers and accountants and doctors and all the others who perform services for 
money? You think they should work for the love of it, unpaid?
So I marketed BALOOK from summary. But I was still new to this type of marketing, and a trifle uncertain. 
Suppose I got a contract, and a deadline for delivery—and then the novel didn't jell? So I kept on writing it. And 
a British editor liked it! He was ready to issue a contract, provided I did not have the characters refer to sex too 
specifically. Remember, this is a juvenile novel; teenagers may get pregnant and suffer venereal disease, but 
they may not read about sex. I agreed, and kept writing. Then the editor decided he'd rather see the whole novel 
first. Oh-oh; I had had experience with that sort of thing. "Not without a contract!" I said in essence to my agent. 
The publisher lost interest. I had seen it coming. I had almost completed writing the novel in pencil, but faced 
with this reneging, I halted work. Likewise the sculpture halted. I had to move on to other projects, because I 
had a family to support and money for writers is always close. I simply could not afford to put time into yet 
another unsold novel, however much I liked it. I had to cut my losses.
We tried the summary elsewhere, but editors seem to have a conspiracy: once one bounces a project, all the rest 
do. The novel, like the story, was moribund. Finally I retired it and the statue, both unfinished, with deep regret. 
The manuscript was secure in its folder, but my little girl had trouble understanding why I wouldn't let her play 
with the unused sculptor's wax. Then we moved, and parts got lost, and an ear got knocked off. The figurine 
was in a bad way. Today both front legs are missing, and one hind hoof; Balook can not stand, and his head 
rests separately beside his body. My dream of casting him in silver is ashes. Similarly, it seemed, I lost touch 
with Sterling Lanier; his marriage was in trouble and he had health problems. I looked at the battered Balook 
figure and I grieved for the misery it signified on every level. The thoughtless, unfeeling universe seemed the 
same outside the novel as inside it.
So it continued until the year 1986, twenty years after the story. My career had taken its twists and turns and 
abruptly leaped into high success via fantasy; I no longer had need to consider money when tackling a project. 
The blacklist was a thing of the past; I had survived it better than some of the blacklisting editors, which I think 
is simple justice. I was computerized, and zeroing in on word processing programs that served my needs with 
increasing accuracy. I had labored to place several of those eight unsold novels, and succeeded; only about three 
remained, and BALOOK, which didn't count because it had never been completed.
I entered a dialogue with a small publisher, Underwood-Miller, who was interested in publishing Anthony but 
of course unable to compete with the big outfits in terms of the large advances I now commanded. But as I trust 
I have made plain, money is not my overriding consideration. I suggested three projects that I might do simply 
because I liked the projects, money no object. One of them was BALOOK. This novel differed from some 
others in that I had a high visual involvement; I saw Balook, and wanted others to see him too. So we discussed 
artists, and I named the one I deem to be the best genre artist in the world, Patrick Woodroffe of England. The 
publisher agreed.
I mentioned word processing programs. I had discovered one called FinalWord that promised to be even better 
for me than my prior ones, and just had to try it, because in this as in writing itself I always try for the best. But 
it was complex, and not perfectly adapted to my system or my Dvorak keyboard; it would be a monster to break 
in. So I decided to use a story and a short novel to break it in; once I have novelized a thing, I really understand 
it. The story was "Imp to Nymph," which I retyped for the Program Book for the 1987 World Fantasy 
Convention. The available novel was BALOOK.

Balook
And so, at last, I returned to Balook, taking one month early in 1987 to complete it as I wrestled with the 
computer program, and this is the story of this illustrated novel. I hope that you, the reader, have enjoyed it—
but even if you didn't, I did. Balook lives at last!
 
Copyright © 1990 by Piers Anthony.
Illustrations and Cover art Copyright © 1990 by Patrick Woodroffe.
ISBN: 0-441-00398-2
 

