Apache Tactics 1830–86 
ROBERT N. WATT
ILLUSTRATED BY ADAM HOOK
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

Elite • 119
Apache Tactics 1830–86
ROBERT N. WATT 
ILLUSTRATED BY ADAM HOOK
Series editor Martin Windrow
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
4
The historical background – the Apaches and Spain, Mexico, and the United States 
The scope of this text 
The scale of Apache warfare
CHRONOLOGY
8
ENVIRONMENT AND CULTURE
13
Apacheria 
The role of raiding in Apache life 
Training 
Leadership
GUERRILLA STRATEGIES & TACTICS
16
THE RAID
Raiding ranches and villages 
EVASION
18
Victorio’s evasion strategy 
THE AMBUSH
23
The planned ambush: Ojo Caliente, September 4, 1879 – Cuchillo Negro River, September 30, 1879 –
Santa Cruz Mountains, May 15, 1886 
The killing ambush: Candelaria Mountains, November 1879
Ambush by decoy and deception: Horseshoe Canyon, October 24, 1871 – Las Animas River, September
18, 1879 – Sierra Madre Mountains, April 1883 – McEvers Ranch, September 10–11, 1879 – Whetstone
Mountains, May 5, 1871 – Caballo Mountains, January 30, 1880 
The ad hoc ambush: the Apache
“roadside bomb” – Las Palomas, March 1880 – Goodsight Mountains, September 7, 1880 – Carrizo
Canyon, August 12, 1881
THE ATTACK
44
The rarity of direct attack 
Attack after successful ambush: Cerro Mata Ortiz, November 13, 
1882 – Conline’s skirmish, April 5, 1880
Combined tactics: Hembrillo Basin, April 6–7, 1880 
OTHER ASPECTS OF APACHE WARFARE 
53
Targeting horses and mules 
Reactions to American technology 
Terror tactics 
THE FAILURE OF APACHE RESISTANCE 
59
The Apache scouts 
Shortage of ammunition 
Numerical weakness 
Defeats
FURTHER READING
62
INDEX
64
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

INTRODUCTION
In the middle to late 19th century, Apaches often out-fought their Mexican
and American opponents by deploying a wide range of skilfully developed
guerrilla strategies and tactics. By 1876 Apache guerrillas had adopted,
through trade and capture, modern breech-loading rifles, which allowed them
to develop a more aggressive style of warfare than their earlier hit-and-run
tactics, which had been limited by the use of bows and muzzle-loading
muskets. During the 1870s and 1880s their guerrilla skills proved so effective
that the US Army ultimately had to “become Apaches” in order to defeat
them, relying heavily on large numbers of Apaches enrolled in the companies
of Indian Scouts.
During the 17th and 18th centuries the Spanish colonists of Mexico and
the old Southwest had variable success against the Apaches. Their policies
veered back and forth, between outright extermination by the use of military
force, and attempted assimilation by the use of the presidio system – the
establishment of scattered centers that combined the characteristics of
colonial forts, Catholic missions and civil settlements. It was argued that this
system, though expensive, would gradually undermine the Apaches’ ability to
resist: attracted to settle around these sources of food and trade goods, they
would become so dependent upon such resources that they would lose their
ability to survive independently. The goods supplied to them included not
only beef and alcohol, but also sub-standard muskets, which only the Spanish
would be able to repair for them.
In the later 18th century the Spanish combined this approach with
pressure to “assimilate, or be exterminated,” which, although not wholly
successful, did produce a period of relative peace in the early 19th century.
However, this did not long survive Mexico’s achievement of independence
from Spain in 1821. By the 1830s the Mexicans were unable or unwilling
to continue funding and administering the presidio system, and relations with
the Apaches broke down into a relentless cycle of war, temporary truce, and
renewed war. The authorities in the Mexican states of Sonora and Chihuahua
– with little Federal control, and often sunk in near-anarchic internal rivalries
– resorted to offering cash bounties for the scalps of Apache men, women
and children. Inevitably, atrocity begat atrocity, and some areas became
actually uninhabitable by Mexicans – for example, the mining center of Santa
4
APACHE TACTICS 1830–86 
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

Rita near the Pinos Altos Mts, abandoned under the attacks of the Mimbreno
Apaches led by the vengeful chief Mangas Coloradas.1 Nevertheless, at the
same time the current governors of each state were capable of reaching
temporary truces with the Apaches. The latter often turned this to their
5
This posed study of an Apache
warrior (whose name is given
phonetically as “Goodygouye”)
is a good deal more convincing
than most. It shows a short,
muscular man wearing a
headband, breechclout and
knee-length moccasins – the
preferred fighting dress of an
Apache. He is armed with a
.45/70 Springfield M1873 rifle,
and a revolver holstered butt-
forwards on his left hip from his
cartridge belt. Handguns
appear in a number of photos
of Apaches, and an account of
an action by a detachment
from the 9th US Cavalry in 1879
mentions one of their Navajo
scouts being killed by a warrior
with a revolver. (Courtesy
Arizona Historical Society, 
no. 41255) 
1 For notes on the different Apache tribes and groups, and aspects of Apache culture, see
Osprey Men-at-Arms 186, The Apaches, by Jason & Richard Hook. The most basic tribal
divisions were as follows: Jicarilla (Olleros/Hoyeros & Llaneros groups; NE New Mexico
& S Colorado); Mescalero (Sacramento, Guadelupe & Davis Mts of SE New Mexico,
& W Texas); Chiricahua (Eastern – Mimbreno & Warm Springs groups, SW New Mexico;
Central – Chokonen or “Cochise” group, SE Arizona, New Mexico & Mexico; Southern –
Nednhi or “Bronco,” Sierra Madre Mts of Mexico); and Western Apaches (White
Mountain/Coyotero, Cibecue, San Carlos, N & S Tonto groups, Arizona)
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

advantage: if they were at peace with Sonora, they would raid in Chihuahua
and trade their plunder back in Sonora, and vice versa. 
The regional authorities of the United States became embroiled in this
situation after the USA annexed a huge segment of Mexican territory
following victory in the Mexican-American War (1846–48). The Apaches took
similar advantage of the international frontier as they did of regional borders,
and the cycle of “trade/hate” relations continued until Geronimo’s surrender
in September 1886. (As Geronimo was being escorted out of Mexico during
that month by Apache scouts and US troops, a large body of Mexican troops
shadowed them. Much to the US officers’ consternation, their Indian Scouts
prepared for a fight, and Geronimo made it known that he and his warriors
would side with the Americans if the Mexicans attacked. Hostilities
were avoided only after a tense round of negotiation between the US and
Mexican officers.)
There were a number of violent incidents between Americans and Apaches
in the 1840s and 1850s, and an influx of American miners and settlers
6
In most studio photographs –
as here – Apaches are shown
wearing their best clothing.
This scout also holds a single-
shot M1873 Springfield, the
most common model of rifle
and carbine carried in the later
Indian Wars. (Courtesy Arizona
Historical Society, no. 50136) 
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

Parts of Apacheria are far from
the Hollywood image of arid
desert. This scene gives an idea
of the dense vegetation that
can be found near water or
higher in the mountain ranges.
(Courtesy Arizona Historical
Society, no. 14896)
7
By contrast, this bleak view
shows the buildings at the
San Carlos Indian Agency,
between the Salt and Gila
rivers. The Chiricahuas who
were sent to San Carlos in the
mid-1870s were settled on the
barren and unhealthy land that
was not already occupied by
the Western Apaches – whom
they regarded with suspicion,
or outright hostility. (Courtesy
Arizona Historical Society,
no. 19864) 
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

into New Mexico led to new tensions with the Chiricahua Apaches. Mangas
Coloradas was provoked into war by encroachments into his territory
and an attack on an Apache camp in December 1860. Early in 1861 his ally
Cochise was wrongly accused of raiding and kidnapping, and was held by
US troops while under a flag of truce. Cochise managed to break free, but his
brother and five other Apache warriors were detained; Cochise in turn took
four Americans hostage, and when negotiations broke down both sides killed
their prisoners. Between 1860 and 1886, the Apaches would pursue the
traditional cycle of alternating war and truce with the USA. The situation was
aggravated during the early 1860s by the simultaneous American Civil War,
which left regional security in the hands of local volunteers rather than regular
Federal troops.
* * *
This book’s title refers to the whole period 1830–1886, because the essential
nature of Apache strategies and tactics was unchanged throughout that
half-century. (In this context “strategy” is used to mean maneuvers undertaken
out of sight of the enemy, and “tactics” refers to maneuvers on the battlefield,
within sight of the enemy.) Although it largely relies upon illustrative examples
from the warfare orchestrated by two of the most able Chiricahua Apache
leaders, Victorio (Bi-du-ya) and Nana (Kas-tziden), principally in New Mexico
and Chihuahua from 1879 to 1881, incidents from the earlier Apache wars
and the period 1882–86 are also mentioned where appropriate.
An essential point to note is the relatively small scale of this type of
warfare. This was not war conducted in the grand manner, but a classic “small
war,” where it was unusual for the total number of fighting men to exceed
3,000 at any one time. The Apaches of the 1830s to 1860s could sometimes
mount expeditions involving several hundred warriors, but the long war of
attrition with the Mexicans and then the Americans took a steady toll. By the
climactic period between 1879 and 1883 Apache leaders rarely directed more
than a hundred warriors at a time; yet their tried and tested guerrilla strategies
and tactics often left their far more numerous US and Mexican opponents
confounded, while the threat that they were believed to present paralyzed
economic activity in northern Mexico, Arizona and New Mexico. The last
resistance mounted in 1885–86 by Geronimo, Naiche, Nana, Ulzana and his
brother Chihuahua (his Mexican name – not to be confused with the Mexican
state) involved fewer than 50 warriors. Yet this band was still able to ambush
and defeat at least one US Army detachment less than four months before
they finally surrendered in 1886. The aim of this book is to give readers an
idea of why and how such small numbers of fighting men managed to hold out
for so many years before finally succumbing to the vastly greater manpower
and firepower of the United States. In the process, it is hoped to suggest wider
lessons to be learned from one of modern history’s most impressive examples
of “classic” guerrilla tactics.
CHRONOLOGY
1821 Mexico gains independence from Spain.
1830s–1850s Intermittent warfare between the Mexicans of Chihuahua and
Sonora states and the Apaches is characterized by raid and counter-raid,
massacre and retaliation, punctuated by temporary and unreliable truces.
8
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

Periodically, both Mexican states resort to uncoordinated policies of
extermination, by offering bounties for Apache scalps.
1848 A large tract of “Apacheria” passes into the jurisdiction of the USA
at the end of the Mexican-American War.
Dec 1860 An unprovoked attack on an Apache village by a party of miners
provokes Mangas Coloradas of the Eastern Chiricahua into war with
the Americans.
Feb 1861 A false accusation of raiding and kidnapping, and the mutual
killing of hostages, provoke Cochise of the Central Chiricahua into open
warfare with the USA, in collaboration with Mangas Coloradas.
1861–62 On the outbreak of the Civil War the few Federal troops based in
Arizona depart, and the citizens of the territory find themselves in a state
of siege by the Apaches.
1862 As part of an effort to drive Confederate forces out of Arizona and
New Mexico, Gen Carleton marches east at the head of volunteer Union
troops raised in California. July 14: The advance guard is ambushed
in Apache Pass by large numbers of Apaches directed by Cochise and
Mangas Coloradas. The deployment of two mountain howitzers decides
the day for the Californians.
1862–71 A prolonged guerrilla war of attrition ensues between the USA and
Apaches led by Cochise and Mangas Coloradas. Jan 1863: Mangas
Coloradas, taken prisoner under a flag of truce, is shot “while trying to
escape.” Cochise continues the fight; neither side gains the upper hand,
but both US and Mexican forces inflict steady casualties upon the
Chiricahuas, which ultimately prove unsustainable. By 1871 Cochise is
willing to consider peace overtures. Independently, the Western Apaches,
some of whom had allied with Cochise in the early 1860s, continue
making periodic raids upon US citizens.
April 1871 Tucson citizens and Papago Indians slaughter peaceful Western
Apaches in the “Camp Grant massacre.” A national outcry, and continued
raids by infuriated Apaches, prompt the appointment of LtCol George
Crook as commander of the Department of Arizona. He arrives in June
with a remit to force an end to hostilities, while a peace commission under
Vincent Colyer and Gen Oliver Howard is sent to establish reservations.
Sept–Oct 1872 Gen Howard concludes a peace treaty with Cochise, who
agrees to settle on a reservation based on the Dragoon and Chiricahua Mts
around Fort Bowie, Arizona. This brings Cochise’s 11-year war with the
USA to an end, and saves the Chiricahua from being targeted in Crook’s
forthcoming “Tonto Basin campaign” against the Western Apaches in
Arizona. Other Chiricahua bands at Old Fort Tularosa reservation remain
restless, wishing to move to the Ojo Caliente (Warm Springs) reservation
in New Mexico.
Nov 1872–April 1873 Crook launches several company-sized columns each
accompanied by Indian Scouts, and keeps them in the field for long
periods by use of mule-trains.These tactics take the Western Apaches by
surprise; they suffer heavy casualties, and the winter campaign destroys
their will to resist. Key defeats are inflicted at Salt River Cave in Dec 1872,
and Turret Mountain in March 1873. Most of the Western Apaches agree
to settle upon reservations around Fort Apache and San Carlos. Crook
is promoted to brigadier-general.
1873–74 Gen Crook keeps his troops and scouts in the field against
uncowed Western Apache bands, launching a second offensive in
9
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

1
2
left flank guard
advance guard
right flank guard
rear guard
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

Jan 1874. This inflicts further serious
losses, culminating in the killing of
the remaining militant leaders by
Aug 1874. In the same year Cochise
dies of natural causes; and the US
government agrees to Victorio’s people
returning to Ojo Caliente.
1875–76 The Department of the Interior
adopts a new cost-cutting policy to
concentrate all Apaches – of mutually
hostile tribes and bands – on a
single reservation at San Carlos; this
disastrous mistake is largely responsible
for the Apache wars of 1877–86. The
Chiricahua reservation around Fort Bowie is closed, and its inhabitants
are moved to San Carlos. 
1877–79 The concentration policy gathers momentum. May 1877, the Ojo
Caliente reservation is closed, and Apaches led by Victorio, Loco and
Nana are transferred to San Carlos. They protest this move, and in
Sept 1877 they lead warriors in breaking out of the reservation. The
US government authorizes Gen Edward Ord, then commanding the
Department of Texas, to mount “hot pursuits” over the Mexican border.
Between Oct 1877 and Aug 1879, Victorio and Nana fight for a return to
Warm Springs; Loco chooses to return to San Carlos and pursue the same
goal peacefully.
Sept 1879–May 1880 Having caused minimal casualties in the US between
1877 and 1879, Victorio loses patience, and wages all-out war against the
USA and Mexico. He outwits or defeats every force sent against him, and
his warriors inflict heavy casualties upon the citizens and soldiers of both
countries. He is gradually worn down by a defeat at the hands of Apache
scouts in May 1880, and by being outmaneuvered by the 10th US Cavalry
in West Texas during July–Aug 1880.
Oct 1880 Victorio is finally trapped and killed at Tres Castillos by c.400
Mexican state troops led by Joaquin Terrazas, supported by a large
US expedition that enters Mexico by agreement with state authorities
but without permission from the weak Mexican central government. 
July–Aug 1881 Nana, Victorio’s successor, regroups survivors of Tres Castillos
and launches a legendary raid into New Mexico. At the age of about
75 years, he leads his raiders approx. 1,500 miles in six weeks, holds off
APACHE “MARCHING FORMATION”
This illustrates a typical formation for travel – both highly
practical, and implicitly incorporating the “four sacred
directions” for protection. Depending upon terrain and
circumstances, the distance between the main body and its
advance, flank and rear guards might be measured in yards or
miles. The Apache party here consists of a small group of
Mescalero warriors, c.1840 (inset 1), escorting a larger group
mainly of women and children (inset 2). The formation might
equally be adopted by a large group of warriors setting out on
or returning from a raid, or warriors driving captured livestock. 
Should a threat be detected, then the advance, flank and
rear guards could exchange their roles depending upon the
new direction of travel chosen. For example, if a threat from
the left forced a 90-degree change of direction to the right,
then the right flank guard became the advance guard, the
advance guard covered the left flank, what had been the left
flank guard moved to cover the rear, and the rear guard
became the new right flank guard. Any adjustments between
the numbers of warriors in each outlying party could be made
while on the move in the new direction of travel.
A
Apacheria: a view roughly
southwards from the western
end of Cooke’s Canyon. The
Florida Mts are in the middle
distance approximately
15 miles away, and the Tres
Hermanas Mts are visible on
the horizon, about 35 miles
off and just short of the
Mexican border. Note that the
nearer, “level” ground is in fact
anything but featureless; it was
in this valley that Victorio’s
warriors laid an ambush from
an almost invisible arroyo and
cut down five men passing
on the trail in May 1880.
(Author’s photo).
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

or defeats at least seven US Army detachments, and inflicts heavy casualties
among ranching and mining communities in southern New Mexico.
Aug 1881 Western Apache scouts mutiny when the US Army arrests an
Apache spiritual leader at Cibecue Creek. This incident provokes Western
Apaches – alienated by US government failure to honor treaty obligations
undertaken following Crook’s campaigns – to make a direct attack upon
Fort Apache on Sept 1, 1881, but they soon withdraw.
Sept 1881 Alarmed by US Army activity following the Cibecue mutiny and
the attack on Fort Apache, Juh and many Chiricahuas flee from the
San Carlos reservation into Mexico. They take refuge in the Sierra Madre
Mts, and join forces with Nana, recently returned to Mexico from his raid
into New Mexico.
April 1882 The Apaches from the Sierra Madre arrive at San Carlos and
force Loco and his Warm Springs Apaches to return with them to Mexico.
They are pursued by US Cavalry and Apache scouts, and ambushed by
Mexican troops. Of the 400 Apaches who leave the reservation, more
than 100 are killed before they reach the Sierra Madre.
July 1882 The dissident Western Apaches are finally cornered by US troops
and Apache scouts at Big Dry Wash/Chevelon Fork, and the survivors
disperse. General Crook, recalled to Arizona in response to the crisis,
quickly addresses Western Apache grievances.
May–June 1883 Crook, with a force mainly made up of Apache scouts,
penetrates the Chiricahua strongholds in the Sierra Madre Mts. Benefiting
from his reputation among the Apaches for honest dealing, he persuades
them to surrender.
Feb 1884 Geronimo is the last Chiricahua to arrive from Mexico after the
peace agreement with Gen Crook.
May 1885 Geronimo, Naiche, Mangus, Nana, Ulzana and Chihuahua flee
the San Carlos reservation.
Nov–Dec 1885 Ulzana leads a small party of warriors into the USA and
causes widespread disruption before returning to Mexico.
March 1886 General Crook meets with the Apaches at Canyon de los
Embudos. Nana, Ulzana, Chihuahua and their followers surrender, and
12
A typical Apache camp in
scrubby terrain. Such camps
were carefully sited to avoid
detection, in defensible places
with a choice of escape routes;
they could be moved quickly
and quietly, and sometimes
decoy camps were constructed
to mislead the enemy. The
wikiup huts were also widely
dispersed so that they could
not be overrun quickly, giving
most of the women and
children a chance to escape
from even a successful surprise
attack. Captain John Bourke
was told by Apache scouts that
for the sake of concealment
the Chiricahuas did not light
cooking fires until after 9am,
when the darkness had
completely lifted. (Courtesy
Arizona Historical Society,
no. 62111)
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

are sent back to the USA, but Geronimo and Naiche flee. Crook resigns
and is replaced by Col Nelson Miles. The surrendered Chiricahua Apaches
and those who remained on the reservation are deported to Florida. 
Sept–Oct 1886 Geronimo and his followers surrender in Skeleton Canyon;
they are deported to Florida – along with those Chiricahuas who had
served as scouts. A small separate group led by Mangus returns to the
USA to surrender, and is also sent to Florida.
ENVIRONMENT AND CULTURE
Before examining the techniques of Apache warfare, we should note a
number of factors that influenced the development of these strategies and
tactics. One profound influence was, of course, the natural environment of
what is called today “Apacheria”; another was the Apache culture of warrior
training, and of leadership gained by merit rather than inheritance.
The popular image of the Apache guerrilla is one of a hardy desert warrior
accustomed to surviving in the arid terrain of New Mexico and Arizona. This
image is not inaccurate, but it fails to take into account that while the
Apaches certainly knew how to survive in this harsh land, they did not choose
to live in the desert unless absolutely necessary. All the tribes were essentially
hunters and gatherers, completely attuned to the natural world of plant and
animal life in even the most apparently barren areas, but some – particularly
the Western and Jicarilla Apaches – also practiced agriculture. Apacheria is
a region of wide extremes, from high mountain peaks to low-lying deserts,
where temperatures ranged from below freezing in winter to 100°F (38°C) in
August. If we examine a map of the area, and some of the photos in this
book, we can see that the terrain is spotted not only with scorched mesas
rising above the flats and canyons, but also with mountain ranges that are
often covered in pine forest and have good water. It was in such relatively
fertile islands in a desert sea that the Warm Springs (Ojo Caliente) division of
the Eastern Chiricahua Apaches chose to live. 
The many mountains were also used as landmarks to aid travel between
water sources in New Mexico and Chihuahua. When traveling between
campsites the Apaches cached extra supplies of dried food, clothing material
and ammunition; this practice also helped them to survive if they were
surprised by an enemy and forced to abandon their possessions and disperse.
Mountain ranges also provided lookout posts. For example, in September
1880 the commandant of Fort Bliss, Capt Brinkerhoff, received intelligence
from his own scouts that they had discovered tracks indicating that Victorio
had sent small parties to the top of the Potrillo Mountains. From this
vantage point the Apaches could detect any movement by the troops
concentrated at Fort Cummings southwards into Mexico towards Victorio’s
camp near the Laguna de Guzman. The distance between the fort and the
lagoon is approximately 75 miles (120km), yet lookouts stationed on the
Potrillo Mts would have been able to scan much of the distance between
these two points. 
The locations of camps were carefully chosen, usually upon higher ground
with a good view of the surrounding area. US Army officers and scouts in the
1860s and 1870s gave credit to Victorio for his careful selection of camps in
difficult terrain. If necessary, the Apaches would often construct small rock
breastworks where the terrain did not provide natural cover.
13
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

The animals that are found in New Mexico and Chihuahua also influenced
the manner in which the Apaches engaged their enemies. While night-fighting
was not unknown, they did not like to fight in darkness. The Apaches themselves
reported to ethnologists that they feared the ghosts or evil spirits who walked
the night, but it is equally plausible that these beliefs were fostered to warn
future generations that to fight at night increased the risks of encountering
venomous creatures when they were at their most active. The Southwest is a
home to tarantulas, Black Widow and Recluse spiders, venomous centipedes
and scorpions. There is also a poisonous lizard called the Gila Monster and,
last but certainly not least, the Western Diamondback rattlesnake. (An equally
practical reason for not fighting at night was, of course, to prevent the wasting
of precious ammunition.)
Culture
What any historian has to bear in mind when studying the Apaches is that,
from a Euro-American point of view, we are confronted by a very different
culture. Two examples should suffice to give the reader an appreciation of
Apache views on the role of warfare in their society. A key anthropological
work on the Apaches, Opler’s An Apache Life-Way (see “Further Reading”),
reports in great detail their raiding and warfare practices – but in a chapter
headed simply but significantly “Maintenance of the Household.” Again,
when the US authorities proceeded to close the Chiricahua reservation in 1876,
a dispute arose amongst Chiricahua Apaches as to whether to accept removal
or raise armed resistance. When this debate could not be resolved, it was the
“peace faction” that gunned down the “war faction.” 
To understand Apache warriors, we have to grasp how central hunting,
raiding and warfare were to their culture, and how this shaped their response
to any perceived threat – be it from other Apaches, other American Indians,
Spaniards, Mexicans, or Americans. Apache thinking was focused upon the
hunting and fighting skills that were critical to their survival; however, they
drew a sharp distinction between raiding to capture property, and war to
inflict deaths on an enemy. 
14
View eastwards from the top
of Emory Pass in the southern
Black Range (Mimbres Mts),
showing the thick pine forest
that can be found in the
highest ranges. In the dry, clear
air one can see long distances
from such crests. The
mountains on the furthest
horizon are the San Andres,
some 70 miles distant; those
sloping slightly down from left
to right on the nearer horizon
are the Caballo Mts (see map,
Plate C). In January 1880,
Maj Morrow’s pursuit of
Victorio passed from right
to left in the middle distance,
through the foothills of the
Black Range. (Author’s photo)
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

Training and leadership
The basic principle of Apache warfare – as
among any people with a relatively small and
dispersed population – was to inflict maximum
damage upon their enemy while sustaining the
minimum of losses. To fit them for life in a harsh
environment, Apache boys were raised from an
early age in such a way as to maximize strength,
stamina, and discipline. Such training started
young; it included bathing in icy mountain
streams, and running long distances in rough
terrain – it is well documented that a warrior
could run up to 70 miles in a day, and Apache
women could achieve very nearly the same
distances. Boys were made to run up and down
hills with a mouthful of water that was not to be
swallowed, to teach them both self-discipline and
breath control. Instruction in hunting had the
natural consequence of teaching the concealment
skills and fieldcraft for which the Apaches were
famous. This training ended only once the
adolescent boy had successfully completed four
raids as an apprentice warrior. 
Apache culture extolled individuals who were
not only tough but also patient, and successful
raiders were those who did not take unnecessary
risks. While an element of hereditary succession
was not unknown, Apache leadership was based
upon merit derived from an individual’s record
of repeated successful application of these
principles. Apache leaders who were perceived
to be unsuccessful, particularly if they sustained
what were judged to be unnecessary casualties,
soon lost their influence. This respect for proven
skills explains why Apaches were often found
being led by men in their fifties and beyond.
Victorio was believed to be about 50 years old when he was killed at Tres
Castillos in 1880, and his lieutenant, Nana, was at least 75 when he led his
famous raid into New Mexico the following year. Other Apache leaders of the
time such as Juh, Chihuahua and Ulzana (also known as Jolsanny/Josanie) are
believed to have been still active in their sixties and seventies. Younger men,
such as Kaytennae, only rose to precocious leadership in their twenties by dint
of their proven success. 
Apache training produced not only excellent leaders, but also warriors
who – even if they did not rise to the leadership of large numbers of men –
could be trusted to act independently, since they knew exactly what was
expected of them. Apaches often operated in separated groups under the
broad direction of their chosen leader; this required warriors who could be
trusted to act as directed without being directly supervised. Apache warriors
tended to group together, in the first instance, according to their closest kinship
links, and thus a man could rise to the leadership of his immediate family.
If seen as particularly successful, he could gain the allegiance of a number of
15
Some of the venomous wildlife
commonly found in Apacheria:
a Western Diamondback
rattlesnake, a tarantula, and a
scorpion – only visible against
the pale ground by its shadow
(the rule of thumb is that the
smaller their pincers, the more
dangerous their sting). While
most active at night, such
animals may easily be
encountered by day – whether
by men seeking cover in the
1870s, or by those exploring a
historic battle site today. The
records of the 6th US Cavalry
mention losing a number of
horses to rattlesnake bites.
(Author’s photos) 
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

kinship groups, and eventually he might even attract followers from other
tribes. Nevertheless, even highly successful leaders required the presence of
this network of individual “family” leaders if they were to implement their
strategy and tactics. What we would call “squad leaders” were an essential
component of Apache warfare, often being relied upon to make individual
judgments as to whether to continue a fight or to withdraw in response to
rapidly changing circumstances. 
GUERRILLA STRATEGIES & TACTICS
THE RAID
Much of the Apaches’ warfare against the Mexicans and Americans from the
1830s to 1886 involved raids aimed at gathering loot that could be consumed,
or traded for essential supplies. Captured horses and cattle might be either
kept or traded, depending upon circumstances. Guns and ammunition might
be captured by raiding, but were more often acquired
in exchange for other goods taken in raids.
While Apache raiding activities sometimes caused
the Americans serious problems, it was the Mexicans
of northern Sonora and Chihuahua states who
sustained the heaviest losses in property and lives.
As mentioned above, the Apaches defined raiding as
taking property from an enemy, whereas warfare
was to take lives. Thus, if Mexican villagers did
manage to defend themselves successfully and killed,
wounded or captured any Apaches, they would
find themselves subject to further attacks inspired by
vengeance for previous losses. Between 1883 and
1886, US Army officers serving in northern Mexico
in pursuit of Chiricahua Apaches noted the ruins
of Mexican settlements often long abandoned.
However, this was not usually the result of direct
assaults upon villages or haciendas (ranches), but of
the cumulative effects of relentless hit-and-run
attacks. These made it impossible for such small
communities to sustain themselves without running
a high risk of being picked off by hostile Apaches
as they worked in the fields or on the cattle ranges,
or made necessary journeys. In time, large areas of
northern Sonora were effectively depopulated by
these methods.
Where occasional ranches or houses were
actually overrun it is unclear how the Apaches
accomplished such destruction, since they seldom
left survivors to tell the tale. Nevertheless, there are
a number of clues as to how the Apaches might
storm a building with minimal loss. They would
usually mount a careful and patient reconnaissance
of the target before risking a direct attack on any
building. The most common technique would be to
This Apache, stripped down
for action, would have been
trained from early boyhood
not only to survive in the harsh
natural environment, but to
thrive in it, and to move across
it with a speed, stealth and
stamina far beyond those of
the Mexican and American
soldiers hunting him. He could
run and climb for many miles
between dawn and sunset in
all weathers, finding water
and wild food as he went, and
during a forced march he might
go without sleep for several
days. (Courtesy Arizona
Historical Society, no. 50132)
16
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

employ their legendary stealth of movement to reach the building undetected,
and burst in on unsuspecting victims. If there was enough flammable material
all they needed to do was to creep close enough to set the building alight, and
kill the occupants as they broke out. Apaches could also approach buildings
professing friendship and then open fire from point-blank range. Finally,
there were occasions where Apaches would stealthily approach a building
and fire shots through the doors and windows to test the level of resistance
before deciding whether to close in or withdraw. Once the Apaches had
access to breech-loading weapons they could change their positions while
keeping up a rapid fire, in an attempt to panic the defenders into fleeing
the building. 
In truth, direct assaults on buildings were very rare, because of the high
risk of sustaining unacceptably high casualties. Accounts of Apache attacks
upon settlements in northern Mexico fall into two categories. The first were
raids aimed at stealing horses or cattle, where any casualties inflicted were
incidental to that primary goal. The second were when Apaches were looking
to inflict casualties in revenge for previous losses, but their approach was
usually detected before they could strike an effective blow. In both cases there
A posed portrait of a Chiricahua
named Ze-Le and his wife;
the carbine seems to be a
photographer’s prop. The
Apaches made great use of
trade cloth, and at least one
supply-cache containing bolts
of calico was discovered during
military operations in New
Mexico. (Courtesy Arizona
Historical Society, no. 50134) 
17
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

would be enough Mexican survivors to leave a record of their experiences.
If an alerted populace managed to reach solid and relatively non-flammable
buildings, they would normally be safe from the Apaches until the next attack.
The richer Mexican ranchers in the area built their ranches with defenses
designed to frustrate Apache raiding, and the photos above show a surviving
example of a fairly massive complex with stables and living quarters built in
an easily defensible hollow square. 
Apache raiding would often provoke a reaction from the Mexicans and
Americans, and the Apaches developed a number of responses. These can be
divided broadly into evasion, ambush, and attack, and this text is arranged
to consider them in turn.
EVASION
One of the greatest challenges when attempting to counter Apache guerrillas
was intercepting them in the first place. The Apaches used a number of tricks
to coordinate their own movements and evade enemy activity. For signaling
between parties they used mirrors during the day and fires at night. When
moving from one area to another they put out advance scouts, flanking scouts
and rearguards to prevent their being surprised (see Plate A). It would be
routine for a rendezvous point to be decided each day in advance of leaving
ABOVE LEFT
Exterior of an abandoned
quadrangular complex of
living quarters and stables at
El Carmen, Chihuahua State,
Mexico. One of the two main
entrances, boarded up, is
visible at the right. Such
strongly protected buildings
were normally invulnerable
to Apache raids provided the
ranchers got warning of their
approach, but only the
wealthiest haciendas could
afford such stout defenses.
(Author’s photo)
ABOVE RIGHT
The interior of the abandoned
buildings at El Carmen in
northern Chihuahua; the living
quarters are on the left and
the stables on the right of the
entrance visible on the far side.
(Author’s photo) 
FROM EVASION TO AMBUSH 
Another hypothetical scenario, here from the 1860s, imagines
the interception by Mexican Rurales (1, and inset 1) of a White
Mountain Apache raiding party traveling home with stolen
cattle. The Mexicans’ approach is detected by the left flank
guard (2), who raise the alarm. When an Apache party were
intercepted they might often choose to scatter, and
rendezvous later at a pre-arranged location; but on this
occasion, with the cattle to protect, they attempt to draw their
pursuers into an ambush. At the first alarm the left flank guard
join the main body (3), and helps screen its retreat towards a
pass in the mountains. The advance guard (4) and right flank
guard (5) race ahead of the main body to reach a suitable spot
to spring an ambush once the main body has passed,
doubling back across high ground to get into position (6, and
inset 2). Armed at this date with muzzle-loading weapons or
bows and arrows, they find firing positions as close to the trail
as possible, but their skill at concealment in even moderate
cover is legendary. The rear guard (7) confuse the pursuers by
taking a different route, but then head for the nearer flank of
the defile chosen for the ambush (8), to bring the pursuers
under fire from both sides. 
B
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

1
2
3
1
2
4
5
6
8
7
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

their camp; the standard response to the appearance of an enemy force was to
scatter in order to break contact, and to re-group later at this rendezvous
point. Equally, however, if the terrain favored such tactics, then the Apaches
might give the appearance of fleeing while in reality leading their pursuers into
an ambush (see Plate B). This inclination to evade their enemies unless the
conditions for fighting were very favorable proved to be a major headache for
the US Army. A deeply frustrated Gen Philip Sheridan noted on October 22,
1879 that:
their tactics being to attack and plunder some given point, then to
scatter like quails and meet again at some other distant point
previously understood, for plunder and again scatter [sic], therefore it
is exceedingly difficult for our troops to over-take and punish them.
This technique figures in reports from every level of command in the US Army.
The Apaches would usually attempt to scatter whether or not their pursuers
had spotted them; on at least one occasion they fired dry grass and scrub to
hinder the pursuit. However, they would sometimes fight a rearguard action,
buying time to allow for the escape of their dependants or of warriors driving
stolen livestock. 
On August 16, 1881, Lts G. Valois and G.R. Burnett with a small
detachment from Company I of the African-American 9th US Cavalry were
halted near Canada Alamosa, New Mexico, as one of a number of detachments
from that regiment charged with intercepting Apache raiders led by Nana. They
were watering their horses at the Rio Alamosa when they received a report
that the Chavez ranch downstream had been attacked. Lieutenant Burnett
left immediately with a few men, while Lt Valois mustered the rest of the
detachment and followed. Arriving at the ranch, Burnett joined forces with a
posse of Mexicans intent on avenging those recently killed by the Apaches.
As this force mounted a bluff above the ranch they spotted what they took at
first to be more mounted Mexicans, dressed in serapes and sombreros. These
men waved to them, but it soon became apparent that these were the very
Apaches they sought, and both sides opened fire. 
Having failed to deceive their pursuers, the Apaches split into two groups.
The first group drove their stolen stock towards the Cuchillo Negro Mts
approximately 10 miles away. The other Apaches dismounted behind a very
gentle rise, and opened fire. They continued this fire until Sgt Williams’ party
threatened to outflank them on their left, whereupon they remounted and
retreated to the next slight fold in the terrain, where they again dismounted
and opened fire (see diagram opposite). They successfully repeated these
delaying tactics until they reached the Cuchillo Negro Mts, where they
occupied a ridge from which they eventually drove off their pursuers.
Victorio’s evasion strategy
Victorio used an extended variation of the basic traveling formation as a
strategic decoy, to cripple his enemies’ ability to pursue the Apaches while
simultaneously protecting his families and logistic support. He would take
the majority of his warriors and launch raids in one part of the country,
allowing another group of mainly women and children with a small warrior
escort to move from their current camp to a new site many miles from the
area being attacked by Victorio. Thus the Apaches preserved the integrity of
their own “logistic base,” while targeting the logistics of their opponents.
20
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

In January 1880, when Victorio and his followers returned to New
Mexico from Chihuahua, they were faced with the problem of evading the
US troops that had been stationed in southern New Mexico to intercept the
Apaches should they attempt to return to their strongholds in the US. During
November and December 1879, Victorio’s warriors had stolen hundreds
of horses and cattle in Chihuahua, and in January 1880 he had to get these
through to the Mescalero Apache reservation, about 30 miles east of the
White Sands, where they could be sold to unscrupulous traders in exchange
for rifles and ammunition. Victorio now employed the same strategic-decoy
method to draw a US force under Maj Albert P. Morrow, 9th Cavalry, into
pursuing his band of warriors north, from the Goodsight Mts up between
the Black Range and the Caballo Mts, as far as the Cuchillo Negro Mts and
beyond (see Plate C). On January 16, Victorio had a brief parley at Canada
Alamosa with one Andrew Kelley, who would report that the chief was
leading approximately 60 well-armed and well-mounted warriors. (Kelley
had been an interpreter at Victorio’s old reservation at Ojo Caliente, and had
also acted as an intermediary between Victorio and the US Army in February
1879.) Once Morrow’s pursuit was well underway, a second Apache group
drove their large and vulnerable looted herd northeastwards through the area
just vacated by the Army, to reach their destination safely. 
There was another dividend to be gained from this ploy: drawing the
available US troops into a long pursuit over very rough terrain wore out
21
The general area of the Burnett
skirmish, with the Cuchillo
Negro Mts on the western
horizon. Although the terrain
appears to be flat, there are
very gentle undulations in the
plain; these gave the Apaches
enough cover to mount a
running rearguard action
against their pursuers until
they reached the cover of the
mountains. (Author’s photo) 
Sketch plan of Lt Burnett’s
skirmish against Nana’s
warriors on August 16, 1881.
Mexican flank
guard
Lt Burnett’s
force
Sgt Williams’ flanking
detachment
As Sergeant Williams’ detachment works around the flank, the
Apache rearguard withdraws to the next elevation
Apache rearguard
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

the men and mounts of these overstretched units. The Apaches could keep
ahead of the soldiers on foot if needs be, but if they were on horseback it was
well-nigh impossible to maintain a successful pursuit. During this strategic
movement Victorio chose to fight several skirmishes, which Maj Morrow
interpreted as rearguard actions to protect Apache dependants – yet Victorio
was apparently completely unencumbered with either families or loot. The
reason for allowing the 9th Cavalry to get within range to fight these
skirmishes was to foster an illusion among the pursuers that, with a little
extra effort, victory would be within their grasp. Having achieved both their
aims – to decoy the cavalry away from the route of the Apaches’ plundered
herd, and to tire them out – the warriors broke contact at a time of their own
choosing. By the end of this pursuit, the editor of The Grant County Herald
reported on February 21, 1880 that:
[Morrow’s] men were ragged, many of them barefooted, and nearly
one half without horses. All were hungry and jaded. Officers and men
had been messing in common, and the sick list was increasing daily. In
short the command, which had been kept on the move almost
constantly for six weeks, was in no condition to continue the
campaign.
The last sentence is of special significance. Major Morrow was highly praised
for his and his men’s perseverance during several long pursuits of Victorio in
1879 and 1880 – but in fact, these displays of dogged stamina to the point
of exhaustion were exactly what the Apache leader wanted to provoke.
THE AMBUSH 
The basic aim of the ambush was to cripple the enemy’s ability to respond to
the first volley. The ambush site would often be chosen so as to allow the
Apaches to fade back into rough terrain should this first volley fail to be
crippling – if the target either detected the ambush in time, or elected to stand
and fight rather than flee. The ambush would ideally be delivered from close
THE THEATER OF OPERATIONS, 1879–81
This sketch map of southern New Mexico and northern
Chihuahua, with parts of Arizona to the west and West Texas
to the east, shows only major terrain features, the US Army
posts and settlements mentioned in the text, and the
approximate sites of the actions described. The Fort Apache
reservation, north of the Salt River, and the San Carlos agency,
south of that river, are off the map to the west – Ft Apache
was perhaps 80 miles northwest of Old Fort Tularosa. The
Mescalero reservation is off the map to the east, about 20 miles
northeast of La Luz, in the edge of the Sacramento Mountains.
Tres Castillos, where Victorio was killed, is about 20 miles east
of the bottom right hand corner of the map. (Other Army posts
briefly mentioned in the text are Fort Wingate, which is far
to the northwest of the map; and Fort Stanton, which is off
the map about 100 miles east of Fort Craig.) 
The two US Army regiments that provided the permanent
garrisons in New Mexico – the 9th Cavalry and 15th Infantry – 
were understrength, and usually had to operate in very
modest dispersed detachments often of fewer than 30 soldiers.
A cavalry regiment had 12 companies (or “troops”), so was
divisible into three battalions (or “squadrons”). A company was
supposed to have about 80 all ranks, but this was never
achieved on the frontier. For example, in October 1879,
Maj Albert P. Morrow’s battalion of the 9th Cavalry from
Fort Bayard consisted on paper of five companies; but Co A
had 28 enlisted men, Co B counted 23, Co C had 25, Co G
numbered 32, and Co H had only 15 – a total of just 123 NCOs
and troopers. On October 23, Maj Morrow also had
attachments of the 34-man Co A from 6th Cavalry, and about
the same number of Apache scouts; but by the time Victorio
and Juh ambushed him on October 27, in the Guzman Mts,
after leading him across the parched sandhills of northern
Chihuahua, Morrow had just 81 thirsty troopers of the 9th and
6th Cavalry, and 18 of Lt Gatewood’s scouts. 
C
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

range without any warning. The first targets would usually be their enemy’s
horses, as the minimum aim of the ambush was to hinder the enemy’s ability
to continue their pursuit. 
The Apaches were masters of concealment, being able to hide quickly in
apparently barren terrain – even bare grassland – but when they had time they
could prepare hidden and protected positions. While the Apaches were, on
average, poor marksmen, their first shots were usually quite accurate, since
they generally chose positions that allowed them to rest their firearms and take
steady aim, at ranges short enough to maximize the effect of the opening volley.
(It should also be noted that their opponents were usually not particularly
good shots themselves; the US Army could not afford the extra ammunition
to provide its troops with regular target practice, and did not begin to discuss
a remedy to this situation until 1880. Reports of a number of actions also make
clear that the Apaches sometimes enjoyed superior close-range firepower,
having Winchester repeaters against the Army’s single-shot Springfield
“trapdoor” breech-loaders.)
A number of variations in the type of ambush employed by the Apaches
in the 1870s and 1880s can be identified. These fall into four broad
categories: planned, killing, decoy, and ad hoc ambushes – although these
were not always clearly distinct (for example, an ad hoc ambush might have
used decoys in order to lure the enemy into position). The following examples
are grouped according to the principal element of the ambush techniques
employed on each occasion. 
Planned ambushes: Ojo Caliente, September 4, 1879
The Apaches were known to watch their targets for a number of days in order
to identify any exploitable weaknesses in their routine. On September 4,
1879, Victorio and a number of warriors attacked the horse herd belonging
to Company E, 9th Cavalry, then stationed (under Capt A.E. Hooker, an
officer who was both severe and incompetent) at Victorio’s favorite camping
ground at Ojo Caliente. They killed the five men guarding the 50 horses and
18 mules, and drove off the entire herd without alerting the rest of the
garrison. They were able to do this by watching the horse-herders’ routine
patiently, and only striking when the herd was out of sight and earshot of
the rest of the garrison. The Apaches noted that each day the horses and
mules were taken out to graze further and further up the valley from the post,
and that as the herd turned back towards Ojo Caliente it passed through an
area on the far side of a low ridge, which was slashed with a number of
arroyos (stream-beds) running down to the more level ground. While the herd
was driven along the side of the ridge and across these arroyos the guards
appear to have been in the habit of stopping for a rest, and it was at this
moment that the Apaches struck. 
When the ground was examined after the attack, it was noted that the
Apaches had divided into three groups. The first, about 12–15 strong, had
been tasked with killing the guards, and had concealed themselves around
the area where the troopers (who were armed only with revolvers) took their
break. There is some indication that this spot was not fixed, as there were
signs that these Apaches had quietly fallen back in the face of the advancing
herd until the guards stopped. Other dismounted Apaches were concealed
along the flanks of the herd’s advance, to drive the horses and mules down
an arroyo; and a third group were concealed in another arroyo further down
the ridge, to head off any animals which tried to return to Ojo Caliente.
24
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

Three of the five guards were believed to have been dismounted when the
Apaches opened fire, while the two men still mounted were thought to have
been shot out of the saddle as the herd stampeded down the arroyo. The
tracks showed that at least some of the horses had tried to turn back towards
Ojo Caliente before the mounted Apaches had headed them off, collected
the herd and driven them away. 
By the time the herd was missed at Ojo Caliente the Apaches had a
two-hour start over the now practically dismounted garrison (a courier had
to be sent for help mounted on the single remaining mule). Company E did
not receive remounts until December 1879, thus preventing them from taking
part in the Army’s pursuit of Victorio in September and October 1879. This
pursuit ended when the Apaches slipped into Mexico, and fought off their
exhausted pursuers in the mountains near Laguna de Guzman in Chihuahua
on the night of October 27/28.
25
Apaches regarded the horse
with a good deal less reverence
than the Plains Indians. They
rarely fought on horseback,
and regarded horses simply as
a way to move rapidly around
the country – and as food, if
necessary. A participant in
one of the 10th Cavalry’s
engagements in West Texas
recalled seeing Apaches
employing classic “mounted
infantry” tactics – fighting on
foot, mounting to ride to a new
position, then dismounting
to resume firing. (Courtesy
Arizona Historical Society,
no. 47493)
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

Cuchillo Negro river, September 30, 1879
On September 29, 1879, Apache scouts led by Lts Augustus P. Blocksom and
Charles Gatewood, 6th Cavalry, supported by troopers from Maj Morrow’s
9th Cavalry command, attacked Victorio’s camp near the Cuchillo Negro
river. They managed to kill two Apache warriors and one woman before the
rest made good their escape into the surrounding mountains as darkness fell.
Gatewood and Blocksom pitched their camp about half a mile up the canyon
from that set up by Morrow’s 9th Cavalry detachment. Early the following
morning the Apache scouts fanned out from their camp in search of the
hostiles, leaving Gatewood and Blocksom in their camp with a detachment
of 6th Cavalry troopers (the latter being attached to Indian Scout companies
simply to guard their mule-train). In the meantime, some of Victorio’s
warriors had infiltrated the heights around Morrow’s camp, and others had
slipped into positions above the 6th Cavalry detachment. 
The hostiles waited until breakfast, when Maj Morrow withdrew 11 out
of 12 men from guard duty on the bluffs surrounding his camp. The remaining
sentry was shot through the head by an Apache sniper, while the rest of the
Apaches opened a hot fire from all sides into both camps. Gatewood recorded
the confusion caused by this attack:
Early next morning, as we had just finished breakfast, a single shot
rang out down the canyon, then a volley, suddenly increasing into
more shots and more volleys, with sounds of command, all doubled
and trebled in reverberations up the valley, until it was one roar of
pandemonium that was enough to set a nervous man wild. I didn’t
believe there was a sane man in the country, except the Corporal, who
coolly informed me after a while that I was sitting on the wrong side
of a rock, and pointed out to me the folly of protecting a rock.
The deadlock was broken by the storming of one of the bluffs by the
6th Cavalrymen, who then provided covering fire as Maj Morrow led an assault
on another bluff. At this point the Apache scouts returned, and Victorio’s men
pulled back into the mountains. Morrow later reported that he had driven off
the Apaches, but had had to withdraw through lack of water; Gatewood told
a very different story, however, stating that the hostiles had withdrawn to better
positions from which they could not be dislodged. When Morrow started to
withdraw these Apaches returned to the attack, and harassed the command
BELOW LEFT
View from a clifftop at the
foot of a mountainside, looking
down on a trail leading into the
Black Range/Mimbres Mts of
New Mexico. Rocky outcrops
provided perfect ambush
positions, and could be
improved easily – and invisibly
– by piling a few more rocks
into simple breastworks .
(Author’s photo)
BELOW RIGHT
The same feature, seen
from the opposite side of the
canyon. Despite having walked
the ground, the author was
unable to distinguish the exact
clifftop position from which
he took the previous picture.
(Author’s photo) 
26
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

until it reached more open ground. The key point to note is that the hostile
Apaches were familiar enough with US Army routine to strike the command
when it was at its most vulnerable.
Santa Cruz Mountains, May 15, 1886
This was another occasion when monitoring of their enemy’s routine paid
handsome dividends for the Apaches. On May 14, 1886, Apache raiders stole
30 horses from a ranch near the Santa Cruz Mts in Sonora, Mexico. The
raiders struck in the mid-afternoon, and as darkness approached one of the
ranch hands contacted Company D, 4th US Cavalry, commanded by Capt
Charles Hatfield. This detachment – consisting of the captain, 37 cavalrymen,
and two Mexican guides named Moreno and Mendez – set out in pursuit,
following the trail into the mountains until darkness fell. The following day
Hatfield’s detachment neared the top of the mountains, and discovered the
Apache camp. The nature of the terrain meant that much of the pursuit had
been conducted by dismounted men leading their horses. Hatfield now
assigned double the usual number of mounts to his horse-holders (seven or
eight each, instead of the usual four), while the rest of his men charged into
the camp. The Apaches scattered, and Hatfield reported capturing 21 horses
and camp equipment. The captain quickly realized that getting his command
and their recaptured horses out of the mountains would be difficult should the
Apaches choose to counterattack.
By throwing out a dismounted skirmish line to the front, and assigning
a few men to guard the captures and the troops’ own mounts and mules, he
managed to get clear of the mountains without further contact with the
hostiles. Once back on more or less level terrain, Hatfield reorganized his
small command into three groups. A sergeant and 14 dismounted men took
the lead in skirmish order. These were preceded by a single mounted man, and
flanked by a mounted trooper at each end of the line; this group was also
accompanied by Moreno and Mendez. Hatfield himself, with 12 troopers,
took charge of the led troop horses; he was followed by seven men driving the
mule-train and the captured horses. The detachment had to pass through
some more rough terrain before they could reach the relative safety of the
town of Santa Cruz. Passing through a narrow canyon, the advance guard
found a spring sufficient to supply the needs of both men and animals, the
latter having been without water for more than 24 hours.
The reason for the lack of contact during the descent out of the mountains
was that the Apaches had moved ahead of the command, watching Hatfield’s
movements, and had set up positions above and beyond this spring in
anticipation that he would have to use it. They let the advance element take
water and then move on – doubtless noting that this group had drawn ahead
of the two parties with the horses (in spite of explicit orders from Hatfield to
his sergeant not to allow such a gap to develop). The Apaches allowed Hatfield
to water the troop horses, and only struck when the last group of seven men
with the mule-train and captured horses reached the spring. 
They opened up a withering fire from the rocks, causing a momentary panic
among the troopers when their sergeant was wounded. Both Hatfield’s and
the final group were then pinned down for half an hour, before some of the
advance detachment returned and helped to extricate the trapped men. This
involved a further vigorous exchange of fire, during which a trapped and
wounded man was shot dead by the Apaches at the very moment of his rescue.
The captain then ordered the survivors to withdraw. Hatfield suffered two men
27
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

killed and two sergeants wounded, and lost his mules (which would have been
carrying food and probably extra ammunition), and the Apaches recaptured
their horses. The captain also lost his own personal mount, and three troop
horses which were forgotten in the heat of the action. There was no indication
of any casualties sustained by the Apaches.
Here we can see the rapidity with which Apaches could size up a situation
and plan an effective ambush at relatively short notice. It also shows the
discipline exercised by the warriors in not opening fire until the optimum
moment. Such discipline was crucial to the success of a ruthlessly efficient double
ambush executed by Victorio in the Candelaria Mountains of Mexico.
The killing ambush: Candelaria Mountains, November 1879 
(see Plate D)
We are lucky to have reports of this incident – which virtually exterminated
two parties of Mexican militia from the village of El Carrizal – from
Mexicans and Texas Rangers who reached the scene less than two weeks after
the event, and later recollections from James Kaywaykla, who as a very young
Warm Springs Apache warrior took part in the first phase of the double
ambush. Kaywaykla clearly describes how Victorio assigned leadership of
different elements of this ambush to various senior members of his following.
Both the Apaches and Texas Rangers state that there were no survivors from
this first party of 14 militiamen (though a Mexican source implies the survival
of one wounded man). 
While the first phase was accomplished by skillful positioning and
concealment and good fire-discipline, the second not only reinforces the
impression of Victorio’s control over his warriors, but also suggests
his exploitation of a knowledge of his opponents’ culture, and of their
supposed understanding of Apache tactics. As reconstructed by the Texas
Rangers who helped recover the bodies, the Apaches – most unusually – did
not immediately withdraw after wiping out the first party of El Carrizal
irregulars, but remained at the ambush site over two nights. Victorio
apparently anticipated that a second party of Mexicans would come looking
for their comrades, and that they would be confident that the Apaches had
left the area. (If the Mexican source is correct that a wounded survivor was
discovered, that would have reinforced this belief.) The second party gathered
up the bodies of their fellow villagers, and dug a grave; and it was only when
the men were grouped around the grave that the Apaches opened fire. The
author would suggest that this indicates that Victorio knew enough about
how Mexicans would react on discovering the bodies to catch them at their
most vulnerable. Most of the second party were killed; a number of them
managed to break out of the trap and some of these escaped completely,
but one was found to have been cut off and killed after getting 600 yards
into open country, and two others were never found. A local Mexican source
writing within days of the event acknowledged the loss of a total of 33 men
in the double ambush.
This ambush underlines the patience and discipline exercised by the
Apaches. In all likelihood, most if not all of them were in position during the
whole time the second group of Mexicans were gathering up their dead for
burial, and not one of these warriors betrayed his presence. In comparison with
the “coup-counting” Plains Indian culture of the 1860s–70s, Apache culture did
not reward displays of individual boldness, but rather the ability to follow the
directions of a respected leader. A young Apache who opened fire prematurely
28
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

and ruined an ambush would be marked as unreliable, even dangerous, and
would be shunned by his peers. 
Evidence reported by the Texas Rangers also showed the Apaches’
adherence to the principle of minimum exposure to risk. One Mexican had
crawled into a crevice from which he could shoot anyone coming at him from
either east or west, and was hidden from warriors on the cliffs above him.
However, his legs were exposed to Apache riflemen on the opposite (north)
side of the canyon, and – instead of rushing him, which would certainly have
allowed him to shoot down at least one of them – the latter had aimed at his
legs and “literally shot them off up to his knees.” The Apaches probably
sustained few, if any casualties in either of these ambushes.
Ambushes by decoy
This term needs to be defined with some care. Apaches often used decoy tactics
of one sort or another to lull their targets into a false sense of security, and
these were usually more subtle than those used by the Plains Indians. A classic
Plains Indian ploy was to send out a small party of warriors to draw the enemy
into a pursuit of this visible target, which then tried to lead the pursuers into
an ambush by a far larger force. The obvious example of this technique is the
destruction of Capt William J. Fetterman’s command near Fort Phil Kearny on
December 21, 1866 by Lakota, Cheyenne and Arapaho warriors.
While Apaches did occasionally employ this type of tactic (e.g. at Cerro
Mata Ortiz in November 1882 – see below), their techniques were usually
more indirect. In the “Fetterman massacre,” the decoys and the intended target
were both aware of each other’s presence, and the aim was to draw Fetterman’s
detachment on, by the promise of an easy victory, into a deadly trap. By
contrast, the aim of Apache decoys was usually to lull the enemy into a false
sense of security just prior to the ambush. The tracks of their horses could be
laid in such a manner as to deceive the enemy into thinking that there were no
Apaches in the near vicinity. Noise, such as gunfire, could be used to draw the
enemy through a prepared ambush. Closer to the classic Plains technique was
the encouragement of an enemy to launch an attack by allowing him to sight
Apaches who were acting as if they were unaware of his presence, thus
encouraging him to follow them into terrain that he would normally have
avoided. Likewise, decoys might also simulate sudden panic upon apparently
sighting their foes, to provoke a charge that would spring an ambush laid
between the decoys and the enemy. 
Decoys by tracks: Horseshoe Canyon, October 24, 1871 
(see Plate E2)
On October 21, 1871, Apaches attacked a small ranch about 25 miles from
Camp (later Fort) Bowie in the San Simon Valley in southern Arizona.
Two men, Richard Barnes and R.M. Gilbert, were in one of the two adobe
buildings; some of the Apaches quietly occupied the vacant building during
the night, and fatally wounded Barnes the following morning when he
emerged from the other building. Gilbert, though suffering from fever,
temporarily drove the Apaches back into cover with his Henry repeating rifle,
and managed to drag his comrade back into the house. The Apaches then
placed the building under siege, and managed to wound Gilbert. When they
subsequently set the roof on fire, Gilbert, realizing that Barnes was beyond
aid, blasted his way free and managed to reach good cover. The Apaches knew
where he was, but could not finish him off without great risk from his
29
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

1
2
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

rapid-fire weapon, so they left him to the mercy of the terrain. The following
day Gilbert managed to reach help; that night he was brought into Camp
Bowie, and the alarm was raised.
Twenty-five men from the 3rd US Cavalry led by Capt Gerald Russell and
accompanied by civilian guide Robert H. Whitney set out in pursuit, and
trailed the Apaches (possibly led by Juh) into the Chiricahua Mountains.
On October 24, approximately 40 miles from Bowie, Russell’s detachment
was ambushed in Horseshoe Canyon. The Apaches had used a false trail to
convince Russell that it was safe to approach the waterhole there; they had
left a clear trail both into and then out of the box canyon. After traveling
away from the canyon mouth they had turned up into the mountains,
and returned to occupy the high ground surrounding Horseshoe Canyon.
When Russell arrived in the mid-afternoon he found himself pinned down
until nightfall; Whitney and two horses were killed, and a cavalryman was
wounded. Russell claimed to have killed many warriors, but withdrew under
the cover of darkness and saw no bodies. From the Apache point of view, the
light casualties inflicted on their pursuers were irrelevant – they had succeeded
in their aim of terminating Russell’s pursuit.
A more common technique was for the Apaches to lay a trail that passed
through the ambush zone, and then to simply double back on the flanks to
take up concealed positions. Captain Russell himself had been caught in just
such an ambush in the Dragoon Mts in April 1871, six months before and
some 35 miles west of his action in Horseshoe Canyon (see Plate E1). With
approximately 30 troops and a guide, he had pursued the trail of a large
group of Apaches led by Cochise into the Dragoons. Russell’s guide Merejildo
Grijalva became convinced that the Apaches were waiting to ambush them if
they proceeded any further. As they commenced their withdrawal, they found
that Cochise’s warriors had circled around behind the troops and occupied
both sides of the canyon. Despite the heavy fire opened upon them as they
rode out, on that occasion Russell managed to extricate his men from the
trap without casualties. 
The increased sophistication of the October ambush in Horseshoe Canyon
even raises the intriguing possibility that at least some of these Apaches had
earlier been involved in the April skirmish in the Dragoon Mountains. The
KILLING AMBUSH: CANDELARIA MOUNTAINS,
NOVEMBER 7 & 9, 1879
This reconstructs a successful double-stage ambush planned
and sprung by Victorio. 
In the first phase, the Chiricahuas were lying in wait, on either
side of a canyon, for a party of about 14 Mexican irregulars
from the village of El Carrizal. Once the Mexicans (blue spots)
had ridden into the canyon, warriors whom Victorio had
posted each side of the entrance and exit of the killing-ground,
and others along the slope to the Mexicans’ right (red spots),
opened fire. The Mexicans’ horses were the primary target of
this first fusillade. Seeing an apparently obvious source of
cover, the Mexicans ran to take shelter among the scatter of
large boulders to their left. At that point the majority of the
Apaches, who were waiting in concealment along the top of
that slope (red triangles), opened fire from above and behind
them. The Mexicans were wiped out.
In a remarkable example of his hold over his followers,
Victorio, judging that a search party would come looking for
the first, did not move off at once – the almost invariable
Apache practice. Instead, the Chiricahuas remained on the
spot for 48 hours, and were under cover (inset 1) when, on
November 9, a second party of 20–30 riders from El Carrizal and
the Samaniego ranch duly arrived – probably feeling secure in
the knowledge that Apaches always withdrew immediately
after a clash. The Mexicans gathered up the bodies of their
relatives and neighbors, and proceeded to dig a mass grave
for them. The position of the corpses of men from this second
party suggested that the Apaches waited until they were
gathered in a compact group around the grave before
springing the trap (inset 2). Some of the survivors managed to
ride out of the canyon and make good their escape, but others
were ridden down and killed. The total Mexican losses to this
double ambush were reported as 33 men killed.
D
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

relatively low numbers involved in this guerrilla warfare meant that quite
junior leaders in the US Army would have been easily recognized by the
Apaches, in whose culture the qualities of an individual were important. It is
tempting to imagine that in October some of the Apaches might have
recognized Russell, and agreed that since this officer might have learned from
the earlier ambush, they should try a different variation this time.
Las Animas river, September 18, 1879
A third example of a decoy ambush by tracks was that sprung upon two
companies of the 9th Cavalry in the Black Range around the headwaters of
the Rio Las Animas on September 18, 1879. Here an obvious trail up into the
mountains led through and beyond the chosen ambush site; the Apaches then
took up positions around and above this trail, and waited. About 40 “buffalo
soldiers” from Companies A & B, 9th Cavalry, led by Capt Byron Dawson
and accompanied by four Navajo scouts, were following the trail. 
Despite the Navajos’ unease as to the wisdom of following the trail,
Dawson pressed on, and in mid-morning the detachment suddenly came under
fire from above and all around. One of the Navajos was killed in the opening
volley, but most of the Apache fire seems to have been aimed at Dawson’s
horses. The troopers took cover as best they could, but found themselves
pinned down in a murderous crossfire from which they could neither advance
nor retreat. By noon, Dawson’s men were running low on ammunition; but
help then arrived in the form of Companies C & G of the 9th, accompanied
by civilian volunteers from the Hillsboro mining camp. However, these
reinforcements were soon pinned down in their turn. Although they were only
able to pull out as darkness fell, the casualties were again surprisingly low –
two Navajo scouts, one civilian, and two, perhaps three 9th Cavalrymen.
Their horse casualties were far higher; the regiment’s monthly return
acknowledged 29 horses killed in action, while the Fort Bayard return stated
the loss of 28 horses (but admitted that some of these had escaped rather than
been killed). It was acknowledged that the detachment had to abandon much
equipment in their withdrawal, and the bodies of those killed were not
recovered until almost a week later. There is some suspicion that one or
32
The left-hand man in this group
photo of Apache scouts is the
guide Merejildo Grijalva, a
Mexican who escaped after
being captured by Cochise,
and scouted for the US Army
for many years. It was he who
warned Capt Russell,
3rd Cavalry, of the imminent
ambush in the Dragoon Mts in
April 1871. While the Apaches
carry single-shot Springfield
M1873 carbines, Grijalva clearly
has a repeating rifle. (Courtesy
Arizona Historical Society,
no. 43387) 
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

two of these men might have been alive and missed in the darkness when the
detachment withdrew. From the Apache point of view, a simple decoy trail
into an ambush had crippled the ability of four companies of the 9th Cavalry
to maintain their immediate pursuit, and forced them to abandon much
equipment to the Apaches.
Near Bavispe, Sierra Madre Mountains, April 24 or 26, 1883
In 1883, Gen George Crook mounted an expedition, spearheaded by a large
number of Apache scouts, into the Sierra Madre Mts of northern Mexico
in pursuit of hostile Apaches. However, before Crook’s expedition surprised
the hostiles and negotiated their surrender, they received news of an ambush
sprung on local troops. The Apaches had stolen a number of cattle from
around the villages of Bavispe and Bacerac and had driven them up into the
mountains. Some 50 men of the Sonora Guardia Nacional from these villages
took up the trail, and as they were making their way up a steep slope they
were ambushed. The Apaches had set up small stone breastworks across
and to either side of the trail; these had been covered over with dry grass,
and were virtually invisible until the Apaches delivered a volley at point-blank
range from three sides. Four men were killed and two others severely
wounded, and the surviving National Guardsmen fell back. They were joined
by Mexican Federal troops who had been following them up, but by the time
they returned to the scene of the attack the Apaches were long gone.
Decoy by gunfire: McEvers Ranch, September 10–11, 1879
A week after they had taken the horse herd of Company E, 9th Cavalry
at Ojo Caliente (see above), Victorio’s warriors attacked a Mexican settlement
at Jaralosa, approximately 56 miles south of Ojo Caliente. Here they killed
between seven and ten men, women and children. Word of the attack reached
the mining settlement of Hillsboro approximately 20 miles to the north,
and men saddled up and rode south to render what assistance they could.
The pursuit does not appear to have been very well organized; the numbers
involved are unclear, and the men did not ride together as a single group.
When the Hillsboro men arrived
at
Jaralosa they were outraged
by what they found there. One
William Bates, interviewed in 1940,
recalled that the bodies showed
evidence of extremely cruel deaths;
even today, some descendants of
people who lived in the area at the
time recall this as an atrocity even
by Apache standards. 
Almost 
before 
this 
ghastly
spectacle had sunk in, the posse
heard gunfire from the direction
of McEvers Ranch, some 2 miles
to the southeast of Jaralosa. The
haphazard pursuit was continued
in that direction, and the Hillsboro
men ran piecemeal into an ambush
in which between ten and 18 of
them were reported as being killed.
Author’s suggested site for
the McEvers Ranch ambush
of September 10, 1879; the
posse’s starting point at
Jaralosa is off the top of the
sketch map, and their
destination at the ranch is a few
hundred yards off the bottom
left. Riders following the road
(double broken lines) roughly
southwards would pass on
their left a stretch of marshy
cienega, and on their right
some hills and ridges – only
about 50ft high, but steep, and
offering many natural firing
positions close above the trail
at (B), (C) and (D). Once the
posse reached (A) the Apaches
could bring them under fire
from three directions at close
range. Any survivors could have
found cover in the marshland,
but if the Apaches had placed
riflemen at (E) they would have
been pinned down there. Point
(F) would have provided an
excellent vantage point, from
which Victorio or whoever else
directed this ambush could
signal instructions to his
warriors. 
33
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

1
Russell
Apaches
Apaches
2
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

The actual site of the ambush is unknown, but, having examined the terrain,
the author believes the most likely spot to be just outside the ranch.
The number of fatalities inflicted suggests that the ambush must have been
sprung from very close range. There is a ridge further away from the ranch
that is said to be the ambush site; however, the terrain there does not offer
easy escape routes from positions close to the trail, and if the Apaches had
been deployed along the ridgeline itself they would have been too far away
to inflict such casualties. The spot where we believe the ambush occurred
allows good concealment close to the road, with good escape routes. The
killing ground is just beyond a blind corner, and the terrain does not look
Cave Creek Canyon, looking
roughly westwards into the
Chiricahua Mountains. This
gives a good idea of the
difficulty US Army detachments
faced in remaining undetected
by Apache lookouts, and of the
heavy cover on the lower
slopes that masked any
number of ambush positions.
(Photo courtesy Catherine
Edwards)
AMBUSH BY DECOY TRAILS
1: Dragoon Mountains, April 1871
Captain Gerald Russell of the 3rd US Cavalry, with about
30 troopers and a Mexican guide, was following the trail of
a large group of Chokonen Chiricahua led by Cochise. As they
followed the trail along a canyon in the Dragoon Mts, the scout
Merejildo Grijalva became convinced that if they proceeded
any further they would run into an ambush. Russell heeded his
advice, and the troop began to retrace their steps. The scout
had been right: a little further ahead, Cochise had divided his
band and sent them doubling back over the high ground to
lay an ambush on both sides of the canyon. In fact, he had
been hoping to catch Russell from three directions, but the
latter’s withdrawal after becoming suspicious of the terrain
directly ahead of him foiled that part of the plan. Despite
heavy fire from both flanks, Russell managed to extricate his
men without casualties.
2: Horseshoe Canyon, October 1871
On this occasion Capt Russell was again following the trail of
Apache raiders, with 25 troopers and the scout Robert H.
Whitney. Seeking to water the horses and men in Horseshoe
Canyon in the Chiricahua Mts, Russell and Whitney were
deceived by a false trail. The Apaches had also used the
waterhole, but had then left clear tracks emerging from the
canyon again. Convinced that it was safe, Russell proceeded
to the waterhole – unaware that the Apaches had later turned
away from their direction of march and up into the high
ground, following the upper slopes and dropping off at
intervals to lay an almost circular ambush above and around
the waterhole. When Russell arrived at mid-afternoon they
opened fire, and the troopers were pinned down until Russell
managed to lead them out after nightfall. Whitney was killed,
as were two horses, and a trooper was wounded; but despite
these light casualties, Russell had to give up his pursuit – which
had been the Apaches’ primary motive. 
Inset: Before the enrolment of the Indian Scout companies
was promoted by Gen George Crook for his 1872 Tonto Basin
campaign, and even afterwards, the experienced advice of
local civilian guides, both Mexican and American, was of
crucial value. US Army officers new to the Southwest were
unfamiliar with the terrain, and anyway lacked any
professional grounding in counter-guerrilla tactics. Part of the
continued value of white or mixed-blood guides was as
interpreters with the Indian Scouts. 
E
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

particularly threatening until you are well
inside the danger area (see sketch map on
page 33). 
The Apaches’ use of decoy techniques
is crucial to the understanding of this
ambush. A decoy in this sense is any ploy
to attract the attention of the target and
then draw him into the arranged ambush.
In this case the attack upon Jaralosa
attracted the attention of the armed
civilians at Hillsboro, and what they
found when they arrived there enraged
them (as the Apaches no doubt intended).
Angry men bent on revenge do not think
as clearly as they should, and once they
had been drawn into the general area, the
firing from McEvers Ranch then drew the
posse incautiously down the road and
into the ambush that had been prepared
to receive them. Here the Apaches did not
simply monitor the targets’ movements
and then arrange an ambush in their
path; they thought out the sequence of
events in advance, and arranged them to
manipulate their quarry’s reactions.
Having sited the ambush in the most
advantageous terrain along the posse’s
predicted line of travel, they fired the
decoy shots. These gave the Hillsboro
men the impression that another group
of settlers might still be rescued from
the horrors they had found at Jaralosa,
and also that their own approach was
undetected – past experience would have
suggested that the Apaches tended to flee in the face of substantial and
aggressive armed parties. The local newspapers were periodically full of
stories about the “cowardly” manner in which Apaches fought; at McEvers
Ranch the Apaches apparently took advantage of this reputation and turned
it back upon their enemies.
Decoy by simulated innocence: Whetstone Mountains, May 5, 1871
Another form of decoy was to send out one or two men – or, in at least one
instance, women – into the open where they knew the enemy would see them.
Acting as if unaware of the presence of danger, the decoys would saunter
casually into and beyond the killing ground, hoping that they would be
followed. Even experienced Indian-fighters could be taken in by this ploy.
On May 5, 1871, Lt Howard B. Cushing’s detachment was hunting for
Cochise when they found a fresh trail left by an Apache woman meandering
up a canyon. Though suspicious, they still entered the trap; when they came
under fire from Apaches led by Juh, most of the detachment managed to
extricate themselves, but Cushing was killed. Sergeant John Mott recorded
the quiet discipline of the Apache warriors who attacked them:
36
An Apache scout poses with
what appears to be a
Winchester repeater, and a
revolver and “butcher knife”
at his belt. By the late 1870s
many hostile Apaches had also
acquired repeating weapons.
Lieutenant Charles Gatewood
of the Scouts recalled that
during the fight against
Victorio in the Guzman Mts on
October 27, 1879, “The whole
top of the mountain was a
fringe of fire flashes… the
reports from their Winchesters
above were so frequent as to
be almost a continuous roar.”
(Courtesy Arizona Historical
Society, no. 43391)
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

The Indians were well handled by their chief, a thick, heavy-set man,
who never dismounted from a small brown horse during the fight. They
were not noisy or boisterous as Indians generally are, but paid great
attention to their chief, whose designs I could guess as he delivered his
instructions by gestures.
Decoy by simulated panic: Caballo Mountains, January 30, 1880
Women were also to play a key role in the ambush of Capt Louis B. Rucker
in the Caballo Mts during Maj Morrow’s pursuit of Victorio in January 1880.
Captain Rucker, leading a detachment drawn from Companies B & M,
9th Cavalry, accompanied by civilian volunteers, crossed the Rio Grande
following a trail into a canyon (probably Mescal Canyon) at the northern
end of the Caballo Mountains. About a mile up the canyon they came upon a
herd of livestock guarded by three or four Apache women, who immediately
“panicked” and tried to drive the herd up the canyon, thus encouraging
Rucker’s men into a rash pursuit. As they charged towards the herd they were
caught in a crossfire from Apache warriors above and all around them.
One Navajo scout was killed and three cavalrymen were wounded. Some of
the detachment themselves panicked, and fled all the way back to the other
side of the Rio Grande. Rucker, with another officer and ten men, fought a
rearguard action back down the canyon, with the Apaches harassing them
from the high ground throughout their retreat to the river. 
The reporting of this skirmish in the monthly regimental return and the
bi-monthly company muster roll is interesting. In the former it is
acknowledged that Rucker lost five horses killed in this ambush. The latter
claimed that four horses were shot by order due to their exhaustion prior to
the ambush, and admitted to only one horse lost. Both sets of records note
that three troopers were wounded in action, but give no further detail.
However, The Grant County Herald reported the details of this skirmish
on February 21, 1880. This publication was not particularly well disposed
towards the African-American 9th Cavalry, but a private letter from one
of Morrow’s lieutenants also confirmed that a small detachment had been
defeated in the Caballo Mts on January 30.
37
Mescal Canyon, at the northern
end of the Caballo Mts; this is a
likely spot for the ambush of
Capt Rucker’s detachment of
the 9th Cavalry on January 30,
1880. This photo was taken
about a mile up the canyon
from the bank of the Rio
Grande; the canyon opens up
into a natural amphitheatre
before narrowing again,
making it an ideal place to
station the decoy herd.
(Author’s photo) 
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

Ad hoc ambushes: the Apache “roadside bomb”
The rapidly arranged ad hoc ambush would be sprung either upon the
unexpected appearance of a tempting target, or in an attempt to slow down
or cripple a pursuing enemy. One of the things that quickly becomes apparent
when traveling in Apacheria is the Apaches’ selection of potential ambush
sites to catch their enemies off guard. They knew that when passing through
a canyon their targets would almost certainly be on the alert for trouble.
But by selecting positions in apparently flat terrain, the Apaches could catch
their targets off guard, either just before the soldiers increased their state of
alertness on entering difficult terrain, or as they breathed a sigh of relief after
negotiating it safely. What we might term the Apache “roadside bomb”
technique – by analogy with today’s IEDs in Iraq and Afghanistan – is typical
of the use of apparently innocuous terrain for ambushes.
One ambush of this type was sprung in the aftermath of a major defeat
inflicted upon Victorio by Apache scouts on May 24, 1880, in the Black
Range in the vicinity of the Palomas
river. Several groups of Apaches
fled southwards to Mexico, and on
May 29 one of these groups spotted
a party of five men with a wagon
moving towards Cooke’s Canyon.
Before the entrance to the canyon itself
the Apaches occupied a small, narrow
arroyo, washed out by the heavy
rainfall that periodically strikes the
region. These narrow gulleys may be
deep enough to conceal a standing
man, and are virtually invisible until
one stumbles upon them. Where these
arroyos converge with or run parallel
Some of the natural cover
along Mescal Canyon, above
the natural arena where Capt
Rucker is believed to have been
ambushed – with such success
that some of his troopers fled
all the way back and over the
Rio Grande. (Author’s photo)
An ambush on flat, apparently
featureless ground could be
even more shocking than a trap
laid in a canyon. This is a
temporary arroyo in Cooke’s
Canyon, caused by the heavy
rains of late July and August;
it is close to the trail, and deep
enough to shelter a standing
man. This gulley is almost
invisible from a few yards away,
and Apaches often employed
such ground for point-blank
ambushes on unwary travelers.
Five men were killed in this
immediate vicinity on May 29,
1880 by Victorio’s warriors,
who were on their way to
Mexico via the Florida Mts,
visible on the horizon to the
left. (Author’s photo) 
38
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

to the trail, they provide excellent positions from which to open fire at point-
blank range without warning. On this occasion the burned wagon and
corpses were later found by US troops from Fort Cummings. 
Victorio was not the only Apache war chief to use this technique. In
November and December 1885 the leader known as Ulzana (Jolsanny/ Josanie)
led a small group of warriors up from Mexico to cause havoc in southern
New Mexico and Arizona. During the raid he used the “roadside bomb”
technique twice: at Soldier Hill on December 19, 1885, and in the Chiricahua
Mts on December 27. At Soldier Hill (so-named after the attack), Ulzana’s
warriors ambushed a detachment from the 8th US Cavalry, killing Surgeon
Maddox and four soldiers. The ambush was sprung as the cavalrymen followed
a road that curved steadily up a ridgeline towards its summit. The Apaches
waited until the detachment had almost reached the top before opening fire,
from positions along the crest above and flanking them. 
Eight days later, the same Apaches killed two men, William Reese and
Caspar Albert, in the eastern foothills of the Chiricahua Mts as they drove
a wagon towards Galeyville. There are two possible reconstructions of this
ambush. The first is that the wagoners were caught in a close-range crossfire
in the riverbed at the bottom of a slope; the other is that they were caught as
they rounded a bend and descended towards the ford, by warriors in
positions immediately beyond the outer curve of the road. In the latter case,
one of the two men would have been wholly occupied with controlling the
vehicle, and thus unable to return fire.
This type of ambush was also employed by Apaches in the 1860s when
they were more reliant upon bows and muzzle-loading firearms. Cochise
used this technique to devastating effect in 1862 near Apache Pass in the
Chiricahua Mts, and again at Dragoon Springs in 1869. On July 13, 1862,
nine miners traveling west towards Apache Pass were ambushed from close
range by a large group of Apaches concealed in a small gulley running parallel
to the trail. When the bodies were discovered by US troops it appeared
39
The grave of the victims of
Ulzana’s ambush in the foothills
of the Chiricahua Mts on
December 27, 1885; the rough
inscription reads “Killed by
Indians William Reese and
Casper Albert Dec 1885.”
Monuments to soldiers were
also sometimes raised, perhaps
partly as a warning to recruits;
one that can still be seen at
Fort Cummings reads: “Sacred
to the Memory of Thos Ronan
aged 45 LS Hunter aged 33
Chas Devlin aged 28 Thos Daly
aged 28 late Privates of Co G
1st Veteran Infantry Cal. Vols.
Killed by Apaches at Oak Grove
NM Jan 17 1866.” (Author’s
photos)
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

that all nine men were taken completely unawares by the
opening volley, presumably assuming that they were safe on
flat, open ground. All were hit, and those not killed outright
were quickly finished off, though one man was reported to
have been taken alive and burned to death.
At Dragoon Springs, Cochise not only took advantage of
the terrain but also used the time of day to lull his target into
a false sense of security. As the sun set on October 5, 1869,
a coach with six men – the driver, four soldiers from the
21st Infantry, and mine owner John F. Stone – was driving
towards Dragoon Springs in the Sulphur Springs Valley. The
ground was deceptively flat, and since twilight was drawing
in the coach party assumed that they were safe (as mentioned,
Apaches did not usually attack at night). Once again, Cochise
used a small arroyo close to the road to conceal most of his
men. These warriors opened fire as the coach drove past
them, killing the driver and three soldiers; Stone and the
surviving soldier were cut off and killed by mounted Apaches
when the coach team bolted off the road.
Las Palomas, March 1880
The principle of striking immediately before or beyond an
obvious ambush point can also be identified in the
opportunist ambush of two wagons south of Las Palomas
during March 1880, carried out by a small band of Apaches
believed to have been led by Nana. (It should be noted
that this particular attack has been inflated into a story of
the destruction of a whole wagontrain. However, a letter
written within a week of the event by an Army doctor
who accompanied the Apache scouts who discovered the
remains clearly states that only two wagons were involved,
and that the Apaches killed five Mexicans and took two
children prisoner.)
Once again, their victims were simply in the wrong place
at the wrong time. During March 1880 several Apache
raiding parties struck the Rio Grande valley in New Mexico.
One of these groups of raiders must have spotted these two
wagons, and also noted an ideal ambush position along the wagon road
where the trail climbed up out of a large, deep arroyo. The two wagons had
negotiated the difficult terrain of the riverbed and the steep slope out of it,
and had entered what they must have thought was a less dangerous stretch
of some 200–300 yards of level road. This illusion was only dispelled when
the Apaches opened fire; small hillocks, a ridge only some 20ft high, and a
small depression alongside the road offer hiding places within point-blank
range in four directions. Lieutenant Thomas Cruse, 6th Cavalry, who
commanded the Apache scout detachment that discovered the remains shortly
afterwards, wrote in his memoirs that the memory of the sight haunted
his sleep for many years.
Goodsight Mountains, September 7, 1880
The more usual ad hoc ambush was employed when Apaches were trying to
stop or at least slow down an enemy who was in close and vigorous pursuit.
40
Naches, of the Central
Chiricahua, photographed
in middle age; he holds a
repeating rifle, apparently a
Winchester. While the Apaches
did acquire significant numbers
of these, usually by trade south
of the border, some primary
sources and modern battlefield
archaeology confirm that in the
late 1870s and early 1880s
many appreciated the longer
effective range of the
Springfield “trapdoor” or
Remington “rolling block” rifles.
(Courtesy Arizona Historical
Society, no. 20803)
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

Somewhat confusingly, two officers with the same surname figure in two of
the best examples of this type of action. 
On September 6, 1880, a stagecoach was ambushed by Apaches in the
Goodsight Mts, about 18 miles east of Fort Cummings. When word reached
the fort, Col George P. Buell (CO of the 15th US Infantry, and now in field
command of operations against the Apaches in southern New Mexico),
sent Capt Leopold Parker with Company A, 4th Cavalry, accompanied by
ten Apache scouts, towards the scene of the attack, with orders to pick up
the trail. Since it was most likely that the raiders would flee into Mexico via
either the Florida or the Potrillo Mts, a second company of the 4th was sent
directly south to the Floridas to intercept the Apaches should they go that way;
41
While this is obviously a stiffly
posed studio photo, Apaches
were known to use the bow
and arrows into the 1880s,
when it was still an essential
weapon for silent hunting.
Archaeological evidence
strongly suggests that arrows
were employed as part of the
attempt to stampede Lt
Conline’s troop horses during
his skirmish of April 5, 1880 –
see Plate G. (Courtesy Arizona
Historical Society, no. 3236)
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

if no sign of them was found, this
second detachment was to march
east to the Potrillo Mountains. 
Captain Parker found that
the
trail of the Apaches ran
south along the east side of the
Goodsight
Mts, and took up
the chase; unfortunately, he only
assigned two of his men to flanking
duty. Towards the southern end
of the range he was ambushed
by at least 30 Apaches who had
concealed themselves along a low
ridge; where there was no natural
cover, they had constructed small
rock breastworks. In the opening
volley two Apache scouts and one
cavalryman were killed and three more troopers were wounded (including
a soldier named Aker, who according to the bi-monthly company muster roll
was shot “through fleshy part of thigh and scrotum”). Parker fell back,
dismounted, and attempted to drive the Apaches off the ridgeline by advancing
in skirmish line with horse-holders to the rear. After several failed attacks he
retreated for several miles, and sent to Fort Cummings for support. 
Colonel Buell left the fort with a large detachment of the 9th Cavalry under
the command of LtCol Nathan Dudley, accompanied by a Gatling gun and a
Hotchkiss mountain howitzer. By the time this force arrived, the Apaches
were, of course, long gone, having scattered and re-formed some 20 miles
further south in the Potrillo Mountains. All Buell saw during the pursuit was
a distant dustcloud making its way into Mexico, and when he reached the
Potrillos he found that after using the waterhole at their camp site the Apaches
had poisoned it with horse entrails. Buell concluded that without a mule-train
to carry food and barrels of water, further pursuit was futile. The second
4th Cavalry company, finding no sign of Apaches in the Florida Mts, did not
reach the Potrillos until the following day. 
In essence, Buell’s plan had been perfectly sensible: he correctly predicted
the broad movements of the Apaches, and put a plan in place to cut them off.
The problem was simply that the speed with which the Apaches could move
across country when pursued by a larger force made it almost impossible
for US Cavalry to catch up with them without killing or crippling their more
An anonymous grave in
Cooke’s Canyon; these may
be encountered randomly
thoughout Apacheria, though
they are not usually as well
preserved as this example.
Lieutenant Thomas Cruse,
6th Cavalry, recalled that in
1880 Cooke’s Canyon was
littered with graves and debris
from Apache attacks dating
back to the early 1860s.
(Author’s photo)
ATTACK: CONLINE’S SKIRMISH, 
APRIL 5, 1880 (I)
Lieutenant John Conline, with two scouts and 29 troopers of his
Co A, 9th Cavalry, was following a trail roughly westwards up
Hembrillo Canyon in the San Andres Mountains. Reaching a
narrowing of the canyon at about 4.30pm, he halted and sent
out videttes – (2 & 3) forward to reconnoitre for a possible
ambush, and (1)to the left and up-slope, to watch that flank and
the rear. At some point Conline formed a skirmish line (4), with
the horse-lines behind and below him (5). Atc.5.30pm Apaches
were spotted moving down the left slope, and then anything up
to 50 more coming fast down the canyon (6). The videttes
skirmished with the Apaches on the move as they fell back on
Conline’s main force (7, and inset). A warrior identified by the
scout José Carillo as Victorio was seen directing his men from
high on the northern slope (8). A few warriors took up position
on the northern slopes (9), above and to the right front of
Conline. Many more of them used the cover of an arroyo cutting
up the southern slope of the canyon, which was hidden from
the soldiers, to form a firing line (10–11). From positions above,
to the left of, and facing the troopers, the Apaches engaged
them in a fire-fight at a range of some 200 yards. 
F
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

1
2
3
6
8
7
7
11
7
10
9
4
5
N
S
W
E
^
200
300
1000
100
yards
400
500
0
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

heavily-laden horses in the process. (And even if Buell’s plan had worked,
the Apaches would simply have scattered once again.) From the Apache
viewpoint, they had stopped and fought off the immediate pursuit, allowing
them time to put enough distance between themselves and further pursuers
to escape into Mexico.
Carrizo Canyon, August 12, 1881
In this case the ad hoc delaying ambush evolved into an attack. Nana had
come up from Mexico in July 1881, and had commenced raiding far and
wide across southern New Mexico. From Fort Wingate, Capt Charles Parker
was leading 19 men from Company K, 9th Cavalry and a Mexican scout, as
one of a number of detachments of the 9th sent out from Forts Stanton,
Cummings, Bayard, Craig and Wingate in an attempt to find the Apaches.
On August 11, Parker received a report that Nana had attacked a party of
civilians 28 miles to his south and approximately 40 miles from Sabinal,
between the Sierra Lucero and the Rio Grande. He reached the spot where
the attack had taken place, and followed the Apaches’ trail eastwards
towards Sabinal. 
Despite being covered by a small advance group and flankers, the
detachment walked straight into an ambush by well-concealed warriors.
Parker later reported that the Apaches had killed the NCO commanding his
advance group and flankers with their opening volley. He withdrew some
yards and attempted to make a stand, but the Apaches, seeing the damage
they had inflicted, chose to press home their advantage and launched an
infiltrating attack towards and around his position. Despite losing two killed,
and three troopers and the Mexican guide seriously wounded, the detachment
held its nerve and shot it out, and the Apaches eventually withdrew. Once
again, the important fact for the Apaches was that Parker also lost ten horses
shot dead, and had to withdraw to Sabinal; in one sudden ambush Nana
had knocked out one of the 9th Cavalry detachments pursuing him. It would
be four days before another of these detachments caught up with him (see
page 21, for skirmish between Nana’s band and Lt Burnett).
THE ATTACK 
If Apaches launched a direct attack upon their opponents, it was usually in
the aftermath of a particularly successful ambush, when the targets were so
demoralized that the Apaches were confident enough to gamble on moving
in for the kill. Some Apaches would infiltrate directly towards the enemy,
making the maximum use of terrain and cover, while others worked their
way around the flanks. Once the use of repeating rifles became common,
such attacks could be accompanied by a high rate of fire on the move. This
was not usually particularly accurate, but was primarily intended to give an
exaggerated impression of the Apaches’ strength. These attacks were
launched in such a way that if the enemy rallied stubbornly, the Apaches
could fade back into cover and disperse with minimal loss – as in the example
of Nana’s ambush in Carrizo Canyon, cited above. 
Cerro Mata Ortiz, November 13, 1882
This was an action between Apaches directed by Juh, Geronimo and Nana,
and a small party of Chihuahua state troops led by Juan Mata Ortiz. In
November 1882 those Apaches living in the Sierra Madre Mts of Mexico
44
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

decided to attack the garrison of
the small town of Galeana. A later
account by Jason Betzinez, who
was present, estimated that at this
time those Apaches who had left
the San Carlos reservation between
1877 and 1882 numbered 75 “first
line warriors,” plus a large number
of youths and older men who
would also participate in hostilities
if necessary. (It is worth repeating
that most of the key leaders present
were in fact numbered among these
older men.)
Two warriors volunteered to
steal horses from the vicinity of
Galeana, with the aim of leading
any pursuers into an ambush (as noted, the Apaches were willing, where
appropriate, to employ such unsubtle Plains Indian-style decoy tactics).
Small groups of warriors were hidden in a ravine running alongside the road
out of Galeana towards the mountains, and further from the town a large
group blockaded the road, hidden by a dip in the terrain. The horses
were duly stolen and, as hoped, the thieves were pursued, by a detachment
of 22 mounted soldiers (such Mexican state troops, recruited for the short
term, were often well armed with Remington carbines and pistols, but
suffered from lack of numbers and rudimentary logistics). The decoys stayed
out of range, but close enough to draw the pursuers into the trap. The
warriors hidden in the roadside ravine let the Mexicans pass, and only opened
fire when the latter found themselves confronted by the blocking force. 
Fired upon from front and rear, their leader Mata Ortiz made for a nearby
low hill or cerro (which was later named after him), where his men
dismounted and hurriedly raised rock breastworks. The Apaches surrounded
the hill, and the older men and some of the better marksmen among them
settled in to keep the Mexicans pinned down by fire. All but eight of the
remaining warriors started crawling slowly up one side of the hill, while eight
younger men, who habitually worked as a team, circled to the opposite side
of the hill and did the same. Both groups pushed rocks slightly larger than
their heads in front of them to protect themselves from the Mexicans’ return
fire. Occasionally one of the crawling warriors would pause in his slow
progress to fire at the Mexicans. Eventually, the Apaches got to within yards
of the surrounded soldiers, whose firing began to dwindle. The Apaches
thought that the Mexicans might have run short of ammunition, but
suspected that they might receive a volley if they rose to charge. At this point
one of the Mexicans managed to mortally wound the cousin of one of the
Apaches leading the attack.
This provoked the final assault by the furious Apache leader. It seems that
the soldiers were indeed low on ammunition, since the warrior rush was not
met with a volley. The Apaches killed all but one of the 22 Mexicans,
including Mata Ortiz. One man managed to break out and make a run for
Galeana, and Geronimo shouted to let the fugitive go – he might bring out
more troops to be ambushed… The Apaches lost only two warriors killed in
this fight. Those who had followed Victorio until his death in October 1880
45
Cerro Mata Ortiz, named for the
Mexican officer killed with 20
of his Chihuahua state troops
when they were ambushed
and then surrounded on this
low hilltop near the town of
Galeana on November 13,
1882. (Author’s photo)
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

were particularly pleased with the killing of Juan Mata Ortiz, as he had
been second-in-command of the Mexican force that finally cornered Victorio
at Tres Castillos.
Conline’s skirmish, April 5, 1880 (see Plates F & G)
As already stated, it was very rare for Apaches to launch a direct attack upon
opponents unless they caught them unawares, and usually such an attack
would only be attempted if the odds were stacked in their favor. One example
was an action fought on April 5, 1880, when Lt John Conline of Company
A, 9th Cavalry, entered Hembrillo Canyon in the San Andres Mts; there
he was attacked by a superior force of Apaches, and was probably saved from
significant losses, or even disaster, only by the onset of nightfall.
Conline was attached to a battalion of four companies (A, D, F & G) of
the 9th Cavalry commanded by Capt Henry Carroll. This was part of a
three-battalion force tasked with trying to trap Victorio, who was then
believed to be based in the San Andres Mountains. On April 5, Capt Carroll
had ordered Conline, with 29 soldiers and two guides, to scout ahead towards
the eastern side of the San Andres. During that afternoon they encountered
a trail made by about 50 horses and
100 cattle that led into Hembrillo
Canyon. Conline followed these
tracks roughly westwards until about
4.30pm. The canyon was starting to
narrow, and, concerned about the
possibility of an ambush, Conline
halted and sent out six men to scout
further ahead. At about 5.30pm,
Conline spotted two Apaches moving
down the slope of the left (south)
side of the canyon – and then saw
between 35 and 50 more, moving
rapidly down the canyon towards
him. His advance videttes carried out
a fighting withdrawal until they
The view up Hembrillo Canyon
from the position of Lt
Conline’s original skirmish line
on April 5, 1880 – see Plate F.
Up to 50 Apaches attacked
down the canyon towards the
camera. Some moved up the
slopes on the left of the 9th
Cavalry detachment; others
infiltrated forwards under cover
of the deceptively rough
terrain, and a third party
worked around Conline’s right
flank along an arroyo, hidden
by the green vegetation
running from the center to the
right of the photograph.
(Author’s photo) 
ATTACK: CONLINE’S SKIRMISH, APRIL 5,
1880 (II)
The initial skirmish line of Conline’s detachment (1) was
particularly vulnerable on its right flank. While the troopers
engaged warriors to their front (2) and above them to the left
(3), the Apaches then launched an attack on their right flank
(4), working their way forwards over the rough ground on the
lower slopes of the canyon’s left (southern) side. Some of
Victorio’s warriors also got into another dry streambed (5–6),
which led them all the way around the flank to Conline’s right
rear (7). From here they opened fire on his horse-lines; at least
one Apache climbed the north side of the canyon to fire down
(8), and another got into position directly behind the original
skirmish line (9). It seems that some troopers from that line,
and some of those guarding the horses, then formed a second
skirmish line (10) to face this new threat. At about 7.30pm, the
determined horseshoe-shaped defense and failing light seem
to have persuaded the Apaches to withdraw up the canyon
rather than risk pressing the attack home. 
Inset: A warrior creeping up from the dry arroyo towards the
rear of Lt Conline’s right flank; the Apaches were renowned
for their skill at concealment in the most rudimentary cover. If
they had time to prepare for battle they often stripped to
breechclout and moccasins, but would retain items that
imparted “war medecine,” such as feathered war caps. This
Chiricahua, who has followed Victorio from the Warm Springs
reservation, also has a beaded “ration ticket” pouch fringed
with tin cones. He is armed with an 1873 Winchester carbine;
tucked under his cartridge belt is a skull-crushing “floppy-
head” warclub for close combat, and he would also certainly
be carrying a knife. Despite their fearsome reputation, the
Apaches were not generally renowned for marksmanship; on
April 5, Lt Conline’s company suffered only two men
wounded, one horse killed and a second wounded.
G
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

1
2
3
4
5
6
10
9
7
8
N
S
W
E
^
200
300
100
yards
400
500
0
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

reached his command. According to Conline, he blocked the Canyon with
a skirmish line, and managed to defeat an attempt to turn his flank. The
Apaches broke off the engagement at about 7.30pm, allowing the detachment
to withdraw with only two men slightly wounded. 
The report left by Conline is vivid in its detail; one of his guides,
José Carillo, knew Victorio personally, and identified the Apache leader as
directing this attack – which, according to Conline, was pressed home with
some vigor. This attack was probably born of an attempt to ambush Conline,
but the ambush was not sprung because the troopers did not go far enough
up the canyon. However, on seeing the size of the detachment and where they
had chosen to halt, Victorio must have judged that terrain and numbers were
in his favor, and moved down the canyon.
Actual examination of the site revealed that Conline’s account was not
quite as detailed as it might have been. Conline chose to halt in a less than
ideal position, where the Apaches were able to dominate his left flank from
above, and to infiltrate to close range through the rough ground immediately
to his front. What was worse – and absent from Conline’s report – was the
fact that they were able to use a dry streambed to turn Conline’s right flank,
as he did not extend his skirmish line across the whole canyon. Two things
probably saved Conline and his men. First, they did not panic, and formed
a horseshoe-shaped defense; this faced the Apaches with the prospect of
having to move in closer, at the cost of taking too many casualties themselves.
Secondly, the approach of nightfall probably convinced the Apaches that
the risks were too great and, being reluctant to fight at night, they used the
darkness to withdraw.
A direct attack such as that made on Conline was a rarity, but it does show
what Apaches were capable of doing if they had superior numbers, modern
weapons with plentiful ammunition, favorable terrain, and excellent leadership.
The lieutenant and his men were lucky that they had not encountered Victorio
earlier in the day. Their calm defense served them well; had they attempted to
48
The dry arroyo in Hembrillo
Canyon used by the Apaches to
outflank Conline’s troopers on
the right. The right-hand end
of his original skirmish line was
just off the left side of this
photograph – see Plate G.
(Author’s photo)
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

make a run for it they would have encouraged the Apaches
to press home their advantage, and would probably have
suffered considerably heavier losses. But neither was the
decision to stand fast without its risks: they were hemmed
in, and without water other than what remained in their
canteens. The calm defense dissuaded the Apaches from
moving any closer for fear of taking unacceptable casualties,
but Conline’s men were exposed to fire from warriors who
had infiltrated all round them and who occupied far better
protected positions. Had this been earlier in the day, the
Apaches would have had the time to sit secure and punish
the troopers from safety. Once the Apaches had turned the
right flank they were within arrow-range of Company A’s
horses; at the very least, Conline’s horse casualties would have
been far more dramatic had this Apache encirclement been
achieved earlier in the day.
Hembrillo Basin, April 6/7, 1880 (see Plate H)
The Apaches could also combine ambush, attack, and evasion techniques,
depending upon the way that events unfolded. Victorio’s mixed band of
Warm Springs Chiricahua and Mescalero warriors would demonstrate this
full range of Apache tactics in the two days following Lt Conline’s skirmish. 
Late on the evening of April 5, Conline rejoined Capt Carroll’s battalion.
The latter decided that simply to enter Hembrillo Canyon by the same route
was too predictable. He remained unsure as to the location of Victorio’s base,
but he had to act immediately, since the Apaches might have decided
to scatter as a precaution. The following day he sent Lt Patrick Cusack with
Companies A & G of the 9th Cavalry back in the direction taken by Conline
the previous day. Carroll himself, with the 71 men of Companies D & F,
entered the San Andres Mts to the north of Hembrillo Canyon; they followed
a roughly parallel canyon, that eventually led them into what is now known
as Hembrillo Basin – a wide area high in the San Andres, where Victorio was
in fact camped. 
49
View of the Hembrillo Basin
battlefield looking north from
Victorio Ridge, showing the
overnight position of Capt
Henry Carroll’s two companies
of the 9th Cavalry on April 6/7 –
see Plate H. The lower Apache
position on the right represents
the infiltrating attacks early on
the morning of April 7. Victorio
Ridge formed the main position
from which Victorio’s warriors
fought their rearguard action
during that day, when US Army
reinforcements arrived to
relieve Carroll. His command
had probably entered
Hembrillo Basin somewhere
on the center-left horizon.
(Author’s photo)
A cartridge case from a .45/70
Springfield rifle found on the
Hembrillo Basin battlefield. The
last time it was handled was by
one of Victorio’s warriors as he
closed in on Carroll’s troopers
early on the morning of April 7,
1880. (Author’s photo) 
Apache positions
Apache positions
Carroll’s position
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

4
2
3
1
2
2
6
5
7
8
Victorio’s camp
Carroll, April 6
Apache ambush
Rock House spring
Carroll, overnight
Apaches, overnight
Cusack, April 7
McLellan, April 7
Apaches fall back
Apache rearguards
Apaches disperse
N
S
W
E
^
Apache 
lookout
Apache Ridge
Geronimo Peak 
Victorio Ridge
Carroll’s Ridge
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

Carroll’s approach from the
north, by a less than obvious route,
seems to have taken the Apaches by
surprise. Nevertheless, they had time
to set up an ad hoc ambush designed
to stall his advance, and this worked
better than expected. Carroll’s
command found themselves trapped
overnight on a low ridge dominated
by higher ground, from which the
Apaches harassed them thoughout
the hours of darkness. The Apaches
also stationed men between the
soldiers and a small stream that ran
below their position, and during the
night a number of troopers were
wounded during attempts to reach
the water. 
In the early morning of April 7, the Apaches started to close in on Capt
Carroll’s men, and their calculation of the odds encouraged them to attempt
infiltrating attacks.
It was only the fortuitous and simultaneous arrival of both Capt
McLellan, with two companies of Apache scouts and a company of the 6th
Cavalry from another battalion, and of Lt Cusack with the balance of
Carroll’s battalion, which saved the day. Even so, the Apaches made a steady
fighting withdrawal, buying time for their dependants to escape from
Hembrillo Basin before they finally dispersed into the mountains. Captain
Carroll and seven of his men were seriously wounded (three of the latter later
died from their wounds), and it was reported that the Apaches also killed 25
horses and mules and captured four others.
COMBINED TACTICS: HEMBRILLO BASIN,
APRIL 6–7, 1880
(1) Late afternoon, April 6: Capt Carroll, with Cos D & F,
9th Cavalry, advances into Hembrillo Basin and towards
Victorio’s camp from the north. Lookouts alert the Apaches
in time for them to set a defensive V-shaped ambush from
positions on Carroll’s Ridge and Apache Ridge; these open fire,
blocking Carroll’s advance and his access to Rock House
Spring. Carroll drives the warriors off the eastern slopes of
Carroll’s Ridge, but then becomes trapped, and has to form
a defensive overnight position.
(2) Victorio’s warriors close in around Carroll’s command,
sniping, and preventing the troopers from fetching water from
Rock House Spring. At first light they launch infiltrating attacks,
to such close quarters that some troopers have to defend
themselves with their revolvers.
(3) At daybreak on April 7, Lt Cusack arrives with Cos A & G,
9th Cavalry, and relieves Carroll’s encircled command. 
(4) Almost simultaneously, Capt McLellan arrives by another
route, with a detachment of 6th Cavalry and two companies
of Apache scouts.
(5) Under attack by both Cusack and McLellan, the Apaches fall
back to Victorio’s Ridge, where they take up rearguard
positions.
(6) McLellan’s company of 6th Cavalry attacks the left half of
Victorio’s line, and the Apache scouts push ahead to hook
around behind the hostiles’ left flank. 
(7) Cusack’s companies of 9th Cavalry attack the right half of
the Apache rearguard line.
(8) After conducting a steady fighting withdrawal to give their
dependants time to escape from the camp area, during the
late afternoon of April 7 the Apaches break contact and
disperse. Some escape north of Geronimo Peak on horseback,
but most move southwards and eastwards into the mountains,
switching to the tactics of evasion. 
Inset: US Cavalry officer on detachment to lead Indian Scouts,
with his Apache corporal. Many officers adopted convenient
non-regulation dress when in the field; the Scouts – often
identified by red headcloths – favored a mixture of their own
dress and US Army issue, and were armed with the same
Springfield weapons as the soldiers. The contribution of these
scouts to the US Army’s campaigns was essential to success,
and a number of American officers who served with them
became skillful frontier fighters. 
H
Apache breastwork in
Hembrillo Basin, about 2 feet
high and offering good
protection for a kneeling
rifleman. The viewpoint is
roughly from west to east;
Carroll’s command was pinned
down off-camera to the left,
and the darker line at top right
marks Victorio Ridge, where the
warriors held off the US Army
reinforcements until their
dependants had escaped from
the camp site further south.
(Author’s photo)
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

In this action we see the combination of ambush, attack and evasion
techniques. Despite being taken by surprise the Apaches quickly organized an
ambush. When this worked better than expected, they surrounded Carroll’s
force and harassed them throughout the night, denying them access to water.
At first light they launched infiltrating attacks. When suddenly confronted
with a large number of reinforcements, the Apaches quickly fell back,
fought a rearguard action, and scattered. The speed with which the various
Apache groups surrounding Carroll evaluated a rapidly changing situation is
also noteworthy. 
Finally, it is worth adding that – like Conline the previous day – Carroll
was probably lucky that he was pinned down in the late afternoon rather
than earlier in the day. By the time the Apaches had positioned themselves
more securely around his exposed position, darkness was gathering. Their
night-time sniping was unnerving but quite inaccurate; the moon did not rise
until approximately 4.30am on April 7, and even then it was little more than
a thumbnail, giving little light. Had Carroll been trapped earlier in the day,
or had reinforcements not arrived early the following morning, his men and
horses would have become sitting targets for the better-positioned Apaches.
He would have been faced with the choice of either attempting a break-out,
storming one of the surrounding ridges, or digging in to hold out as best
he could – short of water, and outnumbered by the rifles of approximately
a hundred Apaches, most of them on higher ground. 
52
A faded but interesting photo
of a group of Apache scouts
with a white or mixed-blood
guide and an Army officer. The
white man, wearing a slouch
hat, has a Winchester carbine;
in front of him note one of the
Apaches wearing a US Army
M1872 dress helmet. The
Apaches carry M1873
Springfield infantry rifles, and
the officer – who has a
flamboyantly non-regulation
hat, and fringed leggings –
holds a Springfield carbine.
A decisive right hook around
Victorio’s line of resistance in
the Hembrillo Basin was made
by Apache scouts led by
Lts Gatewood and Cruse of the
6th Cavalry. (Courtesy Arizona
Historical Society, no. 19841) 
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

OTHER ASPECTS OF APACHE
WARFARE
The targeting of horses and mules
One of the most effective Apache tactics was their targeting of their enemies’
mounts and pack animals. As noted, horses were the primary target in the
opening seconds of an ambush. Moreover, the Apaches also killed and
crippled hundreds of US Army horses and pack mules by deliberately leading
the Cavalry over the roughest terrain imaginable for weeks or even months
at a time. The 9th Cavalry – just one of ten US Cavalry regiments – sustained
34.4 percent of the Army’s overall losses of horses (died, lost and stolen)
between July 1879 and June 1880. The Apache strategy of encouraging the
9th Cavalry to engage in long pursuits produced the situation that in May and
June 1880 the regiment had fewer serviceable than unserviceable horses. 
The numbers of Army mules died, lost and stolen during the financial
years July 1876–June 1881, and the numbers purchased to replace them, also
tell an eloquent story:
These figures make a good argument that Victorio’s Apaches were having an
appreciable effect upon the US Army’s overall supply of mules. The key year
is 1879–80, when the only major conflict with American Indians was that
with the Apaches in New Mexico. The large numbers of mules purchased
in that year may reflect a realization by the US Army that a doubling of the
inventory of pack mules was essential for the logistic support of troops
engaged in this campaign. Indeed, at the end of May 1880, the equine
casualties inflicted both directly and indirectly by the Apaches led General
of the Army William T. Sherman to inform Col Edward Hatch (commanding
the 9th Cavalry, and the District of New Mexico) that there was no more
money available for the purchase of fresh horses and mules until Congress
approved the Army’s next annual budget.
1876/77
1877/78
1878/79
1879/80
1880/81
Mules lost 
696
781
758
918
687
Bought
842
1,162
1,149
2,265
1,006
Mule-packers at work.
Mule-trains were essential for
keeping US Army detachments
supplied in the field during
their long pursuits of hostile
Apaches, and losses among the
Army’s mule herd could be a
significant drag on operations.
(Courtesy Arizona Historical
Society, no.19510)
53
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

Apache reactions to American technology
The Apaches quickly learned to appreciate the threat of the telegraph, and
reacted by destroying sections of the wires. This might have the two-fold
benefit of hampering US Army communications, while drawing Army
attention and personnel to a particular place. In January 1880, when Victorio
needed to distract attention from the rustled herd of livestock being driven
from the Mexican border to the Mescalero reservation (see above, “Victorio’s
evasion strategy”), Maj Morrow’s attention was attracted in the first place
by the destruction of a long section of telegraph line between Fort Cummings
and La Mesilla. When repair teams arrived on the scene they reported
the discovery of a large trail left by the Apaches, and Morrow set his forces
in motion.
Victorio may also have employed a more subtle variation in 1880, and it
was certainly known to the US Army in 1885–86. The telegraph wire would
be cut at the top of the pole or in any trees through which the line passed,
and the two ends would then be tied back in place with strips of rawhide.
This obliged the Army’s repair teams to take the time to check every pole and
tree until they discovered the break. 
Examination of the Hembrillo Basin battle site suggests that the Apaches
deployed different types of breech-loading rifles to maximize their advantages.
Winchester and Henry lever-action repeating rifles – with their high rate of
fire, but shorter effective ranges – were deployed closer to the US Cavalry
positions, while Apaches with Springfield and Remington single-shot rifles
were deployed to take advantage of their longer effective range. A number
of the ambushes discussed above also show that the Apaches appreciated the
value of catching their enemies in a crossfire from well-protected positions
surrounding the target; the riflemen would also be sited slightly above the
killing-ground, to avoid “friendly fire” from other Apache positions.
The Apaches were also aware of the psychological effect of breech-loading
weapons. At the end of April 1880, Victorio’s warriors struck the mining
and ranching communities along the southern edge of the Mogollon Mts of
New Mexico. It was reported that when the Apaches attacked some families
who had “forted up” on one ranch near present-day Alma:
The Indians were able to keep up a constant fire as fifteen warriors
would drive up and fire then drop back to reload their guns and
another fifteen would take their place thereby keep up [sic] a constant
fire as they were always moving in a circle. There were two-hundred
thirteen warriors counted.
In truth, this raiding party was probably made up of no more than 25 to
30 warriors, and the attack may have been carried out by as few as ten to
15 men. The Apaches would habitually use the terrain for “fire and
movement,” giving an exaggerated impression of their numbers. If the enemy
did not flee, then the attack would be abandoned, but it might be repeated
several times to test the morale of their opponents. What the Apaches were
trying to do was to get the besieged party to abandon the ranch so that it
could be ransacked in safety. When this failed, a rearguard was left to pin
down the defenders of the buildings while the rest of the Apaches moved on
to tackle fresh targets.
The deployment of artillery – particularly mountain howitzers, which
could easily be concealed in wagons, or broken down and transported by
54
OPPOSITE
The Sharps carbine, which was
manufactured and issued in
great numbers to the US
Cavalry during the Civil War,
was one of the earliest single-
shot breech-loading weapons
that became available to the
Apaches through trade and
raiding. It started its career as a
percussion-lock weapon taking
a paper cartridge and separate
percussion cap, but from 1863
it was converted to take a
metal cartridge with an integral
cap; this made reloading
quicker, and ammunition
simpler to store and carry.
While some longer Sharps rifles
were renowned for their range,
modern trials have shown that
this short-barreled carbine was
not accurate enough to hit a
man-sized target consistently
at more than 200 yards.
However, in actual combat
conditions that often sufficed,
and the soft lead bullet with
a caliber of up to .56in had
a devastating impact. It is
believed that Pvt John Teal,
who wounded Mangas
Coloradas at Apache Pass in
1862, was carrying a Sharps.
(Courtesy Earl Robinson, Lake
Forest California)
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

mule – would invariably prompt the Apaches to scatter. Their effect was thus
primarily psychological, since by the time these guns were brought into
action the Apaches would have had time to break off the engagement.
In December 1879, at Fort Marcy, New Mexico, a howitzer was test-fired at
a ridge 1,400 yards distant. It was found that with zero elevation the shell
range was 300 yards; with 5º and 3º elevation, the shell passed over the target
ridge; and the fourth and fifth shots, at 1º elevation, achieved impacts at
550–575 yards’ range, though the effectiveness of the shellburst depended
upon whether the ground was soft or hard – the best result was a 40-yard
radius of fragmentation. 
These results suggest that it would take some time to range a howitzer on
target, but that once the range was found – and terrain permitting – the
weapon had the potential to inflict significant casualties even among
concealed and dispersed Apache warriors.
In one skirmish between the 9th Cavalry and Apaches on January 12,
1880 a mountain howitzer was eventually brought into action, and the
Apaches withdrew. However, the only man killed in this skirmish was
the sergeant directing the deployment of the howitzer – which suggests
that the Apaches spotted the threat, tried to counter it, and then withdrew
before it could inflict casualties.
The most famous encounter between artillery and Apaches was at
the “Battle of Apache Pass” in the Chiricahua Mts on July 14, 1862.
Brigadier-General James H. Carleton’s volunteer California Column had been
organized to counter the Confederate invasion of New Mexico in 1862.
An advance party of 140 men of the 1st California Cavalry led by Col
55
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

Edward Eyre reached Apache Pass on June 25, and held a parley with
Cochise, whose followers had already killed three of Eyre’s stragglers. Eyre
informed Cochise that he was only passing through, that more troops were
camped at Tucson, and that his commander only desired peace with the
Apaches. Not realizing that Cochise was at war with the US Army since he
had been falsely accused and held in early 1861, Eyre warned the Chiricahua
chief that more US troops would be coming west through the pass. More
inexplicably, given that Eyre had been ordered to scout the area, he sent no
word back to Tucson concerning Apache hostility – even after the discovery
of the bodies of his three missing troopers, and after some night-time sniping
into Eyre’s camp.
The next US troops to enter Apache Pass, three weeks later, were an
advance detachment of 60 infantry, eight cavalrymen and two howitzers led
by Capt Thomas L. Roberts. He had left Tucson with 102 infantry,
24 troopers, the two howitzers, and 25–30 civilian teamsters. Roberts had
detached 13 men to guard a supply dump for following detachments of
Carleton’s force, and directed 25 soldiers and 20 teamsters to escort his
wagons and ration cattle while he moved ahead with the balance of his force
towards Apache Pass. 
The numbers of Central and Eastern Chiricahuas led by Cochise and
Mangas Coloradas are unclear, but they certainly heavily outnumbered
Roberts’ detachment, and had time to prepare their positions. The soldiers
were first ambushed at an abandoned stage station; they had started to relax
on arriving there when they were attacked from the rear, and were only able
to beat off the Apaches when they deployed the two howitzers. The troops
were still several hundred yards from the spring inside Apache Pass; on
advancing towards the water, they saw the surrounding ridges well fortified
with rock breastworks, from which the concealed Apaches opened a heavy
fire. A first attempt to capture the spring, supported by howitzer fire, was
driven back. Captain Roberts changed his tactics, and a group of his men led
by Sgt Albert Fountain stormed the highest of the ridges. This allowed the rest
of the soldiers to seize the spring, while the howitzers were moved to higher
ground and shelled the remaining Apache positions. This, combined with
the rifle fire of Fountain’s men,
finally obliged the remaining
warriors to withdraw. 
The strength of the resistance
prompted Roberts to send seven
of his cavalrymen back to warn
the detachment escorting his
wagons and stock. However,
this party were seen to be pursued
out of the mountains by a large
number of Apaches, so, assuming
the worst, Roberts decided
to return to his supply train
himself. There he found that his
seven troopers had evaded the
Apaches (including Pvt Teal who,
unhorsed, had saved himself by
wounding Mangas Coloradas).
In the meantime the Apaches
Looking eastwards up
Diamond Creek in the Black
Range/Mimbres Mts of New
Mexico. During April–May 1879
Victorio led a number of
pursuing US Army
detachments over difficult
terrain in order to exhaust their
horses. On May 29, these
Chiricahuas fought a rearguard
action against Capt Charles
Beyer’s 9th Cavalry detachment
after leading them up Diamond
Creek and over the Black Range
to a location that came to be
known as Beyer’s (or Byer’s)
Run. (Author’s photo)
56
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

had re-occupied their positions above
the spring in Apache Pass. The next
day, Roberts deployed his infantry
in a skirmish line across the canyon
backed by his cavalrymen, with the two
howitzers in the center, and in the event
he had little difficulty in driving the
warriors from their positions.
Captain Roberts estimated that his
men had killed nine Apaches, while
he had lost two men killed and two
wounded. Both sides agreed that it
was the deployment of the howitzers
that had been decisive; they had not
done much actual damage, but only
because the Apaches had chosen to
withdraw before they were ranged in
on their targets. 
Terror tactics
The Apaches had a fearsome reputation for the torturing of captives, and,
while certainly exaggerated by their foes, this was not without foundation.
One can find lurid tales in the local press, but these stories are, at best, usually
second-hand. However, when interviewed by anthropologists and historians
in the 1930s–50s the Apaches themselves sometimes acknowledged this
reputation. Daklugie, son of Juh, stated that “We had the Sioux beat [for
cruelty], especially the Nednhi and Chiricahua. The Warm Springs too. They
were brave warriors and real fighting men.” 2
We have noted the deliberate use of cruelty to manipulate white reactions,
at Jaralosa in 1879 (see “McEvers Ranch,” above). The widespread fear
created by such terror tactics could sometimes defeat an opponent before
hostilities even commenced; in this sense, inflicting death by torture upon
captives fitted in with the Apache principle of minimizing their own casualties. 
Dan L. Thrapp (see “Further Reading”) argues that the Apache wars with
the US can be divided into two phases. The first was the 1860s and early 1870s,
when the Apaches were trying to prevent US and Mexican encroachment
into their territory; this period ended with the creation of a number of Apache
reservations in the Southwest. The second period of warfare, from the
mid-1870s to 1886, featured a number of breakouts from these reservations
by Apache leaders such as Victorio, Nana, Juh and Geronimo. One suspects
that the use of torture was more common in the first period, when it can
logically be seen as part of an attempt to warn other potential victims to avoid
Apache territory. It seems to have been less prevalent during the second half
of the Apache wars, simply because the Apaches often had to move constantly
to evade their pursuers, and delaying their movements in order to torture
captives only increased their danger of being caught. However, some individual
incidents seem well attested, and the reputation for cruelty survived throughout
the Apache wars.
57
A muzzle-loading Hotchkiss
120mm mountain howitzer,
photographed at Fort Bowie.
This Napoleonic-looking little
cannon, essentially unchanged
since the French original
appeared in 1827, was light
enough to be disassembled
and carried into rough terrain
in pack-mule loads. Two of
these were the decisive factor
in the Battle of Apache Pass in
July 1862. (Author’s photo) 
2 Juh (pronounced “Whoo”) was a leader of the Southern Chiricahua or Nednhi. A
successful war leader and contemporary of Victorio and Nana, he had a particular
reputation for cruelty.
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

Victorio, in particular, has been
left with a popular reputation
for
extreme cruelty that is not
generally supported by the primary
records (notwithstanding the Jaralosa
incident). However, these records
do suggest a reason why Victorio’s
enemies may have labeled him in this
way. Whether or not the Apaches
used torture, they very rarely took
adult males prisoner. Such captives
could not be adopted into Apache
society, and so were killed if taken
alive – and if the Apaches feared
detection, they would also kill any
women and children who fell into
their hands. The warriors fighting
under the direction of Victorio and his successor Nana did not draw any
European distinctions between combatants and non-combatants, and inflicted
very heavy casualties amongst miners, prospectors, sheepherders and ranch
hands on both sides of the border between 1879 and 1881. (Indeed, since
many of these men would routinely have been armed, the distinction between
“combatants” and “non-combatants” was fairly meaningless.) 
The treatment suffered at Apache hands depended upon circumstance.
James Kaywaykla of the Warm Springs Apaches described an occasion when
four Mexicans, including a woman and child, had been killed. Despite his
obvious horror when recalling the event many years later, Kaywaykla also
pointed out that the Apaches were being closely pursued by US troops, and
that any live witnesses could jeopardize their own safety. When Apaches were
not feeling threatened they usually would not harm women and children.
Kaywaykla recalled an incident when a party led by Nana caught two
adolescent boys in New Mexico. Nana ordered his second-in-command,
Kaytennae, to get rid of the two captives, as they might alert the authorities
to the location of the raiders. However, Kaytennae, as the leader of the
rearguard party, chose to release them – a decision that Nana accepted without
comment. In this case the Apaches were on the move, and by the time any
alarm was raised they would have been far away. 
There was even an incident when Nana and his warriors took adult males
prisoner and then released them. This occurred at Monica Springs on
August 2/3, 1881 when, despite being pursued by a detachment of the
9th Cavalry and Apache scouts, the captives were held while their ranches
were ransacked and then released. The reason for this was that most of the
men involved were ex-reservation employees with whom Nana had been
acquainted in the early 1870s, and with whom – since they survived the
experience – he must have enjoyed good relations. Apache warriors, while
ruthless, usually had a clear sense of honor.
The fear of hostile Apaches had a far wider effect upon economic activity
than was warranted by the losses they actually inflicted. Although Apache
raids by small numbers of warriors caused relatively heavy local casualties,
these were a fraction of the local population. Yet those who survived would
understandably “fort up,” and most economic activity by miners, freighters
and traders would cease while the threat was perceived to be high. 
58
One of the Apache positions in
Apache Pass, seen from the
viewpoint of the attacking
California Volunteers; this is
probably Overlook Ridge,
successfully stormed by Sgt
Fountain’s men. The defensive
positions on different features
combined to form a horseshoe-
shaped line around the spring,
which is further up the canyon
to the right of this picture.
(Author’s photo) 
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

THE FAILURE OF APACHE RESISTANCE
The three key weaknesses of the Apache guerrillas were the willingness of
other Apaches to serve in the US Army as scouts; the difficulty of maintaining
a secure supply of rifles and ammunition; and simple lack of numbers –
despite the well-documented ability of small war parties to achieve effects
out of all proportion to their strength. 
Beginning with Gen Crook in 1871–72, US commanders were able to
exploit inter-tribal rivalries to enlist hundreds of Apache scouts, whose
deployment was usually decisive – particularly their tracking skills. Victorio’s
only major defeat in US territory was inflicted by 62 Apache scouts led by
Capt Henry K. Parker, on May 23/24, 1880, at an unknown location in the
Black Range somewhere between present-day Winston and Kingston. During
the night the Apache scouts surrounded the camp on three sides, and at
daybreak they opened fire. Victorio had stationed a single sentry above his
camp, and this man was picked off by one of the Apache scouts while the
rest of this group volleyed into the camp. Victorio’s followers, completely
surprised, attempted to flee; blocked by a second group of scouts, they then
tried to escape in another direction, only to be blocked once more by Parker’s
third group. Finding all avenues of escape cut off, the survivors took refuge
among boulders, and a long stalemate ensued. Victorio was wounded in the
leg during the attack, and he and his surviving followers were only able to
escape when the Apache scouts – almost out of ammunition – had to
withdraw, since expected US Army reinforcements failed to materialize.
Victorio was reported to have lost 55 of his followers on this occasion,
although many of these were women and children. 
When Nana launched his famous raid into New Mexico in July and
August 1881 he and his men fought a number of skirmishes with US troops.
When faced by Army detachments accompanied by Apache scouts the
A group identified as
“Crawford’s Scouts,” so
presumably from the battalion
of about 100 White Mountain
and Chiricahua Apaches of
Indian Scout Cos A, B & C that
were led into Mexico in January
1886 by Capt Emmet Crawford,
in pursuit of Geronimo.
Crawford and his chief scout
Tom Horn were among seven
men wounded – Crawford
mortally – when they were fired
upon in error by Mexican state
troops. Note the blue US Army
“sack coats” worn by nearly all
these men, some with NCO
chevrons, and their long
Springfield M1873 infantry
rifles. (Courtesy Arizona
Historical Society, no. 63674) 
59
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

hostiles would immediately try to
break contact with their pursuers.
On
three
occasions during this
expedition Nana’s raiders stood their
ground and defeated detachments
from the 9th Cavalry; none of these
three patrols was accompanied by
Apache scouts.
General Crook’s 1883 Sierra
Madre expedition, which persuaded
the Apaches to surrender, was only
successful because of his predominant
use of Apache scouts; the only US
troops present were a single company
of cavalrymen who acted as escort
to the expedition’s mule-train. It was
the pressure and persuasion applied
by Apache scouts, not the deployment
of thousands of US troops, which
persuaded Chihuahua, Nana, Ulzana,
Naiche and Geronimo to surrender
in 1886.
* * *
The adoption of modern weapons
did allow the evolution of Apache
guerrilla tactics into a more aggressive
form than the hit-and-run warfare
characteristic of the 1860s, but these
more aggressive tactics could only
be sustained if there were plentiful
and secure sources of rifles and
ammunition. Such security of supply
was rarely, if ever, established, and
was a constant source of concern for
Apache leaders. The ammunition that
could be picked up by raiding was
never enough to keep them adequately
supplied. They had to engage with
illegal traders on both sides of the border in order to replenish their stocks
of weapons and cartridges, and – despite their own formidable reputation –
the Apaches had to remain vigilant for treachery during such trading sessions.
There were a number of occasions when, having concluded their trade
in Mexican towns, warriors were persuaded to get drunk with their hosts,
and were then killed for the scalp bounty.
A major contributing factor to Victorio’s death at Tres Castillos in
northern Chihuahua on October 14/15, 1880 was his band’s shortage of
ammunition due to US Army initiatives. In the immediate aftermath of the
Hembrillo Basin battle the Mescalero Apache reservation was placed under
close guard by the Army. The attempt to disarm and dismount the Mescaleros
was botched, but the effective closing of the reservation shut down Victorio’s
surest source of ammunition. When he tried to bypass troops in New Mexico
60
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

by traveling through West Texas in an attempt to reach the Mescalero
reservation, he was outmaneuvered by detachments from the 10th Cavalry
(then commanded, along with the District of the Pecos, by the famous
Civil War hero Col Benjamin H. Grierson). Starved of ammunition, and
pursued by Chihuahua state troops led by Col Joaquin Terrazas, assisted by
troops from New Mexico led by Col George P. Buell, Victorio had to disperse
many of his warriors in search of fresh ammunition. These men were absent
when Terrazas trapped Victorio and his remaining followers at Tres Castillos. 
* * *
It must be remembered that although Victorio, Nana, Juh, Ulzana,
Chihuahua and other Apache leaders sometimes achieved a temporary
tactical superiority, they generally had the numbers stacked against them.
They very rarely directed more than 150 men against a far more numerous
array of forces. In Victorio’s case, the Army effort was spearheaded by the
9th Cavalry supported by the 15th Infantry, but by the time he was killed
he had also faced strong detachments from the 4th, 6th and 10th Cavalry,
with support from the 13th and 16th Infantry regiments. This opposition was
intermittently enhanced by civilian volunteers recruited to protect settlements
in New Mexico, by Mexican state troops from Chihuahua and Sonora,
and – from late 1879 – by occasional Mexican Federal Army operations,
such as those led by Gen Geronimo Trevino. In the final pursuit of Geronimo
in 1885–86 almost a quarter of the US Army – about 5,000 men – were
deployed in the search for fewer than 50 warriors. 
Finally, while we have seen that the Apaches were superbly adept
guerrillas, they were not perfect. Occasionally they could be caught off their
guard, and, given their small numbers, these occasions could have decisive
consequences. (In a reversal of a modern comment on counter-terrorist
warfare, we might say that the Apaches had to be lucky every time, while
the US Army only had to get lucky once or twice.) In his defeat by Apache
61
The famous photo taken by C.S.
Fly of Tombstone at Canyon de
los Embudos in Mexico in
March 1886, during Gen
Crook’s negotiations with the
hostile Apaches. Geronimo is
mounted on the left, Naiche
on the right. (Courtesy Arizona
Historical Society, no. 7816)
OPPOSITE
A scout named Esh-kin-tsay-
gizah, in a mixture of traditional
and Euro-American dress and
carrying a Springfield rifle. The
willingness of Apaches to assist
the US Army may seem
puzzling to some, but it was
nothing extraordinary. In many
19th and early 20th-century
colonial wars, the eventual
success of white armies
depended upon their
successful employment of
native irregulars. With our
modern sensibilities colored
by simplistic images of
“patriots” and “collaborators,”
we often fail to understand the
nature of tribal, pre-national
societies. In such communities,
often faced by a daily struggle
to survive in a marginal natural
environment, the meaningful
sense of identity was more or
less local, and the course of
action chosen was governed
by calculation of the immediate
interests of each particular
group. (Courtesy Arizona
Historical Society, no. 25647)
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

scouts in May 1880, Victorio had camped on a site that turned into a
death-trap. He had correctly assumed that he had shaken off the 9th Cavalry,
but apparently he had not factored the Apache trackers into the equation,
and he suffered the grievous consequences.
One of the most serious defeats inflicted upon Apaches was a consequence
of the failure of the advance guard in their standard “marching formation”
(as outlined in Plate A). On or about April 18, 1882, some 60 Apaches from
the Sierra Madre Mts appeared on the San Carlos reservation, and forced
a large number of Warm Springs Apaches under Loco to return with them
to Mexico. During their flight they suffered a few losses when an element
of the 4th Cavalry caught up with them in Doubtful Canyon on April 23. By
April 27 the fugitive Apaches were in Mexico, and, assuming that US troops
would not follow them over the border, they halted for a victory celebration
on the edge of the Sierra Enmedio. They were unaware that two Apache scout
companies backed up by two companies of the 6th Cavalry were closing in on
them. The Apache scouts tried to surround the camp, but were discovered
prematurely; while suffering some casualties in a fierce fire-fight, the hostiles
held off the scouts and troopers and escaped at sundown. 
It was as they were fleeing further south on the following day, with one
eye over their shoulders for pursuing US troops, that they ran into a force
of Mexican soldiers. Apparently the Apache advance guard had passed
the Mexican ambush before they spotted it, and then inexplicably failed to
alert the main group, comprising mainly women and children. The Mexicans
attacked this party, doing fearful execution among the Apache families before
the rearguard of warriors arrived. These Apaches held the Mexicans off in a
particularly savage battle, but the damage had been done. Shapard estimates
that about 400 Apache men, women and children had left San Carlos. By the
time the Apaches reached the Sierra Madre over 100 had been killed, and
a further 33 women and children had been captured by the Mexicans.
Had the Apache advance guard done its job properly, this disaster might have
been avoided.
FURTHER READING
There is a large amount of literature on the Apache Wars, but some of the more
easily accessible and available material is listed below. The archaeological
works by Laumbach et al (2001 & 2005) are detailed investigations of
two key actions in 1880.
Ball, E., In the Days of Victorio: Recollections of a Warm Springs Apache
(University of Arizona Press; Tucson, 1970)
Ball, E., Indeh: An Apache Odyssey (University of Oklahoma Press; Norman,
1980)
Betzinez, J., I Fought with Geronimo (Stackpole, Mechanicsville, 1959; r/p
University of Nebraska Press, London, 1987) 
Cozzens, P., Eyewitnesses to the Indian Wars 1865–1890, Vol I: The Struggle
for Apacheria (Stackpole; Mechanicsville, 2001)
Cozzens, P., Eyewitnesses to the Indian Wars 1865–1890, Vol V: The Army
and the Indian (Stackpole; Mechanicsville, 2005)
Cruse, T., Apache Days and After (Caxton Printers Ltd, London, 1941; r/p
University of Nebraska Press, London, 1987)
62
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

Goodwin, G., Western Apache Raiding and
Warfare (University of Arizona Press;
Tucson, 1998)
Haley, J.L., Apaches: A History and Culture
Portrait (University of Oklahoma Press,
Norman, 1981)
Hook, J., The Apaches (Men-at-Arms 186;
Osprey, London, 1987)
Laumbach, K.W., Hembrillo, An Apache
Battlefield of the Victorio War: The
Archaeology and History of the Hembrillo
Battlefield (Prepared for the White Sands
Missile Range, New Mexico by Human
Systems Research Inc; 2001)
Laumbach, K.W., D.D. Scott & J. Wakeman,
Conline’s Skirmish: An Episode of the
Victorio 
War. 
Archaeological 
and
Historical Documentation of an 1880s
Skirmish Site on White Sands Missile
Range (Prepared for The Directorate of
Public Works, White Sands Missile Range,
New 
Mexico, 
by 
Human 
Systems
Research Inc; 2005)
Opler, M.E., An Apache Life-Way: The
Economic, Social, & Religious Institutions
of the Chiricahua Indians (University of
Chicago Press, 1941; r/p University of
Nebraska Press, Lincoln, 1996) 
Roberts, D., Once They Moved Like The
Wind: Cochise, Geronimo and the Apache Wars (Pimlico; London, 1998)
Robinson, S., Apache Voices: Their Stories of Survival as Told to Eve Ball
(University of New Mexico Press; Albuquerque, 2000)
Shapard, B., Chief Loco: Apache Peacemaker (University of Oklahoma Press;
Norman, 2010)
Sweeney, E.R., Cochise: Chiricahua Apache Chief (University of Oklahoma
Press; Norman, 1991)
Sweeney, E.R., From Cochise to Geronimo: The Chiricahua Apaches
1874–1886 (University of Oklahoma Press; Norman, 2010)
Sweeney, E.R., Mangas Coloradas: Chief of the Chiricahua Apaches
(University of Oklahoma Press; Norman, 1998)
Thrapp, D.L., The Conquest of Apacheria (University of Oklahoma Press;
London, 1967)
Thrapp, D.L., Victorio and the Mimbres Apaches (University of Oklahoma
Press; London, 1974)
Worcester, D.E., The Apaches: Eagles of the Southwest (University of
Oklahoma Press; Norman, 1979)
63
An archetypal image of an
Apache scout, wearing almost
completely Euro-American
clothing and holding a
Winchester. (Courtesy Arizona
Historical Society, no. 35)
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

64
References to illustrations are shown in bold.
Plates are shown with page locators in brackets.
Albert, Casper  39, 39
ambushes: aims  23; avoidance  32; division 
of attackers by task  24; escape routes  35; firing
positions  18, B(19), 23, 24, 26, 27, D(30), 31,
33, E(34), 35, 35, 39, 40, 42, F(43), H(50), 51,
54; first targets  23, 24; importance of fire-
discipline  28, 29, 36–7; laying of  18, B(19),
E(34), 35, H(50), 51; leading enemy into  18,
B(19), 20, 45; monitoring enemy’s routine 24,
26, 27; siting of  23, 36, 38–9, 40, 41;
techniques used  49, 52: ad hoc 24, 38–43, 44,
51, 52; decoy  24, 29, 31–3, 34–7, D(35); killing
24, 28–9, D(30), 31, 33; planned  24–8; use of
terrain for concealment  24, 26, 28, 29, 33,
35-6, 35, 37, 38–9, 38, 40, 41, 42, F(43), 45,
46, H(50), 51, 52, 54
animals (venomous), threat from  14, 15
Arizona, fighting in  8, 9, 12, 29, 31–2, 32, E(34),
35, 39–40, 54, 55–6, 57, 57, 58
attacks: influence of time of day  48, 49, 52;
launching of  44, 45; rarity of  46; tactics used
42, F(43), 46, G(47), 49, 51, 52; use of terrain
44, 48, 52
Battle of Apache Pass (1862)  9, 39–40, 54, 55–6,
57, 57, 58
Beyer, Capt Charles  56
Bourke, Capt John  12
boys, training of as warriors  15, 16
Buell, Col George P.  41, 42–3, 61
Burnett, Lt G.R.  20, 21, 44
camps/campsites  20, 49: attacks on  8, 26, 27, 59;
escape from  26, 51; siting of  12, 13
captives/prisoners, treatment of  8, 40, 57, 58
Carillo, José  42, F(43), 48
Carleton, Brig-Gen James H.  9, 55, 56
Carroll, Capt Henry  49, H(50), 51, 51
cattle/livestock, stealing of  16, 17, 18, B(19), 20,
21, 23, 33, 54   
Central Chiricahua Apaches  9, 40
Chihuahua (leader)  8, 12, 15, 60, 61
Chiricahua Apaches  7, 12, 17: actions involving  8,
12, 16, D(30), 31, 46, G(47), 56, 56, 57;
casualties  9; deportation to Florida  13;
leave reservations  12, 14; as scouts  59;
surrender of  12
Chokomen Chiricahua Apaches  E(34), 35
clothing  5, 6, 13, 46, G(47), H(50), 51, 52, 59, 63
Cochise (leader)  8, 9, 11, 31, 36, 39–40, 56
combined tactics, use of  H(50), 51
Conline, Lt John  41, 42, F(43), 46, 46, G(47),
48–9, 48, 52
Crawford, Capt Emmet  59
Crook, Gen George  9, 11, 12, 13, 33, 35, 59,
60, 61
cruelty/torture, use of  33, 40, 57–8
Cruse, Lt Thomas  40, 42, 52
Cusack, Lt Patrick  49, H(50), 51
Daly, Thomas  39; Devlin, Chas  39
decoys/decoy tactics, use of  20, 24, 36, 45: camps
12; herds  37; gunfire  33, 35–6; tracks/trails  29,
31–2, 33, E(34), 35, 36; traveling formation  20
delaying tactics, use of  20, 21
disguise, use of for deception  20
Eastern Chiricahua Apaches  9, 13
evasion, use of  18, 20–1, 49, H(50), 51, 52 
fighting withdrawal, use of  H(50), 51
forts (US Army): Apache  9, 12, 23; Bayard  23, 32,
44; Bliss  13; Bowie  9, 11, 29; Craig  C(22), 23,
44; Cummings  13, 39, 39, 41, 42, 44, 54;
Macy 55; Phil Kearny  29; Stanton  23, 44;
Wingate  23, 44
Fountain, Sgt Albert  56, 58
Gatewood, Lt Charles  23, 26, 36, 52
Geronimo (leader)  6, 8, 12, 13, 44, 45, 57, 59, 60,
61, 61
ghosts/evil spirits, fear of  14
Grijalva, Merejildo  31, 32, E(34), 35
haciendas, attacks on  16–17, 18, 29
headwear  5, 46, G(47), H(50), 51, 52
horses: exhaustion of  29, 56; killing of  15, 24, 31,
32, E(34), 35, 37, 44, 46, G(47), 49, 51, 52, 53;
regard for  25; stealing of  16, 17, 21, 24, 25, 27,
28, 32, 33, 41, 45
Hunter, L.S.  39
infiltrating attacks, use of  44, H(50), 51, 52
Juh (leader)  12, 15, 23, 31, 36, 44, 57, 61
Kaytennae  15, 58; Kaywaykla, James  28, 58
landmarks, use of in travel  13
leaders/leadership  16: age of  15; by merit  13, 15;
and kinship allegiance  15–16; reward for
following  28
Loco (leader)  11, 12, 62
lookouts, use of  13, 35
Mangas Coloradas (leader)  5, 8, 9, 12, 13, 54, 56
“marching formation”  A(10), 11, 62
Mata Ortiz, Juan  44, 45, 46
McLellan, Capt  H(50), 51
Mescalero Apaches  A(10), 11, 21, 23, 49, 60
Mexico  4–5, 11: Apaches in  25, 39, 44, 62;
federal/state troops  6, 9, 11, 12, 33, 44, 45,
45, 46, 59, 61, 62; fighting in  4–6, 9, 11, 12–13,
14, 16–18, 18, 20, 21, 23, 25, 27–9, D(30), 31,
33, 36, 40, 44–5, 45, 46, 58, 59, 60, 61, 61, 62
Mimbreno Apaches  5, 56
miners/mining centers, attacks on  5, 6, 8, 9, 12, 32,
33, 36, 39, 54, 58 
Morrow, Maj Albert P. 14, 21, 23, 26, 37, 54
“mounted infantry” tactics, use of  25
mules/mule-trains  27, 53, 60: guarding of  26;
importance of  9, 28, 42, 53, 57; killing of  28,
51, 53; stealing of  24, 28, 53
Naiche (leader)  8, 12, 13, 60, 61
Nana (leader)  8, 11–12, 15, 20, 21, 40, 44, 57, 58,
59–60, 61  
New Mexico  8, 13, 14: fighting in  9, 11–12, 11,
14, 15, 20, 21, 21, 26, 32–3, 33, 35–6, 37, 37,
38–9, 38, 39, 40–3, 41, 42, F(43), 44, 46, 46,
G(47), 48–9, 48  49, H(50), 51–2, 51, 52, 54,
56, 57, 59–60, 62
night-fighting  14, 48, 51, 52
Parker, Capt Leopold  41, 42
Plains Indians  25, 28, 29, 45
pursuits, problems associated with  21, 23, 29
raiding/raids: defense against  18, 18;
definition/purposes of  14, 16, 17, 20, 21, 27;
importance to Apache culture  17; strength of
54; tactics used  17, 18, B(19), 54
ranches, raids on  12, 17, 18, 18, 20, 27, 29, 54, 58
rearguard actions  18, 20, 21, 23, 37, 49, H(50),
51, 52, 54, 56, 62
Reese, William  39, 39
rendezvous points, use of  18, 20
reservations/camps: closure of  11, 14; creation of 9,
57; departures from  12, 45, 57; Ojo Caliente  9,
11, 21, 24, 33; Old Fort Tularosa  9, C(22), 23;
San Carlos  9, 11, 12, 13, 45, 62
Roberts, Capt Thomas L.  56, 57
Ronan, Thomas  39; Rucker, Capt  37, 38
Russell, Capt Gerald  31, 32, 32, E(34), 35
scouts/guides  52: Apache  6, 11, 12, 13, 26, 32, 33,
36, 38, 40, 41, 42, H(50), 51, 52, 58, 59–60, 60,
61–2, 63; Indian Scouts  4, 6, 9, 26, 35, H(50),
51, 59; Mexican  27, 31, 32, E(34), 35, 42,
F(43), 44, 46, 48; mixed-blood  35; native
irregulars  60; Navajo  32, 37; use of  6, 11, 12,
13, 18, 26, 27, 31, 33, E(34), 35, 38, 41, 46, 48,
H(50), 51, 52, 59–60, 61–2
settlements/settlers, attacks on  6, 8, 16–18, 33
signaling (devices), use of  18
skirmish lines, formation/positioning/use of  27, 42,
F(43), 46, G(47), 48, 57 
skirmishes  37: as illusion of victory within grasp
23; reasons for fighting  23
snipers/sniping, use of  26, 51, 52
Teal, Pvt John  54, 56
telegraph lines/wires, destruction of  54
terrain, use of for concealment  13, 15, 18, B(19),
21, C(22), 23, 24, 26, 27, 29, D(30), 31, 33, 38,
44, 46, 48: arroyos 11, 24, 38–9, 38, 40, 42,
F(43), 46, 46, G(47), 48; breastworks (rock)  13,
26, 33, 42, 45, 51, 56; canyons  42, F(43), 46,
48; cerros 45; gulleys  38, 39; higher ground
21, 31, 48, 52; outcrops  26; ridges/hills  20, 33;
rocks  45; stream-beds  48
Ulzana (leader)  8, 12, 15, 39, 39, 60, 61
US Army: Cavalry regiments: 1st California 
55–6; 3rd  31–2, 32, E(34), 35; 4th  27–8, 41–3,
61, 62; 6th  15, 23, 26, 40, 42, H(50), 51, 52,
61, 62; 8th  39; 9th  5, 20, 21, 21, 23, 24–5, 26,
32–3, 37, 37, 38, 42, F(43), 44, 46, 46, G(47),
48–9, 49, H(50), 51–2, 53, 55, 56, 58, 60, 61,
62; 10th  11, 25, 61; 15th  23
US Army: Infantry regiments: 1st Veteran
(California Volunteers)  9, 39, 58; 13th  61; 15th
41, 61; 16th  61; 21st  61
Victorio (leader)  8, 11, 15, 53, 60–1: attacks
involving  11, 11, 23, 24–5, 28–9, D(30), 31, 33,
33, 35–6, 36, 38, 42, F(43), G(47), 48, 49, 49,
H(50), 51, 51, 52, 54; breakout from reservation
57; death of  11, 15, 23, 45–6, 60, 61; defeat by
Apache scouts  11, 38, 59, 62; pursuit of  14,
20–1, 25, 37, 46, 61, 62; reputation for cruelty
58; tactics used  11, 11, 13, 20, 21, 23, 28–9,
D(30), 31; understanding of opponents  28
warfare: Apache definition of  14, 16, 17;
importance of to Apache culture  14; principles
of  15; reasons for  16, 17; role of in Apache
society  14; scale of  8
Warm Springs Apaches  12, 13, 28, 49, 51–2, 57,
58, 62
weaponry  24, 48, 60: bows and arrows  4, 18,
B(19), 39, 41; carbines  17, 32, 45, 46, G(47),
52, 55; “floppy-head” warclub  46, G(47);
Gatling gun  42; knives  36, 46; mountain
howitzers  9, 42, 54–5, 56, 57, 57; muskets  4;
pistols/revolvers  5, 24, 36, 45; rifles  4, 5, 6, 17,
21, 24, 29, 32, 36, 40, 44, 49, H(50), 51, 52, 54,
59, 59, 60, 60, 63
Western Apaches  7, 9, 11, 12, 13
White Mountain Apaches  18, B(19), 59
Whitney, Robert H.  31, E(34), 35
Williams, Sgt  20, 21
women and children  17, 40: killing of  26, 33, 58,
62; protection of  A(10), 11, 12, 20; role in
decoy ambushes  36, 37
INDEX
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

Related Titles
PDF ISBN
SERIES
No.
TITLE
9781849085960
Elite
99
Italian Army Elite Units and Special Forces 1940–43
9781846038778
Elite
100
World War II Axis Booby Traps and Sabotage Tactics
9781849086318
Elite
119
Apache Tactics 1830-86
9781846037603
Elite
163
SOF Afghan
9781846038198
Elite
166
The Bay of Pigs
9781846037887
Elite
169
World War II Japanese Tank Tactics
9781846038136
Elite
170
SOF Iraq
9781849081160
Elite
175
World War II US Cavalry Units: Pacific Theater
9781849081207
Elite
176
WWII US Armored Infantry Tactics
9781849082716
Elite
180
US Coast Guard in World War II
9781849083003
Elite
182
Prussian Napoleonic Tactics
Visit the Osprey website
• Information about forthcoming books
• Author information
• Read extracts and see sample pages
• Sign up for our free newsletters
• Competitions and prizes
www.ospreypublishing.com
To order any of these titles, or for more information on Osprey Publishing, contact:
North America E-mail: uscustomerservice@ospreypublishing.com
UK & Rest of World E-mail: customerservice@ospreypublishing.com
www.ospreypublishing.com
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

First published in Great Britain in 2012 by Osprey Publishing,
Midland House, West Way, Botley, Oxford, OX2 0PH, UK
44-02 23rd Street, Suite 219, Long Island City, NY 11101, USA
E-mail: info@ospreypublishing.com
OSPREY PUBLISHING IS PART OF THE OSPREY GROUP
© 2012 Osprey Publishing Ltd.
All rights reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of private
study, research, criticism or review, as permitted under the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act, 1988, no part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic, electrical, chemical, mechanical, optical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior written permission
of the copyright owner. Inquiries should be addressed to the Publishers.
A CIP catalog record for this book is available from the British Library
Print ISBN: 978 1 84908 630 1
PDF ebook ISBN: 978 1 84908 631 8
ePub ebook ISBN: 978 1 78096 031 9
Editor: Martin Windrow
Page layout by Ken Vail Graphic Design, Cambridge, UK (kvgd.com)
Index by Fineline Editorial Services
Typeset in Sabon and Myriad Pro
Originated by Blenheim Colour Ltd, Oxford
Printed in China through Worldprint Ltd
12 13 14 15 16 17 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Osprey Publishing is supporting the Woodland Trust, the UK’s leading
woodland conservation charity, by funding the dedication of trees.
www.ospreypublishing.com
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author would like to thank the following for their help and
encouragement: Catherine Edwards, Willy Dobak, Dan Aranda, Emilio Tapia,
Berndt Kuhn, Ed Sweeney, Bill Cavaliere, Eric and Kathy Fuller, Spike
Flanders, Frank Brito, Mary Williams, Karl Laumbach, Chris Adams, Ron
Burkett, James Irby, Allan Redbourne, Robert Wooster, Durwood Ball, Diana
Hadley and Martin Windrow.
ARTIST’S NOTE
Readers may care to note that the original paintings from which the color
plates in this book were prepared are available for private sale. All
reproduction copyright whatsoever is retained by the Publishers. All
enquiries should be addressed to:
Scorpio Gallery, PO Box 475, Hailsham, East Sussex BN27 2SL, UK
The Publishers regret that they can enter into no correspondence upon this
matter.
© Osprey Publishing. Access to this book is not digitally restricted. In return, we
ask you that you use it for personal, non-commercial purposes only. Please
don’t upload this pdf to a peer-to-peer site, email it to everyone you know, or
resell it. Osprey Publishing reserves all rights to its digital content and no part of
these products may be copied, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any
form by any means, electronic, mechanical, recording or otherwise (except as
permitted here), without the written permission of the publisher. Please support
our continuing book publishing programme by using this pdf responsibly.
Front cover: Geronimo (left) and Naiche (right) on horseback,
photographed during their negotiations with General Crook at Canyon de
los Embudos in March 1886. (Photo C.S. Fly; courtesy Arizona Historical
Society, no. 78163)
Title page: A faded but interesting photo of a US Army officer with a group
of Apache scouts. One of the latter wears a US Army M1872 dress helmet,
and the officer has adopted a non-regulation hat and fringed leggings.
(Courtesy Arizona Historical Society, no. 19841)
© Osprey Publishing • www.ospreypublishing.com

