Facebook   fan   power 
Convert   your   fans   into   cash! 
“Apple iPad Guide”  
 
This simple guide will have your viral Facebook page up and 
running in no time. Follow the steps below to ensure success.  
Note: The texts in the images are borrowed from the Custom 
Portal Guide. Do not use the text in the images, simply replace 
them with your Apple iPad text. 
Before you begin: You need to have an Apple iPad affiliate link 
to use this method. See the Affiliate Network Signup PDF for 
networks to join. MaxBounty and AdscendMedia both have 
Apple iPad CPA’s.  
 
Step #1:    creating  a  facebook  page 
You need to create the fan page on Facebook. Go to your 
Facebook Home and click “Ads and Pages” on the left side. See 
below:  

 
 
Then click the “Pages” link on the left side of the page.  
 
Next, on the left side towards the top, click the “Create Page” 
button.  

 
Now you need to select a category and enter a name for your 
page. This is VERY IMPORTANT! The Page name must be 
attractive to users. For example, “50,000 Fans get a FREE Apple 
iPad.”  
Check off the box “Do not make page publicly visible”. You will 
do this once the page is complete. 
 
 
Now you will be redirected to your brand new Facebook page. 

 
 
Step #2:   Adding  fbml 
Now you need to add FBML to your page. FBML is the type of 
coding language Facebook developer’s use. We will use it to 
implement the custom script. 
Open a new tab and visit: 
http://www.facebook.com/apps/application.php?id=49497528
78 
On the left side under the display image, click “Add to my Page”. 

 
Find your newly created page in the list and click “Add to Page”.  
Go back to your new Facebook page, and under the display 
picture click “Edit Page”. 
 
Scroll down and you will see “FBML” under the Applications 
section. Open the “edit” link under it in a new tab. While you’re 
still on this list, click “remove application” on Discussion, events, 
and reviews. They just clutter up the tab row.  Go to the edit 
link now.  

 
You will now see 2 input fields. Type in a title for your tab. This 
will be the first page that users see when they click your fan 
page.  Leave the second field blank. We will come back to that 
later.  
 
Click the “Save Changes” button and go back to your new 
Facebook page. Click the arrow button on the row of tabs at the 
top, and when it expands you will see the new tab you created.  
 

Click the title and it will be added to your row. You can now 
drag it and move its position.  
We will come back to this tab later on. Now we are going to 
upload the designs for the script.  
 
Step #3:   Uploading  Script  images 
You can find the script images in the FACEBOOK PAGE 
GRAPHICS folder. Upload them to www.imageshack.us or 
www.tinypic.com. Make note of each image’s specific “Direct 
Link”. You will need it later. 
 
 
 
Step #4:   Adding  the  custom  script  
During this step be careful to pay attention to details. Dealing 
with code can get messy and confusing, but I will make it as 
painless as possible. 

Open up Notepad or Dreamweaver. Then open the “APPLE 
IPAD SCRIPT” in this folder.  
This is the code that will make up your custom fan portal.  
 
First, we will place the images in the code. Grab the “Direct 
Links” of the two images you uploaded to the internet.  
On Line 3– Replace #HEADER IMAGE URL# with the URL of the 
Header image. 
 
On Line 57(near the bottom) – Replace #SIDE BOX IMAGE URL# 
with the URL of the Side Box image. 
 

Second, we will place the URL of the Apple iPad affiliate link 
into the code. There are two spots for it, one links Step 3 and 
the other links the Side Box image.  
On Line 44 – Replace #WINDOW URL ADDRESS# with the URL of 
your landing page. 
 
On Line 57 – Replace #WINDOW URL ADDRESS# with the URL of 
your landing page. 
 
Third, we add your unique Facebook page number into the 
code. Go to the main window of your Facebook page on 
Facebook. Look at the URL in the Address Bar in your browser. 
You will see a string of numbers, copy it.  
 
Go back to the Notepad window code.  
On Line 14 – Replace ########## with the string of numbers. 
On Line 23 – Replace ########## with the string of numbers. 
You are now finished editing the Facebook page code. Sit back 
and relax for a couple of minutes.  
Step #5:   Adding/Testing the   script  on  your  page  
Go to your Facebook fan page main window. Click “Edit Page” 
on the left. Then go to “Edit” under your FBML title box. 

   
 
Go to your Notepad window and Select ALL of your code. Copy 
it. Now go back to the FBML Edit page and paste the code into 
the “FBML” box. 
 
Click “Save Changes” at the bottom. Go to your Facebook fan 
page and click the tab you made. You will see your new money 
making portal!  
We now need to test the page to make sure we didn’t mess up 
in coding:  
 Click the “Become a Fan” button. CHECK 
 Click the “Click Here to suggest to friends” link. Box pops up. 
CHECK 
 Click the link on Step 3 and the Side Box to test the affiliate. 
Window pops up at the top. CHECK 
Finally, we will change the setting to make this new custom tab 
the first part of your page every user sees. Go to the main page 

window and click “Edit Page”. Then go to “Wall Settings” and 
click “Edit”.  
   
 
Look at the “Default Landing Tab” option. Change it to your 
new custom tab.  
 
Uncheck the box under “Fan Permissions” for “Posting Ability”. 
We do not want fans posting on the wall. 
 
Save changes. 
 
Step #10:   Finishing  touches  
On your Facebook pages main window, click the picture box at 
the top right. You need to add an image there. Put a picture of 
an iPad. You could also put short text over the image to quickly 
describe the page. It is not necessary though as almost 
everyone will just go to your custom part of the page.   

Under that picture box, there is a box with text saying: Write 
something about *Your Page Title Here*! 
In this part tell the users to go to your custom Facebook page 
tab. That is where you want them to be.  
Click the info tab and you can edit more information there. 
Once again, I would tell the users to go to your custom 
Facebook page tab.  
Finally, go back to your main Facebook page. At the top is a box 
asking you if you want to “Publish this page”. You can now click 
this link to make your page public. 
 
Step #11:   Maintaining  your  page 
There is hardly anything you must do once you finish making 
your page and share it with your friends (advertise). Read the 
Advertise Your Page PDF that came with this guide for some 
simple ways to market your new page to make more money. 
Two things I strongly recommend are: 
 Go to your Facebook Pages main window and make 
STATUS UPDATES at least once a day. This will make the 
page show on everyone’s feed. More exposure = more 
money. 
 Check up on your custom page once in awhile to test the 
images, links, and landing page. It is always a good idea to 
make sure they still work.  
FINISHED. 

 
 
 
Thank you for purchasing 
Facebook   fan   power 
If you run into any problems with this guide, please 
contact me at: facebookfanpower@gmail.com 
 
 
 
 
 

