Application 
Models for 
E-Commerce
Zinovy Radovilsky

Application Models for 
E-Commerce
Zinovy Radovilsky
California State University, East Bay

Application Models for E-Commerce
Copyright © Cognella Academic Publishing 2015
www.cognella.com
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any
means—electronic, mechanical, photocopy, recording, or any other
except for brief quotations, not to exceed 400 words, without the prior
permission of the publisher.
ISBN-13: 978-1-63157-209-8 (e-book)
Collection ISSN: 2156-8200 (electronic)
www.businessexpertpress.com
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks
or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and
explanation without intent to infringe.
A publication in the Business Expert Press Supply and Operations 
Management collection
Cover and interior design by S4Carlisle Publishing Services Private Ltd., 
Chennai, India 

Preface....................................................................................................v
Chapter 1	
What Is E-Commerce?.......................................................1
Chapter 2	
Mobile Applications.........................................................19
Chapter 3	
Electronic Payment Applications......................................51
Chapter 4	
Electronic Services Applications.......................................83
Index..................................................................................................105
Contents


E-commerce is mushrooming in both business-to-business and business-­
to-consumer sectors. It shakes the foundation of most industries, leads 
to entirely new kinds of businesses, and directly affects both our careers 
and the way we live. One of the most significant changes is the manner in 
which companies conduct business. Specifically, how they manage their 
resources, connect and communicate with customers, and negotiate and 
outsource from suppliers.
In many cases, the management of enterprise resources is based on 
e-commerce systems and applications. E-commerce may be defined in a 
variety of ways: as a technological tool for web development, as an online 
transaction between a buyer and a seller, or as an activity that adds value 
to business customers and consumers. The main goal of this book is to 
explain in a systematic way the managerial aspects of various e-commerce 
models and applications, as well as to demonstrate their value-added 
capabilities.
Application Models for E-Commerce provides a detailed description and 
analysis of e-commerce business models, including their components, 
classification, and performance results. This book also presents manage­
rial aspects of various up-to-date e-commerce models. Among them are:
• Demand-side e-commerce models associated with selling 
goods, services, and information to business customers 
and consumers.
• Supply-side e-commerce models used for purchasing and 
outsourcing from suppliers.
• Collaborative commerce models involved in sharing information 
and business data, and also providing collaborative decisions for 
new product design and development.
• Mobile commerce models that employ wireless devices 
and wireless communication for buying, selling, and 
collaborating online.
Preface

vi	
PREFACE
• Electronic payment models used for making payment 
transactions via the Internet.
• Electronic services employed for supporting and facilitating 
e-commerce.
Application Models for E-Commerce provides methodology and practi­
cal examples of selecting and implementing e-commerce business models 
and associated online applications. It also emphasizes managerial aspects 
of enterprise resources planning (ERP) systems, which are considered an 
integral part of e-commerce management today.
I hope that after reading this book you will not only gain knowledge 
but also develop essential skills required for managing e-commerce mod­
els and applications. You will obtain a clear understanding of the current 
development and future trends in e-commerce. All this will better prepare 
you to take on responsibilities in managing and improving e-commerce 
models and applications.
Sincerely,
Zinovy Radovilsky

1.1  The Internet ERA
In 2005, the CNN channel conducted a survey of the most important 
global innovations in the past quarter century. What do you think was 
the top-rated innovation? What would you rate as innovation #1? You are 
correct—the Internet was voted as the most important innovation in the 
past quarter century along with other important inventions like the cell 
phone, the personal computer, fiber optics, ­e-mail, and others[1].
The Internet’s infrastructure is networked computing that connects 
computers and other electronic devices by telecommunication networks. In 
the recent years, the Internet has become a global phenomenon that has 
profoundly changed the nature of communication between people and busi­
nesses. It has also become a major distribution channel, where transactions to 
purchase goods and services are made. The Internet has profoundly changed 
economics, markets, and even industry structures in many countries[2].
The World Wide Web, commonly abbreviated as WWW or the Web, 
is one of the main ways of accessing and utilizing information over the 
Internet. It is an information-sharing model that is built on top of the 
­Internet  [3]. The Web employs the Hyper-Text Transmission Protocol 
(HTTP), the main tools used in the Internet, to transmit Internet-based 
documents (data). It also uses browsers like Internet Explorer and Firefox 
to access and view documents called web pages (web sites) that are linked to 
each other via hyperlinks. Web documents also contain graphics, sounds, 
text, and video. The Internet, not the Web, is also used for ­e-mail, instant 
messaging, and file transferring (using file transfer protocol or FTP)[3].
The growth of Internet-related activities has been tremendous from the 
last decade of the 20th century to the modern time (see Figure 1.1) [4]. The 
number of Internet domain hosts (companies and consumers that have 
CHAPTER 1
What is ­E-Commerce?

2	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
their own web pages and provide web site service to others) has grown, at an 
accelerated rate, from less than 10 million hosts in 1995 to near 550 million 
hosts in 2007[3]. This number will certainly continue to grow in the future.
What drives people and organizations to increase their utilization 
of the Internet and World Wide Web? Why is it so popular today? The 
answers to these questions can be quite clear if we consider the Internet as 
an incredible medium that provides:
• Rich sources of information and news for different subjects 
that may not be available in other media.
• Quick access to this information and news at any time and 
at any place in the world, provided Internet access may be 
established.
• Easy search, selection, and retrieval of information and news.
• Easy communication and information sharing.
• Extensive business opportunities in terms of selling, buying, 
transacting, and communicating on the Internet.
The last point is in the core of developing commercial solutions on the 
Internet called “e-commerce.”
1.2  E-Commerce and ­E-Business Definitions
E-commerce has become a significant element in the modern global eco­
nomic environment. “E-commerce” is defined as the use of a computer 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
19951996 1997199819992000 2001200220032004 200520062007
Host Number, mln
Figure 1.1  Internet Hosts’ Growth

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
3
network, primarily the Internet, to buy and sell products, services, infor­
mation, and communication. However, ­e-commerce may also be con­
sidered as an application of technology using the Internet. It may also 
represent another aspect of being a tool for increasing efficiency and low­
ering costs in organizations. The three definitions of ­e-commerce are sum­
marized in Table 1.1.
All aspects of ­e-commerce are important and deserve in-depth expla­
nation. In this chapter and other chapters of this book, we will concen­
trate on the business side of ­e-commerce, considering ­e-commerce as a 
business phenomenon (second definition), and as a tool that adds value 
to business and customers (third definition).
As we mentioned before, ­e-commerce communication and transac­
tions are predominantly done through Internet-based web sites. These 
online web sites may be used to sell products through electronic store­
fronts, provide customer service, disseminate information, provide busi­
ness intelligence (for example, create recommendations of what products 
to purchase), and many other possible value-added offerings or activities 
(see Figure 1.2). Sometimes, the ­e-commerce web sites are available only 
to internal customers or employees of an organization, and are not to 
anyone outside the organization. Enterprise Intranet is usually an orga­
nization’s internet, which is accessible to employees of this organization 
and other responsible parties using the secure login environment. This is 
done to protect the organization’s sensitive information, and not allow 
E-Commerce
Aspects
E-Commerce Definitions
Technology
E-commerce is the application of technology used to 
automate and improve business transactions utilizing 
predominantly Internet-based web sites.
Business
E-commerce is used to provide the capability of buying and 
selling products, services, and information on predominantly 
Internet-based web sites.
Value
E-commerce is a tool that may be used by business customers 
and consumers to create value in the Internet-based 
transactions by increasing efficiency and cutting costs while 
improving the quality of goods and services.
Table 1.1  Definitions of E-commerce

4	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
all kinds of online “intruders” to access this information (see ­Figure 1.2). 
Companies are also required, in many cases, to have protected and safe 
connections between their web sites and those of their suppliers, dis­
tributors, logistics and financial services, and many others. Enterprise 
Extranet uses internet technology to establish a private network connec­
tion between a company’s ­e-commerce web site and its external suppli­
ers, service, and information providers (see Figure 1.2). In some cases, 
an extranet may be regarded as a part of the company’s intranet that is 
expanded to users outside the company.
In many cases, instead of “e-commerce” the term “e-business” is used. 
Are these terms different or the same? In general, these terms are, in fact, 
different. “E-business” is a broader concept than “e-commerce,” in that 
it does not only represent commercial applications of buying and selling. 
It is also associated with servicing customers and collaborating between 
business partners, as well as conducting Internet-related business transac­
tions within or outside an organization. However, in modern practice, 
these two terms are used interchangeably, and become almost like syn­
onyms. Most ­e-business web sites contain ­e-commerce-related activities 
like selling or buying online. At the same time, many ­e-commerce web 
sites have elements of collaboration with customers or business partners, 
as well as online service and support. In this book, we will be using the 
term “e-commerce” to designate both commercial and business activities, 
i.e., ­e-business and ­e-commerce on the Internet.
1.3  History and Current Development 
of E-Commerce
The “life” of ­e-commerce as a business system is relatively short as com­
pared with many other existing business and management systems. 
,QWUDQHW
+XPDQ5HVRXUFHV
3URMHFW0DQDJHPHQW
.QRZOHGJH
0DQDJHPHQW
6XSSOLHUV
6HUYLFHV

([WUDQHW
,QWHUQHW
2QOLQH
6WRUH
DQG
6HUYLFH

Figure 1.2  E-commerce Networking

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
5
­E-commerce started around 1995, and since then has had an interesting 
and sometimes turbulent history.
The proliferation of Internet-based computer technology in the last 
five years of the 20th century triggered extensive development of differ­
ent kinds of ­e-commerce tools and applications. Many new ­e-commerce 
companies were born at that time. Their intention was to sell products 
to business and individual consumers, outsource/buy products from 
businesses, or provide a virtual environment to facilitate the exchange of 
products and services between the companies. It was a time of “irratio­
nal exuberance,” when every day several Internet-based companies started 
their ­e-commerce business online with great expectations of soon becom­
ing a publicly traded company and earning a tremendous amount of cash 
after its initial public offerings (IPO) in the stock market. The notion 
behind this was that the stock market would quickly appreciate almost 
any new ­e-commerce development. This was the era of the so called “dot-
com bubble” of ­e-commerce. The term evidently came from the point 
that most of these companies had an Internet name of their web site end­
ing with “.com.”
By the year 2000, the dot-com bubble reached its peak, from which 
started an almost freefall of the dot-com stock prices, overall customer 
excitement and expectation, and venture investments in ­e-commerce. 
Between 2000 and 2003, a significant number of dot-com companies 
closed, were acquired, or merged with other businesses. The many reasons 
for this crash of the dot-com bubble have been well documented in vari­
ous literature sources. However, the main reason for the disappearance of 
these companies was their inability to be profitable and to provide value 
to their customers. “If it does not make cents, it does not make sense.” 
Many companies were created by bright computer professionals who 
knew how to design and start a technologically advanced ­e-commerce 
solution. However, these professionals had little to no ability to provide 
an efficient and effective business-related model for their solutions.
At the end of the crash in 2001–2002, a new trend appeared evi­
dent within ­e-commerce—a trend of developing and implementing 
­e-commerce solutions that were not only more business-oriented and 
­targeted the need to provide significant value to the customers but also 
by doing that, be more financially sound, i.e., profitable. This designated 

6	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
a new era of ­e-commerce that had some major differences with the previ­
ously used “dot-com” approach in ­e-commerce (see Table 1.2).
The table clearly depicts the main differences between the old and 
new approaches to ­e-commerce. Instead of old ­e-commerce decisions 
being based on technology innovations and revenue emphasis, the 
new ­e-commerce development is mostly based on the need to develop 
a solid business model that would emphasize value-added offerings for 
the customers and profits for the company. According to some literature 
sources  [5], more than 60% of all ­e-commerce companies were profit­
able in 2004 as opposed to only 10% of them being profitable in 2001. 
Instead of the entrepreneurial nature of most dot-com companies and 
pure online strategies (doing all business online), the new ­e-commerce 
development is mostly associated with traditional firms. These firms range 
from large companies like IBM and GE to a myriad of small and mid-size 
enterprises (SME) who embrace an ­e-commerce strategy as a part of the 
overall business strategy. In this case, it may be called a mixed or “click-
and-brick” strategy. Finally, during the ­e-commerce evolution, many 
special standards regulating its activities and communication through 
­e-commerce have been developed or improved. For example, XML 
(eXtensible Markup Language) and XBML (business XML) computer 
languages were developed to improve communication between different 
­e-commerce web sites. The Electronic Product Code (EPC) was created 
to recognize the product being sold or delivered using mobile commerce 
equipment.
A new changing trend in ­e-commerce is associated with utiliza­
tion of the Internet-related technology and software for improving 
Table 1.2  Dot-Com and new ­E-Commerce compared
“DOT-COM” ­E-Commerce
New ­E-Commerce
Technology-driven
Business-driven
Revenue growth emphasis
Earning and profits emphasis
Venture capital financing
Traditional financing
Pure online strategies
Mixed “click-and-brick” strategies
Entrepreneurial
Traditional firms
Lack of standards
Stronger regulation/standards

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
7
communication, information sharing, collaboration, and functionality of 
the Web, which is commonly defined as Web 2.0. Web 2.0 means pro­
liferation of connectivity and interactivity of web-delivered content that 
allows users to—besides obtaining information from a web site—own the 
data on the Internet, gain control over this data, and add value to the web 
site as they use it. The key Web 2.0 applications and services include[6]:
• Blog (web-log)–a webpage consisting of brief user opinions, 
views, and information, or links (also called posts), arranged 
chronologically within a menu-driven format.
• Wiki–a webpage or set of web pages that can be easily edited 
by anyone who is allowed access. A well-known example is 
Wikipedia, the free Internet encyclopedia.
• Podcast–audio recordings, usually in MP3 format, of 
talks, interviews and lectures, which can be played either 
on a desktop computer or on a wide range of handheld 
MP3 devices.
• Multimedia sharing–services that facilitate the storage and 
sharing of multimedia content such as video (YouTube), 
photos (Flickr), and podcasts (Odeo).
• Social networking–professional and social networking sites 
like facebook.com and myspace. com that facilitate meeting 
people, finding like minds, and sharing content.
• RSS–a family of formats which allow users to find out about 
updates to the content of RSS-enabled websites, blogs or 
podcasts without actually having to go and visit the site. 
Information from the website (typically, a new story’s title 
and synopsis, along with the originating website’s name) 
is collected within a feed (which uses the RSS format) and 
‘piped’ to the user in a process known as syndication.
1.4  E-Commerce Growth
Since its creation, ­e-commerce has experienced steady growth with an 
increasing rate of growth in the first decade of the 21st century. Survey after 
survey conducted by a variety of companies has indicated an accelerating 

8	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
volume of transactions in business-to-consumer (B2C) and particularly in 
business-to-business (B2B) ­e-commerce. In 2003–2005, more than 70% 
of companies in the United States have experimented with purchasing 
online; and around 15–20% of their total spending was being channeled via 
the Internet[7, 8]. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, B2B ­e-commerce 
covers more than 20% of all business transactions in the U.S.A[9].
Although B2B sales continue to dwarf B2C sales, many retailers now 
see online sales as their best opportunity for new growth. The estimates 
made by different consulting firms[10] show that by the end of 2012, the 
sales through ­e-commerce will be between 210 and 340 billion dollars 
(see Figure 1.3). The average growth of retail ­e-commerce is estimated to 
be from 12% to 14% annually[11]. In addition, the proportion of retail 
­e-commerce in the total U.S. retail sales is predicted to grow from approx­
imately 4% in 2006 to 13% in 2010[11].
The implementation of ­e-commerce also varies across the globe. The 
highest level of ­e-commerce sales as a proportion of the total sales is in 
­Australia, South Korea, and France—with more than 16% of the total sales 
in 2004, United States—more than 13%, and Japan—around 9%[12].
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
eMarketer
Forrester
Jupiter
Figure 1.3  Comparative Estimates: U.S. Retail E-commerce 
Sales, (billions)[10]

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
9
The projected ­e-commerce growth raises the interest of researchers 
to understand how effective and efficient this ­e-commerce implementa­
tion has been, and what influences ­e-commerce results in manufacturing 
and service organizations. Despite the evident increase in importance of 
­e-commerce and effectiveness of its implementation, until recently little 
research has been undertaken to investigate factors that influence the 
results of ­e-commerce solutions. This knowledge not only has potential 
benefits for organizations considering ­e-commerce implementation but 
also for those organizations that have already engaged in such implemen­
tations, because it can provide them with an understanding of how to 
facilitate and improve their implementation processes.
1.5  Main Characteristics, Dimensions, 
and Types of ­E-Commerce
The main characteristics of ­e-commerce are its pervasiveness and inexo­
rability. Pervasiveness of ­e- commerce means its persistent development 
and proliferation in business and non-profit organizations of various 
sizes. Inexorability of ­e-commerce represents its inevitable and unstop­
pable nature in terms of the high rates of growth that were described in 
the previous section. Inexorability also means that ­e-commerce tends to 
transcend geographical, cultural, and political differences of nations and 
countries and enables common business information and web sites for the 
entire world. Finally, inexorability represents the ability of ­e-commerce 
to change the business environment, and create completely new business 
relations. ­E-commerce development has completely revitalized different 
industries including jewelry, banking, telecommunications, hotels, real 
estate, software, and many others[13].
If you ask yourself why ­e-commerce development is so pervasive and 
inexorable, the answer should come from the simple fact that ­e-commerce 
can be a rich source of value for organizations that employ it. This value 
comes from ­e-commerce disintermediation, which means an act of tak­
ing out an intermediary organization used for channel delivery of prod­
ucts and services. For example, direct sales of computers through the 
Internet by Dell or Hewlett-Packard (HP) eliminates any intermediate 
organizations like distributors and retailers. This leads to reduced cost 

10	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
of product delivery to the customers and increased profits. At the same 
time, ­e-commerce re-intermediation facilitates creation of third party 
organizations that provide virtual environments for connecting buyers 
and sellers or, generally, business partners for transactions on the Internet. 
The creation of companies like eBay or Amazon is a typical example of 
­e-commerce re-intermediation.
Organizations may have various levels of ­e-commerce implementa­
tion. The differentiation between these organizations is based upon three 
dimensions[14]:
• Products and services produced and sold by an organization 
that can range from traditional physical to fully digitized 
products (services).
• Processes established in the organization that can also vary 
from physical to fully digitized (online) processes.
• Agent, which is an organization itself, ranging from a traditional 
“brick-and-mortar” firm to a virtual online organization.
Pure ­e-commerce organizations are characterized by their products/
services and processes being completely digitized, as well as the whole 
organization being a digital agent company. These organizations are also 
known as virtual or pure-play ­e-commerce companies. An example 
of such an organization is www.YouTube.com, a famous online site for 
uploading, storing, and sharing videos worldwide. It is a pure ­e-commerce 
company, because all its products/services, like video play lists or sub­
scriptions, are digitized; its processes like video search, creating video play 
lists, etc. are also digitized; and, finally, this organization is a virtual (com­
pletely online) digital agent.
Partial ­e-commerce organizations are those organizations that may 
have some physical ­e-commerce dimensions like physical products or 
processes. For example, Amazon purchases and stores books (physical 
products) that it then sells online. The company also organizes a logistics 
(physical) process of book delivery to the customers. However, Amazon 
also sells many digital products (like videos and music) and provides a 
variety of digitized processes. In this case, Amazon is a typical partial 
­e-commerce organization.

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
11
“Click-and-mortar” organizations are companies that conduct 
some ­e-commerce activities, for example, selling computers, printers, or 
software through ­e-commerce channels like HP or Gateway, but provide 
their primary business in the physical world. Contrary to that, “brick-
and- mortar” organizations perform all their business without the Inter­
net by selling their physical products in stores or conducting processes by 
means of physical agents only. The number of “brick- and-mortar” com­
panies have significantly shrunk over the years as ­e-commerce prolifera­
tion has grown in a variety of traditional companies.
E-commerce organizations are also differentiated by the transactions 
and interactions they make. One of the common types are the Business-
to-Business (B2B) ­e-commerce organizations that provide transactions, 
communication, and interactions between business partners. B2B 
transactions may include selling products and services to businesses, 
outsourcing from suppliers, logistics, and distribution of products to 
companies, financial transactions, and others. B2B transactions may be 
done on the downstream of the organization’s supply chain, i.e., from 
raw materials, to manufacturing organizations, and then to distribution 
and retail (see Figure 1.4). B2B can also be done on the upstream of the 
company supply chain, for example purchasing materials from suppli­
ers, or outsourcing a logistics provider for a manufacturing organization 
(see Figure 1.4).
Suppliers 
Logistics 
Transportation 
Logistics     
Transportation 
Logistics 
Transportation 
Production 
Retail 
Distribution 
     Customer 
Figure 1.4  B2B and B2C E-commerce

12	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
Another very common type is Business-to-Consumer (B2C) 
­e-commerce organizations which provide transactions, communication, 
and interactions with consumers (end users). These organizations can 
be manufacturing, distribution, retail, or other companies that sell their 
products or services to consumers online. B2C transactions and interac­
tions are done on the downstream of the organization’s supply chain (see 
Figure 1.4).
Since the beginning of the ­e-commerce era, both B2B and B2C trans­
actions have experienced consistent growth in revenues. These revenues 
are derived from selling products and services online to business custom­
ers or end consumers. They also include revenues from financial transac­
tions via the Internet.
The volume of transaction revenues in B2B ­e-commerce is substan­
tially larger than that of B2C. For example, in 2004 the B2B transaction 
revenues in U.S.A were around $1,812 billion or 93% of all ­e-commerce 
revenues. At the same time, the revenues from B2C ­e-commerce transac­
tions were $130 billion, which was just 7% of the total business-related 
­e-commerce transactions[9].
Besides B2B and B2C transactions, ­e-commerce transactions and 
interactions may have other types:
• Consumer-to-Consumer (C2C) ­e-commerce is used in 
organizations that provide private sales and auctions between 
individual consumers.
• Peer-to-Peer (P2P) ­e-commerce allows networked peer 
computers to share data and processing with each other 
directly; can be used in C2C, B2B, and B2C ­e-commerce.
• Government-to-Business (G2B) and Government-to-
Consumer (G2C) ­e-commerce enable government 
organizations to provide information, interaction, 
business, and services to companies and consumers 
respectively.
• Business-to-Business-to-Consumer (B2B2C) ­e-commerce 
organizations provide some products or services to client 
businesses that maintain their own customers. eBay, for 
example, provides a virtual marketplace to its customers 

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
13
(business and individuals) that sell products through eBay 
to their own customers.
• Mobile Commerce (M-commerce) makes possible 
­e-commerce transactions and activities to be conducted in 
a wireless environment, for example, buying products and 
services from a web site on a cell phone.
• Location-based Commerce (L-commerce) provides 
m-commerce transactions targeted at individuals in specific 
locations and at specific times, like navigation systems in cars.
• Intra-business ­e-commerce includes all internal 
organizational activities that involve the exchange of goods, 
services, or information.
• Collaborative Commerce (C-commerce) creates an 
environment where individuals or groups communicate or 
collaborate online.
Many of these transactions types, including mobile and location-based 
commerce, collaborative commerce, and business-to-business-to-consumer 
commerce will be discussed in this book.
1.6  Value Creation in ­E-Commerce
As previously mentioned, the main reason for the growth and prolifera­
tion of ­e-commerce (pervasiveness and inexorability) is its ability to create 
value for an organization that implemented the ­e-commerce solutions, 
for the customers of this organization, and for its partners and suppliers. 
Value creation represents the potential or expected and actual monetary 
and non-monetary results of utilizing an ­e-commerce business model. 
The main monetary results of value creation include revenue enhance­
ment through sales growth and price differentiation, and cost reduction 
related to cost of goods sold, operating costs, and asset intensity reduction 
(see Figure 1.5).
Revenue enhancement is the first aspect of value creation. ­E-commerce 
develops a new online channel for selling a company’s products and ser­
vices along with existing traditional channels. This potentially generates 
additional sales volume through this channel, and, at the same time, can 

14	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
Figure 1.5  Creating Monetary Value in E-commerce
facilitate product sales through the existing channels. For example, a con­
sumer may use Walmart’s web site to purchase a variety of products that can 
be then sent to a nearby store for customer pickup. At the same time, while 
coming to the store for the pickup, the consumer may potentially end up 
buying some more products from the company. In this case, the channels do 
not cannibalize, but rather complement each other and provide higher sales 
volumes and revenues. The revenue increase may be also associated with 
the ability to quickly adjust prices depending on customer segments (for 
example, repeat customers will pay a higher price than new customers will) 
or by increasing prices through building the company’s brand name recog­
nition on the Internet. In addition, ­e-commerce can enable quick matching 
of customer demand with existing supply of products, and, thus, provide 
better knowledge of what prices need to be established and promoted.
Besides the opportunity of increased revenue, ­e-commerce is also an 
important source of cost reduction. This is the second aspect of value 
creation through ­e-commerce (see Figure 1.5). The cost of goods sold 
through online web sites may be reduced by providing a direct selling 
channel to the customers and reducing the need for intermediaries like 
wholesalers and retailers. Taking out the intermediaries can reduce the 
cost of sales up to 25–30%. At the same time, by using ­e-commerce for 
outsourcing materials, components, and services, companies can reduce 
process and transaction costs associated with outsourcing. ­E-commerce 
enables companies to simplify outsourcing processes and reduce related 

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
15
costs. Finally, ­e-commerce creates opportunities for asset intensity reduc­
tion, which means (a) reducing capital costs by effective, speedy disposi­
tion (selling) of unnecessary or old equipment as well as excess or obsolete 
inventory, and (b) more effectively using existing space by reducing inven­
tory clutters with ­e-commerce.
The results of the survey conducted among the companies that 
implemented ­e-commerce solutions[15] revealed that more than 61% of 
respondents stated that implemented ­e-commerce solutions increased or 
significantly increased revenues. At the same time, 58% of those respond­
ing achieved a decrease or significant decrease in costs through the imple­
mentation of ­e-commerce solutions. According to the survey results, the 
most important cost categories that were reduced appeared to be trans­
actional cost specifically in terms of paperless transactions, administra­
tive cost associated with reduction of purchasing procurement personnel, 
inventory cost, and reduction of prices of materials and services. All 
this represents typical cost savings results associated with ­e-commerce 
implementation.
The non-monetary value creation may incorporate a variety of tan­
gible and intangible results relevant to ­e-commerce development:
Improved customer satisfaction through providing more choices of 
products, services, and information.
Customization and personalization of product and service offering.
Improved quality of products and services.
Faster delivery schedules.
Extended hours of work (24 hours, 7 days a week).
Global outreach of products, services, and information.
Permanent access to information.
According to the survey  [15], organizations that implemented 
­e-commerce presented relatively evenly distributed answers about the 
benefits of ­e-commerce implementation, which are shown in Table 1.3.
However, responses to the question of drawbacks and problems in 
implementing ­e-commerce solutions demonstrated that the three most 
critical problems in ­e-commerce implementation were high costs of 
implementation, data security, and low liquidity (not enough buyers and 
sellers), which covered 66.7% of responses (see Table 1.4).

16	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
1.7  Chapter Summary: Managerial Aspects 
of ­E-Commerce
	 1.	 E-commerce has become a significant element in the modern global 
economic environment. It represents the use of a computer network, 
primarily the Internet, to buy and sell products, services, informa­
tion, and communication. ­E-commerce is also an application of 
technology using the Internet. In addition, it is a tool for increasing 
efficiency and lowering costs in organizations.
	 2.	 The main characteristics of ­e-commerce are its pervasiveness and 
inexorability. Pervasiveness of ­e-commerce means its persistent 
development and proliferation in business and nonprofit organi­
zations of various sizes. Inexorability of ­e-commerce represents 
its inevitable and unstoppable nature in terms of the high rates of 
growth that were described in the previous section.
	 3.	 e-commerce can be a rich source of value for organizations that 
employ it. ­E-commerce disintermediation means an act of taking 
Table 1.3  Benefits of implementing ­E-Commerce solutions
Main benefits of implementing ­E-Commerce 
­solutions in organizations
Number of 
­responses (%)
Shorter procurement cycle
13.3%
Improve communication and relationships with suppliers
13.3%
Improve communication and relationships with customers
12.6%
Better reliability and control of purchase orders
11.9%
New channel of marketing and sale with global outreach
10.4%
Reduce inventory level and cost
8.9%
Eliminate or reduce the number of middlemen
8.9%
Reduce purchase prices
7.4%
Table 1.4  Drawbacks and problems in ­E-Commerce implementation
Main drawbacks and problems in implementing ­
E-Commerce solutions in organizations
Number of 
responses (%)
High costs of implementing ­e-commerce solutions
26.7%
Data security
26.7%
Not enough buyers and/or sellers online
13.3%
Poor integration with internal “back-office” systems
8.9%
Low return on investment and/or long payback period
6.7%
Not enough speed of connection/bandwidth problems
6.7%

	
What is ­E-Commerce?	
17
out intermediary organizations used for channel delivery of products 
and services though ­e-commerce supply chain. At the same time, 
­e-commerce re-intermediation facilitates creation of third party orga­
nizations that provide virtual environments for connecting buyers and 
sellers or generally, business partners for transactions on the Internet.
	 4.	 Organizations may have various levels of ­e-commerce implemen­
tation. Pure ­e-commerce organizations are characterized by their 
products/services and processes being completely digitized. Partial 
­e-commerce organizations are those organizations that, besides dig­
ital products and processes, may have some physical ­e-commerce 
dimensions like physical products or processes. “Click-and-mor­
tar” organizations are companies that conduct some ­e-commerce 
activities, but provide their primary business in the physical world.
	 5.	 E-commerce organizations are also differentiated by the transactions 
and interactions they make. The most common types are Business-to-
Business (B2B) and Business-to-Consumer (B2C) e-commerce trans­
actions. Besides B2B and B2C transactions, e-commerce transactions 
and interactions may have other types: ­consumer-to-consumer 
(C2C), business-to-business to-consumer (B2B2C), government-to-
business (G2B), mobile commerce (­M-commerce), Location-based 
Commerce (L-commerce), and some others.
	 6.	 Value creation in ­e-commerce represents the potential or expected 
and actual monetary and non-monetary results of utilizing an 
­e-commerce business model. The main monetary results of value 
creation include revenue enhancement through sales growth and 
price differentiation, and cost reduction related to cost of goods sold, 
operating costs, and assets intensity reduction. The non-­monetary 
value creation may incorporate a variety of tangible and intangible 
results relevant to ­e-commerce development like improved customer 
satisfaction and quality, faster delivery schedules, extended hours of 
work, global outreach, and permanent access to information.
References
1.	 Cable Network News (CNN), “Top 25 Innovations: The Internet Ranked 
No 1, Changed the World,” March 1, 2005, retrieved from www.cnn
.coml2005lTECHl01l03lcnn25.top25.innovationslindex.html.

18	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
2. Drucker, P., Managing in the Next Society, Truman Talley Book, New 
York, 2002.
3.  “The Difference between the Internet and the World Wide Web,” 
Webopedia, February 29, 2008, retrieved from www.webopedia.
com.
4. Internet Domain Survey, “Number of Hosts Advertised in the DNS,” 
Internet System Consortium (ISC), January 2008, retrieved from 
www.isc.org/index.pl?/ops/ds.
5.	 Mullaney, T.J., “E-biz Strikes Again,” Business Week, Special Report -- 
­E-Biz, May 10, 2004, retrieved from www.businessweek.com.
6.	 Anderson, P., “What is Web 2.0? Ideas, Technologies, and Implications 
for Education,” JISC Technology and Standard Watch, February 2007, 
1–63.
7.	 Bednarz, A., “Analyst Firm Predicts ­E-business Upswing”, Network 
World, September 1, 2004.
8.	 Juniper Media Metrix, “The Forecast for ­Business-to-Business 
e-­commerce”, DM Review, Jan. 17, 2006, retrieved from www
.­DMreview.com.
9.	 U.S. Census Bureau, “e-commerce 2004,” May 25, 2006, retrieved 
from www.census.govlestats.
10.	 E-Business News, “US Retail ­e-commerce Set for Growth,” February 
2008, retrieved from www.ebusinessnews.infol?action=read&article=684.
11.	 “Forrester Research US eCommerce Forecast: Online Retail Sales 
to Reach $329 by 2010,” September 19, 2005, retrieved from www
.internetadssales.com.
12.	 eMarketer, “Report on Europe ­e-commerce: B2B and B2C,” July 2003, 
retrieved from www.emarketer.com/Report.aspx?b2b_b2c_euro_jul03.
13.	 Special Report-E-biz, “E-biz Strikes Again,” BusinessWeek, May 
10, 2004, retrieved from www.businessweek.com/magazine/con­
tent/04_19/b3882601.htm.
14. Whinston, A, Choi, S.Y., and Stahl, D. O., The Economics of 
­Electronic Commerce, 1st McMillan Technical Publishing, 1997.
15.	 Radovilsky, Z. and V. Hegde. Factors Influencing ­e-commerce 
­Implementation: Analysis of Survey Results, Journal of Academy of 
Business and Economics, Vol. IV, No.1, 2004, p. 29–37.

CHAPTER 2
Mobile Applications
Mobile commerce has gained much attention recently, not only as part of 
consumer-oriented services and products, but also as a tool to augment 
business strategies and support organizational processes using internet-
based wireless models. Major surveys in this area conducted in recent 
times clearly demonstrated a continuous growth and proliferation of 
mobile commerce applications in various areas of business. For exam­
ple, according to a Telecom Trends International study, the number of 
mobile commerce users will grow to 1.67 billion by 2008[1]. The inter­
est in mobile commerce is also triggered by recent development of new 
mobile technologies like Wi-Max and wireless voice over IP (VoIP) (see 
explanation in Table 2.1), and the need to identify their future areas of 
implementation. Besides that, the growing attention to mobile commerce 
is facilitated by several recent business wireless initiatives, specifically the 
implementation of radio frequency identification (RFID) applications in 
Wal-Mart and the U.S. Department of Defense.
Although wireless technologies have primarily been applied in 
­consumer-oriented areas, there is a growing interest in increasing the 
usage of wireless technology in the enterprise environment. Some recent 
researches have shown that mobile commerce can enhance business effi­
ciency by distributing information to the workforce remotely and by offer­
ing new channels on which to interact with customers[2]. Organizations 
that are capable of leveraging the power of mobile technologies to automate 
and streamline business processes may improve productivity, lower opera­
tional cost, increase customer satisfaction, and improve decision-making.
While the business trends of e-commerce have been studied in detail, 
its mobile extension has not gotten similar attention. Instead, current 
literature sources on mobile commerce mainly focus on technological 

20	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
concepts, specific mobile services, or high-level business model analysis [3]. 
At the same time, new questions and problems arise. Are mobile com­
merce models independent from existing e-commerce models or they 
are complimentary to already established e-commerce models? Is mobile 
commerce relatively expensive to the customers? What is the proportion 
of mobile commerce models among overall e-commerce implementation? 
What are value-added offerings, value creation, and return on investments 
of mobile commerce models?
In this Chapter, you will find answers to these and some other ques­
tions about mobile commerce.
2.1  Define Mobile Commerce
Mobile commerce or m-commerce refers to commercial (buying and sell­
ing) business models and applications carried out via a mobile devices 
such as cell phones or smartphones (personal data assistants). These 
applications, for example mobile banking or mobile shopping, may 
vary significantly depending on the device and mobile service provider. 
M-commerce is a natural extension of e-commerce, although in reality 
wireless communication may also have non-commercial elements like 
downloading information or media files. Thus, the term “m-business,” in 
addition to “m-commerce,” may be a valid term for describing business 
applications carried out over a mobile device.
Technology Behind M-commerce
The m-commerce development is highly associated with technological 
advances in telecommunications and wireless technology. The technologi­
cal elements that affected in the past and continue to affect m-commerce 
development and proliferation are listed in Table 2.1.
2.5G and 3G are the most commonly used technologies today for 
wireless communication through cell phones and PDAs. Wi-Fi commu­
nication is often employed in computers and laptops for wireless access 
to the Internet. In the near future, the new technological breakthroughs 
in terms of using more sophisticated and speedy wireless systems like 4G, 
Wi-Max, and Wireless VoIP are expected.

	
Mobile Applications	
21
Table 2.1  M-commerce technology terms
Terms
Description
1G
First generation of mobile wireless that utilizes analog air interface 
technology. These analog cell phone standards were introduced in the 
1980s and continued until being replaced by 2G digital cell phones in 
mid-1990s.
2G
Second generation of mobile wireless, which utilizes various digital 
protocols including GSM (Global System for Mobile communication), 
CDMA (Code Division Multiple Access), TDMA (Time Division 
Multiple Access) instead of analog air interface. The data transmission is 
predominantly in a text format; and the speed of transmission is relatively 
low. Existed from mid- 1990s until current time.
2.5G
Interim 2.5 generation of mobile wireless that was an interim step 
building up to 3G involving the overlay of higher-capacity data 
transmission capability to existing 2G digital wireless networks. The 
speed of transmission is about 115 Kbits/sec; can accommodate limited 
graphics. The main digital protocol is GPRS (General Package Radio 
Service) Extensively used from late 1990s until modern time.
3G
Third generation of mobile wireless that provides the ability to transfer 
simultaneously both voice data (a telephone call) and non-voice data 
with rich media such as music, video clips. The speed of transmission is 
up to 384 Kbits/sec. The main digital protocol is EDGE (Enhanced Data 
GSM Environment). Extensively used since 2005–2006.
4G
Fourth generation of mobile wireless is not just one defined technology or 
standard, but rather a collection of technologies and protocols that enable 
the highest transmission speed and lowest cost of wireless network.”
Bluetooth
Bluetooth is a short-range wireless specification that allows for radio 
connections between devices (cell phones, computers, etc.) within a 
30-foot range of each other. The name comes from the 10th-century 
Danish King Blåtand (Bluetooth), who unified Denmark and Norway.
GPS
Global Positioning System is a satellite-based tracking system that 
enables the determination of a GPS device’s location.
Mobile-Fi
Mobile-Fi is a high-frequency wireless network that provides wireless 
access in a moving object (train, car) at a range of up to 30 miles.
PDA
Personal Digital Assistant is a mobile, handheld device—such as the 
Palm Treo and RIM BlackBerry—that gives users access to text-based 
information. Users can synchronize their PDAs with a PC or network; 
some models support wireless communication to retrieve and send 
e-mail and get information from the web.
RFID
Radio Frequency Identification represents devices that use radio 
frequencies to transmit data. One typical use: a bar code scanner 
gathers information about products in stock or ready for shipment in 
a warehouse or distribution center and sends them to a database or 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system.
(continued)

22	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
Terms
Description
SMS
Short Messaging Service is a service through which users can send 
text-based messages from one device to another. The message—up to 
160 characters—appears on the screen of the receiving device. SMS 
works with GSM networks.
Smartphone
A combination of a mobile phone and a PDA, smartphones allow users 
to converse as well as perform tasks, such as accessing the internet 
wirelessly and storing contacts in databases. Smart phones have a 
PDA-like screen.
WAP
Wireless Application Protocol is a set of protocols that lets users 
of mobile phones and other digital wireless devices access internet 
content, check voice mail and e-mail, receive text of faxes, and conduct 
transactions. WAP works with multiple standards, including CDMA 
and GSM.
Wi-Fi
Wireless Fidelity is the common term for a high-frequency wireless 
local- area network (WLAN). The term is used generically when 
referring of any type of 802.11 network including 802.11b, 802.11a, 
802.11g or 802.11a/g. Wi-Fi operates in the unlicensed 2.4 GHz range 
offering data speeds up to 54 Mbps with a range of up to 300 feet.
Wi-Max
Wi-Max is similar to Wi-Fi, but with a substantially larger range of up to 
25–30 miles. It is based on a separate standard, 802.16.
Wireless
VoIP
Wireless Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) is used to transmit voice 
with internet wireless networks like Wi-Fi and Wi-Max.
ZigBee
ZigBee is a wireless technology that coordinates communication among 
thousands of tiny sensors These sensors can be scattered throughout 
offices, farms, or factories, picking up bits of information about 
temperature, chemicals, water, or even motion.
M-commerce Growth and Share
Starting from the early years of the 21st century, m-commerce has expe­
rienced significant growth. The revenues from m-commerce transactions 
have increased worldwide from $3.4 billion in 2002 to $22.2 billion in 
2005[4]. The m-commerce revenues are projected to reach $88 billion in 
2009[4] (see Figure 2.1).
The growth of m-commerce worldwide is directly associated with the 
global growth and proliferation of wireless devices including cell phones 
and modern wireless PDAs called smartphones. M-commerce growth 
is also associated with advantages in wireless technology, for example, 
a switch from 2G to 3G wireless communication and implementation 
Table 2.1  M-Commerce Technology Termsn (continued)

	
Mobile Applications	
23
of Wi-Max technology. Companies find more opportunities to employ 
wireless technology and develop m-commerce applications that provide 
value-added offerings and create monetary and non-monetary value for 
the customers.
However, compared with overall e-commerce revenues, m-commerce 
still represents a small portion of these revenues. The revenues generated 
through e-commerce are measured in trillions of dollars (see Chapter 1), 
which dwarfs the level of revenues in the m-commerce industry. According 
to a survey conducted in 2005–2006, the share of m-commerce applica­
tions in overall e-commerce implementation is relatively small[5]. Almost 
71% of respondents identified m-commerce market share as being less 
than 5% of the overall e-commerce volume of transactions. About 21% 
of those that responded to the survey consider the m-commerce share 
between 5–10%, and only 8% of respondents indicated that the level of 
m-commerce is about 10–30%[5]. The explanation of these results may be 
related to the fact that m-commerce is a relatively recent extension of the 
traditional e-commerce, and, thus, did not gain a larger share in organiza­
tions. In addition, m-commerce limitations that will be presented later in 
3.4
7.6
14.5
22.2
88.0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
2002
2003
2004
2005
2009
Figure 2.1  Global M-commerce revenues, $billion

24	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
this chapter preclude the organizations from further implementation of 
m-commerce applications.
On a global scale, m-commerce applications are most commonly used 
in the Western European countries, Japan and the U.S. The U.S. market 
of m-commerce, which has lagged those in Japan and Europe, is now 
growing at a high rate catching up with the other competitors.
M-commerce Value-added Offerings and Benefits
Besides the proliferation of wireless devices and improvements in wireless 
technology, the growth of m-commerce is driven by value-added offerings 
that the wireless models and applications may provide to the customers. 
The main value-added offerings, also called m-commerce characteristics[6], 
are Mobility and Broad Reach (see Figure 2.2). Mobility is the main value-
added characteristic directly imbedded in this application. In comparison 
with general e-commerce, a mobile device can be carried around, and the 
access to the Internet is not dependent upon the device’s location. Espe­
cially, it is independent from the wired Internet access points (locations). 
Broad Reach is another critical value-added characteristic of m-commerce 
that enables m-commerce applications to reach customers (through their 
wireless devices) at any point in time in distributed locations.
Based on Mobility and Broad Reach, m-commerce provides more 
value-added offerings (see Figure 2.2)[6]:
• Product/Service localization enables identification of user 
location at any point in time, and provides services associated 
with driving directions (navigations system), location of 
nearby facilities (restaurants, hotels, entertainment, etc.), and 
emergency service (On-Star system for GM vehicles).
• Personalization is a feature of m-commerce that allows 
preparation of selling and service information for individual 
and business customers associated with their location, cell 
phone number, or other parameters. For example, Google’s 
personalized information for mobile customers (www.google.
com/mobile) may include a preview of the latest e-mail 
account messages; headlines from Google News and other top 

	
Mobile Applications	
25
news sources; weather forecasts, stock quotes, and movie show 
times; and a variety of other popular feeds.
• Ubiquity is a value-added offering of m-commerce that 
enables access to the Internet or a customer through 
m-commerce at any location and at any given time regardless 
of wired Internet access points. This feature is directly derived 
from m-commerce mobility and broad reach.
• Instant connectivity provides easy and quick connection of a 
customer to m-commerce applications. As long as the wireless 
device is on, it is instantly connected to the available internet-
based applications.
• Convenience as a value-added offering of m-commerce, is 
directly associated with the ability to easily carry a wireless 
device, and its ability to connect instantly to the internet and 
m-commerce environment.
The results of a survey conducted in 2005–2006[5] revealed some 
important principles of implementing m-commerce. Almost 61% of 
respondents identified that the most important principle is providing 
value-added offerings to the m-commerce users. Additionally, almost 55% 
of the respondents consider free of charge mobile commerce service to be 
M-commerce
Broad Reach 
Mobility 
Product/Service Localization 
Personalization  
Ubiquity 
Instant Connectivity 
Convenience 
Main Value-added
Characteristics 
Value-added Offerings 
Figure 2.2  Value-added offerings

26	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
the second important principle of implementing m-commerce solutions. 
Other common principles of m-commerce implementation (in descend­
ing order) include m-commerce as a complement to the e-commerce 
channel of marketing and sales; utilization of innovative mobile technol­
ogy in m-commerce; and utilization of existing e-commerce resources in 
developing m-commerce solutions.
When asked about the main benefits of implementing e-commerce 
and m-commerce applications, the respondents have presented different 
results[5]. The e-commerce benefits are predominantly associated with 
monetary value creation. Approximately 84% of the respondents identi­
fied the benefits of revenue growth by adding a new online channel of 
sales; cost reduction by reducing inventory level and cost; and shortening 
procurement cycle (procure-to-pay cycle), which leads to cost reduction. 
At the same time, benefits of m-commerce are predominantly related 
to non-monetary value creation including improved communication 
and relationships with customers, faster delivery of products and/or ser­
vices, and better reliability and control of customer orders (76% of the 
respondents).
Limitations and Problems of M-commerce
The results of the survey[5] also revealed substantial differences in most 
critical drawbacks and problems in implementing e-commerce and 
m-commerce applications. The most common drawbacks and problems 
in implementing e-commerce applications are (in descending order): high 
cost, data security, poor integration with internal systems (like ERP), low 
ROI, and lack of universal standards. In contrast, the most common 
drawbacks in implementing m-commerce applications are associated 
with design of mobile devices (small screens that cannot provide reach 
Internet contents and multimedia) and wireless technology (insufficient 
speed of connection, poor reception/signal interferences, etc.). The only 
common drawback between the two groups of applications is the high 
cost of implementation.
The main limitations and associated problems of m-commerce are 
summarized in Table 2.2.

	
Mobile Applications	
27
2.2  M-Commerce Models and Applications
Groups of Models
M-commerce models can be clustered into two main groups: active and 
passive models. The active m-commerce model relates to wireless appli­
cations, in which the user has to take the initiative on his or her wireless 
device to start these applications. For example, a customer opens a web 
site on a wireless PDA to download a song, news, or weather information. 
In contrast, the passive m-commerce model is activated by an external 
source of wireless communication for accomplishing the assigned jobs. 
An example of such model is stock market alerts delivered on a user’s 
wireless device.
Depending on the performed functions, m-commerce models can be 
further subdivided into commercial transactions, content delivery and 
telemetry services (see Figure 2.3).
Table 2.2  Limitations/Problems of M-commerce
Limitations/Problems
Description
Insufficient bandwidth
Low in comparison with wired e-commerce bandwidth 
and speed of connection. Long time or difficult to 
download multimedia files. Sufficient bandwidth is 
necessary for widespread use and it must be inexpensive.
Transmission interferences
Weather and terrain problems as well as distance-limited 
connection affect the quality of wireless transmission and 
may lead to poor reception.
Security standards
Universal standards for using wireless communications 
are still not available. Switching from one wireless 
provider to another may change standards needed to use 
m-commerce applications.
Human interface with 
device
Screen and keyboards are usually small, uncomfortable, 
and tedious for many people to use.
Power consumption
Batteries with long life are needed for mobile computing; 
color screens and Wi-Fi consume more electricity.
Wireless Applications 
Protocol (WAP) limitations
WAP sites are still cumbersome in comparison with Web 
sites They cannot provide rich media format due to small 
screen size of most cell phones and PDAs, and relatively 
low speed of connection.
Potential health hazards
Potential health damage from cellular radio frequency 
emission. More car accidents are possibly related to 
drivers talking on cell phones while driving.

28	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
The m-commerce Commercial Transactions group includes a vari­
ety of online selling and buying activities tailored to mobile phones and 
PDAs. These devices are being equipped with the internet-based capabili­
ties of browsing, selection, purchase of item or service, and payment. One 
of the largest groups of active m-commerce applications within this cat­
egory is wireless online financial applications including bank and credit 
card payments, and stock trading. Another important m-commerce trans­
action is to initiate and pay for purchases and services in real time while 
shopping in stores. Passive m-commerce applications in this category may 
be associated with using wireless devices that include digital cash cards for 
paying and recording payments of toll, mass-transit, fast food, and other 
transactions.
The m-commerce Content Delivery group of applications is based on 
the wireless devices’ ability to retrieve information, such as weather, transit 
M-COMMERCE
Active
M-commerce
Passive
M-commerce 
Commercial
Transactions
Content
Delivery  
Telemetry
Services
–Financial
Applications
–Buying /Shopping
and Selling
–Auctions
–Exchanges
–Enterprise-based
Transactions 
–Advertising
–Information and
News
–Personalized
Service
–Consumer Service  
–Global Positioning
System
–Intrabusiness,
Dispatching, and
Warehouse
Management
Systems
–Supply Chain
Management
–Pervasive
Computing
–RFID
Figure 2.3  Classification of M-commerce applications

	
Mobile Applications	
29
schedules, flash news, and market prices, from the providers of information 
and directory services. With 3G transmission technology, digital products, 
such as MP3 music, software, high-resolution images, and full-motion 
advertising messages, can be easily downloaded to and used in wireless 
devices. Passive m-commerce applications may include all kinds of mail, 
such as e-mail, fax documents and digitized voice mail that can be received 
passively to the wireless devices. In addition, users may be tempted by 
some services free of cost for viewing audio or video advertisements deliv­
ered to their wireless devices. Any kind of security breach, illegal intrusion, 
unusual event, or unacceptable condition will trigger automatic notifi­
cation to users regardless of location. Airline companies are testing this 
technology to alert frequent air passengers regarding seat availability and 
upgrades, and to notify them about the changes through wireless devices.
The last group of m-commerce applications is Telemetry Services. 
This group includes the monitoring of objects (products, people, equip­
ment, trucks, etc.) using Global Positioning System (GPS) or Radio Fre­
quency Identification ( RFID). These devices are used for the purpose of 
locating objects, scanning, tracking, and dispatching them. Specifically, 
this is useful in Supply Chain Management applications. The telemetry 
services may also be used in homes for contacting and activating remote 
systems like home appliances, TVs, etc. For example, delivery drivers will 
ping intelligent dispensing machines or users can transmit messages to 
activate remote recording devices or service systems. Passive m-commerce 
telemetry is the foundation of still another form of interactive marketing. 
Stores will be able to market their products and services by constantly 
transmitting promotional and inducing messages and doling out some­
thing that gets the attention of both passers-by and remote mobile users.
The results of the survey[5] that considered implementation of 
m-commerce applications showed that the most common applications 
of m-commerce (in descending order) were mobile banking, mobile dis­
patching, RFID, mobile investments, and mobile auctions. These results 
are not surprising. Mobile banking applications, including account main­
tenance, bill payments, and account transactions, are relatively standard­
ized. In addition, they do not require a high speed of connection, and are 
easy to display on the small screen of a mobile device. Mobile dispatching 
is also popular applications in intra-organization enterprise management, 

30	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
and RFID applications are associated with supply-chain tracking and 
shipping/receiving of orders.
Financial Applications
A typical financial m-commerce application is Wireless Banking. A vari­
ety of banks offers a customer mobile access to financial and account 
information for purposes of making inquiries and financial transactions. 
For example, the HDRC Bank (www.hdfcbank.com) enables its custom­
ers to use a variety of mobile financial services using SMS (see Table 2.1). 
Among the services are:
• Balance inquiry of all accounts linked to customer 
identification number
• Other transactions provide that information on the primary 
account
• Checking the last three transactions in a customer’s account
• Placing a stop payment on a check
• Requesting a check book
• Requesting an account statement
• Check status inquiry
• Bill presentation
• Bill payment
• Fixed deposit inquiry
• A help menu, which gives the transaction codes for the 
various transactions.
SMS allows a customer to send a short text message with a designated 
code number from his/ her mobile device instead of making a phone call. 
The response is sent as an SMS message, all in the matter of a few seconds. 
This message travels from the mobile phone to an SMS center of the cel­
lular service provider (like Verizon or T-Mobile), and from there it travels 
to the Bank’s systems. The information is retrieved and sent back to the 
mobile phone via the SMS Center, all in a matter of a few seconds.
The applications of Wireless Trading and Portfolio Management enable 
customers to use wireless devices for managing, controlling, and monitoring 

	
Mobile Applications	
31
stock, bond, and mutual fund investments. For example, Charles Schwab, a 
discount stockbroker company, provides wireless access to customer accounts 
for a variety of trade-related activities. These include getting real-time quotes 
and order status, placing Buy, Sell and Short orders. The activities may also 
involve monitoring all pending orders and transactions, providing account 
statistics, and accessing news, account details, watch lists, and others.
Financial organizations that provide wireless services to their custom­
ers usually make these services complementary to the existing web-based 
wired services, and free of charge. The complementation and free use of 
m-commerce applications in this case is an important way to attract more 
customers to use these and other financial services. In addition, making 
the wireless service a complimentary one requires fewer investments for 
developing, implementing, and maintaining this service.
Overall, the usage of wireless applications in financial/banking institu­
tions is still relatively small as compared with traditional web-based wired 
applications. Surveys indicate there is strong latent demand for these offer­
ings that is waiting for the technology and transmission speeds to improve.
Shopping and Auction Applications
The number of web sites with wireless shopping opportunities continues 
to grow. In practice, m-commerce shopping is done in several major ways.
Many popular shopping sites, like Amazon, Yahoo Shopping, and 
eBay offer mobile shopping and auctioning complementary to their 
online shopping and auction tools. These include wireless shopping carts, 
checkout process, bidding, payments, and others. For example, eBay’s 
mobile capabilities involve viewing items with pictures, getting auction 
details, placing bids, checking the auction status, and receiving text-­
messaging alerts (see Figure 2.4).
SMS-based shopping represents the use of SMS for identifying the best 
prices for specific products. For example, Smarter.com offers the ‘Smarter 
SMS.’ A customer, who found an item in a store, can text a Manufac­
turer Part Number (MPN) or product SKU specified on that product to a 
designated phone number (Figure 2.5). Smarter.com will send back a text 
message with the lowest price using the search of the product prices from 
popular shopping sites.

32	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
Google offers the same type of service through its shortcodes (short-
codes can be used in place of phone numbers). In addition to the price, 
Google’s SMS service (www.google.com/sms) also returns the store, which 
offers the lowest price. Frucall (www. frucall.com) provides a similar ser­
vice but by voice message. According to this service, a customer calls a free 
number (1-888-DO-FRUCALL) and types in the MPN (Manufacturer’s 
Product Number) of the item. The Frucall service uses Amazon, Google, 
Yahoo, Street Prices, and Shopping.com to get results. Within seconds, an 
automated voice will tell the customer price ranges for a new item, noting 
in a separate range the prices for used items, if available.
Location-based Shopping (telemetry shopping services) provides shop­
ping directions in the area where a customer shops based on GPS. Some­
times this application is also called Location Commerce (L-commerce).
One of the companies that provide l-commerce service is Slifter (www
.slifter.com). Through Slifter, a customer can find out where a product is 
Figure 2.4  eBay Wireless Auction
Figure 2.5  SMS-based Shopping
A. Sending Product SKU
B. Receiving Information on Lowest Price

	
Mobile Applications	
33
sold in the local area. By entering a zip code along with the MPN/SKU 
(Stock Keeping Unit), the service returns distances to local shops, which 
sell the product.
Finally, Wireless In-store Shopping is another opportunity to employ 
mobile devices for quickly identifying product prices right in a store and 
eliminating waiting time at checkout. For example, Fujitsu Transaction 
Solutions[7] has introduced a self-service retail scanner, U-Scan Shopper 
(see Figure 2.6), which essentially is a wireless computer with an integral 
bar code scanner mounted on a shopping cart.
According to Fujitsu Transaction Solutions[7], the U-Scan Shopper 
offers the following advantages to customers:
• Self-scanning in aisle–costumers can scan and bag items 
while shopping to get a running basket total and eliminate 
waiting time at checkout
• Mobile price-checker–provides immediate price lookups for 
shoppers if shelf labels are missing or not clearly visible
• Pick-up notification–place in-store orders, such as deli or 
pharmacy requests; U-Scan Shopper will alert the customer 
when the order is ready for pickup
• Store directory–provides detailed item location and 
availability.
Figure 2.6  Fujitsu U-Scan Shopper

34	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
The company even suggests that customers might upload a shopping 
list to the store’s web site before leaving home, and then download the list 
to the shopping cart upon arriving at the store. For retailers, the U-Scan 
offers what Fujitsu calls “true 1:1 marketing” that enables customized, 
personalized in-store ad campaigns that are relevant both to shoppers’ 
preferences and to their location in the store. The shopper’s location is 
determined by shelf-mounted, battery-powered infrared transmitters 
with programmable ID.
Intrabusiness and Enterprise Applications
The most common m-commerce intrabusiness application is Wireless Job 
Dispatching allowing voice and non-voice communication with mobile 
employees. These include using mobile devices to make task assignments, 
providing scheduling and other details of employee jobs. Wireless job 
dispatching can be used effectively in such areas as transportation, taxis, 
rent-a-car, utilities, field services, health care, and security. Dispatching 
solutions enable the improvement of response time to accept required tasks 
or promptly changing them with reduced resources. In addition, wireless 
dispatching can provide real-time tracking of work centers and mobile 
employees, increase dispatched efficiency, and reduce administrative work.
Another popular m-commerce intrabusiness application is the Wire­
less Warehouse Management System (WWMS), which enables a com­
pany to manage, collect, monitor, and update warehouse data directly 
from the warehouse or other part of an organization. Using wireless 
devices, employees can enter the warehouse/material transaction right 
where it happens on the plant floor, on the forklift, at receiving, at ship­
ping, and anywhere in between (see Figure 2.7).
According to IQMS (www.iqms.com), one of the leading companies 
in WWMS, the main benefits of this system are:
• Collecting inventory data from the plant floor using either a 
dedicated hand-held scanner or radio frequency-enabled PDA.
• Using a single database with all inventory transactions.
• Providing real-time integration with scheduling, production, 
and sales.

	
Mobile Applications	
35
• Supporting packaging and distribution requirements for 
EDI-based shipments.
• Improving customer service with 100% real-time updates to 
inventory information, available to all departments—customer 
service, accounting, manufacturing, shipping, and receiving.
• Potential to drastically reduce the reliance on keyboard and 
mouse-based computer interaction when recording plant floor 
activity.
• Reducing time spent at dedicated workstations and 
dramatically improved accuracy of data input.
Pervasive Computing
Technology is gradually moving from personal computers to handheld 
intelligent devices with imbedded technology and connectivity. Perva­
sive Computing provides convenient access to relevant information and 
applications through a new class of ubiquitous, intelligent appliances that 
have the ability to function when and where needed.
Andover Controls Corp., which has 100,000 building-control sys­
tems installed worldwide, is working with Goodman Manufacturing 
Co. to cut energy consumption an expected 10% with ZigBee wireless 
sensors[8]. In a test, Andover has installed four matchbox-size sensors in 
about 25 hotel rooms in Texas. One sensor is placed on the air condi­
tioner, while the others are placed on the walls to monitor motion and 
Figure 2.7  Wireless Warehouse 
Management System

36	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
temperature in the room. The sensors track whether the air conditioner 
is on, if someone is in the room, and the temperature. The data moves 
through the bucket brigade of sensors to the front desk, which monitors 
the temperature and the equipment. A clerk, or even a computer, can shut 
off an air conditioner if one room is getting too cold. Andover expects the 
system to be more energy efficient than relying on customers to fiddle 
with the controls.
The term “Pervasive Computing” means that technology moves 
beyond personal computing to everyday devices and objects that surround 
us for the purposes of providing intelligent information and communica­
tion. Pervasive computing is also known as Ubiquitous Computing and 
Embedded Computing. The goal of pervasive computing is to create an 
environment where the connectivity of devices is embedded in such a way 
that the connectivity is unobtrusive and always available. Thus, the value-
added offerings for pervasive computing may be as following:
• Always on and connected computing devices in the 
environment that is brought about by a convergence of 
advanced electronic, and particularly, wireless technologies 
and the internet.
• Using devices that are not personal computers but very 
tiny—even invisible—devices, either mobile or embedded 
in almost any type of object imaginable.
• Creating a ubiquitous network of devices that can 
communicate and share information with each other.
Pervasive computing may be used for consumer-centric solutions 
including mobile or imbedded devices in vehicles, tools, home appliances, 
hotel equipment, clothing and various consumer goods—all communi­
cating through interconnected networks. There are numerous examples 
of these solutions provided today and planned for near future: an exercise 
machine maker may equip its products with free web service; a convec­
tion microwave oven downloads recipes and automatically sets the time, 
adjusts the power, and does the roasting, baking, and broiling.
Pervasive computing may also be employed in business-centric solu­
tions. For example, elevators in commercial buildings may be equipped 

	
Mobile Applications	
37
with internet-based display screens that continually deliver news, finan­
cial data, and advertising customized for each captive audience. Another 
example is a retailer that utilizes radio frequency identification (RFID) for 
monitoring, tracking, and finding packages in its warehouse.
The elements of value creation (benefits) of pervasive computing 
are also related to whether these are consumer or business-centric appli­
cations. For consumers, pervasive computing provides life-­enhancing 
appli­cations that improve quality of life, increase productivity of ­consumer-
associated activities, and improve security of life. For business-centric 
applications, the benefits are also related to increased productivity of 
operations, but may be also associated with reducing cost of inventories 
and labor resources, increasing accuracy of transactions, and providing on 
time delivery of products and services.
2.3  RFID M-Commerce
RFID History
One of the most popular applications of pervasive computing is Radio 
Frequency Identification (RFID) tags used in the area of supply chain 
management. According to the AMR Research, “Ultimately, RFID will 
be a core technology deployed across the Supply Chain in most indus­
tries.” David Luttenberger, Director of Packaging Strategies, Inc. rec­
ognized that RFID “. . . will be used to radically transform the entire 
distribution chain and retail environment tomorrow”[8].
The history of RFID goes back more than four decades. In the 1960’s 
an RFID precursor, called electronic article surveillance, grew into wide­
spread commercial use. Simplistic in nature, surveillance allowed a remote 
sensor to be able to detect the presence or absence of its corresponding 
tags. One of the first commercial applications was undertaken in 1977, 
following the release of RFID technologies by Los Alamos Scientific Lab­
oratories. Identronix Research explored the use of RFID tags embedded 
into livestock, usually on the ear, in order to be able to track their move­
ment, manage their care, and identify them without ruining the cowhide 
with branding. Other early RFID applications were geared towards the 
tracking of vehicles and for internal inventory tracking within the bound­
aries of the organization. The logistics companies and carriers industry 

38	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
have become frontrunners in deploying RFID technology. The 1990s saw 
improved technology allowing greater functionality and the slow spread 
of RFID applications and implementation of Electronic Product Code 
(EPC) standards.
However, as correctly mentioned by Ethan Harris, Sr. Economist, 
Lehman Brothers, referring to RFID, “One of the great lessons of U.S. 
economic history is that you get benefits from new technology long after 
the innovation. That comes from businesses figuring out how to use it 
right.”[8] This happened in 2003 when Wal-Mart announced that the 
mega retailer’s top 100 suppliers must put RFID tags carrying EPC on 
pallets and cases by January 2005. Wal-Mart later informed the world 
that all company’s suppliers would fall under this directive by the end of 
2006. Reinforcing this supply chain revolution were other major retailers: 
Target, Best Buy and Home Depot of the U.S.; Marks & Spencer, Tesco 
and Woolworths of the U.K.; the Metro Group of Germany; and Car­
refour of France, along with the U.S. Department of Defense, issuing the 
same requirement to their suppliers.
Packaging Strategies and Cap Gemini Ernst & Young conducted a 
survey to evaluate interest and actual adoption of RFID applications[9]. 
The general survey results showed that 54% of those surveyed believed 
that Wal-Mart’s 2005 supplier mandate would be a “catalyst” for the evo­
lution of RFID adoption in the industry; 15% of respondents feel it is 
“overrated”; and 31% of those surveyed had no opinion. Almost 60% of 
respondents agreed that retail would be mostly impacted from the first 
wave of RFID adoption; and 31% of respondents believe that the health 
and pharmaceutical industries will be also affected.
RFID Goal and Underlying Technology
RFID is a technology that uses radio-frequency waves to transfer data 
between a reader and a movable item for its identification, location, and 
tracking. The main goal of using RFID tags in supply chain management is 
to enable a continuous 100% visibility of all assets within an enterprise or 
supply chain with no human intervention. RFID tags are miniature tran­
sponders comprised of a unique 64 or 96-bit microprocessor EPC identifier 
with a tiny radio antenna (see in Figure 2.8 an example of RFID tag used 

	
Mobile Applications	
39
for baggage in Hong Kong International Airport). Electronic data encoded 
in RFID tag contains SKU number, number of items in shipment, supplier 
identification, date of shipping, and item cost. RFID tags are usually a small 
object, such as an adhesive sticker that can be attached to or incorporated 
into a product during the manufacturing or packaging process.
RFID tags may be produced as passive and active tags. Passive RFID 
tags do not have their own power supply: the minute electrical current 
induced in the antenna by the incoming radio-frequency scan provides 
enough power for the tag to send a response of its ID number. Active RFID 
tags, on the other hand, must have a power source, and may have longer 
ranges and larger memories than passive tags, as well as the ability to store 
additional information sent by the transceiver (see Table 2.3). In addition, 
the active tags send product information out without being induced.
The passive and active tags can also be writable tags (multiple read 
and re-write tags), meaning that they can be used a number of times with 
different products and information, and non-writable tags (write once, 
read many times tags)—for multiple use with a specific product. As pas­
sive non-writable tags are much cheaper to manufacture, the vast majority 
of RFID tags in existence are of the passive non-writable variety.
Microprocessor with
Product Info 
Antenna
Figure 2.8  RFID Tag

40	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
In addition to a microprocessor (chip) with product information, 
RFID tags also contain an Antennae and RFID Reader, which converts 
an analog radio signal into a digitized data format (see Figure 2.9). The 
Reader sends this data to a computer/server that uses special RFID soft­
ware for manipulating RFID data (store, retrieve, update, and analyze). 
RFID is fast, reliable, and does not require physical sight or contact 
between reader/scanner and the tagged item. Besides, RFID tags, Anten­
nae, Reader, and computer with RFID software, the system may also need 
a special equipment/printer for printing additional RFID tags.
Where RFID is Used in Supply Chain Management
RFID tags and associated wireless equipment may be used in various 
steps of a supply chain process inside and outside an organization. In 
the Receiving step, RFID may be used to validate cases and pallets auto­
matically as a forklift drives through the dock door (see Figure 2.10). 
Table 2.3  Active and Passive RFID Tags
Active Tag
Passive Tag
Tag power 
Source
Internal to tag (battery)
Radio frequency (RF) energy 
transferred from reader
Radio signal
Transmits radio signal without 
activation from reader
Reflects radio signal from reader
Range
Up to 100m (300 ft)
Up to 5 m (15 ft)
Multi-tag reading
1000’s of tags recognized with 
high speed
200–600 within 3–5 m 
(10–15 ft) of reader
Data storage
Up to 128 Kb of read/write
128 bytes of read/write
Price
Between $15 to $40
Approximately $0.10–0.75 
By 2007–08, may come down 
to $0.05
Antenna and Reader
RFID
Tag
Server with RFID
Software  
RFID Data
Figure 2.9  General Process of Reading RFID Tag

	
Mobile Applications	
41
Automated reading enables cases and pallets to be sorted quickly. RFID 
can support cross-docking operations where the system directs a forklift 
operator to deliver the items directly to an assembly line or to a particular 
dock for immediate shipment. Put-away and Picking is another applica­
tion for RFID in the warehouse. RFID can identify the location of the 
pallet, and thus the inventory items will not be lost.
In the Shipping step, an RFID system can tell the user when a 
customer’s order is being put on the wrong truck. RFID may also be 
employed for Order Tracking to enable the system to know where the 
customer’s order is and that it has been filled correctly. Finally, RFID may 
be used for Equipment Tracking, when it keeps track of the company’s 
assets. It can tell where all of the pallets, dollies, and forklifts are located. 
Rewriteable RFID tags can administer a maintenance program, telling 
the last time a piece of equipment was serviced and who did the work. 
The technician looks at the service menu on the handheld display, checks 
the maintenance items performed, aims the device at the RFID tag, and 
pulls the trigger. The information on the tag is updated.
RFID Value-added Offerings and Value Creation
RFID provides a variety of value-added offerings to the organizations, 
their customers, and suppliers. These value-added offerings can be sum­
marized as following:
• No “line of sight” requirements: Bar code reads can sometimes 
be limited or problematic due to the need to have a direct 
RFID
Reader 
RFID
Tags 
Figure 2.10  Examples of RFID Usage in Supply 
Chain Management[10]

42	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
“line of sight” between a scanner and a bar code. RFID tags 
can be read through materials without line of sight.
• Automated reading: RFID tags can be read automatically 
when a tagged product comes past or near a reader, reducing 
the labor required to scan product and allowing more 
proactive, real-time tracking.
• High read rates: RFID tags ultimately offer higher read rates 
than bar codes, especially in high-speed operations such as 
carton sort.
• Data capacity: RFID tags can be easily encoded with item 
details such as lot, batch, weight, etc.
• “Write” capabilities: Because RFID tags can be rewritten 
with new data as supply chain activities are completed, tagged 
products carry updated information as they move throughout 
the supply chain.
• The value creation (benefits) of RFID is usually associated 
with more efficient utilization of resources (labor, materials, 
etc.) and improvement in production and delivery processes. 
Main benefits include:
• Reduced inventory with real-time visibility: RFID enables 
real-time visibility to assets and goods across the supply chain.
• Reduced labor costs: RFID enables more automated reading, 
reduces labor in manufacturing and distribution while 
ensuring highly accurate processes (seven seconds for a single 
bar code scan).
• Improved control and financial settlement: RFID can be 
used to improve processes now plagued by inaccuracy, such 
as deliveries to customers where there are discrepancies about 
what was actually delivered and received.
• Increase efficiency and product flow: RFID eliminates 
many manual and paper-based operations, such as paper 
“travelers” that follow an item through the manufacturing and 
distributions process. RFID reduces the number of manual 
activities associated with information flow and product 
hand-offs between steps, as well as processes and functions 
(i.e., automating receiving activities).

	
Mobile Applications	
43
• Improved decision-making: RFID provides real-time 
visibility to supply chain assets and gives operators (such 
as repair technicians) detailed product information right 
from the tag; improves decision-making and often speeds 
processing.
• Goods authentication: With accurate product tracking, 
RFID can reduce losses from shrinkage and counterfeit 
goods.
• Improved supply chain integration: RFID tag data can be 
the “information glue” that enables multiple parties in the 
supply chain to connect regarding the flow of goods.
Return on Investments
As mentioned before, the implementation of RFID may lead to reduction 
of inventory cost. According to some research, this cost reduction can be up 
to 5% of the total cost of inventory[11]. A reduction of labor cost through 
automated RFID inventory reading can be up to 7.5% of the total ware­
house labor cost. In addition, improvements due to RFID efficiency and 
inventory tracking may increase sales by about 7% of the total sales in a 
company[11]. These quantitative results may be used to identify and analyze 
RFID return on investments. In Table 2.4, you can find ROI analysis based 
on the described sale increase and cost reduction.
RFID Problems and Issues
Implementation of RFID is not free from major issues and problems. Even 
Wal-Mart’s next leap forward in the ultra-efficient RFID environment is 
showing some signs of fizzling. A pioneer in low-cost practices widely cop­
ied by competitors like Target, Best Buy and many others, Wal-Mart has 
pushed its suppliers to use RFID tags to chop labor and inventory costs 
anew. However, tests and pilot projects using the tags for many of these 
suppliers do not show any savings, and suppliers forced to invest in the 
relatively expensive technology are grumbling. In many of these suppli­
ers, the ROI from RFID is uncertain, and payback may potentially take a 
number of years.

44	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
ROI Analysis: RFID
Parameter used 
in calculations
2007
2008
2009
2010
Revenue, COGS, and gross income, $
Total revenue from sales (forecast)
330,500,000
396,600,000
475,920,000
Total cost of goods sold (COGS)
247,875,000
297,450,000
356,940,000
including:
  Inventory cost (50% of COSG)
0.5
123,937,500
148,725,000
178,470,000
  Warehouse labor cost (2% of COSG)
0.02
4,957,500
5,949,000
7,138,800
Gross income
82,625,000
99,150,000
118,980,000
Gross income margin (% of sales)
25%
25%
25%
Investment and costs, $
Total initial set-up (investment) cost
24,500,000
Recurring cost of components and infrastructure (15–20% of investment)
0.20
4,900,000
4,900,000
4,900,000
Total cost
24,500,000
4,900,000
4,900,000
4,900,000
Table 2.4  ROI Analysis of RFID

	
Mobile Applications	
45
ROI Analysis: RFID
Parameter used 
in calculations
2007
2008
2009
2010
Income and savings, $
Income through increased sale (up to 7% of total sale)
0.07
5,783,750
6,940,500
8,328,600
Reduce inventory (up to 5% of total inventory cost)
0.05
6,196,875
7,436,250
8,923,500
Reduce warehouse cost (up to 7.5% of labor cost in warehouse)
0.075
371,813
446,175
535,410
Total income and savings
0
12,352,438
14,822,925
17,787,510
Annual profit, $
−24,500,000
7,452,438
9,922,925
12,887,510
Period, years
3
Required rate of return, %
5%
Average income per year, $
10,087,624
Average income as a % of gross income
10.1%
Payback, years
2.4
ROI, %
41%

46	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
The modern generation of RFID tags cost about 10–15 cents apiece 
while bar codes cost a fraction of a cent. Thus, the usage of RFID tags 
may be cost-inefficient for many low-cost products and pallets. Beyond 
the tags, suppliers have to bear the cost of buying hardware—readers, 
transponders, antennas—and computer software to track and analyze the 
data. Suppliers have to pay additional fees to integrate that software with 
their current inventory and manufacturing applications. For a consumer 
goods supplier, the initial investment cost may reach, according to esti­
mates, $9–25 million, and annual recurring costs of RFID components 
(tags, readers, etc.) and infrastructure maintenance may reach 15–20% of 
the initial investment cost[11]. On top of that, suppliers say that instead 
of saving labor, RFID tagging actually takes more: While bar codes are 
printed on cases at the factory, because most manufacturers have yet to 
adopt RFID, those tags have to be put on by hand at the warehouse.
Originally, RFID implementation lacked globally accepted standards, 
particularly the electronic product code (EPC). However, the recently 
developed EPC Global Standards Generation 2 (EPC Gen 2) can over­
come this problem. Another issue is the reading accuracy of RFID tags. 
The reading accuracy variations depend on a supplier’s quality of printing 
tags, the tag’s mounting position, passing speed, and influence by metal/
moisture, etc. In general, the reading accuracy is just around 90%. This 
may be lower than the bar code accuracy that can reach 99%.
2.4  Chapter 2 Summary: Managerial Aspects 
of Mobile Commerce
	 1.	 Mobile commerce or m-commerce refers to commercial (buying and 
selling) business models and applications carried out via a mobile 
devices such as cell phone or and smartphones (personal data assis­
tants). M-commerce is a natural extension of e-commerce, although 
in reality wireless communication may also have non-commercial 
elements like downloading information or media files.
	 2.	 The growth of m-commerce worldwide is directly associated with 
the global growth and proliferation of wireless devices including cell 
phones and modern smartphones. M-commerce growth is also asso­
ciated with advantages in wireless technology, for example, a switch 

	
Mobile Applications	
47
from 2G to 3G wireless communication and implementation of W
i-Max technology. The growth of m-commerce is also driven by 
value-added offerings that the wireless models provide to the cus­
tomers including m-commerce mobility, broad reach, personaliza­
tion, ubiquity, instant connectivity, and convenience.
 3. Despite the extensive growth pattern, m-commerce represents a 
tiny market share in the overall e-commerce. M-commerce revenues 
still correspond with a very small portion of the total e-commerce 
revenues.
	 4.	 Common limitations of using m-commerce applications are associ­
ated with design of mobile devices (small screens that lacks reach 
internet contents and multimedia), wireless technology (insufficient 
speed of connection, poor reception/signal interferences, etc.), and 
relatively high cost of implementation.
	 5.	 The m-commerce Commercial Transactions include a variety of 
online selling and buying activities tailored to mobile phones and 
PDAs. These devices are being equipped with the internet-based 
capabilities of browsing, selection, purchase of item or service, and 
payment. The m-commerce Content Delivery is based on the wire­
less devices’ ability to retrieve information, such as weather, transit 
schedules, flash news, and market prices, from the providers of infor­
mation and directory services. The m-commerce Telemetry Services 
include monitoring of objects (products, people, equipment, trucks, 
etc.) using Global Positioning System (GPS) or Radio Frequency 
Identification (RFID). These devices are used for the purpose of 
locating objects, scanning, tracking, and dispatching them.
	 6.	 Financial organizations that provide wireless services to their cus­
tomers usually make these services complementary to the existing 
web-based wired services, and free of charge. The complementation 
and free use of m-commerce applications in this case is an impor­
tant way to attract more customers to use these and other financial 
services. In addition, making the wireless service a complimentary 
one requires fewer investments for developing, implementing, and 
maintaining this service. Overall, the usage of wireless applications 
in financial/ banking institutions is still relatively small as compared 
with traditional web-based wired applications. Surveys indicate there 

48	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
is strong latent demand for these offerings that is waiting for the 
technology and transmission speeds to improve.
	 7.	 Many popular shopping sites, like Amazon, Yahoo Shopping, and 
eBay offer mobile shopping and auctioning complementary to their 
online shopping and auction tools. These include wireless shopping 
carts, checkout process, bidding, payments, and other elements on 
demand-side e-commerce.
	 8.	 The most common m-commerce intrabusiness application is Wire­
less Job Dispatching allowing voice and non-voice communication 
with mobile employees (in taxis, rent-a-car, utilities, field services, 
health care, and security). Dispatching solutions enable the improve­
ment of response time to accept required tasks or promptly chang­
ing them with reduced resources. In addition, wireless dispatching 
can provide real-time tracking of work centers and mobile employ­
ees, increase dispatched efficiency, and reduce administrative work. 
Wireless Warehouse Management System (WWMS) allows a 
company to manage, collect, monitor, and update warehouse data 
directly from the warehouse or other part of an organization.
	 9.	 The goal of pervasive computing is to create an environment where 
the connectivity of devices is embedded in such a way that the con­
nectivity is unobtrusive and always available. Pervasive computing 
may be used for consumer-centric solutions including mobile or 
imbedded devices in vehicles, tools, home appliances, hotel equip­
ment, clothing and various consumer goods—all communicating 
through interconnected networks. Pervasive computing may also 
be employed in business-centric solutions including utilization of 
radio frequency identification (RFID) for monitoring, tracking, 
and finding inventory.
 10. RFID is a technology that uses radio-frequency waves to transfer 
data between a reader and a movable item for its identification, loca­
tion, and tracking. The main goal of using RFID tags in supply chain 
management is to enable a continuous 100% visibility of all assets 
within an enterprise or supply chain with no human intervention. 
RFID tags and associated wireless equipment may be used in various 
steps of a supply chain process inside and outside an organization 

	
Mobile Applications	
49
including: order receiving, putting away and picking inventory in a 
warehouse, shipping, order tracking, and equipment tracking.
 11. RFID provides a variety of value-added offerings like automated 
reading of products/inventory with high read rate, radio tags that 
do not require “line of sight” for scanning, can be encoded with 
detailed information on the product, and may also be rewritable. 
The value creation (benefits) of RFID is usually associated with more 
efficient utilization of resources (labor, materials, and inventory), 
and improvement in production and delivery processes.
 12. Implementation of RFID is not free from major issues and prob­
lems. The modern generation of RFID tags cost about 10–15 cents 
apiece while bar codes cost a fraction of a cent. Thus, the usage of 
RFID tags may be cost-inefficient for many low-cost products and 
pallets. Beyond the tags, suppliers have to bear the cost of buying 
hardware—readers, transponders, antennas—and computer soft­
ware to track and analyze the data. The suppliers should pay addi­
tional fees to integrate that software with their current inventory 
and manufacturing applications. Originally, RFID implementation 
lacked globally accepted standards, particularly the electronic prod­
uct code (EPC). However, the recently developed EPC Global Stan­
dards Generation 2 (EPC Gen 2) will overcome this problem.
References
1.	 Telecom Trends International, “Mobile Commerce Takes Off,” 
Research Study, April 1, 2006, retrieved February 10, 2008 from 
www.telecomtrends.net/reports.htm.
2. Leung, K. and J. Antypas, “Improving Returns on M-Commerce 
Investments,” Journal of Business Strategy, 2001, 22 (5), p.12–13.
3. Barnes, S. J., “The MREFobile Commerce Value Chain: Analysis and 
Future Developments,” International Journal of Information Manage­
ment, 2002, 22 (2), p.91–108.
4.	 Payment News and Resource Center, “Statistics for Mobile 
­e-commerce,” retrieved September 10, 2007 from www.epaynews.com/
statistics/mcommstats.html#49.

50	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
  5.	 Radovilsky, Z., “M-Commerce and e-commerce Applications: Com­
parison of Implementation Results,” Journal of Academy of Business 
and Economics, Vol. VI, No. 2, 2006, p. 104–110.
  6. Turban, E., King, D., Lee, J.K., and D. Viehland, Electronic Com­
merce: A Managerial Perspective 2006, Prentice Hall, 4th Edition, 
2006, p. 389–390.
  7.	 “Advanced Self-checkout Systems Offer Improved Flexibility, Scal­
ability, Reliability and Usability,” May 2, 2007, retrieved on Febru­
ary 10, 2008 from www.fujitsu.com/us/services/retailing.
  8.	 Special Report, “Wireless Wonders, No Wires, No Rules,” April 26, 
2004, available at: BusinessWeek.com.
  9.	 Packaging Strategies and Cap Gemini Ernst & Young (CGE&Y), Sur­
vey on RFID, Business Wire, March 26, 2004.
10. Dusharme, M., “RFID Tunes into Supply Chain Management,” 
Quality Digest, October 2006, retrieved on February 10, 2008 from 
www.qualitydigest.com.
11. Bolan, C., “RFID Improves Supply Chain Efficiency, but Carries a 
Hefty Price Tag,” Global Cosmetic Industry, January 1, 2005.

The growth and proliferation of e-commerce required an adequate payment 
system that could provide quick and secure payment capabilities while con­
ducting business online. This facilitated the development of a completely 
new industry of e-commerce payments or simply e-payments, which are 
experiencing, along with other e-commerce models, significant growth. 
According to the industry statistics[1], the percentage of U.S. consumer bill 
payments that are made online will rise from 14% in 2006 to 28% by 
2010. In addition, between 2006 and 2010 the percentage of U.S. con­
sumer bill payments that are made by check will fall from 54% to 37%[1].
Credit card payments remain the main payment option in the B2C 
e-commerce environment with 59% of the total online payments[2] (see 
Figure 3.1). However, e-payment today is increasingly based on other 
options including payment intermediaries like PayPal, e-checks and 
e-cash, and other options (see Figure 3.1). In fact, the e-payment inter­
mediary service is the second largest option among online payments with 
18% of the total payments online.
Attracted by the prospect of better cash management, U.S. businesses 
are turning from checks to cards, according to a survey from Visa U.S.A. 
The survey found that 68% of U.S. businesses intend to reduce their reli­
ance on checks for commercial payments and 63% plan to increase their 
use of corporate payment cards for online and offline payments[3]. One of 
these cards is a procurement or purchasing card. Its utilization online has 
increased dramatically, with companies using this card for making larger 
payments for B2B online outsourcing. Besides purchasing cards, companies 
employ other methods of online payments like credit cards, intermediary 
payment services like PayPal, electronic currency payments, and others.
CHAPTER 3
Electronic Payment 
Applications

52	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
Due to a variety of different e-payments methods and their continu­
ous growth, it is important to understand what e-payment models need 
to be applied in various B2C and B2B e-commerce models. We also need 
to understand the value-added offerings and value creation in e-payment 
models. These and other topics will be covered in this chapter.
3.1  Characteristics and Classification 
of E-Payment Models
When business and individual consumers use a payment system online, 
they seek a payment environment that enables a quick, easy, and secure 
transaction. They also want to be sure that the payment system is inex­
pensive and may be used for different types of payments. In order to be 
successful, the value-added offerings (characteristics) of an e-payment 
system need to be the following:[4]
	 1.	 Applicability represents the availability of an e-payment system at 
the online point of sale (POS) for various payment sizes including 
large sums or micropayments, and for different destinations like 
merchants or private persons.
	 2.	 Ease to obtain defines the ability to register quickly to an e-payment 
system, and ease of the navigation in this system.
Credit Cards
Online
59%
Other Online
Payment Options
6% 
Intermediary
Payment Service
18%
Debit Cards
12%
E-check/E-cash
5%
Figure 3.1  Online payment options

	
Electronic Payment Applications	
53
	 3.	 Reliability/ease of use necessitates simplicity, ease of making pay­
ments, and transparency of use by customers and merchants.
	 4.	 Cost of transaction should be based on a fixed transaction fee or 
proportion/percentage of the sales value. In either case, the transac­
tion cost should be relatively small to allow payments of any size 
(large and micropayments).
	 5.	 Security represents a transmission mechanism from customer 
(buyer) to merchant (seller) with minimum risk; it also defines cus­
tomer confidence in storing proprietary information online.
	 6.	 Liability should be based on protecting customers from potential 
monetary losses.
	 7.	 Anonymity requires protection of personal information by an 
­e-payment system.
Among the characteristics, the security of transactions and customer 
information in an e-payment system places a crucial role. Customers 
would like to make sure that in an e-payment system, their financial data, 
including bank account and card information, will be securely transacted, 
and would not get into the hands of internet hackers. The two main sys­
tems used for the payment transaction security are Secure Socket Layer 
and Secure Electronic Transaction.
Secure Socket Layer (SSL) is the widely used secure service sys­
tem and is an important measure to establish trust between an online 
merchant (seller) and customer (buyer). Encryption and decryption 
allow secure transfer of information between an Internet browser and 
server. SSL also permits merchant identification through SSL server 
certificates. The SSL standard has been widely adopted because it is 
relatively simple and easy to use. SSL has an approximately 90% share 
of security transactions used in both wired e-commerce and wireless 
(m-commerce) markets.
Secure Electronic Transaction (SET) is a more complex security sys­
tem based on digital certificates and signatures. SET needs specific soft­
ware and is more difficult for cardholders to obtain and use, and despite 
the high level of security offered it has not gained widespread use.
A wide range of models has been developed for online payments. 
However, they may be divided into two main groups: account-based and 

54	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
electronic currency models (see Figure 3.2)[4]. Account-based Models 
allow for payments via an existing personalized account, which is usu­
ally a bank account or intermediary account. The account-based models 
are based on online utilization of credit and debit cards, intermediary 
services, mobile/wireless payments, and payment via online banking. 
Electronic Currency Models allow for payments if the payer has an 
appropriate amount of electronic currency. These systems can be divided 
into three main categories of payments based on smart cards, online cash 
systems, and electronic transfer of funds.
In the next sections of this chapter we will discuss these e-payment 
models in more details, identify their value-added offerings and value cre­
ation, and describe the situations where these systems may be used in 
various e-commerce models.
3.2  Credit and Debit Cards’ E-Payments Models
Credit cards are widely used to pay for online e-commerce transactions. 
A major difference, however, between online and offline payments is 
that in online purchases a physical copy of the card is not provided, 
and the merchant does not obtain a signed confirmation from the cus­
tomer. In addition, all offline transactions are authorized at the point 
of sale, whereas this is not the case for all online purchases (especially 
with small businesses). The improvements in authentication and verifi­
cation technologies have increased the ability of accurately authorizing 
transactions.
E-payment
Models
Account-based
Models
Electronic
Currency Models
Credit
Cards 
Intermediary
Services
Debit
Cards 
Payment
Via
Online
Banking
Smart
Card
Systems
Electronic
Funds
Transfer
(EFT) 
Online
Cash
Systems
Mobile
Payment
Figure 3.2  E-Payment models

	
Electronic Payment Applications	
55
Credit Card Processing
The credit card processing system is rather complex involving a number of 
participants, organizations, and process steps. A typical process of using a 
credit card in an online payment is presented in Figure 3.3[5].
The chart in Figure 3.3 shows seven participants that normally inter­
act in the credit card e- payment process. Customer is a buyer (payer) rep­
resenting a consumer or organization making e-payment in exchange for 
products and services. Merchant is a seller (payee) receiving the e- pay­
ment in exchange for selling products and services. Payment Gateway 
is an online connection that ties a merchant’s web site to the back-end 
processing systems of the credit card issuer. It ensures that the connec­
tion between the merchant’s web site and the merchant bank’s processor 
is secure. Some commonly used vendors offering credit card gateway are 
VeriSign.com, Authorizenet.com, and FirstData.com.
Merchant Bank’s Processor is an online organization that actually pro­
cesses the credit card transaction from the merchant to the credit card issuer 
through the Credit Card Interchange—the online network, by which credit 
Figure 3.3  Credit card processing

56	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
card participants manage the processing, clearing, and settlement of credit 
card transactions. Credit Card Issuer is a bank or non-banking institution 
(credit union, for example) that issues the customer credit card, used to make 
the purchase. Merchant’s Bank is a financial organization (for example, a 
bank) that helps the merchant to set up the merchant account, and provides 
the software and equipment for performing credit card transactions.
The credit card online processing consists of nine steps[7]:
• Step 1: The merchant submits a credit card transaction to 
the Payment Gateway on behalf of a customer via a secure 
connection from a web site or a wireless device.
• Step 2: The Payment Gateway receives the secure transaction 
information and passes it via a secure connection to the 
Merchant Bank’s Processor.
• Step 3: The Merchant Bank’s Processor submits the 
transaction to the Credit Card Interchange.
• Step 4: The Credit Card Interchange routes the transaction to 
the customer’s Credit Card Issuer.
• Step 5: The Credit Card Issuer approves or declines the 
transaction based on the customer’s available funds and passes 
the transaction results, and if approved, the appropriate funds, 
back through the Credit Card Interchange.
• Step 6: The Credit Card Interchange relays the transaction 
results to the Merchant Bank’s Processor.
• Step 7: The Merchant Bank’s Processor relays the transaction 
results to the Payment Gateway.
• Step 8: The Payment Gateway stores the transaction results 
and sends them to the customer and/or the merchant. This 
communication process averages three seconds or less!
• Step 9: The Credit Card Interchange passes the appropriate 
funds for the transaction to the Merchant’s Bank, which then 
deposits funds into the merchant’s bank account.
In general, the online credit card payments are processed quite rap­
idly. The whole transaction process from Step 1 through Step 8 averages 

	
Electronic Payment Applications	
57
2–3 seconds or less. The cost of credit card transactions is relatively low 
and represents from 2% to 6% of the transaction amount[8]. This cost 
depends on a geographical location of the merchant, issuing bank, mer­
chant and sales characteristics including transaction size, and the impor­
tance of national and international sales. In addition, there is usually a 
certain fixed fee for opening and maintaining a credit card account. An 
example of transaction cost distribution between participants of the credit 
card’s e-payment is presented in Figure 3.4[9]. As can be seen from the 
chart, out of $100 that a customer pays for a product or service, a mer­
chant (seller) will get $97.15. The difference of $2.85 (2.85% in this 
case) will be paid to the transaction participants, i.e., Payment Gateway, 
Merchant Bank’s Processor, Credit Card Interchange, Credit Card Issuer, 
and Merchant Bank.
Credit Card Value-added Offerings and Limitations
E-payments through credit cards provide a number of value-added 
offerings to the customers. These value-added offerings should reflect, 
as discussed in the previous section, availability of credit cards, ease of 
obtaining and using them, credit card security, and others. The main 
value-added offerings for online payments with credit cards are presented 
in Table 3.1.
Customer 
pays $100 
Merchant 
gets $97.15 
Credit 
Card Issuer 
charges $1.93  
Merchant’s Bank 
charges $0.65 
Credits Card 
Interchange 
charges $0.09 
Payment Gateway
charges $0.10 
Merchant Bank’s 
Processor charges $0.08 
Figure 3.4  Online credit card transaction cost

58	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
Besides the evident value-added capabilities of online payments 
through credit cards, there are major limitations in using credit cards 
online, such as:
• Fees for credit card operations for small payments are 
relatively high; credit cards are less suitable for micropayments 
($10 or less). May not be feasible for occasional transactions 
or small businesses.
• Some segments of potential buyers may not be eligible for this 
payment method. For example, in the rapidly growing online 
games market, one third of game players are less than 18 years 
old. They may not have a credit card because minimum 
financial conditions have to be fulfilled.
• In emerging economies, where credit cards are not widespread 
(for example, China, Russia, and many other countries), the 
credit card system may not be most suitable for online payments.
• About one third of transactions did not end in payments 
predominantly due to rejection by the credit card issuer. 
Another related problem is chargeback, or refusal of a 
Value-Added
offerings
Explanation
Credit Card 
Applicability
Has a long-established network of users and merchants ensuring 
widespread applicability and a large user base for most kinds of 
transactions.
Ease to Obtain
Customers do not need to obtain any additional hardware or software 
and there is no need for further registration with third parties.
Ease of Use
Payment systems are relatively easy to use, provided users have 
experience with online transactions.
Cost
Cardholders do not pay a transaction fee; low transaction fee for a 
merchant.
Security
Cardholders’ authentication has usually been handled through the 
provision of name, credit card number, and expiration date.
Anonymity
Secure socket layer (SSL) is usually used to prevent information 
interception during the transmission of credit card information. 
SSL also allows verification of merchant identity via the SSL server 
certificate (see description of SSL below).
Table 3.1  Value-added offerings and limitations

	
Electronic Payment Applications	
59
customer to pay claiming that the purchase was done by 
someone else. The chargeback happens substantially more 
frequently in online transactions than that offline in brick-
and-mortar sales.
• As non-completion of credit card payments appears to be 
relatively high, there may be additional costs (perhaps up to 
one third higher) for online stores. Even when the credit card 
transaction is authorized and concluded, the merchant may 
have to cover costs for payment reversals. Merchants generally 
bear the cost of chargeback if they do not have a customer 
transaction signature.
• Despite the availability of tools to verify and secure online 
transactions, a significant share of e-commerce sites (10%) 
may still lack protection mechanisms for the transmission of 
credit card information, and some industries have significantly 
lower levels of implementation of security options.
Credit card companies have taken numerous steps to address secu­
rity concerns, and a number of complementary systems have been 
developed. Some of them have not had a wide take-up, and currently 
the most important systems are MasterCard SecureCode and Verified 
by Visa. The latter two protect an existing credit card with a password 
created by the user, assuring the user that only they can use their credit 
card when shopping online. The idea is to have these more secure pay­
ments substitute simple credit card payments. An important step in this 
direction has been taken with the industry adoption of this payment 
technology as a standard.
Credit card risk management techniques and fraud-prevention 
software are widely available. The Merchant Fraud Squad provides 
education about fraud prevention techniques and encourages busi­
nesses selling online to adopt best practices and antifraud technologies. 
The organization combatfraud.org offers a variety of fraud-protection 
services. Members access the site’s database of credit card numbers, 
e-mail addresses, and postal addresses that resulted in a chargeback. 
Merchants check for “deadbeats” at this site and then refuse to accept 
charges from them.

60	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
Debit Cards
In contrast to credit cards, debit card payments are directly withdrawn 
from the payee’s bank account and not from an intermediary account. 
This can make it difficult for consumers to handle a dispute/chargeback, 
since there is typically no extra protection of the funds in a debit account. 
Once the funds have been withdrawn, they are harder to refund than 
with a credit card. In addition, for debit payments a physical card and/or 
providing a card number is often not necessary; an account number may 
be enough. Apart from these differences, the payment mechanism is com­
parable with credit card transactions.
Debit cards have a significant user spread, which in most countries 
is higher than the number of credit card users. However, debit card pay­
ments are generally not as widespread on merchant web sites as credit card 
payment. Their application is mostly limited to national payments, due 
to the national structures, operations and regulation of banking systems, 
and they do not address the demand for international payments. Further­
more, their cost structure (as for credit cards) is not suitable for realizing 
micropayments. It is again essential to provide SSL for the transaction as 
well as for merchants and consumers to take the necessary security pre­
cautions. Banks frequently impose stronger identification requirements 
for debit payments and their overall security has been found to be higher 
than for ordinary credit card payments.
Debit cardholders are less protected in terms of legislation than are credit 
card holders. For example, there is a lack of specific protection in case of 
undelivered goods or services, notably in the United States, Austria, Canada, 
Greece, and the United Kingdom. Furthermore, as this is an account-based 
payment card, it does not usually allow for anonymous payments.
3.3  E-Payment Intermediary Services
The e-payment intermediary service is provided by an online company 
that enables financial transactions between buyers and sellers. These ser­
vices may also be called e-payment cybermediary or mediating ser­
vice. E-payment transactions are usually done seamlessly by transferring 
money from the buyer’s to seller’s online accounts without using credit or 
debit cards or bank accounts.

	
Electronic Payment Applications	
61
PayPal
PayPal (www.PayPal.com) is a money transfer system that was originally 
launched for C2C (customer-to-customer) transactions, but then introduced 
for B2C and B2B transactions, by offering accounts for businesses. For C2C 
and B2C transactions, PayPal is the most popular payment method at eBay 
(PayPal has been a part of eBay since 2002) with over 50% of auctioning 
sellers recommending PayPal as the preferred payment method. PayPal can 
accept money from the customer (buyer) in one of three ways:
• Charging the customer’s credit card for any transactions (payments)
• Debiting a checking account for any payments
• The customer deposits a check in his or her account at PayPal 
to create a positive balance, and has any payments deducted 
from the account.
Payment recipients (sellers) can use the money in the account for 
online purchases or payments, Sellers receive the payment from PayPal by 
check or by direct money deposit into the recipient’s checking account.
PayPal contains a suite of different payment options that can assist mer­
chants to start accepting payments online or enhance their existing payment 
functions. The first option—Website Payments Standard uses PayPal’s 
own website to process payments (see Figure 3.5A)[10]. Customers tem­
porarily leave the online storefront, where they purchase an item, and pay 
on the PayPal web site with a credit card or by using their PayPal account, 
which contains funds deposited from their checking account. Customers 
are redirected to the storefront’s web site at the end of the transaction.
The second Website Payments Pro option (see Figure 3.5B)[10] com­
bines two payment systems:
• Direct Payments enable customers to pay at the storefront 
via credit card, without knowing that PayPal is involved. No 
PayPal branding appears on the payment page. This is an 
alternative to establishing a merchant account and payment 
gateway relationship, i.e., PayPal will be both merchant 
account provider and payment gateway

62	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
• Express Checkout allows users not to register or login to the 
storefront where they purchase; instead, they complete their 
purchases at PayPal, where the same login information can be 
used for any store that supports Express Checkout.
The third PayFlow Payment Gateway[10] option presents two 
choices:
• PayFlow Pro is a standard payment gateway (see Section 3.2 
of this chapter), which translates into a credit card form 
shown to customers during checkout (see Figure 3.6). (1) The 
customer inputs credit card information during the checkout 
process. The Payment Gateway (2) encrypts data and securely 
sends it to seller’s Internet Merchant Account. (3) The 
transaction is reviewed for authorization. (4) The result is 
encrypted and sent back through the payment gateway. 
(5) The seller gets the results and decides whether to fulfill 
the order
Figure 3.5  Paypal payment options

	
Electronic Payment Applications	
63
• PayFlow Link directs customers out of the store to the 
Payflow Link page, where they pay for the order. This system 
is typically used when a seller does not have a shopping cart, 
and is simply in need of a payment page to collect payment 
for a product or service.
The cost and usage of different PayPal options are present in Table 3.2.
The usage of PayPal, as well as other e-payment intermediary services, 
provides a number of value-added offerings:
• Applicability–PayPal provides seamless payment methods 
for a variety of e-commerce web sites such as online forward 
auctions and storefronts. It allows person-to-person transfers 
without the seller having to register as a merchant (as required 
for accepting credit card payments). They can also increasingly 
be used in other areas, for example, to pay taxes in certain 
countries, provide gift vouchers, online music sales, etc.
• Ease to obtain–Customer (buyers) can easily sign up for the 
service. In addition, a key advantage for sellers is that they 
can obtain an account easily and do not need to create a 
merchant account. This PayPal’s option explains much of its 
success. It makes the service particularly attractive to small 
and medium sellers
• Cost–The PayPal system is free of charge for buyers and 
earns revenue from charging merchants. It charges a rate of 
2.2–2.9% and a flat fee of $0.30 per transaction. To make its 
cost structure more attractive for micropayments in the digital 
music sector, the company charges a rate of 2.5% plus $0.09 
per transaction
Figure 3.6  Payflow payment gateway

64	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
• Security–In contrast to credit or debit card payment, the 
customer’s financial information (credit card number or 
bank account number) stays with the intermediary service 
provider like PayPal. It is not transmitted to the seller. PayPal 
adds additional verification layers for customers and sellers, 
and insures up to a certain amount for each customer’s 
payment transaction. As both buyers and sellers have 
frequent transactions with PayPal rather than with individual 
merchants or buyers, there are incentives on both sides not 
Paypal Payment 
Options
Cost
Usage
Website Payment 
Standard
No setup and monthly fees 
1.9%–2.9% transaction fees 
+ $0.30
Used for small online stores 
that do not have Express 
Checkout
Website Payment Pro: 
Direct
No setup fees 
$20 monthly and 2.2%–2.9% 
transaction fees + $0.30 
depending on the transaction 
volume
This offers an easy way to 
support credit card payments 
on a storefront without 
having to get an Internet 
merchant account.
Website Payment Pro: 
Express Checkout
$20 monthly fees 
2.2%–2.9% of transaction 
fees + $0.30 depending 
on the transaction volume
Activate it on the storefront 
if a customer wants to provide 
an alternative checkout 
option, similar to Google 
Checkout. Customers that 
hate to register with a new 
store will appreciate the ability 
to bypass the registration form.
PayFlow Pro
$249 setup fees 
$59 monthly fees 
1000 free transactions 
Above 1000, $0.10 per 
transaction
If a storefront processes several 
hundred orders a day, use this 
option to take advantage of 
more robust reporting and 
transaction reconciliation 
tools. The customer will need 
an internet merchant account 
through the bank.
PayFlow Link
$179 setup fees 
$19.99 monthly fees 
500 free transactions 
Above 1000, $0.10 per 
transaction
If a customer uses a 
professional shopping cart, he/
she does not need this service.
Table 3.2  Paypal options: cost and usage

	
Electronic Payment Applications	
65
to defraud, to ensure future benefits of making/accepting 
payments through the service
• Anonymity–As customers have to register with the service, 
their private information (name, address, etc.) may not be 
revealed to the sellers.
Besides the described value-added offerings, the e-payment interme­
diary services including PayPal contain several major issues and problems. 
First, they still have a limited utilization in the overall online payment 
system. The size of the user network (buyers and sellers) is important for 
the intermediary service to survive. In fact, PayPal faces a restricted net­
work outside eBay payments and outside of the United States. Second, 
in order to use an intermediary service, consumers have to sign up for 
the service, whereas using credit cards online does not involve any new 
services. Third, the fixed component in the intermediary payment struc­
ture (see Table 3.2) is a major cost disadvantage for competition in the 
micropayments sector. Finally, there is no inherent anonymity in the ser­
vice. The provider (PayPal) may be storing and using the information 
provided, for example if there are close relations between the mediating 
service and a merchant site.
Other E-Payment Intermediary Services
Google introduced an e-payment intermediary service called Google Check­
out (checkout.google.com/sell). Users provide Google with their credit card 
and shipping information, which is stored by Google. Users then purchase 
goods and services at participating merchants without sharing credit card 
information with merchants. Checkout supports credit cards from Visa, 
MasterCard, American Express Co. and Discover Financial Services. This 
service is similar to PayPal, except users cannot maintain an account bal­
ance with Google Checkout for future transactions, make payments using 
online bank withdrawals or make consumer-to-consumer payments. 
Google’s transaction fees are lower than those transaction fees used by Pay­
Pal. Google Checkout charges merchants $0.20 and 2% per transaction.
To attract consumers, Google offered several incentives like $10 
rebates to people who use Checkout to complete online purchases from 

66	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
participating merchants, and free transactions until 2008. Checkout also 
offered discounts to merchants who buy AdWords (see case study on 
Google in Chapter 1), and merchants who had a Checkout shopping-cart 
icon next to their listings to indicate they accept Checkout. Checkout 
bundled with AdWords could be a powerful incentive for merchants to 
advertise with Google, boosting AdWord sales.
eBillme (www.ebillme.com) is an e-payment intermediary service that 
appeals to consumers who purchase online but do not have credit cards 
or who do not want to reveal personal financial information to online 
merchants/sellers. Consumers select the eBillme icon when purchasing 
online. Seconds later, an invoice confirming the purchase arrives in their 
e-mail, and shoppers use online bank accounts to make payments. Mer­
chants pay 1% to 1.5% fee (depending on the merchant’s volume) for 
eBillme transactions.
Pay-By-Touch (www.paybytouch.com) uses front-end biometric 
authentication in the form of fingerprint scans for payment, age verifica­
tion, check cashing and loyalty programs. At checkout, shoppers place a 
finger on a reader and enter a search number (usually their phone num­
ber). They are then authenticated and presented with a list of financial 
accounts from which they select their payment method. Transactions are 
then processed as if a card or check were present. Loyalty programs are 
automatically recognized.
In general, the e-payment intermediary services will continue to grow 
in numbers and volume of transactions. They will become a major substi­
tute application for online credit and debit card payments.
3.4  E-Payment Via Online Banking
By the end of 2005, the number of online banking customers in the U.S. 
increased to nearly 40 million in the fourth quarter of 2005[11]. That was 
a 27% increase over the previous year; online bill paying increased 36 % 
during that time[11].
For years, financial institutions have used powerful computer net­
works to automate millions of daily transactions. Now that the customers 
are connected to the Internet via personal computers, banks pursue simi­
lar economic advantages by adapting the same internal electronic pro­
cesses to home use. Banks view online banking as a powerful value-added 

	
Electronic Payment Applications	
67
tool to attract and retain new customers. Online banking also helps to 
eliminate costly paper handling and teller interactions in an increasingly 
competitive banking environment.
Today, most large national banks, many regional banks, and even 
smaller banks and credit unions offer some form of online banking, 
known as PC banking, home banking, electronic banking or Inter­
net banking. Those that do are sometimes referred to as “brick-to-click” 
banks, both to distinguish them from “brick-and-mortar” banks that 
have yet to offer online banking, as well as from online or “virtual” banks 
that have no physical branches or tellers whatsoever.
The challenge for the banking industry has been to design this new 
e-payment service channel in such a way that its customers will readily 
learn to use and trust it. Most of the large banks now offer fully secure, 
fully functional online banking for free or for a small fee. Some smaller 
banks offer limited access or functionality; for instance, a customer may 
be able to view the account balance and history but not initiate transac­
tions online. As more banks succeed online and more customers use their 
sites, fully functional online banking likely will become as common as 
automated teller machines.
The most typical online banking systems include:
• Online banking transfers where the account holder 
(customer) is redirected to the bank’s web site by the 
merchant site to make payment.
• Advanced electronic and mobile banking, which have more 
advanced features, for example, scheduled payments.
• Electronic Bill Presentment and Payment (EBPP) transactions 
are automatically entered from the electronic bill. In this case, 
the customer simply needs to authorize the bill. The EBPP 
provider (either bank or third party) establishes contracts 
with the organizations whose bills it can present electronically 
(e.g. utility companies) and will send in the bills the customer 
has authorized.
According to the Council for Electronic Billing and Payment (CEBP), 
Electronic Presentment and Payment (EPP) represents one of the fast­
est growing Internet applications because it streamlines the billing and 

68	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
invoicing process for billing corporations, financial institutions, and their 
customers. EPP is comprised of two primary applications, one consumer 
oriented, the other business oriented. Electronic Bill Presentment and 
Payment (EBPP) generally refers to the billing and payment process for 
consumers, or B2C applications. Electronic Invoice Presentment and 
Payment (EIPP) generally refers to the invoicing and payment process 
between businesses (discussed in Section 3–5 of this Chapter).
Electronic Bill Presentment and Payment (EBPP) is the electronic 
presentation of statements, bills, invoices, and related information sent 
by a company to its customers, and corresponding payment for goods 
or services. The internet provides billing companies and their custom­
ers with new methods to deliver and access billing information. One of 
the most common ways of EBPP is the Bill Direct payment model (see 
Figure 3.7)[12].
According to the Bill Direct model, the e-billing process flow consists 
of four main steps[12]:
• Step 1: Service Initiation. The customer signs up to receive 
and pay bills via the Biller’s web site. Biller is an organization 
(utility, cell phone, mortgage, etc.) that bills the customer.
• Step 2: Presentment. The Biller makes the billing 
information available to the customer, i.e., provides an online 
bill statement called presentment.
Figure 3.7  E-billing process flow: bill direct model

	
Electronic Payment Applications	
69
• Step 3: Payment. Once the customer views the bill, he/she 
authorizes it, which initiates a payment at the site
• Step 4: Payment. The Biller then initiates a payment 
transaction, which moves funds through the payment system.
Besides the Bill Direct payment model, the billing can be done 
through an intermediary aggregation services called the Third Party 
­Consolidation/Aggregation model. For example, CheckFree.com is one 
of the popular third-party e-billing vendors that can consolidate and aggre­
gates all of a customer’s bills into a single presentment. This ­e-payment 
intermediary can also set up payments with companies that do not offer 
electronic billing, alert users to problems with any payments, and export 
the transaction records to Quicken or Microsoft Money software.
Value Added 
Offerings
Explanation
Applicability
Online banking has grown rapidly in some countries as payment 
systems are in place and familiarity is very high so that there is 
potential for further applications and merchant use. The online 
payment option may be integrated into the shopping process, but it 
may also be used to pay after the purchased item has been received.
Ease to Obtain
Obtaining the online payment option via online banking is 
straightforward. The possession of a customer account and 
subscription to online banking automatically allows use of online 
payments as far as merchants accept them.
Cost
For merchants, setup costs are relatively low as the payment is 
effected via the bank’s payment facilities and they do not need to 
install particular payment services and security devices. In addition, 
the system allows existing networks to be used and does not require 
the creation of a new one.
Security
Banks have frequently implemented supplementary security provisions 
beyond the standard use of a password and PIN number, for example, 
one-off passwords for authentication, which cannot be re-used.
Online banking also often applies multiple authentications to 
improve payment security; the consumer has to provide several 
confidential pass codes to access a personal account.compared with 
alternative hardware systems, these are relatively low cost solutions. 
Ability to use the online banking to pay for the items that have been 
received provides additional security to buyers. This may encourage 
consumers who distrust online shopping to purchase on the Internet.
Table 3.3  Value-added offerings in online banking

70	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
The e-payment systems via online banking provide a number of value-
added offerings presented in Table 3.3.
Whether the bank is a traditional “brick-and-mortar” institution or 
a Web-only bank with no “brick-and-mortar” branches, online banking 
lets a customer connect to the bank through the Internet and do things 
such as view the customer accounts, transfer money between accounts, 
view images of canceled checks, print copies of those checks and pay bills 
online. The customer may find that it is common for online banking sites 
to be compatible with money managing programs such as Quicken and 
Microsoft Money.
Many banks make it easier to manage checking accounts by allow­
ing set up of e-mail alerts so that the customer can be notified when 
checks clear or when the balance slips below a certain level. There is also a 
detailed listing of all canceled checks. If the customer wants to eliminate 
paper checks, then a growing number of companies allow this person to 
make automatic payments through the online banking account.
Online banking is not out to change customer money habits. It simply 
uses the Internet technology to give a customer the option of bypassing 
the time-consuming, paper-based aspects of traditional banking in order 
to manage finances more quickly and efficiently. It is almost certainly the 
way that most banking will be conducted business in the future.
For Customers
For Billers (Sellers)
Direct control over the timing and 
amount of the payment
A savings on the cost of checks, postage 
and envelopes
Simplify bill payment processing and 
record retention
Centralize and streamline all bill payment 
functions and storage on their computer 
Review bills and make payments when 
they want, 24 hours a day
Reduction or elimination of paper filing 
and storage
Improve customer service
Leverage the delivery power of the 
Internet
Provide a unique opportunity to touch 
customers in a new medium
Create one-to-one marketing 
opportunities
Integrate with existing automated billing 
and payment functions, such as cash 
management and accounts receivable
Reduce billing and payments processing 
expense
Customer retention
Improve cash flow and posting time
Table 3.4  Value creation in online banking

	
Electronic Payment Applications	
71
3.5  E-Payment Currency Systems
Smart Cards
Smart card represents an electronic card containing an embedded micro­
chip that stores personal information including cash account and the 
amount in this account. The card connects to a reader with direct physi­
cal contact or with a remote contactless radio frequency interface. With 
an embedded microcontroller, smart cards have the unique ability to store 
large amounts of data, carry out their own on-card functions, for exam­
ple, encryption and mutual authentication, and interact intelligently with 
a smart card reader.
In practice, there are two general types of smart cards: contact and 
contactless. A contact smart card (see figure 3.8) must be inserted into 
a smart card reader with a direct connection to a conductive contact 
plate on the surface of the card (typically gold plated)[13]. Transmission of 
commands, data, and card status takes place over these physical contact 
points. A contactless smart card requires only close proximity to a reader. 
Both the reader and the card have antennae, and the two communicate 
using radio frequencies (RF) over this contactless link[13]. Most contact­
less cards also derive power for the internal chip from this electromagnetic 
signal. The range is typically one-half to three inches for non-battery-
powered cards, ideal for applications such as building entry and payment 
that require a very fast card interface.
Smart cards are used in many applications worldwide, for exam­
ple, in secure identity applications like employee ID badges or driver’s 
licenses. They can be also employed in some countries as citizen health 
ID cards, physician ID cards, or portable medical records cards. Besides, 
Figure 3.8  Contact and contactless smart card

72	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
smart cards are successfully used as an e-payment system including tele­
phone payment cards, gift cards, or for paying small amounts within 
organizations like vending or copy machine cards. The smart cards usu­
ally rely on specialized hardware and dedicated smartcard readers for 
authentication.
Leading financial issuers have put millions of contactless credit and debit 
cards and devices into the hands of U.S. consumers. Issuers in the United 
States include American Express, Citibank, GE Consumer Finance, JPMor­
gan Chase, KeyBank, MBNA, Wells Fargo and others. Visa and JPMorgan 
Chase have also launched a contactless mobile payment pilot in Atlanta, and 
Discover has announced that it will pilot contactless payments using mobile 
phones[14]. Introduction of contactless credit and debit cards has focused 
on markets that have lower value transactions (less than $25). In these sit­
uations, the consumers use cash for payment, and transaction speed and 
customer convenience are critical. Merchant locations throughout the U.S. 
are now accepting contactless payment, including quick service restaurants, 
convenience stores, pharmacies, theaters, and sports venues, among oth­
ers. Well-known national merchants such as McDonald’s, 7-Eleven, AMC 
Theaters, and Regal Theaters have chosen to accept contactless payments.
Online Cash Systems
A number of online currency or cash systems have been designed for 
online cash payments. An online cash payment or e-cash is a digital 
equivalent of paper currency and coins, which enables secure and anony­
mous purchase of relatively inexpensive (low-priced) items. Online cur­
rency systems are software-only electronic money instruments based on 
signed money. They usually work via prepaid cards. For example, the B2B 
online cash payments are done with purchasing cards.
Purchasing card (P-card) is special-purpose payment cards issued to a 
company’s employees to be used solely for purchasing non-strategic materi­
als and services up to a preset dollar limit. The purchasing card is a mean of 
streamlining the traditional purchase order and payment processes for low 
cost transactions. Users, typically corporations and government agencies, 
find that a number of small dollar payments, those less than $1,000, make 
up the majority of payments while representing a small percentage of the 
dollars spent. This scenario represents the 80/20 rule at its best.

	
Electronic Payment Applications	
73
The transactional cost of making these payments using the traditional 
process is the same regardless of the dollar amount of the payment, i.e., 
it costs the same to process a $25 payment as it does a $100,000 pay­
ment. Often the cost of making a payment exceeds the value of the item 
being acquired, i.e., the cost to acquire a $25 wrench may exceed $100. 
The purchasing card simplifies the process and reduces the cost. Estimates 
of the transactional cost of the purchase order and payment process range 
from $50 to $250. The purchasing card’s efficiencies result in savings 
ranging from 55% to 90% of this transactional cost[15].
• An example of how the purchasing card works is presented 
in Figure 3.9[15]. The information presented in Figure 3.9 
describes the following process:
• A plastic purchasing card or non-plastic account number is 
issued to the cardholder.
• Each card/account is mapped to a general ledger account. (In 
some cases, G/L mapping can be done based on Merchant 
Category Codes or Point of Sale Information.)
• The cardholder places orders with suppliers providing 
appropriate payment instructions.
• The supplier processes the order using their acquiring bank’s 
authorization process.
Figure 3.9  How purchasing card works

74	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
• The cardholder receives the purchasing card statement directly 
from the card issuer. The cardholder reviews and approves the 
statement. Cardholders do not submit a payment.
• A single electronic invoice is sent from the card issuer to the 
cardholder’s organization on a monthly, weekly, or daily basis. 
The invoice is processed to create accounting entries and 
facilitate payment.
The usage of a purchasing card by an employee provides several impor­
tant value-added benefits. The purchasing card directly increases productivity 
of the online purchasing process. The purchasing departments may be freed 
from the substantial day-to-day procurement activities required by purchas­
ing cards, and can then focus on their core competencies like e-sourcing 
and relationships with suppliers. The purchasing card payments are usually 
consolidated into a single invoice that can be paid electronically through an 
electronic fund transfer. Additionally, values go beyond transactional savings 
when the organization begins to realize the behavioral changes required to 
make a purchasing card work most effectively. Additional values include:
• Supply base consolidation
• Reinforcement of general purchasing best practices
• A significant source of spend information
• Streamlining payees in the accounts payable system
• An opportunity for suppliers to streamline their processes
Suppliers accepting purchasing cards reap considerable benefits. 
When purchasers use their purchasing cards, suppliers:
• Receive payment within two to three days of submitting the 
transaction to the bank. The result is improved cash flow—
2 days vs. the typical 30–60 days.
• Streamline their administrative functions via the elimination 
of invoices and the consolidation of receivables.
• Meet the requests of their customers, differentiate themselves 
from their competitors, and build better partnerships with 
their customers. The result is additional sales revenue.

	
Electronic Payment Applications	
75
Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT)
In general, Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) is a system of transfer­
ring money from one bank account directly to another bank account 
through the electronic connections using a paperless environment. EFT 
may include money transfers for credit card, ATM, and point-of-sale 
(POS) transactions. It is used for both credit transfers, such as payroll 
payments, and for debit transfers, such as mortgage payments. Transac­
tions are processed by the bank through the Automated Clearing House 
(ACH) network.
The Automated Clearing House (ACH) Network is a nationwide 
electronic payments system governed by the NACHA—the Electronic 
Payments Association, a trade association representing more than 12,000 
financial institutions. The ACH Network is a batch-processing, store, and 
forward system. ACH transactions, or entries, that are received during 
the day by financial institutions are stored and processed in a group, or 
batch, mode. ACH transactions are accumulated and sorted by destina­
tion for transmission during a predetermined time. This process provides 
significant economies of scale and enables faster processing than is pos­
sible for checks, which must be physically handled. Instead of using paper 
to carry transaction information, ACH payments are sent from one finan­
cial institution to another via data transmission. An example of the EFT 
process using ACH is present in Figure 3.10[16].
Figure 3.10  Example of EFT process using ACH

76	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
The process presented in Figure 3.10 consists of the following steps [16]:
• (1) The Buyer and the Seller enter into a contractual 
agreement that establishes authorization for ACH payment. 
The Seller must provide the Buyer with the bank routing 
number of their financial institution and depository 
account number or electronic lockbox account number. 
This information is used to route the ACH payment to 
the Seller. The Seller notifies the Buyer of the desired 
ACH format.
• (2) The Buyer, who is the originator of the ACH transaction, 
initiates an ACH credit through its financial institution, the 
ODFI (Originating Depository Financial Institution). The 
Buyer uses the payment and remittance format agreed to with 
the Seller. The ACH transaction can be initiated by the Buyer 
using a financial institution’s information reporting system 
(which may or may not be internet based), PC software, a 
phone call, or by transmitting a formatted file.
• (3) The ODFI formats the payment and remittance data per 
the Originator’s instructions, or uses formatted data provided 
by the Originator, and sends the ACH transaction to the 
ACH Operator in a batch transmission one to two days 
prior to the desired settlement date. The ODFI must have a 
minimum of one day prior to the settlement date to process 
the ACH request.
• (4) The ACH Operator (Federal Reserve Bank or Electronic 
Payments Network (EPN), Payments Resource One, and Visa) 
sorts and batches ACH transactions for the appropriate 
RDFI (Receiving Depository Financial Institution) and 
transmits the ACH transaction in a batch to the RDFI 
by the settlement date.
• (5) The ODFI debits the Buyer/ Originators account. The 
ACH Operator debits the ODFI and credits the RDFI. 
The RDFI credits the Seller’s, or Receiver’s, account on the 
settlement date. The settlement date is either one or two days 
after initiation of the payment transaction by the Originator, 

	
Electronic Payment Applications	
77
depending on the ODFI’s cutoff times for ACH origination 
and the timing of the Buyer’s delivery of the payment request 
to the ODFI.
• (6) Remittance data, which is generated by the Buyer in 
step 2 above, is transferred by the RDFI to the Seller in the 
format agreed to by the Seller and the RDFI in their contract. 
Remittance data, accommodated in either CCD+ or CTX, 
contains the information necessary for the Seller to update its 
Accounts Receivable (A/R).
• (7) The payment is posted to the Seller’s A/R. If a CCD is 
used, the payment is posted to A/R based on the amount 
credited to the Seller’s account at the RDFI.
The growing popularity of EFT for online bill payment is paving the 
way for a paperless universe where checks, stamps, envelopes, and paper 
bills are obsolete. The benefits of EFT include reduced administrative 
costs, increased efficiency, simplified bookkeeping, and greater security. 
However, the number of companies who send and receive bills through 
the internet is still relatively small.
The U.S. Government monitors EFT compliance through Regula­
tion E of the Federal Reserve Board, which implements the Electronic 
Funds Transfer Act (EFTA). Regulation E governs financial transactions 
with electronic payment services, specifically with regard to disclosure of 
information, consumer liability, error resolution, record retention, and 
receipts at electronic terminals.
3.6  Chapter 3 Summary: Managerial Aspects 
of Electronic Payments
	 1.	 The growth and proliferation of e-commerce facilitated the devel­
opment of a completely new industry of e-commerce payments 
or simply e-payments, which are experiencing, along with other 
­e-commerce models, significant growth.
	 2.	 The value-added offerings of an e-payment system should include 
its applicability, ease to obtain, reliability/ease of use, low cost of 
transaction, and security. The security of transactions and customer 

78	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
information in an e-payment system places a crucial role. Custom­
ers would like to make sure that in an e-payment system, their 
financial data, including bank account and credit card informa­
tion, will be securely transacted, and would not get into the hands 
of Internet hackers. The two main systems used for the payment 
transaction security are Secure Socket Layer and Secure Electronic 
Transaction.
	 3.	 A wide range of e-payment models can be clustered into two main 
groups: account-based and electronic currency models Account-
based Models allow payment via an existing personalized account, 
which is usually a bank account or intermediary account. The 
account-based models are based on online utilization of credit and 
debit cards, intermediary services, mobile/wireless payments, and 
payment via online banking. Electronic Currency Models allow 
payment simply if the payer has an appropriate amount of electronic 
currency. These systems can be divided into three main categories of 
payments based on smart cards, online cash systems, and electronic 
transfer of funds.
	 4.	 Credit cards are widely used to pay for online e-commerce transac­
tions. A major difference, however, between online and offline pay­
ments is that in online purchases a physical copy of the card is not 
provided, and the merchant does not obtain a signed confirmation 
from the customer. In addition, all offline transactions are autho­
rized at the point of sale, whereas this is not the case for all online 
purchases (especially with small businesses).
	 5.	 E-payments through credit cards provide a number of value-added 
offerings to the customers that should reflect availability of credit 
cards, ease of obtain and using them, low transaction cost, credit card 
security, and some others. Major limitations in using credit cards 
online are associated with their relatively high cost for micropayments 
($10 or less, non-eligibility for some market segments (customers 
that are less than 18 years old), high level of payment rejection by 
issuer, and chargeback.
	 6.	 Debit cards have a significant user spread, which in most countries 
is higher than the number of credit card users depending on financial 
regulation and conditions attached to credit card issuance. However, 

	
Electronic Payment Applications	
79
debit card payment is generally not as widespread on merchant Web 
sites as credit card payment. Their application is mostly limited to 
national payments, due to the national structures, operations and 
regulation of banking systems, and they do not address the demand 
for international payments.
	 7.	 The e-payment intermediary service is provided by an online com­
pany that enables financial transactions between buyers and sellers. 
These transactions are usually done seamlessly by transferring money 
from the buyer’s to seller’s online accounts without using credit or 
debit cards or bank accounts.
	 8.	 PayPal, the most popular e-payment intermediary service, contains 
a suite of different payment options that can assist merchants to 
start accepting payments online or enhance their existing payment 
functions. Website Payments Standard uses PayPal’s own website 
to process payments Website Payments Pro enables customers to 
pay at the storefront via credit card, without knowing that PayPal 
is involved, or allows users not to register or login to the storefront 
but complete their purchases at PayPal. PayFlow Pro is a standard 
payment gateway, which translates into a credit card form shown to 
customers during checkout.
	 9.	 E-payment intermediary services including PayPal contain sev­
eral major issues and problems. First, they still have a limited 
utilization in the overall online payment system. Second, in order 
to use an intermediary service, consumers have to sign up for 
the service, whereas using credit cards online does not involve 
any new services. Third, the fixed component in the intermediary 
payment structure is a major cost disadvantage for competition in 
the micropayments sector. Finally, there is no inherent anonymity 
in the service.
	10.	 The challenge for the banking industry has been to design this new 
e-payment service channel in such a way that its customers will read­
ily learn to use and trust it. Most of the large banks now offer fully 
secure, fully functional online banking for free or for a small fee. 
Some smaller banks offer limited access or functionality; for instance, 
a customer may be able to view the account balance and history but 
not initiate transactions online. As more banks succeed online and 

80	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
more customers use their sites, fully functional online banking likely 
will become as common as automated teller machines.
	11.	 Smart card represents an electronic card containing an embedded 
microchip that stores personal information including cash account 
and the amount in this account. The card connects to a reader with 
direct physical contact or with a remote contactless radio frequency 
interface. With an embedded microcontroller, smart cards have the 
unique ability to store large amounts of data, carry out their own on-
card functions, for example, encryption and mutual authentication, 
and interact intelligently with a smart card reader.
	12.	 Online cash payment or e-cash is a digital equivalent of paper cur­
rency and coins, which enables secure and anonymous purchase of 
relatively inexpensive (low-priced) items. Online currency systems 
are software-only electronic money instruments based on signed 
money. They usually work via prepaid cards. For example, the B2B 
online cash payments are done with purchasing cards. Purchasing 
card (P-card) is special-purpose payment cards issued to a compa­
ny’s employees to be used solely for purchasing non-strategic materi­
als and services up to a preset dollar limit. The purchasing card is a 
mean of streamlining the traditional purchase order and payment 
processes for low cost transactions.
	13.	 Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) is a system of transferring money 
from one bank account directly to another bank account through 
the electronic connections using a paperless environment. EFT may 
include money transfers for credit card, ATM, and point-of-sale 
(POS) transactions. It is used for both credit transfers, such as pay­
roll payments, and for debit transfers, such as mortgage payments. 
Transactions are processed by the bank through the Automated 
Clearing House (ACH) Network, which is a nationwide electronic 
payments system for batch-processing, store, and forwarding elec­
tronic fund transfers.
References
1. Aite Group, U.S., “Online Bill Payments to Double by 2010,” 
­October 16, 2006, available at epaynews.com.

	
Electronic Payment Applications	
81
2.	 Electronic Transactions Statistics, May 17, 2007, available at: 
epaynews.com.
3.	 Visa International, U.S., “Businesses Abandon Checks for Cards,” 
October 25, 2006, available at epaynews.com.
4.	 Paunov, C. and Vickery, G., “Online Payment System for ­e-commerce,” 
Organization for Economic Development and Cooperation, April 16, 
2006 p.1–56.
5. “How It Works” Diagram: Credit Card Processing, AuthorizeNet.com, 
May 2007.
6.	  Paunov, C. and Vickery, G., Online Payment System for e-com­
merce, Organization for Economic Development and Cooperation, April 
16, 2006 p.1–56.
7.	 Murdock, K., “Credit Card Processing: How It All Works,” www
.practicalecommerce.com, May 2007.
8.	 PayPal.com, May 2007.
9.  40 Million Americans Used Online Banking in Q42005, comSource­
Network, www.itfacts.biz/index.php?id=P6241, April 10, 2006.
10. Biller Direct Model, NACHA’s Council for Electronic Billing and Pay­
ment (CEBP), ebilling.org, May 2007.
11.	Smart Card Primer, Smart Card Alliance, www.smartcardalliance.org, 
May 2007
12.	 Paunov, C. and Vickery, G., Online Payment System for ­e-commerce, 
Organization for Economic Development and Cooperation, April 16, 
2006 p.1–56.
13.	P-card Basic, National Association of Purchasing Card Professionals 
(NAPCP), www.napcp.org, May 2007.
14.	Business-to-Business EIPP: Presentment Models and Payment 
Options Part Two: Payment Options, Council for Electronic Bulling 
and Payment, July 2001, p. 1–24.


In the previous chapters, we discussed a variety of e-commerce models 
including demand-side e-commerce, supply-side e-commerce, and col­
laborative commerce. In addition, we discussed mobile commerce and 
e-payments. The last two models, because of the way they are defined and 
used, may also be recognized as electronic services or simple e-services. 
In fact, the internet contains an increasing number of online models that 
have the service nature and application. We need to understand what 
these models mean, and what their classification and utilization are in the 
modern business environment.
4.1  Definition and Classification 
of Electronic Services
In general, electronic service (e-service) can be defined as the distributed 
services that can be accessed via the internet. They are used to support 
and facilitate business and non-business related activities in organizations 
and for individual consumers. It is a natural extension of e-commerce 
(e-business), which may create extensive opportunities to deliver new ser­
vices to existing customers.
E-service Business Concepts
One of the e-service business concepts was originated by Hewlett Pack­
ard (HP)[1]. It is the idea that the World Wide Web is moving beyond 
­e-business and e-commerce into a new phase where many business ser­
vices can be provided for a business or consumer using the Web. Some 
CHAPTER 4
Electronic Services 
Applications

84	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
e-services, such as remote bulk printing, may be done at a Web site; 
other e-services, such as news updates to subscribers, may be sent to your 
computer. Other e-services will be done in the background without the 
customer’s immediate knowledge. HP defines e-services as “modular, 
nimble, electronic services that perform work, achieve tasks, or complete 
transactions.”
Using HP’s e-services concept, any application program or informa­
tion resource is a potential e-service or Internet Service Provider (ISP), 
and other companies are logical distributors or access points for such 
service. The e-services concept also sees services being built into “cars, 
networked devices, and virtually anything that has a microchip in it.” 
HP’s vision is that IT departments will increasingly address their needs in 
a modular way so that individual modules can potentially be addressed 
by some e-service[1]. According to HP, the three trends in e-services were:
• The increasing availability of service applications providers, 
for example, for accounting, payment systems, purchasing, 
and enterprise resource planning (ERP).
• A growing number of specialized web portal sites.
• More “on-the-fly” management of service requests that may 
require handling by several companies.
Besides the three specified trends, there are several more trends exist­
ing in e-service development. We will discuss them in the next section of 
this chapter.
Another concept of e-service is based on e-service outsourcing. Out­
sourcing is an arrangement in which one company provides services for 
another company that could also be, or usually have been, provided in-
house. Outsourcing is a trend that is becoming more common in infor­
mation technology and other industries. It is used for services that have 
usually been regarded as intrinsic to managing a business. The main rea­
sons for e-service outsourcing are:
• A desire of companies to concentrate on their core business
• The need to have services up and running rapidly
• Lack of expertise and resources for many support services

	
Electronic Services Applications	
85
• The inability to have the economy of scale enjoyed by 
outsourcers, which often results in high costs for in-house 
service options
• The inability to keep up with rapidly fluctuating demands if 
an in-house service option is used
• The number of required services, which usually are simply too 
many for one company to handle
E-service Classification
The Internet contains a significant number of e-services, sometimes quite 
different in nature, activities, business models, and results. However, all 
this variety of services can be classified into several groups of service mod­
els presented in Figure 4.1.
The clustering of the e-service models into six different groups is 
based on the objectives and functionality of these models. The first group, 
E-infrastructure, contains e-service models that provide technical, tech­
nological, and managerial infrastructure services to customers. These 
include e-service companies that enable access to the Internet (Internet 
Service Providers) or mobile service (Mobile Service Providers), estab­
lish integration between e-commerce models and internal ERP system, 
and participate in consulting and customer services. The second group, 
E-content and Information, include online information services, con­
tent providers, and Internet search companies (for example, Google). The 
third group, E-process, deals with a variety of online transactional services 
used in e-commerce models, for example, e-payments, m-commerce, 
e-logistics, etc.
The fourth group of e-services, E-communities, contains a number 
of e-services associated with different online communities, for example, 
Figure 4.1  Classification of e-service models
 
Groups of
E-Services Models
E-Infra-
structure
E-Content
&
Information
 
E-Process
E-
Communities 
E-
Marketing
Software
as a
Service

86	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
government services, business directories, blog web sites, and others. 
The fifth group, E-marketing, combines a number of services related 
to marketing, advertising, and affiliate services. Finally, the sixth group, 
Software as a Service (SaaS), includes a variety of business software 
systems and applications that may be used by business customers and 
consumers on an as needed basis or on-demand basis. This is a very fast 
growing area of e-services, which we will discuss in more details in this 
chapter.
Table 4.1  Components of e-service business model
Components
Description
Value Proposition
Construction of a value proposition requires to specification 
of two things:
• Target segment
• Core customer benefits
Value-added Offerings
Represents value-added activities in the following categories:
• Scope of offering
• Products and services
• E-service processes
• Mapping products and services to e-commerce processes
Supporting Resources
Select and then align resources to deliver the benefits of the 
value proposition
Revenue/Cost Model
Revenue model:
• Product, service, or 
information sales
• Transaction fees
• Subscription fees
• Advertising
• Affiliate fees
• Licensing fees
Cost model:
• Direct and/or indirect cost
• Inventory cost reduction
• Paperless environment
• Administrative expenses
• Quality cost
Value Creation
Monetary value creation
• Revenue enhancement/growth
• Cost reduction
• Asset intensity reduction 
Non-monetary value creation
• Improve quality of service
• Faster delivery of products and services
• Convenience of obtaining services
• Permanent and quick access to data
• 24/7 operation
• Data accuracy
• Improve customer service
• Improve customer satisfaction

	
Electronic Services Applications	
87
E-Service Business Model
The categories of e-service business model are very similar to those pre­
sented in Chapter 2 for a general e-commerce business model. The busi­
ness model components and their brief description are shown in Table 4.1.
4.2  Description of E-Service Model Groups
E-Infrastructure
The electronic infrastructure services are used by companies and individual 
consumers to develop technical, technological, and managerial capabilities 
of using e-commerce models. This is a large group of diverse e-services.
One of the typical infrastructure e-services is Internet Service 
­Provider (ISP), which is used to enable direct access to the internet. 
ISPs contain the equipment and telecommunication line access, which 
is required in order to have a point-of-presence on the Internet for the 
geographic area served. The larger ISPs have their own high-speed leased 
lines so that they are less dependent on telecommunication providers and 
can ensure better service to their customers. Among the largest national 
and regional ISPs are AT&T WorldNet, IBM Global Network, Comcast 
Cable, and others. The list of ISPs can be found, for example, at dir.
yahoo.com or www.cix.org (US Internet Service Provide Association).
Network Service Provider (NSP) is a company that enables back­
bone services to the ISP. The world’s top NSPs are AT&T in the U.S.A, 
British Telecom in the U.K., NTT DoCoMo in Japan, and SingTel in 
Singapore. Additionally, there are a number of NSP companies that do 
connection, installation, maintenance and support of a customer’s (usu­
ally, a business customer) network services. This may include local area 
network (LAN), wide area network (WAN), wireless network, connec­
tion to the high-bandwidth links, and other activities. The directory of 
NSPs can also be found at dir.yahoo.com. Electronic Data Interchange 
(EDI) services provide development and implementation of EDI systems 
for a variety of business customers. EDI is the process of using comput­
ers to exchange business documents between companies. Previously, fax 
machines or traditional mail was used to exchange documents. Mailing 
and faxing are still used in business, but EDI is a much quicker way to 
do the same thing.

88	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
Internet Security Providers are e-services that enable security tools 
and applications on the customer’s web site. The customers can outsource 
firewall and antivirus software. The security providers guarantee constant 
signature updates, maintenance, and support of the security applications. 
A good selection of internet security providers can be found at www
.internetsecuritydirectory.com.
A big cluster of the e-infrastructure services is associated with Mobile 
Service Providers (Verizon, AT&T, Sprint and others) that enable cus­
tomer access to wireless communication and provide m-commerce capa­
bilities (see Chapter 2). Another group of e-services, Web Portals and 
Web Hosting, is used to provide online hosting of customer web sites, 
their software, and product/ service databases. A specific hosting or web 
portal vendor may be found in www.portalwebhosting.com or www.find­
myhosting.com.
The integration between e-commerce web sites and internal enterprise 
computer systems like enterprise resources planning (ERP) or functional 
computer systems (accounting, marketing, or operations) may involve a 
lot of complexity. The internal systems could be developed long before the 
internet era (they are usually called the “legacy systems”), and thus may 
not be compatible with the modern e-commerce systems. In addition, the 
companies may seek help to integrate their dispersed computerized sys­
tem into one combined system. In these cases, the customers may use Sys­
tem and Application Integration e-service providers that are also called 
Enterprise Application Integration (EAI). EAI is a business computing 
term for the plans, methods, and tools aimed at modernizing, consoli­
dating, and coordinating the computer applications in an enterprise [2]. 
Typically, an enterprise has existing legacy applications and databases and 
wants to continue to use them while adding or migrating to a new set of 
applications that exploit the internet, e-commerce, extranet, and other 
new technologies. EAI may involve developing a totally new view of an 
enterprise’s business and its applications, seeing how existing applications 
fit into the new view, and then devising ways to reuse efficiently what 
already exists while adding new applications and data[2]. The directory of 
EAI services and related information may be found at eai.ittoolbox.com.
Besides the software integration, e-commerce requires a number of 
integration standards that enable compatibility and communication 

	
Electronic Services Applications	
89
between various e-commerce sites. For this purpose, the e-commerce 
companies may employ Integration Standard services that help with 
establishing and maintaining a variety of standards in e-commerce, col­
laboration (c-commerce), and m-commerce. For example, EPCGlobal 
(www.epcglobalinc.org) leads in the development of the industry-driven 
standards for the Electronic Product Code (EPC) to support the RFID 
systems. Another set of standards may be found from Universal Code 
Council (UCC) (www.uc-council. org) that establishes and promotes 
multi-industry standards for product identification and related electronic 
communication.
E-content and Information
I-content and Information group is well defined by its name. E-services 
in this group are used to providing rich information content, search 
results, directory services, and research information to e-commerce cus­
tomers and individual consumers. The summary of the services in the 
E-content and Information group is present in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2  Summary of e-content and information services
Subgroup
Description
Examples
Information Search
Online service providing news, 
information, and links to other 
web sites
Establish online encyclopedia of 
terms collaboratively developed 
by users worldwide
www.wsj.com, 
www.businessweek.com
www.Wikipedia.com
Content Providers
Provide information content 
(breaking news and information) 
to other information services
www.reuters.com
www.ap.org
Information Services
Enable search for general subject 
or specific industry information
www.google.com
www.ask.com
Consulting Services
Develop, market, and sell research 
reports and papers on different 
areas of e-commerce
Provide systems and applications 
consulting in e-commerce
www.gartner.com
www.oracle.com
Directory Services
Store and organize information 
about network computer users and 
network resources.
Microsoft Active Directory 
Mac OS Open Directory 
Apache Directory Server

90	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
E-process
E-process is a conglomerate of diverse e-services which is used for enabling 
and facilitating transactions in various e-commerce models. A transac­
tion in this case means a process of moving a physical or virtual product/
service, information, data, or expertise from one organization/customer 
to another organization/customer. The examples of the e-process services 
include:
• E-payment, which establishes a variety of payment services to 
business customers and consumers like www.PayPal.com (see 
Chapter 3)
• E-logistics that provides logistics services like product 
transportation, order tracking, and order fulfillment like 
www.fedex.com
• Database and Record Processing allows database and 
recordkeeping services, for example, electronic medical 
records
• Insurance enable the customer to purchase online different 
types of insurances from a variety of insurance companies 
(www.insure.com)
• Loans enable online services for acquiring loans from a 
variety of lenders (www.eloan.com).
E-Communities
The E-Communities group includes an extensive number of e-services 
associated with various government, business, and consumer organiza­
tions that have online representation. These e-services are mostly used for 
providing information, guidelines, education, and useful links in differ­
ent areas of business and life.
One such e-service is Government Services that provide information 
about various aspects of government activities, resources, policies, and 
procedures. For example, a U.S. government portal www.firstgov.gov pro­
vides a number of links to government-related information and resources 
on the web (see Figure 4.2), like Benefits and Grants, Consumer Guides, 
Defense and International, Environment and Energy, Agriculture, Family, 

	
Electronic Services Applications	
91
Home, Community, and many others. Besides information, the web 
site provides links to transactional (e-process) services including driver’s 
license renewal, vital records changes, government online auctions, pass­
port renewal, government job applications, and others.
The next popular e-service is Business and Consumer Blogs. Blog is a 
short form for the word weblog and the two words are used interchange­
ably. In general, a blog is a frequently updated online journal or diary. It 
could be managed by an individual, organization, or business. A blog is 
the place to express personal or business opinion and share thoughts. A 
typical blog combines text, images, and links to other blogs, web pages, 
and other media related to its topic. The ability for readers to leave com­
ments in an interactive format is an important aspect of many blogs.
The number of blogs today is hard to estimate; it is measured in thou­
sands and thousands of web pages. There are special online companies that 
help create and maintain blogs, for example, www.blogger.com. To find 
the blog companies, or to respond to the blog postings, customers may 
Figure 4.2  U.S. Government information portal

92	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
use several e-service portals that contain links to business and consumer 
blogs, for example, www. bloggersblog.com and www.bloguniverse.com.
Supplier Directories are a common e-service in the area of supply 
management, procurement, and sourcing (see Chapter 4 on Supply-
side Ecommerce). They enable identification and evaluation of prospec­
tive suppliers that may be used for outsourcing or for participation in 
reverse auctions. One of the popular supplier directories is Thomas Reg­
ister, www.thomasnet.com. The web site allows searching for suppliers by 
browsing product categories. In addition, the supplier may be found by 
product name, company’s name, or location.
E-marketing
The E-marketing group contains a variety of online services that help 
organizations with advertising, promotions, marketing, market research, 
and data mining. The Advertising and Marketing e-services provide ser­
vice and consulting in the following areas:
• E-mail and off-line marketing campaigns
• Banner and text advertising
• Mailing lists and newsletter services
• Web site promotion services
• Online branding
• Performance analysis and lead generation
• Market analysis
• Web site design for marketing and promotion campaigns.
The number of internet-based companies that can help with online 
marketing and advertising is measured in the hundreds. A list of such 
companies can be found in online business directories like: dmoz.org and 
www.business.com.
Affiliate Services or Affiliate Marketing Services is a way for a com­
pany to sell its products online by signing up individuals or companies 
(affiliates) who market the company’s products online for a commission. 
These services are usually “pay-per-sale” or “pay-per-click” marketing 
programs based on the concept of revenue sharing. Companies selling 

	
Electronic Services Applications	
93
products or services online give the affiliates a cut of their profits (a share 
in their revenue) as a commission on any sales generated from a customer 
they introduce to the partner site. Internet affiliate programs are popular 
with both companies looking to increase sales and web sites wanting to 
generate extra income. The affiliates help the merchants by exposing the 
merchant’s products/services to visitors of their web site through careful 
placement of banners and links.
There are several ways to establish an affiliate service. An e-commerce 
company can offer an affiliate program to others or an online company 
can sign up to be the affiliate. The e-commerce business company will 
pay affiliates a commission fee for every lead or sale they drive to the 
company’s web site. An affiliated company may provide services to many 
e-commerce companies at the same time. For example, www.bizrate.com 
provides product price comparisons and ranking of e-commerce shopping 
sites (see Figure 4.3). If a customer clicks on one of these shopping sites to 
Figure 4.3  Example of affiliate web site (www.BizRate.com)

94	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
continue shopping, the affiliate company (in this case www.­bizrate.com) 
will get an affiliate fee (commission) from that site.
Data Mining Services provide software and expertise to improve data 
extraction and analysis of company statistical information. This includes 
financial, marketing, and operational data, consumer surveys, competi­
tors’ results, and other data relevant to the company. Businesses of all 
sizes have embraced data mining as a process for improving the bottom 
line. With enormous amounts of customer information now centralized 
in enterprise data warehouses, and improved technology to support inte­
gration and dissemination of information for marketing purposes, data 
mining and analytical customer relationship management (CRM) appli­
cations appear to have the potential to greatly improve marketing ROI. 
However, there is growing sentiment that investments in data mining and 
analytical CRM have not paid substantial dividends.
4.3  Software as a Service
The concept of the software development and distribution has signifi­
cantly changed from the time companies started to use computers to now. 
Originally, development of computer systems usually took place inside an 
organization, which created homegrown computer systems for internal 
business and engineering needs. They were used predominantly on pow­
erful mainframe and mini computers, and distributed to the end users via 
terminals connected to the internal computer networks. These systems 
may still be found today in large corporations, where they are usually used 
for high-volume batch transactions. The old computer systems are usually 
referred as “legacy systems” (see Figure 4.4). Overall, the internal software 
development process required significant resources and time, and was not 
necessarily based on the best practices in this field.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, a new generation of software dis­
tribution became popular: client-server software. The development of 
personal PC and powerful servers signified a possibility for companies 
to purchase the software license from a vendor (software provider) with 
the established core competencies in software development, and then 
install the software on the company’s server(s). End-user PCs in the 
company became “clients” that contained run-time applications of the 

	
Electronic Services Applications	
95
same software. This facilitated the delivery and performance results of 
the software on the client PC. However, the implementation of the ven­
dor’s software was still lengthy and not free from substantial implemen­
tation errors and delays. It would also require significant resources for 
completion.
In the late 1990s, the development and proliferation of internet-based 
e-commerce applications opened new opportunities for software delivery 
to users. Business customers could buy software licenses and download 
the applications from the software provider’ e-commerce storefront. The 
Internet also brought the opportunity to outsource software capabilities 
from a hosting provider via the Internet network. This created a new con­
cept in software delivery-software as a service (SaaS).
Software as a Service (SaaS) is a software delivery model in which 
online applications are hosted by a service provider and made available to 
customers over the Internet. The hosting company (a software vendor or 
a third-party organization) provides hardware, installation, maintenance, 
daily technical operation, and support for the software delivered to their 
clients via the Internet (World Wide Web). The software can be deliv­
ered to any market segment including home consumers, small business, 
medium and large business. The main characteristics of SaaS are:
• Network-based access to, and management of commercially 
available (e.g., not custom) software.
• Activities that are managed from central locations rather 
than at each customer’s site, enabling customers to access 
applications remotely via the Web.
Figure 4.4  Evolution of software development and distribution
Legacy
Software
Client-
Server
Software
Internet-
Based
Software
Software
as a
Service

96	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
• Application delivery that typically is closer to a one-to-many 
model (single instance, multiuser architecture) than to a one-
to-one model, including architecture, pricing, partnership, 
and management characteristics.
The SaaS application has captured a relatively big market share in specific 
business functions like Customer Relationship Management (CRM), HR, 
and Procurement, and vertical markets (Technology, Financial Services, and 
Utilities) (see Figure 4.5)[3]. The Gartner group estimated that by 2011, 25% 
of all software spending would be in applications delivered using SaaS[3].
Figure 4.5  Market share of SaaS/On-demand applications

	
Electronic Services Applications	
97
The early version of SaaS that had evolved during the dot-com era was 
Applications Service Providers (ASP). According to ASPnews.com [4], 
an ASP is a third party entity that deploys, hosts and manages access 
to a packaged application, and delivers software-based services and solu­
tions to customers across a wide area network from a central data center. 
Companies used ASPs to outsource some or most applications for their 
information technology needs. ASPnews.com breaks the industry into 
five subcategories[4]:
• Enterprise ASPs—deliver high-end business applications.
• Local/Regional ASPs—supply wide variety of application 
services for smaller businesses in a local area
• Specialist ASPs—provide applications for a specific need, 
such as Web site services or human resources
• Vertical Market ASPs—provide support to a specific industry 
such as healthcare
• Volume Business ASPs—supply general small/medium-sized 
businesses with prepackaged application services in volume.
ASPs may also be commercial ventures that cater to customers, or 
not-for-profit or government organizations, providing service and sup­
port to end users. In general, an ASP hosting company purchased and 
deployed on its server(s) a copy of software requested by the customer. 
The hosting company could also offer widely available software for use 
by customers. A licensing fee and monthly subscription fees were sepa­
rately paid to the maker of the software and the ASP hosting company, 
respectively. The hosting company also enabled some level of software 
customization.
When ASPs sprang up in the 1990s, they offered essentially the same 
thing SaaS vendors offer today: hosted applications delivered over the 
internet[5]. The problem ASPs ran into (actually, they ran into many prob­
lems, not the least of which was the venture capital money that dried up 
in the 2000–2001 time frame during the dot-com crash ) was that they 
tried to be all things to all people, and they buckled under the weight 
of their own infrastructure. In trying to serve the unique needs of each 
of their customers, ASPs lost the economies of scale that were necessary 

98	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
for them to provide their services in a cost-effective manner[5]. Other ASP 
problems were associated with the following:
• ASP generation was merely traditional client-server 
applications with HTML front-ends.
• These applications were hosted by third parties who ordinarily 
did not have application expertise, but were managed server 
providers.
• Because the applications were not written as net-native 
applications, performance was poor and application updates 
were no better than self-managed applications.
The current (after ASP) generation of Software as a Service is also known 
as Software On-Demand (SOD). Unlike traditional packaged applications 
or ASPs models, in which users owned the software licenses, the SOD ­vendor/
provider owns the software and runs it on computers in its data center. The 
customer does not own the software but effectively rents it, usually for a 
monthly fee. The SOD provider offers software specifically built for one-
to-many hosting, i.e., one copy of the software is installed for use by many 
companies who access the software across the Web. The SOD vendor may 
not provide software customization for specific customers. However, there 
may be a variety of similar software products for outsourcing by customers.
The main value-added offerings and value creation in SaaS/on-
demand software are presented in Table 4.3.
One of the leaders in SOD services is www.salesforce.com, which pro­
vides on-demand customer relationship management (CRM) applica­
tions. These applications include:
• Sales Force Automation for managing different sales 
information, forecasts, pricing, sale leads and sales campaigns
• Service and Support that is used for identifying and 
managing customers, providing customer support, 
analyzing feedback and customer complaints
• Marketing for providing marketing and promotion 
campaigns, analyzing markets, and providing optimal 
marketing decisions

	
Electronic Services Applications	
99
• Partner Relationship Management including planning and 
recruiting partners, partner marketing, sales, and analysis
• Analytics which provides business intelligence and analytical 
tools for facilitating and improving management of various 
CRM applications (see Figure 4.6).
The company also established the AppExchange site that provides 
an online marketplace of applications developed by salesforce.com and 
its community of developers, customers, and partners. These applica­
tions are clustered into Sales, Marketing, Service and Support, Analyt­
ics, Finance and Administration, Human Resources, Financial Service, 
and Non-Profits.companies can visit the AppExchange to choose from 
hundreds of on-demand applications. With just a few clicks, these apps 
can be installed into a company’s salesforce.com environment and begin 
delivering added functionality immediately. The AppExchange is a way 
for independent software vendors (ISVs) to distribute applications to the 
largest audience of on-demand subscribers in the world. Developers at 
companies of all sizes are building applications on Salesforce’s on-demand 
platform and bringing them to market on the AppExchange.
In general, SaaS solutions work best for non-strategic, non-mission-
critical processes and functions such as expense and travel management, 
procurement, and employee performance management that are simple, 
Table 4.3  Main Value-added offerings and benefits of SaaS/
On-demand software
Value-Added Offerings
Value Creation (Benefits)
The customer is renting and using software 
via the Internet
The hosting company provides a variety 
of standardized software options that the 
customer can choose from
The hosting company owns the software, 
and is responsible for hardware and 
software installation and implementation
The hosting company provides constant 
and seamless updates and improvement 
of the software for all customers at the 
same time
Reduce costs through low upfront 
investments in hardware, installation, and 
implementation
Reduce cost through low subscription fees
Relatively quick implementation cycle 
(usually from 3 to 6 months)
Reduce implementation errors and bugs
Improve customer satisfaction

100	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
standard, and not highly dependent on or integrated with other busi­
ness functions and systems. SaaS also works well for processes that are 
being automated for the first time, because there are no legacy processes 
to replace and thus fewer change-management challenges[5].
4.4  Chapter 4 Summary: Managerial Aspects 
of Electronic Services
	 1.	 The electronic service (e-service) business concepts originated by 
Hewlett Packard (HP) is the idea that the Internet and World Wide 
Web are moving beyond e-business and e- commerce into a new 
phase where many services can be provided for a business organi­
zation or end consumer using the Web. Any application program 
or information resource is a potential e-service or Internet Service 
Provider (ISP), and other companies are logical distributors or access 
points for such service.
	 2.	 Main trends in e-service development are associated with the 
increasing availability of ISPs applications providers, growing num­
ber of specialized web portal service sites, and more “on-the-fly” 
Figure 4.6  Example of salesforce’s On-demand analytics

	
Electronic Services Applications	
101
management of service requests that may require handling by several 
companies.
	 3.	 E-service outsourcing concept is an arrangement in which one com­
pany provides services for another company that could also be, or 
usually has been, provided in-house. The main reasons for e-service 
outsourcing are: (a) the desire of companies to concentrate on their 
core business; (b) the need to have services up and running rapidly; 
(c) the lack of expertise and resources for many support services; (d) 
the inability to have the economy of scale enjoyed by outsourcers; (e) 
the inability to keep up with rapidly fluctuating demands if an in-
house service option is used; and (f) the number of required services, 
which usually are simply too many for one company to handle.
	 4.	 The internet contains a significant number of e-services, sometimes 
quite different in nature, activities, and business models. However, 
all this variety of services can be classified into six main groups of 
e-service models based on their objectives and functionality.
	 5.	 E-infrastructure contains e-service models that provide technical, 
technological, and managerial infrastructure services to the custom­
ers. These include e-service companies that enable access to the inter­
net (Internet Service Providers) or mobile service (Mobile Service 
Providers), establish integration between e-commerce models and 
internal ERP system, and participate in consulting and customer 
services.
	 6.	 E-content and Information include online information services, 
content providers, and Internet search companies (for example, 
Google). The third group, E-process, deals with a variety of online 
transactional services used in e-commerce models, for example, 
e-payments, m-commerce, e-logistics, etc.
	 7.	 E-communities contain a number of e-services associated with dif­
ferent online communities, for example, government services, busi­
ness directories, blog web sites, and others.
	 8.	 E-marketing combines a number of services related to marketing, 
advertising, and affiliate services.
	 9.	 Software as a Service (SaaS) is a software delivery model in which 
online applications are hosted by a service provider and made 
available to customers over the internet. The hosting company 

102	
APPLICATION MODELS FOR E COMMERCE
(a software vendor or a third-party organization) provides hardware, 
installation, maintenance, daily technical operation, and support for 
the software delivered to their clients via the internet (World Wide 
Web). The software can be delivered to any market segment includ­
ing home consumers, small business, medium and large business.
	10.	 The early version of SaaS that had evolved during the dot-com era 
was Applications Service Providers (ASP). ASP is a third party 
entity that deploys, hosts, and manages access to a packaged applica­
tion, and delivers software-based services and solutions to customers 
across a wide area network from a central data center. Companies 
used ASPs to outsource some or most business applications for their 
information technology needs. The main problem ASPs ran into 
was that they tried to be all things to all people, and they buckled 
under the weight of their own infrastructure. In trying to serve the 
unique needs of each of their customers, ASPs lost the economies of 
scale that were necessary for them to provide their services in a cost-­
effective manner.
	11.	 The current (after ASP) generation of Software as a Service is known 
as Software On-Demand (SOD). Unlike traditional packaged 
applications or ASPs models, in which users owned the software 
licenses, the SOD vendor/provider owns the software and runs it on 
computers in its data center. The customer does not own the soft­
ware but effectively rents it, usually for a monthly fee.
 12. Value-added offerings provided by SOD are based on renting and 
using software via the internet. The hosting company develops 
a variety of standardized software options that the customer can 
choose from; it owns the software, and is responsible for hardware 
and software installation. Finally, the hosting company provides 
constant and seamless updates and improvement of the software for 
all customers at the same time.
 13. SOD value creation is associated with reduced costs through low 
upfront investments in hardware, installation, and implementation; 
reduced cost through low subscription fees; relatively quick imple­
mentation cycle (usually from 3 to 6 months); reduced implementa­
tion errors and bugs; and, finally, improved customer satisfaction.

	
Electronic Services Applications	
103
 14. In general, SaaS/SOD solutions work best for non-strategic, non-
mission-critical processes and functions such as expense and travel 
management, procurement, and employee performance manage­
ment that are simple, standard, and not highly dependent on or inte­
grated with other business functions and systems. SaaS also works 
well for processes that are being automated for the first time, because 
there are no legacy processes to replace and thus fewer change-­
management challenges
References
1. Definition-E-services, searchcio.techtarget.com, May 2007.
2. Definition: EAI-Enterprise Application Integration, ­searchWebServices
.com, May 2007.
3.	 Gruman, G., “The Truth about Software as a Service,” www.cio.com, 
May 15, 2007.
4.	 Applications Service Provider (ASP), “ASPnews Glossary,” www
.ASPnews.com, January 11, 2002.
5.	 Levinson, M., “ABC: Introduction to Software as a Service,” www
.CIO.com, May 15, 2007.


A
Asset intensity reduction, 13, 15, 86
Automated Clearing House (ACH) 
Network, 75, 80
B
Blog, 7
“Brick-and-mortar” organizations, 11
Browsers, 1
Business model, 13
Business-to-business (B2B), 7–8, 11
Business-to-Business-to-Consumer 
(B2B2C), 12–13
Business-to-consumer (B2C), 
7–8, 11, 12
C
C-commerce—see Collaborative 
Commerce
“Click-and-mortar” 
organizations, 11
Collaborative Commerce 
(C-commerce), 13
Consumer-to-Consumer (C2C) 
e-commerce, 12
Core customer benefits, 86
Cost reduction, 14, 86
Credit Card—see Credit card 
processing
Credit card processing, 55–57
Credit Card Issuer, 55–56
Credit Interchange, 55–56
Customer, 55
Merchant, 55
Merchant Bank’s 
Processor, 55
Merchant’s bank, 55
Payment Gateway, 55
Value-added Offerings, 57
D
Debit card, 60, 78
Dot-com bubble, 5–6
E
E-business, 4
E-commerce (Electronic commerce)
Benefits, 15
Characteristics, 9–10
Cost reduction, 13
Defined, 2–4
Dimensions, 10
Disintermediation, 9
Growth, 7–9
History and current development 
of, 4–7
Inexorability, 9
Internet, 1–2
Managerial aspects of, 16–17
Networking, 4
Pervasiveness, 9
Re-intermediation, 10
Revenue enhancement, 13
Supply-side e-commerce, 75–108
Types of, 11
Value creation, 13–16
E-infrastructure, 85, 87
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI), 87
Electronic Payment, 51–81
Account-based models, 54
Automated Clearing House (ACH) 
Network, 75
Credit card processing, 75–77
Debit cards, 60
E-cash, 72–74
Electronic Bill Presentment and 
Payment (EBPP), 67
Electronic currency models, 54
Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT), 
75–77
Electronic Presentment and 
Payment (EPP), 67
E-payment currency systems, 71
E-payment via online banking, 66
Intermediary service, 60
Online cash system (e-cash), 72–74
PayPal, 62–65
Index

Purchasing card (P-card), 72
Secure Electronic Transaction 
(SET), 53
Secure Socket Layer (SSL), 53
Smart card, 71–72
Value-added offerings, 70
Electronic service, 83–103
Affiliate service, 92
Applications Service Providers 
(ASP), 97
Business and consumer blogs, 7
Data Mining Services, 94
E-communities, 101
E-content and Information, 85
E-infrastructure, 85
E-marketing, 85
Enterprise Application Integration 
(EAI), 88
E-process, 85
E-service Classification, 85
Internet security providers, 88
Internet Service Provider (ISP), 84
Network Service Provider (NSP), 87
Software as a Service (SaaS), 
191–194
Software On-Demand (SOD), 98
Supplier directories, 92
Embedded computing—see Pervasive 
computing
Enterprise Extranet, 4
Enterprise Intranet, 3
E-payment—see Electronic Payment
E-payment currency system—see 
Electronic Payment
E-payment via online banking—see 
Electronic Payment
E-procurement—see Supply-side 
e-commerce
E-procurement with electronic 
catalogs—see Supply-side 
e-commerce
E-service—see Electronic Service
G
Google, 24, 32, 64, 85
Government-to-Business (G2B) 
e-commerce, 12
Government-to-Consumer (G2C) 
e-commerce, 12
H
Hyper-Text Transmission Protocol 
(HTTP), 1
I
Inexorability of e-commerce, 9
Internet, 1–2
Intra-business e-commerce, 13
L
L-commerce—see Location-based 
Commerce
Location-based Commerce 
(L-commerce), 13, 32
M
M-commerce—see Mobile Commerce
Mixed/“click-and-brick” strategy, 6
Mobile Commerce (M-commerce), 6, 
13, 19–50
1G, 21
2.5G, 21
2G, 21
3G, 21
4G, 21
Bluetooth, 21
Broad Reach, 24
Characteristics, 24
Classification, 28
Commercial applications, 37
Content delivery, 28–29
Convenience, 25
Financial applications, 28, 30–31
GPS, 21
Instant Connectivity, 25
Intrabusiness and Enterprise 
Application, 34
Limitations and Problems, 26
Mobile-Fi, 21
Mobility, 24–25
Personal Digital Assistant (PDA), 21
Pervasive Computing, 35–37
Product/Service Localization, 24
RFID, 19, 21, 28–50
Shopping and Auction 
Applications, 31
Smartphone, 20, 22
SMS-based shopping, 31
Technology Terms, 21
106	
INDEX

Telemetry services, 27
Ubiquity, 25
WAP, 22
Wi-Fi, 22
Wi-Max, 22
Wireless VoIP, 22
ZigBee, 22
Monetary value in E-commerce, 14
Monetary Results (value creation)—
see Value Creation
Multimedia sharing, 7
N
Non-monetary, 15, 86
O
Online cash system, 54, 72–74
P
Partial e-commerce organizations, 10
PayPal, 61–65, 79
Direct Payments, 61
Express Checkout, 62
PayFlow Link, 63, 64
PayFlow Payment Gateway, 62
PayFlow Pro, 64
Value-added offerings, 65
Website Payment Pro, 64
Website Payment Standard, 64
Peer-to-Peer (P2P) e-commerce, 12
Pervasive computing, 35–37, 48
Pervasiveness of e-commerce, 9
Podcast, 7
Portal, 84
Product Lifecycle Management 
(PLM)
Collaborative Product Design, 83
Purchasing card (P-card), 72, 80
Pure e-commerce organizations, 10
Pure-play e-commerce companies, 10
R
Radio Frequency Identification 
(RFID), 28–29, 37–50, 89
Active RFID tags, 39
Passive RFID tags, 39
Return on Investment, 43
Value-added offerings, 41
Value Creation, 42
Writable tags, 39
Return on Investment (ROI), 43
Revenue enhancement, 13
RSS, 7
S
Secure Electronic Transaction 
(SET), 53
Secure Socket Layer (SSL), 53
Smart card, 71, 80
Social networking, 7
Software as a Service (SaaS), 86, 
95–103
Evolution of software, 95
Software on demand (SOD), 98
Supply-side e-commerce, 75–108
U
Ubiquity, 25
Value-added offerings, 69
V
Value creation, 13
Monetary, 13, 14
Non-monetary, 13
Virtual/pure-play e-commerce 
companies, 10
W
Web 2.0, 6–7
Web pages, 1
Wiki, 7
World Wide Web (WWW), 1
Y
YouTube.com, 10
	
INDEX	
107


Application Models 
for E-Commerce
Zinovy Radovilsky
Dr. Zinovy Radovilsky is Professor of Management in 
the College of Business and Economics at California 
State University, East Bay. He has more than 20 years 
of experience in teaching operations and supply chain 
management courses. Dr. Radovilsky has been a busi-
ness consultant to leading U.S. companies and organi-
zations and has done extensive research in the areas of 
enterprise resource planning (ERP), e-commerce busi-
ness models and management, quality management, 
and quantitative business methods. He published a 
number of papers in international and domestic peer-
reviewed journals. Dr. Radovilsky is also a managing 
editor of two research journals
For further information, a 
free trial, or to order, contact: 
sales@businessexpertpress.com
www.businessexpertpress.com/librarians
THE BUSINESS 
EXPERT PRESS
DIGITAL LIBRARIES
EBOOKS FOR 
BUSINESS STUDENTS
Curriculum-oriented, born-
digital books for advanced 
business students, written 
by academic thought 
leaders who translate  real-
world business experience 
into course readings and 
reference materials for 
students expecting to tackle 
management and leadership 
challenges during their 
professional careers.
POLICIES BUILT 
BY LIBRARIANS
• Unlimited simultaneous 
usage
• Unrestricted downloading 
and printing
• Perpetual access for a 
one-time fee
• No platform or 
maintenance fees
• Free MARC records
• No license to execute
The Digital Libraries are a 
comprehensive, cost-eﬀ ective 
way to deliver practical 
treatments of important 
business issues to every 
student and faculty member. 

