
This is a stone.

Digital
Mindﬁeld
When choosing MINDFIELD DIGITAL™ and our DBMD™ 
Program for your development services, you can be sure 
you will receive an app that will save you money and 
resources using the most advanced design and interface 
concepts.
We follow an Application Development Cycle where every 
We follow an Application Development Cycle where every 
step is carried out to maximum perfection. Our application 
developers are experienced and knowledgeable, and are 
skilled at delivering top high tech Apps. 
Our team is constantly looking for promising partners in 
Our team is constantly looking for promising partners in 
order to improve our quality, broaden our experience and 
create a global range of Apps with the most impressive 
conceptual designs, 3D Graphics and Sound FX.
This is a stone.



WWDC 2017: 
THE BIGGEST 
ANNOUNCEMENTS
HOME SWEET HOMEPOD: 
A DIFFERENT KIND OF 
SMART SPEAKER
2017 IN REVIEW: 
ANOTHER GROUND-BREAKING 
YEAR FOR APPLE
60
182
26
80
iPHONE 8 AND 
iPHONE 8 PLUS: 
A POWERFUL 
UPGRADE FOR A 
PROPER PRICE

TOP 10 APPS  200
TOP 10 SONGS   204
TOP 10 ALBUMS   206
TOP 10 MUSICS VIDEOS   208
TOP 10 TV SHOWS   210
TOP 10 BOOKS   212
TV APP AN “ENTIRE POP CULTURAL EXPERIENCE” IS IN THE WORKS  08
iPHONE 8: A NEW ERA OF PERSONAL SECURITY  46
MASTER YOUR iPHONE: 25 iOS 10 TIPS AND TRICKS  104
iOS SECURITY: ARE YOU SAFE?  124
APPLE GOES INDIE WITH NEW GAMES SHOWCASE  138
THE EVOLUTION OF GAME SPORTS  150
REALITY: APPLE’S FUTURE IS IN AUGMENTED TECHNOLOGY  166
DRAW YOUR IMAGINATION: HOW THE NEW AGE OF TOUCH SCREENS...  214
REMEMBERING AN ICON: PRINCE’S DISCOGRAPHY NOW AVAILABLE TO STREAM...  230
DEEP LEARNING: A NEW CORE FOR APPLE?  244

8

9

10

APPLE-MADE TV SHOWS AND FILMS 
MAY ON THE WAY
Apple has often declared the fourth-generation 
Apple TV set-top box “the future of television”, 
but there have been recent flickers of evidence 
that Apple’s ambitions in television could extend 
far beyond this little home hub. These ambitions 
could encompass the production of original TV 
shows for the promotion of a video streaming 
service and indeed, Apple hardware. Could TV, 
rather than smartwatches or augmented reality, 
be the place for Apple’s next big revolution?
AN “ENTIRE POP CULTURAL EXPERIENCE” 
IS IN THE WORKS
The current version of Apple TV was released in 
October 2015 and has since received software 
updates enhancing its onboard operating 
system tvOS. In December, Apple released a 
new app, simply called ‘TV’, allowing users to 
browse content from various providers through 
the same portal on iPhones, iPads and Apple 
TVs. Apple has also dipped its toes into original 
content, having helped to develop a new 
version of Carpool Karaoke and reportedly, 
dark Dr. Dre drama Vital Signs.
That iteration of Carpool Karaoke will be 
released for users of the streaming service Apple 
Music, while Vital Signs evidently could have 
similar availability. However, in January, The Wall 
Street Journal reported that Apple was seeking 
to make further original content that would 
also become available through Apple Music. 
Apple is thought to be preparing to launch 
that content later in 2017 - and the proposed 
projects “don’t have any particular relationship 
to music”.
11

12

In fact, the Cupertino company is believed to be 
aiming to make shows along the lines of HBO’s 
Westworld and Netflix’s Stranger Things - while 
there are also “more preliminary” plans for original 
films. A few days after these revelations, Apple 
executive Jimmy Iovine admitted: “At Apple 
Music, what we’re trying to create is an entire 
cultural, pop cultural experience”, adding: “If 
South Park walks into my office, I’m not going to 
say you’re not musicians, you know?” 
WHY APPLE COULD BENEFIT FROM 
LAUNCHING ‘APPLE VIDEO’
Still, it looks like Apple’s move into original 
content is intended to augment the appeal of 
Apple Music in its fight against Spotify rather 
than directly take on Netflix or Amazon, now 
both established producers of acclaimed audio-
visual content. This seems a wise strategy, 
given that Apple would reportedly require an 
annual expenditure of hundreds of millions or 
even billions of dollars to compete with those 
companies. However, for Apple, one big benefit 
of making original content could be getting its 
previously rumored video streaming service off 
the ground.
In 2015, it was claimed that Apple had entered 
discussions with networks including CBS 
about bringing exciting content to a television 
subscription service for Apple customers. 
Those talks ultimately stalled as Apple failed 
to reach agreements with content providers. 
Apple executive Eddy Cue later downplayed the 
prospect of Apple offering such a service that 
would provide strictly the best for a low monthly 
fee, insisting: “As a matter of fact, I’m not a big 
fan of the skinny bundle.”
13

14

15

However, in an opinion piece for 9to5Mac, Zac 
Hall has suggested that an “Apple Video” - as he 
calls it - streaming service could help to plug 
a few holes in Apple’s TV app. Last year, Apple 
introduced a feature called Single sign-on (SSO), 
allowing tvOS 10 and iOS 10 users to unlock 
numerous channels with just one authentication 
process. However, Hall has observed that Apple 
Video could provide SSO to users who would 
otherwise have to wait for their cable provider to 
co-operate with Apple.
Furthermore, the selection of third-party 
content that can be browsed in the TV app is 
patchy right now. Content from a number of 
big-name companies, including HBO, ESPN and 
Disney, can be perused in this way. However, 
cable providers like Time Warner Cable and 
Comcast remain unsupported - while Netflix, 
which has not embraced Single sign-on, 
is only partly integrated with the app. By 
making more of its own content, Apple could 
provide more content for ready access in the TV 
app without the need for tricky and awkward 
negotiations with other providers.
16

17

HOW APPLE’S ORIGINAL CONTENT 
PLANS COULD UNFOLD 
While rumors don’t suggest that Apple is intent 
on seriously rivaling Netflix and Amazon with its 
own output of original and exclusive content, 
such a strategy would seem a natural evolution 
following the shows already launched solely on 
Apple Music. These have included Taylor Swift: 
The 1989 World Tour Live and 808: The Movie, 
a documentary about the influential 1980s 
drum machine. So, what further material could 
Apple be lining up?
Brian Blau, an Apple-following analyst with 
Gartner, told NPR: “Having original content is 
a strategy that is simply just going to bring 
people back to Apple.” He cited the company’s 
“unique opportunity” to become “more 
competitive with these other original content 
providers that potentially have been drawing 
Apple users away from the Apple ecosystem”. So 
for a hint of what is to come from Apple, should 
we look at what Netflix and Amazon have 
been making?
Statistics from the measurement service 
Symphony cite the 2016 viewer figures for 
18

Netflix original shows like Fuller House and 
Orange is the New Black as almost 16 million 
for each. Making these shows apparently paid 
off handsomely for the company - which, last 
quarter, recruited about seven million new 
subscribers globally. That progress had been 
beyond Wall Street’s expectations and Blau 
believes that, in the case of Apple, “this sort of TV 
and video and music content I think is just going 
to be one more pillar that they’re going to be 
able to stand on over time.”
This could be especially the case should Apple 
strike gold with a really big hit - one that 
could help pick up subscribers for an ‘Apple 
Video’ service and maybe even sell iPhones, 
iPads and Apple TVs. Hollywood producer 
Art Linson reckons that Netflix and Amazon 
have excelled with their own original content 
due to taking a more experimental approach 
forgone by cautious Hollywood studios. Apple 
might need to be similarly bold, using writers 
and directors with “the emotional ability to 
move us as viewers,” in the words of producer 
Sid Ganis.
Image: Stephen Lam
19

20

21

TREATS ALREADY BEING SERVED UP 
ON APPLE TV
But all of that is looking far into the future. 
While we’re still waiting for Apple to provide 
its own content, what can we already enjoy on 
what the company enthusiastically calls “the 
future of television” - yes, the fourth-generation 
Apple TV? The answer: lots of great stuff. Major 
apps currently available natively on the device 
include Fox Now, HBO Now, HBO Go and CNN 
Go. Some other notable apps, including Fox 
News and Amazon Video, are available to enjoy 
on the set-top box through the AirPlay feature, 
through which content can be streamed from an 
iOS device.
Other Apple TV apps from well-known media 
companies include YouTube, Hulu Plus, 
Showtime, iTunes, Vimeo, Watch ESPN, Watch 
Disney Channel, NBC, Nic, Nat Geo TV, CNBC 
and Bloomberg TV. None of those apps require 
AirPlay, making the Apple TV appealing even for 
people without iOS devices. Could that appeal 
grow yet further later this year, when Apple is 
rumored to be set to officially announce content 
of its own? We’ll have to wait and see, but we’re 
already excited.
22

23



26

27

Apple holds its Worldwide Developer’s 
Conference every year, giving thousands of 
developers from around the world a chance 
to meet with Apple engineers and attend 
workshops and software sessions. Between 
Monday 5 June and Friday 9 June this year, the 
WWDC takes place at the McEnery Convention 
Center in San Jose, California.
In keeping with tradition, Apple began the 
conference on Monday with a keynote, 
detailing several big announcements that 
would set the stage for the remainder of the 
week. As press invitations were sent out, many 
were already deliberating about what would be 
unveiled, with expectations rising high for the 
latest versions of software macOS and iOS and 
potentially new hardware products including 
a Siri smart speaker and a new iPad Pro. These 
rumors came flooding in, right up until key 
executives Craig Federighi, Phil Schiller and 
CEO Tim Cook took to the stage to announce 
some huge changes. Here are just some of 
the highlights. 
28

29

THE HomePod SPEAKER 
Rumors had been circulating for some time 
that Apple would be the next to join the battle 
for the best smart home speaker, but no one 
would imagine that it would be set to rival not 
only the Amazon Echo and Google Home but 
also the Sonos home entertainment speakers. 
Apple has dubbed this new device the 
HomePod, and it uses spatial awareness to 
tune and better fill the room with sound 
based on its surrounding space. Another 
feature that gives it an advantage over its rivals 
is ‘Musicologist’ that works with Apple Music 
once you’ve asked its built-in Siri to play a 
certain track. In true Siri fashion, the speaker will 
also respond to any questions you may have 
about the artist or album that’s playing, control 
smart home devices and check the day’s news 
or weather forecast. Available in black or white, 
Apple has priced the HomePod at $349 and 
plans to ship it to the US, UK, and Australia in 
December this year.
Image: Expert Reviews
30

31

32

33

34

UPDATED SOFTWARE FEATURES 
WITH iOS 11
Hundreds of new features, both major and 
minor, have been introduced in the latest 
version of the operating system that runs the 
iPhone and the iPad. While iOS10, which was 
released in September last year, tended to 
bypass the iPad, the new software includes 
a number of features for both beginners and 
professional users of the hardware. You are 
now able to customize the Dock on the iPad, 
providing access to frequently used apps and 
documents as well as multitasking functionality 
like Split View and Slide Over. A new App 
Switcher feature also lets you see all of the apps 
you’re using and quickly switch between them. 
True to speculation, a new Files app now lets 
you access all of your files regardless of whether 
they are stored locally, in the iCloud drive or 
on other cloud services such as Dropbox and 
Google Drive. Further updates for iPad include 
system-wide drag and drop and a deeper 
integration with Apple Pencil that allows users 
to open Notes from the lock screen by just 
tapping the Apple Pencil icon that is on display. 
On both the iPad and the iPhone, iOS11 has a 
refreshed look that focuses on bolder fonts and 
other smaller design changes. The redesigned 
single-screen Control Center is customizable, 
and the new Lock Screen makes it easier to 
see notifications. 
Siri has gained a more natural voice (both male 
and female) that has natural intonation, pitch, 
tempo and emphasis and a new Siri translate 
feature allows users to now translate English 
words into Spanish, French, German, Italian 
35

and Chinese. The functionality of Apple’s 
smart assistant has also improved in the new 
software update with on-device learning now 
available for more personal experiences and 
suggestions based on your use of Safari, Mail, 
News, and Messages.  
Speaking of Messages, there is now an app 
drawer that allows for easier access to stickers 
and apps and Apple Pay has been updated to 
include a peer-to-peer payment option that 
allows money to be sent via iMessage.  
Do Not Disturb has been expanded to include 
new features to be used while driving, muting all 
incoming notifications and letting people know 
that you’re on the road. This feature will start 
automatically when the device is paired with 
your car’s Bluetooth. 
As usual, a public beta of iOS11 will be made 
available later in the summer, but the final 
release isn’t set to roll out until the eagerly 
awaited iPhone 8 coming in September.
36

37

ARKit FOR AUGMENTED REALITY APPS
Maybe one of the most exciting announcements 
of the keynote was the new API Developer Kit 
for augmented reality apps. Some may say 
that Apple has kept a low profile in regards 
to augmented reality despite CEO Tim Cook 
stating last year that it could be huge. 
Popular third-party iOS apps have incorporated 
AR abilities, but up until now, neither Apple’s 
hardware nor software has been built to enable 
it until now.  ARKit allows developers to create 
AR apps and games with built-in features 
to make objects look as though they’re 
being placed in real space, instead of simply 
hovering over it. A demo showed an updated 
Pokemon Go app with realistic physics, and a 
greater awareness of the camera’s surroundings 
and Sir Peter Jackson’s studio Wingnut AR 
demonstrated a complex augmented reality 
landscape made in Unreal Engine alongside 
Unity and SceneKit. It’s said that this will be 
released as a game later this year. Executive 
Craig Federighi boasted that ARKit will be 
available across the entire iOS ecosystem 
making it “the largest AR platform in the world.”
38

Image: Justin Sullivan
39

NEW iPAD PRO MODELS
The new 10.5 inch and 12.9 inch iPad Pro 
models are due to ship next week. The 10.5 
inch starts at $649 with 64GB of memory or 
$779 for a 64GB cellular version, and the 12.9-
inch version starts at $799 for 64GB of storage 
and Wi-Fi or $929 for the cellular version with 
64GB memory. Both will be powered by the 
new A10X six-core CPU, include a 12-core CPU 
and support HDR video with a 120Hz refresh 
rate making it ideal for integration with the 
Apple Pencil as it drops the latency rate to an 
impressive 20 milliseconds. What’s more, the 
True Tone display is 50 per cent brighter 
than earlier models, and both new versions 
feature a 12-megapixel rear-facing camera 
alongside a 7-megapixel front-facing camera. 
Alongside the release of the devices, Apple will 
be launching new sleeves and accessories.
40

41

A REFRESHED MAC HARDWARE LINE
The long-awaited iMac desktop and MacBook 
laptops are finally here with enhanced 
processors and memory power. Apple also 
gave us a sneak peak at the new iMac Pro, 
specifically designed for pro users, with its 
27-inch Retina 5K display, an 18-core Xeon 
processor and up to 22 Teraflops of graphics 
computation that make it the most powerful 
Mac ever. In a space gray enclosure, the iMac 
Pro is said to be ideal for graphics editing, the 
creation of virtual reality content and real-
time 3D rendering and is scheduled to ship in 
December at a start price of $4,999.
42

43

44

These were only a few of the announcements 
made at this year’s keynote, however. Further 
news included an update for the Apple Watch 
which introduces new faces and complications 
and details regarding the upcoming version 
of macOS which we learned will be called 
High Sierra. 
Of course, as developers and lucky members of 
the press continue to try out the new devices, 
we’re bound to see more of features appearing 
right up until the release of the iPhone 8 in 
September. It seems as though Apple always has 
something up its sleeve!
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
45

46

47

Image: Handy Abo Vergleich 
Original Source: https://www.handy-abovergleich.ch/iphone-8-concept/
48

THE iPHONE 8 RUMOR MILL
The rumor mill continues to churn in regards 
to what we might see with the next iPhone 
release. The most recent hints suggest that a 
facial recognition feature that will propel Apple 
forward toward more advanced biometrics. 
After all, it has been widely speculated for some 
time now that Apple is ditching the home 
button in an attempt at a bezel-free design, 
and this would fit in well with the idea of a fully 
integrated facial recognition system. It makes 
sense that the Cupertino firm heads in this 
direction. Even if it doesn’t yet reach the dizzying 
heights of Jonathan Ive’s single sheet of glass 
design, we can still see a clear progression from 
the very first iPhone and its functionality.
Reports now claim that Apple has succeeded 
in purchasing Tel-Aviv based, Israeli start-up 
RealFace, a software company that provides 
“frictionless face recognition.” The start-up, 
formed in 2014, is said to have been bought 
by Apple for several million dollars and may 
provide the “iPhone 8” (and future iterations of 
the smartphone) with a practical face scanning 
utility powered by a laser 3D scanner.
49

50

THE SUPERMAN EFFECT
Facial recognition systems have been 
around for almost 50 years, and have seen 
many practical applications within the field of 
biometrics. This method of identification has 
been promising in recent years, thanks to its 
ability to determine people’s physiological and 
behavioral characteristics instead of relying 
on things such as passwords and PINs to gain 
access into domains both physical and virtual 
– the methods of identification we’re most 
used to when it comes to our smartphones 
and desktop computers. There are a number 
of considerations that those developing facial 
recognition systems should take into account, 
though, including factors such as the speed 
of the system from detection to recognition, 
overall accuracy and how much the system 
can be updated or enlarged as the population 
continues to increase. With more than a 
billion iPhones sold since launch in 2007, an 
accurate facial recognition system could prove a 
challenging technological feat for Apple.
However, in the real world that isn’t one of 
action movies and spy thrillers, facial recognition 
can present a challenging problem. When we 
think of software such as RealFace, it is natural 
to assume that it will work in the same way as 
it does in films like the Bourne series whereby 
an artist’s sketch is presented and expertly 
matched to a mug shot or even a live CCTV 
stream of the criminal who is, conveniently, at 
that very moment, up to no good. This type 
of expertise would require thousands, if not 
millions, of cameras whose job it would be to 
51

52

53

track individual faces and produce high-quality 
footage, alongside taking an extensive amount 
of information from constantly updating 
databases. Even if this technology did exist, we 
know that facial recognition is still not 100% 
accurate thanks to studies that have shown that 
small alterations to a person’s appearance, 
such as taking off a pair of glasses, can 
significantly affect accurate facial recognition.
NEW BIOMETRIC TECHNOLOGIES 
We can only speculate about what this 
potential addition of a facial recognition system 
can mean for the iPhone’s current fingerprint 
recognition tech, Touch ID. The company’s 
acquisition of RealFace only adds more fuel 
to the fire when it comes to the rumors that 
suggest that Apple is dropping Touch ID 
in favor of “new biometric technologies.” 
This may simply be referring to the company 
holding patents for embedding a fingerprint 
reader into the screen, but the likelihood is 
that Apple will continue to adopt Touch ID 
alongside new facial recognition technologies 
that users can have as an alternative. If 
Apple does go ahead with exactly what is 
speculated, we can probably rest assured that 
their approach will be secure, using advanced 
tech such as 3D multi-point facial features 
or iris recognition, the latter of which is used 
worldwide to confirm identities at Immigration.
Further problems arise concerning basic things 
such as speed. Commercial systems that use 
this technology will typically take two seconds 
or longer to recognize you. Therefore, the rate 
in which we’re used to unlocking our iPhone 
could so much as double. Secondly, we can refer 
Image: Handy Abo Vergleich 
54

Original Source: https://www.handy-abovergleich.ch/iphone-8-concept/
55

back to ‘the superman effect’ with regards to iris 
recognition software being unable to identify 
those wearing glasses. Those who wear glasses 
could be required to remove them each time 
they wish to unlock their phone, which is in 
no way practical and makes for a lacking user 
experience. This problem ties in with a similar 
one that may arise regarding unlocking your 
phone in dim lighting, something which doesn’t 
require any explanation. 
Facial recognition isn’t the only form of 
security that has been raised, though. Voice 
recognition is recognized as a highly secure 
form of biometric identification so much so that 
it is used by one of the world’s leading banks, 
HSBC. Rather than remembering a password, 
customers are simply required to respond 
to a question over the phone to access their 
mobile banking. This could be an option, but 
it would probably be avoided by those who 
already admit that they are too embarrassed 
to use Siri in a public space.  Apple would, 
therefore, be required to find a happy medium 
between offering the functionality of voice or iris 
technology, alongside a password input that is 
more inconspicuous.
56

57

THE INCLUSION OF AR TECH 
There have been huge implications that the 
next iPhone will be a game changer, because of 
the inclusion of augmented reality (AR) tech. The 
success of recent apps such as Pokémon Go and 
Blippar, which both use AR, have led to ideas 
that suggest the smart phone’s next update 
will change the way that we communicate 
and express ourselves by being able to display 
digital information on top of real-world items. 
Inquisitive fingers have pointed to Apple’s 
relationship with Lumentum, a 3D sensor 
technology company whose software will 
allow the iPhone to identify what it can see in 
the frame. We already know that Apple CEO 
Tim Cook has spoken in glowing terms about 
AR, though he continues to keep quiet about its 
inclusion in the next update.
Things on the facial recognition front remain 
vague. It is certainly possible that we could see 
the inclusion of some form of facial recognition 
software in the next update to the smartphone 
lineup, and iOS, but some reports suggest the 
deal between Apple and RealFace was not 
completed in time for the tech to be included 
this year. It isn’t unusual for Apple to keep 
certain acquisitions under wraps, however, and 
they may have been working alongside the start 
up, or indeed, another company, for some time. 
One thing we do know, however, is that after all 
of these impressive rumors, fans and investors 
alike will be thoroughly disappointed if Apple 
fails to deliver anything short of spectacular 
come the expected release date in September.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin
Original Source: https://www.handy-abovergleich.ch/iphone-8-concept/
58

iPhone Image: Handy Abo Vergleich 
59

60

61

62

Another year means another iPhone (or in this 
year’s case three) and the reviews have started 
to roll in for two of Apple’s latest offerings – the 
iPhone 8 and the iPhone 8 Plus. Those thinking 
about upgrading may feel that their decision 
is overshadowed by the looming release of 
the iPhone X but trust us when we say that the 
iPhone 8 (or Plus) is a powerful upgrade for less 
of the price. 
So, exactly how does this generation compare to 
those that came before it? In general, the iPhone 
8 and 8 Plus both provide us with a good dose 
of change from the likes of the iPhone 6 and 
iPhone 7, particularly when it comes to things 
like enhanced performance and a glimpse at 
the augmented reality features that are set to 
change the smartphone game.
63

64

AN UNRIVALED PERFORMANCE
Performance-wise, both the iPhone 8 and 
iPhone 8 Plus are equipped with a six-core A11 
bionic chip which Apple says has brought some 
major improvements from the previous iPhone 
7. The devices feature two performance cores 
and four efficiency cores, and certain CPU tests 
that have recently been carried out suggest 
that both not only significantly outperform the 
A10 but beat the A10X Fusion that is found in 
the iPad Pro. This means that your iPhone 8 or 
8 Plus will perform to the standard of the latest 
13-inch MacBook Pro – at least! When it comes 
to day-to-day use, there is little change from the 
iPhone 7, but for the 4.7-inch device, battery 
life has finally improved. Users can now expect 
their iPhone 8 to last just over 26 hours, and 
that’s without turning off push notifications 
or avoiding YouTube videos. This is a huge 
difference from the 14-hour battery life that the 
iPhone 7 initially boasted. Similarly, when the 
battery is dead, the iPhone 8 will charge much 
faster using a USB-C charging with Power 
Delivery. Of course, the newest big feature for 
Apple is wireless charging and although this is 
something that a number of their main rivals 
have supported for years, it’s good that they’re 
finally on board.
65

Images: Sarah Tew/CNET
66

67

EXACTLY HOW FRAGILE IS THE 
ALL-GLASS DESIGN? 
The entry-level price for the iPhone 8 with 64 GB 
of storage costs Apple $247.51 to make. This is 
compared with the $237.94 it cost to make the 
entry-level 32 GB iPhone 7. Recently, IHS has 
attributed this price hike to three of the new 
phone’s components: the camera, memory, 
and processing. This means that apart from the 
increase in base storage, the most expensive 
parts of the iPhone 8 and 8 Plus are the screen 
and mechanical enclosures. Bearing this in mind, 
then, we can begin to wonder just how fragile 
this all-glass design is.
The all-glass design provides us with the ability 
to charge our phones wirelessly but is this a 
big price to pay if the device is going to shatter 
on impact completely? Early drop tests have 
proven that the iPhone 8 is indeed more fragile 
than its predecessors, but if you do drop your 
iPhone, you should be thankful that it’s not 
a Samsung Galaxy Note 8. At the launch, 
Apple explained that the iPhone 8 and iPhone 
X have better glass than any models, but this 
is something you’re bound to curse if it does 
accidentally slip out of your hands.
68

iPhone 8 Plus vs 7 Plus DROP Test!
69

Image: Sarah Tew/CNET
70

iPhone 8 Plus vs Galaxy Note 8 Drop Test!
71

72

WHAT EXACTLY IS THE BIG DEAL 
WITH iOS 11? 
Compared to last year’s iOS 10, some may say 
that not a great deal has changed with iOS 11 on 
the iPhone as the majority of new features are 
now confined to the iPad. Firstly, there is the 
new control center that gives you the power 
to customize the shortcut menu with the 
tools and controls that you use the most. Now, 
swiping from the bottom lets you remove four 
of the default icons (Camera, Timer, Flashlight, 
and Calculator) and determine what goes there 
instead. Some features that you decide may be 
specific to you, such as adding the Apple TV 
Remote there so you can easily switch between 
your Netflix shows or the brand new Do Not 
Disturb While Driving tool that frees you from 
the distraction of any incoming notifications. 
This isn’t everything, though. Now by holding 
the Camera icon, you can choose from specific 
options such as take a selfie, record video or 
take a portrait photo, with the flashlight you 
can adjust the brightness, and in Wallet, you can 
choose which of your cards you want to use. 
There’s even a hidden ‘Quick Start’ feature that 
lets you set up your new phone a lot quicker 
than going through the usual process.
Top 11 iOS 11 Features - What’s New Review
73

Image: Jason Cipriani/CNET
74

iPhone 8 unboxing and fast set up
with iOS 11’s new Quick Start
75

A BRIEF GLIMPSE AT 
AUGMENTED REALITY 
Over the past decade or so, Apple has changed 
the way that we interact with our mobile 
devices, so perhaps the feature that we’d all 
been waiting for at the most recent launch was 
augmented reality. Blurring the line between 
the real world and the virtual world, Apple first 
launched their own AR technology at the 
World Wide Developers Conference earlier 
this year. Using the tech to add virtual objects 
to real-world situations, Apple demonstrated the 
endless possibilities of AR and how it could soon 
become readily available to consumers.  In the 
iPhone 8 and iPhone 8 Plus, then, the upgraded 
cameras allow for better AR processing 
meaning that users both young and old can 
have fun with some new apps such as Google 
Translate, Night Sky, and Quiver.
TOUCH ID IS A PROVEN SECURITY 
MEASURE; FACE ID IS NOT. 
What we must not forget to mention is the 
newest of Apple’s security features, Face ID, 
and how they did not do much in their keynote 
presentation to show its reliability. 
This facial recognition software allows users 
to get into their phone via a 3D Face scan and 
has come against some criticism. Although it 
has been explained that Apple’s engineering 
team “worked hard to make sure Face ID can’t 
easily be spoofed by things like photographs,” 
by testing the security with realistic models, 
there is yet to be any real evidence to prove 
that it’s more secure. By choosing the iPhone 
8 or 8 Plus, you’ll forego this feature and stick 
Image: TechCrunch
76

77

with the proven entity that is Touch ID although 
the iPhone X launch in November will be the 
first time that anyone has seen Face ID work 
in practice. This, alongside the trade-off for a 
physical home button, is a factor that requires 
some careful consideration.
All in all, both the iPhone 8 and 8 Plus are an 
upgrade from their respective predecessors, 
although they do seem a little like an ‘S’ upgrade 
in disguise. If you base your opinion on the 
specification bumps that we’ve highlighted, 
you might think it’s a good idea to wait for the 
upcoming iPhone X, but if the price is something 
you’re concerned about, then the premium one 
may not be for you.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
Image: Sarah Tew/CNET
78

79

80

81

82

APPLE CONTINUES TO DOMINATE THE 
TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY
Yet again, Apple continued to push the 
boundaries of technology throughout 2017 and 
dominate the market. We saw the introduction 
of the iPhone X, the most anticipated iPhone 
since 2007, the Apple Watch series 3, AirPods, 
Apple Pay Cash and more. To celebrate this 
ground-breaking year for the tech giant, we 
are taking a look back on all their biggest 
achievements this year, before looking ahead to 
the tech possibilities for Apple in 2018.
83

84

iPHONE X: 
THE MOST IMPORTANT iPHONE TO DATE
The iPhone X was long rumored before it was 
officially released, with many speculating it 
would mark the 10-year anniversary of the 
first ever iPhone. Apple took a big risk with the 
latest phone, and it marks the biggest ever 
jump between models. It features a radical all-
glass design, which Apple claims is the most 
durable glass to ever appear on a smartphone. 
This all-glass design enables wireless charging 
and Apple has given a sneak preview of its 
AirPower charging pad.  This new model has 
lost the home button entirely and instead, 
it utilizes facial recognition, and Apple also 
revolutionized the emoji with ‘animojis’ that can 
mirror the user’s facial expressions. This model is 
also water-resistant to a depth of one meter for 
up to 30 minutes.
It was released alongside the iPhone 8 and 
the 8 Plus at Apple’s new spaceship campus in 
California. However, all these features come with 
a high price tag. According to Trusted Review,  
possibly as a result of its price tag, sales of the 
iPhone X are below expectations.
85

Apple reveals AirPower
86

87

iPAD PRO: 
ON TRACK TO REPLACE THE MAC
According to Apple’s marketing chief Phil 
Schiller, the iPad Pro can both supplement 
and replace the Mac, and it is marketed on 
Apple’s website as “more powerful than most 
PC laptops.” The new iPad Pro was announced 
at Apple WWDC 2017,and the new 10.5-inch 
display is nearly 20% larger than the 9.7-inch 
model, but both this and the 12.9-inch model 
are still completely portable. It also still works in 
88

conjunction with the Apple Pencil and is said to 
be even more responsive and natural. 
The 10.5 inch starts at $649 with 64GB of 
memory, and the 12.9 inch is pricier, starting 
at $799 for 64GB of storage. Both support HDR 
video, are powered by the new A10X six-core 
CPU and the True Tone display is 50% brighter 
than earlier models.
89

90

APPLE PAY CASH: ANOTHER STEP 
TOWARDS A CASHLESS SOCIETY
2017 was the year Apple revolutionized our 
relationship with money. Apple users have been 
utilizing Apple Pay, Apple’s mobile payments 
service, since October 2014, which allows us 
to make purchases in stores using our mobile 
phone. However, just a few weeks ago, Apple 
turned on the switch for its Apple Pay Cash 
feature, which allows users to send and receive 
money from friends using the Messages app or 
by speaking with Siri.
The best part is, you aren’t required to download 
a separate app but can use the cards you already 
have set up in your Wallet. What this means for 
the future is very exciting. Will America follow 
in Sweden’s footsteps and work towards 
becoming a cashless society? In Sweden, digital 
payments are accepted almost everywhere, 
including on buses and by magazine sellers on 
the street. Apple Pay Cash is another step on the 
ladder towards making the transfer of money 
as simple, quick and efficient as possible, and 
a serious competitor for the likes of PayPal and 
Facebook Messenger.
91

92

APPLE AIRPODS: 
A WIRELESS EXPERIENCE
Apple AirPods, which are now sold out until 
2018, mean uses no longer have to plug in 
their headphones, waste time untangling the 
wire or worry about them getting caught on 
something. One big worry users have is losing 
their wireless headphones. However, reviews 
suggest they will even stay in while running. 
The battery life is better than expected and the 
built-in microphone is certainly something to 
rave about thanks to Apple’s noise-canceling 
technology, which detects the subtle vibrations 
that indicate you are speaking.
93

94

APPLE WATCH SERIES 3: 
REBRANDED AS A FITNESS TRACKER
Released around the same time as the 
iPhone X, all focus was on the new phone, 
however, Series 3 of the Apple Watch should 
not be overlooked. Three years on from the 
announcement of the original Apple Watch, 
this upgrade introduces new technology, most 
importantly it has built-in cellular connectivity. 
This means the watch can now be used 
independently of the iPhone and you can 
make phone calls and load online data even 
when you leave your phone at home. The 
dual-core S3 processor makes the Series 3 70% 
faster than S2 inside last year’s Series 2 model, 
according to Apple. The latest version of the 
watch has been somewhat rebranded as a 
fitness tracker, targeting runners and swimmers 
as it is waterproof, and encourages to you meet 
fitness goals every day.
Apple Watch Series 3: Unboxing & Review
95

96

APPLE MUSIC: A STREAMING SERVICE 
TO RIVAL SPOTIFY
While Spotify remains the leader in 
streaming music,  Apple Music is a worthy 
competitor. Apple Music features more than 
40 million songs, and it has a series of high-
profile albums including Chance the Rapper’s 
Coloring Book and Taylor Swift’s 1989, which 
was not available on Spotify for some time. 
Apple Music’s most useful feature, however, 
is perhaps its iCloud Music Library which 
allows MP3 collectors to access their libraries 
wherever they go and Apple Music is also 
available in 113 countries.
97

Apple TV 4K: Unboxing & Review
98

APPLE TV 4K: 
THE CRISPEST PICTURE TO DATE
If you have a 4K HDR TV and already use iOS, 
then the Apple TV 4K is the perfect Christmas 
gift for you. Apple did enter the 4K streaming 
market a little late, with its last major update 
to Apple TV in 2015, making this product long 
awaited, but it did not disappoint. The picture is 
clearer and crisper than ever before, with four 
times more pixels than standard HD, and 
you can even browse a variety of apps without 
having to switch between them. You can 
continue watching from your iPad and iPhone 
for seamless viewing, and it even incorporates 
Siri for hands-free viewing. 
99

Introducing iMac Pro — Apple
100

iMAC PRO: FIRST ORDERS TO ARRIVE THE 
WEEK AFTER CHRISTMAS
Apple released a teaser video for the iMac 
Pro back in June. However, it only started 
shipping on December 14,and the first orders 
will arrive the week after Christmas.  Prices 
start at $4,999, and while this sounds a lot, Apple 
claims if you build a PC equivalent it would 
cost $7,000. Currently, only the 8-core and 10-
core models are available, but the 14-core and 
18-core models will ship in 2018. Apple has 
focused heavily on speed benefits, claiming 
2D designers will be able to visualize huge 3D 
models and render scenes up to 3.4 times faster 
and photographers can work with huge files and 
process images up to 4.1 times faster.
In conjunction with the iMac Pro, Apple has also 
announced Final Cut Pro 10.4, which has VR 
capabilities.  It also has advanced color grading, 
custom white balance, HEVC support, NFS 
support and more.
101

APPLE HOMEPOD: 
HITTING STORES IN 2018
The Apple HomePod won’t be available in time 
for Christmas and is now not likely to hit stores 
until 2018, although the speaker was originally 
announced back in June. The speaker is due to 
retail at $349, costing significantly more than 
Amazon’s most expensive Echo device, but less 
than Google Home Max at $399. The HomePod 
will feature Siri. However, it’s got some work 
to do ifit wants to compete with Google and 
Amazon. Apple told Tech Radar:
“We can’t wait for people to experience HomePod, 
Apple’s breakthrough wireless speaker for the 
home, but we need a little more time before it’s 
102

ready for our customers. We’ll start shipping in 
the US, UK, and Australia in early 2018.”
It will feature a sleek design, be able to adapt to 
what is playing and have spatial awareness so 
it can analyze acoustics and adjust the sound 
based on its location in the room.
2017 has, therefore, been another 
groundbreaking year for Apple. While the iMac 
Pro, the iPad Pro and the Apple Watch Series 3 
are all worthy competitors, undoubtedly the 
biggest technology breakthrough this year is 
the iPhone X, even with its hefty price tag. Watch 
out for next week’s issue where we look ahead 
to what technology breakthroughs Apple could 
have to 2018. 
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
103

104

105

Image: Sean Gallup
106

MAKE MORE OF YOUR iPHONE
Nearly six months has passed since the release 
of iOS 10, and the mobile operating system 
is still the world’s most advanced. Apple is 
expected to unveil the next iteration of iOS at 
the WWDC 2017 Keynote on June 5 in San 
Jose, with rumors suggesting features such 
as a Dark Mode and a Snapchat-style video 
sharing app will be added. Until then, here are 
25 fantastic tips for helping you make the most 
out of your iPhone and iPad.
 1. 
UNLOCK PHONE WITHOUT PRESSING 
THE HOME BUTTON
It was one of the most annoying parts of iOS 
10 – the removal of the ‘swipe to unlock’ 
feature that many iPhone users had become 
accustomed to. It’s possible to unlock the 
screen without pressing down on the Home 
button, however, and that is by going to 
Settings >> Touch ID & Passcode and toggling 
the Rest Finger to Open option. Now, you can 
unlock your iPhone simply by placing your 
finger on the Home button.
2. 
MAKE YOUR FLASHLIGHT BRIGHTER
If you have an iPhone with 3D Touch capabilities 
– that is, the iPhone 6S onwards – you can 
control the brightness levels of your flashlight. 
Open your control panel and long press your 
107

flashlight icon, which will then allow you to 
select Bright, Medium or Low light levels.
3. 
PRIORITIZE ESSENTIAL DOWNLOADS
Downloading or updating more than one app at 
a time? Prioritize the most important by pressing 
down on the app and tapping the Prioritize 
Download button. By doing so, you’ll be able to 
choose which app is updated or download first, 
saving you time and allowing you to get back 
into action as soon as possible.
4. 
CLEAR YOUR HOME SCREEN BY 
REMOVING STOCK APPS
It was one of the most commonly requested 
features, and it finally came with iOS 10. If you 
want to delete stock apps such as Stocks, Maps, 
and Contacts from your phone, then hold the 
app icon and click on the ‘X’ on the top-left 
corner. Although the app icon will be removed 
from your home screen, removing stock apps 
won’t save space on your phone.
5. 
COLLABORATE WITH FRIENDS 
ON NOTES
If you’ve used Google Docs or Dropbox Paper 
in the past, you’ll know how convenient it can 
108

109

be to collaborate on documents. Now, with iOS 
10, you can finally share notes with your friends. 
Tap on the share icon in the top right-hand 
corner of your Notes app and share an invite 
to collaborate on notes with friends and family 
through email, Twitter or iMessage.
6. 
DRAW ON YOUR PHOTOS
In a similar vein to Snapchat and Facebook 
Messenger, Apple lets you draw on your photos 
when sending them through iMessage. When 
you send a picture to a friend, tap on it to 
reveal a Markup option, which allows you to 
add text, magnify areas and draw on notes.
7. 
CLOSE ALL TABS IN SAFARI AT ONCE
If you’re the sort of person who fills their internet 
browser with hundreds of tabs, then this one’s 
for you. Open Safari, click on the Tabs button 
and, once you’re in Tab view, click on the Done 
button and you’ll be able to close all of your 
open tabs in one go.
8. 
MAKE SIRI MORE USEFUL
A relatively new feature to Siri is the ability for 
her to announce the name or number of an 
incoming caller. This is particularly useful when 
110

111

112

you’re driving or are away from your phone – 
just head to Siri in the Settings menu, and you’ll 
be able to activate this feature.
9. 
CLEAR YOUR STORAGE
Living with a 16GB iPhone has always been a 
challenge, but iOS 10 made it more convenient 
for those who are running low on storage. 
Head to the Storage settings menu and toggle 
the Optimize Storage feature. Doing so will 
automatically delete songs from your Apple 
Music library that haven’t been played in a long 
time, giving you more room to download apps 
and listen to music without those pesky ‘low on 
storage’ pop-ups.
 10. 
FIND YOUR CAR
Forget where you’ve parked your car every 
time you visit the mall? Activate Bluetooth 
when you’re in your vehicle, and Maps will 
automatically add a pin to your destination 
when you disconnect, alerting you with a ‘Find 
My Car’ pop-up when you’re ready to go home.
 11. 
SAVE MONEY ON TOLL ROADS
If you want to avoid toll road charges when 
traveling long-distance, visit Settings >> Maps 
113

114

>> Driving & Navigation and then toggle the 
switch to bypass routes with tolls.
 12. 
VOICEMAIL TRANSCRIPTION
Don’t have the time or energy to sit through 
long voicemail messages? iOS 10 will listen to 
and transcribe them for you. Just click on the 
Voicemail section of your Phone app.
 13. 
LET APPLE KNOW YOU LIKE TO WALK
Want Apple Maps to give you streamlined 
directions in your preferred mode of transport? 
Go to Settings >> Maps and choose between 
Driving, Walking and Public Transport – the app 
will default to your preferred mode every time, 
and you can quickly switch between them.
 14. 
READ AND WATCH AT THE SAME TIME
Want to look at a video on a website and read 
an article at the same time? Before iOS 10 this 
wasn’t possible, but a new exit full-screen 
mode will allow you to watch the video from 
within the browser window. This feature is also 
available within iMessage – you can watch 
full-length YouTube videos while chatting 
with your friends.
iMessage on iOS 10: Tips, Tricks and Full Tutorial
115

116

 15. 
UNSUBSCRIBE FROM MAILING LISTS
Mailing lists can be annoying – indeed, more 
than 269 billion emails are sent every day. 
Luckily, for those who don’t like email spam, 
iOS 10 makes it easy to unsubscribe. Instead of 
scrolling to the bottom of an email to find the 
unsubscribe button and then wait for a website 
to confirm that you’re no longer on their list, 
Mail will now automatically detect if an email is 
a mail-out and display an ‘unsubscribe’ button at 
the top of the page.
 16. 
STOP YOUR FRIENDS FROM KNOWING 
YOU’RE IGNORING THEM
Read Receipts have always been a contentious 
subject, but with iOS 10, it’s now possible to 
toggle them on and off on an individual basis. This 
means, if you have a friend or client who you want 
to get back to later, you can turn off Receipts, and 
they won’t know you’ve read their message.
 17. 
CALL WITHOUT UNLOCKING 
YOUR PHONE
Add preferred contacts to your Favorites widget, 
and you’ll be able to call them with just a tap, 
instead of unlocking your phone and heading to 
your contacts menu.
117

 18. 
COPY AND PASTE FROM ONE DEVICE 
TO THE NEXT
If you have an iPhone, iPad and a Mac, 
then Universal Clipboard is the ultimate 
companion. Ensure you’re running the latest 
operating systems – iOS 10 and macOS Sierra – 
and then copy and paste your text across your 
devices. The technology saves the copy and 
pasted content in the cloud for two minutes and 
then reverts to an individual clipboard.
 19. 
FIND OBJECTS IN PHOTOS
Want to find an image of a particular object? 
Search for it in Photos, like Horses or Houses, 
and it will show all of the relevant results.
20.  
USE RAISE AND WAKE
The Apple Watch springs to life the moment 
you lift it up – and now, iPhone does the 
same. As Raise to Wake requires an M9 motion 
coprocessor, only owners of the iPhone 6s, 
iPhone 6s Plus, iPhone SE, iPhone 7 and 
iPhone 7 Plus can use it. Head to Settings >> 
Display & Brightness >> Raise to Wake to 
activate this feature.
118

119

21. 
GET A GOOD NIGHT’S SLEEP
The Clock app was redesigned for iOS 10, and 
now has a feature called Bedtime. The option 
sets a recurring wake-up alarm and reminds you 
when it’s time to go to bed.
22. 
‘HACK’ YOUR iPHONE INTO 
DARK MODE
It’s a feature we’ve all been waiting for, and 
although it’s not here yet, it’s possible to add 
some Dark Mode features to your iPhone on iOS 
10. Go to Settings >> General >> Accessibility 
and then tap Zoom, Choose Filter and Low 
Light. Although this doesn’t affect the interface 
design of your iPhone, it makes it easier to use 
your phone at nighttime.
23. 
TROUBLESHOOT YOUR WI-FI
It can be irritating to have problems with your 
internet connection, but not know why. With 
iOS 10, you can navigate to the Wi-Fi options at 
Settings >> Wi-Fi and browse information about 
your connection. It may say, for example, that 
you’re browsing on an Unsecured Connection, 
or that your connection is not providing access 
to the Internet.
120

121

122

24. 
CUT YOUR DATA BILL
If you don’t have an unlimited mobile data plan, 
an extra movie download or FaceTime chat 
can be expensive. One way to reduce your 
mobile data usage is to reduce image quality 
on iMessage. Go to Settings >> Messages >> 
Enable Low-Quality Image Mode and you’ll save 
data without even realizing.
25. 
STOP YOURSELF FROM 
SPENDING MONEY
If you’re trying to save money or want to stop 
your children from making purchases on your 
phone, then turn off Apple Pay from your Safari 
app. Go to Settings >> Safari and ensure that 
Check for Apple Pay is switched off.
We’ve highlighted just 25 of iOS 10’s most 
convenient features – features that will save you 
time and help you make the most out of your 
Apple device. Until iOS 11 is announced in June, 
spend time exploring the ins and outs of your 
smartphone to make it more efficient, more 
personalized and more suited to your lifestyle.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin
123

124

125

126

HOW SECURE IS YOUR SMARTPHONE?
Smartphones have transformed our lives, made 
it easier to communicate, be entertained and 
informed, and have even helped to provide 
more than 17 million jobs to the worldwide 
economy. But as smartphones and operating 
systems become more complicated, and hackers 
look for new ways to exploit personal data from 
their victims, it has never been more important 
to keep your smartphone and your data secure. 
Apple designed its iOS operating system with 
“security at its core”, but has the company 
done enough to protect its customers against 
potential hackers and damage?
Speaking to the International Business Times 
website, James Maude, the senior security 
engineer at security firm Avecto, said that 
iOS is still a secure smartphone operating 
system.  “Apple maintains tight control over 
the entire ecosystem, from the hardware and 
OS to screening the apps and accessories,” he 
said. “Although there have been occasional 
issues, these are much easier to deal with as one 
company owns and manages the entire system.”
Perhaps one of the biggest reasons why Apple 
has managed to fend off hackers is because its 
operating systems’ adoption rates are not the 
biggest. Indeed, iPhones and Macs are some of 
127

the world’s most popular technology products, 
but they have never had overall dominance of 
the market. Mac computers are much less likely 
to be subject to hacks and viruses, as the MacOS 
operating system has been much less widely 
adopted by businesses and individuals than 
Microsoft’s Windows. But as Apple continues to 
grow its mobile operating market share (Apple’s 
iPhone accounted for 33% of all mobile 
activations in the last quarter of 2016), the 
operating system is becoming increasingly 
attractive to hackers and attackers.
THE THREATS ASSOCIATED WITH 
SMARTPHONE SECURITY
Over the past several years, the smartphone 
has been subjected to increasing threats 
from attackers around the world, looking 
to siphon credit card details and other 
personal information from their victims. And 
for businesses, having customer details and 
financial information leak into public spheres 
can be devastating, so it’s essential that 
smartphone software is as secure as possible.
And it’s not just the software that needs to be 
secure – the security of actual smartphones also 
needs to be taken into consideration. Indeed, 
5.2 million smartphones were stolen in the 
United States in 2014, but this figure continues 
to fall as iOS and Android make it increasingly 
difficult to access smartphones through 
fingerprints and other security technology – 
and applications such as Find My iPhone and 
Google’s Find my Phone make it easy to track 
misplaced smartphones.
Image: Ramona Leitao
128

The enemy on your phone:
evolution of mobile threats
129

130

THE SECURITY FEATURES OF iOS
Of course, the first thing you should do if 
you want to improve the security of your 
smartphone is to upgrade to the latest version 
of iOS and turn on automatic updates to ensure 
you always have the most recent security 
patch for your phone. Apple regularly pushes 
updates based on security intelligence, so it’s 
important that you regularly check to make 
sure you’re running the latest edition of the 
operating system – and the same can be 
applied to applications that you download to 
your smartphone.
Over the past several years, Apple has 
significantly bolstered its security features to 
help business owners and individuals manage 
and secure their data. Apple’s recent additions 
to Mobile Device Management, for example, 
allows companies to bake-in important policies 
on devices they hand out to their employees 
and control data if an employee was to leave the 
company. This was backed up with iOS 9, which 
brought with it the Device Enrolment Program. 
IT teams within companies can install and 
update apps while restricting access to others, 
making smartphones more secure and reducing 
the possibilities of installing malware or apps 
that interact with confidential data.
Apple also beefed up its already secure app 
submissions process, recently, now requiring 
that all apps are signed by certificates checked 
on Apple’s servers. This allows Apple to 
immediately remove an app if any malicious 
content is found, and ensures that all apps are 
delivered through encrypted channels for the 
safety and security of its users.
Device Enrollment Program DEP
131

Just this month, WikiLeaks unveiled Vault 7, 
packed with intelligence about the CIA’s hacking 
tools and techniques. Apple has already promised 
to ‘rapidly address’ any security holes in its 
operating system and released a statement to 
reassure customers that many of the issues had 
already been addressed in previous patches 
of iOS. In a statement, Apple said: “While our 
initial analysis indicates that many of the issues 
leaked today were already patched in the latest 
iOS, we will continue work to rapidly address 
any identified vulnerabilities. We always urge 
customers to download the latest iOS to make 
sure they have the most recent security updates.”
THE FUTURE OF iOS SECURITY
Because Apple is committed to improving the 
security of its operating systems continually, 
the Cupertino firm is already working on 
improvements ready for iOS 11, which will 
be unveiled on June 5 in San Jose. Rumors 
dating back as far as 2014 suggest that the 
operating system will support iris scanning, 
ready for the release of iPhone 8 in September.
But it’s not just in software where Apple is keen 
to make technological improvements to offer 
a more secure smartphone. The new iPhone 
is also expected to include a reinvented 
fingerprint reader, alongside facial recognition 
to provide another form of identification.  This 
technology has been available on Android 
devices for a few years, but Apple’s advanced 
processes are expected to make this technology 
more mainstream and easier to use.
KGI Securities analyst Ming-Chi Kuo, who has 
been known to accurately predict or ‘leak’ key 
132

133

134

information about Apple’s hardware plans, says 
that the iPhone 8’s security will be centered 
around biometric features like front-facing 
camera systems, iris scanners and facial 
recognition.  Whether or not these features 
will arrive when the new iPhone is unveiled in 
September remains to be seen, but it’s clear 
that, with a number of rumors all pointing 
toward advanced biometric technology, Apple is 
stepping up its game when it comes to physical 
security features.
BOLSTERING SECURITY WITH COMMON 
SENSE AND APPS
There’s a reason why big company executives 
such as Mark Zuckerberg put tape over their 
cameras and microphones – they don’t want 
135

to be watched. While you can certainly rely on 
Apple’s operating systems – iOS and MacOS – to 
keep you and your data secure, you should also 
take the responsibility of your accounts into 
your own hands. Change passwords regularly, 
don’t access public Wi-Fi channels, don’t plug 
your devices into computers that you don’t own, 
and always keep your smartphone locked with 
a strong password, Find My iPhone enabled and 
TouchID intact.
There’s also a wide range of security apps 
that you can download to your smartphone 
to keep your data secure, like NordVPN, which 
re-routes and encrypts your web traffic, and 
Spam Arrest, which monitors and filters out 
messages, emails and other communications 
you don’t want to see.
136

The future of iOS looks bright – especially 
when you take into consideration the new 
hardware that will make the operating system 
more robust than ever. If you want to ensure 
your data remains private and confidential at 
all times, practice sensible digital security, keep 
your phone up to date and never disclose your 
personal information such as passwords, unique 
codes and email addresses.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin
137

138

139

APPLE IS CELEBRATING 
INDEPENDENT DEVELOPERS
If you’ve ever played a game on your iPhone, 
then you’ll have already witnessed the talent 
of gaming developers across the world. While 
many of the world’s most popular games 
are created by multi-million-dollar gaming 
companies like King, the Candy Crush creator 
that’s worth an incredible $6 billion, some of 
the most famous games have been produced 
by independent studios.
In an aim to show off the talent of these 
independent studios, Apple has unveiled 
a new addition to the App Store, a section 
called Indie Showcase, to encourage its 
users to buy and play more games from 
independent companies. Although the 
new section was launched as a March 9-20 
promotion, the Cupertino firm has confirmed 
on its Twitter channel that it will remain 
a permanent feature of the App Store,  
giving independent developers exposure to a 
lucrative $28 billion industry.
With a mix of free-to-play and paid titles, 
Apple’s editorial team will continually update 
and edit its Indie Showcase to bring new 
apps and games into the spotlight. With such 
a prominent placement on the App Store, 
however, it’s clear that this feature will give 
independent developers the stepping stone 
they need to compete against big games such 
as Candy Crush Saga, Angry Birds, Subway 
Surfers, Temple Run and Words With Friends, 
just some of the most popular App Store 
games of all time.
140

141

THE STATE OF THE APP STORE
It’s undoubtable that the Apple App Store is the 
world’s most successful mobile marketplace. 
In 2016, the App Store brought in a record 
$28 billion, with developers netting $20 
billion of that figure. In December alone, App 
Store revenues topped $3 billion, through a 
combination of purchases, subscription fees and 
in-app purchases for upgrades, extra lives, and 
other micro transaction (MTX) content.
In 2016, Apple announced that it would be 
rewarding its developers with a greater revenue 
percentage. The news followed criticism 
that the Cupertino firm was not paying its 
developers enough or responding to their 
support requests. With a renewed emphasis 
on subscription-based applications, whether 
that be for software, magazines or games, 
Apple now allows developers to earn beyond 
the standard 70/30 percentage split that has 
been in operation since the launch of the App 
Store. Developers who entice their users into a 
subscription will now be able to earn up to 85 
percent of all App Store purchases, up from 
the standard 70 percent.
On top of increased venue for developers, Apple 
also recently announced plans to start showing 
advertisements for apps in the App Store. For 
the first time, developers can now pay the 
Cupertino firm for a more prominent position in 
the App Store, potentially reducing installation 
rates for their competitors and allowing them 
to get ahead. “We’ve thought about how to 
carefully do it in a way that, first and foremost, 
customers will be happy with,” Phil Schiller, 
senior vice president of worldwide marketing at 
142

143

144

Apple, says. The VP said that by investing in an 
advertising auction approach, the App Store 
search would be “fair to developers, and fair 
for indie developers, too.”
Another key change to the App Store is the speed 
of app review times. Now, 50 percent of apps are 
now reviewed within 24 hours, and 90 percent 
with 48 hours. This is great for developers who 
want to release an application quickly, perhaps 
on the back of news or a viral phenomenon.
With the video game market now worth an 
eye-watering $91 billion, and the mobile game 
segment valued at $41 billion, there has never 
been a more exciting time for indie gaming 
developers to jump on the bandwagon and 
create content that speaks to their audiences 
and convert casual gamers into long-term 
customers where merchandising, app add-ons 
and subscriptions can be sold.
A MORE DEVELOPER-FRIENDLY APP 
STORE EXPERIENCE IS COMING
With iOS 11 just around the corner, we can do 
nothing but speculate as to the changes we’re 
expecting – but some features have already 
been confirmed with the launch of iOS 10.3 
and MacOS Sierra 10.12.4, which was seeded to 
developers recently.
One of the biggest changes in the latest 
version of the operating system is the ability 
for developers to respond to customer reviews. 
According to MacRumors, an overhauled 
review system in the App Store will allow 
developers to leave single responses to 
reviews, and users will be able to label others’ 
reviews as ‘Helpful.’  One final change coming to 
145

the App Store is automated review prompts. If 
you’ve ever been annoyed with an app asking 
you to leave a review every time you open it, 
then you can worry no more; Apple will be 
imposing sanctions on developers who abuse 
the system.
While no iOS 11 features will be officially 
confirmed by Apple until its WWDC 2017 event 
in San Jose this June, ValueWalk reports that 
the operating system will be packed with 
Kinect-like functionality, such as the ability to 
power a 3D front camera with sensor and depth-
sensing capabilities, allowing facial recognition 
for games and allowing virtual reality to become 
a possibility on the iPhone.
THE APP STORE IS ALREADY HOME TO 
THOUSANDS OF INDEPENDENT TITLES
While new exposure for independent games 
will encourage developers and studios to try 
out the platform, there are already thousands of 
incredible independent games in the market to 
try out. Threes, which is a matching game that 
refueled the 2048 phenomenon, is an addictive 
swipe game that focuses on numbers, swipes 
and stunning graphics. At just $2.99, this game 
features no micro transactions and is perfect 
on the subway or a quiet afternoon at work. 
Designed by Sirvo LLC, this game has almost 
20,000 App Store ratings, and was the winner 
of Apple Game of the Year in 2014.
If you’re looking for a little more adventure, then 
consider Space Age, a retro-futuristic game 
that’s set in the sci-fi world of 1976. Designed 
by independent studio Big Bucket, the game 
has enjoyed worldwide press coverage, and 
146

#01 – Threes!
By Sirvo LLC
Category: Games
Requires iOS 6.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, 
and iPod touch.
#02 – Space Age: A Cosmic Adventure
By Big Bucket Software
Category: Games
Requires iOS 6.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, 
and iPod touch.
147

has been so popular that an official gaming 
soundtrack has been released for avid fans 
that want a Space Age fix.
We’ve only rounded up a couple of the most 
exciting independent games on the market 
– just peruse the new Indie Showcase on 
the App Store to see what’s new. Whether 
you’re a gaming developer or you just enjoy 
smartphone gaming, Apple’s new Showcase is 
good news for all. With an increased emphasis 
on independent studios, new app store features 
like developer responses on reviews, and new 
software expected on iOS 11, the future’s bright 
for smartphone gamers. The iPhone 8, which will 
celebrate ten years of the iPhone, is expected 
to include technology such as a 3D front-
facing camera, which can not only be used in 
taking 3D selfies, but also in the future of mobile 
gaming. If the rumors are to be believed, then 
an augmented reality smartphone gaming 
experience is within reach!
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin
148

149

150

151

When Apple publicly refashioned the Apple 
Watch as a health and fitness-centric wearable 
starting with last year’s Series 2 model, it made 
the device a much more powerful draw for 
athletes. Of course, many Apple Watch features 
can be used to impressive effect by anyone 
who wants to generally improve their physical 
wellbeing. However, if you look much more 
closely at the Apple Watch, the benefits for 
athletes can become especially apparent.
A MAJOR TRANSFORMATION FOR 
THE APPLE WATCH
It was only in September that Apple announced 
the Apple Watch Series 3 - and, soon after 
unpacking one that has just been purchased, 
you could be pleasantly surprised by how much 
you can do with it. While the first-generation 
Apple Watch in 2015 felt basically like a 
smartphone on the wrist, the Series 3 can feel 
much more like a sophisticated fitness tracker.
Many smartphone-like features, including the 
abilities to make calls and send texts from the 
watch, set reminders and receive notifications, 
remain intact with the Series 3. However, you 
can also track how many steps you take, your 
heart rate - including your resting, walking, and 
workout recovery heart rate - and even, thanks 
to a water-resistant design, your swimming 
regime. GPS technology also enables the device 
to independently detect your location - a 
particular boon during hiking.
All of the health and fitness data collected by 
this Apple Watch can be saved to your iPhone’s 
Health app. That app even has a Heart View 
section, which gives a more in-depth overview 
of what the Apple Watch’s Heart Rate app 
Image: Sarah Tew/CNET
152

153

has detected. In the Health app, it’s even now 
possible to see VO2 max data collected by 
the Watch.  This data reveals how much oxygen 
your body can utilise in a minute and, thus, 
your capacity for aerobic work, as iPhone in 
Canada explains.
THE SERIES 3 CATERS FOR MANY 
DIFFERENT ACTIVITIES
The Apple Watch Series 3 is available in various 
forms - including a specially branded Nike+ 
model. It’s a good choice of device if you want 
to use an Apple Watch primarily for use with 
regular running. As well as all of the usual 
features of the Series 3, this watch comes with 
exclusive Nike watch faces and the Nike+ Run 
Club app. This app can intricately track your 
running efforts and provide expert guidance to 
help you get the most out of them.
However, what if swimming, rather than 
running, is the type of physical exercise that 
you want an Apple Watch to help you with? 
The Series 3 has got you covered there, too. The 
device is water-resistant to a depth of up to 50 
metres and can track your swimming activity 
in various intelligent ways, as Popular Science 
has found.  The motion of strokes is tracked 
by the gyroscope and accelerometer, while 
watchOS 4 has made the device capable of 
detecting the start and end of laps.
154

155

Image: Sarah Tew/CNET
156

157

158

A CELLULAR WEARABLE LOOKS LIKE A 
GAME-CHANGER
The cellular version of the Series 3 is the 
first Apple Watch capable of mobile - rather 
than merely Wi-Fi - Internet connectivity 
without any need for an iPhone to be nearby. 
Unfortunately, that functionality could actually 
worsen instances like those of the Boston Red 
Sox recently using the Apple Watch to gain a 
controversial upper hand in baseball games. 
The New York Times reports how it was used to 
steal hand signals from opposing catchers and 
relay these details to Red Sox players.
However, the hugely broadened potential of 
on-the-wrist cellular capability looks set to 
outweigh such controversy. For example, it will 
enable Apple Watch users to listen to music that 
is streamed directly on the device. At the time of 
writing, Apple has yet to activate the software 
necessary for this. However, when the update 
does arrive, it will mean being able to listen to 
curated playlists and radios for music that can 
help keep up that motivation vital to a buoyant 
fitness regime.
A PROMISING FUTURE FOR LIVE SPORTS 
ON APPLE TV
If you are indeed a fitness buff, then what do 
you do when you aren’t physically exercising? 
Well, probably watching other people do it. 
Furthermore, it’s probably with Apple devices 
that you are doing that. For that reason, you 
might have especially good reason to be excited 
by a particular announcement that many 
people could have easily overlooked during 
Apple’s crowded September keynote: enriched 
159

functionality for use with watching live sports in 
Apple’s TV app on Apple TV.
This functionality includes being able to track 
particular teams, be notified on-screen about 
events, and reach everything with a new, sports-
specific section of the TV app. We might soon 
see that section bulked out with contributions 
from a sports editor which Apple has 
intended to recruit.  The company expressed its 
wish for “an experienced editor to lead content 
curation and programming” and “maintain 
a thoughtful, dynamic, and always relevant 
editorial voice for sports programming”.
HOW ARKIT COULD REVOLUTIONISE 
SPORTS WATCHING
When Apple unveiled the iPhone X, iPhone 8 
and iPhone 8 Plus, it was hard to escape the 
strong focus on augmented reality. Of course, 
all iOS devices with an A9 chip or later can 
run apps that use the company’s augmented 
reality framework ARKit. At the September 
presentation, the company particularly showed 
off a new AR feature that was coming to MLB’s 
very popular At Bat app: the ability to hold up 
the device at a baseball game and see stats 
about individual players.
Those statistics will appear above those players’ 
heads on the field, making this a feature that 
could only be used at an actual game. People 
watching the game on live TV or following it 
through some other form of live feed would be 
unable to utilise the feature - and this could give 
more people an incentive to attend games at 
the actual stadium. Should app developers add 
even more such features, it’s easy to see how 
that incentive could snowball in strength...
160

161

162

163

164

Inc. has outlined several other examples 
of how augmented reality could - ahem - 
augment the in-stadium experience.  For 
example, a fan could, after entering the 
stadium, be notified about a nearby poster over 
which they can hover their phone to watch a 
video from their favourite player. That fan could 
even hover their device over a certain part of 
the game program to view a reel of season 
highlights and a direct call-to-action to buy 
merchandise from the team shop.
ARKit also permits fresh promotional avenues 
that, far from coming across as mere “spam”, can 
feel “organic to the experience”, sports lecturer 
Kurt Badenhausen explains in a Forbes article.  
Teams and associated organisations could bring 
up targeted adverts to people who are close to 
the stadium or store. Features like these would, 
says Badenhausen, boost “the sense of community 
that makes attending a game so special and truly 
augments the reality of the experience.”
A WHOLE NEW WORLD WITH 
SPORTS TECHNOLOGY?
While no-one can be certain about how the 
experiences of both playing and watching 
sports will continue to evolve due to Apple 
devices, that reflects on the beauty of 
technology. There is so much potential, but also 
unpredictability. The most effective uses of both 
new hardware like the Apple Watch Series 3 and 
software additions like ARKit could actually arise 
on the initiative of third-party app developers. 
Just how different could sports experiences be 
several years from now?
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
165

Image: BMW
166

167

SATELLITES FOR EXTENDING 
INTERNET ACCESS
If you have been keeping a close eye on all of 
the recently circulating rumors about what 
Apple is currently cooking up, you could easily 
become excited thinking what the company’s 
development laboratories must look like. 
Basically, imagine some kind of tech equivalent 
of the colorful and vibrant world of Willy Wonka’s 
chocolate factory - where augmented reality 
glasses, self-driving cars, satellites, and possibly 
even spaceships are being thoroughly tested by 
excited Apple staffers...
Truth be told, the picture that we have just 
painted is probably more of a best-case scenario 
than a faithful reflection of what is actually 
happening behind those closed doors. Maybe 
the more outlandish of those ideas are, like Willy 
Wonka’s “square sweets that look round”, just 
the stuff of fantasy... for now. Still, why shouldn’t 
Apple at least work towards realizing sky-high 
ambitions? Furthermore, there have been more 
and more leaks of evidence that it actually is.
168

Image: NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center
169

THE NEW - AUGMENTED - REALITY 
There have been increasing murmurings 
that the “iPhone 8” could help in dramatically 
changing the smartphone game - one reason 
being that it will feature, in analyst Gene 
Munster’s words, “augmented reality as its 
foundation”. Apple CEO Tim Cook has hardly 
been shy about his enthusiasm for AR, a 
technology which allows digitized images to 
be overlaid on a view of the real-life world. 
In October, he called AR “profound” and 
“broad-based” in a way unlike virtual reality.
With Apple having recently acquired 
numerous AR companies including Metaio, 
PrimeSense and RealFace, Munster believes 
their new Cupertino parent to have a lead 
in this technology.  He told CNBC that he 
expects AR to “lay the foundation of the 
next computing paradigm” - and, judging 
from a recent Bloomberg report, the 
technology could make its Apple debut in 
the iPhone 8.  The site has cited “hundreds of 
engineers” working on Apple’s AR efforts.
While still relatively light on revelations, the 
report claims that Apple is developing “several 
AR products, including digital spectacles that 
could connect wirelessly to an iPhone and 
beam content - movies, maps and more - to 
the wearer.” However, in the wake of the failure 
of the similar Google Glass, Apple seems 
understandably eager to take its time to get 
its own offering right. Bloomberg concedes: 
“While the glasses are a ways off, AR could 
show up in the iPhone sooner.”
170

Image: Gustavo Caballero
171

Image: Apple
172

FORMS THAT iPHONE-BASED AR 
COULD TAKE
Bloomberg lists various AR applications 
that Apple is exploring - including taking a 
photograph before changing its depth or that 
of specific objects in the image. Alternatively, 
an object, like a person’s head, could be isolated 
in the picture and tilted 180 degrees. Also 
reportedly in the works is the Snapchat-like 
ability to use AR to place digital objects and 
effects on a person in an image.
The depth-sensing features seem very plausible 
in light of a slightly earlier prediction that the 
iPhone 8 would feature a front-facing camera 
system enabling a complete feature set of 
3D sensing. That prediction was made in 
February by KGI Securities analyst Ming-Chi 
Kuo, who said that this “revolutionary” system 
would draw upon PrimeSense algorithms.  
Meanwhile, those Snapchat-style functions 
could tie in with Apple’s recently-released video-
editing app Clips.
AR GLASSES COULD ALREADY 
BE PROTOTYPED
So, the iPhone 8 could plausibly provide a 
taste of augmented reality technology to be 
more fully realized by Apple’s AR eyewear 
project. Bloomberg speculates that the 
glasses, like the Apple Watch, will probably 
be iPhone-tethered, allowing the smartphone 
to “do the heavy lifting”. 3D content could 
be beamed to the spectacles, the other 
applications of which could be vast. “To be 
successful in AR, there is the hardware piece, 
but you have to do other stuff too: from maps 
173

to social to payments,” Munster opined, calling 
Apple “one of the only companies that will be 
able to pull it off.”
The glasses probably already exist in 
prototype form, according to a leaked 
document quoted from by Gizmodo.  The 
document, put together by an Environment 
Health and Safety contractor and mistakenly 
submitted to hundreds of Apple staffers, 
mentions two particularly intriguing incidents. 
In one, an employee “reported eye pain after 
working with new prototype”, while another 
worker “experienced discomfort in her eye 
and said she was able to see the laser flash 
at several points during the study”. The study 
lead later “secured prototype unit for analysis”.
The mention of a laser is tantalizing, but Cult 
of Mac insists, in reference to the prototype 
Image: BMW
174

involved, that “it’s pretty safe to say that 
it’s not an iPhone with lasers”.  It can’t be 
completely ruled out that Apple’s AR glasses 
could integrate some virtual reality features - 
especially as the development team includes 
engineers who were involved with Facebook’s 
Oculus VR project, according to Bloomberg. Still, 
the evidence suggests that Apple is currently 
prioritizing AR over VR.
One man who could especially help Apple 
in doing that is Jeff Norris, an ex-employee 
of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Lab. There, he was 
heavily involved in devising new techniques for 
using augmented reality to control spacecraft 
- and, earlier this year, he took up a senior 
managerial role on Apple’s augmented 
reality team, according to Bloomberg. This is 
the team working on the AR headwear.
175

176

THE APPLE CAR AND SIRI SPEAKER 
Two Apple projects that have been rumored to 
be in development but attracted little publicity 
lately are Apple’s electric car initiative and the 
Amazon Echo-like Siri-housing speaker. However, 
recent developments have shed new light on 
how both could be shaping up. Having made 
a public-records request, Business Insider 
recently obtained documents showing Apple’s 
development of an “Automated System” that could 
serve various useful purposes in self-driving cars.
“The development platform uses hardware and 
software to monitor surrounding objects and 
events,” wrote an Apple official on a government 
form, adding that this technology is “capable 
of sending electronic commands for steering, 
accelerating, and decelerating and may carry out 
portions of the dynamic driving task”. Apple is 
clearly being careful to ensure that the car will 
be safe when in use; indeed, the company has 
planned to train staff in procedures including 
how an autonomous car’s manual control can be 
regained should this be necessary.
Also coming to light recently have been some 
intriguing details about the specific people 
involved in putting Apple’s autonomous driving 
software to the test. One of those people is a 
former NASA researcher once given the job 
of developing a self-driving vehicle intended 
for exploring one of Jupiter’s moons. This is 
revealed, as AppleInsider reports, in a report 
from The Wall Street Journal, which noted 
other testers to be engineers previously of 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Another tester 
was involved with automotive supplier Bosch’s 
early attempts at making a self-driving car. 
Image: BMW
177

As well as enter the autonomous car market, 
Apple could also soon bolster its presence in 
the home automation market on the back of 
that Siri speaker. Rumored for possible release 
later this year, it could, due to Siri’s ability to 
detect a specific person’s voice, avoid an issue 
recently faced by Google’s virtual personal 
assistant technology.  Burger King recently ran 
a 15-second television commercial including the 
utterance of the query “OK Google, what is the 
Whopper burger?”
That question was intended to trigger Google 
Home speakers and Android phones to begin 
reading the burger’s Wikipedia page. Fortunately 
for many people, Google speedily disabled the 
trigger in Home speakers through registering 
the sound clip. However, the incident shows 
how Apple could already have a head-start on 
Google if, as previously hinted, the Siri speaker 
arrives soon.
APPLE COULD BE HEADING INTO SPACE
Apple could have an even more ambitious 
project with which it will look to the skies... 
literally. Bloomberg has reported Apple 
recruiting two highly-regarded satellite 
executives from Google.  John Fenwick, 
former head of Google’s spacecraft operations, 
and Michael Trela, who led the search giant’s 
satellite engineering team, have joined Apple 
“in recent weeks” and will be involved with “a 
new hardware team”. Apple has also talked with 
aerospace company Boeing about possibly 
investing in its project to provide, via over a 
thousand satellites, broadband Internet access.
178

Image: PHILIPS
179

These moves could lead Apple to assist in 
bringing Internet access to billions of people 
who continue to be without it. Boeing is 
currently exploring using low-earth orbit 
satellites to deliver broadband services 
speedier than current cellular systems. Apple’s 
collaboration with the company could, thus, 
have the long-term benefit of helping it to grow 
the global penetration of iPhones, iPads and 
other hardware that heavily rely on Internet 
access for many of their functions. Could an 
Apple-branded spaceship even be on the way? 
Considering Fenwick’s former role, we perhaps 
shouldn’t rule it out.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin
180

181

182

183

A SMART HOME HUB WITH HOMEKIT 
AT THE CENTER 
Apple had long been rumored to be readying 
a smart speaker to challenge the Amazon Echo 
and Google Home - and, this month finally 
unveiled it. It’s called the HomePod and has Siri 
built-in for answering a broad array of queries 
and controlling HomeKit-compatible smart 
home appliances. However, there’s a lot more to 
the HomePod than even all of that. Apple has 
primarily billed it as set to revolutionize home-
based music-listening, hinting at a somewhat 
unorthodox strategy.
184

185

A TYPICALLY APPLE TAKE ON 
THE SMART SPEAKER
Many aspects of the HomePod shouldn’t 
overly surprise; in fact, in many ways, it is a 
very Apple-like approach to the smart speaker. 
With its 6.8-inch-tall and 5.6-inch-wide body 
covered almost entirely by a mesh fabric, it 
adheres strongly to the company’s trademark 
minimalist design philosophy.  Furthermore, 
it will be significantly more expensive than 
the competition, with a US price that is nearly 
twice as high as the Echo’s. However, Apple has 
long prioritized product quality before pricing 
concerns - and has gone a long way towards 
making the HomePod justify its $349 price tag. 
One apparent reason why Apple has resisted 
being too fierce with its pricing is that, with the 
HomePod, it isn’t merely targeting the likes of 
Image: Expert Reviews
186

the Echo and Google Home. It also has, in its 
crossfire, the Sonos speakers aimed at delivering 
an unparalleled music experience in the home. 
Given Apple’s impressive music heritage 
going right back to that 2000s hit the iPod and 
through to Apple Music, its namesake festival, 
and more, the company seems well-positioned 
to act effectively on this strategy.
As Apple exec Phil Schiller explained when 
introducing the HomePod on the WWDC 
stage earlier this month, the HomePod will be 
available for less than a separate smart speaker 
and Sonos-like music system combined. He 
drew much attention to how the HomePod’s 
advanced hardware will be capable of elevating 
music-listening in the home. The high-excursion 
woofer can play a broad range of rich bass, while 
the seven tweeters can aim beams to make the 
music sound good from all angles.
187

188

189

190

SOUND QUALITY THAT IS... SOUND 
However, if Apple markets the HomePod for 
music-listening first and as a home assistant 
second, the technology needs to stand up to 
testing. Thankfully, it has - so far. Members of 
the press allowed to hear a prototype HomePod 
at WWDC were impressed, as MacRumors 
details.  Engadget enthused that the HomePod 
“sounded crisp and bright no matter the musical 
genre fed through it.” CNET said that it sounded 
“bolder and more vivid than Sonos PLAY:3 ... 
and a lot better than the Amazon Echo”, which 
Business Insider likened to “someone ... singing 
through a tin can a mile away.” 
That site’s writer Steve Kovach reported that 
the HomePod could “fill a large room very well 
and sounded great no matter what angle I was 
listening from.” According to Apple, this is due 
to the HomePod’s ability to smartly tune itself 
and, with its audio-balancing, take account of 
exactly what room or position it is in. Doubtless 
playing a large part in that is the HomePod’s 
A8 processor, which is also in the iPhone 6 
series, iPad Mini 4, and fourth-generation Apple 
TV. Kovach added that the HomePod’s sound 
quality improved further when synced with 
another HomePod for stereo playing.
You probably already use AirPlay to stream 
music from your iOS device to an Apple TV. 
However, with AirPlay 2, announced at WWDC, 
it will also be possible to stream that audio to 
multiple compatible speakers simultaneously. 
191

You will then be able to enjoy a multi-room 
listening experience which you will have the 
option of tailoring with multi-ambient controls 
on a device running iOS 11. The HomePod 
will be compatible with AirPlay 2 - which also, 
compared to its predecessor, will have a lower 
latency for faster speeds.
HEY SIRI, WHAT ARE YOU LIKE ON 
THE HOMEPOD?
Apple devoted so much time to explaining the 
HomePod’s audio capabilities and Apple Music 
integration that we heard little about the device’s 
potential for helping with home routines. 
Nonetheless, that subject wasn’t completely 
neglected in the keynote. Say “Hey Siri” and, at 
the HomePod’s top, a light will appear to indicate 
that Siri is listening. You can ask Siri to control 
such HomeKit-ready accessories as light bulbs, 
garage doors, and security cameras.
You can also ask Siri types of queries that 
you can direct to it on an iPhone or iPad. So, 
whether you want Siri to set a 10-minute timer, 
tell you what’s in the news, translate a sentence 
192

from a foreign language, or play a specific 
album on Apple Music, all of that - and much 
more - is possible. A lot of this seems very 
much in the Echo’s realm - but, together, are Siri 
and HomeKit really enough to help Apple draw 
many people’s attentions away from the smart 
speaker competition?
WHY SIRI AND HOMEKIT COULD BE 
CRUCIAL TO THE HOMEPOD’S SUCCESS
Siri is generally thought to have fallen behind 
voice assistant rivals Alexa and Google Assistant 
in functionality and usefulness. Thankfully, Apple 
is seemingly working head to improve Siri, 
having made acquisitions of major AI players 
and recruited machine learning engineers. 
However, TechCrunch’s John Mannes has noted 
Amazon’s admission that music is the Echo’s 
most popular use case.  Therefore, prioritizing 
the quality of the HomePod’s speaker makes a 
lot of sense for Apple.
As for home automation, the HomePod 
shouldn’t be a slouch in that area. There has 
been reasonable support for HomeKit from 
193

appliance makers. On Apple’s website, the 
HomeKit-compatible devices available for 
purchase include cameras, plugs, thermostats, 
locks, motion sensors, and more. Furthermore, 
Apple has recently made it easier to develop 
HomeKit devices, as developers no longer 
require an MFi license from Apple before 
testing such devices.  Furthermore, 
authentication can now take place through 
software rather than a special hardware chip.
These changes mean that we should see 
HomeKit adoption among gadget makers 
continuing to grow and, likely, at a quicker rate 
than before. The enabling of software-based 
authentication means that existing products 
lacking HomeKit support can now receive it 
through a firmware upgrade. However, Apple 
has not loosened the hardened encryption 
that it has always used for the HomeKit 
authentication procedure - making HomeKit 
especially appealing for the security-conscious. 
Digital Trends has posted a complete list 
of devices that include compatibility 
with HomeKit. 
194

195

196

Image: Expert Reviews
197

198

WHY THE HOMEPOD HAS A 
PROMISING FUTURE
Apple has arrived relatively late to the smart 
speaker market. However, Apple CEO Tim Cook 
enthused to Bloomberg that customers will 
be “blown away by the experience” with the 
HomePod.  He also noted that Apple wasn’t 
first with the MP3 player, smartphone, or tablet 
markets, adding: “For us, it’s not about being 
first. It’s about being the best”. Business Insider 
calls the HomePod a familiar Apple gadget in 
being “another piece of a simple, seamless, 
and interconnected system.” 
Furthermore, it looks like Apple could succeed 
in monetizing the HomePod more effectively 
than Amazon has managed with the Echo. While 
it is still unclear the extent to which personal 
assistants can make money, it’s a different 
situation for the home speaker market in which 
Sonos competes. The wireless audio market will 
have, it has been estimated, a worth exceeding 
$50 billion by 2022. Therefore, the HomePod 
could be surprisingly successful at bringing in 
revenue for Apple.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
199

#01 – Rules of Survival
By NetEase Games
Category: Games / Free
Requires iOS 7.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#02 – YouTube
By Google, Inc.
Category: Photo & Video / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#03 – Snapchat
By Snap, Inc.
Category: Photo & Video / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#04 – Messenger
By Facebook, Inc.
Category: Social Networking / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#05 – Dune!
By Voodoo
Category: Games / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#06 – Instagram
By Instagram, Inc.
Category: Photo & Video / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#07 – Facebook
By Facebook, Inc.
Category: Social Networking / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#08 – Words With Friends 2-Word Game
By Zynga Inc.
Category: Games / Free
Requires iOS 10.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#10 – Netflix
By Netflix, Inc.
Category: Entertainment / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#09 – Bitmoji - Your Personal Emoji
By Bitstrips
Category: Utilities / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
200

#01 – GarageBand
By Apple
Category: Music / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later
#02 – WhatsApp Desktop
By WhatsApp Inc.
Category: Social Networking / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.9.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#04 – 1Doc: Word Processor for Writer
ByChengyu Huang
Category: Business / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#03 – Open Any File
By Rocky Sand Studio Ltd.
Category: Utilities / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#05 – PDF Reader Pro Free
By PDF Technologies, Inc.
Category: Business / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.8 or later, 64-bit processor
#09 – The Unarchiver
By Dag Agren
Category: Utilities / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.6.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#06– OneDrive
By Microsoft Corporation
Category: Productivity / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.9.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#08 – Kindle
By AMZN Mobile LLC
Category:  Reference / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.9 or later
#10 – Xcode
By Apple
Category: Developer Tools / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.11.5 or later
#07– Microsoft OneNote
By Microsoft Corporation
Category: Productivity / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
201

#01 – Heads Up!
By Warner Bros.
Category: Games / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#02 – Minecraft
By Mojang
Category: Games / Price: $6.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#03 – kirakira+
By Kentaro Yama
Category: Photo & Video / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#04 – Plague Inc
By Ndemic Creations
Category: Games / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 6.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#05 – Bloons TD 5
By Ninja Kiwi
Category: Games / Price: $2.99
Requires iOS 6.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#06 – NBA 2K18
By 2K
Category: Games / Price: $7.99
Requires iOS 9.0 or later.
#07 – The Game of Life
By Marmalade Game Studio
Category: Games / Price: $2.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#08 – Facetune
By Lightricks Ltd.
Category: Photo & Video / Price: $3.99
Requires iOS 7.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#10 – Geometry Dash
By RobTop Games AB
Category: Games / Price: $1.99
Requires iOS 5.1.1 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#09 – MONOPOLY Game
By Electronic Arts
Category: Games / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 8.1 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
202

#01 – The Sims™ 2: Super Collection
By Aspyr Media, Inc.
Category: Games / Price: $39.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.9.2 or later
#07 – Mirror for Samsung TV
By AirBeamTV BV
Category: Video / Price: $13.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#08 – Home Design 3D
By Anuman
Category: Graphics & Design / Price: $8.49
Compatibility: OS X 10.8 or later, 64-bit processor
#09 – PomTimer
By Bech LLC
Category: Productivity / Price: $1.39
Compatibility: OS X 10.9 or later, 64-bit processor
#02 – Magnet
By CrowdCafé
Category: Productivity / Price: $1.39
Compatibility: OS X 10.9 or later, 64-bit processor
#10 – Adobe Photoshop Elements 2018
By Adobe
Category: Photography / Price: $84.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#04 – Dr. Cleaner Pro
By Trend Micro, Incorporated
Category: Utilities / Price: $20.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#03 – Duplicate Photos Fixer Pro
By Systweak Software
Category: Photography / Price: $1.39
Compatibility: OS X 10.7 or later
#05 – Logic Pro X
By Apple
Category: Music / Price: $279.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#06 – RollerCoaster Tycoon 3 Platinum
By Aspyr Media, Inc.
Category: Games / Price: $20.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.8.5 or later
203

204

TENNESSEE RAIN
(THE VOICE PERFORMANCE)
Addison Agen
WISH I DIDN’T LOVE YOU
(THE VOICE PERFORMANCE)
Chloe KohAnsKi
PERFECT
ed sheerAn
RIVER (FEAT. ED SHEERAN) 
eminem
I PRAY (THE VOICE PERFORMANCE)
red mArlow
PERFECT SYMPHONY
ed sheerAn & AndreA BoCelli
O HOLY NIGHT (THE VOICE PERFORMANCE)
BrooKe simpson
ROCKSTAR (FEAT. 21 SAVAGE)
post mAlone
HUMBLE AND KIND
(THE VOICE PERFORMANCE)
Addison Agen
HAVANA (FEAT. YOUNG THUG)
CAmilA CABello
205

206

REVIVAL
eminem
÷ (DELUXE)
ed sheerAn
THE BEAUTIFUL & DAMNED
g-eAzy
THE GREATEST SHOWMAN
(ORIGINAL MOTION PICTURE SOUNDTRACK)
VArious Artists
REPUTATION
tAylor swift
A PENTATONIX CHRISTMAS DELUXE
pentAtonix
STAR WARS: THE LAST JEDI
(ORIGINAL MOTION PICTURE SOUNDTRACK)
John williAms
THE COMPLETE SEASON 13 COLLECTION
(THE VOICE PERFORMANCE)
Chloe KohAnsKi
FROM A ROOM: VOLUME 2
Chris stApleton
THE ESSENTIAL NOW THAT’S
WHAT I CALL CHRISTMAS
VArious Artists
207

208

PERFECT SYMPHONY (WITH ANDREA
BOCELLI) [FEAT. ANDREA BOCELLI]
ed sheerAn
PERFECT
ed sheerAn
MIC DROP (STEVE AOKI REMIX)
Bts
MARRY ME
thomAs rhett
LITTLE DRUMMER BOY
for King & Country
HAVANA (FEAT. YOUNG THUG)
CAmilA CABello
MOTORSPORT
migos, niCKi minAJ & CArdi B
LEMON (VIDEO)
n.e.r.d & rihAnnA
DESPACITO (FEAT. DADDY YANKEE) 
luis fonsi
HALLELUJAH
pentAtonix
209

210

STRONGER THAN EVER
the reAl housewiVes of BeVerly hills, seAson 8
BACK IN THE SADDLE
VAnderpump rules, seAson 6
PRESS PASS
Keeping up with the KArdAshiAns, seAson 14
HIGH HOPES
teen mom, Vol. 19
WOMEN TRANSFORM THE WORLD
mAdAm seCretAry, seAson 4
ROCK THE BOAT
the reAl housewiVes of AtlAntA, seAson 10
CHAPTER FOURTEEN:
 “A KISS BEFORE DYING”
riVerdAle, seAson 2
HOW IT’S GOTTA BE
the wAlKing deAd, seAson 8
SHEPARD WIVES CLUB
relAtionshep, seAson 1
CHAPTER FIFTEEN: “NIGHTHAWKS”
riVerdAle, seAson 2
211

212

SINFUL EMPIRE
meghAn mArCh
MISTLETOE MYSTERIES
ChArlotte mACleod
DARKER
e l JAmes
THE HOOKUP
Kristen Ashley
ORIGIN
dAn Brown
SWEET LITTLE LIES
ABBi glines
LITTLE FIRES EVERYWHERE
Celeste ng
THE ROOSTER BAR
John grishAm
END GAME
dAVid BAldACCi
SWEET LITTLE MEMORIES
ABBi glines
213

Image:  Andy Warhol
214

215

The term ‘digital art’ dates back to the 1960’s, a 
time in which we encountered Andy Warhol’s 
Commodore Amiga experiments and Stella 
McCartney’s trippy selfie videos. It is used to 
refer to any artistic work or practice that uses 
digital technology as an essential part of the 
creation, and it has transformed activities such 
as painting, drawing and sculpture as well as 
bringing to light the new forms of net art, digital 
installation art and virtual reality. Digital art 
techniques are used extensively worldwide, by 
the mainstream media in advertisements and by 
film-makers to create visual effects and, given 
the parallels between visual and musical arts, it 
seems increasingly likely that digital visual art 
will become accepted much in the same way as 
electronically produced music has over the past 
three decades.
APPLE DEVICES: IMPROVING ART 
PRODUCTION WORLDWIDE 
Decades ago, creative roles had no choice 
than to be more defined and focused whereas 
nowadays an artist can work across many fields 
at once, even within one device. The rapid 
shift toward digital is no longer a problem 
for modern artists thanks to devices such as 
the MacBook, iPad and iPhone that allow you 
to work between multiple art production 
programmes at the same time. Back in 2015, 12 
illustrators, photographers and filmmakers were 
handpicked for an Apple marketing campaign 
called ‘Start Something New’. This campaign 
turned Apple stores around the world into 
galleries that showcased art created exclusively 
on iPhones, iPads and iMacs. The artists, some of 
whom had already made a name for themselves 
216

Image:  Ian McQue
217

by leveraging technology to create their art, 
were given full reign to do anything that they 
wanted for the exhibitions as long as they 
used Apple tools.  This initiative was not only 
a clever way of marketing products, but a way 
to demonstrate that high-quality art can be 
achieved with this tech.  More recently, Condé 
Nast used the iPhone 7 Plus to shoot the front 
cover for the May editions of two of their 
most popular magazines: Traveler and Bon 
218

Appétit. This device has one of the best cameras 
currently available in the smartphone market, 
particularly because of the option to shoot in 
Portrait Mode that mimics the effects of a DSLR, 
blurring the background to achieve something 
more than a simple snapshot. As early as last 
week, Apple launched a website for budding 
photographers that features a range of tutorials 
on how to capture different types of photos 
including panoramas, action shots and portraits. 
Image:  William Hundley
219

Image:  Arif Jawad
220

Image:  Eason Hsiung
221

APPS FOR ARTISTS 
Mobile apps have transformed the way we deal 
with boredom, particularly if we have a creative 
mind. There are a whole host of apps available 
today that allow you to edit photos, build color 
palates, sketch, create 3D shapes and much 
more whether it’s your aim to create a work of 
art or simply wind away a few hours with some 
wistful doodling. Apple devices will now allow 
us to make the most of two of the most widely 
used design programmes in the world; Adobe 
Illustrator Draw and Adobe Photoshop 
Express, both of which can be used with the 
Apple Pencil (despite this being a cursed product, 
haunted by Steve Jobs quote from 2010: “If you 
see a stylus, they blew it”). Apple deliberately 
designed the pencil to look, feel and function 
like a creative tool, going so far as to interpret the 
hand of the artist for the computer. Another app 
that has been praised for its ability to professional 
design is Concepts which effortlessly combines 
paper and pencil with vector manipulations, 
allowing the user to create quick sketches or 
precise illustrations. Similarly, the App Store 
Essential Procreate is a complete artist’s toolbox 
that helps you achieve sketches and paintings 
anywhere you are. Budding artists can also make 
the most of apps such as Artsy which lets you 
browse a curated collection of artworks whether 
you’re looking to buy or not and ArtStack that 
lets you discover and share art you like with your 
friends and followers. With the App Store, there’s 
no limit to what you can achieve when it comes 
to creating, viewing and saving digital art. What’s 
more, with the rise of image-based social media 
platforms such as Instagram and Pinterest, could 
we all be considered digital collagists?
222

Image:  Caroline Blanchet 
223

Adobe Illustrator Draw
By Adobe
Category: Productivity
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, 
iPad and iPod touch.
Concepts
By TopHatch, Inc.
Category: Productivity
Requires iOS 9.3 or later. Compatible with iPhone, 
iPad and iPod touch.
Adobe Photoshop Express
By Adobe
Category: Photo & Video
Requires iOS 9.3 or later. Compatible with iPhone, 
iPad, and iPod touch.
Procreate
By Savage Interactive Pty Ltd
Category: Entertainment
Requires iOS 10.0 or later. Compatible with iPad.
Shapr3D
By Shapr3D Zrt
Category: Productivity
Requires iOS 9.1 or later. Compatible with iPad Air, iPad mini 
2, iPad Air 2, iPad mini 3, iPad mini 4, 12.9-inch iPad Pro, 9.7-
inch iPad Pro, and iPad (5th generation).
Amaziograph
By Marina Staykova
Category: Entertainment
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPad.
Over
By Over
Category: Photo & Video
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, 
and iPod touch.
PANTONE Studio
By Pantone
Category: Reference
Requires iOS 9.3 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, 
and iPod touch.
224

225

226

WHAT WE’RE EXPECTING FROM THE 
NEXT GENERATION OF iPADS
In recent years, one of the most popular 
devices to create digital art has been the 
iPad Pro which is why the launch of the iPad 
Pro 2 has been highly anticipated, with many 
wondering what features and design changes if 
any, we’ll see next. After Apple quietly released 
the minor, budget-friendly update iPad 2017 in 
March without much fuss, many are expecting 
the iPad Pro 2 to launch at the WWDC event 
in June whereas others claim that an update 
this far after is unlikely. Regardless, we’ve heard 
rumors that a new size model is on the way, 
taking the options available to 9.7 inch, 10.5 
inch and 12.9 inches, all of which will feature 
design changes such as the likes of a bezel-
free screen, touch bar menu bar and a slightly 
more out-there claim that suggests Apple will 
be creating a folding iPad. When it comes to 
tech specs, recent updates in Apple’s Xcode 
software hints that the next generation of 
iPads might have an upgraded 120Hz display, 
providing a smoother experience when playing 
games or using accessories to create art such 
as the Pencil. For the processor, there are strong 
rumors that each size will include a version of 
the A10 Fusion chip currently featured in the 
iPhone 7. This is a strategy Apple has tended 
to follow with the iPad shortly after the release 
of a new iPhone. The current 9.7 inch iPad Pro 
came with 2GB of RAM and the 12.9-inch version 
4GB, but some have suggested that this may be 
more generous in the newer model. Particularly 
in the larger sizes, the iPad Pro 2 is likely to be 
positioned in the market as a laptop alternative. 
Each version will support accessories such as a 
227

228

stylus and a keyboard, making them a powerful 
tool for anyone looking for a device that allows 
them to achieve their completed designs.
In an age where the digital shapes our culture 
so much it’s no surprise that art is being swept 
up, too. After at least 50 years of digital art in 
practice, art institutions are still trying to get to 
grips with its relevance and how best to display 
and communicate it. Countless artists, curators 
and galleries continue to experiment with the 
stability of digital work, trying out ways that it 
can be brought to the physical world but, as the 
popularity of creating art via devices such as 
the iPad increases, what we must continue to 
remember is that a medium is simply a vehicle 
and that nothing limits the creation of art other 
than the artist’s imagination.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
229

230

231

For many, (the artist formerly known as) Prince 
was more than just a musical artist. He was 
an icon, a sex symbol, a rebel, a prodigy, an 
innovator who brought us an oeuvre that 
transcended boundaries of musical style, 
textures, and genres. He was known for his 
flamboyancy both on and off stage, playing 
with signifiers of gender and defying racial 
stereotypes that led the Los Angeles Times to 
crown him the “first post-everything pop star.” 
Taking influences from artists and musicians 
including the likes of Miles Davis, Joni Mitchell, 
Jimi Hendrix, Chuck Berry and David Bowie, 
every album that Prince released showed 
growth in style and musical diversity. Through a 
constant experimentation with different sounds, 
Prince went on to be revered as a contemporary 
artist who brought differences together to form 
one cohesive whole.  
232

233

PAYING TRIBUTE TO A TRUE VISIONARY 
To coincide with the 59th Grammy Awards, 
which saw a tribute to the late star from artists 
Bruno Mars and The Time, streaming services 
such as Apple Music, Spotify and Pandora 
announced the release of Prince’s catalog 
of hits which were previously only available 
through Tidal. Now subscribers can listen again 
to a number of Prince’s greatest hits including 
‘Purple Rain,’ ‘Let’s Go Crazy’ and ‘When Doves 
Cry’ as well as outtakes, demos, live recordings 
and the opportunity to follow specially curated 
playlists that pay tribute to such a visionary 
artist.  This digital showcase has come as a 
sigh of relief for many of Prince’s fans who 
have petitioned for his music to return to such 
streaming services for months. Prince’s contract 
with Warner Bros expired in 1996, and after that, 
he went on to experiment under his own label 
by selling music directly to fans through his 
website. Then, as of a 2014 contract between 
the two, Warner Bros again owned the licensing 
rights to the majority of the discography 
which is what we’ll see on Apple Music and 
other streaming services. The rest of his music, 
including albums released after 1996, will be 
auctioned off by Prince’s estate and are said to 
be priced at between $40-50 million with the 
three label giants Universal Music, Sony Music 
and Warner all due to compete in what is likely 
to be a tight battle.
So, why now? Prince was known for constantly 
clashing with record labels (and later digital 
music companies) for one reason or another. 
Before his death in 2016, Prince issued a request 
for all streaming sites to take down his music, 
giving Jay-Z’s platform Tidal exclusive rights for 
234

Prince - Purple Rain Live 2007
235

Prince - Let’s Go Crazy LIVE! (REMASTERED)
236

Prince - When Doves Cry
237

238

the next 19 months. This happened in 2015, 
and since then, Warner Bros have continued 
to petition to return the catalog to popular 
streaming sites. In a statement released on 
Sunday, the company thanked Prince’s estate for 
helping to achieve this.
“Prince recorded his most influential and 
popular music during his time with Warner Bros., 
and we are deeply aware of our responsibility 
to safeguard and nurture his incredible legacy,” 
Chairman and CEO Cameron Strang said.
“Warner Bros. is thrilled to be able to bring 
Prince’s music to his millions of fans around 
the world via streaming services, fittingly on 
music’s biggest night.”
APPLE MUSIC CONTINUES ITS 
IMPRESSIVE EXPANSION
As of October 2016, Apple Music was said to 
have at least 20 million subscribers, which 
isn’t a vast amount compared to Spotify’s base 
of 40 million, but impressive when considering 
this much younger streaming service only went 
live in June 2015. Now available in more than 
100 countries worldwide including the U.S, 
Canada, the U.K, Australia, Japan, India, and 
Brazil, with a $10 per month subscriber fee, 
users are allowed access to the entire iTunes 
library of roughly 40 million songs, 24-hour 
radio stations and a vast amount of expertly-
curated playlists. There is even an option for 
a three month free trial alongside a family 
plan that comes at a discounted rate. Other 
competitors such as Amazon’s Music Unlimited 
and Tidal are no match for Apple Music, which 
also allows users to integrate their iTunes library 
239

with their Apple Music library, meaning that 
transferring previously ripped CDs or albums 
already purchased in the iTunes Store has never 
been easier. Additionally, as long as your device 
has enough space to hold them all, you can save 
as many songs as you want to listen to offline. 
This is a great option for those who want to 
keep track of their date consumption or who are 
traveling with their phone in Airplane mode.
An especially impressive feature of Apple Music 
is that it will recommend music based on your 
tastes. So if you’re a fan of Prince, expect to see 
similar artists in your For You section thanks 
to intelligent algorithms that are, according to 
Apple, built by real people. These people will 
soon know your musical preferences intimately, 
continuously improving and curating new 
playlists for you every day that can depend on 
your mood, likes or artists that your ‘recently 
played’ have taken their inspiration from.  
Something that Apple has put a lot of emphasis 
on is the streaming service’s 24-hour live radio 
station Beats 1, which gives you access to 
240

241

broadcasts from DJs based in New York, Los 
Angeles and London and again, curates and 
delivers songs, news and interviews with artists 
you’re interested in. Recent updates with this 
feature now allow you to listen to Beats 1 shows 
off-air with on-demand episodes that you can 
add to your music library or download to listen 
to offline. There’s also a social networking aspect 
to Apple Music via Connect. This lets you follow 
your favorite artists who will share exclusive 
content with their fans.
There is a great joy in the discovery section of 
Apple Music, which lets subscribers choose 
from lists of new music, curated playlists, videos, 
top charts, and genres. Choose a list to explore, 
and you’ll be faced with an elegantly designed 
interface that showcases album artwork in the 
same way as the app store. The A-List playlists 
bring together over 50 songs of a particular 
genre, all of which are covered by the cost of 
your subscription. Plus signs next to songs allow 
you to save them quickly and easily to your 
ever-growing library and even create your own 
playlists with the added personalized touch of 
including photos.
Most of all, Apple Music gives you the 
opportunity to have an excess of high-quality 
music at your fingertips, so much so that it may 
become an addictive pursuit for those of us who 
get our thrills from discovering new artists. Now, 
more than ever, the capability to stream music 
wherever we are is something that could lead us 
into a sense of prolonged captivation, however 
musically diverse and enriching that may be.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin
242

243

244

245

246

Apple’s WWDC launch keynote this year was 
undoubtedly its most exciting in years, being 
packed to the rafters with announcements 
about both software updates and new 
hardware. We learned about not only the 
expected updates to iOS, macOS, and watchOS, 
but also the Siri-powered HomePod smart 
speaker and stunningly powerful new iPads. 
However, you might have overlooked the large 
extent to which all of these will be driven by the 
AI advancement known as deep learning.
HOW MACHINE LEARNING AND DEEP 
LEARNING WORK
Deep learning is a strand of machine learning, 
a term that was often bandied about during 
Apple’s two-and-a-half-hour presentation. 
Machine learning indicates a pivotal change in 
approaching artificial intelligence; it posits that, 
rather than pour data into machines in the effort 
to teach them everything, we should instead 
simply give them access to data before leaving 
them to learn for themselves. It gives machines a 
more human-like approach to learning that has 
made artificial intelligence’s development more 
efficient, says big data expert Bernard Marr 
for Forbes.
However, in a follow-up article for Forbes, Marr 
explains how deep learning has even further 
strengthened the beneficial effects of machine 
learning.  With deep learning, abundant data 
is put into a computer system and through 
neural networks. These networks analyze the 
data before classifying it. That data could be in 
any form - such as text, speech, audio, or video 
- and used to arrive at conclusions akin to those 
reached by humans, albeit very, very quickly.
Image: Justin Sullivan
247

Marr cites various examples of how deep 
learning could be put to practical uses. These 
include a system that could analyze cars 
driving along a public road and, through taking 
account of such factors as different vehicles’ 
shapes, sizes, and engine sounds, attempt to 
classify cars by their make and model. This is 
machine learning; however, deep learning 
could enable that system to, over time, 
consume fresh data and use it to learn from 
mistakes. Therefore, the system’s probability of 
correctly detecting a particular car’s model and 
make would grow in future.
MACHINE LEARNING WAS HERE, THERE, 
AND EVERYWHERE AT WWDC
For even more examples of how deep learning 
can help us, we could look to Apple itself. Siri 
is becoming much smarter in iOS 11; keeping 
your Apple Music preferences in mind, she 
will be able to play songs that you have never 
previously heard but are likely to love. In 
the News app, she will suggest stories that 
apparently align with what interests you, and 
- with the QuickType keyboard - estimate the 
time that you should soon be meeting a friend. 
In the Photos app, meanwhile, she will sort 
your photos into albums without needing to be 
manually fed context about these images.
Siri’s intelligence in discerning your music 
tastes will be especially vital to the HomePod, 
which Apple has billed as primarily suited to 
personalized music-listening in the home rather 
than home automation tasks. However, all of 
the above-mentioned AI enhancements will 
be present in the new 10.5-inch and 12.9-inch 
iPad Pro models - and, of course, this fall’s new 
248

249

250

251

252

iPhones. The Apple Watch, too, will get a new 
face on which such content as traffic information 
will be customized in real time.
Furthermore, it’s not just Apple’s own software 
that deep learning will be able to enrich. In 
its keynote, Apple also unveiled a new API for 
developers: Core ML. This machine learning 
framework will allow a wide range of apps to 
complete ML tasks, including face recognition 
and text analysis, six times more quickly than 
what Google’s competing AI processor is 
capable of. On its Developer website, Apple 
claims that Core ML supports “extensive deep 
learning with over 30 layer types”.
DEEP LEARNING HAS EXCITING 
IMPLICATIONS FOR APPLE PRODUCTS
It isn’t difficult to see how deep learning could 
continue to realize a broad array of possibilities 
for apps - both Apple’s and those of third parties. 
Cardiogram recently reported how, on the Apple 
Watch, deep learning can be used to detect 
the heart conditions cardiac arrhythmia. 
Also, Marr notes that deep learning is helping 
with the development of medicines that are 
genetically tailored to different genomes; Apple 
could yet provide data to further assist such 
health-based applications.
However, Apple’s little-wavering approach to 
privacy means that, with Core ML, what data 
is drawn upon for deep learning purposes 
will be stored not in the cloud, but instead on 
customers’ devices. This could call for more 
efficient chips to prevent a deterioration in all-
round performance - and, indeed, such chips 
are coming from major Apple supplier TSMC. As 
253

reported by Patently Apple, the Taiwan-based 
company has reported its intent to integrate 
extreme ultraviolet lithography technology in its 
chips.  This technology will enable more efficient 
use of deep learning.
HAVE APPLE’S AI EFFORTS HIT 
A SPEED BUMP?
There do remain significant obstacles for Apple 
to overcome in its drive to further hone its deep 
learning efforts. In June, ExtremeTech cited 
claims, made in a report by The Wall Street 
Journal, that Apple’s reluctance to harvest user 
data has hindered its attempts to improve Siri. 
Google Assistant, for instance, can understand 
context more effectively due to leveraging the 
huge amount of user data at Google’s disposal. 
Last year, Apple did launch SiriKit, an API 
allowing developers to integrate their apps with 
Siri; however, it is deemed more restrictive than 
the API for Amazon’s Alexa.
Apple’s culture of secrecy has also deterred 
potential heavyweight recruits from the AI 
field. Such experts like to join companies 
that routinely publish their research, though 
Apple has at least slightly loosened a gag in 
this particular area. In October, the Cupertino 
corporation hired the Carnegie Mellon 
professor and deep learning expert Russ 
Salakhutdinov. He told The Washington Post 
that, this month, Apple will have its second 
academic paper on AI published; the first 
was published in December.  Richard Zemel, 
a machine learning professor at the University 
of Toronto, has remarked about the greater 
visibility of Apple staff at academic conferences.
254

Still, will all of this help Apple to close a gap that, 
despite launching the first voice assistant on 
a phone back in 2011, it has allowed to open 
between itself and Google and Amazon? Apple 
analyst Gene Munster told The Washington Post 
that Apple “understand that in the future, every 
255

company is going to become an AI company, and 
they are in a particularly tough spot.” However, he 
also remarked: “The good news is that if we look 
at how AI is going to impact the world, it’s still 
early days - there is plenty of time to catch up.”
HOW APPLE CAN PLAY THE 
LONG GAME IN AI
Apple has good reason not to delay in 
its efforts to catch up in the emerging AI 
revolution. After all, the deep learning-friendly 
technology in TSMC’s chips will not be available 
exclusively to Apple. However, Daniel Gross, 
once an Apple executive focusing on AI, 
remarked that Apple’s strong commitment to 
privacy will have helped it to build consumer 
trust. He remarked to The Washington Post: 
“I think Google and Facebook will have to 
answer to a world where a similar product that 
is offered is more privacy-preserving.”
Apple’s stance could even help many of its 
users overcome the modern difficulties of 
staying truly anonymous in a setting as public 
as the Internet. Fast Company cites the 
example of artist Curtis Wallen - who, even 
utilizing such techniques as spending with the 
cryptocurrency Bitcoin, struggled to create a 
completely new identity for himself.  “There 
isn’t anything inherently criminal in valuing 
privacy,” Wallen said. “This shouldn’t be what it 
takes to feel safe.” In our next issue, we will look 
at how Apple’s deep learning efforts can, with 
cryptocurrency, tackle the privacy dilemma.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
256

257

ads@applemagazine.com
Digital
Mindﬁeld

AppleMagazine © Copyright 2017-2011. All Rights Reserved.
No part of the document may be circulated, quoted, or reproduced for distribution without prior written approval.
Proper Trademark Notice and Attribution iPhone™, iPad™, HomePod™, Apple Watch™, iPod™, Mac™, iMac™, Macbook™, AppleTV™, Siri™, iOS™, OS X™, watchOS™, and others
are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the US and other countries. Please contact support for additional trademark ownership rights information.
The following is a list of Apple’s trademarks and service marks http://www.apple.com/legal/ trademark/appletmlist.html.
All other trademarks are the properties of their owners.
AppleMagazine is an independent publication and has not been authorized, sponsored, or otherwise approved by Apple Inc.
Authorized Publisher
WRITERS
 
Precise English Inc.
 
Benjamin Kerry  (UK)
 
Gavin Lenaghan  (UK)
 
Craig Lenaghan  (UK)
 
Elena Lusk  (US)
COLUMNS
COLUMNS
 
iTUNES REVIEW
 
Gavin Lenaghan
 
FINANCE NEWS
 
Associated Press / Bloomberg
REVISION
 
Gavin Lenaghan
  
Jack Crute
PRODUCTION SUPPORT / COLLABORATORS
 
Rui da Costa  
 
 
 
Icy Ventura
 
Segolene Vincent 
 
 
Pilar Bescos
 
Fabian Groenhof  
 
 
Candice Liu
 
Lise Berda
 
James Jarvis
  
Richard Sawyer
 
Lauren Brown
 
Matthew Coburn
 
Jeﬀrey Milks
 
Susan Kiesling
 
Raquel Serrano
 
Robert Fluellen
  
Lisa Swiniarski
 
Roger Gayalkar
PRIVACY POLICY
 
applemagazine.com/privacy-policy/
TERMS OF USE
 
applemagazine.com/terms-of-use/
SOCIAL NETWORKS
 
 
 
 
Twitter
 
 
@apple_magazine
 
 
twitter.com/#!/Apple_Magazine
 
 
Facebook
 
 
facebook.com/applemagazineinternational
SUBSCRIPTIONS
 
AppleMagazine Oﬃcial Website
 
applemagazine.com
 
Zinio LLC.
 
zino.com
 
Readr Newsstand
  
readrapp.com
 
Magzter Newsstand
 
magzter.com
 
Amazon Newsstand
 
amazon.com
 
Ebsco/Flipster
 
ebsco.com
 
Scoop Newsstand (Singapore)
 
getscoop.com
CONTACTS
 
Suport & CRM - contact@applemagazine.com 
 
Magazine and Website Editor - editor@applemagazine.com 
 
Executive Director - ceo@applemagazine.com
 
Advertise - ads@applemagazine.com  
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
 
Ivan Castilho
 
Chief Executive Oﬃcer / Design Conception
MINDFIELD DIGITAL ART & GRAPHIC DESIGN
 
Glauco Ribeiro
 
Chief Design Oﬃcer / Art & Graphic Design Director
 
Michael Danglen
  
Art & Graphic Design Producer
 
Anderson Oliveira
 
Art & Graphic Design Producer
MAGAZINE EDITORIAL CONTENT
 
Benjamin Kerry
 
Chief Editor
OFFICIAL WEBSITE
  
Benjamin Kerry
 
Production Director
 
Jack Crute
 
WordPress Production & Website Support
MASTHEAD
APPLEMAGAZINE INTERNATIONAL
applemagazine.com


