
This is a stone.

Digital
Mindﬁeld
When choosing MINDFIELD DIGITAL™ and our DBMD™ 
Program for your development services, you can be sure 
you will receive an app that will save you money and 
resources using the most advanced design and interface 
concepts.
We follow an Application Development Cycle where every 
We follow an Application Development Cycle where every 
step is carried out to maximum perfection. Our application 
developers are experienced and knowledgeable, and are 
skilled at delivering top high tech Apps. 
Our team is constantly looking for promising partners in 
Our team is constantly looking for promising partners in 
order to improve our quality, broaden our experience and 
create a global range of Apps with the most impressive 
conceptual designs, 3D Graphics and Sound FX.
This is a stone.



APPLE INVESTORS 
URGE ACTION 
TO CURB CHILD 
GADGET ADDICTION
TAKE THIS JOB 
AND SHIVER IT: 
CHILLY OFFICES 
PLAGUE WORKERS
CES 2018: EVERYTHING 
YOU NEED TO KNOW
18
142
46
WHO’S AFFECTED 
BY COMPUTER CHIP 
SECURITY FLAW
36

TOP 10 APPS   108
iTUNES REVIEW   112
TOP 10 SONGS   158
TOP 10 ALBUMS   160
TOP 10 MUSIC VIDEOS   162
TOP 10 TV SHOWS   164
TOP 10 BOOKS   166
WHY CABLE BILLS ARE RISING AGAIN AND WHAT CAN YOU DO  08
BORDER INSPECTIONS OF ELECTRONIC DEVICES HITS RECORD HIGH  26
FX NETWORKS CHIEF: EVEN PEAK TV CAN BE A ‘SIDESHOW’ TO INTERNET  32
SWISS APPLE STORE EVACUATED AFTER iPHONE BATTERY EMITS SMOKE  44
INTEL CEO: FIXES ON THE WAY FOR SERIOUS CHIP SECURITY FLAWS  68
NEW TECH GADGETS ARE FOLLOWING THE SOUND OF YOUR VOICE  74
RETAIL WORKERS FEEL DISRUPTION FROM SHIFTING SHOPPER HABITS  84
SPACEX SAYS ROCKET PERFORMANCE OK IN SECRET SATELLITE LAUNCH  100
AT&T DROPS PLAN TO SELL HUAWEI SMARTPHONE IN US  104
BOX OFFICE TOP 20: ‘JUMANJI’ KNOCKS ‘STAR WARS’ TO NO. 3  128
KODAK SURGES AT IT BECOMES LATEST ‘CRYPTOCURRENCY’ CONVERT  138
ROBOT DUCK’S AIM: HELPS KIDS WITH CANCER VIA POWER OF PLAY  148
FORMULA E SECURES $100 MILLION-PLUS TITLE SPONSORSHIP  156
$306 BILLION: US HITS RECORD FOR COSTLY WEATHER DISASTERS  168
MALAYSIA OKS NEW SEARCH BY PRIVATE COMPANY FOR MISSING PLANE  174
FRANCE INVESTIGATES APPLE FOR SLOWING DOWN OLD iPHONES  180

8

Cable and satellite TV providers are ringing in 
the new year with an unwelcomed gift: higher 
cable bills.
Comcast, for instance, says customer bills will 
rise 2.2 percent, on average, in 2018. AT&T is 
raising DirecTV’s prices by up to $8 a month in 
mid-January. Smaller providers are planning 
increases, too.
Over the past decade, prices for TV service have 
risen almost twice as fast as inflation, according 
to an analysis of government data. Data provider 
S&P Global Market Intelligence says customers’ 
cable and satellite TV bills have soared 53 
percent since 2007, to $100.98 in 2017.
Annual rate hikes are as guaranteed as death and 
taxes. But you can push back and trim your bill.
WHY CABLE BILLS 
ARE RISING AGAIN 
AND WHAT 
CAN YOU DO
9

Image: Roberto Machado Noa
10

WHY PRICES RISE
Cable companies point to rising fees they pay to 
carry TV networks. The networks, in turn, have 
their own rising costs — particularly sports, as 
they willingly pay more to sports leagues for 
what they consider must-have programming. 
But the networks also know they can pass those 
costs back to cable companies and ultimately 
their subscribers.
It’s industry convention that a cable bundle 
needs live sports. Otherwise, cable companies 
risk losing subscribers to Netflix and other 
sports-less alternatives.
The consulting firm PwC estimates that sports 
leagues in North America raked in $18.4 billion 
in 2016 from TV, radio and tech companies 
that stream games, up from $11.6 billion in 
2012. That’s expected to keep growing as tech 
companies such as Amazon and Facebook 
become more interested in sports, meaning 
more competition for rights to televise games.
The big winner in the TV ecosystem? “If anyone’s 
the beneficiary it’s NFL players,” Pivotal Research 
Group analyst Brian Wieser said.
Meanwhile, to get the biggest audience 
possible, many entertainment companies like 
Disney require cable companies to include 
expensive channels in the most popular 
bundles. Verizon tried to offer a cheaper 
package by dropping Disney’s ESPN from a basic 
package, making it an optional add-on. ESPN 
sued, and now Verizon offers a sports-focused 
basic package with ESPN alongside ones that 
doesn’t have sports.
11

12

Beyond sports, networks pay for high-quality TV 
series to compete with hits on Amazon, Netflix 
and other services. Those costs are passed 
along, too.
In all, S&P Global Market Intelligence estimates 
that network fees that cable companies are 
paying are nearly 2.5 times what they were a 
decade ago.
PUSH BACK
You can threaten to ditch your cable company 
in hopes of getting a discount. Companies 
will often offer a promotional rate for a year or 
two — though they may also try to get you to 
upgrade packages in the process. BillFixers, a 
service that fights on your behalf in return for a 
cut of your savings, estimates that 55 percent of 
customers are on a promotion at any given time.
But just having a discount doesn’t mean it’s 
a good one. BillFixers’ founder, Ben Kurland, 
recommends calling to complain about prices 
and rejecting the first deal offered. More often 
than not, a better discount will be available if 
you ask for it. Repeatedly.
If you decide to cut one of your services, like 
your home phone, but you feel that you are still 
paying too much, Kurland advises calling back 
again in a month and seeing if there are any 
new discounts.
Cable companies are already dealing with 
customers dropping TV service entirely. That 
hurts the networks, too, as their fees are based 
on the number of subscribers. It’s in everyone’s 
interest to keep you as a customer, even if you 
are paying less.
13

Many promotions are automatic after you 
initially sign up for service and last for a year or 
two. That may protect you from immediate price 
hikes, at least partially. Those deals don’t always 
include equipment charges and separate fees 
for over-the-air networks, including ABC, CBS, 
Fox and NBC (yes, you’re paying for them, too, 
even though they are free with an antenna).
CORD-CUTTING
An increasingly popular option is to just peace 
out. Though there are still 94 million cable 
and satellite TV customers, that’s roughly 4 
million fewer than two years ago, according to 
MoffettNathanson Research.
You don’t have to drop TV networks completely. 
Online TV services such as YouTube TV, DirecTV 
Now and Sling TV offer smaller packages of 
channels, often for less than what cable charges. 
MoffettNathanson estimates these services have 
3.5 million customers combined. Make sure 
the service has your favorite channels, as these 
services have notable gaps.
Antennas are also available for $50 or less. You 
get over-the-air networks for free, although 
reception might not be perfect.
Be careful: Paying for online services to replace 
TV could eventually add up to more than a $100 
cable bill, especially as more services are created 
to compete for your dollars. Disney, for instance, 
is pulling its movies from Netflix and plans its 
own streaming service in 2019. On the other 
hand, it’s easy to cancel after a month or two 
of catching up on shows; cancelling cable is a 
chore by comparison.
14

15



18

Two major Apple investors have urged the 
iPhone maker to help curb smartphone 
addiction among children, highlighting growing 
concern about the effects of gadgets and social 
media on youngsters.
New York-based Jana Partners LLC and the 
California State Teachers’ Retirement System 
said in open letter to Apple that the company 
must offer more choices and tools to help 
children fight addiction to its devices. The two 
investors collectively control $2 billion worth of 
Apple shares.
“Apple can play a defining role in signaling to 
the industry that paying special attention to the 
health and development of the next generation 
is both good business and the right thing to do,” 
the letter said.
APPLE INVESTORS 
URGE ACTION 
TO CURB 
CHILD GADGET 
ADDICTION
19

Among their proposals to Apple: Establish 
a committee of experts, including child 
development specialists; offer Apple’s “vast 
information resources” to researchers; and enhance 
mobile device software so that parents have more 
options to protect their children’s health.
The letter cited various studies on the negative 
effects of smartphones and social media on 
children’s mental and physical health. Examples 
include distractions by digital technologies in 
the classroom, a decreased ability of students to 
focus on educational tasks, and higher risks of 
suicide and depression.
A study published in November suggested 
that heavy smartphone use and social media 
exposure among teens may contribute to 
depression and other traits linked with suicide. 
But that and similarly designed research cannot 
rule out that already troubled teens may be 
more likely than others to be frequent users of 
smartphones and social media.
In its most recent update on teens and media 
use, the American Academy of Pediatrics said 
in 2016 that social media and internet use have 
benefits and potential risks for teens. It urged 
families to create their own media use plans that 
include consistent time and content limits.
The American Psychiatric Association does 
not consider heavy internet use a true mental 
addiction and says more research is needed.
Apple didn’t immediately respond to a request 
for comment.
The investors’ letter reflects growing concerns 
about the long-term impact of gadgets and 
social media, especially for those who start to 
use smartphones at an early age.
20

21

While tech companies have not acknowledged 
openly that their gadgets may be addictive, 
some Silicon Valley insiders have begun to speak 
about how gadgets, mobile applications and 
social media sites are designed to be addictive 
and to keep users’ attention as long as possible.
Facebook’s founding president, Sean Parker, said 
recently, for example, that the company exploits 
a “vulnerability in human psychology” to addict 
its users. He called its stream of comments, 
“likes” and reactions a “social validation feedback 
loop that exploits how human brains work.” And, 
he said, “God only knows what it’s doing to our 
children’s brains.”
James Steyer, the CEO of Common Sense Media, 
a nonprofit that studies kids’ technology use, 
called the letter a “big deal” in the ongoing effort 
22

to make it clear that cellphones are a “public 
health concern.”
“It’s the beginning of a much bigger 
conversation about these issues and it’s great 
that shareholders care about it,” he said.
Steyer said Apple is in a position to “do good 
here.” Among other things, he said, Apple can 
finance independent research on the effects of 
mobile phone use and pay for public education 
campaigns that teach parents and kids about 
responsible technology use. He said Apple can 
also design addiction-prevention features, such 
as an automatic shut-off after an hour.
But Steyer said a bigger problem is with social 
media companies “designing platforms to grab 
and retain your children.” He said companies 
23

such as Twitter, Facebook and Snap will change 
“only with major pressure from the public and 
from shareholders.”
The Apple letter is the start of a bigger push by 
one of the investors, Jana, to focus on socially 
responsible investing, according to a report in 
The Wall Street Journal. The investor, the Journal 
said, is planning to raise billions of dollars to 
launch a new fund, Jana Impact Capital, to invest 
in companies that should be “better corporate 
citizens.” The idea is that responsible companies 
can produce better long-term value not just for 
shareholders, but for society.
24

Image: Lev Dolgachov
25

26

The government inspected a record number of 
international travelers’ electronic devices last 
year, expanding a practice that has drawn alarm 
from privacy advocates.
U.S. Customs and Border Protection announced 
last week that its border agents inspected 
30,200 phones and other electronic devices in 
fiscal year 2017, which ended in September — a 
nearly 60 percent spike from 2016, when 19,051 
devices were searched.
BORDER 
INSPECTIONS 
OF ELECTRONIC 
DEVICES HITS 
RECORD HIGH
27

But the agency stressed the searches represent 
just a tiny fraction — 0.007 percent of arriving 
international travelers — out of more than  
397 million.
“In this digital age, border searches of 
electronic devices are essential to enforcing 
the law at the U.S. border and to protecting 
the American people,” CBP’s deputy executive 
assistant commissioner John Wagner  
said in a statement.
The searches are aimed at combatting 
terrorism, child pornography and other 
crimes. But the practice has drawn fire from 
privacy advocates who argue the government 
shouldn’t be able to search devices without 
warrants or probable cause.
CBP officials credit the spike, in part, to the fact 
that people now carry more devices — often 
several at a time — along with growing traveler 
volume and risk assessments.
The agency also released an updated written 
directive that clarifies how passwords and 
cloud data should be handled.
The new rules make clear that agents are only 
allowed to inspect information physically 
present on a device — and not information 
stored remotely, such as on the cloud.
To prevent officers from accessing information 
they shouldn’t, they are now required to 
request that travelers turn off their devices’ 
network connectivity, or disable it themselves.
Passwords provided by travelers to access their 
phones, computers, tablets and other devices 
must also be deleted or destroyed immediately 
following a search, the directive says.
28

29

It also differentiates between basic searches, 
during which officers can scroll through 
passengers’ contacts, photos and other material 
without reasonable suspicion of criminal 
behavior, and advanced searches, in which 
devices are connected to external equipment so 
their contents can be reviewed or stored.
That more intense search now requires the 
approval of a supervisor and “reasonable 
suspicion of activity in violation” of the law or 
“a national security concern,” such as a person’s 
presence on a terror watch list.
The increase in searches comes as the Trump 
administration has moved to ramp up border 
security and dramatically curtail who is 
permitted to enter the country.
Hugh Handeyside, a staff attorney in the 
American Civil Liberties Union’s National 
Security Project, described the changes as a 
“step in the right direction,” but said they are 
largely cosmetic and still allow the government 
to conduct unconstitutional searches.
“Officers can still conduct what amounts to a 
digital strip search of passengers” without a 
warrant, he said.
The group filed a lawsuit last year against the 
Department of Homeland Security on behalf of 
11 travelers whose smartphones and laptops 
were searched at the border.
30

31

Television keeps churning out record numbers 
of original series but is being overshadowed by 
the internet’s dubious distractions, FX Networks 
CEO John Landgraf said.
Technology entrances people with “hourly doses 
of bite-size half-truths and click bait come-ons,” 
Landgraf told a TV critics’ meeting.
“To be honest, as incredible as television’s 
become, it sometimes feels to me like a 
sideshow in what has become a daily three-ring 
media circus,” he said.
Given concerns over society’s shrinking 
attention span and “dwindling intolerance for 
dissent,” he’s glad when even his competitors’ 
worthy and enlightening shows draw viewers, 
he said.
The veteran TV executive, who has made FX 
the unofficial accountant for so-called “Peak TV” 
numbers, said that the total number of cable, 
broadcast and streamed series hit an estimated 
high of 487 in 2017, a 7 percent increase over 
FX NETWORKS CHIEF: 
EVEN PEAK TV CAN BE A 
‘SIDESHOW’ TO INTERNET
32

33

34

2016’s tally of 455. The 117 streamed series from 
outlets including Netflix and Amazon  
last year represented the biggest increase,  
30 percent, over 2016.
Landgraf was asked about the future of FX 
Networks as one of the elements of Rupert 
Murdoch’s media empire that would be  
sold to Walt Disney Co. in a deal facing 
regulatory approval.
Last month, Disney said it was buying a large 
part of the Murdoch family’s 21st Century Fox 
for about $52.4 billion in stock, including its film 
and TV studios and cable and international TV 
businesses. The deal doesn’t include the Fox 
Broadcasting network and stations, Fox News 
Channel, Fox Business Network, FS1, FS2 and 
Big Ten Network.
In a “lovely conversation” with Disney CEO 
Robert Iger, he was reassured that FX Networks 
is seen as something unique, Landgraf said. 
Disney has proven a “very good steward” of 
other brands it’s acquired with distinctive 
creative cultures, such as Pixar and Marvel, 
which seem to be thriving under the new 
ownership, he said.
Given that Disney is making the acquisition to 
compete with the changing media market and 
rapidly expanding streaming services, FX will be 
a good fit as the “adult scripted component of 
their larger plans,” he said.
Pressed about how he and FX Networks would 
fit into Disney, Landgraf said Disney has yet 
to discuss that with him and it may yet be 
undecided. The deal faces a year to 18 months 
of scrutiny and for now it’s business as usual for 
him and FX, he said.
35

Technology companies are scrambling to 
fix serious security flaws affecting computer 
processors built by Intel and other chipmakers 
and found in many of the world’s personal 
computers and smartphones.
The two hardware bugs discovered can be 
exploited to allow the memory content of 
a computer to be leaked. Such a leak could 
potentially expose stored passwords and other 
sensitive data, including personal photos, emails 
and instant messages.
Researchers at Google’s Project Zero and 
academic institutions including the Graz 
University of Technology in Austria discovered 
the problem last year and disclosed it last week.
WHO’S  
AFFECTED BY 
COMPUTER CHIP 
SECURITY FLAW
36

37

There’s no evidence that bad actors have yet 
exploited the bugs, but companies from Microsoft 
to Mozilla said this week they have worked 
to patch up vulnerabilities to their operating 
systems and browsers to protect against one of 
the bugs. Researchers say the other is harder to 
fix and “will haunt us for quite some time.”
Here’s a look at what’s affected, what’s being 
done about it and whether you should worry.
INTEL INSIDE
Intel is at the center of the problem because 
it supplies the processors used in many of the 
world’s PCs. Researchers say one of the bugs, 
called Meltdown, affects nearly every processor 
it’s made since the mid-1990s.
While security flaws are typically limited to a 
specific company or product, Intel says the 
problem is “not a bug or a flaw in Intel products” 
but rather a broader problem affecting 
processing techniques common to modern 
computing platforms.
Both the chipmaker and Google, which 
informed Intel about the vulnerability in June, 
said they were planning to disclose the issue 
next week when fixes will be available. Tech 
companies typically withhold details about 
security problems until fixes are available so that 
hackers wouldn’t have a roadmap to exploit the 
flaws. But in this case, Intel was forced to disclose 
the problem after British technology site The 
Register reported it, causing Intel’s stock to fall.
Most of the immediate fixes will be limited to 
the Meltdown bug. The other, Spectre, is harder 
to fix, but also harder to exploit, making it less of 
an immediate threat to consumer devices.
38

39

40

OTHER CHIPMAKERS
While researchers say the Meltdown bug is 
limited to Intel processors, they have verified 
Spectre as a problem for Intel, Advanced 
Micro Devices and ARM processors. AMD chips 
are also common in PCs, while ARM chips 
are found in many smartphones and other 
internet-connected products, including cars 
and home appliances.
AMD said there is “near zero risk” to its own 
processors, either because its chips are 
designed differently, or security fixes for 
Microsoft Windows and other operating 
systems will take care of the problem. ARM 
Holdings said it’s working with Intel, AMD 
and operating system vendors to address 
the problem. The ARM design is also used in 
Apple’s mobile chips. Apple said late Thursday 
that all of its devices are affected, but it’s 
already made fixes to help defend against 
Meltdown in laptops and phones and soon 
plans to release mitigations in the Safari 
browser to help defend against Spectre.
SECURING THE CLOUD
The bugs also affect cloud-computing services 
powering much of the internet. These services, 
offered by Amazon, Microsoft, Google, IBM and 
others, give smaller companies access to data 
centers, web hosting and other services they 
need to run their businesses. But these cloud 
services also use computers with the same 
types of problem chips.
Unauthorized access will be difficult to detect 
so cloud-computing providers need to act 
quickly to protect against these vulnerabilities, 
41

42

said Ryan Kalember, senior vice president of 
cybersecurity at Proofpoint. The good news, he 
said, is that major cloud providers have known 
about this for months and have had time to 
tackle the problem.
WHAT TO DO NEXT?
There are limits to what consumers can do  
now to protect their computers.
Advice from the U.S Computer Emergency 
Readiness Team’s was grim. The federal 
organization says that “fully removing the 
vulnerability” requires replacing the  
hardware already embedded in millions of 
computing devices.
That’s not to say nothing can be done.
Consumers can mitigate the underlying 
vulnerability by making sure they patch 
up their operating systems with the latest 
software upgrades. There are already 
Meltdown patches for Microsoft’s Windows, 
Apple’s macOS and Linux. Mozilla says it’s 
also implementing a short-term mitigation 
that disables some capabilities of its Firefox 
browser. Google says Android devices  
are protected if they have the latest  
security updates.
“If you download the latest update from 
Microsoft, Apple, or Linux, then the problem 
is fixed for you and you don’t have to worry,” 
security researcher Rob Graham said in a  
blog post Thursday. “If you aren’t up to  
date, then there’s a lot of other nasties  
out there you should probably also be 
worrying about.”
43

Swiss authorities say smoke from an overheating 
iPhone battery prompted the evacuation of 
some 50 staffers and customers at an Apple 
store in downtown Zurich. A store employee 
sustained minor burns and seven people 
received medical treatment.
Marco Bisa of the Zurich police office says store 
staff “responded well and correctly” by sprinkling 
quartz sand on the overheating battery to 
contain the smoke, then opening ventilation 
systems to release it.
Bisa said police, firefighters, several ambulances 
and an emergency vehicle were deployed in 
response to the incident in the store’s workshop 
— not the showroom — on Tuesday.
The injured staffer sustained light injuries to the 
hand when the battery he was removing from 
the phone overheated.
Police forensic experts were examining what 
caused the battery to overheat.
SWISS APPLE STORE 
EVACUATED AFTER iPHONE 
BATTERY EMITS SMOKE
44

45

46

47

48

CES 2018: THE MOST HIGHLY 
ANTICIPATED TECH EVENT OF THE YEAR 
The biggest tech show of the year finally 
arrived! That’s right, CES 2018, the most highly 
anticipated tech event of the year, took place 
this week from 9th to 12th January in Las Vegas. 
More than 2,900 companies attended this year’s 
event, and unveiled everything from AI-powered 
robots to self-driving cars. 
On Monday, LG, Samsung, Sony and more all 
held press conferences throughout the day but 
the main event took place from Tuesday. 2018 
is set to be an even bigger year for technology 
with Alexa, and other touchless computing 
devices, predicted to really take off. We saw the 
introduction of these devices in 2017, and they 
have somewhat become the norm in many 
houses, but they are set to really explode this year. 
You’ve got the speakers, but this year you could 
have access to devices that allow you to control 
your lights, locks, thermostats and more. This has 
been kicked off by a brand new smart mirror 
called HiMirror, which combined with Amazon 
Alexa’s voice, helps you analyse your skin.  We 
have also only scratched the surface of 8K TV’s, AR 
and VR, and electric cars in 2017 and 2018 is set to 
hold even more exciting developments.
WHAT TO EXPECT FROM THE BIGGEST 
TECH COMPANIES
Typically, Apple and Google don’t make big 
announcements at CES, but we’ve got the 
lowdown on the most exciting announcements 
from the other big tech companies at this year’s 
event. The full schedule for the event can be 
found here.
49

FOLDABLE PHONE FROM SAMSUNG
Samsung held a press conference on Monday, 
announcing some of it’s most exciting products 
to be released throughout 2018. The most 
highly anticipated update from Samsung is the 
possibility that the foldable Galaxy X might 
be coming this year. Yes, you read that right. It 
looks like Samsung could be the first company 
to release a foldable phone. The so-called 
Samsung Galaxy X has been the subject of 
rumors for some time and is thought to have 
been six years in the making. This isn’t the first 
time Samsung has played with the idea of a 
foldable phone as back in 2011, they launched a 
prototype of a foldable phone that remarkably 
remained intact after 100,000 folds, with only a 
6% drop in brightness at the center.
However, a foldable phone is not all Samsung 
has been working on. Samsung launched a 
new modular TV at the event, called The 
Wall, which offers both deep blacks and bright 
highlights. Samsung has also unveiled its 146-
inch modular MicroLED TV as well as it’s 85-inch 
Q9S TV which uses AI to upscale to 8K. 8K TVs 
were a big focus of the CES 2018 event. The new 
85-inch Q9S QLED TV is set to be Samsung’s first 
commercial 8K television, and it will have a 7,680 
x 4,320 display. This is 16 times more pixels 
than 1080p and 4 times that of today’s 4K 
TVs, allowing it to compete with the 8K TV LG 
is also likely to release.
We can also expect the Notebook 7 Spin, 
featuring Windows Hello secure login for 
extra security, the NW700 Sound+ soundbar, 
a 53.5mm-deep speaker to be released this 
year and a smart fridge. Yes, really. This new 
50

Samsung Responds to the iPhone X 
With a Foldable Smartphone
51

52

invention will be voice controlled, will allow you 
to see inside your fridge when out of the house, 
and will send you notifications to help you plan 
when to go food shopping.
LG’S 8K TV
LG will be a fierce competitor of Samsung as it 
is also releasing an 8K TV in 2018. This 88-inch 
8K OLED TV will have Google Assistant and 
Amazon Alexa support. LG will also compete 
with Samsung when it comes to foldable 
devices as it plans to release a 65-inch OLED 
TV that rolls up. LG is also planning to release 
its very own smart speaker, the ThinQ smart 
speaker. Make sure to also look out for LG’s 4K 
projector and its latest gram laptop, which lasts 
longer and is thinner than ever before.
LG will exhibit a new 88-inch OLED TV with an 8K 
screen for the next CES 2018
53

GOOGLE ASSISTANT SET TO TAKE OFF
Google had a large booth as well as eight 
hospitality suites at the show, which, of course, 
only meant one thing – we can expect a lot from 
the tech giant this year. While Google doesn’t 
typically make big announcements at CES, the 
biggest focus for Google at this year’s event was 
the Google Assistant. With other companies now 
producing their very own smart speakers, Apple 
is determined to continue to improve their own 
assistant. According to Google, the “Assistant is 
now available on more than 400 million devices” 
and in “a dozen countries, from France to Japan, 
offering help in 8 languages around the globe.”
54

55

3 NEW SONY PHONES
Each year at the CES, Sony focuses heavily on it’s 
Bravia TVs and this year was no exception. Sony’s 
next line of Bravia TVs are likely to feature OLED 
screens. Sony has also introduced a $30,000 4K 
projector at this year’s event, perhaps it’s biggest 
announcement, which projects an image that 
can stretch up to 120 inches and reach a peak 
brightness of 250 lumens.
Sony has also announced it is releasing three 
new phones at this week’s event, all featuring 
a radical new design. They will include a 
camera that can shoot 120-degree selfies at 
8 megapixels, or 16-megapixel selfies, without 
the wide-angle. This will allow you to feature 
more of the world around you or more of your 
friends in your selfies.
These Xperia phones will also feature fingerprint 
sensors, allowing them to finally compete on a 
similar level to their competitors. The fingerprint 
sensor will feature on the back of the phones, 
like Google’s Pixel 2 phone, which has been 
voted the world’s fastest fingerprint sensor. 
It is likely all three phones will be available 
sometime in February.
56

57

INTEL’S RECOVERY FROM 
SECURITY FLAW
All eyes were on Intel CEO Brian Krzanich as he 
gave the show’s opening keynote, just days after 
experts at Google found a flaw in chips made 
by Intel. These chips are used widely in devices, 
and it could affect all computers with Intel chips 
from the last ten years. Krzanich claimed 
Intel’s chips would be made safe in a week, 
stating “security is key”.
Intel has recently revealed it’s new Core 
processors with AMD graphics. This 
collaboration between the rivals comes as a 
surprise to many. By collaborating the two have 
created incredibly thin and light laptops and 
PCs, that can provide 4K media streaming.
Image: David Paul Morris
58

59

DELL’S NEW LAPTOPS
Dell is all about laptops this new year. The tech 
company has given a sneak preview of its 
next XPS 13 laptop which features a thin 
design and 13-inch screen. This laptop comes 
in a new color and features an Infinity Edge 
display, making use as smooth and aesthetically 
pleasing as possible. This high-resolution display 
incorporates 2.5 million more pixels with 4K 
Ultra HD. The laptop can be activated by voice, 
touch or facial recognition and will have 19 
hours of battery life.
60

61

62

TRANSFORMATIONS IN CAR 
TECHNOLOGY
A whole range of companies are on track 
to transform the car industry this year, with 
Byton Nissan, Fisker and Hyundai all making 
announcements at this year’s CES. Byton has 
unveiled an electric SUV, complete with Alexa 
support and touchscreen embedded into the 
steering well. This car is set to launch is 2019 at 
a starting price of $45,000, and rumors suggest 
it could challenge Tesla. This vehicle will stop 
drivers reaching for their phones on the road 
and instead a voice command or hand gesture 
will allow the vehicle to take care of their needs.
63

64

65

66

Nissan has just revealed ‘brain-to-vehicle’ 
technology, and it will demonstrate this 
in a driving simulator at CES 2018. This 
new technology will help us respond to 
dangerous situations on the road as much as 
0.2 to 0.5 seconds faster with the help of an 
electroencephalography headset which 
can predict our next actions. This innovative 
technology has the potential to prevent 
accidents and save many lives.
2018 SET TO REVOLUTIONIZE 
THE TECH INDUSTRY
Acer, Nvidia, Lenovo, and more also 
announced more exciting projects from 2018. 
How long it will be before many of these 
announcements are available for purchase is 
yet to be seen, but one thing is for sure: 2018 
will be another groundbreaking year for the 
technology industry.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
67

Intel has big plans to steer toward new business 
in self-driving cars, virtual reality and other 
cutting-edge technologies. But first it has to pull 
out of a skid caused by a serious security flaw in 
its processor chips, which undergird many of the 
world’s smartphones and personal computers.
Intel CEO Brian Krzanich opened his keynote 
talk Monday night at the annual CES gadget 
show in Las Vegas by addressing the hard-to-
fix flaws disclosed by security researchers last 
week. At an event known for its technological 
optimism, it was an unusually sober and high-
profile reminder of the information security and 
privacy dangers lurking beneath many of the 
tech industry’s gee-whiz wonders.
INTEL CEO: FIXES 
ON THE WAY FOR 
SERIOUS CHIP 
SECURITY FLAWS
68

69

Some researchers have argued that the flaws 
reflect a fundamental hardware defect that 
can’t be fixed short of a recall. But Intel has 
pushed back against that idea, arguing that 
the problems can be “mitigated” by software 
or firmware upgrades. Companies from 
Microsoft to Apple have announced efforts to 
patch the vulnerabilities.
And Krzanich promised fixes in the coming 
week to 90 percent of the processors Intel has 
made in the past five years, consistent with an 
earlier statement from the company . He added 
that updates for the remainder of those recent 
processors should follow by the end of January. 
Krzanich did not address the company’s plans 
for older chips.
To date, he said, Intel has seen no sign that 
anyone has stolen data by exploiting the 
two vulnerabilities, known as Meltdown and 
Spectre. The problems were disclosed last 
week by Google’s Project Zero security team 
and other researchers. Krzanich commended 
the “remarkable” collaboration among tech 
companies to address what he called an 
“industry-wide” problem.
While Meltdown is believed to primarily affect 
processors built by Intel, Spectre also affects 
many of the company’s rivals. Flaws affecting the 
processor chips also endanger the PCs, internet 
browsers, cloud computing services and other 
technology that rely on them. Both bugs could 
be exploited through what’s known as a side-
channel attack that could extract passwords and 
other sensitive data from the chip’s memory.
70

71

72

Image: David Paul Morris
Krzanich himself has been in the spotlight over 
the security issue after it was revealed that he 
had sold about $39 million in his own Intel 
stocks and options in late November, before the 
vulnerability was publicly known. Intel says it 
was notified about the bugs in June.
The company didn’t respond to inquiries about 
the timing of Krzanich’s divestments, but a 
spokeswoman said it was unrelated to the 
security flaws.
During his presentation Monday, Krzanich 
also launched into a flashy and wide-ranging 
celebration of the way Intel and its partners are 
harnessing data for futuristic innovations, from 
3D entertainment partnerships with Paramount 
Pictures to virtual-reality collaborations with the 
2018 Winter Olympics and a new breakthrough 
in so-called quantum computing.
A self-driving Ford Fusion rolled onto the stage 
of the casino theater where Krzanich gave his 
talk. It’s the first of a 100-vehicle test fleet run by 
Mobileeye, the Israel-based software company 
that Intel bought for $15 billion last year. 
Mobileeye processes the information cars “see” 
from cameras and sensors.
A flying taxi — the German-built Volocopter 
— later lifted from the stage. Then came the 
drones, in a musical performance that Krzanich 
said would mark a Guinness record for the 
“world’s first 100-drone indoor lightshow 
without GPS.”
73

74

What’s the hottest thing in the world of 
technology these days? Your voice.
Some of the most popular gadgets over the 
holiday season were smart speakers with 
digital assistants from Amazon and Google. 
Apple is coming out with its own speaker this 
year; Microsoft and Samsung have partnered 
on another.
As the annual Consumer Electronics Show kicks 
off in Las Vegas this week, manufacturers are 
expected to unveil even more voice-controlled 
devices — speakers and beyond — as Amazon 
and Google make their digital assistants 
available on a wider array of products. If these 
prove popular, you’ll soon be able to order 
around much more of your house, including 
kitchen appliances, washing machines and 
other devices.
NEW TECH 
GADGETS ARE 
FOLLOWING 
THE SOUND OF  
YOUR VOICE
75

CES is expected to draw more than 170,000 
people, as some 4,000 exhibitors showcase 
their wares over the equivalent of nearly 50 
football fields, or more than 11 New York city 
blocks. The show formally opened Tuesday.
While major tech companies such as 
Apple and Google typically don’t make big 
announcements at CES, their technologies 
will be powering products and services 
from startups and other small companies. 
Expect more gadgets using Google’s Android 
operating software and Google’s digital 
assistant, for instance, and products that work 
with Apple’s HomeKit, a smart-home system 
getting a boost with the coming launch of 
Apple’s HomePod smart speaker.
Here’s what else to expect at CES.
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Computers that learn your preferences and 
anticipate your needs are no longer the stuff of 
science fiction. Consumers are seeing practical 
applications in voice-assisted speakers such 
as the Amazon Echo and Google Home. These 
systems will get more useful as manufacturers 
design new ways to control their products with 
voice commands.
You might also see hints of where AI is 
heading. Steve Koenig, senior director of 
market research at CES organizer Consumer 
Technology Association, says that as more 
people use these AI systems, companies have 
more data to better train the machines.
Auto makers will also demonstrate self-driving 
vehicles propelled by AI. CES is increasing  
the space for self-driving technologies by  
76

77

more than a third this year. Startups are 
expected to unveil earphones that promise 
real-time translations of conversations in 
different languages, much as Google’s Pixel 
Buds now do, but only for Google’s Pixel 
phones. There are also conference sessions 
devoted to high-tech retailing, including the 
importance of collecting and analyzing  
data on customers.
SMART EVERYTHING
Cars, lights, washing machines and other 
everyday items are getting internet 
connections. That could mean checking what’s 
left in your fridge from the grocery store, for 
instance. Expect more appliances and tasks for 
them to do online.
As more devices get connected, there’s greater 
concern for security. We’ll likely see more 
products and services designed to protect these 
smart-home devices from hacking.
Beyond that, companies will showcase the 
potential of smartening up entire cities so 
that maintenance crews can remotely detect 
roads needing repairs, and motorists can view 
and reserve parking spaces ahead of time. 
Better yet, how about traffic lights that aren’t 
set with timers, but reflect actual traffic and 
pedestrian flows?
For the first time, CES has an area devoted  
to smart cities, with more than 40 companies 
set to exhibit. The smart-cities concept has 
been making the rounds at several tech 
shows, but what remains unanswered is when 
it will actually begin happening — and who 
will pay for it.
78

79

80

CONSUMER GADGETS
CES is typically when Samsung, LG and other 
manufacturers announce their TV lineups for 
the year. In a bid to get consumers to upgrade 
sooner, higher-end models will come with fancy 
technologies going by such names as “4K,” “HDR” 
and “OLED.” Many sets will come with voice 
controls. They will sit alongside basic sets that 
work just fine for regular viewing.
Don’t expect new iPhones or flagship Galaxy 
models. Apple and Samsung typically announce 
those at their own events. But CES is the place 
for less-known and lower-cost Android phones, 
along with tablets, laptops and other personal 
computers, not to mention storage drives and 
other accessories.
There will also be virtual-reality and augmented-
reality technologies, some aimed at sports fans 
who want to feel they’re more part of the game.
And while a few companies like Apple and 
Fitbit are currently dominant in wearable 
devices, many startups are eager to challenge 
them with new approaches for tracking fitness 
and medical issues.
There should also be no shortage of flying 
drones overhead and scurrying robots 
underfoot. There will even be a robot that folds 
your laundry — though at a snail’s pace of one 
shirt every two minutes.
81

82

Image: Walden Kirsch
BEHIND THE SCENES
Although CES is about consumer electronics, 
consumers will never see many of the 
technologies on display. Network-equipment 
makers, for instance, might use the show to 
display technologies for next-generation 5G 
wireless networks, which promise to be much 
faster than the existing 4G LTE. Phones that can 
take advantage of 5G won’t be around for a few 
more years.
Gary Shapiro, the head of the Consumer 
Technology Association, said that given the 
changing nature of technology, about a third of 
CES is now about back-end business deals rather 
than direct-to-consumer products.
“Twenty years ago, people bought products sold 
at retail stores in very defined categories,” he 
said. “Now every company and business defines 
itself as a tech company.”
83

84

With new options and conveniences, there’s 
never been a better time for shoppers. As for 
workers ... well, not always.
The retail industry is being radically reshaped by 
technology, and nobody feels that disruption 
more starkly than 16 million American shelf 
stockers, salespeople, cashiers and others. 
The shifts are driven, like much in retail, by 
the Amazon effect — the explosion of online 
shopping and the related changes in consumer 
behavior and preferences.
As mundane tasks like checkout and inventory 
are automated, employees are trying to  
deliver the kind of customer service the 
internet can’t match.
RETAIL WORKERS 
FEEL DISRUPTION 
FROM SHIFTING 
SHOPPER HABITS
85

So a Best Buy employee who used to sell 
electronics in the store is dispatched to 
customers’ homes to help them choose just 
the right products. A Walmart worker dashes 
in and out of the grocery aisles, hand-picks 
products for online shoppers and brings them 
to people’s cars.
Yet even as responsibilities change — and in 
many cases, expand — the average growth in 
pay for retail workers isn’t keeping pace with the 
rest of the economy. Some companies say that 
in the long run the transformation could mean 
fewer retail workers, though they may be better 
paid. But while some workers feel more satisfied, 
others find their jobs are just a lot less fun.
Bloomingdale’s saleswoman Brenda Moses 
remembers the pre-internet era, when 
the upscale store was regularly filled 
with customers ready to buy. These days, 
department stores are less crowded and the 
customers who do come in can make price 
comparisons on their phones at the same time 
as they pepper staff with questions.
“You tell them everything, and then they look at 
you and say, ‘You know what? I think I will get it 
online,’” she said.
Moses has seen her commission rate rise to  
6 percent from a half a percent, but her  
hourly wage dropped from $19 as low as $10 
before it came back up to $14. Depending 
more on commissions means her income 
fluctuates, and she’s competing with her 
colleagues for each sale.
“Now,” Moses said, “you have to fight to make 
your money.”
86

87

88

The same could be said for the retailing 
industry, overall. In 2017, 66,500 U.S. retail 
jobs disappeared (not taking into account 
jobs added in areas like distribution and 
call centers). In the past decade, about one 
out of every seven jobs have vanished in 
the hardest-hit sectors like clothing and 
consumer electronics, says Frank Badillo, 
director of research at MacroSavvy LLC. Though 
department stores have suffered the most, 
smaller businesses also have struggled to 
compete with online sellers.
Many of the survivors are rushing to adapt. 
Of the retail jobs that remain, over the next 
decade as many as 60 percent will either be 
new kinds of roles or will involve revised duties, 
says Craig Rowley, senior client partner at Korn 
Ferry Hay Group, a human resources advisory 
firm. He estimates the number is about 10 
percent now.
How fast retail jobs will change and what 
they’ll look like depends on three factors, 
Rowley said: the pace at which online shopping 
advances; the speed at which robotics and 
other technology progress; and shifts in the 
minimum hourly pay.
“Jobs for workers will get more interesting and 
be more impactful on the company’s business,” 
Rowley said. “But the negative side is that there 
will be fewer entry-level jobs and there will be 
more pressure to perform.”
Some retail workers at the vanguard of  
the changes — like Laila Ummelaila, a  
personal grocery shopper at a Walmart in  
Old Bridge, New Jersey — speak glowingly  
of their new responsibilities.
89

Walmart, the nation’s largest private employer, 
has scrutinized every job in its stores as it looks 
to leverage its more than 4,000 U.S. locations 
against Amazon’s internet dominance.
The company now has 18,000 personal shoppers 
who fill online orders from store shelves, and 
17,000 check-out hosts whose responsibilities 
are more extensive than the greeters of old, 
including keeping the area clean and making 
sure registers move efficiently. The company 
has also shifted workers from back-room clerical 
jobs and eliminated some overnight stocker 
positions in favor of more daytime sales help. 
The customers like the changes, company 
officials say, pointing to more than three years 
of sales growth at its established U.S. stores — a 
contrast with other, suffering retailers.
Ummelaila became a personal shopper after 
joining the company three years ago. To meet 
her store’s goals, she must pick one item per 30 
seconds. If she can’t find something, she has to 
quickly get a substitute that’s as good or better.
“You start to get to know the customers, you 
know what they like,” she said, “how they like 
their meat ... and how long they keep milk in 
the fridge.”
Best Buy, meanwhile, has begun a free service 
in key markets where salespeople will sit with 
customers in their own homes and make 
recommendations on setting up a home office 
to designing a home theater system. Best Buy 
said shoppers spend more with a home visit 
than they do at the stores. The project follows 
Amazon, which reportedly has been testing a 
program that sends employees to shoppers’ 
houses for free “smart home” recommendations.
90

91

At Steve Frederick’s townhouse in Chicago,  
Billy Schuler offered advice about speakers  
that can be adjusted from a smartphone. 
Schuler, who had previously worked at Best 
Buy for 14 years, returned to the company to 
take on the new role.
“Customers are more relaxed when they are in 
their home,” he said. “We can do a walkthrough 
of the house and see their needs.” He likes 
to “break the ice” by calling the person and 
chatting a day or two before the visit.
Frederick, who’s spending close to $20,000  
on the equipment, describes himself as “old-
school” and says he needed a lot of help. He 
thinks it was worthwhile.
“When you are spending that kind of money, 
you want to have someone come in and 
explain it,” he said.
Schuler declined to give specifics but says he 
is well compensated. Ummelaila says her pay 
went up to nearly $12 per hour from $10 when 
she became a personal shopper.
Target credits its strategy of assigning 
dedicated sales staff in areas such as  
clothing, consumer electronics, and beauty  
for helping increase sales, and says having 
visual merchandisers create vignettes like 
shoppers would see in specialty stores  
inspires people to buy. “You are making an 
outfit and telling a story on each rack,” says 
Crystal Lawrence, who works at a Target  
store in Brooklyn, New York. She likes the 
variety in her new job, and Target says it 
plans to keep paying higher wages for those 
specialized roles.
92

93

But a survey of nearly 300 retail workers — 
conducted by the Center for Frontline Retail and 
Community Development Project at the Urban 
Justice Center — found that of those workers 
whose job responsibilities have changed, more 
than 40 percent said they hadn’t received pay 
increases to reflect that.
Wages for hourly retail workers have risen less 
than 9 percent since 1990, compared with 18 
percent for overall workers in the private sector. 
There has been some progress recently; some 
of the biggest retailers, like Walmart and Target, 
have made moves to increase pay in the face of 
low unemployment and competition for workers.
“For a long period, these retail jobs were just 
terrible on average,” said Michael Mandel, chief 
economic strategist at the Progressive Policy 
Institute. “Retail stores have been following one 
strategy: high turnover, low wages. That strategy 
is no longer viable.”
Mandel sees hope in technology, which he says 
has historically created more and better-paying 
jobs than it has eliminated.
The National Retail Federation trade group 
points to government data showing that even in 
large supermarket chains where self-checkout 
has become standard, the number of employees 
per store has held steady over the 15 years 
through 2014. And the demand for grocery 
cashiers increased in the past few years, says 
Burning Glass Technologies, a company that 
analyzes labor market data.
McDonald’s says the self-serve kiosks it has 
been rolling out won’t result in mass layoffs, 
but will mean that some cashiers shift roles to 
accommodate changes like offering table service.
94

95

96

But a report prepared by Cornerstone Capital 
Group for the Investor Responsibility Research 
Center Institute predicts that more than 7.5 
million retail jobs are at risk of being eliminated 
by automation over the next several years.
Amazon is testing a grocery store in Seattle 
without cashiers, using cameras and shelf 
sensors to keep track of the items that shoppers 
grab and charge them. Eatsa, an automat-style 
restaurant in San Francisco, lacks cashiers as well 
— diners order at kiosks and workers prepare 
the food behind an opaque wall, with virtually 
no interaction between them.
Labor groups are trying to address some of 
the new issues. Under a contract reached last 
May between Bloomingdale’s and the Retail, 
Wholesale and Department Store Union, Moses 
and other members who work at the flagship 
store in Manhattan can also get commissions 
from some online sales.
And a labor group representing 1.3 million 
grocery and food workers is trying to combat 
automation by highlighting that workers’ 
specialized skills — like the care they take in 
icing a rose on a wedding cake, or arranging 
flowers, or the ability of human workers 
 to recognize spoiled food — provide a  
benefit to shoppers.
“Separating progress for the consumer, 
for the worker, for the economy versus the 
stockholders ... those are completely different 
things,” says Erikka Knuti, a spokeswoman for 
the United Food and Commercial Workers 
International Union.
Others say automation and happy workers are 
not necessarily incompatible.
97

Image: Mackenzie Stroh
Walmart’s CEO Doug McMillon foresees fewer 
sales associates at his stores, but they’ll be better 
paid and better trained. Walmart has trained 
225,000 supervisors and managers on topics 
like new apps and better customer service. It 
says managers who go through the academies 
have better retention rates than those who do 
not. Workers who report to those managers stay 
longer. And entry-level workers who complete a 
new training program are more likely to remain.
It’s a shift retailers may have to speed up. 
Government figures show the rate of retail 
workers quitting their jobs in 2016 was at its 
highest since 2007.
Alfredo Duran, who started as a sales associate 
at Gap and worked at six retailers over 15 years, 
left the industry two years ago. As a manager at 
clothing chain Mango, he was making $75,000 
a year. But once the store closed, he had trouble 
finding another job in retail because no one 
wanted to pay him for his experience.
“It’s gone down. One person is doing three 
jobs. And you can’t move up,” said Duran, 38, of 
Queens, New York.
He’s now a concierge at a Manhattan hotel, 
making half of what he used to earn — but 
happy he left retail.
98

99

100

SpaceX defended its rocket performance during 
the weekend launch of a secret U.S. satellite, 
responding Tuesday to media reports that the 
satellite codenamed Zuma was lost.
Company President Gwynne Shotwell said 
the Falcon 9 rocket “did everything correctly” 
Sunday night and suggestions otherwise are 
“categorically false.”
Northrop Grumman — which provided the 
satellite for an undisclosed U.S. government 
entity — said it cannot comment on classified 
missions. The company chose SpaceX as the 
launch provider, noting late last year that it took 
“great care to ensure the most affordable and 
lowest risk scenario for Zuma.” The name refers 
to a Malibu beach in Southern California.
This was SpaceX’ s third classified mission for 
the U.S. government, a lucrative customer. It 
was so shrouded in secrecy that the sponsoring 
government agency was not even identified, as 
is usually the case.
SPACEX SAYS 
ROCKET 
PERFORMANCE 
OK IN SECRET 
SATELLITE LAUNCH
101

The Falcon’s first stage completed its job, lifting 
the rocket off the pad and toward space, then 
separated and landed back at Cape Canaveral. 
But second-stage information was kept to a 
minimum because of all the secrecy surrounding 
the flight. The rocket’s second stage propels the 
satellite into orbit.
The Wall Street Journal quotes unidentified 
congressional officials who were briefed on the 
mission as saying the satellite apparently did not 
separate from the second stage, and plunged 
through the atmosphere and burned up.
Originally scheduled for a November launch, 
Zuma was delayed by potential concern about 
another mission’s payload fairing, the shell on 
top that protects a satellite during launch. The 
company later said it had cleared the issue.
Shotwell said in a statement that since no rocket 
changes are warranted for upcoming flights, the 
company’s launch schedule remains on track. If 
additional reviews uncover any problems, she 
said, “we will report it immediately.”
Last year was a banner year for the private space 
company with 18 launches. It’s shooting for even 
more flights in 2018.
SpaceX’s new, powerful rocket, the Falcon Heavy, 
was at its launch pad at NASA’s Kennedy Space 
Center on Tuesday, awaiting an engine test-
firing sometime this week. The California-based 
company aims to launch the Heavy by month’s 
end, making its debut with chief executive Elon 
Musk’s own personal Tesla Roadster on board. 
Another Falcon 9, meanwhile, is scheduled to fly 
in three weeks with a communication satellite 
for Luxembourg.
102

103

104

U.S. telecoms carrier AT&T has dropped plans 
to sell Chinese brand Huawei’s smartphones 
in the United States, dealing a setback to the 
No. 3 global phone maker’s expansion plans, 
according to news reports.
The Wall Street Journal, which reported the 
development Tuesday, gave no reason for AT&T 
Inc.’s decision. The South China Morning Post 
of Hong Kong said Huawei Technologies Ltd.’s 
vice president for consumer business, Richard 
Yu, confirmed the move in a text message 
to the newspaper and wrote, “We have been 
harmed again.”
A Huawei spokesman declined to comment.
Yu told in December the company would 
announce smartphone sales through a U.S. 
AT&T DROPS PLAN 
TO SELL HUAWEI 
SMARTPHONE 
IN US
105

carrier this week. Huawei sells some models 
in U.S. electronics stores and online but has a 
minimal share of an American market in which 
most sales are through carriers.
Ahead of the planned announcement, Huawei 
had issued a statement that said, “Over the past 
five years Huawei has proven itself by delivering 
premium devices with integrity globally and 
in the U.S. market. This week Huawei will 
introduce new products to the U.S. market, 
including availability.”
Huawei, the world’s biggest maker of network 
gear used by phone companies, suffered a 
setback in the U.S. market when a congressional 
report in October 2013 said it was a security 
risk and warned telecom carriers not to use 
its equipment.
Globally, the company’s handset business trails 
Samsung and Apple by shipments. But it leads in 
China, the biggest market, and says it expects to 
ship a total of 150 million units this year.
Huawei’s shipments rose 16.1 percent in the 
latest quarter over a year earlier to 39.1 million 
handsets, ahead of Apple’s 2.6 percent growth to 
sales of 46.7 million, according to IDC. Samsung 
sales expanded 9.5 percent to 83.3 million units.
In his comments in December, Yu rejected the 
U.S. security complaints as politically motivated 
or possibly an attempt by competitors to keep it 
out of the market.
“They are lying,” said Yu. “We are a company 
that really cares about cybersecurity and 
privacy protection. We do a lot better than the 
other vendors.
106

107

#01 – Rules of Survival
By NetEase Games
Category: Games / Free
Requires iOS 7.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#02 – YouTube
By Google, Inc.
Category: Photo & Video / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#03 – Snapchat
By Snap, Inc.
Category: Photo & Video / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#04 – Messenger
By Facebook, Inc.
Category: Social Networking / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#05 – Dune!
By Voodoo
Category: Games / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#06 – Instagram
By Instagram, Inc.
Category: Photo & Video / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#07 – Facebook
By Facebook, Inc.
Category: Social Networking / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#08 – Words With Friends 2-Word Game
By Zynga Inc.
Category: Games / Free
Requires iOS 10.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#10 – Netflix
By Netflix, Inc.
Category: Entertainment / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#09 – Bitmoji - Your Personal Emoji
By Bitstrips
Category: Utilities / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
108

#01 – GarageBand
By Apple
Category: Music / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later
#02 – WhatsApp Desktop
By WhatsApp Inc.
Category: Social Networking / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.9.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#04 – 1Doc: Word Processor for Writer
ByChengyu Huang
Category: Business / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#03 – Open Any File
By Rocky Sand Studio Ltd.
Category: Utilities / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#05 – PDF Reader Pro Free
By PDF Technologies, Inc.
Category: Business / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.8 or later, 64-bit processor
#09 – The Unarchiver
By Dag Agren
Category: Utilities / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.6.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#06– OneDrive
By Microsoft Corporation
Category: Productivity / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.9.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#08 – Kindle
By AMZN Mobile LLC
Category:  Reference / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.9 or later
#10 – Xcode
By Apple
Category: Developer Tools / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.11.5 or later
#07– Microsoft OneNote
By Microsoft Corporation
Category: Productivity / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
109

#01 – Heads Up!
By Warner Bros.
Category: Games / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#02 – Minecraft
By Mojang
Category: Games / Price: $6.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#03 – kirakira+
By Kentaro Yama
Category: Photo & Video / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#04 – Plague Inc
By Ndemic Creations
Category: Games / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 6.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#05 – Bloons TD 5
By Ninja Kiwi
Category: Games / Price: $2.99
Requires iOS 6.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#06 – NBA 2K18
By 2K
Category: Games / Price: $7.99
Requires iOS 9.0 or later.
#07 – The Game of Life
By Marmalade Game Studio
Category: Games / Price: $2.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#08 – Facetune
By Lightricks Ltd.
Category: Photo & Video / Price: $3.99
Requires iOS 7.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#10 – Geometry Dash
By RobTop Games AB
Category: Games / Price: $1.99
Requires iOS 5.1.1 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#09 – MONOPOLY Game
By Electronic Arts
Category: Games / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 8.1 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
110

#01 – The Sims™ 2: Super Collection
By Aspyr Media, Inc.
Category: Games / Price: $39.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.9.2 or later
#07 – Mirror for Samsung TV
By AirBeamTV BV
Category: Video / Price: $13.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#08 – Home Design 3D
By Anuman
Category: Graphics & Design / Price: $8.49
Compatibility: OS X 10.8 or later, 64-bit processor
#09 – PomTimer
By Bech LLC
Category: Productivity / Price: $1.39
Compatibility: OS X 10.9 or later, 64-bit processor
#02 – Magnet
By CrowdCafé
Category: Productivity / Price: $1.39
Compatibility: OS X 10.9 or later, 64-bit processor
#10 – Adobe Photoshop Elements 2018
By Adobe
Category: Photography / Price: $84.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#04 – Dr. Cleaner Pro
By Trend Micro, Incorporated
Category: Utilities / Price: $20.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#03 – Duplicate Photos Fixer Pro
By Systweak Software
Category: Photography / Price: $1.39
Compatibility: OS X 10.7 or later
#05 – Logic Pro X
By Apple
Category: Music / Price: $279.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#06 – RollerCoaster Tycoon 3 Platinum
By Aspyr Media, Inc.
Category: Games / Price: $20.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.8.5 or later
111

Movies
TV Shows
&
Trailer
112

Rotten Tomatoes
83%
by Geremy Jasper
Genre: Drama
Released: 2017
Price: $14.99
55 Ratings
Patti Cake$  
Tired of her life in her Jersey hometown, 
Patricia Dombrowski aka Patti Cake$ hopes 
to follow the footsteps of her idol and hit 
the road to achieve stardom as a rapper. 
With help from her best friend, a mysterious 
musician and her grandmother, Patti leads 
the charge against her army of haters, 
unpaid bills, and broken dreams that are 
holding her back.  
FIVE FACTS:
1. The movie’s writer and director Geremy 
Jasper wrote all of the featured rap lyrics. 
2. Initially, Patti was supposed to be from 
Lodi, New Jersey as a tribute to Glen Danzig/
The Misfits. 
3. Danielle Macdonald is Australian and 
therefore had to learn to master the New 
Jersey accent for her role. 
4. The film is also known as Patti Cake$ - 
Queen of Rap. 
5. This is Geremy Jasper’s first feature film.
 
113

114

“Parking Lot Rap”
115

Bushwick
The moment Lucy steps off the subway in the 
streets of Brooklyn’s Bushwick neighborhood, 
she walks into a bloodbath. Texas’ attempts 
to secede from the Union mean that militia 
forces have descended on New York City to 
claim it as its East Coast base of operations. 
Lucy must take refuge in Stupe’s basement, a 
burly war veteran who reluctantly agrees to 
help her reach her destination.  
FIVE FACTS:
1. Jane Levy was originally cast in the lead 
role before Brittany Snow replaced her. 
2. The movie was almost entirely shot in 
one, seemingly uncut camera take. However, 
at around the 72-minute mark, there is 
a cut inside to a helicopter, a cut below 
the character and then a cut back to the 
main characters. 
3. When Stupe and Lucy visit her sister, the 
film playing on the TV in the background is 
an early short film by the directors. 
4. At one point we hear the song “Dorks” 
by rapper Aesop Rock. He was the 
film’s composer. 
5. The tagline for the movie is “The New Civil 
War Has Begun.” 
 
by Cary Murnion & 
Jonathan Milott
Genre: Action & Adventure
Released: 2017
Price: $14.99
69 Ratings
Rotten Tomatoes
44%
116

Trailer
117

Trailer #2 (2017) 
Dave Bautista, Brittany Snow Thriller Movie HD
118

119

Music
Night Moves 8-26-2017 Moline
Genre: Rock 
Released: Nov 17, 2017
13 Songs
Price: $9.99
113 Ratings
120

I Knew You When 
(Deluxe) 
Bob Seger 
Despite his age, Seger is rocking as hard as 
ever on tracks like “Gracile” and “The Sea Inside” 
where he emerges with a gritty, soulful voice 
that demands your undivided attention. This 
album proves that he can transform any tune 
with his deep Detroit mojo, especially when he 
tackles the likes of Lou Reed’s “Busload of Faith” 
and Leonard Cohen’s “Democracy.” 
FIVE FACTS:
1. Seger co-wrote the Eagle’s number one 
hit “Heartache Tonight.” 
2. He contributed piano and vocals on Kid 
Rocks’ 2010 album Born Free. 
3. In 2001 and 2002, he won the prestigious 
Port Huron to Mackinac Boat Race. 
4. Seger is a big admirer of Leonard Cohen, 
Tom Waits, and Joni Mitchell. 
5. His work ethic became the stuff of 
legends after he played 260 dates in 1975.
121

122

Bob Seger Pittsburgh “Night Moves” Concert
123

Woodstock 
Portugal. The Man  
During a trip home to Alaska in 2016, 
frontman John Gourley stumbled on his 
dad’s $8 Woodstock festival ticket stub. This 
discovery sparked an infatuation with ‘60s 
pop culture and its politically charged music, 
ultimately spurring the band’s eighth album 
which is a thrilling package of experimental 
pop-rock. With production from Danger 
Mouse and Mike D, the album features 
energetic tracks like “Live in the Moment” and 
poignant lyrics in tracks like “Noise Pollution.” 
FIVE FACTS:
1. Breaking Bad’s Jesse Pinkman is a fan of 
the band and Aaron Paul, who plays Pinkman, 
can be seen dancing to the song on a 
treadmill in a Vitamin Water commercial. 
2. Their name is as random as it sounds. It’s 
based on the idea of David Bowie’s “bigger 
than life” fame. 
3. The band was originally started as 
Gourley’s side project to his first band 
Anatomy of a Ghost. 
4. Their song “Heavy Games” was featured 
on the trailer for the fourth season of The 
Walking Dead TV show. 
5. Both Mike D from The Beastie Boys and 
Mac Miller worked with them to record their 
eighth studio album.
124

“Live In The Moment”
Genre: Alternative
Released: Jun 15, 2017
10 Songs
Price: $7.99
293 Ratings
125

126

“Feel It Still”
127

“Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle” and “Insidious: 
The Last Key” knocked the reigning box office 
champ “Star Wars: The Last Jedi” to third place 
this weekend. “Jumanji,” in its third weekend in 
theaters, earned $37.2 million while the fourth 
film in the “Insidious” franchise launched with 
$29.6 million.
“The Last Jedi,” now in its fourth weekend in 
theaters, fell to third place with $23.7 million. 
The film has earned $572.7 million to date.
“The Greatest Showman” took fourth with $13.8 
million and “Pitch Perfect 3” landed in fifth with 
$10.3 million.
BOX OFFICE TOP 20:
‘JUMANJI’ KNOCKS 
‘STAR WARS’
TO NO. 3
128

129

The top 20 movies at U.S. and Canadian theaters 
Friday through Sunday, followed by distribution 
studio, gross, number of theater locations, 
average receipts per location, total gross and 
number of weeks in release, as compiled 
Monday by comScore:
1. 
“Jumanji: Welcome To The Jungle,” Sony, 
$37,233,653, 3,801 locations,  
$9,796 average, $245,606,319, 3 Weeks.
2. 
“Insidious: The Last Key,” Universal, 
$29,581,355, 3,116 locations,  
$9,493 average, $29,581,355, 1 Week.
3. 
“Star Wars: The Last Jedi,” Disney, 
$23,728,944, 4,232 locations,  
$5,607 average, $572,691,546, 4 Weeks.
4. 
“The Greatest Showman,” 20th Century 
Fox, $13,770,951, 3,342 locations, 
$4,121 average, $76,875,323, 3 Weeks.
5. 
“Pitch Perfect 3,” Universal, 
$10,298,345, 3,458 locations, 
$2,978 average, $86,055,435, 3 Weeks.
130

131

132

6. 
“Ferdinand,” 20th Century Fox, 
$7,697,773, 3,156 locations, $2,439 
average, $70,466,891, 4 Weeks.
7. 
“Molly’s Game,” STX Entertainment, 
$6,856,578, 1,608 locations,  
$4,264 average, $14,073,138, 2 Weeks.
8. 
“Darkest Hour,” Focus Features, 
$6,050,225, 1,733 locations,  
$3,491 average, $28,086,332, 7 Weeks.
9. 
“Coco,” Disney, $5,382,651, 
1,894 locations, $2,842 average, 
$191,925,612, 7 Weeks.
10. 
“All The Money In The World,” Sony, 
$3,571,226, 2,123 locations,  
$1,682 average, $20,153,135, 2 Weeks.
133

134

11. 
“The Shape Of Water,” Fox 
Searchlight, $3,139,084,  
804 locations, $3,904 average,  
$21,692,548, 6 Weeks.
12. 
“I, Tonya,” Neon Rated, $2,445,877, 
242 locations, $10,107 average, 
$5,419,569, 5 Weeks.
13. 
“Wonder,” Lionsgate, $2,381,646, 
1,258 locations, $1,893 average, 
$126,638,732, 8 Weeks.
14. 
“Downsizing,” Paramount, 
$2,202,311, 2,020 locations,  
$1,090 average, $22,932,429, 3 Weeks.
15. 
“The Post,” 20th Century Fox, 
$1,698,027, 36 locations,  
$47,167 average, $3,847,683, 3 Weeks.
135

16. 
“Lady Bird,” A24, $1,572,031, 
562 locations, $2,797 average, 
$34,128,122, 10 Weeks.
17. 
“Father Figures,” Warner Bros., 
$1,262,474, 1,717 locations,  
$735 average, $16,772,934, 3 Weeks.
18. 
“Call Me By Your Name,” Sony 
Pictures Classics, $747,129,  
117 locations, $6,386 average,  
$6,073,057, 7 Weeks.
19. 
“The Disaster Artist,” A24, $746,034, 
478 locations, $1,561 average, 
$19,431,782, 6 Weeks.
20. 
“Three Billboards Outside Ebbing 
Missouri,” Fox Searchlight, 
$705,188, 310 locations, $2,275 average, 
$25,392,902, 9 Weeks.
Universal and Focus are owned by NBC Universal, a unit of Comcast 
Corp.; Sony, Columbia, Sony Screen Gems and Sony Pictures Classics 
are units of Sony Corp.; Paramount is owned by Viacom Inc.; Disney, 
Pixar and Marvel are owned by The Walt Disney Co.; Miramax is owned 
by Filmyard Holdings LLC; 20th Century Fox and Fox Searchlight are 
owned by 21st Century Fox; Warner Bros. and New Line are units 
of Time Warner Inc.; MGM is owned by a group of former creditors 
including Highland Capital, Anchorage Advisors and Carl Icahn; 
Lionsgate is owned by Lions Gate Entertainment Corp.; IFC is owned by 
AMC Networks Inc.; Rogue is owned by Relativity Media LLC.
136

137

138

Kodak, which traces its roots to the early days 
of film-based photography, is getting into the 
digital licensing and cryptocurrency market as 
part of a partnership with WENN Digital.
The companies are launching blockchain 
technology with KodakOne and KodakCoin. 
Blockchain is a ledger where transactions of 
digital currencies, like bitcoin, are recorded.
Rochester, New York-based Kodak, founded 
in 1880, is the latest company to enter the 
cryptocurrency market as Bitcoin makes gains. 
Bitcoin has surged from less than $1,000 a year 
ago to more than $14,000.
KODAK SURGES AT  
IT BECOMES LATEST 
‘CRYPTOCURRENCY’
 CONVERT
139

Recently, Long Island Iced Tea Corp. said  
it plans to change its name to Long  
Blockchain Corp., as it wants to focus more on 
blockchain technology, while continuing to 
make beverages.
The Kodak systems will allow photographers 
to register work that they can license and then 
receive payment. The initial coin offering will 
open Jan. 31.
Shares of Eastman Kodak Co. more than doubled 
to close at $6.80 Tuesday. The stock has been 
slumping over the last year, shedding more than 
70 percent of its value.
“Engaging with a new platform, it is critical 
photographers know their work and their 
income is handled securely and with trust, which 
is exactly what we did with KodakCoin,” said CEO 
Jeff Clarke.
Kodak and others are entering the market as 
warnings grow over the riskiness of virtual 
currencies and the potential for a bubble. 
There are no regulations over the creation and 
use of virtual currencies and the nature of the 
transactions make them hard to trace.
140

141

142

Two long-sleeved shirts, a sweater, a fleece 
jacket, two scarves and two pairs of socks.
That has been Karen Ericson’s go-to outfit in her 
office in Des Moines, Iowa, in recent weeks.
“I am still shivering,” the 39-year-old graphic 
designer said last week, estimating the 
temperature in the office was in the mid-60s 
while outside, the city hit 19 below zero at one 
point. “Living in the Midwest, I’m well-trained to 
dress warmly and in layers, but this deep freeze 
has been difficult to endure, especially when 
I expect to be comfortable — or at least not 
shivering — inside.”
TAKE THIS JOB 
AND SHIVER IT: 
CHILLY OFFICES 
PLAGUE WORKERS
143

As much of the nation muddled through bitter 
weather in recent weeks, office dwellers found 
they still had to brave the cold even when 
indoors. Many relied on winter parkas, gloves, 
blankets and space heaters just to keep working.
“Today I’ve got two sweaters, a scarf, ear 
coverings, gloves and a blanket over my lap,” 
Rebecca Miller, a 27-year-old academic adviser 
at Tennessee State University in Nashville, said 
last week as temperatures barely ticked above 
50 degrees in her office while outside it was 20 
degrees or lower in the daytime. “But I’m still 
having a hard time working. I’m shaking cold, 
and it’s hard to focus. The gloves make it hard 
to type, and the bulky layers make it difficult to 
move around.”
Like thousands of other chilly Americans, she 
snapped selfies at her desk in attire usually 
reserved for the ski slopes and shared them on 
social media.
Office developments are built with centralized 
heating systems that make the buildings 
suitable for a range of uses over many years. 
The down side is that they provide little  
climate control to individual tenants — 
sometimes purposely, said Khee Poh Lam, 
architecture professor at Carnegie Mellon 
University in Pittsburgh.
Thermostats are often tucked into hard-to-reach 
spaces like false ceilings and air ducts so office 
tenants can’t mess with them, Lam said. Other 
buildings have dummy units out in the open 
that don’t actually do anything except give 
desperate workers the illusion of control.
Finding the right temperature to please 
everyone has been an elusive goal for office 
144

145

146

designers and builders, said Stefano Schiavon, 
architecture professor at the University of 
California, Berkeley, who co-wrote a 2012 study 
that found roughly 40 percent of U.S. workers 
were satisfied with their office’s temperature. 
Design standards call for an acceptability rate 
closer to 80 percent, he said.
The challenge isn’t just confined to the winter, 
of course. Chilly offices have long been the 
bane of women who complain air conditioning 
is cranked up in the summer to appease their 
male, suit-wearing counterparts. And there are 
certainly many offices with overzealous furnaces 
that prompt workers to crack open windows 
even on the coldest days.
Optimal temperature for office work is 72 to 79 
degrees — or nearly 10 degrees more than what 
many buildings typically set their thermostats, 
said Alan Hedge, a design professor at Cornell 
University in New York who has researched how 
temperature affects productivity.
Schiavon suggested that companies, even those 
based in the draftiest old offices, can invest in 
safe, relatively inexpensive technology to keep 
workers warm and productive, like heated 
chairs, electric blankets and heated floor mats.
“The bottom line is that central heating won’t 
work for everyone, even if designed right,” he 
said. “We’re very different people and need some 
sort of personalization of our environment.”
Ericson, the Iowa resident, said the key to 
getting through the work day has been 
reminding herself the cold is only temporary.
“Every day that passes,” she said, “is a day  
closer to spring.”
147

148

A plush, robotic duck may soon become a 
fixture in the world of children who have cancer 
— a social robot that can be silly, happy, angry, 
scared or sick just like them, and help them cope 
creatively with their illness through the power 
of play.
The duck, developed by robotics expert Aaron 
Horowitz and his company, is undergoing 
testing and is expected to be widely distributed 
by the end of this year.
Horowitz said he was diagnosed as a child 
with human growth development deficiency 
and had to give himself daily injections for five 
years. The experience, he said, made him want 
to help other children with illnesses, which led 
to his co-founding of the Rhode Island-based 
company Sproutel with a partner he met at 
Northwestern University.
ROBOT DUCK’S 
AIM: HELPS KIDS 
WITH CANCER VIA 
POWER OF PLAY
149

Health care facilities from children’s hospitals to 
nursing homes have been experimenting for 
more than a decade with the use of robots for 
social companionship and emotional health. 
Some devices look like quintessential robots; 
others are designed as cute animal toys, such 
as the duck and Paro, a baby seal developed by 
Japanese researchers to lessen a person’s stress 
in the same way a real pet might. The machines’ 
technological sophistication varies, but they have 
similar aims: improving patients’ psychological 
well-being, reminding them of health-related 
tasks or teaching them about health goals.
Horowitz said the first social robot his company 
launched was Jerry the Bear, an interactive 
companion for kids with diabetes. Children take 
care of Jerry by feeding him, giving him insulin 
and monitoring his blood glucose levels. They 
also unlock a modular diabetes curriculum 
geared toward kids.
“Out of this came the idea of, ‘Why can’t we do it 
for other types of kids?’” Horowitz said.
They turned to kids with cancer — in the U.S., 
almost 11,000 get such a diagnosis yearly, 
according to the American Cancer Society.
The robot duck is modeled after the mascot 
for the insurance company Aflac, which paid 
for its development and is branding the duck 
with its name. Aflac spokesman Jon Sullivan 
said the ducks — plush on the outside with 
sophisticated robotics hidden beneath a 
washable cover — will be given free to children 
diagnosed with cancer in the U.S. The duck is 
expected to be featured Monday at the CES 
gadget show in Las Vegas. Sullivan said the 
company intends to continue covering costs of 
150

151

152

the duck for kids, with no plans for hospitals or 
insurers to pay for them — unlike Jerry the Bear, 
which can be purchased directly online.
Aflac and Horowitz said they make no claims the 
duck has medicinal value — instead, they want 
the ducks to provide comfort, help them cope 
with treatment, and distract them from what 
they’re going through.
The duck can make the soothing sounds of a 
beach or rainforest and quack tunes. It also does 
deep-breathing exercises the child can mimic 
to relax. It has an attachable tube to emulate 
chemotherapy injections.
Kelli Daniels of Alpharetta, Georgia, said her 
12-year-old son, Ethan, has B-cell lymphoblastic 
lymphoma and must undergo at least three 
more years of treatment. When he was recently 
introduced to the duck, his eyes widened. 
“Awesome,” he said.
He put on the various attachments that help direct 
the robot and was impressed by how it could 
sound as if it was in pain. Ethan seemed to connect 
with the duck’s breathing exercises: He closed his 
eyes as if in meditation, breathing along.
His mom said that once Ethan receives his own 
duck, it could help for years.
“It’s a way for Ethan to express himself without 
actually having to say it, because you don’t want 
to always say ‘I hurt,’” Kelli Daniels said. “He feels 
like he hurts all the time.”
Sonia Chernova, an assistant robotics professor 
at Georgia Tech in Atlanta, said social robots can 
provide unique support as a child goes through 
the physical and emotional stress of cancer 
treatments. A study by MIT researchers who 
153

created an interactive robotic teddy bear found 
that children at a pediatric hospital physically and 
verbally engaged with it more than they did with 
a virtual character on a screen or a traditional toy.
“Children interact with robots in a different way 
than adults,” Chernova said. “For a kid, a robot 
can be a peer; it is not an adult authority figure.”
Chernova hasn’t seen the duck for children with 
cancer, and she notes that social robotics is in 
its infancy. But she cited success with social 
robots in the education world, and with some in 
research with autistic children and adults.
“Social robots are not meant to replace your social 
support network or your social interaction with 
others, but they are there to also help,” she said.
154

155

Image: Sam Bloxham
156

Formula E signed a title sponsorship worth 
more than $100 million with Swiss technology 
company ABB on Tuesday.
The seven-year contract through 2025 for 
the electric-powered motorsport series was 
announced in London.
The ABB sponsorship “is a strong sign and proof 
of the attractiveness of this championship, 
which is still in its infancy,” Jean Todt, president 
of motorsport governing body FIA, said.
The four-year-old electric series is trying 
to grab attention in a sport dominated by 
the long-standing petrol-based Formula 
One championship.
Although the cars are quieter compared to 
the ear-splitting, fuel-guzzling engines in F1, 
Formula E touts its environmentally friendly 
qualities and accessibility to fans.
Fans can walk to watch Formula E street races 
in Berlin, Buenos Aires, Hong Kong, Mexico City, 
Paris, and New York.
FORMULA E 
SECURES $100 
MILLION-PLUS TITLE 
SPONSORSHIP
157

158

FINESSE (REMIX) [FEAT. CARDI B] - SINGLE
Bruno Mars
FILTHY
Justin tiMBerlake
PERFECT
ed sheeran
MEANT TO BE
 (FEAT. FLORIDA GEORGIA LINE)
BeBe rexha
HAVANA (FEAT. YOUNG THUG)
CaMila CaBello
THUNDER
iMagine dragons
ROCKSTAR (FEAT. 21 SAVAGE) 
Post Malone
THIS IS ME
keala settle & the greatest showMan enseMBle
MARRY ME
thoMas rhett
FOR YOU (FROM “FIFTY SHADES FREED”)
liaM Payne & rita ora
159

160

THE GREATEST SHOWMAN
(ORIGINAL MOTION PICTURE SOUNDTRACK)
Various artists
LIFE OF A DARK ROSE
lil skies
REVIVAL
eMineM
BEAUTIFUL TRAUMA
P!nk
÷ (DELUXE)
ed sheeran
EVOLVE
iMagine dragons
REPUTATION
taylor swift
DAMN.
kendriCk laMar
FROM A ROOM: VOLUME 2
Chris staPleton
PITCH PERFECT 3
(ORIGINAL MOTION PICTURE SOUNDTRACK)
Various artists
161

162

PERFECT SYMPHONY
 (WITH ANDREA BOCELLI)
ed sheeran
FINESSE (REMIX) [FEAT. CARDI B]
Bruno Mars
MIC DROP (STEVE AOKI REMIX)
Bts
FILTHY
Justin tiMBerlake
NO LIMIT REMIX (FEAT. A$AP ROCKY,
CARDI B, FRENCH MONTANA, JUICY J &
BELLY) [OFFICIAL VIDEO]
g-eazy
PERFECT
ed sheeran
HAVANA (FEAT. YOUNG THUG)
CaMila CaBello
SHE FOR KEEPS
Quality Control, QuaVo & niCki MinaJ
DESPACITO (FEAT. DADDY YANKEE) 
luis fonsi
MARRY ME
thoMas rhett
163

164

LIGHTS OUT!
the real housewiVes of BeVerly hills, season 8
SEX, LIES AND AUDIOTAPE
VanderPuMP rules, season 6
2202
the BaChelor, season 22
THE FIFTH WHEEL
this is us, season 2
MY MOTHER’S KEEPER
keePing uP with the kardashians, season 14
ISLANDS PART ONE
the good doCtor, season 1
THE POWER OF THREE
the Challenge: Vendettas
DIGGIN’ UP DIRT
lethal weaPon, season 2
MITYA
MadaM seCretary, season 4
DESPERATE MEASURES
the BraVe, season 1
165

166

FIRE AND FURY
MiChael wolff
OPERATOR DOWN
Brad taylor
THE WOMAN IN THE WINDOW
a. J. finn
THE WIFE BETWEEN US
greer hendriCks & sarah Pekkanen
SINGLE STATE OF MIND
andi dorfMan
LITTLE FIRES EVERYWHERE
Celeste ng
SEDUCING HER BROTHER’S BEST FRIEND
noelle adaMs
DARKER
e l JaMes
BLOOD FURY
J.r. ward
THE SUBTLE ART OF NOT GIVING A F*CK
Mark Manson
167

168

With three strong hurricanes, wildfires, hail, 
flooding, tornadoes and drought, the United 
States tallied a record high bill last year for 
weather disasters: $306 billion.
The U.S. had 16 disasters last year with damage 
exceeding a billion dollars, the National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration said this 
week. That ties 2011 for the number of billion-
dollar disasters, but the total cost blew past the 
previous record of $215 billion in 2005.
Costs are adjusted for inflation and NOAA 
keeps track of billion-dollar weather disasters 
going back to 1980.
$306 BILLION:
US HITS RECORD 
FOR COSTLY 
WEATHER 
DISASTERS
169

Three of the five most expensive hurricanes in 
U.S. history hit last year.
Hurricane Harvey, which caused massive 
flooding in Texas, cost $125 billion, second only 
to 2005’s Katrina, while Maria’s damage in Puerto 
Rico cost $90 billion, ranking third, NOAA said. 
Irma was $50 billion, mainly in Florida, for the 
fifth most expensive hurricane.
Western wildfires fanned by heat racked up  
$18 billion in damage, triple the U.S. wildfire 
record, according to NOAA.
Besides Texas, Florida and Puerto Rico, California, 
Colorado, Minnesota, Nebraska, Missouri, Illinois, 
Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Tennessee and 
North Carolina all had more than $1 billion in 
damage from the 16 weather disasters in 2017.
“While we have to be careful about knee-
jerk cause-effect discussions, (many scientific 
studies) show that some of today’s extremes 
have climate change fingerprints on them,” said 
University of Georgia meteorology professor 
Marshall Shepherd, a past president of the 
American Meteorological Society.
NOAA announced its figures at the society’s 
annual conference in Austin, Texas.
The U.S. averages six of the billion-dollar 
weather disasters each year, costing a bit more 
than $40 billion annually.
The increase in billion-dollar weather disasters is 
likely a combination of more flooding, heat and 
storm surge from climate change along with 
other non-climate changes, such as  
where buildings are put, where people move 
and how valuable their property is, said Deke 
Arndt, NOAA’s climate monitoring chief.
170

171

172

Image: Jae C. Hong
“Perhaps it is time to mandate urban 
development in a more resilient and sustainable 
manner given the increasing frequency of 
weather extremes, especially along the nation’s 
coasts,” Susan Cutter,  
director of the University of South Carolina’s 
Hazards and Vulnerability Research Institute, 
said in an email.
The weather agency also said that 2017 was  
the third hottest year in U.S. records for the 
Lower 48 states with an annual temperature 
of 54.6 degrees (12.6 degrees Celsius) — 2.6 
degrees warmer than the 20th century average. 
Only 2012 and 2016 were warmer. The five 
warmest years for the Lower 48 states have all 
happened since 2006.
Arndt said the U.S. — which has had above 
normal annual temperatures for 21 straight 
years — is showing the same warming effects 
as the rest of the world. The burning of coal, oil 
and gas emits heat-trapping gases that change 
Earth’s climate.
This was the third straight year that all  
50 states had above average temperatures  
for the year.
Five states — Arizona, Georgia, North Carolina, 
South Carolina and New Mexico — had their 
warmest year ever.
Temperature records go back to 1895.
173

174

Malaysia’s government said that it has approved 
a new attempt by a private company to find the 
wreckage of Malaysia Airlines Flight 370, nearly 
four years after its disappearance sparked one of 
aviation’s biggest mysteries.
The Houston, Texas-based company Ocean 
Infinity dispatched a search vessel this past week 
to look in the southern Indian Ocean for debris 
from the plane, which disappeared March 8, 
2014, on a flight from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing 
with 227 passengers and 12 crew members.
The governments of Malaysia, China and 
Australia called off the nearly three-year official 
search last January. The Australian Transport 
Safety Bureau’s final report on the search 
conceded that authorities were no closer to 
knowing the reasons for the Boeing 777′s 
disappearance, or its exact location.
MALAYSIA OKS 
NEW SEARCH 
BY PRIVATE 
COMPANY FOR 
MISSING PLANE
175

“The basis of the offer from Ocean Infinity is 
based on ‘no cure, no fee,’” Malaysian Transport 
Minister Liow Tiong Lai said, meaning that 
payment will be made only if the company finds 
the wreckage.
“That means they are willing to search the 
area of 25,000 square kilometers (9,653 square 
miles) pointed out by the expert group near the 
Australian waters,” he said.
However, he said, “I don’t want to give too 
much hope ... to the (next of kin).” He said his 
government was committed to continuing with 
the search.
He did not offer other details.
Ocean Infinity said in a statement that the search 
vessel Seabed Constructor, which left the South 
African port of Durban, was taking advantage of 
favorable weather to move toward “the vicinity 
of the possible search zone.”
In the initial search for the plane, a 52-day 
surface search covered an area of several million 
square kilometers (square miles) in the Indian 
Ocean west of Australia, before an underwater 
search mapped 710,000 square kilometers 
(274,000 square miles) of seabed at depths of 
up to 6,000 meters (20,000 feet). They were the 
largest aviation searches of their kind in history, 
according to the Australian Transport Safety 
Bureau (ATSB).
Despite other methods such as studying satellite 
imagery and investigating ocean drifts after 
debris from the plane washed ashore on islands 
in the eastern Indian Ocean and the east coast 
of Africa, the 1,046-day search was called off on 
Jan. 17, 2017.
176

177

178

However, the ATSB’s report said the 
understanding of where the plane may be is 
“better now than it has ever been,” partly as a 
result of studying debris that washed ashore in 
2015 and 2016 that showed the plane was “not 
configured for a ditching at the end-of-flight,” 
meaning it had run out of fuel.
The search team also looked back at satellite 
imagery that showed objects in the ocean that 
may have been MH370 debris. The report said 
this analysis complemented work detailed in 
a 2016 review and identified an area of less 
than 25,000 square kilometers (9,650 square 
miles) — roughly the size of the U.S. state of 
Vermont — that “has the highest likelihood of 
containing MH370.”
The search was extremely difficult because no 
transmissions were received from the aircraft 
after its first 38 minutes of flight. Systems 
designed to automatically transmit the flight’s 
position failed to work after this point, the 
report said.
Online:
https://oceaninfinity.com/
179

180

French authorities have opened an investigation 
into Apple over revelations it secretly slowed 
down older versions of its handsets, the Paris 
prosecutor’s office said Tuesday.
The preliminary probe was opened last 
week over alleged “deception and planned 
obsolescence” of some Apple products, the 
office said. It is led by the French body in 
charge of fraud control, which is part of the 
finance ministry.
It follows a legal complaint filed in December 
by a French consumer rights group whose 
aim is to stop the intentional obsolescence of 
goods by companies.
FRANCE 
INVESTIGATES 
APPLE FOR 
SLOWING DOWN 
OLD iPHONES
181

In France it is illegal to intentionally shorten 
the lifespan of a product in order to encourage 
customers replace it. A 2015 law makes that a 
crime, with penalties of up to two years in prison 
and fines of up to 5 percent of the company’s 
annual turnover.
Apple apologized in December for secretly 
slowing down older iPhones, a move it said 
was necessary to avoid unexpected shutdowns 
related to battery fatigue.
The company said on its website “we have 
never — and would never — do anything 
to intentionally shorten the life of any Apple 
product, or degrade the user experience to drive 
customer upgrades.”
Apple France didn’t respond to email and 
phone requests for comment on the latest  
legal developments in France from The 
Associated Press.
Lawsuits against the company have also been 
filed in the U.S. and Israel.
The French consumer rights group, called 
HOP, filed a lawsuit on Dec. 27. It claims Apple 
slowed down older smartphones in order to 
make clients buy the new iPhone 8, which was 
launched on the market around the same time, 
according to HOP’s statement.
Benchmark tests have suggested the slowdown 
isn’t huge, but noticeable. Although Apple 
has said that’s done to prevent iPhones from 
unexpectedly shutting down because of weak 
batteries, lawsuits filed against Apple say that its 
failure to disclose that right away could have led 
some people to wrongly conclude they needed a 
newer, faster phone rather than just a new battery.
182

183

184

Laetitia Vasseur, the director of HOP, said studies 
have showed that peaks in speed reductions 
match the releases of new phones on the market.
“We can see that there is an intention to have 
people buy new phones because of the speed 
reduction,” she told the AP.
Vasseur said her group launched a survey 
following its complaint so that users can report 
problems they have faced. In 10 days, HOP has 
received more than 3,000 reports that will be 
handed over to the DGCCRF, the government 
fraud watchdog in charge of the investigation, 
she said.
Vasseur said she hopes that the consequences 
globally could be to go toward more sustainable 
and durable products “for all manufacturers that 
won’t want to face the same kind of scandal.”
A similar investigation targeting Japanese 
printer-maker Epson was opened in November, 
also following a complaint by HOP.
185

The Epson probe, was launched by another 
prosecutor’s office, in Nanterre outside Paris, is 
related to some of its ink cartridges and printers’ 
spare parts. It was the first legal action ever for 
planned obsolescence and deception in France, 
HOP said in a statement.
Epson has denied any wrongdoing, saying 
that planned obsolescence is not part of the 
company’s policy.
In the French legal system, preliminary 
investigations are launched and led by 
prosecutors’ offices. Such probes can last weeks 
or months. When they’re over, prosecutors can 
either decide to drop the cases or to send them 
to investigating judges for full investigations. 
Judges, in turn, can also dismiss the cases, due 
to lack of evidence for instance, or send them to 
courts for trial. In these cases, the whole process 
may last months or even years.
Since Epson and Apple cases are the first legal 
actions for planned obsolescence in France, 
there hasn’t been case law yet on possible 
penalties, fines or damages awarded by courts 
under this particular offense.
186

187

ads@applemagazine.com
Digital
Mindﬁeld

AppleMagazine © Copyright 2017-2011. All Rights Reserved.
No part of the document may be circulated, quoted, or reproduced for distribution without prior written approval.
Proper Trademark Notice and Attribution iPhone™, iPad™, HomePod™, Apple Watch™, iPod™, Mac™, iMac™, Macbook™, AppleTV™, Siri™, iOS™, OS X™, watchOS™, and others
are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the US and other countries. Please contact support for additional trademark ownership rights information.
The following is a list of Apple’s trademarks and service marks http://www.apple.com/legal/ trademark/appletmlist.html.
All other trademarks are the properties of their owners.
AppleMagazine is an independent publication and has not been authorized, sponsored, or otherwise approved by Apple Inc.
Authorized Publisher
WRITERS
 
Precise English Inc.
 
Benjamin Kerry  (UK)
 
Gavin Lenaghan  (UK)
 
Craig Lenaghan  (UK)
 
Elena Lusk  (US)
COLUMNS
COLUMNS
 
iTUNES REVIEW
 
Gavin Lenaghan
 
FINANCE NEWS
 
Associated Press / Bloomberg
REVISION
 
Gavin Lenaghan
  
Jack Crute
PRODUCTION SUPPORT / COLLABORATORS
 
Rui da Costa  
 
 
 
Icy Ventura
 
Segolene Vincent 
 
 
Pilar Bescos
 
Fabian Groenhof  
 
 
Candice Liu
 
Lise Berda
 
James Jarvis
  
Richard Sawyer
 
Lauren Brown
 
Matthew Coburn
 
Jeﬀrey Milks
 
Susan Kiesling
 
Raquel Serrano
 
Robert Fluellen
  
Lisa Swiniarski
 
Roger Gayalkar
PRIVACY POLICY
 
applemagazine.com/privacy-policy/
TERMS OF USE
 
applemagazine.com/terms-of-use/
SOCIAL NETWORKS
 
 
 
 
Twitter
 
 
@apple_magazine
 
 
twitter.com/#!/Apple_Magazine
 
 
Facebook
 
 
facebook.com/applemagazineinternational
SUBSCRIPTIONS
 
AppleMagazine Oﬃcial Website
 
applemagazine.com
 
Zinio LLC.
 
zino.com
 
Readr Newsstand
  
readrapp.com
 
Magzter Newsstand
 
magzter.com
 
Amazon Newsstand
 
amazon.com
 
Ebsco/Flipster
 
ebsco.com
 
Scoop Newsstand (Singapore)
 
getscoop.com
CONTACTS
 
Suport & CRM - contact@applemagazine.com 
 
Magazine and Website Editor - editor@applemagazine.com 
 
Executive Director - ceo@applemagazine.com
 
Advertise - ads@applemagazine.com  
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
 
Ivan Castilho
 
Chief Executive Oﬃcer / Design Conception
MINDFIELD DIGITAL ART & GRAPHIC DESIGN
 
Glauco Ribeiro
 
Chief Design Oﬃcer / Art & Graphic Design Director
 
Michael Danglen
  
Art & Graphic Design Producer
 
Anderson Oliveira
 
Art & Graphic Design Producer
MAGAZINE EDITORIAL CONTENT
 
Benjamin Kerry
 
Chief Editor
OFFICIAL WEBSITE
  
Benjamin Kerry
 
Production Director
 
Jack Crute
 
WordPress Production & Website Support
MASTHEAD
APPLEMAGAZINE INTERNATIONAL
applemagazine.com


