
This is a stone.

Digital
Mindﬁeld
When choosing MINDFIELD DIGITAL™ and our DBMD™ 
Program for your development services, you can be sure 
you will receive an app that will save you money and 
resources using the most advanced design and interface 
concepts.
We follow an Application Development Cycle where every 
We follow an Application Development Cycle where every 
step is carried out to maximum perfection. Our application 
developers are experienced and knowledgeable, and are 
skilled at delivering top high tech Apps. 
Our team is constantly looking for promising partners in 
Our team is constantly looking for promising partners in 
order to improve our quality, broaden our experience and 
create a global range of Apps with the most impressive 
conceptual designs, 3D Graphics and Sound FX.
This is a stone.



SPACEX: 
FALCON HEAVY 
BLASTS OFF WITH 
SPORTS CAR ON TOP
CANCER FROM 
CELLPHONES? NEW 
STUDIES SAY NO NEED 
TO HANG UP
iWORK: ALL OF THE APPS 
YOU NEED TO EXCEL AT 
SCHOOL OR WORK
12
132
54
OLYMPIC VIDEO AND VR: 
GUIDE TO WATCHING 
WITHOUT A TV
42

TOP 10 APPS   98
iTUNES REVIEW   102
TOP 10 SONGS   152
TOP 10 ALBUMS   154
TOP 10 MUSIC VIDEOS   156
TOP 10 TV SHOWS   158
TOP 10 BOOKS   160
APPLE MULLS REFUNDS FOR BATTERY REPLACEMENT ON OLD iPHONES  08
WOMAN AT TOP OF HER GAME SEEKS GIRLS WITH A CYBER-APTITUDE  28
GOOGLE’S AI PUSH COMES WITH PLENTY OF PEOPLE PROBLEMS  34
FIREFIGHTERS LEARN WAYS TO USE TECHNOLOGY TO BATTLE BLAZES  52
PARTNERSHIP BRINGS INTERNET TO HOMES OF SCHOOLCHILDREN  74
APPLE, ONCE AGAIN, HAS A BAD CASE OF THE iPHONE JITTERS  82
FOXCONN PUTTING US HEADQUARTERS IN MILWAUKEE  90
WILL DISNEY’S STREAMING SERVICE ROAR - OR SQUEAK?  92
‘JUMANJI’ REBOOT REIGNS AGAIN AT THE BOX OFFICE  118
WITH NEW TRAILER, ‘SOLO’ HOPES TO OUTRUN PRODUCTION TROUBLES  128
RAIL INDUSTRY SAYS KEY SAFETY TECHNOLOGY NOT DUE UNTIL 2020  140
AMAZON TO PAY FRANCE $250 MILLION IN BACK TAXES  150
ROBOT MAKES COFFEE AT NEW CAFE IN JAPAN’S CAPITAL  162
‘FANCY BEAR’ HACKERS TOOK AIM AT US DEFENSE CONTRACTORS  166
CHINA SOLAR SUPPLIER GROWS IN INDIA TO AVOID TRADE CONTROLS  182

Apple is mulling refunds to customers who 
paid full price for battery replacements on 
older iPhones.
Apple now offers a $50 discount as part of its 
apology for secretly slowing down the devices. 
Apple isn’t providing details on a potential 
rebate yet. The possibility was mentioned in 
Apple’s five-page letter to Sen. John Thune, a 
South Dakota Republican who demanded more 
details about the iPhone slowdown.
Thune released Apple’s Feb. 2 response on 
Tuesday. Thune says Apple will follow up with 
additional information at a future date.
Apple has been replacing batteries on older 
iPhones for $29 since late December, down from 
the usual $79. The offer is good through this 
year. A new battery is supposed to prevent older 
iPhones from bogging down.
APPLE MULLS REFUNDS FOR 
BATTERY REPLACEMENT 
ON OLD iPHONES
8

9



SpaceX’s big new rocket blasted off Tuesday on 
its first test flight, carrying a red electric sports 
car aiming for an endless road trip past Mars.
The Falcon Heavy rose from the same launch 
pad used by NASA nearly 50 years ago to send 
men to the moon. With liftoff, the Heavy became 
the most powerful rocket in use today, doubling 
the liftoff punch of its closest competitor.
For SpaceX, the private rocket company run 
by Elon Musk, it was a mostly triumphant 
test of a new, larger rocket designed to hoist 
supersize satellites as well as equipment to the 
moon, Mars or other far-flung points. For the 
test flight, a red sports car made by another of 
Musk’s companies, Tesla, was the unusual cargo, 
enclosed in protective covering for the launch.
SPACEX: FALCON HEAVY 
BLASTS OFF WITH  
SPORTS CAR ON TOP
12

13

The three boosters and 27 engines roared to 
life at Kennedy Space Center, as thousands 
watched from surrounding beaches, bridges 
and roads, jamming the highways in scenes 
unmatched since NASA’s last space shuttle 
flight. At SpaceX Mission Control in Southern 
California, employees screamed, whistled and 
raised pumped fists into the air as the launch 
commentators called off each milestone. 
Millions more watched online, making it the 
second biggest livestream in YouTube history.
Viewers were left with video images beamed 
from space of Musk’s red Roadster circling the 
blue planet after the protective covering had 
dropped away and exposed the car. A space-
suited mannequin was at the wheel, named 
“Starman” after the David Bowie song.
“It’s kind of silly and fun, but I think that silly and 
fun things are important,” said the SpaceX chief 
who also runs Tesla and is keen to colonize Mars. 
“The imagery of it is something that’s going to 
get people excited around the world.”
Two of the boosters— both recycled from 
previous launches — returned minutes after 
liftoff for on-the-mark touchdowns at Cape 
Canaveral. Sonic booms rumbled across the 
region with the vertical landings.
Musk later revealed the third booster, brand 
new, slammed into the Atlantic at 300 mph  
and missed the floating landing platform, 
scattering shrapnel all over the deck and 
knocking out two engines.
He was unfazed by the lost booster and said 
watching the other two land upright probably 
was the most exciting thing he’s ever seen.
14

Image: Trevor Mahlmann
15

Before liftoff, “I had this image of just a giant 
explosion on the pad, a wheel bouncing down the 
road, the Tesla logo landing somewhere,” he said. 
“But fortunately, that’s not what happened.”
Musk’s rocketing Roadster is shooting for a solar 
orbit that will reach all the way to Mars.
Ballast for a rocket debut is usually concrete  
— “so boring,” Musk said in a post-launch  
news conference.
The Roadster was anything but. Cameras mounted 
on the car fed stunning video of “Starman” tooling 
around Earth, looking something like a NASCAR 
racer out for a Sunday drive, with its right hand on  
the wheel and the left arm resting on the car’s door.
A sign on the dashboard read: “Don’t panic!” 
Bowie’s “Life on Mars?” played in the background at 
one point. A Hot Wheels roadster was also on the 
dash with a tiny spaceman on board.
The Falcon Heavy is a combination of three Falcon 
9s, the rocket that the company uses to ship 
supplies to the International Space Station and lift 
satellites. SpaceX is reusing first-stage boosters to 
save on launch costs. Most other rocket makers 
discard their spent boosters in the ocean.
Unlike most rockets out there, the Falcon Heavy 
receives no government funding. The hulking 
rocket is intended for massive satellites, like those 
used by the U.S. military and communication 
companies. Even before the successful test flight, 
customers were signed up.
“It was awesome like a science fiction movie 
coming to reality,” said former NASA deputy 
administrator Dava Newman, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology’s Apollo professor of 
astronautics. “They nailed it. Good for them.”
16

17

18

19

Given the high stakes and high drama, 
Tuesday’s launch attracted huge crowds not 
seen since NASA’s final space shuttle flight 
seven years ago. While the shuttles had more 
liftoff muscle than the Heavy, the all-time 
leaders in both size and might were NASA’s 
Saturn V rockets, which first flew astronauts to 
the moon in 1968.
On the eve of the flight, Musk said the 
company had done all it could to maximize 
success. Musk has plenty of experience with 
rocket accidents, from his original Falcon 1 
test flights to his follow-up Falcon 9s, one of 
which exploded on a nearby pad during a 2016 
ignition test.
“I’ve seen rockets blow up so many different 
ways, so, yeah, it’s a great relief when it actually 
works,” Musk said after liftoff.
Not counting Apollo moon buggies, the 
Roadster is the first automobile to speed right 
off the planet.
The car faces considerable speed bumps before 
settling into its intended orbit around the sun, 
an oval circle stretching from the orbit of Earth 
on one end to the orbit of Mars on the other. It 
has to endure a cosmic bombardment during 
several hours of cruising through the highly 
charged Van Allen radiation belts encircling 
Earth. Finally, a thruster has to fire to put the car 
on the right orbital course. The car battery was 
expected to last for about 12 hours after liftoff.
If it weathers all this, the Roadster will reach the 
vicinity of Mars in six months, Musk said. The 
car could be traveling between Earth and Mars’ 
neighborhoods for a billion years, according to 
the high-tech billionaire.
20

Falcon Heavy Animation
21

SpaceX’s big new rocket has blasted off on its  
first test flight, carrying a red sports car on an 
endless road trip past Mars.
22

“Maybe discovered by some future alien race, 
thinking what were you guys doing? Did they 
worship this car? Why did they have a little car? 
That will really confuse them,” Musk said.
Musk acknowledged the Roadster could  
come “quite close” to Mars during its epic 
cruise, with only a remote chance of crashing 
into the red planet.
Also on board in a protected storage unit is Isaac 
Asimov’s science fiction series, “Foundation.” A 
plaque contains the names of the more than 
6,000 SpaceX employees.
The Heavy already is rattling the launch market. 
Its sticker price is $90 million, less than one-
tenth the estimated cost of NASA’s Space 
Launch System megarocket in development for 
moon and Mars expeditions.
SpaceX has decided against flying passengers 
on the Heavy, Musk said, and instead will 
accelerate development of an even bigger 
rocket to accommodate deep-space crews. His 
ultimate goal is to establish a city on Mars.
“If people think we’re in a race with the Chinese, 
this is our secret weapon: the entrepreneurship 
of people like Elon and others like Jeff Bezos,” 
said Stanford University’s G. Scott Hubbard, 
NASA’s first Mars czar.
Amazon’s Bezos heads Blue Origin, which is 
developing a big, reusable orbital-class rocket 
and already is making suborbital flights in Texas.
“Woohoo!” Bezos said in a congratulatory tweet.
THE ROCKET
The Falcon Heavy has three first-stage boosters, 
strapped together with 27 engines in all. 
23

Stretching 40 feet (12 meters) at the base and 
standing 230 feet (70 meters) tall, the Heavy 
is a triple dose of the Falcon 9, the company’s 
frequent flyer with just a single booster. At 
liftoff, the Heavy packs about 5 million pounds 
of thrust. That’s more liftoff punch than any 
other rocket currently operating in the world 
— by a factor of two — but less than NASA’s 
old space shuttles and Saturn V moon rockets. 
Two of the boosters— recycled from previous 
Falcon 9 launches — returned minutes later 
for simultaneous, side-by-side touchdowns at 
Cape Canaveral. There was no immediate word 
on whether the third booster made it onto the 
ocean platform.
THE CARGO
SpaceX’s Elon Musk also runs the electric 
carmaker Tesla. So in a bit of cross-marketing, 
he put his own cherry-red Tesla Roadster on 
the Heavy’s inaugural flight with a space-
suited dummy at the wheel. No car has ever 
rocketed into space before, if you don’t count 
NASA’s Apollo-era moon buggies, still parked 
on the lunar surface. The Federal Aviation 
Administration had to sign off on the Heavy-
Tesla combo. Usually, there are steel or concrete 
slabs or mundane experiments on test flights. 
The convertible was at the top of the rocket, 
enclosed for liftoff. The protective cover dropped 
away, allowing the car to travel on its way. Three 
cameras were mounted on the Roadster.
THE DESTINATION
SpaceX is targeting a long, oval orbit around the 
sun for the Roadster that will take the car as far out 
as Mars, and have it making laps for a billion years. 
24

Falcon Heavy Test Flight
25

First up, hours of deep-space coasting through 
the high-energy Van Allen radiation belts 
encircling Earth. If it weathers all this, the 
Roadster will reach the vicinity of Mars in six 
months. Musk said that the car could come fairly 
close to Mars and that there’s an “extremely tiny” 
chance it could crash into the planet. Musk is 
intent on establishing a city on the red planet, 
with hordes of Earthlings and building materials 
flying there on a super-extra-mega SpaceX 
rocket that is still in development.
THE LAUNCH PAD
The Falcon Heavy lifted off from the same 
launch pad used by NASA to send astronauts to 
the moon. SpaceX leases Launch Complex 39A 
from NASA. Not only did LC-39A, as it’s known, 
serve as the departure point for all the Apollo 
moonshots from 1968 to 1972, it was the scene 
for most of the space shuttle liftoffs. Its location 
at Kennedy Space Center keeps people at least 
three miles away, a distance determined by 
NASA in the 1960s to be safe just in case the 
Saturn V exploded on the pad.
THE FUTURE
SpaceX already has customers lined up for the 
Falcon Heavy. The rocket is designed to hoist 
supersize satellites as well as equipment to the 
moon, Mars or other far-flung points. The private 
company’s online flight manifest shows the U.S. 
Air Force as already signed up. Other aerospace 
companies are developing rockets and NASA 
is sinking billions of dollars into a massive new 
rocket called the Space Launch System, or SLS, 
that’s meant to return astronauts to the moon 
and also get them one day to Mars.
26

SpaceX: www.spacex.com
Live Views of Starman
27

28

Dora Schriro, Connecticut’s public safety 
commissioner, knows what it’s like to be a 
woman in the male-dominated world of criminal 
justice, so she jumped at the chance to work 
with organizers of a national competition being 
held this month to find and attract young 
women to the field of cybersecurity.
The program, “Girls Go Cyberstart,” is being 
run by the SANS Institute, a security education 
organization. The online problem and puzzle-
solving competition is open to high school-age 
girls in 18 states and American Samoa.
The game, which starts Feb. 20, has participants 
protecting an imaginary headquarters and 
moon base by cracking codes, plugging security 
gaps and creating software tools. It is designed 
to test aptitude in areas such as cryptography 
and digital forensics.
WOMAN AT TOP 
OF HER GAME 
SEEKS GIRLS WITH 
A CYBER-APTITUDE
29

30

Only about 20 percent men or women have 
brains wired in a way that allows them to be 
good at this type of work and to enjoy it, said 
Alan Paller, the director of research at SANS. The 
game, he said, will help the organization find 
those people.
Winners get prizes that include a trip to a 
cybersecurity conference in Chicago, as well as 
computers and tablets.
But more than that, girls who show aptitude 
will continue to receive mentorship and 
opportunities, including scholarships, to 
continue along a career path, Paller said.
SANS decided to do a girls-only event after 
holding a similar competition in August. About 
3,500 students signed up. Only 7 percent were 
female, Paller said.
“There are big barriers to women getting into 
this field, and we want to give them an on-ramp 
that is their own,” he said
Most girls will spend between 10 and 20 hours 
over several days trying to complete the game, 
Paller said. Contestants don’t need any previous 
computer knowledge.
Schriro heard about the contest through the 
National Governor’s Association and decided 
to get involved. Her own decision to enter the 
field of criminal justice came from a 45-minute 
presentation in high school, she said.
“Sometimes all it takes,” she said, “is a 
couple minutes.”
In addition to promoting the contest from 
her bully pulpit, Schriro also contacted 
the Girl Scouts of America and got the 
organization involved.
31

32

The Girl Scouts, which offer a badge in 
cybersecurity, are forming and sponsoring 
teams for the contest.
“It’s really a way for these girls to get a taste 
of something, because maybe they don’t 
know they like it,” said Mary Barneby, the 
chief executive officer of the Girl Scouts 
of Connecticut.
The state will get receive names of the girls 
who do well in the contest, said Schriro, who 
plans to make sure those who are interested are 
given resources and opportunities to continue 
their education.
“I have been selected by three different 
governors in three different states to be the first 
woman to take on a variety of criminal justice or 
law enforcement responsibilities,” said Schriro, 
who previously ran the New York City jail system 
and was the first woman to head corrections 
departments in Arizona and Missouri. “How 
much more exciting it might be to be the 50th 
or the 500th to be working in this field when it’s 
normalized and expected?”
33

Image: Ramin Talaie
34

Google CEO Sundar Pichai recently declared 
that artificial intelligence fueled by powerful 
computers was more important to humanity 
than fire or electricity. And yet the search giant 
increasingly faces a variety of messy people 
problems as well.
The company has vowed to employ thousands 
of human checkers just to catch rogue YouTube 
posters, Russian bots and other purveyors of 
unsavory content. It’s also on a buying spree to 
find office space for its burgeoning workforce in 
pricey Silicon Valley.
GOOGLE’S AI PUSH COMES WITH 
PLENTY OF PEOPLE PROBLEMS
35

For a company that built its success on using 
faceless algorithms to automate many human 
tasks, this focus on people presents something 
of a conundrum. Yet it’s also a necessary one 
as lawmakers ramp up the pressure on Google 
to deter foreign powers from abusing its 
platforms and its YouTube unit draws fire for 
offensive videos , particularly ones aimed at 
younger audiences.
In the latest quarter alone, Google parent 
Alphabet Inc. added 2,009 workers, for a total 
of 80,110. Over the last three years, it hired a 
net 2,245 people per quarter on average. That’s 
nearly 173 per week, or 25 people per day.
Some of the extra workers this year will be 
part of Google’s pledge to have 10,000 people 
across the company snooping out videos and 
other material that violate the company’s 
policies — but which computers can’t catch 
on their own. That program will lead to what 
Google calls “significant growth ” in personnel.
Google will take on even more workers in the 
current quarter now that it has closed its $1.1 
billion purchase of part of hardware maker  
HTC, bringing onboard the 2,000-plus 
engineers who worked on the Pixel 
smartphone line.
Last week, Pichai spoke bullishly about content-
checkers hiring, saying the investments now set 
the company up to capture growth in the future 
— in the same call with investors that he touted 
self-driving vehicles developed by Alphabet’s 
Waymo unit, which aim to do away with human 
drivers entirely.
For instance, Pichai said he sees consumers 
increasingly watching YouTube videos on 
36

37

38

connected TVs in the living room, a lucrative 
segment of growth for the digital video 
advertising that helps power Google’s growth.
After controversies over YouTube stars who 
made anti-Semitic comments or showed video 
of someone who had apparently died by 
suicide, Google has tightened its standards . It 
has limited which YouTube channels can serve 
up ads; vowed to manually review every video 
in its most popular channels for 18-to-34-year-
olds; and will pay outside companies to ensure 
that brands don’t have their ads turn up next to 
unsuitable videos.
“While there have been some concerns, we’re 
working really hard to address them and 
respond strongly,” Pichai said.
Some analysts aren’t so sure. Collin Colburn, 
an analyst with market researcher Forrester, 
wonders how much of the recent changes are 
just window dressing at a company for whom 
hiring thousands of people amounts to little 
more than pocket change.
“I wonder if it’s more of a move of optics rather 
than practicality,” Colburn said, noting Google’s 
“massive” double-digit revenue growth and cash 
hoard of $102 billion.
Revenue at Google parent Alphabet rose 24 
percent from a year ago to $32.32 billion. After 
subtracting advertising commissions, revenue 
was $25.87 billion, exceeding Street forecasts 
of $25.65 billion. But the company swung to a 
$3 billion loss from a $5.33 billion profit a year 
earlier, reflecting the recent federal tax overhaul.
Alphabet shares were down 2.3 percent at 
$1,141.42 in after-hours trading.
39

Google’s growing workforce has the company 
on a real-estate tear.
It recently opened up offices in Austin, Texas; 
Ann Arbor, Michigan; Boulder, Colorado; and 
is planning to open offices in Detroit. It broke 
ground in November on a huge office building 
in the heart of London, home to its DeepMind 
artificial intelligence unit, that will come 
complete with a rooftop running track.
Near its current headquarters, construction is 
underway on two futuristic dome-like structures 
infused with natural light, brimming with solar 
panels and set to open in late 2019. Google is 
negotiating with the city of Mountain View to add 
10,000 housing units, many of which will likely be 
home to employees known as “Googlers.”
Pichai said the company intends to hire 
“thousands of people across the U.S.” this year, 
build or open five new data centers, and make 
“significant investments” in nine states.
40

41

42

Every Olympic event will be streamed live. But 
to watch online, you’ll still need to be a paying 
cable or satellite subscriber.
As with past Olympics, NBC is requiring proof 
of a subscription. If you’ve already given up on 
traditional cable or satellite TV, you can sign up 
for an online TV service such as PlayStation Vue 
or YouTube TV. Otherwise, your video will cut 
out after a half-hour grace period.
The subscription requirement also applies to 
coverage on virtual-reality headsets.
More than 1,800 hours of online coverage 
in the U.S. with preliminary curling matches. 
Friday’s opening ceremony will be shown 
live online starting at 6 a.m. ET, and on NBC’s 
prime-time broadcast on a delayed basis at 
8 p.m. NBC also plans live streaming of the 
closing ceremony on Feb. 25.
Here’s a guide to watching the Olympics online.
OLYMPIC VIDEO AND VR:
 GUIDE TO WATCHING 
WITHOUT A TV
43

TRADITIONAL COVERAGE
NBC’s over-the-air network will cover popular 
sports such as figure skating and skiing, some 
of it live. For those who can’t get to a TV, NBC 
will stream the broadcast at NBCOlympics.com 
and the NBC Sports app. But there you’ll need 
your paid-TV credentials to sign in — even 
though you can watch the network over the  
air for free.
The sports network NBCSN will be the main 
overflow channel, carrying events such as 
biathlon, bobsled and luge. Coverage on CNBC 
and USA Network will be limited to curling 
and ice hockey. The Olympic Channel will have 
medal ceremonies, news and highlights, but 
not event coverage. All four of these cable 
channels will also be streamed online.
Much of the online coverage will come  
from the International Olympic Committee’s 
Olympic Broadcasting Services. That means  
the spotlight will be on all athletes, not  
just Americans. In addition to live events,  
you can get streams of some training and 
practice runs. NBC also plans digital-only 
shows, including a daily two-hour wrap-up 
starting at noon ET (2 a.m. the next morning  
in Pyeongchang).
Some cable companies plan special features. 
NBC owner Comcast will include online 
coverage on its TV set-top boxes and TV 
coverage on its mobile apps to offer viewers 
one-stop access to the Olympics. Comcast 
and other cable providers will also offer the 
opening ceremony and other events in sharper 
“4K” resolution, though with a day’s delay.
44

Image: Rafa Aparicio
45

46

VIRTUAL REALITY
Intel is working with the Olympic Broadcasting 
Services to produce virtual-reality coverage of 30 
events. Eighteen events, or 55 hours, will be live.
During the Rio Olympics in 2016, VR coverage 
typically wasn’t live and required Samsung’s 
Gear VR headsets with a Samsung phone. 
This time, VR is available on Google Daydream 
and Microsoft Mixed Reality headsets as well. 
Those without a headset can still watch on web 
browsers or Apple and Android mobile devices. 
In the U.S., you’ll need the NBC Sports VR app.
VR isn’t meant to replace television. While 
Intel’s VR productions of baseball and other 
sports had their own announcers, the Olympic 
coverage will rely on regular television coverage 
embedded in the VR experience. And most of 
the VR video will be in 180 degrees — you’ll 
see the action in front of you and a little bit to 
the sides, but not what’s behind you. Videos in 
360 degrees will be limited to non-competition 
features such as a demo run down the bobsled.
But VR will offer more leaderboards and  
stats than television, along with the ability  
to choose camera positions. For downhill 
skiing, for instance, you might prefer watching 
from a particular location on the mountain,  
the way a spectator would, rather than have 
the camera shift the skier goes down. For  
figure skating, one camera will be near the 
judges so you can get their vantage point. 
There will be no cameras on the rink or on  
any athletes, however.
47

48

IF YOU LACK CABLE OR SATELLITE TV
For the most part, access to an online TV 
service — one that streams many of the 
channels you’d get from a cable subscription  
— will also let you use the NBC apps for  
streaming and VR.
Google’s YouTube TV has the lowest price for 
all five Olympic TV channels, at $35 a month. 
Google says the service is available in more 
than 80 U.S. markets, covering more than 80 
percent of households, though the NBC  
station isn’t available everywhere.
In excluded markets, you could check out  
a rival. What works best will depend on  
your needs:
— DirecTV Now also has a $35-a-month 
offering. But the Olympic Channel is part of a 
higher tier, at $60 a month, and DirecTV Now 
generally won’t let you record programs for 
viewing later (a DVR feature is still being tested 
among some subscribers).
— Hulu with Live TV is $40 a month for all five 
channels and DVR.
— PlayStation Vue, Sling TV and FuboTV are  
all $45 for comparable packages. But you 
 can bring Sling TV’s bill down to $30 for  
just the two main Olympic channels and 
 DVR. PlayStation is $40 without the  
Olympic Channel.
Free trials are available, and you can cancel 
after the Olympics. Most services let you 
enter your ZIP code to check whether the 
NBC station is available. Streaming might be 
restricted where the station isn’t available.
49

50

BEYOND VIDEO
The NBC Sports app and the NBCOlympics 
website offer highlights, interviews and features 
on athletes without needing a subscription. 
You’ll also have full access to scores, schedules 
and guides to understanding obscure events.
Samsung, an Olympic sponsor, developed the 
official Apple and Android app for the games, 
called PyeongChang 2018. It has schedules, 
news and 3-D and drone views of the venues.
The games’ official website,  
pyeongchang2018.com, also has live video  
of the Olympic torch relay.
Traditional media organizations will also cover 
the event, even though extensive video from 
the official venues are restricted to the rights-
holding broadcasters. The Associated Press, 
for instance, has a Winter Games hub with 
traditional text, photo and video coverage 
alongside graphics breaking down complicated 
moves in figure skating and snowboarding and 
daily illustrations from sketch artist Dan Archer. 
The AP will also have 360-degree video and 
drone views of the venues.
51

52

Firefighters who are used to knocking down 
doors with heavy equipment and battling 
suffocating fire now are learning about new 
ways technology can help them more efficiently 
battle big blazes.
The Spectrum reports trainees at the Utah Fire 
and Rescue Academy Winter Fire School in St. 
George spent a lot of time last month operating 
touch screens, analyzing data and learning ways 
to implement technology.
Firefighters are learning to use three-
dimensional map projections that pop up from 
the floor like holograms and show computerized 
simulation of how a fire would spread, or how 
traffic might impede their access, or how an 
unsuspected gas leak might complicate matters.
Wildfires over the past year across the western 
U.S. have raised the profile of firefighting 
expertise and citizens’ expectations of their 
local departments.
Information from: The Spectrum 
FIREFIGHTERS 
LEARN WAYS 
TO USE 
TECHNOLOGY 
TO BATTLE BLAZES
53

54

55

iWORK OUTRANKS ITS COMPETITION
Apple, Microsoft, and Google all compete to 
deliver the best possible document apps to 
their users. The question is, do Pages, Numbers, 
Keynote, collectively known as iWork, compete 
on the same level as Microsoft and Google’s own 
versions which users are perhaps more familiar 
with and rely on more? Apple has made some 
big developments, and some argue that they are 
now a step ahead of their competition.
56

57

iWORK APPS ARE YEARS AHEAD OF 
MICROSOFT OFFICE
Immediately, Pages, Numbers, and Keynote all 
appear very user friendly, and have easy to use 
navigation. Pages is smooth and glitch-free, 
and Apple insists the final documents “look 
beautiful and read beautifully.”  Pages makes 
it very easy to create unique and innovate work 
that incorporates custom fonts, text styles, and 
graphics. They offer 60 templates to choose 
from, which can be personalized and edited 
until they are your own unique document.
58

Numbers, used to create spreadsheets, 
charts, tables, and images, also allows you to 
organize your document in a format that suits 
you. You have endless opportunity to formal 
tables and charts in ways that suit your data. 
Finally, Keynote is a powerful way to design 
unique presentations that showcase your 
work. Users can choose from over 30 themes, 
add charts, edit photos and finalize the whole 
presentation with cinematic effects and 
engaging transitions or animations.
Pages 101 for Mac - Full Tutorial!
59

You can even use touch-ID to access password 
protected documents, and all three allow 
users to save the files in Microsoft formats, 
ensuring they can be accessed by Word, Excel 
and PowerPoint users. More features are now 
supported, “including commenting, formatting 
and bubble charts…it’s never been easier 
to take a Microsoft Office document from 
your Mac or PC and import it into Pages, 
Numbers, and Keynote. So you can keep the 
workflow flowing.”
Apple’s high level of quality and precision shines 
through, and their iWork apps are professional, 
elegant and reliable. They are easy to use 
and really will boost your productivity. These 
powerful apps are years ahead of Microsoft 
Office and are transforming the way students 
and workers are creating and using documents. 
If you haven’t yet made the switch to iWork, 
what is stopping you?
60

61

NEW FEATURES FOR iWORK
Apple recently introduced updated versions of 
all the iWork apps and introduced a whole host 
of new features, including Drag and Drop 
support. This radical new feature allows users 
to drag and drop text, as well as images, links 
and more, between apps. The new update also 
allows iWork documents to be accessed from 
within the new Files app when users are on an 
iPhone or iPad. Multitasking has never been 
easier thanks to the new iPad Doc that allows 
for spilt view.
The performance and stability of all three apps 
has been significantly improved. Apple has 
also introduced features that make creating 
shapes in any of the iWork apps even 
easier. The new Unite, Intersect, Subtract and 
Exclude commands help users create shapes, 
and a number of other commands make 
arranging these shapes just as efficient. This 
feature, in particular, allows Apple to remain a 
step ahead of the competition and offer users 
something more.
62

63

64

GREATER CONNECTIVITY AND 
SHARING WITH iWORK
iOS 11 now allows iWork users to easily share 
their documents using iCloud. You might 
recognize this feature as it is somewhat similar 
to Google Docs and Microsoft One Drive, 
however, again Apple are a step ahead of their 
competition. Using iCloud, users can collaborate 
with whole teams and they can create and edit 
documents together in real time, even from the 
other side of the world. You can view changes on 
Pages, Numbers, and Keynote as they are made, 
whether you are using a Mac, iPad, iPhone or 
web browser. Using iCloud, you can organize 
your documents using folders and tags.
65

iCLOUD FOR iWORK VS GOOGLE DOCS 
VS MICROSOFT OFFICE ONLINE
There has been much debate over whether 
iCloud for iWork, Google Docs or Microsoft Office 
Online takes the top spot. All three are designed 
to enhance user experience and productivity and 
they are easy to use yet give maximum results. 
With all three available to users, it has never been 
easier to be productive and successful at school, 
university or work, but which is considered the 
best? With new updates to iCloud for iWork, we 
might just have a winner.
Google Docs, Sheets and Slides are all available 
as part of Google Drive and have been since 
2006. These reliable apps are fast, slick and 
user-friendly. Loading time is fast, and you 
can even create, view and edit files without 
an internet connection. The apps work with 
Microsoft Office file formats, and they allow 
several users to edit the same document at the 
same time. Users are able to track every edit 
made and seamlessly work together to create 
a final product. Like Apple and Microsoft’s 
versions, everything is free, and the documents 
created and saved on your drive do not count 
towards your 15BG storage allowance.
Google Docs and Sheets Tutorial 2017
66

67

Microsoft offers a rival service, which is also 
free, and while it didn’t release the system 
as early as Google Docs, it created one that 
rivals both iWork and Google Docs. Their 
online versions of Word, Excel, and PowerPoint 
have even been considered slightly better 
than their rivals’ versions, however, they are 
not as responsive and intuitive. The apps are 
often slow and can freeze. They offer a range 
of useful templates and the transition from 
computer to online is seamless. They are a 
good choice for anyone already familiar with 
Microsoft Office Programs.
Finally, iWork, while only introduced in 2013, 
perhaps outdoes both its competitors. The 
apps are again free, they just required an Apple 
ID and web browser. The overall appearance 
of the apps is more elegant and they are far 
more intuitive to use. They are straightforward 
enough that anyone can use them easily, 
however, they also allow users to make 
advanced documents if they so wish. iCloud is 
the obvious choice for anyone already using 
a range of Apple devices.
68

69

MICROSOFT ONEDRIVE APP NOW 
SUPPORTS THE FILES APP
On January 30, Microsoft released an update 
to its OneDrive app, announcing that it now 
supports the Files app in iOS 11. Microsoft 
announced a number of updates to their 
app, including ensuring they make better use 
of screen space. Files are now easier to use, 
thumbnails are larger and the app has generally 
been redesigned to enhance user experience. 
Similarly, to iWork, OneDrive also now supports 
drag and drop. The most important update for 
Apple users, however, is that OneDrive now 
supports the Files app.
70

71

Image: iMore
72

THE FUTURE FOR iWORK
Overall, iWork is an essential tool for anyone 
looking to excel at school, college or work. The 
new updates only improve the experience of 
these apps further. We can only speculate what 
the future will bring for iWork, but we know it 
will be innovate, exciting and ultimately unlike 
anything we have seen before.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
73

Image: Lev Dolgachov
74

A Bedford County-based partnership is working 
with two state school divisions to help test 
technology that uses television white space 
— channels not in use on the broadcasting 
spectrum — to deliver internet service in 
underserved rural areas.
The SOVA Innovation Center in Forest is rolling 
out the technology with the Halifax County and 
Charlotte County school divisions in partnership 
with Microsoft and a Halifax County nonprofit. 
PARTNERSHIP 
BRINGS INTERNET 
TO HOMES OF 
SCHOOLCHILDREN
75

The pilot project involves providing free 
equipment, installation and access to selected 
educational content on the internet; more than 
200 homes with school-age children in the two 
counties currently have internet access as part of 
the project, said Bob Bailey, executive director of 
the SOVA Innovation Center.
TV white space originally acted as a buffer 
in the days of analog broadcasting to 
prevent interference. In 2009, the Federal 
Communications Commission moved to a 
digital broadcasting format, eliminating the 
function for which those white space channels 
were designed.
Instead of running underground wires for 
internet access, the technology relies on a 
multidimensional radio antenna and a router at 
home to provide internet over TV white space 
from a nearby tower.
“In areas that have low population density, how 
can you justify putting in infrastructure?” Bailey 
said. “TV white space, for a variety of reasons, is 
cost efficient.”
The SOVA Innovation Center is a subsidiary 
of Adaptrum, a California-based technology 
company, and is funded jointly by Adaptrum 
and Mid-Atlantic Broadband Communities 
Corporation, a nonprofit based in South Boston 
that works toward expanding internet access to 
promote economic development in southern 
Virginia, Bailey said. That partnership was 
announced in June 2017.
The center joined with an initiative announced 
by Microsoft and Mild-Atlantic Broadband 
in May 2017 called the “Southern Virginia 
Homework Network,” aimed at delivering free 
76

77

78

Image: Martin Phelps
broadband internet access at home to students 
in Charlotte and Halifax counties. The Tobacco 
Region Revitalization Commission awarded the 
project a $500,000 grant in June, according to a 
commission news release.
About 50 percent of students in Charlotte and 
Halifax counties have broadband access at 
home, according to a Microsoft news release. 
Charlotte County Public Schools had 1,881 
students enrolled in the division during the 
fall for the 2017-18 school year, while Halifax 
County Public Schools had 5,101 students 
enrolled during the fall, according to the Virginia 
Department of Education.
The Homework Network pilot program reached 
about 100 homes by June. As of January, the 
pilot program has provided internet access to 
educational material to 209 homes in Halifax 
and Charlotte counties with school-age children, 
Bailey said.
Bailey said the center has heard from about 
1,200 households in Halifax and Charlotte 
counties with school-age children who 
expressed an interest in participating.
Of those who have expressed interest, the  
pilot program currently is working with about 
500 households in Halifax and Charlotte 
counties to identify where the center can  
install infrastructure to provide the new 
technology to them, Bailey said, adding 
another 250 households in the same area  
are close to an existing tower but are 
experiencing broadcast issues.
The Homework Network program provides an 
opportunity for the innovation center to test its 
white space router technology and equipment, 
79

Bailey said. While the technology has long-range 
and non-line-of-sight capabilities, the center 
still is finding out specifically its limitations and 
capabilities. “Long term, when we’ve put that 
infrastructure in place, people can buy (internet 
access),” Bailey said.
The SOVA Innovation Center is a tenant in  
the Center for Energy Research and Education 
off U.S. 460, which previously was known as  
the Center for Advanced Engineering and 
Research and is owned by Liberty University. 
Bailey said the innovation center has set up 
 the new technology at towers surrounding 
CERE to help research and development  
of the project.
Bailey said the center works with the two 
county school systems’ leaders to decide what 
educational content to allow the students to 
access online.
“Schools are updating the list,” Bailey said. “It’s a 
filter we change all the time.”
Nancy Leonard, superintendent for Charlotte 
County Public Schools, said the school division 
has sent home flyers with students to make 
parents and guardians aware of the program. 
They plan on sending out more flyers soon.
The school division also has allowed the center 
to put towers on school property, Leonard 
said. Currently, the center has 15 towers for the 
program, Bailey said.
“We’re hoping this pilot program (with) this very 
unique piece of equipment can unlock some 
capabilities for other rural localities that may 
be experiencing difficulty accessing internet 
services,” Leonard said.
80

81

82

Apple is making more money than ever, but 
it still doesn’t seem to be enough to keep 
everyone happy. Not with conspiracy theories 
swirling around Apple’s secret slowdown of 
older iPhones while a cloud of uncertainty 
looms over its high-priced iPhone X.
It’s a reality check for a company accustomed 
to an unflinchingly loyal customer base. Apple 
expected buyers to embrace the iPhone X as a 
revolutionary device worth its $1,000 price, but 
it’s still not clear how many people are willing to 
ante up, especially with other recently released 
models selling for $200 to $300 less.
APPLE, ONCE AGAIN, HAS A BAD 
CASE OF THE iPHONE JITTERS
83

The first clues about consumers’ interest in the 
iPhone X emerged last week with the release of 
Apple’s fiscal first-quarter earnings report. That 
period covered the final three months of last 
year, including the early November debut of 
the iPhone X.
Apple sold 77.3 million iPhones in the quarter, 
about 1 million fewer than at the same time in 
the previous year, which included an additional 
week because of quirk in the calendar. Despite 
the smaller window of time, analysts had 
predicted Apple would sell 80 million iPhones in 
the past quarter, according to FactSet.
What’s more, consumers disillusioned with the 
slowdown of their devices may be even less 
inclined to upgrade in the months ahead.
Apple attributed the slowdown to its effort to 
prevent unexpected crashes caused by aging 
batteries, and it’s now offering to replace those 
batteries for just $29. That $50 discount is 
available as part of Apple’s apology for not being 
more forthcoming about what it did.
“Once you get past all the enthusiasts who want 
the iPhone X, you get down to a lot of people 
who think $1,000 is a lot of money for a phone,” 
said analyst Bob O’Donnell of the research firm 
Technalysis. “We may be getting near the peak 
of the smartphone market, and that impacts 
everyone, including Apple.”
Apple CEO Tim Cook told a different story, 
describing it as its top-selling model in every 
week since its release in early November.
“We feel fantastic about the results,” Cook said 
in a conference call with analysts. “The most 
important thing for us isn’t really the numbers. 
84

Image: Justin Sullivan
85

86

Image: Frederic J. Brown
It’s customer satisfaction and customer 
satisfaction is literally off the charts on iPhone X.”
But Apple’s revenue forecast for the current 
quarter fell below analysts’ already diminished 
expectations, fueling fears that early appetite for 
the iPhone X has quickly faded.
Those concerns are the primary reason Apple’s 
stock had fallen about 7 percent since hitting 
an all-time high two weeks ago. The shares 
recovered some of those recent losses after the 
quarterly numbers came out, gaining $5.62 to 
$173.40 in after-market trading.
87

88

The iPhone X is unlike any other iPhone in the 
decade-long history of Apple’s best-selling 
product line. It features a brighter screen that 
spans the device from edge to edge, and boasts 
facial recognition technology for unlocking the 
device and other features.
Although those changes appear to be winning 
over consumers who flock to the latest in 
technology, facial recognition technology 
may be turning off potential buyers more 
comfortable with the familiar home button on 
all other iPhones, O’Donnell said.
Apple doesn’t break down iPhone sales by 
model, instead reporting only the total number 
all phones sold. That practice forces analysts 
to do a bit of guesswork based on the limited 
information that Apple provides.
One inescapable conclusion is that the higher 
prices of the iPhone X and the other two other 
new models, the iPhone 8 and iPhone 8 Plus, are 
propelling Apple’s earnings and sales to record 
levels. Apple sold its iPhones for an average of 
$796 during the past quarter, a roughly $100 
increase from the previous year.
That helped lift Apple’s profit 12 percent from 
the previous year to $20.1 billion while revenue 
surged 13 percent to $88.3 billion.
More telling than any of the quarterly numbers 
may be the lack of a wait to get an iPhone X 
now. Most analysts thought intense demand 
and a shortage of components meant Apple 
wouldn’t be able to fill all orders until this spring. 
But the iPhone X is currently available, meaning 
that either Apple solved the production issues 
earlier than anticipated — or consumer demand 
is waning.
89

90

Foxconn Technology Group says it will establish 
a U.S. headquarters in Milwaukee as part of a 
massive investment it is making in an electronics 
manufacturing plant in southeast Wisconsin.
The Taiwan-based company said this week it 
will purchase an existing seven-story office 
building downtown that now has a capacity of 
650 people. The building will be called Foxconn 
Place. It will house business incubators and start-
up initiatives in addition to Foxconn staff.
Republican Gov. Scott Walker says Foxconn’s 
decision to put its headquarters in Milwaukee is 
a sign of the company’s “ever-growing footprint” 
in the state.
The electronics giant is building a manufacturing 
plant in Racine County to make liquid crystal 
display panels for commercial and consumer 
uses, including televisions. The plant is expected 
to be a $10 billion, 13,000-employee complex.
FOXCONN 
PUTTING US 
HEADQUARTERS 
IN MILWAUKEE
91

92

Will Disney’s upcoming streaming services be 
the mouse that roared ... or squeaked?
Disney already owns enviable entertainment 
properties including Pixar, Marvel and Star Wars. 
Now, it’s looking to add Fox’s TV and movie 
studios as it prepares to launch two streaming 
services, one for sports and another focused 
on entertainment.
In announcing first-quarter earnings this week, 
CEO Bob Iger said he was “excited about what 
lies ahead” including the sports streaming 
service and the pending deal for Fox. Adjusted 
income of $1.89 per share beat analyst 
expectations, as did revenue of $15.35 billion, a 
4 percent increase.
WILL DISNEY’S 
STREAMING 
SERVICE ROAR - 
OR SQUEAK?
93

But the same financial report hints at trouble with 
the lucrative ESPN cable channel. Revenue in the 
cable networks business fell 1 percent to $4.5 
billion, hurt by an ESPN revenue decline. The ESPN 
decline resulted from lower ad revenue, though 
that was partly offset by growth in fees from cable 
distributors and lower programing costs.
Disney announced a $5-a-month price for the 
ESPN Plus streaming service, which is coming 
this spring.
The services represent Disney’s big bet on 
what the next generation of entertainment will 
look like: more streaming and more choices. A 
streaming business is critical for Disney because 
the ESPN channel has been losing subscribers 
as more people ditch cable and satellite TV 
services and stream video on Netflix, Amazon 
and Hulu instead.
While Disney is trying to brace for the future 
with the streaming services, questions remain 
about they will offer enough to take on well-
established services such as Netflix.
Rich Greenfield of BTIG Research said the ESPN 
streaming service seems more like a niche 
offering because it won’t have any content from 
the ESPN channel.
And while the entertainment service could be 
a hit, with classic and upcoming movies from 
the studio, shows from Disney Channel, and the 
“Star Wars,” Marvel and Pixar movies, that service 
isn’t launching until late 2019.
“Our fear is that they’re just not all in on 
streaming,” Greenfield said. “If they want to be 
successful, they have to bring all their content 
to streaming.”
94

95

Instead, he said, Disney is dipping its toes in 
streaming while trying to preserve its traditional 
business models.
To boost revenue from theatrical screenings, 
studios such as Disney typically wait months to 
sell or rent movies on DVDs and a year to make 
them available through subscription services 
such as HBO. But such a timeline is quickly 
becoming a relic of the past. People now expect 
things immediately, like being to watch a Disney 
movie on an Xbox right after it is released in 
the theater.
“That’s very hard to balance and be successful,” 
Greenfield said.
The Fox content could help in giving viewers 
more reason to subscribe to yet another 
streaming service. Disney has offered $52.4 
billion to buy the bulk of 21st Century Fox in 
a deal expected to close in the next 12 to 18 
months. When that happens, Disney will own 
the Fox movie and television studios, cable TV 
networks such as FX and National Geographic 
and 22 regional sports networks. But many 
of movies and shows from those businesses 
are already licensed out in the short term; for 
example, HBO gets Fox movies until 2022.
RBC Capital Markets analyst Steven Cahall is 
more positive about how the deal with Fox 
might help Disney’s streaming offerings. 
Notably, Disney gets Fox’s share in Hulu, giving 
it a controlling stake. Cahall said the Fox video 
will help both Hulu and the upcoming Disney-
branded streaming service.
“Disney is likely to be a global player in 
streaming in the coming years given the breadth 
and depth of its content,” he said.
96

Image: Bloomberg
97

#01 – Baseball Boy!
By Voodoo
Category: Games / Free
Requires iOS 7.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#02 – Bitmoji
By Bitstrips
Category: Utilities / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#03 – YouTube: Watch, Listen, Stream
By Google, Inc.
Category: Photo & Video / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#04 – Instagram
By Instagram, Inc.
Category: Photo & Video / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#05 – Messenger
By Facebook, Inc.
Category: Social Networking / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#06 – HQ - Live Trivia Game Show
By Intermedia Labs
Category: Games / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#07 – Snapchat
By Snap, Inc.
Category: Photo & Video / Free
Requires iOS 10.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#08 – Facebook
By Facebook, Inc.
Category: Social Networking / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#10 – Knife Hit
By Ketchapp
Category: Games / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#09 – NFL
By NFL Enterprises LLC
Category: Sports / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch. Apple TV.
98

#01 – GarageBand
By Apple
Category: Music / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later
#02 – WhatsApp Desktop
By WhatsApp Inc.
Category: Social Networking / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.9.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#04 – 1Doc: Word Processor for Writer
ByChengyu Huang
Category: Business / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#03 – Open Any File
By Rocky Sand Studio Ltd.
Category: Utilities / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#05 – OneDrive
By Microsoft Corporation
Category: Productivity / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.9.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#09 – Microsoft Remote Desktop 8.0
By Microsoft Corporation
Category: Business / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.9.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#06 – PDF Reader Pro Free
By PDF Technologies, Inc.
Category: Business / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.8 or later, 64-bit processor
#08 – Xcode
By Apple
Category: Developer Tools / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.11.5 or later
#10 – Microsoft OneNote
By Microsoft Corporation
Category: Productivity / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#07 – Slack
By Slack Technologies, Inc.
Category: Business / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.6.0 or later, 64-bit processor
99

#01 – Minecraft
By Mojang
Category: Games / Price: $6.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#02 – Pocket Build
By MoonBear LTD
Category: Games / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#03 – Heads Up!
By Warner Bros.
Category: Games / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#04 – PAKO 2
By Tree Men Games
Category: Games / Price: $1.99
Requires iOS 10.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#05 – Plague Inc
By Ndemic Creations
Category: Games / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#06 – Bloons TD 5
By Ninja Kiwi
Category: Games / Price: $2.99
Requires iOS 6.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#07 – Geometry Dash
By RobTop Games AB
Category: Games / Price: $1.99
RRequires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#08 – HotSchedules
By HotSchedules
Category: Business / Price: $2.99
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#10 – NBA 2K18
By 2K
Category: Games / Price: $7.99
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#09 – Facetune
By Lightricks Ltd.
Category: Photo & Video / Price: $3.99
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
100

#01 – Magnet
By CrowdCafé
Category: Productivity / Price: $1.39
Compatibility: OS X 10.9 or later, 64-bit processor
#07 – Affinity Designer
By Serif Labs
Category: Graphics & Design / Price: $69.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.7 or later
#08 – DaisyDisk
By Software Ambience Corp.
Category: Utilities / Price: $13.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.8 or later, 64-bit processor
#09 – Adware Doctor: Malware Remove
By YONGMING ZHANG
Category: Utilities / Price: $6.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#02 – Bridge Constructor Portal
By Headup Games GmbH & Co KG
Category: Games / Price: $13.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#10 – BetterSnapTool
By Andreas Hegenberg
Category: Productivity / Price: $3.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#04 – Notability
By Ginger Labs
Category: Productivity / Price: $13.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#03 – Final Cut Pro
By Apple
Category: Video / Price: $399.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.7 or later
#05 – Logic Pro X
By Apple
Category: Music / Price: $279.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#06 – PDF Expert - Edit and Sign PDF
By Readdle Inc.
Category: Productivity / Price: $84.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
101

Movies
TV Shows
&
Trailer
102

Rotten Tomatoes
85%
by Stephen Chbosky
Genre: Drama
Released: 2017
Price: $19.99
247 Ratings
Wonder 
Based on the New York Times bestseller, 
Wonder follows the story of an inspirational 
boy born with facial differences who is 
entering mainstream elementary school 
for the first time. When he enters the fifth 
grade, Auggie becomes the most unlikely 
of heroes. 
FIVE FACTS:
1. Jacob Tremblay, the actor who plays 
Auggie, went with his family to the 
Children’s Craniofacial Association retreat 
to meet children with Treacher Collins 
syndrome, the syndrome Auggie has.
2. Jacob Tremblay’s sister and father also 
feature in the movie.
3. The author of the novel also wrote The 
Perks of Being a Wallflower, the film of which 
was also directed by Stephen Chbosky.
4. Jacob Tremblay also starred in Room, 
which is also narrated from the perspective 
of the child he is playing.
5. The film was originally going to be 
directed by Paul King, before he dropped 
out to work on Paddington 2.
 
103

104

Why Are We Whispering?
105

Dunkirk
This is far from a romantic war film but 
portrays the events of Dunkirk as hundreds 
of thousands of British and Allied troops 
were surrounded by enemy forces. This 
undeniably tense film draws on the harsh 
realities of war and provides no context or 
background at all. It is an utterly immersive 
experience that is a celebration of heroism 
in the face of utter terror. 
FIVE FACTS:
1. Around 30 Dunkirk survivors attended 
the premiere in London. They agreed that it 
accurately captured the event.
2. 12 of the original civilian ships that took 
part in the Dunkirk evacuation featured in 
the film.
3. The film was shot on the actual beach at 
Dunkirk where the evacuation took place 
and 1000 extras were used.
4. Director Christopher Nolan made the 
crossing to Dunkirk on a boat with his wife, 
the way the civilians would have, and it took 
19 hours due to adverse conditions.
5. Nolan also rode in the Spitfire shown in 
the movie to allow him to accurately portray 
the experience of the dogfights in the film.
 
by Christopher Nolan
Genre: Action & Adventure
Released: 2017
Price: $19.99
573 Ratings
Rotten Tomatoes
92%
106

Trailer
107

Breath :15
108

109

Music
“Man of the Woods” 
110

Genre: Pop
Released: Feb 2, 2018
16 Songs
Price: $12.99
2.9k Ratings
Man of the Woods
Justin Timberlake
Justin Timberlake’s latest album is a return 
to his roots and is not, as many thought the 
title suggested, a country album. This album 
does not reply on one genre in particular, and 
in some tracks returns to the soul and funk 
style pop that he started his career creating. 
Timberlake challenges himself and redefines 
his music through this new album.
FIVE FACTS:
1. Justin Timberlake performed Filthy from 
his new Man of the Woods album at Super 
Bowl 2018 Halftime Show.
2. The intimate video he released to 
announce the album, demonstrated just 
how personal this new album would be.
3. The album artwork is very different from 
his previous releases and surprised many.
4. The title of the album, Man of the Woods, 
is the meaning behind his son’s name, Silas.
5. This is the first time Timberland has 
released a track with Pharrell Williams since 
his 2002 debut solo album, Justified.
111

112

“Say Something”
113

Here come the Runts
AWOLNATION 
This album echoes all the artists Aaron 
Bruno grew up idolizing, Bruce Springsteen, 
The Cars, Dire Straits and more. In the past, 
the band has blended genres and styles to 
create entirely unique albums like nothing 
we’ve heard before and their latest does 
not disappoint. The album evokes nostalgic 
memories of a better time.
FIVE FACTS:
1. Singer Aaron Bruno had been 
with a number of other bands before 
forming AWOLNATION.
2. The album was recorded at Bruno’s home 
studio near Los Angeles.
3. The band’s headline tour starts on 
February 11 in Toronto, with support from 
Nothing But Thieves.
4. AWOLNATION were so pleased with 
their success in 2011, that they gave their 
Christmas EP to fans for free.
5. Although known for being a hard rock 
band, Aaron Bruno still listens to other genres 
including country, pop and even hip-hop.
Genre: Alternative
Released: Feb 2, 2018
14 Songs
Price: $9.99
118 Ratings
114

“Here Come The Runts”
115

116

“Handyman”
117

118

On a typically sluggish Super Bowl weekend, 
Sony Pictures’ “Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle” 
topped the North American box office for the 
fourth time in seven weeks.
The runaway hit, a reboot starring Dwayne 
Johnson and Kevin Hart, sold $10.9 million 
in tickets in its seventh weekend of release, 
according to final figures Monday.
Sliding to second was last week’s No. 1 film, 
“Maze Runner: The Death Cure.” The third 
installment in the young adult sci-fi trilogy 
earned $10.5 million in its second week. The 
film’s modest domestic performance has been 
partly alleviated by stronger sales abroad, where 
it has grossed $142.9 million.
The lone new wide release to compete with 
the Super Bowl was the Lionsgate-CBS Films 
supernatural thriller “Winchester,” starring Helen 
Mirren. It debuted in third, with $9.3 million.
‘JUMANJI’ REBOOT 
REIGNS AGAIN AT 
THE BOX OFFICE
119

The top 20 movies at U.S. and Canadian theaters 
Friday through Monday, followed by distribution 
studio, gross, number of theater locations, 
average receipts per location, total gross and 
number of weeks in release, as compiled 
Monday by comScore:
1. 
“Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle,” Sony, 
$10,930,222, 3,352 locations,  
$3,261 average, $352,572,974, 7 weeks.
2. 
“Maze Runner: The Death Cure,” 20th 
Century Fox, $10,474,895,  
3,793 locations, $2,762 average, 
$40,035,094, 2 weeks.
3. 
“Winchester,” Lionsgate, $9,307,626, 
2,480 locations, $3,753 average, 
$9,307,626, 1 week.
4. 
“The Greatest Showman,” 20th Century 
Fox, $7,695,644, 2,588 locations, 
$2,974 average, $137,370,816, 7 weeks.
5. 
“The Post,” 20th Century Fox, 
$5,218,122, 2,462 locations,  
$2,119 average, $67,202,632, 7 weeks.
120

121

122

6. 
“Hostiles,” Entertainment Studios Motion 
Pictures, $5,108,228, 2,934 locations, 
$1,741 average, $20,822,641, 7 weeks.
7. 
“12 Strong,” Warner Bros., $4,706,481, 
2,918 locations, $1,613 average, 
$37,300,034, 3 weeks.
8. 
“Den of Thieves,” STX Entertainment, 
$4,551,163, 2,112 locations,  
$2,155 average, $36,152,095, 3 weeks.
9. 
“The Shape of Water,” Fox Searchlight, 
$4,448,520, 2,341 locations,  
$1,900 average, $44,728,570, 10 weeks.
10. 
“Paddington 2,” Warner Bros., 
$3,277,453, 2,388 locations,  
$1,372 average, $36,481,132, 4 weeks.
123

124

11. 
“Three Billboards Outside Ebbing 
Missouri,” Fox Searchlight, 
$3,013,022, 1,726 locations, $1,746 average, 
$41,777,073, 13 weeks.
12. 
“I, Tonya,” Neon Rated, $2,469,724, 
1,450 locations, $1,703 average, 
$22,553,612, 9 weeks.
13. 
“Padmaavat,” Viva Entertainment, 
$2,438,930, 345 locations,  
$7,069 average, $8,900,499, 2 weeks.
14. 
“Darkest Hour,” Focus Features, 
$2,362,975, 1,486 locations,  
$1,590 average, $48,786,132, 11 weeks.
15. 
“Star Wars: The Last Jedi,” Disney, 
$2,338,242, 1,467 locations, 
$1,594 average, $614,455,022, 8 weeks.
125

16. 
“Forever My Girl,” Roadside 
Attractions, $2,290,138,  
1,427 locations, $1,605 average, 
$12,551,792, 3 weeks.
17. 
“Phantom Thread,” Focus Features, 
$2,129,155, 1,186 locations,  
$1,795 average, $14,163,264, 6 weeks.
18. 
“Coco,” Disney, $1,729,708, 
1,636 locations, $1,057 average, 
$204,789,437, 11 weeks.
19. 
“The Commuter,” Lionsgate, 
$1,666,757, 1,494 locations,  
$1,116 average, $34,266,504, 4 weeks.
20. 
“Insidious: The Last Key,” Universal, 
$1,462,810, 1,253 locations,  
$1,167 average, $65,753,770, 5 weeks.
Universal and Focus are owned by NBC Universal, a unit of Comcast 
Corp.; Sony, Columbia, Sony Screen Gems and Sony Pictures Classics 
are units of Sony Corp.; Paramount is owned by Viacom Inc.; Disney, 
Pixar and Marvel are owned by The Walt Disney Co.; Miramax is owned 
by Filmyard Holdings LLC; 20th Century Fox and Fox Searchlight are 
owned by 21st Century Fox; Warner Bros. and New Line are units 
of Time Warner Inc.; MGM is owned by a group of former creditors 
including Highland Capital, Anchorage Advisors and Carl Icahn; 
Lionsgate is owned by Lions Gate Entertainment Corp.; IFC is owned by 
AMC Networks Inc.; Rogue is owned by Relativity Media LLC.
126

127

The first trailer of “Solo: A Star Wars Story” 
has finally arrived, offering the first glimpse 
of the much-anticipated spinoff plagued by 
production troubles.
After a 45-second ad for the latest “Star Wars” 
film played during Sunday’s Super Bowl, a 
90-second teaser trailer premiered Monday 
on “Good Morning America.” The footage 
showcased a gritty prequel featuring the snazzy 
interior of a then-new Millennium Falcon, the 
familiar growl of Chewbacca and a plethora of 
handsome fur coats.
Though punctuated by the brashness of Alden 
Ehrenreich’s young Han Solo, the vibe of the trailer 
is a little chiller than was once forecast for “Solo.” 
WITH NEW TRAILER, 
‘SOLO’ HOPES 
TO OUTRUN 
PRODUCTION 
TROUBLES
128

129

Solo: A Star Wars Story Official Teaser
130

The initial directors, Phil Lord and Christopher 
Miller (“The Lego Movie,” “21 Jump Street”) 
are known for their irreverent sense of humor, 
something that first excited many “Star Wars” 
fans when the pair was enlisted for the stand-
alone installment.
But Lord and Miller were removed from the film 
six months into production over what Lucasfilm 
said were “different creative visions” on the film. 
Ron Howard was brought in as a replacement in 
July, and shooting concluded in October.
The trailer for the film, to be released May 25, 
seemed intent on assuring fans that “Solo” 
will be a more typically somber chapter in the 
science-fiction franchise. Young Solo is shown as 
an ambitious flyboy who drops out of the fight 
academy and enlists with a rogue band led by 
Woody Harrelson’s Tobias Beckett.
“I’ve been running scams on the street since I 
was 10,” Solo says in voice-over. “I was kicked out 
of the fly academy for having a mind of my own. 
I’m going to be a pilot — best in the galaxy.”
Concerns have also been focused on 
Ehrenreich, who has the unenviably position 
of following in Harrison Ford’s footsteps in 
one of the most iconic roles in movies. Before 
booking the role, Ehrenreich starred in Joel 
and Ethan Coen’s “Hail, Caesar!” and Warren 
Beatty’s “Rules Don’t Apply,” but The Hollywood 
Reporter earlier reported that an acting coach 
was brought in late in the production to aid the 
actor’s performance.
Instead of focusing solely on Solo, Monday’s 
trailer promoted the film’s larger ensemble, 
including Donald Glover as Lando Calrissian, 
Emilia Clarke and Thandie Newton.
131

132

Two government studies that bombarded rats 
and mice with cellphone radiation found a weak 
link to some heart tumors, but federal regulators 
and some scientists say don’t worry — it is safe 
to use your device. They still do.
Previous studies of cellphone users had found 
little reason for concern, but the newest research 
took a closer look at the effects of super-high 
doses in animals to address some lingering 
questions that could not be tested on humans.
CANCER FROM
 CELLPHONES?
 NEW STUDIES 
SAY NO NEED
TO HANG UP
133

The rat study released last week found a small 
increase in an unusual type of heart tumor 
in male rats, but there were no significant 
problems in female rats or in a separate study of 
mice. In particular, scientists could not find hard 
evidence for concern about brain tumors.
The lead author of the research, John Bucher of 
the National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, is not changing his cellphone use or 
advising his family to.
“I am actually holding my cellphone up to my 
ear,” Dr. Otis Brawley, the American Cancer 
Society’s chief medical officer, said in an 
interview after reading the studies.
The rodent studies do not reflect real-life 
cellphone use, he cautioned.
“These draft reports are bound to create a lot 
of concern, but in fact they won’t change what 
I tell people. The evidence for an association 
between cellphones and cancer is weak. And 
so far, we have not seen a higher cancer risk 
in people. But if you’re concerned about this 
animal data, wear an earpiece.”
The findings about the rare nerve-tissue tumor 
discovered in the hearts of male rats do not 
translate directly into a concern for humans, 
Bucher stressed.
Bucher’s agency conducted the $25 million 
study at the behest of the Food and Drug 
Administration, which quickly said cellphones 
are safe.
“The current safety limits for cellphones are 
acceptable for protecting the public health,” 
FDA radiation health chief Dr. Jeffrey Shuren 
said in a statement.
134

135

136

Bucher said typical cellphone use is “very, very, 
very much lower than what we studied.”
Rats and mice were bombarded for nine hours 
a day for up to two years with a radiation level 
so high that humans would only experience it 
briefly, such as when a phone with a weak signal 
expends more energy searching for a stronger 
one, Bucher said at a news conference.
“At best it might be a weak carcinogen. ... if in 
fact it is a carcinogen,” he said.
Confusingly, the radiated rats somehow lived 
longer than comparison rats that were not 
exposed to cellphone radiation. Bucher said 
that could be just chance, or it could be that 
the radiation reduced inflammation in the rats, 
which in turn decreased the risk of a rat disease.
The toxicology program released preliminary 
results two years ago and finalized last week. 
The earlier report showed a hint of increased 
brain tumors in male rats, but the final results 
did not bear that out.
The new rat study found what it called 
“equivocal evidence” for increases in DNA 
damage, brain tumors and a few other  
cancers, but it was not clear that it was  
related to the cellphones.
“Evidence of DNA damage was seen in some 
tissues of some animals, but we don’t feel we 
have evidence to comment on the biological 
significance,” Bucher said.
Still, it was surprising that the rodents did 
experience a variety of other effects, even if they 
were not at high enough levels to be considered 
significant and possibly linked, said Leeka 
Kheifets, an epidemiology professor at the  
137

138

University of California, Los Angeles, and a 
former head of radiation studies for the World 
Health Organization.
“There is some concern that there is so much 
activity going on,” she said, also speaking from 
a cellphone. But “it’s not like the sky is falling, a 
huge effect. Definitely not.”
The findings failed to reassure longtime critics 
of cellphone radiation, such as David Carpenter, 
head of environmental health at the State 
University of New York in Albany. Carpenter  
said the studies were not large enough to 
uncover some rare problems and that the claim 
of “equivocal” findings about brain tumors 
“cannot be dismissed.”
“It’s not anywhere near as dangerous as 
cigarettes, but is there a real hazard from 
excessive use? Yes,” Carpenter said from a landline.
In 2011, a working group of the International 
Agency for Research on Cancer said cellphones 
are possibly carcinogenic. But numerous studies 
over the years, before and after that listing, have 
found little evidence of a problem.
Among the largest studies, a 2010 analysis in 13 
countries found little or no risk of brain tumors, 
with a possible link in the heaviest users that the 
study’s authors found inconclusive. And a large 
Danish study that linked phone bills to a cancer 
registry found no risk even from more than 13 
years of cellphone use, according to the latest 
update in 2007.
In December, the state of California put out a 
guide on how people could reduce exposure to 
radiofrequency from cellphones if they’re worried, 
such as using earphones or texting instead.
139

140

The railroad industry is playing down 
expectations that a safety technology that could 
have prevented recent deadly train crashes will 
be in operation across the United States by the 
end of the year.
Indeed, freight and commuter rail officials speak 
as if there never was any plan to complete their 
work on the technology known as positive train 
control, or PTC, by Dec. 31.
RAIL INDUSTRY 
SAYS KEY SAFETY 
TECHNOLOGY 
NOT DUE 
UNTIL 2020
141

Congress required in 2008 that railroads adopt 
PTC and gave them seven years to do the job. 
When it became clear that wasn’t enough, 
Congress gave them another three years. The 
discussion then was that a few railroads might 
need even more than three extra years, and 
provisions were added to the legislation to allow 
railroads that showed substantial progress, but 
couldn’t meet the new deadline, the ability to 
obtain extensions of up to two additional years.
Officials for the trade associations representing 
the seven major freight railroads in the U.S. and 
the nation’s commuter railroads now say they 
view Dec. 31 as the date by which railroads must 
meet several PTC milestones to qualify for an 
extension, rather than the ultimate deadline.
The Transportation Department has little choice 
but to grant the extensions as long as railroads 
meet the milestones, said Kathryn Kirmayer, 
the Association of American Railroads’ general 
counsel. One milestone is that freight railroads 
have PTC in operation on half their route miles 
where it’s required.
“By the end of 2020 is the absolute deadline 
everybody has to have it installed and 
implemented, which means operating 
everywhere they are required to have it 
operating,” she said.
Members of Congress expressed frustration with 
railroads backing off this year’s deadline.
Congress never intended the extensions be used 
“to allow railroads that have dragged their feet 
to just blow off the mandate,” said Rep. Peter 
DeFazio of Oregon, the House transportation 
committee’s senior Democrat. Sen. Bill Nelson 
of Florida, the Senate commerce committee’s 
142

Image: Randall Hill
143

Full Remarks: NTSB Sunday briefing on Amtrak 
collision in Cayce, South Carolina
144

Image: Randall Hill
The chairman of the National Transportation Safety 
Board says an Amtrak train that crashed in South 
Carolina on Sunday killing two people veered into a 
parked freight train after the tracks were ‘padlocked’ 
in the wrong direction.
Authorities investigate the scene of a fatal Amtrak 
train crash in Cayce, South Carolina.
145

senior Democrat, said, “Every railroad should 
be taking the recent deadly train accidents 
seriously and doing everything they can to meet 
the 2018 deadline.”
Reports filed with the Federal Railroad 
Administration show some railroads have nearly 
completed their work, while others have made 
little progress.
Randy Clarke, the American Public 
Transportation Association’s vice president for 
operations, said three or four of the nation’s 
27 commuter railroads have already received 
extensions past Dec. 31 and more extensions  
are expected.
“We are actively working as an industry to 
get everyone to the milestones necessary for 
extension or to completion,” he said. “We know 
not every agency is in the same place and some 
have more complications than others.”
The National Transportation Safety Board has 
said the technology could have prevented a 
collision between an Amtrak train and an out-of-
service CSX freight train on Sunday near Cayce, 
South Carolina, and the derailment of an Amtrak 
train in December near Olympia, Washington. 
Five people were killed and dozens more injured 
in the two crashes.
Amtrak has said it will complete its work on PTC 
by Dec. 31, but its trains often operate on tracks 
owned by other railroads.
Sarah Feinberg, who led the railroad 
administration under President Barack Obama, 
drew a distinction between large freight 
railroads and smaller commuter railroads that 
often struggle for funds.
146

Image: Jeff Blake
147

148

“The freight industry should be embarrassed  
by the way they’ve approached the PTC 
mandate and deadline, and the Congress 
should be embarrassed for letting them get 
away with it,” she said.
But industry officials said the obstacles to 
developing PTC systems are underappreciated. 
It took many years just for the railroad 
administration to develop standards and then 
to approve systems that meet those standards, 
Clarke said.
Despite some federal aid, commuter railroads 
have had a hard time scraping up the money 
for the technology.
“We’re public transit agencies. It’s not like  
we have a surplus of money lying around,”  
he said.
Mike Rush, vice president of freight rail group, 
estimated that freight railroads will ultimately 
spend $10 billion implementing PTC, and 
commuter railroads about $3 billion.
Other challenges have included acquiring 
wireless spectrum, taking locomotives out 
of service to install hardware and software, 
installing communications towers along 
tracks, and competing with other railroads 
for the services of the handful of specialized 
contractors able to install the systems,  
Clarke said.
“You don’t have a lot of available (contractors), 
and everyone is trying to hit the deadline 
at the same time,” he said. “We don’t have a 
surplus of money and the technical challenges 
are immense, especially on the larger, more 
complicated railroads.”
149

150

Online retailer Amazon has reached a deal with 
French authorities to pay about $250 million in 
back taxes.
Amazon was asked in 2012 to pay the amount 
over earnings made in 2006-2010 and has since 
been involved in a dispute with tax authorities.
Details of the deal have not been revealed.
The company said Monday it has reached an 
“overall settlement agreement with the French 
tax authorities on past issues, and our main 
objective remains to provide the best possible 
buying experience for our customers in France, 
where we have invested more than 2 billion 
euros since 2010, and created more than 5,500 
permanent jobs.”
Amazon last year reached a similar deal with 
Italian authorities to end a 100-million-euro 
($118 million) dispute over its tax payments 
from 2011-15.
AMAZON TO  
PAY FRANCE  
$250 MILLION IN 
BACK TAXES
151

152

THE CHAMPION (FEAT. LUDACRIS)
Carrie Underwood
SAY SOMETHING (FEAT. CHRIS STAPLETON)
JUstin timberlake
FILTHY
JUstin timberlake
CAN’T STOP THE FEELING!
JUstin timberlake
MEANT TO BE
 (FEAT. FLORIDA GEORGIA LINE)
bebe rexha
PERFECT
ed sheeran
FINESSE (REMIX) [FEAT. CARDI B] - SINGLE
brUno mars
HAVANA (FEAT. YOUNG THUG)
Camila Cabello
THE MIDDLE
Zedd, maren morris & Grey
MAN OF THE WOODS
JUstin timberlake
153

154

MAN OF THE WOODS
JUstin timberlake
THE GREATEST SHOWMAN
(ORIGINAL MOTION PICTURE SOUNDTRACK)
VarioUs artists
NOW THAT’S WHAT I CALL MUSIC, VOL. 65
VarioUs artists
FROM A ROOM: VOLUME 2
Chris stapleton
SEVENTEEN SPECIAL ALBUM
‘DIRECTOR’S CUT’ - EP
seVenteen
PERCEPTION
nF
TRUE SADNESS
the aVett brothers
24K MAGIC
brUno mars
÷ (DELUXE)
ed sheeran
HERE’S TO YOU
montGomery Gentry
155

156

PERFECT SYMPHONY
 (WITH ANDREA BOCELLI)
ed sheeran
SAY SOMETHING
(FEAT. CHRIS STAPLETON) [OFFICIAL VIDEO]
JUstin timberlake
SUPER BASS
niCki minaJ
FINESSE (REMIX) [FEAT. CARDI B]
brUno mars
HAVANA (FEAT. YOUNG THUG)
Camila Cabello
MIC DROP (STEVE AOKI REMIX)
bts
CAN’T STOP THE FEELING!
(ORIGINAL SONG FROM DREAMWORKS
ANIMATION’S “TROLLS”)
JUstin timberlake
DESPACITO (FEAT. DADDY YANKEE) 
lUis Fonsi
YONCÉ
beyonCé
PERFECT
ed sheeran
157

158

SUPER BOWL SUNDAY
this is Us, season 2
A RANDOM KILLING
the assassination oF Gianni VersaCe:
ameriCan Crime story, season 2
(DON’T FEAR) THE REAPER
Grey’s anatomy, season 14
MANHUNT
the assassination oF Gianni VersaCe:
ameriCan Crime story, season 2
THE PEOPLE V. OLIVIA POPE
sCandal, season 7
CORAL REEFS
blUe planet ii
THE MAN WHO WOULD BE VOGUE
the assassination oF Gianni VersaCe:
ameriCan Crime story, season 2
DIVAS LIP SYNC LIVE
rUpaUl’s draG raCe all stars, season 3 (UnCensored)
CHAPTER SEVENTY-THREE
Jane the VirGin, season 4
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE:
“THE WICKED AND THE DIVINE”
riVerdale, season 2
159

160

THE GREAT ALONE
kristin hannah
REED
sawyer bennett
LOOK FOR ME
lisa Gardner
THE DECEIVERS
alex berenson
THE WIFE BETWEEN US
Greer hendriCks & sarah pekkanen
THE WOMAN IN THE WINDOW
a. J. Finn
RUNNING SCARED
lisa JaCkson
YOUR ENDLESS LOVE
layla haGen
MOST WANTED
lisa sCottoline
DARK IN DEATH
J. d. robb
161

162

Japan has a new cafe where customers 
can enjoy coffee brewed and served by a 
robot barista.
The robot named Sawyer debuted this week at 
Henna Cafe in Tokyo’s downtown business and 
shopping district of Shibuya. The shop’s name in 
Japanese means “strange cafe.”
The single-armed robot scans a ticket 
purchased from a vending machine and 
greets the customer.
“Would you care for a delicious coffee?” the 
barista, with a screen showing a pair of cartoon 
ROBOT MAKES 
COFFEE AT NEW 
CAFE IN JAPAN’S 
CAPITAL
163

eyes, asks in a flat tone. “I can make one better 
than human beings around here.”
It grinds the coffee beans, fills a filter and pours 
hot water over a paper cup for up to five people 
at once. A cup of brewed coffee costs 320 yen 
($3) and takes a few minutes.
Sawyer can also operate an automated machine 
for six other hot drinks including cappuccino, 
hot chocolate and green tea latte.
Customers, many of them young men, took 
photos with their smartphones while they 
waited in line.
The cafe operator, travel agency H.I.S. Co., says 
robots can increase productivity while also 
entertaining customers.
“An essential point is to increase productivity,” 
said Masataka Tamaki, general manager of 
corporate planning at H.I.S. He said only 
one person needs to oversee the robot cafe, 
compared to several people needed at a regular 
coffee shop, so it can serve better quality coffee 
at a reasonable price.
Tamaki says it’s not just about efficiency. “We 
want the robot to entertain customers so it’s not 
like buying coffee at a vending machine,” he said.
Takeshi Yamamoto, a 68-year-old restaurant 
employee who works in the neighborhood, 
said his first experience with the robot cafe 
was very enjoyable, and his robot-made coffee 
was delicious.
“It’s quite rich, and tastes very good,” Yamamoto 
said, as he took a sip. “You can get machine-
made coffee at convenience stores, too, and it’s 
actually good. But here, I had great fun.”
164

Image: Koji Sasahara
165

166

Russian cyberspies pursuing the secrets of 
military drones and other sensitive U.S. defense 
technology tricked key contract workers into 
exposing their email to theft, an Associated 
Press investigation has found.
What ultimately may have been stolen is 
uncertain, but the hackers clearly exploited 
a national vulnerability in cybersecurity: 
poorly protected email and barely any direct 
notification to victims.
The hackers known as Fancy Bear, who also 
intruded in the U.S. election, went after 
at least 87 people working on militarized 
drones, missiles, rockets, stealth fighter jets, 
cloud-computing platforms or other sensitive 
activities, the AP found.
Employees at both small companies and 
defense giants like Lockheed Martin Corp., 
Raytheon Co., Boeing Co., Airbus Group and 
General Atomics were targeted by the hackers. 
A handful of people in Fancy Bear’s sights also 
worked for trade groups, contractors in U.S.-
allied countries or on corporate boards.
‘FANCY BEAR’ 
HACKERS
 TOOK AIM AT 
US DEFENSE 
CONTRACTORS
167

“The programs that they appear to target and 
the people who work on those programs are 
some of the most forward-leaning, advanced 
technologies,” said Charles Sowell, a former 
senior adviser to the U.S. Office of the  
Director of National Intelligence, who  
reviewed the list of names for the AP. “And 
if those programs are compromised in any 
way, then our competitive advantage and our 
defense is compromised.”
“That’s what’s really scary,” added Sowell,  
who was one of the hacking targets.
The AP identified the defense and security 
targets from about 19,000 lines of email 
phishing data created by hackers and collected 
by the U.S.-based cybersecurity company 
Secureworks, which calls the hackers Iron 
Twilight. The data is partial and extends only 
from March 2015 to May 2016. Of 87 scientists, 
engineers, managers and others, 31 agreed to 
be interviewed by the AP.
Most of the targets’ work was classified. Yet 
as many as 40 percent of them clicked on 
the hackers’ phishing links, the AP analysis 
indicates. That was the first step in potentially 
opening their personal email accounts or 
computer files to data theft by the digital spies.
James Poss, who ran a partnership doing 
drone research for the Federal Aviation 
Administration, was about to catch a taxi to the 
2015 Paris Air Show when what appeared to 
be a Google security alert materialized in his 
inbox. Distracted, he moved his cursor to the 
blue prompt on his laptop.
“I clicked on it and instantly knew that I had been 
had,” the retired Air Force major general said.  
168

169

Poss says he realized his mistake before 
entering his credentials, which would have 
exposed his email to the hackers.
Hackers predominantly targeted personal 
Gmail, with a few corporate accounts mixed in.
Personal accounts can convey snippets of 
classified information, whether through 
carelessness or expediency. They also can 
lead to other more valuable targets or carry 
embarrassing personal details that can be used 
for blackmail or to recruit spies.
Drone consultant Keven Gambold, a hacking 
target himself, said the espionage could help 
Russia catch up with the Americans. “This 
would allow them to leapfrog years of hard-
won experience,” he said.
He said his own company is so worried about 
hacking that “we’ve almost gone back in time 
to use stand-alone systems if we’re processing 
client proprietary data — we’re FedEx’ing hard 
drives around.”
The AP has previously reported on Fancy Bear’s 
attempts to break into the Gmail accounts 
of Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign, 
American national security officials, journalists, 
and Kremlin critics and adversaries around 
the world. U.S. intelligence agencies have 
concluded the hackers worked for the Kremlin 
and stole U.S. campaign email to tilt the 2016 
election toward Donald Trump — all of which 
Russian leader Vladimir Putin has denied.
But the hackers clearly had broader aims. 
Fifteen of the targets identified by the AP 
worked on drones — the single largest group 
of weapons specialists.
170

171

172

Countries like Russia are racing to make better 
drones as the remote-control aircraft have moved 
to the forefront of modern warfare. They can 
fire missiles, hunt down adversaries, or secretly 
monitor targets for days — all while keeping 
human pilots safely behind computer controls.
The U.S. Air Force now needs more pilots for 
drones than for any other single type of aircraft, 
a training official said last year. Drones will lead 
growth in the aerospace industry over the next 
decade, with military uses driving the boom, the 
Teal Group predicted in November. Production 
was expected to balloon from $4.2 billion to 
$10.3 billion.
So far, though, Russia has nothing that compares 
with the new-generation U.S. Reaper, which has 
been called “the most feared” U.S. drone. General 
Atomics’ 5,000-pound mega-drone can fly more 
than 1,000 miles (1,600 kilometers) to deliver 
Hellfire missiles and smart bombs. It has seen 
action in Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria.
The hackers went after General Atomics, 
targeting a drone sensor specialist. He did not 
respond to requests for comment.
They also made a run at the Gmail account of 
Michael Buet, an electronics engineer who has 
worked on ultra-durable batteries and high-
altitude drones for SunCondor, a small South 
Carolina company owned by Star Technology 
and Research. Such machines could be a useful 
surveillance tool for a country like Russia, with its 
global military engagements and vast domestic 
border frontier.
“This bird is quite unique,” said Buet. “It can fly at 
62,000 feet (18,600 meters) and doesn’t land for 
five years.”
173

The Russians also appeared eager to catch up in 
space, once an arena for Cold War competition 
in the race for the moon. They seemed to 
be carefully eyeing the X-37B, an American 
unmanned space plane that looks like a 
miniature shuttle but is shrouded in secrecy.
In a reference to an X-37B flight in May 2015, 
Russian Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Rogozin 
invoked the vehicle as evidence that his 
country’s space program was faltering. “The 
United States is pushing ahead,” he warned 
Russian lawmakers.
Less than two weeks later, Fancy Bear tried 
to penetrate the Gmail account of a senior 
engineer on the X-37B project at Boeing.
Fancy Bear has also tried to hack into the 
emails of several members of the Arlington, 
Virginia-based Aerospace Industries Association, 
including its president, former Army Secretary 
Eric Fanning. It went after Lt. Gen. Mark 
Shackelford, who has served in the military 
and aerospace industry as a corporate board 
member. He has been involved with major 
weapons and space programs like SpaceX, the 
reusable orbital rocket company founded by 
billionaire tech entrepreneur Elon Musk.
Along another path, the hackers chased people 
who work on cloud-based services, the off-site 
computer networks that enable collaborators to 
easily access and juggle data.
In 2013, the CIA signed a $600 million deal  
with web giant Amazon to build a system  
to share secure data across the U.S. intelligence 
community. Other spy services followed,  
and the government cleared them last year  
to move classified data to the cloud at the 
174

175

176

“secret” level — a step below the nation’s  
most sensitive information.
Fancy Bear’s target list suggests the Russians 
have noticed these developments.
The hackers tried to get into the Gmail accounts 
of a cloud compliance officer at Palantir and a 
manager of cloud platform operations at SAP 
National Security Services, two companies that 
do extensive government work. Another target 
was at Mellanox Federal Systems, which helps the 
government with high-speed storage networks, 
data analysis and cloud computing. Its clients 
include the FBI and other intelligence agencies.
Yet of the 31 targets reached by the AP, just one 
got any warning from U.S. officials.
“They said we have a Fancy Bear issue we need 
to talk about,” said security consultant Bill 
Davidson. He said an Air Force cybersecurity 
investigator inspected his computer shortly after 
the 2015 phishing attempt but found no sign 
that it succeeded. He believes he was contacted 
because his name was recognized at the Air 
Force Office of Special Investigations, where he 
used to work.
The FBI declined to give on-the-record details of 
its response to this Russian operation. Agency 
spokeswoman Jillian Stickels said the FBI does 
sometimes notify individual targets. “The FBI 
takes ... all potential threats to public and private 
sector systems very seriously,” she said in an email.
However, three people familiar with the matter 
— including a current and a former government 
official — previously told the AP that the FBI 
knew the details of Fancy Bear’s phishing 
campaign for more than a year.
177

Pressed about notification in that case, a  
senior FBI official, who was not authorized 
to publicly discuss the hacking operation 
because of its sensitivity, said the bureau 
was overwhelmed by the sheer number of 
attempted hacks. “It’s a matter of triaging to  
the best of our ability the volume of the  
targets who are out there,” he said.
A Pentagon spokeswoman, Heather Babb, said 
she could release no details about any Defense 
Department response, citing “operational 
security reasons.” But she said the department 
recognizes the evolving cyber threat and 
continues to update training and technology. 
“This extends to all of our workforce — military, 
civilian and contractor,” she added.
The Defense Security Service, which protects 
classified U.S. technology and trains industry 
in computer security, focuses on safeguarding 
corporate computer networks. “We simply 
have no insight into or oversight of anyone’s 
personal email accounts or how they are 
protected or notified when something is  
amiss,” spokeswoman Cynthia McGovern  
said in an email.
Contacted by the AP, Lockheed Martin, 
Raytheon, Boeing, Airbus and General Atomics 
did not respond to requests for comment.
Jerome Pearson, a space system and drone 
developer, acknowledged that he has not 
focused on security training at his company,  
Star Technology, where Buet has consulted. 
“No, we really haven’t done that,” he said with 
a nervous laugh. “We may be a little bit remiss 
in that area.” He said they may do training for 
future contracts.
178

A Media investigation finds that Russian cyber spies 
exploiting a national vulnerability in cybersecurity 
are trying to break into the emails of scores of 
people working on military drone technology.
179

180

Cybersecurity experts say it’s no surprise 
that spies go after less secure personal email 
as an opening to more protected systems. 
“For a good operator, it’s like hammering a 
wedge,” said Richard Ford, chief scientist at the 
Forcepoint cybersecurity company. “Private 
email is the soft target.”
Some officials were particularly upset by the 
failure to notify employees of cloud computing 
companies that handle data for intelligence 
agencies. The cloud is a “huge target for foreign 
intelligence services in general — they love to 
get into that shared environment,” said Sowell, 
the former adviser to the Office of the Director 
of National Intelligence.
“At some point, wouldn’t someone who’s 
responsible for the defense contractor base be 
aware of this and try to reach out?” he asked.
Even successful hacks might not translate  
into new weapons for Russia, where the 
economy is weighed down by corruption and 
international sanctions.
However, experts say Russia, while still behind 
the U.S., has been making more advanced 
drones in recent years. Russian officials have 
recently been bragging as their increasingly 
sophisticated drones are spotted over war zones 
in Ukraine and Syria.
At a 2017 air show outside Moscow, plans were 
announced for a new generation of Russian 
combat drones.
Rogozin, the deputy prime minister, boasted 
that the technological gap between Russia and 
the United States “has been sharply reduced and 
will be completely eliminated in the near future.”
181

182

Image: Carlos Barria
One of China’s biggest makers of solar panels 
said this week it will invest $309 million to 
expand manufacturing in India in a move to 
guard against what it complained is a rising 
threat of import controls in the United States 
and other markets.
Longi Solar Technology Ltd.’s announcement 
follows the Trump administration’s Jan. 24 
decision to impose an extra 30 percent duty on 
imported solar modules. An Indian regulator says 
it is considering a “safeguard tariff” of 70 percent 
on solar panels from China and Malaysia.
CHINA SOLAR 
SUPPLIER GROWS 
IN INDIA TO AVOID 
TRADE CONTROLS
183

Chinese manufacturers dominate global solar 
panel production. Their explosive growth has 
helped to propel adoption of renewable energy 
by driving down costs. But the United States, 
Europe, India and others complain unfairly low-
priced exports hurt their manufacturers and 
threaten thousands of jobs.
The United States, Europe and other non-
Chinese markets account for only 10 percent of 
Longi’s sales, according to its strategy director, 
Max Xia. But he said Longi wants to promote 
global sales of its latest technology this year.
“We think sooner or later anti-dumping and 
trade protection will be happening in several 
countries,” said Xia at a news conference. 
“This is why we choose to do the investment 
in Malaysia and also in India, because we 
don’t know when and where it will happen, 
this kind of anti-dumping. So we prepare to 
counter it.”
Xia’s comment represented an unusually 
explicit statement by the Chinese industry that 
it is moving production to avoid trade controls. 
Other Chinese producers have set up factories 
in India and Southeast Asia but usually say 
they are getting closer to customers or taking 
advantage of local talent and supply chains.
That migration has complicated efforts by the 
United States, the European Union and other 
governments to control imports from China.
Some Chinese solar manufacturers responded 
to earlier U.S. and European trade measures by 
supplying those markets from factories outside 
China, avoiding higher tariffs and quotas on 
Chinese-made products.
184

185

186

Longi already has a solar module factory in 
the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh. The latest 
investment will double production there, the 
company said.
Xia repeated warnings by Chinese 
manufacturers that import controls are 
hampering efforts to encourage adoption of 
renewable energy.
“That possibly could start a ’green energy trade 
war,’” he said. “That is, with the whole world 
concerned about climate change, what people 
who want to solve energy problems and realize 
green development aren’t willing to see.”
Longi, headquartered in the western city of 
Xi’an, ranked No. 7 among global solar panel 
producers by 2017 output, according to PV Tech, 
an industry journal. The South Korean-German 
supplier Hanhwa-Q Cells was the only non-
Chinese competitor in the Top 10.
India is regarded by the solar industry as one 
of the most promising markets but low-cost 
Chinese imports have undercut the New Delhi 
government’s ambitions to develop its own 
solar technology suppliers. Government data 
show imports, mostly from China, account 
for 90 percent of last year’s sales, up from 86 
percent in 2014.
India’s Finance Ministry said Jan. 5 it was 
considering adding a temporary 70 percent 
“safeguard tariff” on solar equipment from China 
and Malaysia to prevent “further serious injury” 
to the Indian industry. The ministry said Chinese 
exporters shifted their focus to India in early 
2017 after the United States and Europe stepped 
up import controls.
187

ads@applemagazine.com
Digital
Mindﬁeld

AppleMagazine © Copyright 2017-2011. All Rights Reserved.
No part of the document may be circulated, quoted, or reproduced for distribution without prior written approval.
Proper Trademark Notice and Attribution iPhone™, iPad™, HomePod™, Apple Watch™, iPod™, Mac™, iMac™, Macbook™, AppleTV™, Siri™, iOS™, OS X™, watchOS™, and others
are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the US and other countries. Please contact support for additional trademark ownership rights information.
The following is a list of Apple’s trademarks and service marks http://www.apple.com/legal/ trademark/appletmlist.html.
All other trademarks are the properties of their owners.
AppleMagazine is an independent publication and has not been authorized, sponsored, or otherwise approved by Apple Inc.
Authorized Publisher
WRITERS
 
Precise English Inc.
 
Benjamin Kerry  (UK)
 
Gavin Lenaghan  (UK)
 
Craig Lenaghan  (UK)
 
Elena Lusk  (US)
COLUMNS
COLUMNS
 
iTUNES REVIEW
 
Gavin Lenaghan
 
FINANCE NEWS
 
Associated Press / Bloomberg
REVISION
 
Gavin Lenaghan
  
Jack Crute
PRODUCTION SUPPORT / COLLABORATORS
 
Rui da Costa  
 
 
 
Icy Ventura
 
Segolene Vincent 
 
 
Pilar Bescos
 
Fabian Groenhof  
 
 
Candice Liu
 
Lise Berda
 
James Jarvis
  
Richard Sawyer
 
Lauren Brown
 
Matthew Coburn
 
Jeﬀrey Milks
 
Susan Kiesling
 
Raquel Serrano
 
Robert Fluellen
  
Lisa Swiniarski
 
Roger Gayalkar
PRIVACY POLICY
 
applemagazine.com/privacy-policy/
TERMS OF USE
 
applemagazine.com/terms-of-use/
SOCIAL NETWORKS
 
 
 
 
Twitter
 
 
@apple_magazine
 
 
twitter.com/#!/Apple_Magazine
 
 
Facebook
 
 
facebook.com/applemagazineinternational
SUBSCRIPTIONS
 
AppleMagazine Oﬃcial Website
 
applemagazine.com
 
Zinio LLC.
 
zino.com
 
Readr Newsstand
  
readrapp.com
 
Magzter Newsstand
 
magzter.com
 
Amazon Newsstand
 
amazon.com
 
Ebsco/Flipster
 
ebsco.com
 
Scoop Newsstand (Singapore)
 
getscoop.com
CONTACTS
 
Suport & CRM - contact@applemagazine.com 
 
Magazine and Website Editor - editor@applemagazine.com 
 
Executive Director - ceo@applemagazine.com
 
Advertise - ads@applemagazine.com  
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
 
Ivan Castilho
 
Chief Executive Oﬃcer / Design Conception
MINDFIELD DIGITAL ART & GRAPHIC DESIGN
 
Glauco Ribeiro
 
Chief Design Oﬃcer / Art & Graphic Design Director
 
Michael Danglen
  
Art & Graphic Design Producer
 
Anderson Oliveira
 
Art & Graphic Design Producer
MAGAZINE EDITORIAL CONTENT
 
Benjamin Kerry
 
Chief Editor
OFFICIAL WEBSITE
  
Benjamin Kerry
 
Production Director
 
Jack Crute
 
WordPress Production & Website Support
MASTHEAD
APPLEMAGAZINE INTERNATIONAL
applemagazine.com


