
This is a stone.

Digital
Mindﬁeld
When choosing MINDFIELD DIGITAL™ and our DBMD™ 
Program for your development services, you can be sure 
you will receive an app that will save you money and 
resources using the most advanced design and interface 
concepts.
We follow an Application Development Cycle where every 
We follow an Application Development Cycle where every 
step is carried out to maximum perfection. Our application 
developers are experienced and knowledgeable, and are 
skilled at delivering top high tech Apps. 
Our team is constantly looking for promising partners in 
Our team is constantly looking for promising partners in 
order to improve our quality, broaden our experience and 
create a global range of Apps with the most impressive 
conceptual designs, 3D Graphics and Sound FX.
This is a stone.



TESLA PROPOSES 
BIG PAYOUT 
IF MUSK MEETS 
LOFTY GOALS
AI CAN READ! 
TECH FIRMS RACE 
TO SMARTEN 
UP THINKING 
MACHINES
HOMEPOD: 
STUNNING CONNECTED 
SOUND EXPERIENCE
18
134
56
FIFA: VIDEO TECH 
‘DEFINITELY’ AT WORLD 
CUP, FINDING SPONSOR
44

TOP 10 APPS   100
iTUNES REVIEW   104
TOP 10 SONGS   158
TOP 10 ALBUMS   160
TOP 10 MUSIC VIDEOS   162
TOP 10 TV SHOWS   164
TOP 10 BOOKS   166
APPLE WILL GIVE USERS CONTROL OVER SLOWDOWN OF OLDER iPHONES  08
EU FINES QUALCOMM FOR PAYING APPLE TO USE ITS MICROCHIPS  14
NETFLIX’S SUCCESS TURNS NET NEUTRALITY INTO AN AFTERTHOUGHT  28
MONTANA MANDATES ‘NET NEUTRALITY’ FOR STATE CONTRACTS  36
GET YOUR STUFF AND GO: AMAZON OPENS STORE WITH NO CASHIERS  50
FACEBOOK TO EMPHASIZE ‘TRUSTWORTHY’ NEWS VIA USER SURVEYS  74
MAYBE NEXT TIME: CITIES SEE FAILED AMAZON BIDS AS TRIAL RUNS  80
COMMERCIAL ROCKET FROM NEW ZEALAND DEPLOYS SMALL SATELLITES  88
COMCAST HOPES FOR A TV WINDFALL FROM SUPER BOWL, OLYMPICS  92
WILD RIDE: ‘JUMANJI’ HOLDS ON TO TOP SPOT AT BOX OFFICE  120
‘HOBBIT’ DIRECTOR PETER JACKSON MAKING WWI DOCUMENTARY  130
SPACEWALKING ASTRONAUTS GIVE NEW HAND TO ROBOT ARM  142
CHRISTA MCAULIFFE’S LOST LESSONS FINALLY TAUGHT IN SPACE  146
BETTER THAN HOLOGRAMS: A NEW 3-D PROJECTION INTO THIN AIR  154
SOLAR INDUSTRY ON EDGE AS TRUMP WEIGHS TARIFFS ON PANELS  168
UK REGULATOR SAYS FOX TAKEOVER OF SKY NOT IN PUBLIC INTEREST  176

8

Apple’s next major update of its mobile 
software will include an option that will  
enable owners of older iPhones to turn off a 
feature that slows the device to prevent aging 
batteries from shutting down.
The free upgrade announced Wednesday  
will be released this spring.
The additional controls are meant to  
appease iPhone owners outraged since  
Apple acknowledged last month that its  
recent software updates had been secretly 
slowing down older iPhones when their 
batteries weakened.
APPLE WILL 
GIVE USERS 
CONTROL OVER 
SLOWDOWN OF 
OLDER iPHONES
9

Many people believed Apple was purposefully 
undermining the performance of older iPhones 
to drive sales of its newer and more expensive 
devices. Apple insisted it was simply trying to 
extend the lives of older iPhones, but issued an 
apology last month and promised to replace 
batteries in affected devices at a discounted 
price of $50.
Despite Apple’s contrition, the company is still 
facing an investigation by French authorities, a 
series of questions from U.S. Senate and a spate 
of consumer lawsuits alleging misconduct.
Besides giving people more control over the 
operation of older iPhones, the upcoming 
update dubbed iOS 11.3 will also show how 
well the device’s battery is holding up. Apple 
had promised to add a battery gauge when it 
apologized to consumers last month.
Other features coming in the next update will 
include the ability to look at personal medical 
histories in Apple’s health app, more tricks in its 
augmented reality toolkit and more animated 
emojis that work with the facial recognition 
technology in the iPhone X.
10

11



14

The European Union slapped a $1.23 billion 
fine on U.S. chipmaker Qualcomm for abusing 
its market dominance in the lucrative sector of 
components in smartphones and tablets for 
half a decade.
EU Commissioner Margrethe Vestager said that 
San Diego-based Qualcomm “illegally shut out 
rivals from the market” for more than five years 
by paying key customer Apple to not use chips 
made by Qualcomm’s rivals.
Vestager said Qualcomm paid “billions of dollars” 
to Apple and in the process helped establish 
itself as the dominant force.
She said the payments were made in part by 
reducing prices for Apple to buy Qualcomm 
components on condition that Apple iPhones 
and iPads would exclusively use Qualcomm chips.
The EU said that the abuse happened between 
2011 and 2016 and centered on baseband 
chipsets that allow smartphones and tablets 
EU FINES QUALCOMM FOR PAYING 
APPLE TO USE ITS MICROCHIPS
15

to connect to cellular networks. Over most of 
that period, Qualcomm accounted for over 90 
percent of the market.
Apple was a dominant player with its iPad and 
iPhones and the two companies twice entered 
an agreement that cut out rivals.
Vestager said there were no regulatory 
repercussions for Apple despite accepting the 
system for the best part of six years. She said 
she had internal documents showing Apple 
considered switching some of its work to Intel 
but could not do so financially until the end of 
the agreement.
Only when the deal was about to expire did 
Apple start to diversify. “Competition in this 
market is now on the up,” Vestager said.
Qualcomm issued a statement saying it “strongly 
disagrees with the decision and will immediately 
appeal.” It said that the EU move did not affect its 
ongoing operations.
In a warning to others, Vestager said “don’t go 
there” and the fine of 997 million euros is meant 
to be a deterrent. She said it amounted to 
almost five percent of annual turnover.
“It is reflecting the fact that it is very illegal 
behavior. It went on for quite some time.”
She said Qualcomm used the system to establish 
the company as the industry’s chipmaker of 
choice. She said that if smaller companies see a 
big firm like Apple using Qualcomm chips, they 
would be more likely to do so as well.
“In particular it has made a difference because 
we are talking about the one of the biggest 
and most important customers in this market,” 
Vestager said.
16

17

18

Elon Musk is known for his bold predictions on 
electric and self-driving cars. Now his pay could 
depend on whether those predictions come true.
Under a new all-or-nothing pay package, Musk 
would remain at Tesla Inc. for the next decade 
and see his compensation tied to ambitious 
growth targets.
The proposal, revealed this week in a regulatory 
filing, requires that Tesla grow in $50 billion 
leaps, to a staggering $650 billion market 
capitalization.
The electric car maker, based in Palo Alto, 
California, is worth less than $60 billion today. 
Tesla must hit a series of escalating revenue 
and adjusted profit targets, only after which 
Musk would vest stock options worth 1 percent 
of company shares. He would get no other 
guaranteed compensation.
TESLA PROPOSES 
BIG PAYOUT IF 
MUSK MEETS 
LOFTY GOALS
19

The pay package, developed over the last six 
months by Tesla’s board, still needs the approval 
of Tesla shareholders, who will vote on it at a 
special meeting in late March. Musk and his 
brother Kimbal, who is a Tesla board member, 
will recuse themselves from the vote.
If the goals are reached, Tesla would be one of 
the biggest companies in America. The $650 
billion benchmark would make Tesla the fourth-
most valuable U.S. company, behind only Apple 
Inc., Alphabet Inc., and Amazon.com Inc. based 
on current valuations. It would be larger than 
Microsoft Corp., and would exceed the current 
combined valuation of the world’s top eight 
publicly-traded auto companies.
The pay scheme would also catapult Musk into 
the ranks of the world’s richest people. Musk’s 
stock options could be worth up to $55.8 billion 
if he meets the company’s goals. He also would 
own a 28 percent stake in Tesla, which would 
be worth $182 billion. Forbes’ current richest 
billionaire, Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates, is 
worth $86 billion.
Musk has long had ambitious plans for Tesla. In 
a 2015 earnings call with analysts and media, 
he predicted Tesla could match Apple in total 
value by 2025.
Musk’s growth plans were laid out in a 2016 
blog post he titled “Master Plan, Part Deux.” 
Tesla plans to expand from electric cars and 
SUVs to trucks — including a semi due out in 
2019 — and buses. It will continue to work on 
autonomous vehicle technology and plans to 
enter the car-sharing business, letting Tesla 
owners share their cars when they’re not using 
them and running Tesla-owned fleets in cities.
20

21

22

The company, which bought solar panel maker 
SolarCity Corp. in 2016, also plans to expand its 
solar panel and energy storage businesses. Tesla 
is making solar panels and roof tiles at its factory 
in Buffalo, New York, which will help the company 
blunt any impact from President Donald Trump’s 
recent 30-percent tariff on imported solar panels 
and cell modules.
The plans are ambitious, but that’s nothing new 
for Tesla. Under a 2012 agreement, Musk’s stock 
options vested only if the Tesla’s market cap 
continued to rise in $4 billion increments. The 
company also had to hit matching operational 
milestones, including vehicle production targets 
and developmental milestones tied to the 
Model X and Model 3 programs. Tesla wound up 
reaching all of the market cap milestones and nine 
of the 10 operational milestones, falling short only 
of its goal to have four consecutive quarters with 
30-percent gross margins.
When that pay package was created, the company 
was worth just $3.2 billion. Its market cap at the 
end of last year was 17 times that amount. That’s 
why the new goals may not be that far-fetched, 
says Michael Ramsey, an analyst with Gartner who 
follows Tesla.
“To this point, it has been dangerous to predict 
failure for Tesla or Elon,” he said.
Adam Jonas, an analyst with Morgan Stanley who 
follows Tesla, thinks plan is partly a marketing tool 
as the competition for electric and autonomous 
vehicle talent heats up.
Jonas added that Musk — who owns 21.9 percent 
of Tesla shares — is already “all-in” on the company, 
so he sees the incentive package as more for investor 
confidence than for Musk’s personal benefit.
23

24

In order to vest shares when milestones are 
reached, Musk must stay on as CEO or serve 
as both executive chairman and chief product 
officer. That would give Tesla the option of 
hiring a different CEO. Tesla said while it doesn’t 
currently intend for Musk to step away from 
the CEO role, the terms allow him to potentially 
focus his attention on key products and strategy.
The amount of time Musk divides between 
Tesla and other ventures has been a concern for 
investors. Musk is also the founder and CEO of 
rocket maker SpaceX and the co-founder and 
chairman of OpenAI, a nonprofit that researches 
artificial intelligence. He also recently started 
The Boring Co., which hopes to build tunnels 
beneath Los Angeles and other major cities for 
high-speed transit.
25

Musk has never made a salary at Tesla, which 
is unusual but not unheard of for a CEO. Ford 
Motor Co. Executive Chairman Bill Ford didn’t 
take a salary or bonus for five years starting 
in 2005 when the company’s fortunes were 
sagging. Oracle Corp.’s Larry Ellison has a $1 
salary but takes home millions in stock awards. 
And Steve Jobs took home $1 per year when he 
was Apple’s CEO from 1997 to 2011.
Tesla — which turns 15 this year — has never 
earned a full-year profit. It has reported only two 
profitable quarters since it went public in 2010.
Each of the four vehicles it has made has faced 
significant delays and production problems. Its 
newest vehicle, the lower-cost Model 3 sedan, is 
no exception. Musk initially said Tesla would be 
making 20,000 Model 3s per month by the end 
of 2017, but he recently pushed that goal to the 
end of the second quarter.
That hasn’t dimmed investors’ appetite for  
Tesla’s stock. Tesla shares were up less than 1 
percent to $352 in afternoon trading. They’ve 
risen around 40 percent over the last year.
26

27

28

Netflix once fought fiercely for net neutrality, 
fearing that its online video service would suffer 
if internet providers were free to discriminate 
against it.
But now that it boasts one of television’s largest 
audiences, Netflix isn’t spending much time 
worrying about the demise of the government 
rules that once protected it.
With millions of subscribers still flocking to its 
service, Netflix figures internet providers are 
unlikely to do anything that might alienate large 
numbers of their own customers who also turn 
to Netflix for trendy shows such as “Stranger 
Things,” “The Crown and “Black Mirror.”
NETFLIX’S 
SUCCESS TURNS 
NET NEUTRALITY 
INTO AN 
AFTERTHOUGHT
29

“Netflix’s fortress is so strong now that net 
neutrality has become background noise for 
them,” says GBH Insights analyst Daniel Ives.
BIG AND GETTING BIGGER
The Trump-era Federal Communications 
Commission repealed net-neutrality rules 
in mid-December. Those regulations barred 
internet providers like Comcast, AT&T and 
Verizon from slowing or blocking customer 
access to apps and sites, or from setting up paid 
“fast lanes” for favored companies. The rules 
have been a big deal for smaller startups, as 
Netflix once was.
But now Netflix has more than 117 million 
subscribers worldwide, including nearly 55 
million in the U.S., according to the company’s 
fourth-quarter earnings report, released 
Monday. The service picked up 8.3 million of 
those worldwide subscribers — a quarterly 
record — in the October-December period last 
year. That included a gain of 2 million in the U.S.
The performance blew past the projections of 
Netflix’s own management and stock market 
analysts. It was especially striking given a 10 
percent price increase on the company’s most 
popular subscription plan in the U.S.
Investors apparently aren’t fretting about the 
end of net neutrality, either. The company’s 
stock soared 9 percent to $248.24 in Monday’s 
extended trading. That positions Netflix’s market 
value to surpass $100 billion for the first time in 
Tuesday’s regular trading session.
Emboldened by its success, Netflix now plans to 
spend up to $8 billion on its programming line-
up this year, up from $6 billion last year.
30

31

“Our goal is to entertain people,” Netflix wrote in 
its earnings commentary . “We are thrilled to be 
able to do that at great scale.”
Last year, Netflix’s average viewership rose 
9 percent, although the company refuses to 
disclose how many subscribers are watching 
at any given time. CBS was the most watched 
traditional TV network in the U.S. during the 
season ending in last May, with an average 
viewership of nearly 10 million people.
NETFLIX NEUTRALITY
When it was smaller, Netflix worried that 
internet providers might throw obstacles in 
its way to protect the cable businesses many 
of them owned. Those pay-TV bundles have 
been losing subscribers for years, thanks in 
part to consumers opting for Netflix and other 
streaming services.
In early 2014, Netflix CEO Reed Hastings wrote 
an essay advocating strong net-neutrality rules 
to keep cable and phone companies from 
imposing tolls on services like Netflix. That was 
shortly after Netflix reluctantly agreed to pay 
Comcast, one of the biggest internet providers 
in the country, for a more reliable connection 
that would ensure its videos weren’t disrupted in 
mid-stream.
At the time, though, Netflix had half as 
many subscribers worldwide as it does now, 
including 20 million fewer in the U.S. And it 
had only recently launched an expansion into 
original programming that turned it into an 
entertainment powerhouse.
Netflix is now such a household staple that 
even Comcast, the owner of NBC and other 
32

33

34

TV networks, has incorporated the video service 
into its set-top boxes. That makes Netflix as easy 
to watch as any other cable channel. Other cable 
providers have since followed suit.
That’s one of the reasons that Hastings softened 
his tone on net neutrality. By last May, he told 
a technology conference during an onstage 
interview that net neutrality is “not our primary 
battle at this point.” In a show of solidarity, 
Netflix is still joining the legal fight to restore the 
net neutrality regulations, but only as part of the 
Internet Association, a trade group.
Netflix earned $186 million, or 41 cents per 
share, on revenue of $3.3 billion to hit analyst 
targets. But the company also absorbed a 
fourth-quarter charge of $39 million to account 
for programming that it decided to abandon. 
The company didn’t identify the shows.
35

36

Montana became the first state to bar 
telecommunications companies from receiving 
state contracts if they interfere with internet 
traffic or favor higher-paying sites or apps, under 
an order from Gov. Steve Bullock intended to 
protect so-called net neutrality.
The Democratic governor’s order comes after 
the Federal Communications Commission last 
month repealed rules enacted in 2015 that  
had more tightly regulated companies such as 
AT&T and Verizon.
MONTANA 
MANDATES 
‘NET NEUTRALITY’ 
FOR STATE 
CONTRACTS
37

Commission members said the repeal was 
needed to ensure the government maintains 
a “light touch” in its oversight of the internet. 
But critics such as Bullock contend change will 
hurt consumers and make it harder for startup 
companies to enter the market.
“There has been a lot of talk around the country 
about how to respond to the recent decision,” 
Bullock said in announcing his order before a 
group of computer science students in Helena. 
“It’s time to actually do something about it.”
Attorneys from more than 20 states and the 
District of Columbia have sued to block the 
repeal. State legislatures in New York, California 
and elsewhere have introduced bills promoting 
net neutrality, but Bullock is the first governor 
to taken action, according to the National 
Conference on State Legislatures.
His order applies to any company seeking a 
new state contract for telecommunications 
services after July 1. At that time, in order to 
receive a state contract companies must not 
“unreasonably interfere” with Montana internet 
users’ ability to access the content of their 
choice. That includes giving preference to 
websites that pay more to internet providers.
Terms of existing telecommunications contracts 
with the state — worth about $50 million 
annually — would not be changed, Bullock 
spokeswoman Marissa Perry said. Among those 
are contracts with CenturyLink, Verizon, AT&T 
and Comcast, she said.
It was unclear from the order what would 
happen to companies with existing contracts. 
Bullock told the state Department of 
Administration to craft policies and guidance 
38

39

by March 1 to put the order into effect, and he 
invited governors and lawmakers across the 
United States to duplicate his action.
If other states follow suit, it could have 
a significant impact — both on large 
telecommunications companies with state 
contracts and smaller companies trying to 
get into the market, said Christopher Mitchell 
with the Institute for Local Self-Reliance, which 
supports net neutrality.
“States spend a lot of money on 
telecommunications contracts,” Mitchell said. 
“We’re seeing a number of states interested in 
doing something like this.”
The National Cable and Telecommunications 
Association and USTelecom, which represent 
the broadband industry, said Congress and not 
individual states should step forward to craft 
permanent rules.
“We simply cannot have 50 different regulations 
governing our internet,” said Sally Aman, US 
Telecom’s senior vice president for public affairs.
It was not immediately clear if Bullock’s order 
could face a legal challenge for being out of step 
with the FCC plan.
The FCC repeal — expected to go into effect 
this spring — pre-empted states and cities from 
imposing rules that contradict its own plan.
Perry said Bullock had latitude on the issue 
because his order applies only to state 
contracts and the terms by which Montana, as a 
consumer, wants to buy internet services
Aman said it was too soon to say if the 
broadband association would file a lawsuit over 
Bullock’s order.
40

41

42

Image: Spencer Platt
NY DECREES NET NEUTRALITY FOR  
WEB FIRMS WITH STATE CONTRACTS
Democratic Gov. Andrew Cuomo enacted the 
policy through executive order, following a 
similar move by Montana Gov. Steve Bullock. 
Several states are considering how to respond 
after the Federal Communications Commission 
last month repealed its net neutrality policy.
New York state legislators had pushed for the 
new policy as a way to protect consumers 
by using the state’s lucrative information 
technology contracts as leverage over  
internet companies.
Attorneys general for 21 states and the District 
of Columbia have sued to block the repeal of the 
federal policy, which had banned companies 
from interfering with web traffic or speeds to 
favor certain sites or apps.
43

44

Video replays will be used at the World Cup for the 
first time and talks are underway with potential 
sponsor branding to appear when the technology 
is used, a FIFA executive said on Monday.
Soccer’s rule-making panel met on Monday 
to assess recent trials ahead of video assistant 
referees (VAR) being officially approved by FIFA 
later this season for use in Russia in June and July.
“Definitely, VAR will happen,” FIFA chief 
commercial officer Philippe Le Floc’h told The 
Associated Press. “It’s great to have technology 
in football because this is also a fair(ness) thing.”
FIFA: VIDEO TECH 
‘DEFINITELY’ 
AT WORLD 
CUP, FINDING 
SPONSOR
45

Referees were assisted for the first time by high-
tech aids at a World Cup in 2014 when goal-
line technology was used. That system sees a 
message instantly flash on referees’ watches 
saying only whether the ball crossed the line.
Video review is used when there is a “clear and 
obvious error” involving goals, penalty awards, 
red cards, and mistaken identity.
Replays could lead to delays in games in Russia 
as different angles are reviewed, presenting an 
opportunity for FIFA to brand up the segment 
on the global broadcast feed.
“We are talking to various technological 
companies who are very interested with 
what we are doing on the technology side of 
things,” Floc’h said on board the World Cup 
trophy tour plane during a stop at London 
Stansted Airport.
The final decision on allowing replays to 
become part of the rules of the game falls to 
the International Football Association Board on 
March 3 when its annual meeting is held at FIFA.
Video review has been expected at the World 
Cup because FIFA controls half the votes in IFAB’s 
decision. The other voters are the four British 
soccer federations.
Monday’s meeting brought together IFAB 
technical experts, FIFA refereeing officials, and 
researchers from the University of Leuven in 
Belgium, who have studied use of video review 
in 804 games across more than 20 competitions.
“The discussions we had today do not indicate 
that further experiments need to be conducted,” 
said Johannes Holzmueller, FIFA’s lead official for 
technological innovation.
46

47

IFAB’s research showed one “clear and obvious 
error” in every three games for decisions 
involving goals, penalty awards, red cards, and 
mistaken identity.
That rate equates to 21 errors in a 64-game 
World Cup in Russia.
In the 804 competitive games, video review 
technology was decisive in 8 percent of them — 
the equivalent of five World Cup games.
The research suggested referees’ accuracy in key 
decisions rose from 93 percent to 98.9 percent. 
FRENCH LEAGUE TERMINATES GOAL-
LINE TECHNOLOGY CONTRACT
The French football league has terminated the 
contract with its goal-line technology provider 
after a series of glitches.
The LFP had already suspended the use of 
GoalControl, the German system that was 
deployed at the 2014 World Cup.
According to L’Equipe newspaper, the league 
will launch a tender in February to find a new 
provider of the technology that determines 
whether the ball crossed the line.
In recent months, the French league had 
repeatedly expressed its discontent with 
Goal Control.
Goal-line technology entered soccer after a goal 
was wrongly disallowed at the 2010 World Cup.
FIFA is already focused on fast-tracking the next 
phase of technology — video assistant referees 
— for the World Cup in June.
Goal-line technology and VAR were provided by 
Hawk-Eye at the Confederations Cup last year.
48

49

Image: Elaine Thompson
50

No cashiers, no registers and no cash — this is 
how Amazon sees the future of store shopping.
The online retailer opened its Amazon Go 
concept to the public this week in Seattle, which 
lets shoppers take milk, potato chips or ready-
to-eat salads off its shelves and just walk out. 
Amazon’s technology charges customers after 
they leave.
“It’s such a weird experience, because you feel 
like you’re stealing when you go out the door,” 
said Lisa Doyle, who visited the shop this week.
GET YOUR 
STUFF AND GO: 
AMAZON OPENS 
STORE WITH 
NO CASHIERS
51

Amazon employees have been testing the 
store, at the bottom floor of the company’s 
Seattle headquarters, for about a year. 
Amazon.com Inc. said it uses computer vision, 
machine learning algorithms and sensors to 
figure out what people are grabbing off its 
store shelves.
The store is yet another sign that Amazon is 
serious about expanding its physical presence. 
It has opened more than a dozen bookstores, 
taken over space in some Kohl’s department 
stores and bought Whole Foods last year, giving 
it 470 grocery stores.
But Amazon Go is unlike its other stores. 
Shoppers enter by scanning the Amazon Go 
smartphone app at a turnstile, opening plastic 
doors. When an item is pulled of a shelf, it’s 
added to that shopper’s virtual cart. If the item is 
placed back on the shelf, it is removed from the 
virtual cart.
Not everyone can shop at the store: People 
must have a smartphone and a debit or credit 
card they can link to be charged. Amazon said 
families can shop together with just one phone 
scanning everyone in. Anything they grab from 
the shelf will also be added to the tab of the 
person who signed them in. But don’t help out 
strangers: Amazon warns that grabbing an item 
from the shelf for someone else means you’ll be 
charged for it.
There’s little sign of the technology visible to 
customers, except for black boxes, cameras and 
a few tiny flashing green lights in the darkened, 
open ceiling above.
One shopper, Paul Fan, tested the technology 
by turning off his phone and taking items and 
52

53

Image: Bloomberg
54

putting them in incorrect spots. The app was still 
able to tally up his items correctly.
“It’s really smart,” he said.
At 1,800 square feet, Amazon Go resembles a 
convenience store, except for a kitchen visible 
from the street where sandwiches and ready-
to-cook meal kits are prepared. A small section 
features products from the Whole Foods 365 
brand. There’s no hot coffee or hot food, but 
microwaves are available for customers who 
want to warm something up. Beer and wine is in 
a cornered-off section where a staffer checks ID 
before anyone enters.
The store has other employees, too, 
who make food, stock shelves and help 
customers. This week, workers were on hand 
to help shoppers find and download the 
Amazon Go app and guide them through 
the exit.
The company had announced the Amazon Go 
store in December 2016 and said it would open 
by early 2017, but it delayed the debut while 
it worked on the technology and company 
employees tested it out. By lunchtime on day 
one, Amazon’s no-lines hope was thwarted, at 
least outside the store: There were at least 50 
people waiting to enter, in a line that stretched 
around the corner.
Peter Gray, who said he typically shops online 
and avoids physical stores, stopped by Amazon 
Go after seeing it on Twitter.
“Just being able to walk out and not interact 
with anyone was amazing,” he said.
55

56

57

APPLE’S HOMEPOD IS ON THE HORIZON
Apple’s $349 HomePod is now available to 
preorder and the wireless speaker will be in 
stores on February 9. The HomePod will be on 
sale in US, UK and Australia and will rollout to 
France and Germany in the spring. Apple will 
finally compete with the likes of Google Home 
and Amazon’s Echo as they bring out their 
own smart speaker. Apple is promoting it as a 
speaker primarily and an assistant second. This is 
a speaker that could transform how you listen to 
music at home as it claims to analyze the room 
to deliver exceptional quality. It will also allow 
you to make lists, write emails, send messages 
and ask the weather, but how will it compare 
with others on the market?
Image: Justin Sullivan
58

APPLE’S HOMEPOD FINALLY 
HAS FCC APPROVAL
Apple originally suggested the HomePod 
would be available in December 2017, but 
they failed to meet this promise. Apple 
then promised the device will be ready in 
“early 2018” and we have only just received 
confirmation that it will launch on February 9, 
a lot sooner than we thought.
Apple has finally obtained FCC approval for 
their HomePod, meaning they are free to begin 
selling their device. They need this approval 
from the United States Federal Communications 
Commission because all communications 
technologies like Bluetooth and Wi-Fi need 
to be approved before they can be sold. 
WWDC ‘17: Apple HomePod first look
59

Apple received FCC approval for the iPhone X 
on October 4 and was able to release the phone 
on November 3, and the HomePod’s release has 
followed a similar pattern. We can finally get our 
hands on the speaker in early February.
According to The Taipei Times, Apple supplier 
Inventec has began shipping the first million 
HomePods to Apple. Apple will finally be able 
to compete with the likes of Google Home and 
Amazon’s Echo. Some claim that Apple has 
joined the party too late, but their smart speaker 
does offer a lot of unique features that could set 
it apart from their competition.
60

61

APPLE TO COMPETE WITH GOOGLE 
HOME AND AMAZON’S ECHO
When the HomePod is released, the battle of 
the smart speakers will truly commence. Smart 
speakers were all the rage in 2017, and it is only 
now that Apple is finally catching up. All the 
leading smart speakers will tell you the news, 
how much traffic there is, and whether you will 
need an umbrella, but how do they differ and 
which gets you the most for your money?
In terms of design, its down to personal 
preference and in reality, they don’t differ 
much. Amazon’s Echo has become a lot more 
inconspicuous, but Google Home will definitely 
blend into your home better. You even have 
the option of choosing different colors for 
the base. In comparison, Apple’s HomePod 
is perhaps a little bland, but many prefer this 
minimalistic look.
Google Home has undoubtedly been deemed 
the best at voice recognition, and it can be 
paired with your Chromecast so you can stream 
62

63

directly to your TV. The Echo definitely beats 
Google Home when it comes to sound quality, 
however, while Apple’s HomePod hasn’t had 
much time to prove itself yet, it is already 
being voted as having the best sound quality 
of the three. Many have commented that 
Google Home is a little base heavy, while the 
Echo can be paired with any Apple or Android 
smartphone with Bluetooth casting, its sound 
quality does not come close to Apple’s product. 
Apple claims their speaker “senses the room 
and tunes the music”. They claim the smart 
speaker can analyse the acoustics of any room 
and will adjust the sound accordingly.
We also have to also consider the price of the 
three leading smart speakers. Apple’s HomePod 
is the most expensive at $349, while the Echo 
originally launched at £150 and the new 
Echo 2 is sold for £90. Google Home is sold 
at £130, but they both also have smaller, and 
cheaper, versions that Apple does not offer. The 
Echo Dot and Google Home Mini both retail at 
£50. Therefore, Amazon’s smart speaker wins 
on price, but for many, Google Home wins on 
value for money.
64

65

REVOLUTIONISING MUSIC
Critics say the sound quality of Google’s 
HomePod easily beats Amazon’s Echo and 
Google Home, and this is only to be expected, 
given the price. How accurate Apple’s claim is 
that it can analyze the acoustics of any room 
and adjust the sound accordingly is still yet 
to be determined. However, their claim that the 
speaker can hear you over the music no matter 
how far away you are and how loud the music is 
has proved true.
66

While Amazon and Google both focus on the 
smart side of their assistant, it is the sound 
quality that Apple is emphasizing. They are 
marketing it as a speaker first and foremost, 
choosing to reiterate the quality of the sound. 
The speaker, of course, works with Apple Music 
and users can not only ask it to play a specific 
song but can also ask a series of questions 
including when the song was recorded, who it is 
by and who the drummer was.
67

68

Apple HomePod Special Event in 8 minutes
69

A DEDICATED A8 CHIP
You might be wondering what powers this 
speaker to give it such a powerful sound. It is 
the dedicated A8 chip that analyses and delivers 
outstanding sound quality. Apple claims this 
chip is the most powerful processor to ever 
be found in a speaker. It is the same chip that 
appeared in the iPhone 6 in 2014, and while 
this is not the latest Apple has released, it is 
undoubtedly the most powerful to ever have 
featured in a speaker. The HomePod is equipped 
with a 4in, upward-facing woofer and seven 
beam-forming tweeters. These each come with 
their own amplifier. 
Apple even claims it has automatic bass 
equalization and dynamic audio modeling. All 
of this is powered by the A8 chip. This chip even 
helps it determine if there is another HomePod 
in the room so the two can work together to 
70

71

deliver ultimate sound quality. However, this 
feature might not be available with initial launch 
and may require a future software update. 
Overall, Apple has done a good job creating a 
speaker that really does fill the room with sound.
IT’S MORE THAN JUST A SPEAKER
While, Apple is pitching the HomePod as a 
speaker primarily, it does excel in other areas. 
HomePod is also a HomeKit hub, meaning you 
can control other accessories using it. You can 
run automations through it without an Apple 
TV or an iPad in the house. The smart speaker 
can also play Apple Podcasts, set reminders, 
provide weather updates and send messages. 
It’s still unclear if the HomePod will have 
multiuser features.
It will also have multi-room audio playback 
using AirPlay 2 and two HomePods will be able 
to pair. It comes in both black and white and 
the top will be touch sensitive, allowing you to 
activate Siri manually.
The HomePod is likely to be popular with 
anyone who already uses a variety of Apple 
products if they are willing to pay the price. It is 
also the best choice for anyone who rates sound 
quality highly. It remains to be seen whether the 
big price tag will harm its sales and prevent it 
competing on the same level as Google Home 
and Amazon’s Echo. 
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
72

73

74

Facebook is taking another step to try to 
make itself more socially beneficial, saying it 
will boost news sources that its users rate as 
trustworthy in surveys.
In a blog post and a Facebook post from 
CEO Mark Zuckerberg, the company said it is 
surveying users about their familiarity with and 
trust in news sources. That data will influence 
what others see in their news feeds.
It’s the second major tweak to Facebook’s 
algorithm announced this month. The social-
media giant, a major source of news for users, 
has struggled to deal with an uproar over 
fake news and Russian-linked posts, meant to 
influence the 2016 U.S. elections, on its platform. 
The company has slowly acknowledged its role 
in that foreign interference.
FACEBOOK  
TO EMPHASIZE 
‘TRUSTWORTHY’
 NEWS VIA  
USER SURVEYS
75

Image: Konstantin
Zuckerberg has said his goal for this year is to fix 
Facebook , whether by protecting against foreign 
interference and abuse or by making users feel 
better about how they spend time on Facebook.
Facebook announced last week that it 
would try to have users see fewer posts from 
publishers, businesses and celebrities, and 
more from friends and family. Zuckerberg  
said because of that, news posts will make  
up 4 percent of the news feed , down from  
5 percent today.
Facebook says it will start prioritizing news 
sources deemed trustworthy in the U.S.  
and then internationally. It says it has  
surveyed a “diverse and representative  
sample” of U.S. users and next week it will  
begin testing prioritizing the news sources 
deemed trustworthy. Publishers with lower 
scores may see a drop in their distribution 
across Facebook.
“There’s too much sensationalism, 
misinformation and polarization in the  
world today. Social media enables people to 
spread information faster than ever before, 
and if we don’t specifically tackle these 
problems, then we end up amplifying them. 
That’s why it’s important that News Feed 
promotes high quality news that helps  
build a sense of common ground,”  
Zuckerberg wrote.
Of course, there are worries that survey-takers 
will try to game the system, or that they just 
won’t be able to differentiate between high-
quality and low-quality news sources — an 
issue made evident by the spread of many 
fake-news items in the past few years.
76

77

78

Image: Stephen Lam
Zuckerberg says that some news organizations 
“are only broadly trusted by their readers or 
watchers, and others are broadly trusted across 
society even by those who don’t follow them 
directly.” But this is complicated.
In the U.S., there has been a growing 
partisan split in perceptions of the media . 
Roughly a third of Democrats in early 2017 
said they trusted information from national 
news organizations a lot; only 11 percent of 
Republicans did, according to Pew Research 
Center; that gap had grown from early 2016.
Facebook’s move is a positive one, but that  
it’s not clear how effective this system will  
be in identifying trustworthy news sources,  
David Chavern, CEO of the news media trade 
group News Media Alliance, said in a  
statement last Friday.
79

80

For some of the 200-plus cities knocked out of 
the running for Amazon’s second headquarters, 
the effort may turn out to be a trial run for other 
opportunities. But they’re advised to not make 
the same kind of promises to just anyone.
Cities such as Detroit, Memphis, Tennessee; 
and Gary, Indiana, failed to make Amazon’s first 
cut as the online giant narrowed its list to 20 
prospective sites for the $5 billion project that 
could employ up to 50,000 people. Looking on 
the bright side, several leaders whose proposals 
didn’t make it say the time spent putting 
together juicy tax incentives, massive chunks of 
land and infrastructure studies was not wasted.
“We used this opportunity to showcase all the 
options in Delaware not just for Amazon, but 
for any business looking for a location to set 
down roots and grow,” the state’s governor, John 
Carney, said.
MAYBE NEXT TIME: 
CITIES SEE FAILED 
AMAZON BIDS AS 
TRIAL RUNS
81

“This exercise showed us new ways to showcase 
our city that we are already using to attract other 
businesses,” Memphis Mayor Jim Strickland said.
Seattle-based Amazon made clear that tax 
breaks and grants would be a big factor in 
its decision.
Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan floated an incentive 
package of more than $5 billion to lure the 
second headquarters to Montgomery County. 
New Jersey’s pitch contains $7 billion in tax 
breaks and Boston’s offer includes $75 million 
for affordable housing for Amazon employees 
and others.
Generous tax breaks and other incentives can 
erode a city’s tax base. Economists have said the 
Amazon headquarters is a rare case in which 
some enticements could repay a city over the 
long run.
But the pursuit of Amazon could re-ignite an 
incentive war between cities, regions and states 
to lure companies and jobs, says Tim Bartik, a 
senior economist at the W.E. Upjohn Institute for 
Employment Research in Kalamazoo, Michigan.
Just because they offered certain things to 
Amazon, doesn’t mean every company should 
get the same, Bartik said. “’Now that we’ve 
offered the store to Amazon, let’s offer the 
store to someone else,’” he added. “I’d be little 
concerned with that.”
Amazon’s list includes New York, Boston, Los 
Angeles, Indianapolis, Washington, D.C., Denver, 
Miami, Atlanta and Chicago. Texas’ Austin 
and Dallas made the cut, as did Philadelphia 
and Pittsburgh in Pennsylvania. The others 
are Columbus, Ohio; Montgomery County, 
82

83

Image: Paul Sancya
84

Maryland; Nashville, Tennessee; Newark, New 
Jersey; Northern Virginia; and Raleigh, North 
Carolina. Toronto also is on the list.
Detroit’s absence from the list muted what many 
see as an exciting time in the city as it makes 
progress since its 2014 exit from bankruptcy. 
Businessman Dan Gilbert led the team that 
put together the Motor City’s proposal, which 
included a video showcasing the city and a more 
than 240-page, color, spiral-bound book. The 
cost of the proposal has not been revealed.
“We are not deterred in any way, shape or 
form,” said Gilbert, founder of online mortgage 
lender Quicken Loans and Bedrock commercial 
real estate. “Detroit is the most exciting city 
in the country right now and the momentum 
continues to build every single day. There 
are numerous large and small deals you will 
continue to see develop into reality in the 
months and years ahead.”
Some spent big on their pitches to Amazon. 
Worcester, Massachusetts, released invoices 
showing that it spent more than $10,500 on 
its proposal, most of it on a video. Connecticut 
shelled out $35,000 for renderings and drone 
footage. Virginia Beach, Virginia, reported 
spending at least $85,000. That included $3,000 
to build a sand sculpture at the beach to 
promote its application.
For areas considered longshots, going after 
Amazon was a bit of an experiment.
“As much as this process helped identify our 
major assets, it also helped us to assess our gaps 
and where we can continue to improve,” said 
Birgit Klohs, chief executive of Grand Rapids, 
Michigan-based The Right Place, Inc. The 
85

86

economic development organization was part 
of the team making the pitch for Grand Rapids.
Gov. Chris Sununu said New Hampshire’s 
proposal “was the most comprehensive business 
marketing plan” the state had produced.
“We are excited that it is already serving as a 
template for other businesses that now have 
New Hampshire on their radar,” Sununu said. 
He did not name specific companies, and 
Democrats argued that if Sununu truly wanted 
to attract businesses, he would invest more 
in education, workforce development and 
increasing the minimum wage.
87

A rocket launched from New Zealand on 
Sunday successfully reached orbit carrying small 
commercial satellites.
California-based company Rocket Lab said 
its Electron rocket, which carries only a small 
payload of about 150 kilograms (331 pounds), 
successfully deployed an earth imaging and two 
other satellites for weather and ship tracking 
after blastoff from the Mahia Peninsula on North 
Island’s east coast.
COMMERCIAL 
ROCKET FROM 
NEW ZEALAND 
DEPLOYS SMALL 
SATELLITES
88

89

Image: Rocket Lab
Company CEO and founder Peter Beck, a New 
Zealander, said the launch marks the beginning 
of a new era in commercial access to space. He 
said that deploying customer payloads on a 
second test flight “is almost unprecedented.”
The company last May reached space with its 
first test launch, only to abort the mission due to 
a communication glitch. It has official approval 
to conduct three test launches and sees an 
emerging market in delivering small devices, 
some as big as a smartphone, into orbit.
The satellites would be used for everything from 
monitoring crops to providing internet service.
90

91

Image: Jeff Fusco
92

Comcast’s NBC is airing both the Super Bowl and 
the Olympics in February, a double-whammy 
sports extravaganza that the company expects 
to yield $1.4 billion in ad sales, helping it justify 
the hefty price it’s paying for both events.
NBC is banking heavily on these sports events 
since traditional TV ratings have slumped in recent 
years. Live sports are marquee TV events that 
draw most of the largest TV audiences, but even 
those ratings have declined. More Americans are 
dumping their cable packages — Comcast lost 
33,000 video customers in the fourth quarter 
and 151,000 for all of 2017 — and advertisers are 
following consumers to their phones.
Spending on U.S. TV ads is expected to grow 
an anemic 0.4 percent this year, according 
to eMarketer.
In the October-December quarter, 
NBCUniversal’s broadcast TV ad revenue fell 
6.5 percent, after a boost in 2016 from election 
COMCAST 
HOPES FOR A TV 
WINDFALL FROM 
SUPER BOWL, 
OLYMPICS
93

ads. As it adapts to a slowing TV market, NBC 
is continuing some digital efforts from Rio and 
expanding others to meet viewers wherever 
they are — whether in front of a TV or not.
THE SUPER BOWL
The Super Bowl reaches more than 100 million 
people in the U.S., outstripping every other TV 
event. It’s the most expensive ad time on TV.
This year’s Super Bowl is Feb. 4 and follows a 
two-year slump in regular-season NFL ratings, 
according to ESPN . But NBC has said it is not 
worried about a lack of interest. The game is an 
event that “transcends sport and even the game 
itself,” Dan Lovinger, an NBC Sports ad-sales 
executive, said in January, about three weeks 
before the game.
NBC said then that it had nearly sold out Super 
Bowl ad spots and that on average, companies 
are paying more than $5 million for 30-second 
ads during the game. Kantar Media expects rates 
slightly higher than last year’s $5.05 million.
Fox aired the Super Bowl in 2017, and said it had 
$500 million in ad revenues for the day. NBC has 
predicted about $500 million for the game and 
associated events this year.
NBC also makes money from ads during events 
before and after the game and a special episode 
that day of its hit drama, “This is Us.”
For the first time, it’s selling ads for the game 
that will only appear on its app or website.
ADS FROM PYEONGCHANG
NBC is paying $963 million for the broadcast rights 
to the Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang, South 
94

95

Korea, which follow a Summer Olympics in Rio two 
years ago that disappointed in some ways.
NBC ruled the airwaves during the Rio Games, 
besting other networks, and raked in $250 
million in profit. But ratings for the prime-time 
broadcast declined compared to the London 
Olympics in 2012, so NBC had to give advertisers 
some extra ad slots to make up for it.
This time around, NBC will sell ads for this 
Olympics based on total viewership, counting 
cable and digital viewers as well as those who 
tune into NBC proper. That gives them more 
leverage with advertisers, said Brian Wieser, an 
ad analyst for Pivotal Research Group.
NBC expects to sell more than $900 million 
worth of ads for the Olympics, which it 
says would be the highest ever for a Winter 
Games. (Summer Games are more popular.) 
The company is offering more hours of 
programming this year, both on TV and online, 
than it did for the Sochi Games in 2014.
KEEPING FANS HAPPY
Past Olympics have been criticized by fans for 
tape-delayed events. This year, NBC will air its 
nightly prime-time broadcast simultaneously 
across the country. That means the West Coast 
evening broadcast will start early, at 5 p.m.
The company says it will be able to show many 
Olympics events live for the U.S. audience, 
including skiing, snowboarding and figure 
skating. (U.S. prime time starts at 10 a.m. Korean 
time.) But some popular events will be live at 
odd hours in the U.S. Speed skating will take 
place in the evening in Korea, for example — 
but morning in the U.S.
96

Image: Cameron Spencer
97

Image: Mary Altaffer
98

NBC will stream the opening ceremony at 6 a.m. 
Eastern on Feb. 9, but only for cable customers. 
A delayed version will air on prime time. And 
it’s not yet clear whether exciting medal-round 
events will be shown at the best time for NBC’s 
ratings, said Kantar Media chief research officer 
Jon Swallen. NBC just says that all figure skating, 
alpine skiing and freestyle snowboard finals will 
be aired live in either prime time or what it calls 
“prime-time plus,” which stretches from 11:30 
p.m. until 2 a.m. Eastern.
GOING DIGITAL
As it did during the Rio Olympics, NBC has 
again partnered with BuzzFeed to make videos 
on Snapchat, a messaging app popular with 
millennials. These will include behind-the-
scenes videos posted by Snapchat users, clips of 
athletes and Olympics venues shot by BuzzFeed, 
and snippets of NBC’s own Olympics coverage. 
NBC’s revenue from its Snapchat deal is in the 
tens of millions, said an NBC Sports spokesman.
The broadcaster is also teaming up with the 
online news site Vox to make a daily Olympics 
podcast for the 18 days of competition. NBC 
parent Comcast is showcasing both NBC’s 
Olympics broadcasts and streaming video for 
its home cable customers in a way that will be 
easily searchable on TV sets.
In its fourth-quarter earnings report on 
Wednesday, Comcast said its net income 
soared to $15 billion, or $3.17 per share, from 
$2.3 billion, or 48 cents per share, because of 
a one-time impact from tax changes recently 
signed into law. Revenue climbed 4 percent 
to $21.92 billion.
99

#01 – Knife Hit
By Ketchapp
Category: Games / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#02 – Finger Driver
By Ketchapp
Category: Games / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#03 – YouTube: Watch, Listen, Stream
By Google, Inc.
Category: Photo & Video / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#04 – Google Arts & Culture
By Google, Inc.
Category: Entertainment / Free
Requires iOS 10.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#05 – Instagram
By Instagram, Inc.
Category: Photo & Video / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#06 – Messenger
By Facebook, Inc.
Category: Social Networking / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#07 – Snapchat
By Snap, Inc.
Category: Photo & Video / Free
Requires iOS 10.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#08 – Facebook
By Facebook, Inc.
Category: Social Networking / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#10 – Twisty Road!
By Voodoo
Category: Games / Free
Requires iOS 7.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#09 – HQ - Live Trivia Game Show
By Intermedia Labs
Category: Games / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
100

#01 – GarageBand
By Apple
Category: Music / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later
#02 – WhatsApp Desktop
By WhatsApp Inc.
Category: Social Networking / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.9.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#04 – Xcode
By Apple
Category: Developer Tools / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.11.5 or later
#03 – Open Any File
By Rocky Sand Studio Ltd.
Category: Utilities / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#05 – 1Doc: Word Processor for Writer
ByChengyu Huang
Category: Business / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#09 – Slack
By Slack Technologies, Inc.
Category: Business / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.6.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#06 – OneDrive
By Microsoft Corporation
Category: Productivity / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.9.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#08 – Kindle
By AMZN Mobile LLC
Category:  Reference / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.9 or later
#10 – PDF Reader Pro Free
By PDF Technologies, Inc.
Category: Business / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.8 or later, 64-bit processor
#07– Microsoft OneNote
By Microsoft Corporation
Category: Productivity / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
101

#01 – Minecraft
By Mojang
Category: Games / Price: $6.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#02 – Pocket Build
By MoonBear LTD
Category: Games / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#03 – Heads Up!
By Warner Bros.
Category: Games / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#04 – Geometry Dash
By RobTop Games AB
Category: Games / Price: $1.99
RRequires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#05 – Plague Inc
By Ndemic Creations
Category: Games / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#06 – NBA 2K18
By 2K
Category: Games / Price: $7.99
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#07 – Facetune
By Lightricks Ltd.
Category: Photo & Video / Price: $3.99
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#08 – Bloons TD 5
By Ninja Kiwi
Category: Games / Price: $2.99
Requires iOS 6.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#10 – Tabs & Chords - learn and play
By Ultimate Guitar
Category: Music / Price: $2.99
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#09 – The Game of Life
By Marmalade Game Studio
Category: Games / Price: $2.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
102

#01 – Magnet
By CrowdCafé
Category: Productivity / Price: $1.39
Compatibility: OS X 10.9 or later, 64-bit processor
#07 – Disk Doctor: System Cleaner
By FIPLAB Ltd
Category: Utilities / Price: $3.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#08 – ShutterCount
By DIRE Studio
Category: Photography / Price: $5.49
Compatibility: OS X 10.8 or later, 64-bit processor
#09 – RollerCoaster Tycoon 3 Platinum
By Aspyr Media, Inc.
Category: Games / Price: $27.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.8.5 or later
#02 – The Sims™ 2: Super Collection
By Aspyr Media, Inc.
Category: Games / Price: $39.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.9.2 or later
#10 – The File Converter
By SmoothMobile, LLC
Category: Utilities / Price: $9.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#04 – Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas
By Rockstar Games
Category: Games / Price: $20.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#03 – Final Cut Pro
By Apple
Category: Video / Price: $399.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.7 or later
#05 – Adware Doctor: Malware Remove
By YONGMING ZHANG
Category: Utilities / Price: $6.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#06 – Logic Pro X
By Apple
Category: Music / Price: $279.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
103

Movies
TV Shows
&
Rotten Tomatoes
41%
by Hany Abu-Assad
Genre: Drama
Released: 2017
Price: $9.99
144 Ratings
Trailer
104

The Mountain 
Between Us 
Kate Winslet and Idris Elba’s characters 
become stranded on a remote snow-
covered mountain following a plane crash. 
From here on out this suspense drama is 
a battle for survival as the pair begin their 
perilous journey home. The strangers are 
forced to work together, and they discover 
their own inner strength as they fight for 
their lives. 
FIVE FACTS:
1. Much of the film was shot in Canada, on 
the border of Alberta and British Columbia.
2. Both Michael Fassbender and Margot 
Robbie dropped out of the movie, followed 
by Charlie Hunnam and Rosamund Pike. Idris 
Elba and Kate Winslet were eventually cast in 
the leading roles.
3. Filming was delayed a few days so Kate 
Winslet could attend Alan Rickman’s funeral.
4. In an interview, the director said the high 
altitude caused the actors to faint due to 
lack of oxygen.
5. Kate Winslet wouldn’t let her stunt double 
fall through the ice for her, stating that when 
you sign up for a part, you have to play the 
whole part.
 
105

106

 “We Don’t Have A Choice”
107

Happy Death Day
This petrifying thriller features a college 
student who is forced to relive the day of 
her murder. She lives through the mundane 
details as well as her terrifying end. She is 
trapped in this seemingly unending torture 
until, finally, she unveils the identity of 
her killer. 
FIVE FACTS:
1. In one scene, Tree walks across the 
campus quad completely naked. This had 
to be filmed quickly as they were filming 
on a real college campus and couldn’t 
risk students witnessing the scene and 
taking photos.
2. Originally, the film was going to be called 
Half to Death.
3. Christopher Landon thinks too many 
horror films take themselves too seriously 
and argues that fear and humor work 
well together.
4. The original mask for the killer, designed 
by Tony Gardner, was a pig but this had been 
used in the Saw movies.
5. While testing out the killer’s baby mask, 
director Christopher Landon scared a worker 
in his office while testing out the baby mask.
 
Trailer
108

by Christopher Landon
Genre: Thriller
Released: 2017
Price: $14.99
139 Ratings
Rotten Tomatoes
71%
109

110

Happy Death Day Movie Clip
Tree Gets Attacked (2017)
111

Music
“From Now On” with Hugh Jackman
112

Genre: Soundtrack
Released: Dec 8, 2017
11 Songs
Price: $9.99
1.7K Ratings
The Greatest 
Showman
Various Artists
The soundtrack from the ultimate feel-good 
film will have you singing along and grinning 
from ear to ear throughout. The Greatest 
Showman is a celebration of the birth of show 
business, following the true story of a man 
who challenged social norms to bring the 
excluded and mocked out from the shadows. 
The film is a celebration of humanity, and so is 
the soundtrack that accompanies it.
FIVE FACTS:
1. Hugh Jackman’s favorite track is ‘This 
is Me’, which is all about celebrating our 
differences and accepting who we are.
2. While the film is set in the 1800s, the 
decision was taken to make the songs are far 
more contemporary, evoking pop and hip-
hop genres, rather than the more classical 
music style of the time.
3. Rebecca Ferguson’s voice was dubbed by 
Loren Allred. 
4. All eleven songs are written by Benj 
Pasek and Justin Paul, who also wrote the 
award-winning tracks that featured in 
La La Land (2016)
5. Zac Efron has starred in four other 
musicals, including the High School Musical 
trilogy and Hairspray.
113

“Come Alive” Live Performance
114

115

Hallelujah Nights
LANCO 
Their new album encompasses everything 
LANCO are known for and showcases feel-
good country anthems with an edge of 
classic rock and blues. This much-awaited 
album is likely to serve as a base to their 
successful career and could have them 
following in the footsteps of Imagine Dragons 
and Mumford & Sons. This album is upbeat 
and uplifting and is packed full of anthems 
that you can’t help but sing along to.
FIVE FACTS:
1. Their debut EP, Extended Play, was 
released in April 2016.
2. Pick You Up, Win You Over and Middle 
of the Night are all about the same night 
mentioned in Greatest Love Story, their 
breakthrough single.
3. Jay Joyce, who has worked with the likes 
of Little Big Town, Zac Brown Band, and 
Emmylou Harris, produced the album.
4. The band’s name is short for Lancaster 
and Company as the band consists of lead 
singer Brandon Lancaster, who started the 
band, and four other members.
5. Greatest Love Story became the theme for 
the Netflix series The Ranch, in 2017.
Genre: Country
Released: Jan 19, 2018
11 Songs
Price: $7.99
56 Ratings
116

“Hallelujah Nights” 
117

118

“Trouble Maker”
119

120

“Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle” notched its 
third straight weekend on top of the box office, 
besting a pair of new releases — “12 Strong” and 
“Den of Thieves” — both of which still managed 
to slightly outperform expectations.
Sony’s “Jumanji” took in $19.5 million in ticket 
sales in its fifth weekend of releases, according 
to final box-office figures Monday. The reboot, 
starring Dwayne Johnson and Kevin Hart, has 
shown surprisingly strong legs after spending its 
first two weeks of release in second behind “Star 
Wars: The Last Jedi.” Its cumulative total through 
Sunday is $316.5 million.
Warner Bros ‘s “12 Strong,” about U.S. special 
forces sent to Afghanistan in the weeks after 
the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, followed with $15.8 
million in its debut. STX Entertainment’s crime 
thriller “Den of Thieves” debuted in third with 
$15.2 million.
WILD RIDE:
 ‘JUMANJI’ HOLDS 
ON TO TOP SPOT 
AT BOX OFFICE
121

122

The top 20 movies at U.S. and Canadian theaters 
Friday through Monday, followed by distribution 
studio, gross, number of theater locations, 
average receipts per location, total gross and 
number of weeks in release, as compiled 
Monday by comScore:
1. 
“Jumanji: Welcome To The Jungle,”  
Sony, $19,505,170, 3,704 locations, 
$5,266 average, $316,450,318, 5 weeks.
2. 
“12 Strong,” Warner Bros.,  
$15,815,025, 3,002 locations,  
$5,268 average, $15,815,025, 1 week.
3. 
“Den Of Thieves,” STX Entertainment, 
$15,206,108, 2,432 locations,  
$6,253 average, $15,206,108, 1 week.
4. 
“The Post,” 20th Century Fox, 
$11,716,960, 2,851 locations,  
$4,110 average, $44,758,362, 5 weeks.
5. 
“The Greatest Showman,” 20th Century 
Fox, $10,644,824, 2,823 locations, 
$3,771 average, $113,125,431, 5 weeks.
123

124

6. 
“Paddington 2,” Warner Bros., 
$8,009,129, 3,702 locations,  
$2,163 average, $24,810,362, 2 weeks.
7. 
“The Commuter,” Lionsgate, $6,603,842, 
2,892 locations, $2,283 average, 
$25,627,371, 2 weeks.
8. 
“Star Wars: The Last Jedi,” Disney, 
$6,555,435, 2,456 locations,  
$2,669 average, $604,273,911, 6 weeks.
9. 
“Insidious: The Last Key,” Universal, 
$5,874,055, 2,546 locations,  
$2,307 average, $58,658,320, 3 weeks.
10. 
“Forever My Girl,” Roadside 
Attractions, $4,245,490,  
1,114 locations, $3,811 average,  
$4,245,490, 1 week.
125

11. 
“Proud Mary,” Sony, $3,568,996, 
2,125 locations, $1,680 average, 
$16,850,600, 2 weeks.
12. 
“Phantom Thread,” Focus Features, 
$3,246,720, 896 locations,  
$3,624 average, $6,059,449, 4 weeks.
13. 
“Pitch Perfect 3,” Universal, 
$3,022,185, 1,772 locations,  
$1,706 average, $100,535,230, 5 weeks.
14. 
“I, Tonya,” Neon Rated, $2,859,938, 
799 locations, $3,579 average, 
$14,508,658, 7 weeks.
15. 
“Darkest Hour,” Focus Features, 
$2,729,810, 1,341 locations,  
$2,036 average, $40,792,987, 9 weeks.
126

127

128

16. 
“The Shape Of Water,” Fox 
Searchlight, $2,186,311,  
853 locations, $2,563 average,  
$30,195,358, 8 weeks.
17. 
“Three Billboards Outside Ebbing 
Missouri,” Fox Searchlight, 
$1,917,162, 954 locations, $2,010 average, 
$31,994,519, 11 weeks.
18. 
“Coco,” Disney, $1,910,672, 
878 locations, $2,176 average, 
$200,726,972, 9 weeks.
19. 
“Ferdinand,” 20th Century Fox, 
$1,686,160, 1,212 locations,  
$1,391 average, $79,172,376, 6 Weeks.
20. 
“Molly’s Game,” STX Entertainment, 
$1,622,177, 1,091 locations,  
$1,487 average, $24,280,686, 4 weeks.
Universal and Focus are owned by NBC Universal, a unit of Comcast 
Corp.; Sony, Columbia, Sony Screen Gems and Sony Pictures Classics 
are units of Sony Corp.; Paramount is owned by Viacom Inc.; Disney, 
Pixar and Marvel are owned by The Walt Disney Co.; Miramax is owned 
by Filmyard Holdings LLC; 20th Century Fox and Fox Searchlight are 
owned by 21st Century Fox; Warner Bros. and New Line are units 
of Time Warner Inc.; MGM is owned by a group of former creditors 
including Highland Capital, Anchorage Advisors and Carl Icahn; 
Lionsgate is owned by Lions Gate Entertainment Corp.; IFC is owned by 
AMC Networks Inc.; Rogue is owned by Relativity Media LLC.
129

130

Image: Matt Sayles
“The Lord of the Rings” director Peter Jackson 
is going from Middle Earth to the Western 
Front, transforming grainy black-and-white 
footage of World War I into 3-D color for a new 
documentary film.
Jackson’s movie, announced this week, is among 
dozens of artworks commissioned by British 
cultural bodies to commemorate 100 years since 
the final year of the 1914-18 war.
The New Zealand-based director of “The Hobbit” 
and “Lord of the Rings” series has restored film 
from the Imperial War Museum using cutting-
edge digital technology and hand coloring, 
pairing it with archive audio recollections from 
veterans of the conflict.
‘HOBBIT’ DIRECTOR 
PETER JACKSON 
MAKING WWI 
DOCUMENTARY
131

He said the aim is to close the 100-year time gap 
and show “what it was like to fight in the war.”
“We all know what First World War footage 
looks like,” Jackson said in comments broadcast. 
“It’s sped-up, it’s fast, like Charlie Chaplin, 
grainy, jumpy, scratchy, and it immediately 
blocks you from actually connecting with the 
events on screen.
“But the results we have got are absolutely 
unbelievable. They are way beyond  
what I expected.
“This footage looks like it was shot in the last 
week or two, with high definition cameras.”
The film will have its premiere during the 
London Film Festival in October before being 
broadcast on BBC television. Every school in the 
U.K. will also receive a copy.
The film is part of the government-backed 14-18 
Now project, which has presented works by more 
than 200 artists over four years to remember a 
conflict in which 20 million people died.
Other works premiering this year include a 
large-scale performance piece by South African 
artist William Kentridge about African porters 
who served in the war; processions to mark 
the 100th anniversary of some British women 
winning the right to vote; and a performance 
celebrating wartime homing pigeons that 
includes birds fitted with LED lights.
Slumdog Millionaire” director Danny Boyle 
— who helmed the 2012 London Olympics 
opening ceremony — will create a mass-
participation work to be performed on the 
anniversary of the Nov. 11, 1918, armistice that 
ended the war.
132

133

Seven years ago, a computer beat two human 
quizmasters on a “Jeopardy” challenge. Ever 
since, the tech industry has been training its 
machines even harder to make them better at 
amassing knowledge and answering questions.
And it’s worked, at least up to a point. Just don’t 
expect artificial intelligence to spit out a literary 
analysis of Leo Tolstoy’s “War and Peace” any 
time soon.
AI CAN READ! 
TECH FIRMS RACE 
TO SMARTEN 
UP THINKING 
MACHINES
134

135

Research teams at Microsoft and Chinese tech 
company Alibaba reached what they described 
as a milestone earlier this month when their AI 
systems outperformed the estimated human 
score on a reading comprehension test. It was 
the latest demonstration of rapid advances 
that have improved search engines and 
voice assistants and that are finding broader 
applications in health care and other fields.
The answers they got wrong — and the 
test itself — also highlight the limitations of 
computer intelligence and the difficulty of 
comparing it directly to human intelligence.
ERROR! ERROR!
“We are still a long way from computers  
being able to read and comprehend 
general text in the same way that humans 
can,” said Kevin Scott, Microsoft’s chief 
technology officer, in a LinkedIn post that 
also commended the achievement by the 
company’s Beijing-based researchers.
The test developed at Stanford University 
demonstrated that, in at least some 
circumstances, computers can beat humans 
at quickly “reading” hundreds of Wikipedia 
entries and coming up with accurate answers 
to questions about Genghis Khan’s reign or the 
Apollo space program.
The computers, however, also made mistakes 
that many people wouldn’t have.
Microsoft, for instance, fumbled an easy 
football question about which member of 
the NFL’s Carolina Panthers got the most 
interceptions in the 2015 season (the correct 
answer was Kurt Coleman, not Josh Norman). 
136

137

A person’s careful reading of the Wikipedia 
passage would have discovered the right 
answer, but the computer tripped up on the 
word “most” and didn’t understand that seven 
is bigger than four.
“You need some very simple reasoning here, 
but the machine cannot get it,” said Jianfeng 
Gao, of Microsoft’s AI research division.
HUMAN VS. MACHINE
It’s not uncommon for machine-learning 
competitions to pit the cognitive abilities 
of computers against humans. Machines 
first bested people in an image-recognition 
competition in 2015 and a speech recognition 
competition last year, although they’re still 
easily tricked. Computers have also vanquished 
humans at chess, Pac-Man and the strategy 
game Go.
And since IBM’s “Jeopardy” victory in 2011, the 
tech industry has shifted its efforts to data-
intensive methods that seek to not just find 
factoids, but better comprehend the meaning 
of multi-sentence passages.
Like the other tests, the Stanford Question 
Answering Dataset, nicknamed Squad, 
attracted a rivalry among research institutions 
and tech firms — with Google, Facebook, 
Tencent, Samsung and Salesforce also  
giving it a try.
“Academics love competitions,” said Pranav 
Rajpurkar, the Stanford doctoral student who 
helped develop the test. “All these companies 
and institutions are trying to establish 
themselves as the leader in AI.”
138

Image: Jeff Chiu
139

LIMITS OF UNDERSTANDING
The tech industry’s collection and digitization 
of huge troves of data, combined with new sets 
of algorithms and more powerful computing, 
has helped inject new energy into a machine-
learning field that’s been around for more than 
half a century. But computers are still “far off” 
from truly understanding what they’re reading, 
said Michael Littman, a Brown University 
computer science professor who has tasked 
computers to solve crossword puzzles.
Computers are getting better at the statistical 
intuition that allows them to scan text and find 
what seems relevant, but they still struggle with 
the logical reasoning that comes naturally to 
people. (And they are often hopeless when it 
comes to deciphering the subtle wink-and-nod 
trickery of a clever puzzle.) Many of the common 
ways of measuring artificial intelligence are in 
some ways teaching to the test, Littman said.
“It strikes me for the kind of problem that they’re 
solving that it’s not possible to do better than 
people, because people are defining what’s 
correct,” Littman said of the Stanford benchmark. 
“The impressive thing here is they met human 
performance, not that they’ve exceeded it.”
140

141

142

Spacewalking astronauts gave a hand to the 
International Space Station’s big robot arm.
As the federal government geared back up 250 
miles below, NASA astronauts Mark Vande Hei 
and Scott Tingle successfully installed the new 
mechanical gripper.
Because of the lingering effects of the 
government shutdown, the spacewalk got 
started in the morning without coverage on 
NASA TV. An on-air message simply stated: “We 
regret the inconvenience.” Nearly an hour into 
the spacewalk, however, NASA TV came alive 
and began broadcasting the event with typical 
blow-by-blow commentary.
Space station operations were largely unaffected 
by the three-day shutdown. Considered 
essential personnel, Mission Control kept watch 
as usual at Johnson Space Center in Houston.
Vande Hei performed a similar spacewalk last 
October, when he replaced the first of two 
original hands on the Canadian-built arm. This 
SPACEWALKING 
ASTRONAUTS GIVE 
NEW HAND TO 
ROBOT ARM
143

second new hand will go on the opposite end of 
the 58-foot arm, able to move like an inchworm 
by grabbing hold of special fixtures.
The bulky bundle of latches — more than 3 
feet, or a meter, long and weighing more than 
440 pounds, or 200 kilograms — needed to be 
replaced because of wear and tear. It’s been in 
orbit, grabbing cargo capsules and performing 
other chores, since 2001.
Tingle had to use extra muscle to release 
a stubborn bolt securing the spare 
mechanical arm.
“Nice work,” Vande Hei said. “And the crowd goes 
wild,” chimed in Mission Control.
Next, the spacewalkers wrested the old, 
degraded hand from the robot arm. Once 
the new hand was in place, a software issue 
cropped up briefly. Six hours into the spacewalk, 
NASA declared victory. The spacewalk lasted 
7 1/2 hours.
It was the first spacewalk for Tingle, who arrived 
last month, and the third for Vande Hei.
“Make us proud out there,” astronaut Joe Acaba 
told the spacewalkers from inside. “We’ll have 
hot chow for you when you get back.”
Vande Hei will go back out Monday with 
another astronaut to finish the job. Then the two 
Russians on board will conduct a spacewalk Feb. 
2 to install a new antenna on their country’s side 
of the outpost.
The space station is home to three Americans, 
two Russians and one Japanese.
Online: NASA 
144

145

146

Christa McAuliffe’s lost lessons are finally getting 
taught in space.
Thirty-two years after the Challenger disaster, 
a pair of teachers turned astronauts will pay 
tribute to McAuliffe by carrying out her science 
classes on the International Space Station.
As NASA’s first designated teacher in space, 
McAuliffe was going to experiment with fluids 
and demonstrate Newton’s laws of motion for 
schoolchildren. She never made it to orbit: She 
and six crewmates were killed during liftoff of 
space shuttle Challenger on Jan. 28, 1986.
CHRISTA 
MCAULIFFE’S LOST 
LESSONS FINALLY 
TAUGHT IN SPACE
147

Image: Victor Zelentsov
148

Astronauts Joe Acaba and Ricky Arnold will 
perform some of McAuliffe’s lessons over the 
next several months. Acaba shared the news 
during a TV linkup last week with students at 
her alma mater, Framingham State University 
near Boston.
“I can’t think of a better time or a better place to 
make this announcement,” Acaba said. He and 
Arnold “look forward to helping to inspire the 
next generation of explorers and educators.”
Four lessons — on effervescence or bubbles, 
chromatography, liquids and Newton’s laws — 
will be filmed by Acaba and Arnold, then posted 
online by the Challenger Center, a not-for-profit 
organization supporting science, technology, 
engineering and math education.
The center’s president, Lance Bush, said he’s 
thrilled “to bring Christa’s lessons to life.”
“We are honored to have the opportunity to 
complete Christa’s lessons and share them with 
students and teachers around the world,” Bush 
said in a statement.
On Friday, he thanked Acaba, who along with 
two station crewmates fielded questions from 
Framingham State students about life in space.
NASA’s associate administrator for education, 
Mike Kincaid, said the lessons are “an incredible 
way to honor and remember” McAuliffe as well 
as the entire Challenger crew.
Four of the six lessons that McAuliffe planned to 
videotape during her space flight will be done. 
A few will be altered to take advantage of what’s 
available aboard the space station.
The lessons should be available online 
beginning this spring.
149

Image: Kolenovsky
150

151

Acaba returns to Earth at the end of February. 
Arnold flies up in March. NASA is billing their 
back-to-back missions as “A Year of Education 
on Station.”
The two were teaching middle school math 
and science on opposite sides of the world 
— Acaba in Florida and Arnold in Romania 
— when NASA picked them as educator-
astronauts in 2004.
McAuliffe was teaching history, law and 
economics at Concord High School in New 
Hampshire when she was selected as the 
primary candidate for NASA’s teacher in space 
project in 1985.
Her backup, Barbara Morgan, is on the 
Challenger Center’s board of directors.  
Morgan was NASA’s first educator-astronaut, 
flying on shuttle Endeavour in 2007 and 
helping to build the space station.
McAuliffe planned to keep a journal during  
her space shuttle mission, and one college 
student asked if the astronauts were doing  
the same. Acaba said he’s been making  
entries in a leather-bound journal during  
his 14 years as an astronaut. He writes in it 
every night before he goes to sleep on the 
space station.
“When I’m sitting on my porch sometime in  
the future, I’ll look back on all these great 
times,” Acaba said.
Online:
NASA: tinyurl.com/yearofeducation
Challenger Center: www.challenger.org
152

153

BETTER THAN HOLOGRAMS: 
A NEW 3-D PROJECTION 
INTO THIN AIR
154

One of the enduring sci-fi moments of the 
big screen — R2-D2 beaming a 3-D image of 
Princess Leia into thin air in “Star Wars” — is 
closer to reality thanks to the smallest of screens: 
dust-like particles.
Scientists have figured out how to manipulate 
nearly unseen specks in the air and use them 
to create 3-D images that are more realistic and 
clearer than holograms, according to a study in 
Wednesday’s journal Nature. The study’s lead 
author, Daniel Smalley, said the new technology 
is “printing something in space, just erasing it 
very quickly.”
In this case, scientists created a small butterfly 
appearing to dance above a finger and an image 
of a graduate student imitating Leia in the Star 
Wars scene.
Even with all sorts of holograms already in use, 
this new technique is the closest to replicating 
that Star Wars scene.
“The way they do it is really cool,” said Curtis 
Broadbent, of the University of Rochester, 
who wasn’t part of the study but works on a 
competing technology. “You can have a circle of 
people stand around it and each person would 
be able to see it from their own perspective. And 
that’s not possible with a hologram.”
The tiny specks are controlled with laser light, 
like the fictional tractor beam from “Star Trek,” 
said Smalley, an electrical engineering professor 
at Brigham Young University. Yet it was a 
155

different science fiction movie that gave him the 
idea: The scene in the movie “Iron Man” when 
the Tony Stark character dons a holographic 
glove. That couldn’t happen in real life because 
Stark’s arm would disrupt the image.
Going from holograms to this type of 
technology — technically called volumetric 
display — is like shifting from a two-dimensional 
printer to a three-dimensional printer, Smalley 
said. Holograms appear to the eye to be three-
dimensional, but “all of the magic is happening 
on a 2-D surface,” Smalley said.
The key is trapping and moving the particles 
around potential disruptions — like Tony Stark’s 
arm — so the “arm is no longer in the way,” 
Smalley said.
Initially, Smalley thought gravity would make the 
particles fall and make it impossible to sustain 
an image, but the laser light energy changes air 
pressure in a way to keep them aloft, he said.
Other versions of volumetric display use larger 
“screens” and “you can’t poke your finger into 
it because your fingers would get chopped 
off,” said Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
professor V. Michael Bove, who wasn’t part of the 
study team but was Smalley’s mentor.
The device Smalley uses is about one-and-a-half 
times the size of a children’s lunchbox, he said.
So far the projections have been tiny, but with 
more work and multiple beams, Smalley hopes 
to have bigger projections.
This method could one day be used to help 
guide medical procedures — as well as for 
entertainment, Smalley said. It’s still years away 
from daily use.
156

Pictures in the air: 3D printing with light
157

158

GOD’S PLA N 
Drake
PERFECT
eD Sheeran
MEANT TO BE
 (FEAT. FLORIDA GEORGIA LINE)
BeBe rexha
HAVANA (FEAT. YOUNG THUG)
Camila CaBello
NO NAME
nF
FINESSE (REMIX) [FEAT. CARDI B] - SINGLE
Bruno marS
THUNDER
imagine DragonS
PARALLEL LINE
keith urBan
FILTHY
JuStin timBerlake
ROCKSTAR (FEAT. 21 SAVAGE)
PoSt malone
159

160

THE GREATEST SHOWMAN
(ORIGINAL MOTION PICTURE SOUNDTRACK)
VariouS artiStS
M A N I A
Fall out Boy
POET L ARTIST
Jonghyun
HALLELUJAH NIGHTS
lanCo
÷ (DELUXE)
eD Sheeran
HYSTERIA
DeF lePParD
KIDZ BOP 37
kiDZ BoP kiDS
CAMILA
Camila CaBello
PYROMANIA
DeF lePParD
REPUTATION
taylor SwiFt
161

162

PERFECT SYMPHONY
 (WITH ANDREA BOCELLI)
eD Sheeran
FINESSE (REMIX) [FEAT. CARDI B]
Bruno marS
FLIP MY HAIR
JeSSie JameS DeCker
HAVANA (FEAT. YOUNG THUG)
Camila CaBello
PERFECT
eD Sheeran
END GAME (FEAT. ED SHEERAN & FUTURE)
taylor SwiFt
MIC DROP (STEVE AOKI REMIX)
BtS
DESPACITO (FEAT. DADDY YANKEE) 
luiS FonSi
NO LIMIT REMIX (FEAT. A$AP ROCKY,
CARDI B, FRENCH MONTANA, JUICY J &
BELLY) [OFFICIAL VIDEO]
g-eaZy
YONCÉ
BeyonCé
163

164

IT’S NOT ABOUT THE PASTA
VanDerPumP ruleS, SeaSon 6
DIAMONDS ARE FOREVER
keePing uP with the karDaShianS, SeaSon 14
2204
the BaChelor, SeaSon 22
SEVEN REASONS
the gooD DoCtor, SeaSon 1
ONE OCEAN
Blue Planet ii
THE BOY ON THE BRIDGE
the alieniSt, SeaSon 1
STORMING OUT
the real houSewiVeS oF atlanta, SeaSon 10
1-800-799-7233
grey’S anatomy, SeaSon 14
PASSING THE TORCH
Summer houSe, SeaSon 2
CLOSE TO HOME, PT. 1
the BraVe, SeaSon 1
165

166

THE WOMAN IN THE WINDOW
a. J. Finn
FALL FROM GRACE
Danielle Steel
HERE COMES THE SUN
marie ForCe
JUDGMENT ROAD
ChriStine Feehan
THE WIFE BETWEEN US
greer henDriCkS & Sarah Pekkanen
FOREVER MY GIRL
heiDi mClaughlin
FIRE AND FURY
miChael wolFF
XO, ZACH
kenDall ryan
12 RULES FOR LIFE
JorDan B. PeterSon
ALL-AMERICAN MURDER
JameS PatterSon anD otherS
167

168

Image: Freiburg im Breisgau
Solar energy is booming in the United States, 
but companies riding the wave fear that 
President Donald Trump could undercut them 
this week if he decides to impose new tariffs on 
imported solar panels.
Businesses that install solar-power systems 
are benefiting from a glut of cheaper panels 
made overseas, mostly in Asia. That has made 
solar power more competitive with electricity 
generated from coal and natural gas.
A green-technology research firm estimates that 
tariffs could cost up to 88,000 U.S. jobs related to 
installing solar-power systems.
On the other side are two U.S. subsidiaries of 
foreign companies that argue the domestic 
manufacturing of solar cells and modules has 
been decimated by a flood of imports, mostly 
from Chinese companies with operations 
throughout Asia.
Imports of silicon photovoltaic cells, the building 
blocks of solar panels, soared nearly 500 percent 
SOLAR INDUSTRY 
ON EDGE AS 
TRUMP WEIGHS 
TARIFFS ON PANELS
169

between 2012 and 2016, according to the U.S. 
International Trade Commission.
The four members of the commission — 
two Republicans and two Democrats — 
unanimously ruled in October that import are 
hurting American manufacturers, although they 
differed on exactly how the U.S. should respond. 
Trump has until this Friday to act on the agency’s 
recommendations for tariffs of up to 35 percent.
Trump has wide leeway — he can reject the 
recommendations, accept them, or go beyond 
them and impose tougher tariffs. Congress 
has no authority to review or veto his action. 
Countries harmed by his decision could appeal 
to the World Trade Organization.
The trade case grew out of a complaint by 
Suniva Inc., a Georgia-based subsidiary of a 
Chinese company, which declared bankruptcy 
last April. Suniva was joined by SolarWorld 
Americas, the U.S. subsidiary of a German 
company. Suniva wants higher tariffs than those 
recommended by the trade commission.
The U.S. Commerce Department imposed stiff 
anti-dumping duties on imported panels made 
from Chinese solar cells in 2012 and 2015. 
Tim Brightbill, SolarWorld Americas’ lawyer, 
said Chinese companies have gotten around 
those sanctions by assembling panels from 
cells produced in other Asian countries such as 
Malaysia and Vietnam. That makes the current 
trade case even more important, he said.
“It is a global case. It addresses the global 
import surge,” Brightbill said. “We need the 
strongest possible remedies from President 
Trump to maintain solar manufacturing here in 
the United States.”
170

171

A consultant for SolarWorld said tariffs on 
imports could create up to 45,000 U.S. jobs, 
assuming that domestic capacity grows, and 
installation jobs would also increase. But U.S. 
manufacturing of solar cells employed only 
about 1,300 people at its recent peak in 2012, 
according to the trade commission.
While U.S. solar-cell manufacturing has 
shriveled, installations — from home rooftops 
to utility-scale operations — have boomed. 
Installations have soared more than tenfold 
since 2010, with the biggest jump coming in 
2016, after prices for solar panels collapsed. In 
2016, solar was the largest source of new U.S. 
electricity-generating capacity.
The Solar Energy Industries Association, a trade 
group for U.S. installers, says tariffs would drive 
up the cost of installing solar-power systems, 
leading to a drop in demand.
“We are selling energy that can be created by 
wind, by natural gas, by hydro, by coal, by nukes. 
When you raise the price of what we are selling, 
we can’t compete,” said Abigail Ross Hopper, the 
group’s president.
Jim Petersen, CEO of PetersenDean, a California 
company that installs solar rooftop panels 
mostly for residential customers, once favored 
tariffs on imported panels, which he found to be 
of inferior quality. He has changed his mind.
Petersen said tariffs could stunt his business by 
raising the cost of a job, which ranges from $6,000 
to $60,000 or more. He said he might be forced 
to lay off up to 25 percent of his 3,200 installers.
“This is bad for American jobs, bad for the 
consumer,” he said.
172

173

174

In the New Mexico desert, Albuquerque-
based Affordable Solar is working on a $45 
million solar farm to help power a massive 
new data center for Facebook. The company’s 
president, Kevin Bassalleck, said tariffs would 
hurt homegrown companies that make racks, 
tracking systems and electronics that are 
part of a power system. He said jobs at those 
companies are hard to outsource.
“If you ever set foot in a solar module assembly 
factory, most of what you see are robots. There 
are very few people,” he said. “But if go out on 
to any one of our project sites like the Facebook 
project, you would see a small army of people 
working and installing things.”
U.S. Sen. Martin Heinrich, a New Mexico 
Democrat and advocate for renewable energy, 
said tariffs won’t revive U.S. solar manufacturing.
“The jobs that have been lost because of 
cheaper solar cells have already been lost,” 
Heinrich said in an interview. “These tariffs are 
then going to take the very rapidly growing, 
successful, good jobs that we have built in 
manufacturing of the other equipment, in 
installing, and reduce those jobs to a fraction of 
what they should be.”
Many people on both sides of the debate expect 
Trump to impose sanctions.
Brightbill, the lawyer for SolarWorld Americas, 
sounded confident.
“This administration’s focus is on U.S. 
manufacturing and U.S. jobs and getting tough 
on China for the trade deficit,” he said, “so we 
think the administration’s goals are very well-
aligned with saving U.S. solar manufacturing.”
175

176

British regulators said this week that 21st 
Century Fox’s takeover of London-based pay 
TV company Sky is not in the public interest 
because it would give Rupert Murdoch too 
much control over the country’s news media. 
But they offered remedies that may pave the 
way for the deal go ahead.
The regulator’s preliminary finding is the 
latest hurdle for Fox’s effort to buy the 61 
percent of Sky PLC it doesn’t already own for 
11.7 billion pounds ($16.3 billion). A previous 
takeover attempt six years ago was derailed 
by the phone-hacking scandal at Murdoch’s 
British newspapers.
UK REGULATOR 
SAYS FOX 
TAKEOVER OF 
SKY NOT IN 
PUBLIC INTEREST
177

The findings of the Competition and Markets 
Authority will be finalized by May 1, when the 
regulator will send its report to the government, 
which will make a final ruling on the Sky deal. 
That decision may ultimately be a moot point 
because the Walt Disney Co.’s $52.4 billion bid for 
most of Fox would give Disney — not Murdoch 
— full ownership of Sky.
Regulators said the Sky takeover raises concerns 
about Murdoch’s power over British media because 
his family trust already controls News Corp., which 
owns newspapers such as the Times and the Sun, 
and the deal would increase its control of the 
influential Sky News channel. Even before the Sky 
bid, liberal politicians claimed Murdoch had too 
much influence over public debate, with his papers 
often supporting conservative causes.
“The (Murdoch family trust’s) news outlets 
are watched, read or heard by nearly a third 
of the U.K.’s population, and have a combined 
share of the public’s news consumption that 
is significantly greater than all other news 
providers, except the BBC and ITN,” the regulator 
said in a statement. “Due to its control of 
News Corp., the Murdoch family already has 
significant influence over public opinion, and full 
ownership of Sky by Fox would strengthen this 
even further.”
But the regulators also offered ways for Fox to 
remove their objections, including a spin-off of 
Sky News or “behavioral remedies” that would 
reduce the Murdoch family’s ability to direct the 
channel’s news coverage.
Fox said it was “disappointed” by the ruling 
on media plurality, while Sky took note of the 
suggested remedies.
178

179

180

The authority recognized that the completion 
of Disney’s bid for Fox would weaken concerns 
about media plurality, because Disney would 
own Sky. But the authority said there was no way 
to guarantee when or if Disney’s takeover of Fox 
will be completed so the British government’s 
review of the Sky merger must go forward.
“We cannot be sufficiently confident at this 
stage whether, when, or how the Disney/Fox 
transaction will complete,” the regulator said.
Former British Culture Secretary Karen Bradley 
asked the authority to evaluate the takeover 
in September, directing it to look at Fox’s 
commitment to broadcasting standards and the 
deal’s impact on media plurality in the U.K.
In its decision, the regulator dismissed concerns 
about broadcasting standards, saying that Fox 
and Sky had a good record in this area. As part 
of its investigation, the authority considered 
allegations of sexual harassment at Fox News in 
the U.S.
“While these are serious, the CMA has 
provisionally found that these are not directly 
related to the attainment of broadcasting 
standards and do not call into question Fox’s 
or the (Murdoch family trust’s) commitment 
to broadcasting standards in the U.K,” the 
authority said.
Campaign group Avaaz did not bother to hide 
its disappointment that the authority did not 
hold the Murdoch empire to account for alleged 
sexual harassment in the workplace and other 
issues. They promised to fight on.
“The watchdog has let the Murdochs squirrel 
out of any responsibility for the hacking, 
181

182

harassment and hush money at his companies,” 
Alex Wilks, Campaign Director, Avaaz. “In the 
coming weeks they’ll hear from citizens, victims 
and whistleblowers to show them they got 
this wrong.”
Analysts said the ruling may actually be good 
news for the takeover because the spinoff of 
Sky News is workable — while it would have 
a less clear path for the companies to mitigate 
concerns about broadcasting standards. Shares 
of Sky plc rose 2.3 percent in London.
“It has a path to conclusion,” said media analyst 
Alice Enders of the decision. “That’s why the 
markets are so jolly.”
Fox is seeking to consolidate its control over 
Sky as media companies try to combine 
content creation and distribution channels 
amid pressure from competitors such as Netflix, 
Google and Amazon.
Sky’s European pay TV operation has 22.5 million 
customers, attracted by offerings such as English 
Premier League soccer and “Game of Thrones.”
A previous bid for the whole of Sky foundered 
amid the 2011 phone-hacking scandal, in which 
journalists working for Murdoch newspapers 
were accused of gaining illegal access to the 
voicemail messages of celebrities, members of 
the royal family and crime victims. Murdoch’s 
News Corp. withdrew its bid for Sky in 2012.
Labour Party Deputy Leader Tom Watson, a 
long-time opponent of the Murdochs, tweeted 
that the regulator was “right to say that the Fox 
takeover of Sky would give the Murdoch family 
too much power.”
“This is the right decision for the U.K.,” he said.
183

ads@applemagazine.com
Digital
Mindﬁeld

AppleMagazine © Copyright 2017-2011. All Rights Reserved.
No part of the document may be circulated, quoted, or reproduced for distribution without prior written approval.
Proper Trademark Notice and Attribution iPhone™, iPad™, HomePod™, Apple Watch™, iPod™, Mac™, iMac™, Macbook™, AppleTV™, Siri™, iOS™, OS X™, watchOS™, and others
are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the US and other countries. Please contact support for additional trademark ownership rights information.
The following is a list of Apple’s trademarks and service marks http://www.apple.com/legal/ trademark/appletmlist.html.
All other trademarks are the properties of their owners.
AppleMagazine is an independent publication and has not been authorized, sponsored, or otherwise approved by Apple Inc.
Authorized Publisher
WRITERS
 
Precise English Inc.
 
Benjamin Kerry  (UK)
 
Gavin Lenaghan  (UK)
 
Craig Lenaghan  (UK)
 
Elena Lusk  (US)
COLUMNS
COLUMNS
 
iTUNES REVIEW
 
Gavin Lenaghan
 
FINANCE NEWS
 
Associated Press / Bloomberg
REVISION
 
Gavin Lenaghan
  
Jack Crute
PRODUCTION SUPPORT / COLLABORATORS
 
Rui da Costa  
 
 
 
Icy Ventura
 
Segolene Vincent 
 
 
Pilar Bescos
 
Fabian Groenhof  
 
 
Candice Liu
 
Lise Berda
 
James Jarvis
  
Richard Sawyer
 
Lauren Brown
 
Matthew Coburn
 
Jeﬀrey Milks
 
Susan Kiesling
 
Raquel Serrano
 
Robert Fluellen
  
Lisa Swiniarski
 
Roger Gayalkar
PRIVACY POLICY
 
applemagazine.com/privacy-policy/
TERMS OF USE
 
applemagazine.com/terms-of-use/
SOCIAL NETWORKS
 
 
 
 
Twitter
 
 
@apple_magazine
 
 
twitter.com/#!/Apple_Magazine
 
 
Facebook
 
 
facebook.com/applemagazineinternational
SUBSCRIPTIONS
 
AppleMagazine Oﬃcial Website
 
applemagazine.com
 
Zinio LLC.
 
zino.com
 
Readr Newsstand
  
readrapp.com
 
Magzter Newsstand
 
magzter.com
 
Amazon Newsstand
 
amazon.com
 
Ebsco/Flipster
 
ebsco.com
 
Scoop Newsstand (Singapore)
 
getscoop.com
CONTACTS
 
Suport & CRM - contact@applemagazine.com 
 
Magazine and Website Editor - editor@applemagazine.com 
 
Executive Director - ceo@applemagazine.com
 
Advertise - ads@applemagazine.com  
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
 
Ivan Castilho
 
Chief Executive Oﬃcer / Design Conception
MINDFIELD DIGITAL ART & GRAPHIC DESIGN
 
Glauco Ribeiro
 
Chief Design Oﬃcer / Art & Graphic Design Director
 
Michael Danglen
  
Art & Graphic Design Producer
 
Anderson Oliveira
 
Art & Graphic Design Producer
MAGAZINE EDITORIAL CONTENT
 
Benjamin Kerry
 
Chief Editor
OFFICIAL WEBSITE
  
Benjamin Kerry
 
Production Director
 
Jack Crute
 
WordPress Production & Website Support
MASTHEAD
APPLEMAGAZINE INTERNATIONAL
applemagazine.com


