
This is a stone.

Digital
Mindﬁeld
When choosing MINDFIELD DIGITAL™ and our DBMD™ 
Program for your development services, you can be sure 
you will receive an app that will save you money and 
resources using the most advanced design and interface 
concepts.
We follow an Application Development Cycle where every 
We follow an Application Development Cycle where every 
step is carried out to maximum perfection. Our application 
developers are experienced and knowledgeable, and are 
skilled at delivering top high tech Apps. 
Our team is constantly looking for promising partners in 
Our team is constantly looking for promising partners in 
order to improve our quality, broaden our experience and 
create a global range of Apps with the most impressive 
conceptual designs, 3D Graphics and Sound FX.
This is a stone.



INTEL UNDERFOOT: 
FLOOR SENSORS 
RISE AS RETAIL 
DATA SOURCE
INFINITI SAYS IT WILL GO 
‘ALL ELECTRIC’
VR HEADSETS: 
A BREAKTHROUGH IN 
AUGMENTED REALITY
20
124
56
LIFELIKE ROBOTS 
MADE IN HONG KONG 
MEANT TO WIN 
OVER HUMANS
44

TOP 10 APPS   92
iTUNES REVIEW  96
TOP 10 SONGS   146
TOP 10 ALBUMS   148
TOP 10 MUSIC VIDEOS   150
TOP 10 TV SHOWS   152
TOP 10 BOOKS   154
QUANTUM SPEED LIMIT MAY PUT BRAKES ON QUANTUM COMPUTERS  08
A SAMPLING OF TRACKING TECHNOLOGIES FOR TRADITIONAL STORES  28
WHAT FACEBOOK’S SHIFT COULD MEAN TO USERS, BUSINESSES  32
CLICK, TAP, BUY: HOLIDAY SHOPPERS SPENT RECORD AMOUNT ONLINE  54
ILLINOIS LAWMAKERS FORM SUBCOMMITTEE FOR DIGITAL CURRENCY  72
WAVE OF LAWSUITS FILED TO BLOCK NET-NEUTRALITY REPEAL  76
APPLE TO BUILD 2ND CAMPUS, HIRE 20,000 IN $350B PLEDGE  80
COMMUNITY SEEKS TO BRIDGE HIGH TECH GENDER GAP  86
BOX OFFICE TOP 20: ‘JUMANJI’ HITS NO. 1 AGAIN  112
‘SUPERFAST’ INTERNET CABLE TO CROSS MEDITERRANEAN SEA  122
HOW ROBOT MATH AND SMARTPHONES LED RESEARCHERS TO A DRUG...  132
METEOR CREDITED FOR BRIGHT LIGHT, NOISE RATTLING MICHIGAN  142
VERIZON PUSHES FURTHER INTO SPORTS STREAMING WITH NBA DEAL  144
BLACKBERRY UNVEILS CYBERSECURITY SOFTWARE FOR VEHICLES  156
PALESTINIANS TO GET 3G IN WEST BANK, AFTER ISRAEL LIFTS BAN  160
FRANCE VS. FAKE NEWS OFFERS TEST CASE FOR DEMOCRATIC DILEMMA  170

8

Over the past five decades, standard computer 
processors have gotten increasingly faster. 
In recent years, however, the limits to 
that technology have become clear: Chip 
components can only get so small, and be 
packed only so closely together, before they 
overlap or short-circuit. If companies are to 
continue building ever-faster computers, 
something will need to change.
One key hope for the future of increasingly fast 
computing is my own field, quantum physics. 
Quantum computers are expected to be much 
faster than anything the information age has 
developed so far. But my recent research has 
revealed that quantum computers will have 
limits of their own – and has suggested ways to 
figure out what those limits are.
QUANTUM 
SPEED LIMIT MAY 
PUT BRAKES 
ON QUANTUM 
COMPUTERS
9

THE LIMITS OF UNDERSTANDING
To physicists, we humans live in what is called 
the “classical” world. Most people just call it “the 
world,” and have come to understand physics 
intuitively: Throwing a ball sends it up and then 
back down in a predictable arc, for instance.
Even in more complex situations, people tend 
to have an unconscious understanding of how 
things work. Most people largely grasp that a 
car works by burning gasoline in an internal 
combustion engine (or extracting stored 
electricity from a battery), to produce energy 
that is transferred through gears and axles to 
turn tires, which push against the road to move 
the car forward.
Under the laws of classical physics, there are 
theoretical limits to these processes. But they 
are unrealistically high: For instance, we know 
that a car can never go faster than the speed of 
light. And no matter how much fuel is on the 
planet, or how much roadway or how strong the 
construction methods, no car will get close to 
going even 10 percent of the speed of light.
People never really encounter the actual 
physical limits of the world, but they exist, and 
with proper research, physicists can identify 
them. Until recently, though, scholars only had 
a rather vague idea that quantum physics had 
limits too, but didn’t know how to figure out 
how they might apply in the real world.
HEISENBERG’S UNCERTAINTY
Physicists trace the history of quantum theory 
back to 1927, when German physicist Werner 
Heisenberg showed that the classical methods 
did not work for very small objects, those 
10

11

roughly the size of individual atoms. When 
someone throws a ball, for instance, it’s easy to 
determine exactly where the ball is, and how 
fast it’s moving.
But as Heisenberg showed, that’s not true for 
atoms and subatomic particles. Instead, an 
observer can see either where it is or how fast 
it’s moving – but not both at the exact same 
time. This is an uncomfortable realization: 
Even from the moment Heisenberg explained 
his idea, Albert Einstein (among others) was 
uneasy with it. It is important to realize that this 
“quantum uncertainty” is not a shortcoming of 
measurement equipment or engineering, but 
rather how our brains work. We have evolved 
to be so used to how the “classical world” works 
that the actual physical mechanisms of the 
“quantum world” are simply beyond our ability 
to fully grasp.
12

Image: Walden Kirsch
13

ENTERING THE QUANTUM WORLD
If an object in the quantum world travels from 
one location to another, researchers can’t 
measure exactly when it has left nor when it 
will arrive. The limits of physics impose a tiny 
delay on detecting it. So no matter how quickly 
the movement actually happens, it won’t be 
detected until slightly later. (The lengths of 
time here are incredibly tiny – quadrillionths 
of a second – but add up over trillions of 
computer calculations.)
That delay effectively slows down the potential 
speed of a quantum computation – it imposes 
what we call the “quantum speed limit.”
Over the last few years, research, to which my 
group has contributed significantly, has shown 
how this quantum speed limit is determined 
under different conditions, such as using 
different types of materials in different magnetic 
and electric fields. For each of these situations, 
the quantum speed limit is a little higher or a 
little lower.
To everyone’s big surprise, we even found that 
sometimes unexpected factors can help speed 
things up, at times, in counterintuitive ways.
To understand this situation, it might be useful 
to imagine a particle moving through water: The 
particle displaces water molecules as it moves. 
And after the particle has moved on, the water 
molecules quickly flow back where they were, 
leaving no trace behind of the particle’s passage.
Now imagine that same particle traveling 
through honey. Honey has a higher viscosity 
than water – it’s thicker and flows more slowly – 
so the honey particles will take longer to move 
14

Image: Walden Kirsch
15

back after the particle moves on. But in the 
quantum world, the returning flow of honey 
can build up pressure that propels the quantum 
particle forward. This extra acceleration can 
make a quantum particle’s speed limit different 
from what an observer might otherwise expect.
DESIGNING QUANTUM COMPUTERS
As researchers understand more about this 
quantum speed limit, it will affect how quantum 
computer processors are designed. Just as 
engineers figured out how to shrink the size of 
transistors and pack them more closely together 
on a classical computer chip, they’ll need some 
clever innovation to build the fastest possible 
quantum systems, operating as close as possible 
to the ultimate speed limit.
There’s a lot for researchers like me to explore. 
It’s not clear whether the quantum speed limit 
is so high it’s unattainable – like the car that 
will never even get close to the speed of light. 
And we don’t fully understand how unexpected 
elements in the environment – like the honey in 
the example – can help to speed up quantum 
processes. As technologies based on quantum 
physics become more common, we’ll need 
to find out more about where the limits of 
quantum physics are, and how to engineer 
systems that take the best advantage of what 
we know.
16

17



20

Image: Ivan Moreno
The next phase in data collection is right under 
your feet.
Online clicks give retailers valuable insight into 
consumer behavior, but what can they learn 
from footsteps? It’s a question Milwaukee-based 
startup Scanalytics is helping businesses explore 
with floor sensors that track people’s movements.
The sensors can also be used in office buildings 
to reduce energy costs and in nursing homes 
to determine when someone falls. But retailers 
make up the majority of Scanalytics’ customers, 
highlighting one of several efforts brick-
and-mortar stores are undertaking to better 
understand consumer habits and catch up with 
e-commerce giant Amazon.
INTEL UNDERFOOT:
 FLOOR SENSORS 
RISE AS RETAIL  
DATA SOURCE
21

Image: Ivan Moreno
22

Physical stores have been at a disadvantage 
because they “don’t have that granular level of 
understanding as to where users are entering, 
what they’re doing, what shelves are not doing 
well, which aisles are not being visited,” said 
Brian Sathianathan, co-founder of Iterate.
ai, a small Denver-based company that helps 
businesses find and test technologies from 
startups worldwide.
But it’s become easier for stores to track 
customers in recent years. With Wi-Fi — among 
the earliest available options — businesses can 
follow people when they connect to a store’s 
internet. One drawback is that not everyone 
logs on so the sample size is smaller. Another is 
that it’s not possible to tell whether someone is 
inches or feet away from a product.
Sunglass Hut and fragrance maker Jo Malone 
use laser and motion sensors to tell when 
a product is picked up but not bought, and 
make recommendations for similar items on 
an interactive display. Companies such as 
Toronto-based Vendlytics and San Francisco-
based Prism use artificial intelligence with 
video cameras to analyze body motions. 
That can allow stores to deliver customized 
coupons to shoppers in real time on a 
digital shelf or on their cellphones, said Jon 
Nordmark, CEO of Iterate.ai.
With Scanalytics, Nordmark said, “to have (the 
sensors) be super useful for someone like a 
retailer, they may need to power other types of 
things,” like sending coupons to customers.
Scanalytics co-founder and CEO Joe Scanlin 
said that’s what his floor sensors are  
designed to do. For instance, the sensors  
23

24

Image: Dan Dalton
read a customer’s unique foot compressions  
to track that person’s path to a digital display 
and how long the person stand in front of it 
before walking away, he said. Based on data 
collected over time, the floor sensors can tell 
a retailer the best time to offer a coupon or 
change the display before the customer  
loses interest.
“Something that in the moment will increase 
their propensity to purchase a product,” said 
Scanlin, 29, who started developing the paper-
thin sensors that are 2-square feet (0.19-sq. 
meters) as a student at the University of 
Wisconsin-Whitewater in 2012. He employs 
about 20 people.
Wisconsin-based bicycle retailer Wheel and 
Sprocket uses Scanalytics’ sensors — which can 
be tucked under utility mats — to count the 
number of customers entering each of its eight 
stores to help schedule staff.
“That’s our biggest variable expense,” said co-
owner Noel Kegel. “That sort of makes or breaks 
our profitability.”
Kegel wants to eventually have sensors in 
more areas throughout his stores to measure 
where customers spend most of their time and 
what products are popular, but he said it’s too 
expensive right now.
The cost of having the sensors ranges from $20 
to $1,000 per month, depending on square 
footage and add-on applications to analyze 
data or interact with digital signs, Scanlin said. 
He said he’s working with 150 customers in the 
U.S. and other countries and estimates that 
about 60 percent are retailers.
25

26

The emergence of tracking technologies is 
bound to raise concerns about privacy and 
surveillance. But Scanlin noted his sensors don’t 
collect personally identifying information.
Jeffrey Lenon, 47, who was recently shopping at 
the Shops of Grand Avenue mall in Milwaukee, 
said he wasn’t bothered by the idea of stores 
tracking foot traffic and buying habits.
“If that’s helping the retailer as far as tracking 
what sells and what no, I think it’s a good idea,” 
Lenon said.
These technologies have not become ubiquitous 
in the U.S. yet, but it’s only a matter of time, said 
Ghose Anindya, a business professor at New York 
University’s Stern School of Business.
“In a couple of years this kind of conversation 
will be like part and parcel of everyday life.  
But I don’t think we’re there yet,” he said.
27

Brick-and-mortar retailers are using different 
tracking technologies to better understand their 
customers and keep up with e-commerce giant 
Amazon. Here is a sampling of the different 
tracking methods available to stores:
FLOOR SENSORS
Paper-thin tiles developed by Milwaukee-based 
Scanalytics measure foot compressions to 
analyze people’s movements over time so stores 
know what products displays draw customers’ 
attention and for how long. That allows 
businesses to study what sells, know when to 
schedule staff for busy times, and what store 
layout is most effective. The technology might 
still be too pricey for smaller retailers, however.
A SAMPLING 
OF TRACKING 
TECHNOLOGIES 
FOR TRADITIONAL 
STORES
28

29

30

MOTION SENSORS
Sunglass Hut and fragrance maker Jo Malone 
are using laser and motion sensors from Perch 
Interactive to tell when a product is picked 
up but not bought. The technology can also 
make recommendations for similar items on an 
interactive display.
WI-FI BEACONS
Wi-Fi beacons can track customer movements 
— as long as they connect to the store’s 
internet. Because not everyone opts in, stores 
have a smaller sample size to analyze. Another 
drawback is that it’s not possible to tell whether 
a customer is inches or feet from a product.
INTELLIGENT VIDEO CAMERAS
Companies such as Toronto-based Vendlytics 
and San Francisco-based Prism use artificial 
intelligence with video cameras to analyze 
body motions. That can allow stores to deliver 
customized coupons to shoppers in real-time on 
a digital shelf or on their cellphones on an app.
31

32

In coming days, Facebook users will see fewer 
posts from publishers, businesses and celebs 
they follow. Instead, Facebook wants people to 
see more stuff from friends, family and other 
people they are likely to have “meaningful” 
conversations with — something the company 
laments has been lost in the sea of videos, news 
stories (real and fake), and viral quizzes on which 
“Big Bang Theory” character you are.
Here are some frequently asked questions about 
what users and businesses might expect from 
the changes.
WHY IS FACEBOOK DOING THIS?
CEO Mark Zuckerberg has been doing a bit of 
soul-searching about the negative effects his 
company may be having on society and its users’ 
psyches. He’s come a long way since November 
2016, when he dismissed the notion that fake 
news on Facebook could have influenced the 
U.S. presidential election as a “pretty crazy idea.”
WHAT FACEBOOK’S 
SHIFT COULD
MEAN TO USERS, 
BUSINESSES
33

Now it’s his personal goal for 2018 to fix the 
site and weed out hate, abuse, meddling by 
malicious nation states, while also making it 
more “meaningful” and less depressing for users.
While he acknowledges that Facebook may 
never be completely free of malign influences, 
Zuckerberg says that the company currently 
makes “too many errors enforcing our policies 
and preventing the misuse of our tools.”
The company also faces pressure from 
regulators in the U.S. and abroad, and a growing 
backlash from academics, lawmakers and 
even early executives and investors about the 
ways in which social media may be leaving us 
depressed, isolated, bombarded by online trolls 
and addicted to our phones.
Facebook would much rather make changes on 
its own than have its hand forced by regulators 
— or to see disillusioned users move on to other, 
newer platforms.
HOW WILL IT AFFECT  
THE COMPANY’S BUSINESS?
Facebook’s stock price dropped almost 6 percent 
last week before regaining some ground. That 
suggests investors take Facebook seriously when 
it says the move will likely make users spend less 
time on its service. Less time, of course, means 
fewer advertising eyeballs at any given time.
This is a huge shift for Facebook, which until 
recently has been laser-focused on keeping 
users glued to the service by offering a bevy 
of notifications and “engaging” but low-value 
material.
Facebook has been doing very well financially. 
Its stock hit an all-time high earlier this month, 
34

35

and the company’s market value is more than 
$522 billion. Its quarterly results routinely 
surpass Wall Street’s expectations.
So arguably the company can afford to shift 
its focus a bit away from quarterly profit gains 
and metrics like “user engagement” that get 
advertisers salivating. Zuckerberg already 
signaled this would happen late last year, when 
he said the company’s planned investments in 
preventing abuse would hurt profitability.
While the changes could hurt Facebook’s 
business in the short term, happier users could 
make for better profits over the long term. At 
least, that’s what the company hopes.
IS THIS THE END FOR BRANDS AND 
PUBLISHERS ON FACEBOOK?
Many news organizations, bloggers and 
businesses have grown reliant on Facebook 
to spread information — articles, videos, 
infomercials — to their followers without paying 
for ads. The changes could jeopardize that route 
to their audiences, though some speculate it 
could be a ploy to force these companies to buy 
more Facebook ads.
“It’s obvious that the days of getting exposure as 
a business on Facebook are coming to an end,” 
said Michael Stelzner, the CEO of social media 
marketing company Social Media Examiner. 
While Facebook has made plenty of changes to 
its news feed algorithm in the past, he said, this 
time might be different.
That’s because Facebook is being “far more 
explicit” in its wording about what sorts of posts 
will diminish. “It has never been this black and 
white,” Stelzner said.
36

37

WON’T THIS JUST REINFORCE THE 
“FILTER BUBBLES” THAT TRAP USERS 
AMONG THE LIKE-MINDED?
Do you enjoy arguing with people you  
disagree with? Maybe, maybe not. But 
Facebook’s goal is to make people happier 
using the site — not to expose them to 
opposing views. So yes, this is possible.
That said, company says this is how people make 
friends and interact with each other offline. We 
gravitate toward people like us. And Facebook 
says its own research shows that users are 
exposed to more divergent views on its platform 
than they would be otherwise. Of course, this 
is difficult to verify independently, since the 
company doesn’t often show that  
data to outsiders.
ARE PEOPLE REALLY GOING TO SPEND 
LESS TIME ON FACEBOOK?
Admitting that its changes will likely reduce the 
time people spend on Facebook less was a big 
deal for the company. Video, especially, has been 
a big focus for the social media giant — and 
videos have been especially good at keeping 
users around. This latest move, however, will de-
emphasize videos too.
While it’s too early to tell what users will do, 
there’s little reason not to trust Facebook on this 
particular question.
38

39

40

WILL THE CHANGES MAKE PEOPLE 
HAPPIER OR SADDER?
The jury is still out on how seeing mostly 
exuberant posts from friends and family affects 
people over time.
Facebook obviously believes most of its users 
enjoy keeping up with what’s happening in their 
social circles, even if the material being shared 
mostly revolves around parties, vacations and 
other fun times while omitting life’s inevitable 
challenges and tedium. Sharing these moments 
together, Facebook reasons, deepens the 
connections between people, even if they can’t 
always be together offline.
But some research and anecdotal evidence 
suggests that Facebook can make people 
feel isolated, inadequate or alienated as they 
experience a phenomenon known as “fear of 
missing out,” or FOMO. Teenagers are particularly 
prone to “Facebook depression” as they try 
to measure up to and fit in with their peers, 
according to the American Academy of Pediatrics.
41

42

But other researchers believe how people react 
to Facebook depends on their personality. If 
you’re prone to anxiety, insecurity or already 
unhappy with your life, then seeing other 
people having fun could deepen your feelings of 
missing out or being left out. If you’re confident 
and content with your life, then seeing a friend 
or family member with a smile on their face 
could make you happy too.
A recent article in Perspectives on Psychological 
Science concluded that already lonely people 
who use Facebook and other social media as a 
substitute for real-life relationships tend to end 
up feeling more isolated. But when Facebook is 
used to deepen friendships that have already 
been struck and to forge new relationships, the 
social network helps people feel less alone.
43

44

David Hanson envisions a future in which 
AI-powered robots evolve to become 
“super-intelligent genius machines” that 
might help solve some of mankind’s most 
challenging problems.
If only it were as simple as that.
The Texas-born former sculptor at Walt Disney 
Imagineering and his Hong Kong-based startup 
Hanson Robotics are combining artificial 
intelligence with southern China’s expertise 
in toy design, electronics and manufacturing 
to craft humanoid “social robots” with faces 
designed to be lifelike and appealing enough to 
win trust from humans who interact with them.
Hanson, 49, is perhaps best known as the 
creator of Sophia, a talk show-going robot 
partly modeled on Audrey Hepburn that he 
calls his “masterpiece.”
Akin to an animated mannequin, she seems as 
much a product of his background in theatrics 
as an example of advanced technology.
LIFELIKE ROBOTS 
MADE IN 
HONG KONG 
MEANT TO WIN 
OVER HUMANS
45

“You’re talking to me right now, which is very 
‘Blade Runner,’ no?” Sophia said during a recent 
visit to Hanson Robotics’ headquarters in a 
suburban Hong Kong science park, its home 
since shortly after Hanson relocated here 
in 2013.
“Do you ever look around you and think, ‘Wow 
I’m living in a real world science fiction novel?’” 
she asked. “Is it weird to be talking to a robot 
right now?”
Hanson Robotics has made about a dozen 
copies of Sophia, who like any human is a work 
in progress. A multinational team of scientists 
and engineers are fine tuning her appearance 
and the algorithms that enable her to smile, 
blink and refine her understanding and 
communication.
Sophia has moving 3D-printed arms and, with 
the help of a South Korean robotics company, 
she’s now going mobile. Shuffling slowly on 
boxy black legs, Sophia made her walking debut 
in Las Vegas last week at the CES electronics 
trade show.
Her skin is made of a nanotech material that 
Hanson invented and dubbed “Frubber,” 
short for flesh-rubber, that has a flesh-like 
bouncy texture. Cameras in her eyes and a 3D 
sensor in her chest help her to “see,” while the 
processor that serves as her brain combines 
facial and speech recognition, natural language 
processing, speech synthesis and a motion 
control system.
Image: Denis Balibouse
46

47

Sophia seems friendly and engaging, despite 
the unnatural pauses and cadence in her 
speech. Her predecessors include an Albert 
Einstein, complete with bushy mustache and 
white thatch of hair, a robot named Alice whose 
grimaces run a gamut of emotions and one 
eerily resembling the late sci-fi author Philip K. 
Dick, which won an award from the American 
Association of Artificial Intelligence. They 
variously leer, blink, smile and even crack jokes.
Disney’s venture capital arm is an investor in 
Hanson, which is building a robot based on one 
of the entertainment giant’s characters.
An artist and robotics scientist, Hanson worked 
on animatronic theme park shows, sculpting 
props and characters for Disney attractions like 
Pooh’s Hunny Hunt and Mermaid Lagoon. He 
studied film, animation and video, eventually 
earning a doctorate in interactive arts and 
technology from the University of Texas at Dallas.
Hanson says he makes his robots as human-like 
as possible to help alleviate fears about robots, 
artificial intelligence and automation.
That runs contrary to a tendency in the industry 
to use cute robo-pets or overtly machine-
like robots like Star Wars’ R2-D2 to avoid 
the “uncanny valley” problem with human 
likenesses such as wax models and robots that 
many people find a bit creepy.
Some experts see Sophia as mainly a clever 
marketing gimmick.
“It’s a good advertising tool, whatever that 
company produces as a business plan,” said 
Roland Chin, chair professor of computer 
science at Hong Kong Baptist University.
48

49

50

Global market revenue for service robotics is 
forecast to grow from $3.7 billion in 2015 to 
$15 billion in 2020, according to IHS Markit. 
That includes both professional and domestic 
machines like warehouse automatons, smart 
vacuums and fuzzy companion robots.
Hanson Robotics is privately owned and 
has a consumer-oriented business that sells 
thousands of shoebox-sized $200 Professor 
Einstein educational robots a year. Chief 
Marketing Officer Jeanne Lim says the company 
is generating revenue but won’t say whether 
it’s profitable.
For now, artificial intelligence is best at doing 
specific tasks. It’s another thing entirely for 
machines to learn a new ability, generalize that 
knowledge and apply it in different contexts, 
partly because of the massive amount of 
computing power needed to process such 
information so quickly.
“We’re really very far from the kind of AI and 
robotics that you see in movies like ‘Blade 
Runner’,” said Pascale Fung, an engineering 
professor at Hong Kong University of Science 
and Technology. “Sorry to disappoint you.”
Unlike toddlers, who use all five senses to learn 
quickly, machines generally can handle only one 
type of input at a time, she noted.
While Sophia’s repartee can be entertaining, 
she’s easily thrown off topic and her replies, 
based on open-source software, sometimes miss 
the mark.
51

52

Hanson and other members of his team like 
Chief Scientist Ben Goertzel have set their 
sights on a time when the computer chips, 
processing capacity and other technologies 
needed for artificial general intelligence could 
enable Sophia and other robots to fill a variety 
of uses, such as helping with therapy for autistic 
children, caring for seniors, and providing 
customer services.
As for tackling challenging world problems, 
that’s a ways off, Hanson acknowledges.
“There’s a certain expression of genius to be 
able to get up and cross the room and pour 
yourself a cup of coffee, and robots and AI have 
not achieved that level of intelligence reliably,” 
Hanson said.
Online:
http://www.hansonrobotics.com/
53

54

Shoppers spent a record amount online during 
the holiday season.
That’s according to Adobe Analytics, which 
reports online shopping during the holiday 
season reached $108.2 billion, up almost 15 
percent from $94.4 billion the year before. The 
research arm of software maker Adobe says more 
than a third of online holiday revenue came from 
purchases made on smartphones or tablets.
Adobe Analytics says people likely spent more 
due to low unemployment rates and a strong 
stock market.
Last week, the National Retail Federation 
said in-store and online holiday spending 
rose 5.5. percent, the strongest gain since the 
Great Recession. 
CLICK, TAP, BUY: 
HOLIDAY SHOPPERS 
SPENT RECORD 
AMOUNT ONLINE
55

56

57

Image: David Paul Morris/Bloomberg
58

At CES 2018, which took place in Las Vegas 
last week, HTC unveiled a brand new headset 
as part of their virtual reality line. Although 
the HTC VIVE Pro hasn’t brought with it an 
entirely new generation of VR hardware, it has 
proven to be an impressive upgrade from those 
already on the market. The three days at CES 
saw a huge progression in the field of VR, with 
demonstrations that highlighted the potential 
to improve even some of the more high-end 
VR technologies.
WHAT EXACTLY IS THE DIFFERENCE 
BETWEEN VR AND AR?
Before we go any further, it might be a good 
idea for us to firmly establish the difference 
between VR and AR as many people still tend 
to get the two confused. A virtual reality (VR) 
headset is hardware that users can wear in a 
similar vein to ski goggles, completely blocking 
your view of the outside world. When wearing 
a VR headset, the device will track your head 
movement and display 3D images inside the 
headset, making you appear as if you’ve been 
fully submerged into a 3D virtual world. 
On the other hand, with augmented reality (AR), 
users will wear see-through glasses that allow 
them to see the world around them, with the 
image being displayed in front of your eyes. If 
you remember headlines from a few years ago, it 
was Google Glass that first brought attention 
to AR although this technology has progressed 
a lot in recent years. 
59

THE NEW HTC VIVE: HOW IT’S RAISED 
THE BAR FOR VR
Taiwanese gadget maker HTC was the leader 
in room-scale virtual reality even before it 
announced new updates to the HTC VIVE at CES. 
With the recent introduction of Vive Pro and 
Vive Wireless Adaptor, these new upgrades are 
now able to deliver premium VR experiences 
to consumers, and that’s before we even begin 
to mention the new improvements for users to 
discover, experience and acquire VR content. 
60

These improvements have delivered on 
users’ desire for a higher resolution, greater 
comfort, improved audio, wireless freedom 
and a content discovery experience that’s 
completely immersive.  The VIVE Pro boasts 
dual-OLED displays with a crisp 2800 x 1600 
picture resolution, a 78% increase in resolution 
over the current VIVE HMD. VR enthusiasts can 
now benefit from sharper text and graphics, 
and the high-performance headphones with 
built-in amplifier offer a richer sound and 
therefore a heightened sense of presence. To 
answer the question of comfort, the headset 
includes a head strap with a sizing dial to 
decrease weight on the front of the device and 
thus allow for more balanced wear. Further 
improvements such as dual microphones 
with noise cancellation and dual front-facing 
cameras were included with developer 
creativity in mind.  “There’s a clear need in the 
VR market for a premium VR experience with 
high-resolution display, integrated audio and the 
best components available today in a headset,” 
explained Daniel O’ Brien, GM U.S., VIVE. 
“VIVE Pro offers an immediate upgrade for both 
VR enthusiasts and enterprises that want to utilize 
the best VR experience.” 
HTC VIVE Announces the VIVE Pro - CES 2018
61

Arguably though, the HTC headset is not the 
biggest announcement to come out of CES. A 
huge fuss has been made over HTC’s wireless 
adapter; something that many believe will 
change the game for mainstream VR. So far, 
the headset has no release date (or price) but 
what we do know is that it provides users with 
the opportunity to beam both audio and video 
output from a VR-capable computer directly 
to their VR headset rather than having to deal 
with the frustration of a tangle of wires. Call us 
bold, but we firmly believe that this could be the 
biggest improvement to virtual reality since the 
release of the original Oculus Rift. 
62

Wearable tech has proven to be an incredibly 
hard sell to consumers outside of the tech 
bubble for the understandable reason that 
many people don’t want to invest in something 
that makes them look silly. Up until now, the 
cable management required with the HTC VIVE 
not only did nothing to resolve this problem 
but actually made it worse. Users planning to 
spend a considerable amount of time immersed 
in their VR headset will need to keep a close 
eye on the tether that provides the connection 
between the real and virtual world. Without a 
doubt, this is a difficult skill to master if you don’t 
want to disrupt your overall experience and 
make your VR presence a fragile one. While HTC’s 
wireless adapter isn’t the first of its kind, it is the 
first to be released by a major manufacturer 
and may be the final push the industry needs to 
make it mainstream.
Image: Stephen Lam
63

64

ARE VR HEADSETS THE NATURAL 
EVOLUTION FOR APPLE? 
When it comes to Apple, then, what’s the 
latest on the rumor surrounding their foray 
into AR? Despite this being something that’s 
been circulating for well over two years, 
things started to heat up at the Worldwide 
Developers Conference in June 2017 with 
the announcement of ARKit. It came as no 
surprise that Apple was deeply interested in this 
area, with the news that Google and Microsoft 
were both developing AR devices it was an 
opportunity that couldn’t be missed. 
The first rumor that had some weight 
behind it was picked up by Bloomberg back 
in 2016, detailing that Apple was working 
on a pair of Google Glass-style augmented 
reality glasses rather than a VR headset that 
was first suggested. One year later, further 
rumors suggested that the company had the 
technology ready to release an AR-headset as 
early as 2020. Using the current generation of VR 
headsets that use the smartphone engine and 
screen, it was claimed that Apple’s device would 
have its own display and chip operating system 
thus making it a trailblazer in the industry. 
Such things continue to remain very much up 
in the air, and a 2020 launch window has been 
regarded as far too ambitious. 
Apple’s CEO Tim Cook has never been shy about 
his attitude toward the possibilities of AR, stating 
that it has the opportunity to be as revolutionary 
as the smartphone. Cook has also expressed 
his opinion that AR is a lot less isolating than 
VR and thus the applications for its use are 
endless. When asked about the possibility of 
Image: Stephen Lam
65

66

67

Apple AR glasses, Cook kept quiet about any 
hardware developments but suggested that the 
technology “doesn’t exist to do that in a quality 
way.” However, with the recent revelations at this 
year’s CES, once Apple finally succeeds in its AR 
ventures (which we’re sure they will), VR headsets 
seem like the most obvious progression.
WHAT CAN WE EXPECT FROM APPLE? 
Apple is a company that’s known for its focus on 
user experience. In that case, then, what can we 
expect to gain from a probable venture into VR? 
While Apple is developing its own prototypes, 
company engineers are apparently using HTC 
VIVE devices for internal prototyping and 
testing. Another recent report claims that Apple 
met with potential suppliers of AR Glasses at 
CES 2018 suggesting once more that rumors 
will soon become a reality.
68

An early version of Apple’s augmented reality 
device is said to include a dedicated display, 
a built-in processor, and a custom operating 
system named “rOS” (reality operating system). 
A report in early November 2017 also claimed 
that while Apple had not yet finalized how 
users will control the headset and launch 
apps, it’s in the process of investigating 
ideas such as touch screens, Siri voice 
activation, and head gestures. This report 
claims, “Engineers are prototyping a range of 
applications, from mapping and texting to more 
advanced features including virtual meeting 
rooms and 360-degree video playback. The 
company has discussed pairing the headset with 
its own version of the App Store, where users 
would be able to download content, just as they 
do with the iPhone, Watch, Apple TV and Mac.”  
Of course, this evolution won’t necessarily be 
Image: Magic Leap
69

70

something that remains designated to the 
likes of iPhones and iPads. Once Apple has 
cracked the possibilities of VR we may see 
a virtual presence for FaceTime, virtual 3D 
recording, and 3D modeling art and sculpture 
for 3D printing.  
There has been a huge amount to suggest 
that Apple is, in fact, working on a VR headset 
and these rumors go as far back as 2014. Back 
then, the company posted a job listing for app 
engineers that were experienced in 3D graphic 
design, virtual reality, and augmented reality. 
Since then, it’s made some relatively high-profile 
hires that have included the likes of Microsoft’s 
Nick Thompson and Bennett Wilburn and Doug 
Bowman, known to be a leader in the field of 
3D user interfaces. Furthermore, a number of 
VR-related companies have been acquired 
including a reported $345 million spent on 
PrimeSense in 2013. That’s a huge amount of 
money to spend on a company for technology 
that might not be used. Finally, Apple has 
not hidden the fact that it sent employees 
to specialist VR labs several times over the 
course of three months.
Perhaps Tim Cook’s claim that VR isn’t a niche 
that Apple wishes to pursue is simply a way 
for the company to remain tight-lipped about 
the subject. Nonetheless, recent developments 
in the industry have prompted further 
investigation into VR prospects from Apple, 
a company that is known for trailblazing the 
way in tech. 
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
Image: Sarah Tew/CNET
71

Image: Jordan Mansfield
72

Illinois lawmakers have formed a subcommittee 
to explore state policies over decentralized 
digital currencies like bitcoin.
The Department of Financial and Professional 
Regulation doesn’t consider digital currencies 
valid. But some lawmakers believe digital 
currencies and blockchain technology may have 
benefits that could make state government 
more efficient.
Rep. Mike Zalewski of Riverside will chair the 
House subcommittee. Zalewski told the State 
Journal-Register that his goal is to understand 
whether a digital currency would be a worthy 
investment or a risky gamble.
“As lawmakers, we all want government 
to run more efficiently and transparently,” 
Zalewski said. “Distributed ledger technology 
has the promise to do just that — replace old 
antiquated systems with a modern approach to 
serving citizens’ needs.”
ILLINOIS 
LAWMAKERS FORM 
SUBCOMMITTEE 
FOR DIGITAL 
CURRENCY
73

He said he hopes the subcommittee can create a 
policy that puts consumers first.
Digital currencies like bitcoin have gained 
popularity in the past decade. Digital currency 
is unlike traditional currency because it’s 
created and exchanged independent of banks 
or governments. Instead, they rely on peer-
to-peer transactions that are recorded in an 
online ledger.
Blockchain is a database that can be 
used to record digital transactions and 
avoid duplication.
State Rep. Jaime Andrade of Chicago is 
chairman of the Cybersecurity, Data Analytics 
and IT committee. He said the aim of the 
subcommittee is to create an environment that 
“allows and fosters this technology.”
Andrade said a report will be released soon 
from the task force that was created last 
year to study how and if state, county and 
municipal governments can benefit from 
record keeping and service delivery based on a 
blockchain system.
No hearings have been scheduled yet for the 
new subcommittee.
74

75

76

The expected wave of litigation against the 
Federal Communications Commission’s repeal of 
net-neutrality rules has begun.
A group of attorneys general for 21 states and 
the District of Columbia sued Tuesday to block 
the rules. So did Mozilla, the maker of the Firefox 
browser, and New America’s Open Technology 
Institute. Other public-interest groups are 
expected to file suit as well, and the tech-industry 
lobbying group has said it will support litigation.
The rules barred companies like AT&T, Comcast 
and Verizon from interfering with internet traffic 
and favoring their own sites and apps. FCC 
Chairman Ajit Pai’s push to undo them inspired 
both street and online protests in defense of the 
Obama-era rules.
WAVE OF 
LAWSUITS 
FILED TO BLOCK 
NET-NEUTRALITY 
REPEAL
77

78

New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman, 
who is leading the suit, said Tuesday that the 
end of the net neutrality rules would hurt 
consumers and businesses.
FCC spokesman Brian Hart declined to comment 
on the litigation.
The lawsuits are part of a multi-pronged 
approach against the net-neutrality repeal. 
There are efforts by Democrats to undo the 
repeal in Congress. State lawmakers have 
also introduced bills to protect net neutrality 
in their own states. However, the FCC’s order 
bars state laws from contradicting the federal 
government’s approach.
The other attorneys general participating in 
the lawsuit are from California, Connecticut, 
Delaware, Hawaii, Illinois, Iowa, Kentucky, 
Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, 
Mississippi, New Mexico, North Carolina, 
Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont 
and Virginia and Washington.
The parties may have to file suit again after the 
FCC’s order is published in the Federal Register. 
That hasn’t happened yet. The different suits 
may also be consolidated.
79

80

Apple is planning to build another corporate 
campus and hire 20,000 workers during 
the next five years as part of a $350 billion 
commitment to the U.S. that will be partially 
financed by an upcoming windfall from the 
country’s new tax law.
The pledge announced this week comes 
less than a month after Congress approved 
a sweeping overhaul of the U.S. tax code 
championed by President Donald Trump that 
will increase corporate profits.
Besides dramatically lowering the standard 
corporate tax rate, the reforms offer a one-time 
break on cash being held overseas.
APPLE TO BUILD
 2ND CAMPUS,
HIRE 20,000 IN 
$350B PLEDGE
81

Apple plans to take advantage of that provision 
to bring back about $252 billion in offshore 
cash, generating a tax bill of roughly $38 
billion. It’s something that Apple CEO Tim Cook 
promised the company would do if it could 
avoid being taxed at the 35 percent rate that 
had been in effect under the previous tax law.
About $75 billion of the $350 billion in U.S. 
investments will be paid from money that had 
been overseas, Apple estimated.
Companies who bring back money stashed 
overseas this year will be taxed at a 15.5 
percent rate, below the new 21 percent rate  
for U.S. corporate profits under the new law.  
As a whole, corporate America has an 
estimated $2.6 trillion in overseas cash,  
with most of that concentrated in the 
technology industry, with Apple sitting at  
the top of the heap.
Analysts have been predicting that most of 
the overseas profits coming back to the U.S. 
would be plowed into paying shareholder 
dividends and buying back stock, something 
that happened the last time a one-time break 
on offshore profits was offered more than a 
decade ago.
While Apple is likely to return some of 
its overseas money to its shareholders, 
Wednesday’s announcement is designed to 
be a show of faith in the U.S. — the company’s 
largest market. The public show of support to 
the U.S. also helps the optics of a company that 
will still continue to make most of its iPhones, 
iPads and other gadgets in factories located in 
China and other faraway countries that offer 
cheaper labor.
82

83

“Apple is a success story that could only have 
happened in America, and we are proud to 
build on our long history of support for the U.S. 
economy,” Cook said.
Apple, which just spent an estimated $5 billion 
building a Cupertino, California, headquarters 
that resembles a giant spaceship, plans to 
announce the location of a second campus 
devoted to customer support later this year. The 
company didn’t say how big the second campus 
will be, or how many of the additional 20,000 
workers that it plans to hire will be based there.
One thing is certain: Cities from across the  
U.S. will likely be offering Apple tax breaks  
and other incentives in an attempt to 
persuade the company to build its second 
campus in their towns.
That was what happened last year after 
Amazon announced it would build a second 
headquarters in North America to expand 
beyond its current Seattle home. The online 
retailer received 238 proposals from cities 
and regions in the U.S., Canada and Mexico. 
Amazon is expected to announce the winning 
bid later this year.
84

85

86

Sarah Chapman wanted to close the gap 
between girls and boys who can write 
computer code and, with the help of her 
community, she is well on her way.
“The kids my daughter’s age have grown up 
with smartphones, computers and tablets 
around them,” Chapman said. “They are really 
savvy technology-wise. But having them make it 
is another step.”
Chapman, an Amesbury resident and the 
mother of a 10-year-old girl, sees computer 
coding as the wave of the future and wanted  
to introduce her daughter and other girls to  
the discipline. Chapman executed a quick 
internet search last spring and discovered  
Girls Who Code.
Founded with a mission to close the gender gap 
in technology, the New York-based nonprofit 
has spent the past five years teaching computer 
science to nearly 40,000 young women.
COMMUNITY 
SEEKS TO BRIDGE 
HIGH TECH 
GENDER GAP
87

“Women are so underrepresented in that 
industry,” Chapman said. “This will be one of the 
top employment industries in the future.”
Hoping to start a Girls Who Code club in her 
hometown, Chapman approached Amesbury 
Public Library’s children’s librarian, Clare 
Dombrowski. While Dombrowski was excited 
by the idea, she said the library didn’t have 
the equipment to run the program but knew 
someone who could.
Enter Code & Circuit founder Ken Aspeslagh, 
who has been teaching coding to schoolchildren 
in the city for the past four years.
The Girls Who Code mission matches nicely 
with Aspeslagh’s own hopes to close the 
gender gap in technology, so he offered 
Chapman the use of his Main Street classroom 
and its coding technology.
“Over the last four years, we have noticed a 
smaller percentage of girls in our classes as the 
grade levels increase,” Aspeslagh? said. “We will 
go from a fairly even distribution of girls and 
boys in grades K through 2, then we get up to 
the middle and high school levels and there may 
be one or two or even no girls involved in one of 
those groups.”
Enlisting the aid of Johanne Knowlton to instruct 
a two-hour class each Friday, Chapman had 
eight local girls, ages 10 to 16, coding at Code & 
Circuit by the end of October.
“You have to be a nonprofit to teach Girls Who 
Code, so Ken is a perfect match,” Chapman 
said. “He had all the hardware and the internet 
connection we needed. I would say a couple of 
the girls were nervous about computer science 
88

89

90

when we started. But we have a couple of girls 
who have experience and are pretty confident, 
so they have been terrific leaders in the group 
and have helped everyone organize themselves.”
Although Alice Dragnea studied computer 
programming at school, the Amesbury High 
School student said she’s learned a lot more 
from Knowlton.
“I never tried making a website before,” Dragnea 
said. “But I have learned both the design process 
and also the building aspect of it. There are a lot 
of factors to think about and I just learned how 
to use a database along with a dynamic page. 
It’s a lot more effective.”
Since the program is administered by the library, 
the Girls Who Code students get to learn for free 
and have spent their time building a website 
about endangered animals.
“These girls could be missing a career in high-
tech that could be life changing for them or their 
families,” Aspeslagh? said. “These are the high-
paying, easy-to-find jobs of right now and the 
future. The fact that half of the population is not 
heading in that direction is something that we 
are trying to solve. Hopefully, we can tap into 
that natural curiosity they have.”
With her first Girls Who Code session due to be 
completed soon, Chapman said she hopes to do 
it again in the near future.
“We are still wire framing and putting pieces 
together,” Chapman said. “So it will take us until 
March to finish up. I will have to check with 
Johanne but I would love to see us do it again. 
I had this idea that I didn’t really know how to 
execute, and Clare and Ken made it happen.”
91

#01 – Google Arts & Culture
By Google, Inc.
Category: Entertainment / Free
Requires iOS 10.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#02 – Finger Driver
By Ketchapp
Category: Games / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#03 – Sweatcoin - Coin For Sweat App
By Sweatco Ltd
Category: Health & Fitness / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#04 – YouTube: Watch, Listen, Stream
By Google, Inc.
Category: Photo & Video / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#05 – Instagram
By Instagram, Inc.
Category: Photo & Video / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#06 – Messenger
By Facebook, Inc.
Category: Social Networking / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#07 – Snapchat
By Snap, Inc.
Category: Photo & Video / Free
Requires iOS 10.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#08 – Facebook
By Facebook, Inc.
Category: Social Networking / Free
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#10 – Netflix
By Netflix, Inc.
Category: Entertainment / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#09 – Run Sausage Run!
By Crazy Labs
Category: Games / Free
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
92

#01 – GarageBand
By Apple
Category: Music / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later
#02 – WhatsApp Desktop
By WhatsApp Inc.
Category: Social Networking / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.9.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#04 – 1Doc: Word Processor for Writer
ByChengyu Huang
Category: Business / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#03 – Open Any File
By Rocky Sand Studio Ltd.
Category: Utilities / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#05 – PDF Reader Pro Free
By PDF Technologies, Inc.
Category: Business / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.8 or later, 64-bit processor
#09 – The Unarchiver
By Dag Agren
Category: Utilities / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.6.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#06– OneDrive
By Microsoft Corporation
Category: Productivity / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.9.0 or later, 64-bit processor
#08 – Kindle
By AMZN Mobile LLC
Category:  Reference / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.9 or later
#10 – Xcode
By Apple
Category: Developer Tools / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.11.5 or later
#07– Microsoft OneNote
By Microsoft Corporation
Category: Productivity / Free
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
93

#01 – Minecraft
By Mojang
Category: Games / Price: $6.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#02 – Heads Up!
By Warner Bros.
Category: Games / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#03 – Geometry Dash
By RobTop Games AB
Category: Games / Price: $1.99
RRequires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#04 – Getting Over It
By Bennett Foddy
Category: Games / Price: $4.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#05 – Plague Inc
By Ndemic Creations
Category: Games / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#06 – Facetune
By Lightricks Ltd.
Category: Photo & Video / Price: $3.99
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#07 – NBA 2K18
By 2K
Category: Games / Price: $7.99
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#08 – Bloons TD 5
By Ninja Kiwi
Category: Games / Price: $2.99
Requires iOS 6.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#10 – Minds On Physics the App - Part 1
By Physics Classroom, LLC
Category: Education / Price: $0.99
Requires iOS 5.1.1 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
#09 – The Game of Life
By Marmalade Game Studio
Category: Games / Price: $2.99
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.
94

#01 – The Sims™ 2: Super Collection
By Aspyr Media, Inc.
Category: Games / Price: $39.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.9.2 or later
#07 – Mirror for Samsung TV
By AirBeamTV BV
Category: Video / Price: $13.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#08 – Home Design 3D
By Anuman
Category: Graphics & Design / Price: $8.49
Compatibility: OS X 10.8 or later, 64-bit processor
#09 – PomTimer
By Bech LLC
Category: Productivity / Price: $1.39
Compatibility: OS X 10.9 or later, 64-bit processor
#02 – Magnet
By CrowdCafé
Category: Productivity / Price: $1.39
Compatibility: OS X 10.9 or later, 64-bit processor
#10 – Adobe Photoshop Elements 2018
By Adobe
Category: Photography / Price: $84.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#04 – Dr. Cleaner Pro
By Trend Micro, Incorporated
Category: Utilities / Price: $20.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#03 – Duplicate Photos Fixer Pro
By Systweak Software
Category: Photography / Price: $1.39
Compatibility: OS X 10.7 or later
#05 – Logic Pro X
By Apple
Category: Music / Price: $279.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.10 or later, 64-bit processor
#06 – RollerCoaster Tycoon 3 Platinum
By Aspyr Media, Inc.
Category: Games / Price: $20.99
Compatibility: OS X 10.8.5 or later
95

Movies
TV Shows
&
Rotten Tomatoes
85%
by Valerie Faris & 
Jonathan Dayton
Genre: Comedy
Released: 2017
Price: $9.99
76 Ratings
Trailer
96

Battle of the Sexes  
Battle of the Sexes portrays the true events 
of the 1973 tennis match between World 
number one Billie Jean King (Emma Stone) 
and ex-champ and serial hustler Bobby 
Riggs (Steve Carell). 
FIVE FACTS:
1. Emma Stone was initially cast as Billie 
Jean King but was forced to pass on the role 
due to scheduling issues. Brie Larson was 
then tapped to replace Stone, but after a few 
months, Larson dropped out. Once Stone’s 
schedule was cleared she was able to take 
back the role. 
2. When riding in the car, King and Marilyn 
listen to an Elton John song. By 1974, Elton 
John and King had become friends, and 
he co-wrote his hit single ‘Philadelphia 
Freedom’ as a favor to her. 
3. Emma Stone’s middle name is also ‘Jean’. 
4. The movie sugarcoats the tragic love affair 
with Marilyn. The private become public in 
1981 when Marilyn sued King by invoking 
the palimony law that almost destroyed 
King’s career. 
5. In 1973, Billie Jean King was 29, and 
Bobby Riggs was 55. At the time of filming 
Emma Stone was 28 and Steve Carell was 54. 
97

Battle Of The Sexes | Club Scene
98

99

Blade Runner 2049 
A young blade runner, K (Ryan Gosling), 
discovers a long-buried secret which 
prompts him to seek out former blade 
runner Rick Deckard (Harrison Ford) who has 
been missing for thirty years. 
FIVE FACTS:
1. David Bowie was Villeneuve’s first choice 
for the role of Niander Wallace but passed 
away before the start of shooting. 
2. When Joi searches Deckard’s place, there 
is an ambient sound which was heard in 
Deckard’s apartment in the first movie and 
was also used as background noise in the 
med bay in Alien (1979). 
3. The character name Ana Stelline is a pun on 
anastellin, a human antiangiogenic peptide. 
4. Jared Leto used Silicon Valley tech 
investors and inventors that he personally 
knows as examples of how Niander Wallace 
would behave. 
5. Policeman K’s serial number is P KD6-3.7. 
This pays homage to the author Philip K. Dick.
 
by Denis Villeneuve
Genre: Action & Adventure
Released: 2018
Price: $19.99
513 Ratings
Rotten Tomatoes
87%
100

Trailer
101

Blade Runner 2049 - Fire
102

103

Music
Havana ft. Young Thug
104

Genre: Pop
Released: Jan 12, 2018
11 Songs
Price: $9.99
2.9k Ratings
Camila
Camila Cabello
Camila is the eponymous debut studio album 
by Cuban-American singer Camila Cabello. 
After the success of the lead track ‘Havana’, 
Cabello has succeeded in creating an album 
that is deeply personal, with break-up ballads 
like ‘Something’s Gotta Give’ that doesn’t fail to 
hold back on emotionally-charged lyrics. As a 
testament to her voice, production is limited, 
and instead, she’s accompanied by pianos and 
acoustic guitars that make it an album that, 
while Latin influences are obviously there, still 
manages to be gently experimental. 
FIVE FACTS:
1. The project was initially announced as 
The Hurting. The Healing. The Loving. before 
being changed to simply Camila. 
2. The album was executive produced by 
Frank Dukes with additional work from 
Skrillex and The Futuristics. 
3. Cabello first rose to fame as a member 
of the girl group Fifth Harmony, who were 
formed during the second season of the X 
Factor in 2012. The group came third place 
in the competition. She parted ways with 
the band in December 2016. 
4. As part of the album, she worked with 
artists such as Sia and Ed Sheeran on tracks 
that were eventually scrapped. 
5. Cabello has partnered with the Children’s 
Health Fund, a non-profit organisation that’s 
dedicated to providing healthcare to low-
income families with children.
105

106

“Never Be The Same”  
107

Blue Madonna 
BØRNS 
In his second full-length album, BØRNS ticks 
a number of boxes including a seductive 
falsetto, a kinetic electro-pop and even 
a space-age theremin solo. While tracks 
like “Bye-bye Darling” provide the perfect 
accompaniment to a slow dance, “God Save 
Our Young Blood” finds Borns and Lana Del 
Rey drifting on a cloud. This is an album 
where different tracks will hook you in every 
time you listen.
FIVE FACTS:
1. During his time in high school, Børns 
briefly performed in a cover band called 
‘Brown Chicken Brown Trout.’
2. He is known as a leader in the “gender-
bender” movement, often flaunting nail 
polish and crop-tops on social media. He has 
admitted that his androgynous vocals and 
appearance have led many to mistake him 
for a woman on first listen. 
3. He performed at the Coachella Valley 
Music and Arts Festival in 2016. 
4. During his time as Garrett Borns, he 
released an EP entitled A Dream Between 
featuring seven early tracks, one being the 
hit single “Mittens.” 
5. He formed a partnership with Gucci after 
wearing a Gucci-inspired outfit on The 
Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon.
108

“Faded Heart”
Genre: Alternative 
Released: Jan 12, 2018
12 Songs
Price: $9.99
123 Ratings
109

“American Money”
110

111

After finishing second behind “Star Wars: The 
Last Jedi” for two weeks, “Jumanji: Welcome to 
the Jungle” notched its second straight weekend 
atop the North American box office, taking in 
$35.2 million over the four-day Martin Luther 
King Jr. holiday weekend, according to final 
figures Tuesday.
Steven Spielberg’s Pentagon Papers drama “The 
Post” took in $23.1 million in its nationwide 
launch, while the Liam Neeson thriller “The 
Commuter” opened with $15.8 million.
The Taraji P. Henson hit “Proud Mary” debuted 
with $11.7 million. And the sequel “Paddington 
2,” bowed with $15 million. Warner Bros. 
purchased the North American distribution 
rights for the Paddington Bear sequel from The 
Weinstein Co. last November.
BOX OFFICE TOP 20:
‘JUMANJI’ HITS
NO. 1 AGAIN
112

113

114

The top 20 movies at U.S. and Canadian theaters 
Friday through Tuesday, followed by distribution 
studio, gross, number of theater locations, 
average receipts per location, total gross and 
number of weeks in release, as compiled 
Tuesday by comScore:
1. 
“Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle,”  
Sony, $35,176,695, 3,849 locations, 
$7,301 average, $291,312,604, 4 Weeks.
2. 
“The Post,” 20th Century Fox, 
$23,055,654, 2,819 locations,  
$6,868 average, $27,544,891, 4 Weeks.
3. 
“The Greatest Showman,” 20th Century 
Fox, $16,177,587, 2,938 locations, 
$4,244 average, $98,931,455, 4 Weeks.
4. 
“The Commuter,” Lionsgate, 
$15,795,899, 2,892 locations,  
$4,738 average, $15,795,899, 1 Week.
5. 
“Paddington 2,” Warner Bros., 
$15,003,359, 3,702 locations,  
$2,972 average, $15,003,359, 1 Week.
115

6. 
“Star Wars: The Last Jedi,” Disney, 
$14,627,721, 3,090 locations,  
$3,836 average, $594,902,305, 5 Weeks.
7. 
“Insidious: The Last Key,” Universal, 
$14,353,765, 3,150 locations,  
$3,943 average, $50,594,905, 2 Weeks.
8. 
“Proud Mary,” Sony, $11,701,440,  
2,125 locations, $4,687 average, 
$11,701,440, 1 Week.
9. 
“Pitch Perfect 3,” Universal, $7,326,950, 
2,505 locations, $2,393 average, 
$96,326,175, 4 Weeks.
10. 
“Darkest Hour,” Focus Features, 
$5,415,720, 1,693 locations,  
$2,636 average, $36,631,272, 8 Weeks.
116

117

118

11. 
“Ferdinand,” 20th Century Fox, 
$4,863,022, 2,154 locations,  
$1,638 average, $76,891,116, 5 Weeks.
12. 
“Coco,” Disney, $4,618,538, 
1,362 locations, $2,446 average, 
$198,161,978, 8 Weeks.
13. 
“Molly’s Game,” STX Entertainment, 
$4,618,479, 1,708 locations,  
$2,267 average, $21,447,576, 3 Weeks.
14. 
“I, Tonya,” Neon Rated, $4,068,388, 
517 locations, $6,504 average, 
$10,767,207, 6 Weeks.
15. 
“The Shape of Water,” Fox 
Searchlight, $3,450,402,  
723 locations, $3,921 average,  
$27,172,294, 7 Weeks.
119

16. 
“Three Billboards Outside Ebbing 
Missouri,” Fox Searchlight, 
$3,075,421, 1,022 locations, $2,464 average, 
$29,283,880, 10 Weeks.
17. 
“Lady Bird,” A24, $2,157,666, 
652 locations, $2,712 average, 
$37,373,875, 11 Weeks.
18. 
“Wonder,” Lionsgate, $1,627,928, 
970 locations, $1,248 average, 
$129,016,502, 9 Weeks.
19. 
“All the Money in the World,” Sony, 
$1,484,807, 1,408 locations,  
$869 average, $23,310,867, 3 Weeks.
20. 
“Phantom Thread,” Focus Features, 
$1,391,276, 62 locations,  
$18,513 average, $2,473,054, 3 Weeks.
Universal and Focus are owned by NBC Universal, a unit of Comcast 
Corp.; Sony, Columbia, Sony Screen Gems and Sony Pictures Classics 
are units of Sony Corp.; Paramount is owned by Viacom Inc.; Disney, 
Pixar and Marvel are owned by The Walt Disney Co.; Miramax is owned 
by Filmyard Holdings LLC; 20th Century Fox and Fox Searchlight are 
owned by 21st Century Fox; Warner Bros. and New Line are units 
of Time Warner Inc.; MGM is owned by a group of former creditors 
including Highland Capital, Anchorage Advisors and Carl Icahn; 
Lionsgate is owned by Lions Gate Entertainment Corp.; IFC is owned by 
AMC Networks Inc.; Rogue is owned by Relativity Media LLC.
120

121

A Cypriot company says its new sub-sea internet 
cable that will connect Israel with Spain will be 
powerful enough to handle up to 60 percent of 
the world’s internet traffic at peak time.
Quantum Cable Chairman Nasos Ktorides said 
after signing on this week an agreement to 
lay the cable that the $200 million project is 
expected to come online in 2020.
Ktorides said the cable will have 40 times  
more capacity than existing internet cables 
on the Mediterranean seabed. He said that’s 
enough capacity to handle as many as 80 
million high-definition video calls between  
Asia and Europe simultaneously.
The 4785-mile (7,700 km) cable will reach 
Bilbao, Spain, where an equally powerful 
internet cable now connects Spain with the  
U.S. state of Virginia.
‘SUPERFAST’ INTERNET
CABLE TO CROSS 
MEDITERRANEAN SEA
122

123

124

Infiniti, the luxury brand of Japanese automaker 
Nissan, will start phasing out gas-powered 
vehicles in 2021 and switch to “all electrified” 
models, the maker’s new CEO Hiroto Saikawa 
said this week.
Making an appearance at the Automotive News 
World Congress in Detroit — his first in the U.S. 
since succeeding Carlos Ghosn as Nissan Motor 
Co. CEO last April — Saikawa also suggested 
that the Euro-Asian Renault-Nissan-Mitsubishi 
Alliance could look to add a fourth partner.
INFINITI SAYS IT WILL
GO ‘ALL ELECTRIC’
125

“Infiniti will have a specific focus on 
electrification,” said Saikawa, adding, “We 
are trying to position Infiniti as the premier 
electrified brand” as part of the five-year Nissan 
business plan that will extend through 2022.
The announcement came as something of 
a surprise because Infiniti had previously 
signaled its intent to migrate to another 
breakthrough technology, the VC-T engine. 
More formally known as the Variable-
Compression Turbo engine, it is the first 
mass-production powertrain that can adjust 
its compression ratio — anywhere from 8:1 
to 14:1 — to yield the best balance between 
performance, fuel economy and emissions. It 
appears that new engine will be used in the 
near term but eventually phased out.
The engine recently debuted in the new QX50 
crossover and will continue to be phased into 
other Infiniti models — at least until Infiniti 
apparently phases it out in favor of new battery-
based technology.
That will include two different approaches 
to electrification, Saikawa said, including 
pure battery-electric models like the second-
generation Leaf that the Nissan brand is just 
getting ready to roll into global showrooms.
Infiniti had actually scrubbed a plan to market a 
more upscale version of the first-generation Leaf 
early in the decade because it didn’t offer the 
level of refinement, range or performance that 
they believed luxury buyers would demand.
The latest versions of the technology offers 
significantly longer range and much improved 
refinement and performance — while battery 
costs have also plunged dramatically.
126

Image: Shizuo Kambayashi
127

Along with pure battery-electric vehicles, Infiniti 
will add what Saikawa called e-Power models. 
These also are referred to as extended-range 
electric vehicles, and include such models as the 
Chevrolet Volt and BMW i3 REx. While similar 
to plug-in hybrids, they use onboard gasoline 
engines solely as generators to power their 
electric motors.
While Saikawa declared that all Infiniti models 
will go electric, he backtracked slightly, 
suggesting the strategy will exclude a handful 
of the brand’s largest SUV models, a list likely to 
include the massive, truck-based QX80.
Virtually the entire auto industry is on a path to 
electrify. Ford Motor Co. this week revealed it 
will launch 40 electrified models, including 16 
pure battery-electric vehicles, over the next five 
years. General Motors Co. said it will have 20 all-
electric models by 2023. Volkswagen will have 
40 by 2025.
Beyond all-electric Tesla, the brand hewing 
closest to the Infiniti plan is Chinese-owned 
Volvo which last year said it will go all-electric 
on all new models launched after 2018. But 
that strategy includes conventional and plug-in 
hybrids, as well as pure battery-electric vehicles.
For the moment, battery-based vehicles have 
found relatively little acceptance in the global 
market. In the U.S., in particular, all forms 
generated barely 3 percent of total new vehicle 
sales in 2017, though with improvements in the 
technology and with manufacturers responding 
to government mandates, the Boston 
Consulting Group last month forecast electrified 
vehicles could account for 50 percent of global 
volume by 2035.
128

129

For Infiniti, that could happen for more quickly, 
at least if Saikawa is correct. “Our assumption for 
Japan by 2022 is that 40 to 45 percent of (Infiniti) 
sales will be electrified and the same for Europe.” 
By 2025, he added, that would reach 50 percent.
On the other hand, he saw lower acceptance 
in the U.S., “maybe 20 to 25 percent,” noting 
that Americans drive longer distances and use 
larger vehicles that will be slower to switch to 
battery power.
The Infiniti electrification plan was just one of 
the surprises the Nissan CEO dropped during 
his World Congress appearance. Asked about 
the recent addition of Mitsubishi to the Renault-
Nissan Alliance, he said he hopes it will prove as 
successful as the original partnering has been.
“We need to demonstrate three is better than 
two,” said Saikawa, adding that, “If it is successful 
it will open the door to go from three to four.”
While it is far too soon to see if Mitsubishi, nearly 
bankrupt before it was rescued by Nissan in 
2016, will be able to turn around, it has done 
once thing for the Alliance. Including the smaller 
maker’s sales has made it one of the three 
largest auto groups in the world and, some 
estimates have forecast, could let it leapfrog 
both Japanese arch-rival Toyota, as well as 
Volkswagen AG this year.
130

131

132

Robotic movement can be awkward.
For us humans, a healthy brain handles all 
the minute details of bodily motion without 
demanding conscious attention. Not so for 
brainless robots – in fact, calculating robotic 
movement is its own scientific subfield.
My colleagues here at the University of 
Washington’s Institute for Protein Design have 
figured out how to apply an algorithm originally 
designed to help robots move to an entirely 
different problem: drug discovery. The algorithm 
has helped unlock a class of molecules known 
as peptide macrocycles, which have appealing 
pharmaceutical properties.
HOW ROBOT MATH AND 
SMARTPHONES LED RESEARCHERS TO A 
DRUG DISCOVERY BREAKTHROUGH
133

ONE SMALL STEP, ONE GIANT LEAP
Roboticists who program movement conceive of it 
in what they call “degrees of freedom.” Take a metal 
arm, for instance. The elbow, wrist and knuckles 
are movable and thus contain degrees of freedom. 
The forearm, upper arm and individual sections 
of each finger do not. If you want to program an 
android to reach out and grasp an object or take a 
calculated step, you need to know what its degrees 
of freedom are and how to manipulate them.
The more degrees of freedom a limb has, the 
more complex its potential motions. The math 
required to direct even simple robotic limbs is 
surprisingly abstruse; Ferdinand Freudenstein, 
a father of the field, once called the calculations 
underlying the movement of a limb with seven 
joints “the Mount Everest of kinematics.”
Freudenstein developed his kinematics equations 
at the dawn of the computer era in the 1950s. 
Since then, roboticists have increasingly relied 
on algorithms to solve these complex kinematic 
puzzles. One algorithm in particular – known 
as “generalized kinematic closure” – bested the 
seven joint problem, allowing roboticists to 
program fine control into mechanical hands.
Molecular biologists took notice.
Many molecules inside living cells can be 
conceived of as chains with pivot points, or 
degrees of freedom, akin to tiny robotic arms. 
These molecules flex and twist according to the 
laws of chemistry. Peptides and their elongated 
cousins, proteins, often must adopt precise 
three-dimensional shapes in order to function. 
Accurately predicting the complex shapes of 
peptides and proteins allows scientists like me 
to understand how they work.
134

135

MASTERING MACROCYCLES
While most peptides form straight chains, a 
subset, known as macrocycles, form rings. 
This shape offers distinct pharmacological 
advantages. Ringed structures are less flexible 
than floppy chains, making macrocycles 
extremely stable. And because they lack free 
ends, some can resist rapid degradation in 
the body – an otherwise common fate for 
ingested peptides.
Macrocycles have a circular ‘main chain’ (shown 
as thick lines) and many ‘side chains’ (shown 
as thin lines). The macrocycle on the left — 
cyclosporin — evolved in a fungus. The one 
on the right was designed on a computer. Ian 
Haydon/Institute for Protein Design
Natural macrocycles such as cyclosporin  
are among the most potent therapeutics 
identified to date. They combine the stability 
benefits of small-molecule drugs, like 
aspirin, and the specificity of large antibody 
therapeutics, like herceptin. Experts in the 
pharmaceutical industry regard this  
category of medicinal compounds as 
“attractive, albeit underappreciated.”
“There is a huge diversity of macrocycles in 
nature – in bacteria, plants, some mammals,” 
said Gaurav Bhardwaj, a lead author of the new 
report in Science, “and nature has evolved them 
for their own particular functions.” Indeed, many 
natural macrocycles are toxins. Cyclosporin, 
for instance, displays anti-fungal activity yet 
also acts as a powerful immunosuppressant 
in the clinic making it useful as a treatment for 
rheumatoid arthritis or to prevent rejection of 
transplanted organs.
136

137

138

A popular strategy for producing new 
macrocycle drugs involves grafting medicinally 
useful features onto otherwise safe and stable 
natural macrocycle backbones. “When it works, 
it works really well, but there’s a limited number 
of well-characterized structures that we can 
confidently use,” said Bhardwaj. In other words, 
drug designers have only had access to a 
handful of starting points when making new 
macrocycle medications.
To create additional reliable starting points,  
his team used generalized kinematic closure 
– the robot joint algorithm – to explore the 
possible conformations, or shapes, that 
macrocycles can adopt.
ADAPTABLE ALGORITHMS
As with keys, the exact shape of a macrocycle 
matters. Build one with the right conformation 
and you may unlock a new cure.
Modeling realistic conformations is “one of the 
hardest parts” of macrocycle design, according 
to Vikram Mulligan, another lead author of 
the report. But thanks to the efficiency of the 
robotics-inspired algorithm, the team was 
able to achieve “near-exhaustive sampling” 
of plausible conformations at “relatively low 
computational cost.”
The calculations were so efficient, in fact, 
that most of the work did not require a 
supercomputer, as is usually the case in the field 
of molecular engineering. Instead, thousands 
of smartphones belonging to volunteers were 
networked together to form a distributed 
computing grid, and the scientific calculations 
were doled out in manageable chunks.
139

With the initial smartphone number crunching 
complete, the team pored over the results – a 
collection of hundreds of never-before-seen 
macrocycles. When a dozen such compounds 
were chemically synthesized in the lab, nine 
were shown to actually adopt the predicted 
conformation. In other words, the smartphones 
were accurately rendering molecules that 
scientists can now optimize for their potential as 
targeted drugs.
The team estimates the number of macrocycles 
that can confidently be used as starting points 
for drug design has jumped from fewer than 
10 to over 200, thanks to this work. Many of the 
newly designed macrocycles contain chemical 
features that have never been seen in biology.
To date, macrocyclic peptide drugs have shown 
promise in battling cancer, cardiovascular 
disease, inflammation and infection. Thanks to 
the mathematics of robotics, a few smartphones 
and some cross-disciplinary thinking, patients 
may soon see even more benefits from this 
promising class of molecules.
140

141

Image: Trifonov Evgeniy
142

Experts say a bright light and what sounded like 
thunder in the sky above Michigan was a meteor.
The American Meteor Society says it received 
hundreds of reports of a fireball Tuesday night 
over the state, including many in the Detroit 
area. Reports also came in from several other 
states and Ontario, Canada.
Some Michigan residents reported their 
homes shaking.
The society says the reports suggest a space rock 
penetrated deep into the Earth’s atmosphere 
before it broke apart. The U.S. Geological Service 
says it registered as a 2.0 magnitude earthquake 
in Michigan.
Bill Cooke with NASA’s Meteoroid Environment 
Office tells The Detroit News it was “definitely a 
meteoroid” and a rare sight for Michigan.
Other states where people reported seeing a 
fireball included Illinois, Pennsylvania, Ohio, 
Indiana and Missouri.
METEOR CREDITED 
FOR BRIGHT LIGHT, 
NOISE RATTLING 
MICHIGAN
143

Image: Ezra Shaw
144

Yahoo users will be able to stream eight 
basketball games for free under a new deal 
with the NBA.
Verizon, which owns Yahoo, is hoping to use 
sports to build a digital ad business to rival 
Facebook and Google. The company now lets 
anyone watch NFL games on a mobile Yahoo 
app; before games were limited to Verizon 
customers. Other major tech companies 
including Facebook and Amazon are also 
bidding for sports streaming rights.
Fans can choose the eight games they want 
once they sign in, but local and nationally 
televised games are blocked. It isn’t limited to 
Verizon wireless customers.
Verizon will also have a daily highlights 
show and may make other original sports 
programming. It will work with the NBA 
on fan fantasy experiences, including 
custom highlights.
VERIZON 
PUSHES FURTHER 
INTO SPORTS 
STREAMING 
WITH NBA DEAL
145

146

THE CHAMPION (FEAT. LUDACRIS)
Carrie Underwood
LINGER
The Cranberries
DREAMS
The Cranberries
PERFECT
ed sheeran
ZOMBIE
The Cranberries
HAVANA (FEAT. YOUNG THUG)
Camila Cabello
MEANT TO BE
 (FEAT. FLORIDA GEORGIA LINE)
bebe rexha
FINESSE (REMIX) [FEAT. CARDI B] - SINGLE
brUno mars
THUNDER
imagine dragons
TEQUILA
dan + shay
147

148

THE GREATEST SHOWMAN
(ORIGINAL MOTION PICTURE SOUNDTRACK)
VarioUs arTisTs
STARS: THE BEST OF 1992-2002
The Cranberries
CAMILA
Camila Cabello
NO NEED TO ARGUE
The Cranberries
THE BIG PESCADO
berner
SOMETHING ELSE
The Cranberries
EVERYBODY ELSE IS DOING IT,
SO WHY CAN’T WE?
The Cranberries
P2
daVe easT
÷ (DELUXE)
ed sheeran
REPUTATION
Taylor swifT
149

150

FLIP MY HAIR
Jessie James deCker
PERFECT SYMPHONY
 (WITH ANDREA BOCELLI)
ed sheeran
END GAME (FEAT. ED SHEERAN & FUTURE)
Taylor swifT
LINGER
The Cranberries
DREAMS
The Cranberries
HAVANA (FEAT. YOUNG THUG)
Camila Cabello
FINESSE (REMIX) [FEAT. CARDI B]
brUno mars
MIC DROP (STEVE AOKI REMIX)
bTs
HE LIKE THAT
fifTh harmony
ODE TO MY FAMILY (RADIO VERSION)
The Cranberries
151

152

SEE YOU NEXT TUESDAY
anderpUmp rUles, season 6
MIME OVER MATTER
keeping Up wiTh The kardashians, season 14
2203
The baChelor, season 22
SOUND AND FURY
madam seCreTary, season 4
ISLANDS PART TWO
The good doCTor, season 1
THE PEACHES OF WRATH
The real hoUsewiVes of aTlanTa, season 10
LEGION OF SUPER-HEROES
sUpergirl, season 3
GROUNDED
The braVe, season 1
OH BABY
Teen mom, Vol. 19
A SOLDIER’S DAUGHTER (UK EDITION)
ViCToria, season 2
153

154

CITY OF ENDLESS NIGHT
doUglas presTon & linColn Child
THE WOMAN IN THE WINDOW
a. J. finn
FIRE AND FURY
miChael wolff
IRON GOLD
pierCe brown
FOREVER MY GIRL
heidi mClaUghlin
SEX, NOT LOVE
Vi keeland
HEAT
sTUarT woods
THE WIFE BETWEEN US
greer hendriCks & sarah pekkanen
ORIGIN
dan brown
LITTLE FIRES EVERYWHERE
CelesTe ng
155

156

Canadian tech company BlackBerry Ltd. this 
week introduced a new cybersecurity software 
product at the Detroit auto show.
Called BlackBerry Jarvis, the software is 
designed to help automakers protect their cars 
from computer hackers, said John Chen, the 
company’s executive chairman and CEO.
Chen made the announcement at a news 
conference at the North American International 
Auto Show in Detroit.
“We think this is a very appropriate venue to 
announce our first product on the (automotive) 
cybersecurity side,” he said. “Our company has 
been using it for a long time and it’s a well-
proven technology.”
BLACKBERRY UNVEILS CYBERSECURITY 
SOFTWARE FOR VEHICLES
157

158

He said the software is a one-of-its-kind, cloud-
based static binary code scanning program that 
can identify vulnerabilities in the software used 
in automobiles.
A modern car has more than 100 million lines of 
computer code and as more is added to improve 
cars and make them autonomous, they will be 
more vulnerable to cyberattack, he said.
Chen said Jaguar Land Rover has already been 
testing out its Jarvis technology.
“In our independent study, Jarvis delivered 
excellent efficiencies in time-to-market, 
significantly reducing the time to security 
assess code from thirty days to seven minutes,” 
Ralf Speth, CEO of Jaguar Land Rover, said in a 
statement. “The productivity delivered by Jarvis 
combined with BlackBerry’s trusted security 
heritage can transform vehicle safety.”
Based in Waterloo, Ontario, the company was 
founded in 1984 and operates in North America, 
Europe, Asia, Australia, Middle East, Latin 
America and Africa.
159

Palestinians in the West Bank are finally 
getting high-speed mobile data services, after 
a yearslong Israeli ban that cost their fragile 
economy hundreds of millions of dollars, 
impeded tech start-ups and denied them simple 
conveniences enjoyed by the rest of the world.
Palestinian cell phone providers Wataniya and 
Jawwal are expected to launch 3G broadband 
services in the West Bank by the end of this 
month, Palestinian officials said, after Israel 
assigned frequencies and allowed the import 
of equipment.
“It’s about time,” Wataniya CEO Durgham Maraee 
said of the anticipated launch, speaking to media 
at company headquarters in the West Bank last 
week. “It has taken a very, very long time.”
PALESTINIANS  
TO GET 3G IN  
WEST BANK, 
AFTER ISRAEL  
LIFTS BAN
160

161

162

The belated move to 3G comes a decade after 
Palestinian operators first sought Israeli permits 
and at a time when faster 4G is increasingly 
available in the Middle East.
This keeps Palestinian mobile companies 
at a continued disadvantage, including in 
competition with Israeli companies that offer 
3G and 4G coverage to Palestinian customers 
in the West Bank through towers installed 
in Israeli settlements. The World Bank has 
criticized this state of affairs because the Israeli 
firms do not pay license fees or taxes to the 
Palestinian authorities.
The Israeli ban on 3G also remains in place 
in the Gaza Strip, making that Palestinian 
territory, dominated by the militant group 
Hamas, one of the last without such services 
across the globe. Mobile internet is available 
in far-flung places, from the Himalayan 
kingdom of Bhutan to the Atlantic’s volcanic 
rock island of Ascension.
In blocking 3G for years, Israel has cited security 
concerns, without going into details. Officials 
suggest, for example, that high-speed mobile 
data could make it easier for Palestinian militants 
to communicate while reducing the risk of Israeli 
surveillance.
Israel’s Shin Bet security agency declined 
comment Sunday.
COGAT, an Israeli Defense Ministry branch, said it 
worked on implementing a 2015 memorandum 
of understanding with the Palestinians on 3G, 
and that it expects a launch in two to three 
weeks. Officials did not respond to questions 
about Israel’s yearslong ban on 3G.
163

Israel has delayed approval for Palestinian 
economic development projects in the past, 
leading to efforts by high-level international 
efforts to try to speed things along. Most 
recently, President Donald Trump’s Mideast  
team has urged Israel to make economic 
gestures to the Palestinians.
Palestinian officials have said they suspect such 
projects are being used as political leverage.
At the same time, Israeli Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu has called for so-called 
“economic peace” with the Palestinians,  
as he stepped back from offers by  
predecessors to negotiate the terms of an 
independent Palestinian state on lands Israel 
captured in 1967.
At Wataniya headquarters, where employees 
got 3G as part of pre-launch tests, the mood 
was upbeat.
The CEO said the 3G launch and the company’s 
recent expansion into Gaza, after Israel lifted 
restrictions on importing equipment, could 
translate into profits in 2018 — the first since 
Wataniya began operations in 2009 as the 
second Palestinian cellphone provider.
“The future is bright,” Maraee said.
But the company’s struggles also illustrate  
the difficulties faced by Palestinian 
entrepreneurs, large and small, as they  
operate under Israeli obstacles to trade, 
movement and access.
Israel has kept a tight grip on the daily lives of 
Palestinians since its 1967 capture of the West 
Bank, Gaza and east Jerusalem, areas sought for 
a Palestinian state.
164

Image: Mahmud Hams
165

166

Image: Khaled El Fiqi
It annexed east Jerusalem and retains overall 
control of the West Bank. The Palestinian 
Authority, a self-rule government, administers 
38 percent of the West Bank, while the 
remaining area, home to 400,000 Israeli  
settlers, is largely off-limits to Palestinian 
economic development.
Israel withdrew from Gaza in 2005, but has 
enforced a border blockade, along with  
Egypt, since Hamas seized the strip in 2007. 
The West Bank-based Palestinian Authority of 
President Mahmoud Abbas is trying to regain a 
foothold in Gaza in stop-and-go reconciliation 
talks with Hamas.
The World Bank has repeatedly urged Israel to 
unshackle the Palestinian economy to allow 
private sector growth, essential for lowering 
double-digit Palestinian unemployment.
In 2016, the bank said the Palestinian mobile 
phone sector lost more than $1 billion in 
potential earnings over the previous three years, 
largely due to Israeli restrictions.
It noted that Israeli providers siphoned off as 
much as 30 percent of the potential Palestinian 
customer base in the West Bank with offers of  
3G and 4G services.
Maraee said Wataniya has stayed afloat 
in part because of the continued support 
of its main investors — the Qatar-based 
telecommunications company Ooredoo 
and the self-rule government’s Palestinian 
Investment Fund.
Wataniya is now at the break-even point, but 
that it once suffered losses of as much as $20 
million a year, he said.
167

168

Image: Khaled El Fiqi
“If it wasn’t for the commitment of the PIF 
and the Ooredoo Group ... to the Palestinian 
economy, probably Wataniya would not  
have survived under these trying 
circumstances,” he said.
Smaller Palestinian entrepreneurs also  
expect an immediate 3G bump in business.
Ali Taha launched Rocab, an online taxi  
booking service, last July, but has so far 
captured only a tiny slice of the market. He 
expects a significant increase with 3G, since 
customers would be able to summon a ride 
from anywhere, instead of having to search  
for a location with WiFi.
Shadi Atshan, founder of the Palestinian start-
up accelerator FastForward, said he expects 
app development to flourish and generate 
more Palestinian tech jobs.
For ordinary Palestinians, everyday life will get 
just a little easier.
Alaa Amouri, 20, a student, said she gets 4G 
from an Israeli provider that offers only partial 
coverage in the West Bank.
Mobile data from a Palestinian provider  
would offer real-time updates on potential 
trouble on the roads, said Amouri, who 
commutes between east Jerusalem and her 
West Bank university, passing through the 
crowded Israeli-run Qalandiya crossing  
almost daily.
“It (3G) helps in getting news updates,”  
she said. “Sometimes when we are at the 
Qalandiya crossing, we find it blocked  
without knowing why.”
169

Can a democratic country outlaw fake news?
France is about to find out, after President 
Emmanuel Macron ordered a law to quash 
false information disseminated around  
electoral campaigns.
Criticism is pouring in from media advocates, 
tech experts — and Kremlin-backed 
broadcaster RT. They say the law smacks of 
authoritarianism, would be impossible to 
enforce and is sure to backfire.
Macron’s stance “could be just the beginning 
of actually censoring freedom of speech. We 
believe it is a very dangerous situation,” Xenia 
Fedorova, director of RT’s newly launched 
French-language channel, told.
FRANCE VS. FAKE NEWS 
OFFERS TEST CASE FOR 
DEMOCRATIC DILEMMA
170

Image: Francois Mori
171

Yet in a world where a falsehood can reach 
billions instantaneously and political 
manipulation is increasingly sophisticated, 
Macron argues something must be done.
A congressional report by U.S. Democrats 
released last week detailed apparent Russian 
efforts to undermine politics in 19 European 
countries since 2016, using cyberattacks, 
disinformation, clandestine social media 
operations, financing of fringe political  
groups and, in extreme cases, assassination 
attempts. Macron’s own campaign suffered 
a big hacking attack last year, though the 
government later said it found no proof of 
Russian involvement.
Propaganda and disinformation aren’t new 
or unique to Russia. Author and technology 
historian Edward Tenner argues that fake news 
is as old as George Washington’s cherry tree — 
an enduring but untrue legend about the first 
U.S. president.
While democracies usually rely on defamation 
and libel laws to combat false publications, 
Macron wants more.
In a New Year’s speech to journalists, he  
said he’s ordering a new “legal arsenal” that 
would oblige news sites to reveal who owns 
them and where their money comes from. It 
could cap the money allowed for content  
seen as aimed at swaying an election and  
allow emergency legal action to block 
websites. The French broadcast regulator’s 
power would expand to allow it to suspend 
media seen as trying to destabilize a vote — 
notably those “controlled or influenced by 
foreign powers.”
172

Image: Francois Mori
173

Image: Gonzalo Fuentes
174

That probably means outlets such as RT — 
whose coverage was seen as favoring far-right 
candidate Marine Le Pen in last year’s French 
election and which many consider a tool of the 
Russian government — and Sputnik, another 
Russian-backed outlet that drew attention for 
reporting a rumor during the French presidential 
campaign that Macron was having a gay affair.
He denied it, and beat Le Pen anyway, but 
never forgot.
RT’s Fedorova says they are being unfairly 
targeted. Speaking from RT’s gleaming French 
studios on the banks of the Seine River, she 
says she struggled to get permits to open in 
France, and her journalists are routinely barred 
from the Elysee Palace after Macron accused 
RT and Sputnik last year of being “organs” of 
Russian influence.
RT France’s coverage appears broadly similar to 
other French networks, with a slightly greater 
emphasis on street violence and migrants. The 
biggest difference: its extensive coverage of 
Syria, which stresses the views of the Russian 
and Syrian governments.
“RT stands for giving the floor, the platform  
to different opinions, and I personally 
believe that diversity of voices is absolutely 
necessary in order to have the big picture,” 
said Fedorova, who says RT will be watching 
Macron’s plan closely.
Media freedom watchdog Reporters  
Without Borders is also watching closely. It  
has decried fake news as undermining 
journalists who work hard to uncover 
wrongdoing and verify information, but the 
group is wary of Macron’s order.
175

“We are not opposed to the principle of a law 
against fake news. But the point is to be able to 
write a law without endangering the freedom 
to reveal things,” the group’s chief, Christophe 
Deloire, told.
“Probably our democracies have to be defended 
in front of the fake news wave,” he said, but not 
“with the ways that despotic countries use.”
His group, also known by French acronym 
RSF, is working with partners on a potential 
certification system that could classify news 
sources according to their verification  
methods, transparency about financing  
and other criteria — and leave it up to the 
 public to decide what to believe.
As France’s government prepares its bill, it  
will be learning lessons from a German law  
that went into effect this month cracking  
down on hate speech on social networks.  
Some fear legitimate posts by satirists or 
journalists are being accidentally caught up  
in the dragnet.
Shutting down websites can also backfire by 
calling more attention to them.
“The only long-term solution for the fake  
news problem is a more sophisticated  
public,” Tenner said.
“Sophisticated manipulators of facts will always 
find a way around whatever regulations are 
in place,” such as creating a front company to 
sponsor a website or writing “something that is 
misleading and inflammatory that is factually 
true,” he said.
176

177

Image: Thibault Camus
Daniel Castro, vice president of the Information 
Technology and Innovation Foundation, 
outlines another problem: “People like fake 
news. It reinforces their beliefs.”
Macron is prompting “a very valid conversation” 
about campaign funding and transparency. But 
“where it runs into trouble is when they try to 
define fake news,” he said.
The Macron government’s digital affairs chief is 
lucid about the challenges ahead.
“This is the beginning of the debate. We won’t 
go too fast,” Mounir Mahjoubi told the AP.
He insists governments shouldn’t remain 
complacent, especially with elections coming 
up in Italy, Russia and the U.S., and for the 
European Parliament next year.
“We need to ask this question,” he said, “and 
work all together on what can be done.”
178

179

ads@applemagazine.com
Digital
Mindﬁeld

AppleMagazine © Copyright 2017-2011. All Rights Reserved.
No part of the document may be circulated, quoted, or reproduced for distribution without prior written approval.
Proper Trademark Notice and Attribution iPhone™, iPad™, HomePod™, Apple Watch™, iPod™, Mac™, iMac™, Macbook™, AppleTV™, Siri™, iOS™, OS X™, watchOS™, and others
are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the US and other countries. Please contact support for additional trademark ownership rights information.
The following is a list of Apple’s trademarks and service marks http://www.apple.com/legal/ trademark/appletmlist.html.
All other trademarks are the properties of their owners.
AppleMagazine is an independent publication and has not been authorized, sponsored, or otherwise approved by Apple Inc.
Authorized Publisher
WRITERS
 
Precise English Inc.
 
Benjamin Kerry  (UK)
 
Gavin Lenaghan  (UK)
 
Craig Lenaghan  (UK)
 
Elena Lusk  (US)
COLUMNS
COLUMNS
 
iTUNES REVIEW
 
Gavin Lenaghan
 
FINANCE NEWS
 
Associated Press / Bloomberg
REVISION
 
Gavin Lenaghan
  
Jack Crute
PRODUCTION SUPPORT / COLLABORATORS
 
Rui da Costa  
 
 
 
Icy Ventura
 
Segolene Vincent 
 
 
Pilar Bescos
 
Fabian Groenhof  
 
 
Candice Liu
 
Lise Berda
 
James Jarvis
  
Richard Sawyer
 
Lauren Brown
 
Matthew Coburn
 
Jeﬀrey Milks
 
Susan Kiesling
 
Raquel Serrano
 
Robert Fluellen
  
Lisa Swiniarski
 
Roger Gayalkar
PRIVACY POLICY
 
applemagazine.com/privacy-policy/
TERMS OF USE
 
applemagazine.com/terms-of-use/
SOCIAL NETWORKS
 
 
 
 
Twitter
 
 
@apple_magazine
 
 
twitter.com/#!/Apple_Magazine
 
 
Facebook
 
 
facebook.com/applemagazineinternational
SUBSCRIPTIONS
 
AppleMagazine Oﬃcial Website
 
applemagazine.com
 
Zinio LLC.
 
zino.com
 
Readr Newsstand
  
readrapp.com
 
Magzter Newsstand
 
magzter.com
 
Amazon Newsstand
 
amazon.com
 
Ebsco/Flipster
 
ebsco.com
 
Scoop Newsstand (Singapore)
 
getscoop.com
CONTACTS
 
Suport & CRM - contact@applemagazine.com 
 
Magazine and Website Editor - editor@applemagazine.com 
 
Executive Director - ceo@applemagazine.com
 
Advertise - ads@applemagazine.com  
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
 
Ivan Castilho
 
Chief Executive Oﬃcer / Design Conception
MINDFIELD DIGITAL ART & GRAPHIC DESIGN
 
Glauco Ribeiro
 
Chief Design Oﬃcer / Art & Graphic Design Director
 
Michael Danglen
  
Art & Graphic Design Producer
 
Anderson Oliveira
 
Art & Graphic Design Producer
MAGAZINE EDITORIAL CONTENT
 
Benjamin Kerry
 
Chief Editor
OFFICIAL WEBSITE
  
Benjamin Kerry
 
Production Director
 
Jack Crute
 
WordPress Production & Website Support
MASTHEAD
APPLEMAGAZINE INTERNATIONAL
applemagazine.com


